COFttJELL    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARY


3   1924   101    105   116


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in
tine  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105116


THE

PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EDITED   BY  THE

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER;
AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY  THE


-urSS.  ARCHDEACON   F.    W.    FAERAH,    D.D.,    P.E.S.— EIGHT  EEV.  H.    COTTHEILL,   D.D.,
P.B.S.E.— VBEY  EEV.  PEINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EBV.  CANON  Q.
KAWLINSON,  M.A.-KEV.  A.  PLtnUMEE,  M.A.,  D.D.


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  Yoke  and  Toronto.


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY.


EDITED  BY  THE


REY.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

VICAU  AND  RUBAL  DEAN  OF  ST.  PANCRAS,  AMD  EXAUINIKQ  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE  LOKD
BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL;


AND  BY  THE

REY.  JOSEPH    S.  EXELL,

EDITOR  OF  "THE  HOMUJSTIC  QUARTBRLY."


LEVITICUS.

Sntro&nctiona :

REV.   R.  COLLINS,   M.A  REV.   PROF.  A.  CAVE,  B.A.

(Elevosition  anb  ^omiletics:
REV.    F.    MEYRICK,    M.A.,

RCCXOB  OF  BUCEUNO,  PREBENDARY  OF  LINCOLN,  AND    EXAUHnNO  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE  UMU)

BISHOP  OF  LINCOLN.

i^otniliee  bg  ibations  ^nttiota:

REV.  PROF.  R.  A.  REDFORD,  LL.B.,  M.A.,  REV.  R.  M.  EDGAR,  M.A.

REV.  W.  CLARKSON,  B.A.,  REV.  J.  A.  MACDONALD.

REV.  S.  R.  ALDRIDGE,  B.A.,  LL.B.


PUNK    &    WAJGHSTALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto.


AN  ESSAY  ON  SACRIFICE.


EEV.  RICHAED  COLLINS,  M.A.

What  is  the  origin,  true  character,  and  proper  place  of  sacrifice  as  a  part  of  religion  ?
Half  a  century  ago,  when  many  of  us  were  schoolboys,  there  was  certain  definite
teacumg  on  this  subject.  Probably  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  out  of  every  thousand
ettucated  Englishmen,  who  had  seriously  turned  their  thoughts  to  the  matter,  were  per-
fectly satisfied  with  the  view,  and  regarded  it  as  almost  axiomatic,  that  sacrifice  was
a  divinely  appointed  religious  rite,  intended  to  typify  and  educate  the  world  for  one
Great  Sacrifice,  which  Great  Sacrifice  having  been  accomplished,  there  was  no  need  for,
or  even  place  for,  any  future  sacrifice,  truly  so  called,  in  the  Christian  Church.  I  do  not
put  the  matter  thus  under  the  idea  that  the  consensus  of  antiquity  is  necessarily  any
warrant  for  the  truth  of  a  doctrine,  but  only  because  the  view  of  sacrifice  that  I  have
alluded  to  has  seemed  to  multitudes  so  scriptural,  so  simple,  so  fully  to  account  for  the
peculiarities  and  mysteries  of  the  subject,  that  in  reconsidering  it  we  should  be  led  to  use
the  utmost  diligence  in  finally  satisfying  our  minds  as  to  its  true  place  and  character.

For  we  must  reconsider  it,  if  not  for  our  own  satisfaction,  at  least  for  the  satisfaction
of  those  we  may  have  to  teach.  This  duty  is  forced  upon  us  by  the  fact  that  the  waves
.  of  modern  opinion  have  rudely  shaken  our  ancient,  and  what  perhaps  we  considered
our  orthodox,  notions  about  sacrifices ;  and,  indeed,  it  has  been  not  merely  a  shaking,
but  a  complex  shaking — one  wave  rolling  the  notion  in  one  direction  and  another  in  an
opposite  one,  so  that  we  feel  that  we  must  first  secure  the  notion  before  we  can  assign
it  its  true  place  in  history  and  in  reference  to  the  Christian  religion.

Men,  probably  equals  in  intellectual  force  and  learning,  have  lately  propounded
views  as  to  the  nature  and  office  of  sacrifice  so  diametrically  contradictory  the  one  to
the  other  that  both  cannot  be  true :  the  truth  must  either  reside  in  the  one,  to  the
total  exclusion  of  the  other,  or  it  must  be  found  between  the  two,  or  beyond  either.
According  to  one  view,  sacrifice  is  a  mistake  of  man's  still  undeveloped  reason  in  the
days  of  his  ignorant  wonder.  The  inexorable  laws  of  nature  pressed  upon  man's  infant
intelligence,  so  that  he  worshipped  them  in  fear,  and  exalted  them  into  gods.  The
inevitable  begat  the  idea  of  an  inflexible,  exacting  justice  which  must  be  satisfied  or
appeased.  Hence  arose  the  idea  of  propitiation  before  the  presence  of  this  rigorous
justice,  at  length  personified,  by  the  iminolation  of  the  best  a  man  had — the  fruit  of  his
body,  or  some  other  costly  human  sacrifice;  a  sacrifice  which  was,  as  human  reason
became  more  highly  developed,  commuted  by  the  offering  of  animal  instead  of  human
life.  A  further  development,  as  human  reason  grew,  was  a  mere  self-sacrifice,  not  of
blood,  but  of  service,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Buddhist.  And  the  last  stage  of  develop-
ment, according  to  this  teaching,  is  the  elimination  from  mankind  of  every  sacrificial
altar  and  every  dogma  having  a  sacrificial  aspect.

According  to  the  other  view,  not  only  were  animal  sacrifices  of  Divine  institution,

•  LEVITICUS.  b


AN  ESSAY  OK  SACRIFICE.


prospective  to  the  Great  Sacrifice,  but  tho  duty  of  offering  a  sacrifice  is  stiU  tlie  cmtral
duty  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  Catholic  Church  is  truly  Christ's  body  only  so  long
as  it  contains  a  sacrificing  priesthood,  and  a  sacrifice  as  truly  such  as  were  the  sacnlices
of  Aaron.  The  offering  of  the  Holy  Eucharist  is  not  a  commemorative  saonfice  m  Uie
sense  of  its  being  a  commemoration  of  a  sacrifice,  but  in  the  sense  of  its  being  a  true
oblation  of  that  which  shall  plead  for  the  quick,  and  even,  as  some  hold,  for  the  dead.
In  short,  according  to  this  school  of  thought,  the  highest  development  of  human  reason
in  respect  to  this  matter  is  the  exact  converse  of  that  previously  stated.  It  is  that  the
life  of  the  Church  absolutely  depends  upon  its  enshrinement  of  a  true  sacrificial  altar
and  upon  a  continually  sacrificing  priesthood.

Where  lies  the  truth  ?  m,  i

As  an  exponent  of  the  former  view,  we  may  take  a  recent  article  in  the  Nineteenth
Oentwry,  on  Shylock's  bond,  'The  Pound  of  Flesh,'  by  Mr.  Moncure  D.  Conway.
According  to  the  argument  pursued  in  that  article,  it  is  maintained  that  the  idea  of
sacrifice  arose  from  "non-human  nature;"  that  it  was  the  outgrowth  of  "nature-
worship,"  the  remorselessness  of  hard  "  natural "  law  calling  for  recompense ;  and  that
forgiveness  is  the  highest  development  of  "  human  nature  " — that  mercy  is  the  basis  of
"  purely  human  religion."

As  an  exponent  of  the  other  extreme,  we  may  take  the  writings  of  Mr.  Orby  Shipley,
who  states  that  Christ  becomes  "  incarnate  in  the  hands  of  the  priest "  at  the  consecra-
tion of  the  elements  in  the  Holy  Eucharist,  and  that  there  and  then  •  ■acrifice  U
offered  for  the  sins  of  mankind.

I  propose  to  consider  the  subject  of  sacrific&-»

L  In  its  origin ;

n.  In  its  limits.

I.

The  doctrine  that  sacrifices  were  originally  the  offspring  of  human  Ignonmee
reflected  on  the  Deity,  is  fairly  summed  up  in  the  following  extract  from  Mr.  Conway's
article  to  which  I  have  alluded :'  "  Side"  by  "side,"  Mr.  Conway  writes,  "in  all  ages  and
races,  have  struggled  with  each  other  the  principle  of  retaliation  and  that  of  for-
giveness. In  religion  the  vindictive  principle  has  euphemistic  names ;  it  is  called  law
and  justice.  The  other  principle,  that  of  remission,  has  had  to  exist  by  sufferance,  and
in  nearly  all  religions  has  been  recognized  only  in  subordinate  alliance  with  its
antagonist.  An  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,  blood  for  blood,  is  primitive  law.
Projected  into  heaven,  magnified  into  the  Divine  majesty,  it  becomes  the  principle  that
a  Deity  cannot  be  just,  and  yet  a  Justifier  of  offenders.  '  Without  the  shedding  of  blood
there  is  no  remission  of  sins.'  Since  finite  man  is  naturally  assumed  to  be  incapable
of  directly  satisfying  an  infinite  law,  all  religions,  based  on  the  idea  of  a  Divine
Lawgiver,  are  employed  in  devising  schemes  by  which  commutations  may  be  secured
and  vicarious  satisfactions  of  Divine  law  obtained.  No  Deity  inferred  from  the  always
relentless  forces  of  nature  has  ever  been  supposed  able  to  forgive  the  smallest  sin  until
it  was  exactly  atoned  for.  For  this  reason,  the  Divine  mercifulness  has  generally
become  a  separate  personification.  The  story  of  the  'pound  of  flesh'  is  one  of  the
earliest  fables  concerning  these  conflicting  principles."

Thus,  then,  if  I  understand  this  line  of  reasoning  clearly,  we  are  brought  to  the
theory  that  all  religions  have  been  the  imputations  of  human  feelings  and  experiences
to  the  Deity.    And  whether  the  Deity  exist  as  the  Great  Unknown  or  be  marelT  a

'  Nineteenth,  Century,  May,  1880,  p.  830.


AN  ESSAY  ON  SACRIFICE.  Hi


figment  of  man's  brain,  Mr.  Conway's  argument  remains  the  same.  According  to  this
theorj,  as  the  principle  of  retaliation  and  that  of  forgiveness  have  straggled  for
ascendency  in  man's  moral  development,  so  in  parallel  lines  have  the  god  or  gods  real
or  imaginary,  been  vindictive  or  forgiving.  In  this  way,  the  history  of  the  religions
of  mankind  is  merely  the  history  of  man's  moral  growth  reflected  on  another  sphere-
where  we  see  the  survival  of  the  moral  fittest,  human  mercy,  as  a  purely  human  force
gradually  supplanting  human  vindictiveness.  And  thus  Divine  law,  or  justice,  is
translated  by  human  vindictiveness ;  and  the  offering  of  sacrifices,  animal  or  other,  is  a
human  scheme  by  which  "  commutations  may  be  secured  and  vicarious  satisfactions
obtained  "  to  propitiate,  or  appease,  the  supposed  Divine  vindictiveness.

Mr.  Conway  illustrates  and  supports  his  theory  by  reference  to  Brahmanic,  Bud-
dhistic, and  Semitic  examples.

"  The  following  legend,"  he  writes,  "  was  related  to  me  by  a  Hindu,  as  one  he  had
been  told  in  his  childhood.  The  chief  of  the  Indian  triad,  Indra,  pursued  the  god
Agni,  Agni  changed  himself  to  a  dove  in  order  to  escape ;  but  Indra  changed  himself
to  a  hawk,  to  continue  the  pursuit.  The  dove  took  refuge  with  Vishnu,  second  person
of  the  triad,  the  Hindu  saviour.  Indra,  flying  up,  demanded  the  dove ;  Vishnu,  con-
cealing it  in  his  bosom,  refused  to  give  up  the  dove.  Indra  then  took  an  oath  that,  if
the  dove  were  not  surrendered,  he  would  tear  from  Vishnu's  breast  an  amount  of  flesh
«qual  to  the  body  of  the  dove.    Vishnu  still  refused  to  surrender  the  bird,  but  bared

his  breast.    The  divine  hawk  tore  from  it  the  exact  quantity,  and  the  drops  of  blood

the  blood  of  a  saviour — as  they  fell  to  the  ground,  wrote  the  scriptures  of  the  Vedas.

"  We  may  see,"  Mr.  Conway  goes  on  to  remark,  "  in  the  fable  reflection  of  a  sacrificial
age ;  an  age  in  which  the  will  and  word  of  a  god  became  inexorable  fate,  but  also  th«
dawning  conception  of  a  divineness  in  the  mitigation  of  the  law,  which  ultimately
adds  saving  deities  to  those  which  cannot  be  appeased."  Versions  of  this  story  are
traced  in  some  of  the  Hindu  writings ;  and  advancing  to  the  discussion  of  Buddhism,
Mr.  Conway  says,  "  With  Buddha  the  principle  of  remission  supersedes  that  of  sacrifice.
His  argument  against  the  Brahmanic  sacrifice  of  life  was  strong.  When  they  pointed
to  these  predatory  laws  of  nature  in  proof  of  their  faith  that  the  gods  approved  th»
infliction  of  pain  and  death,  he  asked  them  why  they  did  not  sacrifice  their  own  children  •
why  they  did  not  offer  to  the  gods  the  most  valuable  lives.  The  fact  was  that  they
were  outgrowing  direct  human  sacrifices — preserving  self-mortifications — ^and  animals
were  slain  in  commutation  of  costlier  offerings."  The  Semitic  story  adduced  is,  of
course,  that  of  Abraham  and  Isaac.  "  In  the  case  of  Abraham  and  Isaac,"  Mr.  Conway
writes,  "  the  demand  is  not  remitted,  but  commuted.  The  ram  is  accepted  instead  of
Isaac.  But  even  so  much  concession  could  hardly  be  recognized  by  the  Hebrew  priest-
hood as  an  allowable  variation  from  a  direct  demand  of  Jahve,  and  so  the  command  is
said  to  have  been  given  by  Elohim,  its  modification  by  Jahve.  The  cautious  transfor-
mation is  somewhat  in  the  spirit  of  the  disguises  of  the  Aryan  deities,  who  may  partially
revoke  as  gods  the  orders  they  gave  as  hawks.  It  would  indicate  a  more  advanced  idea
if  we  found  Jahve  remitting  a  claim  of  his  own  instead  of  one  made  by  Elohim."

Thus  too  the  Jewish  religion  and  the  Christian  religion  are  brought  under  the  same
category  with  Hinduism  and  Buddhism,  and  are  made  to  illustrate  the  same  human
principles.    The  idea,  possibility,  probability,  or  claims  of  revelation  are  untouched.

I  do  not  enter  the  arena  of  controversy  to  discuss  with  Mr.  Conway  the  character
and  revelation  of  Jehovah ;  that  would  be  quite  beside  the  mark  in  this  commentary.
But  standing  on  the  platform  of  Holy  Scripture,  I  wish  thence  to  consider  some  portion*
of  his  theory.

Kow   while  Jew  and  Christian  have  sufBcient  reason  for  believing  that  certain


W  AN  ESSAY  ON  SAOIUFICB.

sacrifices  were  commanded  or  sanctioned  by  Divine  revelation,  as  a  part  of  the
religious  observances  of  the  Jewish  people;  yet  we  find  sacrifices  of  one  kind  or  another
common  to  almost  all  ancient  nations,  and  practised  long  before  the  Israelites  were
under  Mount  Sinai.  Leaving  out  of  sight,  for  the  present,  the  object  of  the  Mosaic
•aoriflces,  and  the  possible  question  whether  Jehovah  sanctioned  and  regulated  for  the
Jewish  worship  something  which  was  already  a  part,  as  it  were,  of  human  nature,  let
us  test  the  question,  whether  the  practice  of  offering  sacrifice  can  have  had  any  such
origin  as  that  suggested  by  Mr.  Conway.

Fii-st,  take  the  central  idea,  if  I  understand  Mr.  Conway  aright,  that  the  principle
of  forgiveness,  mercy,  is  a  purely  human  attribute,  and  that  it  has  been  winning  its
way  against  the  principle  of  vindictiveness  by  a  kind  of  natural  selection,  in  the
struggle  of  the  noble  against  the  ignoble  in  the  moral  world.  I  fail  to  read  this  fact  in
the  history  either  of  the  race  or  of  the  individual.  The  principle  of  retaliation,
vindictiveness,  we  find  to-day  as  robust  as  when  the  earliest  pages  of  history  were
penned.  Purely  human,  it  has  its  origin  in  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  and
seems  to  be  an  echo  in  man  of  what  can  be  traced  through  the  brute  creation.  But  is
mercy,  as  expressed  by  the  forgiveness  of  the  injurious  by  the  injured,  of  human  origin
at  all  ?  Is  it  anywhere  to  be  traced  in  man's  history  apart  from  the  influence  of  the
religion  of  Jehovah  ?  That  there  is  a  germ  of  mercy  in  the  human  constitution  there
is  no  doubt ;  otherwise  we  could  not  understand,  appreciate,  or  practise  the  principle  of
forgiveness  at  all.  But  where  in  the  history  of  the  human  race  do  we  find  the  principle
contained  in  the  words,  "Forgive  your  enemies,"  asserting  itself,  except  in  what
Christians  hold  to  be  a  Divine  revelation  ?  It  is  undoubtedly  true  that  Koong-foo-tse
taught  that  men  should  "do  as  they  would  be  done  by."  But  we  do  not  know
whence  he  received  his  philosophy ;  possibly,  in  common  with  Gautama  Buddha,  irom
the  teaching  of  pious  Jews  at  the  court  of  Babylon— an  influence  which  may  well
have  had  a  worldwide  character  (see  Dan.  vi.  25—28).  And  "Do  as  you  would  be
done  by  "  comes  very  far  short  of  «  Love  your  enemies."  Buddhism,  again,  contains  no
teaching,  so  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover,  on  the  subject  of  forgiveness.  The
nearest  approach  to  it  that  I  have  met  with,  is  a  story  of  the  queen  Samawati,  who,
when  her  enraged  husband  was  about  to  shoot  her  with  a  poisoned  arrow,  looked  at
him  with  a  smile  of  aff'eotion,  and  so  paralyzed  his  arm  that  he  could  not  draw  the
bow;  an  act  that  was  followed  by  this  wise  piece  of  advice,  "  When  you  desire  to
pacify  anger,  look  upon  the  angered  person  with  love."  But  this  could  only  be  in  the
case  hke  her  own,  when  love  pre-existed.  And  this  story  is  not  related  by  the
Buddhists  to  enforce  forgiveness  for  its  own  sake,  but  to  illustrate  their  doctrine  that
there  is  a  supernatural  power,  derived  from  merit  in  a  former  state  of  existence  which
preserves  its  possessor  from  danger.  Mr.  Conway  states  that  "in  Buddhism  the
principle  of  rem.s.sion  supersedes  that  of  sacrifice."  I  do  not  know  upon  what  quota-
tions  from  Buddhistic  writings  he  would  verify  '  "
impossible  in  Buddhism,  since  it  forbids  the  takii

that  that  peculiar  law  of  Buddha  has  any  especial  reierence  to  the  sacrifice  of  animals
as  a  religious  observance.    And  with  resnent.  tn  th.  ^.i  „„:„,„  .r  _.  ""^""^^  »'  animals


tions  from  Buddhistic  writings  he  would  verify  this  sta"teme;r3errnVsacrire1:
impossible  m  Buddhism,  since  it  forbids  the  takincr  of  all  life  B„t  T  hlJ  ^^.°^  "'
that  that  peculiar  law  of  Buddha  has  any  especial^et'nJe  to  t^s Lr  flceTf  7n  mal!
as  a  religious  observance  And  with  respect  to  the  principle  of  remissS  or  fordve
ness  I  am  not  aware  of  a  word-though  it  may  be  that  I  b«v«  w  !!l!Lf!^^'r'


which  the  ind  vidual  man  may  be  freed  from  the  curse  of  morfa^y  "^  tK' ''^

Z'ldl  ^  r        "  '"  ^f^''''''°  ^^^'^^•'^S'  '"-y  °'ig--lly  ^--^  b  en  conn  cted  witb
the  Idea  of  the  remission  of  sins,  is  not  only  possible  but  probable.     But  ?n  ot  prel  It


AN  ESSAY   ON   SACKIFICE.


ignorance  of  the  true  historical  origin  of  the  teachings  of  Buddha,  this  is  a  subject,  the
discussion  of  which  would  be  without  the  scope  of  this  essay.  The  fact  with  regard  to
Buddhism  as  now  known  is  that,  while  the  idea  of  sacrifice  is  historically  present,  it
has  no  reference  to  remission  or  foigiveness.  Self-sacrifioe,  which  is  so  essential  a
part  of  Buddhism,  is  nowhere  connected  with  remission,  but  merit ;  as  when  Gautama,
while  a  Bodhisat  (i.e.  a  candidate  for  the  Buddhahood),  voluntarily  allowed  a  hungry
tigress  to  devour  him,  in  order  to  save  her  life  and  that  of  her  cubs,  as  a  step  towards
becoming  a  Buddha.

In  Hinduism,  again,  there  is  no  teaching  on  the  subject  of  forgiveness,  either  as
between  man  and  man,  or  the  deity  and  man,  except  in  a  very  few  passages  in  some  of
the  earliest  hymns  of  the  Eig  Veda:  as  Hinduism  progresses,  the  idea  is  lost,  not
developed.  When  the  head  of  the  cock  is  cut  off  before  the  altar  of  Kali,  there  is  no
thought  of  obtaining  forgiveness  of  the  deity ;  the  general  idea  is,  as  with  the  Buddhist,
that  merit  will  accrue  on  the  performance  of  a  prescribed  act  of  religion  which  they
have  learned  from  their  forefathers.  There  are  whole  races  of  men  in  whose  vocabu-
lary there  is  no  word  for  forgiveness.  The  spiritlof  retaliation  seems  to  be  still  as
potent  as  ever,  apart  from  the  spirit  of  Christianity.  The  successful  struggle  of  the
principle  of  forgiveness,  as  a  purely  human  attribute,  against  the  principle  of  retalia-
tion, does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  made  out.  There  must,  therefore,  be  some  other
reason  why  the  virtue  of  forgiveness,  theoretically  at  all  events,  holds  so  influential  a
position  in  the  ethics  of  the  learned  men  of  Europe.  The  Christian  would  maintRin
that  this  virtue  has  been  learned  solely  from  Holy  Scripture  by  the  moderns,  and  from
anterior  Divine  revelation  by  the  ancients.

Then,  again,  we  have  to  confront  the  theory  that  man,  under  the  influence  of  a
religious  instinct  (and,  of  course,  the  case  of  the  Christian  religion  is  here  included),  has
formed  no  higher  ideal  of  Divine  justice  than  such  as  is  a  reflection  of  his  own  innate
sense  Of  retaliation  or  vindictiveness.  This,  I  suppose,  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  passages
quoted  before :  "  In  religion  the  vindictive  principle  has  euphemistic  names ;  it  is  called
law  and  justice.  .  .  .  An  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth,  blood  for  blood,  is  primitive
law.  Projected  into  heaven,  magnified  into  the  Divine  majesty,  it  becomes  the  prin-
ciple that  a  Deity  cannot  be  just,  and  yet  a  Justifier  of  offenders."

Now,  this  is  a  subject  that  requires  extremely  nice  discrimination.  For  that  the  idea
of  vindictiveness,  or  retaliation,  has  been  "  projected,"  so  to  speak,  on  the  Divine  justice
by  the  short-sightedness  of  man,  there  is  no  doubt.  But  that  the  idea  of  the  Divine
justice  that  underlies  the  Christian  religion  is  the  offspring  of  such  a  principle  in
man's  heart,  is  a  theory  which  entirely  subverts  the  truth  of  Christianity.

We  may  begin  by  remarking  that  our  natural  views  of  justice,  equity,  are  not,  of
course,  in  any  degree  the  children  of  our  natural  impulse  towards  retaliation.  Nor  can
Mr.  Conway  be  supposed  to  suggest  this.  Equity,  human  justice,  represented  by  the
ancients  under  the  symbol  of  an  even  balance,  so  far  from  being  the  child  of  the  prin-
ciple, or  spirit,  of  vindictiveness,  is  that  which  alone  controls  it.  Justice  determines
whether  the  "  pound  of  flesh  "  and  the  debt  are  really  in  equipoise ;  justice  stops  a  man
when  his  instinctive  vindictiveness  sends  him  in  pursuit  of  his  enemy ;  the  laws  of
England  do  not  allow  a  man  to  retaliate,  but  endeavour  to  put  him  into  the  hands  of
justice ;  and  so  when  our  Saviour  said,  "  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said.  An  eye
for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth  :  but  I  say  unto,  you.  That  ye  resist  not  evil,"  he
evidently  meant  that  men  should  curb  the  impetuosity  of  personal  rindictiveness,  and
leave  their  case  in  the  hands  of  a  more  perfect  justice.

Man  has  the  power  of  realizing  a  perfect,  even-handed  justice,  however  often  and
however  &r  he  may  have  abused  the  principle  in  practice.    And  although  he  may  have


AN   EBSAY   ON   SACEIFICE.


reflected  hU  own  imperfections  on  false  gods,  and  may  have  made  them  ymd.ctiye,  the
DiYine  justice  that  underlies  the  Christian  religion  owns  none  of  this  imperfection,  but
is  in  accordance  with  that  perfect  ideal  that  man  U  capable  of  formmg,  though  not

always  of  practising.  _  ....        ,  . .       i.    i.v

How,  then,  does  the  Christian  religion  regard  the  Divine  justice  m  relation  to  the
forsiveness  of  sins?  Does  it  impute  to  that  justice  vindictiveness,  or  retaliation,  and
then  "devise  a  scheme  by  which  a  commutation  may  be  secured,  and  a  vicarious  satis-
faction obtained,"  to  meet  the  inexorable  demands  of  that  Divine  retahation?  Tne
Scripture  does  indeed  say  that  "by  the  deeds  of  the  Law  there  shall  no  flesh  be
justified  in  his  sight."  But  this  is  no  threat  of  retaliation ;  for  it  simply  states  a
self-evident  fact,  that  a  man  canuot  be  both  guilty  and  guiltless.  And  there  is  no  part
of  Holy  Scripture  which  says  that  "the  Deity  cannot  be  just,  and  yet  a  Justifier  of
offenders."  On  the  contrary,  it  says  that  "  God  can  be  just,  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  the
ungodly ; "  and  it  makes  it  a  part  of  the  justice  of  God  that  he  does  forgive  offences,
for  "  He  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins."  But  it  will  be  said,  this  act  of
God's  justice,  in  forgiving  offenders,  is  only  extended,  according  to  the  Christian
Scriptures,  in  view  of  the  "  satisfaction  "  made  to  the  Divine  justice  in  the  death  of  the
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  as  a  vicarious  offering ;  and  that  a  satisfaction  implies  something
to  be  satisfied.  This  is  in  a  certain  sense  true ;  but  there  is  no  word  in  the  New  Testa-
ment which  represents  the  satisfaction  as  made  to  any  principle  of  retaliation.  And  I
may  note,  in  passing,  that  the  word' itself, "  satisfaction,"  though  occurring  in  the  Prayer
of  Consecration  in  the  English  Prayer-book,  does  not  anywhere  occur  in  that  connection
in  the  New  Testament.  The  utmost  care  is  needed  in  enforcing  the  doctrine  of  the
atonement  from  the  pulpit,  lest  the  idea  of  retaliation  should  be  inferred.  The  spirit  of
retaliation  would  make  God  thirst  for  the  blood  of  the  sinner,  whereas  Gxjd  "  willeth
not  the  death  of  a  sinner ; "  it  would  represent  the  Deity  as  injured,  whereas  God  caimct
be  injured.  We  cannot  shut  up  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement  under  the  naked  formula,
that  man  must  be  punished  on  account  of  his  sins  unless  some  one  else  can  be  found  to
be  punished  for  him ;  that  the  justice  of  God  must  have  suffering  somewhere,  if  man  is
not  to  suffer.  To  provide  suffeiing  was  not  the  one  only  object  of  the  atonement ;  it  was
not  merely  to  balance  suffering  against  suffering  that  the  one  Great  Sacrifice  was  offered.
To  what,  then,  was  satisfaction  made  ?  It  is  made  to  absolute  justice,  to  the  truth  of
God ;  and  it  is  made  not  only  by  the.  sufferings,  but  by  the  perfect  life  of  Jesus,  as  the
perfect  man,  in  obedience  to  the  Law.  Justice — not  retaliation — demands  that  what  a
man  sows,  that  shall  he  reap.  Man  sows  sin,  and  reaps  the  necessary  results — death,
the  forfeiture  of  God's  presence.  Man  cannot  be  pardoned  and  restored  on  his  own
merits.  The  merits  of  another  are  offered  to  him.  The  picture  of  atonement  in  the  Ola
Testament  is  that  of  a  covering  of  sins,  and  in  the  New  Testament  is  reconciliation  of
man  to  God.  In  the  English  version  of  the  New  Testament  the  word  "atonement"  occurs
once,  and  translates  the  word  which  is  elsewhere  translated  "reconciliation"  (kalallage).
The  satisfaction  on  which  this  covering  of  sins  and  reconciliation  of  man  to  God  is  based
embraces  the  life,  death,  resurrection,  ascension,  and  mediation  of  the  Saviour  God-
man.  The  object  in  view  of  the  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  was  not  one,  but
tnanifold.  It  was  to  manifest  God  ("God  manifest  in  the  flesh");  to  reconcile  man's
neart  ("You,  that  were  sometimes  alienated  and  enemies  in  your  mind  by  wicked
works,  yet  now  hath  he  reconciled  in  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death,  to  present
you  holy  and  unblameable  and  unreproveable  in  his  sight ") ;  to  show  man  that  he  has  a
Mediator  ("  the  one  Mediator  between  (Jod  and  man,  the  man  Christ  Jesus ")  •  to
prove  his  love  ("  Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for
b-s  friends") ;  to  enter  death  that  he  might  show  man  that  he  is  the  victor  over  it,  ««


AN  ESSAY  ON  SAGEIFICE.  M


the  Firstfruits  from  the  dead  ("  If  Christ  he  not  raised,  then  is  our  hopa  la  vaIa  ") ;  to
read  a  lesson  to  other  spheres  ("  To  the  intent  that  now  unto  the  pribci^^iitWi  and
powers  in  heayeuly  places  might  he  known  by  the  Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of
Qod,  according  to  the  eternal  purpose  which  he  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  criv  Lord").
In  all  this  he  stood  in  man's  place  to  suffer ;  the  "  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon
him ;  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed ; "  "he  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  Law,
being  made  a  curse  for  us."  His  merits  were  so  .perfect  that  they  outweighed  all  man's
demerits,  so  that  for  his  sake  man  can  be  justified  and  accepted  according  to  the
covenant  of  grace.  Nay,  this  doctrine  of  the  atonement  is  too  wonderful,  too  mys-
teriously great,  too  deep  to  be  gauged  by  man  ;  we  have  not  yet  fathomed  its  depths ;  nor
had  even  the  inspired  apostle,  who  wrote,  "  Oh  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the
wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  1  how  unsearchable  are  his  judgments,  and  his  ways  past
finding  out !  "  But  to  introduce  the  spirit  of  vindictiveness,  or  retaliation,  on  the  part
of  the  Jehovah  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  as  thirsting  for  the  blood  of  the  sinner,  ami
demanding  the  sufferings  of  Christ  from  any  principle  analogous  to  the  human  principle
of  retaliation — ^as  though  he  would  demand  the  pound  of  flesh  because  he  could  not
obtain  the  sheltered  dove — is  one  of  the  greatest  insults  ever  offered  to  the  Christian
religion,  which  declares  that  the  whole  motive  power  towards  salvation  was  love.  "  God
so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  helieveth  in  him
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."

The  fact,  however,  remains,  that  the  Christian  religion  does  centre  round  a  Sacrifice ;
and  the  further  fact  remains,  that  not  only  was  the  Jewish  religion  a  religion  of
sacrifices,  but  that  in  almost  all,  if  not  all,  nations  sacrifices  have  been  offered  from  the
earliest  days  of  historical  man,  and  in  many  cases  up  to  the  present  moment.  What
has  originally  given  birth  to  the  idea  of  sacrifices?  It  is  asked, "  Are  they  not  substitu-
tions, that  have  suggested  themselves  to  man,  by  which  to  propitiate  and  avert  from
himself  the  supposed  Divine  vindictiveness,  which  he  has  euphemized  as  Divine  law  and
justice  ?  "  The  answer  must  be,  first,  that  it  seems  impossible  that  man  could  invent  the
system  of  sacrifice.  Suppose  a  man,  in  the  dawn  of  human  reason,  who  should  have  no
better  idea  of  Divine  justice  than  as  interpreted  by  his  own  innate  vindictiveness.  We
may  even  suppose  him  to  have  reasoned  up  to  the  conclusion,  that  the  deity  cannot  be
just,  and  yet  the  justifier  of  the  guilty ;  that  is,  that  a  man  cannot  he  held  to  he  guilt-
less imless  his  complete  innocence  is  manifest.  And  to  this  he  adds,  from  his  own
nature,  that  Nemesis  must  overtake  him.  But  what  is  there  in  human  nature  to  suggest
to  him  to  make  an  offering  in  blood,  whether  human  or  animal  ?  He  fears,  it  may  be,
the  vengeance,  the  vindictiveness,  or  even  the  malignity  of  an  unseen  deity  on  himself.
But  what  is  there  in  that  to  suggest  the  idea  of  a  propitiatory  offering,  a  commutation,
a  vicarious  satisfaction,  in  lieu  of  his  own  person,  in  blood  ?  Nay,  what  is  there  to
suggest  any  offering  of  any  kind  ?  Human  vindictiveness  might  lead  him  to  hurl  a  dart
at  the  imagined  deity,  could  he  hope  to  reach  him ;  but  of  what  avail  would  any  kind  of
offering  be?  Would  he  think  of  bribing  the  deity  not  to  injure  him,  as  he  might  bribe
an  earthly  judge  ?  Should  such  a  thought  arise  in  his  mind,  it  would  perish  at  the  first
attempt;  for  what  man  would  try  twice  to  bribe  an  earthly  judge  who  persistently
refused  the  bribe  ?  And  what  man,  in  fear  of  an  earthly  judge,  would  think  of  going  to
his  door  with  the  life-blood  of  his  son,  or  of  the  best  of  his  flock  ?

We  will  suppose  the  case  of  such  a  primitive  man,  totally  unacquainted,  from  what-
soever cause,  with  any  portion  of  a  Divine  revelation.  He  embodies  in  his  imagination
the  phenomena  of  the  atmosphere  as  the  attributes  of  a  personal  deity,  whom  we  may
call  Indra.  From  Indra  he  receives  the  bounties  of  the  sun  and  rain  which  mature  his
harvests,  and  also  the  floods,  torrents,  tempests,  and  thunder  and  lightning,  which  make


viii  AN   ESSAY  ON  SACEIFL  E.


him  fear.  He  surrounds  this  deity  with  a  moral  atmosphere  of  inflexible,  uncompromis-
ing remorselessness— the  moral  shadow,  we  may  say,  of  the  character  he  attaches  to  tli«
physical  heavens.  Suppose,  then,  that  one  day,  when  he  and  his  sons  are  reaping  their
harvest,  their  great  desire  being  for  a  cloudless  heaven  to  dry  their  sheaves,  an  ominoui
cloud  gathers ;  the  heavens  are  soon  black,  the  forked  lightning  darts^with  angry  quiver
from  cloud  to  cloud,  and  from  cloud  to  earth  :  the  thunder  seems  to  split  the  firmament
in  rage  :  till  out  darts  a  forked  tongue  of  flame,  and  slays  his  youngest  son  at  his  feet.
Will  he"  regard  this  as  Indra's  retaliation  on  account  of  some  offence  he  has  been  guilty
of?  Suppose  it  is  so.  What  would  human  nature  suggest  to  him  to  do  in  order  to  escape,
if  possible,  Indra's  further  vindictiveness  ?  Is  there  anything  in  his  nature  that  would
lead  him  to  cut  the  throat  of  his  eldest  son,  and,  hurling  him  on  a  pile  of  faggots,  to  con-
sume his  body  with  fire,  as  a  holocaust,  to  appease  the  supposed  wrath  of  liidra,  and  so
under  the  idea  of  sacrificing  a  substitute  of  the  greatest  worth  in  his  estimati(»n,  to  wara
off  danger  from  himself?  Would  he  be  likely  to  fling  the  blood  of  his  lamb  or  his  kid
towards  the  heavens,  under  the  idea  of  sheltering  himself  from  Indra's  retaliative  stroke?
Or  could  anything  in  his  own  nature  suggest  to  him  that  Indra  required  some  voluntary
sacrifice  ?  We  cannot  touch  even  the  elements  of  such  a  thought  in  man's  nature,  much
less  trace  their  development.  There  is  nothing  whatever,  surely,  in  human  nature  to
suggest  such  thought  or  action.

But  there  is  a  kind  of  sacrifice  which  man  has  always  understood — self-sacrificQ  for
the  sake  of  another.  Mr.  Conway's  illustrations  would  seem  to  me  to  touch  this  thought
lather  than  the  idea  of  commutation  by  sacrifice.  History  is  full  of  this  phase  of
sacrifice.  When  Qautama  Buddha,  as  related  above,  was  pictured  as  giving  his  body  as
food  to  the  tigress,  the  idea  was  self-sacrifice  for  the  sake  of  the  starving  animal  and  her
young.  The  bravery  of  Horatius  Cocles,  though  his  life  was  spared,  is  an  illustration  of
the  same  thought.  There  is  the  idea  of  substitution :  but  it  is  a  substitution  in  the
sacrifice  of  one's  self  at  one's  own  hands  for  the  salvation  of  another.  This  is  a  doctrioe
which  man  can  understand.  But  the  idea  of  thrusting  forward  a  substitute  for  the  sake
of  guarding  one's  self  is  foreign  to  man's  innate  nobility.

Turn  the  matter  as  we  will,  nothing  is  more  diflScult  than  to  try  to  realize  what  there
is  in  man  that  would  lead  him  of  his  own  accord  to  offer  the  life  of  a  bullock,  a  sheep,
a  goat,  or  a  dove,  to  propititate  the  Divine  justice.  But  it  has  been  done  in  all  ages.
How  has  the  custom  originated?

It  has  arisen  about  the  world-sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ.  That  was  a  self-sacrifice  of  the
highest  conceivable  import;  but  it  involved  the  shedding  of  a  life.  And  that  one
Sacrifice,  coupled  with  the  life,  resurrection,  and  ascension  of  Jesus  Christ,  was  in  allits
bearings  the  most  significant  event  that  ever  happened  in  the  history  of  the  human  race.
Should  not,  then,  the  world  of  all  time  be  educated  for  that  one  great  central  "  mystery
of  godliness,"  the  reconcihation  of  the  worid  by  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  the  outward
circumstance  of  which  was  the  life-shedding  of  Jesus  on  Calvary  ?

The  world  has  often  been  divinely  taught  by  signs  ;  and  the  deeper  the  degradation
of  man,  the  simpler  and  more  pointed  the  sign.  Jeremiah,  with  his  "  marred  girdle,"  his
"  potter's  clay,"  his  "  good  and  evil  figs  j "  Ezekiel,  with  his  "  tile,"  his  "  razor,"  his  "  staff
upon  his  shoulder,"  and  his  "  seething-pot,"  are  familiar  examples.  In  these'days  of  the
Christian  Church  we  are  taught  by  a  very  significant  symbol  to  realize,  as  we  look  upon
It,  the  offering  of  Jesus  Christ  on  the  cross  ;  a  symbol  appointed  by  his  own  words  and
acts—"  Thb  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  The  breaking  of  bread  and  the  eating  it,  the
ponnng  out  of  wine  and  the  drinking  it,  are  the  symbol  under  which  we  are  to  "  ghow
the  Lord's  death  till  he  come."

But  how  was  the  world  to  be  educated  in  prospect  of  that  Sacrifice?    The  great


AN  ESSAY  ON  SACRIFISE.


central  fact  to  be  taught  was — ^the  shedding  of  a  life  the  salvation  and  life  of  the  woild.
We  are  taught  now  to  look  upon  that  Sacrifice  at  a  meal,  because  the  atoning  power
must  always  be  connected  with  the  life-giving  power.  The  eating  of  bread  and  the
drinking  of  wine  are  signs  distinct  enough  to  keep  the  world  in  memory  of  the  fact  and  '
eharacter  of  the  death  of  Christ,  the  Life  of  the  world.  The  Lord's  Supper  is,  moreover,
a  bridge  of  history,  taking  us  back  by  unerring  steps  to  the  hour  of  its  institution,  and
the  hour  of  Christ's  agony.  But  to  prepare  the  world  for  this  great  idea,  to  perpetuate
through  succeeding  generations,  before  the  event,  an  expectation  of  the  coming
"  mystery,"  something  more  distinct  was  appointed.

To  take  the  Mosaic  dispensation  as  a  starting-point,  we  find  under  that  dispensation
the  great  analogue  to  the  Lord's  Supper  in  the  system  of  sacrifice.  And  we  have  the
authority  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  for  saying  that  the  Jewish  sacrifices  were  a
figure  of  Christ.  Then  also  the  symbol  was  connected  with  a  meal;  or  had  in  every
case  at  least  some  reference  to  food.  Except  in  the  case  of  the  whole  burnt  offering,
either  the  priests  and  the  offerers  of  the  sacrifice,  or  the  priests  alone,  solemnly  ate  the
offering,  and  that  for  the  most  part,  in  "  the  holy  place."  Nor  was  the  animal  sacrifice
the  only  sacrifice :  the  "meat  offering"  (jninchaK)  yias  as  truly  a  sacrifice  as  the  Iamb,
part  being  also  consumed  in  the  holy  fire,  and  part  eaten  by  the  priest.  Every  animal
sacrifice  was  an  animal  or  bird  used  for  food.  But  to  the  ritual  of  the  animal  sacri-
ficial meal  was  added  a  most  elaborate  ritual  as  to  the  previous  slaying  of  the  animal
itself,  and  the  sprinkling  of  its  blood,  the  offerer  putting  his  hand  on  the  head  of  the
victim,  and  being  taught  to  regard  the  sacrifice  as  a  picture  of  atonement,  the  Hebrew
idea  of  which  was  a  covering,  or  a  hiding  of  sin ;  and  the  blood  was  called  the  blood
of  the  covenant.  Thus,  while  the  lesson  of  life  by  food  is  the  same  in  the  Lord's  Supper
and  the  sacrificial  feast,  the  symbol  of  breaking  of  bread  in  token  of  the  death  of  the
Lord's  body  is  replaced  by  a  much  more  powerful  symbol  in  the  slaying  of  the  animal
that  supplies  the  feast,  and  the  solemn  sprinkling  of  its  blood.  The  two  ordinances
are  from  the  same  hand ;  and  while  we  see  the  exquisite  beauty  of  the  symbolism  in
the  commemorative  Supper  of  the  Lord,  we  cannot  fail  to  see  the  beauty  of  power
in  the  parallel  symbolism  of  the  shedding  of  blood  in  the  prospective  Old  Testament
dispensation.

But  for  the  Jews  to  realize  that  power  they  must  have  been  instructed  in  the  fact
that  God  would  provide  a  greater,  a  perfect  atonement  in  the  person  of  the  long;
promised  Messiah.  They  must  have  had  an  intelligent  knowledge  of  what  the
"  covenant "  meant.  The  Eucharistic  service  of  the  Church  of  the  Christian  dispensation
could  have  no  meaning  for  the  man  who  was  unacquainted  with  the  atonement  of
Christ.  Nor  can  we  conceive  the  intelligent  and  devout  Jew  seeing  in  the  mere  blood
and  death  of  an  animal  a  covering  for  his  sin.  The  Jew  was  not  taught  that  the  death
of  the  animal  was  accepted  instead  of  his  punishment ;  but  he  was  instructed  to  look
upon  it  as  a  foreshadowing  of  a  perfect  Offering  to  come.  This  may  not  be  apparent
on  a  cursory  glance  at  the  Pentateuch  ;  but  the  New  Testament  commentary  leaves  no
doubt  on  the  question.  "  It  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should
take  away  sins ; "  the  first  tabernacle  was  " a  figure  for  the  time  then  present ; "  "the
Law  having  a  shadow  of  good  things  to  come,  and  not  the  very  image "  (or  full
revelation)  "  of  the  things,  can  never  with  those  sacrifices  which  they  offered  year  by
year  continually  make  the  comers  thereunto  perfect."  This  is  not  a  contradiction  of
the  Old  Testament,  but  an  explanation  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  Of  Moses  we
know,  through  our  Saviour's  own  words,  that  he  saw  through  and  beyond  the  type
to  the  Antitype :  "  Had  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  would  have  believed  me :  for  he  wrote
of  me ; "  as  of  Abraham,  that  he  "  saw  Christ's  day,  and  was  glad."    That  the  sacrifices


AN  ESSAY  ON  SACEIPICE.


were  nothing  in  themselves  is  a  lesson  constantly  brought  before  the  Jews.  "  To  what
purpose  is  the  multitude  of  your  sacrifices  tmto  me  ?  saith  the  Lord :  I  am  full  of  the
burnt  offerings  of  rams,  and  the  fat  of  fed  beasts ;  and  I  delight  not  in  the  blood  of
•  bullocks,  or  of  lambs,  or  of  he  goats."  That  the  offering  of  the  sacrifice  was  efScacious
in  itself  for  atonement  as  an  opus  operatum,  was  man's  perversion  of  the  truth ;
a  perversion  that  is  consonant  with  all  that  we  know  of  human  nature,  of  which  every
age  testifies  that  it  will  hold  tenaciously  to  the  outward  forms  of  religion,  and  with
difficulty  maintain  its  spirit.  The  Jew  was  never  taught  that  the  slaying  or  oflFering
of  the  animal  was  an  atonement  in  itself.  Neither  the  animal  nor  the  minchah  was  a
substitute  for  something  else — a  commutation,  but  a  foreshadowing,  an  educating  of
the  world  for  the  appreciation  of  the  one  atonement.  As  the  sabbatical  divisions
of  days  and  years  were  to  familiarize  Israel  with  the  idea  of  a  final  rest ;  as  the  cities
of  refuge  were  to  familiarize  them  with  the  idea  of  salvation  ;  as  the  most  remarkable
institution  of  the  goel,  the  kinsman-redeemer,  was  to  familiarize  them  with  the  idea
of  redemption  ; — so  the  most  elaborate  ritual  of  sacrifice  was  to  train  them  for  the
expectation  of  the  offering  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all  on  the  cross,  for  the  reconciliation
of  the  world.     It  was  the  great  sacrament  of  the  old  world.

Thus,  then,  the  nature  and  the  object  of  the  Mosaic  sacrifice  seems  very  evident;  and
its  origin,  with  that  of  all  its  most  remarkable  accompaniments,  was  Divine.  The  farther
question  now  arises.  What  was  the  origin  of  other  and  previous  sacrifices?  First  of  all,
the  idea  of  sacrifice,  as  connected  with  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  was  not  originated
under  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  Jethro,  before  the  institutions  of  Mount  Sinai,  "  took
a  burnt  offering  (olali)  and  sacrifices  (zebachim)  for  God."  These  are  the  same  words
that  are  in  use  afterwards  under  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  "  And  Aaron  came,  and  all
the  uldersof  Israel,  to  eat  bread  with  Moses' father-in-law  before  Gk)d"(Exod.xviii,  J2)
—not  an  ordinary,  but,  no  doubt,  the  sacrificial  feast,  the  old-world  sacrament.  Again,
Jacob,  on  the  eve  of  his  memorable  parting  with  Laban,  "offered  sacrifice  upon  the
mount,  and  called  his  brethren  to  eat  bread."  The  sacrifice  here,  again,  was  the
tebach ;  and  was  not  the  "  eating  bread "  the  same  sacrificial  feast  ?  Noah  also  on
coming  out  of  the  ark  "  builded  an  altar "  (mizbeach,  from  zdbach,  to  slay),  "  and  took
of  every  clean  beast,  and  of  every  clean  fowl "  (i.e.  such  as  were  eaten), "  and  offered  burnt
offerings  (oloth)  on  the  altar."  Of  Abel  also,  in  the  very  first  generation  of  historical
men,  we  know  that  he  "  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock  and  of  the  fat  thereof,"  as
an  offering  unto  the  Lord ;  and  why  was  his  offering  acceptable  but  that  it  was  brought
in  obedience  to  God's  own  express  direction  ?

The  animals  sacrificed  were  always  food  animals.  Twice  the  sacrifice  i«  mentioned
in  connection  with  a  meal.  And  in  Exodus, "  to  hold  a  feast "  and  "  to  sacrifice  "  seem
to  refer  to  the  same  event.  The  inference,  therefore,  is  by  no  means  extravagant,  that
the  pre-Mosaic  saciifices  were  of  precisely  the  same  kind  as  those  of  the  Mosaic  dis-
pensation. The  "clean"  animals  used  for  sacrifice  were  so  used  Jecouse  they  were
the  animals  used  for  food.  (The  theory,  it  may  be  observed,  that  animal  food  was
not  used  before  the  Deluge  seems  to  rest  on  no  foundation  whatever.)  And  if  food  was
consecrated  to  the  worship  of  Jehovah  from  the  days  of  Adam,  as  food  is  Bow  con-
secrated by  the  words  of  Jesus  htmself  to  the  same  worship  in  the  Lord's  Supper,
where  shall  we  seek  for  the  origin  of  that  significant  feast,  and  the  ritual  of  its
observance,  but  in  Jehovah  himself?

It  may  not  be  unimportant,  as  a  confirmation  of  such  a  view  of  the  matter  to  not*
here  that  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  in  probably  every  point,  would  seem  to  have  been
a  renewal  of  former  Divine  directions  as  to  the  externals  of  worship.  The  leading
features  of  the  Mosaic  dispensation  wear  the  appearance  rather  of  a  reformation  than


AN   ESSAY  ON  SACRIFICE.


<af  an  initial  institution.  Thus  the  very  form  and  character  of  the  tabernacle  itself,
«nd  after  it  of  the  temple  of  Solomon,  were  precisely  the  same  as  we  now  find  in  many
Hindu  temples.  We  cannot  think  that  the  Hindus  copied  at  any  time  the  form  of  th«
^bemacle  in  the  wilderness  or  of  the  temple  on  Mount  Moriah.  Rather  we  must
-suppose  that  the  Hindus  still  perpetuate  what  was  the  most  primitive  form  of  a  temple
-for  Divine  worship,  the  fane  with  its  two  rooms  and  the  surrounding  court ;  and  that
4hat  form  was  reinstituted  under  Mount  Sinai.  Nor  was  there  anything  new  in  the
Aaconic  priesthood :  Melchizedek  was  a  eohen ;  Jethro  was  a  eohen.  Then,  again,  as
40  the  sacrifices,  the  minchah  is  still  the  daily  ofTering  in  the  Hindu  temple ;  food  ii
-offered  before  the  idol  in  the  inner  room  of  the  fane,  a  handful  is  consumed  on  the
sacrificial  fire,  and  the  meal  is  eaten  by  the  priests.  The  same  kind  of  food  offering
was  made  both  by  Grreeks  and  Romans.  The  sacrifice  of  food  animals  has  also  been
3)erpetuated  by  various  other  nations.  Such  were  the  principal  sacrifices  among  the
■Greeks  and  Romans,  and  among  the  Hindus  there  is  stiU  the  sacrifice  of  the  lamb.
:Some  even  of  the  minutiaa  too  of  the  more  ancient  rites  evidently  remained  intact  for
Ages ;  as,  for  instance,  compare  Numb.  xix.  2,  "  They  shall  bring  thee  a  red  heifer
-  .  .  upon  which  never  came  yoke,"  with  Ovid  ('  Fasti,'  iii.  375,  376)—

"  ToUit  humo  munus  ccesa  prius  ille  juvenca,
Quffi  dedeiat  uulli  colla  premenda  jugo."

We  cannot  account  for  these  things  by  supposing  that  the  heathen  nations  learned
4he  rules  of  sacrifice  from  the  Jews.  The  only  rational  supposition  is  that  they
(retained  many  of  the  externals  of  primitive  worship,  while  the  worship  of  the  Jews
^/r-Aa  truly  the  primitive  worship  divinely  restored.  Heathen  religious  rites  and  sacri-
^oes  are  fossils  of  the  old-world  Church  history,  the  exuvim  of  dead  faiths.  Incrustedi
indeed,  they  are  with  superstitions  many  and  grievous,  petrified,  the  true  primitive  life
long  since  crushed  out  of  them ;  but  yet  unmistakably  the  remains  of  an  ancient
^rden  of  the  Lord's,  of  a  primitive  sacrificial  and  sacramental  worship,  the  analogue
•of  that  which  was  again  seen  in  the  days  of  Moses,  David,  and  Solomon.

If  Bucb  be  the  case,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  conclude  that  the  whole  system  of  heathen
sacrifice,  however  degraded  and  distorted  in  its  present  application,  bears  ample  witness
-to  a  Divine  origin.  The  theory  that  sacrifice  is  an  outcome  of  human  nature  does  not
t)ear  examination.  The  fact  that  man  will  cling  to  the  externals  of  religion  while
losing  its  spirit,  is  attested  by  all  history.  The  very  existence,  therefore,  of  priest  and
-sacrifice  as  worldwide  facts  would  seem  to  point  back  infallibly  to  a  day  of  pure
aeligion  and  a  Gk>d-appointed  worship.

n.

Is  there  a  sacrifice,  a  priesthood,  and  an  altar  in  the  Christian  Church?

This  question  is  so  suggestive,  and  related  to  so  much  that  is  collateral,  that  only
salient  points  must  here  be  touched  upon,  and  such  as  have  reference  to  what  has  gone
%efoi«,  or  this  essay  would  very  soon  exceed  its  due  limits.

First,  perhaps,  it  is  well  to  guard  one's  self  against  an  idea  too  commonly  expressed,
*hat  the  Mosaic  dispensation  was  "  imperfect."  The  thought  has  arisen  around  the
expression  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  of  the  "  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle."
The  Mosaic  dispensation  wot  imperfect,  as  all  human  things  must  be,  even  when  of
Divine  appointment,  when  compared  with  Christ ;  but  it  was  not  imperfect  as  a  dis-
fiensation.  No  ordinance  from  God's  hands  can  be  imperfect.  The  sacrificial  system
'must  have  been  the  very  best  method  of  teaching  the  ways  of  God  to  man,  or  it  would
ttot  have  been  institited.    We  must  not,  therefore,  approach  the  words,  "sacrifice,"


AN  ESSAY   ON  SACRIFICE.


"priest,  "  "altar,  "-with  a  prejudice.     They  were  once  God's  ordinance.     Are  they

so  still?  .

The  Lord's  Supper  is  manifestly  a  modiflcation  of  the  ancient  prospective  sacrificial
system,  for  the  edification  of  the  Church  in  retrospect.  In  what  particulars,  as  regards-
directions  actually  recorded,  does  the  Institution  given  under  Mount  Sinai  differ  from
the  Saviour'sinstitution?  In  both  the  Saviour  istypifled  by  food  at  a  meal.  But  in
the  latter  there  is  no  direction  as  to  an  "offering;"  neither  is  the  Church  nor  the
individual  instructed  to  "present"  the  bread  and  the  wine  before  God,  as  under  the
former  sacrificial  system.  There  is  no  direction  as  to  animal  food ;  indeed,  practically
it  is  prohibited.  There  is,  therefore,  no  ritual  of  blood.  There  is  no  command  tO'
confess  sins  in  connection  with  an  offering,  as  when  under  the  older  dispensation  ther
offerer  laid  his  hand  on  the  head  of  the  victim.  There  is  no  command  to  burn  a
portion  of  the  food  in  the  sacred  fire  ;  no  sacred  fire  is  vouchsafed.  Hence  no  altar,  of
the  same  character  as  the  Jewish  altar,  is  required ;  nor  is  one  mentioned  by  the;
Saviour.  There  is  no  mention  made  of  a  priest ;  those  who  were  commanded  to  per-
petuate the  ordinance  were  not  called  coTiens  by  Christ,  but  "apostles,  "  missionaries.
Nearly  all  the  actual  ancient  sacrificial  duties,  both  of  priest  and  people,  were  practi-
cally abrogated  at  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the  only  point  authoritatively-
preserved  being  the  partaking  of  the  mincha-h  with  wine.  The  Lord's  Supper,  then,
in  that  it  is  a  typical  feast,  a  part  of  the  ancient  feast,  picturing  the  blessed  Redeemer
in  his  sacrifice  for  the  life  of  the  world — "  This  is  my  body,  which  is  given  for  you ;"
"  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  covenant" — has  most  distinctly  a  sacrificial  aspect ;  but-
it  is  denuded  of  almost  all  the  observances  peculiar  to  the  ancient  sacrificial  feast.
It  points  to  the  same  offering  as  the  old-world  sacrifices,  and  by  the  same  method,  but.
accompanied,  as  it  is  apparently  intended  to  be,  with  much  less  elaborate  circum-
stance. An  adaptation,  however,  of  the  more  ancient  sacrificial  system  it  most-
manifestly  is ;  such  an  adaptation  as  seemed  to  him,  who  is  the  All-wise,  best  fitted
for  the  edification  of  the  future  Church.

But  is  it  not  evident  that,  by  the  method  of  our  Saviour's  institution,  many  details^
vere  left  to  be  otherwise  determined  1  Nothing  can  be  more  distinct  than  the  matter,
the  form,  and  the  intention  of  the  Lord's  Supper ;  but  there  is  no  direction  as  to  the
how,  the  when,  or  the  where.  Under  the  Mosaic  dispensation  every,  the  most  minute,
particular  was  provided  for  by  Divine  ordinance.  Time,  place,  person,  and  manner  are
most  exhaustively  described.  But  our  Saviour  did  not  in  like  manner  appoint  the-
priest,  the  vestments,  the  accompaniments,  the  ritual  of  the  Holy  Meal.  The  com-
mission, "  Bo  this  in  remembrance  of  me,"  was  given  to  the  sacred  society  of  apostles,
or  missionaries,  who  afterwards  received  that  further  commission,  "Go  ye  into  all  the
world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  "  They,  therefore,  were  the  first
celebrants ;  but  their  exact  method  of  procedure  has  not  been  handed  down  to  us.
They  were  inspired  men ;  had  they  subsequently  any  Divine  directions?  All  we-
know  on  this  matter  is  found  in  1  Cor.  xi.  Were  the  apostles  left  to  their  private
judgments  as  to  the  arrangements  necessary  for  the  suitable  celebration  of  the  Lord 'S'-
Supper?  or  were  they  divinely  directed?  We  cannot  know.  But  we  do  know  that
very  early  in  the  history  of  the  Church  the  Lord's  Supper  was  separated  from  the
agapae,  and  administered  at  a  special  service ;  that  at  this  service  there  were  customs
which  seem  to  be  a  modified  revival  of  the  customs  of  the  ancient  sacrificial  system
notably  the  confession  of  sins  by  the  congregation,  and  the  public  declaration  of  God's
acceptance  on  repentance.  It  could  not  have  escaped  the  early  Christians  especially
the  Jewish  converts,  that  the  Lord '  sSupper  (established,  too,  as  it  had  been '  during  the
observance  of  the  most  significant  and  important  of  the  Jewish  sacrificial  feasts)  was  a.


AN  ESSAY  ON  SACRIFICE.  xiii

•wiroepectiTe  adaptation  of  the  once  prospective  sacrifice.  We  cannot  wonder,  there-
■fore — though  we  know  not  the  exact  customs  of  the  apostles  themselves — that  we
-should  early  read  of  the  Christian  sacrifice,  the  Christian  priest,  the  Christian  altar.
The  "  elements  "  of  the  feast  were  a  continuation  of  the  "  meat  offering,"  the  minchah,
part  of  every  former  sacrifice ;  the  presbyter,  elder,  or  president,  who  served  at  the
table,  though  not  a  priest  of  the  Aaronic  line,  yet  might  well  be  called,  in  a  certain
though  modified  sense,  a  priest ;  and  the  table  at  which  he  served,  though  no  longer
the  seat  of  the  sacred  fire,  or  sprinkled  with  blood,  was  to  the  Christian  what  the  altar
had  been  to  the  Jew — that  from  which  he  fed  on  the  picture  of  Christ.  And  I  cannot
•doubt,  on  a  candid  examination  of  the  expression,  though  I  once  held  to  the  contrary,
-that  there  is  a  reference  to  the  table  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  Heb.  xiii.  10,  "  We
'(Christians)  have  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  the  taber-
jiacle."  True  it  is  that  Christ's  divinity  is  the  actual  altar  of  the  universe,  which
upheld,  sustained,  and  sanctified  the  humanity  of  Jesus  in  his  sacrifice  of  himself;  yet,
AS  the  Jewish  altar  was  that  which  held  the  picture  of  the  Sacrifice  to  come,  and  from
which  the  Jew  ate  the  emblematic  feast,  so  the  holy  table  from  which  we  Christians
feed  in  memory  of  Christ's  death,  is,  in  a  parallel  though  modified  sense,  an  altar.  To
-refuse  to  the  Christian  Church,  then,  the  very  names  of  sacrifice,  priest,  and  altar  wonld
■seem  almost  to  be  to  deny  the  propriety  and  solemnity  of  the  words  under  the
-earlier  dispensation,  and  to  interfere  materially  with  our  understanding  the  real  signifi-
cance of  our  Saviour's  institution  aa  an  adaptation  of  the  divinely  appointed  sacrificial
system  to  the  Christian  dispensation.

Yet  as  different  views  may,  no  doubt,  lawfully  be  taken  as  to  the  intention  of  our
l»lessed  Saviour's  silence  at  the  moment  of  the  institution  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  we
«hould  surely  allow  that  latitude  of  thought  to  others  who,  like  ourselves,  love  the
liOrd  Jesus  in  sincerity.

What  is  the  error  that  has  grown  up  about  the  words  "  sacrifice,"  "  priest,"  and
■"altar"?  It  is  idolatry  ;  that  is,  making  the  picture  more  than  a  picture.  When  the
Jew  believed  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  could  take  away  sin,  he  perverted
the  truth  and  the  ordinance  of  God ;  and  when  the  Christian  holds  that  there  is  In
ithe  Lord's  Supper  a  propitiatory  sacrifice  for  the  quick  and  the  dead  for  the  remission
«f  sing,  he  equally  abuses  the  truth  of  God  and  the  beauty  of  the  ordinance.  It  is  the
-confounding  of  the  inward  spiritual  grace  in  the  sacraments  with  the  rite  itself  that  has
teen  at  the  root  of  the  chief  of  the  religious  errors  of  mankind.  The  inward  spiritual
^race  is  the  apprehension  and  appropriation  by  the  intelligence  and  the  affections  of
that  which  the  outward  observance  typifies,  and  therefore  to  the  faithful  the  actual
reception  of  its  benefit ;  and  the  observance  itself,  when  rightly  understood,  becomes
6n  mstrument  in  arousing  that  apprehension,  as  well  as  a  pledge  and  means,  by  virtue
^f  its  institution,  of  our  receiving  that  grace.  But  to  make  a  sacrament  an  opus
'Operatum,  to  convert  the  image  into  that  which  it  represents,  is  idolatry.  It  is  this
astounding,  though  truly  human,  error  that  plunged  the  ancient  world  into  heathenism,
4he  Jewish  world  into  Pharisaism,  and  the  Christian  world  into  what  is  now  commonly
«alled  Popery.  The  fall  of  the  intelligence  when  the  floods  of  -superstition  are  let  in
4ipon  the  soul,  is  great  indeed  ;  so  that  a  man  can  even  hold  the  blasphemous  doctrine
ithat  the  blessed  Redeemer  can  become  incarnate  in  the  sacramental  elements  of  bread
*nd  wine  in  the  hands  of  the  priest,  and  that  it  is  necessary  for  salvation  that  the
•body,  soul,  and  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  should  be  digested  in  the  human  stomach.
This  is  a  fall  sorer  than  any  fall  on  record  of  the  Jews ;  however  much  we  may  I'ity
iheir  unbelief,  we  have  no  evidence  that  any  Jew  ever  taught  that  every  Passj.-er
iamb  and  every  victim  brought  to  the  altar  was  God  incarnate ;  and  yet,  if  it  be  true


AN  ESSAY  ON   SACEIFICB.


of  the  Christian  element  of  sacrifice,  It  must  have  been  true  of  the  Jewish.  We  canao*
wonder  at  the  reformers  of  the  English  Church  expunging  the  word  "  altar  "  from  the
Prayer-book,  when  we  know  how  the  idea  of  the  Christian  altar  was  perverted  to  servn
the  purposes  of  the  grossest  idolatry.  But  in  meeting  the  doctrinal  errors  that  hav»
entwined  themselves,  like  Laocoon's  snakes,  around  the  Christian  altar,  it  is  surely
not  necessary  for  us  to  blind  ourselves  to  the  fact  that  our  Saviour  did  perpetuate  for
the  Church  the  principle  and  method  of  the  ancient  sacrificial  feast ;  and  that,  there
fore,  in  some  sense  at  least,  we  have,  as  the  Church  seems  from  very  early  times  t©-
have  expressed  herself,  a  sacrifice,  a  priest,  and  an  altar ;  always  remembering  that,  m
reference  to  sacrifice,  that  sense,  as  defined  by  St.  Chrysostom  and  others  in  the  early-
Church,  who  speak  of  the  Eucharist  as  a  sacrifice,  is  that  it  is  a  "  commemoration  of  »
sacrifice  "  (vide  St.  Chrysostom  on  Heb.  x.  9).

The  points  to  be  kept,  then,  constantly  and  pronnnently  before  the  Church  are  r
first,  that  we  must  not  misinterpret  the  character  of  the  Jewish  sacrifice  itself;  second,
that  we  must  maintain,  as  a  truth  for  all  time,  that  an  image  of  a  thing  cannot  be  the
thing  itself;  and  third,  that  as  the  Jewish  sacrifice  was  not  truly  in  itself  propitiatory,,
but  only  the  figure  and  pledge  of  propitiation  and  spiritual  life,  so  there  is  no  pro-
pitiation, but  only  a  figure  and  pledge  of  the  propitiatory  and  life-giving  office  of  Christ
in  the  Holy  Eucharist.  And  then  we  need  not  fear  to  use  the  Old  Testament  terms,  st>
in  one  instance  appears  to  me  to  have  been  done  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  for
designedly  parallel  Christian  ordinances.

And  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  seems  to  be,  that  the  Church  still  has,  in  s>
reasoTiJihle  though  modified  sense,  not  an  ofiering  for  sin,  but  still  a  sacrifice,  whicte
tho  Church  of  England  calls  a  "  sacrifice  of  praise  and  tljanksgiviii|(,"


THE  LEVITTCAL  SACEIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED

BT  THE

REV.  PROFESSOR  ALFRED  CAVE,  B.A-

That  man  of  steel,  as  he  was  called,  Origen,  the  greatest  of  the  great  Fathers  of
Alexandria,  had,  to  judge  from  his  Eclogues  and  his  Homilies  on  Leviticus,  a  very  poor
opinion  of  the  literal  interpretation  of  tlie  ritualiatio  sections  of  the  Book  of  the  Law.
The  circumstantial  and  realistic  observances  of  the  Jew,  based  upon  an  unquestioning
acceptance  of  the  Levitioal  injunctions,  were  considered  by  Origen  both  inappropriate
and  useless.  Nay,  the  literal  interpretation  of  this  diversified  rubric  made,  he  thought,
cavillers  and  infidels  ;  for  it  led  some,  to  use  his  own  words,  to  "  despise  the  Law  as  a
vile  thing  unworthy  of  the  Creator,"  and  others  to  "  impiously  condemn  the  Creator
himself  who  could  ordain  such  vile  commands."  Hence  his  so-called  spiritual  sense —
a  gross  misnomer,  unless  the  spiritual  is  synonymous  with  the  imaginative — was
Origen's  great  panacea  for  all  the  apparent  inanities  of  the  sacred  records,  the  infallible
harmonizer  of  all  its  seeming  contradictions.  And  bis  tilented  lead  has,  alas !  been
followed  by  only  too  many  eminent  successors.  It  was  but  an  application  of  the  same
method  of  forcibly  squaring  Law  with  Gospel,  when  in  the  next  age  such  moulders  uf
opinion  as  Augustine  and  Ambrose  descended — the  former  to  expound  in  his  treatise, '  De
Isaak  et  Anima,'  the  simple  fact  of  Rebekah's  filling  her  pitcher  at  the  well,  as  "  the
soul  descending  to  the  fountain  of  wisdom  to  draw  the  discipline  of  pure  knowledge."
and  the  latter  to  find  a  reference  in  circumcision  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  qua
desideria  carnalia  au/ert.  Even  when  the  reign  of  Augustine  in  Biblical  hermeneutics
gave  way  before  the  infiuence  of  that  delicate  exegete,  Isidore  of  Uispala,  whose  work,
•  De  AUegoriis,'  became  a  type  of  scriptural  exposition  in  the  Middle  Aces,  it  was  virtually
the  same  allegorizing  principle  which  was  advocated  and  exemplified.  Nor  was  the
case  different  at  the  Reformation.  When,  at  that  epoch,  the  close  study  of  Scripture
became  a  vital  necessity  for  the  consolidation  of  belief,  the  writings  of  Melancthon  and
Luther,  Zwingli  and  Calvin,  abundantly  testify  to  the  prtdominant  fondness  for
"  spiritualizing ; "  whilst  the  subsequent  history  of  the  Lutheran  and  Reformed  Churches
further  witnesses  to  the  potency  of  these  revered  leaders,  until  spiritualizing  blossomed
into  such  amusing,  if  not  appalling,  extravagances  as  are  to  be  found  in  Coccejus  and
bis  school.  To  Lund,  for  example,  Aaron's  rod  that  budded  was  a  type  of  the  rod  out  of
the  stem  of  Jesse  ;  its  supernatural  greenness  was  a  type  of  Christ's  supernatural  con-
ception ;  the  mystery  of  its  sprouting  a  type  of  the  mystery  of  the  birth  of  the  Son  of
the  Virgin ;  the  night  of  its  blossoming  was  a  type  of  the  night  in  which  the  miraculous
birth  of  Christ  occurred  ;  there  were  three  things  on  the  rod,  after  the  miracle,  which
were  not  there  before — Cleaves,  flowers,  and  fruits,  whereby  the  threefold  work  of  the
Redeemer  is  prefigured ;  and,  not  to  linger  farther  upon  this  illustration,  in  the  preser-
vation of  the  rod  within  the  holy  of  holies  we  have  foreshadowed,  he  supposed,  the

IiEVmCITS.  •


THE  LEVITICAL  SAOEIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


pasdng  of  the  risen  Christ  into  the  heavenB,  there  to  await  the  advent  of  his  elect.
Could  exegetical  caprice  go  further?

That  this  "  spiritualizing  "  method  of  interpretation  has  fallen  somewhat  Into  disre-
pute is  due  to  an  unexpected  source  of  enlightenment.  "  It  is  an  ill  wind  that  blows
no  one  good,"  and  a  more  vivid  conception  of  the  historical  character  of  the  Old
Testament  has  heen  one  of  the  good  things  which  the  ill  wind  of  rationalism,  with  its
microscopic  and  carping  criticism  of  the  letter,  has  blown  to  the  Chriafian  Church.
When  the  rationalists  frigidly  maintained  that  the  Old  Testament  was  but  a  collection
of  the  historical  records  of  Judaism,  to  be  regarded  in  the  same  light  as  a  collection  of
the  archives  of  Greece  say,  or  Rome,  the  Church  could  at  least  cheerfully  accept  one
part  of  the  contention,  and  believe  that  the  Old  Testament  was  a  historical  record.  Thus
the  Old  Testament  came  to  be  studied  for  itself,  as  well  as  for  its  connection  with  the
New.  Thus  the  Old  Testament  came  to  be  considered  at  least  as  worthy  of  examina-
tion for  its  own  sake,  and  apart  from  its  relation  to  C3iristianity,  as  the  sacred  books  of
Mahomet  or  Zoroaster,  Kakya-Mouni  or  Buddha.  In  fact,  it  is  now  readily  acknow-
ledged that  the  most  repulsive  details  of  the  ceremonial  law,  to  say  nothing  of  the
splendid  eloquence  of  the  prophets,  are  facts  in  religious  history  deserving  of  close
investigation  as  snch.  Largely  thanks  to  the  indirect  influence  of  the  rationalistic
movement,  the  Jewd  are  now  seen  to  have  had  a  distinctive  religion  of  contemporary  as
well  as  prospective  value.

To  trace  the  outline  of  that  Old  Testament  faith,  to  authenticate  the  credibility  and
the  historical  character  of  its  records,  to  contrast  that  faith  with  the  other  religions  of
the  world,  to  demonstrate  its  advance  upon  the  creeds  of  heathendom  and  towards  the
creed  of  Christ,— rsuch  a  task  of  elucidation,  comparison,  and  defence  is  one  of  the  press-
ing needs  of  our  day,  to  be  satisfied  only  by  the  use  of  all  modern  appliances,  and  in
view  of  all  modem  scholarship.  One  prominent  phase  of  that  Old  Testament  religion  is
that  of  Mosaism,  or  the  religion  of  the  Hebrews  as  far  as  it  can  be  deduced  from  the
Pentateuch.  Further,  of  Mosaism  the  Levitioal  sacrifices  form  no  imimportant  section.
To  study  the  nature  and  significance  of  these  Levitical  sacrifices,  as  they  are  in  them-
selves, rather  than  in  their  connection  with  Christianity,  is  the  aim  of  this  introduction.
In  other  words,  our  purpose  is  to  prosecute  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  injunctions
of  the  Law  which  bear  upon  these  sacrifices,  and  to  see  whither  such  interpretation
will  conduct  us.  The  Levitical  sacrifices  will  approve  themselves  a  religious  cultiu
not  unworthy  to  be  designated  Divine.

The  course  which  will  be  pursued  is  as  follows.  A  classification  of  the  Levitical
sacrifices  will^rs*  be  given.  Next,  some  principles  will  be  deduced  from  the  letter  of
Scripture  by  which  the  comprehension  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices  will  be  facilitated.
Thirdly,  an  application  will  be  made  of  the  principles  thus  deduced  to  the  elucidation
of  the  entire  scheme  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices.  Fourthly,  the  relation  of  this  sacrificial
worship  to  that  of  the  patriarchal  age  will  be  pointed  out.  Fifthly,  the  relation  of  this
sacnficial  worship  to  the  sacrificial  views  of  the  New  Testament  will  call  for  some  remark.
And  lastly,  a  few  words  may  be  bestowed  upon  the  bibliography  of  the  subiect.

And  at  this  point  the  writer  may  advisedly  call  attention  to  the  difforeni  standpoint
ne  here  assumes  to  that  occupied  in  his  work  upon  'The  Scriptural  Doctrine  of  Sacri-
fice. To  put  that  standpoint  briefly,  he  would  say  that,  whereas  his  view  of  the  Jewish
sacrificea  was  previously  more  analytic,  he  aims  in  this  introduction  at  a  synthesis  at
buiidmg  np  into  a  consistent  whole  the  numerous  details  of  the  Mosaic  ritual,  and  dis-

edition,  issued  in  1738.  ,  i  «ui,  i   u ,  edited  and  annotated  by  Wolf,  in  ,  new


THE  LEVITICAL  SACEIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.  iii

playing  thereby  the  salient  and  instructive  characteristics  of  the  Levitical  sacrificial
cultus.  Let  the  writer  state,  however,  once  for  all,  that  where  he  has  expressed  any
details  of  that  cultus  in  as  fitting  and  accurate  language  as  he  is  capable  of  in  his  earlier
work,  he  has  not  gone  about  to  seek  a  new  dress  for  old  facts,  but  has  freely  used  his
previous  materials.  Where,  therefore,  passages  occur  in  inverted  commas,  without  the
mention  of  the  name  of  an  author,  it  will  be  understood  that  the  writer  quotes  from  bis
earlier  work.

A.  The  CLAssiFioATioir  of  the  Levitical  Saceifices.

At  the  outset  it  is  necessary  to  classify  the  numerous  sacrificial  rites  of  the  old
covenant  with  some  accuracy.  An  indispensable  preliminary  to  such  a  classification  is
a  precisedefinition  of  "sacrifice."  According  to  the  usage  ofthe  Old  Testament,  the  most
general  term  for  sacrifice  is  qorban.  This  word  was  employed  in  the  Law  to  describe
the  genus  of  which  sacrifices  of  all  kinds  were  species.  It  is  expressly  predicated  of
the  burnt  offering,  the  peace  offering,  the  thank  offering  and  the  votive  offering,  the
sin  offering,  the  trespass  offering,  the  Passover,  the  sacrifice  of  the  Nazarite  on  the
expiry  or  breach  of  his  vow,  the  whole  range  of  national  sacrifices,  the  firstfruits,  and
even  offerings  made  to  Jehovah  of  the  spoils  of  battle.  Qorban  is  manifestly  the
generic  Hebrew  term,  equivalent  to  our  English  term  sacrifice.  The  important  thing,
therefore,  in  defining  "sacrifice"  in  a  scriptural  sense  is  to  ascertain  the  customary
Biblical  significance  of  this  term.  Not  to  delay  upon  philological  considerations,  which
may  be  studied  by  the  curious  in  the  Appendix  to  the  writer's  previously  mentioned
work,  BufBce  it  to  say  that  this  Hebrew  word  is  expressly  used  and  translated  by
an  unequivocal  Greek  word  in  a  passage  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  St.  Mark's  Gospel.
That  passage  runs  thus  :  "  'Eoc  Aip  HvBpanros  t^  ttot/jI  t)  tJ  lOfrpl'  Kop$ay,S  icrnv  Sapov,t
ecky  ii  ijiov  axpeXriBps i"  "  K  a  man  shall  say  to  his  father  or  his  mother,  Qorban,  that  is
to  say,  a  gift,  by  whatsoever  thou  mightest  be  profited  by  me "  (Mark  vii.  11).  This
"  Kop0ay,  3  iany  Sapor"  settles  the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  sacrificial  technicality  once  for
all,  at  the  same  time  as  the  insertion  of  the  Hebrew  word  throws  light  upon  the  unfiUal
pleading  alluded  to.  Qorban,  the  equivalent  of  the  English  word  sacrifice  in
general,  is  a  gift  to  Ood.  The  usage  of  the  LXX.  is  identical.  A  sacrifice  in  the
Levitical  sense  was  a  gift,  or  offering,  or  presentation  made  to  Jehovah.  Ewald  wa»,
therefore,  perfectly  at  liberty  to  call  abstinence  from  labour  upon  the  sabbath  a  sacri-
fice of  rest ;  nor  would  it  be  inconsistent  with  the  usage  of  the  Pentateuch  to  call
obedience  to  the  legal  injunctions  concerning  the  seventh  year  and  the  year  of  jubilee
by  the  name  of  sacrifice,  or  to  regard  a  scrupulous  adherence  to  the  Levitical  laws  of
food  a  self-denial  of  the  nature  of  a  sacrifice.  In  the  large  majority  of  cases,  however,  a
distinction  was  perceptible.  A  sacrifice,  in  the  legal  sense,  was,  it  is  true,  a  presentation
to  Jehovah.  But  in  the  stricter  sense  of  the  word  a  presentation  could  not  be  indis-
criminately made  either  as  regards  time  or  place.  Especially  is  emphasis  laid  in  the
Law  upon  the  place  of  presentation.  It  is  at  the  place  where  Jehovah  consents  to
record  his  Name,  at  the  one  appointed  place  for  Divine  worship,  that  sacrifices  in  the
stricter  sense  can  alone  be  made.  Whilst,  therefore,  Ewald  is  etymologically  correct,  it
is  doubted  by  many  whether  he  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  usage  of  the  Law  when  he
designates  those  offerings  sacrifices  which  were  not  presented  at  the  one  ap|iointed  place
where  man  might  meet  with  his  Maker.  It  is  true  that  the  usage  for  whicli  Ewald
contends,  according  to  which  prayers,  and.charity,  and  abstinence,  and  obedience,  may
be  termed  sacrifices,  is  common  to  the  books  of  the  prophets  and  ofthe  New  Testament,
whereas,  on  the  other  hand,  the  legal  application  of  sacrifice  seems  to  be  almost  restricted
to  offerings  associated  with  the  courts  of  the  Lord.     Kurtz  avoids  the  difficulty  by


THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


dividing  the  Levitical  saori6ces  into  sacrifices  in  general  and  altar  sacrifices— an  un-
necessary distinction,  apt  to  conceal  their  common  significance.

Defining  sacrifice,  then,  in  accordance  with  both  usage  and  etymology,  as  a  gift,  a
presentation  to  God.  a  surrender  to  God  of  what  has  cost  the  offerer  somethmg,  a
material  embodiment  of  the  self-sacrificing  spirit,  and  remembering  that  in  the  large
maiority  of  cases  at  least  these  sacrifices  were  associated  with  the  holy  places,— the
several  ordinances  of  the  Mosaic  Law  in  reference  thereto  will  arrange  themselves  under
the  following  classes.  There  were  the  national  sacrifices,  or  those  presented  m  the  name
of  the  entire  Jewish  people  by  their  representatives.  There  were  the  official  sacrifices,
or  the  specific  acts  of  worship  by  presentation  prescribed  for  the  ecclesiastical  and
political  orders.  And  there  were  the  personal  sacrifices,  which  were  made  by  individual
suppliants  of  the  Heavenly  Majesty.  To  the  enumeration  of  the  several  varieties  under
each  of  these  three  divisions  we  now  proceed,  after  uttering  a  proviso.  When  we  speak
of  the  Levitical  sacrifices  we  do  not  mean  those  which  are  recorded  in  Leviticus  simply,
but  those  contained  in  any  of  the  legal  poi-tions  of  the  Pentateuch.  The  Book  of
Leviticus  does  not  contain  the  entire  Mosaic  ritual ;  its  legal  provisions  are  supplemented
by  parts  of  Exodus  and  Numbers.  Indeed,  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  sharp  separation
of  the  Leviticus  from  the  other  parts  of  the  Pentateuch  is  not  of  very  late  date.
Apparently,  to  judge  from  the  Jewish  rolls  of  the  Law,  what  we  now  call  the  Book  of
Leviticus  was  simply  sections  twenty-four  to  thirty-three  of  the  Torah,'  the  first
division  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptires.

I.  Thb  national  sacrifices.  Sacrifice,  as  a  form  of  Divine  worship,  was  not  confined
under  the  Law  to  individuals,  whether  among  the  priests  or  the  populace.  The  nation
as  such  was  identified  with  sacrificial  observances.  A  national  rejoicing  was  regarded
as  possible,  and  therefore  a  national  thank  offering.  The  chosen  people  were  supposed
to  be  collectively  capable  of  humiliation  and  confession  of  sin,  and  therefore  of  a
national  atonement.  Similarly,  a  national  self-surrender  to  the  will  of  Jehovah  was
deemed  to  be  frequently  appropriate,  and  hence  national  burnt  offerings  were  consumed
in  the  national  behalf.  This  national  identification  with  the  Levitical  sacrifices  is  a
prominent  characteristic  of  the  Jewish  Church.

The  national  offerings  consisted :  1.  Of  the  serial  offerings,  or  those  daily,  weekly,
and  monthly  sacrifices  ordered  to  be  presented  in  the  nation's  behalf.  2.  Of  the  festal
offerings,  or  the  ceremonial  appropriate  to  the  several  exceptional  days  of  sacrificial
observance.  3.  Of  the  offerings  for  the  service  of  the  holy  place;  and  4.  Of  some
extraordinary  offerings  instituted  in  response  to  a  widely  felt  need  for  worship  or
humiliation  at  extraordinary  seasons.

1.  The  serial  offerings.  Every  day,  morning  and  evening,  the  priests  were  bidden  to
effect,  in  the  name  of  the  congregation,  the  burnt  offering  of  a  lamb  of  a  year  old,  and
to  present  therewith  its  appropriate  meal  offering  and  drink  offering  (Exod.  ixix.
38 — 42;  ch.  vi.  1 — 4;  Numb,  xxviii.  3 — 8).  The  presentation  was  made  according
to  the  customary  ritual  for  burnt  offering.  From  the  regularity  of  its  succession  this
daily  burnt  offering  is  also  called  the  "continual"  or  "continuous"  burnt  offering
(Exod.  xiii.  42 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  6 ;  comp.  Dan.  viii.  11).  The  only  additional  feature
of  this  daily  offering  to  which  attention  need  be  called  is  the  probability  of  a  direct
association  with  the  people  at  large  by  a  peculiarity  of  ritual.  According  to  rabbinic
tradition,  the  nation  was  expressly  represented  in  the  court  of  the  Lord's  house  by
certain  iDj^a  '^)n,  or  permanent  officials,  who  performed  the  customary  rites  of  the
imposition  of  their  hands  upon  the  victim,  and  its  slaughter.  Should  this  tradition
>  Bee  'Commentary  upon  the  Holy  Bible,'  edited  by  Canon  Cook,  •Leviticus,'  toL  1


THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


simply  refer  to  the  days  of  Zerubbabel's  temple,  still  that  later  practice  must  point  back
to  some  earlier  form  of  national  representation."

Every  sabbath  the  daily  bm-nt  offering  was  doubled  night  and  morning  (Numb.
xxviii.  9, 10).

On  the  first  day  of  every  month,  or  on  the  new  moon  as  it  was  called,  two  young
bullocks,  a  ram,  and  seven  lambs,  with  the  prescribed  meal  and  drink  offerings,  were
ordered  to  be  offered,  in  addition  to  the  continuous  burnt  offering ;  a  kid  was  also  to
be  killed  for  a  sin  offering  (Numb,  xxviii.  11—15).  The  new  moon  was  also  emphasized
by  a  rousing  blast  upon  the  silver  trumpets  (Numb.  x.  10).  Further,  on  the  new  moor
of  the  seventh  month,  dignified  pre-eminently  with  the  name  of  the  Feast  of  the  Bias  J
of  Trumpets,  an  additional  burnt  offering  was  to  be  made  of  a  bullock,  a  ram,  and
seven  lambs,  in  addition,  that  is,  to  the  offering  of  the  month  and  the  daily  burnt
offering  (oh.  xxiii.  23 — 25 ;  Numb.  xxix.  1 — 6).

2.  The  festal  offerings.  Following  the  order  of  the  Levitical  calendar,  the  several
festal  or  solemn  seasons  were  Passover,  the  Paschal  Feast,  and  Pentecost  (or  the
Passover  cycle),  and  the  Day  of  Atoiiement,  followed  by  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles
(or  the  cycle  of  the  seventh  month).

The  Passover  cycle.  Even  in  the  first  celebration  of  the  Passover,  amidst  all  the
idolatry  and  hardship  of  Egypt,  there  were  features  of  sacrificial  import.  It  was  by
Divine  command  that  a  lamb  or  kid,  a  male  and  physically  immaculate,  had  been
slain  at  sunset  in  every  household,  the  sacred  blood  having  been  sprinkled  with  hyssop
upon  the  posts  and  lintels  of  the  front  door.  Also  it  was  by  Divine  command  that  the
victim  was  roasted  whole,  and  hastily  partaken  of  with  loins  girt  and  staff  in  han  d
Thus  two  features — the  blood  ritual  and  the  sacred  feast — were  not  without  their
sacrificial  reference.  And  this  reference  was  made  yet  more  distinct  when  the  per-
petual celebration  of  the  Passover  was  enjoined  under  altered  conditions,  and  when  the
solemn  feast  of  expectation  became  the  solemn  feast  of  reminiscence.  Instead  of  being
slain  at  home,  the  Paschal  lamb  was  to  be  slain  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,  and
instead  of  being  sprinkled  upon  the  doorway  of  the  offerer,  it  was  to  be  sprinkled  upon
the  altar  of  burnt  offering  (comp.  Exod.  xii.  j  Deut.  xvi.  1 — 8 ;  2  Chron,  xxx.  16  ;
XXXV.  11 ;  also  Exod.  xiii.  3 — 10 ;  xxxiv.  18 — 21 ;  ch.  xxiii.  4—8 ;  Numb.  ix.  1—14  ;
xxviii.  16—25).

On  the  morning  after  the  Paschal  Supper,  namely,  on  the  fifteenth  of  the  first  month,
the  Paschal  Feast  commenced.  It  lasted  seven  days,  the  first  day  and  the  last  par-
taking of  the  character  of  a  sabbath ;  that  is  to  say,  work  being  interdicted,  and  a
public  assembly  of  the  people  at  the  one  place  of  worship  enjoined.  This  feast  is  known
under  two  names.  It  is  most  frequently  called  in  the  Pentateuch  the  Feast  of
Unleavened  Bread,  from  the  circumstance  that  none  but  such  bread  was  eaten  by
command  throughout  its  course.  It  is  once  designated  the  Feast  of  the  Passover  in
the  Pentateuch.  In  after  times  these  names  were  retained.  At  this  feast,  in  addition
to  the  abstention  from  leaven — ^itself  of  sacrificial  significance — a  peculiar  ritual  was
ordered  to  be  observed.  Every  day,  after  the  offering  of  the  customary  burnt  offering,
a  further  offering  by  fire  was  made.  Two  bullocks,  a  ram,  and  seven  lambs,  with  their
accompanying  meal  and  drink  offerings,  wore  to  constitute  the  festal  burnt  offering,  and
one  goat  the  sin  offering ;  these  offerings  being  repeated  every  day  of  the  feast.  The
second  day  of  the  feast  was  also  characterized  by  an  additional  act,  not  a  little  curious.
Being- the  time  of  early  harvest,  a  sheaf  of  the  firstfruits  was  brought  to  the  priest,  who
"  waved "  it  before  the  Lord,  presenting  at  the  same  time  a  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering,

>  See  Carpzov,  '  Apparatus  Historioo-Criticus  AntKiaitatnm  Gentis  Hebraica '  (1748),
pp.  109,  110.    Oomp.  Keil,  '  Handbuch  dor  Bibl.  Arohaologie,'  sect  76,  1.


THE  LEVITIOAL  SACRIFICES  LlfEBALLT  CONSIDERED.


together  with  a  fifth  of  an  ephah  of  meal  and  a  quarter  of  a  hin  of  wine  (corap.  tk,
xxiii.  9 — 14 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  17 — 25).

Fifty  days  after  the  Paschal  Supper  came  the  Feast  of  Harvest — to  use  one  of  th«
several  designations  of  the  final  feast  of  the  Passover  cycle — so  called  from  the  time  of
its  observance.  Another  name  for  this  feast  was  that  of  Firstfruita,  a  designation  which
is  self-explanatory.  From  the  fact  that  seven  full  weeks  were  allowed  to  elapse  after  the
Passover  before  its  celebration,  it  was  also  named  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  or  possibly  this  name
refers  to  the  whole  period  between  Passover  and  Pentecost.  The  date  of  its  occurrence  aim
explains  its  later  name,  just  mentioned,  of  Pentecost.  The  feast  lasted  but  a  day,  and
partook  of  the  nature  of  a  sabbath.  This  feast  again  has  a  special  sacrificial  ritual
peculiar  to  itself,  consisting  of  a  meal  oflfering,  a  burnt  offering,  a  sin  offering,  and  a
peace  offering :  the  meal  offering  being  two  loaves  of  leavened  bread,  to  be  offered  M
firstfruits;  the  burnt  offering  consisting  of  seven  lambs,  one  ram,  and  a  bullock  together
with  meal  offerings  and  drink  offerings ;  a  kid  constituting  the  sin  offering,  and  two  lambg
the  peace  offering.  The  common  details  of  the  ritual  of  presentation  were  observed
with  two  exceptions— the  two  loaves  and  the  two  lambs  were  simply  waved  before  the
Lord,  and  were  not  consumed  by  fire;  they  were  "holy  to  the  Lord  for  the  priest"

(comp.  ch.  xxiii.  15—21 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  26 — 31 ;  Deut.  xvi.  9 12).

The  cycU  of  the  seventh  month.  The  seventh  month  stood  out  in  strong  relief  in  the
Jewish  calendar.  It  opened,  as  we  have  seen,  with  the  Feast  of  Trumpets,  as  if  to
awaken  the  nation  year  by  year  to  the  high  importance  of  the  days  in  which  it's  lot  was
cast,  and  continued  with  blended  solemnity  and  rejoicing,  bringing  in  due  course  thf
great  Day  of  Atonement,  upon  the  tenth  of  the  month,  and  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,
or  Ingathering,  upon  the  fifteenth.

The  ritual  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  was  peculiarly  sacrificial,  and  although  there  is
combined  therein  not  only  offerings  referring  to  national  sins,  but  those  of  an  official
nature,  it  may  tend  to  clearness  if  that  ritual  be  described  in  order  once  for  aU.  "The
law  concerning  the  Day  of  Atonement  contains  instruction  as  to  the  performance  of  the
appropriate  ritual,  and  as  to  its  performance  annually.  The  prescribed  ritual  was  u
follows :  As  a  sacrifice  for  the  priesthood,  the  high  priest  was  to  bring  a  sin  offering  of*
bullock  and  a  burnt  offering  of  a  ram ;  and  as  a  sacrifice  for  the  congregation,  a  sin
offering  of  two  he-goats  and  a  burnt  offering  of  a  ram.  The  priest  was  to  be  clothed,
not  in- his  state  costume,  but  in  a  dress  entirely  of  white,  to  be  put  on  after  bathing
the  whole  body,  and  not  simply  the  hands  and  feet  as  customarily.  This  dress  of  white
was  not  even  the  plain  official  dress  of  the  ordinary  priesthood,  for  that  had  a  coloured
girdle.  Lots  were  then  cast  upon  the  two  he-goats-one  lot  for  Jehovah  and  one  for
Azazel;  and  a<=oording  as  the  lots  fell,  so  were  they  presented  as  living  sacrifices  before
iill^lt!;./  Tr,!Trv,  '^"  1^^^""°"^  °^  '^'  P"^^'^°°'l  ''"d-the  holy  places  then
ZSriJSn  H  .1"  '^"'•''S.^f  °  t'°  *^  ^  ^i'^  °ff«ri"g  for  himself  and  his  house,
the  high  pr.es  filled  the  censer  with  embers  from  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  and  with
mcense  and  placed  the  censer  within  the  vail.  Some  of  the  blood  of  the  ol  w^  Z
sprinkled  upon  the  mercy-seat  and  seven  times  upon  the  ground.  Atonemrt  wm
afterwards  made  for  the  nation.     The  he-goat  was  slain   and  its  WnTi  u

t^\ti^:  f°'r'  ^'' ''''''''''  -  *^^  ^'°°^  °^  tL:':;xrd  tv2ytr  s


THE  LEVITIOAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.  »ij

kimself  at  the  layer,  and,  having  donned  his  official  rohes,  offered  the  humt  offerings  foi
himself  and  the  people."

Further,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  time  of  wild  and  often  libidinous  rejoicing  as  it
was,  had  its  specific  ritual  of  gifts  and  atonement,  adjusted  to  the  several  days  during
which  it  lasted.  Seven  days  long  were  the  booths  standing  in  the  sacred  court,  and  a
kind  of  retrogression  was  observed  in  the  sacrificial  procedure.  As  on  the  other  fast
days,  a  goat  was  daily  offered  as  a  sin  offering.  The  number  of  rams  and  lambs  was
doubled,  being  two  and  fourteen  respectively.  But  it  was  in  the  number  of  bullocks
that  the  distinguishing  feature  of  the  feast  appeared.  Seventy  bullocks  in  all  were
offered,  these  being  so  distributed  that,  on  the  last  day  of  the  feast,  seven  were  slain,
eight  on  the  day  preceding,  nine  on  the  day  previous  to  that,  and  so  on,  daily  increasing
by  one  until  the  total  reached  thirteen,  the  proportion  slaughtered  on  the  first  day
(comp.  Exod.  xxiii.  16 ;  oh.  xxiiL  34 — 43 ;  Numb.  xiix.  12—38  j  Deut.  xvi.  13 — 16 ;
xxxi.  10—13).

3.  The  offerings  for  (he  service  of  the  holy  place.  These  offerings  consisted  of  the
holy  oil  for  the  daily  replenishing  of  the  lamps  of  the  golden  candlesticks,  arranged
"  from  evening  to  morning  "  by  the  priesthood ;  of  the  incense,  peculiarly  compounded,
■nd  daily  burnt  upon  the  golden  altar ;  and  of  the  twelve  loaves,  arranged  in  rows,  with
frankincense  and  libations  of  wine,  to  judge  from  the  furniture  of  the  table  of  shew-
bread,  which  were  laid  before  the  Lord  as  a  memorial  at  the  beginning  of  every  week,
and  eaten  by  the  priests  as  "  a  most  holy  thing  "  at  the  close.  In  the  present  reference,
the  significant  fact  in  connection  with  these  offerings  is  that  they  were  national  rather
than  official,  to  say  nothing  of  personal.  For  the  materials  thereof  were  selected  from
offerings  representatively  made  by  the  people.  Thus  it  is  the  children  of  Israel,  and
not  the  priests,  who  are  bidden  to  bring  pure  olive  oil  for  the  lamps  of  the  sanctuary.
It  would  seem  also  that  the  constituents  of  the  sacred  incense  were  the  gift  oi  the
people,  seeing  that  in  the  first  instance  they  were  ordered  to  be  provided  by  Mosea,  the
representative  of  the  tribes  at  large  rather  than  of  Levi.  And,  as  regards  the  shew-
bread,  conceding  that  the  number  of  its  loaves  did  not  point  to  tbe  number  of  the
tribes,  as  seems  probable,  it  is  expressly  said,  "every  sabbath  it  shall  be  presented
before  Jehovah  continually  on  the  part  of  the  sons  of  Israel,  an  eternal  covenant"
(ch.  xiiv.  8).  Compare  on  tbe  above  statements,  Exod.  xxvii.  20 ;  ch.  xxiv.  2 ;  Kxod.
XIX.  34 — 38 ;  xxv.  30;  ch.  xxiv.  6 — 8 ;  Numb.  iv.  7 ;  Exod.  xxvii.  12.

4,  The  extraordinary  offerings.  Amongst  these  offerings,  in  which  we  sm  the
general  theory  of  Old  Testament  sacrifice  applied  to  unlooked-for  waves  of  national
sentiment,  whether  penitential  or  eucharistic,  may  be  classed  such  abnormal  offerings
as  those  for  the  erection  of  the  tabernacle ;  those  at  the  consecration  of  Aaron ;  the
surrender  of  their  mirrors  by  the  Hebrew  women  for  the  manufacture  of  the  Isazen
laver;  the  sin  offerings  presented  by  the  congregation  in  acknowledgment  of  lome
special  sin  of  national  bearing,  such  as  the  crimes  of  Korah  and  Achan ;  or  the  multi-
tude of  sacrifices  slaughtered  at  the  consecration  of  the  temple.  A  very  interesting
series  of  instances,  showing  as  they  do  a  trial  of  old  ordinances  in  new  conditi(HiB,  an
application  of  the  Law  to  changed  circumstances,  an  apprehension  of  the  spirit  which
is  nobler  than  an  obedience  to  the  letter ;  and  suggesting,  as  they  undoubtedly  do
suggest,  a  variety  of  possible  adaptations  of  the  Law  to  religious  ends  not  expressly
contemplated.

IL  The  official  baohificbb.  Not  only  did  the  officials  of  the  Jewish  nation  act
U  the  relig)0U8  representatives  of  the  tribes  in  the  manner  just  described,  not  only  did
they  approach  the  Majesty  on  high  as  individual  suppliants  in  the  manner  about  to  be
described,  but,  according  to  the  dictates  of  the  Mosaic  Law,  there  were  sacrificial  rites


rUi  THE  LEVITIOAL  SACEiFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


administered  by  them,  neither  in  their  representative  nor  in  their  individual  capacity,
but  purely  as  officials.  These  rites  pertained  to  the  officials  of  Church  and  State  and
society  at  large,  and  may  be  conveniently  classified  according  as  they  attached  to  the
priests,  the  kings,  the  elders,  and  the  ministering  women.

1.  The  priestly  offerings.  Quite  apart  from  their  almost  endless  duties  as  the
religious  executive  of  the  Israelites,  there  was  a  distinctive  sacrificial  cultus  which
belonged  to  the  priests  in  their  exceptional  official  functions.  The  following  enumera-
tion is  exhaustive.  There  were  special  sin  offerings  to  be  made  by  any  priest  who  had
inadvertently  erred  in  the  discharge  of  his  holy  calling  (ch.  iv.  3).  There  was  a  specific
offering  of  meal  to  be  made  by  the  high  priest  daily,  morning  and  evening,  within  the
outer  vail  (ch.  vi.  14).  The  solemn  expiation  of  the  great  Day  of  Atonement  opened,
as  we  have  seen,  with  an  atonement  for  the  officiator  and  the  whole  priestly  order.  At
the  consecration  of  any  high  priest,  priest,  or  Levite,  characteristic  offerings  were
enjoined,  varying  in  costliness  and  manner  in  each  case.  Thus  at  the  consecration  of
•  Levite,  the  lowest  grade  in  the  hierarchy,  there  was  a  consecration  itself  called  a
Bacrifice  (Numb.  viii.  13);  after  a  process  of  purification,  two  young  bullocks  were
offered,  the  one  for  a  sin  offering  and  the  other  for  a  burnt  offering  (Numb.  viii.  5—26).
At  the  consecration  of  a  priest,  the  intermediate  ecclesiastical  grade,  two  sets  of  three
acts  were  performed:  in  the  first  place,  the  novice  vyas  specially  purified,  solemnly
invested,  and  religiously  anointed ;  and  in  the  second  place,  a  triple  sacrifice  was  pre-
sented in  his  behalf,  consisting  of  a  bullock  for  a  sin  offering,  a  ram  for  a  burnt  offering,
and  a  ram  for  a  peace  offering  (Exod.  xxiv.  1 — 37 ;  xL  12 — 15 ;  ch.  viii.  1 — 36).  At
the  consecration,  however,  of  the  "  anointed  priest,"  or  "  the  priest "  par  excdlence
afterwards  called  the  "high  priest,"  a  more  elaborate  ceremonial  still  was  ordained,

occupying  seven  days  instead  of  one,  and,  whilst  consisting  of  the  same  series  of  acts

purification,  investiture,  anointing,  and  sacrifice,  this  last  act  showing  as  clearly  as  the
investiture  with  the  "  golden  garments "  the  exalted  rank  of  the  person  concerned—
whereas  for  an  ordinary  priest  one  bullock  formed  a  sin  offering,  for  a  high  priest  seven
bullocks  were  offered  on  successive  days.  A  further  evidence  of  his  exalted  position
may  be  seen  in  the  sin  offering  to  he  made  by  the  high  priest  upon  any  infringement
of  his  official  duty.  "  He  was  to  offer  an  ox  without  blemish.  Having  performed  the
presentation,  the  imposition  of  the  hand,  and  the  slaughtering  in  the  customary
manner,  he  took  a  part  of  the  blood  into  the  tabernacle,  and  sprinkled  it  seven  times
'  in  the  face  of  the  vail  of  the  holy,'  and  having  put  some  of  the  blood  upon  the  horns
of  the  altar  of  incense,  he  poured  out  the  remainder  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of
burnt  offering.  The  same  fatty  portions  which  were  removed  in  the  case  of  the  peace
offerings  were  afterwards  lifted  off  the  carcase  and  consumed  above  the  daily  burnt
offering,  the  high  priest  carrying  the  rest  of  the  carcase  to  a  clean  place  before  the
camp,  and  burning  it  on  wood  with  fire."  A  ceremonial  of  highly  significant
variations  1

2.  The  offerings  of  the  princes  and  the  ruler.  Express  mention  is  made  of  elaborate
offerings  made  at  the  dedication  of  the  tabernacle  "  by  the  princes  of  Israel,  heads  ol
the  house  of  their  fathers  "—gold  and  silver  utensils,  a  goat  apiece  for  a  sin  offering
and  large  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings  (Numb.  vii.  10—89).  Express  mention
is  also  made  of  a  sin  offering  for  a  ruler,  whether  judge  or  king  (ch.  iv.  22—26)
Remembering,  however,  the  special  offerings  of  David  and  Solomon  on  set  evasions,  it
would  appear  that  the  offerings  just  mentioned  are  simply  instances  of  an  adaptatioii
of  the  sacrificial  cultus  to  the  sanctification  of  the  chief  officers  of  the  State  and
instances  which  any  occasion  of  great  penitence  or  gratitude  might  constitute  into  as.
inspiring  p-ecedent.


THE  LEVITIUAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.  u

8.  I%e  offerings  of  the  holy  women.  In  this  case  again  we  seem  merely  to  have  an
instance  of  a  class  of  presentations  capable  of  infinite  repetition  by  sections  of  Jewish
lociety.  These  holy  women  "  served  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle"  (Exod.  xxxviii.  8;
1  Sam.  U.  22),  not  assisting,  of  course,  in  any  of  the  ritual  prescribed  for  the  priests  or
Levites,  but  abiding  apparently  in  a  holy  ministration  of  prayer  and  praise,  fasting  and
sacrifice,  like  the  saintly  daughter  of  Fhanuel ;  at  least,  such  is  the  interpretation  ot
these  holy  attendants  suggested  by  the  Septuagint,  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  ^etucae,
and  many  rabbis,  as  shown  by  Miinster  and  Pagius  in  the  '  Critici  Sacri.'

ni.  The  personal  offebinos.  These  are  divisible  into  two  classes — the  blood  and
».he  bloodless  sacrifices,  the  former  including  the  burnt  offerings,  the  peace  offerings,  the
sin  and  the  trespass  offerings ;  and  the  latter  including  the  meat,  or  the  meal,  offerings
as  they  are  better  termed,  the  libations,  the  offerings  of  oil  and  incense,  and  a  variety
of  oblations,  such  as  the  redemption  moneys  for  every  Israelite,  the  tithes,  the  firstlings,
and  the  vows.  Of  these  two  classes  in  order ;  certain  modifications  of  the  blood  and
bloodless  sacrifices  under  special  circumstances  may  then  be  appended.

1.  2%e  bhod  sacrifices.  The  burnt  offerings.  Two  points  call  for  notice,  namely,  the
Injunctions  concerning  the  victims  to  be  slain,  and  those  concerning  the  ritual  to  be
observed  in  slaying.  The  victims  varied  with  the  wealth  of  the  offerers.  If  the  offerer
was  poor,  a  turtle-dove  or  pigeon  sufficed  to  neutralize  the  command  not  "  to  appear
before  the  Lord  empty,"  and  in  the  presentation  of  this  humblest  offering  the  ofSciating
priest  simply  cleaned  the  birds  and  burnt  them  upon  the  accustomed  altar.  Richer
offerings  were  such  as  an  ox,  a  ram,  or  a  goat,  in  the  transformation  of  either  of  which
into  a  sweet  savour  a  more  elaborate  ritual  was  observed.  This  ritual  is  described  at
length  because  it  was  adopted  in  all  burnt  offerings,  whether  national,  ofScial,  or
personal.  "  The  victim  was  brought  to  the  altar  by  the  offerer,  who  then  forcibly  laid
his  band  upon  the  animal's  head,  and  slaughtered  it  upon  the  north  side.  In  the  act
of  slaughtering,  the  blood  was  caught  by  the  priest  and  swung  against  the  four  walls  of
the  altar.  The  offerer  then  flayed  the  slaughtered  animal,  divided  it,  cleansed  the
intestines  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  legs ;  whereupon  the  officiating  priest,  appropriating
the  skin,  placed  the  several  parts,  with  the  head  and  fat,  in  order  upon  the  wood,  which
had  been  previously  arranged  upon  the  ever-burning  fire,  and  the  whole  sacrifice  rose
'  as  an  offering  of  fire  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  Jehovah.' "  A  meal  offering  and  a  drini
offering  always  accompanied  this  form  of  sacrifice  (oomp.  ch.  i.).

The  peace  offerings.  In  this  case  also  emphasis  must  be  laid  upon  the  victims  anu
the  mode.  With  respect  to  the  former,  it  might  be  a  bull,  a  cow  or  a  calf,  a  ram,  a
sheep  or  a  lamb,  a  he-goat  or  a  she-goat,  the  selection  being  regulated  by  the  purse
and  the  inclination  of  the  offerer.  As  for  the  ritual,  which  mutatis  mutandis  was  also
observed  in  all  the  varieties  of  the  peace  offering,  national,  official,  or  individual,  it  in
part  resembled  and  in  part  differed  from  that  of  the  burnt  offering.  "The  victim
having  been  brought  to  the  altar,  the  offerer  laid  his  hand  upon  its  head,  slaughtered
it  (but  apparently  not  on  the  north  side) — the  priest  meanwhile  catching  the  blood
and  sprinkling  it  upon  the  altar — flayed,  divided,  and  cleansed  it.  The  course  subse-
quently followed  was  essentially  different  from  that  employed  for  the  burnt  offering.
Instead  of  burning  the  animal  entire,  the  offerer  detached  all  the  separable  portions
of  fat,  such  as  the  flare,  and  that  in  which  the  intestines,  kidneys,  and  liver  are
embedded ;  and  in  the  case  of  sheep  severed  the  fat  tail ;  these  portions  were  then
burnt  with  the  daily  burnt  offering.  The  breast  was  afterwards  '  waved '  by  a  kind  of
horizontal  movement,  and  given  to  the  Aaronites,  and  the  right  leg  was  lifted  or
'  heaved  off'  as  a  gift  to  the  officiating  priest.  The  remains  of  the  carcase  were  carried
away  by  tke  offerer,  and  a  meal  made  of  it  in  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  tabernacle.


THE  LEVITIOAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


Meat  and  drink  offerings  accompanied  this  form  of  sacrifice,  one  of  the  cakes  of  the
meal  offering  always  falling  to  the  priest."  Three  occasions  for  the  presentation  of
peace  offerings  are  expressly  mentioned :  they  might  he  made  at  special  seasons  of
gratitude,  and  were  then  called  thank  offerings ;  they  were  presented  when  tows  were
made  before  the  Lord,  and  were  then  called  votive  offerings ;  or  they  were  voluntarily
made  at  any  time  when  there  was  a  longing  for  the  fellowship  of  Jehovah,  heing
then  Q»lled  voluntary  offerings.  The  laws  of  the  peace  offering  are  given  in  chs.  UL
and  vii.  U— 36.

The  sin  offeringt.  Some  of  the  characteristic  features  of  the  sin  offering  have  been
already  passed  under  review  in  connection  with  the  national  and  official  offerings,  and
It  has  already  become  evident  that  the  differentia  of  this  class  of  sacrifices  was  to  he
found  in  a  peculiar  manipulation  of  the  blood  of  the  animal  slaughtered.  This  fact
becomes  very  evident  indeed  when  we  turn  to  the  regulations  concerning  the  individual
lin  offerings.  "  When  a  ruler  or  common  Israelite  sinned  through  ignorance,  they
were  ordered  to  bring,  on  becoming  conscious  of  their  fault,  the  ruler  an  immaculate
he-goat,  and  the  Israelite  an  immaculate  shaggy  she-goat ;  in  both  cases  the  offerer
then  went  through  the  customary  process  of  laying  on  the  hand  and  slaying,  upon
which  the  priest,  having  collected  the  blood,  smeared  some  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar,
poured  out  the  rest  at  the  foot,  and  burnt  the  whole  of  the  fat  upon  the  hearth  •  the
carcase  fell  to  the  priest.  The  sin  offerings  were  slain  where  the  burnt  offerings  were.
It  is  also  noteworthy  that,  whilst  many  victims  might  be  offered  as  a  burnt  offering
the  sin  offering  might  never  consist  of  more  animals  than  one."  It  will  be  perceiv^
upon  a  comparison  of  the  several  forms  of  sin  offering,  that  the  ritual  observed  was
always  the  same  in  certain  important  points,  such  as  the  manipulation  with  the  blood,
the  burning  of  the  fatty  portions,  and  the  destination  of  the  carcase  (which  always  fell
to  the  priest,  either  for  his  own  use  or  to  bum  without  the  camp).  For  the  law  of  the
sin  offering,  consult  ch.  iv.

The  trespass  offerings.  However  similar  in  name,  these  formed  a  class  quite  distinct
from  the  preceding  class,  and  this  distinction  must  be  considered  later  on.  At  present
it  is  sufBcient  to  tabulate,  as  has  been  done  in  the  other  three  classes,  the  sort  of
victims  presented  and  the  manner  of  their  presentation.  "In  all  cases  the  offering
consisted  of  a  ram,  the  blood  of  which,  after  the  customary  presentation,  imposition  of
hands,  and  slaughtering,  instead  of  being  smeared  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  or  taken
into  the  holy  place  like  the  blood  of  the  sin  offerings,  was  simply  swung  agairst  the
side  of  the  altar,  the  ritual  being  thenceforth  the  same  as  for  the  sin  offering  either  of
a  ruler  or  common  Israelite.  This  class  of  sacrifice  was  always  accompanied  by  •
recompense,  which  was  considered  as  due  to  God  and  man ;  the  discharge  of  the  debt
to  God  being  effected  by  the  placing  by  the  priest  of  a  fancy  value  upon  the  offered
ram  equivalent  to  the  wrong  done;  and  the  human  liability  being  discharged  by  the
payment  to  the  party  wronged  of  the  whole  amount  of  the  fraud,  increased  by  a  retri-
hitory  fifth."  The  laws  of  the  trespass  offerings  are  given  in  chs.  t.  14,  etc.,  and
vL  1 — 7.

2.  The  bloodless  sacrifices.  These  include  the  so-called  meat  offerings,  the  tithes
^d  the  firstfruits,  both  of  which  were  solemnly  presented  before  the  Lord  at  the  altar
of  burnt  offering  and  consecrated  by  a  solemn  dedication  by  fire  of  part  w  the  Lord
and  the  other  bloodless  sacrifices  which  were  not  presented  at  the  altar.  Of  these  only
the  first  class  call  for  any  further  remarks.

The  meat  offerings  were  so  caUed  in  the  Authorized  Version  because  meal  was  the
staple  food  of  the  sixteenth  century.  Times  and  customs  have  now  changed,  and
the  word    meat    refers  now  to  animal  rather  than  vegetable  food.    It  is  now  therefore


THE  LEVITICAL  SACEIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.  zl

advisable  to  speak  of  meal  offerings,  not  meat  offeringB.  Tliese  offerings  were  the
Levitical  vegetable  sacrifices,  and  were  preceded,  with  two  exceptions — the  daily  offer-
ing of  the  high  priest  and  that  which  was  substituted  by  the  poor  for  the  burnt
offering — ^by  some  form  of  blood  sacrifice,  either  a  burnt  offering  or  a  peace  offering.
"  They  consisted  of  fine  wheaten  flour,  or  of  cakes  of  the  same,  variously  prepared
with  oil,  according  to  the  culinary  arts  of  the  Jews,  some  being  baked  in  a  small  oven
like  the  Arab's  tannur,  some  being  prepared  on  plates,  and  some  in  a  skillet ;  they  also
occasionally  consisted  of  roasted  ears  of  com.  To  all  these  '  meat  offerings '  oil  and
salt  were  added,  and  to  those  which  consisted  of  flour  or  grain  incense  also.  .  .  .  The
ritual  of  presentation  wasivery  simple.  The  offerer  brought  the  offering  to  the  priest,
who  took  a  handful  of  the  meal  and  oil  with  the  incense,  and  burnt  them  on  the  altar,
the  remainder  falling  to  the  priest  as  '  a  thing  most  holy.' "

3.  Certain  modifications  of  the  two  previous  classes  enjoined  under  special  circum-
ttanees.  Not  merely  did  the  Law  contain  directions  for  individual  sacrifices  such  as
have  been  already  described,  but  some  specific  adaptations  were  enjoined  of  the  sacri-
ficial ritual,  in  order  to  expressly  connect  certain  states  of  mind  and  body  with  the
scenic  worship  of  the  sanctuary.  The  occasion  for  these  modified  forms  of  ritual  were
the  following ;  they  are  simply  named  for  the  most  part,  and  the  references  given  to  the
Law  for  fuller  details : —

Upon  amtact  with  a  corpse  (see  Numb.  xiz.  and  comp.  '  Scriptural  Doctrine  of
Sacrifice,'  p.  74).

Upmi  the  cure  of  a  leper.  The  purification  of  a  restored  leper  was  divided  into  two
series  of  acts  performed  after  an  interval  of  seven  days,  being  at  both  times  a  modified
sacrificial  ritual  (comp.  ch.  xiv.  and  '  Scriptural  Doctrine  of  Sacrifice,'  p.  75).

After  parturition.  The  mother  who  had  recovered  from  childbirth  must  present
herself  with  a  sacrifice  at  the  altar  (see  ch.  xii.  1 — 8).

After  cessation  of  derangement  of  sexual  organs  (see  ch.  xv.  1 — 15 ;  25 — 30).

In  connection  with  the  Nazarite  vow.  This  vow  of  abstinence  and  continency  was
itself  a  form  of  sacrifice.  It  was  also  directly  associated  with  the  sacrificial  ritual.
Upon  any  unintentional  defilement  of  a  Nazarite  by  sudden  death  in  his  company,  an
offering  was  to  be  made  of  two  doves,  or  pigeons,  by  way  of  atonement,  and  a  lamb  was
to  be  brought  as  a  trespass  offering.  There  was  also  a  peculiar  rite  to  celebrate  the
expiry  of  his  vow  (comp.  Numb.  vi.  13 — 21).

At  thi.  so-called  trial  of  jealousy,  a  solemn  ordeal,  by  which  conjugal  infidelity  was
submitted  to  an  awful  sacrificial  test.  The  suspicious  husband  brought  the  wife  to  the
priest,  together  with  an  offering  of  barley  meal,  without  oil  or  incense.  The  ordeal  was
this.  The  priest,  taking  some  holy  water  from  the  laver,  apparently  in  an  earthen
vessel  in  which  he  had  mixed  a  little  dust  from  the  sacred  court,  and  placing  the  meal
in  the  woman's  hand,  sware  the  woman  according  to  an  appalling  formula,  to  which  he
gays,  "  Amen,  amen."  Further,  he  wrote  the  formula  in  a  book,  and,  having  blotted
it  out  with  the  holy  water,  caused  the  woman  to  drink  the  water.  Nor  was  the  ordeal
even  yet  complete.  There  was  a  subsequent  waving  of  the  meal  before  the  Lord,  a
burning  of  it  upon  the  altar,  and  a  second  potation  of  the  holy  water.  With  this
result,  the  thigh  of  the  perjured  woman  rotted  (see  Numb.  v.  11—31),

B.  SoBiFrDSAii  Fbihoiples  afflioable  to  tee  ELUomATioir  of  thb  Letitioal

Sacbifices.

To  the  Christian  mind,  accustomed  to  accept  instinctively  as  fundamental  postulate!
the  spirituality  and  universality  of  worship,  it  might  well  seem  at  first  sight  that  bo
costly  and  complicated  a  ritual  as  has  just  been  described  was  something  less  than


ku        thr  levitioal  sacrifices  literally  considered.


Divine.    Origen'B  dUemma,  that  this  cultus  by  presentation  is  either  unworthy  ctiU
Creator,  or  its  Creator  is  himself  unworthy,  seems  to  have  some  reason  on  its  side.    Nor
does  his  escape  from  the  dilemma  appear  at  first  blush  irrational ;  it  may  seem  better
to  some  to  inquire  as  to  what  these  laws  may  be  made  to  mean,  rather  than  to  investi-
gate minutely  what  they  seem  to  mean.     Nevertheless,  in  real  truth,  it  is  needless
to  constitute  one's  self  a  pupil  of  the  philosophical  eunuch  of  Alexandna.    Ascetic
rebellion  against  the  actual  condition  of  life  providentially  arranged  for  us  is  not  the
highest  mark  of  sanctified  wisdom,  and  quite  another  method  of  escape  than  Origen'a
from  the  danger  of  the  flesh  may  be  pursued  both  in  morals  and  in  religion.    As
marriage  may  afford  finer  scope  for  the  spiritual  culture  of  life  than  celibacy,  so  a
patient  study  of  the  reputed  materialism  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices  may  issue  in  a  more
spiritual  view  of  the  Divine  dealings  than  spiritualizing  falsely  so  called.    A  little  care
and  attention  bestowed  upon  the  actual  teachings  of  Scripture  show  an  exquisite
adaptation  to  the  needs  of  the  Jew  in  the  process  of  discipline  to  which  he  was
divinely  submitted.     Indeed,  a  rational  interpretation  of  the  language  of  Scripture
will  elevate  the  Levitical  cultus  into  so  splendid  an  agent  in  the  religious  development
of  the  chosen  people,  as  not  to  be  derogatory  to  Deity  himself.    At  least,  so  we  hope  to
show  by  an  examination  into  the  early  records  of  the  Pentateuch.    By  the  sacrifice
and  offering  which  Jehovah  did  not  for  himself  desire,  he  yet  satisfactorily  educated,
as  we  shall  see,  a  people  to  whom  the  higher  revelation  in  the  body  could  be  made.
Nay,  however  Judaism  may  fall  short  of  Christianity,  it  is  beyond  all  comparison  with
any  other  religious  system  developed  during  the  world's  course.    A  worship  which
could  train  and  satisfy  a  David  and  an  Isaiah,  a  Jeremiah  and  an  Ezekiel,  must  be
pre-eminent  amongst  the  non-Christian  faiths.   The  task  we  now  place  before  ourselves,
therefore,  is  to  educe  from  the  Old  Testament  certain  general  principles  which  may  be
applied  to  the  comprehension  of,  the  Levitioal  sacrifices.    What  light  the  Jew  had
upon  the  rites  he  was  bidden  to  perform,  we  are  now  to  gather  into  a  focus.    If  the
labour  be  great,  it  will  not  be  unremunerative ;  in  this  toil,  too,  there  will  be  profit.
The  inquiry  will  conveniently  range  itself  under  the  following  heads :  We  shall  first
elicit  from  Scripture  some  fundamental  ideas  common  to  the  whole  of  the  Levitical
sacrifices;   we  shall  next  investigate  the  significance  attached  by  Scripture  to  the
varied,  yet  ordained,  ritual  of  those  sacrifices ;  thirdly,  we  shall  ascertain  the  meaning
associated  by  Scripture  with  the  several  varieties  of  these  sacrifices ;  and  lastly,  we
shall  consider  the  significance  of  the  several  feasts  and  fasts  to  the  celebration  of  which
tl.u  sacrificial  ritual  was  accommodated.     These  details  settled,  it  will  then  be  possible
to  regard  the  Levitical  sacrifices  as  a  whole.    The  application  of  these  leading  principles
to  the  multitudinous  injunctions  previously  classified  will  then  be  easy,  and  the  result,
it  is  believed,  will  be  at  once  stimulatiog  to  faith  and  evocative  of  devout  thankfulness.
Here  a  caution  may  be  not  unwisely  interpolated.    It  possibly  calls  for  explicit
statement  that,  when  we  speak  of  scriptural  principles  of  sacrifices  and  of  principles
deducible  from  the  Scriptures,  we  do  not  refer  to  proof  texts  merely.    The  interpreta-
tion and  application  of  Scripture  is  not  so  facile.     However  poorly  the  writer  has
•UMeeded  in  his  aim,  that  aim  itself  is  to  base  the  interpretation  of  the  Levitical  sacri-
fices upon  a  series  of  complete  inductions  from  the  scriptural  data,  including,  as  they
do,  the  implications  of  philology  and  the  suggestions  of  general  usage,  possibly  \he  hints
derivable  from  a  trained  sense,  as  well  as  the  numerous  passages  for  which  chapter  and
verse  can  be  given.     Scriptural  archeology  is  only  inexpugnivble  when  it  consists  of
perfect  inductions  from  Scripture,  and  perfect  inductions  must  summarize  tenor  in
addition  to  positive  statements  of  facts.

1.  Certain  fundamental  ideas  common  to  the  Levitical  sdcrifice$.    The  idea  underlying


THE  LEVITICAL  SACBIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


the  generie  term  "  qorban."  After  what  has  been  already  said  upon  the  meaning  and
Biblical  usage  of  this  tenn  for  all  forms  of  sacrifice,  whether  bloodless  or  marked  by
the  effusion  of  blood,  whether  presented  at  the  altar  or  without  discrimination  of  place,
little  further  need  be  added.  All  the  Levitical  sacrifices  were  gifts  to  Jehovah.  They
gave  tangible  expression  to  the  innate  sentiments  of  every  worshipper  down  to  the
lowest  grade  of  the  fetichist,  that  it  is  necessary  to  attest  the  self-denial  of  his  soul  by
■ome  gift  which  the  band  can  bring ;  a  sentiment  which  Jehovah  not  only  sanctioned
in  the  Jew,  but  demanded  when  he  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  appear  before  me  empty.''
He  who  brought  a  qorban  made  a  presentation.  Undoubtedly  the  problem  of  the
Levitical  sacrifices  ia  like  one  of  those  intricate  locks  which  only  a  combination  of  keys
can  open.  One  master-key  has  been  discovered  in  this  idea  of  qorban.  What-
nwtx  else  the  Levitical  sacrifices  were,  they  were  presentations  to  Jehovah,  sacrifices
qrmbolic  of  self-sacrifice.

The  idea  underlying  the  term  "  kipper  "  and  its  several  forms.  This  technical  term  and
Ua  derivatives  are  translated  in  the  Authorized  Version  by  atone  and  its  derivatives.
Without  discussing  the  primary  significance  of  the  word,^  suffice  it  to  say  that "  atone  "
In  its  scriptural  sense  means  "  to  cover  sin,"  in  other  words,  to  neutralize  or  conceal  sin
■0  that  it  should  not  offend  the  Deity — ^to  render  the  Divine  wrath  inoperative.  To
make  an  atonement,  if  we  probe  the  Hebrew  figure,  ".was  to  throw,  so  to  speak,  a  veil
ever  sin  so  dazzling  that  the  veil  and  not  the  sin  was  visible,  or  to  place  side  by  side
irith  sin  something  so  attractive  as  to  completely  engross  the  eye.  The  figure  which
the  New  Testament  iises  when  it  speaks  of  the  '  new  robe,'  the  Old  Testament  uses
when  it  speaks  of  atonement.  When  an  atonement  was  made  under  the  Law,  it  was
•a  though  the  Divine  eye,  which  had  been  kindled  at  the  sight  of  sin  and  foulness,  was
now  quieted  by  the  garment  thrown  around  it ;  or,  to  use  a  figure  much  too  modem,
yet  equally  appropriate,  it  was  as  if  the  sinner,  who  had  been  exposed  to  the  lightning
of  the  Divine  wrath,  had  been  suddenly  wrapped  round  and  insulated."  So  much  for
ihe  idea  of  the  word.  In  addition,  let  the  precise  association  of  the  idea  be  remembered.
Tlais  idea  of  atonement  is  expressly  associated  with  the  blood  of  the  sacrifices  in  an
important  passage:  "  For  the  soul,"  it  is  said,  in  ch.  xvii.  11,  "of  the  fiesh  is  in  the
blood,  and  I  (the  Lord)  have  given  it  you  upon  the  altar  to  be  an  atonement  for  your
floula :  for  the  blood  it  atones  by  the  soul."  In  other  words,  to  avoid  the  lengthy
«ontroversy  connected  with  this  passage,  it  is  at  least  alleged  that  the  blood  of  every
animal  sacrifice  has  been  appointed  by  God,  for  some  reason  of  his  own,  as  a  means  of
neutralizing  the  sin  of  the  Jew,  because  the  blood  is  the  life  of  the  animal  sacrificed.
Four  truths  thus  emerge,  viz.  first,  the  Levitical  sacrifices  had  a  power  of  atonement ;
■eoondly,  that  atonement  was  connected  only  with  the  blood  sacrifices ;  thirdly,  it  was
<iie  effusion  of  blood  which  was  declared  to  be  a  neutralizing  of  sin ;  and  fourthly,  this
act  of  atonement  was  an  act  of  substitution,  that  is  to  say,  a  forfeited  human  life  was
■pared  because  of  an  animal  life  surrendered.  Of  course,  we  are  not  arguing  either  the
ceaaonableness  or  irrationality  of  this  fact ;  it  is  our  present  purpose  simply  to  state  it.
Thus  the  second  master-key  to  the  Levitical  sacrifices  has  been  obtained.  But  although,
to  continue  the  figure,  the  door  into  the  mysterious  chamber  is  opened,  the  only
•vailable  light  is  that  which  has  followed  our  entrance ;  there  are  many  windows  to  be
unbarred  and  blinds  to  be  lifted  before  the  entire  chamber  is  visible  to  its  remotest
corner  and  most  secret  recess.  To  this  unbarring  and  illuminating  we  must  now
|iroceed.

The  significance  of  the  materials  used  in  sacrifice.    As  our  previons  classification  has
ahown,  these  materials  were  divisible  into  animal  and  aon-animal  offerings,  or,  to  adopt
»  'Bbriptural  Doctrine  of  Saoriflce,'  pp.  482—486.


THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


the  yet  more  significant  technicalities,  into  blood  and  bloodless  offerings.  The  idea*
already  educed  render  the  interpretation  of  these  two  classes  of  niaterial  easy,  lb*
bloodless  offerings  were  presentations  simply ;  they  were  gifts  made  to  Jehovah  up<m
approach  to  him  in  worship;  they  were  this  and  nothing  more.  The  blood  sacrifica*
were  this  and  something  more;  they  were  both  presentations  and  instruments  of
atonement;  in  addition  to  being  the  gifts  of  the  offerer  to  Jehovah,  they  possessed  the
all-important  blood  which  testified  to  the  substituted  life.  In  every  case  of  animal
sacrifice  the  blood  spilt  spoke  of  a  substituted  life,  whilst  in  every  case  also  the  animal
itself,  of  some  value  to  the  offerer,  spoke  of  a  presentation  made.  And  it  is  this  lattw
fact  which  elucidates  another  point  in  the  ceremonial  of  animal  sacrifice,  namely,  the
variety  and  the  kind  of  victims  enjoined.  Offerings  were  only  to  be  made  of  such
animals  as  did  not  contradict  the  Levitical  laws  of  food — of  such  animals,  therefore,  as
Jehovah  could  receive.  Further,  the  victims  were  of  very  different  value ;  a  bullock
was  worth  more  than  a  cow,  a  cow  than  a  calf,  a  calf  than  a  ram,  a  ram  than  a  sheep,
a  sheep  than  a  lamb,  a  lamb  than  a  pigeon,  and  a  pigeon  than  a  handful  of  meal ;  the
gradation  of  animal  became  •  gradation  of  gift.  The  more  costly  the  gift  the  mon
self-sacrificing  the  offering.

The  significance  of  the  place  of  sacrifice.  In  the  patriarchal  age,  it  would  appear,
any  place  might  be  a  place  of  special  Divine  revelation,  and  therefore  a  place  where  an
altar  might  be  erected ;  in  the  Levitical  code,  the  legitimate  place  of  sacrifice  was  moiw
restricted.  The  large  majority  of  offerings,  as  our  previous  description  has  already
made  evident,  were  ordered  to  be  presented  within  the  precincts  of  the  one  spot  which
Jehovah  had  consecrated  by  his  presence.  As  it  is  said  in  Deut.  xii.  5,  6,  "  But  unto
the  place  which  the  Lord  your  God  shall  choose  out  of  aU  your  tribes  to  put  his  Name
there,  even  unto  his  habitation  shall  ye  seek,  and  thither  thou  shalt  come :  and  thith»
ye  shall  bring  your  burnt  offerings,  and  your  sacrifices,  and  your  tithes,  and  heav«
offerings  of  your  hand,  and  your  vows,-and  your  freewill  offerings,  and  the  firstlings  of
your  herds  and  of  your  flocks."  And  yet  again,  in  vers.  13, 14,  "  Take  heed  to  thyself
that  thou  offer  not  thy  burnt  offerings  in  every  place  that  thou  seest :  but  in  the  place
which  the  Lord  shall  choose  in  one  of  thy  tribes,  there  thou  shalt  offer  thy  burnt
offerings,  and  there  thou  shalt  do  all  that  I  command  thee."  And  still  more  solemnly
is  the  same  injunction  conveyed  in  ch.  xvii.  3 — 9,  "  What  man  soever  there  be  ol
the  house  of  Israel,  that  killeth  an  ox,  or  lamb,  or  goat,  in  the  camp,  or  that  killeth  it
out  of  the  camp,  and  bringeth  it  not  unto  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congrega-
tion, to  offer  an  offering  imto  the  Lord  before  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord ;  blood  shaQ
be  imputed  unto  that  man ;  he  hath  shed  blood ;  and  that  man  shall  be  cut  off  from
among  his  people :  to  the  end  that  the  children  of  Israel  may  bring  their  sacrifices,
which  they  offer  in  the  open  field,  even  that  they  may  bring  them  unto  the  Lord,  unto
the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  unto  the  priest,  and  offer  them  for  slain
offerings  unto  the  Lord,"  etc.  If  apparent  exceptions  are  seen  in  the  case  of  GidetHi,
Manoah,  David,  and  Elijah,  it  needs  to  be  remembered  that  their  aberrant  practice  was
sanctioned  by  express  Divine  revelations ;  and  so  little  was  their  example  regarded  as
a  type  of  permissible  action,  that  when  the  Keubenites  wished  to  build  a  second  altar,
all  Israel  grew  furious,  and  was  ready  to  put  two  tribes  and  a  half  to  the  sword.
It  is  therefore  evident  that  immense  importance  was  attached  under  the  Law  to  the
place  of  sacrifice.  That  place  was  ordered  in  such  a  way  that  it  always  fell  somewhere
within  the  one  sanctuary ;  and  very  significantly  so,  for  there  Jehovah  was  supposed
and  stated  to  be  peculiarly  present  and  approachable.  There  was  a  ceitain  localization
of  the  Deity  according  to  the  Mosaic  Law,  and  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Shechinah  wst
holy  ground,  as  the  Law  itself  represents  Jehovah  as  saying.    "And  there  I  will


THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITEEALLY  CONSIDERED.


XT


■Met"  are  the  words  of  the  Lord  at  the  ordinance  of  the  perpetual  burnt  offering  at
dM  door  of  tabernacle,  "  And  there  I  will  meet  with  the  children  of  Israel,  and  the
Ubemacle  shall  be  sanctified  by  my  glory.  And  I  will  sanctify  the  tabernacle  of
the  congregation,  and  the  altar:  I  will  sanctify  also  both  Aaron  and  his  sons,  to
minister  to  me  in  the  priest's  office.  And  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of  Israel,  and
will  be  their  God"  (Exod.  xxix.  43,  44).  Let  it  be  noted,  however,  that,  whilst  the
whole  sanctuary  was  the  abode  of  Jehovah,  approach  to  him  was  limited  by  two
conditions :  first,  certain  sections  of  the  sanctuary  were  allotted  to  certain  sections
«f  the  people,  the  high  priest  alone  being  allowed  to  enter  the  holy  of  holies,  the  priests'
peculiar  portion  being  the  holy  place,  and  the  court  being  apportioned  to  the  Jew ;  and
secondly,  the  altars  were,  so  to  speak,  the  centres  of  the  several  sections,  in  which  their
mgnificance  was  concentrated  and  from  which  their  power  radiated.

Thus  we  have  express  scriptural  authority  for  saying  that  the  various  offerings  were
to  be  presented  within  the  precincts  of  the  holy  place,  each  according  to  the  status  of
the  worshipper,  because  there  Jehovah,  the  covenant  God,  had  consented  to  reveal  his
Name,  and  be  peculiarly  present.

The  significance  of  the  officiating  priests.  Not  only  was  the  large  majority  of  sacrifices
otdered  to  be  made  at  a  certain  place,  but  by  the  mediation  of  a  certain  ecclesiastical
executive.  The  Jews  at  large  were  not  priests  unto  God,  they  did  their  priestcraft
by  deputy ;  and  from  the  days  of  their  unanimous  refusal  of  the  more  exalted  office
«f  Divine  administration,  the  tribe  of  Levi  was  set  apart  for  holy  service.  The
pieceding  description  of  the  legal  commands  has  already  shown  how  large  a  part
tbe  priest  played  in  sacrificial  worship,  how  minute  a  rubric  instructed  the  priest  in  the
dutiful  discharge  of  his  sacred  functions.  For  our  present  purpose,  the  tribe  of  Levi  as
•  whole  may  be  ignored ;  it  is  simply  needful  to  concentrate  attention  upon  the  priests
proper,  the  descendants  of  Aaron,  and  their  official  head,  the  so-called  high  priest.  Had
the  fact  of  the  mediation  of  priests  any  doctrine  to  convey  to  the  reverent  and  thoughtful
worshipper?  Most  assuredly.  The  priests  were  middle-men ;  they  had  an  exceptional
privilege  of  Divine  approach;  they  represented  God  to  man,  and  man  to  OtoA.  Every
■Bcrifice  presented  through  the  priest  was  presented  to  Jehovah  by  the  appointed  medium
•f  kgal  access.

2.  The  significance  of  the  several  details  of  the  sacrificial  ritual.  It  is  next  necessary
to  consider  the  significance  of  the  curious  and  precise  ritual  ordered  to  be  adopted  in
■Mxificial  worship,  and  to  see  whether  and  how  far  religious  truths  were  taught  thereby.
U  will  be  seen  that  no  prescribed  act  was  meaningless,  and  that  each  stage  in  the  elabo-
nte  act  of  worship  had  its  own  message  to  convey.

The  act  of  presentation.  The  first  stage  in  every  act  of  sacrifice  was  the  deliberate
presentation  of  the  offerer  and  his  gift  at  the  appropriate  altar.  Entrance  into  the  court
of  the  Lord's  house  was  not  casual  or  heedless,  but  of  set  purpose.  The  offerer  pre-
KQted  himself  and  his  offering  solemnly  before  the  priest.  Nor  was  this  presentation  a
mere  opportunity  for  an  official  examination  into  the  fulfilment  of  the  legal  conditions
of  valid  sacrifice,  although  the  officiating  priest  was  unquestionably  bound  to  see  that
die  victim  had  neither  spot  nor  blemish  nor  any  such  thing.  The  presentation  was  itself
a  thoughtful  religious  act.  Of  what  nature  ?  Without  entering  upon  the  various  replies
which  have  been  returned  by  Neumann,  Keil,  Eliefoth,  Kurtz,  and  Wangemann,  suffice
it  to  say  that  the  thebiah  was  a  symbolical  prayer  for  the  privileges  accruing  to  legal
MCiifioe.  To  come  to  the  altar  was  to  come  to  the  Lord ;  to  come  with  a  willing  and
•bedient  mind,  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  the  Law,  was  to  ask  for  a  share  in  the  promises
tiwreto  attached.

The  imposition  qf  the  hand.    The  victim  having  been  solemnly  presented,  "  the


iTl  THE  LEVITIOAL  SACBIFICES  LITBBALLY  00N8IDEREU


offerer  forcibly  laid  his  hand  upon  ita  head ;  his  hand,  not  his  slave's ;  hta  If'id.  nolM.
^uiLtitute's./orhi8wife's,buthisownhand--toretran8ktewhatOutramextrac^^

the  Talmud.  There  was  a  forcible  imposition  of  the  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  ^etitai
by  the  offerer,  whoever  he  might  be.  whether  priest  or  Uyman,  kingor  elder.  And  thi.
act  was  singularly  eloquent.  Again  refraining  from  entering  into  the  protracted  e^
troversy  as  to  the  meaning  of  the  rite  (discussed  in  the  writer's  previous  work),  suffio*
it  to  say  that  this  act  was  a  dedication  of  the  victim  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  waa
brought.  Perfunctory  worship  Jehovah  would  not  have,  and  as  the  deliberate  act  of
presentation  kept  the  mind  of  the  offerer  awake  to  the  importance  of  the  rite  m  whidi
he  was  engaging,  so  the  deliberate  act  of  the  imposition  of  the  hand  kept  the  mind
awake  to  the  same  great  object.  Just  as  the  presentation  said,  «  This  is  my  deliherat*
aet,"  BO  the  imposition  of  the  hand  implied.  "This  is  my  deUberate  gift."

The  act  of  slaughter.  This,  be  it  observed,  was  always  performed  by  the  offenr
(possibly  assisted  or  guided  by  the  Levites),  and  hence  its  significance.  In  offering  an
animal,  he  was  bringing  before  God  an  atonement  as  well  as  a  presentation.  Bat
atonement  was  by  the  blood,  not  by  the  living  animal.  Whilst,  therefore,  sacrifice  as*
gift  was  complete  when  the  victim  was  dedicated  to  sacred  purposes  in  the  two  first  ritmd
acts  already  described  and  explained,  sacrifice  as  an  atonement  was  not  complete  until
the  blood  was  given  to  the  priest.  In  the  act  of  slaughter  by  his  own  hand,  the  offerer
obediently  brought  before  God  the  blood  of  atonement.  The  slaughtering  was  important
as  the  consummation  of  the  act  of  sacrifice  by  the  presentation  of  the  atoning  blood
before  the  Lord.

2%e  heaving  and  waving.  Sometimes  a  peculiar  swinging  of  the  offering  wa»
appended  to  the  other  acts  of  presentation,  called  "heaving"  and  "waving"  {therumak
and  thenvpha).  This  detail  was  enjoined  in  the  consecration  of  the  Levites  and  priests^
in  the  vow  of  the  Nazarite,  in  the  offering  of  jealousy,  in  the  cleansing  of  the  leproiu,
in  the  thank  offerings  and  the  tithes.  Nor  are  the  movements  themselves  difficult  t»
trace.  "  Heaving  "  was  a  perpendicular  motion  from  below  upwards,  a  swinging  from
earth  towards  heaven.  "  Waving  "  has  been  very  differently  understooi  Some  of  th»
early  Protestant  exegetes  regarded  "  waving  "  as  making  the  sign  of  the  cross,  in  which
they  found  some  mysterious  reference  to  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus ;  Hengstenburg  and
Bahr  accept  this  interpretation  whilst  rejecting  the  inference.  Gtesenius,  Thalhofer,
Eeil,  Enobel,  Schultz,  and  Oehler  seem  to  regard  thenupha  as  a  mere  synonym  <^
thebiah,  and  as  forming  no  distinct  part  of  the  ceremonial ;  in  which  view  there  is  both
truth  and  falsity,  the  "  waving  "  being  assuredly  a  part  of  the  act  of  presentation,  but  a
part  of  the  ritual  distinctly  emphasized.  As  Wangemann  has  pointed  out,  the  compileca
of  the  Mishna — ^no  mean  authorities  on  the  details  of  ancient  worship — ^regard  this  move-
ment of  heniph  as  a  "  going  and  coming,"  as  if  "  waving  "  were  a  horizontal  movement
backwards  and  forwards.  With  this  certain  passages  in  the  Old  Testament  coincide.
Thus  Isaiah  calls  the  swinging  of  an  axe  "  waving,"  as  also  the  angry  shake  of  the
threatening  finger.  On  the  whole,  therefore,  this  significant  act  of  the  officiator  would
seem  to  be  a  more  emphatic  presentation.  The  priest  took  the  offering  and  "  heaved  "
it  towards  heaven,  as  if  presenting  it  to  the  Deity  who  had  made  the  heavens  his  thioM,
and  then  returned  the  gift  to  the  altar  by  a  "  waving  "process,  which  only  differed  from
the  reverse  of  "  heaving  "  by  the  exercise  of  force  to  counteract  gravity,  and  place  tb»
limb  or  the  firstfmits,  for  example,  upon  the  altar.

The  significance  of  the  manipulations  with  the  Wood.  Although  this  act  varied  !■
the  several  kinds  of  sacrifice,  it  was  nevertheless  invariably  a  more  or  less  oomplet*
pouring  forth  of  the  life-blood  before  the  Lord.  The  rabbinical  interpreters  of  the  Lav
divided  the  manipulation  in  question  into  three  teta—kkidui,  serika.  and  ah^icha.   T»


THK  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  COMSIDERED.         xvii


ihe  collection  of  the  blood  in  a  silver  bowl  they  gave  the  name  of  hkiehai  the  applica-
tion of  the  blood  so  reserved  to  the  altar  they  called  seriha ;  and  the  pouring  out  of  the
superfluous  blood  at  the  runnel  of  the  altar,  whence  it  flowed  into  the  brook  Kedron,  they
designated  shepidia.  This  triple  division  is  useful  as  showing  the  stages  of  tbo
customary  procedure.  It  was  the  second  stage  which  was  manifestly  the  important  one,
the  first  being  a  mere  preliminary,  and  the  third  a  mere  consequent  thereto.  This
serika,  or  sprinkling,  varied  with  the  sacrifice,  sometimes  being  a  sprinkling  of  the  sur-
face of  the  brazen  altar,  sometimes  a  smearing  of  the  horns,  and  sometimes  a  general
aspersion  of  all  the  holy  places  and  their  sacred  utensils.  It  was  always,  however,  a
bringing  of  blood  in  contact  with  the  altar,  and  thus  before  Jehovah.  Upon  the  sig-
nificance of  this  repulsive  proceeding  to  modern  eyes  we  are  left  in  no  doubt.  The
interpretation  tbereof  is  given  in  the  passage  which  has  already  been  quoted  (ch.  xvii.
11),  and  concerni'ig  which,  however  interpreters  may  vary  as  to  its  exact  purport,  all
are  agreed  that  it  defines  the  use  of  blood  in  the  Law.  "  For  the  soul  of  the  flesh,"
it  runs,  "  is  in  the  Uood  :  and  I  (the  Lord)  have  given  it  you  upon  the  altar  to  be  an  atone-
ment for  your  souls :  joi  iLs  blood  atones  by  the  soul."  In  other  words,  this  verse  asserts
that  the  blood  of  the  animal  legally  presented  has  been  appointed  by  God  as  a  means  of
atonement  for  human  life,  because  that  blood  is  really  the  life  of  the  animal  sacriflced,
or,  to  put  the  same  thing  in  other  words,  the  blood  or  life  of  an  animal  has  been
graciously  accepted  by  Jehovah  (for  some  reason  or  other,  and  by  some  means  or  other)
as  a  valid  substitute  for  the  life  or  blood  of  the  sinful  offerer.  As  Kahnis  puts  it,  blood
is  life  in  compendia.  By  the  blood  manipulation  one  part  of  the  twofold  aim  of  animal
sacrifice  was  completed,  and  a  legal  atonement  was  made  for  human  sin.

The  significaveeof  the  combustion  upon  the  altar.  In  the  blood  manipulation,  as  has
just  been  observed,  the  atoning  aspect  of  animal  sacrifices  was  complete ;  the  two  remain-
ing rites  were  connected  with  the  offerings  as  gifts  to  God.  There  was  in  every  case  a
burning  of  the  carcase,  wholly  or  in  part ;  this  was  the  first  of  the  remaining  acts.  The
symbolism  of  this  combustion  is  manifest.  It  was  a  sending  of  the  gift  to  God.  After
arranging  the  divided  or  the  selected  portions  of  the  carcase  in  the  heaven-bom  fire,
which  had  issued  forth  from  the  Divine  presence  at  the  consecration  of  the  tabernacle,
and  had  never  been  permitted  to  altogether  expire,  they  were  burned,  that  is  to  say,
they  were  etherealized,  and  they  rose  to  heaven  as  "  a  sweet  savour."  The  rite  bore  a
similar  interpretation  when  it  had  reference  to  any  of  the  bloodless  offerings.  To  bum
was  to  effectually  present.

The  significance  of  the  concluding  meal.  In  all  offerings  but  the  holocausts  and
certain  forms  of  the  sin  offerings,  the  ritual  ended  in  a  sacrificial  meal,  enjoyed  for  the
most  part  by  the  priesthood,  but  occasionally — that  is  to  say,  in  the  case  of  peace
offerings — shared  by  the  laity.  Of  necessity,  when  there  was  a  consummating  feast,  the
entire  gift  was  not  burnt ;  part  was  consumed  by  fire  in  symbolical  gift  to  GM,  and
pa .t  was  retained.  That  this  remnant  commonly  fell  to  the  priesthood  points  to  the
significance  of  this  closing  act.  The  priests  were  the  representatives  of  Jehovah;
consumption  by  the  priest  was  as  much  giving  to  God  as  consumption  on  the  altar.
There  was  a  mystical  union  between  Jehovah  and  his  priests,  and  participation  by  the
latter  was  participation  by  the  former.  In  the  peace  offering  there  was  a  continuation
of  the  same  idea.  For  a  time,  the  sacrificing  family  was  admitted  to  the  privileges  of
the  priesthood.  It  consisted  for  a  gracious  season  of  priests  unto  Gkid.  Aa  Kurtz  has
strikingly  said,  "  Just  as  the  effusion  of  blood  betokened  justification, .  .  .  lo  the
sacrificial  meal  told  its  tale  of  the  unio  myitica.''

3.  The  significance  of  the  several  species  of  sacrifice.  It  will  be  conTenient  to  Krene
nur  previous  order  of  exposition,  and  begin  with —

LEVITICUS.  d


XTiU


THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


The  Woodless  offerings.  In  these,  as  their  name  minchoth  implies,  the  fact  of  presen.
tation  is  alone  emphasized.  They  were  gifts  to  God  simply;  they  were  ^^l^^^'^'
of  atonement.  The  whole  ritual  of  their  offering  was  adapted  to  express  that  they
were  presentations  alone.  Their  further  significance  varied  with  their  material.  They
consisted  always  of  the  products  of  labour ;  they  were  therefore  objective  representations
of  so  much  self-sacrifice;  audit  is  interesting  to  see  how  these  pure  gifts  might  be
made  from  all  the  branches  of  human  activity— agriculture,  stock-farming,  arbori-
culture, merchandise,  luxuries,  even  the  spoils  of  battle  and  the  titles  of  property.
'  ZTie  several  blood  sacrijkes.  These  conveyed  both  the  leading  elements  of  Jewish
worship.  They  were  at  once  gifts  and  means  of  atonement.  The  ritual  enjoined
accentuated  both  features  of  blood  manipulation  and  presentation.  Further,  whilst
every  blood  sacrifice  made  both  the  aspects  of  sacrifice  prominent,  the  materials  ordered
and  the  ritual  enjoined  adapted  these  fundamental  facts  to  varying  states  of  mind  and
inclination.  The  burnt  offerings,  and  sin  offerings,  and  trespass  offerings,  and  peace
offerings,  were  all  means  of  adoring  God,  and  covering  sin  as  well ;  but  in  each  species
there  was  a  special  adaptation  to  the  more  vivid  expression  and  satisfaction  of  some
religious  state.

The  burnt  offering  is  most  nearly  allied  to  the  bloodless  sacrifices.  As  its  ritual
shows  most  clearly,  and  as  its  name  of  holocaust  implies,  presentation  is  its  leading
characteristic ;  so  far  from  the  blood  manipulation  constituting  a  prominent  feature,  it
seems  to  be,  what  it  is  in  fact,  a  mere  means  to  an  end,  a  recognition  of  sinfulness  lest
the  gift  of  man  be  despised.    The  variation  too  in  the  victims  allowed  points  to  the

same  fact to  the  relative  value  of  gifts,  and  is  a  kind  of  Old  Testament  proclamation

»f  tee  duty  of  proportionate  giving ;  the  poor  man's  handful  of  meal,  or  pigeoU;  tells  the
same  story  as  the  widow's  mite.  On  the  other  hand,  the  swinging  of  the  blood  collected
by  the  priest  against  the  altar  is  the  least  emphatic  manner  of  procedure  in  atone-
ment whereas  the  burning  of  the  whole  carcase  pointed  most  conclusively  to  the
animal  as  a  presentation  to  God.

In  the  «»■»  offering,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  just  the  blood  manipulation  which  is
strongly  emphasized.    If  the  burnt  offering  was  an  atonement  that  it  might  be  a  gift,
the  sin  offering  was  a  gift  that  it  might  be  an  atonement.    This  inference  is  suggested
by  the  name  as  well  as  the  ritual.    A  sin  offering  was  an  offering  for  sin— for  sin
of  an  accurately  defined  nature,  sin  bishgagah,  sin  of  error,  and  not  deliberate  sin.    As
for  the  ritual,  there  is  as  distinct  an  accentuation  of  the  blood  manipulation  as  there  is
an  evident  withdrawal  into  the  background  of  the  ritual  of  gift,  the  carcase  simply
i;..ling  to  the  priest,  or  being  unostentatiously  burnt  without  the  camp,  as  a  thing  which
has  performed  its  purpose  elsewhere.     Further,  in  connection  with  the  ritual  of  the
makUig  a  substitute  for  sin,  it  is  important  to  notice  the  increase  in  the  value  of
the  substitute  as  the  status  of  the  offerer  rose.    There  is  a  well-marked  gradation  in  the
victims  commanded,  from  the  comparatively  worthless  she-goat  of  the  common  Israelite
to  <ne  more  valuable  he-goat  of  the  ruler,  and  thence  to  the  ox  for  the  priest  or  the
congregation.    Again,  be  it  observed  that  the  sin  offerings  of  individuals  were  not
presentable  for  any  sin,  but  only  for  the  so-called  sins  of  ignorance,  error,  weakness,
whichever  word  may  be  most  suitably  employed  for  the  frequent  lapses  of  sanctified
but  depraved  human  nature.    Sharply  defined,  therefore,  sin  offerings  were  gifts  which
were  made  for  atonement  of  sins  of  ignorance,  sins  of  ignorance,  according  to  the
Levitical  conception,  being  any  sins  which  did  not  wilfully  contravene  the  dictates  of
Jeliovah,

Similarly,  the  significance  of  the  trespass  offerings  may  be  inferred  from  the  ritual
and  the  law  of  their  presentation.     From  the  former  it  is  manifest  that  neithei  the


THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDEEBD.  xU

element  of  gift  nor  of  atonement  was  the  prominent  feature,  but  the  element  ol
testitution.  In  this  class  of  sacrifice  there  was  always  an  accompanying  recompense,
which  was  paid  both  to,  God  who  has  been  offended  by  the  trespass,  and  to  man  who
has  been  defrauded.  It  was  the  fancy  value  which  was  put  upon  the  ram  and  which
expiated  the  wrong-doer  before  the  Great  Giver  of  all  things,  and  it  was  the  monetary
indemnity  which  expiated-  the  human  fraud,  which  gave  to  this  offering  its  peculiar
place  and  value.  And  this  inference  is  strengthened  by  noting  certain  special  cases  in
which  this  form  of  offering  was  ordained.  Trespass  offerings  were  to  be  made  upon
unconscious  negligence  in  such  dues  as  tithes  or  firstrruits,  upon  an  unintentional
infringement  of  a  Divine  command,  and  upon  any  deceitful  violation  of  the  rights  of
property  ;  thus,  to  translate  the  injunctions  into  more  general  terms,  trespass  offerings
were  to  be  made  upon  any  forgetfulness  of  duty  to  God  or  duty  to  our  neighbour.
There  was  always  present  in  this  class  of  sacrifices  the  idea  of  retribution.

Similarly,  in  the  peace  offerings,  it  is  again  manifest  that  it  is  neither  the  fact  of  ^t
nor  that  of  atonement  which  is  uppermost,  but  that  of  the  sacrificial  meal.  In  this
class,  as  in  the  preceding,  the  elements  of  presentation  and  atonement  are  but  means
to  an  end.  The  peace  offerings  were  gifts  and  expiations  that  they  might  be  feasts.
The  peace  offering  was  the  social  offering,  the  sacrifice  of  friendship,  where  a  man  and
his  kindred  might  have  loving  fellowship  with  Jehovah  and  his  priests.  The  burnt
offering  was  the  act  of  one  in  union  with  Jehovah,  the  peace  offering  of  one  who  would
cement  union  by  eommunion.  The  peace  offering  was  the  Lord's  Supper  of  the  old
covenant.

4.  The  significance  of  the  several  feasti  and  fasts.  The  several  feasts  and  fasts  now
call  for  coDuderation  before  we  proceed  to  build  up  these  numerous  details  into  one
consistent  and  instructive  synthesis.  The  significance  of  these  festal  or  penitential
seasons  must  again  be  inferred  &om  the  scriptural  records  by  means  of  •  careful
induction  in  each  case.

The  general  import  of  these  exceptional  times  and  seasons  in  the  Jewish  calendar
may  be  gathered  from  the  name  so  frequently  applied  to  them.  They  are  called  "  holy
convocations ; "  whereby  is  signified  that  they  were  not  simply  seasons  of  rest,  a  kind
of  Dicadi,  or  Sansctilottide,  an  atheistic  day  of  rest,  or  popular  festival ;  they  were  holy
days  as  well  as  holidays.  Nor  were  they,  this  name  implies,  like  birth  and  marriage
days,  like  Waterloo  memorials  and  American  Days  of  Independence,  like  Foundation
Days  and  remembrances  of  a  pious  benefactor — ^mere  jubilant  or  regretful  reminiscences
of  past  evtiiit:,  such  as  the  Divine  pause  after  Creation,  or  the  flight  from  Egypt,  or  the
tenting-out  at  Ijuccoth ;  they  were  religions  in  the  sense  of  presgnt  participation  in
spiritual  privilege ;  they  were  sacramental  memorials.  In  short,  the  Jewish  festivals
(to  use  a  convenient  term  not  to  be  understood  as  excluding  days  of  humiliation),
whatever  else  they  were,  whether  holidays  or  days  of  rest,  were  dedicated  to  religious
exercises,  and  therefore  became  media  for  new  experimental  participation  in  the
blessings  of  religious  truth.

The  sabbaths  were  times  of  holy  convocation,  and  nothing  more.  They  were  pauses
authoritatively  demanded  in  the  busy  life  of  the  world  for  spiritual  as  well  as  physical
ends.  They  stood  out  amidst  .the  days  of  the  week  as  the  Lord's  days,  and  as
peremptorily  as  the  fourth  commandment  bade  "  Bemember  the  sabbath  day  to  keep  it
holy,"  did  prophets  take  up  the  strain,  saying,  "  Moreover,  I  gave  them  my  sabbaths,
to  be  a  sign  between  me  and  them,  that  they  might  know  that  it  is  I  the  Lord  that
•anctify  them."  Of  the  same  general  sabbatic  character  the  new  moons  partook,  and
the  sabbatic  and  jubilee  year  also.  They  were  times  for  holiness  and  congregation  in
addition  to  being  seasons  of  rest.     Without  calling  any  special  historical  event  to


THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITEBALLY  CONSIDERED.


mind,  they  were  "holy  convocations,''  labour  being  remitted  that  religion  might  be  the
oore  engrossing.  .       u    .j

The  remaining  festal  times  and  seasons  had  an  additional  characteristic.  Besides
being  "holy  convocations,"  when  there  might  be  a  general  adoration  of  Jehovah,
and  a  general  remembrance  of  his  goodness,  and  a  general  participation  in  the
blessedness  which  the  truths  he  had  graciously  revealed  were  calculated  to  impart,
there  was  in  these  other  feasts  and  fasts  a  particular  remembrance  of  some  special
religious  crisis  in  the  national  history,  a  particular  celebration  of  some  special  act  of
Divine  goudness,  and  a  particular  reception  of  some  spetial  Divine  blessing.  It  was
as  though  each  year  there  was  again  a  remembrance  of  the  principal  needs  of  the
religious  life,  together  with  the  special  Divine  methods  for  ministering  to  those  needs.
In  fact,  as  the  sabbatic  cycle  of  festivals  was  fitted  to  keep  alive  in  the  soul  the  general
relations  of  the  Jew  to  his  covenant  God,  so  the  remaining  festivals  were  individually
adapted  to  fan  the  flickering  embers  of  some  single  spiritual  sense  only  too  liable  to
expire.  The  several  exceptional  festiv.als  were  ordained  to  be  at  once  holy  convoca-
tions, sacred  memorials,  and  blessed  sacraments,  and  both  history  and  precept  an
inadequately  estimated  if  either  element  is  disregarded.

Thus  it  is  an  insufficient  interpretation  of  the  Passover  if  it  is  spoken  of  simply  as
a  remembrance  of  the  first  constitution  of  the  released  Hebrews.  The  Passover,  as  it
was  celebrated  from  year  to  year,  was  a  re-enactment,  a  reiteration,  a  renewal  of  that
ancient  rite  which  inaugurated  the  Divine  adoption  of  Israel  as  "  a  peculiar  treasure,
a  kingdom  of  priests,  and  a  holy  nation,"  as  Jehovah  himself  described  the  liberated
Egyptian  slaves.  Passover  was  a  time  of  solemn  convocation  and  sacred  reminiscence ;
it  was  also  a  repetition  of  that  symbolic  ritual  by  which  the  children  of  Israel  were
admitted  into  their  peculiar  relationship  to  the  Deity,  wherein  they  may  feast  as  the
ransomed  sons  of  God.  Briefly,  Passover  was  a  holy  convocation,  when  the  first
Passover  was  recapitulated,  and  the  nation  again  entered  upon  the  amenities  of  Diviae
forgiveness  and  adoption.  Or,  yet  more  briefly,  Passover  was  the  Feast  of  Justifica-
tion, "  made  year  by  year  continually."

The  days  succeeding  the  Passover  constitute  one  long  festal  season,  commencing
with  the  days  of  Unleavened  Bread,  and  ending  with  the  Feast  of  Firstfruits.  Again
we  have  an  addition  to  the  general  significance  of  a  festival  for  a  special  end.  The
justified  nation  is  now  submitting  itself  to  rules  of  abstinence  and  habits  of  self-
sacrifice.  A  not  unsuitable  name  for  this  season  would  be  the  Feast  of  Consecration ;
or,  to  modify  our  previous  form  of  speech,  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  by  which  name  the  Old
Testament  seems  sometimes  to  designate  the  whole  period  from  Passover  to  Pentecost,
was  marked  by  special  days  of  holy  convocation,  in  which  the  first  joys  of  national
obedience  and  deliverance  were  reiterated,  and  the  people  admitted  to  the  privileges
of  the  Divine  adoption  testified  to  its  blessedness  by  willing  consecration  of  self  and
substance  to  Divine  purposes.  More  briefly,  the  Feast  of  Weeks  was  the  Feast  of
Consecration,  "  made  year  by  year  continually."

A  similar  line  of  remark  is  applicable  to  the  great  Day  of  Atonement.  This  day  of
humiliation  was  by  no  means  a  repetition  of  the  Passover,  as  some  have  thought.  It
does  not  celebrate  the  entrance  of  the  people  upon  covenant  rights,  nor  the  beneficial
remembrance  of  that  entrance ;  it  is  a  fast  and  a  penitential  season  for  those  who  hay»
been  already  admitted  to  the  Divine  intimacy.  What  else,  then,  could  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment signify  than  the  atonement  demanded  by  the  sinfulness  inseparable  even  from  the
reconciled  ?  What  else  could  the  Day  of  Atonement  suggest  than  the  permanent  need
of  atonement  even  by  a  nation  of  priests  ?  And  what  else  did  that  day  proclaim  than  the
means  divinely  prearranged  for  meeting  that  evident  need  ?    The  Day  of  Atonemeni


THE  LEVSi'lOAL  SACEIFIOES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.  xxl

was,  as  its  name  implies,  that  holy  convocation  in  which  the  covenant  people  were
deansed  from  the  sin  contaminating  their  holiest  seivice,  "  year  by  year  continually,''
— the  Fast  of  Absolution.

Hence  follows  the  meaning  of  that  festival  which  formed  the  climax  of  the  festive
seasons  of  the  year,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Naturally  enough  it  was  jubilant  and
exultant ;  dances  and  singing  and  mirth  were  its  natural  accompaniments.  For  a  time,
at  least,  there  was  a  joyous  sojourn  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house,  and  a  kind  of
Paradise  restored  where  man  might  hear  the  voice  of  God  amidst  the  leaves  of  the  trees
in  which  the  swallow  had  built  a  nest  for  herself.  The  season  was  a  symbolic  represen-
tation of  the  joy  of  the  elect,  who  dwell  in  Jehovah's  temple  fearlessly  and  gleefully.
The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  religiously  regarded,  was  the  Feast  of  the  Joy  of  the
Reconciled.

Such,  at  any  rate,  were  the  religious  truths  these  festivals  were  fitted  to  convey,  and
the  types  of  religious  life  they  were  adapted  to  gratify,  mould,  and  objectify.  Doubtless
the  picture  drawn  is  ideal,  as  has  been  the  whole  delineation  of  the  significance  of  the
Levitical  sacrifices.  Undoubtedly  also  the  realization  was  but  rarely  attained,  and
that  not  in  the  entire  nation,  bat  in  the  sanctified  heart  of  some  solitary  worshipper  like
David  or  Ezekiel.  Nevertheless,  these  Divine  object-lessons  were  not  without  their
vtilue.  They  were  at  once  an  exercise  and  an  embodiment  of  an  indispensable  form  of
educational  religion.  They  were  admirably  qualified  for  a  paternal  education  of  a  religious
childhood,  if  they  fell  short  of  a  personal  culture  of  a  religious  manhood.  Add  the  fifrther
truth,  so  clearly  taught  in  the  old  covenant,  of  the  preparatory  character  of  Judaism,
and  this  divinely  given  cultus  by  presentation  and  atonement  was  blessed  and
stimulating  indeed,  "  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ."

0.  The  Application  of  the  Fbincifles  deduced  to  the  Entibe  Sohemb  ov
THE  Levitical  Saobifioes.

There  is,  alas  I  no  royal  road  to  the  comprehension  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices,  and  in
the  esteem  of  the  present  writer  it  is  only  after  a  laborious,  observant,  protracted,
and  possibly  wearisome  journey  through  a  wide  realm  of  detail,  that  anything  like  sure
approach  can  be  made  to  a  mastery  of  the  difBculties  of  the  way.  A  few  jottings  only
of  that  journey  have  been  given,  a  few  impressions  recorded  in  transit,  but  even  now
some  advance  can  be  made  to  the  promised  land  of  intelligibility.  To  speak  without
figvu-e,  a  complete  synthesis  of  the  facts  and  interpretations  already  obtained  could  only
result  upon  a  full  and  exhaustive  survey  by  the  light  of  the  principles  deduced  of  the
entire  Jewish  calendar  of  sacrifice.  Such  a  survey  is  precluded  by  our  limits ;  but
some  suggestive  outlines  thereof  may  now  be  drawn.

Let  us  suppose  ourselves  standing  within  the  entrance  of  the  court  of  the  tabernacle
or  the  temple  as  twilight  is  passing  into  dawn  on  the  morning  of  the  Ist  of  Abib,  or,  as
it  was  afterwards  called,  the  1st  of  Nisan.  For  years  the  same  round  of  ritual  has  been
pursued,  at  once  reminding  the  chosen  people  of  their  exceptional  religious  privileges
and  expressing  with  eloquent  symbol  the  religious  sentiments  which  so  Iwnevolent  a
religious  system  could  evoke  and  educate,  and  once  more  the  blank  page  of  the  new
year  is  being  presented  for  completion,  and  the  services  of  the  year  are  recommencing.
Before  our  eyes  the  barefooted  priests,  who  are  to  officiate  in  their  course,  are  already
pre]«iing  themselves  for  their  solemn  duties  by  ablution  at  the  brazen  laver,  whilst,  on
the  hearth  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings  the  remnants  of  the  first  evening  sacrifice  of
the  new  year  are  still  burning.  The  ceremonies  of  the  day  begin.  First  comes  the  con-
tinuous burnt  offering.  One  of  the  elders  of  the  people  possibly  presents  himself  in  the
people's  name  at  the  altar,  bringing  with  him  the  appointed  lamb  for  the  sacrifice  and


xxil         THE  LEVITICAL  SACEIFICES  LITEEALLY  CONSIDERED.


the  appointed  meat  and  drink  offerings.    He  is  seen  to  lay  his  hand  with  some  force
upon  the  victim's  head,  thus  dedicating  it  in  the  name  of  the  entire  people  as  a  burnt
offering  in  its  behalf.    He  draws  his  knife  and  cuts  its  throat.    The  priest,  who  is
ready  with  a  basin,  collects  the  streaming  blood  and  dashes  it  as  an  atonement  agunst
the  sides  of  the  altar,  then  dissects  and  cleanses  the  carcase  in  the  prescribed  manner,
and,  laying  the  pieces  in  order  upon  the  hearth,  the  morning  oblation  rises  into  the  air,
"a  sweet  savour  unto  Jehovah;"  and  once  more  the  daily  burnt  sacrifice  has  been
presented  as  an  acceptable  token  and  memorial  of  the  nation's  consecration  to  Jehovah.
But  the  day  is  a  new  moon,  a  more  emphatic  and  memorable  day  of  grace,  and  a
more  elaborate  offering  is  added  to  the  ordinary  daily  presentation.    The  task  of  the
national  representative,  whoever  he  may  be,  is  not  yet  complete,  and  he  again  presents
himself  in  the  same  place  with  two  young  bullocks,  a  ram,  and  seven  lambs  for  a  burnt
offering,  together  with  the  prescribed  offerings  of  meat  and  wine,  and  also  with  a  kid  ■
for  a  sin  offering.    Analogy  would  suggest  that  the  sin  offering  is  first  made.    Again
the  offering  is  formally  made  to  the  priests  at  the  brazen  altar,  clad  as  before  in  their
white  robes  and  parti-coloured  girdles,  but  increased  in  number;  again  the  hand  if
impressed  upon  the  head  of  the  victim ;  again  the  animal  is  slain  in  the  nation's  behalf;
again  one  of  the  priests,  the  accredited  representatives  of  Jehovah,  collects  the  blood  of
the  slaughtered  beast ;  but  there  the  similarity  of  the  ceremonial  ends.    According  to
the  ritual  ordained  for  the  sin  offering,  some  of  the  blood  is  more  carefully  smeared
upon  the  horns  of  the  altar,  and  is  thus  brought  in  more  solemn  memorial  before  the
Lord,  whilst  the  remainder  is  poured  away,  its  end  being  achieved,  at  the  base  of  the
altar ;  some  few  portions  of  the  fat  are  alone  consumed  by  fire,  the  offering  partaking
more  of  the  nature  of  an  atonement  than  a  gift,  and  for  the  same  reason  the  rest  of  the
carcase  is  not  burnt  within  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  holy  place,  but  in  some  dean
spot  without    the    camp.      Then  follows  the  large  monthly  burnt  offering  before
described,  which  puts  the  larger  number  of  priests  in  requisition,  the  same  form  of  ritual
being  gone  through  as  in  the  case  of  the  "continuous"  sacrifice,  and  the  same  truth
being  signified  with  more  display.    Thus,  at  the  opening  year,  the  chosen  nation  is
agtun  reminded  of  its  jconsecration,  and  reconsecrated  to  God  in  emphatic  manner,  the
doctrine  being  simultaneously  declared  by  the  presentation  of  the  sin  offering  as  well
as  by  the  form  of  blood  sacrifice,  that  even  the  best  hours  of  religious  acknowledgment
in  the  most  prominent  days  of  a  sanctified  peojde  are  not  untainted  by  sin,  but  call
for  humiliation  and  atonement.

The  national  offerings  made,  and  the  golden  candlestick  replenished  in  the  holy  place,
the  ofBcial  offerings  follow.  The  high  priest,  in  his,  official  robes  of  white  and  blue,
"Holiness  to  the  Lord"  glistening  in  gold  upon  his  mitre,  his  jewelled  breastplate
flashing  and  sparkling  in  the  early  sun,  passes  to  the  performance  of  his  exalted
functions,  the  bells  and  pomegranates  at  the  fringe  of  bis  broidered  tunic  ringing  as  he
goes  to  present  his  daily  sacrifice.  Now  he  burns  his  offering  of  meal  at  the  altar  of
burnt  offering,  and,  by  a  gift  of  his  substance,  consecrates  himself  anew  to  the  Lord,  no
effusion  of  blood  being  in  his  case  necessary,  because  of  the  peculiar  holiness  supposed
to  attach  to  his  sublime  office ;  now  he  advances  to  the  holy  place,  and,  drawing  back
the  chequered  curtain,  "  a  thing  of  beauty  and  of  glory,"  is  hidden  from  view  for  a
time,  but  within,  we  know,  he  is  burning  incense  before  the  Lord  on  the  golden  altar,  as
a  further  testimony  of  priestly  consecration— presenting  solemnly  this  exceptional
holocaust  without  blood.

The  personal  offerings  now  succeed.  These,  of  course,  vary  from  day  to  day  according
to  the  number  of  those  who  are  religiously  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  sacrifice,  and
according  to  the  mode  of  impression.  For,  legaUy  compulsory  aa  several  of  the  varieties


THE  LEVITIOAL  SACEIFIOES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.       xxiii

of  individual  sacrifices  were,  there  was  an  element  of  freedom  in  some,  and  of  limitatiou
in  all ;  and  as  manifestly  as  the  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings  were  purely  volun-
tary, it  is  equally  evident  that  the  sin  offerings  and  trespass  offerings  were  largely
influenced  by  time  and  space.  A  Jew  who  lived  remote  from  Jerusalem,  for  example,
might  know  the  Law,  but  could  not  possibly  fulfil  it ;  thus  there  would  be,  even  with  the
enthusiastically  religious,  a  more  probable  remembrance  and  observance  upon  certain  set
occasions,  such  as  the  annual  feasts.  Nor  must  the  hardness  of  the  human  heart  bu
forgotten,  and  the  rare  virtue  of  living  up  to  spiritual  privileges.  Still,  the  supposition
is  that  we  are  standing  in  the  court  ofthe  tabernacle  on  a  New  Tear's  Day.  Although  m-t
dignified  with  the  importance  of  Pentecost  or  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  it  is  still  a
festal  day,  and  offerings  of  many  kinds  will  certainly  be  presented.  At  one  hour,
full  of  gratitude  to  Qoi,  and  anxious  for  service  and  self-abnegation,  a  man  brings  his
bull,  or  his  ram,  or  his  goat,  for  a  burnt  offering,  according  to  his  means  and  inclination,
whilst  his  poorer  neighbour  presents  his  pair  of  pigeons.  The  customary  ritual  is  gone
through,  each  stage  of  which  is  symbolically  expressive  of  the  act  and  method  of
consecration,  until  the  holocaust  rises  "  as  an  offering  of  fire  of  a  sweet  savour  unto
Jehovah,"  and  the  deed  of  personal  consecration  is  complete.  At  another  time  it  is  an
omission  of  some  sacred  duty  which  is  to  he  remembered  before  the  Lord,  and  in  that
obedience  which  is  dearer  even  than  sacrifice,  an  Israelite  from  the  ranks  is  leading  his
spotless  shaggy  she-goat  to  the  altar,  when  again  the  ceremonies  of  presentation,  of
imposition,  and  of  slaughter  are  carefully  gone  through,  each  stage  in  the  sanguinary
proceeding  having  its  own  spiritual  suggestiveness  for  the  religiously  minded,  the
blood  is  smeared  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  to  bring  the  medium  of  atonement  before
the  Lord,  and,  the  expiation  for  the  unwitting  sin  being  ended,  the  offerer  walks  away,
mentally  at  rest.  Or  perhaps  it  is  a  trespass  offering  which  is  being  brought  in
repentant  recollection  of  some  deed  of  fraud,  a  kind  of  conscience  money;  in  acknow-
ledgment of  wrong  done  to  God  as  well  as  man,  the  substitutionary  ram  is  presented
and  slain,  whilst  the  story  of  the  fraud  is  told  over  the  head  of  the  slaughtered  beast,
the  priest  placing  a  judicial  value  upon  the  wrong  done  to  Jehovah,  and  accepting  the
ram  in  lieu  thereof,  a  monetary  recompense  being  made  to  the  injured  neighbour.
Or  it  may  be  a  peace  offering  which  is  brought  by  a  whole  family  in  joyful  recognition
of  the  Divine  goodness,  the  priest  being  welcomed  to  the  hallowed  society ;  the  victim
is  slain,  and  the  sin  present  even  in  such  united  religious  joy  atoned ;  and  the  feast
follows  within  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  holy  place — a  love  feast  indeed,  a  banquet
where  "  the  banner  over  them  was  love."  Or,  descending  to  the  less  frequent  instances
of  the  Levitical  ceremonial,  "  now  a  Hebrew  woman,  but  recently  a  motlier,  is  modestly
presenting  herself  with  her  offering  of  pigeons ;  and  now  the  high  priest  is  passing
through  the  gate  of  the  court,  attended  by  a  Levite  carrying  birds  and  scarlet  wool
and  hyssop — ^he  has  been  summoned  without  the  camp  to  examine  a  restored  leper.
Anon  an  application  is  made  for  the  means  of  purifying  some  tent  where  the  dead  is
lying.  At  one  honr  a  householder  is  compounding  for  the  property  which  he  has
voluntarily  vowed  unto  the  Lord ;  the  next,  a  Nazarite,  with  unshorn  hair  and  beard
is  presenting  the  prescribed  sacrifices  for  release  from  his  vow."

Such  might  have  been  the  sights  afforded  to  the  observer  by  a  single  day.  From
early  morning  to  the  hour  of  the  evening  sacrifice  there  was  oftentimes,  we  may
assume,  one  long  series  of  presentations  by  all  grades  of  people  and  for  all  varieties  of
experience ;  and  a  similar  course  was  pursued  the  whole  year  round,  as  we  shall  presently
detail  at  more  length  after  a  brief  digression  which  is  rather  a  further  "xplanation.

To  test  the  usefulness  and  the  sufBciency  of  the  explanatory  principles  already
deduced,  let  attention  be  concentrated  upon  two  of  those  peculiar  ceremonies  which


xiiv        THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDER  F.D.


might  be  occasionally  witnessed,  namely,  that  of  the  purification  of  the  dead  and  that  ot
the  consecration  to  the  priesthood.

Analyze,  for  example,  the  rites  ordained  for  the  purification  of  the  dead — interpret
them  by  the  light  of  the  principles  previously  deduced— and  the  ceremony  would
suggest  some  such  series  of  thoughts  as  the  following.  The  rite  was  a  purification,  and
as  such  pointed  to  the  great  doctrine  of  original  sin.  It  was  a  purifica'..jn  of  ao
exceptionally  solemn  kind,  and  it  was  a  purification  of  a  solemn  kind  from  its  singular
blending  of  the  atoning  with  the  cleansing  element  of  the  Levitical  worship.  Such  is
an  induction  from  the  various  features  in  which  the  ritual  resembled,  and  differed  from,
the  general  course  of  procedure.  According  to  the  Law,  a  dead  body  contamina("'d  all
in  its  vicinity.  "  To  be  in  a  tent  at  the  time  of  the  death  of  an  inmate,  to  enter  a  tent
where  a  dead  body  lay,  to  touch  a  corpse,  a  grave,  or  a  bone,  was  to  contract  unclean-
ness  for  seven  days."  The  process  of  purification  was  very  arresting,  from  its  peculiarity.
Like  most  processes  of  purification,  it  was  a  form  of  aqueous  ablution;  but  the  water
employed  had  been  specifically  prepared.  A  red  cow  was  brought  to  the  son  or  heir  ot
the  high  priest,  by  the  popular  representatives,  for  slaughter  without  the  camp.  Very
little  ceremonial  was  observed,  but  all  was  singularly  expressive.     The  blood  was

sprinkled  seven  times  towards  the  tabernacle,  and  then  the  whole  of  the  carcase not  a

part — together  with  the  skin  and  the  blood  and  dung,  was  burnt ;  a  little  cedar-wood,
hyssop,  and  scarlet  wool  being  thrown  into  the  fire.  From  the  ashes  the  water  of
purification  was  prepared.  When  occasion  called,  the  ashes  were  mixed  with  spring
water,  and  sprinkled,  by  means  of  a  bunch  of  hyssop,  on  the  third  and  seventh  day
after  defilement,  upon  the  tent  and  the  vessels  and  persons  it  contained;  after  the
customary  ablution  of  the  person,  the  unclean  became  pui'e  in  the  evening.  After
ablution  also,  all  those  who  had  had  any  share  in  the  ritual,  and  who  were  thus
rendered  unclean,  were  also  purified.  Now,  the  use  of  water  associates  this  curious
rite  with  the  other  rites  of  purification,  and  therefore  shows  that,  according  to  the
Levitical  conception,  contamination  by  the  proximity  of  death  was  regarded  as  a  form
of  involuntary  sin,  which,  like  parturition,  proclaimed  the  natural  depravity  of  man,  to
be  obviated  by  special  ceremonial.  But  the  peculiarities  of  ritual  imparted  a  specific
character  to  this  form  of  purification.  Not  simply  was  water  to  be  used,  but  running
or  spring  water — water  at  its  greatest  power  of  cleansing ;  living  water,  as  the  Hebrew
expressively  puts  it.  Further,  this  "  waiter  of  iniquity  "  was  a  lye  prepared  by  the
admixture  of  these  ashes  of  the  red  cow.  What  additional  significance  is  thereby
given?  These  ashes  were  loudly  eloquent  of  atonement,  and  nothing  but  atonement.
Let  it  be  noted  that  this  red  cow  was  manirestly  a  kind  of  sin  offering — indeed,  it  is

actually  so  called:  did  not  the  blood  manipulation  point  to  the  same  conclusion? but

that  it  differs  in  many  essential  points  from  the  sin  offering  proper.  Like  the  latter,  it
was  a  national  propitiation,  and  was  therefore  brought  by  the  representatives  of  the
tribes ;  but,  unlike  the  latter,  it  consisted  of  a  cow — most  probably  that  it  be  not
confounded  with  the  bullock  enjoined  for  the  sin  offering  for  the  congregation,  and
that  at  the  same  time  its  inferior  grade  be  denoted.  Then  let  it  also  be  observed
that  this  cow  was  in  no  sense  a  presentation,  t  ke  the  sin  offering  proper.  It  was
not  offered  at  the  altar  of  burnt  offering,  but  w;thout  the  camp ;  no  portions  were
reserved  for  priestly  use.  It  was  not  submitted  to  the  customary  rites  of  presentation ;
even  the  skin  and  f^oes  were  burnt,  and  not  separated.  In  fact,  this  red  cow  was  an
atonement  by  substitution— this,  and  nothing  more.  Its  blood  was  sprinkled,  like  the
blood  of  the  sin  offering,  before  the  tabernacle  seven  times,  thus  bringing  the  appointed
means  of  "covering"  emphatically  before  Jehovah;  scariet  wool— blood-coloured
wool— was  throvn  into  the  flames  when  the  carcase  was  burnt ;  nay,  the  very  colour  0/


THE  LEVITICAL  SACUIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


xxy


the  cow  was  selected  as  the  colour  of  the  blood  which  atoned ;  and  so  completely  was  ,
the  victim  regarded  as  a  substitute,  that  every  ministrant  at  the  ritual  was  rendered
unclean  thereby,  and  the  high  priest  was  precluded  from  ofiSciating,  lest  he  be  inca-
pacitated for  his  other  exalted  functions,  and  so  his  son,  his  nearest  kinsman,  and
official  representative  took  his  place.  Thus,  in  pictorial  and  impressive  form,  the
momentous  truths  were  inculcated  of  death  as  the  punishment  of  sin  ordained  by  the
Divine  anger,  and  of  the  counteraction  of  the  influence  of  death  by  an  appointed
substitute.  There  is  not  a  detail  of  vhe  involved  ritual  which  cannot  be  explained  by
the  aid  of  such  principles  as  we  have  deduced.

So,  too,  so  elaborate  a  ceremonial  as  the  consecration  of  a  priest  becomes  at  once  lucid,
brilliant,  suggestive,  and  religious  by  the  application  of  the  principles  in  question.  As
we  have  seen,  a  bullock  and  two  rams,  unleavened  bread  and  wheaten  cakes,  were
brought  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  where  the  candidates  to  be  initiated  were  washed
with  water,  arrayed  in  oScial  garments,  anointed  with  the  holy  oil,  atoned  for  by  a  sin
offering,  sanctified  by  a  burnt  offering,  and  admitted  to  fellowship  by  a  peace  offering
In  one  significant  particular  the  ritual  of  this  closing  sacrifice  differed  from  that
customarily  observed  in  sacrifices  of  the  same  class.  After  the  habitual  imposition  of
the  hand,  and  slaughter,  some  of  the  collected  blood  was  put  upon  the  tip  of  the  right
ear,  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand,  and  the  toe  of  the  right  foot,  and  was  sprinkled  upon
the  clothing  of  the  newly  ordained,  priest,  in  addition  to  the  usual  smearing  of  the
horns  of  the  altar.  Now,  as  most  investigators  have  pointed  out,  this  consecration
consisted  of  two  sets  of  three  acts.  In  the  first  place,  there  was  a  solemn  purification,
an  ex|iress  investiture,  and  a  formal  anointing ;  and  in  the  second  place,  there  followed
a  triple  sacrifice  in  the  noteworthy  order  of  a  sin  offering,  a  burnt  offering,  and  a  peace
offering.  Every  detail  is  luminous  and  has  of  itself  a  profound  suggestiveness  for  the  age
contemporaneous,  and  although  the  minutiae  of  the  rite  only  receive  their  full  illumi-
nation in  Christianity,  they  nevertheless  conveyed  many  a  valuable  lesson  to  the  Jew.
In  fact,  in  its  adaptation  of  the  general  ritual  of  Levitical  sacrifice  to  the  ordination
of  priests,  the  prescribed  ceremonial  is  a  simple  and  intelligible  object-lesson  in  the
requisites  of  acceptable  religious  service.  In  the  set  washing  with  water  we  have,  as
Oehler  put  it,  "  a  symbol  of  the  spiritual  purification  without  which  none  can  approach
God,  at- least  to  atone."  In  the  investiture  there  is  the  visible  assumption  of  the
priestly  office.  In  the  anointing,  the  Divine  seal  is  attached  to  such  acceptance  of
office ;  whereas  the  sin  inherent  even  in  an  accepted  priest  must  be  removed  by  a  sin
offering,  upon  which  may  follow  the  expressive  sacrifices  of  consecration  and  fellowship.
As  for  the  varying  featuires  in  the  peace  offering,  where  a  different  blood  manipulation
is  gone  through,  what  change  could  be  more  significant?  Before  admission  to  the
communion  of  priests,  and  of  the  Deity  whom  the  priests  serve,  there  must  bo  a  specific
atonement,  and  the  atoning  blood  of  the  ram,  "  the  ram  of  consecration,"  is  placed  not
only  in  contact  with  the  altar,  but  with  the  person  and  garments  of  the  newly  ordained
priest,  the  very  ceremonial  signifying  that  the  ear  and  hand  and  foot,  which  are  to  be
swift  to  serve,  must  be  atoned  for  before  they  are  hallowed,  and  that  the  very  garments
of  office  must  be  cleansed  before  dedication  to  their  sacred  use.

With  such  daily  observances,  the  Jewish  year  ran  its  course,  the  customary  worship
repeated  evening  and  morning,  in  combination  with  the  voluntary  expression  of
religion  by  sacrifice,  associating  absolution,  confession,  and  adoration  with  all  the
phases  and  grades  of  the  national  life.  If  the  tribe  of  Levi  sanctified  itself  by  holy
service  in  sacrifice,  by  the  same  means  the  farmer  sanctified  his  toil,  the  mother  her
child,  the  father  his  skill,  the  prophet  his  calling,  the  singer  his  talent,  the  prince  his
government,  and  the  elders  their  nation.    Day  by  day  these  Levitical  sacrifices  were


xiTi        THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITEKALLY  CONSIDERED.


capable  of  proclaiming,  in  sanctuary,  in  palace.  In  market,  in  house,  and  in  tent,
religious  truths  of  the  highest  importance.  To  this  daily  observance  let  the  additional
observances  of  the  various  festal  seasons  be  added,  and  it  will  become  yet  more  manifest
how  admirably  this  cultus  of  sacrifice  at  once  educated  and  ministered  to  the  Jewish
phasis  of  religion.

From  the  2nd  of  Abib  to  the  10th,  the  customary  daily  celebration  of  Divine
service  was  observed,  the  interval  being  abnormally  broken  into  solely  by  the  increased
consecration  called  for  and  symbolized  by  the  double  burnt  offering  of  the  sabbath.
When  God  was  especially  remembered,  man  was  to  be  especially  consecrated.  With  the
10th  of  Abib  came  the  Paschal  feast,  continued  more  or  less  till  the  Feast  of  Pentecost.
And  very  full  of  spiritual  suggestions  was  this  opening  festival  of  the  year,  every  detail
of  the  rites  enjoined  tending  to  deepen  those  suggestions.  In  its  first  institution,  as
we  have  seen,  the  Passover  was  a  sacrificial  admission  to  covenant  rights,  and  every
subsequent  celebration  thereof  was  at  once  a  remembrance  and  a  repetition  of  that
initiatory  ceremoniaL  From  this  fundamental  significance  all  the  peculiarities  of  this
sacrifice  follow.  Thus  the  Paschal  lamb  was  neither  a  sin  offering  pure  and  simple
nor  a  peace  offering ;  it  did  not  in  many  important  points  come  beneath  the  laws  of
the  acknowledged  sacrificial  rituah  It  was  a  kind  of  inclusive  sacrifice,  which  conveyed
the  prominent  teaching  of  several  forms  of  sacrifice  under  one  suggestive  form.  Thus
first  and  foremost  the  Paschal  lamb  was  an  atonement  of  so  potent  a  nature  as  to
arrest  the  destroying  arm  of  the  angel  of  death,  and  of  so  emphatic  a  ritual  as  to  be
brought  more  into  contact  with  the  several  households  of  the  tribes  than  was  the  case
in  any  other  festal  season.  The  time  allowed  to  elapse  between  the  selection  of  the
victim  and  its  slaughter,  the  minute  injunctions  for  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  upon
the  lintel  and  doorposts,  the  command  that  no  bone  of  the  lamb  was  to  be  broken,  the
strict  command  that  what  remained  was  to  be  burnt  by  fire,  the  rapid  manner  of
partaking, — all  pointed  to  the  offering  as  less  intended  for  a  feast  than  an  atonement,
and  laid  very  exceptional  stress  upon  the  neutralizing  power  of  the  effused  blood.
Certain  features  of  the  feast  were  undoubtedly  ordained  because  of  the  peculiar  position
oi  the  Israelites  in  Egypt,  and  if  that  position  be  borne  in  mind,  and  the  fundamental
significance  of  the  Passover  as  the  great  initiatory  rite,  all  the  superficial  difficulties  of
the  narrative  are  removed.  It  is,  of  course,  not  denied,  but  strongly  believed,  that  there
are  features  in  this  institution  which  nothing  but  the  fulfilment  of  the  type  could
perfectly  explain,  and  which  are  the  outcome  of  distinct  Divine  prevision ;  at  the  same
time,  it  is  contended  that  even  so  extraordinary  a  command  as  that  of  keeping  the  skeleton
intact  was  intelligible  to  the  Jew  as  a  natural  consequence  of  what  he  -was  able  to
apprehend  of  the  meaning  of  the  Passover.  Possibly  even  this  nineteenth  century  is
a  record  of  many  facts  likewise  which  seem  to  us  to  be  of  a  present  import  only,  which
will  only  receive  an  adequate  explanation  in  the  light  of  a  coming  dispensation.
Similarly  with  the  following  days  of  the  Paschal  feast  and  with  the  day  of  Pentecost,
all  the  details  of  the  injunctions  relative  thereto  are  nothing  but  exemplifications
divinely  prearranged  of  the  leading  fact  taught  thereby  of  the  Feast  of  Consecration.
Therefore,  for  example,  was  the  pleasure  of  leavened  bread  eschewed ;  therefore  were
the  firstfruits  presented.

Nor  need  we  go  outside  the  principles  already  deduced  for  explanation  of  the  remain-
ing feasts  and  their  observances.  Pentecost  past,  the  year  rolled  upon  its  course  for  a
time,  it  is  true,  in  a  more  level  manner,  the  regularity  of  the  daily  celebration  being
only  interrupted  by  the  sabbatic  and  lunar  formalities,  every  day,  therefore,  a  kind  ol
gospel  being  proclaimed  of  Divine  mercy  and  forgiveness  and  reconciliation,  with  its
Invariable  postulates  of  human  sin  and  decadence,  death  and  guilt.    At  length  cams


THE  LEVITKAL  SACBIflCES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.       xxtU

the  Ugh  season  of  the  seventh  month,  heralded  by  the  rousing  blasts  of  the  Feast  of
Trumpets.

The  seventh  month  affords  two  very  excellent  tests  of  the  adequacy  of  these  principles
of  interpretation,  namely,  in  their  application  to  the  elucidation  of  the  great  Day  of
Atonement  and  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  The  ritual  of  the  former  need  not  be  repeated ;
it  was  undoubtedly  exceptional ;  it  was  as  undoubtedly  instructive ;  indeed,  the  more
minute  and  accurate  the  investigation  bestowed  even  upon  th^  more  trivial  points  of
observance,  the  more  harmonious  does  it  appear,  and  the  more  didactic.  At  first  sight,
it  may  be  allowed,  the  ceremonial  shows  a  laboured  and  officialistic  respect  to  a  mass  of
legal  detail,  valuable  as  a  testimony  to  ecclesiastical  thoroughness  in  routine,  and  to
little  else.  Viewed  more  closely,  the  ceremonial  b  a  complete  and  balanced  whole,
exact  and  even  concise,  forcible  as  well  as  clear  in  the  religious  lesson  it  has  to  convey.
That  lesson,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  atonement  possible  for  the  sins  of  the  redeemed,
for,  be  it  observed,  the  stranger  and  the  foreigner  had  no  part  in  the  worship  of  this  day
of  national  humiliation.  Carrying  this  principle  in  the  mind,  the  entire  series  of  acta
yields  up  its  meaning.  Not  a  soul  in  the  priestly  tribe,  however  holy  and  exalted  hU
function,  not  a  utensil  in  the  consecrated  place,  however  sacred  and  sublime  its  use,  but
must  be  atoned  for.  Hence  the  mediators  and  the  instruments  of  mediation  must  be  first
removed  from  beneath  the  ban  of  uncleanness  and  sin.  The  solemn  proceedings  are
therefore  commenced  by  the  offering  of  the  bullock  in  expiation  of  the  holy  places  and
ministrants.  The  high  priest,  who  leads  in  officiating,  may  not  even  wear  his  ofiicial
robes  till  the  ceremonial  of  expiation  is  completed,  but  stands  at  the  altar  clothed  in
white ;  and,  on  the  slaughter  of  the  bullock,  sprinkles  the  mercy-seat  and  the  floors  and
the  altars  with  the  blood  of  atonement,  and  presents  the  blood  before  the  Lord  in  atone-
ment for  his  own  sin  and  the  sins  of  his  kindred  and  tribe.  The  whole  ritual  is  an
emphatic  act  of  atonement,  as  every  detail  shows.  Atonement  is  likewise  solemnly
made  by  the  blood  of  the  ram  in  behalf  of  the  nation.  The  remaining  rite  was  an
exquisitely  symbolic  act,  declarative  of  forgiveness.  Confessing  over  the  head  of  the
live  goat  the  sins  and  iniquities  of  the  entire  nation,  the  high  priest  seemed  to  transfer
those  sins  to  the  head  of  the  animal,  who  bore  them  away  from  the  dwelling-place  of
Jehovah,  and  carried  them  into  the  abode  of  Azazel.  The  sins  were  removed  as  well  as
covered.  Now  the  priest  may  assume  his  golden  garments ;  now  the  people  may  present
acceptable  sacrifice;  now  burnt  offerings  may  typify  the  national  consecration.

The  ritual  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  somewhat  less  intelligible ;  nevertheless,  its
secret  was  also  largely  open  to  the  thoughtful  and  devout  Jew.  It  very  expressively
followed  the  more  serious  service  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  gave  visible  and  pleasant
expression  to  the  joy  of  the  elect,  who  have  been  redeemed  at  the  Passover,  consecrated
at  Pentecost,  and  absolved  at  the  great  day  of  national  expiation.  This  feast  ended,
the  climax  of  the  doctrinal  teaching  by  symbol  had  been  reached,  and  the  year  was
brought  to  a  close  by  the  common  series  of  daily,  weekly,  and  monthly  sacrificings.

Now,  in  view  of  this  didactic  sacrificial  cultus,  at  once  so  eloquent  and  so  disciplinary,
it  would  certainly  be  interesting  to  inqvure  what  contributions  were  thereby  made
towards  a  system  of  revealed  religion.  It  would  also  be  interesting  to  ask  with  what
arguments  the  pious  Jew  would  combat  the  assaults  of  disbelievers  in  what  he  regarded
the  Divine  origin  of  his  sacrificial  creed.  Nor  could  it  be  by  any  means  impracticable,
whilst  it  certainly  would  be  of  value,  to  frame  both  a  systematic  and  apologetic
theology  of  Judaism,  in  which  such  notes  as  the  laws  of  purification  and  the  injunctions
for  blood  sacrifice,  the  significance  of  the  priesthood  and  the  explanation  expressly
assigned  to  the  tabernacle,  might,  by  an  intellectual  effort  of  no  severe  kind,  be  made  to
disclose  the  inmost  messages  of  their  symbolism,  and  become  part  of  a  concatenated


xxviii      THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFiCES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


doctrine  of  Old  '"fstament  theology,  of  its  doctrine  of  sin  and  of  salvation,  of  its  doctrine
of  God  and  of  man.  But  after  all,  it  is  the  practical  aspect  of  this  Old  Testament  faith
which  most  calls  for  admiring  regard.  Its  theological  implications  are  of  Interest  to
the  theologian,  its  practical  implications  are  of  human  interest.  And  practically
regarded,  these  Levitical  sacrifices  are  noteworthy,  first,  as  a  means  of  religious
education,  and  next  as  a  means  of  religious  satisfaction.  They  evolved  religions  senti-
ment, and  they  appeased  it.  However  superficially  this  sacrificial  cultus  be  regarded,
it  assuredly  proclaimed  such  truths  as  these:  the  sinfulness  of  man  (extending
too  beyond  the  bounds  of  volition,  and  affecting  the  race),  the  Divine  alienation  conse-
quent thereupon,  the  need  of  atonement,  its  possibility,  its  method,  the  acceptability
of  the  service  of  the  reconciled.  All  these  truths — ^which,  to  judge  from  Christianity,
constitute  the  essentials  of  a  religion  adapted  to  man — were  taught  by  arresting  sym-
bolism and  an  imposing  ceremonial.  They  were  equally  capable  of  educating  up  to  a
high  degree  of  religiousness  and  of  ministering  to  the  religious  needs  so  matured,.  They
affected  too  the  whole  range  of  life,  training  the  Church,  sanctifying  the  State,  pene-
trating the  home,  and  affecting  the  individual.  They  interwove  the  essentials  of  religion
with  all  the  relationships,  duties,  sorrows,  and  pleasures  of  life.  According  to  its  own
ideal,  the  Jewish  nation  was  a  theocracy  where  reconciled  rebels  gave  their  every
allegiance  to  the  King  of  kings  acceptably.

Thus,  historically  regarded,  and  without  trespassing  upon  or  forestalling  the  later
revelations  made  by  Christ  and  his  apostles,  the  Levitical  sacrifices  are  seen  to  be  a
profound  recognition  of  the  wants  of  man,  and  a  response  to  his  deepest  needs.  The
Levitical  sacrifices  declared  unmistakably,  from  the  hour  of  their  first  promulgation,
the  necessity  there  was  for  atonement,  and  the  Divine  provision  for  that  necessity.  Indeed,
it  la  simple  truth  to  say  that  there  is  not  a  feature  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices  which  does
not  accentuate  in  some  way,  either  the  fact  of  estrangement  from  God  with  its  large
disabilities,  or  the  fact  of  reconciliation  to  God  with  its  large  privileges.  To  how
enormous  an  extent  their  teaching  relied  for  confirmation  and  potency  upon  Christianity,
we  shall  presently  see ;  just  now  the  point  upon  which  it  is  necessary  to  insist  is  the
value  of  Judaism  as  a  religious  system  apart  from  Christianity.  The  system  was,  alas  I
ideal.  The  Jew  seldom  realized  and  never  exhausted  its  magnificent  possibilities.
Nevertheless,  how  immense  was  its  practical  value,  let  the  hundred  and  nineteenth
psalm  testify,  with  its  hundred  and  seventy-six  verses  in  praise  of  this  very  Levitical
system,  which  the  Psalmist  is  glad  to  recall,  and  which  he  feels  it  no  exaggeration  to

(les(>nl)e mass  of  commandments,  laws,  testimonies,  statutes,  though  it  be — as  a  fitting

guide  of  youth,  an  object  of  great  delight,  a  mine  of  wonders ;  as  the  rule  of  the  free
and  the  song  of  the  exile  ;  as  sweeter  than  honey  and  more  valuable  than  riches ;  as
life,  light,  and  health ;  a  pleasant  subject  of  meditation  in  this  world  and  also  in  the
eternity  of  Jehovah.

D.  Relation  of  thk  Levitical  Saobifioes  to  thk  Saobificeb  of  the
Patriarchal  Aob.

Contrasting  this  detailed  and  expressive  system  of  Levitical  sacrifice  with  the  brief
records  of  the  pre-Mosaio  age,  it  would  appear  that  the  later  cultus  differed  from  the
earlier  in  authoritj/,  in  complexity,  in  centralization,  in  doctrine,  and  in  practical
value.

As  regards  the  authority  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices,  they  are  expressly  ascribed  to
a  Divine  origin.  "  And  Jehovah  said  unto  Moses "  is  the  almost  invariable  formula
with  which  the  several  legal  sections  begin.    In  this  there  is  a  marked  distinction  from


THE  LEVITIOAL  SACEIFIOBS  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.        xxlx


the  days  of  the  great  fathers  of  the  Hebrew  nation.  Whatever  Divine  influences  were
brought  to  bear  upon  Abel  in  the  first  recorded  sacrifice— and  it  is  easy  to  exaggerate

those  influences  to  the  detriment  of  the  inspiriting  teaching  of  the  narrative it  is

manifest  that  from  that  time  onwards  the  ever-growing  system  of  worship  by  sacrifice
was  almost  wholly  a  human  development.  "Almost  wholly,"  we  say,  for  sacrificial
revelations  were  given  to  Noah  and  Abraham,  but  the  one  was  simply  an  exhortation  to
sacrifice,  and  the  other  a  correction  of  an  erroneous  inference.  In  fact,  the  patriarchal
sacrifices  are  apparently  representative  of  pure  ethnic  sacrifices,  whereas  the  Divine
acknowledgment  and  improvement  of  human  religious  ideas  testify  at  once  to  the
hardness  of  the  human  heart  and  to  the  gracious  condescension  of  Jehovah.

So  it  is  likewise  evident  that  the  Levitical  sacriflces  were  an  advance  upon  the
patriarchal  in  complexity.  Hereditary  priests  have  taken  the  place  of  the  father  of  the
family,  and  all  the  various  ceremonial  of  the  court,  the  holy  place,  and  the  holiest,  in
all  the  mutations  of  the  Jewish  year,  have  superseded  those  two  simple  varieties
mentioned  in  earlier  times,  the  burnt  offering  and  the  festal  offering — which  were
adapted  on  occasion,  as  best  they  could  be,  to  all  the  changing  and  contrasted  emotion
of  the  religious  life.

A  third  difference  between  the  two  dispensations  is  seen  in  the  later  localieation.
Abraham,  Isaac,  and^Jacob,  wherever  Qoi  bad  revealed  himself  and  made  his  presence
known,  could  present  their  offerings  of  praise,  and  erect  their  holy  places.  The
Levitical  sacrifices  are  legitimate,  so  testifies  the  whole  Pentateuch,  at  one  sanctuary
alone.  There  being  a  localization  of  Deity,  or  rather  of  his  gracious  presence,  acceptable
sacrifice  must  be  offered  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  mercy-seat.

There  is  a  clearness  too  in  the  doctrinal  implications  of  the  Levitical  rites,  which
is  conspicuously  absent  from  the  earlier  forms  of  worship.  No  such  array  of  parallel
principles  can  be  inferred  from  the  Genesis  as  has  been  deduced  from  the  Exodus  and  the
Leviticus.  The  acceptability  of  sacrifice,  as  a  testimony  to  self-sacrifice  even,  has  very
much  less  evident  sanction  for  Abraham  than  for  Moses.  The  point  is  so  certain  that
attention  needs  simply  be  drawn  thereto.  To  an  additional  point,  however,  it  is
necessary  to  refer  with  some  distinctness ;  the  patriarchal  cultus  was  a  worship  by
presentation,  the  Levitical  cultus  was  a  worship  by  atonement  as  well.  No  reference  is
made  in  the  Genesis,  whether  direct  or  indirect,  by  express  statement,  by  ritual,  or  by
any  mention  of  a  special  manipulation  of  the  blood  of  the  victims  offered,  to  the
Levitical  doctrine  of  expiation  by  blood.  Animal  sacrifices  were  made,  it  is  true,  but
only  because  stock-farming  as  well  as  agriculture  formed  part  of  the  staple  labour  of
the  ancestors  of  the  Jewish  nations,  and  gifts  might  be  therefore  made  from  the  former
as  well  as  the  latter,  or  because  animal  food  was  eaten  by  them  as  well  as  vegetable.
The  evidence  would  seem  to  be  conclusive  that  not  only  did  the  Almighty,  according
to  the  testimony  of  the  Pentateuch,  adopt  the  results  of  human  religious  thought  and
practice,  giving  them  at  the  same  time  a  wider  bearing  and  a  more  assured  interpreta-
tion, but  that  he  added  to  that  interpretation  the  very  significant  doctrine  peculiar  to
Judaism  of  the  atonement  for  sin  by  the  blood  of  a  substituted  victim.

And  of  course  all  these  differences  culminated  in  a  difference  of  practice.  The
educational  value  of  the  religion  of  Moses  was  higher  than  that  of  the  pre-Mosaio
age,  because  more  accurate  and  minute  in  doctrinal  significance,  just  as,  for  the  same
reason,  its  value  was  increased  as  a  discipline.  A  more  developed  and  sound  theology
is  always  the  cause  of  a  profounder  and  more  usefnl  religious  education,  and  a  purer
and  more  satisfying  religious  worships


THE  LEVITICAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.


E,  Bklation  of  the  Letitioal  Saorifioes  to  the  Chbibtias  SACBiFiau.

The  leligionB  of  Moses  and  Jesus  Christ  both  agree  and  differ  in  their  sacrifidal
teaching.

They  agree  in  dividing  their  doctrine  of  sacrifice  into  two  parts ;  their  doctrine  u(
presentation  and  their  doctrine  of  atonement,  according  to  both  presentation  bang
possible  and  atonement  necessary.  They  also  agree  In  asserting  that  atonement  must
precede  sacrifice.

They  differ  in  the  material,  directness,  and  timeliness  of  presentation,  and  in  the
method  and  frequency  of  atonement.  To  take  the  latter  points  first.  The  New
Testament  teaches  that  atonement  is  made  for  human  sin  by  the  substitution  of  the
life  of  Jesus  for  that  of  the  sinner.  As  Peter  expresses  it,  "  Christ,  who  his  own  self
carried  up  our  sins  in  his  own  body  to  the  tree,  that  we,  having  died  to  sins,  might
live  unto  righteousness."  Or,  as  Paul  put  it,  adopting  the  Jewish  synonym  of  blood
for  life,  "Christ  Jesus,  .  .  .  whom  God  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation,  through  faith, by
his  blood ; "  and  according  to  the  nature  of  the  case  this  atonement  or  propitiation  is
made  once  for  all.  The  Old  Testament  teaches  that  the  Jew  is  atoned  for  by  the  blood,
or  life,  of  an  animal  substitute,  which  is  so  far  from  being  presented  once  for  all,  that
life  must  be  effused  on  every  occasion  of  worship.  Similarly  as  regards  the  doctrine  of
presentation,  there  is  a  change  of  teaching :  in  the  Old  Testament,  certain  prescribed
forms  of  offering  are  alone  allowed,  and  the  man  is  accepted  because  of  the  offering  of
his  substance ;  in  the  New,  self  is  more  important,  and  the  offering  is  accepted  because
of  the  man.  There  is  an  alteration  in  another  respect ;  the  New  Testament  demands
no  priestly  mediation  like  that  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  in  approaching  the  Majesty  on  high.
And  in  yet  a  third  respect  there  is  a  change :  the  offering  of  a  reconciled  heart  may  be
made  at  any  time  and  in  any  place  at  the  free  suggestion  of  the  worshipper,  and  with-
out legal  restriction.

Without  entering,  therefore,  upon  abstract  doctrinal  discussion,  and  judging  solely
by  the  facts  presented  by  the  sacrificial  conceptions  of  the  two  dispensations,  they  are
manifestly  connected,  and  that  as  the  higher  and  the  lower  in  a  prearranged  system  of
development.  There  is  in  Christianity  an  evident  growth  in  reasonableness  and
freedom.  In  Christianity  the  fetters  of  Judaism  are  snapped,  and  its  unintelligible
features  are  explained.  As  Augustine  said,  "  In  the  epoch  of  the  old  covenant  the  new
lay  latent,  as  a  fruit  does  in  a  root,"  or,  in  the  language  of  more  modem  times,  we  may
say,  the  New  Testament  sacrifices  are  antitypes  of  those  of  the  Old.  In  a  word,  judged
by  the  definition  of  final  cause,  Christianity  is  the  final  cause  of  Judaism

F.  The  Litebatube  of  the  Levitical  Baobifioes.

From  the  voluminous  literature  upon  the  Levitical  sacrifices  the  following  treatiaei
are  aelected  as  of  especial  importance  >-

L  Biblioai-  Diotionabies  ant  CTOLOPiEDiAB.  Bee  the  relative  artiicles  in  Herzog,
•EealencyklopSdie;'  Eiehm,  '  Handworterbuch  des  Bibiischen  Alterthums:'  Smith
•Dictionaryof  the  Bible;'  Winer, 'BiblischesBeal-Worterbuch.'  '

XL  aMMENTABnts.  Baumgarteu, '  Theologischer  Commentar  zum  Pentateuch,'  two
y^.,  Kiel,  1843, 1844;  Hirsch,  'Der  Pentateuch  Uebersetzt  und  Erklart.'  Frankfort
JsZo'  fije.ToJs- (yaluaWe  for  its  rabbinic  lore)  ;  Joule,  'Notes  on  Leviticus.'  London!
J^.5  Kalisoh,  'Leviticus,'  especially  Essay  A,  London,  1867 ;  KnobeL  'Exodus  und
Leviticus,  1857  (a  second  edition,  edited  by  DiUmann,  which  is  almost  a  new  work
was  issued  last  year).  wum,

IIL  BiBLioAL  ABoaBOLOGY  AND  Theoloot.     De  Wette,   'Lehrbuch  der  Hebr-


THE  LEVinOAL  SACRIFICES  LITERALLY  CONSIDERED.        xxxi

JMischen  ArcMologie,'  4th  edit.,  Leipsig,  1864 ;  Bwald, '  Die  Alterthiimer  des  Volkes
Israel,'  3rd  edit.,  Gottingen,  1866  (English  translation,  1876);  'Die  Lehre  der  Bibel
von  Gott,  oder  Theologie  des  Alten  und  Neuen  Bundes,'  four  vols. ,  Leipsig,  1871 — 1875 ;
Fairbairn, '  The  Typology  of  Scripture,'  two  vols.,  5th  edit.,  1870 ;  Hofmann, '  Der  Schrift-
beweis,'  2nd  edit.,  three  vols.,  Nordlingen,  1857;  Hoffmann,  'Abhandlungen  fiber  die
Pentateuch-Gesetze,'  Berlin,  1878  (valuable  for  its  acquaintance  with  the  synagogal
literature)';  Jatho, '  Blioke  in  die  Bedeutung  des  Mosaischen  Cultus,'  Hildesheim,  1876  ;
Keil, '  Handbuch  der  Biblischen  Archaologie,'  1st  half,  1st  edit.,  1858,  2nd  edit.,  1875  ;
Kliefoth, ' Liturgische  Abhandlungen,'  vol.  iv.,  2nd  edit.,  1858;  Litton,  'The  Mosaic
Dispensation,'  the  Bampton  Lecture  for  1856 ;  Lowman, '  Rationale  of  the  Ritual  of  the
Hebrew  Worship,'  London,  1748 ;  Maurice, '  The  Doctrine  of  Sacrifice,'  new  edit.,  London,
1879 ;  Oehler,  •  Theologie  des  Alten  Testament,'  vol.  i.,  Tiibingen,  1873  (translated
Into  English,  1875) ;  Saalschiitz,  '  Archaologie  der  Hebraer,'  two  vols.,  1855,  1856 ;
Salvador,  'Histoire  des  Institutions  de  Moise  et  du  Peuple  H^breu,'  two  vols.,  3rd
edit.,  Paris,  1862;  Schafer,  'Die  Religiosen  Alterthiimer  der  Bibel,'  Munster,  1878;
Schultz,  '  Alttestanientliche  Theologie,'  vol.  i.,  Frankfiirt,  1869  (2nd  edit.,  adapting
results  to  the  hypothesis  of  Graf  and  Kuenen,  1878) ;  Steudel,  '  Vorlesungen  Uber  die
Theologie  des  Alten  Testament,'  Berlin,  1840 ;  Spencer,  '  De  Legibus  Hebrseorum  et
earum  Rationibus,'  1st  edit.,  1685 ;  Tholuck,  '  Das  Alte  Testament  im  Neuen  Testa-
ment,' Gotha,  6th  edit.,  1868 ;  Umbreit,  '  Die  Sunde,  Beitrag  zur  Theologie  des  Alten
Testament,'  Gotha,  1853.

IV.  MoNOGEAPHS  ON  THE  Lkvitioal  Saobifices.  Bahr,  '  Symbolik  des  Mosaischea
Cultus,'  in  two  vols.,  Heidelberg,  1837  (the  first  volume  of  a  second  and  largely  altered
-  edition  was  issued  at  the  close  of  1876,  but  upon  the  doctrine  of  sacrifice  all  that
has  appeared  is  in  the  first  edition) ;  Hengstenberg,  •  Die  Opfer  der  Heiligen  Schrift,'
Berlin,  1859  (translated  as  an  Appendix  to  his  '  Commentary  on  Ecclesiastes,'  in  the
Foreign  Theological  Library) ;  Kurtz, '  Der  Alttestamentliohe  Opfercultus,'  Mittau,  1862
(translated  in  Foreign  Theological  Library) ;  Outram, '  De  Sacrificiis,'  1st  edit.,  London,
1677  (translated  into  English,  1817) ;  Stockl,  '  Liturgie  und  Dogmatische  Bedeutung
der  Alttest.  Opfer,  Insbesondere  in  ihren  Verhaltnisse  zur  Neutest.  Opfertheorie,'  1848 ;
Wan^emann, '  Das  Opfer  nach  Lehre  des  Heiligen  Schrift,'  two  vols.,  Berlin,  1866.

V.°Review  Aeticlbs  on  the  Levitical  Saceitices.  De  Chareney, '  Fragments  sur
la  Symbolique  H^braique,'  in  the  Bevite  de  Linguistiqite,  April,  1879 ;  Listov, '  Was
Bedeutet  im  Mos.  Cultus  das  Versbhnen,'  in  the  Theological  Tidskri/t,  1878 ;  Mann-
heimer,  '  Der  Mosaismus  im  Gegensatz  zum  CEgyptenthum,'  Judisches  Literaturblatt,
1878;  Marbach,  'Das  Blut,  eine  Theologische  Studie,'  in  HUgenf eld's  Zeitschrift  fur
WissenscliaftUdte  Theologie,  1866 ;  Neumann,  '  Die  Opfer  des  Alten  Bundes,'  in  the
Deutsche  Zeitschri/tfiir  Christl.  Wissenschaft,  1852, 1853,  and  1857 ;  Park,  '  The  Divine
Institution  of  Sacrifice,'  in  the  Bibliotheca  Sacra,  January,  1876  ;  Biehm, '  Der  Begriff
der  Siihne  im  Alten  Testament,'  in  the  Studien  und  Kritiken,  1877.

VL  Monogbaphs  on  Related  Themes.  Auber,  '  Histoire  et  Th&irie  du  Sym-
bolisme  R^ligieuse,'  four  voi«.,  Paris,  1872 ;  Ebrard, '  Die  Lehre  von  der  Stellvertretenden
Gtenugthuung  in  der  Heiligen  Schrift  Begriindet,'  Konigsberg,  1856;  Klaiber,  'Die
Neutest.  Lehre  von  der  Slinde  und  Erlosung,'  Stuttgart,  1836 ;  Kiiper, '  Das  Priester-
thum  des  Alten  Bundes,'  Berlin,  1866.

VII.  Jewish  and  Talmudio  Litebatueb.  The  tractates '  Sebachim '  and '  Menachoth ; '
Ugolino,  '  Thesaurus  Antiquitatum  Sacrarum.'  The  writings  of  Philo,  especially  the
•  De  Victimis '  and  the  '  De  Victimas  Offerentibus.'  Numerous  extracts  in  Buxtorf,
•Lexicon  Chaldaicum  et  Talmudicum ;'  Godwyn,  'Moses  and  Aaron ;'  Carpzov,  'Appa-
ratus Criticus;'  the  works  of  Lightfoot,  especially  his  '  Temple  Service  in  the  Days  of
our  Saviour;'  and  Reland,  '  Antiquitates  Saorse.'  The  commentary  upon  Leviticus  oi
Baschi,  edited  by  Berliner,  1866,. and  Schlossberg's  'Sifra,'  1862.

For  a  brief  statement  and  criticism  of  the  several  schools  of  interpretation,  the  reader
is  referred  to  the  chapter  upon  tiie  Theories  of  the  Old  Testament  Sacrifices  reviewed  in
my  work  on  Sacrifice,


THE   BOOK    OF   LEVITICUS.


INTRODUCTION.

1.  Subject  of  the  Book.

.  Li  vinous  forms  the  centre  and  nuoleus  of  the  five  books  of  Moses.
Closely  attached  to  it  are  the  two  Books  of  Exodus  and  Numhers,  and  out-
side of  them,  on  either  side,  stand  Genesis  and  Deuteronomy.  The  subject
of  the  Book  of  Leviticus  is  the  Sinaitio  legislation,  from  the  time  that  the
tabernacle  was  erected.  It  does  not,  however,  comprise  the  whole  of  that
legislation.  There  is  an  overflow  of  it  into  the  Book  of  Numbers,  which
thus  contains  the  laws  on  the  Levites  and  their  service  (Numb.  i.  49 — 53 ;
iii.  6—16,  40 — 48 ;  iv.  1 — 33 ;  viii.  5 — 26)  ;  on  the  order  in  which  the  tribes
were  to  encamp  (Numb,  ii,  1 — 31) ;  on  the  removal  of  the  unclean  from  the
camp  (Numb.  v.  2 — 4) ;  on  the  trial  of  jealousy  (Numb.  v.  11 — 31)  ;  on  the
Nazarites  (Numb.  vi.  1 — 21) ;  on  the  form  of  blessing  the  people  (Numb.  vi.
23 — 27);  on  the  second  month's  Passover  (Numb.  ix.  6 — 12);  on  the  silver
trumpets  (Numb.  x.  1 — 10) ;  besides  a  repetition  of  the  laws  on  restitution
(Numb.  V.  6 — 10)  ;  on  the  lighting  of  the  lamps  (Numb.  viii.  2 — 4)  ;  on  the
Passover  (Numb.  ix.  1 — 5).  With  these  exceptions,  the  Book  of  Leviticus
contains  the  whole  of  the  legislation  delivered  in  the  district  of  Mount  Sinai,
during  the  month  and  twenty  days  which  elapsed  between  the  setting  up  of
the  tabernacle  on  the  first  day  of  the  second  year  after  quitting  Egypt,  and
the  commencement  of  the  march  from  Sinai  on  the  twentieth  day  of  the
second  month  Of  the  same  year.  But  while  this  was  the  whole  of  the
Sinaitio  legislation  "  out  of  the  tabernacle,"  there  were  also  laws  given  on
Mount  Sinai  itself  during  the  last  nine  months  of  the  first  year  of  the  march
from  Egypt,  which  are  recounted  in  Bxod.  xix. — xl.  While,  therefore,
Leviticus  is  very  closely  connected  with  the  early  part  of  Numbers  on  one
side,  it  is  yerY  closely  connected  with  the  latter  part  of  Exodus  on  the
other.

Analysis  of  its  Contents.

The  book  naturally  falls  into  five  divisions.  The  first  part  is  on  sacrifice ,
the  second  part  records  the  establishment  of  an  hereditary  priesthood ;  the
third  deals  with  the  question  of  uncleanness,  ceremonial  and  moral ;  the
fourth  enumerates  the  holy  days  and  seasons.     The  book  ends  with  a  fifth

LBVITICUf


INTRODUCTION  TO


part,  consisting  of  an  exhortation  to  obedience,  and  there  is  attached  to  it  an
appendix  on  vows.    The  following  is  a  more  detailed  Bketch  of  the  contents.

§  1.  Sacrifice,
A  question  is  often  asked  whether  the  idea  nnderlying  Jewish  saorifioeis
(1)  that  of  a  gift  to  God,  the  Giver  of  all  good  things,  by  man,  the  grateful
receiver  of  his  gifts  ;  or  (2)  that  of  appeasing  and  satisfying  the  justice  of  an
averted  Deity  ;  or  (3)  that  of  symbolically  manifesting  full  submission  to  his
■will ;  or  (4)  that  of  exhibiting  a  sense  of  union  between  God  and  his  people.
And  this  question  cannot  be  answered  until  the  different  sacrifices  have  been
distinguished  from  one  another.  For  each  of  these  ideas  is  represented  by
one  or  other  of  the  sacrifices — ^the  first  by  the  meat  offering,  the  second  by
the  sin  offering  and  trespass  offering,  the  third  by  the  burnt  offering,  the
fourth  by  the  peace  offering.  If  the  question  be,  Which  of  these  was  the
primary  idea  of  Hebrew  sacrifice  ?  we  may  probably  say  that  it  was  that  ol
symbolical  self-surrender  or  submission  in  token  of  perfect  loyalty  of  heart ;
for  the  burnt  sacrifice,  with  -which  the  meat  offering  is  essentially  allied
appears  to  have  been  the  most  ancient  of  the  sacrifices ;  and  this  is  the
thought  embodied  in  the  combined  burnt  and  meat  offering.  But  while  this
is  the  special  idea  of  the  burnt  sacrifice,  it  is  not  the  only  idea  of  it.  It
contains  within  itself  in  a  minor  degree  the  ideas  of  atonement  (ch.  i.  4)
and  of  peace  (ch.  i.  9,  13,  17).  Thus  it  is  the  most  complex  as  well  as  the
oldest  form  of  sacrifice.  If  we  had  no  historical  information  to  guide  us  (as
we  have  Gen.  iv.  4),  we  might  reasonably  argue  from  this  very  complexity
to  the  greater  antiquity  of  the  burnt  and  meat  offerings.  Symbolism  first
embodies  a  large  idea  in  an  institution,  and  it  then  distinguishes  the  institu-
tion  into  different  species  or  parts  in  order  to  represent  as  a  primary  notion
one  or  other  of  the  ideas  only  secondarily  expressed  or  suggested  in  the
original  institution.  The  sin  and  trespass  offerings,  therefore,  would  natur-
ally spring,  or,  we  may  say,  be  divided  off,  from  the  burnt  and  meat  offerings,
when  men  wanted  to  accentuate  the  idea  of  the  necessity  of  reconciliation
and  atonement ;  and  the  peace  offering,  when  they  wished  to  express  the
joy  felt  by  those  who  were  conscious  that  their  reconciliation  had  been
effected.

The  sacrifice  of  Gain  and  Abel  appears  to  have  been  a  thanksgiving  offer-
ing of  the  firetfruits  of  the  produce  of  the  land  and  of  the  cattle,  presented
to  the  Lord  as  a  token  of  recognition  of  him  as  the  Lord  and  Giver  of  all.
It  is  called  by  the  name  of  minchah — a  word  afterwards  confined  in  its  signi-
fication to  the  meat  offering — and  it  partook  of  the  character  of  the  meat
offering,  the  burnt  offering,  and  the  peace  offering  (Gen.  iv.  3,  4).  Noah's
sacrifices  were  burnt  offerings  (Gen.  viii.  20) ;  and  this  was  the  general
character  of  subsequent  offerings,  though  something  of  the  nature  of  peace
offerings  is  indicated  by  Moses  when  he  distinguishes  *'  sacrifices "  from
"  burnt  offerings,"  in  addressing  Pharaoh  before  the  departure  of  the  Israelites
from  Egypt  (Exod.  x.  26).     The  full  idea  of  sacrifice,  contained  implicitly  in


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


the  previous  sacrifices,  was  first  developed  and  exhibited  in  an  explicit  form
by  the  Levitical  regulations  and  institutions,  which  distinguish  burnt  offer-
ings, meat  offerings,  peace  offerings,  sin  offerings,  and  trespass  offerings ;  and
the  special  significations  of  these  several  sacrifices  have  to  be  combined  once
more,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  original,  but  at  first  less  dearly  defined^
notion  of  the  institution,  and  to  constitute  am  adequate  type  of  that  which
was  the  one  Antitype  of  them  all.

The  typical  character  of  sacrifices  must  not  be  confounded  with  their
symbolical  character.  While  they  symbolize  the  need  of  reconciliation  (sin
and  trespass  offerings),  of  loyal  submission  (burnt  and  meat  offerings),  and
of  peace  (peace  offering),  they  are  the  type  of  the  one  Sacrifice  of  Christ,  in
wMch  perfect  submission  was  yielded  (burnt  offering)  and  exhibited  (meat
offering)  by  man  to  God ;  by  which  reconciliation  between  God  and  man
were  wrought  by  means  of  atonement  (sin  offering)  and  satisfaction
(trespass  offering) ;  and  through  which  the  peace  effected  between  God  and
man  was  set  forth  (peace  offering).  (See  Notes  and  Homiletics  on  ohs.
i. — ^vii.)

The  Section,  or  Part,  on  sacrifice,  consists  of  ohs.  L — ^viL

Oh.  L  contains  the  law  of  the  burnt  offering.
Ch.  ii.  „  „        meat  offering.

Ch.  iii.  „  n        peace  offering.

Ohs.  iv.,  V.  1—13  „        Bin  offering.

Chs.  V.  14 — 35 ;  vi.  1 — 7  „        trespass  offering.

The  following  chapter  and  a  half  contain  more  definite  instructions  as  to
the  ritual  of  the  sacrifices,  addressed  particularly  to  the  priests,  namely —

Ca».  vi.  8 — 13.    The  ritual  of  the  burnt  offering.

^     14 — 23.        „  „        meat  offering,  and  in  particular  of  the  priesta'  meat

offering  at  their  consecration.

^     24 — 30.   The  ritual  of  the  sin  offering.
Ch.  vii.  1 — 10.        „  »        trespass  offering.

„       11—21 ;  28—34      „        peace  offering.

„       22 — 27  contain  a  prohibition  of  eating  the  fat  and  the  blood.

^       36—38  form  the  conclusion  of  Part  I.

{  2.  Priesthood,

The  primary  idea  of  a  priest  is  that  of  a  man  who  performs  some
function  in  behalf  of  men  towards  God  which  would  not  be  equally  acceptable
by  God  if  performed  by  themselves,  and  through  whom  God  bestows  graces
upon  men.  The  first  priests  were  the  heads  of  a  family,  as  Noah;  then
the  heads  of  a  tribe,  as  Abraham ;  then  the  heads  of  a  combination  of  tribes
or  of  a  nation,  such  as  Jethro  (Exod.  ii.  16),  Melchlzedek  (Gen.  xiv.  18),
Balak  (Numb.  xxii.  40).  In  many  countries  this  combination  of  the  highest
secular  and  ecclesiastical  office  continued  to  be  maintained — for  example,
in  Egypt ;  but  among  the  Israelites  a  sharp  line  of  separation  between
them  was  drawn  by  the  appointment  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  to  the
priesthood.

Priesthood  and  sacrifice  are  not  originally  correlative.     A  man  whe


INTRODUCTION   TO


acts  in  behalf  of  others  towards  God,  whether  by  making  known  to  him
their  wants  or  interceding  for  them,  is  thereby  a  priest ;  and  again,  a  man
who  acts  in  behalf  of  God  towards  man,  by  declaring  to  them  his  will  and
conveying  to  them  his  blessing,  is  thereby  a  priest.  Sacrifice  being  one
means,  and  at  a  particular  time  the  chief  means,  of  "  calling  upon "  or
approaching  God  and  of  receiving  graces  at  his  hands,  it  naturally  fell
to  the  priest  to  perform  it  as  one  of  his  functions,  and  by  degrees  it  came
to  be  regarded  as  his  special  function,  and  yet  never  in  so  exclusive  a
manner  as  to  shut  out  the  functions  of  benediction  and  intercession.  The
man  through  whose  action,  sacramental  or  otherwise,  God's  graces  are
derived  to  man,  and  man's  needs  are  presented  to  God,  is,  by  that  action,
a  priest  of  God.  To  suppose  that  sacrifice,  and  in  particular  the  sacrifice
of  animals,  is  necessary  for  either  one  or  the  other  of  the  priestly  functions,
is  to  narrow  the  idea  of  priesthood  in  an  unjustifiable  manner.

When  so  complex  a  system  as  that  of  the  Levitical  sacrifices  had  been
instituted,  the  appointment  of  an  hereditary  priesthood  became  necessary.
And  this  appointment  took  away  &om  the  heads  of  families  and  the  tribe
leaders  the  old  priestly  rights  which  up  to  that  time  they  had  maintained
and  which  we  see  to  have  been  exercised  by  Moses.  We  cannot  doubt  that
this  abolition  of  their  ancient  privileges  must  have  been  resented  by  many
of  the  elder  generation,  and  we  find  that  it  was  necessary  to  enforce  the  new
discipline  by  a  strict  injunction,  forbidding  sacrifices  to  be  offered  elsewhere
than  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,  and  by  other  hands  than  those  of  the
hereditary  priesthood  (see  Notes  and  Homiletics  on  chs.  viii. — ^x.  and  xviii.).

The  Section,  or  Fart,  on  the  priesthood  consists  uf  chs.  viii. — ^z.

Ch.  viii.  contains  the  ceremonies  of  the  consecration  of  Aaron  and  his  sons.
Oh.  ix.  recounts  their  first  priestly  offerings  and  benediction.

Gh.  X.  contains  the  account  of  the  death  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  and  the  law  against
drinking  wine  while  ministering  to  the  Lord.

These  three  chapters  constitute  Fart  IL

§  3.  Uneleannest  and  its  BemovaL

OflTences  are  of  two  kinds,  ceremonial  and  moral;  the  former  must  be
purged  by  purifying  rites,  the  latter  by  punishment.  A  ceremonial  offence
is  committed  by  incurring  legal  uncleanness,  and  this  is  done  (1)  by  eating
unclean  food  or  touching  unclean  bodies  (ch.  xi.),  (2)  by  childbirth  (ch.  xii.),
(3)  by  leprosy  (chs.  xiii.,  xiv.),  (4)  by  issues  (oh.  xv.) ;  whoever  offended  in
any  of  these  ways  had  to  purge  his  offence — ^in  light  oases  by  washing,  in
grave  cases  by  sacrifice.

Moral  offences  are  committed  by  transgressing  God's  moral  law,  whether
written  on  the  human  heart  or  in  his  Law.  The  list  of  these  offences
commences  with  an  enumeration  of  unlawful  marriages  and  lusts
(ch.  xviii.),  to  which  are  added  other  sins  and  crimes  (oh.  xix.).  They
must  not  be  allowed  to  go  unpunished ;  else  they  bring  the  wrath  of  God
upon  the  nation.     The  penalties  differ  according  to  the  heinousness  of  the


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


offence,  but  if  they  are  not  exacted,  the  guilt  passes  to  the  communitj'.
Yet  a  certain  concession  to  human  frailty  is  allowed.  Moral  offences  differ
in  their  character,  according  as  they  are  committed  with  a  determinate
resolution  to  offend,  or  have  arisen  from  inadvertence  or  moral  weakness.
It  is  for  the  former  class  that  punishment,  either  at  the  hands  of  man  or  of
God,  is  a  necessity.  The  latter  are  regarded  more  leniently,  and  may  be
atoned  for  by  a  trespass  offering,  after  the  wrong  inflicted  by  them  on  others
has  been  compensated.

But  after  every  purification  for  ceremonial  and  inadvertent  moral  faults
has  been  made,  and  all  penalties  for  presumptuous  sins  and  crimes  have  been
duly  exacted,  there  will  remain  a  residue  of  unatoned-for  evil,  and  for  the
removal  of  this  the  ceremonial  of  the  great  Day  of  Atonement  is  instituted
(see  Notes  and  Homiletics  on  chs.  xi. — xxii.).

The  Section,  or  Part,  on  uncleanness  and  its  "  putting  away,"  contained
in  chs.  li. — xxii.,  consists  of  four  divisions :  chs.  xi. — xv. ;  chs.  xvi.,  xvii. ;
obs.  xviii. — xx. ;  and  chs.  xxi.,  xxii.  The  first  division  has  to  do  with
ceremonial  uncleanness,  arising  from  four  specified  causes,  and  its  purifi.
cation ;  the  second  with  general  uncleanness  and  its  pui  ification  on  the  Day
of  Atonement ;  the  third  with  moral  uncleanness  and  its  punishment ;  the
fourth  with  the  ceremonial  and  moral  uncleanness  of  priests,  and  their
physical  disqualifications.

First  division:    Ch.  xi.    Uncleanness  derived  from  eating  or  touching  unclean  flesh,

whether  of  beasts,  fishes,  birds,  insects,  or  vermin.

Ch.  xiL    Uncleanness  derived  from  the  concomitants  of  childbirth,
and  its  purification.

Chs.  xiii.,  xiv.    Uncleanness  accruing  from  leprosy  to  men,  clothes,
and  houses,  and  its  purification.

Ch.  XV.    Uncleanness  derived  from  various  issues  of  the  body,  and
its  purification.
Haoond  divinon :  Ch.  xvL    General  uncleanness  of  the  congregation  and  of  the  taber-
nacle, and  its  purification  by  the  ceremonies  of  the
Day  of  Atonement.

Ch.  xvii.  Corollary  to  all  the  preceding  part  of  the  book.  That
sacrifices  (chs.  L-^—viii.),  which  are  the  means  of  purifica-
tion (chs.  xi. — xvi.),  are,  since  the  institution  of  the
hereditary  priesthood  (chs.  viii. — x.),  to  be  only
offered  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.
Third  division ;    Ch.  xviii.    Moral  uncleanness  connected  with  marriage  forbidden.

Ch.  xix.    Other  moral  uncleanness  forbidden.

Ch.  XX.     Penalties  for  moral  uncleanness,  and  exhortation  to  holiness.
Fourth  division :  Chs.  xxi.,  xxii.  1 — 16.    Ceremonial  and  moral  cleanness  required  in

an  extra  degree  in  priests,  and  freedom  from  physical
blemish.

Ch.  xxii.  17 — 33.    Freedom  from  blemish  and  from  imperfection
required  in  sacrifices.

These  chapters  constitute  Fart  III.

§  4.  Holy  Days  and  Seasoiu.

The  weekly  holy  day  was  the  sabbath.    The  injunction  to  observe  it
was  coeval  with  the  origin  of  mankind.    It  kept  in  mind  the  rest  of  God


INTRODUCTION  TO


after  his  creative  work,  and  foreshadowed  the  rest  of  Christ  after  hia
redeeming  work.  It  anticipated  the  rest  of  his  people  in  Canaan,  and  the
further  rest  of  the  Christian  dispensation,  and  the  still  farther  reit  o*
paradise.

The  monthly  holy  days  were  the  new  moons  on  the  first  day  of  each
month ;  among  which  the  new  moon  of  the  seventh  month  held  a  sevenfold
sanctity,  and  was  also  observed  as  the  New  Year's  Day  of  the  civil  year,
being  sometimes  inexactly  called  the  Feast  of  Trumpets.

The  yearly  holy  days  began  in  the  first  month  with  the  festival  of  the
Passover,  to  which  was  closely  attached  that  of  Unleavened  Bread.  These
two  festivals,  united  into  one,  represented  historically  the  fact  of  Israel's
deliverance  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  and  typically  they  represented  the
future  deliverance  of  the  spiritual  Israel  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  both  at
the  first  and  at  the  second  coming  of  Christ.  The  lamb,  the  exhibition  of
whose  blood  delivered  from  destruction,  was  a  type  of  Christ.  The  festival
served  also  as  the  spring  harvest  feast  of  the  year.

The  Feast  of  Pentecost,  or  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  observed  seven  weeks  after
the  Passover,  was  the  second  or  summer  harvest  festivaL  It  might  possibly
have  commemorated  the  gift  of  the  Law  at  Sinai :  it  certainly  was  the
day  on  which  was  instituted  the  new  Law  in  Jerusalem  (Acts  ii.).

The  fast  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,  observed  on  the  tenth  day  of  the
seventh  month,  symbolically  represented  the  removal  of  the  sins  of  the
world  by  Christ,  at  once  the  Sacrifice  for  sin  ofiered  on  the  orofis
(the  sacrificed  goat),  and  the  Deliverer  from  the  consciousness  of  the  power
of  sin  (the  scapegoat).  It  also  typified  the  entry  of  Christ  into  heaven  in
the  character  of  our  Great  High  Priest,  with  the  virtue  of  his  blood  of
Atonement,  there  to  abide  as  the  prevailing  Mediator  and  Intercessor  for
his  people.

The  Feast  of  TabemaolPE,  celebrated  for  a  week  beginning  on  the  fifteenth
day  of  the  seventh  month,  was  the  last  and  most  joyous  harvest-home
festival  of  the  year.  Historically,  it  looked  back  to  the  day  of  joy  when,
safe  in  their  booths  at  Succoth,  the  children  of  Israel  felt  the  happiness  of
the  freedom  from  Egyptian  bondage  which  they  had  at  last  attained  (Exod.
xii.  37) ;  and  it  looked  forward  to  the  period  of  peaceful  enjoyment  which
was  to  come  with  the  institution  of  Christ's  kingdom  on  earth,  and  beyond
that  time,  to  the  glories  of  the  Church  triumphant  in  heaven.

The  sabbatical  year,  which  required  that  every  seventh  year  should  be  a
year  free  from  agricultural  toil,  enforced  on  a  large  scale  the  teaching  of
the  sabbath,  and  it  taught  the  lesson  afterwards  illustrated  in  the  contrast
of  the  lives  of  Mary  and  Martha  (Luke  x.  38 — 12),  and  the  duty  of  trusting
to  the  providence  of  God.

The  jubilee,  which  restored  all  things  that  had  been  changed  or  depraved

to  their  original  state  every  fifty  years,  while  it  served  as  a  means  of

preserving  the  commonwealth  from  confusion  and  revolution,  foreshadowed

the  Christian  dispensation,  and  after  that  the  final  restitution  of  aU  things

See  Notes  and  Homiletics  on  chs.  xxiii. — xxv.y


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  rii

The  Section,  or  Part,  on  holy  days  and  Beasons  comprises  chs.  xxiii. — xxt.
Ch.  xxiii.     The  sacred  days  on  which  holy  convocations  are  to  be  held.
Ch.  xxIt.     Parenthetical.    Oa  the  oil  for  the  lamps,  and  the  shewbread,  and  on

blasphemy.
Ch.  XXT.    The  sablKitical  year  and  the  jubilee.

§  5.  Final  Exhortation,

Many  of  the  laws  in  the  Book  of  LeTiticus  are  withont  the  sanction  of
any  penalty.  They  are  commanded,  and  therefore  they  ought  to  be  obeyed.
In  place  of  a  regular  code  of  penalties  for  individual  transgressions,  and  in
addition  to  the  penalties  already  declared,  Moses  pronounces  blessing  and
ctirsing  on  the  nation  at  large,  according  as  it  obeys  or  disobeys  the  Law.
The  rewards  and  punishments  of  a  future  life  ha,ve  no  place  here,  as  nations
have  no  future  existence.  Twice  in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  Moses  intro-
duces similar  exhortations  (chs.  xi.,  xxviii.).  As  a  matter  of  history,  we
find  that  as  long  as  the  nation  was,  as  such,  loyal  to  Jehovah,  it  prospered,
and  that  when  it  fell  away  from  him  the  evils  here  denounced  overtook  it.

The  exhortation  is  contained  in  ch.  xxvi.

§  6.  Appendix — Vow$.

The  subject  of  vows  is  not  introduced  into  the  body  of  the  book,  because
it  was  not  the  purpose  of  the  legislation  to  institute  them  or  to  encourage
them.  At  the  conclusion  a  short  treatise  is  added,  giving  no  special
approbation  of  them,  but  regulating  them,  if  made,  and  appointing  a  scale
of  redemption  or  commutation.

This  appendix  occupies  the  last  chapter — oh.  xxvii. — being  attached  to
the  rest  by  a  final  declaration  that  it  belongs  to  the  Sinaitic  legislation.

2.  Authorship  and  Date.
The  question  of  authorship  does  not  properly  arise  on  this  book.  What-
ever may  be  said  of  Genesis  and  Deuteronomy,  the  second,  third,  and
fourth  of  the  books  of  Moses  stand  or  fall  together,  nor  is  there  any-
thing in  the  Book  of  Leviticus  to  separate  it  in  respect'  to  authenticity
from  Exodus  which  precedes,  and  Numbers  which  follows  it.  There  is
only  one  passage  in  it  which  can  be  regarded  as  seeming  to  indicate  an
author  of  later  date  than  Moses.  This  is  the  following  passage :  "  That  the
land  spue  not  you  out  also,  when  ye  defile  it,  as  it  spued  out  the  nations
that  were  before  you"  (ch.  xviii.  28).  It  has  been  argued  with  some
plausibility  that,  as  Canaan  had  not  spued  out  its  inhabitants  till  after  the
death  of  Moses,  these  words  must  have  been  written  by  some  one  who  lived
later  than  Moses.  But  an  examination  of  the  context  takes  away  all  the
force  of  this  argument.  The  eighteenth  chapter  is  directed  against  in-
cestuous marriages  and  lusts;  and,  after  the  lawgiver  has  ended  his
prohibitions,  he  proceeds :  "  Defile  not  ye  yourselves  in  any  of  these  things  :
for  in  all  these  the  nations  are  defiled  which  I  cast  out  before  you :  and  the
land  is  defiled :  therefore  I  do  visit  the  iniquity  thereof  upon  it,  and  the


viii  INTRODUCTION  TO


land  itself  yomitetli  out  her  inhaHtantB.  Ye  shall  therefore  keep  mj
statutes  and  my  judgments,  and  shall  not  commit  any  of  these  ahomina-
tions;  neither  any  of  your  own  nation,  nor  any  stranger  that  sojonmeth
among  you :  (for  all  ihese  ahominations  have  the  men  of  the  land  done
which  were  hefore  you,  and  the  land  is  defiled ;)  that  the  land  spue  not  you
out  also,  when  ye  defile  it,  as  it  spued  out  the  nations  that  were  hefore
you."  In  this  passage,  the  words  translated  "  vomiteth  "  and  "  spued  "  are
in  the  same  tense.  It  is  that  tense  which  is  ordinarily  called  a  perfect.
But  this  so-called  perfect  does  not  necessarily  indicate  a  past  time.  Indeed,
the  Hebrew  tenses  do  not,  as  such,  express  time,  but  only  (when  in  the
active  voice)  action.  We  must  look  to  the  context  in  order  to  discover
the  time  in  which  the  act  takes  place,  took  place,  or  will  take  place.  In
the  passage  before  us  the  words,  "  I  cast  out,"  in  ver.  24  are  expressed  by  a
participle,  "  used  of  that  which  is  certainly  and  speedily  coming  to  pass  "
(Keil),  meaning,  "  I  am  casting  out ; "  and  by  a  law  of  the  Hebrew
language,  as  this  participle  and  the  rest  of  the  context  indicate  present
time,  the  two  verbs  under  consideration  must  indicate  present  time  also.
Even  if  we  were  compelled  to  translate  the  two  words  as  perfects,  there
would  be  nothing  impossible  or  unnatural  in  God's  saying  to  Moses,  and  to
the  children  of  Israel  through  him,  that  the  land  "has  vomited,"  or  "has
spued  out,"  the  nations  of  Canaan,  the  act  being  regarded  as  in  the  Divine
mind  done,  because  determined  on  and  in  the  course  of  immediate  accom-
plishment. Or,  still  again,  the  land  might  be  said  to  "  have  spued  out  '
the  nations  of  Canaan  in  relation  to  the  time  when  it  should  spue  out  the
degenerate  Israelites.

Putting  aside  this  passage,  so  easily  explained,  there  is  nothing  in  the
whole  book  which  is  incompatible  with  the  authorship  and  the  date  of
Moses.  This  being  so,  the  fact  that  it  has  come  down  to  us  as  the  work
of  Moses,  and  that  it  by  implication  professes  itself  to  be  the  work  of
Moses,  and  that  its  character  and  language  are,  so  far  as  we  can  judge,
such  as  would  be  in  accordance  with  a  work  of  Moses,  leave  the  hypothesis
of  the  authorship  of  Moses  as  certain,  on  the  score  of  internal  evidence,  as
any  such  hypothesis  can  be.  Nor  is  there  wanting  any  external  evidence
which  could  be  expected  to  exist.  The  Book  of  Joshua  recognizes  the
existence  of  "  the  Book  of  the  Law  of  Moses  "  (Josh.  xxii.  6 ;  cf.  i,  8 ;  viii.
31 — =35).  In  the  Book  of  Judges  there  is  an  apparent  reference  to  Lev.
xxvi.  16,  17,  in  ch.  ii.  16  ("Whithersoever  they  went  out,  the  hand  of  the
Lord  was  against  them  for  evil,  as  the  Lord  had  said,  and  as  the  Lord  had
Bwom  unto  them  ") ;  and  in  ch.  iii.  4  we  find  mention  of  "  the  command-
ments of  the  Lord,  which  he  commanded  their  fathers  by  the  hand  of
Moses."  In  the  Book  of  Judges,  "the  sacred  character  of  the  Levites,
their  dispersion  among  the  several  tribes,  the  settlement  of  the  high
priesthood  in  the  family  of  Aaron,  the  existence  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
the  power  of  inquiring  of  God  and  obtaining  answers,  the  irrevocability  of
a  vow,  the  distinguishing  mark  of  circumcision,  the  distinction  between


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


clean  and  unclean  meats,  the  law  of  the  Nazarites,  the  use  of  burnt
offerings  and  peace  offerings,  the  employment  of  trumpets  as  a  means  of
obtaining  Divine  aid  in  war,  the  impiety  of  setting  up  a  king,"  are
enumerated  by  Canon  Eawlinson  as  "severally  acknowledged,  and  con-
stituting together  very  good  evidence  that  the  Mosaic  ceremonial  law  was
already  in  force"  ('Aids  to  Faith:  The  Pentateuch,'  London,  1862).  In
the  Book  of  Samuel,  "  we  meet  ,at  once  with  Eli,  the  high  priest  of  the
house  of  Aaron,  .  .  .  the  lamp  burns  in  the  tabernacle,  .  .  .  the  ark  of
the  covenant  is  in  the  sanctuary,  and  is  esteemed  the  sacred  symbol  cf  the
presence  of  God  (1  Sam.  iv.  3,  4,  18,  21,  22 ;  v.  3,  4,  6,  7 ;  vi.  19)  .  .  .  there
is  the  altar  and  the  incense  and  the  ephod  worn  by  the  high  priest  (1  Sam.
ii.  28).  The  various  kinds  of  Mosaic  sacrifices  are  referred  to  :  the  burnt
offering  (oldh,  1  Sam.  x.  8 ;  xiii.  9 ;  xv.  22),  the  peace  offerings  {shelamim,
1  Sam.  X.  8 ;  xi.  15 ;  xiii.  9),  the  bloody  sacrifice  (zehach,  1  Sam.  ii.  19),  and
the  unbloody  offering  (minchah,  1  Sam.  ii.  19;  iii.  14;  xxvi.  19),  The
animals  offered  in  sacrifice — the  bullock  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  26),  the  lamb  (1  Sam.
xvi.  2),  and  the  ram  (1  Sam.  xv.  22)— are  those  prescribed  in  the  Levitical
code.  The  especial  customs  of  the  sacrifices  alluded  to  in  1  Sam.  ii.  13
were  those  prescribed  in  Lev.  vi.  6,  7 ;  Numb,  xviii.  8— xix.  25,  32 ;  Deut.
xviii.  1,  gqq."  (Bishop  Harold  Browne,  'Introduction  to  the  Pentateuch,'  in
'  The  Speaker's  Commentary ').  In  the  Books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles  there
are  frequent  allusions  or  references  to  the  "  Law  of  Moses  "  and  its  enactments
(see  1  Kings  ii.  3;  viii.  9,  53;  2  Kings  vii.  3;  xi.  12;  xxii.  8;  xxiii.  3,  25 ;
1  Chron.  xvi.  40  ;  xxii.  12,  13 ;  2  Chron.  xxv.  4;  xxxiii.  8  ;  xxxiv.  14).  So
too  in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  (see  Ezra  iii.  2 — 6 ;  vi.  18 ;  vii.  6 ;  Neh.  i.  7 — 9  ;
vii.  1 — 18;  ix.  14);  and  in  Daniel  (see  Dan.  ix.  11 — 13).  Amos  (iL  7)
apparently  quotes  Lev.  xx.  3  ;  Hosea  (iv.  10)  seems  to  quote  Lev.  xxvi.  26.
Joel,  the  earliest  of  the  prophets  of  the  southern  kingdom,  implies  through-
out his  prophecy  the  existence  of  the  Levitical  system,  and  he  and  Ezekiel
appear  to  have  undoubtedly  had  before  them  the  twenty-sixth  chapter  of
Leviticus  (Joel  i.  13, 14,  16 ;  ii.  1,  14—27 ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  25—31).  The  New
Testament  assumes  throughout  the  Mosaic  original  of  the  whole  Pentateuch.
Taking  the  authorship  of  Moses  as  proved,  we  have  further  to  inquire  as
to  the  date  of  his  composition  of  the  book.  On  this  point  we  cannot  speak
with  certainty,  but  we  may  regard  it  as  in  the  highest  degree  probable  that
the  laws  were  written  down  as  they  were  delivered  to  and  by  Moses  during
the  fifty  days  previous  to  the  departure  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  Sinai,
and  that  they  were  subsequently  put  together  during  one  of  the  encamp-
ments in  the  wilderness.

S.   LlTEKATTJEB.

The  literature  on  Leviticus  is  very  extensive,  and  belongs  for  the  most  part  to  two
classes — commentaries  on  the  Pentateuch  with  their  introductions,  and  special  dis-
eertatlons  on  one  or  other  of  the  subjects  with  which  the  Book  of  Leviticus  deals.
We  make  a  selection  of  works  under  both  headings.

To  the  first  class  belong  Origen,  '  Selecta  in  Levit./  '  Horn,  in  Levit.'  (Op.,  torn.  ii.

USVITICUB.  '


INTRODUCTION  TO  .THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


Pentatenohum  Commentarii — Leviticus '  (Op.,  torn,  ii.  p.  334,  edit.  Migne) ;  Calvin,
'  Commentarii  in  Quatuor  Mosis  Libros '  (Op.,  torn.  i.  p.  248,  Amsterdam,  1671) ;  '  Poll
Synopsis  Criticorum'  (tom.  i.  p.  510,  London,  1669);  'Critici  Sacri'  (vol.  ii.,  Amster-
dam, 1698) ;  Clericus  (Le  Clerc),  'Mosis  Prophetaa,  Lib.  IV.'  (voL  i.  p.  207,  Amsterdam,
1710);  Carpzov,  'Introductio  aid  Libros  Veteris  Testamenti:  De  Levitico'  (p.  100,
Leipsig,  1727);  Matthew  Henry,  'Commentary'  (vol.  i.,  1737);  KosenmUUer,
'Scholia'  (Leipsig,  1824);  Havemick,  'Handbuch  der  Historisch-Kritischen  Ein-
leitung  in  das  Alte  Testament:  Leviticus,'  §§  117—130  (Erlangen,  1836),  and  (a
part  of  the  above)  his  '  Introduction  to  the  Pentateuch '  (published  by  T.  and  T.
Clark,  Edinburgh,  1850) ;  Hengstenberg,  '  On  the  Pentateuch '  (translated  by  Eyland,
Edinburgh,  1847);  Keil  and  Delitzsch,  'On  the  Pentateuch'  (translated  by  Martin,
vol.  ii.,  T.  and  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh,  1878);  Stuart,  'Introduction  to  the  Old  Testa-
ment ; '  Bush,  '  Commentaries  on  the  Five  Books  of  Moses ; '  Baylee,  '  Course  of
Biblical  Instruction '  (vol.  i.,  St.  Aldan's,  1865);  Wordsworth, '  Commentary '  (part  ii.,
London,  1865)  ;  Harold  Browne,  'Introduction  to  the  Pentateuch*  (in  the  '  Speaker's
Commentary,'  vol.  i.,  London,  1871) ;  Clark, '  Introduction  to  and  Notes  on  Leviticus '
f ibid.) ;  Bonar, '  Commentary  on  Leviticus '  (London,  1875)  ;  Lange,  '  Commentary '
'Vyol.  ii.,  edit.  Schaff,  published  by  T.  and  T.  Clark,  Edinburgh) ;  Blunt,  '  Annotated
Bible  *  (vol.  i.,  London,  1878).

Under  the  second  heading  come  Mede, "  The  Christian  Sacrifice,  Book  2 '  (vol.  L,
London,  1664) ;  Ontram, '  De  Sacrificiis '  (London,  1677 :  English  translation,  London,
1817) ;  Lightfoot,  '  The  Temple  Service  as  in  the  Days  of  Our  Saviour '  (vol,  i.,
London,  1684) ;  Spencer,  '  De  Legibus  Hebraorum '  (Cambridge,  1727) ;  J,  Mayer,
'  De  Temporibus  Sanctis  et  Pestis  Diebus  Hebrjeorum '  (Amsterdam,  1724) ;  Deyling,
'  Observationes  Sacrse '  (Leipsig,  1735) ;  Bahr, '  Die  Symbolik  des  Mosaischen  Cultus '
(Heidelberg,  1837) ;  Davison,  '  Inquiry  into  Primitive  Sacrifice '  (in  his  '  Remains,'
Oxford,  1840) ;  Tholuck, '  Das  Alte  Testament  im  Neuen  Testament  (Hamburg,  1849) ;
Johnstone, '  Israel  after  the  Flesh  '  (London,  1850) ;  Maurice, '  The  Doctrine  of  Sacrifice
deduced  from  Scripture '  (Cambridge,  1854) ;  Pairbaim,  '  The  Typology  of  Scripture '
<^Edinburgh,  1854) ;  Freeman,  '  Principles  of  Divine  Service '  (London,  1855) ;  Heng-
stenberg, '  Die  Opfer  der  HeiligenSchrift' (Berlin,  1859);  Kurtz,  '  Der  Alttestamentliohe
Opfercultus'  (Mittau,  1864) ;  Barry,  Articles  on  '  Sacrifice '  (in  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of
the  Bible,'  London,  1860);  Eawlinson,  Essay  on  'The  Pentateuch  '  (in  'Aids  to  Faith,'
London,  1862) ;  Kuepfer, '  Das  Priestenthum  des  Alten  Bundes,'  1865 ;  Ebers, '  Egypten
und  die  Biicher  Moses '  (Leipsig,  1868)  ;  Jukes,  '  Law  of  Ofierings ; '  Marriott,  '  On
Terms  of  Gift  and  Offering '  (in  his  '  Memorials,'  London,  1872) ;  Edersheim,  *  The
Temple  Service ; '  Willis, '  The  Worship  of  the  Old  Covenant '  (Oxford,  1880).

Philo  JudsBUS  (Op.,  Frankfort,  1691),  and  the  Mishna  (Suieakua.  Ain»t«rdam,  1688),
«honld  also  b«  coniultocU


THE


BOOK   OF   LEYITICUS.

PAET    I.
THE  LAWS  AND  EEGULATIONS  EESPECTING  SACEIPICES.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  L

Thb  saobhtoes  (ohs.  i. — ^vii).  There  are
five  olaBBes  of  saoiifices  instituted  or  regu-
lated in  the  first  seven  chapters  of  Leviticus,
each  of  which  has  its  special  signification —
the  burnt  offering,  the  meat  offering,  the
sin  offering,  the  trespass  offering,  and  the
peace  offering.  The  burnt  offering,  in
which  the  whole  of  the  victim  was  con-
sumed in  the  fire  on  God's  altar,  signifies
entire  self-surrender  on  the  part  of  the
offerer ;  the  meat  offering,  a  loyal  acknow-
ledgment of  God's  sovereignty;  the  sin
offering,  propitiation  of  wrath  in  him  to
whom  the  offering  is  made,  and  expiation
of  sin  in  the  offerer ;  tlie  trespass  effering,
satisfaction  for  sin ;  the  peace  offering,  union
and  communion  between  the  offerer  and
him  to  whom  the  offering  is  made.

The  burnt  offering  (oh.  i.)  typifies  the
perfect  surrender  of  himself,  made  by  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  exhibited  by  his  life
and  death  on  earth;  and  it  teaches  the
duty  of  self-sacrifice  on  the  part  of  man.

Yer.  1.— And  the  LOSD  called  unto  Hoses.
The  first  word  of  the  verse,  in  the  original
Vayikra,  meaning  "and  called,"  has  been
taken  as  the  designation  of  the  book  in  the
Hebrew  Bi'ole.  The  title  Levitioon,  or
Leviticus,  wm  first  adopted  by  the  LXX.,  to

UtVITKItlS.


indicate  that  it  had  for  its  main  subject
the  duties  and  functions  appertaining  to
the  chief  house  of  the  priestly  tribe  of  Levi.
The  word  "and"  connects  the  third  with
the  second  book  of  the  Pentateuch.  God
is  spoken  of  in  this  and  in  the  next  book
almost  exclusively  under  the  appella-
tion of  "  the  Lord"  or  "Jehovah,"  the  word
"  Elohim  "  being,  however,  used  sufficiently
often  to  identify  the  two  names.  Cf.  ch.
ii.  13,  xix.  12.  And  spake  unto  bim.  The
manner  in  which  God  ordinarily  communi-
cated with  a  prophet  was  by  "  a  vision  "  or
"in  a  dream;"  but  this  was  not  the  case
with  Moses ;  "  My  servant  Moses  is  not  so,
who  is  faithful  in  all  mine  liouse;  with  him
will  I  speak  mouth  to  mouth,  even  ap-
parently "  (Numb.  xii.  8).  The  Levitical
code  of  laws,  therefore,  was  delivered  to
Moses  in  his  ordinary  mental  state,  not  in
trance,  or  dream,  or  ecstasy.  Out  of  the
tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  The  taber-
nacle had  just  been  set  up  by  Moses  (Exod.
xl.  16).  It  derives  its  name  of  the  congre-
gation, or  rather  of  meeting,  from  being  the
place  where  God  met  the  representatives
of  his  people  (see  Numb,  xvi  42).  Hitherto
God  had  spoken  from  the  mount,  now  he
speaks  from  the  mercy-seat  of  the  ark  in
the  tabernacle.  He  had  symbolically
drawn  near  to  his  people,  and  the  sacri-
ficial system  is  now  instituted  as  the  means
by  which  they  should  draw  nigh  to  him.
All  the  laws  in  the  Book  of  Leviticus,  and
in    the  first  ten  chapters  of  the  Book  ot


THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  L  1—17.


Numbers,  were  given  during  the  fifty  days
which  intervened  between  the  setting  up  of
the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xl.  17)  and  the  de-
parture of  the  ehildren  of  Israel  &om  th«
neighbourhood  of  Honnt  Binai  (Nnmb.
X.  II).

Yer  2. — If  ttaj  man  of  jov.  bring.  Stori-
fioes  are  not  now  being  instituted  for  the
first  time.  Burnt  offerings  at  least,  if  not
peaee  ofieringi,  had  existed  since  the  time
of  the  FaU.  The  Levitical  law  lays  down
regulations  adapting  an  already  existing
practice  for  the  use  of  the  Israelitish  nation ;  <
it  begins,  therefore,  not  with  a  command,
"  Thou  shalt  bring,"  but,  if  any  man  of  you
(aecording  to  custom)  bring.  Any  member
of  the  congregation  might  bring  his  volun-
tary offering  when  he  would.  The  times
at  which  the  public  offerings  were  to  be
made,  and  tkeii  number,  are  afterwards
designated.  An  offering.  This  verse  is
introductory  to  the  ensuing  chapters,  and
speaka  of  "  offerings  "  in  general.  "  Kor-
ban, '  which  is  the  word  here  nsed  for
"offering,"  derived  from  harab,  meaning
"  to  draw  near  for  the  sake  of  presentation,"
is  the  generic  name  including  all  offerings
and  sacrifices.  It  is  used  in  speaking  of
aniMial  sacrifices  of  various  kinds,  including
peace  offerings  and  sin  offerings  (ch.  iii.  1 ;  iv.
23)  and  it  is  applied  to  vegetable  offerings
'eh.  ii,  1, 13),  and  to  miscellaneous  offerings
for  the  service  of  the  tabernacle,  such  as
wagons  and  oxen,  silver  vessels  for  the
altar,  gold,  jewels,  etc.  (Numb.  vii.  8,  10;
zxxi.  50).  It  is  translated  by  the  LXX.
into  Greek  by  the  word  Sapov,  equivalent  to
the  Latin  dMiwn,  and  our  "gift."  These
offerings  are  now  distinguished  into  their
different  kinds.

Yer.  3. — If  his  offering  be  a  bnmt  sacri-
floe.  The  Hebrew  term  for  "  burnt  sacrifice  "
is  olah,  meaning  "that  which  ascends;"
sometimes  ialeel,  "  whole  offering,"  is  found
(Deut.  TTTJii  10) ;  the  LXX.  use  the  word
SXoKairoiiia,  "whole  burnt  offering."  The
conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  an  Israelite  who
offered  a  burnt  sacrifice  were  the  following:
— 1.  He  must  offer  either  (I)  a  young  bull
without  blemish,  or  (2)  a  young  ram,  or  (3)
a  young  he-goat,  or  (4)  a  turtle-dove,  or  (5)
a  young  pigeon,  2.  In  case  it  were  a  bull,
ram,  or  goat,  he  must  bring  it  to  the  door  of
the  tabernacle,  that  is,  the  entrance  of  the
court  in  front  of  the  brazen  altar  and  of  the
door  of  the  holy  place,  and  there  offer  or
present  it.  3.  In  offering  it  he  must  place
his  hand  firmly  on  its  head,  as  a  ceremonial
act  4.  He  must  kill  it,  either  himself  or  by
the  agency  of  a  Levite.    5.  He  must  flay  it,

6.  He  must  divide  it  into  separate  portions.

7.  He  must  wash  the  intestines  and  legs.
Meantime  the  priests  had  their  parts  to  do ;
they  had  1,  To  catch  the  blood,  to  carry  it


to  the  altar,  and  to  strike  the  inner  sides  of
the  altar  with  it.   2,  To  arrange  ttie  fire  on
the  altar.    3.  To  place  upon  the  altar  the
bead,  and  the  fat,  and  the  remainder  of  the
animal,  for  eoniumption  by  the  fire.    4.  To
8()rinkle    or  place  a  meat    offering    upon
them.    5,  The  next  morning,  still  dressed  in
their  priestly  garments,  to  take  the  ashes  off
the  altar,  and  to  place  them  at  the  east  of  the
altar  (ch.  vi.  10).     6.  To  carry  them  outside
the  camp  to  a  clean  place,  the  bearer  being
dressed  in  his  ordinary  costume  (ch.  vi  11).
There  were,  therefore,  four  essential  parts  In
the  ritual  of  the  burnt  offering — the  obla-
tion of  the  victim  (vers.  3,  4),  the  immolation
(ver.  S),  the  oblation  of  the  blood,  repre-
senting the  life  (ibid.),  and  the  consumption
(ver.  9) — the  first  two  to  be  performed  by
the  offerer,  the  third  by  the  priest,  the  fourth
by  the  fire  representing  the  action  of  God.
The    moral    lesson    taught   by  the   bnmt
offering  was  the  necessity  of  self-surrender
and  of  devotion  to  God,  even  to  the  extent
of  yielding  up  life  and  the  very  tenement
of  life.    As  the  offerer  could  not  give  up
his  own  life  and  body  and  still  live,  the
life  of  an  animal  belonging  to  him,  and
valued  by  him,  was  substituted  for  bis  own ;
but  he  knew,  and  by  laying  his  hand  on  its
head  showed  that  he  knew,  that  it  was  his
own  life  and  his  very  self  that  was  repre-
sented by  the  animal.    The  mystical  lessons
taught  to  those  who  could  grasp  them  were
— 1 .  The  doctrine  of  substitution  or  vicarious
suffering.     2.   The  fact  that    without  the
shedding  of  blood  there  was  no  acceptance.
3.  The  need  of  One  wlio,  being  very  man,
sliould    be  able  to  perform    an   action  of
perfect  surrender  of  his    will  and  of  his
life.     The  fulfilment  of  the  type  is  found
in  the  perfect  submission  of  Christ  as  man,
throughout  his  ministry,  and  especially  in
the   Garden   of   Gethsemane,  and   in  the
offering  made  by  him,  as  Priest  and  willing
Yictim,  of  his  life  upon  the  altar  of  the  cross.
The  burnt  offering  is  to  be  without  blemish,
for  had  not  the  animal  been  perfect  in  its
kind,  it  would  not  have  served  its  moral,
its  mystical,  or  its  typical  purpose.    The
word  i/jLa/jLos,  used  by  the  LX'X.  as  equiva-
lent to  the  Hebrew  term,  is  applied  to  Christ
in  Heb.  ix.  14  and  1  Pet  L  19;  and  St,
Paul  teaches  that  it  is  the  purpose  of  God
that  those  who  are  adopted  in  Christ  shonld
also  be  "  holy  and  without  blemish  "  (Eph.
i   4).      A  priest  had  to  certify  that  the
victim  was  tree  from  all  defeota.    He  shall
offer  it  of  his  own  voluntary  will  should
rather  be  translated.  He  thaill  offer  ii  for  his
ovm  aeeeptanee.    The  animal,  representing
the  offerer,  was  presented  by  the  latter  in
order  that  he  might  be  hheself  accepted  by
the  Lord.    This  rspect  of  the  offering  ii
brought  out  more  dearly  1^  the  minchah,  or


OH.  I.  1 — 17.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


meat  offering,  which  always  accompanied
the  burnt  offering.  The  piaoe  where  the
presentation  took  place  was  the  door  of  the
tabernacle,  tliat  is,  the  space  immediately
within  the  eastern  entrance  into  the  court
of  the  tabernacle,  immediately  facing  the
brazen  altar,  which  stood  before  the  east
end  of  tlie  tabernacle,  where  was  the  door
or  entrance  which  led  into  the  holy  place.
"The  presenting  of  the  victim  at  the  en-
trance of  the  tabernacle  was  a  symbol  of
the  free  wiU  submitting  itself  to  the  Law  of
the  Lord"  (Clarke).  Cf.  Bom.  lii.  1:  "I
beseech  you  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a
living  8acrifi''e,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,
which  is  your  reasonable  service."

Ver.  4. — And  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon
the  head  of  the  burnt  offering.  This  putting,
or  forcibly  leaning,  the  hand  on  the  victim's
head,  which  is  the  most  essential  part  of
the  oblation  of  the  victim,  was  a  symbolical
act  implying  "  This  animal  is  now  for  pre-
sent purposes  myself,  and  its  life  is  my  life."
It  was  this  act  of  identification  with  the
offerer  which  made  it  be  accepted  for  him  to
make  atonement  (literally,  covering')  for  him.
The  sin  offering  is^  the  sacrifice  which  es-
peoially  symbolizes  and  ceremonially  effects
atonement,  but  the  idea  of  atonement  is
not  absent  from  the  burnt  sacrifice.  The
aspect  under  which  atonement  is  presented
here  and  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament
is  that  of  covering.  But  it  is  not  the  sin
that  is  covered,  but  the  sinner.  Owing  to
his  sin,  the  latter  is  exposed  to  the  wrath
of  a  just  God,  but  something  inteivcnes
whereby  he  is  covered,  and  he  ceases,
therefore,  to  attract  the  Divine  anger  and
punishment.  No  longer  being  an  object
of  wrath,  he  becomes  at  once  an  object  of
benevolence  and  mercy.  The  covering  pro-
vided by  a  sacrifice  is  the  blood  or  life  of
an  animal,  symbolically  representing  the
offerer's  own  life  freely  surrendered  by  him
for  his  acceptance,  and  typically  foreshadow-
ing the  blood  of  Christ.

Ver.  5. — And  he  shall  IdU  the  bullock.
After  having  made  the  presentation,  the
offerer  proceeds  to  the  second  part  of  the
sacrifice,  the  immolation  or  slaying,  which
was  to  be  performed  before  the  Lord,  that
is,  in  front  of  the  tabernacle,  on  the  north
side  of  the  brazen  altar.  Then  follows  the
third  part  of  the  sacrifice:  the  priests,
Aaron's  sons,  shall  bring  the  blood,  and
sprinkle  the  blood  round  about  upon  the
altar.  The  priests  caught  the  blood  (some-
limes  the  Levites  were  allowed  to  do  this,
2  Chron.  xxx.  16),  and  sprinkled  or  rather
threw  it  round  about  on  the  allar,  that  is,
•0  as  to  touch  all  the  inner  sides  of  the
altar.  "A  red  line  all  round  the  middle
of  the  altar  marked  that  above  it  the  blood
of  sacrifices  intended  to  be  eaten,  below  it


that  of  sacrifices  wholly  consumed,  was  te
be  sprinkled  "  (Edersheim, '  The  Temple  ')•
This  was  in  some  respects  the  most  es-
sential part  of  the  ceremony,  the  blood
representing  the  life  (ch.  xvii.  11),  which
was  symbolically  received  at  the  hands  of  the
offerer,  and  presented  by  the  priests  to  God.
.In  the  antitype  our  Lord  exercised  the
function  of  the  sacrificing  priest  when  he
presented  his  own  life  to  the  Father,  as  he
hung  upon  the  altar  of  the  cross.

Ver.  6. — He  shall  flay  the  burnt  offering.
The  hide  was  given  to  the  priest  (ch.  vii.  8).
The  whole  of  the  remainder  of  the  animal
was  consumed  by  the  fire  of  the  altar ;  none
of  it  was  eaten  by  the  offerer  and  his  friends
as  in  the  peace  offerings,  or  even  by  the
ministers  of  God  as  in  the  sin  offerings ;  it
was  t>  whole  burnt  offering.  His  pieces,
into  which  it  was  to  be  out,  means  the
customary  pieces.

Ver.  7.— The  priest  shall  put  fire  upon  the
altar.  The  fire  once  kindled  was  never  to  be
allowed  to  go  out  (ch.vi.  13).  Unless,  there-
fore, these  words  refer  to  the  first  occasion
only  on  which  a  burnt  sacrifice  was  offered,
they  must  mean  "  make  up  the  fire  on  the
altar,"  or  it  might  possibly  have  been  the
practice,  as  Bishop  Wordsworth  (after  Mai-
nionides)  supposes,  that  fresli  fire  was  addei
to  the  altar  fi[re  before  each  saciifice.

Ver.  8. — And  the  priests  shall  lay  the  parts,
the  head,  and  the  fat,  in  order.  The  head
and  the  fat  are  designated  by  name,  because,
with  the  "  pieces,"  they  complete  the  whole
of  the  animal  with  the  exception  of  the
hide.  The  order  in  which  they  were  laid  is
said  to  have  been  the  same  approximately
as  that  which  the  members  held  in  the
living  creature.

Ver.  9. — ^The  priest  shall  bum  all  on  the
altar,  etc.  The  fourth  and  last  part  of  the
sacrifice.  The  word  employed  is  not  the
common  term  used  for  destroying  by  fire,  but
means  "  make  to  ascend."  The  life  of  the
animal  has  already  been  offered  iutlie  blood;
now  the  wliole  of  its  substance  is  "  made  to
ascend  "  to  the  Lord.  Modern  science,  by
showing  that  the  effect  of  fire  upon  the  sub-
stance of  a  body  is  to  resolve  it  into  gases
which  rise  from  it,  contributes  a  new  illustra-
tion to  the  verse.  The  vapour  that  ascends  is
not  something  different  from  that  which  ia
burnt,  but  the  very  thing  itself,  its  essence;
which,  having  ascended,  is  of  a  sweet  savour
unto  the  Lord,  that  is,  acceptable  and  well-
pleasing  to  him.  The  burnt  offering,  tlie
meat  offering,  and  the  peace  offering,  are
sacrifices  of  sweet  savour  (ch.  ii.  2 ;  iii.  6),
the  expression  is  not  used  with  regard  to  the
sin  offering  and  trespass  offering.  St.  Paul
applies  it  to  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  in  Eph.
v.  2,  "As  Christ  also  loved  us,  and  gave
himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[en.  1. 1:— 17.


God  for  a  Bweet-amellmg  Bavoiir;"  thus
indicating,  in  an  incidental  manner,  the
connection  between  the  Jewish  sacrifices
and  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  as  type  and
antitype.

Ver.  10.— If  his  offering  he  of  the  flocks.
The  ritual  of  the  burnt  offering  was  the
same,  whether  tiie  victim  was  a  bull,  sheep,,
or  goat.

Ver.  11.— He  shall  kail  it  on  the  side  of  the
altar,  northward  before  the  Lord.  In  the
sacrifice  of  the  bullock  it  is  only  "  before
the  Lord"  (ver.  5).  No  doubt  the  same
place  is  meant  in  both  cases,  but  it  is
specified  with  more  exactness  here.  On  the
western  side  of  the  altar  was  the  tabernacle,
on  the  east  side  the  heap  of  ashes  (ch.  i.  16),
on  the  south  side  probably  the  ascent  to  the
altar  (see  Josephus,  'De  Bell.  Jud.,'  v.  5,  6);
on  the  north  side,  therefore,  was  the  most
convenient  slaughtering-place,  and  this  ia
probably  the  reason  for  the  injunction.

Ver.  14. — If  the  burnt  sacrifice  for  Us
offering  to  the  Lord  bo  of  fowls.  A  com-
parison of  eh.  xii.  8  leadi  ub  to  infer  that  the
permission  to  offer  a  bird  was  a  concession
to  poverty.  The  pigeon  and  the  turtle-dove
were  the  most  easy  to  procure,  as  the
domestic  fowl  was  at  this  time  unknown
to  the  Hebrews.  The  first  and  only  allusion
in  the  Bible  to  the  hen  occurs  in  the  New
Testament  (Matt,  xxiii.  37 ;  Luke  xiii.  34),
noi  ia  there  any  representation  of  the  do-


mestic fowl  in  ancient  Egyptian  paintings.
The  donjicile  of  the  bird  was  still  confined
to  India.  A  single  pigeon  or  turtle-dove
formed  a  sacrifice,  and  there  was  no  rule  in
respect  to  sex,  as  there  was  in  the  case  o{
the  quadrupeds.

Ver.  IS. — The  priest  shall  bring  it  unto  the
altar.  The  difference  in  the  ritual  for  the
burnt  sacrifice  of  fowls  is :  1.  That  the
offerer  is  not  commanded  to  lay  his  hand  on
the  bird.  2.  That  the  alter  is  the  place  of
maclation,  instead  of  the  space  on  the  north
side  of  the  altar.  3.  That  the  priest  slays
it  instead  of  the  offerer.  4.  That  the  blood
(owing  to  its  smaller  quantity)  is  pressed
out  against  tlie  side  of  the  altar  instead  of
being  caught  in  a  vessel  and  tlirown  on  it.
There  is  no  essential  variation  here;  the
analogy  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  animal  is
followed  so  far  as  circumstances  permit.  It
is  not  certain  that  the  word  malak,  trans-
lated wring  off  hit  head,  means  more  than
"  make  an  incision  with  the  nail ;  "  but  in
all  probability  the  head  was  to  be  severed
and  laid  on  the  fire  separately,  after  the
manner  of  the  other  sacrifices,

Ver.  16. — With  his  feathers,  rather  the
eontenU  of  the  crop.  This  and  the  ashes
are  to  be  placed  beside  the  altar  on  the  east
part,  as  being  furthest  &om  the  tabernacle
and  nearest  to  the  entrance  of  the  court,  M
that  they  might  be  readily  removad.


HOMILETICa

Ven,  1,  9. — The  saerlficial  tyitem.  The  religion  of  Israel,  as  exhibited  to  ns  in  the
Law,  bears  at  first  sight  a  strange  appearance,  unlike  what  we  shoulrl  have  expected.
We  read  in  it  very  little  about  a  future  life,  and  not  much  about  repentance,  faith,  and
prayer,  but  we  find  commanded  an  elaborate  system  of  sacrifices,  based  upon  a  practice
almost  coeval  with  the  Fall.

L  Saoboiok  was  used  nr  akte-Mosaio  days  ab  a  ueaot  of  afpboach  to  Odd.
"  In  process  of  tinie  it  came  to  pass  that  Cain  brought  of  the  fruit  of  the  ground  an
offering  unto  the  Lord.  And  Abel,  he  also  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock  and  of
the  fat  thereof"  (Gen.  iv.  4).  The  covenant  with  Noah  was  made  by  saoriSce :  "  And
Koah  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lord,  and  took  of  every  clean  beast  and  of  every  clean
fowl,  and  offered  burnt  offerings  on  the  altar.  And  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour.
.  .  .  And  God  spake  unto  Koah,  and  to  his  sons  with  him,  saying.  And  I,  behold,  I
establish  my  covenant  with  you,  and  with  your  seed  after  you "  (Gen.  viii.  20,  21 ;
ix.  8,  9).  When  Abraham  first  entered  Canaan,  he  "  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lord
who  appeared  unto  him  "  (Gen.  xii.  7),  as  the  means  of  communicating  with  him.  At
his  next  halting-place,  "  he  builded  an  altar  unto  the  Lord,"  as  the  means  of  "  calling
upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  (Gen.  xii.  8 ;  xiii.  4).  On  removing  to  Hebron,  Rgain  he
"  built  there  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  "  (Gen.  xiii.  18).  The  covenant  with  Abraham
was  made  by  sacrifice  (Gen.  xv.  9) ;  and  at  Jehovah-jireh,  Abraham  "  offered  a  ram
for  a  burnt  offering  in  the  stead  of  his  son  "  (Gen.  xxii.  13).  At  Beer-shaba  Isaac
"  builded  an  altar  and  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  (Gen.  xxvi.  25).  At  Shalem
Jacob  "  erected  an  altar  and  called  it  El-elohe-Israel "  (Gen.  xxxiiL  20).  At  Bcth-el
he  "built  an  altar  and  called  the  place  El-beth-el "  (Gen.  xxxv.  7).  At  Beer-sheba  he
"offered  sacrifices  unto  the  God  of  his  father  Isaac  "  (Gen.'xlvi.  1),  During  the  sojourn
In  Egypt  it  is  probable  that  the  practice  of  sacrifice  was  discontinued  through  fear  of


eH.1.1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


giving  offence  to  the  religious  feelings  of  the  Egyptians  (Exod.  viii.  26) ;  but  the  ide«
of  sacrifice  being  the  appointed  means  of  serving  God  was  preserved  (Exod.  v.  3 ;  viii.  27),
Moses,  Aaron,  and  the  elders  of  Israel  took  part  in  a  sacrificial  meal  with  Jethro  in  the
wilderness  (Exod.  xviii.  12).  And  the  covenant  made  at  Sinai  was  ratified  by  burnt
offerings  and  peace  offerings  (Exod.  xxiv.  5).  Indeed,  the  Book  of  Psalms  declares  the
method  of  entering  into  covenant  with  God  to  be  "  by  sacrifice."  "  Gather  my  saints
together  unto  me ;  those  that  have  made  a  covenant  with  me  by  sacrifice  "  (Ps.  1.  5).
The  Christian  covenant  was  thus  ratified  (Heb.  ix.  15),  as  well  as  the  covenants  of
Noah,  Abraham,  and  Moses.

II.  There  are  three  classes  of  saobiviobs  miBSB  the  Mosaic  sispsniatiok,

BSSENTIALLT   DIFFEBINO   IN   CHASACTBB

Burnt  offerings;
Peace  offerings ;
Sin  offerings ;
beside  Meat  offerings,  ordinarily  attached  to  the  burnt  offerings,  and
Trespass  offerings,  a  species  of  sin  offering.

III.  What  was  thbib  meaning.  1.  In  general,  they  served,  as  before,  as  a  means
of  reconciliation  between  God  and  man,  as  a  means  of  access  for  man  to  God.  This
purpose  they  fulfilled  to  all  humble-minded  men,  whether  their  full  meaning  was
understood  or  no.  To  the  more  spiritually  minded  they  were  also  a  means  of  instruction
in  sacred  mysteries  to  be  revealed  hereafter.

2.  Specifically,  they  each  taught  their  own  lesson  and  brought  about,  symbolically
and  ceremonially,  each  their  own  effect.

The  sin  offering  taught  the  need  of,  and  symbolically  effected,  the  propitiation  of
God's  anger  and  the  expiation  of  man's  sin.

The  burnt  offering  taught  the  lesson  of  self-surrender,  and  symbolically  effected  the
snrrender  of  the  offerer  to  God.

The  peace  offering  taught  the  lesson  of  the  necessity  and  joyousness  of  communion
between  God  and  man,  and  symbolically  represented  that  communion  as  existing
between  the  offerer  and  God.

IV.  Whbnok  they  derived  theib  bfmoaot.  Their  efficacy  was  derived  from
representing  and  foreshadowing  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  on  the  cross,  the  sin  offering  typi-
fying the  propitiation  and  expiation  once  for  all  there  wrought,  the  burnt  offering  the
perfect  self-surrender  of  the  sinless  sufferer,  the  peace  offering  the  reconciliation  thereby
effected  and  continued  between  God  and  his  people.

Vers.  3 — 17. — The  hurnt  offering.  It  was  wholly  consumed  by  the  fire  of  Gcd'i
altar ;  nothing  was  left  for  the  after  consumption  either  of  the  offerer  or  even  of  Crod'i
ministers,  as  in  the  other  sacrifices.

L  It  typifies  the  entire  self-sttrbendeb  of  Christ  to  God.

1.  In  his  eternal  resolve  to  redeem  by  becoming  man.

2.  In  the  humility  of  his  birth  on  earth.

3.  In  the  silence  in  which  his  youth  was  spent.

4.  In  the  narrow  limits  within  which  he  confined  his  ministry.

5.  In  the  victory  won  over  his  human  wUl  in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemaotk

6.  In  his  yielding  his  life  to  his  Father  on  the  cross.

II.  Example  herein  to  us.

1.  We  must  surrender  what  is  evil-
Bad  hahits,  e.g.  sloth,  drunkenness.

Bad  affections,  e.g:  love  of  money,  bodily  inditlgenoe.
Bad  passions,  e.g.  ill  temper,  pride.

2.  We  must  surrender  what  Qoi  does  not  thw'i.  fit  to  give  na,  though  not  In  itself
pvil,  such  a^—

Health,

Domestic  happiness,

Worldly  supcess.

III.  The  Christian  temfeb  BEguLTiNS  fbou  SELF-smtBENDia

1.  Acquiescence  in  God's  wilL

2.  Cheerfulness  in  rendering  that  acquiescence.


e  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  i.  1— ir.

S.  Spiritual  peace  and  happiness  arising  from  the  con^iousness  of  having  yielded  our
will  to  our  Father's  will.

4.  Love  to  the  brethren.  Cf.  Bph.  v.  2 :  "  Walk  in  love,  as  Christ  also  loved  vn,
and  gave  himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour."

Vers.  5 — 9. — Mediation.  The  sacrificial  act  cannot  be  completed,  though  it  can  be
begun,  by  the  offerer  alone.  The  intervention  of  God's  priest  is  requisite,  and  it  is  his
hand  which  performs  the  most  solemn  portion  of  the  rite.  Thus  there  is  taught  the
need  of  mediation  and  of  a  mediator  when  a  work  of  atonement  is  to  be  accomplished.
"  The  expiation  was  always  made  or  completed  by  the  priest,  as  the  sanctified  mediator
between  Jehovah  and  the  people,  or,  previous  to  the  institution  of  the  Aaronic  priest-
hood, by  Moses,  the  chosen  mediator  of  the  covenant.  ...  It  is  not  Jehovah  who
makes  the  expiation,  but  this  is  invariably  the  office  or  work  of  a  mediator,  who  inter-
venes between  the  holy  God  and  sinful  man,  and  by  means  of  expiation  averts  the
wrath  of  God  from  the  sinner,  and  brings  the  grace  of  God  to  bear  upon  him  "  (Keil).
Hence,  the  great  work  of  atonement,  of  which  all  other  atonements  are  but  shadowe^
was  performed  by  the  One  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  man  Jesus  Christ

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Entire  consecration,  as  illustrated  in  the  humf  offering.  Ch.  i. ;  cf.  Rom.  xfi.  1.—
We  start  with  the  assumption  that  the  Book  of  Exodus  presents  "the  history' of
redemption."  It  is  an  account  of  how  the  Lord  delivered  the  people  he  had  chosen
out  of  bondage,  and  brought  them  to  himself  (Exod.  xix.  4).  It  contains,  moreover,
an  account  of  the  erection  of  the  tabernacle,  or  "  tent  of  meeting,"  where  God  proposed
to  dwell  as  a  Pilgrim  in  the  midst  of  a  pilgrim  people,  and  out  of  which  would  issue
his  commands  as  their  Guide  and  Leader.  In  this  Book  of  Leviticus,  then,  we  have
the  Lord  speaking  "out  of  the  tent  of  meeting"  (ver.  i),  that  is,  to  a  people  in
covenant  relations  with  himself.

This  helps  us  to  understand  why  the  "burnt  offering"  is  treated  first.  Not  only
was  it  the  very  oldest  offering,  but  it  was  to  be  the  daily  offering  (Numb.  xxix.  6) ;
morning  and  evening  was  a  holocaust  to  be  presented  to  the  Lord.  It  was,  therefore'
manifestly  meant  to  express  the  proper  state  or  condition  of  those  professing  to  be
Grod's  covenant  people.  It  is  on  this  account  that  we  entitle  this  a  homily  on  Entire
Consecration.

I.  This  idea  of  bntibk  consbcbatios  is  one  which  all  olasbbb  of  God's  pboplk
AHE  EXPECTED  TO  EXPRESS.  The  poor,  who  could  only  bring  "  turtle-doves  "  or  "  young
pigeons,"  the  representatives  of  domestic  fowls  at  that  time,  were  just  as  welcome  at  the
tabernacle  as  those  who  could  bring  lambs  or  bullocks.  Consecration  is  an  idea  which
can  be  carried  out  in  any  worldly  condition.  The  poor  widow  with  her  two  mites
carried  it  out  more  gloriously  than  her  neighbours  in  the  midst  of  their  abundance.
Complete  self-surrender  is  not  the  prerogative  of  a  class,  but  the  possibility  and  ideai
of  alL

II.  CONFEBSION  OF  SIN  IS  AN  EXPECTED  PRELIHINABT   TO  CONSBCBATIOIf.      The  JeW,

whatever  was  his  grade  in  society,  was  directed  either  expressly  to  "  lean  "  (J^ii)  his  hand
upon  the  head  of  his  offering,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  the  fowls  where  it  was  physically
impossible,  to  do  so  by  implication ;  and  this  was  understood  to  represent,  and  some
believe  it  to  have  been  regularly  accompanied  by,  confession  of  sin.  Of  course,  con-
fession of  sin  is  not  of  the  essence  of  consecration  ;  we  have  in  the  case  of  our  biessed
Lord,  and  of  the  unfallen  angels,  similar  consecration,  where  no  sense  of  sin  is  possible.
And  we  are  on  the  way  to  consecration  in  the  other  life,  divorced  from  the  sense  of  sin'.
Meanwhile,  however,  confession  is  only  just,  since  sin  remains  with  us.  Indeed  the
consecration  of  redeemed  sinners  will  not  prove  very  deep  or  thorough  where  confession
of  sin  is  omitted,

IIL  The  spectaolb  of  a  suBSTrruTE  dyino  in  odb  boom  and  stead  n  wm,l
FITTED  TO  DEEPEN  OTTB  SENSE  OF  C0N8ECEATI0N.  The  slaughter  of  the  animal  upcn
whose  head  the  sins  have  by  confession  been  laid,  must  have  exercised  upon  the  offOTer
a  very  solemnizing  influence.    There  is  nothing  in  like  manner  so  fitted  to  hallow  us  as


«H.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  1

the  spectacle  of  Jesus,  to  whom  these  sacrifices  pointed,  dying  on  the  cross  in  our
«tead.  The  love  he  manifested  in  that  death  for  us  constrains  us  to  live,  not  unto  our-
selves, bat  unto  him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again  (2  Cor.  y.  14,  15).  The  moral
power  of  ttAstituiion  cannot  be  dispensed  with  in  a  sinful  world  like  this.

IV.  Thk  acoeftanor  op  the  blood  upon  thk  altab,  that  is,  of  ofb  afteb  thh

DBATH-PBNALTT  HAS  BEEN  PAID,  ALSO  HELPS  TO  DEEPEN  THE  SENSE  OP  OON8E0BATION.

For  when  the  priest  by  Divine  direction,  sprinkled  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  all  round
about  upon  the  altar,  it  was  to  indicate  the  acceptance  on  Qod's  part  of  the  life  leycmd
death.  It  indicated  that  God  was  satisfied  with  the  substitution,  that  the  penalty  had
been  paid  by  the  death  of  the  victim,  and  that  in  consequence  the  blood,  that  is,  the
life — for  the  life  was  in  the  blood  (ch.  xvii.  11) — could  be  accepted.  Acceptance  in  and
through  another  was  what  this  portion  of  the  ritual  implied,  and  this  is  well  calculated
to  deepen  the  sense  of  consecration.  For,  according  to  the  typology,  the  Person  in
whom  we  are  accepted  is  he  to  whom  we  ought  to  be  consecrated.  It  is  when  we
realize  that  we  are  accepted  in  Christ  that  we  feel  constrained  to  dedicate  6urselyes
unto  him.  The  one  good  turn  deserves  another,  and  we  are  held  under  a  sense  of
fiweetest  obligation.

V.  The  consecration  op  the  child  op  God  is  the  complete  subbendbb  of  self
TO  the  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Ewald  has  most  pertinently  remarked  that
among  the  Greeks  and  other  nations  such  holocausts  as  were  daily  presented  by  the
Jews  were  rarities.  The  idea  of  entire  consecration  is  too  broad  for  a  heathen  mind.
Partial  consecration  was  comparatively  easy  in  idea,  but  a  "  surrender  without  reserve  "
is  the  fruit  of  Divine  teaching.  Now  this  is  what  the  burning  of  the  holocaust  in  the
sacred  fire  of  the  altar  signified.  For,  since  all  sensation  had  ceased  before  the  sacrifice
was  laid  upon  the  altar,  the  burning  could  not  suggest  the  idea  to  the  worshipper  of  pain
or  penalty.  The  fire  had  come  out  from  God  as  the  token  of  acceptance  (ch.  ix.  24).  It
is,  moreover,  one  of  the  recognized  symbols  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Consequently,  the
exposure  of  every  portion  of  the  sacrifice  to  the  altar  fire  represented  the  yielding  of  the
grateful  worshipper  in  his  entirety  to  the  operation  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  This,  after
all,  is  the  essence  of  sanctification.  It  is  the  surrender  of  our  whole  nature,  body,  soul,
and  spirit,  to  the  disposal  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  devotedness  indeed.  Nowheru
has  the  idea  been  more  felicitously  wrought  out  than  in  a  little  posthumous  volume  of
F,  B.  Havergal's,  entitled  '  Kept  for  the  Master's  Use.'  We  cannot  better  convey  the
idea  of  the  burnt  oifering  than  by  copying  her  simple  foundation  lines  upon  which  she
iuw  built  her  chapters.

"Take  my  life,  and  let  it  be
Consecrated,  Lord,  to  Thee.

Take  my  moments  and  my  days ;
Let  them  dow  in  ceaseless  praise.

Take  my  hands,  and  let  them  moT*
At  the  impulse  of  Thy  love.

Take  my  feet,  and  let  them  be
Bwift,  and  ' beautiful'  for  Thee.

Take  my  voice,  and  let  me  aing
Always,  only,  for  my  king.

Take  my  lips,  and  let  them  be
Filled  with  messages  &om  tbM,

Take  my  silver  and  my  gold :
Not  a  mite  would  I  withhold.

Take  my  intellect,  and  use
Every  power  as  Thou  shalt  ohootNi

Take  my  will  and  make  it  Thins*
It  shall  be  no  longer  mine.

Take  my  heart ;  it  is  Thine  owa:
-It  shall  be  Thy  royal  throne.


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  1. 1—17,


Take  my  lovej  My  Lord,  I  pour
At  Thy  feet  its  trMSure-store.
Take  myself,  and  I  will  be
Ever,  only,  all  for  Thee."

B.  M.  B.

Vers.  1 — 14. — 3%«  weakness  of  man  and  the  grace  of  Ood.  Measureless  Is  the
distance  between  man  and  his  Maker.  And  it  is  sometimes  emphasized  in  such  a
way  as  to  repress  thought  and  stifle  the  aspirations  of  the  human  breast.  In  Scripture
it  is  not  brought  forward  as  a  rayless  truth,  but  is  shown  to  be  replete  with  profit
and  joy.  To  consider  it  increases  humility,  indeed,  but  also  intensifies  gratitude  and
love.  For  the  less  has  been  blessed  by  the  Greater,  and  we  are  permitted  to  say,
looking  upon  the  attributes  of  the  Eternal  as  exercised  towards  us  in  mercy  and
favour,  "  This  God  is  our  God :  we  will  rejoice  in  his  salvation."

I.   Man  IB  IGNORANT  :   THE  QBAOB  OF  GoD  IS  SEEN  IN  THE    DISTINCT   ENUNCIATION  OF

HIS  WILL.  The  light  of  reason,  the  voice  of  conscience,  the  promptings  of  emotion,—
these  can  inform  us  only  to  a  slight  extent  of  the  worship  and  service  likely  to  be
acceptable  to  God.  Hence  the  surpassing  worth  of  the  full,  clear-toned,  authoritative
utterances  of  Scripture.  That  God  is  Spirit,  Light,  and  Love,  that  he  is  holy  and
almighty,  are  declarations  for  which  we  must  be  devoutly  thankful.  The  Epicureans
pictured  the  happy  gods  as  dwelling  in  unruffled  serenity  far  from  all  cognizance  of  or
interference  with  the  concerns  of  men.  Inspiration  removes  our  suspicions,  reassures
us  with  the  words,  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  over  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  are
open  unto  their  prayers."  Errors  in  the  Tuanner  of  our  approach  are  prevented.  Some
would  have  presumptuously  drawn  near  without  the  accustomed  offering ;  others  might
bring  unsuitable  gifts — human  sacrifices,  unclean  animals,  etc.  A  God  less  kind
might  suffer  the  people  to  incur  the  terrible  consequences  of  ignorance,  but  no!  if
Nadab  and  Abihu  perish  it  shall  not  be  for  lack  of  instruction.  "  Go  ye  into  all  the
world,  teaching  them  to  observe  whatsoever  things  I  have  commanded  you."

II.  Man  IS  FEARFUL  AND  PERTURBED  IN  THE  PRESENCE  OP  GoD  :  IT  IB  GRAOIOUSLT
ORDAINED  THAT  SPECIAL  MESSENGERS  SHALL  BE  THE  APPOINTED  CHANNELS  OF  COMMU-
NICATION. "  The  Lord  called  unto  Moses,  saying,  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel."
When  God  appeared  on  Sinai  and  thundered  out  His  Law,  the  terrified  people  implored
that  God  might  not  Himself  speak  again  lest  they  should  die.  Their  entreaty  was
regarded,  and  Moses  became  the  medium  of  conveying  the  mind  of  God.  Should
Jehovah  be  for  ever  appearing  in  person,  his  visits  would  be  attended  with  such  over-
whelming awe  that  the  purport  of  his  words  might  be  in  danger  of  being  lost  or  mis-
taken. When  embarrassed,  man's  thoughts  are  dispersed,  and  memory  fails.  It  was
better,  therefore,  that  holy  men  should  speak  unto  men  as  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost.
The  striking  instance  is  the  assumption  of  our  nature  by  the  Son  of  God,  putting  a  veil
over  the  features  of  Deity  that  weak  sinful  mortals  might  draw  near  without  trembling
ana  admire  the  gracious  words  proceeding  out  of  his  mouth.  Even  children  hear  and
understand  the  words  of  Jesus.  And  here  we  may  remark  that  the  utterances  of  the
messengers  must  he  received  as  coming  from  the  Most  Eigh.  In  the  appointed  place
QoA  talked  with  Moses,  and  on  his  repeating  the  instructions  to  the  Israelites  they
were  bound  to  attend  to  ttem.  It  is  equally  incumbent  upon  us  to  respect  the  decrees
of  God  delivered  through  prophets  and  apostles,  and  above  all  to  honour  the  Father
by  honouring  the  Son,  believing  his  words,  trusting  him  as  the  Teadher  sent  from
God.  Preachers  are  "  ambassadors  for  Christ."  We  would  give  thanks  without  ceas-
ing when  hearers  receive  the  truth  from  our  lips,  not  as  the  word  of  men,  but  the  word
of  God  (1  Thess.  ii.  13).

III.  Man  is  sinful  :  the  ohaob  of  God  provides  mediatorial  access  to  the
Holt  One.  1.  Sacrifices  appointed.  "  Bring  an  offering  "  without  blemish,  and  place
your  hand  upon  its  head,  to  show  that  it  is  willingly  offered  and  stands  instead  of  the
offerer.  And.  "  it  shall  be  accepted  to  make  atonement "  for  you,  to  cover  your  person
and  works  with  the  robe  of  mercy  and  righteousness,  so  that  the  Divine  gaze  may  be
fastened  upim  you  without  displeasure.  By  the  grace  of  God  it  was  arranged  that
Jesus  Christ  should  taste  death  lor  every  man.     His  was  the  one  offering  that,  through


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  »

accomplishing  the  will  of  God,  sanctifies  all  who  make  mention  of  his  name.  Who
will  hesitate  to  appear  before  the  Most  High  ?  Let  faith  lay  her  hand  upon  the
Saviour,  rejoicing  in  the  conviction  that  "  while  we  were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for
us."  2.  A  priesthood.  The  Levites  were  set  apart  for  the  service  of  Jehovah,  instead
of  all  the  firstborn  of  Israel.  And  of  the  Levites,  the  sons  of  Aaron  were  to  minister
continually  before  the  Lord,  observing  all  his  regulations  and  maintaining  constant
purification  of  themselves,  so  tliat  without  insulting  the  holiness  of  God  they  might
interpose  between  him  and  his  people.  Priesthooil  bridged  the  chasm  between  sinful
creatures  and  a  pure  Creator.  The  priesthood  sanctified  the  entire  nation,  which  was
theoretically  a  "  kingdom  of  priests."  Jesus  Christ  has  concentred  the  priestly  func-
tions in  himself.  He  has  entered  into  the  heaven  as  our  Poreruiiner,  to  sprinkle  the
atoning  blood  on  the  altar.  And  now  with  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith  we
may  draw  nigh  to  God.

IV.  Man's  condition  vakies  :  the  oraob  or  God  provides  fob  its  inequalities,
1.  Notice  is  taken  of  the  poor,  and  appropriate  offerings  permitted.  Oriental  monarchs
often  despised  and  rejected  the  subjects  who  were  unable  to  enrich  their  royal  coffers.
But  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  It  is  one  of  the  glories  of  the  gospel  that  it  has
been  preached  to  the  poor,  and  is  adapted  to  their  needs.  God  expects  every  man  to
come  and  testify  his  respect  and  affection.  The  poor  may  bring  "  turtle-doves  or  young
pigeons."  The  way  was  thus  opened  for  the  parents  of  him  who  "  became  poor  for
our  sakes.''  It  is  to  be  feared  that  many  withhold  a  contribution  because  it  seems  so
insignificant.  But  the  Lord  is  as  sorry  to  see  the  mite  retained  in  the  pocket  as  the
gold  which  the  wealthy  refuse  to  part  with.  "  If  there  be  first  a  willing  mind  it  is
accepted  according  to  that  a  man  hath."  Do  not  decline  to  engage  in  Christian  work
on  the  plea  of  defective  ability !  Surely  some  fitting  department  of  service  can  be
found.  It  is  often  the  one  talent  that  is  hid  in  a  napkin.  2.  The  offering  of  the  poor
is  pronounced  equally  acceptable.  Note  the  repetition  of  "  it  is  a  sacrifice,  of  a  sweet
savour  unto  the  Lord  "  after  the  17th  verse.  It  is  rather  the  spirit  than  the  action
itself  which  God  regards.  Not  the  results  of  labour  so  much  as  its  motives  and  the
proportion  of  ability  to  accomplishment. — S.  E.  A.

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  greatness  of  God.  Too  wide  a  field  lessens  the  thoroughness  of
observation.  Hence  it  is  allowable  and  advantageous  to  distinguish  in  thought  what
is  in  reality  inseparable,  in  order,,  by  fixing  the  attention  upon  certain  parts,  to  acquire  a
better  knowledge  of  the  whole.  Such  a  method  recommends  itself  in  dealing  with  the
attributes  of  God.  To  attempt  to  comprehend  them  all  in  one  glance  is,  if  not  impos-
sible, at  least  of  little  result  in  increasing  our  acquaintance  with  His  character.  Let
us  observe  how  the  hints  in  this  chapter  present  us  with  the  greatness  of  Gk)d  in
varied  aspects.

I.  The  holiness  of  God  demands  a  baceificial  offbrino  from  all  who  would
SEEK  HiB  FAVOUR.  The  offerings  here  spoken  of  were  spontaneous  free-will  offerings.
They  indicated  a  desire  on  the  part  of  man  to  draw  nigh  to  Jehovah,  and  they  also
manifested  a  sense  of  disturbance  wrought  by  sin  in  man's  relations  with  his  Maker.
Once  man  walked  with  God  in  uninterrupted  harmony.  Then  transgression  chased
innocence  away,  and  shame  drove  man  to  hide  himself  from  the  presence  of  God
among  the  trees  of  the  garden.  The  consciousness  of  sin  renders  an  offering  necessary,
under  cover  of  which  ("  to  make  atonement  for  him ")  we  may  venture  to  an  audi-
ence with  the  Holy  One.  Thus  can  fellowship  be  resumed.  The  Antitype  of  these
sacrifices,  Jesus  Christ,  is  now  our  peace.  He  was  "  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of
many."  "  By  one  offering  he  hath  for  ever  perfected  them  that  are  sanctified."  The
old  cry,  "  How  shall  man  be  just  with  God  ?  "  is  still  uttered,  and  the  response  comes,
"  Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."

II.  The  majesty  of  God  requires  that  the  eequlations  for  approach  which
HE  HAS  appointed  BE  STRICTLY  OBSERVED.  The  condesconsion  of  God  in  manifesting
himself  to  the  Israelites  might  be  fraught  with  danger  if  it  led  to  presumption  and  to
holding  in  light  esteem  his  awe-inspiring  attributes.  Instructions  are  consequently
given  relating  to  the  minutest  details ;  everything  is  prescribed.  God  is  pleased  with
the  free-will  offering,  and  it  will  be  accepted  if  the  precepts  are  adhered  to ;  but  it
must  in  no  wise  be  supposed  that  the  sincere  expression  of  affection  can  excuse  wilful


10  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch,  1. 1— 17.

neglect  of  appointed  rules.  The  love  of  an  inferior  for  his  superior  must  not  prevent
the  ejchibition  of  due  respect.  God  will  be  had  in  reverence  by  all  that  are  about  him.
Nor  is  it  open  to  man  arrogantly  to  pronounce  that  a  consecrated  way  of  access  through
Jesus  Christ  may  be  set  aside  as  unnecessary.  Christianity  may  have  broadened  the
road  of  approach,  but  it  remains  true  that  there  is  still  an  appointed  road.  To  refuse
honour  to  Christ  is  to  treat  God  with  disrespect.  "  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glorified,
and  God  is  glorified  in  him."  Christless  worship,  thanksgiving,  and  prayer,  must  be
shunned.

III.  The  honour  or  Gfon  expects  an  offering  to  consist  of  the  best  that  man
POSSESSES.  If  poor,  a  turtle-dove  would  not  be  rejected,  but  for  a  rich  man  to  offer  the
same  would  be  treated  as  an  insult  to  God.  And  the  offering  from  the  herd  or  flock
must  be  "  a  male  without  blemish."  Strength  and  beauty  combined  are  requisite  to
satisfy  the  searching  eye  of  the  High  and  Lofty  One.  We  see  these  requisites  embodied
in  the  Lamb  of  God,  the  perfect  Sacrifice,  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled."  He  knows  little
of  God  who  imagines  that  he  will  be  put  off  with  scanty  service,  mean  oblations.  We
ought  to  ask,  not  what  is  there  can  be  easily  spared,  but  how  much  can  possibly  be
laid  upon  the  altar.  Let  us  not  mock  him  by  indulging  in  our  own  pleasures,  and
then  giving  to  him  the  petty  remnants  of  our  poverty  1  Let  us  strive  so  to  act  that
the  firstfruits  of  our  toil,  the  chiefest  of  our  possessions,  the  prime  of  our  life,  the  best
of  our  days,  shall  be  devoted  to  purposes  of  religion  I  Bestow  upon  God  the  deepest
thoughts  of  the  mind,  the  strongest  resolutions  of  the  will,  the  choicest  affections  of  the
heart.

IV.  The  perfection  op  God  necessitates  orderly  abeanoembnt  in  all  that
concerns  his  worship  and  service.  There  is  an  appointed  place  for  the  offering,
"  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  The  wood  must  be  laid  "  in  order  upon  the
fire"  (ver.  7),  and  the  diffeient  parts  of  the  victim  must  likewise  be  placed  "  in  order
upon  the  wood  "  (ver.  8).

To  constitute  a  chaos  round  about  the  throne  is  to  derogate  from  the  homage  a  king
inspires.  It  intimates  his  powerlessness,  his  want  of  intelligent  forethought  and  present
control.  Law  reigns  everywhere  throughout  the  dominions  of  Jehovah.  The  heavenly
bodies  speak  of  the  symmetry  he  loves,  and  plants,  animals,  and  minerals  teach  the
same  grand  truth.  "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law."  "  God  is  not  the  author  of  confusion,
but  of  peace."  In  the  worship  of  the  sanctuary  order  and  decency  are  of  pre-eminent
importance.  Whatever  shocks  a  devout  mind  is  likely  to  be  offensive  to  him  all  whose
ways  are  perfect.  Arrangement  need  not  degenerate  into  formality.  The  Sunday
dress,  the  preparation  for  God's  house,  and  the  quiet  attitude  therein,  are  aU  important
adjuncts  to  the  spiritual  education  of  the  young.

Be  it  observed  fiirther  that  order  means  economy  of  space  and  time.  Those  who
have  no  room  nor  leisure  to  be  orderly  do  least  and  retain  least.  The  laws  of  God  are
«ver  synonymous  with  the  true  interests  of  man.

V.  The  purity  of  God  obliges  that  the  offering  be  cleansed  from  defile-
ment. Those  parts  of  the  victim  naturally  subject  to  defilement  are  to  be  washed  in
water,  "  the  inwards  and  the  legs."  One  might  deem  this  a  superfluous  proceeding,
since  they  were  to  be  so  soon  burnt  upon  the  altar.  But  this  would  mean  an  extremely
erroneous  view  of  the  solemnity  of  a  sacrifice.  Those  who  have  not  time  to  serve  Gk)d
properly  had  better  not  try  it  at  all.  He  who  counts  it  a  trouble  to  read  and  pray  has
little  conception  of  the  insult  he  offers  to  God.  Before  we  bow  before  the  Lord  to
render  our  tribute  of  adoration  and  praise,  it  were  well  to  purify  our  hearts,  to  hallow
the  desires  that  may  have  become  impure,  to  call  home  our  wandering  thoughts,  and
to  loose  the  dusty  sandals  from  the  feet  which  have  been  treading  in  the  ways  of  the
world.  The  Almighty  desires  no  part  to  be  absent  from  the  offering.  The  affections,
the  strength,  the  time,  the  money,  that  have  been  lavished  on  unworthy  objects  are
not  in  themselves  sinful,  they  are  unclean  and  require  the  sanctifying  influence  of  the
blood  of  Christ,  and  the  water  of  the  Word,  and  then  they  are  fit  to  be  rendered  unto
God  and  consumed  in  the  fire  that  testifies  his  acceptance  of  the  worshipper.— S.  R.  A

Ver.  9. — Our  reasonaMe  service.  The  burnt  offering  appears  to  have  been  the  most
general  of  the  sacrifices  presented  to  Jehovah,  and  to  have  had  the  widest  significance.
Its  BiMtual  counterpart  is  furnished  in  Rom.  xii.  1.  Meditation  upon  the  prophetic
symbol  will  shed  liG;ht  upon  the  "  livino;  sacrifice  "  of  the  gospel  dispensation.


OH.  1.1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  11

I.   The    NATtTBE    OF    THE    CHRISTIAN   OFPEKING    AS    THUS    STMBOLIZBD.      1.    It   l»    a

tun-ender  to  Qod  of  something  that  telongs  to  us.  Property  inherited  and  acquired  is
the  material  of  the  sacrifice.  Not  only  what  has  come  to  us  hy  natural  endowment,
but  that  which  is  the  result  of  toil — the  cattle  that  were  given  to  us,  and  the  produce
we  have  reared.  God  demands  our  hearts,  our  minds,  our  talents;  and  he  looks  for
the  devotion  to  him  of  any  increment  that  effort  may  secure.  Just  as  Barnabas  sold
his  land  and  laid  the  price  at  the  apostles'  feet,  and  the  Apostle  Paul  commanded  that
each  Corinthian  should  "  lay  by  him  in  store  as  God  hath  prospered  him."  2.  Jt  is  a
voluntaary  surrender.  The  man  "  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt
offering,"  to  evince  his  willingness  to  part  with  the  animal.  All  "the  cattle  on
a  thousand  hills  "  are  really  owned  by  Jehovah,  yet  does  he  treat  man  as  proprietor,
and  does  not  take  by  violence  the  necessary  sacrifices  for  his  glory,  but  leaves  it  to  man
freely  to  recognize  his  God,  and  to  pay  his  just  dues.  "  Voluntary "  in  no  wise
excludes  the  force  of  motives,  since  every  decision  has  motives,  as  an  antecedent  if  not
as  an  efficient  cause.  Freedom  implies  absence,  not  of  inducements,  but  of  constraint.
Man  has  the  power  to  withhold  from  the  service  of  God  his  faculties  and  possessions.
He  is  ever  appealed  to  in  Scripture  as  a  reasonable  individual,  capable  of  deciding  to  what
purposes  his  abilities  shall  be  devoted.  "  Yield  yourselves  unto  God."  3.  The  surrender
must  he  complete.  It  was  not  possible  to  offer  part  of  a  goat  or  lamb,  the  victim  must
be  given  in  its  entirety.  The  blood  is  sprinkled  round  about,  and  "  all "  the  parts  are
burnt  upon  the  altar.  The  disciple  must  follow  the  Lord  fully.  No  putting  of  the
hand  to  the  plough  and  looking  back.  No  keeping  back  part  of  the  price.  The
believer  is  bought  by  Christ,  body  and  soul.  The  reason  why  many  seem  to  have
offered  themselves  to  God  in  vain,  is  because  they  have  done  it  in  a  half-hearted  way,
they  have  not  "  sought  him  with  their  whole  desire."

II.  The  mannek  in  which  the  OFFBKiNa  is  devoted  to  God.  1.  By  the  death
of  the  victim.  Death  is  the  total  renunciation  of  present  enjoyment — the  extremest
proof  of  an  intention  to  set  one's  self  apart  for  a  certain  object.  If  it  does  not  suffice  to
prove  sincerity  and  entire  consecration,  then  proof  is  impossible.  "  All  that  a  man
hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."  Like  the  apostle,  it  behoves  Christians  to  "  die  daily."
At  baptism  there  was  the  emblem  of  death  to  the  world.  "  Old  things  have  passed
away."  Our  death  to  sin,  however,  resembles  the  crucifixion  of  our  Lord,  a  lingering
painful  death.  We  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  crucify  the  flesh,  deny  ourselves.
"If  any  man  will  lose  his  life  he  shall  save  it."  2.  By  cleansing  water  and  purifying
fire.  "  Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth :  thy  word  is  truth."  "  Having  these
promises,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  fiesh  and  spirit."  "  Every  one
shall  be  salted  with  fire."  "  The  trial  of  your  faith  which  is  much  more  precious  than
of  gold  that  perisheth,  though  it  be  tried  with  fire."  All  that  is  earthly  is  consumed.
TTie  smoke,  rising  from  the  material  sacrifice,  reminds  ns  of  the  pure  metal  that  is  free
from  dross,  and  remains  to  "  praise,  honour,  and  glory."  Learn  to  welcome  the  tribula-
tions of  your  lot  as  being  the  discipline  that  makes  the  surrender  of  yourselves
complete.  Martyrs  have  experienced  actual  flames,  the  fire  may  assume  another  shape
to  you.  Perhaps  temptations  assail  you,  and  difficulties  wear  away  your  strength.
Glorify  God  in  the  fires.  Fire  is  an  emblem  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  as  Christ  offered
himself  through  the  Eternal  Spirit,  so  does  his  Spirit  abide  with  his  people,  to  hallow
them,  to  put  away  sin,  to  make  them  pleasing  unto  God.  3.  By  means  of  the  ordained
mediator.  The  priest  must  take  the  slain  animal  to  perform  the  necessary  rites.
Otherwise,  however  free  from  fault,  the  offering  will  bring  loss,  not  gain,  to  the  offerer.
If  all  believers  are  now  "  a  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,"  they  are
only  "  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ."  Our  Saviour  must  be  our  "  Daysman,"
to  come  between  us  and  God,  and  present  us  to  his  Father.  His  life,  death,  and
intercession  must  be  the  inspiration  of  our  lives,  the  spring  of  our  hopes,  the  constrain-
ing influence  that  shall  make  us  dedicate  all  we  have  and  are  to  God.  "  No  man
Cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me."  We  determine  to  know  nothing  save  Christ  and
him  crucified.     "  In  Christ  Jesus  "  we  "  are  made  nigh."

in.  The  KFrecT  of  the  ofpebino.  1.  It  pleases  Ood.  Anthropomorphic  expres-
sions are  employed,  not  to  degrade  the  Almighty,  but  to  clarify  our  conceptions,  and  to
make  the  truth  plain  to  the  dullest  eyed.  "  It  is  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  The
smell  is  repulsive,  and  caimot  be  supposed  to  be  grateful  in  itself  to  him  who  is  a  Spirit.


11  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  1. 1— 17.

But  it  is  the  disposition  to  honour  and  please  God  that  he  delights  to  observe  in  hi»
children.  A  parent  may  admire  the  rudest  sketch  if  his  little  one  brings  it  as  a  token
of  love,  and  may  esteem  the  commonest  fare  a  banquet,  and  ill-dressed  food  a  feast,  if
regard  and  affection  have  contributed  to  its  preparation.  The  agony  and  wounrls  of  the
Redeemer  were  not  watched  by  the  Father  with  unmingled  delight.  As  we  shudder  at
the  spectacle  of  the  Holy  One  made  a  curse  for  us,  and  yet  rejoice  in  the  all-sufficiency
of  his  burden-bearing ;  so  the  Father  felt  the  keenest  pangs  that  rent  the  breast  of  hit^
beloved  Son,  and  only  joyed  in  the  sublime  manifestation  of  filial  devotion,  content  tO'
endure  torture  and  insult  that  the  blot  on  his  Father's  world  through  the  presence  of  sin
might  be  erased  even  at  such  infinite  cost.  Wherein  we  are  partakers  if  the  sufferings
of  Christ  our  Sacrifice  is  fragrant  to  the  Father.  The  apostles,  in  preaching  the  gospel^
became  "  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ."  If  we  walk  in  love,  we  cause  the
incense  of  love  to  ascend  with  sweet  odour  to  heaven  (Eph.  v.  2).  Jesus  ministered  tu
the  wants  of  many,  and  the  Philippians,  in  supplying  the  necessities  of  Paul,  Christ^
servant,  were  an  "  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  well-pleasing  unto  God."  2.  It
'procures  for  the  offerer  satisfaction  of  conscience  and  the  favour  of  Ood,  The  sacrifice
is  accepted,  communion  is  re-established,  sin  is  covered.  There  is  an  inward  content-
ment in  all  religious  acts  that  is  of  itself  evidence  of  the  reality  of  religion,  and  its
adaptation  to  our  circumstances.  Never  did  any  man  abstain  from  selfish,  sinful
gratification,  or  pursue  the  rugged  path  of  holiness  and  virtue,  without  being  solaced  by
the  consciousness  of  having  done  what  was  right,  what  was  in  harmony  with  the
noblest  dictates  of  his  nature.  The  self-denying,  God-serving  life  is  the  happiest  and
most  blessed  life.  Then  do  we  walk  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  and  drink  of
the  river  of  his  pleasures. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  1, 2, — Sacrijicature.  The  Book  of  Exodus  closes  with  an  account  of  the  entrance
of  the  Shechinah  into  the  tabernacle  ;  with  the  manner  in  which  that  sacred  structure
was  enveloped  by  the  cloud  of  the  Divine  presence ;  also  that  in  which,  by  rising  from
the  tabernacle,  God  gave  his  order  for  his  people  to  march,  and,  by  resting  upon  it,  to
liialt  and  encamp.  The  Book  of  Leviticus  is  concerned  with  the  revelations  which  God
gave  to  Israel  from  this  habitation  of  his  holiness,  in  which  the  laws  published  &om
Sinai  were  amplified  (comp.  ch.  vii.  37,  38).  The  text  lays  down  broad  principles  upon
the  subject  of  sacrificature,  which  is  considered  first  in  order,  because  of  its  great  im-
portance to  the  Levitical  system,  and  to  that  more  glorious  system  of  the  gospel  which
it  shadowed  forth.     We  learn  that —

I.  Sacrificature  has  God  for  its  Authob.    1.  It  existed  hefore  the  time  of  Moses.

(1)  Its  prevalence  amongst  the  nations  argues  its  origin  to  be  prior  to  the  dispersion
(Gten.  xi.  9).  How  else  can  this  fact  be  explained  ?  (2)  We  read  of  it  in  patriarchal
times.  The  Hebrew  patriarchs  offered  sacrifices  (Gen.  xii.  7,  et  al-freq.").  So  did  Job,
who  lived  in  the  land  of  Uz,  on  the  boider-land  between  Idumea  and  Arabia,
probably  about  the  time  of  Joseph  (Job  i.  5  ;  see  also  Exod.  xviii.  12).  So  did  Noah
(Gen.  viii.  20).  (3)  The  first  family  had  sacrifices  which  they  presented  when  they
appeared  before  the  Shechinah,  which  flamed  between  the  cherubic  emblems  set  up
eastward  of  Eden  (Gen.-iv.  3,  4).  2.  Jt  could  not  have  heen  invented  by  man.  (1)  It
was,  in  the  nature  of  the  thing,  most  unlikely  to  have  occurred  to  any  finite  mind.

(2)  If  it  did  so  occur,  would  God  have  accepted  it  ?  Does  he  approve  will-worship  ?■
(see  ch.  x.  1,  2).  What  right  has  a  sinner  to  propose  terms  of  reconciliation  to  his
Maker?  His  place  is  to  throw  himself  absolutely  upon  the  Divine  mercy,  and  wait  tl^
"  hear  what  God  the  Lord  may  speak  "(Ps.  Ixxxv.  7, 8).  3.  Sere  we  have  it  authorized
hy  Ood.  (1)  "  And  the  Lord  called  unto  Moses,"  etc.  (2)  So  we  find  God  directing
Abraham  respecting  the  manner  in  which  sacrifices  should  be  ordered  in  his  worship
(Gen.  XV.  9 ;  see  also  xxii.  2).  (3)  The  "  coats  of  skins  "  in  which  our  first  parents  were
clothed  were  presumably  from  animals  offered  in  sacrifice.  Animals  were  not  in  those
days  killed  for  food  (Gen.  i.  29  j  comp.  with  ix.  3).  Since  it  was  "  the  Lord  God  "  who
clothed  them,  the  institution  of  sacrificature  would  date  from  that  time,  and  be  a  reve-
lation of  mercy  immediately  from  him.  God  is  the  Author  of  reconciliation  (John  iiL
16  ;  .Kom.  v.  8 ;  1  John  iv.  9).

n.  It  was  published  from  his  BANcrnTABT.  1.  Tliere  are  revekUioni  of  Ood  in
nature.    (1)  These  are  exhibited  in  our  treatises  on  Natural  Theology.    Who  can  fail


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  13

to  see  the  Designer  in  the  works  of  design?  (2)  The  Scriptures  recognize  this  voice
{Ps.  ix.  1 ;  xix.  1,  etc. ;  Acts  xiv.  it ;  xvii.  27 ;  Rom.  i.  20).  2.  But  these  are  evident
only  after  the  hint  of  them  is  given.  (1)  We  have  no  innate  ideas.  The  Namaquans
and  other  African  tribes  were  found  by  Moffat,  Ridsdale,  and  other  missionaries,  without
»  glimmer  of  an  idea  of  God  or  of  immortality.  (2)  The  traditions  of  the  Gentiles  were
originally  from  a  pure  source,  but  became  corrupted  in  transmission.  (3)  There  are  no
"  deists,"  t.e.  natural  theologians,  where  the  Bible  has  not  been  before  them.  They
do  not  own  the  source  from  whence  they  derive  the  hints  which  guide  them  in  theii
reasonings.  3.  Sacrificature  is  not  taught  in  nature.  (1)  The  bool^  of  nature  was
written  too  soon.  The  Creation  preceded  the  Fall.  (2)  That  it  is,  is  not  presumed.
Sacrificature  is  excluded  from  the  creed  of  the  deist.  (3)  This  subject  belongs  to  the
sanctuary.  "And-  the  Lord  called  Moses  and  spake  out  of  the  tahernacle  of  the
congregation,"  etc.  Even  the  Garden  of  Eden,  where,  we  presume,  it  was  first
instituted,  was  "  planted,"  and  planted  to  be  a  temple  for  Divine  worship.  (4)  Yet
without  sacrificature  there  can  be  no  acceptable  worship.  Cain,  the  deist,  was  rejected
because  he  came  before  God  without  blood-shedding  (see  ch.  xvii.  11 ;  Heb.  ix.  22).
Let  no  man  think  he  acceptably  serves  God  when  he  neglects  the  services  of  the
sanctuary  under  the  pretext  of  "  worshipping  the  God  of  nature  in  the  fields."

III.  The  sacrifices  approved  are  "  from  the  herd  and  from  the  ixock."
1.  They  are  selected  from  the  animals  that  are  clean.  (1)  They  have  the  marks
of  cleanness,  viz.  parting  the  hoof  and  chewing  tlie  cud  (ch.  xi.  3).  But  all  clean
creatures  were  not  proper  for  purposes  of  sacrifice.  Those  of  the  "herd"  (ip3,  baker)
are  distinguished  as  the  bull,  heifer,  bullock,  and  calf.  Those  of  the  "  flock  "  (ins,  tson)
as  sheep  and  goats;  for  this  word  is  used  to  describe  these  animals  promiscuously
.(see  ver.  10).  (2)  This  reminds  us  of  the  purity  of  God,  who  can  accept  nothing  that
is  polluted — "  who  will  in  no  wise  clear  the  guilty  " — who  requires  purity  in  his
worshippers  (Ps.  xxiv.  3,  4).  (3)  It  points  to  the  purity  of  the  Great  One  sacrificed
for  us,  covered  in  whose  righteousness  we  are  justified  or  accounted  as  just  persons,  and
in  whose  atoning  blood  we  are  washed  and  made  clean.  2.  lliey  are  gregarious
creatures.  (1)  This  feature  is  prominently  noticed  here — "  herd,"  "  flock."  Man
is  a  social  being.  He  is  set  in  families,  tribes,  nations,  and  even  internationally  united.
Solitary  confinement  is  amongst  tlie  most  horrible  of  punishments.  (2)  Hence  guilt
and  depravity  become  hereditary.  And  as  we  have  been  represented  to  our  ruin  by  our
common  progenitor,  so  by  the  representation  of  the  second  Adam  we  have  salvation.
(3)  Sin  is  dissocializing.  Consider  its  fruits — Hatred — variance — strifes — murders.
{4}  True  religion  perfects  the  social  principle,  centres  all  union  in  God.  A  universe
can  meet  in  him.  A  universe  can  hold  communion  in  him.  The  genius  of  religion
is  love.     The  heaven  of  heavens  is  love. — ;J.  A.  M.

Vers.  3 — 9. — The  humt  sacrifice  of  the  herd.  Having  given  general  instructions
■concerning  the  great  business  of  sacrifice,  the  Most  High  descends  to  particulars,  and
here  describes  the  burnt  sacrifice  of  the  herd.  These  particulars  contain  specific
directions —

I.  As  TO  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  VICTIM.  1.  It  must  be  a  male.  (I)  Females  were
not  only  admitted  for  burnt  offerings  under  the  patriarchal  dispensation,  but  upon  one
memorable  occasion  even  prescribed  (see  Gen.  xv.  9).  The  ceremonial  distinction
between  male  and  female  was  not  then,  probably,  so  strongly  defined  as  afterwards  it
became  under  the  Law.  Under  the  gospel  it  is  abolished  (Gal.  iii.  28).  (2)  The
male  is  the  stronger  animal ;  and  the  horns,  in  the  ox,  which  are  symbols  of  power,  are
more  developed  in  the  male.  The  male,  therefore,  would  represent  the  excellence  of
strength.  (3)  Thus  Christ,  as  the  "  Power  of  God,"  would  be  preindicated  (I  Cor.  i.  24).
By  his  sacrifice  of  himself  be  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  »nd  became
the  "  power  of  God  unto  salvation  "  to  every  believer  (Bom.  1.  16 ;  1  Cor.  i.  18).  2.  It
must  be  without  blemish.  (1)  The  rabbins  reckon  no  less  than  fifty  things,  any  one  of
"which  would,  in  their  judgment,  render  an  animal  unfit  for  sacrifice ;  five  in  the  ear,
three  in  the  eyelid,  eight  in  the  eye,  etc. ;  but  they  trifle  outrageously.  Any  obvious
defect  or  redundancy  of  parts  would  mar  it  for  sacrifice,  and  so  would  any  disease  by
which  it  might  be  afflicted.  (2)  This  reminds  us  that  Christ,  who  is  accepted  of  God
*s  our  SacrifioL',  is  without  deficiency  or  redundancy,  weakness  or  malady  (1  Pet.  1.  19)i


14  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  1. 1—17.

In  eyerything  perfect.  (3)  We  are  further  taught  that  the  best  should  be  given  to
God.    The  best  thoughts ;  the  best  affections ;  the  best  gifts ;  the  best  service.

II.  Ab  to  the  duty  of  the  offbbeb.  1.  With  a  view  to  procuring  the  occeptaTici
of  his  offering. '  (1)  His  gift  must  be  offered  freely.  "  He  shall  offer  it  of  his  own
voluntary  wiU."  The  sacrifice  of  himself,  which  Christ  offered  for  us,  wa§  voluntary
TGal.  i.  4 ;  ii.  20 ;  Eph.  v.  25 ;  Titus  ii.  6,  li).  God  expects  the  homage  of  the  heart
(John  ir.  23,  24).  (2)  It  must  be  offered  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  The  altar  was
at  the  door.  We  enter  the  heavens  through  the  bhod  of  Jesus  (Heb.  x.  19 — 21).  The
Jewish  sacrifices  were  never  resumed  after  the  destmction  of  their  city  and  temple,  for
they  hold  it  unlawful  to  sacrifice  anywhere  out  of  Jerusalem.  Yet  they  will  not  see  that
the  antitypes  have  come,  and  that  the  types  are  therefore  no  longer  necessary.  (3)  He
must  lay  his  hand  upon  its  head.  This  action  expressed,  (a)  That  the  offerer  confessed
himself  a  sinner  deserving  to  be  sacrificed.  (V)  That  he  ceremonially  transferred  his  guilt
to  a  substitute  in  anticipation  of  the  Great  Substitute  promised  who  should  truly  bear
the  punishment  of  sin  (1  Pet.  ii.  24).  (c)  That  he  trusted  in  the  mercy  of  God  through
the  vicarious  sufferings  of  Messiah  (Dan.  ix.  26).  2.  With  a  view  to  the  making  an
atonement  for  his  sin.  The  direction  is  (1)  That  he  should  kill  the  bullock  "  before
the  Lord.  The  Sheohinah  was  there  in  the  most  holy  place.  The  transaction  is
between  the  Lord  and  the  soul  of  the  sinner.  In  all  worship  we  should  realize  the
presence  of  the  Lord.  (2)  "  He  shall  flay  the  burnt  offering  and  cut  it  into  his  pieces."
This  operation  was  here  performed,  not  by  the  priest,  but  by  the  offerer.  In  the
time  of  the  temple  this  was  done  by  the  priests,  who  were  then  more  numerous  and
better  skilled  in  the  proper  mode  of  doing  it.  For  this  service  they  claimed  the  skin
(ch.  vii.  8;  2  Chron.  xxix.  34).  (3)  People  and  priests  alike  were  concerned, in  the
Great  Sacrifice  on  Calvary.    It  was  done  with  "  wicked  hands  "  (Acts  ii.  23).

ni.  As  TO  THE  DUTY  OF  THE  FBIE8T8.  1.  With  respect  to  the  blood.  (1)  They  were
to  sprinkle  with  it  round  about  the  altar.  The  altar  upon  which  Jesus  was  offered  was,
in  its  more  restricted  sense,  the  hill  of  Calvary.  On  that  hill  his  precious  blood  was
literally  sprinkled.  (2)  The  position  of  the  altar  is  noted,  viz.  "by  the  door  of  the
tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  In  the  wider  sense  the  altar  on  which  Jesus  suffered
was  this  planet,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  entrance  or  vestibule  of  the  great  temple  of
the  universe,  of  which  the  heavens  are  the  holy  places  (see  Heb.  iv.  14),  2.  With
respect  to  the  water.  (1)  Water  is  one  of  the  great  purifiers  in  the  kingdom  of  nature,
and  is  therefore  used  as  an  emblem  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Great  Purifier  in  the
kingdom  of  grace  (John  vii.  38,  39).  So  a  controversy  about  baptism  with  water  is
described  as  a  "  question  about  purifying  "  (John  Hi  25).  (2)  With  water  the  priest
was  to  wash  the  inwards  and  the  legs.  The  inwards  were  a  type  of  the  soul ;  and  God
requires  "truth  in  the  inward  parts,"  in  the  "thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart."
Every  pollution,  also,  connected  with  our  "walk  and  conversation"  must  be  laved
away.  To  express  this  truth  Jesus  washed  his  disciples' /«e^.  3.  With  respect  to  the
fire.  (1)  It  was  "  put "  upon  the  altar.  This  does  not  say  that  it  was  kindled  by  the
priest.  The  fire  was  of  God's  own  kindling  (see  ch.  ix.  24 ;  z.  1,  2).  (2)  It  was,  however,
fed  with  fuel  by  the  priests.  Human  agency  co-operates  with  Divine  even  in  the  most
sacred  things  (Phil.  ii.  12, 13).  (3)  The  parts  of  the  sacrifice  were  laid  in  order  on  the
wood.  The  quarters  were  laid  together  in  their  relative  positions.  So  with  the  head,
the  fat,  and  the  inwards.  Thus  the  whole  animal  was  consumed.  Our  whole  being
should  be  offered  to  God  in  the  flames  of  love  (Deut.  vL  5). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  10—17. —  The  burnt  offering  of  the  flock  and  of  the  fowls.  The  ceremony  of
the  offering  of  the  flock  is  almost  identical  with  that  of  the  herd  described  in  the
verses  preceding.    In  that  of  the  fowls  there  is  a  wider  dissimilarity.

I.  The  vabiety  of  the  victims  claims  attention.  1.  Five  or  six  kinds  of  victims
were  accepted.  (1)  These  were  beeves,  sheep,  goats,  turtle-doves,  pigeons.  To  these  may
be  added  the  clean  birds,  supposed  to  have  been  sparrows,  which  were  required  in  th«
particular  ceremony  of  the  cleansing  of  the  leper.  (2)  All  these,  excepting  the  last,
were  proper  for  burnt  offerings.  They  are  notable  as  mild,  gentle,  inoffensive,  and  useful
creatures.  They  are  therefore  fittingly  used  as  types  to  describe  the  innocence  and
meekness  of  Jesus  (John  i.  36 ;  Isa.  liii.  7).  (3)  As  Christians  we  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  ferocity  of  the  tiger  or  the  rapacity  of  the  wolf.     If  we  have  the  wisdom


OH.  1.1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  16

of  the  serpent,  it  must  be  associated  with  the  harmlessness  of  the  dove  (see  Matt.  x.  16).
2.  But  what  are  ihe  lessons  conveyed  in  this  variety  ?  (1)  It  evinces  the  insufficiency
of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Law.  If  one  sacrifice  or  one  kind  of  sacrifice  could  really  take
away  sin,  why  repeat  it  or  have  recourse  to  others?  Their  usefulness  therefore  was  in
the  manner  in  which  they  foreshadowed  the  better  Sacrifice.  (2)  By  contrast  it  evinces
the  sufficiency  of  the  Great  Sacrifice  of  the  New  Testament.  No  single  sacrifice  or
\ind  of  sacrifice  could  body  forth  all  that  was  required  in  a  sufficient  Saviour ;  therefore
the  number  and  variety  of  the  types.  But  Jesus  offered  himself  alone  and  once,
because  everything  centred  in  him.  Supplementary  sacrifices  such  as  that  of  the
Mass,  are  blasphemous  impertinences.  (3)  It  further  evinces  the  mercifulness  of
Divine  justice.  Here  was  the  bullock  for  the  rich  man.  Here  was  the  sheep  or  goat
for  the  man  in  moderate  circumstances.  Here  were  the  turtle-doves  or  pigeons  for  the
poor  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).     Here  is  Christ  without  money  and  without  price  for  all.

II.  'I'hebe  are  notable  omissions.  1.  The  placing  of  the  offerer^s  hand  upon  the
head  of  the  victim.  (1)  This  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  ofiering  from  the
herd  (jer.  4).-  Omitted  in  the  description  of  the  offering  from  the  flock.  Also  from
the  offering  from  the  fowls.  It  may  have  been  done  nevertheless.  (2)  It  was  very
expressive  of  the  transfer  of  sin  to  the  victim.  Possibly  Paul  refers  to  this  custom — of
course,  taking  it  in  its  application  to  the  gospel — when  he  speaks  of  the  "  laying  on
of  hands"  as  amongst  the  "first  principles  of  the  doctrine  of  Christ"  (Heb.  vi.  2).
(3)  If  in  any  case  it  was  omitted,  it  would  then  suggest  the  important  truth  that  the
hand  of  God  laid  upon  Christ  the  iniquity  of  us  all  (Isa.  liii.  6,  10).  2.  The  flaying  oj
the  skin.  (1)  This  is  described  in  the  account  of  the  herd,  but  omitted  in  that  of  the
flock  (ver.  6).  It  appears,  nevertheless,  to  have  been  done  also  in  the  latter  case.  (2)
The  skin  is  the  natural  clothing  or  covering  of  the  animal.  If  the  coats  of  skins  with
which  God  clothed  Adam  aud  Eve  in  substitution  for  their  covering  of  fig  leaves  by
which  they  expressed  their  sense  of  shame  for  their  sin,  were  those  of  sacrificed  animals,
then  it  vigorously  sets  forth  the  manner  in  which  we  receive  "  beauty  for  ashes  "  when
invested  with  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  3.  Instead  of  the  "  door  of  the  tabernacle  of
the  congregation  "  which  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  herd,  "  northward  "  is  the
term  used  in  connection  with  the  flock  (comp.  vers.  6,  11),  These  expressions  are
generally  synonymous  (ch.  vii.  2).  Standing  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  con-
gregation, the  worshipper  held  communion  with  God  and  with  the  whole  congregation.
He  stood  at  the  north  side  of  the  altar,  because  that  was  the  place  of  rings  to  which  the
victims  were  fastened  in  order  to  be  slain.  The  hill  of  Calvary  also  was  situate  north-
west of  Jerusalem.  How  humiliating  that  our  communion  with  God  and  his  Chtirch
must  be  through  suffering  and  blood  I

III.  DlPFEBENOBS    ARE    NOTICBABLB  IN  THE   BURNT  8A0BIFI0E  OF  FOWLS.      1.   In    this

case  two  birds  were  brought.  (1)  One,  however,  only  is  offered  as  a  burnt  sacrifice.
The  singular  is  used  in  this  description.  (2)  The  other  was  to  be  used  as  a  sin  offering
(see  ch.  v.  7 ;  xii.  8 ;  xiv.  22).  2.  They  were  cloven  but  not  divided.  (1)  Thig  was  in
accordance  with  the  directions  given  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  10).  (2)  The  cleaving  was
required  for  the  removal  of  the  intestines,  but  the  wings  must  not  be  divided,  for  the
power  for  flight  of  Christ  to  heaven  cannot  be  impaired  (Acts  ii.  24).  (3)  The  head
was  wrung  off,  and  the  blood  wrung  out  by  the  side  of  the  altar.  3.  The  crop  and
feathers  were  cast  into  the  place  of  ashes.  (1)  This  was  during  the  tabernacle  "  by  the
side  of  the  altar  on  the  east  part."  All  the  ashes  went  there  (see  ch.  vi.  10).  (2)  In  the
temple  the  place  of  ashes  was  a  closet  under  the  altar.  In  allusion  to  this  the  souls,
that  is  to  say,  the  bodies,  of  the  martyrs  are  represented  as  under  the  altar,  crying  for
vengeance  upon  their  persecutors  (Rev.  vi.  9 — 11).  Eeflect:  The  poor  man's  pigeons  as
truly  as  the  rich  man's  bullock  was  "  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord  "  (see  Eph.  t.  2  j
klso  1  Pet.  ii.  6).— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1,  2. — God  in  special  manifestation.  Always  and  everywhere  God  hft.
been  revealing  himself.  There  is  no  time  when,  no  place  where,  men  might  not  hart
"seen  him  who  is  invisible."  Nowhere  has  he  left  himself  without  witness  (Acts
xiv.  17).  Always  might  "  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead  have  been  understood  "
(Rom.  1. 20).  But  the  eyes  of  man  were  blinded,  and  his  "  foolish  heart  was  darkened,"
80  that  by  hi«  own  wisdom  he  knew  not  God.    It  is  certain  that  he  would  have


le  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  l  1—17

remained  in  ignorance  but  for  those  special  manifestations  of  which  the  sacred  Scriptures
are  the  record.     The  text  reminds  us  that  these  include —

I.  His  pbculiak  people.  Out  of  the  human  race  God  chose  one  people,  "  the  con-
gregation," "  the  children  of  Israel,"  to  whom  he  would  appear,  by  whom  the  knowledge

of  his  nature  and  will  should  be  retained,  and  through  whom  he  should  be  made  known
to  others.  To  this  congregation  "  were  committed  the  oracles  of  God ; "  and  while  sur-
rounding nations  were  stumbling  in  the  darkness,  Israel  was  walking  in  the  light  of
tlie  Lord,

II.  His  own  house.  "  God  spake  out  of  the  tabernacle,"  etc.  This  his  dwelling-
place  in  Israel  had  just  been  coastructed,  and  there,  in  the  most  holy  place,  he  had
signified  his  presence  by  the  glory-cloud.  That  was  none  other  than  the  house  of
Ood,  his  abode  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation.

III.  His  CHOSEN  MiNisTEB.  "The  Lord  called  unto  Moses."  The  experiences  of
Sinai  had  shown  that  there  was  need  of  mediation  between  the  Majesty  of  heaven  and
the  children  of  earth.  God,  therefore,  chose  to  reveal  his  mind  through  the  one  man
who  was  fittest  for  close  access,  and  who  would  calmly  receive  and  feithfully  announce
his  will — the  courageous,  devoted,  magnanimous  Moses.

IV.  His  pakticdlab  dibbctions.  "  Speak  .  .  .  and  say  ,  .  ."  Then  follow  the
instructions  of  this  book  of  the  Law :  particular  and  precise  regulations,  by  attention
to  which  the  congregation  might  worship  with  acceptance  and  "  live  in  holiness  and
righteousness  before  God."

In  the  dispensation  in  which  we  now  stand  we  have  analogous  special  manifestations.
1.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  now  the  congregation  of  the  Lord,  the  "  Israel  of  God ; "
not  the  members  of  any  visible  organization,  but  all  those  of  every  society  who  love
and  honour  Christ,  "  both  theirs  and  ours."  To  such  "  he  manifests  himself  as  he  does
not  unto  the  world ; "  in  them  his  Holy  Spirit  dwells ;  through  them  he  works  on  the
world  without.  2,  The  Christian  sanctuary  is  now  the  house  of  the  Lord,  the  "  place
of  his  abode."  There  he  makes  his  presence  felt;  there  he  causes  us  to  behold  his
glory,  the  beauties  of  his  character,  the  glories  of  his  grace.  At  the  table  of  the  Lord,
more  especially,  the  risen  Mister  meets  with  his  true  disciples,  the  Divine  Host  with
his  human  friends  and  guests,  to  receive  and  return  their  love,  to  accept  their  vows,
to  impart  his  benediction  and  his  blessing.  3.  The  Christian  ministry  is  now  the
chosen  channel  of  his  communications.  Not  necessarily  those  ordained  with  human
hands ;  these  if  sent  by  God,  but  only  if  sent  of  him ;  and  beside  these,  all  whose  hearts
he  has  touched  (1  Sam.  x.  26),  whose  minds  he  has  filled  with  spiritual  imderstanding
(Col.  i.  9),  and  whose  lips  he  has  opened  (Ps.  li.  15) ;  all  those  on  whose  soul  there  really
rests  the  "burden  of  the  Lord."  4.  The  New  Testament  now  contains  the  Divine
instructions.  These  are  (1)  few  in  number ;  (2)  moral  and  spiritual  rather  than  formal
and  mechanical  in  their  nature ;  (3)  adequate  to  penetrate  to  the  deepest  springs  of  the
soul,  and  to  cover  the  widest  particulars  of  the  life.

It  becomes  us,  in  view  of  these  special  manifestations  of  God  in  Christ,  (a)  to
«ssociate  ourselves  immediately  with  the  recognized  people  of  God ;  (J)  to  seek,  con-
Btuntly  and  sedulously,  his  face  and  favour  and  the  knowledge  of  his  will,  in  his  house ;
(c)  to  hold  ourselves  ready  to  speak  for  him  to  others  or  to  receive  his  message  from
others,  as  his  Spirit  shall  prompt  us  or  them ;  (d)  to  master  and  foster  those  principles
of  righteousness  which  Christ  has  taught  us,  that  we  may  cultivate  our  character
and  regulate  our  lives  according  to  his  holy  wilL — 0.

Vers.  2—11.— The  true  end  of  sacrifice,— entire  consecration  to  God.  We  shall  reach
the  end  for  which  God  introduced  all  that  apparatus  of  Divine  worship  so  elaborately
described  in  this  book  if  we  take  the  following  steps : —

I.  The  sbpaeating  pbbsence  or  sin  in  the  heabt  and  like  of  man.  But  for  the
sin  which  "  separates  between  us  and  our  God "  there  would  have  been  unrestrained
communion  between  man  and  his  Maker  in  every  age  and  land :  no  need  of  mediation,
of  special  arrangements,  of  careful  limitations,  of  means  and  media  of  approach.  Every
line  of  this  chapter,  as  also  of  this  book,  speaks  of  sin — sin  in  the  soul,  sin  in  the  life  sin
on  the  conscience,  sin  as  a  hindrance  in  the  way  of  man.

Ii.  The  effobt  of  man  to  find  a  way  back  to  God.  It  is  impossible  to  forget  that
while  Israel  was  offering  its  sacrifices  as  God  directed,  other  nations  were  bringing


OB.  1.1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  17


their  victims  in  t«ach  ways  as  they  deemed  best.  The  commonness  of  sacrifloe,  its  preva-
lence outside  the  holy  nation,  speaks  eloqueatly  enough  of  man's  conscious  distance  from
God,  and  of  his  desire  and  endeavour  to  fiad  a  way  back  to  his  favour.  "  Wherewith
■hall  I  come  befure  the  Lord  ? "  This  is  the  anxious  t[uestion  of  sin-stricken,  unen-
lightened man.  "  Shall  I  come  with  burnt  offerings  .  .  ,  will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with
thousands  of  rams  ?  "  This  is  bis  suggestion  in  reply.  It  is  affecting  to  think  of  the
multitudes  of  sacrifices  under  every  sky,  as  instances  of  men  "  feeling  after  "  the  mercy
of  an  offended  God,  groping  in  the  dimness  or  the  darkness  towards  reconciliation
and  peace.

III.  The  Divine  provision  fob  man's  eetdbn  and  access  to  himself.  1.  Under  the
old  dispensation.  Man  was  to  bring  to  the  altar  of  God  suitable  offerings ;  such  as  were
within  his  reach ;  the  best  of  the  kind ;  an  unblemished  male.  It  might  be  from  his  herd
(ver.  2),  or  from  his  flock  (ver.  IQ),  or  it  might  be  a  fowl  of  the  air  (ver.  14).  The
priest  was  to  pour  the  blood  round  about  the  altar  (vers.  5,  11),  and  the  carcase  was
to  be  consumed  upon  tlie  altar, — a  whole  burnt  offering  unto  the  Lord.  2.  Under  the
new  dispensation.  Instead  of  "  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats,"  God  has  provided  one
offering  which  suffices  for  all  souls  of  every  land  and  age,  even  his  own  beloved  Son.
This  was  the  "Lamb  of  God"  (1),  absolutely  perfect,  "without  blemish  and  without
spot "  (1  Pet.  i.  19  J  Heb.  ix.  14) ;  (2)  shedding  his  own  blood  (Heb.  ix.  12),  giving  "  hi»
soul  (his  life)  an  offering  for  sin  "  (Isa.  liii.  10) ;  "  putting  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of
himself"  (Heb.  ix.  26) ;  (3)  accepted  of  God ;  "  an  offering  ...  of  a  sweet  savour  unto
the  Lord"  (ver.  17;  Eph.  v.  2).  Through  that  shed  blood  of  "  the  Lamb  that  was
slain  "  for  us  we  have  access  at  all  times,  forgiveness  of  sin,  reconciliation  to  God,  But
not  without

IV.  Personal  bpibitual  participation.  The  offerer  under  the  Law  took  personal  part
in  the  off.  ring :  he  brought  his  victim  to  the  tabernacle  (ver.  10) ;  he  killed  it  with
his  own  hands  (vers.  5,  11) ;  he  also  "  put  his  hands  upon  the  head  "  of  the  animal
(ver.  4).  The  sinner,  under  the  gospel,  does  not  provide  the  sacrifice:  "Christ  our
passover  is  slain  for  us."  But  he  does  take  a  personal  participation :  "  by  faith  he  lays
his  hand  on  that,dear  head  of  his ; "  he  acknowledges  that  he  himself  is  worthy  of
death ;  believes  and  appropriates  to  his  own  need  the  fact  that  Jesus  died  for  his  sin ;
earnestly  desires  that  his  guilt  may  be  transferred  to  the  Lamb  of  God  ;  entreats  that
that  shed  blood  of  his  may  atone  for  and  cover  his  iniquity.

V.  The  end  of  bacrifice, — liNTiBE  personai,  consecration.  The  consumption  of
the  whole  animal  in  the  fire  pictures  the  complete  dedication  of  the  Saviour,  his  absolute
and  entire  consecration  to  the  work  which  the  Father  gave  him  to  do.  It  symbolizes
ours  also.  Accepted  by  God  through  the  atoning  blood  of  the  Lamb,  we  are  to  dedicate
ourselves  to  him.  Our  personal  consecration  1.  Should  follow  upon  and  grow  out  of
our  acceptance  through  a  crucified  Saviour.  2.  Should  be  thorough  and  complete:
including  heart  and  life,  body  and  spirit,  things  sacred  and  things  secular.  3.  Will
then  be  well  pleasing  to  Godj  "an  offering  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord"
(ver.  17).— 0.

Vers.  2 — 17. — Principles  of  spiritval  sacrifice.  All  who  know  God  are  engaged,
frequently,  if  not  continually,  in  sacrificing  unto  him.  Here  are  principles  of  sacrifice
by  which  we  may  be  guided.

I.  That  God  desires  and  demands  the  best  we  can  bring.  If  the  offering  were  of
the  herd,  it  was  to  be  a  *'  male  without  blemish  "  (ver.  3) ;  so  also  if  of  the  flock  (ver.  10).
Not  that  which  was  of  small  account  and  could  be  well  spared,  but  the  worthiest  and
best.  The  bent  for  the  Eighest.  Not  "  that  which  costs  us  nothing  "  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  24)
for  him  who  has  given  us  everything ;  rather  the  costliest  of  our  treasures  for  him  who,
"though  he  was  rich,  for  our  sakes  became  poor."  We  may  well  break  the  rarest
alabaster  for  him  whose  "  body  was  broken  "  for  our  sin ;  may  well  pour  out  the  most
precious  spikenard  for  him  who  poured  out  his  life-blood  for  our  redemption.  "  Worthy
is  the  Lamb  to  receive  riches"  (Bev.  v.  12).  When  we  worship  him,  or  work  for  him,
or  give  to  his  cause,  we  should  bring,  not  our  exhaustion,  but  our  vigour;  not  our
languor,  but  our  energy ;  not  costless  effort,  but  that  which  has  taken  time  and  trouble  to
produce — the  gold  rather  than  the  silver,  the  silver  rather  than  the  pence ;  not  anything
that  will  pass  in  the  sight  of  man,  but  the  very  best  we  can  bring  to  his  presence
LEvmcus.  O


18  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ca  1. 1— 17.

II.  That  God  accepts  thk  best  wb  abb  able  to  bbino.  If  he  could  not  afford  a
biiUock,  the  Hebrew  worshipper  might  bring  a  sheep ;  or  if  that  were  beyond  his  means,
a  turtle-dove  or  pigeon  (vers.  2, 10, 14).  God  accepts  gifts  "according  to  that  a  man
hath,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).  He  who  approved  the  widow's  mites  more  than  the  rich
men's  gold  still  "  sits  over  against  the  treasury,"  and  accepts  what  we  can  bring,  how-
ever humble  it  be,  if  we  bring  with  it  "  the  willing  mind."  In  the  balances  of  heaven
a  conversation  in  a  garret  by  the  bedside  of  a  pauper  may  weigh  more  than  the  greatest
sermon  before  the  noblest  audience.

III.  That  God  requibes  the  full  consent  of  oxje  own  mind.  "  He  shall  offer  it  of
his  own  voluntary  will "  (ver.  3).  The  excellency,  the  beauty,  the  acceptableness  of
our  offering  lies  largely  in  the  hearty  good  will  with  which  we  bring  it.  "  The  Lord
loveth  a  cheerful  giver"  (2  Cor.  ix.  7).     (See  1  Chron.  xxix.  6,  9.)

IV.  That  our  offebino  must  be  made  consciously  unto  the  Loed.  He  shall  offer
it  "before  the  Lord"  (ver.  3);  he  shall  kill  it  "before  the  Lord"  (ver.  11).  When
the  victim  was  slain  the  offerer  was  to  have  in  his  mind  the  presence  of  God,  and  was
to  present  it  consciously  to  him.  Whatever  form  our  sacrifice  may  take — sprayer,
praise,  inquiry  of  the  Lord,  contribution,  exhortation — it  must  be  not  mechanical,  but
spiritual ;  it  must  be  religious ;  it  must  be  rendered  "  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men."

V.  That  God  desires  obedience  in  things  betond  odb  undbestandino.  Doubtle_ss
the  priests  of  the  tabernacle  failed  to  see  the  import  of  many  of  the  Divine  directions.
The  people  also  must  have  been  at  a  loss  to  understand  the  reason  of  many  details  of
the  service  (vers.  6,  8,  11,  15,  17).  But  both  priests  and  people  were  required  to  con-
form under  penalty  of  severe  displeasure.  In  many  things  unintelligible  to  them  do
our  children  and  the  uninstructed  conform,  because  they  rightly  trust  to  those  who  are
older  and  wiser.  There  are  many  things  concerning  which  we  have  all  to  feel  ourselves  to
be  the  little  children  we  really  are  in  the  presence  of  the  heavenly  Father,  and  we  must
do  unquestiouingly  what  he  bids  us.  Let  us  try  strenuously  to  understand,  and  when
we  fail  to  reach  the  Divine  meaning,  trustfully  conform.

VI.  That  there  can  be  no  waste  in  the  fullest  sacrifice  wb  lay  on  his  altab.
In  the  burnt  offering  the  whole  victim  was  consumed ;  no  part  was  saved  for  food.  "  To
what  purpose  is  this  waste  ?  "  is  it  asked  ?  We  reply :  1.  That  the  God  in  whom  we  live
and  whose  we  are  is  worthy  of  everything  we  can  offer  him.  2.  That  we  never  so  truly
realize  the  end  and  reach  the  height  of  our  manhood  as  when  we  are  devoting  ourselves
to  God.  3.  That  we  may  count  on  a  large  and  generous  response  at  his  liberal  hand.
4.  That  we  gain  in  spiritual  profit  far  more  than  we  lose  in  material  reduction.— C.

Ver.  17  (latter  part). — Ood's  pleasure  in  man.    We  believe—

I.  That  God  is  a  being  of  supreme  blessedness.  He  is  the  ever-blessed  God,  the
source  and  fountain  of  all  joy.  He  who  gives  such  boundless  bliss  to  his  creation  must
be  divinely  blessed.    He  could  not  give  what  he  has  not  in  himself.

II.  That  some  part  of  his  joy  he  finds  in  man.  What  constitutes  the  happiness
of  the  Supreme  ?  "  The  Lord  will  rejoice  in  his  works ; "  but  it  is  a  larger  truth  that
"  the  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  his  people  "  (Ps.  cxlix.  4) ;  that "  the  Lord's  portion  is  hia
people  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  9).

III.  That  his  good  pleasure  in  ub  is  in—

1.  Our  complete  but  conscious  consecration  of  ourselves.  The  "offering  made  by
fire"  was  "of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord,"  not  as  typifying  the  annihilation  of
our  self,  absolute  absorption  of  self  in  God  (the  Hindoo  theory),  but  as  expressing
the  offerer's  desire  to  dedicate  himself  and  all  that  he  had  to  God, — voluntary,  conscious
devotion.

2.  Our  self-surrender  to  his  Son  our  Saviour.  That  which,  above  all  else,  God  says
to  us  now  is,  "  1'his  is  my  beloved  Son :  hear  ye  him ; "  and  the  initial,  essential,
decisive  step  for  us  to  take,  in  order  to  give  him  pleasure,  is  to  "  receive,"  to  "  believe
in,"  to  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  Teacher,  Saviour,  Lord,  and  Friend.

3.  Our  conformity  to  his  revealed  will,  by  (1)  reverence  (Ps.  oxlvii.  11) ;  (2)  holy
confidence  in  his  pardoning  love  (Ps.  cxlvii.  11) ;  (3)  patient  endurance  of  wrong  (1  Pet.
ii.  20) ;  (4)  generous  service  of  others  (Phil.  iv.  18 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16). — C.

The  first  part  of  this  book,  which  may  be  called  the  spiritual  statute-book  of  IsimI


OH.  L 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  19

as  the  congregation  of  the  Lord,  is  occupied  with  the  laws  of  sacrifice,  chs.  i. — vii.
The  underlying  fact  is  that  of  sin  as  separation  from  God ;  but  the  book,  as  regulating
the  intercourse  between  the  sinful  people  and  the  holy  object  of  their  worship,  is  itself  a
constituent  part  of  the  gracious  covenant  made  with  Israel.  While  it  deepens  the
sense  of  sin,  it  provides  the  means  of  reconciliation  and  sanctiflcation,  and  therefore  the
laws  prescribed,  while,  as  laws,  restraining  liberty  and  giving  form  to  religious  acts,  at
the  same  time  embody  in  themselves  the  grace  of  Qod  in  the  covenant  relation  between
Jehovah  and  his  people.

Vers.  1 — 17. — Law  of  the  burnt  oferings.  The  object  of  worship,  place,  worshipper,
oilering,  are  all  clearly  set  torth.     The  way  of  obedience  made  plam.

Ver.  1. — "  And  the  Lord  called  unto  Moses,  and  spake  unto  him  out  of  the  tabernacle
of  the  congregation."  This  is  the  foundation  on  which  the  whole  of  positive  religion  is
built  up,  the  Divine  voice  speaking  through  a  mediator,  at  an  anointed  place,  and  in
a  distinct,  authoritative  manner.    Notice —

I.  The  Divine  voice.  "  The  Lord,"  Jehovah,  that  is,  the  God  of  revelation  and
covenant.  1.  The  beginning  of  all  true  religion  is  the  gracious  manifestation  of  Qod.  It
is  a  very  different  spiritual  structure  which  is  built  upon  this  foundation  from  that
which  is  raised  on  men's  own  thoughts.  Compare  the  corruptions  of  traditionary
religions,  heathenism,  with  the  Old  Testament  revelation;  the  vague  and  doubtful
attempts  of  religious  philosophy  to  provide  an  object  of  supreme  reverence.  The  name
Jehovah  betokened  a  progress  in  special  revelation.  Tlie  Elohistic  worship  of  the
earliest  ages,  while  resting,  no  doubt,  on  direct  communications  of  God's  Spirit,  without
which  there  can  be  no  living  intercourse  between  the  creature  and  the  Creator,  was
elementary  in  its  character,  suited  to  the  childhood  of  the  world — God  revealed  first
as  the  God  of  creation,  the  object  of  reverential  obedience  in  the  sphere  of  natural  life
and  the  simplest  laws  of  righteousness.  As  the  relations  of  mankind  to  one  another
grew  more  numerous  and  complicated,  the  idea  of  religion  enlarged ;  the  object  of  wor-
ship was  the  God  of  a  people,  the  God  of  families,  the  God  whose  name  was  distinctly
named,  as  distinctly  as  the  people's,  between  whom  and  a  certain  portion  of  mankind
there  was  a  direct  covenant,  involving  gracious  vouchsafements  on  one  side,  and  faith-
ful service  on  the  other.  This  is  the  connection  between  the  Book  of  Exodus  and  th^t
of  Leviticus,  which  the  very  opening  words  remind  us  is  very  close.  In  the  former
book  we  are  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah.  In  this  we  are  listening  to  his  voice,  a  voice
which  speaks  clearly  and  fully  what  are  the  ordinances  of  his  will.  2.  The  invitation
and  summons.  "  The  Lord  called  unto  Moses."  We  must  notice  here  the  two  elements
of  law  and  grace  combined,  which  is  the  very  essence  of  the  book.  All  the  regulations
of  tbe  Mosaic  economy  were  based  upon  the  fact  that  Jehovah  was  in  close  fellowship
with  his  people.  Just  as  a  made  road  brings  the  points  between  which  it  lies  nearer,
by  opening  the  means  of  intercourse,  so  sacrifices  were  a  token  of  covenant  relation,
and  a  perpetual  call  of  Jehovah  to  his  people  to  approach  him.  The  Lord  called  that
he  might  bestow  his  special  grace  on  those  who  obeyed  his  call.  He  called  with  the
voice  of  command  and  authority,  that  his  people  might  henceforth  know  fully  and
without  possibility  of  mistake  what  they  had  to  do.  So  still  there  is  a  gracious  call  of
the  gospel,  which  invites  freely  and  universally,  but  it  is  at  the  same  time  the  pro-
clamation of  a  new  law  of  righteousness,  as  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  and  in  the
whole  revelation  of  duty  in  the  Christian  Church.    Notice—

II.  The  fact  of  mediation.  "  2%e  Lord  called  unto  Moses,  and  spake  unto  him.''
"  The  Law  was  given  by  Moses."  "  It  was  ordained  by  angels  in  the  hand  of  a  mediator,''
through  the  instrumentality  of  an  appointed  servant,  who  should  be  between  Jehovah
and  his  people.  Moses  united  in  himself  remarkably  the  three  elements  of  the  office —
the  prophetic,  as  echoing  the  voice  of  God ;  the  priestly,  as  t^e  medium  of  offered
service ;  the  kingly,  as  the  legislator  and  ruler,  both  proclaimi  ^  and  administrating
the  Divine  Law.  We  see  also  represented  in  the  case  of  Mof  j  the  union  of  the  two
qualifications  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  office  of  mediator — tfc  personal  merit  and  the
Divine  appointment.  Moses  stood  apart  from  the  people  in  nis  character  and  personal
eminence.  He  was  anointed  to  his  office,  and  manifestly  ''  tvoured  of  God  with  special
communications.  In  all  these  respects  he  is  the  type  of  the  perfect  Mediator.  Jesus
Christ  was  in  himself  able  to  be  between  God  and  man.    His  mediation  is  fact,  history.

III.  The  yAOT  op   mediation  was  based  upon  the  fact  of   covenant,   thk


20  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  [cH.  l  1—17

RELATION   BBT»irEBN   THE   PEOPLE    AND   JbHOVAH,    THE    GoD   OP    REVELATION,    MUTUAL

PLEDGE,  AND  PROMISE.  The  whole  Structure  of  the  ceremonial  law  was  built  up  on
reciprocal  obligation.  Living  intercourse  between  God  and  man  is  the  spiritual  reality
which  binds  together  all  the  details  of  this  book  of  the  Law.  A  development,  there-
fore, of  the  first  and  greatest  commandment,  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"
etc.    The  acoeptableness  of  religious  worship  lies  in  the  fellowship  of  love.

IV.  The  place  op  meeting  between  God  and  man.  "  Out  of  the  tabernacle  of
the  cong legation"  or  "the  tent  of  meeHng."  A  temporary  provision,  aftrrwards  super-
seded by  a  more  peraianent  and  elaborate  structure,  but  in  its  external  features
betokening  the  dispensational  character  of  tlie  Law.  The  central  fact  was  a  gracious
manifestation  of  God,  a  meeting-place  inviting  to  intercourse,  an  appointed  form  of
worship,  the  stepping-stone  to  a  higher  communion.  "  God  dwelleth  not  in  temples
made  with  hands."  The  tabernacle  was  subsequent  to  the  covenant.  The  life  of
fellowship  preceded  the  act  of  fellowship.  The  people  are  God's  before  they  receive
the  Law.  There  are  three  elements  in  the  tabernacle,  representative  of  universal  and
abiding  truth.  1.  The  Lord  speaks  out  of  it.  Positive  revelation  the  foundation  of
positive  religion.  The  soul  waits  upon  God.  Gracious  messages  the  beginning  of
Divine  work  in  and  for  man.  There  were  gropings  of  natural  religion  worth  nothing
in  themselves.  The  Spirit  of  God  calls  the  spirit  of  man  to  a  higher  life.  The  true
faith  rests  on  the  Word,  honours  the  ordinances,  seeks  the  place  where  God  speaks
in  the  most  distinct  and  emphatic  manner.  This  finds  illustration  both  individually
and  in  the  history  of  God's  people.  2.  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  Fe  lowship  an
essential  fact  of  the  religious  life.  Man  a  moral  being,  only  as  he  is  in  society.  As  it  is
the  fruit  of  religion,  so  it  is  the  seed  from  which  springs  the  true  life,  both  of  nations
and  individuals.  The  tabernacle  or  temple  the  centre  of  the  Hebrew  national  exist-
ence. The  tent  of  meeting  also  the  palace-chamber  of  the  Great  King.  Jehovah's
throne  amongst  his  people  the  true  source  of  all  power  and  centre  of  all  authority.
All  places  of  worship,  as  meeting-places  of  the  congregation  or  Church,  witness  to  the
presence  of  Jehovah,  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord,  in  the  midst  of  his  people,  and  to  the
kingdom  of  God  in  the  world.  No  doctrine  of  the  Church  consistent  with  this  fact  of
Jehovah  speaking  out  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  but  that  which  recognizes
the  position  of  all  believers  as  the  same.  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together,"
etc.  3.  The  place  of  meeting  was  both  the  centre  to  which  offerings  were  brought  and
from  which  blessings  were  taken.  A  true  religion  must  embrace  both  the  passive  and
the  active  elements — Mind,  heart,  will.  Christianity  did  not  abolish  sacrifice  and
offerings,  lifted  up  the  lower  into  the  higher,  the  local  and  temporary  into  the  universal
and  perpetual.  No  material  edifice,  no  priestly  caste,  no  mere  prescription  of  rites,  can
limit  religious  service.  The  temple  of  the  Jews  was  destroyed,  but  in  place  of  it  we
possess  the  risen  glory  of  Christ,  the  spiritual  presence  of  the  Living  One,  the  communion
of  saints,  the  ceaseless  offering  up  of  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus
Christ.  The  Law  which  was  given  on  the  mount  from  the  lips  of  Jesus  requires  a
higher  righteousness  than  the  righteousness  of  legalists. — R.

Ver.  2. — "  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  and  say  unto  them.  If  any  man  of  you
bring  an  offering  unto  the  Lord,  ye  shall  bring  your  offering  of  the  catUe,  even  if  the
herd,  and  of  the  flock."  Here  is  the  great  fundamental  principle,  as  it  were  the  pre-
amble of  the  law  of  offerings.     Notice —

I.  The  Divine  Law  is  universal.  "  Any  man  of  you."  No  respect  of  persons
with  God.  Same  law  to  rich  and  poor,  wise  and  unwise,  as  to  its  essential  require-
ments. These  private  offerings  represented  personal  religion.  There  may  be  differ-
ences of  official  duty,  but  what  we  bring  to  God  for  ourselves  must  be  without  respect
to  anything  but  the  real  relation  between  our  soul  and  God.

II.  All  offerings  must  be  voluntary.  No  compulsion  with  God  but  the  com-
pulsion of  heart  and  conscience.  True  worship  is  not  a  mere  objective  obedience.
"  If  any  man  bring  an  offeriug."  It  is  brought  by  a  willing  mind,  not  out  of  caprice,
not  to  any  place  or  to  any  God,  but  with  intelligent  acceptance  of  the  will  of  God  as
coincident  with  our  own  will.  When  we  bring  offerings  we  should  know  what  it  Is  in  our
hearts  to  bring,  not  trust  to  the  impulse  of  the  moment  or  the  variations  of  fluctuating
feelings.


OB.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  ai

in.  The  essential  characteristic  op  the  offerixg  is  surrender,  aokowlbdq-
MENT  OF  THE  Lobd's  CLAIM  OVER  US.  "  Out  of  the  herd  or  flock."  That  is,  out  of  our
own  possessions,  valued,  known,  intimately  associated  with  ourselves.  A  religion
which  costs  us  nothing  cannot  be  real.  The  more  of  one's  self  there  is  in  it,  the  more
really  offered  it  is.  The  mistake  of  all  ritualism  is  that  it  leads  us  to  offer  up  another's
offering  instead  of  our  own.  We  observe  the  rite,  we  repeat  by  rote  the  words,  we
listen  to  the  music,  but  is  the  offering  out  of  our  own  herd  or  flock  ?  Jesus  will  have
no  disciple  who  does  not  first  count  the  cost.

IV.  While  the  offering  is  voluntary,  it  is  still  prescribed.  "  Ye  shall  bring
your  offering  of  the  cattle."  An  enlightened  recognition  of  Divine  commandments  is
necessary  to  acceptable  worship.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  hearing  by  the  Word  o(
Ood."  "  Not  every  man  that  saith,  Lord,  Lord ;  .  .  .  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my
Father  which  is  in  heaven  " — ".the  things  that  I  say."  The  liberty  of  the  gospel  is  not
licence.  The  doctrines,  rules,  and  practical  teachings  found  generally  in  the  New
Testament,  though  not  systematized  there,  are  yet  positively  given.  While  we  are
delivered  from  the  bondage  of  a  legal  dispensation,  we  are  yet  under  law  to  Christ.
Will-worship  is  unchristian.  Tendency  of  our  time  is  to  an  in<iividualism  which  is
■dangerous.  The  study  of  the  Old  Testament  in  the  light  of  the  New  a  wholesoma
antidote.    Yet  our  faith  must  always  work  by  love  (vide  Gal.  v.). — R.

Ver.  3. — The  burnt  sacrifice.  The  most  ancient,  that  which  represents  all  others.
Notice —

I.  The  main  principle  represented — Self-surrrndee  in  order  to  self-pre-
servation through  the  covenanted  meroy  of  Jehovah.  In  this  principle  there
are  included  these  points  :  1.  Uecognition  of  the  supreme  claim  of  Ood.  2.  Substitu-
tionary surrender,  a  life  for  a  life,  the  victim  for  the  offerer.  3.  Expiation  of  sin  and
<icceptance,  by  the  restoration  of  the  covenant  relations  between  God  and  man,  proceed-
ing from  Divine  love,  but  resting  on  the  offering  as  representing  a  fulfilment  on  both
sides  of  the  contract — God  forgiving,  man  obeying.  4.  The  union  of  the  two  elements
of  blood  and  fire,  i.e.  of  atonement  and  purification,  the  negative  holiness  and  the
positive  holiness,  justification  and  sanctifi cation,  fulness  of  grace.

II.  Details  OF  THE  sacrifice.  Ver.  3. — "Of  the  herd,  .  .  .  a  male  without  blemish."
God  must  have  our  best.  We  must  make  our  religious  service  a  reality,  putting  into
it  our  strongest  faculties,  best  opportunities,  counting  all  things  but  loss  for  Christ.
Examples  in  the  offerings  of  great  faith.  Nothing  should  be  blemished  in  the  house  of
Ood,  in  private  religion,  in  acts  of  charity.  "  'Ihou  Ood  seest  me."  "  Of  his  own
voluntary  will."  Although  a  law,  it  is  of  no  validity  but  as  an  appeal  to  the  free  heart
of  man.  Anticipation  of  the  gospel,  the  Law  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ.
The  highest  state  of  life  is  when  law  is  absorbed  in  the  activity  of  the  nature ;  we  are
likest  God  when  we  are  by  grace  a  law  unto  ourselves,  "  willing  to  do  his  will."  "  At
the  door  of  the  tahernacle  of  the  congregation  before  the  Lord."  Here  are  the  three
eleraentsof  religion  recognized:  1.  P«W'a/!/.  2.  Fellowship.  3.  Divine  order.  Secret
religion  is  a  contradiction.  The  profession  is  part  of  the  sacrifice.  "  Thy  vows  are
upon  me,  0  Lord."  The  congregation  i3  a  cloud  of  witnesses,  both  sustaining  personal
religion  and  supplying  a  constant  test  of  sincerity.  And  whatever  we  do,  we  do  before
the  Lord.  His  face  we  desire  to  seek,  and  in  the  light  of  his  manifested  favour  we
rejoice.  There  are  special  appointments  which  all  true  worshippers  will  honour:  the
sabbath,  the  Word,  the  congregation,  the  ordered  life  of  the  Christian  Church. — R.

Ver.  4. — "  And  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt  offering;  and  it  shall
be  accepted  for  him  to  make  atonement  for  him."  A  most  significant  commandment,
full  of  gracious  meaning  for  those  who  observed  it.

I.  All  atonement  rests  upon  free  grace.  "  Accepted  for  him  to  make  atont-
ment."  God  sets  forth  the  propitiation,  declares  his  righteousness  for  the  remission  of
sins.  It  shall  be  accepted,  not  because  it  is  in  itself  an  equivalent,  but  because  a
merciful  Father  accepts  it.

II.  The  victim  accepted  proclaims  the  conditional  nature  of  the  grace.
It  is  free  as  being  unmerited,  and  yi  t  it  is  the  expression  of  a  loving  will,  and  cornea
forth  from  an  infinite  nature.  God  forgives  because  he  chooses  to  forgive,  yet  he  for-
Rives  by  the  method  which  he  proclaims.     The  lower  sacrifice  points  to  the  higher.


as  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [cH.  1. 1— 17.


III.  The  offeher's  faith  is  as  tedlt  needful  ab  the  victim  he  brings.  "  With-
out faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God."  The  hand  put  upon  the  head  of  the  victim
signified  the  identification  of  the  offerer  and  offered.  Whether  the  confession  of  sins
was  included  or  not  is  of  little  importance.  Faith  is  self-surrender.  In  all  atonement
there  are  three  parties  represented — the  offender,  the  offended,  the  mediator.  The  hand
of  the  offender  sets  forth  his  whole  activity  and  conscious  self.  His  connection  with
the  victim  is  itself  confession  of  sin  and  acceptance  of  the  covenanted  mercy  of  Jehovah.
We  lay  our  hand  on  the  head  of  Jesus  by  the  spiritual  identification  which  includes
the  application  of  the  mind  to  his  truth,  the  yielding  of  the  heart  to  his  love,  and  the
consecration  of  the  life  to  his  service. — B.

Vers.  5 — 9. — The  hilling,  flaying,  and  consuming  nf  the  victim.  Pull,  throughout,
of  the  idea  of  atonement.  The  three  main  elements  are — I.  The  hlood.  II.  The  fire.
III.  The  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.    Consider —

I.  The  sprinkled  blood.  The  offerer  killed  the  victim.  The  priests  received  the
blood  and  sprinkled  it  upon  the  altar.  The  two  chief  elements  of  atonement  were  thus
united — the  human  and  the  Divine.  Atonement  is  reconciliation  on  the  ground  of  a
restored  covenant  through  sacrifice.  The  blood  shed  represented  the  fact  of  life  for  life
offered  by  faith.  The  blood  sprinkled  by  priests,  represented  the  Divine  offer  of  mercy
through  an  appointed  mediation,  at  the  place  and  time  prescribed  by  God's  gracious
will.  His  will  is  our  sanctification.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  an  outcome  of  Divine
love  received  on  behalf  of  the  sinner  as  being  ofi'ered  by  him  in  believing  surrender  to
God  and  renewal  of  the  covenant.

n.  The  fire.  The  offering  flayed  and  out  in  pieces.  Pire  and  wood  placed  by  the
priests  on  the  altar,  etc.  All  these  details  belong  to  the  one  fact  that  the  offering  is
not  only  presented,  but  consumed,  and  cousumed  in  pieces.  The  idea  is  that  of  the
mingling  together  of  the  will  of  Jehovah  with  the  offered  obedience  of  his  creature.  A
representation  of  the  promised  sanctifying  grace  which  renews  the  whole  man,  gradually,
but  with  comprehensive  application  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  every  part  of  the  being  and
character.  The  ablution  would  convey  the  idea  of  the  washing  of  regeneration.  All
which  is  specially  significant  of  life  and  activity,  "the  inwards  and  the  legs,"  is  wa<hed
in  water  before  placed  on  the  altar.  The  whole  is  then  termed,  "  a  burnt  sacrifice,  an
offering  made  ly  fire."  The  fire  represented  at  the  same  time  purification  and
destruction.  As  applied  in  the  name  of  God,  it  promised  his  bestowment  of  the
supernatural  power  which  should  at  once  destroy  the  evil  and  renew  the  good.  Hence
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  symbolized  by  fire.  We  must  be  wholly  offered,  we
must  be  penetrated  and  pervaded  by  the  Spirit.  The  application  of  the  fire  is  not  only
in  a  first  baptism  of  the  Spirit,  but  in  the  sanctifying  work  of  life,  in  which  oftentimes
consuming  dispensations  are  required,  which,  while  they  bum  up,  do  also  renew  and
recreate.     Are  we  yielding  up  all  to  this  gracious  process  on  God's  altar  ?

III.  The  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.  Pragrant  ascent  of  man's  offering.
Nothing  is  said  of  the  addition  of  incense,  therefore  the  mere  smoke  and  steam  of  the
offering  itself  is  described  as  "  sweet  savour."  The  obedience  of  faith  is  acceptable  to
the  Lord.  Nothing  can  more  decidedly  set  forth  the  freeness  and  fulness  of  pardon
and  reconciliation.  The  Divine  will  is  entirely  reunited  with  the  human  will.  Thus
every  sacrifice  pointed  to  the  end  of  sacrifices.  When  it  is  offered,  when  the  fire  has
done  its  work,  there  is  peace  with  God.  So  the  Lord  Jesus,  anticipating  the  conclusion
of  his  sufferings  and  his  return  to  heaven,  exclaimed,  "The  hour  is  come,  glorify  thy
Son."  "  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth.  I  have  finished  the  work  which  thou
gavest  me  to  do."  Besting  on  that  finished  sacrifice,  we  can  rejoice  in  our  obedience
as  a  sweet  savour  to  the  Lord,  notwithstanding  that  in  itself  it  is  necessarily  consumed
by  the  perfect  righteousness  of  the  Divine  Law.  The  blood  and  fire  of  the  cross  of
Calvary  are  already  upon  the  altar.  We  are  able  in  the  resurrection  and  ascension  to
behold  the  manifest  tokens  of  acceptance.  The  fragrance  of  the  Saviour's  risen  glory
and  eternal  righteousness  are  not  only  before  God,  well  pleasing  to  him,  but  are  also
ours  by  faith,  mingling  with  the  imperfection  of  a  fallen  humanity,  and  lifting  it  up  to
angelic  life  and  spotless  purity  and  joy  in  the  presence  of  God.— B.

Vers.  10—13. — The  offering  from  the  flocks.    Sheep  or  goat.    This  is  a  repetition  o1


CH.  IL  1—16.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITIOUa


23


the  same  law  as  applied  to  the  offering  of  lower  value.  The  great  spiritual  fact  is  thus
set  forth  that  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  His  Law  applies  to  all  sorts  and  con-
ditions of  men,  and  his  grace  is  coextensive  with  his  Law.  The  rich  man's  offering
and  the  poor  man's  substantially  the  same.  The  only  unchangeable  condition  is  the
relation  of  the  offering  to  the  offerer.  It  must  represent  sincere,  heartfelt  surrender  to
God.  It  must  not  be  a  wild  animal  caught  for  the  purpose,  but  that  which,  having
been  associated  with  the  personality  and  life,  represents  both  the  man  himself  and  his
house  and  family.  Hence  in  the  early  Church,  baptism  was  a  consecration  both  of  the
individual  and  of  his  household,  an  offering  of  all  to  the  Lord.  Many  applications  of
this  idea.  All  can  give  something.  Religion  sanctifies  the  world  through  the  sanotifi-
cation  of  souls.     The  Spirit  creates  afresh  the  inner  man,  then  all  follows. — K.

Vers.  14 — 17. — The  offering  of  fowls — turtle-doves  or  young  pigeons.  The  great
abundance  of  these  birds  in  the  East  would  make  the  provisiim  one  which  was  easy
even  for  the  poorest  to  fulfil.  How  gracious  this  appointment!  God  is  no  "hard
master."  He  delights  not  in  mere  burdensome  sacrifice — no  costliness,  suffering,
or  privation  has  merit  with  him.  He  demands  the  willing  obedience  of  the  heart.
He  asks  for  that  which  really  represents  a  surrender  of  self.  All  these  minute  regula-
tions were  simply  intended  to  develop  the  principle  of  voluntary  obedience.  There
was  the  same  subdivision  in  the  case  of  the  bird  as  in  the  case  of  the  quadruped,  to
remind  the  very  poorest  and  humblest  offerer  that  he  must  not  shelter  himself  in  the
insignificance  of  his  offering  from  the  obligations  which  it  represented.  The  applica-
tion of  fire  to  the  second  hird  denoted  the  application  of  the  righteousness  of  God  to
the  life  of  the  offerer,  and  while  it  was  as  a  prescribed  offering  a  promise  of  acceptance,
and  therefore  of  renewing  grace  and  spiritual  restoration,  it  was  on  the  part  of  the
offerer  the  pledge  and  promise  of  an  entire  obedience  in  which  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  all
the  life  and  all  the  possessions,  should  be  consecrated  to  God. — B.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  11.


The  meat  ofpebino.  The  regulation  of
the  burnt  offering  as  a  Levitioal  institution
is  immediately  followed  by  a  similar  regu-
lation of  the  meat  offering,  consisting  of  flour
and  oil,  with  salt  and  frankincense,  and
usually  accompanied  by  the  drink  offering
of  wine  The  sacrifice  of  the  animal  in  the
burnt  offering  had  represented  the  entire
surrender  of  the  offerer's  will  and  life  to
Gtod;  the  presentation  of  the  fruits  and
products  of  the  earth  in  the  meat  offer-
ing represents  man's  gift  of  homage,  where-
by he  acknowledges  God's  sovereignty
over  all  things  and  over  himself,  by  offer-
ing to  him  a  portion  of  that  which  he
had  graciously  bestowed  in  abundance.
David's  words,  "All  things  come  of  thee,
and  of  thine  own  have  we  given  thee
...  all  this  store  cometh  of  thine  hand,
and  IB  all  thine  own "  (1  Ohron.  xxix.  14,
16),  express  the  idea  underlying  the  meat
offering.  In  the  acted  language  of  sym-
bolism, it  not  only  recognized  the  supremacy
of  God,  but  made  a  tender  of  loyal  sub-
mission on  the  part  of  the  offerer ;  as  gifts


of  homage  did  in  the  case  of  Jacob  and
Esau  (Gen.  xxxii.  20),  and  as  they  do  to
this  day  tliroughout  our  Indian  empire,
and  generally  in  the  East.

Ver.  1. — And  when  any  will  offer  a  meat
offering  unto  the  Lord.  The  word  used  in
the  original  for  "  meat  offering  "  (minchah),
means,  like  its  Greek  equivalent,  Sapov,  a
gift  made  by  an  inferior  to  a  superior.  Thus
the  sacrifices  of  Cain  and  Abel  were  their
"minchah"  to  God  (Gen.  iv.  3,  4),  the
present  sent  to  Esau  by  Jacob  was  his
"minchah"  (Gen.  xxxii.  13),  and  the  present
to  Joseph  was  his  brethren's  "minchah"
(Gen.  xliii.  11).  It  is  therefore  equivalent
to  a  gift  of  homage,  which  recognizes  the
superiority  of  him  to  whom  it  is  offered,  and
ceremonially  promises  loyal  obedience  to
him.  Owing  to  its  use  in  this  passage,  it
came  gradually  to  be  confined  in  its  significa-
tion to  vegetable  gifts,— unbloody  sacrifices,
as  they  are  called  sometimes,  in  contrast  to
animal  sacrifices — while  the  word  "  corban  "
came  to  be  used  in  the  wider  accepta-
tion which  once  belonged  to  "minchah."
The  conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  the
Israelite  who  offered  a  meat  offering  were
the  following.  1.  He  must  offer  either  (1)
uncooked  flour,  with  oil,  salt,  and  frankin-
cense, or  (2)  flour  made  into  an  unleavened
cake  (whether  of  tbe  nature  of  biscuit  oi


34


THE  BOOR   OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  n.  \  -16


pancake),  with  oil,  salt,  and  frankincense ;
or  (3)  roasted  grains,  with  oil,  salt,  and
feankincense.  2.  He  must  bring  his  offer-
ing to  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,  and  give
to  the  priests  at  least  as  much  as  one  omer
(that  is,  nearly  a  gallon),  and  not  more  than
sixty-one  omers.  The  priest  receiving  it
from  him  must :  1.  Take  a  handful  of  the
flour,  oil,  and  salt,  or  a  proportionate  part
of  the  cake  (each  omer  generally  made  ten
cakes)  in  place  of  the  flour,  and  burn  it  with
all  the  frankincense  as  a  memorinl  upon  the
altar  of  burnt  oflering.  2.  With  his  brother
priests  he  must  eat  the  remainder  within
the  precincts  of  the  tabernacle.  Here  the
essentials  of  the  sacrifice  are  the  presenta-
tion made  by  the  offerer,  and  the  burning  of
the  memorial  on  the  altur,  followed  by  the
consumption  of  the  remainder  by  the  priests.
The  moral  lesson  taught  to  the  Israelite
completed  that  of  tlie  burnt  ofitring.  As  the
burnt  offering  taught  self-surrender,  so  the
meat  offering  taught  recognition  of  God's
supremacy  and  Bubmission  to  it,  the  first  by
the  surrender  of  a  living  creature  substi-
tuted for  the  offerer,  the  second  by  the  gift
of  a  part  of  the  good  thiufrs  bestowed  by  God
on  man  for  the  preservation  of  life  which,
being  given  back  to  God,  serve  as  a
rt>:ognition  of  his  supremacy.  Spiritually
the  lesson  taught  the  Jew  was  that  of  the
necessity  of  a  loyal  service  to  God ;'  and
mystically  he  may  have  learnt  a  lesson  (1)
as  to  the  force  of  prayer  rising  up  to  heaven
as  the  incense  which  had  to  be  offered
with  each  form  of  the  meat  offering;  (2)
as  to  the  need  of  purity  and  incorruption,
symbolized  by  the  prohibition  of"  leaven
and  honey,  and  the  command  to  use  salt.
The  supplemental  character  of  the  meat
ofi'eriuf;  accounts  for  the  order  in  which  it
here  stands,  not  arbitrarily  interposed  be-
tween two  animal  sacrifices,  but  naturally
following  on  the  burnt  offering,  as  an  ad-
junct to  it  and  the  complement  of  its  teach-
ing. So  close  was  the  union  between  the
two  sacrifices,  that  the  burnt  oflering  was
never  offered  without  the  accompaniment  of
the  meat  offering  (Numb.  xv.  4).  It  has
been  also  maintained  that  the  meat  offering,
like  the  drink  oflering,  was  never  made
independently  of  the  animal  sacrifice ;  but
this  cannot  be  proved.  On  the  contrary,  the
manner  in  which  laws  regulating  it  are  here
laid  down,  lead  to  the  inference  that  it  might
be  offered,  when  any  willed  it,  by  it.-elf.
The  close  connection  between  the  sacrifice
of  an  animal  and  the  offering  of  cakes  of
flour,  and  of  wine,  is  noticeable  in  hcatlien
sacrifices  likewise.  The  very  word,  immo-
lare,  translated  "to  sacrifice,"  is  derived  from
the  mola  or  salt-cake  oftered  with  the  animal ;
and  the  other  word  ordinarily  used  in
Latin  for  "sacrifice,"   that  is,  mactare,  is


derived  from  the  victim  being  enriched
(magis  aucfus)  with  the  libation  of  wine.
Thus  we  see  that  the  offering  of  the  fruits
of  the  earth  was  regarded,  elsewhere  as  well
as  in  Judaea,  as  the  natural  concomitant  of
an  animal  sacrifice,  and  not  only  that,  but
as  so  essential  a  part  of  the  latter  as  to  have
given  a  name  to  the  whole  ceremony,  and
not  only  to  the  whole  ceremony,  but  to  the
specific  act  of  the  slaughter  of  the  victim.
The  thought  of  the  heathen  in  offering  the
fruits  of  the  earth  was  probably  not  much
different  from  that  of  the  Israelites.  It  was
his  gift  to  the  superhuman  power,  to  which
he  thus  acknowledged  that  he  owed  sub-
mission. We  may  further  notice  that  salt
was  enjoined  in  the  heathen  as  in  the  Jewish
sacrifices  as  indiipensable.  Pliny  says  that
the  importance  of  salt  is  seen  especially  m
sacrifices,  none  of  which  are  completed
without  the  salt-cake  ('  Hist.  Nat.,'  31,  7)
The  now  obsolete  use  of  the  word  "  meat "
in  the  sense  of  "  food,"  in  contrast  to  "  flesh,"
creates  some  confusion  of  thought.  "  Fruit
offering  "  would  be  a  better  title,  were  it  not
that  the  signification  of  "  fruit "  is  going
through  a  similar  change  to  that  which
"  meat "  has  undergone.  "  Flour  offering"
might  be  used,  but  an  alteration  in  the
rendering  is  not  imperative.

Yer.  2. — He  shall  take  thereout  his  hand-
ful. This  was  the  task  of  the  priest.  The
handful  that  he  took  and  burnt  upon
the  altar  has  the  technical  and  significative
name  of  the  memorial.  It  acted  as  a
memorial  before  God,  in  the  same  way  as
Cornelius's  prayers  and  alms — "  Thy  prayers
and  thine  alms  are  come  up  for  a  memo-
rial before  God  "  (Acts  x.  4)— being  some-
thing which  should  cause  God  to  think
graciously  of  the  offerer.  The  frankincense  is
not  mixed  with  the  flour  and  the  oil  and
the  salt,  as  a  constituent  element  of  the
offering,  but  is  placed  upon  them,  and  is  all
of  it  burnt  in  "  the  memorial,"  symbolizing
the -need  of  adding  prayer  to  sacrifice,  that
the  latter  may  be  acceptable  to  God.

Ver.  3. — The  remnant  of  the  meatoffering
shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons'.  The  meat
offerings  must  have  gone  far  to  supply  the
priests  with  farinaceous  ftod,  as,  for  every
handful  of  flour  burnt  on  the  altar,  nearly
a  gallon  went  to  the  priests.  They  had  to
eat  it  within  tlie  precincts  of  the  tabernacle,
as  was  the  case  with  all  meats  that  were
most  holy,  viz,  the  minchahs,  the  shew-
bread,  and  the  flesh  of  the  sin  offering  and
of  the  trespass  offering  (ch.  x.  12).  Other
meats  assigned  to  the  priests  might  be  eaten
in  any  clean  place  (ch.  x.  14).  The  priests'
own  meat  offerings  were  wholly  burnt  'ch.
vi.  23).

Vers.  4—11. — The  second  form  of  meat
offering,  when  the  flour  and  oil  were  made  up


CH.  IL  I — 16.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVI'l'ICUS.


25


into  four  varietiea  of  cakes.  The  ritual  of
offering  is  not  different  from  that  of  the  first
form.  The,  frankincense  is  not  mentioned,
but  doubtless  is  understood.  The  rabbini-
cal rule,  that  meat  offerings,  when  follow-
ing upon  burnt  offerings  or  peace  offerings,
had  no  frankincense  burnt  with  them,  rests
on  no  solid  foundation.

Vers.  11, 12. — Ye  shall  bum  no  leaven  nor
any  honey,  in  any  offering  of  the  Lord  made
by  fire.  Leaven  and  honey  are  not  forbidden
to  be  offered  to  the  Lord ;  on  the  contrary,
in  the  next  verse  they  are  commanded  to  be
offered.  The  prohibition  only  extends  to
their  being  burnt  on  the  altar,  owing,  no
doubt,  to  the  etliect  of  fire  upon  them  in
making  them  swell  and  froth,  thus  creating
a  repulsive  appearance  which,  as  we  shall
see,  throughout  the  Mosaic  legislation,  repre-
sents moral  evil.  The  firslfruits  of  honey
are  to  be  offered  (cf.  Exod.  xxii.  29),  and
leaven  is  to  be  used  in  the  two  wave  loaves
offered  at  the  Feast  of  Pentecost  as  first-
fruits  (ch.  xxiii.  17).  The  words  trans-
lated As  for  the  oblation  of  the  firstfruits,  ye
shall  offer  them  unto  the  Lord,  should  be
rendered  j48  an  vhlat.'on  of  firstfruits  ye
thall  offer  them  (tliut  is,  leaven  and  honey).


hut  they  shall  not  be  iurnt  on  the  altar.
The  mark  in  A.  V.  denoting  a  new  paragraph
at  the  beginning  of  ver.  12,  should  be  re-
moved.

Ver.  13. — Every  oblation  of  thy  meat  offer-
ing shalt  thou  season  with  salt,  Salt  is
commanded  as  symbolizing  in  things  spiri-
tual, because  preserving  in  things  physical,
incorruplion  (cf.  Matt.  v.  13;  Mark  ix.  49;
Luke  xiv.  34;  Col.  iv.  6).  It  is  an  emblem  of
an  established  and  enduring  covenant,  such
as  God's  covenant  with  his  people,  which  is
never  to  wax  old  and  be  destroyed,  and  it  is
therefore  termed  the  salt  of  the  covenant  of
thy  God.  Hence  "  a  covenant  of  salt "  came
to  mean  a  covenant  that  should  not  be
broken  (Numb,  xviii.  19 ;  2  Chron.  xiii.  5).
The  use  of  salt  is  not  confined  to  the  meat
offering.  Wi  h  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt
offer  salt.  Accordingly  we  find  in  Ezek.
xliii.  24,  "  The  priest  shall  cast  salt  upon
them,  and  they  shall  offer  them  up  for  a
burnt  offering."

Vers.  14^16, — The  third  form  of  meat
offering,  parched  grains  of  corn,  with  oil,
salt,  and  frankincense.  The  mark  of  a  new
paragraph  should  be  transferred  from  ver.
12  to  the  beginning  of  ver.  14


EOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 16. — Tlie  meat  offering.  It  consisted  of  a  gift  to  God  of  the  prndocte  of  the
earth  most  needed  for  the  support  of  life — flour  and  oil,  to  which  were  added  salt  and
frankincense,  and  it  was  generally  accompanied  by  the  drink  offering  of  wine.  It  was
offered  to  God  in  token  of  the  recognition  of  bis  almighty  power  which  gave  the  corn,
the,  olive,  and  the  vine,  and  of.  the  submission  of  the  creature  to  him,  the  merciful
Creator.

I.  It  wab  a  gift  op  homage.  As  such,  it  had  a  meaning  well  defined  and  well
understood  in  the  East,  that  meaning  being  an  acknowled-'raent  of  the  sovereignty  of
God,  and  a  promise  of  loyal  obedience  on  the  part  of  the  offerer.

II.  ScBiPTUBAL  EXAMPLES  OF  THE  GIFT  OF  HOMAGE.  1.  The  Sacrifices  of  Cajn  and
Abel.  Whether  the  sacrifioe  was  of  the  fruits  of  the  ground  or  of  the  flock  made  no
difference.  Bach  was  the  "minchah,"  or  "gift,"  of  the  otTerer,  acknowledging  God
as  his  God — one,  however,  offered  loyally,  the  other  hypocritically  (Gen.  iv.  3,  4).  2,
The  present  sent  to  Esau  by  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii. ;  xxxiii.).  Jacob  had  sent  a  humble
message  to  his  brother  (Gen.  xxxii.  3),  but  this  was  not  enough,  "  The  messengers
returned  to  Jacob,  saying,  We  came  to  thy  brother  Esau,  and  also  he  cometh  to  meet
thee,  and  four  bundled  men  with  him "  (Gen.  xxxii.  6).  Then  Jacob,  terror-stricken,
sent  his  gift  of  homage  (Gen.  xxxii.  13),  which  symbolically  acknowledged  Esau  as  his
suzerain  lord.  Esau,  by  accepting  it  (Jacob  "  urged  him  and  he  took  it"),  bound  him-
self to  give  protection  to  his  brother  as  to  an  inferior,  and  offered  to  leave  some  of  his
soldiers  with  him  for  the  purpose  (Gen.  xxxiii.  15).  3.  The  present  carried  by  Jacob's
sons  to  Joseph  when  they  went  down  into  Egypt  (Gen.  xliii.  11).  4.  The  present
without  which  Saul  felt  that  he  could  not  appear  before  Samuel  (1  Sam.  ix.  7).  5.
The  gifts  presented  to  the  young  Child  by  the  Wise  Men  of  the  East  (Matt.  ii.  11).

III.  Examples  of  the  gift  of  homage  in  the  present  day.  1.  At  an  Indian
durbar,  every  one  of  the  dependent  princes  brings  his  present,  and  offers  it  to  the
representative  of  the  Empress  of  India.  2.  Presents  are  always  brought  by  natives  of
India  to  British.  oEfioials  set  over  them,  when  they  have  a  request  to  make,  and
ceremonially  accepted  by  the  latter  by  a  touch  of  the  hand.    3.  In  the  Abysainian  war


29  THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch/ii.1— 16.

a  present  of  a  thousand  oxen  and  five  hundred  sheep  was  sent  by  King  Theodore  of
Abyssinia  to  Lord  Napier  of  Magdala,  in  token  of  submission  at  the  last  moment,  and
rejected  by  the  English  general.  Had  he  accepted  it,  he  would  have  been  boui/d  to
give  the  king  protection.

IV.  Lessons  to  us  trom  the  meat  offbrino.  1.  To  give  to  God  of  the  worldly
goods  which  God  has  given  to  us  (1)  freely,  (2)  cheerfully,  (3)  loyally.  Our  motive
must  not  be  self-"ostentation,  nor  the  praise  of  men,  nor  our  own  gratification.  By  our
offering  to  God  we  must  recognize  God's  claims  over  us,  and  openly  profess  our  loving
submission  to  them.  This  throws  a  new  light  on  the  practice  of  almsgiving  in  the
weekly  offertory  of  the  Church.  2.  To  give  a  hearty  and  loyal  service  to  God  in  other
respects  besides  almsgiving,  such  as  obedience  to  his  commandments,  doing  his  will
on  earth.

V.  The  gift  of  homage  calls  forth  a  requiting  oift.  Esau  gave  protection  in
return  for  cattle.  Joseph  gave  sacks  of  corn  in  return  for  "  a  little  balm  and  a  little
honey,  spices  and  myrrh,  nuts  and  almonds."  The  representative  of  the  Crown  ol
England  gives  back  to  each  prince  at  a  durbar  a  present  greater  than  he  has  received.
So  we  give  to  God  repentance,  and  receive  back  from  him  forgiveness ;  we  give  faith,
and  receive  grace ;  we  give  obedience,  and  receive  righteousness ;  we  give  thanksgiving,
and  receive  enduring  favour ;  we  give,  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  the
"  creatures  of  bread  and  wine,"  and  we  receive  back  "  the  strengthening  and  refreshing
of  our  souls  by  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ."

Ver.  13. — Salt  was  to  be  used  with  all  the  sacrifices,  Cf.  Ezek.  xliii.  24 ;  Mark
ix.  49.

I.  What  it  recalled  to  the  mind  op  the  offerer.  The  eating  of  bread  and  salt
together  being  the  ceremony  which  finally  ratified  an  agreement  or  covenant  (as  it  still
is  in  Arabia),  salt  was  associated  in  the  mind  of  the  Israelite  with  the  thought  of  a
firmly  established  covenant.  Each  time,  therefore,  that  the  priest  strewed  the  salt  on
the  offering  there  would  have  been  a  reminder  to  all  concerned  of  the  peculiar  blessing
enjoyed  by  the  nation  and  all  members  of  it,  of  being  in  covenant  with  God,  without
which  they  would  not  have  been  in  a  state  to  offer  acceptable  sacrifices  at  all.

II.  What  it  symbolized.  The  effect  of  salt  being  to  preserve  from  corruption,
its  being  sprinkled  on  the  sacrifice  taught  the  offerer  the  necessity  of  purity  and  con-
stancy in  his  devotion  of  himself  to  God.

III.  The  symbol  taken  up  and  applied  in  the  New  Testament.  1.  The  Christian's
speech  is  not  to  be  corrupting,  but  edifying.  "  Let  your  speech  be  always  seasoned  with
salt,  that  ye  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  every  man  "  (Col.  iv.  6).  "  Let  no
corrupt  communication  proceed  out  of  your  mouth,  but  that  which  is  good  for  the  use
of  edifying,  that  it  may  minister  grace  unto  the  hearers"  (Eph.  iv.  29).  2.  Christian
men  are  to  be  salted  with  fire,  as  the  sacrifices  are  salted  with  salt  (Mark  ix.  49),  and
the  life  of  the  collective  body  of  Christians,  the  Church,  is  to  be,  in  its  effects  upon  the
world,  as  salt.  "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth  "  (Matt.  v.  13).  "  Have  salt  in  your-
selves "  (Mark  ix.  50).  Men  influenced  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  having  been  themselves
salted  with  fire,  have  now  become  the  salt  which  saves  the  world  from  perishing  in  its
own  corruption.

IV.  The  salt  may  lose  its  savouk  (Matt.  v.  13;  Mark  ix.  50;  Luke  xiv.  34).
This  is  the  case  when  "  doctrine  "  being  no  longer  characterized  by  "  uncorruptness,
gravity,  sincerity ''  (Titus  ii.  7),  religion  becomes  changed  into  superstition,  thencefor-
ward pebasing  instead  of  elevating  mankind  ;  or  when  it  stirs  men  to  acts  of  fanaticism,
or  rebellion,  or  cruelty  ;  or  wlieu  the  spiritual  life  becomes  so  dead  within  it  that  it  abets
instead  of  counteracting  the  wickedness  of  the  world.

V.  Salt  symbolizes  permanency  as  well  as  purity.  Our  love  for  Christ  must  be,
St.  Paul  teaches  us  (Eph.  vi.  24),  a  love  "  in  sincerity,"  or  rather,  as  the  word  should
be  translated,  "  in  incorruption,"  that  is,  an  abiiiing  love,  without  human  caprice  or
changeableness ;  and  our  obedience  to  God  must  be  constant,  without  breaks  in  its  even
course,  and  lasting  to  the  end  of  life.  "  Because  iniquity  shall  abound,  the  love  of
many  shall  wax  cold.  But  he  that  shall  endure  unto  the  end,  the  same  shall  be  saved"
(Matt.  xxiv.  12,  13).  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of
life  "  (llev.  ii.  10>


CH.  II.  I— 16.1  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

ConsteraUd  li/e-worJe,  at  hrought  out  in  the  meat  offering.  Cb.  li.  1—11 ;  cf.  John
iv.  84 ;  Acts  x,  4 ;  Phil.  iv.  18 ;  John  vi.  27.  The  idea  prominently  presented  in  the
burnt  offering  is,  we  have  seen,  personal  consecration,  on  the  ground  of  expiation  and
acceptance  through  a  substitute.  In  the  meat  offering,  to  which  we  now  address
ourselves,  we  find  the  further  and  supplementary  idea  of  consecrated  life-work.
For  the  fine  flour  presented  was  the  product  of  labour,  the  actual  outcome  of  the
consecrated  person,  and  consequently  a  beautiful  representative  of  that  whole  life-work
which  results  from  a  person  consciously  consecrated.  Moreover,  as  in  the  case  of  the
burnt  offering  there  was  a  daily  celebration,  so  in  the  case  of  this  meat  offering  there
was  a  perpetual  dedication  in  the  shew-bread.  What  we  have  in  this  chapter,  therefore,
is  a  voluntary  dedication  on  the  part  of  an  individual,  corresponding  to  the  perpetual
dedication  on  the  part  of  the  people.  The  covenant  people  are  to  realize  the  idea  of
consecration  in  their  whole  lile-work.  Lange  has  noticed  that  here  it  is  the  soul  (b'w)
which  is  said  to  present  the  meat  offering,  something  more  spiritual,  as  an  act,  than
the  presentation  of  the  burnt  offering  by  the  man  (P1^).  We  assume,  then,  that  the
leading  thought  of  this  meat  offering  is  consecrated  life-work,  such  as  was  brought
out  in  all  its  perfection  when  our  Lord  declared,  "My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of
him  that  sent  me,  and  to  finish  his  work  "  (John  iv.  34).

I.  Work  done  foe  God  should  be  the  best  of  its  kind.  The  meat  offering,
whether  prepared  in  a  sumptuous  oven  (iwri)  such  as  would  be  found  with  the
wealthy,  or  baken  in  a  pan  (nan?)  such  as  middle-class  people  would  employ,  or
seethed  in  a  common  dish  (na'n'jD)  the  utensil  of  the  poor, — was  always  to  be  of  fine
flour  (iJd),  that  is,  flour  separated  from  the  bran.  It  matters  not  what  our  station  in
life  may  be,  we  may  still  present  to  God  a  thorough  piece  of  work.  "  Whatsoever  thy
hand  findeth  to  do,  do  it  with  thy  might"  (Eccles.  ix.  10)  is  an  exhortation  applicable
to  all.  The  microscopic  thoroughness  of  God's  work  in  nature,  which  leads  him  to  clothe
even  the  grass,  which  i?  to-morrow  to  be  cast  into  the  oven,  with  more  glory  than
Solomon  (Matt.  vi.  28 — 30),  is  surely  fitted  to  stimulate  every  consecrated  person  to
the  most  painstaking  work.

And  here  we  are  led  of  necessity  to  the  life-work  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  embodying
this  idea  perfectly.  How  thoroughly  he  did  everything !  His  life  was  an  exquisite
piece  of  moral  mosaic.  Every  detail  may  be  subjected  to  the  most  microscopic
criticism,  only  to  reveal  its  marvellous  and  matchless  beauty.

II.  Work  done  fob  God  should  be  permeated  by  his  Spirit  and  obace.  The
fine  flour,  be  it  ever  so  pure,  would  not  be  accepted  dry ;  it  required  oil  to  make  it
lakeaUe.  Oil  has  been  from  time  immemorial  the  symbol  of  Divine  unction,  in  other
words,  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  gracious  operation.  Hence  we  infer  that  work  done  for  God
must  be  done  in  co-opeiation  with  the  Spirit.  It  is  when  we  realize  that  we  are  fellow-
workers  with  God,  that  he  is  our  Partner,  that  he  is  working  in  lis  and  by  us,  and
when,  in  consequence,  we  become  spiritually  minded,  walking  in  the  Spirit,  living
in  the  Spirit, — it  is  then  that  our  work  becomes  a  spiritual  thing.

And  -here,  again,  would  we  direct  attention  to  the  li.e-work  of  Christ,  as
spiritually  perfect.  The  gift  of  the  Spirit  at  his  baptism,  the  descending  dove,  an
organic  whole  (Luke  iii.  22),  signalizes  the  complete  spirituality  of  Jesus.  He  was
"  filled  with  the  Spirit,"  it  was  "  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit "  he  did  all  his  work
Herein  he  is  our  perfect  Example.

III.  Work  can  only  be  done  for  God  in  a  prayerful  spirit.  This  follows
naturally  from  what  has  been  already  stated,  but  it  requires  to  be  emphasized  in  view
of  the  frankincense  which  had  in  every  case  to  accompany  the  meat  offering.  This  is
admittedly  the  symbol  of  devotion  (of.  Kalisch,  in  loco).  A  life-work,  to  be  consecrated,
must  be  steeped  in  prayer ;  its  Godward  object  must  be  kept  constantly  in  view,  and
stated  and  ejaculatory  prayer  must  envelop  it  like  a  cloud  of  incense.

It  is,  again,  worth  while  to  notice  how  the  perfect  life-work  of  Christ  was  pervaded
by  prayer.  If  any  one  since  the  world  began  had  a  right  to  excuse  himself  from  the
formality  of  prayer  in  consequence  of  his  internal  slate  of  illumination,  it  was  Jesus


28  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  n.  1— 16

OhriBt.  And  yet  yte  may  ufely  say  that  his  was  the  most  prayerful  life  ever  spent  on
earth.  As  Dr.  Guthrie  once  said,  "  TTie  sun  as  it  sank  in  the  western  sea  often  left
him,  and  as  it  rose  behind  the  hills  of  Moab  returned  to  find  him,  on  his  knees."  We
need  not  wonder  why  he  spent  whole  nights  in  supplication,  for  he  was  bringing  every
detail  of  his  work  into  Divine  review  in  the  exercise  of  prayer.  There  is  consequently
a  most  significant  appeal  issuing  out  of  his  holy  life,  to  work  prayerfully  at  all  times
if  we  would  work  for  God.

IV.  WoBK  FOB  God  must  be  divorced  fbom  malice  and  fbom  passion,  and
DONE  in  calm  pubity  AND  STBENGTH.  Much  of  the  World's  work  has  malice  and
jiassion  for  its  sources.  These  motives  seem  to  be  symbolized  by  the  leaven  and  honey,
which  were  forbidden  as  elements  in  the  meat  ofiering.  Care  should  be  taken  in  work
for  God  that  we  do  not  impart  into  it  worldly  and  selfish  motives.  Such  are  sure
to  vitiate  the  whole  effort.  The  Lord  with  whom  we  have  to  do  looks  upon  the  heart,
and  weighs  the  motives  along  with  the  work.

What  a  commentary,  a.'ain,  was  the  perfect  life  of  Jesus  upon  this!  Malice  and
passion  never  mixed  with  his  pure  motives.  He  sought  not  his  own  will,  nor  did
he  speak  his  own  words,  but  calmly  kept  the  Father's  will  and  glory  before  him,
all  through.

V.  Work  foe  God  should  be  committed  to  his  pkeserving  care.  For  it  is  to
be  feared  we  often  forget  to  season  our  sacrifices  with  salt.  We  work  for  God-  in  a
consecrated  spirit,  but  we  do  not  universally  commit  our  work  to  his  preserving  grace,
and  expect  its  permanency  and  purity.  Work  for  God  should  endure.  It  is  our  own
fault  if  it  do  not.

Our  blessed  Lord  committed  his  Work  to  the  preserving  care  of  the  Father.  He  was,
if  we  may  judge  from  Isa.  xlix.  4,  as  well  as  from  the  Gosppj,  sometimes  discouraged!
yet  when  constrained  to  say,  "  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  I  have  spent  my  strength  for
nought,  and  in  vain,"  he  could  add,  "  Yet  surely  my  judgment  is  with  the  Lord,  and
my  work  with  my  God."

VI.  WoBK    DONE     FOB    GoD    18     SURE    TO     BENEFIT     OUB    FELLOW-MEN.      The    meat

offering  was  only  partially  burnt  on  the  altar— a  handful,  containing,  however,  all  the
frankincense,  was  placed  in  the  sacred  fire,  and  thus  accepted ;  the  rest  became  the
property  of  the  priest.  How  beautifully  this  indicated  the  truth  that  when  one  tries  to
please  Gud,  his  fellow-men,  and  especially  those  of  the  household  of  faith,  are  sure  to
participate  in  the  blessing  I  The  monastic  idea  was  an  imperfect  one,  suggesting  the
possibility  of  devotion  to  God  and  indifference  to  man  coexisting  in  the  same  breast.
We  deceive  ourselves  so  long  as  we  suppose  so.

Our  Master  went  about  doing  good ;  he  was  useful  as  well  as  holy ;  and  so  shall  all
his  followers  find  themselves,  if  their  consecrated  life-work  is  moulded  according  to  the
pattern  he  has  shown  us.  Faithfulness  in  the  first  table  of  the  Law  secures  faithfulness
in  the  second. — E.  M.  E.

Ahont  honouring  Ood  with  our  firsffruits.  Ch.  ii.  12—16 ;  of.  Prov.  iii.  9
1  Cor.  XV.  23;  Jas.  i.  18.  This  arrangement  about  the  firstfruits,  though  appended  to
the  meat  offering,  demands  a  special  notice.  The  meat  offering,  we  have  seen  affirms
the  peneral  pimciple  that  our  life-work  should  be  dedicated  to  God.  But  here  in  the
firstfnuts  we  have  a  special  portion  which  is  to  be  regarded  as  too  sacred  for  any  but
Divme  use.     This  leads  us  directly  to  affirm —

I.  ^VHILE   God   has   a    bight   to   all,    he   claims   a   special   bight   to   THE   FIRST-

FBDITS  OF  ALL  OUR  INCBEA8B.  The  danger  is  in  losing  sight  of  the  special  claim  in
assertmg  the  general  principle.  For  instance,  we  must  not  deny  God  a  si  ecial  claim  upon
the  first  day  of  the  week,  because  we  acquiesce  in  the  general  principle  that  he  has  a
right  to  all  our  time.  Again,  we  must  not  withhold  our  tithes,  a  certain  proportion
of  our  substance,  through  an  easy-going  statement  that  he  has  a  right  to  aU  our
substance.     We  must  condescend  to  particulars.

II.  The  dedioa"ion  op  the  firstfbuits  extended  to  animals  as  well  as  to  the
VEGETABLE  KINGDOM.  The  dedication  of  the  firstborn  of  man  and  beast  is  manifestly
part  and  parcel  of  the  same  principle  (Exod.  xiii.  1—1 6).  TTiis  leads  up  to  God's  right
to  the  Iirstboin  of  the  human  race,  to  him  of  whom  the  Father  said. «'  I  will  make  him


CH.1I.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OF   LEVITICUfci,  29

my  firstborn,  higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth"  (Ps.  Izxzix.  27).  Jesus  is  the
Pirstboru  of  humanity,  the  flower  and  flrstfruits  of  the  race.  Hence  we  find  tie
expression  used  regarding  the  risen  Saviour,  "  3ut  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,
and  become  the  flrstfruits  of  them  that  slept "  (1  Cor.  xv.  23).  He  is  also  called  "  the
flrstborn  from  the  dead"  (Col.  i.  18).  Of  him,  therefore,  pre-eminently  was  the
dedisation  of  the  flrstfruits  typical.

If  God  has  a  right  to  the  flrstfruits  of  the  life-work  of  the  human  race,  he  receives
them  in  the  perfectly  holy  life  of  Jesus  Christ.  So  that,  as  we  found  the  meat  offering
pointing  to  this,  so  do  we  flnd  this  arrangement  about  the  flrstfruits.

III.  God  has  also  a  kibht  to  sbbviob,  even  though  it  may  not  be  pbefbct.
This  seems  to  be  the  principle  underlying  the  "  oblation  of  the  flrstfruits."  This,  as  we
learn  from  ch.  xxiii.  15 — 21,  was  presented  at  Pentecost,  and  consisted  of  two  tenth-
deals  of  flour  baked  with  leaven.  Such  an  arrangement  points  to  the  possibility  of
imperfection  in  serving  God,  which  was  met  by  the  sin  offering  accompanying  it.  If,
then,  the  flrstfruits  at  the  Passover,  presented  with  oil  and  frankincense,  typifled  Christ
the  Flrstfruits  iu  all  his  perfection ;  the  oblation  at  Pentecost  typified  believers.  Gentiles
and  Jews,  who  are  trying,  though  imperfectly,  to  realize  a  consecrated  life-work.  God
does  not  reject  the  labours  of  his  people,  even  though  they  are  very  far  from  perfect.
He  has  provided  a  sin  offering  to  meet  the  imperfections  of  the  case  and  render  al  I
acceptable  to  him.'

IV.  The  dedioatioh  of  the  kiestfruits  was  the  expression  not  only  or
THANKSGIVING  BUT  ALSO  OF  FAITH.  God's  rights  flrst,  even  before  man's  need  hap
been  met.  It  was  seeking  God's  kingdom  flrst,  in  the  assurance  that  all  the  needful
things  shall  be  added  (Matt.  vi.  33).  It  is  most  important  that  we  should  always  act
in  this  trustful  spirit.  This  faith  is,  in  fact,  a  kind  of  flrsttruits  of  the  spiritual  life
which  the  Lord  expects,  and  in  rendering  it  to  him  we  experience  wondrous  comfort
and  blessing. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Mediate  and  immediate  presentation.  The  abrogation  by  Christianity
of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  Judaism  does  not  prevent  the  necessity  nor  dispel  the
advantages  of  becoming  acquainted  with  the  laws  by  wLich  the  ancient  sacrifices  were
regulated.  The  mind  of  God  may  be  ascertained  in  the  precepts  delivered  in  olden  days,
and  underlying  principles  recognized  that  hold  good  in  every  age.  '1  he  very  fact  that
truth  has  thus  to  be  searched  for,  and  by  patient  induction  applied  to  present  conditions,
should  prove  an  incitement  rather  than  a  hindrance  to  investigation.  Freeing  the  kernel
from  its  husk,  grasping  the  essence  and  neglecting  the  accidents,  preferring  the  matter
to  the  form,  we  shall  behold  in  the  Law  prophecies  of  the  gospel,  and  admit  the  likeness
that  proclaims  both  to  have  proceeded  from  the  same  God.

I.  A  DISTINCTION  18  MADE  BETWEEN  OFFERINGS  ACCEPTED  BY  GoD  DIRECTLY,  AND
THOSE   PRESENTED   TO   HIM    INDIRECTLY   FOR    THE   USE     OF    HIS     APPOINTED     SERVANTS.

'  The  flour  being  brought  to  the  priests,  a  handful  was  taken,  and  with  frankincense
was  burnt  upon  the  altar,  rising  to  heaven  in  the  form  of  smoke  and  perfume.  The
remainder  of  the  flour  was  for  the  consumption  of  the  priests.  This  distinction  is
applicable  to  many  Christian  oflerings.  The  money  given  for  the  erection  or  support
of  a  place  of  prayer,  the  surrender  of  time  and  thought  for  public  worship,  or  for
evangelistic  work,  the  acknowledgment  of  Jesus  Christ  by  baptism  and  by  partaking
of  the  Lordo  oupper,  the  devotion  of  our  strength  and  influence  to  God's  service, — these
may  be  considered  as  gifts  presented  straight  to  God  himself.  They  are  laid  upon  the
altar,  enwrapped  iu  the  flre  of  holy  love,  perfumed  with  prayer,  and  are  consumed  with
the  zeal  of  God's  house.  But  there  are  other  oblations  which  must  be  regarded  in  the
light  of  mediate  presentations  to  God,  such  as,  supporting  the  ministry  at  home  and
missionaries  abroad,  ministering  to  the  need  of  the  aged  and  feeble,  and  giving  the
cup  of  water  to  the  disciples  of  Christ.  This  distinction  is  not  meant  to  glorify
the  one  class  in  comparison  with  the  other,  but  to  clarify  our  views,  and  to  lead
to  the  inquiry  whether  we  are  doing  all  we  can  in  both  directions.  There  is  an
idea  in  many  minds  that  if  the  works  of  benevolence  and  charity  be  performed,  the
other  duties  of  gathering  together  in  the  solemn  assembly  and  of  avowal  of  Attach-

•  Of.  Lowe'*  '  Annual  Feasts  of  the  Jews,'  pp.  22 — 45.


30  THE   BOOK  OF  LKVITICUS.  L°a.  u.  1—16.

ment  to  Christ  are  of  little  importance.  The  burning  of  a  portion  of  the  offering
upon  the  altar  rebukes  such  a  cunception.  And  similarly  we  learn  tliat  the  punctual
attendance  upon  the  means  of  grace,  and  the  regular  offering  of  praise  and  prayer,
must  not  exclude  the  exercise  of  hospitality  and  sympathy.

II.  Looking  at  these  two  classes  separately,  we  remark,  respecting  the  bestowment
of  the  "  remnant "  upon  the  priests,  that  offbrinos  to  God  must  be  presented  in
THEIR  ENTIRETY.  All  the  flour  brought  was  considered  "most  holy,"  and  could
not  be  employed  thereafter  except  for  the  benefit  of  "  sacred  "  persons.  A  man  was
at  liberty  to  offer  or  withhold,  but  once  having  vowed,  he  could  not  withdraw  even
a  portion  of  his  present.  God  will  not  be  satisfied  with  a  share  of  a  man's  heart.
If  it  be  given  at  all,  it  must  be  the  whole  heart.  And  once  having  engaged  our-
selves to  be  his,  there  can  be  no  revocation  of  faculty,  affeclion  or  time.  To  look
back  after  taking  hold  of  the  plough  is  to  mar  religious  dedication.  The  mistake
of  Ananias  was  in  pretending  to  give  the  full  price,  and  attempting  to  conceal  a
portion  of  it.  Oh  that  we  could  make  religion  permrate  our  lives,  hallowing  even
our  secular  employments  by  doing  all  to  the  glory  of  God !

III.  With  respect  to  the  portion  burnt  for  a  "  memorial,"  observe  that  an  orPESiNa

HAS  A   DOUBLE   INTENT  ;   IT   EVINUES   A  GRATEFUL  REMEMBRANCE   BT   THE   WORSHIPPER

OF  God's  bounty  and  eequirements,  and  it  ensures  a  gracious  eemembranoe  of
THE  worshipper  ON  THK  ".KT  OF  GoD.  The  Special  significance  of  the  "minchah"
lay  in  its  expression  of  luankfulness,  and  of  desire  by  that  expression  to  secure  the
favour  of  the  God  by  whom  our  needs  are  supplied.  To  appreciate  past  kindness
is  to  show  a  fitness  to  receive  additional  mercies  in  the  future.  To  remember  God
is  to  be  remembered  in  turn  by  God.  At  the  Communion  we  take  the  bread  and
wine  as  Christ's  memorial,  and  he,  the  Master  of  the  least,  approves  the  spirit  and
the  act,  and  thinks  upon  us  for  good.  Self-interest,  rocoramends  us  to  honour  the
Lord.  To  save  a  handful  of  meal  would  be  to  lose  a  coming  harvest,  and  to  save  our-
selves temporally  is  to  lose  eternally.

IV.  All  offkrings  made  in  the  appointed  way  abb  well  pleasing  unto  God.
The  meal  oblation  differed  from  the  sacrifice  of  a  lamb  or  bullock,  perhaps  was  not  so
expensive,  and  all  of  it  was  not  consumed  by  fire ;  yet  it  was  also  declared  to  be  "  of  a
sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  We  should  not  trouble  ourselves  because  our  kind  of
service  is  distinct  from  that  which  our  fellows  render,  or  is  treated  by  the  world  as  less
important.  The  mites  of  the  widow  lie  side  by  side  in  the  treasury  with  the  shekels  of
the  wealthy,  and  will  receive  quite  as  much  notice  from  the  Lord  of  the  sanctuary.
If  a  niche  in  the  temple  of  heroes  is-  denied  to  us,  or  if  the  eloquence  that  sways  the
wills  of  men  belongs  not  to  our  tongue,  yet  may  we  with  kindly  words  and  manly
actions  and  loving  tones  do  our  little  part  in  Christianizing  the  world,  and  our  efforts
will  win  the  commendation  of  him  who  "  seeth  not  as  man  seeth."  And  further  let
us  not  be  sad  because  at  different  periods  we  do  not  find  ourselves  able  to  render  the
same  service.  In  the  winter  we  may  sacrifice  from  our  herds  and  flocks,  but  must  wait
till  the  summer  for  the  firstfruits  of  the  field.  Youth,  manhood,  and  ao-e  have  their
appropriate  labours.  Leisnre  and  business,  health  and  sickness,  prosperity  and  «d-
versity,  may  present  to  the  Lord  equally  acceptable  offerings. — S.  E.  A.

Ver.  13. — The  salt  of  the  covenant.  It  has  been  thought  by  some  unworthy  of  the
notion  of  an  Infinite  Being  to  consider  him  as  concerned  about  such  peity  details  as
those  here  laid  down  for  observance.  Hut  since  the  Deity  had  to  deal  with  uninstructed
creatures,  with  men  whose  ideas  of  his  greatness  and  holiness  were  obscure  and  im-
perfect, it  was  surely  wise  to  act  according  to  the  analogy  furnished  by  the  customs  of
earthly  monarchs,  whose  courts  require  attention  to  be  paid  to  numberless  points  of
behaviour.  Only  thus  could  the  august  nature  of  Jehovah,  the  majesty  of  his  attributes,
and  the  solemnity  of  religious  worship  be  duly  impressed  upon  the  minds  of  the
Israelites.  Every  rite  had  a  meaning,  and  to  add  salt  to  every  offering  was  a  command
we  shall  find  it  interesting  to  study,

I.  Obedience  to  this  command  constitutes  every  offering  a  paet  of  the
covenant  between  God  and  his  people.  It  was  by  virtue  of  a  special  covenant
that  the  nation  had  been  selected  as  the  vehicle  of  Divine  revelation  and  the  re-
pository, of  Divine  favours.     The  relation  of  superiority  in  which  God  stands  to  man


OH.  B.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  31

places  in  a  strong  light  his  condescension  in  making  an  agreement  by  which  he  binds
himself  as  well  as  the  people.  Every  covenant  implies  mutual  obligations.  God
promised  to  guide  and  bless  the  Israelites  if  they,  in  their  turn,  kept  his  commandments
»nd  held  him  in  proper  esteem.  To- put  salt,  therefore,  in  compliance  with  his  behest,
was  to  acknowledge  that  the  covenant  retnained  in  force,  and  the  act  became  a  present
instance  of  the  existence  of  the  covenant.  It  was  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  present  this
gift  because  of  the  covenanted  relationship  in  which  I  stand  to  Jehovah."  The  covenant
of  the  gospel  is  ratified  in  Christ  for  all  his  faithful  seed,  who  are  made  partakers  of
the  blessing  promised  to  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  16).  Hence  whatever  we  do  is  in  the
name  of  Christ,  recognizing  our  sonship,  heirship,  and  co-heirship.  The  corenant
influences,  embraces  all  thoughts  and  deeds.

II.  Salt,  as  the  emblem  of  hospitality,  shows  that  service  to  God  ib  a  feast
OF  FRIENDSHIP.  The  oflferlng  of  flour  on  which  oil  was  poured  was  itself  indicative  of
a  friendly  meal,  and  this  view  was  strengthened  by  adding  salt  to  the  sacrifice.  So
surprising  is  the  intimacy  to  which  the  Most  High  admits  his  people,  that  they  may
be  said  to  feed  daily  at  his  table ;  all  the  fruits  of  the  earth  are  the  product  of  his
bounty,  which  honours  men  as  his  guests.  We  do  but  render  to  God  what  he  first
bestowed,  and  in  thus  approaching  we  enjoy  his  presence  and  favour.  It  is  permitted
us  to  make  ready  for  the  Passover,  whereat  the  Lord  shall  sit  down  with  his  disciples.

III.  Salt,  as  a  preservative,  reminds  us  of  the  purity  which  should  charac-
terize OUR  LIVES.  Nothing  that  partakes  of  corruption  is  fit  to  be  brought  unto  the
ever-living  God.  "  Let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit."
"  Flesh  and  blood  "  tend  to  impurity  and  death,  and  "  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of
God."  Our  speech  must  be  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt,  lest  anything  destructive
of  peace  or  edification  should  issue  from  our  lips.  Apart  from  the  life  that  is  instilled
through  faith  in  Christ,  man  is  dead,  and  decay  is  loathsome.  Without  faith  our  walk
and  conversation  cannot  please  God,  nor  are  we  "  the  salt  of  the  earth."  Christians
are  salted  with  the  purifying  fire  of  trial  (Mark  ix.  49).

IV.  Salt  teaches  us  the  perpetuity  of  our  friendship  with  God.  A  covenant
of  salt  is  for  ever.  (See  Numb,  xviii.  19  and  2  Chron.  xiii.  6.)  It  lasts  as  long  as  the
conditions  are  observed  by  us,  for  God  will  never  change,  nor  desire  on  his  part  to
revoke  his  blessing.  Let  us  rejoice  in  the  truth  that  he  abideth  faithful,  and  in  the
thought  of  the  indissoluble  alliance  thereby  created.  He  does  not  wish  to  treat  us  as
playthings,  invented  to  amuse  him  temporarily,  and  then  to  be  tossed  aside.  We  are
put  in  possession  by  the  great  Healer  and  Life-restorer  of  imperishable  principles,  seeds
of  righteousness,  that  avert  corruption  and  defy  decay.  Our  devotion  is  not  a  hireling
service  that  may  soon  terminate,  but  a  consecration  for  the  everlasting  ages. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  7—13. — 2%e  offering  of  daily  life.  It  is  interesting  to  perceive  how  the
Instructions  here  recorded  made  it  possible  for  all  classes  of  the  people  to  bring  sacri-
fices to  Jehovah.  None  could  complain  of  want  of  sufficient  means  or  of  the  neqessary
cooking  utensils.  All  such  objections  are  forestalled  by  these  inclusive  arrangements.
Whether  consisting  of  "  cakes "  or  "  wafers,"  whether  baked  on  a  flat  iron  plate  or
boiled  in  a  pot,  the  offering  was  lawful  and  acceptable.  How,  then,  can  we  imagine
that  Christian  work  and  gifts  are  so  restricted  in  their  nature  as  to  be  procurable  nn'y
by  a  few  ?

I.  The  material  of  which  this  offering  was  composed.  "  His  offering  shall  be  of
fine  flour."  The  sacrifice  God  desires  is  of  what  man  deems  most  precious,  viz.  life.
As  the  animal  was  killed,  giving  up  its  life  to  God,  so  now  there  is  presented  in  this
oblation :  1.  Something  that  belongs  to  daily  life.  2.  Contributing  to  its  support ;  3.  and
enjoyment.  By  bestowing  of  our  substance  upon  God,  all  our  property  is  sanctified.  To
set  apart  specifically  a  portion  of  time  in  which  to  worship  God,  hallows  the  remainder
of  the  week.  See  in  Jesus  the  true  Meal  Oblation,  the  Bread  of  Life.  We  ask  the
Father  to  accept  his  offering  on  our  behalf,  and  we  also  live  on  him  as  our  spiritual
food.  4.  The  sample  presented  must  be  of  the  best  of  its  kind.  God  will  not  be
slighted  with  scanty  adoration  and  inferior  exercise  of  our  powers.  Only  wheaten  flour
is  permitted.

II.  Accompaniments  of  the  offering.  Allusions  to  the  Jewish  sacrifices  are
frequent  in  the  New  Testament,  and  we  cannot  be  wrong  in  guiding  ourselves  by  such


88  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ci..  ii.  1—16,

■n  interpretation  of  these  figurative  regulations,  1.  Oil  must  be  added.  It  was  the
element  of  consecration,  and  reminds  us  of  the  needful  anointing  of  the  Spirit  to  qualify
us  for  our  duties.  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One."  As  used,  like  butter,  to
impart  a  relish  to  food,  it  became  a  symbol  of  gladness.  So  the  Christian  motto  is,
"  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway."  2.  Frankincense  is  required  that  a  pleasant  odour  may
ascend  to  the  skies.  So  may  our  service  be  redolent  to  earth  and  heaven  of  a  fragrant
savour.  In  Rev.  viii.  3,  incense  is  offered  with  the  prayers  of  the  saints,  and  speaks  to
us  of  the  intercession  of  Christ,  by  which  our  pleadings  are  made  effectual.  Let  prayei
be  the  constant,  attitude  of  our  souls,  and  let  us  connect  the  Saviour  with  all  we  do  and
say.  3.  It  must  be  seasoned  with  salt,  a  remembrance  and  an  emblem  of  God's
covenant,  by  which  his  people  are  admitted  to  intimacy  and  friendship  with  him.  The
status  of  the  believer  is  an  indissoluble  alliance  with  the  Almighty  on  the  ground  ol
promise  and  oath.  This  is  his  privilege  and  motive  power.  Every  sacrifice  must  be
salted  with  the  salt  of  holy  obedience,  producing  peace  and  purity,  and  preserving  it
from  corruption.

IIL  Things  pkohibited.  1.  Leaven,  the  emblem  of  wickedness,  of  hypocrisy,  ot
fermenting  putridity.  2.  Honey,  which,  though  sweet  and  increasing  the  delight  with
which  food  is  partaken  of,  quickly  turns  to  bitterness  and  corruption.  It  is  regarded
as  typical  of  fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul,  that  love  of  the  world  which  mara
Christian  character.  The  warning  conveyed  by  these  prohibitions  is  worthy  of  heintr
sharply  outlined  in  modern  days,  when  the  tendency  waxes  stronger  to  obliterate  the
dividing  line  between  the  Church  and  the  world,  and  attempts  are  made  to  purify  the
impure,  or  to  whiten  the  outside  of  supulchres,  and  to  seduce  Christians  into  the  belief
that  all  the  pursuits  and  pleasures  of  life  may  be  harmlessly  indulged  in,  and  even
sanctified  to  the  glory  of  God.  The  first  intention  may  be  good,  but  the  ultimate  issue
is  unbounded  licence.  Christ  and  Belial,  light  and  daikness,  can  have  no  lasting  concord.
We  may,  however,  take  the  leaven  and  honey  as  indicating  the  truth  that  some  things
lawful  in  themselves  and  at  certain  seasons,  are  at  other  times  displeasing  to  God.  The
mirth  and  music  and  demeanour  that  are  innocent  as  such,  may  not  befit  us  in  th«
solemnity  of  special  circumstances,  for  example,  the  worship  of  the  sanctuary.  "  To
everything  there  is  a  season."

Conclusion.  The  perfect  realization  of  every  offering  is  seen  in  the  Lord  our  Saviour.
What  a  matchless  life  was  his!  No  stain  of  malice  or  lust;  grace,  beauty,  purity,  ali
exemplified  in  fullest  degree ;  on  him  the  Spirit  ever  rested ;  his  words  and  works  a
continual  sacrifice  to  his  Father,  evoking  the  exclamation,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son:
hear  him,"  As  the  heavenly  Manna,  he  satisfies  the  wants  of  his  kingdom  of  priests'
and  his  Body  was  consumed  in  the  flames  of  Calvary  as  our  memento  before  God  —
S.  R.  A.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  minchah,  a  type  of  Christ.  Because  the  minchah  was  an  offer-
ing without  blood,  and  therefore  was  not  intended  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin  (Heb.  ix.  22)
some  have  supposed  that  it  was  in  use  before  the  Pall.  This  opinion,  however  has
but  little  to  sustain  it.  We  certainly  read  of  the  minchah  as  having  been  offered  by
Cain  (Gen.  iv.  3);  but  then  Abel,  at  the  same  time,  offered  the  holocaust,  or  sin
offering,  which  no  one  dreams  of  having  formed  any  part  of  the  original  worship  in
Eden.  Cain's  fault  was  not  in  having  offered  the  minchah,  but  in  not  associating  with
it  some  sin  sacrifice.  It  is  questionable  whether  the  minchah,  under  the  Law,  was  ever
offered  without  such  an  accompaniment.  Yet  we  may  view  the  minchah  as  a  type  of
Christ.    For —

I.  All  the  holt  bbbad  typified  Christ.    1.  The  manna  was  of  this  doss.    (I)

It  is  called  "  bread  from  heaven  "  (see  Neh.  ix.  15),    (2)  Compare  John  vi.  31 3*5  41

48 — 51,  2,  2%e  shew-bread  also  was  of  this  dass.  (1)  It  was  the  bread  of  heaven'
for  it  rested  in  the  sanctuary,  which  was  one  of  the  typical  "  heavenly  places,"  (2)  It
rested  under  the  splendours  of  the  Shechinah,  and  therefore  took  its  name  "  Bread  of
Faces,"  viz.  of  God.  The  Bread  of  the  Sacred  Presence.  3,  So  was  this  Iread  of  the
minchah.  (1)  This,  indeed,  was  offered  in  the  outer  court ;  for  there  the  altar  stood.
But  so  was  Christ  offered  "  outside  the  gate  "  of  Jerusalem,  and  outside  the  courts  of
heaven.  (2)  But  it  was,  like  the  shew-bread,  destined  to  be  eaten  in  the  sanctuary.
Bo  is  Christ  eaten  by  his  spiritual  priesthood  in  his  kingdom  of  heaven  upon  earth!


OH.  II.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  83

So  is  he  destined  to  nourish  the  joys  of  the  glorified  in  the  heaven  of  heavens  (Luke
xxii.  30).  (3)  This  was  a  Eucharistic  offering,  and  equivalent  to  the  bread  of  th«
Christian  Eucharist  (Matt.  xxvi.  26 ;  1  Cor.  x.  16).

II.  This  bread  had  the  quality  of  excellence.  1.  At  bread  it  was  the  staple  of
food.  (1)  We  can  dispense  with  luxuries,  but  bread  is  necessary.  It  is  "  the  staff  of
life."  So  is  Chiist.  (2)  Bread  is,  by  a  figure  of  speech,  put  for  everything  needful  for
the  body  (Matt.  vi.  12).  Christ  is,  by  no  figure  of  speech,  everything  needful  to  the
souL  2.  This  bread  was  of  "fine  flour."  (1)  It  may  have  been  of  barley  as  well  as
of  wheat  (see  Numb.  v.  15).  Every  variety  of  spiritual  nourishment  may  be  found  in
Christ.  (2)  But  the  flour  must  be  "  fine."  The  nourishment  we  find  in  Christ  is  of  the
finest  order.  Christ  is  God's  best  Gift  to  us.  So  is  Christ  our  best  Gift  to  God.  All
secondary  gifts  are  valuable  as  they  are  offered  in  his  Name  (2  Cor.  ix.  15).

III.  It  had  noticeable  adjuncts.  1.  Oil  was  poured  upon  it.  (1)  The  oil  was  from
the  olive,  a  tree  full  of  fatness  CJudg.  ix;  9).  It  is  a  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  grace
(Matt.  XXV.  4).  (2)  The  fine  flour  was  anointed  with  it.  Messiah  is  so  named  because
anointed  with  the  Holy  Ghost  without  measure.  The  Greek  synonym  of  the  Hebrew
Messiah  is  Christ  (Isa.  Ixi.  1 ;  Acts  iv.  27 ;  x.  38 ;  Heb.  i.  9).  (3)  We  are  called  Christians
because  anointed  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  (see  2  Cor.  i.  21 ;  1  John  il.  20,  27).  2.  It  was
■offered  with  frankincense.  (1)  This  was  a  favourite  spice,  which  appears  not  to  have
tieen  yielded  by  one  tree  alone,  but  probably  was  compounded  from  several.  We  read
of  "  spikenard  and  saffron ;  calamus  and  cinnamon,  with  all  trees  of  frankincense "
•(Cant.  iv.  14).  (2)  It  is  associated  with  the  Bridegroom  in  the  Song  of  Songs,  to
express  the  perfections  of  his  holy  character,  by  which  he  is  infinitely  attractive  to
his  Spouse,  the  Church.  He  is  there  described  as  coming  up  out  of  the  wilderness  "  like
pillars  of  smoke,"  probably  alluding  to  the  Shechinah,  and  "  perfumed  with  myrrh  and
frankincense,  with  all  the  powders  of  the  merchant "  (Cant.  iii.  6).  (3)  In  these  per-
fections he  is  no  less  grateful  to  God  when  offered  up  to  him  (Matt.  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  5 ;
2  Pet.  i.  17).  As  we  become  Christ-like,  we  are  also  well  pleasing  in  his  sight.  The
faithful  minister  of  the  Word  ia  "  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ "  (2  Cor.  ii.  15). —
J.  A.M.

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  feast  upon  the  minchah.  In  our  remarks  upon  the  two  first  of
-these  verses,  we  viewed  the  minchah,  or  meat  offering,  as  a  type  of  Christ.  Upon  this
point  additional  light  may  be  incidentally  thrown  as  we  now  proceed  to  consider  the
feast  upon  the  minchah.  For  this  we  hold  to  be  designed  to  represent  our  fellowship
with  God  in  Christ.

I.  Feasts  have  ever  been  beoabded  as  tokens  of  friendship.  1.  Secular  history
■abounds  in  examples.  (1)  These  date  back  to  very  ancient  times.  The  ancient
Egyptians,  Thiacians,  and  Libyans  made  contracts  of  friendship  by  presenting  a  cup  of
wine  to  each  other.  Covenants  were  made  by  the  ancient  Persians  and  Germans  at
feasts.  The  Pythagoreans  had  a  symbol,  "  Break  no  bread,"  which  Erasmus  interprets
to  mean  "  Break  no  friendship."  (2)  Similar  usages  still  obtain.  It  would  be  con-
sidered amongst  us  a  most  incongruous  thing  for  persons  at  enmity  deliberately  to
«t  down  at  the  same  table.  So  according  to  our  laws,  if  a  person  drinks  to  another
against  whom  he  has  an  accusation  of  slander,  he  loses  his  suit,  because  this  supposes
that  they  are  reconciled.  2.  Sacred  history  aUo  furnishes  examples.  (1)  Isaac  and
Abimeleoh  made  a  covenant  with  a  feast  (Gen.  xxvi.  30,  31) ;  so  did  Jacob  and  Laban
-(Gen.  xxxi.  54) ;  so  did  David  and  Abner  (2  Sam.  iii.  20).  (2)  The  verb  (ma,  hera)  to
eat,  in  the  Hebrew,  if  not  the  root  of  the  word  (ri'T3,  berith),  covenant,  is  at  least  a
-kindred  word.  (3)  Hence  in  apostolic  times,  Christians  were  forbidden  to  eat  with
wicked  persons  (1  Cor.  v.  11 ;  see  also  Gral.  ii.  12).  It  must  never  be  forgotten  that
4he  "  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  against  God."

II.  The  feast  of  the  meat  offering  was  a  symbol  op  fellowship  with  God.
1.  The  "  memorial "  of  the  minchah  was  Ood's  meat.    (1)  The  offerer  separated  a  portion

•of  the  mass,  which  was  called  the  memorial,  or  representation  of  the  whole.  Thus  he
■took  from  the  bulk  of  the  fine  flour  a  handful.  To  this  he  added  a  suitable  proportion
of  oiL  The  whole  of  the  frankincense  was  devoted.  (2)  The  priest  then  burnt  the
•complete  memorial  upon  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings.  (3)  God  signified  his  acceptance
of  it  by  consuming  it  in  fire,  which  was  not  of  human  kindling,  but  had  issued  from

LEVITICUS.


34  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  al-lfi

his  Shechinah.  The  portion  thus  consumed  was  regarded  as  "  God's  food,"  or  "  meat,"
of  the  offering  which  he  was  pleased  to  accept.  This  was  one  part  of  the  feast.  2.  The
remnant  was  then  eaten  hy  the  priests.  (1)  The  priests  here  are  not  to  be  viewed  as
types  of  Christ.  The  high  priest  alone  seems  to  have  represented  him  (Heb.  iii.  1 ;  viii.  1 ;
ix.  11).  (2)  The  common  priests  were  representatives  rather  of  the  holy  people.  Hence
the  whole  nation  of  Israel  were  regarded  as  a  "kingdom  of  priests"  (Exod.  xix.  6).
The  people,  therefore,  and  in  particular  the  offerer,  representatively,  feasted  with  God.
(3)  Under  the  gospel  even  this  official  representation  is  changed.  The  people  of  God
are  now  an  holy  priesthood,  not  by  representation,  but  in  right  of  their  spiritual  birth
(1  Pet.  il  9).  They  draw  nigh  unto  God  (Heb.  x.  19—22).  They  feast  with  him  at
his  table  and  in  his  very  Presence.  "(4)  All  this,  amongst  many  other  blessed  things,
is  set  forth  in  the  Christian  Eucharist,  or  Supper  of  the  Lord.

III.  Chbist  is  the  medium  of  this  fellowship.  1.  Obviously  so  since  the  minehah
was  a  type  of  Christ.  (1)  This  has  been  sufficiently  shown  (see  Homily  on  vers.  1,  2).
(2)  We  may  add  that  the  argument  is  sustained  by  the  use  of  the  term  "  memorial."
When  the  firstling  of  the  cattle  was  taken  instead  of  the  rest,  it  is  called  making  a
memorial  to  God  (Exbd.  xxxiv.  19 ;  ^e  Hebrew  text).  This  represented  the  taking  of  the
Great  Firstborn  instead  of  all  men,  and  the  firstling  of  the  cattle  was  only  a  memorial,
not  the  real  sacrifice.  (3)  It  is  a  great  truth  that  Christ  is  our  one  way  of  access  to
God  (John  xiv.  6).  "  He  is  our  peace  ; "  and  it  is  through  the  frankincense  of  his
presence  that  our  offering  becomes  a  "  sweet  savour  " — a  savour  of  rest,  "  unto  the  Lord  "
(vers.  2,  9).  2.  Christ  is  delectable  food  to  faith.  (1)  Sometimes  in  the  minehah  the
flour  was  unbaked  (ver.  2).  In  this  case  the  oil  accompanying  it  was  unmingled.  The
portion  reserved  for  the  priests  might,  therefore,  be  mingled  by  them  in  any  way  they
pleased  to  render  it  most  palatable.  (2)  In  other  cases  the  bread  was  prepared  to  their
hands.  Sometimes  baken  in  the  oven  in  cakes,  mingled  with  oil,  or  in  unleavened
wafers,  with  oil  poured  upon  them  (ver.  4).  Sometimes  in  a  pan  or  flat  plate,  mingled
with  oil  or  oil  poured  over  it  (vers.  5,  6).  Sometimes  in  the  frying-pan  or  gridiron,
with  oil  (ver.  7).  (3)  The  bread  of  life  is  essentially  good  and  nourishing.  It  is  at
the  same  time  capable  of  being  served  up  in  such  variety  as  to  suit  every  taste  that  is
not  vicious.  It  is  the  privilege  of  the  scribe  instructed  in  the  kingdom  to  bring  out
"  things  new  and  old,"  to  set  old  things  in  new  lights,  and  to  show  that  there  is
"  nothing  new  under  the  sun ; "  for  all  things  are  as  old  as  the  councils  of  eternity.—
J.  A.  M.

Vers.  11—13. — Notable  things.  After  describing  the  minehah  under  sundry  forma,  and
before  proceeding  to  the  meat  offering  of  the  firstfruits,  certain  notable  things  are
mentioned  which  the  minehah  has  in  common  with  sacrifices  in  general.  These  now
clum  attention,  viz. —

I.  The  pbohibition  of  leaven  (ver.  11).  The  reasons  of  this  appear  to  be  :  1.  Because
of  its  fermenting  properties.  (1)  These,  which,  under  the  action  of  heat,  throw  the
lump  into  commotion,  represent  the  evil  passions  of  the  heart  (see  1  Cor.  v.  6 — 8).  But
since  the  meat  offering  is  taken  as  a  type  of  Christ,  it  was  most  fitting  that  everything
suggestive  of  these  should  be  excluded.  In  him  was  no  ferment  of  anger  or  discontent
when  he  was  subjected  to  the  fiercest  fires  of  the  wrath  of  GSod  (Isa.  liii.  7).  What  an
example  has  he  left  to  us  1  (2)  By  its  fermenting  properties,  leaven  tended  to  reduce
substances  to  corruption.  But  since  our  "  Bread  of  Life,"  our  "  Firstfruit "  of  the
resurrection,  could  not  "  see  corruption,"  because  he  was  the  "  Holy  One,"  it  was  most
proper  that  leaven  should  be  absent  from  his  type  (Ps.  xvi.  10 ;  Acts  ii.  31).  2.  That
the  Hebrews  might  be  reminded  of  their  deliverance  from  Egypt.  (1)  For  they  were,  at
the  time  of  the  Exodus,  so  hurried  that  they  had  to  take  their  dough  as  it  was  without
being  leavened  (Exod.  xii.  39).  It  was  most  salutary  to  keep  alive  the  remembrance  of
such  mercies  as  they  then  experienced,  and  of  the  stupendous  works  with  which  they
were  associated.  (2)  But  since  those  things  were  all  typical  of  gospel  blessings,  so  must
it  be  most  edifying  to  us  to  remember  the  spiritual  bondage  and  darkness  from  which
we  have  been  emancipated  by  the  hand  of  that  great  Prophet  "  like  unto  Moses,"  to
vhom  it  is  our  duty  to  hearken  in  preference  to  him.

n.  The  prohibition  of  honey  (ver.  11).  The  reasons  of  this  appear  to  be :  1.  B»-
caute  honey  was  a  symbol  qf  eamcU  pleasures.    (1)  It  was  in  this  light  viewed  by  Philo


OH.  n.  1—16  J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  S5


and  by  Jerome :  and  certainly  the  similitude  is  apt.  Though  luscious  to  the  palate,  ii
is  bitter  to  the  stomach.  So  evermore  is  sensual  gratification  (see  Piov.  xxv,  16,  27).
(2)  The  exclusion  of  honey  from  the  sacrifices  and  ofTerings  of  the  altar  will,  therefore,
convey  important  morals,  viz.  (a)  considering  these  as  types  of  Christ,  (i)  considering
them  also  as  types  of  such  spiritual  sacrifices  as  we  can  present  acceptably  to  God
through  Christ.  Another  reason  may  be:  2.  Because  honey  was  offered  with  the
ahominations  of  the  heathen.  (1)  Honey  was  oflFered  to  Bacchus  and  to  the  dii  superi,  the
dii  inferi,  and  departed  heroes.  Hence  Orpheus,  in  beginning  hia  hymns,  calls  the
infernal  gods  /ici\ixio(  9«ii,  and  the  souls  of  the  dead,  lithtaaiu.  The  origin  of  which
custom  is  thus  explain^  by  Porphyry,.  "  They  made  honey  a  symbol  of  death ;  and
therefore  poured  out  a  libation  of  honey  to  the  terrestrial  gods "  (see  Brown's  'Anti-
quities,' vol.  i.  p.  3S1).  (2)  The  Hebrews  were  instructed  scrupulously  to  avoid  the
customs  of  the  pagans  (see  Deut.  xii.  29 — 31).  Let  Protestants  studiously  avoid  the
abominations  of  the  Romish  Antichrist  (Rev.  xviii.  4).  (3)  Leaven  and  honey  might
be  offered  with  the  oblation  of  the  firstfruits ;  but  they  must  not  come  upon  God's
altar.  This  is  the  teaching  of  ver.  12.  The  loaves  of  the  firstfruits,  which  were
perquisites  of  the  priests,  were  even  ordered  to  be  baken  with  leaven  (ch.  xxiii.  17).  So
in  like  manner  honey  was  to  be  offered  to  them  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  5).  There  are  things
which  may  be  lawfully  offered  to  man  that  may  not  be  offered  to  God.  As  leaven  and
honey  minlged  with  the  bread,  even  of  the  priests,  so  human  conversation,  at  its  best,
is  but  imperfect.

III.  The  REQirisiTioN  of  salt  (ver.  13).  The  reason  of  this  appean  In  the
many  excellent  things  of  which  salt  was  the  symbol.  1.  It  was  a  symbol  of  pwity.
(1)  Hence  it  is  described  as  "  the  salt  of  the  covenant  of  God."  The  Hebrew  term  for
covenant  (nna,  herith)  literally  signifies  purification ;  and  the  covenant,  of  God  is  the
gospel  which  is  instituted  of  God  for  our  purification  from  sin.  (2)  Perhaps  it  was
religiously,  viz.  in  relation  to  the  covenant,  rather  than  for  hygienic  purposes,  that
infants  were  rubbed  with  salt  (see  Ezek.  xvi.  4).  2.  It  was  a  symbol  of  friendship.
(I)  The  effect  of  a  covenant  to  the  faithful  is  friendship.  So,  in  token  of  friendship,
the  ancient  Greeks  ate  bread  and  salt  together.  And  the  Russian  emperors  had  a
custom,  derived  to  them  from  antiquity,  of  sending  bread  and  salt  from  their  tables  to
persons  they  intended  to  honour.  (2)  The  delights  of  friendship  are  also  set  fortii
in  this  symbol.  The  following  is  rendered  by  Dr.  A.  Clarke  from  Pliny: — "So
essentially  necessary  is  salt  that  without  it  human  life  cannot  be  preserved :  and  even
the  pleasures  and  endowments  of  the  mind  are  expressed  by  it ;  the  delights  of  life,
repose,  and  the  highest  mental  serenity  are  expressed  by  no  other  term  than  sales
among  the  Latins.  It  has  also  been  applied  to  designate  the  honourable  rewards  given
to  soldiers,  which  are  called  salarii  or  salaries.  But  its  importance  may  be  further
understood  by  its  use  in  sacred  things,  as  no  sacrifice  was  offered  to  the  gods  without
the  scdt-cake."  (3)  But  that "  conversation  "  of  Christians  is  best "  seasoned"  that  has  the
"  salt  of  the  covenant  '  (see  Job  vi.  6  ;  Col.  iv.  5,  6).  3.  It  was  a  symbol  of  perpetuity.
(1)  This  is  suggested  by  its  preserving  properties.  It  is  used  to  preserve  meat  and
other  things  from  decomposing.  It  is  in  this  the  very  opposite  of  leaven ;  so,  the
reason  which  includes  the  one  excludes  the  other.  (2)  Hence  by  the  symbol  of  salt
the  perpetuity  of  God's  covenant  is  expressed.  Thus,  "  It  is  a  covenant  of  salt /or  ever
before  the  Lord  "  (Numb,  xviii.  19  ;  see  also  2  Chron.  xiii.  5).  (3)  Christians,  who  are
the  people  of  the  covenant,  are  the  preservers  of  the  earth  (see  Matt.  v.  13).  Take  the
Christians  out  of  the  world,  and  it  will  rot.  4.  The  qualities  of  salt  should  distinguish
all  sacrifices,  (1)  They  do  distinguish  the  Great  Sacrifice  of  Calvary.  (2)  All  Chris-
tian offerings  should  resemble  that.  In  allusion  to  the  salting  of  sacrifices  preparatory
to  their  being  offered  up  in  the  flames  of  the  altar,  our  Lord  says,  "  Eveiy  one  shall  be
salted  with  fire,"  or  rather,  "  salted /or  the  fire,"  viz.  of  the  altar,  "  and,"  or  rather,  "  as
every  sacrifice  is  salted  with  salt "  (Mark  ix.  49,  50).  "  We  may  reasonably  infer,  that
as  salt  has  two  qualities — the  one  to  season  meat,  the  other  to  preserve  it  from  corrup-
tion ;  so  it  fitly  denotes  that  integrity  and  incorruptness  which  season  every  sacrifice,
and  render  m«i'i  persons  and  services  grateful  to  God  "  (Old  Bible).  ^J.  A.  M.

y«n.  14 — 16. — The  minchah  of  the  firstfruits.  Having  viewed  the  minchah  as  a  type
of  Christ,  and  having  considered  the  feast  upon  it  as  expressing  fellowihip  with  Gbd  in


8«  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  n.  1— 1ft

him,  we  proceed  to  consider  the  offering  of  the  firstfruits,  which  is  still  the  minchah
under  yet  another  form.    The  text  brings  before  us —

I.  Things  peculiab  to  the  offering  op  the  riBSTFEtriTS.  These  are :  1.  Th*
matter  of  the  offering.  (1)  It  is  specified  as  "  green  ears  of  com."  Still,  observe,  it  is
of  the  nature  of  bread,  and  so  still  typifies  Christ,  the  Bread  of  Life.  (2)  But  in  this
case  the  life  is  in  the  grain.  In  this  view  Christ  compares  himself  to  a  com  of  wheat
(John  xii.  24).  In  this  passage  there  is  also  a  reference  to  Ps.  Ixxii.  16,  which  is  con-
strued by  learned  Jews  thus :  "  He  shall  he  a.  corn  of  wheat  in  the  earth  on  the  top  of  the
mountnins."  (3)  It  is  specified  as  "  firstfruits."  As  the  firstborn  of  every  animal  was
the  Lord's  (Exod.  xii.  29;  xiii.  12,  13  ;  Numb,  xviii.  16),  so  did  he  claim  the  vegetable
firstfruits.  And  as  Christ  is  "  the  Firstborn  of  every  creature"  (Col.  i.  15),  the  Anti-
type  of  every  firstborn, — so  is  he  the  Firstfruits  of  everything  in  the  cieation.  Through
him  all  things  are  blessed  to  our  use  and  benefit.  (4)  In  this  character  Jesus  will  come
out  in  full  form  in  the  resurrection.  He  is  the  "  First-begotten  from  the  dead  "  (Eev.
i.  5).  The  "  Firstfruits  of  them  that  slept "  and  still  sleep  (1  Cor.  xv.  20,- 23  ;  1  Thess.
JT.  14).  Thus  is  he  "  the  Beginning  [or  Chief]  of  the  [new]  creation  of  God"  (Eev.  iii.  14).
2.  The  treatment  it  received.  (1)  The  com  was  dried  by  the  fire.  It  was  not  allowed
to  dry  gradually  and  gently  in  the  air,  but  was  violently  scorched.  Here  was  set
forth  expressively  that  fire  of  grief  and  sorrow  which  parched  the  soul  of  Jesus.  The
fires  of  his  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God,  which  was  outraged  by  the  sinfulness  of  men,
entered  into  his  very  soul  (Ps.  cxix.  139).  So  did  the  corresponding  flames  of  sympathy
for  that  humanity  which  he  had  so  wondrously  assumed ;  consuming,  because  of  its
sinfulness,  under  the  fires  of  God's  anger.  (2)  It  was  beaten.  This  threshing  of  the
wheat  represented  the  severity  with  which  Jesus  was  treated,  (a)  in  the  court  of
Caiaphas  ;  {b)  in  the  hall  of  Pilate ;  (c)  at  the  place  called  Calvary  (Isa.  liii.  5,  8).

II.  Things  common  to  the  firstfruits  and  other  forms  of  the  minchah.  1.  /(
««os  offered  upon  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings.  (1)  Touching  the  altar,  it  became  a
sacrifice  to  God.  (2)  Consumed  in  the  fire,  it  was  accepted  by  God.  2.  It  was  offered
with  oil.  (1)  The  natural  use  of  this  was  that  the  offering  thereby  became  more
readily  consumed.  The  flame  of  oil  is  bright  and  feiTent.  (2)  This  was  a  symbol  of
the  Holy  Spirit's  grace,  which  without  measure  rested  upon  Christ  (see  Ps.  Ixix.  9 ;
John  ii.  17).  3.  It  was  offered  with  frankincense.  (1)  The  physical  use  of  this  would
be  to  take  away  from  the  tabernacle  the  smell  of  a  slaughter-house,  and  to  fill  the  courts
with  a  grateful  odour.  (2)  The  spiritual  use  was  to  prefigure  the  fragrance  of  the  merits
of  Jesus,  (a)  in  his  sacrifice  (Eph.  v.  2);  (i)  in  his  intercession  (Rev.  viii.  3,  4).
Thus  the  oifensiveness  of  the  flesh  in  us  is  destroyed,  and  the  living  sacrifice  becomes
acceptable  (Eom.  xii.  1). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 16. —  Our  recognition  of  the  hand  of  Ood  in  the  blessings  of  life.  The  fact
that  the  law  of  the  meat  ottering  follows  that  of  the  burnt  oflfering  is  itself  significant.
It  suggests —

I.  The  true  order  of  the  Divine  life  in  man.  It  is,  indeed,  a  mistake  foi
the  human  teacher  to  attempt  to  lay  down  precise  lines  of  thought  and  feeling  along
which  souls  must  move.  "  The  progress  of  religion  in  the  soul "  varies  with  indi-
vidual experience.  The  action  of  God's  Spirit  is  not  limited,  and  while  we  should
seek  to  lead  all  souls  to  walk  in  the  road  by  which  we  are  travelling,  we  should  not
be  anxious  that  they  should  tread  in  our  own  steps.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  an
order  of  thought  and  experience  which  may  not  be  inverted.  First  the  burnt  offering,
then  the  meat  offering ;  first  the  soul's  presentation  of  itself  as  a  sinner  to  ask  forgive-
ness and  to  offer  itself  to  God,  then  the  service  of  recognition  of  him  and  gratitude  for
his  gifts.  It  is  a  serious,  and  may  be  a  fatal,  spiritual  error  to  attempt  to  gain  God'g
favour  by  doing  those  things  which  are  appropriate  to  his  children,  without  having  first
■ought  and  found  reconciliation  through  a  crucified  Saviour.  Start  at  the  starting-
point  of  the  Christian  course,  lest,  when  the  goal  is  reached,  the  crown  be  not  placed
upon  the  brow.

II.  OuB  gbateful  recognition  of  God's  cokstant  goodness  to  ub.  The  meat
offering  was  a  sacrifice  in  which  the  worshipper  acknowledged  that  the  various  bless-
ings of  his  life  came  from  God  and  belonged  to  him.  He  brought  fine  flour  (ver.  1),
and  oil  (ver,  1),  also  wine  as  the  accompanying  drink  offering  (oh.  xxiii.  13).     The  chiel


can.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  87

produce  of  the  land,  the  principal  elements  of  food  were,  in  a  sacred  hour,  at  the  holj
place,  and,  by  a  pious  action,  solemnly  recognized  as  gifts  of  God,  to  be  gratefully
accepted  from  his  hand,  to  be  reverently  laid  on  his  altar.  We  are  thankfully  to
acknowledge:  1.  OocCs  kindness  in  supplying  us  with  that  which  we  need.  Bread
(corn)  will  stand  for  that  food  which  is  requisite,  and  when  we  consider  the  goodness
of  our  Creator,  (1)  in  originally  providing  that  which  is  so  wholesome  and  nourishing
to  all  men  ;  (2)  in  multiplying  it  so  freely  that  there  is  abundance  for  all;  (3)  in
causing  it  to  be  multiplied  in  such  a  way  as  ministers  to  our  moral  and  spiritual'
health  (through  our  intelligence,  activity,  co-operation,  etc.) ;  (4)  in  making  palatable
and  pleasurable  the  daily  meals  which  would  otherwise  be  (as  sickness  occasionally
proves)  intolerably  burdensome ; — we  have  abundant  reason  for  blessing  Q-od  for  his
kindness  in  respect  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  2.  His  goodness  in  providing  us  with
that  which  is  superfluous.  A  very  large  part  of  the  enjoyment  of  our  life  is  in  the
use  of  that  which  is  not  necessary  but  agreeable ;  in  the  appropriation  of  that  which
is  pleasant, — the  exquisite,  the  harmonious,  the  fragrant,  the  delicately  beautiful,  etc.
This  also  is  of  God.  He  "  makes  our  cup  to  run  over ;  "  from  him  come  the  fruits
and  the  flowers,  as  well  as  the  com  and  the  grass.  Nay,  he  has  closely  associated
the  superfluous  with  the  necessary  in  nature  as  in  human  life.  The  common  potato
does  not  grow  without  bearing  a  beautiful  flower,  nor  the  humble  bean  without  yield-
ing a  fragrant  odour.  As  the  Hebrew  brought  his  oil  and  his  wine  to  the  altar  of
gratitude,  so  should  we  bring  our  thanksgiving  for  the  delicacies,  adornments,  and
sweetnesses  which  come  from  the  bountiful  hand  of  Heaven.

III.  The  necessity  fob  purity  in  our  service.  There  might  not  be  leaven  nor
honey  (ver.  11) ;  there  must  be  salt  (ver.  13).  Everything  associated  with  corruption
must  be  avoided;  that  which  was  antiseptic  in  its  nature  should  be  introduced ;
"  nothing  which  defileth  "  before  him ;  the  "  clean  hands  and  the  pure  heart "  in  "  the
holy  place"  (Ps.  xxiv.  3,  4).    (See  "Purity  in  worship,"  infra.')

IV.  The  acoeptableness  of  our  gratitude  to  God.  All  the  frankincense  was
to  be  consumed  on  the  altar,  and  the  burning  of  the  other  offerings  with  this  fragrant
incense  accompanying  it  betokened  that  it  was,  as  stated,  a  "  sweet  savour  unto  the
Lord"  (vers.  2,  12).  God  is  not  to  be  worshipped  with  men's  hands,  as  though  "he
needed  anything "  (Acts  xvii.  25);  but  he  takes  delight  in  his  children :  1.  Eealizing
his  presence.  2.  Eecognizing  his  hand  in  their  comforts  and  their  joy.  3.  Responding
to  his  fatherly  love  with  their  filial  gratitude  and  praise.

V  The  wholesome  inpluence  of  grateful  service  on  otm  own  hearts.  He
who  "  knows  what  is  in  man,"  warned  his  people  against  saying  in  their  heart,  "  My
power  and  the  might  of  my  hand  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth"  (Deut.  viii.  17).  Such
n  sacrifice  as  that  of  the  meat  offering — a  service  of  grateful  acknowledgment  of  God's
hand — is  fitted  to  render  us  the  greatest  spiritual  benefit,  by :  1.  Helping  ug  to  keep  a
humble  heart  before  God.  2.  Causing  us  to  be  filled  with  the  pure  joy  »f  gratitude
instead  of  being  puffed  up  with  the  mischievous  complacency  of  pride.— 0,

Vers,  11 — 18. — Pwrity  in  worship.  When  the  Hebrew  worshipper  had  presented  his
liumt  offering,  had  sought  forgiveness  of  sin,  and  had  dedicated  himself  to  God  in
sacred  symbolism,  he  then  brought  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  of  that  which  con-
stituted his  food,  and  by  presenting  flour,  oil,  and  wine,  with  frankincense,  he  owned  his
indebtedness  to  Jehovah.  In  engaging  in  this  last  act  of  worship,  he  was  to  do  that
which  spoke  emphatically  pf  purity  in  approaching  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  By  Divine
direction  he  was —

I.  Carefully  to  exclut>b  that  in  which  there  wab  ant  element  of  im-
purity. Leaven  is  "  a  substance  in  a  state  of  putrefaction ; "  honey  "  soon  turns  sour,
and  even  forms  vinegar."  These  were,  therefore,  expressly  interdicted ;  they  might  not
be  laid  on  the  altar  of  God.  But  so  important  was  this  feature  that  positive  as  well  as
negative  rules  were  laid  down.     The  offerer  was —

II.  Constantly  to  introduce  the  corbectivb  of  impurity.  "  Neither  shalt  thou
suffer  the  salt  ...  to  be  lacking ; "  "  with  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  offer  salt."
Salt  is  the  great  preservative  from  putrefaction,  iitting  type  of  all  that  makes  pure
in  symbolic  worship.

When  we  come  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  to  "  offer  the  sacrifice  of  pn.ise  "  or  te
engage  in  any  act  of  devotion,  we  must  remember  that —


88  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITIOUa  [oh.  n.  1—16.


I.  God  lats  gebat  stress  on  the  pubitt  op  our  heart  m  -vtorship.  Only  the
pure  in  heart  can  see  God  (Matt.  v.  8).  Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  him
(Heb.  xii.  14).  They  must  be  clean  who  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  (Isa.  lii.  11).
None  may  ascend  his  holy  hill  but  "  he  that  hath  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart."
"  If  we  regard  iniquity  in  our  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  ns  "  (Ps.  Ixvl.  18).  We
hAve  not  now  laid  down  for  us  any  precise  directions  as  to  what  words  we  shall  use,

.what  forms  we  shall  adopt,  what  gifts  we  shall  devote,  but  we  know  that  the  chief
thing  to  bring,  that  without  which  all  is  vain,  is  a  right  spirit,  a  pure  heart,  a  soul  that
is  seeking  God  and  longing  for  his  likeness.  The  interdiction  of  the  leaven  and  honey,
and  the  requirement  of  salt,  suggest  that —

II.  God  desires  a  vigilant  exclusion  op  evert  unholy  thought  when  wb
DRAW  NIGH  TO  HIM.  We  may  be  tempted  to  allow  corruption  to  enter  into  and  mar
XMT  worship  or  our  Christian  work,  in  the  form  of :  1.  An  unworthy  spirit  of  rivalry.
2.  An  ostentation  of  piety.  3.  Self-seeking  by  securing  the  favour  of  man.  4.  Sen-
suous enjoyment  (mere  artistic  appreciation,  etc.).  5.  A  spirit  of  dislike  or  resentment
towards  fellow-worshippers  or  fellow-workers.  Such  spiritual  "leaven"  must  not  be
brought  to  the  altar;  such  sentiments  must  be  shut  out  fi-om  the  soul.  We  must
strenuously  resist  when  these  evil  thoughts  would  enter.  We  must  vigorously  and
energetically  expel  them  if  they  find  their  way  within  the  heart  (Frov.  iv.  23).

III.  God  desires  thk  presence  of  the  purifying  thought  in  devotion.  There
must  not  only  be  the  absence  of  leaven,  but  the  presence  of  salt ;  not  only  the  absence
of  that  which  corrupts  and  spoils,  but  the  presence  of  that  which  purifies.  There  must
be  the  active  presence  of  sanctifying  thoughts.  Such  are :  1.  A  profound  sense  of  the
nearness  of  God  to  us.  2.  A  lively  sense  of  our  deep  indebtedness  to  Jesus  Christ.
Let  these  convictions  fill  the  sonl,  and  the  lower  and  ignobler  sentiments  will  fail  to
enter  or  will  quickly  leave.  If  we  feel  our  own  feebleness  and  incapacity,  we  may  fall
back  on  the  truth  that —

IV.  God  has  promised  the  aid  of  his  cleansing  Spirit.  We  must  pray  for  "  the
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Titus  iii.  5);  that  he  will  "cleanse  us  from  our  sin;"
will  give  us  "  truth  in  the  inward  parts ; "  will  make  us  "  clean,"  "  whiter  than  snow ; "
will  "create  in  us  a  clean  heart,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  us"  (Ps.  11.;  and
see  Ps.  xix.  12—14;  cxxxii.  23,  24).— 0.

Vers.  3 — 10. — Priest  and  people :  reciprocal  lervieet.  Two  things  are  stated  in  the
Law  concerning  the  priesthood.

I.  That  every  possible  thing  was  done  to  impart  to  them  peculiar  sanctity.
They  were  separated  and  sanctified  by  various  ceremonies  and  services.

II.  That  special  sanctity  was  associated  in  the  minds  of  the  people  with
THEIR  person  AND  OFFICE.  So  much  SO  that  offerings  given  to  them  were  lawfully
regarded  as  presented  to  Jehovah.  In  the  meat  offering  "  the  remnant "  (the  greater
part)  was  to  be  "Aaron's  and  his  sons',"  and  this  is  declared  to  be  "a  thing  most  holy."
To  these  statements  we  may  add —

IIL  That  while  their  nearness  to  God  conferred  special  privilege,  it  did
NOT  ensure  personal  HOLINESS  (ch.  X.  1 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  17,  23  ;  Mai.  1.  6 — 10;  ii.  1 — 9).

IV.  That  in  proportion  to  their  personal  excellence  would  be  the  offerings
OP  the  people.  Few  meat  offerings  would  be  brought  whereby  a  rapacious,  or
arrogant,  or  impure,  or  unsocial,  or  irreverent  priesthood  would  be  benefited  ;  but  free
and  full  offerings  would  come  to  the  altar  where  blameless,  beloved,  and  honoured  men
were  ministering.

The  Christian  ministry  is  unlike  the  Jewish  priesthood  in  that:  1.  It  is  not  heredi-
tiry ;  it  is  (or  should  be)  only  entered  upon  where  there  is  individual  fitness  for  the
oflice.  2.  It  offers  no  sacrifices  (Heb.  x.  11,  12).  3.  It  approaches  God  with  men
rather  than /or  them.  Yet  it  is  like  that  ancient  priesthood,  in  that  it  is  a  section  of
God's  people  set  apart  for  conducting  Divine  worship  and  for  the  service  of  society  is
all  sacred  things.     We  are  reminded —

I.  That  it  is  the  will  of  Christ  that  Christian  ministebs  should  be  bub-
tained  by  the  people's  offerings  (1  Cor.  ix.  11, 13, 14).

II.  That  what  is  presented  to  them  for  their  work's  iakk,  Christ  couim
Aa  orrsBBD  to  himself  (Matt.  x.  40,  41 ;  Phil.  iv.  18).


OB.  n.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  Si

III.  That  in  the  relations  of  ministeb  and  people  thekb  should  be  eboipbo-
CAL  GENEEOSITT.  On  the  part  of  the  latter  let  there  be :  1.  Full  appreciation  of  the
high  nature  and  the  large  number  of  their  services.  2.  Generous  overlooking  of  lesset
faults,  remembering  human  frailty.  3.  Constant  credit  for  purity  of  motive.  4.
Active  sympathy  and  co-operation;  and  5.  Substantial  j)ractical  support.  He  who
has  "the  burden  of  the  Lord  "  upon  his  heart  should  not  be  weighed  down  with  tem-
poral anxieties.  On  the  part  of  the  former,  let  there  be :  1.  Complete  subordination  of
temporal  to  spiritual  solicitudes.  2.  Free  and  generous  expenditure  of  love  and  strength,
both  on  individual  souls  in  special  need,  and  on  the  Church  and  the  world.  Reciprocal
indifference  and  closeness  will  end  in  leanness  of  soul ;  reciprocal  love  and  generosity
in  largeness  of  heart  and  nobility  of  life  (Luke  vi.  38). — 0.

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  meat  offering.  The  offering  of  meat  or  food,  consisting  of  fine
flour,  with  frankincense,  cakes  and  wafers,  parched  grain,  suited  to  all  classes.  The
general  meaning  was  probably  eucharisfic.  A  portion  of  bread,  firstfruits,  offered  in
the  fire  as  a  memorial  of  Divine  goodness  and  pledge  of  the  future  life.  Several  parti-
culars noticeable.  1.  It  was  what  made  part  of  the  daily  meal  of  the  house.  2.  Prank-
incense  mingled  with  it,  and  oil  poured  upon  it ;  the  prayers  and  thankful  worship  of
the  offerer,  which  were  the  work  of  God's  Spirit,  returned  to  him.  3.  It  was  partly
consumed  by  fire,  and  partly  "a  thing  most  holy,"  or  set  apart  to  the  Lord,  eaten  by
the  priests,  supporting  the  temple  worship.  4.  If  baked,  no  leaven  in  it  nor  honey,  no
corruption,  a  pure  sacrifice.  5.  Every  offering  seasoned  with  salt,  "the  salt  of  the
covenant  of  thy  God,"  i.e.  the  emblem  of  Divine  grace,  which,  while  it  accepts  man's
obedience,  overlooks  and  pardons  its  imperfection. — E.

Vers.  4 — 16. — T?ie  various  kinds  of  meat  offerings.  Without  dwelling  on  every
minute  regulation,  the  following  main  points  may  be  distinguished  as  representative.

I.  Offered  food.  Acknowledgment  of  dependence.  Praise  for  life  and  its  gifts.
Joys  and  pleasures  should  be  consecrated.  The  will  of  God  in  them  and  over  them.
Family  worship  a  duty.  Recognition  of  God  in  common  life.  Firstfruits  are  God's,
not  the  remnant  or  gleanings  of  our  faculties  and  opportunities,  but  all.

II.  Oppebing  divided  between  offerer  and  priests.  Connection  of  daily  labour
and  its  results  with  the  sanctuary  and  religious  duties.  The  secular  and  sacred  only
nominally  distinct.  The  house  of  God  and  the  house  of  man  should  open  into  one
another.  Nothing  should  be  allowed  to  interfere  with  the  holiness  of  that  which  is
assigned  to  God's  service  in  the  sanctuary.  "  It  is  most  holy."  Too  often  Christians
fall  into  a  carelessness  with  respect  to  sacred  appointments  which  reacts  on  the  spirit
and  life.     Our  partnership  with  God  involves  responsibility.

III.  No  LEAVEN,  NO  HONEY.  In  all  things  purity  and  humility.  There  must  be
no  corrupt  principle  admitted  into  our  service  of  God.  The  doctrine  must  be  purified
of  leaven.  The  motives  must  be  examined.  We  ought  not  to  serve  God  for  the'sake
of  filrhy  lucre,  under  the  influence  of  mere  sensational  excitement.  Truth  and  sobriety
in  worship.

IV.  Salt  with  eveet  backiftcb.  All  must  be  brought  to  God  in  the  spirit  of
penitent  faith.  Salt  preserves  life,  sets  forth  the  dependence  of  man  upon  God.  The
gracious  covenant  is  the  source  of  all.  He  who  commands  is  himself  the  giver  of  all
power  to  fulfil  his  word.     He  is  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  the  spiritual  life.

V.  Frankincense  and  oil.  Fragrance  and  brightness.  Heaven  and  earth  mingled
together.  Reconciliation  of  God  and  man.  The  outpoured  spirit  of  light  and  life.
Joy  in  God  and  in  his  gifts.  The  anointing  oil  mingled  in  the  fire  and  increased  the
flams.  The  Messiah  is  the  true  Anointed  One.  Every  Israelite,  in  a  lower  degree,  was
himself  a  Messiah,  an  anointed  one,  taken  up  into  the  Son  of  God  and  blessed.  The
people  are  a  holy,  consecrated  people,  separated  unto  Jehovah.  Every  individual  act
of  religinn  is  acceptable  as  the  oil  of  the  Spirit  is  poured  upon  it.  What  a  new  view
of  life  can  thus  be  obtained  1    Make  all  a  meat  offering  to  the  Lord. — B.


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  hl  1—17


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  IIL

The  peace  offering.  The  peace  offer-
ing, though  the  instmotions  here  given
respecting  it  precede  those  relating  to  the
sin  offering  (for  a  reason  to  be  stated  here-
after), is  the  last  in  order  of  the  sacrifices
when  they  were  all  presented  together.
First,  the  sin  offering  taught  the  need  of,
and  symbolically  wrought,  propitiation  and
atonement ;  next  the  burnt  offering  repre-
sented the  absolute  surrender  of  man's  will
to  God's  will ;  then  the  meat  offering,  by  its
gift  of  homage,  declared  the  loyal  submission
of  the  offerer ;  and  then  followed  the  peace
offering,  symbolizing  the  festive  joy  which
pervades  the  souls  of  those  who  are  in  com-
munion with  God.  The  essential  charac-
teristio  of  the  peace  offering  is  the  feast
upon  the  sacrifice,  participated  in  sym-
bolically by  God  (by  means  of  the  part
Bonsumed  on  the  altar,  and  the  part  eaten
by  his  ministers)  and  actually  by  the
offerer  and  his  companions.  It  served  as  a
memorial  to  the  Israelites  of  the  institution
of  the  covenant  between  God  and  them-
ielves  (a  covenant  in  the  East  being  ordin-
arily ratified  by  the  parties  to  it  eating
together),  and  reminded  them  of  the  bless-
ings thence  derived,  which  naturally  called
forth  feelings  ot  joyous  thankfulness;
while  it  prefigured  the  peace  wrought  for
man  by  the  adoption  in  Christ,  through
which  he  has  communion  with  God.

Ver.  1. — Peace  offering,  Zebaoh  shelamim,
"  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings."  The  singular,
thelem,  occurs  once  (Ames  v.  22).  The
conditions  to  be  fulfilled  by  a  Jew  who
offered  a  peace  offering  were  the  follow-
ing:—!. He  must  bring  either  (1)  a  young
bull  or  cow,  or  (2)  a  young  sheep  of
either  sex,  or  (3)  a  young  he-goat  or  she-
goat.  2.  He  must  offer  it  in  the  court  of  the
tabernacle.  3.  In  offering  it  he  must  place,  or
lean,  his  hand  upon  its  head.  4.  He  must  kill
It  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  5.  He  must
provide  three  kinds  of  cakes  similar  to  those
offered  in  the  meat  offering,  and  leavened
bread  (ch.  vii.  11 — 13).     The  priest  had:

1.  To  catch  the  blood,  and  strike  the  sides
of  the  altar  with  it,  as  in  the  burnt  sacrifices.

2.  To  place  upon  the  burnt  offering,  smoul-
dering upon  tiie  altar,  all  the  internal  fat  of
the  animal'i  body,  together  with  the  kidneys


enveloped  in  it,  and,  in  the  cawof  the  iheep,

the  fat  tails,  for  consumption  by  the  flie.

3.  To  offer  one  of  each  of  the  three  different
kinds  of  unleavened  cakes,  and  one  loaf
of  the  leavened  bread,  as  a  heave  offering.

4.  To  wave  the  breast  of  the  animal  back-
wards and  forwards,  and  to  heave  the  leg  or
haunch  upwards  and  downwards,  in  token  of
consecration  (see  notes  on  ch.  vii.  14,  30,
3o).  5.  To  take  for  his  own  eating,  and  that
of  his  brethren  the  priests,  the  three  cakei
and  loaf  and  haunch  that  had  been  heaved
and  waved.  6.  To  return  the  rest  of  the
animal,  and  the  remaining  cakes  and
loaves,  to  the  offerer,  to  serve  as  a  feast  for
him  and  his,  to  be  eaten  the  same  or  th«
next  day,  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle.
The  lesson  taught  by  the  peace  offering
was  the  blessedness  of  being  in  union  with
God  as  his  covenant  people,  and  the  duty
and  happiness  of  exhibiting  a  joyous  sense
of  this  relation  by  celebrating  a  festival
meal,  eaten  reverently  and  thankfully  in
the  house  of  God,  a  part  of  which  was  given
to  God's  priests,  and  a  part  consiuned
symbolically  by  God  himself.  The  burnt
offering  ha!d  typified  self-surrender;  the
meat  offering,  loyal  submission ;  the  peace
offering  typified  the  joyous  cheerfulness
of  those  who,  having  in  a  spirit  of  perfect
loyalty  surrendered  themselves  to  God,  had
become  his  children,  and  were  fed  at  the
very  board  at  which  he  deigned  symbolically
to  partake.  The  most  essential  part  of  the
meat  offering  was  the  presentation ;  of  the
burnt  offering,  the  consumption  of  the  victim
on  the  altar ;  of  the  peace  offering,  the  festive
meal  upon  the  sacrifice.  The  combined  burnt
and  meat  offering  was  the  sacrifice  of  one
giving  himself  up  to  God ;  the  peace  offer-
ing, that  of  one  who,  having  given  himself
up  to  God,  is  realizing  his  communion  with
him.  In  this  respect  the  peace  offering  of
the  old  dispensation  foreshadows  the  Lord's
Supper  in  the  new  dispensation.  Several
other  names  have  been  proposed  for  the^
peace  offering,  such  as  thank  offering,  sal-
vation offering,  etc.  No  name  is  more
suitable  than  peace  offering,  but  the  word
must  bo  understood  not  in  the  sense  of  an
offering  to  bring  about  peace,  but  an  offer-
ing of  those  who  are  in  a  state  of  peace,
answering  to  the  Greek  word  ei/)7;vi/£^,  rather
than  to  the  Latin  word  pacifica.  "  A  state
of  peace  aud  friendship  with  God  was  the
basis  and  sine  qua  non  to  the  presentation
of  a  shelem,  and  the  design  of  that  prcsen
tation,  from  which  its  name  was  derived,
was  the  realization,  establishment,  verifica-
tion, and  enjoyment  of  the  existing  relation*


OH.  m.  1 — 17.]


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


41


of  peace,  friendship,  fellowship,  and  blessed-
ness" (Kuitz,  <  Sacrificial  Worship ').

Vers.  3, 4. — "  There  were  four  parts  to  be
burned  upon  the  altar:  (1)  the  fat  that
ooTereth  the  inwards,  i.e.  the  large  net,
omentum,  MnKovs,  caul,  or  adipose  mem-
brane found  in  mammals,  attached  to  the
stomach  and  spreading  over  the  bowels,
and  which  in  the  ruminants  abounds  with
(at;  (2)  all  the  fat  whioh  is  upon  the
inwards,  •'.«.  the  fat  attached  to  the  intes-
tines, and  which  could  be  peeled  off;  (3)
the  two  kidneys,  and  the  fat  that  is  on
them,  whioh  is  by  the  flanks,  or  loins,  i.e.
the  kidneys  and  all  the  fat  connected  with
them ;  the  kidneys  are  the  only  thing  to  be
burnt  except  the  fat;  (4)  the  smaller  net,
omentum  minus,  or  oaul  above  the  liver,
which  stretches  on  one  side  to  the  region
of  the  kidneys,  hence  on  the  kidneys ;  ^j; = by
them,  not  yjith  them  "  (Gardiner).

Ver.  5. — ITpon  tho  burnt  saorifioe.  The
peace  offering  is  to  be  placed  upon  the
burnt  offering  previously  laid  upon  the  fire.
Symbolically  and  actually  the  bximt  offering
serves  as  the  foundation  of  the  peace  offering.
Self-surrender  leads  to  peace ;  and  the  self-
sacrifice  of  Christ  is  the  cause  of  the  peace
subsisting  between  God  and  man.

Ver.  9. — The  whole  rump  should  nc  doubt
be  a«  uhole  tail,  oonsiating  chiefly  of  fat,


and  always  regarded  as  a  great  delicacy  in
the  East  (see  Herod.,  iii.  ]  13 ;  Thompson,
•  Land  and  the  Book,'  p.  97).  The  burning
of  the  fat  tail  u^on  the  altar,  together  with
the  internal  fat,  is  the  only  point  in  which
the  ritual  to  be  used  when  offering  a  sheep
(vers.  6  -11)  differs  from  that  used  in
offering  a  bull  or  cow  (vera.  1 — 5),  op  a
goat  (vers.  12—16).

Ver.  11.— It  is  the  food  of  the  offering
made  by  fire  unto  the  lord;  literally.  It
it  the  bread  of  the  offering  by  fire  to  the
Lord.  The  idea  of  the  peace  offering  being
that  of  a  meal  at  Gk>d's  board,  the  part  of
the  animal  presented  to  God  upon  the  altar
is  regarded  as  his  share  of  the  feast,  and  is
called  his  food  or  bread.  Cf.  Bev.  iii.  20,
"  I  will  come  in  to  liim,  and  will  sup  with
him,  and  he  with  me."

Ver.  17. — Eat  neither  fat  nor  blood.
These  are  forbidden  to  be  eaten,  as  belong-
ing to  Ghid.  The  fat,  that  is,  the  in-
ternal fat,  is  his  portion  in  the  common
feast  of  the  peace  offering,  and  the  blood
is  presented  to  him  in  all  the  animal
sacrifices,  as  the  material  vehicle  of  life
(see  oh.  vii.  22 — 27).  The  remaining  regu-
lations as  to  the  various  sorts  of  the  peace
offerings,  the  priests'  portions  of  them,  and
the  festive  meal  on  the  sacrifices,  are  given
in  oh.  vii.  II — 34.


H0MILETIC3.

Vew.  1 — ^17. — 3%e  pecux  offering  was  not  a  sacrifice  denoting  self-devotion  like  the
burnt-offering,  nor  a  tender  of  homage  like  the  meat  offering,  but  a  feast  upon  a  sacrifice,
which  God  and  man  symbolically  joined  in  partaking  of.  The  offering  consisted  of  an
animal  and  unleavened  cakes  and  (generally)  leavened  bread,  of  which  a  share  was
given  to  God's  altar  and  priests  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the  offerer  and  his  friends  on
the  other.  It  represented  the  blessedness  and  joyousness  of  communion  between  God
and  man.  "  The  character  of  these  feasts  cannot  be  mistaken.  It  was  that  of  joy-
fulness  tempered  by  solemnity,  of  solemnity  tempered  by  joyfulness.  The  worshipper'
had  submitted  to  God  an  offering  from  his  property ;  he  now  received  back  from  him  a
part  of  the  dedicated  gift,  and  thus  experienced  anew  the  same  gracious  beneficence
which  had  enabled  him  to  appear  with  his  wealth  before  the  altar.  He  therefore  con-
sumed that  portion  with  feelings  of  humility  and  thankfulness ;  but  he  was  bidden  at
once  to  manifest  those  blissful  sentiments  by  sharing  the  meat,  not  only  with  his
household,  which  thereby  was  reminded  of  the  Divine  protection  and  mercy,  but  also
with  his  needy  fellow-beings,  whether  laymen  or  servants  of  the  temple.  Thus  these
beautiful  repasts  were  stamped  both  with  religious  emotion  and  human  virtue.  The
relation  of  friendship  between  God  and  the  offerer  which  the  sacrifice  exhibited,  was
expressed  and  sealed  by  the  feast,  which  intensified  that  relation  into  one  of  an  actual
covenant ;  the  momentary  harmony  was  extended  to  a  permanent  union.  And  tliese
notions  could  not  be  expressed  more  intelligibly,  at  least  to  an  Eastern  people,  than  by
a  common  meal,  which  to  them  is  the  familiar  image  of  friendship  and  communion,  of
cheerfulness  and  joy"  (Kalisch).

I.  It  was  a  federal  feast,  reminding  th*  Israelites  op  the  iNSTrrnnoN  or  thb
OOTKNANT.  In  early  times  the  method  of  making  a  covenant  was  dividing  animals  in
halves  and  passing  between  them  (see  Gbu.  xv.  9, 10 ;  Jer.  xxxlv.  18, 19),  or  otherwise
offering  tliem  in  sacrifice  (Gen.  viii.  20 ;  xv.  9 ;  Ps.  1.  5),  and  then  feasting  together.


42  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITIOUS.  [on.  ui.  1—17.

When  Abraham's  servant  asked  for  Eehekah  for  his  master,  he  refused  to  eat  and  drink
until  he  had  made  his  agreement  (Gen.  xxiv.  33) ;  but  after  it  was  completed,  "  they
did  eat  and  drink,  ho  and  the  men  that  were  with  him  "  (Gen.  xxiv.  54).  Jacob  held
a  solemn  feast  after  he  and  Laban  had  made  a  covenant  together  (Gen.  xxxi.  54).
The  feast  upon  the  peace  offerings,  whether  offered  by  the  whole  congregation  or  by
individuals,  served  as  a  memorial  of  the  covenant  made  between  God  and  their  fathers
(see  Exod.  xxiv.  5,  where  the  name  peace  offering  is  first  used),  and  it  made  them
rejoice  in  being  God's  peculiar  people  in  union  and  communion  with  him.

II.  It  looked  fokwaed  as  well  as  backwabds.  Like  the  Passover,  it  at  once
commemorated  an  historical  event  and  prefigured  a  blessing  to  come.  The  Passover
looked  backwards  to  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  and  forward  to  "  Christ  our  passover
sacrificed  for  us;"  and  in  like  manner  the  peace  offering  feast  commemorated  the
making  of  the  covenant,  and  prefigured  the  blessed  state  of  communion  to  be  brought
about  by  the  sacrifice  of- the  cross.  Communion  is  typified  and  proved  in  the  New
Testament  as  well  as  the  Old  by  eating  and  drinking  together  (Luke  xiv,  15;
Acts  X.  41 ;  Rev.  xix.  9).

m.  Sachifiob  in  relation  to  Christians.  We  have  no  sin  offering  to  offer.  The
full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  Sacrifice  for  sins  was  made  once  for  all  upon  the  cross ;  we
have  only  to  appropriate  the  merits  of  that  one  offering  by  faith.  Nor  have  we  a  burnt
offering  to  offer.  The  full  surrender  of  himself  by  a  perfect  Man  was  once  for  all  made
in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane  and  on  Calvary  ;  we  can  but  follow  the  great  Example.
But  we  may  still  offer  the  meat  offering,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  by  giving  the  service
which  declares  us  to  be  faithful  subjects  of  God ;  arid  we  may  spiritually  offer  the  peace
offering,  whenever  with  grateful  hearts  we  offer  praise  and  thanksgiving  to  God  for
having  brought  us  into  union  and  communion  with  himself.

IV.'^Thb  Holy  Communion  is  the  special  means  of  our  exhtbitino  the  joyous
SENSE  OP  BEING  THE  CHILDREN  OF  GoD.  It  is  uot  a  siu  offering,  being  neither  a  repeti-
tion nor  a  continuation,  but  a  commemoration,  of  the  great  Sin  Offering  of  the  cross ;  it
Ib  not,  therefore,  propitiatory.  Neither  is  it  a  burnt  offering,  for  Christ's  self-surrender
cannot  be  reiterated  or  renewed,  but  only  commemorated.  But  it  answers  to  the  meat
offering,  inasmuch  as  in  it  we  offer  our  alms  and  "the  creatures  of  bread  and  wine"  as
tokens  of  our  loyalty,  and  receive  back  in  requital "  the  strengthening  and  refreshing  of  our
souls  by  the  Body  and  Blood  of  Christ."  And  it  is  a  peace  offering,  for  therein  we  feast
at  God's  hoard,  exhibiting  our  joyful  thankfulness  for  having  been  admitted  into
covenant  with  him,  offering  "  our  sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving,"  and  rejoicing
in  the  assrirance  thus  given  us  "  that  we  are  very  members  incorporate  in  the  mystical
body  of"  Christ  our  Lord.

V.  The  BLESSEDNESS  OF  A  SENSE  OF  PEACE  WITH  GoD.  Eirst,  WO  must  feel  the  need
of  reconciliation,  and  a  desire  to  rid  ourselves  of  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  it.  Then
we  must  go  to  Christ  to  have  our  sins  nailed  to  his  cross ;  and  thus,  "  being  justified  by
faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (Eom.  v.  1),  "and  the
peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall  keep  our  hearts  and  minds  through
Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  iv.  7),  "  and  the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  us  "  (Phil.  iv.  9).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Fellowship  with  God  and  man  as  illustrated  in  the  peace  offering.  Ch.  iii.;  also
vil.  11—21,  28—34;  xix.  6—8;  xxii.  29,  30;  of.  1  John  i.  6,  7;  John  vi.  33.  We
have  found  in  the  burnt  offering  the  principle  of  entire  personal  consecration,  and
in  the  meat  offering  that  of  consecrated  life-work.  We  have  seen  how  these  have  their
perfect  fulfilment  only  in  the  case  of  Jesus  Christ,  while  in  other  cases  they  are  pte-
ceded  by  an  acknowledgment  of  sin  and  shortcoming,  and  of  acceptance  as  coming
through  another.  In  the  peace  offering  we  have  a  further  stage  of  religious  experieoce.
Part  of  the  sacrifice,  whatever  it  may  be,  is  burned  on  the  altar,  part  is  assigned  te  the
priests,  and  part  is  returned  to  the  offerer,  to  constitute  the  staple  of  a  social  feast.
Moreover,  the  portion  laid  upon  the  altar  is  expressly  called  "the  bread  of  Gbd"
(niiT^  nB*!*  on';.),  ver.  11.    Hence  the  idea  of  the  offering  is  that  God  and  his  mediating


OH.  m.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  43

priests  and  his  Bacrificing  servants  are  all  partaking  of  the  one  animal,  the  one  food ;
that  is  to  say,  are  all  in  feliowshvp.  This  is  the  crown  of  religious  experience — con-
scious fellowship  with  Grod  and  with  one  another.  It  is  what  John  refers  to  when  he
says,  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and
do  not  the  truth :  hut  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship
one  with  another,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  ua  from  all  sin "
(1  John  i.  6,  7).

I.  Ik  holding  fellowship  with  God  and  man  labob  libbett  of  sbleotion  is
ALLOWED.  The  animal  presented  might  be  a  female  or  a  male,  and  even,  in  the  case  of
a  free-will  offering,  an  animal  might  be  presented  which  had  something  superfluous
(ch.  zxii.  23).  For,  if  fellowship  is  to  be  expressed,  then,  provided  God  is  presented  with
what  is  perfect,  what  remains  to  represent  man's  share  in  the  fellowship  might  fairly
enough  be  imperfect.  This  wider  range  of  selection  emphasizes  surely  the  fact  that  we
may  hold  fellowship  with  God  through  any  legitimate  thing.  We  shall  presently
indicate  the  subject-matter  of  fellowship  with  Gkid ;  meanwhile  it  is  well  to  notice  the
large  selection  allowed.

II.  It  is  a  pbeliminabt  of  fellowship  with  God  to  acknowledge  sin  and
RECEIVE  aooeptanoe  THROUGH  A  SUBSTITUTE.  God's  rights  are  thus  respected  and
acknowledged  as  our  Moral  Governor.  To  venture  into  the  charmed  circle  of  fellowship
without  the  benefit  of  the  bloodshedding  is  to  presume  before  Gud.  Hence  the  peace
offering  was  done  to  death,  and  its  blood  sprinkled  on  the  altar  before  the  feast  began.
The  fellowship  with  God,  which  has  not  been  preceded  on  the  part  of  sinners  like  our-
selves by  confession  of  si„  and  acceptance,  is  sure  to  be  hollow  at  the  best.

III.  In  any  fellowship  with  God  wb  must  eecoqnizb  his  right  to  the  best
PORTION  of  the  feast.  The  priest  was  directed  to  take  the  fat  that  covereth  the  in-
wards, and  all  the  fat  that,  is  upon  the  inwards,  with  the  kidneys  and  the  lobe  of  the
liver,  and,  in  case  of  a  sheep,  the  tail  of  fat,  and  he  was  to  burn  all  these  upon  the
»'.  ■«  of  burnt  offering,  in  the  ashes  of  the  burnt  offering.  This  was  recognizing  God's
right  to  the  best  portion — to  theses  carnis,  tlie  "  tit-bits,"  as  we  would  call  them.  Now,
it  is  only  natural  to  suppose  that,  whatever  be  the  8,ubject-matter  of  our  fellowship  with
God  he  will  enter  more  fully  into  the  fellowship  and  make  more  of  it  than  we  can  do.
This  will  be  more  apparent  when  we  notice  in  the  sequel  the  different  legitimate  sub-
jects of  fellowship.

IV.  In  FELLOWSHIP  WITH  ONE  ANOTHER,  MOREOVER,  WB  MUST  EBCC">NIZK  THK
POSSIBaiTT    OF    OTHERS    ENTERING   INTO    THE   SUBJECT   MORE   FULLY   THAN   OURSELVES.

The  priestly  class  had  the  wave  breast  and  heave  leg  assigned  to  them  as  their  share.
Next  to  God's  portion,  these  were  the  best  portions  of  the  beast.  It  indicated  plainly
the  liberal  scale  of  "  ministerial  support "  which  God  would  foster,  and  it  prompted  the
self-denial  of  true  fellowship.  For  a  feast  is  a  poor  thing  in  which  the  host  retains
the  best  things  for  himself.  His  pleasure  should  be  to  confer  the  best  on  others.  For
the  time  being  he  literally  "  esteems  others  better  than  himself."

V.  Let  us  now  indicate  the  legitimate  subject-matters  foe  fellowship  which
ARE  typified  IN  THE  PEACE  OFFERINGS.  Here,  then,  we  have  three  sets  of  individuals
partaking  of  the  one  organic  whole — God  on  his  altar,  his  mediating  priests  at  the
tabernacle,  and  the  offerer  and  his  friends.  What  does  the  organic  whole  represent?
And  the  only  answer  is,  what  God  uid  man  can  have/dlowship  iibout.  This  evidently
includes  a  very  wide  range  indeed,

1.  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  great  subject-matter  of  fellowship  as  between  God  and
man,  and  between  man  and  man.  Hence  he  is  called  "  the  bread  of  God  "  which  came
down  from  heaven,  the  bread  on  which,  so  to  speak,  God  feeds,  as  well  as  the  bread  he
gives  to  nourish  the  world.  If  we  think  for  a  moment  of  the  supreme  delight  which
God  the  Father  takes  in  his  well-beloved  Son,  it  is  only  faintly  imaged  by  the  portions
placed  upon  the  altar.  What  fellowship  must  God  have  in  looking  down  upon  his
Son  dedicated  to  life  and  death  to  redeem  and  sustain  a  sinful  race  I  Indeed,  we  cannot
enter  into  such  an  unparalleled  experience ;  no  wonder  it  should  be  said, "  All  the  fat  is
the  Lord's."  Yet  this  does  not  prevent  us  on  our  part  from  feasting  joyfully  and  by
faith  upon  Jesus.     He  becomes  the  subject-matter  of  our  fellowship  and  joy.

2.  God's  Word.  This  is  another  subject-matter  of  fellowship.  How  often  does  God
use  it  in  communicating  with  our  souls  1  and  is  it  not  the  choicest  phraseology  we  can


44  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  m.  1—17


find  in  returning  his  fellowship  through  prayer?  How  much  more,  besides,  does  God
see  in  the  Word,  and  get  out  of  it,  than  we  do !  If  the  crucible  of  criticism  is  only
revealing  the  splendours  of  the  "Word,  how  much  more  must  God  see  in  it  I  "  Thy
word  is  very  pure,  therefore  thy  servants  love  it."

3.  Owrsdves.  For  fellowship  is  having  something  in  common  with  another.  If,  then,
we  are  altogether  consecrated  to  God,  if  we  say  from  the  heart,  "  Lord,  we  are  thine ;
undertake  for  us,"  we  become,  so  to  speak,  the  medium  of  fellowship  as  between  God
and  us.  God's  delight  in  us  is  beyond  conception.  "  The  Lord  taketti  pleasure  in  them
that  fear  him,  in  them  that  hope  in  his  mercy."  And,  as  we  realize  God's  right  and
delight  in  us,  life  becomes  a  joj  ful  feast  to  us.  The  exercise  of  all  our  powers  becomes
a  conscious  joy,  a  feast  of  love,  and  all  around  us  are  the  better  for  our  being.

4.  Every  legitimate  subject  or  engagement.  For  all  may  be  made  subject-matter  of
fellowship  with  God.  Nothing  worth  living  for  but  may  be  made  the  medium  of  com-
mimion  with  him.  All  learning  will  prove  more  delightful  if  undertaken  with  God.
All  social  engagements  will  prove  more  enjoyable  if  spent  with  God.  Every  occui»tion,
in  fact,  becomes  increasingly  blissful  in  proportion  to  our  fellowship  with  God  in  it.  It
is  the  feast  of  life :  he  sups  with  us,  and  enables  us  to  sup  with  him  (Rev.  iiL  20).

5.  Every  hlessing  received  and  vow  registered.  For  this  peace  offering  was  either  the
express'ion  of  praise  for  some  mercy  received  or  the  covenant-sign  of  some  fresh  resolu-
tion. It  corresponded  very  largely  to  our  Eucharistic  celebrations.  Just  as  in  feasting
upon  the  symbols  of  our  Saviours  dying  love  we  hold  fellowship  with  God  and  with
each  other  in  thinking  of  all  we  have  received  and  all  we  now  resolve,  so  was  it  in  the
older  feast.  The  offerer,  as  he  entertained  his  friends,  rejoiced  in  the  goodness  he  had
got  from  God,  and  pledged  himself  in  gratitude.  The  peace  offering  thus  expresses
the  truth  regarding  the  fellowship  possible  between  God  and  man,  and  between  the
brotherhood. — B.  M.  K

Vers.  1—6.—^  general  view  of  offerings.  A  supplementary  account  of  the  mannerin
which  the  peace  offerings  are  to  be  presented  unto  the  Lord  is  contained  in  ch.  viL
Reserving  fuller  distinct  consideration  of  them  till  our  arrival  there,  it  may  be  in-
structive now  to  derive  some  general  lessons  from  a  comparison  between  this  present
chapter  and  the  preceding  chapters,  which  tell  us  of  the  burnt  and  meat  offerings.

I.  Eaoe  season  and  circdmstakcb  has  its  appbopbiatb  opfbeing.  Different
names  are  bestowed  upon  the  offerings.  A  general  name  for  all  is  corban,  a  gift,  a
means  of  approach.  It  may  be  "  a  burnt  offering "  (ch.  i.  3),  significant  of  entire
dedication ;  or  "  an  offering  of  an  oblation "  (ch.  ii.  1),  a  present  of  flour  or  grains,
an  ackuowled,s;ment  of  God's  goodness,  and  an  expression  of  desire  to  obtain  his
good  will ;  or  "  a  sacrifice  of  peace  "  (ch.  iii.  1),  denoting  a  wish  to  live  in  concord  with
Jehovah,  recognizing  his  will  and  enjoying  his  favour.  Thus  the  devout  Israelite
could  never  be  without  a  fitting  means  of  approach,  whatever  his  state  of  mind  or
whatever  the  crisis  in  his  life.  So  we  may  always  have  something  to  offer  our
heavenly  Father,  whether  in  suffering  or  health,  in  adversity  or  prosperity,  in  age  or
youth,  desiring  increased  sanctification,  or  blessing,  or  usefulness,  whether  thankful  for
the  past  or  requesting  grace  for  the  future.  Even  the  one  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ,
like  a  prism  that  exhibits  different  colours  according  to  our  position,  may  appear  a
diversified  offering,  according  as  the  pressing  need  of  the  moment  may  seem  to  be
deliverance  from  wrath,  peace,  happiness,  self-dedication,  temporal  prosperity,  or  the
light  of  God's  countenance.

II.  By   the   mFFBEENCE   IN   OPPEEIKGS    GoD    SEEMS    TO     DESIBE    TO    AWAKEN    AND

DEVELOP  DIFFERENT  MORAL  SENTIMENTS.  Our  chequered  experience  has  its  part  to
fulfil  in  calling  into  play  every  faculty  of  the  mind  and  spirit.  God  likes  a  good  "  all-
round"  character,  strong  at  all  points,  and  only  exercise  can  secure  this.  He  would
have  his  people  attend  to  all  the  requirements  of  the  Christian  life,  to  manifest  all  the
virtues,  knowledge  and  faith,  gratitude  and  hope,  patience  and  vigour.  We  must  not
deem  any  voyage  or  journey  superfluous ;  no  accident  but  may  benefit  us  ;  the  holiness
meeting,  the  evangeUstic  service,  the  workers'  conference, — each  may  be  profitable  in
turn.

IIL  Onk  offbkino  does  not  interfere  with  thk  pbbsentation  of  anotbeb  of
A  different  kind.    In  ver.  5  we  read  that  the  fat  of  the  peace  offering  i«  placed


CH.  III.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  *6

upon  the  buint  offering,  proljably  upon  the  remains  of  the  morning  sacrifice.  So  that
the  one  becomes  a  foundation  for  the  other,  and  clashing  is  obviated.  The  sacrifice  of
the  congregation  does  not  prevent  the  sacrifice  of  the  individual,  nor  does  the  general
offering  prove  a  hindrance  to  the  special.  Family  prayer  is  no  obstacle  to  private
supplication,  nor  does  the  stated  worship  of  the  sanctuary  exclude  extraordinary
gatherings.  The  fear  of  some  good  people  lest  regular  meditation  and  service  should
grow  formal  and  check  any  outburst  of  enthusiasm,  or  any  sudden  prompting  to
special  effort,  is  seen  to  be  groundless.'

IV.  Certain  reguiations  are  common  to  all  ofkehinos.  Burning  on  the  altar
belongs  to  bloody  and  unbloody  sacrifices,  death  and  sprinkling  of  blood  of  necessity
only  to  the  former.  In  every  case  the  offering  must  be  of  the  hest  of  its  kind,  if  an
animal  "  without  blemish,"  if  of  grain  "  fine  flour."  What  we  say  or  do  for  God
should  be  with  our  might ;  in  whatever  service  for  him  we  engage,  it  must  be  with  full
affection  and  earnest  zeal.  And  every  sacrifice  required  the  mediation  of  a  priest.
Christ  must  be  the  inspiration  of  our  acts,  the  way  of  acceptance  consecrating  all  our
gifts  of  money,  strength,  and  time.  By  him  we  die  (as  did  the  sentient  victim)  to  the
world,  by  him  we  live  to  the  glory  of  God. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  16, 17. — Jehovah's  portion.  As  the  Author  of  life  and  the  Giver  of  all  bounty,
God  might  have  claimed  the  whole  of  every  sacrifice.  But  he  discriminated  between
the  parts  of  the  victim,  sometimes  reserving  for  himself  the  greater  share,  at  other  times
only  a  small  proportion  of  that  presented  to  him.  In  the  peace  offering  there  was  selected
for  the  altar,  as  God's  perquisite,  the  "  fat "  of  the  animal,  and  the  remainder  went  to
the  priests  and  the  offerer.

I.  Learn  that  not  the  meanest  but  the  choicest  portions  must  be  eesebved
FOR  Gton's  SEKvicE.  Low  conceptions  of  his  majesty  and  perfection  lead  to  such
religious  observance  as  is  an  insult  rather  than  an  honour.  To  deler  reading  the
Scriptures  or  prayer  till  the  mind  and  body  are  fatigued,  is  an  infraction  of  this  rule.
Let  our  freshest  moments,  our  sweetest  morsels  of  thought  and  p9wer,  be  set  apart  for  the
Lordl  And  similarly,  ask  not,  How  near  can  1  walk  to  the  dividing  line  between  the
Church  and  the  world  ?  or.  Which  of  my  amusements  can  I  with  least  self-denial  renounce
in  order  to  do  his  will?  May  we  not  behold  the  same  lesson  inculcated  in  the  distinc-
tion indicated  in  this  chapter,  between  a  peace  and  a  burnt  offering  1  The  latter,  being
wholly  devoted  to  the  Lord,  must  con.sist  of  a  male  victim ;  the  former,  intended  princi-
pally for  the  participation  of  the  offerers,  may  be  male  or  female  (ver.  1).  It  cannot  be
right,  ttien,to  imagine  that  any  qualifications  will  suffice  for  entire  consecration  to  God's
work.  Ministers  and  missionaries  should  be  numbered  amongst  men  of  highest  intellect
and  in  tensest  spirituality.

II.  See  how  God  accepts  the  opfbrinos  of  his  creatures  ab  the  materials
FOB  his  delight  AND  Gi.ORT.  The  bumt  fat  is  "  food  "  for  the  fire  offering,  and  is
termed  in  another  place,  the  "  bread  of  God."  It  becomes  "  a  sweet  savour  "  that  is,
eminently  pleasing  to  the  Holy  One.  In  the  word  "  food  "  we  discern  the  purport  of
the  peace  offering  as  a  sacrificial  meal,  in  which,  by  returning  to  God  what  he  had
previously  bestowed,  the  worshipper:  1.  Acknowledged  his  indebtedness  and  thanks.
2.  Was  made  a  guest  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  inasmuch  as  he  ate  part  of  the  animal
that  was  "  food  for  the  fire  offering ; "  and  3.  Had  all  his  other  provisions  sanctified  for
the  sustenance  of  life,  being  alloweid  to  consume  the  entire  portions  of  animals  not  fit
for  sacrifice.

III.  Recollect  the  obligatoriness  of  Divine  statutes.  1,  They  prohibit  as
wdl  as  command.  "  Thou  shalt  not "  occupies  as  prominent  a  position  in  the  Decalogue
as  "  Thou  shalt."  Not  only  does  man  need  both  to  try  him  (as  with  our  first  parents)
and  direct  him,  but  one  really  involves  the  other.  Observe  that  what  man  might  not
consume  himself  might  be  properly  consumed  on  the  altar;  so  the  adoration  and
unquestioning  fidelity  that  are  out  of  place  in  reference  to  any  finite  beings,  are  becoming
m  relation  to  God.  2.  They  are  equally  binding  on  all  generations.  They  respect  us
IS  well  as  our  fathers,  and  herein  the  laws  of  God  differ  from  the  mutable  proclamations
of  human  lawgivers.  The  precepts  of  God  only  change  with  a  new  dispensation.  This
is  the  meaning  of  the  word  "  perpetual."  There  is  a  sense,  indeed,  in  which  no  Divine
•itatute  alters,  being  continued  in  spirit  though  the  letter  may  have  varied.     3.  j%.ey


4*  THE  BOOK  OF  LBVITIUCJS.  L™.  in.  1—17

ent»r  into  all  phases  of  life.  The  prohibition  was  to  be  acted  upon  in  "  the  dwellings  "  ai
well  as  at  the  tabernacle.  Let  us  not  make  too  great  a  distinction  between  the  homage
of  the  house  of  God  and  the  home  or  the  workshop  and  the  factory  I  It  is  the
characteristic  of  the  gospel  times  to  have  the  Law  written  on  the  heart,  so  that  we  carry-
it  with  us  wherever  we  ga    Tbui  are  we  prevented  from  sinning  against  God. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  peace  offering.  We  may  get  •  dear  conception  of  the  peace
offering  by  noticing  the  points  of  difference  between  it  and  the  burnt  offering  described
in  the  first  chapter  of  this  book.

I.  It  differs  in  its  title.     1.  The  burnt  offering  is  in  the  Hebrew  called  (rh\y)  olah.

(1)  This  term  comes  from  (rb)i)  alah,  to  ascend.  The  reason  is  that  the  whole  animal
was  converted,  by  the  action  of  the  fire  of  the  altar,  into  flame  and  sparks,  vapour  and
smoke,  in  which  forms  it  rose  from  the  altar,  and  as  it  were  ascended  to  God.  (2)  It
described  the  completeness  in  which  Christ  offered  himself  to  God  in  the  flames  of  the
"spirit  of  burning"  (Heb.  ix.  14).  (3)  It  also  sets  forth  how  completely  we  should
devote  ourselves  as  living  sacrifices  to  God  CEom.  xii.  1),  and  how  constantly  our
thoughts. and  affections  should  rise  into  the  heavens  (Phil.  iii.  20;  Col.  iii.  1 — 3).  2.
This  is  called  (d'0^»)  shelawim.  (1)  The  verb  from  which  this  noun  is  derived  is  (d^»)
shalem,  to  complete  or  make  whole ;  and  the  noun  is  well  rendered  peace  offering,  (2)  It
was,  therefore,  considered  as  making  up  that  which  was  lacking  in  the  sinner,  in  order  to
reconcile  him  to  Grod.  In  cases  of  distress,  peace  offerings  as  well  as  burnt  offerings
were  offered  up  (Judg.  xx.  26).     So  are  we  "  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son."

(3)  In  making  covenants,  or  entering  into  the  covenant,  peace  offerings  were  associated
with  burnt  offerings  in  like  manner  (Exod.  xxiv.  5).  Paul  manifestly  alludes  to  the
peace  offering  in  Eph,  ii.  14 — 19.  "  He  is  our  peace  "  is  equivalent  to  saying,  "  He  is
our  peace  offering."

IL  It  diffees  in  its  victims.  1.  In  respect  to  the  kinds.  (1)  Three  classes  of
animal  were  specified  as  proper  for  the  holocaust :  there  were  those  of  the  herd ;  there
were  those  of  the  flock  j  and  there  were  those  of  the  fowls.  (2)  In  the  peace  offering
there  are  only  two.  Animals  from  the  herd  and  from  the  flock  are  specified,  but  there
is  no  mention  of  turtle-doves  or  young  pigeons  here.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  it
would  be  difiBcult  to  treat  fowls  as  peace  offerings  were  treated  in  relation  to  the  fat  •
and  the  animals  are  so  small  that  if  divided  as  peace  offerings  the  portions  would  be
small.  There  is  thoughtful  consideration  for  the  welfare  of  his  people  in  all  the  laws  of
God.  2.  In  respect  to  the  sexes.  (1)  The  animals  devoted  as  burnt  offerings  were
males.  This  is  specified  in  relation  to  the  burnt  offering  of  the  herd.  Also  to  that  of
the  fiock.  Masculine  pronouns  are  used  in  relation  to  that  of  the  fowls.  The  neuter
"  it,"  ver.  15,  should  have  been  rendered  "  him  "  (see  Hebrew  text).  (2)  In  respect  to  the
peace  offering,  the  matter  of  sex  is  optional.  (3)  The  reason  may  be  this.  The  burnt
offering  appears  to  have  been  partly  an  expression  of  adoration,  in  which  it  is  proper  to
give  to  God  all  ova  strength  and  excellence.  The  peace  offering  was  divided  between
God,  the  priests,  and  the  offerer.  Here,  then,  was  a  feast  of  friendship,  and  the  sexes
are  helpful  to  our  friendships.

III.  It  differs  in  the  treatment  of  its  victims.  1.  There  were  points  of
agreement  here.  (1)  The  offering  must  be  without  blemish.  Acceptable  service  must
be  without  blemish,  and  this  can  only  be  rendered  to  God  through  Christ  (Jude  24  25)

(2)  The  hand  of  the  offerer  must  be  laid  on  the  head  of  the  offering.  This  was  intended
as  a  solemn  transfer  of  sin,  and  acknowledgment  that  the  suffering  is  vicarious.  How
graphically  expressive  of  the  faith  of  the  sinner  in  the  great  Saviour  1  (3)  The  sacrifice
must  be  killed  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  Christ  is  the  door.  There  is  no  other
entrance  into  the  holy  place  of  his  Church  on  earth  but  by  him.  The  holy  led  to  the
holiest.  If  we  do  not  belong  to  his  spiritual  Church  on  earth,  we  cannot  belong  ix>  his
glorious  Church  in  heaven.  There  was  a  visible  Church  near,  but  still,  in  the  bulk  of
its  members,  otiUide  the  door !    Still  there  are  multitudes  only  in  the  outer  courts

(4)  The  blood  must  be  sprinkled  upon  the  altar  round  about.  It  is  by  the  Nood  ot
Jesus  that  we  enter  the  "  new  and  living  way."  2.  But  there  were  points  of  difference
(1)  Instead  of  the  holocaust  the  fat  only  was  offered  here  (vers.  3—6).  The  M  in  the
peace  offering  appears  to  correspond  to  the  oil  in  the  meat  offering.  (2)  In  this  view  it
will  represent  thoM  graces  of  the  mind  which  are  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit     (3)  Burn*


CH.  III.  1—17,]  THE  BOOK  OP  l.EVmCUS.  47

offerings  and  peace  offerings  were  consumed  together  (ver,  5).  The  great  sacrifice  of
Christ  prepares  the  altar  for  sacrifices  of  praise.  These  were  not  accepted  till  we  were
reconciled  through  Mm. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  6 — 17.— The  peace  offering  of  the  flock.  The  ceremony  in  relation  to  this  is
almost  identical  with  that  of  the  herd  already  described.  Nevertheless,  there  |ar«  m
few  expressions  in  the  course  of  the  description  which  are  not  found  in  the  former
paragraph.     We  call  attention  to —

I.  The  dbsoeiption  op  the  fat  of  the  lamb.  Vers.  8 — 10.  1.  Note  the  expres-
lion,  "  The/at  thereof,  and  the  whole  rump."  ^  The  "  and"  here  is  expletive  rather  than
copulative,  thus, "  The  fat  thereof,  even  the  whole  rump."  But  the  "  rump,"  as  vulgarly
understood  among  us,  is  muscle,  not  fat.  The  part  here  indicated  is  the  tail.  This  is
evident  from  what  follows,  viz.  "  It  shall  be  taken  off  hard  by  the  back-bone."  The
tail  of  the  sheep  even  in  our  climate  is  fat,  but  in  the  East  it  is  remarkably  so,  some
of  them  weighing  from  twelve  to  forty  pounds.  2.  The  portions  burnt  were  verif
inflammable.  (1)  Here,  in  addition  to  the  fat  of  the  tail,  was  all  the  fat  of  the  inwards,
which  in  a  sheep  might  weigh  eight  or  ten  pounds.  This,  when  ignited,  would  be
consumed,  whatever  else  may  have  been  laid  upon  the  altar.  (2)  These  parts  were
considered  to  be  the  seat  of  the  animal  passions.  In  this  view  the  lesson  of  their
consumption  upon  the  altar  would  be  that  our  passions  should  be  in  complete  sub-
jection to  God.  Also  to  impress  upon  us  that,  if  not  consumed  in  the  milder  fires  of
his  love,  how  obnoxious  they  are  to  the  fierce  fires  of  his  wrath !  (3)  The  rapid
consumption  of  the  fat  of  lambs  upon  the  altar  is  therefore  appropriately  used  to
describe  the  extermination  of  the  wicked.  "But  the  wicked  shall  perish,  and  the
enemies  of  the  Lord  shall  be  as  the  fat  of  lambs :  they  shall  consume ;  into  smoke
shaH  they  consume  away  "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  20).  Fire,  it  would  seem,  will  be  the  chief
inutrunieiit  which  Providence  will  summon  for  the  destruction  of  the  forces  of  Anti-
christ (Rev.  xvii.  16;  xviii.  9;  lix.  3,  20;  xx.  9,  14).

II.  The  expression,  "  food  of  the  offering  uadb  by  fire  unto  the  Lord  "
(ver.  11).  1.  Thus,  what  was  consumed  by  fire  is  called  Ood'sfood.  (1)  Some  construe
this  to  mean  that  what  is  consumed  is  food  for  the  fire.  But  this  is  to  give  no  infor-
mation. Nor  would  this  be  a  sufficient  reason  for  the  prohibition  of  the  fat  as  food  for
an  Israelite  (see  vers.  16,  17).  Note,  the  fat  intermingled  with  the  flesh  was  not
forbidden,  but  those  portions  only  which  were  prescribed  to  be  offered  upon  the  altar
(see  Neh.  viii.  10).  (2)  But  how  could  God  be  said  to  feast  upon'  such  food?  Not
literally,  certainly  (see  Ps.  1. 13).  But  figuratively.  Thus  his  attributes  of  justice  and
mercy  are,  so  to  speak,  hungry  for  satisfaction ;  and  this  satisfaction  they  find  in  that
sacrifice  of  Christ,  in  virtue  of  which  he  is  not  only  merciful,  but  just  in  justifying  the
ungodly  (Rom.  iii.  24 — 26).  (3)  To  avail  ourselves  of  this  mercy  of  God,  we  must
justify  him,  viz.  by  hearty  repentance  and  true  faith.  While  God  magnifies  his  justice
in  his  mercy,  we,  too,  must  magnify  his  justice  in  his  mercy.  2.  The  portions  of  the
peace  offering  not  consumed  upon  the  altar  were  eaten  hy  men.  (1)  Here,  then,  was
the  expression  of  a  fellowship  between  God  and  men,  which  is  established  through
sacrifice.  This  glorious  privilege  is  set  forth  also  in  the  Christian  Eucharist.  We
feast  with  the  Lord  at  his  table  (1  Cor.  x.  21).  (2)  Here  also  was  fellowship  between
religious  men.  The  priest  had  his  portion,  and  the  offerer  his.  That  the  offerer  should
feast  with  a  Gentile  would  have  been  prufanity.  So  the  fellowship  of  Christians  is  with
the  holy  universe  (Heb.  xii.  22 — 24).

III.  The  note  pkohibitino  the  eating  of  blood.  Ver.  17.  1.  What  are  the  reasons
for  this  ?  (1)  The  first  is  that  the  blood  is  the  life  of  the  flesh.  The  prohibition  of
blood  as  food  is  a  Noachian  precept,  and  this  reason  is  given  there.  The  object  is  to
set  a  store  upon  life  (see  Gen.  ix.  4 — 6).  (2)  The  sfecond  is  that  blood  is  given  upon
the  altar  to  make  atonement  for  the  soul,  viz.  Ufe  for  the  life  (Lev.  xvii.  10 — 14).  The
•toning  blood  of  Christ  must  not  be  treated  as  a  common  thing  (Heb.  x.  29).  2.  We
may  here  refer  to  a  circumstance  in  connection  with  the  bleeding  of  the  sacrifice.  (1)
The  Jews  tell  us  that  the  animal,  after  the  slaughtering,  was  suspended  on  hooks  near
the  place  of  rings  for  the  removing  of  the  skin.  How  suggestive  of  the  hanging  of  Jesus
upon  the  tree  of  his  cross  1  (2)  The  next  thing  was  the  opening  of  the  heart,  to  let
the  remaining  blood  escape.    That  this  should  happen  to  Christ  was  a  special  subject  oi


48  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  iii.  1— 17.


prophecy  (Zech.  xii,  10;  John  xir.  34).  (3)  To  human  appearance  this  prophecy
seems  to  have  heen  fulfilled  as  by  accident.  The  same  remark  may  be  applied  to  the
fulfilment  of  many  prophecies.  There  are  no  mere  accidents.  The  careful  hand  of  k
all  wise  Providence  is  in  everything. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 16. — The  foundation  of  fellowship  with  God.  The  "sacrifice  of  peace
offering  "  was  one  of  fellowship.  Its  distinctive  features  are  brought  out  in  ch.  vii.
(see  Homily  there).  The  sacrifice  enjoined  in  this  (third)  chapter  is  preliminary  to  the
sacred  feast  which  was  to  follow.  Its  significance  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  act  of
communion  with  God  could  only  come  after  the  oblation  had  been  presented.  We  learn,
therefore —

I.  That  sacebd  jot  befobe  GJod  can  only  follow  reconciliation  with  him.  The
Hebrew  people  might  not  come  to  the  tabernacle  and  have  a  solemn  feast  near  the
sacred  Presence  until  the  animal  had  been  slain  and  its  blood  sprinkled  on  the  altar
(vers.  1,  2,  8,  13).  Conscious  unworthiness  must  first  be  taken  away  by  the  shed
blood  of  bull  or  lamb,  and  then  priest  and  people  might  rejoice  together  before  the
Lord.  First  purity,  then  peace  (Jas.  iii.  17).  We  may  aspire  (1)  to  sit  down  with
the  people  of  God  at  the  table  here,  or  (2)  to  mingle  with  those  who  shall  partake  of
the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb  hereafter ;  but  there  is  no  welcome  from  lips  Divine
until  sin  has  been  confessed  and  forgiven.  First,  penitence  at  the  cross  of  the  Eedeemer
and  trust  in  his  atoning  sacrifice ;  then  fellowship  with  God  and  his  people.

II.  That  a  full  self-bubbender  must  precede  the  act  of  communion.  When
the  animal  had  been  slain,  the  priest  was  to  present  to  God  the  fat,  the  kidneys,  etc.
(vers.  3,  4,  9,  10,  14,  15),  special  stress  being  laid  on  "the  inwards;"  the  best  and
richest  parts,  those  which  had  been  the  life  of  the  animal,  were  offered  to  the  Lord,  as
representing  the  animal  itself,  and  so  the  offerer  himself.  He  symbolically  offered
himself  to  God  through  these  vital  parts  of  the  victim.  When  we  draw  near  to  a
service  of  sacred  fellowship  and  joy,  or  when  we  anticipate  the  communion  of  the  skies,
we  should  act  on  the  truth  that  "  our  God  has  commanded  our  strength  "  (Ps.  Ixviii.
28),  that  the  appeal  for  his  mercy  through  Christ  should  be  accompanied  with  a  free,
fiiU  surrender  of  our  whole  selves,  the  consecration  of  our  very  best,  the  "inward
parts  " — the  understanding,  the  affections,  the  will — to  him  and  his  service.

III.  That  faith  in  Christ  and  the  consecration  of  ourselves  result  in  his
PEKFECT  pleasure  WITH  U8 :  "  It  is  an  oflering  ...  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord  "
(▼ers.  5,  16).  When  the  oblation  was  complete,  then  the  offerer  stood  in  the  position
of  one  w  ho  might  rejoice  in  the  Divine  Presence  and  feast  with  the  holy  people  and
with  God.  Accepted  in  Christ,  and  having  "  yielded  ourselves  unto  God  "  iif  unreserved
consecration,  we  may  feel  that  God's  good  pleasure,  his  full  Divine  complacency,  rests
upon  us;  we  may  walk  in  the  light  of  his  reconciled  countenance  all  the  day  long.
Two  supplementary  truths  offer  themselves  to  otir  thought  in  these  verses.  1.  That
every  soul  must  personally  and  spiritually  engage  in  acceptable  service.  The  offerer  was
"  to  lay  his  hand  on  the  head  of  the  offering," — strikinc;  and  significant  act,  by  which  he
clearly  intimated  his  consciousness  of  sin,  and  his  desire  that  the  victim  might  repre-
sent him  in  the  sight  of  God — its  blood  his  life,  its  organs  liis  capacities.  We  may  not
trust  to  our  mere  bodily  presence  while  God  is  being  approached  and  besought,  or  while
Christ's  redeeming  work  is  being  pleaded,  or  while  words  of  dedication  are  being
uttered  in  prayer.  There  must  be  the  positive,  sympathetic,  ]iersonal  participation,  or
we  stand  outside  the  service  and  the  blessing.  2.  That  we  must  intelligently  discrimi-
nate between  the  obligatory  and  the  optional  in  the  service  of  God.  Certain  things  were
imperative  in  the  act  of  worship,  other  things  were  left  to  the  choice  of  the  individual.
In  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  the  worship  of  God  there  are  things  essential  that  none
may  depart  from,  «.y.  the  humble  heart,  the  act  of  faith  and  self-surrender,  the  spirit
of  obedience  toward  God  and  of  love  toward  man ;  there  are  other  things  which  ai«
left  to  personal  discretion,  e.g.  times  and  methods  of  devotion,  scale  of  contribution,
Bphere  of  usefulness.  Yet  in  these  optional  matters  we  are  not  to  act  inconsiderately
or  irrationally,  but  according  to  the  direction  of  wisdom  and  the  teacliings  of  expe-
rience.—0.

Vcr.  17— The  gvnntfvn  nf  saer»d  feelinff.    No  little  stress  {g  laid  on  the  prohibition


?H.  m.  1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUa  i*


of  two  things— the  fat  and  the  blood  of  slain  animals :  it  was  to  be  "  a  perpetual
statute  for  your  generations  throughout  all  your  dwellings.'"  The  fat  thus  inteidicted
was  that  which  was  offered  in  sacrifice  (vers.  3,  4,  9, 10),  not  that  which  was  inter-
lined with  the  lean  (Neh.  viii.  10).     We  may  look  at —

I.  The  meaning  of  this  prohibition  in  theib  case.  Evidently  both  the  fat  and
the  blood  were  disallowed  as  food  because  they  were  offered  in  sacrifice  to  Jehovah.
On  this  account  they  were  to  be  preserved  sacred.  They  were  not  to  be  treated  as
ordinary  things,  vulgarized,  lowered  in  public  estimation ;  a  feeling  of  their  sacredness
was  to  be  cherished  and  carefully  preserved  by  daily  habit.  To  be  continually  using
these  parts  as  meat  and  drink  at  table  would  have  the  effect  which  was  to  be  de-
precated. It  was,  therefore,  an  act  of  religious  duty  to  abstain  from  Shem.  By  such
abstinence  their  feelings  of  reverence  and  piety  would  be  guarded  and  preserved.  Was
it  not  for  a  similar  reason,  viz.  that  no  violation  should  be  done  to  the  sacred  sentiment
of  matei'nity,  that  the  law  was  thrice  repeated,  "  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  his
mother's  milk"  (Exod.  xxiii.  19,  etc.)?  The  influence  of  daily  habit  on  the  finer
sentiments  of  the  soul  is  very  gradual  and  imperceptible,  but  in  the  end  it  is  very
great :  it  is  often  decisive  for  good  or  evil.

II.  Its  bearing  on  odb  own  religious  life.  We  are  to  guard  most  sedulously  our
sacred  feelings ;  to  "  keep  our  heart  above  all  keeping  "  (Prov.  iv.  23).  Among  other
perils  to  be  avoided  is  that  of  allowing  sacred  things  to  be  vulgarized  by  too  frequent
use,  to  lose  their  force  and  virtue  by  reason  of  over-familiarity.  With  this  end  in
view,  there  will  be,  on  the  part  of  the  prudent,  a  certain  measure  of :  1.  Wise  limitation.
This  will  apply  to  (1)  the  use  of  the  Divine  name  (the  avoidance  of  profanity) ;  (2}  the
employment  of  pious  phraseology  in  ordinary  speech  (the  avoidance  of  offensive  and
injurious  cant) ;  (3)  the  repetition  of  sacred  formulas  (the  avoidance  of  a  Pharisaic
formalism) ;  (4)  the  multiplication  of  holy  days  (Rom.  xiv.  6).  (5)  These  matters,  and
such  as  these,  are  questions  of  expediency,  to  be  determined  hy  practical  Christian
wisdom.  Both  extremes  are  to  be  avoided — the  neglect  of  good  things  and  so  the  loss  of
spiritual  help^and  their  excessive  use  resulting  in  the  loss  of  the  sense  of  'flcredness.  The
latter  is  a  subtle  and  strong  evil,  for  when  sacred  things  have  lost  their  sanctity  to  us,
there  is  little  left  to  elevate  and  restore.  "  If  the  salt  have  lost  its  savour,"  etc.  But
beside  wise  limitation,  there  must  be :  2.  Positive  spiritual  endeavour.  It  will  by  no
means  sufSce  to  conform  to  good  rules  of  speech  and  behaviour :  such  abstinences  will
not  preserve  a  reverent  and  loving  spirit ;  we  must  think  seriously  and  pray  earnestly.

(1)  By  serious  thoaght  we  must  be  frequently  realizing  how  great  is  our  indebtedness
to  the  heavenly  Father ;  how  real  is  our  need,  as  sinners,  of  the  Divine  Saviour ;  how
urgent  is  our  want,  as  weak  and  struggling  souls,  of  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit!

(2)  By  earnest  prayer  we  must  be  drawing  down  from  on  high  that  spiritual  replenish-
ment which  God  is  willing  to  bestow  on  all  seeking  souls,  and  without  which  all  life
will  languish,  all  means  and  methods  prove  fruitless  and  vain. — 0.

Vers.  1 — 17. — Th/i  peace  offerings,  also  called  tJianh  offerings  or  salvation  offerings.
The  twofold  object — to  acknowledge  salvation  received,  to  sujiplicate  salvation  desired.
Three  kinds — praise  offerings,  vow  offerings,  free-will  offerings.  Considerable  freedom
permitted  in  them,  though  still  restrictions  observed.  Male  and  female  victims,  of  the
herd  and  flock,  but  only  those  without  blemish.  No  pigeons  permitted,  because  a  pair
of  pigeons  insuffioient  for  the  sacrificial  meal,  which  was  so  important  a  constituent  of
the  service.  Combination  of  the  burnt  sacrifice  with  the  peace  offering  in  the  consump-
tion by  flre  of  the  suet  or  fat  of  the  internal  organs,  and  of  the  fat  tail  of  the  sheep.
The  fat  and  the  blood  offered  to  the  Lord  in  a  special  manner,  by  fire  and  sprinkling
«  on  the  altar  round  about."

Ver.  1, — The  offering  distinguished.  Oblation  denotes  its  voluntary  character;
eacriflce  its  intimate  connection  with  the  altar,  that  is,  its  participation  in  the  atoning
significance  of  all  the  bloody  sacrifices  which  carried  in  them  the  idea  of  reconciliation
with  God  through  the  blood  of  the  covenant.  Peace  offering,  the  specific  distinction,
recognizing  the  fact  that,  whether  the  prominent  feeling  expressed  was  praise  or
prayer,  still  the  offerer  was  standing  on  the  ground  of  covenar'''  fellowship  with  God.
We  may  take  these  offerings  generally  to  symbolize  salvation  at  a  realized  fact.  We
^find  under  this  general  fact  these  three  constituent  spiritual  realities  included:  L

XiEYiriOTTB.  E


30  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [on.  m.  1—17

latercowrse  re-estalUshed  letween  God  and  man,  and  expressed  in  grateful  priuse  and
willing  dependence.  II.  Salvation  as  a  fact  resting  on  continued  faith ;  the  three  parts
of  the  sacrifice  being  the  offerer's  part,  the  priest's  part,  and  Jehovah's  part, — all  essential
and  harmonized  in  one  offering,  ill.  Joy  of  salvation,  both  individual  and  social,
typified  in  the  sacrificial  meal,  God,  as  it  were,  giving  back  the  victim  to  be  the  source
of  delight  both  to  the  priest  and  the  offerer.  On  each  of  these  points  the  details  of  the
sacrifice  have  their  significance.

I.  Eeconciliation.     Ee-established  intercourse  between  God  and  man,  grateful
praise,  willing  dependence.    Here  we  may  notice  the  two  sides  of  the  sacrifice :  that
turned  towa/rds  man — it  is  willingly  brought,  it  is  a  valuable  gift,  it  is  brought  as  a
peace  offering  to  give  praise  or  to  accompany  vows  and  prayers ;  that  turned  towards
Ood,  it  is  a  confession  of  sin,  an  obedience  rendered  to  the  Law,  a  renewal  of  the
covenant,  a  confirmation  of  the  promises,  a  seal  of  grace.    Intercourse  between  man  and
God.    1.  Distinguish  between  the  truth  as  set  forth  in  Scripture,  and  man's  self-derived
ideas.    (1)  Consider  the  non-scriptural  views:  the  notions  of  the  mystic  or  of  the
transcendentalist — man's  lifting  himself  to  God,  or  being  lifted  up  by  ecstasy;   the
rationalistic  conception  that  God  and  man  meet  in  nature,  or  in  human  consciousness,
and  that  such  intercourse  in  the  mere  laws  of  fact  or  thought  is  sufficient.    All  such
reconciliation  ignores  the  fallen  state  of  man,  can  supply  no  gospel  of  peace,  is  contra-
dicted by  the  plain  development  of  righteousness  in  the  course  of  the  world ;  and  there-
fore the  necessity  made  evident  that  man,  as  going  on  to  meet  the  future,  should  be
prepared  to  meet  his  God  in  judgment,  in  the  great  adjustment  of  right  and  vfrong.
The  mere  moralist  falls  into  a  similar  error  when  he  teaches  that  the  partial  obedience
of  human  life  to  Divine  Law,  the  recognition  practically  of  an  ideal  moral  standard,  is  a
reconciliation  between  the  highest  moral  Being  and  his  creature.     (2)  Place  opposite
to  these  defective  and  erroneous  views  the  teaching  of  Scripture.     Out  of  the  orio'inal
source  of  all,  the  will  of  Ood,  that  is,  his  infinite  nature  or  character,  in  actual  relation
to  his  universe,  comes  forth  the  reconciliation.    Revelation  from  the  beginning  an  invi-
tation of  God  to  man  to  intercourse.     The  Mosaic  Law  was  the  development  of  the
preceding  covenant,  which,  under  patriarchal  ministry,  was  a  gospel  of  peace.     The
reconciliation  was  placed  on  the  foundation  of  sacrifice,  that  is,  man's  surrender,  blending
with  God's  promise  of  forgiveness  and  life,  the  preservation  of  righteousness  in  the  ac-
ceptance of  man's  homage  to  the  Divine  character,  the  assurance  of  peace  in  a  covenant
of  friendship  and  interchange  of  love.    2.  This  intercourse  between  God  and  man
being  thus  established,  it  is  expressed  in  grateful  praise  and  willing  dependence  on
man's  part,  in  the  bestowment  oi  peace  and  sancliflcation  on  God's  part.     The  peace
offering  typified  the  life  of  man  as  a  continual  reciprocation  of  covenant  intercourse :
the  presentation  of  gifts  to  God,  the  acceptance  in  return  of  Divine  grace.     Thus  was
religion  set  forth.     It  is  not  separated  from  the  earthly  life,  but  it  is  its  consecration.
It  is  not  a  meritorious  purchase  of  Divine  favour,  or  turning  away  of  wrath,  or  covering
of  the  reality  of  transgression  with  sacrifice,  but  a  thankful  dedication  of  saved  life,  a
subjection  of  all  to  the  will  of  the  Father,  an  appropriation  of  heavenly  gifts.    Perhaps
the  fact  that  no  poor  man's  offering  is  prescribed  may  indicate  that  the  truth  was
already  implied,  though  not  so  distinctly  expressed  as  afterwards  in  the  Psalms  and
Prophets,  that  God  would  have  mercy  and  not  sacrifice,  that  he  laid  no  stress  upon  the
actual  presentation  of  a  peace  offering  so  long  as  the  man  himself  and  his  life  were
offered  in  devout  obedience  and  thankful  spirit.     "  Whoso  offereth  praise  glorifieth  me :
and  to  him  that  ordereth  his  conversation  aright  will  I  show  the  salvation  of  God  "
(Ps.  1.  23).

II.  Salvation  ab  a  fact  bests  on  continued  faith.  In  every  peace  offering
there  were  three  parts — ^the  offerer's,  the  priest's,  Jehovah's.  On  each  occasion,
therefore,  the  main  elements  of  salvation  were  recognized,  which  were  these:  1.  Free
grace.  2.  Mediation.  3.  Self -surrender.  In  each  the  offerer's  faith  makes  salvation  a
fact.  1.  In  bringing  a  peace  offering  to  Jehovah,  the  worshipper  cast  himself  by  faith
on  the  free  grace  which  opened  the  way  for  him  to  reconciliation  and  peace.  "We
love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  The  Jew  failed  to  see  this  freedom  of  Divine  love,
and  hence  became  a  bond  slave  under  the  power  of  his  ritual.  The  gospel  has  exalted
the  Divine  element  so  high  above  the  human  in  the  advent  of  the  Son  of  God,  that  it
is  no  longer  possible  to  hide  it.     "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  him-


cH.  IILI— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  51

lelf."  "The  Lord  hath  visited  his  people."  We  build  all  on  the  foundation  stone
which  God  himself  hath  laid.  We  begin  with  the  person  of  Christ,  divinely  glorious.
Our  faith  lays  hold  of  eternal  life  in  him  who  was  the  Life  and  the  Light  of  men.  2.
The  offerer  brought  the  victim,  but  the  priestly  mediation  was  a  necessary  part  of  the
ceremony.  Salvation  as  a  fact  rests  not  only  upon  the  free  and  infinite  love  of  God,  but
upon  the  manifested  righteousness  and  ceaseless  intercession  of  the  Saviour.  "  Aaron's
sons  sprinkle  the  blood  ;  Aaron's  sons  burn  the  fat  on  the  altar  on  the  burnt  sacrifice ;
a  sweet  savour  imto  the  Lord."  Our  life  as  a  saved  life  is  a  continual  application  to
ourselves  by  faiih  of  the  merit  and  ef&oacy  of  the  Saviour's  atonement  and  ministry  as
our  great  Iligh  Priest.  The  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  "  is  the  food  of  our  thoughts,  the
joy  of  our  hearts,  the  strength  of  our  obedience.  Salvation  as  a  fact  is  realized
forgiveness,  progressive  holiness  in  communion  with  Christ,  victory  through  his  grace
over  the  world  and  all  enemies,  and  at  last  participation  in  the  glorification  of  the
Divine  Man,  and  admission  into  his  eternal  Isingdom.  3.  Self-surrender  was  both  in
the  presentation  of  the  offering  and  in  the  position  of  the  offerer,  laying  his  hand  on
the  head  of  the  victim,  liilling  it,  and  giving  up  the  assigned  portions  to  the  altar  and
fire ;  all  was  confession,  consecration,  obedience.  Our  faith  is  essentially  a  yielding  of
ourselves  to  God.  We  find  our  salvation  a  fact,  just  as  we  "  put  off  the  old  man  and
put  on  the  new  man; "just  as  we  "count  all  things  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  Our  offering  is  a  peace  offering,  both  of  the  past
and  for  the  future.  We  are  no  longer  our  own.  Christ  is  all  to  us,  and  so  we  are
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's.

III.  Jot  of  salvation,  typified  in  the  sacrificial  meal,  in  which  the  representatives
of  God  and  man,  in  the  priests  and  offerer,  met  together  in  social  festivity.  This  was
anticipation  of  the  sacred  meal,  the  Supper  of  the  Lord,  in  which  sacrificial  joy  was
celebrated  in  the  new  society,  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  Christian's  joy  is  prsf-
eminently  joy  of  salvation.  He  builds  all  happiness  on  the  fact  of  reconciliation  with
God.  He  lives  his  new  life  not  unto  himself,  but  unto  Christ  and  to  Christ's  people.
The  social  gladness,  which  was  an  element  in  the  peace  offering,  points  to  the  fact  that
the  redemption  of  Christ  effects  a  deliverance  of  society  from  its  bondage  and  misery,
as  well  as  the  individual  soul  from  its  sin  and  ruin.  Such  a  message  is  specially
wanted  in  these  times,  when  the  world  groans  under  its  burdens,  and  strives  in  vain
after  a  true  liberty  and  peace.  What  offerings  are  laid  on  the  altar  of  war !  Yet  they
are  consumed  in  vain.  There  is  no  happy  banquet  of  fellowship  and  brotherhood
coming  out  of  such  sacrifices.  God  invites  us  to  the  joy  of  a  new-made  world.  He
bids  us  proclaim  the  way  of  peace  to  be  through  the  obedience  of  Christ.  How  sweet
the  savour  to  the  Lord  when  the  whole  human  family  shall  offer  up  its  peace  offering,
acceptable,  because  identified  with  the  offering  of  Calvary,  uniting  all  together  in  a
sacred  festivity  of  gladness  1 — B.

Vers.  3,  4. — "  The  fat  that  oovereth  the  inwards ; "  "  the  caul  above  the  liver,  with  the
kidneys ; "  "aU  the  fat  is  the  Lord's  "  (ver.  16).  The  sweet  fat,  or  suet,  was  burned  as  a
sweet  savour  to  the  Lord."  This  might  be  either  because  fat  of  this  kind  was  a  sign  of
perfection  in  the  animal  life,  or  because  the  offering  in  the  fire  would  be  increased  by
the  oily  matter,  and  would  make  the  burnt  offering  more  imposing.  Any  way  the  dedi-
cation to  the  Lord  is  the  main  idea.

I.  EbLIGIOTTS   SEKVICB   SHOUliD    TAKE  UP  INTO   ITSBLP   THE   HIGHEST   PACTTLTIBS   AND

NOBLEST  AFFECTIONS.     The  worship  of  the  sanctuary  ;  the  active  efforts  of  Christians
in  the  spread  of  the  gospel ;  charity ; — in  all  such  sacrifices  let  "  the  fat  be  the  Lord's."

II.  The  prosperity  of  human  life  is  only  safe  and  blessed  when  the
SUBSTANCE  OF  IT  IS  CONSECRATED  ON  THE  ALTAB.  Men  bccome  vlotims  of  their  own
success  because  they  withhold  the  fat  from  the  Lord,  and  it  becomes  a  curse  to
them. — R.

Ver.  5. — "  And  Aaron's  sons  shall  bum  it  on  the  altar  upon  the  burnt  sacrifice^
which  is  upon  the  wood  that  is  on  the  fire :  it  is  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet
Favour  unto  the  Lord."  Notice  the  preparation  thus  made  for  the  acceptance  of  man's
offering.  There  is  the  altar,  tho  fire,  the  wood,  the  hwnt  sacrifice,  the  offering  of  the
consecrated  fat.    Thus  ch.  vi.  12,  it  is  said,  "  the  priest  shall  hum  wood  every  morning


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  in.  1— 17-


at  the  altar,  and  lay  the  burnt  offering  in  order  upon  it ;  and  he  shall  bum  thereon  ths
fat  of  the  peace  offerings."  The  abiding  sacrifice,  on  the  abiding  altar,  with  the  abiding
fire,  receives  the  occasional  offering  of  the  individual  v^orshipper.  Here  is  the  gisat
truth  of  an  abiding  merit,  an  ever-living  intercession  set  forth.

I.  God,  by  his  grace,  has  provided  for  us  the  true  method  of  eighteousness  anii
ACCEPTANCE.  1.  The  superiority  of  Christ's  sacrifice  to  all  other — because  of  his
person,  his  active  and  passive  obedience,  his  declared  acceptance  by  his  baptism,  trans-
figuration, resurrection,  ascension.  2.  The  simple  work  of  faith,  in  laying  the  offering
on  the  ashes  of  the  burnt  sacrifice,  in  attaching  the  imperfect  obedience  of  man  to  the
infinite  merit  of  Christ.  A  peace  offering  in  the  highest  sense  when  we  thus  lay  all
upon  the  altar  of  the  true  mediation.  The  fire  consuming  denoted  acceptance.  God,  in
Christ,  declares  himself  not  only  well  pleased  in  his  beloved  Son,  but  in  all  who
spiritually  are  identified  with  him.  The  lesser  burnt  offering  is  absorbed  into  the
greater  and  abiding  burnt  offering,  our  obedience  in  Christ's.

II.  Thus  is  set  forth  the  tbub  ohdeb  op  the  ethical  life.  The  lesser  sacrifice
upon  the  greater.  The  peace  offering  on  the  burnt  offering.  1.  Common  mistake  to
attempt  to  reverse  this  order.  Man  supposes  himself  capable  of  building  up  merit  by
moral  acts.  God  teaches  him  that  all  ethical  worth  must  rest  upon  religious  complete-
ness. The  relation  between  God  and  man  mu^t  be  true  and  perfect,  otherwise  morality
is  not  real,  but  only  disguised  selfishness.  2.  The  offering  up  of  human  life  in  activity,
in  suffering,  cannot  be  peace  offering  unless  it  be  religious.  We  want  the  greatest
motive  to  actuate  and  sustain.  We  seem  to  waste  our  offering  unless  we  can  see  it  in
its  relation  with  God's  work,  with  a  redeemed  and  renewed  world.  3.  The  sweetness
of  life  is  a  return  into  our  own  hearts  of  what  the  Lord  hath  found  delightful.  The
"  sweet  savour  "  of  a  consecrated  obedience  pervades  the  whole  existence,  and  makes  it
fragrant  both  to  ourselves  and  others.  Wonderful  transmuting  power  of  religion  in
giving  value  to  the  apparently  worthless  in  human  character,  and  beauty  to  the  com-
monest, and  nobleness  to  the  humblest ;  the  whole  garment  of  sanctity  covering  the
native  imperfections.  Yet  no  sweet  savour  without  fire.  There  must  be  the  reality
of  a  spiritual  life — the  power  of  God,  not  the  mere  form  and  appearance  of  the
offering. — B.

Vers.  6—16. —  Varieties  in  the  offerings — unity  in  the  sacrifice.  Whether  from  the
herd  or  from  the  flock,  an  offering  of  larger  or  smaller  value,  the  same  principle  applies
— the  unblemished  gift,  the  separation  of  the  fat  and  of  the  blood,  the  observance  of
all  prescribed  order  and  detail.

I.  Here  is  the  true  bbligious  libertt.  Obedience  according  to  ability,  "  doing  the
will  of  God  from  the  heart."  The  variety  which  is  necessitated  in  God's  children  by
their  different  capabilities  and  circumstances  is  not  displeasing  to  him.  If  we  cannot
bring  an  offering  from  the  herd,  then  from  the  flock ;  if  not  a  sheep,  then  a  lamb ;  if
neither,  then  the  will  for  the  deed.  Yet  all  can  do  something.  "  Onto  every  one  of
ns  is  given  grace  according  to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  Christ"  (Eph.  iv.  and
1  Cor.  xii.).

II.  Here  is  the  secret  of  social  peace  and  strength — the  only  true  equality ;  God's
altar  bringing  together  rich  and  poor,  high  and  low.  All,  offering;  what  they  can  to
him,  find  out  each  other's  nearness  and  worth.  In  the  house  of  God  the  poor  man  may  be
a  higher  servant  of  the  sanctuary  than  the  rich.  Society  rests  on  religion  as  its  basis.
Mistake  of  philosophy,  which  gives  us  not  brotherhood  but  altruism — not  family  life  but
mere  expediency.  The  true  conception  of  a  State  is  every  one  having  a  place,  and  every
one  in  his  place.  None  but  the  religious  view,  which  makes  the  altar  of  God  the  centre,
really  effects  this  union  of  the  individual  interest  with  that  of  the  community.  The
true  mother  does  not  despise  the  sickly  child.  Philosophy  exalts  the  great  and
depresses  the  little.  Beligion  humbles  the  great  and  exalts  the  low.  The  revelation  ii
to  babes.  The  offering  is  accepted  from  the  weakest  hands.  All  are  one  in  Chriat.
The  perfect  Sacrifice  blends  all  together. — B.


OL  IT.  1 — 35.2


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


63


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV.


The  sin  ofpering  (cha.  iv.,  t.  1 — 13).  At
the  time  of  the  Mosaic  legislation,  burnt
ofiferings  and  meat  offerings  were  already  in
existence,  and  had  existed  from  the  time  of
the  Fall.  A  beginning,  therefore,  is  made
with  them,  and  the  regulations  of  the  peace
offerings  naturally  foUow,  because  these
sacrifices  succeed  in  order  to  the  burnt  and
meat  offerings,  and  because  sacrifices  in
some  respects  of  tlie  same  nature  as  peace
offerings  had  previously  existed  under  a
different  name  (cf.  Exod.  x.  25  with  Exod.
xxiv.  5,  and  see  above  notes  on  ch.  iii.).
The  sin  and  trespass  offerings,  therefore,
are  left  to  the  last,  though,  owing  to  their
meaning,  they  were  always  offered  first  of
all,  when  sacrifices  of  all  three  linds  were
made  together.  Tliey  are  the  mr ons  of  cere-
monially propitiating  God  when  alienated
from  his  people,  or  from  any  individual
member  of  it,  by  sin,  which  they  legally
at  me  for.  The  need  of  expiation  is  implied
and  suggested  by  the  offering  of  the  blood,
both  in  the  burnt  sacrifice  and  the  peace
offering  (cf.  Job  i.  5).  But  this  was  not
sufScient ;  there  must  be  a  special  sacrifice
to  teach  this  great  truth  as  its  primary
lesson.  The  sin  offering  typifies  the  sacrifice
of  our  Lord  Jestis  Christ  upon  the  cross,  as
the  great  Sin  Offering  for  mankind,  whereby
the  wrath  of  God  was  propitiated,  and  an
expiation  for  the  sins  of  man  was  wrought,
bringing  about  reconciliation  between  God
and  man.

Yer.  2. — If  a  soul  shall  sin.  The  conditions
to  be  fulfilled  in  presenting  a  sin  offering
differed  according  to  the  position  held  by
the  offerer  in  the  state.  If  it  were  the  high
priest,  he  had  (1)  to  offer  a  young  bull  in
the  court  of  the  tabernacle ;  (2)  to  place  his
hand  upon  it;  (3)  to  kill  it;  (4)  to  take  the
blood  into  the  holy  place  of  the  tabernacle,
and  there  sprinkle  some  of  it  seven  times
in  the  direction  of  the  vail  that  divided  off
the  holy  of  holies  within  which  the  ark  was
placed,  and  to  smear  some  of  it  on  the  horns
of  the  golden  altar  of  incense ;  (5)  to  pour
out  the  rest  of  the  blood  at  the  foot  of  the
altar  of  burnt  offering  in  the  court  of  the
tabernacle;  (6)  to  burn  all  the  internal  fat
upon  the  altar  of  burnt  offering;  (7)  to
carry  the  whole  of  the  remainder  of  the


animal  outside  the  camp,  and  tkere  ta
burn  it.  If  it  were  the  congregation  that
made  the  offering,  the  same  conditions  had
to  be  fulfilled,  except  that  the  elders  of  the
congregation  had  to  lay  their  hands  on  the
animal.  If  it  were  a  ruler,  the  animal
offered  was  to  be  a  male  kid,  and  the  priest,
instead  of  taking  the  blood  into  the  sanctu-
ary, was  to  smear  it  on  the  horns  of  the
altar  of  burnt  sacrifice  in  the  court.  If  it
were  an  ordinary  member  of  the  congrega-
tion, the  animal  was  to  be  a  female  kid,  or
ewe  lamb,  which  was  to  be  dealt  with  in  the
same  manner ;  or  in  some  cases  two  turtle-
doves or  two  young  pigeons,  one  for  a  sin
offering  (whose  blood  was  all  sprinkled
round  the  inner  side  of  the  altar),  the  other
for  a  burnt  offering  (which  was  to  be  tri  ated
according  to  the  ritual  of  the  burnt  ofiering),
or  even  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  of  flour
(without  oil  or  frankincense),  a  handful  of
which  was  to  be  burnt,  and  the  remainder
delivered  to  tiie  priest  for  his  consumption.
The  moral  lesson  taught  to  the  Jew  by
the  sin  offering  was  of  the  terrible  nature
of  sin,  and  of  the  necessity  for  an  expiation
or  it  in  addition  to  penitence.  Mystically
le  might  see  that,  as  the  blood  of  bulls  and
goats  could  not  of  its  own  virtue  take  away
sin,  there  must  be  an  offering,  foreshadowed
by  the  saoritlce  of  the  animals,  which  should
be  effectual  as  these  were  symbolicaL  Tlie
type  is  fulfilled  by  the  atonement  vnought
by  Christ's  blood  shed  on  the  cross  (see
Heb.  X.  1—21).  Further,  the  ceremonial
cleansing  of  the  sinful  Israelite  by  the  sin
offering  in  the  old  dispensation  foreshadows
the  effect  of  baptism  in  the  new  dispensation,
for,  as  Calvin  has  noted  in  his  Commentary,
"  As  sins  are  now  saoramentaUy  washed  away
by  baptism,  so  under  the  Law  alsd  sacrifices
were  expiations,  although  in  a  different
way."

If  a  soul  shall  sin  through  ignorance.  The
expression,  "through  ignorance"  (bishgagah),
is  intended  to  cover  all  sins  except  those  com-
mitted "with  a  high  hand,"  or  defiantly,
whether  the  agent  was  ignorant  that  they
were  sins  or  was  led  into  them  by  incon-
siderateness  or  infirmity  (cf.  Ps.  xii.  12,  13,
"  Who  can  understand  his  errors  ?  Cleanse
thou  me  from  secret  faults.  Keep  back  thy
servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins  ").  A'
better  translation  of  biehgagah  would  be  by
want  of  consideration,  or  by  inadvertence.
Our  Lord  could  say,  even  of  those  who
crucified  him,  "Father,  forgive  them;  for
they  know  not  what  they  do ;  "  and  there-
fore even  for  them  a  sin  offering  might  ba
made  and  be  accepted.  But  for  deliberata
and  determined  sin  the  Law  has  no  atone-


54


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


Tcb.  IV.  1—35,


ment,  no  remedy.  The  words,  shall  do
against  any  of  them,  i.e.  against  the  com-
mandments, would  be  better  rendered  ehall
do  any  of  them,  i.e.  the  things  which  ought
not  to  he  done.  There  is  no  exact  npodosis
to  this  verse ;  it  is  a  general  heading  to  the
chapter.

Vers.  3— 12.— The  case  of  the  high  priest.
He  is  designated  the  priest  that  is  anointed,
in  respect  to  which  title,  see  notes  on  ch.  viii.
In  case  he  sins  in  his  representative  cha-
racter, his  sin  is  such  as  lo  bring  guilt  on
the  people  (this  is  the  meaning  of  the  words
translated  according  to  the  sin  of  the  people),
and  a  special  sin  offering  must  therefore  be
made.  He  is  to  take  of  the  blood  of  the
animal  sacrificed,  and  bring  it  to  the  taber-
nacle of  the  congregation :  .  .  .  and  sprinkle
of  the  blood  seven  times  before  the  Lord,
before  the  vail  of  the  sanctuary.  And  put
some  of  the  blood  on  the  horns  of  the  altar
of  sweet  incense.  This  was  a  more  solemn
method  of  presenting  the  blood  to  the  Lord
than  that  used  in  the  burnt  offering;  the
offering  of  the  blood,  which  was  the  vehicle
of  life,  being  the  chief  feature  in  the  sin
offering,  as  the  consumption  of  the  whole
animal  by  the  altar  flre  was  in  the  burnt
offering.  In  the  burnt  offerings  and  peace
offuvings  the  blood  was  thrown  once  on  the
altar  of  burnt  sacrifice  (see  ch.  i.  5);  now
it  is  sprinkled,  in  a  smaller  quantity  each
time,  but  as  often  as  seven  times  (the  num-
ber seven  symbolically  representing  com-
pleteness), before  the  vail  which  shiouded
the  ark.  The  altar  of  sweet  incense  is  the
golden  altar,  which  stood  within  the  taber-
nacle, in  front  of  the  vail.  Perhaps  the
reason  why  the  horns  of  the  altar  are  speci-
ally appointed  to  have  the  blood  placed  on
them  is  that  they  were  regarded  as  the
most  sacred  part  of  the  altar,  because  they
were  its  highest  points,  in  which  its  eleva-
tion towards  heaven  culminated.  The  re-
mainder of  the  victim's  blood  is  to  be  poured
at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of  the  burnt
offering,  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,  to
sink  into  the  ground,  because  no  more  of  it
was  wanted  for  ceremonial  use.  The  internal
fat  is  to  be  burnt  upon  the  altar  of  the  burnt
offering,  but  not  actually  upon  the  smoulder-
ing burnt  saciifice,  as  in  the  case  of  the
peace  offerings;  the  sin  offering  preceding
the  burnt  offeiing  in  order  of  time,  while
the  peace  offering  followed  it.  The  re-
mainder of  the  animal  is  to  be  carried  with-
out the  camp  .  ,  .  and  be  burnt,  because  its
flesh  was  at  once  accursed  and  most  holy,
]t  was  accursed,  as  having  been  symbolically
the  vehicle  of  the  sins  laid  upon  it  by  the
offerer ;  therefore  it  must  not  bo  consumed


upon  the  altar  of  G.;l,  but  be  destroyed
with  flre  outside  the  camp,  typifying  the
removal  from  God's  kingdom,  and  the  final
destruction  of  all  that  is  sinful.  But  yet  it
was  most  holy,  as  its  blood  had  been  taken
into  the  tabernacle,  and  had  served  as  a
propitiation ;  therefore,  if  it  had  to  be  burnt,
it  yet  had  to  be  burnt  solemnly,  reverently,
and  as  a  ceremonial  act,  in  a  place  appointed
for  the  purpose.  The  writer  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews  notices  that  one  of  the
points  in  which  our  Lord  was  the  antitype
of  the  sin  offering  was  that  he  "  suffered
without  the  gate,"  "  that  he  might  sanctify
the  people  with  his  own  blood  "  (Heb,  xiii.
12),  which  was  thus  indicated  to  have  been
carried  within  the  sanctuary,  that  is,  into
heaven.

Vers.  13 — 21. — The  case  of  the  whole  con-
gregation. A  nation  may  become  guilty  ot
national  sin  in  different  ways,  according  to
its  political  constitution :  most  directly,  by
the  action  of  a  popular  Legislature  passing
a  decree  such  as  that  of  the  Athenian  as-
sembly, condemning  the  whole  of  the  Mity-
lenean  people  to  death  (Thucyd.,  iii.  36),
or  by  approving  an  act  of  sacrilege  (Mai.  iii.
9) ;  indirectly,  by  any  complicity  in  or  con-
doning of  a  sin  done  in  its  name  by  its  rulers.
The  ritual  of  the  sin  offering  is  the  same  as
in  the  case  of  the  high  priest.  The  elders  of
the  congregation  (according  to  the  Targum
of  Jonatlian,  twelve  in  number),  acting  for
the  nation,  lay  their  hands  on  the  victim's
head,  and  the  high  priest,  as  before,  presents
the  blood,  by  sprinkling  it  seven  times  before
the  Lord,  even  before  the  vail ;  and  putting
some  of  the  blood  upon  the  horns  of  the
altar  which  is  before  the  Lord,  that  is  in  the
tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  It  is  added
that  he  shall  thus  make  an  atonement,  or
covering  of  sin,  for  them,  and  it  shall  be
forgiven  them.

Vers.  22 — 26. — The  case  of  a  ruler  or  noble-
man. The  clause.  Or  if  his  sin  ,  ,  ,  come  to
his  knowledge,  should  be  rather  translated,
If  perhaps  his  sin  come  to  his  knowledge.
He  is  to  offer  a  kid  of  the  goats,  or  rather  a
he-goat.  The  blood  is  not  to  be  carried  into
the  tabernacle,  as  in  the  two  previous  cases,
but  put  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt
offering,  which  stood  outside  in  the  court,
and,  as  a  consequence  of  the  blood  not'
having  been  taken  into  the  tabernacle,  the
flesh  is  not  to  be  burnt  outside  the  camp,
but  to  be  eaten  by  the  priests  in  the  court
of  the  tabernacle  (see  ch.  vi.  26).

Vers.  27 — 35. — The  case  of  a  comnr,on  man.
He  is  to  offer  a  kid  of  the  goats,  or  rather  a
she-goat.  The  ritual  ia  t«  hn  the  same  w  in
the  previous  case.


riT.l— 86.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


H0MILETIC3.

Vers.  1 — 35.— 37l»  stn  offering  signifies  and  ceremonially  effeots  propitiation  and
expiation.  Its  characteristic  feature,  therefore,  is  the  presentation  of  the  blood  of  the
victim,  which  in  this  sacrifice  alone  (when  it  was  ofiered  for  the  high  priest  or  the
whole  congregation)  was  carried  into  the  tabernacle  and  solemnly  sprinkled  before  the
vail  which  covered  God's  presence.

I.  When  it  was  to  be  offekbd.  On  certain  solemn  public  occasions,  and  when-
■ever  the  conscience  of  an  individual  was  awakened  to  being  out  of  communion  with
Ood.  The  contraction  of  certain  defilements  and  the  commission  of  certain  sins  ex-
cluded the  delinquent  from  God's  people,  and  when  this  had  occurred,  he  might  not  be

-readmitted  until  he  had  brought  a  sin  offering  to  be  offered  in  his  behalf.

II.  How  IT  WAS  EFFECTIVE.  The  fact  of  God's  appointing  it  for  a  certain  end  made
it  effective  for  that  end ;  but  we  are  allowed  to  see  why  God  appointed  it,  and  this  was
because  it  was  a  shadow  of  the  Great  Atonement  to  be  wrought  for  all  mankind  by  the
Christian  Sin  Offering  of  the  cross.  For  the  result  of  original  sin  and  the  consequent
growth  and  spread  of  wickedness  upon  the  earth  had  separated  between  God  and  man.
How  were  they  to  be  reconciled?  Christ  became  the  representative  of  sinful  man,  and
the  substitute  for  him,  and  in  this  capacity  he  bore  the  penalty  of  sins,  (1)  in  the
Garden  of  Gethsemane,  (2)  on  the  cross — thus  restoring  taaa  to  communion  with  God.

HI.  Things  to  be  notfj) —

1.  The  wrath  of  God  against  sin.

2.  The  love  of  God  towards  sinners.

3.  The  justice  of  God.

4.  The  love  of  Christ  in  his  incarnation.
6.  The  obedience  of  Christ  in  his  death.

6.  The  blessed  result  to  man,  namely,  union  and  commnnion  with  God,  through
Ohrist  the  Peace-maker.

IV.  The  offering  made  once  fob  all.  The  Jewish  offerings  could  be  brought
again  and  again ;  the  Christian  Sin  Offering  could  be  made  but  once.  There  can  be  no
repetition  of  it,  no  continuation  of  it ;  but  its  effects  are  always  continuing,  and  appli-
cable to  all  Christ's  people.  Its  benefits  are  to  be  grasped  and  appropriated,  each  time
that  they  are  needed,  by  faith.  As  the  Israelite  laid  his  hand  on  the  sin  offering,  so
we  lean  by  faith  on  Christ,  and  may  constantly  plead  the  merits  of  the  offering  which
■cannot  be  renewed.  In  case  we  have  fallen  into  sin,  we  may  not,  like  the  Israelite,
bring  our  bullock  for  sacrifice;  we  cannot  renew  the  Great  Sacrifice  tyiiified  by  the
bullock's  sacrifice ;  but,  by  repentance  and  by  faith  in  the  atonement  wrought  by  tbA
sacrifice  of  Christ's  death,  we  can  be  restored.

V.  Peelings  awakened —

Thankfulness  for  God's  mercy  in  finding  a  way  of  escape ;
Thankfulness  for  Christ's  love  in  working  out  man's  salvation ;
A  blessed  sense  of  peace  resulting  from  the  consciousness  that  the  Great  Atoning
Saci'iilce  has  bet^n  ofiered.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0E3.

Atonement  for  the  penitent,  as  illustrated  in  the  sin  offering.  Ch.  It.;  v.  1 — 13;  of.
Ps.  xix.  12 ;  Gal.  vi.  1 ;  1  Tim.  i.  13,  etc.  The  offerings  already  considered,  viz.  the
burnt  offering,  the  meat  offering,  and  the  peace  offering,  have  respectively  emphasized
the  ideas  of  personal  consecration,  consecrated  life-work,  and  fellowship.  Moreover,
they  are  to  be  regarded  as  voluntary  offerings,  depending  upon  the  impulse  of  the  heart
for  their  celebration.  Special  experience  might  impel  an  Israelite  to  express  his  con-
secration or  his  fellowship,  and  he  would  then  bring  the  appointed  sacrifice.

But  here  we  come  across  an  offering  which  is  imperative.  The  moment  an  Israelite
became  convinced  of  sin,  then  he  was  bound  to  bring  the  offering  prescribed.  Besides,
the  sin  offering  is  Mosaic  in  its  origin ;  it  had  no  existence,  as  such,  before  the  promul-


M  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  nr.  1— 3&


gation  of  the  coTenant  at  Sinai ;  and  consequently  it  is  to  be  taken  as  the  rule  for
penitents,  whose  consciences  have  heen  educated  in  a  more  thorough  detection  of  sin
through  the  Law.  "  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  We  have  at  this  stage,  con-
eequently,  a  perceptible  elevation  of  the  moral  standard.

I.  The  first  lbsson  or  the  sin  offbrinq  is  that  sin  is  a  natubb.  The
superficial  treatment  of  sin  deals  with  outward  and  conscious  acts,  such  as  trespasses ;
what  God  declares  by  his  Law  is  that,  behind  all  conscious  acts  of  the  will,  there  are
natwdl  movements  of  which  we  are  not  conscious,  and  for  which,  nevertheless,  we  are
responsible.  This  important  principle  is  afSrmed  by  all  these  minute  regulations  about
sins  of  ignorance.  The  thoughtful  Israelite  would  see  from  this  that  sin  is  a  much
wider  and  deeper  thing  than  he  at  first  suspected ;  that  the  motions  of  his  personal
being  are  more  numerous  and  varied  than  he  supposed ;  that  deliberation,  in  fact,  is  not
essential  to  every  sin,  and  does  not  cover  responsibility.  In  other  words,  he  would  look
within  and  realize  that  sin  is  a  nature,  working  on,  sometimes  consciously  and  some-
times unconsciously,  and  that  for  all  its  workings  he  will  be  held  accountable.

No  more  important  principle  lies  in  the  field  of  self-examination.  Without  it  there
can  be  no  thorough  treatment  of  sin.  With  it  we  stand  abashed  and  humbled  under
a  sense  of  the  unknown  sin  as  well  as  of  the  known.  We  cry  with  David,  "  Who  can
understand  his  errors?  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults.  Keep  back  thy  servant
also  from  presumptuous  sins ;  let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me :  then  shall  I  be
upright,  and  I  shall  be  innocent  from  the  great  transgression  "  (Ps.  xix.  12, 13 ;  cf.  also
Shedd's  '  Discourses  and  Essays,'  No.  VI.).

IL  Sin  varies  in  its  heinousness.  The  Israelite  not  only  recognized  this  whole
category  of  sins  of  ignorance  marshalled  in  the  Law  before  him;  he  also  saw  a  difference
of  treatment  in  the  cases  under  review.  A  sin  of  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  high
priest  was  made  more  emphatic  than  one  on  the  part  of  a  prince  or  a  private  person.
The  high  priest's  representative  position  and  character  modified  the  whole  case.  His
sin  of  omission  or  neglect  became  much  more  serious  than  a  private  individual's  could
be.  He  was  consequently  directed  to  bring  a  bullock,  the  same  offering  as  for  a  sin
on  the  part  of  the  collective  people ;  for  his  representative  character  made  him,  so  to
speak,  a  mor<d  equivalent  to  them.  While,  therefore,  it  is  well  to  recognize  sin  as  a
nature,  we  must  also  remember  that  God  does  not  treat  sin  in  the  mass,  but  discrimi-
nates between  the  more  or  less  guilty.  In  his  morality  there  are  the  most  deUcate
appreciations  and  adjustments.  Penitence  must  likewise  be  discriminating  as  well  as
profound.  Self-examination  may  be  a  most  humiliating  and  disappointing  process,  but
we  should  weigh  the  relations  of  our  faults  and  sins  when  we  discover  them  and  deal
faithfully  with  ourselves.

III.  Yet  all  sinners  abe  placed  within  beach  of  an  appropriate  atonement.
The  high  priest  and  the  collective  people,  the  prince  and  one  of  the  common  people,
each  and  all  had  their  prescribed  offering  and  guaranteed  atonement.  And  when
people  proved  so  poor  that  they  could  not  offer  turtle-doves  or  young  pigeons,  they
were  directed  to  bring  an  ephah  of  fine  flour,  with  which  the  priest  would  make  atone-
menft  And  as  for  this  atonement,  it  is  in  all  cases  secured  by  the  surrender  of  life.
Even  the  ephah  of  flour  conveyed  this  idea,  for  the  germ  is  hopelessly  sacrificed  in  its
manufacture.  The  one  idea  binding  the  various  sacrifices  together  is  the  surrender  of
life.  That  this  idea  is  to  be  attributed  to  substances  in  the  vegetable  kingdom  as  well
as  the  animal,  is  evident  from  John  xii.  24,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you.  Except  a
corn  of  wheat  fall  into  the  ground  and  die,  it  abideth  alone:  but  if  it  die,  it  brin<reth
forth  much  fruit."  °

And  it  need  scarcely  be  added  that  the  atonement  of  which  these  sin  oflTerinf  s  were
types  is  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  "was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many  "  (Heb.
ix.  28 ;  also  vers.  11—14).  In  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel,  this  most  appropriate
atonement  is  put  within  the  reach  of  all.  No  sinner  is  excluded  from  the  possibility
of  atonement  except  through  his  own  self-will.

IV.  The  reconciliation  with  the  penitbnt,  which  atonement  beoubes,  is  a
MATTER  OF  DEEP  DBLIGHT  TO  GoD.  Por  not  Only  is  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  accepted
St  the  appropriate  spot,  whether  v^il  and  altar  of  incense,  or  the  brazen  altar  only,
according  to  the  status  of  the  penitent ;  but  thcra  is  besides  an  acceptance  of  the  best
portions  of  the  animal  upon  the  altar,  Indicating  that  God  is  delighted  with  the


OB.  IT  1—85.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICU&  9t

accomplished  atonement.  It  was,  so  far  as  God  was  concerned,  as  much  a  feast  as  the
peace  offering.  It  expressed,  consequently,  that  God  was  delighted  heyond  all  our  con-
ception with  the  reconciliation.

It  is  well  to  make  this  idea  always  emphatic.  Our  blinded  souls  are  ready  to  imagine
that  we  are  more  anxious  for  reconciliation,  and  would  be  more  delighted  with  it  when
it  came,  than  God  can  be.  The  truth,  however,  is  all  the  other  way.  The  reconciliation
begins  with  QoA,  the  atonement  is  due  to  his  wisdom  and  mercy,  and  over  the  actual
consummation  he  rejoices  with  "joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."

v.  The  eeconciliation  is  also  iceakt  to  be  a  pbast  of  delight  to  ali  God's

8EBVANT8   who  ARE   INSTKUMBNTAL  IN  BRINGING  IT   ABOUT.      For  WO  mUSt  UCtice  that,

in  the  cases  where  the  priests  are  not  penitents  themselves,  but  mediators,  they  are
allowed  to  make  a  feast  of  what  is  left  after  the  best  portions  are  dedicated  to  Giod.  Of
course,  when  they  are  penitents,  as  in  the  case  of  a  personal  or  a  congregational  sin,  the
arcase  is  to  be  considered  too  holy  for  the  priests  to  partake  of  it ;  hence  it  is  disposed
oMn  its  entirety  in  a  clean  place  beyond  the  camp.  This  was  the  solemn  way  of  dis-
posing of  the  whole  carcase.  But  in  the  other  cases  the  priests  were  directed  to  feast
upon  the  remainder  of  the  offering,  as  those  bearing  atonement.  So  far  they  enjoyed
what  was  their  lot  in  the  peace  offeiing.  As  a  feast,  and  not  a  lugubrious  fast,  it
surely  was  intended  to  indicate  their  personal  joy  and  satisfaction  in  the  reconciliation
they  were  instrumental  in  bringing  about.

Luke  XV.  presents  the  joy  of  the  Godhead  and  of  the  angels  over  returning  penitents.
It  is  this  spirit  we  should  cultivate.  It  will  require,  of  course,  much  personal  dealing
with  souls,  but  it  is  worth  all  the  trouble  to  be  instrumental  in  leading  them  to  peace
with  God,  and  to  the  joy  that  results  therefrom. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1,  9. — Unintentional,  transgression.  God  is  the  source  of  authority  and  law.
From  him  instructions  emanate.  His  words  are  to  be  communicated  to  the  people.
Like  unto  Moses,  ministers  and  teachers  receive  truth  not  to  secrete  it  in  their  own
breasts,  but  to  impart  it  for  the  guidance  of  those  under  their  charge.  "  The  Lord
spake,  .  .  .  saying,  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel."  May  we  listen  carefully,  lest  the
utterances  of  the  "  still  small  voice "  should  be  misheard,  and  the  counsels  intended
for  comfort  and  direction  prove  a  false  light,  speeding  the  unconscious  traveller  to  the
very  pitfalls  he  was  to  avoid.

L  The  untversalitt  oir  transgression.  Provision  is  announced  for  cases  of  sin,,
and  the  possibility  of  its  commission  by  all  classes  is  thus  shown.  1.  The  ordinary
citizen  may  err ;  one  of  "  the  people  of  the  land"  (see  ver.  27).  Poverty  and  obscurity  are
not  safeguards  against  unrighteous  acts.  2.  The  man  ofranle,  the  "ruler"  (ver.  22) or
prince,  is  liable  to  sin.  Honour  and  responsibility  do  not  guarantee  or  produce  im-
munity from  transgression.  3.  The  whole  congregation  (\ex.  13)  is  not  exempt,  for  col-
lective wisdom  and  might  are  not  effectual  barriers  against  the  encroachments  of  unlawful
desire  and  action.  In  the  multitude  of  counsellors  safety  is  often  thought  to  lie,  but  the
"  people  "  may  do  wickedly  as  well  as  an  individual.  This  was  exemplified  at  Mount
Sinai  and  Baal-peor,  and  modern  instances  abound.  Even — i.  The  man  specially  con-
secrated to  holy  service,  the  "anointed  priest"  (ver.  3),  may  incur  guilt  and  bring
punishment  upon  the  people.  How  cautious  we  should  be  I  What  searching  of  our-
selves with  the  candle  of  the  Lord;  what  prayer  for  knowledge  and  strength  should  dis-
tinguish us  all  I

n.  The  possibilitt  of  unintentional  transgression.  A  distinction  is  intimated
between  sin  that  arises  from  mistake  ("ignorance,"  ver.  2),  that  is  at  first  "hid"  from,
perception  and  afterwards  becomes  known  (vers.  13, 14),  awaking  penitence  and  a  desire
to  undo  the  wrong  perpetrated,  and  sin  that  is  wilful,  committed  with  a  high  hand,
with  an  attitude  of  defiance,  a  sin  against  light  and  knowledge.  Inadvertent  sinning  is
possible  through  (1)  carelessness  of  behaviour,  heedless  conduct,  acting  without  previous
deliberation ;  or  (2)  a  misunderstanding  of  the  Law,  failure  in  correct  interpretation,  or
In  remembering  the  precise  precept  at  the  moment ;  or  (3)  a  sudden  outburst  of  passioUj
blinding  the  judgment  and  hurrying  the  will  to  words  and  deeds  afterwards  repented  oL

III.  The  guilt  of  buch  tbansgresbion.  This  is  assumed  by  the  atonement  neces-
sary to  shield  the  doer  from  penalty,  and  by  the  expressions  employed  in  vers.  13,  22,
and  27.     "  Guilty  "  refers  to  the  consequences  of  sinning,  the  state  of  wrath  into  which


58  THE  BOOK  OF  L1.VITICUS.  [ch.  iv.  1—35.

the  sinner  enters,  and  the  moral  devastation  to  which  he  is  liable,  and  from  which
preservation  is  possible  only  through  an  oflfering.  Learn,  then,  that  ignorance  does  not  of
itself  excuse  violation  of  God's  commands,  but  it  permits  resort  to  such  an  atonement  as
will  procure  God's  forgiveness.  Paul  said,  "  I  obtained  mercy  because  I  did  it  ignorantly
and  in  unbelief."  Whereas  if  we  sin  wilfully,  there  is  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins.  The
soul  that  doeth  presumptuously  shall  be  cut  ofT  from  among  the  people. — S.  B.  A.

Ver.  3. — "  Let  him  bring  for  his  sin,  which  he  hath  sinned."  The  atonement  for
involuntary  transgression.  The  Book  of  Leviticus  well  repays  careful  perusal  in  days
when  there  are  many  attempts  made  to  lessen  men's  sense  of  the  enormity  of  sin  and  of
the  necessity  of  a  propitiatory  offering.      Its  teachings  are  impressive,  its  pictures  vivid.

I.  Sin  inflicts  an  injury  upon  the  holiness  op  God,  and  exposes  man  to  penal
CONSEQUENCES.  The  words  used  to  denote  sin  imply  a  turning  aside  from  the  path
marked  out,  a  deviation  from  rectitude.  Man  misses  his  way,  goes  astray,  like  a  lost
sheep.  He  does  what  he  ought  not  to  do  (ver.  2),  and  thereby  the  precepts  of  God  are
slighted  and  God's  honour  is  wounded.  This  cannot  be  permitted  with  impunity.
The  wrath  of  God,  not  a  base  but  holy  passion,  is  aroused,  and  vengeance  or  holy
indignation  threatens  to  visit  the  transgressor.  We  think  wrongly  of  our  sinful  acts
if  we  minimize  their  awful  importance,  or  pay  regard  simply  to  the  injury  done  to  our-
selves. This  is  the  least  part.  The  Supreme  Being  is  concerned,  and  it  is  his  dis-
pleasure we  have  to  fear.  Sin  cuts  at  the  root  of  government,  assails  the  foundations
of  the  eternal  throne.

II.  Every  transoeession  is  eecognized  as'  sinful,  whether  arising  from  ignorance
or  wilfulness,  whether  an  act  of  omission  or  commission.  An  atonement  is  insisted
on  even  for  what  we  deem  the  least  flagrant  derelictions,  Man  is  so  ready  to  extenuate
his  crimes,  that  God  strips  off  the  veil,  and  exposes  sin  in  all  its  guiltiness,  a  thing  to
be  loathed  and  shunned  wherever  met,  requiring  purification  on  oxir  part,  however
accidentally  we  may  have  come  in  contact  with  it.  That  without  intention  we  tmd
upon  a  venomous  serpent,  does  not  protect  us  from  its  fangs.  We  shall  need  the  lemedy,
however  the  poison  may  have  been  injected.

III.  Penitence  and  confession  abb  insufficient  to  obliterate  the  memory  oj
THE  SIN.  To  regret  the  act  and  to  express  sorrow  and  to  determine  not  to  offend  again,
are  good  as  far  as  they  go,  but,  to  wipe  out  the  stain,  blood  must  be  shed.  This  only
can  whiten  the  defiled  robes.  Sinner,  behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the
sin  of  the  world !  To  have  the  sin  brought  to  your  knowledge,  so  that  you  take  a  more
adequate  view  of  its  sinfulness,  to  pour  forth  agonizing  cries  and  floods  of  tears,  will  not
obtain  forgiveness,  unless  accompanied  with  the  presentation  to  the  Father  of  the
righteousness  of  his  Son.

IV.  Sin  becomes  more  conspicuoub  and  pab-beachin&  when  committed  by  the
OCCUPANTS  OF  A  LOFTY  POSITION.  The  high  priest  was  the  representative  of  the  nation,
and  hence  his  offering  must  equal  in  value  that  presented  by  the  whole  congregation.
So  likewise  the  sin  of  a  ruler  was  more  visible  than  that  of  a  subject,  and  wronged  God
the  more,  and  whilst  a  she-goat  sufficed  for  one  of  the  people,  for  him  only  a  he-goat
was  allowed.  Not  without  reason  did  the  apostle  exhort  that  intercession  be  made
"  for  kings,  and  all  that  are  in  authority."  Iniquity  in  high  places  in  the  Church  and
in  society  causes  the  greatest  scandal,  becomes  most  hurtful  in  its  effects,  and  is  most
offensive  to  God.  Both  the  animal  offered  and  the  ritual  observed  testified  to  the
relative  enormity  of  transgressions  by  different  classes.  Between  the  sins  of  each  order
in  themselves  no  distinction  was  made.

V.  By   the     APPOINTED    VICTIM  BECONCILIATION   IS   POSSIBLE    TO    ALL   INADVEBTBNT

OFFENDERS.  We  reserve  this  to  the  last,  in  order  that  the  cheeriest  aspect  may  be  upper-
most. Divest  honour  of  its  consequent  responsibility  we  cannot,  but  we  point  to  the
ample  provision  for  forgiveness  afforded  to  comfort  the  prince  and  the  peasant,  the
priest  and  the  layman,  the  individual  and  the  nation.  Our  Redeemer,  Jesus  Christ,  has
given  his  life  a  ransom  for  the  many.  He  satisfies  all  claims,  reconciles  us  unto  GcA,
BO  that  our  trespasses  are  not  imputed  unto  us. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  3 — 12. — Bites  essential  to  an  atonement.  Who  could  stand  in  the  tabernacle
court  without  having  imprinted  on  his  mind  the  view  God  takes  of  the  guilt  of  sin,  and


OS.  IV.  1—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  59

r

the  neciessity  for  the  sinner's  deliverance  from  its  results  ?  The  victims  brought  for
sacrifice,  the  priests  devoted  to  the  sacrificial  work,  the  altars  of  burnt  offering  and
inceose,  the  vail  that  separated  the  holy  from  the  holiest  place — all  these  were  eminently
calculated  to  deepen  the  Israelites'  conviction  of  the  holiness  of  the  Almighty,  and  the
awfulness  of  violating  his  injunctions.  Neglecting  the  distinctions  enumerated  in  this
chapter  according  to  the  rank  occupied  by  the  transgressor,  let  us  take  a  general  survey
of  the  conditions  enforced  in  a  proper  offering  for  sin.

L  The  death  of  an  appointed  victim.  The  hand  of  the  offerer  is  placed  on  the
animal's  head,  and  the  animal's  life  is  surrendered  to  the  will  of  God.  "  Without
shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission."  This  tragic  spectacle  attests  forcibly  the  rigour  of
Qx)d's  requirements.  Christ  died  as  our  representative,  so  that  in  him  we  all  died
(2  Cor.  v.),  and  those  who  rejoice  in  the  thought  of  his  salvation  place  their  hands  by
faith  upon  him,  believing  that  he  was  "  made  a  curse "  for  them.  Holiness  demands
an  unblemished  victim  in  each  case.  Hence  the  impossibility  of  man  .  becoming  hi  s
own  atonement.    Sin  cannot  expiate  sin.

II.  The  sPEiNKLrsa  op  the  blood  by  the  high  priest  upon  the  hoens  op  the
altab.  "  The  blood  is  the  life,"  and  is  in  this  manner  brought  into  the  immediate
presence  of  God,  symbolized  by  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  in  the  court  or  incense  in
the  sanctuary.  The  horns  represent  the  might  of  the  altar,  so  that  to  smear  them
with  blood  was  to  carry  the  offering  to  the  place  where  the  acceptance  by  God  of
offerings  or  praise  culminated.  Sin  dishonours  God,  and  therefore  the  significance  of
the  offering  for  sin  depends  chiefly  upon  its  presentation  where  God  was  pleased  to
vouchsafe  his  favour  to  man.  Where  sin  was  most  dishonouring,  as  in  the  event  of
transgression  by  the  anointed  priest,  the  blood  had  to  be  sprinkled  before  the  vail  that
covered  the  Shechinah.  By  his  death  Christ  entered  into  heaven,  presenting  his  own
precious  blood  to  the  Father,  and  now  makes  intercession  as  the  appointed  Mediator.

III.  The  poubing  o0T  op  the  blood  at  the  foot  op  the  altab  of  bubnt
OFFBEINQ.  It  is  Said  that,  at  the  building  of  the  temple,  conduits  were  constructed  to
drain  the  blood  into  the  valley  of  Kedron ;  in  the  wilderness  it  suftioed  to  let  it  flow
into  the  earth.  The  life  of  the  animal  was  thus  completely  surrendered  to  God.  Jesus
gave  himself  up  to  do  the  will  of  God.  His  self-sacrifice  is  the  basis  of  ours.  We  must
live,  not  to  ourselves,  but  to  him.  He  considered  not  his  time,  words,  works,  as  his  own,
and  we  must  regard  ourselves  as  devoted  to  the  Father.

IV.  The  bueninq  of  the  fat.  Thus  God  would  be  glorified  by  the  choicest
portions,  analogous  to  the  ceremony  enacted  in  connection  with  peace  offerings.  This
resemblance  seems  designed  to  teach:  1.  That  by  this  sin  offering  agreement  was
re-established  between  God  and  man.  2.  And  that  God's  portion  of  the  victim  might
be  treated  in  the  usual  way,  the  transgression  not  being  on  God's  side,  but  on  that  of
man,  who  therefore  is  not  permitted,  as  in  the  peace  offering,  to  eat  his  part  in  the
enjoyment  of  a  feast.  There  is  thus :  3.  A  reminder  that  but  for  sin  man  too  might
have  shared  in  the  sacrificial  meal  with  God,  but  transgression  had  interrupted  the
communion,  and  deprived  him  of  his  former  privilege.  By  the  obedience  unto  death  of
Jesus  Christ,  God  was  glorified,  and  Christ  became  the  "  propitiation  for  our  sins."

V.  The  consumption  op  the  carcase  bt  fire,  outside  the  camp.  No  part  of
the  animal  was  food  for  man,  but  the  remainder  was  to  be  carried  to  a  clean  place,  and
there  burnt.  Every  detail  of  the  ceremony  speaks  of  God's  hatred  of  sin,  and  the
blessings  which  man  thereby  loses,  and  the  need  for  entire  devotion  of  the  victim  that  is
to  atone  for  sin.  Nothing  must  be  left,  lest  it  should  defile.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
alludes  to  the  fact  that  Christ  suffered  without  the  gates  of  the  holy  city ;  to  such  a
death  of  shame  was  he  exposed  in  order  to  bear  our  sins.

Conclusion.  Beware  of  transgression  1  Behold  the  sternness  of  God  in  dealing  with
it.  Admire  his  grace  in  furnishing  an  expiation,  and  with  grateful  love  avail  yourselves
of  the  sacrifice  of  the  Saviour.— S.  B.  A.

Vers,  1 — 3. — The  sin  offering  for  the  priest.  The  revelations  contained  in  the
preceding  chapters,  and  commencing  with  the  words,  "And  the  Lord  called  unto
Moses,"  etc.,  appear  to' have  been  given  at  one  diet,  and  now  we  are  introduced  to  a
new  series  by  similar  words,  "  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,"  etc.  The  offerings
described  in  the  earlier  series,  viz.  the  burnt  offering,  the  meat  offering,  and  the  peac*


•0  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  rr.  1-^5

offering,  were  similar  to  those  offered  by  the  patriarchs ;  but  these  now  to  be  described
seem  to  be  characteristic  of  the  Levitical  dispensation.  In  the  verses  more  immediately
before  us  we  have  to  contemplate —

I.  The  priest  as  a  sinner.  1.  May  lie  he  viewed  in  this  character  as  a  type  of  Christ  f
(1)  He  is  distinguished  as  "  the  priest  that  is  anointed."  Some  suppose  this  determines
liim  to  be  the  high  priest.  That  the  high  priest  was  a  remarkable  type  of  Christ  there
can  be  no  question  (Heb.  iii.  1).  (2)  But  Christ  wac  sinless.  By  the  miracle  in  his
birth  he  avoided  original  sin  (Luke  i.  35).  In  his  life  he  "  fulfilled  all  righteousness  "
(Matt.  iii.  15  ;  Heb.  iv.  15 ;  vii.  26).  (3)  Yet  so  was  our  sin  laid  to  his  account  that
he  vicariously  stood  forth  as  the  universal  sinner.  "  The  Lord  made  to  meet  upon  him
the  iniquity  of  us  all "  (Isa.  liii.  6,  margin).  2.  He  may  be  viewed  as  a  type  of  the
Christian.  (1)  He  was  not  necessarily  the  high  priest  because  "  anointed."  Aaron's
sons  were  consecrated  with  Aaron  (ch.  viii.  2).  This  expression  may,  therefore,  simply
import  that  he.  was  a  priest  who  had  come  to  official  years,  and  therefore  had  received
consecration  (see  ch.  vii.  6,  where  minors  and  females  are  reputed  to  be  "  among  the
priests  ").  (2)  The  priests  in  general  were  representatives  of  the  nation  of  Israel,  who
were,  in  consequence,  viewed  as  a  "  kingdom  of  priests  "  (Exod.  xix.  6).  (3)  And  they
typified  the  Christians  (1  Pet,  ii.  9).  We  do  not  exercise  our  priesthood  by  proxy,  but
ourselves  "  draw  nigh  unto  God."  This  supplies  a  good  reason  for  their  being
"  anointed,"  for  "  Christians,"  as  their  name  imports,  are  anointed  ones  (see  2  Oor.  1. 21 ;
Heb.  i.  9 ;  1  John  ii.  20,  27).

II.  The  priest  as  needing  a  sin  opfbrinq.  1.  His  sin  is  that  of  ignorance.  (1)  The
case  of  Eli  could  not  be  brought  within  this  statute  (see  1  Sam.  iii.  14).  For  obstinate
sin  there  is  no  mercy  (see  Numb.  xv.  30,  31 ;  Heb.  x.  26 — 29).  True  Christians  do  not
wilfully  sin  (see  Matt.  xiii.  38;  John  viii.  44 ;  1  John  iii.  6 — 10).  Not  all  who  profess
the  Christian  name  have  a  right  to  the  title.  (2)  There  are  sins  that  are  not  wilful :
sins  of  surprise ;  sins  of  inattention ;  sins  of  neglect  in  consequence  (GiaL  vi.  1 ;
Jas.  V.  19,  20).  But  these  are  sins.  (3)  The  sin  offering  is  the  only  remedy  for  these.
Though  ignorance  may  be  pleaded  in  extenuation,  it  cannot  be  pleaded  in  exculpation
(see  1  John  i.  7 — 9).  2.  The  priest  must  bring  a  lullock.  (1)  The  common  people
may  bring  a  kid  (ver.  28).  Even  a  ruler  may  bring  a  kid  (ver.  23).  But  the  priest
must  bring  the  larger  animal.  He  has  to  bring  the  same  which  is  offered  for  the  whole
congregation.  (2)  Much  is  expected  of  professors  of  religion ;  and  more  especially  so
of  office-bearers  and  ministers.  They  should  have  more  perfect  knowledge  iu  that
which  is  the  principal  business  of  their  life.  They  may,  from  their  position,  more  easily
misguide  the  people.  The  words  in  the  text  rendered  "  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do
sin  according  to  the  sin  of  the  people,"  some  construe  "  If  the  anointed  priest  shall
lead  the  people  to  sin."  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  be  a  "  blind  leader  of  the  blind  "  (see
Rom.  ii.  21).  (3)  Conspiouoivs  men  should  consider  this.  Churchwardens  in  Episcopal
Churches ;  deacons  in  Congregationalist  Churches ;  leaders  in  Methodist  Churches ;
ministers  in  all;  they  should  watch;  they  should  pray;  they  should  seek  the
prayers  of  their  Churches  (Eph.  vi,  19  ;  Col,  iv.  3 ;  1  Thess,  v.  25 ;  2  Taess.  iii.  1).—
J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 12.— The  tin  offering  viewed  as  typical  of  the  Sacrifice  of  Calvary.  This
subject  will  be  best  considered  by  citing  some  of  the  more  notable  references  to  it  con-
tained in  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament.

I.  It  is  evinced  from  Kom.  vm.  3  :  «  For  what  the  Law  could  not  do,  in  that  it  was
weak  through  the  flesh,  God  sending  his  own  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  and  for
sin,"  i.e.  by  a  sin  offering  (the  Greek  term  here  used  is  that  by  which  the  LXX.  con"
monly  translate  the  Hebrew  for  "  sin  offering  "), "  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,"  etc.  The
"  flesh"  that  was  "  weak"  here,  we  take  to  be :  1.  Not  ov,r  fallen  nature.  (1)  The
word  "  flesh "  is  used  for  this.  It  is  so  used  in  the  connection  of  this  very  passage
(vers.  4—8  ;  see  also  Gal.  v.  16,  17).  This  circumstance  has  led  expositors  to  accep
the  term  here  in  that  sense.  (2)  But  as  a  mat  ter  of  fact,  is  the  Law  of  God  weak  through
our  fallen  nature  ?  Certainly  not.  The  Law  answers  all  God  ever  intended  it  to  answer.
His  purposes  cannot  be  frustrated.  2.  But  the  flesh  of  the  sin  offerings.  (1)  These
were  constitutionally  weak  for  the  purpose  of  condemning  sin.  The  flesh  of  bulls  and
o'oats  ii  not  "  sinful  flesh."    Therefore  sin  could  not  be  condemned  in  it.     (2)  This


OH.  IT.  1— 36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  61

weakness  was  no  frustration  of  God's  purposes,  for  he  never  intended  that  sin  should  be
condemned  in  such  flesh  as  theirs  (Ps.  Ixix.  30,  31 ;  11.  16  ;  Heb.  x.  4).  He  intended
these  to  foreshadow  something  better,  viz. :  3.  The  Sin  Offering  of  Calvary.  (1)  This
was  made  in  a  human  body.  Being  in  the  "  likeness  of  sinful  flesh ; "  there  was  no  con-
stitutional weakness  here  (Heb.  x.  5 — 10).  (2)  The  glorious  Person  who  assumed  the
"  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  "  was  God's  "  own  Son."  Thus  by  virtue  of  his  Divinity  not
only  has  he  condemned  sin  in  the  flesh,  but  he  enables  us  to  fulfil  the  righteousuess  of
the  Law  in  the  spirit  of  the  gospel.

II.  It  is  evinced  in  2  Coe.  v.  21 :  "  He  was  made  sin,"  i.e.  a  sin  offering,  "  for  us,
who  knew  no  sin  ;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."  1.  Eis
righteousness  is  the  righteousness  of  God.  (1)  Because  he  is  God  himself.  The  Father
was  in  him.  Whoever  failed  to  discern  the  Father  in  him  did  not  comprehend  him,
did  not  know  him  (John  xiv.  7 — 11).  (2)  He  was  approved  of  God  (Matt.  iii.  17 ;
xvii.  5).  His  resurrection  placed  this  beyond  question  (Acts  ii.  22 — 24).  2.  This  we
receive,  hy  imputation,  in  exchange  for  our  sin.  (1)  The  transfer  of  the  sin  was  set
forth  in  the  laying  on  of  the  hand  of  the  offerer  upon  the  bullock  at  the  altar,  while  it
was  yet  alive.  The  Jews  give  us  these  as  the  words  uttered  by  the  offerer,  "  I  have
sinned ;  I  have  done  perversely ;  I  have  rebelled,  and  done  (here  specifying  men-
tallj'  or  audibly  the  cause  of  his  offering).  But  I  return  by  repentance  before  thee,  and
let  this  be  my  expiation."  (2)  The  substitute  is  then  condemned  while  the  ofterer  is
justified.  Not  only  is  he  released  from  the  obligation  to  die,  but  is  taken  into  fellow-
ship with  God,  and  feasts  with  him  upon  the  meat  and  drink  offerings  accompanying
(Numb.  XV.  24).

III.  It  is  evinced  in  Heb.  ix.  28 :  "  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many ;
and  unto  them  that  look  for  him  shall  he  appear  the  second  time  without  sin,"  i.e.
without  a  sin  offering,  "  unto  salvation."  The  allusions  here  are  to  the  sin  offering  of
the  Law.  The  teaching  is  that,  whereas  at  his  first  advent  he  appeared  in  the  similitude
of  sinful  flesh  for  the  purposes  foreshadowed  in  the  sin  offering,  when  ho  comes  the
second  time  it  will  be  in  the  glorious  similitude  of  humanity,  in  innocence  and  holiness,
to  effect  in  us  all  the  glories  destined  to  follow  upon  his  former  meritorious  sufferings
(1  Pet.  i.  11).

IV.  It  is  evinced  in  Heb.  xni.  10 — 13 :  "  We  have  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no
right  to  eat  which  serve  the  tabernacle.  For  the  bodies  of  those  beasts,  whose  blood  is
brought  into  the  sanctuary  by  the  high  priest  for  sin,  are  burned  without  the  camp.
Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify  the  people  vrith  his  own  blood,  suffered
without  the  gate.  Let  us  go  forth,  therefore,  unto  him  without  the  camp,  bearing
his  reproach."  1.  This  passage,  like  those  already  cited,  asserts  generally  the  fact  that
the  sin  offering  was  a  type  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  2.  But  it  also  points  out  the
typical  import  of  the  burning  of  the  body  in  the  place  of  ashes  without  the  camp.
What  is  this  place  of  ashes  but  Calvary,  Golgotha,  the  place  of  a  skull,  which  was
outside  the  gate  of  Jerusalem?  3.  It  furthermore  proves  that  the  consumption  of  the
body  of  the  beasts  in  the  fire,  viz.  after  they  had  been  bled  at  the  side  of  the  altar,
foreshadowed  the  "  suffering  "  of  Christ.  "  He  suffered  without  the  camp."  This  suffer-
ing then  being  distinguished  from  that  represented  by  the  bleeding,  it  must  refer  to
that  agony  of  soul  which  Jesus  suffered  from  the  fire  of  God's  wrath  against  sin.
4.  Since  the  altar  which  supplies  our  Eucharistic  feast  is  that  of  Calvary ;  and  since
ti.s  priests  under  the  Law  did  not  eat  of  the  bodies  of  those  beasts  which  were  burnt
without  the  camp,  which  were  typas  of  Christ,  those  who  serve  the  tabernacle  have
no  right  to  eat  of  our  altar.  Therefore  those  who  embrace  Christ  and  rejoice  in  his
fellowship  must,  in  the  first  place,  renounce  the  ceremonial  law  of  Moses  (Gal.  ii.
19—21 ;  iii.  1—3).— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  13 — 21. — Sin  offering  for  the  congregation.  The  congregation  of  Israel
•ustained  a  twofold  character,  viz.  a  political  and  an  ecclesiastical ;  for  it  was  at  once
«  Nation  and  a  Church.    Here  we  have —

I.  The  sin  of  a  nation.  Ver.  13.  1.  The  commandments  of  the  Lord  concern
nations.  (1)  Nations  are  constituted  under  the  control  of  his  providence.  We  see
this  in  the  account  of  their  origin  at  Babel  (Gen.  xi.  6 — 8).  In  the  teaching  of  prophecy
{Geo.  ix.  25 — 27 ;  xvii.  4,  6, 16).    In  the  inspired  review  of  their  nistory  (Acts  xviL


62  THE   BOOK  OF  LE/ITICUS.  [ch.iy.  1— 3&

26).  (2)  God  has  ever  held  nations  responsible  to  him  (Job  xii.  18 ;  Jer.  xxviL  6 ;
Dan.  ii.  21 ;  iv.  32).  (3)  The  Hebrew  nation  more  especially  so.  He  raised  them  up
in  pursuance  of  his  promise  to  their  fathers.  He  preserved  them  in  Egypt,  He  brought
them  forth  with  an  outstretched  arm.  He  gave  them  a  code  of  laws  at  Sinai.  He  gave
them  possession  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  In  visible  symbol  he  guided  their  government.
(Ps.  oxlvii.  19,  20 ;  Eom.  ix.  4,  5).  2,  Therefore  nations  may  sin  against  him.  (1)
Where  a  law  is  there  may  be  transgression  (1  John  iii.  4).  God  has  not  left  himself
without  witness  (Acts  xiv.  17).  (2)  The  Gentile  nations  sinned  in  throwing  off  their
allegiance  to  the  true  God  and  joining  themselves  to  idols.  They  have  in  consequence
sunk  into  the  most  abominable  immoralities  (Bom.  i.  21 — 32).  (3)  The  Hebrews  •
followed  the  bad  example  of  their  neighbours,  (a)  In  asking  a  king  to  be  like  them  (1
Sam.  viii.  7,  8).  (6)  In  their  idolatries  (1  Kings  xii.  26—30 ;  2  Kings  xxi.  11).  They
became  demoralized  by  licentiousness  and  violence  (Isa.  i.  4).

II.  The  sin  of  a  Chttroh.  1.  The  commandments  of  the  Lord  concern  Churches.
(1)  The  Church  of  God  in  the  noblest  sense  is  a  grand  unity  existing  throughout  the
universe  and  throughout  the  ages.  This  is  the  corporation  against  which  the  gates  of
hell  cannot  prevail  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  (2)  This  invisible  Church  has  visible  represen-
tatives on  this  earth.  The  congregation  of  Israel  was  such  a  representative  (Acts  vii.
38 ;  collate  Ps.  xxii.  22  with  Heb.  ii.  12).  Now  under  the  gospel  these  representatives
are  many.  There  is  a  Church  where  two  or  three  are  met  together  in  the  name  of
Jesus.  2.  These  Ohvrches  are  responsible  to  Ood.  (1)  They  have  to  maintain  the
purity  of  faith  (Titus  iii.  10 ;  2  John  10 ;  Jude  3 ;  Rev.  ii.  13).  (2)  They  have  to
maintain  purity  of  discipline,  viz.  by  persuasion,  by  admonition,  and  by  expulsion  of
incorrigible  offenders.  Excision  in  the  Jewish  Church  was  accompanied  by  the  infliction
of  death ;  for  the  laws  of  the  nation  and  those  of  the  Church  were  one  (Exod.  xxxi.  14 ;
Numb.  XV.  34,  35).  Now  it  means  withdrawment  from  the  companionship  of  the
offender  (Matt,  xviii.  17 ;  Eom.  xvi.  17  ;  1  Cor.  v. ;  2  Thess.  iii.  6, 14 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  5).

III.  The  opfkrino  fob  sik.  1.  Communities  wre  'punished  in  this  world,  (1)
This  is  evident  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  There  is  no  future  resuirection  of  com-
munities. Disintegration  to  a  community  is  its  utter  extinction.  (2)  Nations  meet
their  punishment  in  adversities  which  are  ordered  by  Providence.  These  are  the  sword
(1  Sam.  xii.  9 — 15) ;  the  pestilence  (Deut.  xxviii.  21) ;  the  consequence  is  famine,  and
wasting,  possibly,  unto  extinction.  God  stirs  up  one  nation  against  another  to  punish
its  pride  (Isa.  xii.  2,  25  ;  xlv.  1—4 ;  xlvi.  10 ;  Jer.  1.  21—32).  (3)  Churches  have
their  punishment  in  this  world.  It  may  come  in  the  form  of  spiritual  leanness.  In
abandonment  to  apostacy  (Isa.  Ixvi.  3,  4 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  11).  The  candlestick  may  be
taken  out  of  its  place  (Matt.  xxi.  41 — 43 ;  Eev.  ii.  5)-.  2.  Punishment  may  he  averted
hy  sacrifice.  (1)  Sacrifices  of  the  Law  were  concerned  with  communities.  The  text
furnishes  an  example.  The  community  may  be  civil.  It  may  be  ecclesiastical.  When
sacrifice  is  accepted,  no  punishment  is  inflicted.  This  is  the  import  of  the  assurance,
"  It  shall  be  forgiven  them."  (2)  The  sacrifice  of  Calvary  is  no  less  concerned  with
communities.  Churches  feel  it  as  well  as  individuals.  Nations  feel  it  as  well  as
Churches.  Churches  and  nations  also  should  plead  it  far  more  than  they  do.  3.  There
is  no  mercy  for  wilful  sin.  (1)  To  avail  ourselves  of  the  benefits  of  atonement,  there
must  be  repentance.  This  was  expressed  when  the  elders  of  the  congregation,  on  behalf
of  their  constituents,  laid  their  hands  upon  the  bullock  (see  ver.  15).  The  gospel  of
this  is  obvious.  (2)  There  must  also  be  faith.  The  faith  expressed  in  the  laying  on
of  hands  was  carried  further  in  the  sprinkling  of  blood  (see  vers.  16,  18).  The  vail
was  a  type  of  Christ,  who  is  our  "  Way  "  to  God,  the  "  Door  "  to  us  into  the  temple  of
the  Divine  Presence  (Heb.  x.  19,  20).  The  blood  sprinkled  upon  the  vail  set  forth  the
laying  of  our  sin  upon  him  who  thereby  consecrates  for  us  the  way.  He  also  is  our
altar  of  incense  upon  whom  the  blood  of  our  guilt  is  laid,  and  by  whose  intercession
we  are  rendered  acceptable  to  God  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  (3)  Judgment  is  reserved  for  the
obstinate.  When  a  Church  becomes  apostate  and  will  not  repent,  it  must  be  destroyed.
Such  was  the  case  with  Judaism,  which  was  removed  amidst  the  slaughter  of  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Such  will  be  the  doom  of  the  Babylonish  harlot  (Rev.  xviii.
4 — 8).  And  what  hope  is  there  for  nations  when  they  become  infidel?  If  sins  of
ignorance  cannot  be  forgiven  without  a  sin  offering,  what  must  be  the  fate  of  com-
munities guilty  of  presumptuous  sins  1 — J.  A.  M.


€B.iT.  1— 35.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITI0U8.  «3


Vers.  22 — 35. — The  sin  offering  of  the  ruler  and  of  any  of  the  people.  As  in  the
preceding  paragraph  we  have  lessons  from  the  relation  of  sin  offering  to  communities,
here  we  are  reminded —

I.  That  individuals  are  bbsponsible  to  God.  We  have  :  1.  The  responsibility  of
the  ruler.  (1)  Eulers  stand  related  to  subjects.  Their  influence  is  extensive  in  pro-
portion to  the  elevation  of  their  rank.  The  Jews  construe  this  law  to  relate  to  the
king ;  but  the  term  for  ruler  (x'tyj,  nasi)  is  not  so  restricted  in  Scripture  (see  Numb.  x.  4).
This  law  was  in  force  400  years  before  there  existed  a  king  in  Israel.  (2)  As  ralers  of
subjects  they  stand  related  to  God  (Prov.  viii.  15, 16;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  3).  Note :  here
only,  the  commandment  transgressed  is  said  to  be  the  "  commandment  of  the  Lord  his
God"  (ver.  22).  This  is  to  remind  him  that  if  he  rules  others,  God  rules  him,  and  will
call  him  to  account  for  the  manner  in  which  he  uses  his  authority.  (3)  The  individual
is  not  sunk  in  the  office.  Men  are  too  apt  to  forget  this,  particularly  so  when  they  sit
in  conclave.  So  far  from  neutralizing,  it  makes  individuality  more  conspicuous,  and
should  render  it  more  intense.  2.  The  responsibility  of  the  private  person.  (1)  Subjects
stand  related  to  rulers.  They  have  relative  as  well  as  personal  duties.  They  have
public  as  well  as  private  interests  and  obligations.  (2)  They  stand  as  subjects  to
rulers  in  relation  to  God.  This  is  recognized  in  his  laws.  (See  Exod.  xxii.  28 ;  the
margin  construes  the  term  urhH,  rendered  "  gods,"  by  "  judges."  Magistrates  are  here
presented  as  representatives  of  the  Elohim.)  They  are  to  respect  and  sustain  authority
in  righteousness  (1  Tim.  vi.  1).  To  pray  for  those  in  authority  (1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2).  (3)"The
individual  is  not  sunk  in  the  subject.  None  are  too  obscure  to  be  noticed  by  God  ;
too  insignificant  to  escape  his  inquisition.

II.  That  sin  ofpbeino  is  provided  foe  individuals.  1.  It  is  appointed  for  the
nder  (vers.  22 — 26).  (1)  He  has  to  bring  a  "kid  of  the  goats,"  not  a  bullock,  which
was  required  from  the  priest  and  from  the  congregation.  The  blood  of  the  kid  was  to
be  sprinkled  simply  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt  oifering,  whereas  the  blood  of
the  bullock  was  also  sprinkled  upon  the  altar  of  incense  and  the  vaiL  A  further
difference  was  that  whereas  the  bodies  of  the  beasts  offered  for  the  priest  and  for  the
congregation  were  burnt  without  the  camp,  the  kid  of  the  ruler  was  treated  as  the  peace
offering.  (2)  These  differences  show  that  the  sin  of  the  ruler,  though  so  heinous  as  not
to  be  forgiven  without  sacrifice,  was  yet  not  so  heinous  as  that  of  the  priest.  More  is
expected  from  men  of  religious  profession.  Nor  was  the  sin  of  the  ruler  regarded  as  so
heinous  as  that  of  the  congregation.  "  It  is  bad  when  great  men  give  ill  examples,  but
worse  when  all  men  follow  them "  (Matthew  Henry).  2.  It  is  appointed  for  the
common  person  (vers.  27 — 85).  (1)  Whereas  the  offering  of  the  ruler  is  defined  to  be
"  a  kid  of  the  goats,"  that  of  the  private  individual  may  be  eitlier  a  kid  or  a  Iamb.  As
he  has  more  liberty  in  his  sacrifice,  so  has  he  in  his  conduct.  Freedom  is  limited  in
the  ratio  of  elevation.  The  humble  should  not  be  envious  of  the  great.  (2)  The  offer-
ing of  the  private  person  was  to  be  a.  female,  which  was  proper  to  one  having  no  authority ;
whereas,  and  for  the  opposite  reason,  the  ruler  had  to  bring  a  male.  (3)  These
differences  go  to  show  that  the  sin  of  a  ruler  is  more  serious  than  that  of  a  common
person.  If  his  privileges  are  greater,  so  are  his  responsibilities.  If  his  position  is
elevated,  his  influence,  for  good  or  evil,  is  proportionately  great.

III.  That  sin  ofpekinq  is  discriminative.  1.  As  to  the  nature  of  the  sin.  (1)  It  is
for  sin  against  Ood.  It  seems  to  have  nothing  to  do  immediately  with  sins  against  our
fellows  or  against  society.  These,  of  course,  may  be  constructively  viewed  as  offences
also  against  God.  If  this  were  more  considered,  men  would  be  more  respectful  to  their
fellows,  who  are  "  made  after  the  image  of  God  "  (see  Jas.  iii.  9).  (2)  It  is  for  sin  against
his  negative  commandments.  This  is  the  teaching  of  vers.  2,  15,  22,  27.  (3)  It  is  for
sin  ignorantly  committed  against  them  (see  John  xvi.  2,  3  ;  Acts  iii.  17 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  8).
Ignorance  is  no  plea  for  mercy  without  sacrifice.  It  is  a  plea  for  mercy  with  a  sacrifice
(see  Luke  xxiii.  34;  1  Tim.  i.  13).  2.  ^s  to  the  time  of  the  offering.  (1)  "And  is
guilty,"  viz.  before  the  punishment  of  his  sin  has  come  upon  him.  If  he  discover  his
sin  in  time  and  bring  his  sin  offering,  it  may  avert  that  punishment.  Men  should
never  try  to  hide  their  sins  from  their  own  souls.  On  the  contrary,  they  should
diligently  seek  to  discover  them.  We  should  plead  the  sin  sacrifice  for  those  we  have
not  discovered  (see  Ps.  xix.  12 ;  cxxxix.  23,  24 ;  1  John  i.  7).  (2)  "  Or  if  his  sin^
wherein  he  hath  sinned,  come  to  his  knowledge,"  viz.  by  the  punishment  of  it  over-


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ca.  iv.  1—35


taking  him  (see  2  Sam.  xxxi.  1).  When  calamity  comes  we  must  not  too  readily
relegate  it  to  the  category  of  mere  physical  sequence,  hut  confess  the  hand  of  God.
Timely  sacrifice  may  stay  a  plague  (see  2  Sam.  xxiv.  25).  3.  For  obstinate  infidelity
there  is  no  mercy.  (1)  This  is  what  Paul,  alluding  to  the  sin  offering,  calls  wilful  sin
{Heh.  I.  2G).  His  argument  goes  to  show  that  the  Great  Sacrifice  of  Calvary  is  the  ai:4i-
type  of  that  offering.  (2)  The  Law  had  no  provision  of  mercy  for  presumptuous  «ii.a,
whether  the  precept  outraged  were  negative  or  positive  (see  Numb.  xv.  27 — 31).  An
awful  instance  of  the  severity  of  the  Law  i«  described  in  Numb.  xv.  32 — 36.  This
instance  is  referred  to  by  Paul,  who  goes  on  to  state  that  the  gospel  has  its  correspond-
ing law  of  extremity,  but  with  a  "  much  sorer  punishment "  (Heb.  x.  28,  29).  If  the
extreme  penalty  of  the  Mosaic  Law  was  the  infliction  of  death  upon  the  body,  what
punishmeirt  can  be  "  much  sorer  "  but  the  "  destruction  of  both  body  and  soul  in  hell "
(Matt.  X.  28)?— J.  A.  M.  .

Ver.  2. — The  mind  of  Ood  respecting  the  sin  of  man.  "If  a  soul  shall  sin."
This  chapter  which  treats  of  this  sin  offering,  and  more  especially  these  words  of  the
second  verse,  mav  remind  us —

I.  That  all  men  have  sinned,  and  abb  guilty  befobe  God,  The  stern  facts  of
the  case  make  the  words,  "  If  a  soul  shall  sin,"  equivalent  to  "  When  a  soul  sins."  The
succeeding  chapters  provide  for  all  possible  cases,  as  if  it  were  only  too  certain  that  men
in  every  station  and  in  every  position  would  sin.  So  in  John  we  have,  "  If  any  man
sin,"  accompanied  by  the  plain  utterance, "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive
ourselves,"  etc.  (1  John  i.  8 ;  iL  1).  It  is  a  significant  fact  that,  in  providing  for  the
people  of  God,  the  Divine  Legislator  had  to  contemplate  the  moral  certainty  that  all,
even  those  standing  in  his  immediate  presence  and  engaged  in  his  worship,  would
fall  into  sin  and  condemnation.  This  significant  provision  is  only  too  well  confirmed
by  :  1.  The  record  of  Hebrew  history.  2.  Other  statements  of  Scripture  (Ps.  xiv.  2,  3 ;
Horn.  iii.  10,  23  ;  GaLiii.22;  1  JohnLlO).  3.  Our  observation  and  knowledge  of  man-
kind. 4.  Our  own  conscience :  every  soul  does  sin  in  thought,  in  word,  in  deed ;  doing
those  "  things  wliich  ought  not  to  be  done  "  (ver.  2),  and  leaving  undone  (not  thought,  not
spoken,  not  fulfilled)  those  things  God  righteously  requires.  "  The  God  in  whose  baud
our  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  our  ways,  have  we  not  glorified  "  (Dan.  v.  23).

II.  That  sin  was  (and  btill  mat  be)  dividbd  into  the  pardonable  and  un-
pardonable. The  words,  "  If  a  soul  shall  sin,"  are  preparatory  to  the  announcement  of
Divine  provision  for  pardon.  But  there  s  a  line  drawn  between  sin  and  sin.  Refer-
ence is  frequently  made  to  sinning  "  through  ignorance  "  (vers.  2,  13,  22,  27).  This
is  distinguished  from  "  presumptuous  sin  "  (Numb.  xv.  30,  31 ;  Deut.  xviL  12).  For  the
one  there  was  pardon;  for  the  other,  instRUt  execution.  The  word  "ignorance"  was
not  confined  to  mere  inadvertence ;  it  extended  to  sins  of  unpremeditated  folly  and
passion ;  probably  to  all  sins  but  deliberate,  high-handed  rebellion  against  God  and  his
Law  (ch.  xvi.  21 ;  comp.  Acts  iii.  17 ;  1  Tim.  i.  13).  Pardon  was  provided,  but  there  was
a  limit  to  the  Divine  mercy ;  there  was  iniquity  for  which  no  sacrifice  availed  (I  Sam.
iii.  14).  Under  the  gospel  there  is  one  "  unpardonable  sin,"  the  sin  "  against  the  Holy
Ghost "  (Matt.  xii.  31,  32).  In  the  time  of  our  Lord,  this  sin  took  the  special  form  ot
blasphemy  against  the  Spirit-of  God.  In  our  time  it  resolves  itself  into  a  persistent  and
obdurate  resistance  of  his  Divine  influence.  This  necessarily  ends  in  final  impenitence
and  ultimate  condemnation.  This  one  sin  excepted,  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesui
extends  (1)  to  the  blackest  crimes ;  (2)  to  the  longest  career  in  wrong-doing  ;  (3)  to  the
guiltiest  disregard  of  privilege  and  opportunity.

III.  That  God  has  provided  fob  the  pardon  of  sin  by  saobifice.  It  is  a  striking
fact  that  the  same  word  in  Hebrew  which  signifies  sin  is  also  used  for  "  sin  offering."
So  closely,  so  intimately  in  the  will  of  God,  and  hence  in  the  mind  of  man,  were  the
two  things  connected — sin  and  sacrifice.  All  unpresumptuous  sins  might  be  forgiven,
but  not  without  shedding  of  blood.  Sin,  in  God's  thought,  means  death,  and  the
sinner  must  be  made  to  feel  that,  as  such,  he  is  worthy  of  death.  Hence  he  must  bring
the  animal  from  his  herd  or  flock,  and  it  must  be  slain,  the  guilt  of  the  offerer  having
been  solemnly  confessed  over,  and  (by  imputation)  formally  conveyed  to  the  victim's
head.  The  life  of  the  one  for  the  life  of  the  other.  Doubtless  it  suflced  for  the
time  and  for  the  purpose,  but  it  was  not  the  redemption  which  a  guilty  race  needed.


CH.IV.  1— 35.]  THE  BOOK  OF   LBVITICUa  «B

and  which  a  God  of  boundless  peace  was  intending  and  was  thus  preparing  to  supply.
The  sin  offering  was  prophetic,  symbolical.  The  blood  of  bulls  could  not  take  away
the  sin  of  the  world ;  only  the  slain  Lamb  of  God  would  avail  for  that  (Heb.  i.  4  ;
John  i.  29).  But  "  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin ; "
"  If  any  man  sin,  ...  he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  ...  for  the  sins  of  the  whole
world "  (1  John  i.  7 ;  ii.  1,  2).  "  He  hath  made  him  to  be  sin  (a  sin  offering)  for  us,
who  knew  no  sin ;  that  we  might  be  made,"  etc.  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  We  learn  from  the
foregoing :  1.  The  one  great  and  deep  want  of  the  world.  We  have  bodies  that  need
to  be  clothed,  fed,  etc.,  but  this  is  nothing  to  tlie  fact  that  we  are  souls  that  have
sinned,  needing  to  be  forgiven  and  accepted  of  God.  2.  The  inestimable  advantages
we  now  enjoy.  If  the  Jew  had  great  advantages  over  the  Gentile,  we  are  far  more
privileged  than  he.  There  has  been  ofl'ered  for  us  "  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever  "
(Heb.  X.  12),  available  for  all  souls,  under  the  heaviest  condemnation,  for  all  time.
3.  Our  proportionate  guilt  if  we  are  negligent  (Heb.  x.  29). — C.

Vers.  3,  13,  22,  27. — Oradationa  in  guilt.  In  Israel,  as  we  have  seen,  sin  was
divided  into  the  pardonable  and  the  unpardonable — into  "  sins  through  ignorance  "  and
sins  of  presumption.  But  this  was  not  the  only  distinction.  Of  those  which  might  be
forgiven  there  were  some  more  serious  tlian  others,  demanding  variety  in  expiation.
Special  regulations  were  given  as  to  the  sin  of  the  "  priest  that  is  anointed ''  (ver.  3),
the  "  whole  congregation  of  Israel "  (ver.  13),  the  ruler  (ver.  22),  etc.  These  distinc-
tions teach  us —

I.  That  special  privilege  carries  with  it  peculiar  responsibility.  The  high
piiest,  if  he  sinned,  was  to  bring  a  bullock  without  blemish  (ver.  3),  and  every  detail  of
the  sin  offering  was  to  be  carefidly  observed  in  his  case  (vers.  4,  5,  etc.).  His  trans-
gression was  accounted  one  of  greater  guilt,  needing  a  more  considerable  sacrifice.  His
nearer  access  to  God,  his  larger  share  of  sacred  privilege,  made  his  accountability  and
his  guilt  the  greater.  The  children  of  privilege  are  the  heirs  of  resp'jnsibility ;  the  more
we  have  from  God,  the  closer  we  are  admitted  to  his  presence,  r.he  clearer  vision  we
have  of  his  truth  and  will, — the  more  he  expects  from  us,  and  tie  more  heinous  will
be  our  guilt  in  his  sight  if  we  depart  from  his  ways.

II.  That  the  profession  of  piety  carries  with  it  iNCBEA-iB  op  oblibation.  The
high  priest's  enlarged  accountability  was  partly  due  to  the  f?ct  that,  as  high  priest,  he
professed  to  stand  in  very  close  relation  to  God;  he  was,  in  public  estimation,  the
first  minister  of  Jehovah ;  he  was  regarded  as  the  holiest  man  in  the  whole  congregation.
Special  obligation,  therefore,  rested  on  him,  and  any  slight  irregularity  on  his  part  was
most  serious.  Profession  of  siddliness  is  a  good  and  desirable  thing.  1.  It  is  the  right
thing :  it  places  us  in  the  position  in  which  we  ought  to  stand ;  it  is  being  true  to  our-
selves. 2.  It  is  the  will  of  Christ  as  revealed  in  his  Word  (Matt.  x.  32).  3.  It  adds
to  our  influence  on  behalf  of  righteousness  and  wisdom.  4.  It  is  an  additional  securltj
against  the  power  of  temptation.  But  it  enhances  responsibility ;  it  increases  obligation.
For  if,  professing  to  love  and  honour  Christ,  we  do  that  which  he  has  expressly  for-
bidden, we  brina  his  sacred  cause  into  contempt,  and  "  make  the  enemy  to  blaspheme."
Rise  to  the  full  height  of -duty,  influence,  privilege,  but  remember  that  on  that  height
are  some  special  dangers,  and  that  a  fall  therefrom  is  to  be  dreaded  with  holy  fear,  to  be
shunned  with  devoutest  vigilance.

III.  That  influence  confers  added  responsibility  on  those  who  wield  it.
Special  provision  is  made  for  the  sin  of  the  ruler,  "  When  a  ruler  hath  sinned,"  etc.
(vers.  22,  23,  etc.).  A  ruler  enjoys  a  position  of  prominence  and  power ;  his  influence
is  felt  afar.  What  he  does  will  decide,  to  some  considerable  extent,  what  others  will  do.
He  has  the  peculiar  joy  of  power ;  let  him  remember  that  power  and  responsibility  are
inseparably  united.  Let  all  those  who  hold  positions  of  influence,  all  whose  judgment
and  behaviour  are  importantly  affecting  the. convictions  and  character  of  their  fellows,
realize  that  if  they  sin,  and  thus  encourage  others  in  error  and  transgression,  they  are
specially  guilty  in  the  sight  of  God.

IV.  That  communities  of  men,  as  such,  may  pall  into  serious  condemnation.
"  The  whole  congregation  of  Israel "  might  "  sin  through  ignorance ; "  it  might  be  led,
unwittingly,  into  practices  that  were  forbidden.  In  that  casoj  though  men  have  great
confidence  when  they  err  in  large  companies,  it  would  be  guilty  before  God ;  and  though

lstiticus.  r


M  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  it.  1— Si*


it  might  he  inadvertently  betrayed  into  folly,  it  would  be  condemned  of  him,  and  must
bring  its  oblation  to  his  altar  (see  Homily  on  "  Collective,"  etc.,  infra).

V.  That  no  mbasube  of  obscubity  will  cloak  sin  from  the  sight  of  God.  "If  any
one  of  the  common  people  sin  through  ignorance,"  etc.  (ver  27,  etc.),  he  must  bring  his
kid  (ver.  28)  or  his  lamb  (ver.  32),  and  the  atoning  blood  must  be  shed.  We  shall  not
escape  in  the  throng.  In  the  hundreds  of  millions  of  fellow-travellers  along  the  path  ol
life,  God  singles  each  of  us  out,  and  marks  our  course,  and  searches  our  soul.  He  esteems
every  human  child,  however  disregarded  of  men,  to  be  worthy  of  his  watchful  glance ;  is
displeased  with  each  sinful  deed  or  word,  but  is  ready  to  forgive  when  the  penitent
seeks  ineroy  in  the  appointed  way  (vers,  31,  35). — 0.

Vers.  13, 14. — Collective  guilt  unconsciously  incurred.  We  learn  from  the  special
provision  made  for  the  "  sin  in  ignorance  "  of  "  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel " —

I.  That,  though  God  deals  peimaeilt  with  individual  bouls,  he  has  dibeot
BELATI0N8  WITH  COMMUNITIES.  Ordinarily,  constantly,  God  comes  to  the  individual
Boul,  and  says,  "  Thou  shalt "  or  "  Thou  shalt  not ; "  "  My  Son,"  do  this  and  live,  etc.
But  he  has  his  Divine  dealings  with  societies,  with  secular  and  sacred  communities  also ;
vrith  (1)  nations,  (2)  Churches,  (3)  families.

II.  That  communities,  as  such,  may  incub  his  condemnation.  A  "  whole  congre-
gation," an  entire  people,  may  sin  (ver.  13).  1.  The  nation  :  witness  the  Jewish
people,  again  and  again  denounced  and  punished.  2.  The  Church :  witness  the
Churches  of  Galatia  (Epist.  to  Gal.),  the  Churches  of  Asia  Minor  (Kev.  iL,  iii.).  3.  The
family.

III.  That  this  guilt  mat  be  conteacted  unconscioublt.  "  The  thing  be  hid  from
the  eyes  of  the  assembly  "  (ver.  13).  1.  The  Jewish  nation, "  through  ignorance,  killed
the  Prince  of  Life  "  (Acts  iii.  15, 17).  Under  some  of  the  better  and  worthier  emperors
as  well  as  under  the  viler.  Home  martyred  the  Christians,  thinking  them  injurious  to
that  human  race  which  they  were  regenerating.  2.  The  Church  of  Christ  has  uncon-
sciously fallen,  at  different  times  and  places  into  (1)  error,  (2)  laxity  of  conduct,  (3)  un-
spirituality  in  worship  and  life,  (4)  inactivity.  3.  Families  fall  into  (1)  undevoutness
of  habit ;  (2)  unneighbourliness  and  inconsiderateness ;  (3)  ungraciousness  of  tone,  and
unkindness  of  behaviour  in  the  home  circle.

IV.  That  recognition  or  wbonq  must  be  immediately  followed  by  penitence
AND  FAITH.  When  "  the  sin  was  known,"  the  congregation  was  to  "  offer  a  young
bullock,"  etc.  (ver.  14).  Let  every  nation,  Church,  society,  family :  1.  Eemember  that
it  is  fallible,  and  may  fall  unconsciously  into  sin.  2.  Eeadily,  and  with  open  mind,
receive  expostulation  and  warning  from  others.  3.  Upon  conviction  of  wrong,  resort
in  penitence  and  faith  to  the  all-sufficient  Sacrifice  of  which  the  sin  offering  was  the
type.— C.

Vers.  11,  12. — Full  acceptance  with  Ood.  The  carrying  away  of  all  the  offered
animal  (save  that  part  which  had  been  presented  to  God  in  sacrifice)  and  the  burning
of  it  in  "a  clean  place"  (ver.  12),  was  probably  meant  to  represent  the  full  and  perfect
acceptance  of  the  offerer  by  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  When  the  victim  had  been  slain
and  its  blood  outpoured  on  the  altar  and  its  richest  part  accepted  in  sacrifice,  there
might  seem  to  have  been  sufficient  indication  of  Divine  mercy.  But  one  sign  more  was
added :  the  animal  which  represented  the  worshipper  having  shed  its  blood,  and  that
shed  blood  having  been  received  as  an  expiation,  it  became  holy ;  when,  therefore,  its
flesh  was  not  eaten  by  the  priest  (ch.  vi.  26)  in  token  of  its  sanctity,  every  part  of  the
animal  was  solemnly  and  reverently  consumed,  in  "  a  clean  place."  Nothing  pertaining
tothat  which  had  become  holy  through  the  shed  blood  should  be  treated  as  an  unholy
thing.  Looked  at  in  this  light,  we  gain  tlie  valuable  thought  that  when  sin  has  been
forgiven  through  faith  in  the  shed  blood  of  the  Redeemer,  the  sinner  is  regarded  as
holy  in  the  sight  of  God.  As  everything  was  thus  done  by  pictorial  representation  to
express  the  thought  of  the  fulness  of  Divine  forgiveness,  so  everything  was  stated
in  explicit  language  through  the  psalmists  and  prophets  to  the  same  effect  (Exod.  xxxiv.
6,  7;  Ps.  Ixxxvi.  5, 15;  ciii.  8j  oxlv.  8;  Isa.  i.  18;  Iv.  7).  So,  also,  our  Lord,  in  the
"prince  of  parables,"  included  everything  that  could  be  introduced— the  robe,  the  ring,
the  ihoes,  the  fatted  calf — to  present  in  the  strongest  colouring  the  precious  truti>  that


OH.  i».  1— M.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  «7

Qoi.  does  not  grudgingly  or  imperfectly  forgive,  but  that  he  "  abundantly  pardons."
The  subject  demands  our  consideration  of  two  things —

L  The  fulness  of  God's  acceptance.  God's  mercy  in  Christ  Jesus  embraces :  1.
The  entire  forgiveness  of  all  past  sins,  so  that  all  our  numerous  transgressions  of  his
Law,  both  the  more  heinous  and  the  less  guilty,  are  "  blotted  out "  of  his  "  book  of
remembrance,"  and  no  more  regarded  by  him ;  and  so  that  all  pur  more  numerous
shortcomings,  our  failure  to  be  and  to  do  that  which  the  heavenly  Father  looked  for
from  his  oliildren,  are  entirely  forgiven.  2.  The  overlooking  of  our  present  unworthi-
ness;  so  that  the  scantiness  of  our  knowledge,  the  imperfection  of  our  penitence,  the
feebleness  of  our  faith,  the  poverty  of  our  resolutions,  and  our  general  unworthinesa  do
not  stand  in  the  way  of  his  "  benign  regard."  3.  The  bestowment  of  his  Divine  com-
placency ;  so  that  he  not  only  "receives  us  graciously,"  but  " loves  us  freely  "  (Hos.
xiv.  2,  4).  He  feels  toward  us  the  love  and  the  delight  which  a  father  feels  toward  thi
cliildren  of  his  heart  and  his  home.  But  to  gain  this  inestimable  blessing,  let  us  be  sure
that  we  have  fulfilled —

IL  The  conditions  on  which  it  is  bestowed.  These  are  twofold.  Paul  has  ex-
pressed them  thus:  (1)  repentance  toward  God;  and  (2)  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  (Acts  xx.  21).  He  who  inspired  Paul  has  taught  us  the  same  truth  in  his  own
words  (Luke  xxiv.  47 ;  Acts  xxvi.  18).  There  must  be  the  turning  of  the  heart,  in
shame  and  sorrow,  from  sin  unto  God,  and  the  cordial  acceptance  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  as  the  I 'i vine  Teacher,  the  all-sufficient  Saviour,  the  rightful  Lord  of  heart  and
life,  which  he  claims  to  be.— -C.

Vera.  3,  13,  23,  27. — Access  for  all:  comparison  and  contrast.  In  the  statutes
of  the  Law  given  in  this  chapter  we  are  reminded,  by  comparison  and  by  contrast,
of  two  of  the  main  features  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  We  are  reminded  by  compari-
son of —

L  The  access  that  was  permitted  to  evert  Israelite,  and  is  now  gbanted  to
us.  No  single  individual  in  the  whole  congregation  of  Israel  could  feel  that  he  was
forbidden  to  go  with  his  offering  "  before  the  Lord,"  to  seek  forgiveness  of  his  sin.  The
priest  could  not  think  his  office  stood  in  his  way  (ver.  3) ;  nor  the  ruler  his  function
(ver.  22);  nor  could  any  humble  son  of  Abraham  suppose  himself  too  obscure  to  find
attention  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  (ver,  27).  Special  and  explicit  legislation  pro-
vided for  each  case,  and  there  could  not  have  been  one  Hebrew  family  which  did  not
know  that  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  was  open  to  all,  and  that  on  the  altar  of  sacrifice
every  offender  might  have  his  offering  presented  and  come  "  down  to  his  house  justified."
Thus  broad,  and  indeed  broader  still,  is  the  permission  to  approach  which  is  granted  in
the  gospel.  For  not  only  is  the  Christian  sanctuary  open  to  prince  and  people,  to
minister  and  member,  to  every  class  and  rank,  but  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither
circumcision  nor  uncircumcision,  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  neither  male  nor  female ;  every
distinction  of  every  kind  has  disappeared,  and  is  utterly  unknown.  We  are  reminded
by  contrast  of —

II.  That  access  which  was  denied  to  them,  but  which  is  offered  to  us.  The
ordinary  Jew,  one  of  the  "  common  people,"  could  go  no  further  than  the  "  door  of  the
tabernacle : "  there  his  entrance  was  barred.  At  that  point  he  had  to  leave  everything
to  the  officiating  priest;  it  was  not  permitted  to  him  to  enter  the  holy  place,  to
sprinkle  the  blood  upon  the  altar,  to  present  any  part  of  the  victim  In  sacrifice; —
another  must  do  that  in  his  stead.  But  in  Christ  Jesus  we  have :  1.  Access  to  God
om:  Father  in  every  place  (Eph.  ii.  18 ;  iii.  12 ;  Heb.  xiii.  15).  2.  Eight  to  plead,
ourselves,  the  one  Great  Propitiation  for  sin.  3.  Eight  to  present  ourselves  and  our
gifts  on  his  altar  to  God  and  his  service  (Rom.  xii.  1 ;  Heb.  xiii.  16).  4.  Access  to  the
table  of  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  xi.  28).  Let  us  try  to  realize  (1)  the  height  of  our  Christian
privilege,  and  (2)  the  corresponding  weight  of  the  responsibility  we  bear.  From  us  to
whom  such  full  and  close  access  is  given  will  much  fruit  be  required  to  the  glory  of
Ids  Name,  in  the  growth  of  our  own  souls  and  the  salvation  of  others.— 0.

Vers.  1, 2. — The  sin  offering.  The  main  points  in  this  offering  were  these:  L  The
Law  of  God  is  made  the  standard  of  righteousness.  IL  Sin  is  offence  against  the
Law.    in.  Offences  of  ignorance  or  error  involve  guilt ;  that  is,  require  that  the  Law


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  it.  1—35.


shall  be  honoured  in  view  of  them.  IV.  There  is  forgiveness  with  God  for  all  siu.
V.  Those  who  are  in  the  most  responsible  position  are  the  most  called  to  offer  sacrifice
for  their  sin.  VI.  The  forgiveness  of  sin  is  only  through  expiation,  in  recognition  ol
an  atonement.  These  points  embrace  much  of  the  teaching  of  the  Mosaic  economy.
Consider—

I.  The  Law  of  Gob  the  standaed  op  BiOETEonssESS.  The  sin  which  has  to  be
expiated  is  "  sin  against  any  of  the  commandments  of  the  Lord."  While  distinction  was
plainly  made  from  the  first  between  the  fundamental  moral  law,  as  in  the  ten  command-
ments, and  the  ceremonial  law— still  all  that  was  "  commanded  of  the  Lord"  was  law  to
Israel — was  to  be  strictly  observed,  involved  the  covenant  relation  between  God  and
man,  to  violate  which  was  to  be  estranged  from  the  peace  of  God.  The  ceremonial  law,
taken  in  connection  with  the  Decalogue  and  the  whole  of  the  Mosaic  appointments,  set
forth  this  great  truth,  that  the  existence  of  man  in  all  its  extent  was  subject  to  the  will
uf  God,  and  that  that  will  as  declared  was  law,  which  must  be  obeyed  at  peril  of  Divine
displeasure.  So  there  is  still  the  same  subjection  of  man  to  law,  which  is :  1.  The
law  of  the  heart  or  of  the  inward  man.  2.  The  law  of  ethics,  of  man's  relations  to
his  fellow-man.  3.  The  law  of  the  religious  life,  of  man's  worship  of  God.  The
standard  of  righteousness  must  be  applied  in  each  of  these  spheres  of  Law,  which  our
Lord  shows  by  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  when  he  proclaims  the  will  of  God  to  be
holiness  in  all  these  respects — -poverty  and  purity  of  heart,  love  to  neighbours,  sincerity
and  devotion  in  the  worship  of  Ood.  Against  the  Law  any  offence  is  sin.  Therefore,
as  the  gospel  was  a  new  proclamation  of  the  Law,  so  was  it  a  new  revelation  of  sin ;  for
Christ,  by  the  Spirit,  came  to  "  convince  the  world  of  sin,"  by  revealing  the  law  of
righteousness.

II.  Sin  is  opfbnob  against  the  Law.  The  fundamental  conception  of  the  Mosaic
economy  was  the  fellowship  of  God  and  man — the  true  blessedness  of  human  existence.
The  Law  was  a  setting  out  of  the  boundaries  of  that  ground  of  fellowship  where  alone
God  and  man  could  meet  together.  Whether  it  was  civil  law,  or  moral  law,  or  cere-
monial law,  the  same  twofold  reference  was  in  each  to  the  will  of  God  as  Creator,  King,
Redeemer,  to  the  trustful  subjection  of  man  to  Divine  authority.  An  offence  against
Law  in  this  wide  sense  of  the  word  must  include  not  only  a  deliberate  setting  up  of  the
will  of  the  creature  against  the  Creator  as  in  immorality  or  intentional  disobedience  of
any  kind,  but  anything  in  the  conduct  which  hinders  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine
purposes,  anything  which  opposes  the  Law  as  an  active  principle.  We  recognize  the
same  universality  of  sanction  to  law  in  that  inevitableness  which  we  attach  to  the
laws  of  nature,  whether  physical  or  social.  They  work  out  their  results  both  in
the  individual  and  in  society,  apart  from  all  respect  of  persons.  The  good  man  violating
a  law  of  nature  must  suR'er  the  consequences.  Not  because  he  is  punished  by  the  God
of  providence,  but  because  he  has  put  himself  in  the  way  of  the  great  chariot  of  the
world's  onward  progress,  and  has  become  so  far  an  offence  and  a  stumbling-block,  which
must  be  treated  as  such.  It  was  a  grand  advance  in  revelation  that  all  human  life  was
regarded  as  based  upon  law,  and  all  law  was  declared  to  be  God's  Law.  Therefore,  all
rightness,  all  happiness,  both  positive  and  negative,  must  be  from  God,  the  fruit  of  a
living  fellowship  between  the  creature  and  the  Creator.

III.  Extension  of  guilt  to  offences  of  ignorance  and  brhor.  The  word  rendered
ignorance  signifies  wandering  from  the  way.  Therefore  the  idea  of  the  offence  is  not  that
of  absolute  ignorance  of  the  Law  itself,  which  would  exclude  the  idea  of  guilt  alto-
gether, but  rather  that  of  inadvertence,  through  carelessness,  through  human  infirmity
of  any  kind,  or  through  the  connection  of  our  own  life  with  the  life  of  others.  "  There
are  many  things  which  man's  conscience  would  pass  over,  many  things  which  might
escape  man's  cognizance,  many  things  which  his  heart  might  deem  all  right,  which
God  could  not  tolerate;  and  which,  as  a  consequence,  would  interfere  with  man's
approach  to,  his  worship  of,  and  his  relationship  with  God"  (Macintosh).  Hence  the
need  of  a  Divine  atonement — for  as  David  prays  we  must  all  pray,  "  Cleanse  thou  me
from  secret  faults  "  (Ps.  xix.  12).  Now,  the  sin  offering  pointed  to  the  fact  that  such
secret  faults,  unintentional  violations  of  the  Law,  involved  guilt,  inasmuch  as  they  were
occasions  demanding  that  the  Law  should  be  vindicated  and  honoured  as  truly  as  the
greatest  offences.  This  has  been  universally  recognized  in  the  law  of  nations  as  a
natural  principle  of  justice.    The  overt  act  is  alone  before  the  eye  of  the  law,  not  the


OH.  IT.  I— 35.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  69

secret  intention  except  as  it  changes  the  character  of  the  overt  act.  The  offence  of  man-
slaughter embraces  a  large  number  of  cases  where  ignorance  and  error  might  be  pleaded,
but  are  not  sufQcieut  to  remove  the  liability  of  the  offender.  Guilt  is  not  merely  con-
acious  or  subjective  liability  to  punishment,  but  objective  liability  as  well.  Thus  is  the
conscience  of  man  enlightened  and  its  power  enlarged  by  the  revelation  of  God.  As
Adam  knew  his  sin  much  more  clearly  when  Qod  had  called  him  into  colloquy,  so  the
Law  of  Moses  was  an  appeal  to  the  conscience,  a  quickening  of  it,  a  setting  up  of  the
Divine  mirror  before  man,  that  he  might  know  himself.  See  this  whole  doctrine  of
guilt  treated  by  St.  Paul  in  Eom.  vii.,  "  Sin  by  the  commandment  became  exceeding
sinful."  "  I  was  alive  without  the  Law  once,  but  when  the  commandment  came,  sin
revived,  and  I  died."

IV.  The  offering  fob  bin  is  the  pledoe  op  DnmiB  fobsivbness.  The  sin  of  igno-
rance represented  God's  view  of  sin  as  contrasted  with  man's  view.  Therel'ore,  as  it  was
an  atoning  offering,  it  proclaimed  both  the  righteousness  of  God  as  condemning  all  sin,
and  the  covenant  mercy  of  God  as  forgiving  all  sin.  Man  would  naturally  take
account  only  of  known  sins,  but  the  true  peace  is  that  which  proceeds  from  the
assurance  of  entire  and  infinite  atonement.  How  different  is  such  a  revelation  of
mercy  from  any  of  the  heathen  satisfactions  which  were  mere  attempts  to  appease  the
Divine  wrath  as  a  recognized  danger!  But  dangers  are  not  only  seen,  but  unseen.  In
the  case  of  natural  laws,  how  often  we  find  that  we  have  broken  them  when  we  knew
not!  The  true  safety  is  that  which  we  know  is  not  only  partial  and  probable,  but
absolutely  secured  against  all  possible  contingencies.  God's  thoughts  are  not  as  our
thoughts.     He  invites  us  to  hide  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings.

V.  Responsibility  in  proportion  to  privilege.  The  priest  represented  the  people.
The  congregation  was  the  nation  in  its  collective  capacity,  therefore  it  represented  not
only  the  individuals  as  sinners,  but  the  special  relation  of  the  community  to  Jehovah
as  the  body  to  the  head.  The  official  position  of  the  high  priest  was  one  of  peculiar
dignity  and  solemnity,  therefore  the  sin  of  the  individual  in  his  case  was  more  than
his  own  sin — it  was  the  violation  of  that  larger  relation  in  which  the  people  as  a  whole
stood  to  their  God.  All  superior  knowledge,  all  elevation  of  office  and  vocation,  all
representation,  carries  with  it  special  responsibility.  Those  who  are  ministers  of  God
must  feel  their  sins  as  heavier  burdens,  requiring  to  he  put  away  by  special  acknowledg-
ment, by  extraordinary  eflbrt.  There  are  sins  which  none  but  the  high  priest  and  the
congregation  could  commit.  So  there  are  sins  of  official  life  and  sins  of  Church  life,
which  we  are  apt  to  overlook  because  they  are  less  upon  the  individual  conscience  than
our  own  personal  sins ;  but  God  shows  us  by  the  regulations  of  his  Law,  that  we  must
hate  them  and  avoid  them  and  seek  their  forgiveness,  even  as  though  they  were
deliberate  and  individual  offences.  How  often  men  have  done,  in  the  name  of  their
religious  system  or  in  their  official  capacity,  what,  if  it  had  been  ascribed  to  themselves
in  their  private  life,  they  would  have  immediately  condemned !  The  purity  of  Church
officers  and  of  Church  life  in  general  has  much  to  do  with  the  growth  of  Christianity.
The  history  of  ecclesiastical  errors  is  a  very  sad  one.  It  was  the  absolute  purity  of  Christ
which  so  severely  condemned  the  religious  leaders  of  his  time.  They  suffered  their
consciences  to  be  blinded  by  the  corruption  of  the  system  under  which  they  lived.  They
did  evil,  thinking  often  that  they  did  God  service.  Yet  the  Church  and  its  rulers  will  be
judged,  not  by  the  standard  of  its  own  degeneracy,  but  by  the  Law  of  God.  Judgment
begins  at  the  house  of  God.  Z%ere  are  the  most  responsible  men,  there  are  the  greatest
offences,  and  there  must  be  the  most  exemplary  manifestation  of  Divine  righteousness.
Tlie  clearing  away  of  sin  from  the  Ciiurch  is  the  preparation  for  the  pure  worship  of
God,  for  the  re-established  relation  between  the  covenant  king  and  his  people,  for  the
octpoured  blessings  nf  the  throne  of  grace.

VI.  The  forgiveness  of  sin,  only  by  expiation,  through  atonement.  This  is
«specinlly  set  forth  by  the  sin  offering,  for  it  represented  the  Divine  demand  of  expiation
in  cases  where  human  ignorance  or  error  might  be  pl^dcd  in  excuse  on  man's  side.
What  we  require  is  not  mere  proclamation  of  pardon,  but  a  peace  which  is  settled  on
eternal  foundations.  So  long  as  there  remains  in  the  mind  of  the  sinner  the  thought
that  God  is  not  satisfied,  there  must  be  a  barrier  to  fellowship.  The  "setting  forth  of
the  sin  offering  was  a  provision  of  Divine  righteousness  as  the  condition  of  peace.  Qtod
does  not  overlook  sin  as  that  which  has  excuse  made  for  it ;  he  puts  it  away  as  that


70  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch  iv.  1—36

which  U  atoned  for.  All  the  details  of  the  ceremony,  especially  the  connection  of  the
blood  of  the  sin  offering  with  the  two  altars — that  of  incense  and  that  of  burnt  offering —
pointed  to  the  completeness  of  the  atonement  which  God  provided.  In  the  antitype,
the  great  sacrifice  offered  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whose  soul  was  made  an  offering
for  sin,  we  must  lay  great  stress  on  the  Divine  perrectioa  of  the  Victim  offered,  his
coming  forth  from  Qoi,  his  representation  in  himself  of  Divine  righteousness ;  for  Christ
is  not  a  Saviour  merely  from  individual  transgressions,  but  from  sin  itself  as  an  evil
principle  at  work  in  the  nature  of  man.  Unless  we  hold  firmly  to  this  atoning  per-
fection of  Christ,  we  cannot  proclaim  the  regenerating  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  the
new  life  must  be  founded  in  a  perfect  justification ;  the  same  faith  which  admits  us  into
the  forgiveness  of  sins  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  also  admits  us  into  that  fellowship
and  vital  union  with  the  living  Redeenicr,  which  is  the  commencement  of  a  new  life  in
the  Spirit.  The  Apostle  Peter  (1  Pet.  i.  2)  puts  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit  and
the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  in  juxtaposition.  They  are  included  in  the
one  Sacrifice  of  Calvary,  whereby  atonement  is  made,  and  the  power  of  an  endless  life  is
revealed  in  him  who,  having  offered  himself  through  the  Spirit  without  spot,  rose  again
from  the  dead  to  become  the  Captain  of  salvation,  the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren,
the  second  Adam,  the  man  who  is  made,  by  his  Divine  work,  a  quickening  spiiit.
"  Christ  is  God's,"  and  "  ye  are  Christ's."— R.

Vers.  3 — 12. — The  highprieat's  hwmt  offering.  The  difference  between  the  high  priest's
offering  and  that  for  the  whole  congregation  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  offering  for  an
offending  ruler  or  any  of  the  common  people  on  the  other,  lay  in  the  sprinkling  of
the  blood  of  the.  victim  seven  times  before  the  Lord,  before  the  vail  of  the  sanctuary.
This  betokened  the  purifying  by  this  sacrifice  of  the  public  worship  of  the  people  as
distinguished  from  their  private  and  individual  life.  The  different  modes  of  sprinkling
ihe  blood  marked  successive  degrees  of  consecration,  from  the  altar  of  burnt  offering
without  to  the  vail  in  the  sanctuaiy,  which  especially  represented  Jehovah's  presence.
The  high  priest  was  an  embodiment  of  the  people's  sanctity  as  a  worshipping  people.
The  great  truth  taught  is  the  necessity  of  connecting  together  worship  with  the  revela-
tion of  Divine  righteousness  and  grace.  The  only  true  religion  is  that  which  rests
on  the  twofold  basis — God's  provided  atonement  for  sin ;  man's  faith  and  obedience
towards  God.

Show  that  thebb  ib  "  iniquitt  in  oub  holt  things."  This  was  recognized  by  the
Apostle  Paul  at  Athens.  "  Whom  therefore  ye  ignorantly  worship,  him  declare  I  unto
you."  The  want  of  true  knowledge  renders  the  worship  unacceptable.  But  not  ignorance
only ;  indifference,  heedlessness,  the  superstition  which  proceeds  from  a  corrupt  heart,,
the  falsehood  which  has  grown  up  from  the  root  of  sin  in  human  nature  and  which
the  individual  man  may  adopt  from  tradition  without  perceiving  its  falsity.  The
religious  leaders  of  a  people  may  be  especially  guilty  of  defiling  the  popular  worship.
The  priest,  by  his  false  theology,  or  his  corrupt  ritual,  or  his  lack  of  spirituality,  may
involve  the  congregation  in  sin.  In  the  house  of  God  itself  there  may  be  sinful  defect
of  reverence,  sinful  disorder,  sinful  coldness  and  dulness,  sinful  pride  and  worldliness,  sinful
wanderings  of  thought  and  self-assertion.  Our  worship  needs  to  be  sprinkled  with  the
blood  of  our  Great  Sacrifice  before  it  can  be  accepted.  It  is  especially  incumbent  on  the
religious  teachers  and  ministers  of  the  sanctuary  that  they  be  prominent  in  confessing
sin,  in  urging  the  necessity  of  more  sanctificationj  in  exalting  the  merit  of  Christ  that
worship  be  presented  through  him. — R.

Vers.  13 — 21. — The  whole  congregation  tinners  through  ignorance.  The  sacrifice  is
very  similar  to  the  high  priest's.  The  ruling  thought  in  both  cases  is  that  of  sin
attaching  to  those  who  represent  the  covenant  of  God.  The  people,  whether  as  a  nation
or  assembly,  or  as  a  house  of  God,  a  worshipping  congregation,  whether  in  its  elders  or
rulers,  or  in  its  high  priest,  were  in  a  covenant  relation  to  Jehovah ;  therefore  might
offend  against  that  relation,  and  required  atonement  to  be  made.  Take  up  the  subject
of  national  sins.

I.  A  NATioiT  MAT  BE  GuiLTT.  1.  Negatively,  violating  the  commandments  of  God.
Political  unwisdom,  producing  national  disorder,  ignorance,  division  of  classes  from  one
another,  decay  of  commerce,   and  distress.     International  confusion    and  war.     2.


ca.  IT.  1—35.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  71


Positively  irreligious.  Growth  of  vices  till  they  become  national.  Combinations  of
great  masses  of  people  to  uphold  wrong  and  protect  interests  which  impede  the  advance
of  morality.  Sins  of  rulers  in  dishonest  legislation.  State  interference  with  religious
liberty.  Spread  of  superstition',  for  which  the  nation  as  a  whole  is  accountable.  In-
difference of  the  more  privileged  classes  to  the  moral  and  religious  condition  of  the
multitudes.    Guilty  leaders  followed.

II.  National  sins  should  be  nationally  confessed  and  Pirr  away.  "While
there  are  prominent  members  of  the  nation  who  should  set  an  example  of  penitence
and  sacrifice,  the  whole  people  should  be  summoned  to  a  united  acknowledgment  of
their  position  before  God.  The  national  fast,  if  rightly  conducted,  and  emanating  from
a  widespread  sense  of  sin,  and  not  from  a  mere  royal  command,  must  be  pleasing  to
God.  At  such  times  the  chief  stress  should  be  laid  not  upon  the  performance  of  external
rites,  but  upon  the  facts  of  the  moral  state  of  the  people  and  the  gospel  call  to  repent-
ance and  faith.

III.  There  is  a  roBoivENESs  op  nations  ab  well  as  of  individuals.  "And
the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  them,  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  them."  We
cannot  doubt  that  God,  as  a  Moral  Governor,  punishes  nations.  History  proves  that
there  is  not  a  mere  natural  rise  and  fall  of  great  powers  by  the  working  of  ordinary
physical,  social,  and  economical  laws ;  but  there  is  an  ordering  of  events,  so  as  to  visit
national  sins  upon  nations.  Great  illustrations  :  in  France  ;  in  United  States  for  slavery ;
in  our  own  history,  Spanish  Armada — "  Afflavit  Deus,  et  dissipantur."  Many  instances
of  change  for  the  better  in  affairs  of  nations :  France,  Italy,  America,  England  at  the
Commonwealth.  Preservation  from  impending  evils.  Special  help  in  internal  troubles
and  international  relations.  We  must  watch  the  will  ot  Providence  over  long  periods,
and  adapt  facts  and  principles  to  one  another.  Testimony  in  the  Old  Testament,  and
especially  in  the  Psalms,  to  the  government  of  God  in  nations. — R.

Vers,  22  —  26.  —  A  ruler  can  sin  through  ignorance,  and  requires  atonement,
L  Official  position  is  moral  responsibility.  Whether  the  office  be  inhi':ited  or
appointed,  the  ruler  is  in  a  special  relation  to  God  and  to  the  people.  He  must  jealously
guard  Us  office,  and  the  more  exalted  he  is,  the  more  he  should  preserve  a  conscience
void  of*l)flfence  towards  God  and  towards  man.

II.  The  ruler  should  set  the  example  of  respecting  the  requirements  of  God's  Law.
If  the  people  see  their  natural  leaders  and  official  superiors  confessing  sin  and  seeking
atonement,  religious  reverence  and  obedience  will  spread  through  all  classes.  Fearfifl
curse  of  wicked  rulers.  Those  in  high  positions  should  search  their  lives  and  hearts,
lest,  by  their  neglect,  or  ignorance,  or  sin  of  any  kind,  they  bring  Divine  displeasure
on  the  people.

III.  The  sacrifice  is  not  the  same  for  the  ruler  as  for  the  man.  An  official  position
Ig  not  to  hide  an  individual  and  personal  accountability.  Too  often  sins  are
committed  in  office,  of  which  men  would  be  ashamed  if  their  own  names  were  con-
nected with  them.  We  may  distinguish  the  official  from  the  personal,  but  wo  must
remember  that  God  requires  both  to-be  pure  and  holy. — R.

Vers.  27 — 35. — The  sins  of  the  common  people.  The  idea  of  the  distinction  is  that
those  who,  by  their  distance  from  the  sanctuary  and  their  lack  of  education,  are  more
exposed  to  the  possibility  of  offence,  are  less  guilty,  and  therefore  require  a  some-
what lower  sacrifice.  A  female' kid  or  a  lamb  would  suffice;  but  the  same  ceremonies
were  indispensable — the  laying  on  of  hands,  the  touching  of  the  horns  of  the  altar  of
burnt  offering  with  blood,  the  pouring  out  of  the  blood  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar,  the
fire  offering  of  sweet  savour  to  the  Lord.  Thus  the  least  sins,  the  sins  of  the  least
responsible  people,  the  sins  of  iguorance  and  mere  ceremonial  uncleanness,  were  con-
nected with  the  greatest,  and  the  people  were  reminded  that  all  sin,  as  transgression
of  the  Law,  must  be  atoned  for,  and  without  atonement  there  is  no  forgiveness.
Subject — Sins  of  the  common  people.

I.  We  are  taught  to  deal  with  them  pitifully,  with  consideration  of  circum-
stances, with  remembrance  of  their  comparative  lesser  guilt.  Mere  derunoiations,
unqualified  condemnation,  injurious.  We  should  teach  people  the  Law  that  they  may
«ee  the  sinfulpess  of  sin,  but  in  the  spirit  of  love,  lest  they  be  blinded  «nd  hardened  by


72


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,


[oh.  ▼.  1—13


a  bewjldeniig  confusion  of  conscience  and  despondency.  The  traditional  condemnation
attached  to  those  sins  to  wliich  the  masses  are  especially  tempted  might  mislead,  if  not
modified  hy  the  respect  to  antecedents.

II.  We  must  hold  fast  to  the  Scripture  representation — all  sin  is  guilt.  The
attempt  to  uplift  the  lower  classes,  without  the  power  of  atonement,  by  means  of  mere
moral  or  intellectual  appliances  or  social  influences,  must  be  a  failure  in  the  long  run.
Those  who  make  it  injure  themselves.  Nothing  delivers  them  from  sin  but  the  power
of  Ciirist.  Nor  will  it  avail  to  imitate  the  folly  which  "  makes  light  of  sin."  Of.  the
Saviour's  instructions  in  Sermon  on  the  Mount  (Matt.  vii.).  While  we  avoid  censorious-
ness  and  uncharitable  judgment,  we  must  cultivate  a  wise  caution,  lest  we  cast  our
pearls  before  swine.     The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  our  only  guide  and  strength.

III.  The  prescriptions  of  the  Law  varied  according  to  the  opportunity  of  the  offender.
We  must  SMObTH  the  way  foe  kbtdbn  to  God.  By  adapting  the  commandments  to
the  capacity  and  opportunity  of  men.  By  teaching  them  the  spirituality  of  the  gospel
method,  which  lays  the  chief  stress  on  motive  and  affection,  not  on  mere  external  value
in  the  gift.  By  sympathy  and  co-operation  helping  them  to  find  the  way,  holding
them  up  in  it  for  a  time,  surrounding  them  with  cheerful  companionship  and  en-
couraging words.

IV.  The  common  people  being  thus  marked  out,  iBminds  us  that  there  is  a  special
urgency  upon  the  Christian  Church  in  the  mission  of  the  gospel  to  those  that
AEE  afar  off.  We  are  apt  to  think  it  enough  to  care  for  those  in  and  about  the
temple.  The  common  people  heard  Jesus  gladly.  To  the  poor  his  gospel  is  especially
preached.  If  all  the  sacrifices  typify  the  Great  Sacrifice  of  Calvary,  and  the  sin  offering
more  particularly,  the  adaptation  ol  the  doctrine  of  Christ  to  the  masses  is  thus  set
forth ;    we  must  present  the  sin  offering,  if  we  would  redeem  society  from  its  teeming


RXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  V.

Thb  em  OPFEBIKG — continued  (ren.  1 —
13).  The  subject  of  the  next  thirteen  verses
is  still  the  sin  offering,  not  the  trespass
offering,  as  has  been  supposed  by  some.
The  first  six  verses  state  three  speciflo
cases  for  which  sin  offerings  are  required,
and  the  remaining  seven  verses  detail  the
concessions  made  to  poverty  in  respect  to
the  offerings  requu-ed.  The  cases  are  those
of  a  witness,  of  one  ceremonially  defiled,
and  of  one  who  had  sworn  thoughtlessly.
The  concessions  granted  are  two :  two  turtle-
doves or  young  pigeons  are  allowed  instead
of  a  lamb,  and  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah
of  fine  flour,  without  oil  or  frankincense,  is
•Uowed  instead  of  the  two  turtle-doves  or
young  pigeons.  The  latter  concession  is
the  more  remarknble  as  the  sacrifice  by  its
means  changes  its  character  from  a  bloody
to  an  uubloudy  offering.

Ver.  1. — The  case  of  a  witness  on  oath.
If  a  man  hear  the  voice  of  swearing,  I  hat  is,
If  he  was  one  of  a  number  of  persons  adjured
to  speak  according  to  the  mnnner  in  which
oaths  were  ailministered  in  Jewish  courts  of
jiiatimrgeeMatt  xxvi.  63;  2  Chron.  xviii.  15),


and  he  did  not  give  evidence  of  what  he  had
seen  or  heard,  he  had  to  bear  his-jniqnity,
that  is,  he  was  regarded  as  guilty ;  and  as
this  was  an  offence  which  could  be  atoned
for  by  a  sacrifice,  he  was  to  offer  as  a  sin
offering  a  ewe  lamb,  or  a  female  kid,  or  two
turtle-doves,  or  two  pigeons,  or  the  tenth
part  of  an  ephah  of  flour.  This  injunction
is  a  direct  condemnation  of  the  approved
teaching  of  Italian  moral  theologians  of
paramount  autliority  throughout  the  Roman
Church,  who  maintain  that,  in  case  a  crime
is  not  known  to  others,  a  witness  in  a  court
of  justice  ■ "  may,  nay,  he  is  bound  to,  say
that  the  accused  has  not  committed  it"  (St.
Alfonso  de'  Liguori,  '  Theol.  Mor.,'  iv.  154).

Vers.  2,  3. — Two  cases  of  a  man  cere-
monially defiled.  If  he  had  touched  a  dead
body  or  any  other  substance  conveying  un-
cleanness,  and  it  were  hidden  from  him,  that
is,  if  he  had  done  it  unwittingly,  or  from
forgetfulness  or  neglect,  had  failed  to  purify
himself  immediately,  he  must  offer  his  sin
offering,  as  above.

Ver.  4.— The  case  of  a  man  who  had
negleeted  to  fulfil  »  thoughtless  oath.  If
he  sware  to  do  evil,  or  to  do  good,  that  is,
to  do  anything  whatever,  good  or  bad  (see
Numb.  xxiv.  13),  and  failed  to  fulfil  his
oatli  from  carelessness  or  negligence,  he  too
must  bring  his  offering,  as  above.

Vers.  5,  6. — In  the  four  cases  last  mga-


OH.  ▼.  1 — 13.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


T8


tioned  there  is  first  to  be  an  acknowledg-
ment of  guilt,  he  shall  eonfesB  that  he  hatii
sinned  in  that  thing,  and  then  the  sin  offer-
ing is  to  be  made.  Confession  of  sin  probably
preceded  or  accompanied  all  sin  offerings.
The  use  of  the  word  asham,  translated
trespass  offering  in  ver.  6,  and  the  character
»f  the  four  cases  have  led  many  oommen-
tiitors  to  regard  vers.  1 — 13  as  dealing  with
the  trespass  offering  rather  than  the  sin
offering.  But  if  this  were  so,  the  words
trespats  offering  and  sin  offering  would  be
used  synonymously  in  this  verse,  which  is
very  unlikely,  when  they  are  imniediiituly
afterwards  carefully  distinguished.  It  is
best  to  render  asham  "for  his  trespass,"
that  is,  in  expiation  of  his  guilt,  as  in  the
next  verse,  in  place  of  a  trespass  offering.

Vers.  7 — 13. — If  he  be  not  able  to  bring  a
lamb.  Sin  offerings  being  not  voluntary
sacrifices  but  required  of  all  that    were


guilty,  and  the  four  last-named  cases  being
of  common  occurrence  amongst  the  poor
and  ignorant,  two  concessions  are  made  to
poverty :  two  birds  (one  to  be  offered  with
the  ritual  of  the  sin  offering,  the  other  with
that  of  the  burnt  offering),  or  even  some
flour  (either  three  pints  and  a  half  or  three
quarts  and  a  half,  according  as  we  adopt
the  larger  or  smaller  estimate  of  the  amount
of  the  ephah),  aie  allowed  when  the  offerer
cannot  provide  a  lamb  or  a  kid.  There  is
thus  typically  set  forth  the  freedom  with
which  acceptance  through  the  great  pro-
pitiation is  offered  to  all  without  respect  of
persons.  The  non-bloody  substitute,  being
permitted  only  as  an  exception  for  the
benefit  of  the  very  poor  and  only  in  the  four
cases  above  specified,  does  not  invalidate
the  general  rule  that  without  the  shedding
of  blood  theie  ig  no  remission  of  sin.


H0MILBTIC3.

Ver.  5. — Confession  of  the  sin  committed  is  required  of  the  man  who  Is  allowed  to  offer
a  sin  offering.  It  is  likewise  required  before  a  trespass  offering  is  accepted,  as  appears
from  Numb.  v.  6,  7.  "  When  a  man  or  woman  shall  commit  any  sin  that  men  commit,
to  do  a  trespass  against  the  Lord,  and  that  person  be  guilty,  then  they  shall  confess
their  sin  that  they  have  done."

I.  Traditional  foem  of  confession.,  "  The  sacrifice  was  so  set,  as  that  the  offerer,
standing  with  his  face  towards  the  west,  laid  his  two  hands  between  his  horns  and
confessed  his  sin  over  a  sin  offering  and  his  trespass  over  a  trespass  offering ;  and  his
confession  was  on  this  wise :  '  I  have  sinned,  I  have  done  grievously,  I  have  rebelled  and
done  thus  and  thus ;  but  I  return  by  repentance  before  thee,  and  let  this  be  my  expia-
tion'" (Lightfoot, '  Temple  Service,'  ch.  viii.).  "  I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord ;  I  have  sinned,
I  have  transgressed,  I  have  rebelled,  I  have  (here  the  person  specified  the  particular  sin
-which  he  had  committed,  and  for  which  he  wanted  expiation);  but  now  I  repent,  and  let
this  be  my  expiation  "  (Outram,  '  De  Sacrifioiis,'  I.  xv.  9).  That  some  such  form  as
this  was  used,  according  to  the  universal  trailition  of  the  Jews,  we  may  conclude  with
tolerable  certainty  from  the  present  passage  in  Leviticus  and  that  in  Numb.  v.  6,  7.

II.  This  confession  was  intended  to  spring  from  feelings  op  ebpentancb.  All
that  could  he  enforced  as  a  common  and  public  discipline  was  the  open  confession  of
the  sin.  But  no  Israelite  could  have  believed  that  the  confession  would  be  acceptable
unless  it  proceeded  from  a  penitent  heart.  This  was  left,  as  it  must  be  left,  to  the
individual  conscience,  but  it  was  suggested  and  morally  demanded  by  the  injunction
to  confess.

III.  The  offering  op  the  bin  offering  and  trespass  offkrino  was  not  therefore

AN  EXTERNAL  CEREMONY  ONLY,  BUT  A  SPIRITUAL  PENITENTIAL  ACT.      As    the    offering    of

the  burnt  ofi'ering  implied  the  spiritual  act  of  self-surrender,  and  of  the  meat  offering
the  spiritual  act  of  submission,  and  of  the  peace  offering  the  spiritual  act  of  holy  joy,
BO  the  offering  of  the  sin  and  trespass  offering  implies  the  spiritual  act  of  repentanee,
None  of  these  sacrifices  perform  their  work  as  opera  operata,  without  reference  to  the
religious  state  of  the  ofl'eier's  mind  and  soul.

Vers.  7 — 13. — The  sacrifices  to  he  offered  as  sin  offerings  are  specified,  nor  may  they
be  multiplied.  They  do  not  differ  according  to  the  heinousness  of  the  offence  which
they  are  to  atone  for,  but  according  to  the  means  of  the  offerer.  The  moral  reason  of
this  was  probably  to  prevent  the  idea  arising  that  the  costliness  of  the  sacrifice  might
compensate  for  the  greater  sin,  and  that  men  might  sin  the  more  if  they  were  willing
to  pay  for  it  by  more  sacrifices.     The  difference  in  the  sacrifice  appointed  for  each  class


74  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  y.  1—13.

might  serve  to  point  ont  that  a  sin  is  greater  in  a  man  of  prominent  position  than  in  •
man  of  less  influence,  owing  to  its  effects  upon  a  larger  circle.  The  concession  made  to
the  poor  shows  that  none  are  to  be  shut  out  from  communion  with  God  for  their  want
of  worldly  means.  The  expiation  must  be  made,  that  the  sinner  may  recover  his
covenant  relations  with  God;  but  it  shall  be  of  such  a  nature  that  none  shall  be
prevented  firom  making  it  by  their  poverty.  Here  then  is  a  foreshadowing  of  the  free
grace  of  God  in  the  gospel  dispensation.  "  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the
waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money ;  come  ye,  buy  and  eat ;  yea,  come,  buy  wine  and
milk  without  money  and  without  price  "  (Isa,  Iv.  i.).  "  Let  him  that  is  athirat  coma
And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take  the  water  of  life  freely  "  (Rev.  xzii.  17).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Vers.  1 — 18. — OuUt  removed.  The  Psalmist  cried  out,  "  Who  can  understand  his
errors?  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults."  To  dwell  upon  the  manner  in  which  sin
may  be  committed,  and  to  try  to  deepen  our  sense  of  its  flagrancy,  is  not  a  pleasant
employment,  but  it  is  highly  necessary.  And,  blessed  be  God  I  a  rainbow  of  cheerful
hope  spans  the  dark  cloud  of  transgression;  the  same  page  that  speaks  of  sin  tells  also
of  forgiveness.

I.  This  chapter  reminds  the  Israelites  of  several  ways  in  which,  without  having  been
resolutely  determined  upon,  sin  might  result.  Through  silence  and  concealment  of
knowledge  (ver.  1),  through  defilement  by  contact  with  uncleanness  of  man  or  beast
(ver.  2),  or  through  rash  declarations  (ver.  4),  it  was  possible  inadvertently  to  transgress
the  laws  of  God.  Sm  assumes  many  forms.  It  may  be  of  the  voice  or  the  finger,  by
word  or  deed.  It  may  be  by  forcible  repression  of  the  truth  or  by  careless  voluble
utterance.  It  may  be  incurred  in  connection  with  the  noblest  or  the  lowest  parts  of
God's  creation.  This  thought  should  leget  constant  watchfulness  in  speaking  and
acting.  We  can  never  be  sure  of  preserving  'ourselves  from  contamination  with  evil.
"  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  The  abolition  by  the
gospel  of  ceremonial  restrictions  has  rather  increased  than  diminished  the  strictness  of
the  universally  obligatory  precepts,  making  them  more  searching  in  character.  Our
Lord  taught  that  there  may  be  adultery  in  a  look,  murder  in  a  thought.

II.  We  find  one  law  applicable  to  these  different  cases,  one  sentence  pronounced,  one
ordinance  appointed.  The  important  pact  common  to  all  forms  op  sin  is  that  thet
INVOLVE  THE  OFPENDEB  IN  GUILT.  About  the  particular  sin  we  need  not  trouble  so
much  as  about  the  fact  of  transgression  and  consequent  demerit.  "  He  shall  bear  his
inionity"  (ver.  1).  "He  shall  be  unclean  and  guilty"  (ver.  2).  Jehovah  can  no
longer  look  upon  his  subject  with  favour ;  sin  places  him  under  a  cloud,  mars  him  in  the
right  of  God.  Only  ignorance  can  keep  a  man  at  ease  under  such  circumstances.  The
awakened  soul  exclaims,  "  I  have  sinned :  for  I  have  transgressed  the  commandment
of  the  Lord."  The  peace  of  the  wicked  is  like  the  calm  that  often  precedes  the  tempest.
It  is  the  ofBce  of  the  Word  of  God  to  convince  the  ungodly  of  their  hard  speeches  and
ungodly  deeds,  and  the  question  the  preacher  loves  to  hear  is  that  which  shows  that
Uie  arrow  has  reached  its  mark,  when  the  agonized  sinner  inquires,  "  What  must  I  do  to
be  saved  ?  "

III.  "  By  the  Law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  but  to  leave  the  matter  here  would  be
to  subject  the  transgressor  to  intolerable  anguish.  There  is  a  twofold  method  of
EXPIATION,  to  restore  communion  with  God.  There  must  be  confession  of  hlameworthi-
fMM.  "1  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  before  thee."  "He  shall  confess  that  he
hath  sinned  in  that  thing  "  (ver.  5).  This  acknowledgment  by  the  individual  is  due
to  the  majesty  of  God,  and  is  the  first  step  towards  obliterating  the  injury  caused  by
sia  The  forces  of  government  have  not  henceforth  to  fear  assault  by  the  criminal ;  once
arrayed  against  him  in  hostile  phalanx,  they  now  wear  a  milder  look.  The  rebel  hag
voluntarily  put  the  yoke  of  submission  upon  his  neck,  and  this  public  token  goes  far
to  countervail  the  damage  suffered  by  the  king's  honour.  And,  secondly,  there  must
be  the  presentation  of  an  atonement  by  the  priest.  The  transgressor  is  net  holy  enough
to  appease  offended  Deity  himself;  an  unblemished  offering  is  demanded,  which  must  be
•Uughtered  by  God's  servant  and  its  blood  sprinkled  upon  the  altar,  and  the  other  ritee


OH.T.  1— 13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  16

of  a  sin  offering  duly  performed.  It  is  not  sufficient  to  acknowledge  and  repent  of  our
misdeeds ;  we  want  a  sin  offering,  the  Lamb  of  God,  so  that  we  can  make  mention
of  his  righteousness  and  enjoy  the  atoning  virtue  of  his  precious  blood.  It  is  not  the
offender  but  the  priest  who  makes  atonement  (ver.  6).  Apart  from  our  great  High
Priest,  our  prayers,  confessions,  vows,  and  gifts  are  of  no  avail.  "No  man  cometh
unto  the  Father  but  by  me."

IV.  Either  a  lamb  or  a  kid,  two  turtle-doves  or  pigeons,  or  a  homer  of  fine  flour
would  be  accepted  as  a  propitiatory  offering.  No  class  of  the  coimumiY  is  de-
BABRED  FROM  AN  ATONEMENT  BY  LACK  OP  MEANS.  Regard  is  here  paid  to  the  resources
of  the  humblest  ranks.  The  same  end  is  attained  under  the  gospel  by  providing  a
way  of  salvation  accessible  to  all,  suited  to  the  illiterate  and  the  learned,  the  men  of
substance  and  the  poor.  And  in  each  case  the  forgiveness  is  complete.  "  It  shall  be
for^ven  him."  The  deed  done  cannot  be  undone,  but  its  consequences  may  be  averted.
God  treats  the  believer  as  if  he  had  never  sinned ;  his  iniquities  are  cast  behind  the
back  of  Deity  and  remembered  no  more.  Fears  are  banished,  fellowship  is  resumed.
With  every  subsequent  transgression  the  same  course  must  be  adopted.  Whilst  in  the
world  stains  are  frequent,  and  frequent  must  be  our  resort  to  the  crimson  tide  that  flows
from  the  cross  of  Christ.  What  unity  of  plan  and  procedure  is  visible  in  the  Law  and
the  gospel  1 — S.  R.  A.

Vers.  1 — 13. — T}ie  trespass  offering.  This  was  very  much  of  the  nature  of  the  sin
offering.  Julius  Bate  translates  the  word  (pvtt,  asham)  "guilt  offering."  Possibly
the  "sin  offering"  and  the  "burnt  offering"  may  be  here  comprehended  under  the
general  expression,  "  trespass  offering  "  (see  ver.  7).  We  have  here  brought  under  our
notice —

I.  Examples  of  the  trespass.  Vers.  1 — 4.  Taken  in  order  these  are :  1.  Conceal-
ing the  truth  when  adjured.  (1)  The  Hebrew  law  recognized  a  power  of  adjuration.
TUk  is  assumed  in  the  words  "  And  if  a  soul  sin,"  etc.  (ver.  1).  The  adjuration  in
such  a  case  is  called  the  "  oalL  of  the  Lord  "  (see  Exod.  xxii.  11).  Paul  refers  to  this
law  when  he  says,  "  An  oath  for  confirmation  is  the  end  of  all  strife  "  (Heb.  vi.  16).
(2)  The  Hebrew  history  furnishes  notable  examples  of  adjuration.  Saul,  pursuing  the
Philistines,  "  adjured  the  people,  saying,  Cursed  be  the  man  that  eateth  food  until  the
evening,  that  I  may  be  avenged  on  mine  enemies  "  (1  Ram.  xiv.  24).  Caiaphas  said  to
Jesus,  "  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  thou  tell  me  whether  thou  be  the  Christ,
the  Son  of  God  "  (Matt.xxvi.  63).  (3)  To  conceal  the  truth  when  adjured  was  a  crime
meriting  death.  Achan  and  his  family  perished  in  the  valley  of  Achor  for  his  crime
in  concealing  the  "  accursed  thing  "  (see  Josh.  vi.  17 — 19 ;  vii.  11,  23 — 26).  Jonathan,
in  unwittingly  trespassing  in  the  adjuration  of  Saul,  was  in  danger  of  losing  his  life
(1  Sam.  xiv.  43).  2.  Touching  an  unclean  thing.  (1)  The  law  of  the  case  was  that
whoever  touched  any  unclean  thing,  the  carcase  of  an  unclean  animal,  a  living  person
who  was  leprous  or  otherwise  unclean,  or  the  corpse  of  a  man,  became  unclean.  The
purpose  was  to  show  how  scruiiulously  we  should  avoid  social  contact  with  those  whose
influence  would  be  demorahzing  (see  Jas.  iv.  4).  (2)  Being  thus  unclean,  before  he  can
appear  in  the  sanctuary,  he  mutt  "  wash  his  clothes,  and  be  unclean  until  the  even,"
viz.  when  the  daily  sacrifice  was  offered.  This  shows  how  we  must  be  purified  by  the
washing  of  regeneration  befure  we  can  mingle  in  the  congregation  of  the  heavenly
temple.  (3)  But  if  a  person  had  inconsiderately  entered  the  sanctuary  unclean,  not
knowing  that  he  was  polluted,  he  has  trespassed  against  the  Law,  and  is  guilty.  As
soon  as  he  becomes  aware  of  his  guilt  he  must  bring  a  trespass  offering  or  bear  his  sin.
3.  Swearing  rashly.  (1)  Ver.  4  is  somewhat  obscure,  but  this  appears  to  be  the  mean-
ing :  If  a  man  swear  to  cc  something  without  knowing  whether  it  be  good  or  evil,  but
afterwards  it  becomes  evident  that  to  carry  out  his  oath  would  be  evil ;  now  he  is  in  a
dilemma :  If  he  perform  his  oath  he  is  guilty  of  doing  evil ;  if  he  refrain  he  is  guilty
of  violating  his  oath.  (2)  In  either  case,  then,  he  has  to  bring  a  trespass  offering  with
an  humble  confession  of  his  sin.  If  he  fail  in  this  then  his  guilt  is  upon  him.  The
lesson  is  that  we  should  be  slow  to  swear,  lest  our  oaths  should  prove  rash  and  involve
■s  in  humiliation  or  ruin.

II.  Provisions  of  merct.     1.  Confession  must  he  made.     ( 1)  Not  of  sin  in  general.
There  is  comparatively  little  humiliation  in  general  confession.     Individualiiy  losei


79  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  v.  1—18,

itself  In  the  multitude.  (2)  But  in  particular,  "  that  he  hath  sinned  in  this  thing.''
Sin  thus  carried  home  humbles  us  into  the  dust.  Such  was  the  confession  of  Achan
(Josh.  vii.  20),  who,  though  his  sin  was  "  unto  death,"  may  yet  have  found  the  mercy  of
God  to  his  soul.  Such  was  the  confession  of  David  (Ps.  li.  4).  2.  It  must  be  accom-
panied with  sacrifice.  (1)  "  And  he  shall  bring,"  etc.  (ver.  6).  Here  the  "  trespass
offering "  is  also  called  a  "sin  offering."  It  is  in  this  case  specified  to  be  "a  female
from  the  flock,  a  lamb  or  kid  of  the  goats."  This  was  the  sin  offering  for  any  of  the
common  people.  The  presumption  therefore  is  that  for  a  ruler  a  male  kid  should  be
brought  for  a  trespass  as  for  a  sin  offering ;  and  for  a  priest,  a  bullock  (comp.  iv.  4,  33,
28).  (2)  Confession  without  atonement  will  not  be  accejited.  If  Achan  found  accep-
tance with  God  in  the  spirit  it  must  have  been  immediately  through  the  atonement  of
Calvary.  Atonement  without  confession  will  not  avail.  We  have  to  "  work  out  our
own  salvation ; "  meanwhile  "  God  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do."  3.  The  poor
have  special  consideration.  (1)  Those  who  may  not  be  able  to  furnish  a  lamb  may
bring  either  a  pair  of  turtle-doves  or  a  brace  of  young  pigeons.  The  alternative  liere  ap-
pears to  be  because  in  certain  seasons  pigeons  in  the  Bast  are  hard  and  unfit  for  eating.
Turtle-doves  are  then  very  good.  That  must  not  be  given  to  God  which  would  not  be
acceptable  to  man.  (2)  Two  are  specified,  which  are  to  be  thus  disposed  of:  one  is
offered  for  a  sin  offering,  the  other  for  a  burnt  offering ;  and  they  are  offered  in  this
order.  The  sin  offering  goes  first  to  make  an  atonement ;  then  follows  the  burnt  offer-
ing, which  is  a  sacrifice  of  adoration.  Before  we  can  properly  praise  God  we  must  be
at  peace  with  him.  (3)  Those  so  very  poor  as  not  to  be  able  to  bring  a  brace  of  pij^eons
may  bring  a  tenth  part  of  an  ephah  (about  three  quarts)  of  flour.  A  memorial  of  this
is  burnt  upon  the  altar.  There  must  be  no  oil  in  the  flour  to  render  it  tasteful;  no
frankincense  with  it  to  give  it  fragrance :  "  it  is  a  sin  offering,"  and  sin  is  distasteful
and  odious.    The  reipnant  is  the  priest's  as  a  "  meat  offering."

The  interchanging  of  these  offerings,  sin  and  trespass,  sin  and  burnt,  sin  and  meat,
^ows  how  they  are  intended  to  represent  the  same  great  subj  ct  under  its  various
aspects.  No  one  typical  sacrifice  could  snfiRciently  body  forth  all  the  merits  of  that
blessed  Person  who  "  made  his  soul  a  (pv>H,  asham)  trespass  offering  "  (I^a.  liii.  10). —
J.  A.  M.

Ver.  1. — Fidelity  in  hearing  witness.  The  sinfulness  of  withholding  evllence  in  a
court  of  law  is  here  formally  and  solemnly  incorpurated  in  the  divine  statutes.  We
may  remind  ourselves —

I.  That  we  spend  ouk  life  in  the  sight  of  mak  as  well  as  under  the  etb  of
God.  That  we  do  everything  in  God's  view  is  a  truth  the  fulness  and  the  greatness  of
which  we  cannot  exaggerate.  "  Thou  God  seest  me  "  should  be  as  a  frontlet  for  every
man  to  wear  between  the  eyes  of  his  soul.  But  not  unimportant  is  the  truth  that  we
act  daily  and  hourly  in  the  sight  of  man.  1.  A  very  large  proportion  of  our  deeds  is
done  obviously  and  consciously  before  man.  2.  Many  that  we  think  are  wrought  in
secret  are  seen  by  some  unknown  witness.  3.  Many  leave  traces  which  point  unmis-
takably to  our  agency.  "  He  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  Sooner  or  later,  in
unsuspected  ways,  our  evil  doings  come  under  the  eye  of  human  observation,  and  under
the  ban  of  human  condemnat  ion,

II.  That  it  is  often  our  duty  to  screen  an  offender  from  public  notice.  This
is  not  in  the  text,  but  it  belongs  to  the  subject.  He  who  would  "  do  what  wrong  and
sorrow  claim  "  must  sometimes  "  conquer  sin  and  cover  shame."  There  are  many  cases
in  which  public  justice  does  not  demand  inquiry  and  reprobation,  but  private  considera- .
tion  does  call  for  tenderness  and  mercy  (John  viii.  7).  "Of  some  have  compassion,
making  a  difference  "  (Jude  22).

III.  That  it  is  often  our  duty  to  bear  witness  against  a  wronq-doeb.  1.  It  is
our  duty  to  God,  for  he  has  ordained  human  justice.  "The  powers  that  be  are
ordained  of  God"  (Rom.  xiii.  1 — 4).  The  Jewish  judges  had  the  right  to  adjure  a
witness  to  speak  the  truth  in  the  name  of  the  Supreme  Judge  ("hear  the  voice  of
swearing : "  see  1  Kings  viii.  31 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64).  If,  therefore,  under  an  oath  we
withhold  what  we  know,  we  are  disregarding  a  demand  that  comes  indirectly  and  ulti-
mately from  God  himself.  2.  It  is  also  our  duty  to  society.  The  commonwealth  of
whkll  we  are  members  has  a  right  to  expect  that  we  shall  take  our  share  in  the  necee-


OH. T.I— 13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  77

sary  conviction  and  punishment  of  crime.  When  solemnly  summoned  to  state  what  we
know,  and  especially  when  an  oath  of  the  Lord  is  upon  us,  we  are  not  free  to  keep  back
evidence,  but  are  bound  to  disclose  it.  3.  It  may  be  our  duty  to  the  offender  himself.
Per  it  is  better  for  him  that  he  should  bear  the  penalty  due  to  his  crime  than  that  he
should  elude  justice  and  be  encouraged  in  transgression.  4.  It  is  further  ova  duty  to
ourselves,  for  if  we  are  called  on  to  bear  witness,  and  if  we  undertake,  or  are  even  sup-
posed to  undertake,  to  speak  all  we  know,  and  if  then  we  suppress  important  testimony,
we  are  consciously  misleading  those  who  hear ;  we  are  not  "  doing  the  truth,"  but  are
acting  falsely,  and  are  injuring  our  own  soul  thereby.

IV.  That  negligence  in  such  sooial  obligations  is  a  seeious  offence  in  the
BiOBT  OF  God.    It  is  sin.    It  is  a  thing  to  be  repented  of  and  to  be  forgiven. — G.

Vers.  2,  S,— Shunning  the  impure.  We  naturally  ask,  Why  such  stringent  regula-
tions as  to  everything  of  man  or  beast  that  was  "  unclean  "  ?     We  may  understand —

I.  The  explanation  (the  Jeationalb)  of  these  eequibbments.  1.  The  two
main  truths  God  was  teaching  his  people  were  the  divine  unity,  and  purity  of  heart  and
life.  The  state  of  surrounding  heathendom  made  these  two  lessons  emphatically  and
particularly  necessary.  2.  God's  method  of  teaching  was  pictorial :  it  was  by  rite,
symbol,  illustration.  The  world  was  in  its  religious  childhood.  3.  Under  this  method
bodily  ills  naturally  stood  for  spiritual  evils ;  as  wholeness  of  the  body  stood  for  health
of  the  soul,  so  the  sickness  of  the  body  answered  to  the  malady  of  the  soul,  and  the  un-
cleanness  of  the  one  to  the  impurity  of  the  other.  4.  Hence  would  result  the  fact  that
the  careful  avoidance  of  the  one  would  be  an  instructive  lesson  in  the  shunning  of  the
other.  Associating  the  two  things  so  closely  in  their  minds,  commanded  to  shun  most
scrupulously  all  bodily  uncleanness,  taught  to  look  at  the  least  di  filement  as  a  trans-
gression of  the  law,  they  would  necessarily  feel,  with  all  desirable  intensity,  that  every
moral  and  spiritual  impurity  must  be  most  sensitively  avoided.  Therefore  such  enact-
ments as  those  of  the  text.

II.  Theib  moral  signifioancb.  They  say  to  us :  1.  That  we  should  avoid  all  that  is
auggestive  of  impurity.  2.  That  we  should  shun  everything  which  can,  in  any  way  or
in  the  least  degree,  be  communicative  of  spiritual  evil.  3.  That  a  stain  upon  the  soul
may  be  contracted  without  our  own  knowledge ;  "  if  it  be  hidden  from  him."  This  may
be  through  books,  friends,  habits  of  speech.  4.  That  we  should  point  out  to  the  un-
wary their  danger  or  their  error.  6.  That  on  the  first  intimation  of  error  we  should
penitently  return  on  our  way. — C.

Ver.  4.^Sedeeming promises.  The  reference  in  the  text  is  to  inconsiderate  oaths:
the  hasty  undertaking,  before  God,  to  do  some  act  of  piety  or  kindness  on  the  one  hand
(swearing  "  to  do  good  "),  or  of  retribution  and  permissible  punishment  on  the  other
(swearing  "  to  do  evil ").  It  is  contemplated  that  such  pledges  into  which  the  Divine
Being  is  introduced,  rashly  and  thoughtlessly  taken,  may  be  overlooked  and  remain
unfulfilled.    We  learn —

I.  That  the  fobmal  association  op  the  Divine  Being  with  ant  act  lends
TO  IT  AN  inviolable  saceedness.  That  which  is  done  before  God,  or  with  which
jliis  holy  name  is  intentionally  associated,  must  be  regarded  as  peculiarly  sacred :  even
if  done  impulsively  and  without  due  deliberation,  an  obligation  is  thereby  incurred :
"  God's  vows  are  upon  us."

II.  That  it  is  wise  on  oEniNARY  occasions  not  to  incur  such  multiplied
Ebsponsibilitt.  Better  to  use  the  yea, yea,  or  nay,  nay;  the  simple  affirmation  or
denial  with  the  lesser  obligation  than  to  strengthen  our  utterance  with  an  oath,  and  so
run  the  risk  of  more  serious  sin  in  non-fulfilment.  Calm,  quiet,  unimpassioned  words
are  best  for  daily  use.    Beserve  oaths  for  large  occasions.

III.  That  such  eesponsibility  as  we  do  incur  we  must  religiously  discharge.
If  we  only  affirm  in  our  own  name,  but  far  more  if  we  introduce  the  Divine  name,  we
must  see  to  it  that  we  redeem  our  word.  Negligence,  on  whatever  grounas,  though  it
be  through  sheer  inadvertence — if  "  it  be  hid  "  from  us — is  culpable  in  the  sight  of
GJod.  wherefore :  1.  Study  to  avoid  promising  without  a  due  sense  of  the  bond  that  is
entered  into.  2.  Take  the  earliest  opportunity  of  redeeming  your  word,  for  good  or
eviL    3.  Make  an  opportunity,  if  one  does  not  soon  offer.    4.  Take  necessary  means  of


78  TDE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  t.  1— 13.

keeping  the  promise  in  remembrance  j  by  natural,  or  (if  necessary)  by  artificial  means.
We  may  infer —
IV.  That  if  special  kbsponsibilitt  attaches  to  a  promise  with  which  God's

NAME   18  ASSOCIATED,   80    DOES    IT    TO  ONE    IN   CONNECTION   WITH     HIS    CAUSE.      If     We

cannot  vow,  before  him,  to  do  any  humblest  thing  without  incurring  added  liability,
neither  can  we  undertake  to  serve  in  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom  without  similar  obliga-
tion. A  promise  made  to  take  any  post  or  fill  any  office  in  the  Church  of  Christ  should
be  regarded  as  exceptionally  sacred  and  binding ;  neglect  by  inadvertence  is  wrong,
siiiful.  We  are  bound  to  keep  before  our  mind  and  on  our  heart  anything  with  which
God's  name  and  cause  are  immediately  coiinecteil. — 0.

Vers.  6 — 13. — Pardon  possible  to  all.  The  requirements  of  the  Law,  as  stated  in
these  verses,  speak  of  the  possibility  of  pardon  for  every  offender,  if  he  be  willing  to
sutimit  himself  to  the  will  of  trod.     We  have —

I,  Confession  of  bin.  "  He  shall  confess  that  he  hath  sinned "  (ver.  5).  It  is
believed  that  confession  was  always  required  from  the  offerer  when  he  laid  his  hand  on
the  victim's  head.  It  was  a  marked  feature  in  the  ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment ;  it  is  expressly  enj(jined  here.  This  was  not  only  necessary  from  all,  but  possible
to  all ;  within  every  one's  power :  none  would  be  unable,  and  none  would  be  unwilling,
but  the  imjienitent  who  were  unprepared  for  pardon.

n.  An  OFFERING  which  bvbrt  ONE  COULD  PRESENT.  He  that  could  do  so  was  to
bring  a  lamb  or  kid  (ver.  6)  ;  he  that  could  not  might  bring  "  two  turtle-doves,  or  two
young  pigeons"  (ver.  7) ;  if  this  were  beyond  his  means,  he  might  bring  a  portion  of
"  fine  flour  "  (ver.  11).  The  costliness  of  the  offering  was  thus  graciously  graduated  to
the  circumstances  of  the  offerer.  And  of  so  much  importance  did  it  appear  to  the
Divine  Legislator  that  the  sacrifice  should  be  within  the  reach  of  all,  that  he  allowed
•  deviation  from  the  otherwise  unalterable  rule  that  there  must  be  the  shedding  of
blood  for  the  remission  of  sins  (ch.  xvii.  11 ;  Heb.  ix.  22).  The  very  poor  might
bring  flour  (ver.  11),  thougli,  in  order  tliat  there  might  be  no  mistake  as  to  the  import  of
it,  it  was  specially  prohibited  to  mix  oil  or  frankincense  with  it  (ver.  11).

III.  A  PLACE  OP  APPROACH  OPEN  TO  ALL.  The  transgrossor,  convinced  of  his
error,  was  to  take  his  offering  "  unto  the  Lord,"  by  taking  it  "  to  the  priest."  The
priest  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  was  always  approachable ;  never  a  day  when  he
might  not  be  found.

IV.  Instructions  that  all  oould  understand.  There  could  be  no  doubt  or
difficulty  as  to  what  precise  things  were  to  be  done.  What  offering  should  be  presented,
whither  it  should  be  taken,  what  should  be  done  with  it, — all  this  was  so  explicitly
and  clearly  laid  down  in  the  Law  (vers.  6 — 12),  that  every  Israelite  who  had  the  burden
of  conscious  sin  upon  his  soul,  knew  what  he  should  do  that  the  guilt  might  be
removed,  and  that  lie  himself  might  stand  clear  and  pure  in  the  sight  of  God.

In  the  gospel  of  Christ  we  have  analogous  but  fuller  advantages.     We  have—

1.  Confession  of  sin.  We  must  all  say,  as  we  all  can  say,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned  "
(Luke  XV.  21).    (See  Eom.  x.  10 ;  John  i.  9.)

2.  One  Offering  that  all  can  plead.  No  need  of  lamb,  or  goat,  or  turtle-dove,  or  even
the  humble  measure  of  flour.  The  rich  and  the  poor  of  the  land  may  say,  "  Nothing  in
my  hand  I  bring ; "  for  they  have  but  to  plead  the  one  Great  and  All-sufficient
Sacrifice  that  has  been  presented,  once  for  all  (Kom.  vi.  10 ;  Heb.  ix.  28 ;  1  Pet  iii.
18),  and  they  will  find  mercy  of  the  Lord.  The  richest  can  do  no  more  ;  the  poorest
need  do  no  less.

3.  An  open  throne  of  grace.  "  In  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  we  have  boldness  and  access
with  confidence  "  (Eph.  iii.  11, 12).  No  day  nor  hour  when  the  way  to  the  mercy-
seat  is  barred ;  from  every  home  and  chamber  the  sin-laden,  struggling  soul  finds  its
way  thither  :  one  earnest  thought,  and  it  is  there!

4.  Familiar  knowledge  of  the  will  of  Ood.  Every  unlettered  man  and  untutored
child  may  know  what  is  "the  will  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  concerning  us."  Our  statute-
book,  our  New  Testament,  makes  it  clear  as  the  day  that,  if  we  would  find  forgiveness
of  our  sin,  we  must  not  only  confess  our  transgression,  but  have  fkiih  iu  the  Lord  Jtuiu
Christ,  and  by  faith  we  shall  be  saved. — 0.


OH.  ▼.  14-19.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


79


Vers.  1 — 13. — Coses  of  conceidment  of  knowledge  and  ceremonial  unchanness.  1\bj
are  in  some  sense  trespasses,  although  not  properly  under  the  head  of  trespass  offerings.
The  ground  of  guilt  is  covenant  relation  violated.  We  may  take  this  in  its  twofold
aspect —

I.  As  reyealing  the  positive  value  of  that  covenant  relation.  1.  It  trcparated
from  the  unclean,  and  therefore  enforced  holiness.  2,  It  maintained  society.  Man's
duty  to  his  fellows  was  exalted.  He  must  speak  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  nothing
but  the  truth;  for  we  are  members  one  of  another.  3.  It  promoted  vigilance  and
circumspection  in  conduct,  both  personal  and  relative.  See  that  you  are  pure  both  in
your  intentional  acts  and  in  your  circumstances ;  walk  in  wisdom  towards  them  that
are  without.

II.  The  offering  provided  and  the  atonement  possible  in  all  cases,  even  the  most
minute,  plainly  said,  God  will  abundantly  pabdon  ;  his  Law  is  libeety."  The
covenant  was  not  intended  to  be  bondage ;  it  was  salvation,  not  destruction.  If  any
man  sin,  there  is  forgiveness.  But  this  waited  to  be  gloriously  illustrated  when  the
perfect  fulfilment  of  the  Law  was  set  forth  in  him  who  offered  himself  without  spot,
"  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  all  who  come  unto  God  through  him." — B.


EXPOSITION.


The  trespass  opfbrimo  (ch.  r.  14 — 19,  vi.
1 — 7).  The  new  heading  with  which  ver.
11  begins  indicates  that  it  is  here  and  not
at  ver.  1  that  the  section  on  trespass  offer-
ings commences.  Sin  offerings  and  tres-
pass offerings  are  not  distinguished  from
each  other  in  Ps.  xl.  6 ;  Heb.  x.  8 ;  and  the
classification  of  the  sins  which  require  one
or  the  other  offering  has  caused  great
perplexity  to  commentators.  It  would
appear  that,  primarily,  the  trespass  offering
was  reserved  for  those  cases  in  wMch  repa-
ration had  to  be  made.  Thus,  if  a  man  failed
to  pay  his  tithes  and  offerings  to  the  Lord
(ver.  11),  he  must  bring  his  trespass  offering ;
or  if  he  refused  to  restore  a  deposit  to  his
neighbours  (oh.  vi.  2),  he  must  bring  hia  tres-
pass offering ;  and  his  trespass  offering  is  not
received  until  he  has  made  satisfaction  to  tlie
party  wronged,  and  paiii,  as  a  fine,  one-fifth
of  the  value  of  the  thing  that  he  had  appro-
priated. But  the  class  of  crimes  for  which
the  trespass  offering  was  required  came  to
be  enlarged  by  the  addition  of  other  cases,
similar  in  character  to  the  first,  but  not
Mentical,  whereby  wrong  was  done  to  the
Lord  (as  by  transgressing  his  commands
otherwise  than  by  withholding  tithes  and
offerings,  ver.  17),  or  to  man  (as  by  wronging
a  female  slave,  ch.  xix.  20,  where  the  wrong
is  not  estimated  by  money).  These  cases
are  distinguished  with  difficulty  from  those
for  which  a  sin  offering  is  required.  The
same  act  might  render  it  incumbent  on  a


man  to  offer  either  a  lin  offering  of  a  tres-
pass offering,  or  both :  the  sin  offering  would
teach  the  need  of,  and  would  symbolically
effect,  expiation  for  sin  ;  the  trespass  offer-
ing would  teach  the  necessity  of,  and  would
require  at  the  offerer's  hands,  reparation  for
wrong.  While  the  sin  offering  typified  the
expiation  wrought  upon  the  cross,  the  tres-
pass offering  typified  the  satisfaction  for
sin  effected  by  the  perfect  life  and  voluntary
death  of  the  Saviour.

Vers.  14,  15. — If  a  soul  commit  a  trespass.
Two  previous  conditions  were  required  of  the
Israelite  before  lie  might  offer  his  trespass
ofl'ering.  1.  Hb  must  make  compensation
for  any  harm  or  injury  tliat  he  had  done.
2.  lie  must  give  to  the  injured  party  a  fine
equal  to  one-fifth  (i.e.  two-tenths)  of  the
valueof  the  thing  of  which  he  had  depiived
him,  if  the  wrong  was  capable  of  being  so
estimated.  In  performing  his  sacrifice,  he
had  (1)  to  bring  a  ram  to  the  court  of
the  tabernacle ;  (2)  to  present  and  to
kill  it :  while  the  priest  (1)  cast  the  blood
on  the  inner  sides  of  the  altar;  (2)  burnt
the  internal  fat  and  the  tail ;  (3)  took  the
remainder  to  be  eaten  by  himself  and  hit
brother  priests  and  their  sons  in  the  court
of  the  tabernacle  (ch.  vii.  2 — 7).  The
special  lesson  of  the  trespass  offering  is  the
need  of  satisfaction  as  well  as  of  oblation,
and  thus  it  supplies  a  representation  of
one  feature  in  the  great  Antitype,  who  was
the  "  full,  perfect  and  sufficient  sacrifice,
oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of
the  whole  world."  Through  ignorance  (see
note  on  ch.  iv.  2).

Vers.   IS,   16  refer  to  lins  of  omuwion,


80


THE  BOOK  OF  LEHTICUS.


[cH.  T.  14—19


offences  in  the  holy  things  of  the  lord ;
that  is,  withholding  tithes  and  offerings.
The  non-payment  of  tithes  and  offerings  was
looked  upon  as  robbing  Jehovah  (Mai.  in.
8),  and  therefore  it  is  that  a  trespass  offering,
involving  compensation,  and  not  only  a  sin
offering,  is  required  to  atone  for  the  offence.
The  ram  that  is  to  be  offered  is  to  be  of  a
value  fixed  by  the  priest  (with  thy  estima-
tion, i.e.  according  to  the  estimation  of  the
priest),  and  the  priest  is  to  estimate  it  by
shekels  of  silver ;  implying  that  its  value  must
amount  at  least  to  shekeU  (in  the  plural),
meaning  two  shekels  (see  Ezek.  zlvii.  13,
where  "  portions  "  means  "  more  than  one
portion,"  i.e.  "  two  portions  ").  The  shekel
is  considered  to  be  equnl  to  2>.  Id.  The
shekel  of  the  sanctuary  means  the  shekel
according  to  ita  exact  weight  and  value,


while  still  unworn  by  trafilc  and  daily  nee.
Beside  offering  the  lam,  he  is  to  make
amends  for  the  harm  (or  rather  stn)  that  he
hath  done  in  the  holy  thing,  and  .  .  ■  add  the
fifth  part.  The  fifth  part  is  probably  ap-
pointed as  being  the  same  as  two-tenths  of
the  principal  sum.  Full  satisfaction  is  the
marked  feature  of  the  trespass  offering.  In
Luke  six.  8,  "Zacchseus  stood,  and  said,.  .  .
Behold,  Lord,  ...  if  I  have  taken  anything
from  any  man  by  false  accusation,  I  restore
fourfold."  He  went  far  beyond  his  legal
obligation  in  respect  to  compensation.  (Gf.
2  Sam.  xii.  6, "  He  shall  restore  ihe  Iamb
fourfold.")

Vers.  17 — 19.  Sins  of  commission  may
be  atoned  for  by  the  trespais  offering  as
well  as  sins  of  omissioo.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  14 — 19. — The  trespasi  offering  differs  from  the  sin  offering  in  that  it  was  not
allowed  to  be  presented  until  reparation  had  been  made  for  the  evil  done  by  him  who
desired  to  offer  it.  Its  special  lesson  to  the  Israelite  was  that  satisfaction  for  sin  is
necessary  for  restoration  to  communion  as  well  as  sacrifice.

Its  typical  lesson.  Satisfaction  implies  that  there  is  a  debt  due  which  must  be  paid.
The  debt  is  due  to  God ;  the  debtor  is  man.  •Christ  took  upon  himself  the  payment  of
the  debt,  which  man  could  not  pay.  He  paid  it  in  two  ways :  1.  By  bearing  the
punishment  due  for  its  non-payment  by  man.  2.  By  rendering  in  his  own  person  that
perfect  obedience  which  man  had  failed  to  render,  and  by  that  failure  had  become  a
helpless  debtor.  Having  compensated  for  man's  disobedience  by  the  perfect  obedience
of  his  life,  he  bore  the  punishment  still  due  for  that  previous  disobedience  by  the
sacrifice  of  his  death.  Thus  man's  forgiveness  became  not  only  a  matttr  of  mercy  on
God's  part,  but  of  his  justice.  (See  St.  Anselm's  '  Cur  Deus  Homo  ? '  and  Archbishop
Thomson's  '  Essay  on  the  Death  of  Christ'  in  '  Aids  to  Faith.')


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa

Ratitution  aa  inculcated  in  the  trespass  offering,  Ch.  v,  14 — vi.  7 ;  comp.  Phil.  iv.
8,  9 ;  Luke  xix.  8  ;  Matt.  v.  23,  24.  The  trespass  offering,  in  emphasizing  the  idea  of
restitution,,  is  needful  to  complete  the  list  of  sacrifices.  Without  the  just  dealing  this
sacrifice  demands,  the  personal  consecration,  fellowship,  and  atonement  would  savonr  of
what  was  unreal  and  vain.  God's  mercy  secures  morality,  and  his  Word  condemns  every
desire  to  enjoy  his  grace  and  the  fruits  of  injustice  at  the  same  time.  Let  us,  then,
notice —

I.  The  possibility  of  whonqino  both  God  and  man  trNiNTENrioNALLY.  This  passage
presents  this  possibility.  An  Israelite  might  miscalculate  the  amount  of  his  offerings,
and  find,  on  examination,  that  he  has  defrauded  his  God.  This  omission  must  be  made
good.  Or  again,  he  might  commit,  through  want  of  thought,  something  God  had
forbidden,  and  for  this  sin  of  commission  he  must  make  restitution  according  to  the
estimation  of  the  priest.  The  possibility  of  wronging  a  fellow-man  unintentionally  is
too  obvious  to  require  illustration.

Of  the  first  wrong  we  have,  in  these  gospel  times,  an  instance  in  defective  liberality
on  the  part  of  Christians.  How  many  fiiil  to  calculate  how  much  they  owe  to  God!
Systematic  beneficence  is  a  general  principle,  but  it  is  applied  only  in  the  rough,  and  a
faithful  analysis  will  generally  prove  that  God  has  been  defrauded.  We  defraud  God
also  in  the  matter  of  time  and  of  work.  We  grudge  him  his  own  day ;  we  give-  him
stinted  service.  A  quite  appreciable  defalcation  under  such  heads  as  these  migLt  be
made  out  against  most  of  us.


OH.V.  14— 19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVlTICUa  81

Again,  unintentional  wrong  is  often  done  a  neighbour  in,  for  example,  an  unexpected
failure  in  business.  There  are  many,  let  us  believe,  who  reach  bankruptcy  without
intending  it.  They  erred  with  the  very  best  intentions,  and  through  faulty  manage-,
ment  allowed  their  affairs  to  become  hopelessly  involved.  But  the  loss  suffered  by  a
man's  neighbours  is  not  the  less  real  because  of  his  good  intentions.  Nor  will  these  good
intentions  pass  as  good  bills  with  the  wronged  neighbour's  creditors.

II.  Let  us  notice  the  possibility  of  delibebatelt  wrongino  otm  itmghboub.
We  have  intentional  trespass  against  man  brought  out  in  the  opening  verses  of.  the
sixth  chapter.  We  have  here  such  sins  contemplated  as  falsity  in  trust,  robbery,
oppression,  and  tergiversation  about  projjerty  which  has  been  found.  Here  the  inten-
tion as  well  as  the  act  is  at  fault.

Our  present  mercantile  immoralities  afford  ample  il lustra tiops.  In  fact,  business
qualities  are  regarded  by  many  as  consisting  in  the  advantage  which  a  man  is  able,
legally,  to  take  of  his  neighbour.  Men,  without  sufficient  courage  to  become  highway
robbers,  can  take  advantage  of  a  neighbour  behind  the  hedge  of  some  blundering  act  of
parliament.

III.  The  Law  op  Moses  demanded  hestitution  iw  am,  these  oases  as  a  con-
dition OF  PARDON.  Unless  the  trespassers  brought  the  amount  of  the  defalcation,  with
a  double  tithe  in  addition,  and  the  prescribed  ram  for  a  trespass  offering,  God  refused
them  pardon  and  fellowship.

The  case  of  Zaccha^us  is  in  point.  His  interview  with  Jesus  led  to  the  desire  of
restitution  arising  naturally  in  his  heart.  "  If  1  have  taken  anything  from  any  man
by  false  accusation,  1  restore  him  fourfold  "  (Luke  xix.  8).  God's  forgiveness  is  not
independent  of  moral  feeling.  God  will  not  forgive  trespass  so  as  to  encourage  the
continuance  of  injustice.  There  must  be  restitution  and  compensation,  or  he  will  not
grant  pardon.

IV.  At  the  same  time,  that  bbstitution  shottld  not  be  kboarded  as  mbmtoeiods,
the  Law  kequieed  a  trespass  offerino  in  addition.  There  have  been  cases  of
restitution  by  bankrupts  and  other  trespassers,  but  they  are  so  blazed  abroad  in  the
newspapers,  that  the  public  is  ready  to  set  them  down  as  meritorious,  and  almost
supererogations.  But  the  Divine  Law  excluded  all  possibility  of  boasting,  by  attaching
a  trespass  offering  to  the  restitution.  A  ram  must  be  brought ;  confession  of  sin  must
bo  made  over  it  in  the  usual  fashion ;  it  must  be  slain  ;  its  blood  must  be  sprinkled  as
in  the  former  cases ;  the  choice  portions  are  dedicated  to  God  on  his  altar  j  and  the
remainder  eaten  by  the  priests.

All  this  was  to  show  that,  even  for  such  an  act  as  restitution,  atonement  was  needful.
It  could  not  stand  alone ;  it  had  no  inherent  merit ;  it  was  only  tardy  justice  ;  and  for
the  wrong  there  is  need  of  atonement  as  well,  as  reparation.  And  surely  the  same  great
truth  meets  us  in  the  Christian  life.  Jesus  as  the  Trespass  Offering — and  this  i«  the
phraseology  employed  in  Isa.  Uii.  10  regarding  him — must  encircle  us  with  his  merits,
even  when  we  are  conscientiously  making  restitution.  It  is  as  penitents  we  should  do
this.  Even  though  the  world  glories  in  the  reparation  of  wrong  as  something  in  it?
view  most  meritorious,  the  persons  making  reparation  should  do  so  in  a  penitent  spirit,
having  regard  always  to  the  atoning  merits  of  the  Saviour.

V.  The  coubage  necessary  to  make  restitution  must  be  sustained  by  the
FEABLEBS  PROCLAMATION  OF  God's  Law.  A  Certain  antinomianism  is  encouraged,  if
not  proclaimed,  by  a  loose  presentation  of  God's  gospel.  Immoralities  are  tolerated  in
eommerce  on  the  part  of  professing  Christians,  that  go  far  to  defeat  the  mission  of
Christianity.  It  is  essential,  in  these  circumstances,  that  we  should  cultivate  the  courage
of  men,  and  sustain  their  resolutions  to  be  honest  and  just  in  making  all  possible  resti-
tution. God  requires  no  less  honesty  in  his  gospel  than  he  did  in  his  Law.  He  never
meant  his  pardon  to  be  enjoyed  along  with  the  fruits  of  wrong-doing.  These  must
be  surrendered  if  it  is  to  be  enjoyed.  "  If  it  is  absolutely  impossible  to  be  saved
by  the  works  of  the  Law,  it  is  not  less  impossible  to  be  saved  without  the  works
of  faith,  for  faith  without  works  is  no  faith  at  all,"  We  must  consequently
think  on  "  whatsoever  things  are  honest "  (Phil.  iv.  8),  and  remember  our  Saviour's
irords,  "  If  thou  bring  thy  gift  to  the  altar,  and  there  rememberest  that  thy  brother  hath
onght  against  thee ;  leave  there  thy  gift  before  the  altar,  and  go  thy  way ;  first  be  recon-
ciled to  thy  brother,  and  then  come  and  offer  thy  gift"  (Matt.  t.  23,  24).— B.  M.  E.

LEVITIOUB.  a


82  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  •».  x4— 19,

Yen.  14 — 16. —  Trespass  amended.  I.  To  withhold  fbom  God  bib  dues  _  ig
STSTXTL.  The  rigour  of  Leviticus  may  well  sharpen  that  perception  of  sin  which
is  so  apt  to  become  dim.  God  is  wealthy,  and  yet  will  not  submit  tamely  to
robbery.  Minute  instructions  were  given  concerning  the  offering  of  tithes,  etc.,
for  the  use  of  his  servants  at  the  tabernacle,  and  for  his  glory ;  and  to  omit  such
offerings  and  to  employ  them  in  profane  uses  is  here  counted  as  acting  covertly,  as
faithless  dealing.  For  it  was  a  condition  of  the  covenant  that  the  people  should  pur-
chase their  exemption  from  entire  devotedness,  by  recognizing  that  it  was  incumbent
on  them  to  support  those  engaged  wholly  in  God's  service ;  and  to  neglect  this
condition  was,  in  truth,  a  breach  of  trust.  It  is  not  less  needful  to-day  that  Chris-
tians should  contribute  of  their  substance  to  the  carrying  on  of  the  work  of  the
Church.  Nor  is  it  less  important  to  call  attention  to  the  trespass  committed  by
failing  to  present  to  God  the  emotion  he  claims.  Many  imagine  that  they  are  com-
paratively faultless  if  they  abstain  from  open  notorious  wickedness,  and  they  overlook
their  fatal  omissions  in  the  matter  of  religious  service,  affection,  anc  faith.  "  Thou  sha't
love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thine  heartj"  etc.  "  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever."  Not
to  confess  Christ  is  considered  as  denying  him.  Besides,  it  is  in  the  passage  before  us
assumed  that  the  property  which  ought  to  have  been  devoted  to  the  Lord  las  been
consumed  for  personal  enjoyment.  And  similarly,  we  may  argue  that  tlie  love  and
time  and  strength  not  used  as  required  for  God,  are  lavished  upon  other  objects,  and  a
wrong  is  done  to  our  Father  in  heaven.

II.  To   COMMIT   A    TRESPASS   UNINTENTIONALLY    DOES    NOT    PREVENT  THE   NE0E8BITV

OF  AN  ATONEMENT.  This  is  a  lesson  frequently  enlbrced  in  the  Law.  "  Though  he
wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty,  and  shall  bear  his  iniquity"  (ver.  17).  Evidences  of  the
same  Divine  Law  are  visible  in  the  consequences  that  follow  mistakes  in  life,  where
accidental  errors,  wrong  judgments,  hasty  steps,  are  productive  of  as  injurious  effects  as
if  the  word  or  action  had  been  planned  with  utmost  deliberation,  and  its  result  foreseen.
Any  other  arrangement  might  augment  men's  carelessness,  and  prove  in  the  end  more
harmful  than  the  apparently  inequitable  law.  We  are  taught  the  infinite  importance
that  attaches  to  our  actions,  linked  on  as  they  are  with  a  chain  of  invariable  results.
To  sin  is  to  run  counter  to  widespreading  principles ;  it  is  not  a  little  matter  that  may
be  contemned  ;  it  makes  a  breach  in  the  fortress  of  right  and  justice,  and  this  breach
must  be  repaired  ere  the  offender  can  be  regarded  as  on  the  side  of  the  eternal  verities.
"  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  If  not  the  transgressor,  then  an  unblemished  ram
muiit  be  slaughtered  as  his  substitute,  that  blood  may  cleanse  the  stain,  and  cover  the
transgressor  from  wrarh.  How  easy  is  the  way  made  under  the  gospel,  whereby,  after
the  sin  offering  of  Christ,  all  our  sins  are  forgiven  us  for  his  name's  sake !

III.  Acquaintance  with  the  wrong  done  must  be  followed  by  an  endeavouh
TO  AMEND  it.  The  high  priest  is  to  value  the  "  harm,"  and  a  fifth  being  added  to  the
amount,  the  priest  receives  it  as  compensation.  The  offender  has  gained  nothing  by
his  sin.  Sin  never  profits  in  the  end.  The  restitution  is  thorough.  We  may  reason-
ably distrust  the  sincerity  of  a  repentance  that  is  unaccompanied  by  reformation.
When  conscience  money  is  brought,  then  the  confession  and  desire  of  the  offender  to
undo  the  evil  wrought,  as  far  as  possible,  are  patent.  The  atonement  and  the  restitu-
tion together  procure  the  forgiveness  of  the  supplicant.  What  avails  it  that  men  have
learnt  their  "  trespass,"  unless  it  lead  to  amendment  ?  Knowledge  is  designed  to  be
the  forerunner  of  action.  Like  electricity,  it  furnishes  light  and  moving  power. —
S.  R.  A.

Vers.  14 — 19. — Trespass  in  sacrilege.  The  verses  now  under  consideration  form  a
distinct  matter  of  revelation,  or  were  communicated  to  Moses  at  a  separate  time.  This
we  infer  from  the  opening  words,  "  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,"  comparing  them
with  like  expressions  twice  used  already  (see  ch.  i.  1 ;  iv.  1).

I.  Wilful  sacrilege  was  punishable  with  death.  1.  It  is  fraud  "  in  the  holy
things  of  ike  Lord."  (1)  These  are  such  things  as  belong  to  him  by  requirement  of  his
Law  or  by  solemn  dedication.  Thus  he  claims  half  a  shekel  per  head  ransom  money
when  the  people  are  numbered  (Exod.  xxx.  11 — 16).  He  claims  the  firstborn  or  a
redemption  for  it  (Exod.  xxxiv.  11,  20;  Numb,  xviii.  16).  He  claims  the  firstfrnits
of  the  harvest  (ch.  xxiii.  10 — 14 ;  Prov.  iii.  9).    He  claims  tithes  (ch.  xxvii.  30—32)


«H.v.  14— 19.]  THE   BOOK   OF  LEViTICUS.  tS

The  treasures  of  tlie  temple  of  whatever  kind  were  also  holy  things.  (2)  To  withhold
•ay  ot  these  dues,  or  to  profane  by  eating  that  which  belonged  to  the  priests,  was  a
-Bacrilege,  and,  if  wittingly  done,  exposed  the  criminal  to  death  fsee  Lev.  xxii.  14 — 16 ;
'Comp.  ver.  9).  2.  This  was  the  crime  of  Achan.  (1)  Joshua's  adjuration  devoted
«11  the  spoils  taken  at  Jericho  to  the  Lord  (Josh.  vi.  17 — 19).  Achan,  therefore,  not
only  incurred  tlie  curse  of  the  adjuration,  but  was  also  guilty  of  sacrilege.  He  is,  there-
tore,  8ud  to  have  "  transgressed  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  "  (Josh.  vii.  11,  15).  (2)  His
punishment  was  consequently  signal,  for  his  sake  the  children  of  Israel  were  smitten
t)efore  the  men  of  Ai,  and  the  auger  of  the  Lord  was  only  averted  from  the  nation  by
iheir  stoning  and  burning  Achan,  his  family,  and  all  pertaining  to  him  (Josh.  vii.
24 — 26).  3.  This  also  was  the  crime  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  (1)  Under  the
4;lorious  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at  the  Pentecost,  the  Church  agreed  to  have  all
things  in  common,  to  which  Ananias  and  Sapphira  were  consenting  parties.  They  ac-
■cordingly  sold  a  possession  which  had  been  thus  devoted  to  God,  but  secretly  reserved
ftat  of  the  price,  placing  the  balance  only  at  the  apostles'  feet.  (2)  This  crime  was
tniractilously  punished  with  death.  The  punishment  evinced  that  the  spirit  of  the
Law  is  still  in  the  gospel.  Query :  How  does  this  bear  upon  those  who  have  vowed
that  a  proportion  of  their  revenue  should  be  sacred  to  God,  but  with  increasing  pro-
sperity have  become  worldly,  and  withdrew  the  hand  (see  Mai.  iii.  8 — 12)  ?

IL   SaCRILEQK    THROnOH   INADVEKTENCT   ADMITS   OP   BBPARATION.      1.   In   CaSe$   that

are  undoubted.  (1)  This  class  of  cases  is  described  ver.  15 :  "  If  a  soul  commit  a  tres-
pass, and  sin  through  ignorance,  in  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  He  knows  what
he  did,  though  ignorant  that  it  was  sacrilege,  but  is  now  better  informed.  (2)  His
dnty  now  is  clear :  "  He  shall  bringi  for  his  trespass  unto  the  Lord  a  ram  without
blemish  out  of  the  flocks."  He  brings  a  male,  probably  in  recognition  that  his  sin  was
an  interference  with  things  concerning  rulers  ecclesiastical.  "  With  thy  estimation  by
shekels  of  silver,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary,  for  a  trespass  offering."  (3)  But
how  are  we  to  understand  this  ?  It  may  mean  that  payment  may  be  made  in  money
or  silver,  according  to  the  estimated  value  of  the  harm  sustained  by  the  trespass.  Some
read,  "  by  thy  estimation  two  shekels  of  silver,"  etc.,  which  would  be  a  restoring  four-
fold, half  a  shekel  being  the  atonement  money.  This  is  given  to  the  temple  (see  Bxod.
XXX.  13).  "  And  he  shall  add  to  it  a  fifth,  and  give  it  to  the  priest."  With  this  he  is
accepted.  2.  In  cases  that  are  doubtful,  (1)  These  are  described  ver.  17 :  "  And  if
a  soul  sin,  and  commit  any  of  these  things  wnich  are  forbidden  to  bu  done  by  the  com-
mandments of  the  Lord ;  though  he  wist  it  not,  yet,"  etc.  He  suspects  that  he  may
liave  trespassed  in  sacrilege,  but  is  not  sure ;  "  Yet  b  he  guilty."  The  very  doubt
makes  him  guilty.  (2)  This  principle  is  recognized  in  the  precepts  of  the  Kew  Testa-
ment. Paul  doubtless  deduced  from  this  Law  his  declarations,  that "  Whatsoever  is  not
of  faith  is  sin,"  and  that  "  He  that  doubts  is  damned,"  or  condemned.  (3)  This  person
also  must  bring  a  ram  with  his  estimation  for  the  hypothetical  harm ;  but  in  this  case
there  is  no  addition  of  the  fifth.  Learn  that  ignorance  is  a  crime,  as  it  leads  to  trans-
gression :  therefore  study  God's  Law.    Cultivate  a  tender  conscience. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  15,  16. — Restitution  to  Ood.  The  trespass  for  which  "  God  spake  unto  Moses  "
that  the  children  of  Israel  should  make  atonement,  was  an  offence  in  which  there  was
present  the  element  of  reparable  wrong-doing.  Something,  it  was  contemplated,  would
fee  done  which  could  be  in  some  respects  made  good,  and  where  this  was  possible  it  was
to  be  done.  In  most  cases  this  would  refer  to  wrong  done  to  man ;  but  here  we  have
the  truth  that  God  may  be  wronged,  and  that  he  condescends  to  receive  restitution  at
our  hands.    We  may  look  at —

I.  Sin  beoabded  ab  a  debt  which  is  due  to  Gsd.  Jehovah  was  sovereign  Lord
of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,  and  actual  proprietor  of  all ;  anything  withheld  froir
those  who  were  his  ministers  was  a  sacred  due  withheld,  a  debt  undischarged.  Our
Ood  is  he:  1.  Who  has  placed  us  under  immeasurable  obligation — by  creation,  preser-
vation, benefaction,  fatherly  love.  Divine  interposition.  2.  To  whom  we  owe  e  ery-
thing  we  are  and  have — our  hearts  and  lives.  3.  Prom  whom  we  have  withheld  that
which  we  shall  never  be  able  to  pay :  our  reverence,  gratitude,  obedience,  submission ;
"  ten  thousand  talents"  (Matt,  xviii.  24).    But  there  are  some  special  defaults : —

IL  Abbeabs  in  holt  thikos.   "  If  a  soul  commit  a  trespass  ...  in  the  holy  thia  s  of


84


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  ▼.  It— la


the  Lord"  (ver.  15).  The  Israelites  were  under  many  injunctions;  they  probably
received  professional  instruction  from  the  Levites,  as  well  as  religious  teaching  at  home
(Deut.  vL  7).  But  they  might  be  betrayed  into  ignorance  or  fall  into  forgetfulnes^
and  they  might  come  short  of  their  duty  (1)  in  the  offerings  they  were  to  bring  to  th»
altar,  (2)  in  the  contributions  they  were  to  make  to  the  ministers  of  God.  They
might  ignorantly  rob  God  in  offerings  and  in  tithes,  as  they  even  did  inUnliondlly^
(MaL  iii.  8).  We  also  may  fall  far  short  of  what  we  should  bring  to  God ;  we  may
take  a  totally  inadequate  view  (1)  of  the  nature  of  the  worship  we  should  render,  ([2)  of
the  frequency  of  our  devotional  engagements,  (3)  of  the  contribution  we  should  give  to
the  support  of  the  Christian  ministry,  (4)  of  our  due  share  in  the  maintenance  of  the
cause  and  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Thus  we  may  ignorantly  but
guiltily  (ver.  17)  fall  short  of  our  sacred  obligations.

III.  The  atonement  which  must  be  first  presented.  First  of  all,  there  waa
the  offering  "  not  without  blood "  to  be  made :  the  ram  must  be  brought  by  the
offender,  and  "  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  him  with  the  ram,^ .  .  .  and  it  shall
be  forgiven  him."  First,  we  must  plead  the  atoning  blood  of  the  slain  lamb,  seeking
and  finding  forgiveness  through  the  Saviour's  sacrifice.    But  this  is  not  all ;  there  is —

IV.  The  restitution  which  should  subsequently  be  hade.  The  Jew  was
required  to  "  make  amends  for  the  harm  he  had  done  in  the  holy  things,"  and  not  only
to  give  an  equivalent  to  that  which  he  had  withheld,  but  to  "  add  the  fifth  part
thereto ; "  he  was  not  only  to  make  up,  but  do  more  than  make  up  for  hfs  default.  We
cannot  and  we  need  not  attempt  to  act  according  to  the  letter  of  this  injunction,  but
we  may  and  should  act  in  the  spirit  of  it,  by  kiting  our  consciousness  of  past  deficiency
in  the  worship  and  the  service  of  CJirist  incite  us  to  multiplied  endeavours  in  the  future.
In  looking  back  we  recall  negligences  to  attend  tHe  sanctuary,  to  come  to  the  table  of  the
Lord,  to  worship  God  in  the  secret  chamber  of  devotion ;  therefore  let  us  seek  his  face
and  his  favour  with  constancy  and  earnestness  in  the  days  to  come.  We  have  not
served  his  cause  and  our  generation  according  to  the  measure  of  his  bountiful  dealing*
with  us ;  therefore  let  us  open  our  hand  freely,  and  give  far  more  generously  than  we
should  otherwise  have  done  to  those  various  agencies  of  beneficence  which  are  turning^
the  wilderness  of  wrong  into  the  garden  of  the  Lord. — 0.

Ver.  17. — Unconscious  sin.  Is  there  not  something  here  contrary  to  our  generally
received  ideas  respecting  sin  ?  Can  a  man  sin  "  though  he  wist  it  not "  ?  The  text
suggests —

I.  That  we  commonly  cwnnect  with  our  idea  of  sin  the  consciousness  or
ouilt  at  the  time  of  transgression.  Sin  is  only  possible  to  intelligent,  responsible
beings ;  it  implies  the  power  of  discernment ;  it  is  usually  followed  by  self-reproach ;
it  seems,  at  first  sight,  to  involve  a  consciousness  in  the  soul  of  error  and  wrong-doing
at  the  moment  of  commission.  Hence  men  expect  to  be  excused  if  they  can  say  they
did  not  know  it  was  wrong  at  the  time,  etc.

n.  That  this  thought  about  sin  is  based  on  truth.  It  is  true:  1.  Th»t  tSn
is  a  wilful  departure  from  rectitude :  it  Is  the  soul  consenting  to  commit  some  one  of
"  those  things  which  are  forbidden  to  be  done  by  the  commandments  of  the  Lord."
Where  the  will  does  not  consent,  there  is  no  moral  character  in  the  act  at  all.  2.  That
the  less  there  is  of  knowledge,  the  less  there  is  of  guilt  (Luke  xii.  48).  3.  That  in  the
absence  of  all  possible  knowledge,  there  is  entire  freedom  from  guilt.  "  Where  no  law
is,  there  is  no  transgression"  (Eom.  iv.  15).  Scripture  confirms  what  our  reason
declares,  that  there  can  be  no  condemnation  where  there  are  no  means  of  knowing  "the
commandments  of  the  Lord."  But  we  are  bound  to  remember  for  ourselves,  and  t<»
impress  on  others,  the  opposite  aspect,  viz. —

III.  That  this  truth  is  subject  to  very  grave  qualifications.  1.  Attainable
knowledge  not  gained  involves  sin.  The  Jews  ought  to  have  known  that  it  wa»
obligatory  on  them,  and  highly  beneficial  to  them,  to  be  loyal  to  Jehovah,  to  be
obedient  to  his  servant  Moses,  to  receive  the  exhortations  of  the  prophets;  their
ignorance  was  culpable,  and  therefore  their  errors  were  sinful.  So  with  their  non-
recognition  of  Jesus  Christ.  So  with  our  ignorance  of  that  which  is  most  binding  on
us  and  most  beneficial  to  us.  We  ought  to  know  that  the  service  of  Christ  ii  the
chief  duty  and  the  supreme  blessing ;  in  our  ignorance  is  our  guilt.     2.  Needless  for-


«H.  Vl  1 — 7.J


THE  BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.


85


getfulness  is  sin.  It  was  criminal  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  of  the  prophetic  age  to
forget  the  merciful  and  mighty  interpositions  of  God  in  earlier  days ;  on  the  part  of
those  of  our  Lord's  day  to  forget  the  mighty  worlts  by  which  he  proved  himself  to  be
the  very  Son  of  God.  It  is  criminal  on  our  part  to  forget  those  vital  truths  of  which
Ood's  Word  reminds  us.  3.  The  blunting  of  our  spiritual  perceptions  is  sin.  When  we
aze  blind  to  the  truth  which  is  before  us,  because  our  prejudice,  or  our  pride,  or  our
passion,  or  our  worldly  interests  distort  our  vision,  or  because  long  continuance  in  folly
has  blunted  our  spiritual  powers,  we  are  guilty :  we  "  know  not  what  we  do,"  even
when  we  are  crucifying  a  Messiah ;  but  the  guilt  in  the  action  lies  chiefly  in  the  exist-
ence of  these  enfeebled  or  perverted  faculties,  and,  though  we  "  wist  not,"  yet  we  "  are
guilty  "  in  the  sight  of  God.

IV.  That  unconscious  bin  cabbies  its  penaltt  with  it.  "  He  shall  bear  his
■iniquity."    The  penalty  is  threefold:  1.  The  displeasure  of  God — his  condemnation.

2.  Serious  harm  done  to  our  own  soul.  3.  Awaking,  soon,  to  the  conviction  that  ws
liave  done  grieTOOS  wrong  to  others, — ^it  may  be  a  reparable,  but  it  may  be  an  irreparable,
wrong. — C.

•

Vers.  14— ch.  vL  7. — The  trespass  offerings.  Distinguished  m  :  1.  Being  violations
of  rights  of  property,  either  religious  or  non-reliaious  property.  2.  Including  a  fine,
apportioned  by  the  priest,  for  restoration.  3.  Without  dibtinction  of  persons  or  cir-
cumstances. 4.  The  victim,  a  ram  without  blemish  from  the  flocks,  and  the  atonement
both  sacred  as  producing  Dioine  forgiveness,  and  secular  as  including  pecuniary
indemnity ;  the  blood  being  in  this  case  merely  swung  against  the  side  of  the  altar,
not  smeared  on  the  horns.

Ver.  17. — 2%e  unwitting  trespass.  "  Though  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty,  and
shall  bear  his  iniquity."

L  Thb  absolute  PBBrEcnoN  of  the  Divine  Law.  It  must  be  maintained :  1.  Am
a  revelation  of  the  character  of  Qoi.    2.  As  a  basis  on  which  the  moral  law  is  placed.

3.  As  a  means  of  convincing  man  of  sin,  separating  the  idea  of  guilt  from  arbitrary,
capricious,  local,  individual,  emotional  respects.

II.  The  infinite  fulness  of  the  Divine  compassion.  1.  Atonement  is  provided
not  only  for  sins  repented  of  and  confessed,  but  for  offences  unwittingly  committed.
God  is  thus  represented  as  the  shield  of  his  creature,  amid  the  working  out  of  his
inscrutable  will  in  the  universe.  2.  The  mind  obtains  wonderful  peace  when  it  ia
assured  that  all  possible  liabilities  are  foreseen  and  averted.  3.  Forgiveness  is  not  a
mere  doing  away  of  sin  in  the  conscience,  but  a  removal  of  the  burden  &om  the  life.
Tfaa  Law  has  nothing  more  against  us. — B.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  VL

Tbi  tbispass  OFFEBDia — continued  (vers.
1—7).  The  next  seven  verses,  which  in
the  Hebrew  arrangement  form  the  conclu-
sion of  the  previous  chapter,  enumerate
cases  of  frand  and  wrong,  for  which  a  tres-
pass offering  is  required.  They  are  moral,
Qot  ceremonial  offences.  Separation  and
the  payment  of  a  fine  are  demanded  before
the  offering  is  made.

Ver.  1. — And  the  lord  spake.  The  six
following  verses  contain  a  separate  com-
munication from  the  Lord  to  Moses,  but  in
«ontinuanca  of  the  subject  which  began  at
«h.v.  14.

Ver.  2. — This  verse  would  be  better  trans-
lated M  followi : — ^If  a  soul  sin,  and  opmmit  a


trespass  against  ths  Lord,  and  falsely  deny  to
his  neighbour  something  that  was  delivered
to  him  to  keep,  or  something  that  he  had
received  in  pawn,  or  something  that  he  had
taken  away  by  violence,  or  hath  got  some-
thing by  oppression  from  his  neighbour.  Cf.
the  injunction  in  ch.  six.  11:  "Ye  shall
not  steal,  neither  deal  falsely,  neither  lie
one  to  another."  Exod.  xxii.  7 — 13  con-
tains earlier  legislation  on  the  subject  of
things  taken  in  trust.

Ver.  3. — Or  have  found  that  which  was
lost.  Cf.  Deut.  xxii.  2,  3,  "Thou  shalt
bring  it  unto  thine  own  house,  and  it  shall
be  with  thee  until  thy  brother  seek  after  it,
and  thou  shalt  rsBtore  it  to  him  again.  In
like  manner  shalt  thou  do  with  bis  ass ;  and
so  shalt  thou  do  with  his  raiment;  and  with
all  lost  thing  of  thy  brother's,  which  he
hath  lost,  and  thou  haat  found,  ihalt  ihoa


86


THE  BOOK.  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  VI.  1 7,


do  likewise."  And  sweareth  falsely.  By
previous  legislation  it  had  been  appointed
that,  in  case  of  a  doubt  arising  as  to  what
had  become  of  property  delivered  to  another
to  keep,  there  should  be  "  an  oatli  of  the  Lord
between  them  both,  that "  the  latter  "  hath
not  put  hia  hand  unto  his  neighbour's  goods ;
and  the  owner  of  it  shall  accept  thereof,
and  he  shall  not  make  it  good "  (Exod.
xxii.  11).  This  opened  the  way  to  fulse
swearing  where  men  were  dishonest.  Sinning
therein.  Wrong  to  man  is  sin  against  God
in  every  case,  but  a  special  sin  against


God  is  committed  when  an  appeal  has  bee»
made  to  him  by  oath,  and  the  oath  has  beea
false.

Ver.  4. — As  before,  the  profit  gained  by
fraud  or  violence  is  to  be  given  up,  and  with,
it  a  fine  is  to  be  paid,  amounting  to  one-fifth
of  the  value  of  the  thing  appropriated.

Ver.  5. — In  the  day  of  his  trespass  offering
is  a  better  rendering  than  that  of  the  margin,
"  in  the  day  of  his  being  found  guilty,"  or  "  in>
the  day  of  his  trespass."  The  reparation  is-
to  take  place,  and  immediately  afterwaid»
the  offering  is  accepted.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  3. — StveaHng  falsely  is  in  an  especial  manner  a  sin  against  God,  liecause  in  an
oath  an  appeal  is  directly  made  to  God,  and  if  the  thing  sworn  to  is  false,  God  is  called
to  witness  to  a  thing  as  true  which  the  swearer  knows  to  be  false.  It  is  also  in  an
especial  manner  a  sin  against  society,  as  mutual  truth-telling  is  the  very  bond  of  social
trust.  When  the  moral  and  religions  tone  of  a  nation  stands  high,  "  an  oath  for  con-
firmation is  the  end  of  all  strife"  (Heb.  vi.  16),  and  on  the  other  hand,  when  either
a  disbelief  in  God's  providence  or  a  casuistical  theology  saps  the  confidence  placed
in  promises  confirmed  by  oaths,  society  is  i)erilously  near  its  dissolution  (see  Bishop
Sanderson's  '  Obliaation  of  Oaths ').  The  sanctity  of  an  oath  is  guarded  by  a  special
commandment  in  the  Decalogue.

Ver.  6, — Sepentance,  confession,  satisfaction,  absolution,  follow  each  other  in  order.
Without  repentance  confession  is  vain;  without  confession  satisfaction  is  impracticable;
without  satisfaction  there  is  no  absolution.  In  the  present  case,  the  sense  of  absolution
was  conveyed  to  the  soul  of  the  sinner  by  the  acceptance  of  his  offering  for  trespass,
after  which  he  ceased  to  be,  what  he  was  before,  virtually  excommunicate  from  God'»
peojile.  The  greater  moral  offences  were  punished  either  by  death  (Exod.  xxi.  12 — 17;.
xxxi.  15 ;  xxxii.  27 ;  ch.  xx.  9 — 16  ;  xxiv.  23 ;  Numb.  xxv.  5 ;  Deut.  xiii.  9 ;  xix.  11 ;.
Josh.  vii.  25),  or  by  formal  excommunication,  when  the  offenders  were  cut  off  from  the
people  of  the  J/ord,  though  their  lives  were  spared  (ch.  vii.  20,  21 ;  Gen.  xvii.  14).  But
there  was,  and  there  is,  an  excommunication,  not  formally  pronounced,  when  a  man.
feels  that  his  sin  has  separated  between  him  and  his  God.  In  these  cases  the  sin
offering  or  the  trespass  offering  restored  to  communion,  but,  they  might  not  be  offered,
that  is,  absolution  might  not  be  effected  by  them,  unless  preceded  by  repentance  and
confession,  and,  where  the  nature  of  the  case  admitted  of  it,  by  satisfaction  for  the  wrong
done

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Dishonesty  atoned  for.  The  rebukes  tacitly  administered  by  the  Law
In  cases  of  unjust  dealing  are  neither  effete  nor  unnecessary  in  modern  days.  The
practices  here  reprehended  still  survive,  commercial  immorality  is  even  yet  a  fruitful
topic  of  remark.  Temptations  to  dishonesty  abound,  and  are  as  potent  as  of  yore,  ifor
the  springs  of  evil  in  the  human  breast  remain  unaltered,  pouring  forth  their  dark  and
bitter  waters.  And  whilst  it  is  not  by  works  that  the  children  of  God  expect  to  be
justified,  yet  may  their  good  works  glorify  God ;  and  to  guard  against  the  deeds  of
injustice  to  which  men  are  prone  is  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour.  Happy
the  congregation  of  Christians  none  of  whose  members  has  ever  been  convicted  of  the
transgressions  mentioned  in  these  verses !

L  The  sin  described.  1.  Jts  main  feature  is  the  unlawful  possession  of  another'*
property,  through  wrongful  acquisition  or  detention.  Force  or  deceit  has  been  employed
in  procuring  or  retaining  the  goods.  This  sin  may  be  committed  in  little  things  or
great,  and  by  communities  as  well  as  individuals.  2.  Its  source  is  avarice.  The  eye
beholda,  the  heart  covets,  the  will  consents,  and  the  hand  grasps,  as  in  the  histonr  at


OH.  VI.  1—7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  87


Aclian,  who  robbed  God  (Josh.  vii.  21).  There  is  thus  the  evil  co-operation  of  the
senses  and  faculties,  sin  in  inward  thought  and  outward  act.  The  temporary  gratifica-
tion of  the  flesh  is  preferred  to  the  durable  contentment  of  the  spirit ;  self  is  brought
into  hideous  prominence,  as  if  it  could  never  be  coincident  with  the  interest  of  others
and  of  God.  It  is  classed  with  sins  of  ignorance  because,  though  wittingly  done,  the
covetous  desire  seems  to  blind  the  moral  sight,  and  man  acts  as  if  under  the  constraint
of  a  foreign  power.  Beware  of  greed !  it  is  insidious  in  its  approaches,  and  awful  in  its
effects.  3,  It  is  aggravated  by  faJseJiood.  One  sin  drags  another  in  its  wake ;  avarice
prenares  the  way  for  lying,  even  demands  it  that  its  designs  may  be  achieved.  What
has  been  taken  by  force  is  often  defended  by  perjury.  The  pillars  of  wickedness  are
unstable ;  they  need  each  other's  support,  for  they  cannot  stand  alone  in  their  own
native  strcnsth.    A  covetous  heart  calls  for  a  deceitful  tongue.

II.  The  reparation.  Real  happiness  does  not  accompany  sin;  it  is  a  thorny  rose,
a  cup  with  nauseous  elements,  a  nightmare  sleep.  Though  no  human  eye  detect  the
wrons,  the  sinner  is  guilty,  and  knows  that  One  above  will  not  recognize  the  right
of  mij{iit  and  violence,  nor  allow  his  name  to  be  used  with  impunity  as  a  shield  to  victi
Kemorse  tortures  the  transgressor,  until  he  is  driven  to  confess  his  crime  and  to  make
amends  for  it.  The  Law  mercifully  appoints  a  salve  for  the  bleeding  conscience.
1.  Full  restitution  to  the  rightful  owner.  The  property  stolen  or  retained,  together  with
an  added  fifth,  is  returned  as  compensation  for  the  injury  suffered.  Sin  is  shown  to  be
unprofitable,  and  no  length  of  possession  is  allowed  to  supply  a  reason  for  inequitable
retention.  Lapse  of  time  must  never  be  supposed  to  bar  recovery  of  rights.  Are  there
no  persons  in  our  assemblies  to  whom  this  law  is  applicable?  2.  Acki.owledgment  of
an  offence  committed  against  God.  It  was  "a  trespass  against  the  Lord"  (ver  2),  and  in
several  respects.  His  commandments  were  broken,  notably  the  second,  third,  eighth,  aud
tenth  (Exod.  xx.).  An  atonement  is  required,  the  sacrifice  of  a  ram,  the  fat  parts
of  which  are  burnt  on  the  altar,  and  the  rest  eaten  by  the  priests.  The  two  branches
of  the  moral  law  are  closely  connected.  To  violate  the  one  is  to  dishonour  the  other.
Experience  attests  their  contiguity.  Those  who  best  regard  the  interests  of  their
neighbours  are  the  men  that  are  jealous  for  the  honour  of  God.  Forget  not  to  impress
upon  children  the  importance  of  asking,  not  only  their  parents'  pardon,  but  the
forgiveness  of  their  heavenly  Father  when  they  have  acted  dishonestly  or  unkindly.
Frequently  the  newspapers  record  the  receipt  by  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  of
money  sent  because  of  unpaid  taxes.  Do  the  senders  always  remember  ^hat  they
have  sinned  against  God  as  well  as  man ;  and  implore  forgiveness  in  the  nn"  e  ''f  .Tp.sus
Christ?— S.  B.  A.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Restitution.  This  paragraph  ought  to  have  been  included  in  the
preceding  chapter,  as  it  is  the  conclusion  of  the  subject  there  considered.  The  last
paragraphs  treated  of  sacrilege,  or  trespass  in  the  holy  things  of  God ;  this  has  reference
to  trespass  between  man  and  man.     We  have  here —  '

I.  An  bndmbeation  of  wrongs.  These  may  be  distributed  into  two  classes,  viz. :
1.  In  matters  of  fraud.  These  may  be  (1)  in  respect  to  things  in  custody,  "that
which  was  delivered  him  to  keep."  Under  this  heading  may  be  ranged  things  left  in
pledge,  the  possession  of  which-  is  afterwards  denied.  Also  things  borrowed  and
fraudulently  retained,  (2)  In  respect  to  "  fellowship."  This  may  refer,  in  matters  of
partnership,  to  claiming  for  sole  interest  profits  that  should  be  divided,  or  shifting
liabilities  which  should  be  jointly  borne  wholly  to  the  partner's  account.  The  Hebrew
here  is  "  putting  of  the  hand,"  which  the  margin  interprets  "  in  dealing."  Any  fraud
in  trade  would,  therefore,  come  under  this  head,  viz.  by  light  weight,  short  measure,
false  balances,  false  samples,  adulterations,  misrepresentation  of  values,  or  saunterings
by  which  an  employer  is  robbed  of  his  time.  (3)  In  respect  to  trusts.  Executors  so
managing  estates  as  to  enrich  themselves  at  the  expense  of  their  wards.  Public
servants  manipulating  accounts  to  pocket  balances,  or  taking  bribes  to  favour  parti
cular  contractors  to  the  prejudice  of  competitors  or  of  the  public.  (4)  In  respect  to
"  the  lost  thing  which  he  found."  Solon's  law  was,  "  Take  not  up  that  which  you  laid
not  down."  Ilistorians  relate  that  in  England,  in  the  days  of  Alfred  the  Great,  golden
bracelets  might  he  safely  hung  up  in  the  road.  .  Whoever  retains  what  he  found  when
he  knows  who  the  owner  is,  or  without  using  diligence  to  discover  him,  is  •  thief.


88  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  n,  1— 7.


t.  In  matters  of  violence.  Such  as  (1)  "A  thing  taken  away  by  violence."  A
horrible  example  is  furnished  in  the  case  of  the  vineyard  of  Naboth  (1  Kings  xxi.  15, 16).

(2)  Any  kind  of  oppression.  Exactions  under  pressure  of  necessity.  Exactions  under
threats.     Withholding  adequate  remuneration  for  service  (see  Jas.  ii.  6  ;  v.  4 — 6).

II.  Aqgkavations  of  the  wrongs.     These  are  :  1.  When  lies  are  told  to  cover  them.

(1)  Some  may  have  the  hardihood  stoutly  to  deny,  in  the  face  of  witnesses  to  the  con-
trary, that  they  came  into  fraudulent  possession  of  property.  (2)  It  is  more  easily
denied  when  there  are  no  witnesses  to  attest  delivery,  or  prove  custody  or  trust  against
the  holder.  (3)  Lies  are  told  in  the  forms  of  evasion,  shuflSing,  and  false  colouring.
2.  When  oaths  are  taken  to  give  countenance  to  the  lies.  (1)  God  is  a  witness  ot
everything  (2  Chron.  xvi.  9 ;  Ps.  xxxiv.  15 ;  Prov.  xv.  3).  He  is  often  a  silent
observer.  It  is  an  awful  aggravation  of  a  wrong  to  think  that  it  is  done  under  the  eye
of  God.  (2)  But  when  an  oath  is  taken  to  cover  a  wrong,  God  is  appealed  to.  What
a  fearful  outrage  against  the  God  of  truth,  to  be  thus  called  in  to  attest  a  lie!

(3)  Whether  a  wrong  be  done  before  God  as  a  "  witness,"  which  it  must  be  if  it  is  done
at  all ;  or  whether  he  be  "  appealed  "  to  by  an  oath,  every  trespass  against  man  is  also
"  a  trespass  against  Jehovah  "  (see  Jas.  v.  4).  Trespasses  cannot,  therefore,  be  treated
lightly  because  ot  the  insignificance  of  the  person  wronged,  when  the  Almighty  also  is
concerned,  in  all  the  interest  which  God  takes  in  the  justice  of  human  actions,  he  has
the  good  ot  man  at  heart.

III.  The  law  of  ebpabation.  1.  He  shall  make  up  the  wrong  to  the  perton
injured.  (1)  "  He  shall  restore  it  in  the  principal."  If  this  cannot  be  done  in  the
identical  thing,  then  an  "  estimation  "  of  its  value  must  be  taken,  and  payment  made,
viz.    "in  shekels  of  silver,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary"  (comp.  oh.  v.  15).

(2)  "  He  shall  add  the  fifth  part  more  thereto."  This  is  a  proper  consideration  for
the  inconvenience  the  owner  may  have  suffered  through  the  fraud.  But  if  the
"  estimation "  be,  as  some  read  it  in  oh.  v.  15,  "  two  shekels,"  then  the  restoration
would  be  "  fourfold,"  since  the  atonement  money  was  "  half  a  shekel."  This  would
agree  with  Exod.  xxii.  1  (comp.  also  2  Sam.  xii.  6 ;  Luke  xix.  8).  (3)  And  he  shall
"  give  it  unto  him  to  whom  it  appertaineth,  in  the  day  of  his  trespass  offering."  The
trespass  offering  will  not  be  accepted  else.  Job's  friends  had  to  make  peace  with  him
before  their  sacrifices  would  be  accepted  (Job  xlii.  8;  see  also  Matt.  v.  23,  24).
2.  Be  shall  then  "  bring  his  trespass  offering  unto  the  lord."  (1)  "A  ram  that  is
perfect."  •  God  will  accept  nothing  that  is  imperfect.  Therefore  we  must  come  to  him
through  Christ,  who  can  invest  us  with  his  righteousness.  (2)  "  With  thy  estimation
for  a  trespass  offering,  unto  the  priest."  This,  according  to  ch.  v.  15,  would  be  of
the  value  of  two  shekels.  (3)  "And  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  him,"  etc.
Kefiect :  What  a  power  there  is  in  conscience  1  What  a  costly  thing  is  sin !  How
carefully  should  it  be  avoided !  Let  us  avail  ourselves  of  the  benefits  of  redemn-
tion.— J.  A.  M.  ^

_  Vers.  1 — 7. — ffnman  owntrship  and  dishonesty.  Prom  the  Divine  directions  here
given  as  to  the  trespass  offering,  in  the  case  of  wrong  between  man  and  man,  we
gather —

I.  That  God  allows  us  to  considee  his  gifts  as  BELONamo  to  oubselves.  By
inheritance  or  by  labour  we  acquire  property ;  a  man  has  a  right  to  say,  concerning  an
object  thus  legally  acquired,  "  This  is  mine."  The  possession  of  property  is  carefully
guarded  by  the  declarations  of  God's  Word ;  "  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  "  make  the
vijlation  of  this  right  a  very  serious  sin  (see  text).  It  is  well,  however,  to  remember
that  human  owner.ship  is  never  absolute ;  it  is  subject  to :  1.  God's  prior  and  supreme
claim  (Ps.  xxiv.  1;  1  Chron.  xxix.  11 ;  Hag.  ii.  8).  2.  Our  duty,  in  holding  it,  to
keep  in  view  the  general  good ;  e.g.  large  landowner  has  no  right  to  let  ground  lie
waste,  and  be  covered  with  seed-sowing  weeds.  3.  Oar  liability,  at  any  hour,  to  lay  it
down  at  God's  will.

II.  That  men  find  various  ways  of  disreoaeding  this  right.  Many  forms  of
dishonesty  prevail  in  every  land ;  it  is  an  inevitable  excrescence  of  sin.  Five  special
cases  are  here  provided  against:  1.  Breach  of  trust,  or  failure  to  return  anything
borrowed;  lying  in  "  that  which  was  delivered  him  to  keep  "  (ver.  2).  2.  Unfairness  in
partnership  or  co-operation;  "in  fellowship."     3.  Violent  appropriation  or  hardship


CM.  TL  1—7.3  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  89

(oppression), — "  a  thing  taken  away  by  violence  "  (ver.  2).  4.  Fraud  in  trading, — "  hath
deceived  his  neighbour  "  (ver.  2).  5.  Illegal  retention  of  something  accidently  acquired,
— "  have  found  that  which  v? as  lost,"  etc.  (ver.  3).

in.  That  dishonesty  in  ant  fobm  is  a  serious  sin  against  GtoD,  as  well  as  a
wrong  done  to  our  neighbour.  By  committing  any  one  of  these  offences  a  soul  is  said
to  "  sin,  and  commit  a  trespass  against  th«  Lord  "  (ver.  2)  ;  "  he  sins  therein  "  (ver.  3)
"  he  hath  sinned,  and  is  guilty."  Evidently  the  taking  from  our  neighbour  "  that
which  is  his  "  is  a  high  misdemeanour  in  the  sight  of  God.  Two  of  the  "  ten  com-
mandments "  (Bxod.  XX.)  are  directed  against  it:  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal ;"  "Thou  shalt  not
covet,"  etc.  Theft,  dishonesty,  is  a  treble  sin :  it  is  a  wrong  to  our  fellow ;  it  is  an
injury  to  ourself  (spiritual  demoralization) ;  it  is  an  offence  against  God.

IV.  That  it  calls  fob  restitution  as  well  as  sacrifice.  1.  We  must,  indeed,
bring  our  sacrifice  to  God.  The  Jew  was  to  bring  his  "  ram  without  blemish  "  (ver.  6),
and  an  atonement  was  to  be  made  before  the  Lord,  and  his  trespass  was  forgiven  him
(ver.  7).  We  must  bring  the  sacrifice  of  a  contrite  spirit,  and  plead  the  One  Sacrifice
for  all  sin,  and  we  shall  be  forgiven.  2.  But  we  are  also  bound  to  make  restitution
where  that  is  possible.  The  Jew  was  to  "  restore  it  in  the  principal,  and . . .  add  the  fifth
part  more  thereto  "  (ver.  5) ;  he  was  to  more  than  make  up  for  the  injury  he  had  done.
And  (1)  in  order  that  the  will  of  Christ  concerning  us  in  such  case  may  be  fully  done
(see  Matt.  v.  24),  (2)  that  our  own  conscience  may  be  perfectly  clear  and  unstained,  and  (8)
that  our  brother  may  have  reason  to  be  entirely  satisfied  with  us, — let  us  make  moi  only
adequate  but  ample  or  even  overflowing  compensation  for  the  wrong  which  we  have
done. — 0.

Ver.  3. — Sin  a  germ  as  well  as  a  fruit.  It  is  contemplated  by  the  Supreme  Legislator,
that  if  a  man  once  cherish  a  dishonest  thought,  he  will  probably  go  beyond  fraud  to
falsehood  ("  and  lieth  "),  and,  when  necessary,  from  falsehood  to  perjury  ("  and  sweareth
falsely  ").  This  is  true  to  lil'e.  Sin  is  not  only  the  consequence  of  the  evil  that  came
before  it,  but  it  is  the  cause  of  more  sin  which  is  to  follow ;  it  is  not  only  the  child  but
the  parent  of  wrong.    Learn  that —

I.  No  MAN  WHO  sins  CAN  TELL  HOW  FAB  HIS  SIN  WILL   TAKE  HIM.      Hazael,  Gchazi,

Ahab,  Judas,  etc. ;  "  facilis  descensus  Averni."

II.  It  IS  IN  THE  NATURE  OF  SIN  TO  TEMPT  TO  FURTHER  SIN.  The  instances  wlth
which  we  are  familiar  are  not  remarkable  exceptions;  they  arc  illustrations  of  a
principle  at  work  everywhere  and  always.  "  There's  not  a  crime  but  takes  its  change
out  still  in  crime,  when  once  rung  on  the  counter  of  this  world ; "  dishonesty
naturally,  if  not  necessarily,  leads  to  lying,  and  lying  to  perjury.  One  sin  is  the  germ
of  another,  and  is  sure  to  bear  fruit.

III.  It  IS  A  PART   OF  THE   PENALTY  OF  SIN  THAT   IT  SHOULD  DO  SO.      We  BOmetimeS

think  that  sin  carries  no  penalty ;  so  it  seemed  to  the  Psalmist  (Fs.  Ixxiii.),  but  he  was
wrong,  as  he  owned  (ver.  15).  It  not  only  ends  disastrously  ("  then  understood  I  their
end"),  but  it  results  in  certain,  immediate,  spiritual  injury.  On  the  day  in. which  the
forbidden  fruit  is  eaten,  we  do  die, — in  the  soul.

IV.  This  fact  of  the  diffusiveness  of  sin  helps  to  explain  the  exceeding
EVIL  of  it  in  the  SIGHT  OF  GoD.  It  may  well  be  accounted  "  an  evil  and  bitter  thing,"
a  thing  which  he  "  hates,"  which  he  "  abhors,"  etc.

These  considerations  furnish  (1)  a  very  strong  reason  for  repentance,  etc ;  and  (2)
an  equally  strong  inducement  for  the  cultivation  of  holiness  in  the  heart  and  life  of  the
good. — C.

Vers.  1 — 7,— Trespasses  done  wittingly.  These  were  acts  of  lying,  fraud,  deceit,
violence,  or  any  social  wrong  involving  conscious  trespass  on  the  rights  of  our  neighbour.

I.  Social  morality  bests  upon  religion.  Ofl'ences  against  neighbours,  offences
against  God.  No  true  support  of  society  apart  from  faith.  Follies  of  the  modem
sceptical  schooL  Enthusiasm  of  humanity,  atheism,  development  of  morality  out  of  a
physical  basis, — mere  dreams  of  the  intellect.  Facts  of  history  shoTr  that  corrupt
religion  is  corrupt  morals ;  that  an  atheistic  society  is  mere  organized  selfishness.

II.  The  true  healing  principle  of  society.  The  preservation  of  individual  rights
in  the  spirit  of  a  common  allegiance  to  God.    We  are  all  brethren.    If  one  offend,  let


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  VI.  8—30.


his  offence  be  both  readily  acknowledged  and  atoned  for,  and  readily  forgiven.  So  long
as  we  simply  pay  back,  we  do  not  heal  the  hurt ;  we  must  more  than  pay  back.  His
restitution  was  of  the  principal  and  the  fifth  part  more  thereto.  Such  a  regulation  was
founded  on  the  Divine  love,  as  the  essence  of  the  Divine  Law.  We  must  remedy
wrongs  in  the  spirit  of  benevolence.

IL   As  TYPICAL  OF  THE   CROSS    OV  ChRIST,   THE   DiVINB   TULNESS  OF   EEDEMPTION  is

set  forth.  The  offences  of  men  are  more  than  made  up  for.  Their  redeemed  state  is
an  advance  upon  their  state  of  innocence.  The  new  Law  is  better  than  the  old.  Chiist
in  VLB  is  not  only  the  crucifixion  of  sin  and  the  world,  but  "  the  hope  of  glory."  The
believer  will  find  in  the  blood  of  the  atonement  both  a  cleansing  away  of  guilt,  and  a
washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost. — B.

EXPOSITION.


The  following  section  (ch.  vi.  8 — vii.  38)
is  a  inpplement  to  ch.  i. — vi.  7,  containing  the
regnletions  addressed  to  the  priests  relating
to  the  ritual  of  the  several  sacrifices.  Vers.  8 —
13  of  ch.  vi.  contain  the  further  ritual  of  the
burnt  sacrifice ;  vers.  14—23,  that  of  the  meat
offering ;  vers.  24 — 30,  that  of  the  sin  offer-
ings ;  vers.  1 — 6  of  ch.  vii.,  that  of  the  tres-
pass offering ;  vers.  11 — 36,  that  of  the  peace
offering ;  vers.  7 — 10  declare  the  portion  of
the  priests  In  all  the  offerings ;  vers.  37,  38
conclude  the  section.

Vers.  8— 13.— (See  nnte  on  oh.  i.  3.)  The
further  ritual  of  the  burnt  offering  is  ex-
hibited in  the  particular  instance  of  the
lamb  sacrificed  every  evening  (Exod.  xxix.
88).  In  other  cases  the  ritual  was  to  be  the
same.  Instead  of  It  is  the  burnt  offering,
because  of  the  burning  upon  the  altar  all
night  nnto  the  morning,  the  reading  should
be,  It,  the  burnt  offering  (viz.  the  evening
sacrifice),  ehall  burn  upon  the  hearth  upon
the  altar  all  night  unto  the  morning.  Tlie
priest  is  to  weur  his  priestly  dress  already
appointed  (Exod.  xxviii.  40) — which  was  a
white  linen  gnrment,  covering  the  whole
person  like  a  close-fitting  English  surplice,
fastened  by  a  sash — while  he  is  actually
officiating  at  the  altar;  and  thus  vested,  he
is  to  remove  from  the  altar  the  ashes  which
the  fire  hath  consumed  with  the  burnt  offer-
ing, or  rather  as  it  would  be  better  trans-
lated, the  ashes  to  which  the  fire  hath  reduced
the  burnt  offering,  and  put  them  beside  the
altar,  that  is,  on  the  ash-heiip  to  the  east
of  the  altar.  On  leaving  the  court  of  the
tabernacle,  he  is  to  change  his  dress,  and
to  carry  the  ashes  of  the  sacrifice  without
the  camp  unto  a  clean  place.  The  priest
is  also  instructed  to  lay  fresh  wood  on  tlie
altar  fire  every  morning,  in  preparation  for
the  morning  sacrifice  of  the  lamb  (Exod.xxix.
88).  The  fat  of  the  peace  offerings,  that  is,
the  parts  of  the  peace  offerings  that  were
burnt  on  the  altar,  were  laid  on  the  burnt
oiering.  The  altar  fire  was  never  to  go  out,
beoanse  the  daily  sacrifices  constantly  burn-


ing on  the  altar  symbolized  the  unceasing
worship  of  God  by  Israel,  and  the  gracious
acceptance  of  Israel  by  God.  The  ever-
burning sacrifice  was  the  token  of  the  people
being  in  communion  with  God.

Vers.  14— 18.— The  further  ritual  of  the
meat  offering  (see  note  on  ch.  ii.  1).  The
greater  part  of  it  is  to  be  given  to  the  priests,
and  they  and  the  males  of  their  families  are
to  eat  it  without  adding  leaven  to  it.  With
unleavened  bread  shall  it  be  eaten  (ver.  16)
should  rather  be  rendered,  Unleavened  shall
it  be  eaten.  Not  only  is  it  most  holy  itself,
but  every  one  (or  rather  everything)  that
tcucheth  the  offerings  shall  be  holy.  The
touch  of  the  offering  conveys  the  character
of  lioliness  to  the  thing  touched,  which  must,
therefore,  itsdf  be  treated  as  holy.

Vers.  19— 23.— The  meat  offering  of  the
high  priest  at  his  institution.  This  was  to
be  not  of  uncooked  flour,  but  in  the  form  of
a  pancake,  made  out  of  one- tenth  of  an
ephah  of  flour.  It,  of  course,  accompanied
the  burnt  offering  appointed  for  the  occasion.
Half  of  it  was  burnt  in  the  morning,  that  is.
at  the  morning  sacrifice,  and  half  thereof  at
night,  that  is,  the  other  half  at  the  evening
sacrifice,  none  being  reserved  for  consump-
tion by  the  priests.  This 'meat  offering,
having  firet  been  offered  at  the  consecration
of  Aaron,  was  afterwards  to  be  offered  at  the
consecration  of  each  succeeding  high  priest,
the  expression  Aaron  and  his  sons  meaning
here  the  successive  high  priests.  The  state-
ment that  the  offering  is  to  be  perpetual,  has
led  to  the  belief  that  it  was  made  every  day
by  the  high  priest,  from  the  time  of  his  con-
secration onwards,  and  there  is  tli  ought  to  be
an  allusion  to  this  sacrifice  in  Ecclus.  xlv.
14 ;  but  the  more  probable  opinion  is  that  it
was  only  made  on  the  day  of  consecration,
that  is,  on  the  first  day  that  he  was  qualified
to  act  as  high  priest.

Vers.  24— 30.— Further  ritual  of  the  sin
offeiing  (see  note  on  oh.  iv.  2).  The  flesh  of
the  sin  offerings  is  to  be  eaten  by  the  priests
and  the  males  of  their  families  in  the  holy
place,  that  is,  within  the  precincts  of  the
sanctuary,  with   the  exception  of  the  sin


.  Tl.  8— 30.J


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


91


offerings  of  the  high  priest  and  of  the  con-
gregation, whereof . .  .  the  blood  is  brought
into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  to
reconcile  withal  in  the  holy  place,  which
waa  to  be  burnt  in  the  fire  without  the  camp.
The  holiness  of  the  offering  is  manifested :  1.


By  the  command  that  no  drop  of  the  blood
which  might  have  been  accidentally  spilt
upon  the  offerer's  dresa  should  be  taken  out
of  the  tabernacle  court.  2.  By  the  order  to
break  or  scour  the  pot  in  which  it  was
boiled  for  the  priests'  eating.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  8 — 30. — The  priest^  ritual.  Hitherto  the  command  had  been,  "  Speak  unto
the  children  of  Israel,  and  say  unto  them  "  (ch.  i.  2 ;  iv.  2) ;  now  it  is,  "  Command  Aaron
and  his  sons ; "  the  reason  being  that  the  injunctions  which  follow  are  specially  addressed
to  the  future  priesthood.

I.  Pkbcision  op  thk  positive  rules  and  regulations  oiven  to  the  Aaeonic
PRIESTHOOD.  Nothing  is  left  to  the  individual's  origination,  all  is  ruled  for  him — every
act  that  he  performs,  and  each  word  that  he  speaks;  and  any  failure  in  the  ritual
vitiates  the  whole  ceremony.

II.  Contrast  in  this  respect  with  the  ritual  of  the  Christian  Church.  In  the
New  Testament  there  are  no  such  minute  ritual  regulations  as  in  the  Book  of  Leviticus.
Starch  through  the  Gospels,  and  we  find  the  principles  of  worship  established.  Search  the
Epistles,  and  we  find  order  and  uniformity  in  religious  ministrations  commanded,  but
no  such  specifications  of  manual  acts  as  those  given  in  the  earlier  dispensation.

III.  The  reason  of  the  difference.  It  is  a  higher  and  a  nobler  state  to  be
allowed  freely  to  apply  a  principle  than  to  be  bound  down  to  a  certain  course  by '
a  definite  and  unchanging  rule.  The  former  is  the  conditions  of  sons,  the  latter
of  servants.  "  The  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth."  The  Jew  was  in  this
position.  He  did  not  know  what  it  was  that  he  was  representing  and  rehearsing  in
type.  He  must,  therefore,  be  hedged  about  with  rules,  lest,  in  his  darkness  and  ignor-
ance, he  should  go  astray  and  mar  the  lesson  that  he  had  unwittingly  to  teach.  But
"henceforth,"  says  our  .Lord,  "I  call  you  not  servants,  for  the  servant  knoweth  not
what  his  lord  doeth,  bW  I  have  called  you  friends."  Accordingly,  just  as  in  matters  of
morals  the  principles  contained  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount  are  given  to  Christians
instead  of  bare  nfegative/or  positive  rules  of  conduct;  so  in  matters  of  worship,
certain  principles  are  laid  down  as  to  the  nature  of  true  worship  and  how  it  is  to  be
offered  (John  iv.  21 — 24),  and  a  few  general  rules  commending  uniformity  and  order.
in  public  worship  (1  Cor.  iy.  17 ;  xi.  16 ;  xiv.  33,  40),  and  declaring  its  ends  to
be  the  edification  of;  the  people  (1  Cor.  xiv.  26);  and  then  the  work  of  composing  its
Liturgy  and  commcm  prayers  is  delivered  to  the  Church  without  any  other  restraint
than  that  of  embodying  in  them  settled  forms  of  administration  of  the  two  sacraments
of  Baptism  (Matt,  xxviii.  19)  and  of  the  Lord's  Supper  (Matt.  xxvi.  26 ;  Mark  xiv.  22 ;
Luke  ixii.  19 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  26),  using  the  Lord's  Prayer  (Luke  xi.  2),  and  of  "  asking  "  in  the
name  of  Jesus  Christ  (John  xvi.  24).  Therefore, "  it  is  not  necessary  "  in  the  Christian
Church,  as  it  was  in  the  Jewish  Church,  that  "  ceremonies  be  in  all  places  one,  and
utterly  like :  for  at  all  times  they  have  been  divers,  and  may  be  changed  according
to  the  diversities  of  countries,  times,  and  men's  manners,  so  that  nothing  be  ordained
against  God's  Word.  .  .  .  Every  particular  or  national  Church  hath  authority  to
ordain,  change,  and  abolish,  ceremonies  or  rites  of  the  Church  ordained  only  by  man's
authority,  so  that  all  things  be  done  to  edifying  "  (Art.  XXXIV.).

IV.  A    PRECOMPOSED    LITUEQT   IS    NOT    DISPLBASINO  TO   GoD.      HoWCVOr    mUCh    the

liberty  of  the  Christian  Church  may  in  this  respect  be  superior  to  Jewish  bondage,  yet
it  is  evident  from  the  Levitical  laws  and  regulations  that  a  prearranged  and  formal
method  of  approaching  God  is  in  accordance  with  his  will,  as  recorded  in  his
holy  Word.

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Quench  not  the  Spirit.  Ch.  vi.  8—30.  Cf.  Eph.  iv.  30;  1  Thess.  ▼.  19.  We  have
here  sundry  sacrificial  laws  enabling  us  the  better  to  understand  the  details  of  the
preceding  sacrifices ;  but  the  cardinal  idea  in  them  all,  as  we  shall  now  see,  ia  that
which  heads  this  homily,  "  Quench  not  the  Spirit."    And—


92  TEE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  vi.8— 30.

L  The  firb  of  the  bubnt  offering  was  to  be  oabefttllt  presebved,  so  that
rr  BHOULD  NEVER  oo  OUT.  This  necessitated  a  regular  removal  of  the  ashes  to  tha
clean  place  selected  for  their  reception  without  the  camp.  These  ashes  represented
what  would  not  ascend  in  the  fire,  and  were  a  fitting  symbol  of  the  dross  and  corruption
which  attaches  to  all  human  services.  Everything  which  would  prevent  the  fire  from
burning  was  to  be  removed.  Now,  we  have  already  seen  that  the  fire  of  the  altar
symbolizes  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  what  came  from  God  in  the  first  instance,  and  what
renders  the  sacrifice  acceptable.  Hence  the  lesson  about  the  perpetuation  of  the  altar-fire
is  to  remove  everything  which  would  hinder  or  would  quench  the  free  action  of  the
Spirit  within  us.  The  purer  we  try  to  be,  the  freer  will  the  movements  of  the  Holy
Ghost  be  within  us.  On  the  other  hand,  negligence  in  life  must  interrupt  the  spiritual
action.  Let  us  diligently  use  every  means,  like  the  priest  laying  on  the  wood  and  clearing
away  the  ashes  from  the  altar,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  fire  within  us  will  make  us
ardent  and  enthusiastic  in  the  Divine  life.

II.  New  obedience  ought  to  be  as  holt  in  oub  byes  as  atonement.  This
principle  is  symbolized  for  us  in  the  details  about  the  meat  offering  (vers.  14 — 18).  For
the  priests  are  not  only  to  bum  carefully  the  due  proportion  upon  the  altar,  but  also  to
prepare  the  remainder  for  themselves  without  leaven,  and  to  regard  it  as  a  "holy
of  holies  "  (DT^pT  ^'JW.  I'l^^  the  sin  ofiering  and  the  trespass  offering.  If,  then,  we  saw
reason  to  regard  the  meat  offering  as  emphasizing  the  idea  of  consecrated  life-work,  this
direction  to  the  priests  about  regarding  the  meat  offering  as  just  as  holy  as  the  sin
offering  or  trespass  offering,  embodies  the  idea  that  "  new  obedience "  should  be  as
holy  in  our  eyes  as  "  atonement."  Now,  there  is  no  principle  more  likely  to  please  the
Holy  Spirit,  to  foster  his  indwelling,  and  to  maintain  his  reign.  The  whole  Christian
life  is  elevated  in  tone  when  this  ideal  is  comprehended.  The  perfection  of  our
Saviour's  atonement  and  righteousness  is  to  be  the  model  of  our  lives.

III.  A  CLASS   IS  NEEDFUL  WHOSE   SBLF-DBNYINQ   LIVES   ARE  ABOVE   SUSPICION.      TMs

seems  taught  by  the  arrangement  that  the  meat  offering  of  the  priests  must  be  wholly
burnt  (vers.  19 — 23).  The  life-work  is  to  be  all  consecrated,  all  a  dedicated  thing.
Never  are  the  oflacers  of  God  to  be  "  off  duty,"  "  out  of  season"  as  well  as  "  in  season  "
should  they  serve  God.

Now,  the  self-denial  of  •  class  of  men,  if  realized,  goes  far  to  secure  the  continuance
and  blessing  of  the  Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit  is  the  Spirit  of  self-denial — this  is  the
.  most  important  evidence  of  his  work — and  the  demonstration  of  this  to  men  is  a
concomitant  of  his  abiding.

It  need  hardly  be  observed — it  is  so  evident — that  Jesus,  our  Great  High  Priest,
realized  self-denial  in  all  its  fulness.  He  could  say,  as  none  other  can,  "  My  meat  is  to
do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  and  to  finish  his  work  "  (John  iv.  34).  Every  portion
of  our  Lord's  life-work  was  laid  upon  the  altar,  permeated  with  the  oil  of  the  Spirit,  and
enveloped  in  the  incense  of  prayer.     It  is  for  priestly  believers  to  follow  in  his  steps.

IV.  The   CONSECRATING   POWER  OF   THE   ATONING  SACRIFICE    SHOULD   BE    KEPT  OON-

btantlt  in  view.  In  the  remaining  verses  (vers.  24 — 30),  we  have  brought  before  us
the  intense  holiness  of  the  sin  offering.  It  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  "  holy  of  holies  "
(P^'^ISt^IP)-  111  ordinary  cases  the  priest  is  to  eat  that  which  remains  after  God's  share
has  been  offered  on  the  altar,  to  sustain  him  in  his  atoning  duties,  and  to  sustain  also
his  sense  of  consecration.  In  tlie  more  important  cases,  such  as  are  referred  to  in
ch.  iv.  1 — 21,  the  remainder  of  the  animal  was  to  be  carried  out  to  the  clean  place
outside  the  camp,  and  burned  there  in  the  place  of  the  ashes.  Moreover,  every  person
and  thing  which  touched  the  flesh  was  thereby  consecrated.  So  intensely  holy  was
the  atoning  sacrifice,  that  it  pervaded  with  its  sanctifying  power  everything  in  contact
with  it.

That  this  is  typical  is  clear.  A  similar  but  much  more  real  consecration  attaches  to
the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ.  And  this  great  truth  must  be  kept  in  view  if  we  would
preserve  the  Spirit  within  us.  To  separate  consecration  from  the  atoning  work  of  Jesus
must  ever  be  grieving  to  the  Spirit,  whose  chief  mission  is  to  take  of  the  things  o'
Christ  and  show  them  unto  men  (John  xvi.  14, 15).

We  have  thus  discovered  in  these  miscellaneous  laws  what  course  we  should  follow,
if  the  Spirit  is  not  to  be  quenched  within  us  but  is  to  abide.  We  must  diligently
use  the  appointed  means,  we  must  have  the  highest  possible  ideal  of  a  consecrat^  Me,


CE.TI.  8— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  §8

•nd  we  must  give  all  honour  to  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Jesus.    In  such  ciroumatMiOM
we  ihall  retain,  in  large  and  abiding  measure,  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us. — R.  M.  IS.

Ver.  13. — The  ever-lurning  fire.  The  special  directions  for  the  benefit  of  the
priests  are  fittingly  separated  from  the  instructions  common  to  all  the  people.  In  firont
of  the  tabernacle  stood  the  altar  of  burnt  offering,  and  on  this  a  fire  was  kept  constantly
burning,  in  obedience  to  the  injunction  of  the  text.  For  a  description  of  the  altar,  see
Exod.  xxvii.  1 — 8.  Let  us  advance  in  thought,  and  behold  the  flames  and  curling
smoke,  and  hear  the  lessons  the  fire  preaches.

I.  Consider  it  as  the  fulfilment  of  an  obdinanoe.  From  his  relationship  to
God,  man  is  boimd  to  obey  him,  and  this  same  relationship  causes  that  the  majority  of
(Jod's  utterances  to  man  are  in  the  nature  of  commands,  such  commands,  however,
containing  virtual  promises.  And  those  are  most  honoured  who  have  most  commands.
The  priests  occupied  the  highest  posts  in  the  estimation  of  the  people,  simply  because
they  were  entirely  devoted  to  the  behests  of  the  Almighty.  To  lay  sticks  in  order
upon  the  altar  and  set  fire  to  them,  was  in  itself  a  humble  occupation,  but  the  fact  that
it  was  performed  for  the  glory  of  God  elevated  its  character  in  the  eyes  of  all.  Menial
dvUies  are  ennobled  when  discharged  as  unto  the  Lord.  The  fire  was  an  emblem  of
worship,  of  praise,  and  supplication,  ascending  to  the  Most  High  from  his  faithful
people.  That  it  was  perpetual  indicated  Qod's  desire  to  he  worshipped,  not  with  fitful
enthusiasm,  hut  with  steady  regularity.  There  were  times  when  the  fuel  was  reuewed,
just  as  men  may  have  their  seasons  of  devotion  at  morning  and  at  night,  on  the  Lord's
day  and  on  a  certain  week-day,  but  there  must  be  always  a  flame  of  service  to  testify  to
the  obedience  and  affection  of  the  people.  The  fire  was  kept  alight  by  successive  genera-
tions in  their  turn.  To  no  one  age  is  it  exclusively  given  to  sound  the  praises  and  do  the
will  of  the  Eternal.  When  one  servant  falls  asleep,  having  done  the  will  of  God,  his
younger  comrade  must  step  into  his  place  and  continue  the  work.  Even  the  materials
so  soon  to  be  consumed  must  be  deposited  upon  the  altar  in  an  orderly  manner.  It  is
laid  by  the  rabbins  that  care  was  taken  in  selecting  the  sticks,  no  rotten  ones  being
allowed.     Whatever  is  done  for  Ood  must  be  done  to  the  best  of  our  ability.

IL  Consider  it  as  the  enjoyment  of  a  pbivileqe.  Once  the  fire  was  consecrated
by  the  approach  thereto  of  the  glorious  fire  from  God's  presence  instantly  consuming
the  sacrifice  (ch.  ix.  24).  The  flames  became  henceforth  a  token  of  Qod's  acceptance  of
the  offerings  of  his  servants,  and  his  consequent  reconciliation  and  favour.  If  any
Israelite  doubted  the  reality  of  Jehovah's  existence  or  his  willingness  to  bless  the  nation,
a  glance  at  the  fire  was  sufficient  to  dismiss  all  doubt,  and  to  inspire  his  breast  with  a
consciousness  of  blessing.

The  perpetual  fire  symbolized  OocPs  unchwngeahle  protection  of  his  people.  Through
the  hours  of  daylight  and  through  the  watches  of  the  night  the  fiames  ascended  on  high ;
they  knew  no  cessation ;  they  spoke  of  him  who  "  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps,"  upon
whose  brightness  no  darkening  shadow  ever  rests.  This  altar-fire  consumed  the
various  ofi'erings  presented.  It  kindled  other  fires — from  it  the  burning  coals  for  the
golden  altar  of  incense  were  taken ;  it  was  the  fire-foundation  on  which  the  sacrifices
were  laid,  and  by  which  they  were  consecrated.  It  is  the  loving  sacrifice  of  Christ  that
generates  holy  lives  in  his  followers.  By  his  ascension  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit
descended  upon  the  Church,  kindling  sparks  of  hallowed  emotion,  and  making  the
thoughts  and  words  and  acts  of  Christians  an  erer-brightening  blaze  of  sacred
service. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  25 — 29. — Tht  holiness  of  the  sin  offering.  This  ofiering  was  to  expiate  offences
committed  directly  against  God,  and  which  involved,  therefore,  the  deeper  wrong.  A
peculiar  sacredness  attached  to  the  sacrifice.  Only  the  priests  might  partake  of  it,  for
it  was  "  most  holy."  As  all  Christians  are  made  "  priests  unto  God,"  it  is  permitted
them  to  feed  upon  him  who  died  to  save  them  from  sin.  They  live  by  faith  in  the
Son  of  God.  Union  with  their  Divine  Lord  consecrates  ^hem,  imperishable  principles
sustain  them.

I.  What  is  offebed  unto  God  acquires  thereby  a  saobed  ohasaoteb.  It  is  set
apart,  belongs  to  him  henceforth.  He  accepts  the  gift,  and  his  holiness  is  imparted
CO  all  his  possessions.     His  people  are  holy,  and  so  are  his  house  and  his  statutes.


94  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  vl  8— 30.

Christ,  having  dedicated  himself  to  the  Father,  could  declare  "  I  sanctify  myself."  It  if
no  light  matter  for  a  man  to  take  upon  himself  allegiance  to  a  holy  God,  to  "  70W
to  be  his,  yea,  his  alone."  God  himself  must  sanctify  us  wholly,  that  body,  soul,  and
spirit  may  be  preserved  blameless.  Some  article  of  furniture  that  is  owned  by  a
celebrated  monarch  is  invested  with  importance  by  that  fact,  and  numbers  view  it
with  eager  interest.  The  servant  wearing  his  famous  master's  livery  is  regarded  with
attention.  Surely,  then,  those  are  worth  our  notice  who  are  consecrated  to  the  service
of  the  King  of  kings,  vessels  meet  for  his  use.

n.  Holiness  tends  to  communicate  itself  to  all  that  is  bbouoht  into  contact
WITH  it.  Whoever  touches  the  sin  offering  shall  be  holy.  Like  leaven,  tne  sacredness
spreads.  The  prospect  of  the  world's  improvement  lies  in  the  hope  of  its  permeation
by  Christian  principle.  By  touching  the  Saviour,  the  sick  were  healed,  and  by  placing  the
hand  of  faith  now  upon  Christ's  bleeding  body,  the  sinner  is  sanctified  in  the  sight  of
God.  That  holiness  extends  is  recognized  in  the  apostle's  declaration,  that  "  the
unbelieving  husband  is  sanctified  by  the  wife."  Continual  contact  with  sacred  rites
and  offerings  renewed  the  holiness  of  the  priests.  So  let  us  seek  to  draw  near  unto  our
God  by  the  Living  Way,  having  our  hearts  sprinkled  and  bodies  washed.

III.  In  spite  of  this  consecrating  power,  what  is  holt  must  not  be  thoughtlessly
PLACED  IN  propinquity  WITH  WHAT  18  DEFILING.  Let  blood  from  the  offering  stain  the
garment,  and  it  must  be  cleansed  "  in  the  holy  place,"  not  carried  without  into  the
region  of  things  common  and  unclean.  If  the  fiesh  was  boiled  in  an  earthen  vessel,
the  fat  might  penetrate  through  the  porous  surface,  so  that  no  after  rinsing  or  scouring
would  remove  it,  as  in  the  case  of  copper  ("  brazen  ")  vessels.  The  earthen  pot  must  con-
sequently be  broken,  to  prevent  all  risk  of  any  portion  of  a  sin  offering  being  contami-
nated by  touching  subsequent  food.  Learn  from  this  not  to  profane  what  is  dedicated
to  God.  Our  Lord's  words  to  Mary  after  his  resurrection  are  significant:  "Touch  me
not."  The  precept  of  Paul  was,  "  Be  ye  not  unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers :
for  what  fellowship  hath  i  ighteousness  with  unrighteousness  ?  "  We  must  not  cast  pearls
before  swine.  Let  us  not  commingle  sordid  motives  and  methods  with  the  worship  of  the
sanctuary.  Jesis  founded  upon  the  Word  of  God  are  to  be  shunned.  Previous  prayer
will  not  sanction  worldly  entertainments  and  amusements.  In  many  directions  the
regulations  of  Leviticus  may  be  remembered  with  advantage  to-day. — S.  R.  A.

Vers.  8 — 13. — TJte  law  of  the  burnt  offering.  With  this  paragraph  the  Jews
begin  the  twenty-fifth  section  of  the  Law  ;  and,  as  a  new  subject  is  here  introduced,
this  ought  to  have  been  the  commencement  of  the  chapter.  In  some  of  the  best
editions  of  the  Hebrew  Bible,  the  paragraph  preceding  this  is  properly  made  the  sequel
of  the  fifth  chapter,  and  the  sixth  commences  with  this.  The  burnt  offering  was
treated  of  before,  viz.  in  the  first  chapter,  with  more  particular  reference  to  ceremonies
relating  to  those  who  brought  it ;  here  it  is  considered  in  relation  to  the  priests  who
offered  it.     We  have  now  to  consider —

I.  The  law  of  the  buent  offering  as  to  the  sacrifice.  And  we  observe :
1.  That  the  offering  was  ever  upon  the  altar.  (1)  The  evening  sacrifice  was  "  burning
upon  the  altar  all  night  unto  the  morning."  For  the  particular  reference  here  is  to  the
daily  sacrifice  of  a  lamb  for  the  whole  congregation.  (2)  This  was  then  followed  by
the  corresponding  morning  sacrifice.  This,  together  with  the  occasional  sacrifices  which
were  offered  throughout  the  day,  would  keep  the  altar  fully  occupied  until  the  evening.
(3)  Thus  there  was  kept  up  a  constant  "  remembrance  of  sins  "  day  by  day,  the  year
round,  and  "  year  by  year  continually."  For  the  repetition  of  the  sacrifices  showed
that  "  they  could  never  take  away  sins.''  These  could  only  be  removed  "  through  the
offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  "  (see  Heb.  x.  1 — 10).  2.  That  the  fin  wat
kept  ever  burning.  (1)  This  was  not  common  fire,  but  came  forth  from  God  (see  ch.  ix.
23,  24).  It  was  an  emblem  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  sometimes  represented  his  wrath
sometimes  his  love  (Isa.  iv.  4 ;  Mai.  iii.  2,  3 ;  Matt.  iii.  11 ;  Acts  ii.  3,  4 ;  Heb.  x.
26,  27 ;  xii.  29).  (2)  God  commanded  that  it  should  "  not  be  put  out."  He  wiK  con-
sume with  the  fire  of  his  wrath  those  who  quench  the  fire  of  his  love.  Even  if  we  he
not  always  offering  sacrifices,  love  must  be  kept  always  burning  in  the  heart  (1  Thess.
V.  19 ;  2  Tim.  i.  6).  (3)  The  priests  were  instructed  how  they  should  keep  it  dive!
They  were  to  put  on  wood.     On  this  to  lay  the  burnt  offering.     So  the  Great  Sacrifice'


[OB.TI.8— 30.  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  95

wa3  laid  on  the  wood  of  the  cross,  when  the  fires  of  God's  wrath  entered  into  his  very
soul.  The  fat  of  the  peace  offerings  was  placed  on  the  burnt  offering.  So  the  fire  was
maintained  (see  Isa.  xxxi.  9);  The  fire  was  kept"  ever  burning,  to  show  that  GW»
wrath  could  never  be  quenched  until  the  blood  of  Christ  should  quench  it.

II.  The  law  or  the  burnt  OFFEBisa  as  to  the  pbibst.    1.  "  Aaron  and  Ms  sons  "
together  are  addressed.     Ver.  9.    (1)  The  high  priest  of  the  Law  was  undoubtedly  a
type  of  the  "  Great  High  Priest  of  our  profession."     When  Aaron,  the  high  priest,  is
here  mentioned  with  his  sons,  the  priests,  the  suggestion  is  that  in  his  absence  they
acted  as  his  representatives  in  connection  with  the  burnt  offering.    So  here  they  also  may
be  viewed  as  types  of  Christ.     (2)  The  sons  of  Aaron,  in  their  character  of  ordinary
priests,  represent  Christians.     In  what  they  did,  therefore,  there  may  have  been  a  two-
fold typical  meaning.     2.  They  attended  the  altar  in  their  holy  garments.    (1)  These
were  composed  of  white  linen.     "  His  linen  garment,  and  his  linen  breeches  "  (Bxod.
xxviii.  40 — 43).    They  symbolized  purity  and  righteousness  (Ps.  cxxxii.  9 ;  Rev.  iii.  4  ;
vii.  13,  14  ;  xix.  8).     (2)  As  types  of  Christ  in  offering  up  his  own  sacrifice  of  himself
to  God,  they  would  shadow  forth  his  righteousness.    As  typifying  Christians,  they
would  fore.show  how  we  must  be  clothed  with  the  "  robe  of  righteousness  and  garment
of  salvation  "  through  Christ's  merits,  before  our  spiritual  sacrifices  can  be  accepted.
(3)  Even  when  the  priest  took  up  the  ashes  from  the  consuming  burnt  offering  to  put
them  beside  the  altar,  he  wore  his  holy  garments.     This  was  proper,  for  the  fire  was
still  consuming  the  sacrifice.     But,  3.  He  changed  his  garments  to  carry  the  ashes  out-
side.   (1)  He  had  to  carry  them  I'orth  without  the  camp.     Was  not  Calvary  this  place
of  ashes  (comp.  ch.  iv.  12 ;  Heb.  xiii.  11,  12)  ?     (2)  But  they  were  to  be  laid  in  a
"  clean  place."    The  tomb  of  Joseph  was  such  a  place.     It  had  not  been  polluted  by
the  touch  of  a  dead  body  (see  John  xix.  41,  42).     Nor  did  the  ashes  of  the  world's
Great  Burnt  Offering  pollute  it.    They  were  holy.    Because  he  was  the  "  Holy  One  "  of
God,  his  body  "  could  not  see  corruption  "  (Acts  ii.  31).     (3)  The  holy  raiment  was
laid  aside  when  this  service  was  performed,  to  show  that  now,  as  far  as  the  work  of
sacrifice  was  concerned,  that  was  "finished"  when  Jesus  expired  upon  the  cross.     Let
us  rejoice  in  an  "  eternal  redemption,"  in  an  "  everlasting  salvation." — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  14 — 23. — The  law  of  the  meat  offering.  As  the  law  of  the  tumt  offering,
laid  down  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  viz.  in  relation  to  the  service  of  the  priest,  was
before  mentioned,  more  particularly  in  respect  to  the  offerer,  so  is  the  law  of  the  meat,
or  more  properly  the  bread,  offering,  here  intruduci  d  for  a  similar  reason,  after  being
formerly  mentioned  likewise  (see  ch.  ii.).  The  subject  is  presented  in  two  aspects,
and  we  have  to  consider —

I.  The  law  of  the  bread  offering  op  the  people.  In  this  case :  1.  A  memorial
of  it  was  burnt  upon  the  altar.  (1)  The  memorial  represented  the  whole.  The  bulk
consisted  of  at  least  an  omer,  or  about  three  of  our  quarts,  of  fine  flour,  of  which  a  hand-
ful was  taken  for  the  memorial.  There  was  with  the  omer  of  flour,  a  log,  or  little  more
than  a  half  pint,  of  oil,  of  which  a  fitting  quantity  was  added  to  the  handful  of  flour.
The  memorial  was  completed  by  the  addition  of  all  the  frankincense.  As  the  name  of
a  thing  stands  for  the  thing,  so  did  the  memorial  stand  for  the  whole  offering ;  it
was  like  a  quit  rent,  a  discharge  for  all  demands  on  the  estate.  (2)  It  was  burnt  upon
the  altar  for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.  It  could  not  be  that  to  him  in  a  physical
sense ;  this  expression  must  be  morally  interpreted,  (a)  It  was  a  thank  offering,  and
gratitude  from  his  intelligent  offspring  is  ever  pleasing  to  his  goodness  (Ps.  xxvii.  6;
1.  23 ;  Rom.  xii.  1 ;  1  'I'hess.  v.  IB).  (6)  It  was  placed  on  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings,
and  mingled  among  the  sacrifices  offered,  to  make  atonement  for  sin,  and  so,  coming
up  as  it  were  "  through  Jesus  Christ "  in  whom  the  Father  is  ever  well  pleased,  it
becomes  "  acceptable  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  2.  The  remainder  was  eaten  by  Aaron  and  his
sons.  (1)  Aaron  ate  of  it,  who  was  the  type  of  Christ;  and  his  sons  also,  who
were  types  of  Christians.  So  Jesus  and  his  disciples  together  ate  the  Passover
(Luke  xxii.  IS).  And  he  gave  to  his  disciples  the  bread  and  wine  of  his  Eucharist.
(2)  The  bread  offering  was  to  be  eaten  without  leaven.  This  substance  was
regarded  as  an  emblem  of  evil  dispositions,  malice,  wickedness,  insincerity  (1  Cor.
V.  6^8).  These  must  be  absent  from  those  who  feast  with  Jesus.  (3)  It  was
to  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place.    This  holy  place  was  not  the  innermost  court,  which


96  THE  BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS  [cu.  vi.  8— 3a

was  a  type  of  "heaven  itself*  (Heb.  ix.  24).  It  is  explained  to  be  the  "court  of
the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,"  which  was  a  figure  of  the  Church  in  its  earthly
aspect — the  kingdom  of  heaven  upon  earth.  Those  who  elect  to  worship  (3od  outsida
his  Church,  are  not  following  out  his  instructions.  (4)  .The  males  only  must  eat  of  it.
The  daughters  of  the  priests  were  permitted  to  eat  of  the  "  holy  things,"  such  as  might
be  carried  out  of  the  court,  such  as  the  tithes  and  firstfruits,  and  the  shoulder  and
breast  of  the  peace  offerings.  But  of  the  "  most  holy  things  "  eaten  in  the  sanctuary
they  may  not  eat.  It  was  the  Seed  of  the  woman  who  is  most  holy,  not  the  woman
herself;  the  son,  not  the  daughter,  therefore,  was  holy  unto  God.  Now  that  most  holy
Seed  has  come,  the  distinction  between  male  and  female  is  abolished  (Gal.  iii.  28).
(5)  The  priest  must  not  eat  it  unless  he  be  clean.  "  Every  one  that  toucheth  it  shall
be  holy  "  (ver.  18).  To  eat  and  drink  unworthily  of  the  Christian  Eucharist  is  a  serious
thing  (see  1  Cor.  xi.  27—34).

II.  The  law  of  the  bbead  OFFEama  or  the  pbibsts.  In  this  case :  1.  The  whole
was  offered  upon  the  altar.  (1)  Here  was  no  "  memorial,"  as  in  the  offering  of  the
people.  The  omer  of  fine  flour  was  all  burnt  upon  the  altar  (ver.  28).  "Had  the  priests
been  permitted  to  live  on  their  own  offerings,  as  they  did  on  those  of  the  people,  it  would
have  been  as  if  they  had  offered  nothing,  as  they  would  have  taken  again  to  themselves
what  they  appeared  to  give  unto  the  Lord  "  (A.  Clarke).  (2)  It  was  offered  in  two
portions :  half  in  the  morning,  and  the  complement  at  night  (ver.  20).  And  as  it  is
called  a  "meat  offering  perpetual,"  it  is  generally  imderstood  that  the  high  priest
repeated  this  offering  daily  throughout  his  pontificate.  (3)  This  he  appears  to  have
done  not  for  himself  only,  but  on  behalf  of  the  priesthood  in  general.  This  seems
expressed  in  the  words,  "  This  is  the  offering  of  Aaron  and  of  his  sons,  which  they  shall
offer  unto  the  Lord  in  the  day  when  lie  is  anointed,"  etc.  (ver.  20).  Here  "  they  "  offer
it ;  but  afterwards  we  read,  "  And  the  priest  of  his  sons  that  is  anointed  in  his  stead,"
via.  as  high  priest  at  his  demise,  "  shall  offer  it "  (ver.  22).  Taken  together,  these
passages  show  that  the  high  priest  offered  it  for  the  priesthood  in  general.  2.  None  of
it  vxis  to  be  eaten  hy  the  priests.  (1)  It  appears  to  Imve  been  of  the  nature  of  the  sin
offering;  for  there  is  no  frankincense  offered  with  it.  This  was  the  case  with  the
poor  man's  sin  offering  (see  ch.  v.  11).  In  sin  there  is  nothing  grateful  to  God.  (2)
By  his  eating  of  the  sin  offerings,  the  typical  transfer  of  the  sins  of  the  people  to  the
priest  was  signified  (see  ch.  1. 17).  It  would  not  be  proper,  therefore,  for  him  to  eat  the
sin  offering  in  which  he  was  personally  concerned.  He  must  rather  see  his  sin  trans-
ferred to  the  altar,  and  there  consumed  along  with  the  lamb  of  the  daily  sacrifice.  So
may  we  see  our  sins  consumed. — J.  A.  M,

Vers.  24—30. — The  law  of  the  sin  offering.  This  law  comprehends  a  yariety  of
particulars,  which  may  be  ranged  under  two  heads —

I.  As  IT  RESPECTS  THE  BLEEWNO.  The  particulars  under  this  head  are :  1.  The
place :  "  Where  the  burnt  offering  is  killed  shall  the  sin  offering  be  killed."  (1)  In  the
account  of  the  sin  offering  (ch.  iv.),  the  place  is  implied  rather  than  specified ;  but  the
position  of  the  altar  is  described  in  the  account  of  the  burnt  offering.  It  stood  "  at
the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,"  and  the  burnt  offering  was  killed  "  on
the  side  of  the  altar  northward"  (ch.  i.  3,  5, 11).  Accordingly,  Jesus  "  suffered  with-
out the  gate,"  and  Calvary  was  northward  of  Jerusalem,  The  evangelical  teaching  is
that  a  sinner  has  access  to  God  only  through  Christ,  who  declares  himself  to  be  the
"  Door  "  and  the  "  Way "  (John  x.  9 ;  xiv.  6).  (2)  The  association  here  of  the  sin
offering  with  the  burnt  offering  is  significant.  The  burnt  offering  expressed  adoration,
»nd  was  offered  for  sin  generally.  The  sin  offering  was  more  specific.  Confession  of
an  should  be  particular,  and  faith  individual,  fully  to  realize  the  benefits  of  the  common
salvation  (1  Tim,  iv.  10).  Let  no  man  trust  vaguely  to  the  provisions  of  mercy.  Let
the  sinner  see  in  the  death  of  Christ  the  very  image  of  himself,  with  all  his  iniquities  and
abominations,  suffering  and  satisfying  the  claims  of  Divine  justice,  2.  The  presence:
"  Before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  25).  (1)  This  means  more  than  being  in  the  presence  of  One
who  is  omnipresent.  There  was  a  manifestation  of  a  special  presence  of  Jehovah  in  the
glory  behind  the  vail.  In  a  special  sense  Jesus  promises  to  be  present  where  two  or
three  are  met  in  his  name.  (2)  This  presence  of  God  was  at  once  judicial  and  merciful.
The  throne  of  his  glory  was  a  proplxiatory,  but  he  was  there  armed  with  fire  to  smite


OH.VI.8— 30.]  THE  BOOK  Oif  LEVITICUS.  t7

with  deBtruction  any  who  dared  to  set  him  at  defiance  (Fs.  zcvii.  2,  3 ;  iTTTtr.  14).  g,
The  recuon :  "  It  is  most  holy  "  (ver.  26).  What  ?  (1)  Not  the  sin  laid  on  the  sacrifice.
Sin  seen  in  the  sacrifice  is  exceeding  sinfuL  That  which  could  cause  the  Son  of  God
his  agonies  is  horrihle  and  ahominahle  in  the  extreme.  (2)  Not  the  sin,  but  its  con-
demnation in  the  sacrifice.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ,  by  which  sin  is  removed  out  of  the
sight  of  God,  is  indeed  "  most  holy."  Had  Jesus  not  been  "  most  holy,"  he  could  never
have  accomplished  this  miracle  of  grace  and  mercy.  (3)  The  blood  of  the  sin  offering,
if  sprinkled  upon  any  garment,  must  be  washed  out  within  the  sanctuary.  And  if  the
blood  of  the  type  must  not  be  treated  as  a  common  thing,  much  more  must  we  reverence
that  blood  which  cleanseth  from  all  sin.

IL  As  IT  BBSPEOTS  THE  EATIMQ.  1.  It  wcM  to  be  eaten  by  the  priest,  "The  priest
that  offereth  it  for  sin  shall  eat  it."  (1)  By  this  ceremony  the  "sin"  (riKcn,  chattath)
became,  in  a  sense,  assimilated  in  the  body  of  the  priest  (see  ch.  x.  17 ;  Hos.  iv.  8).
This  represented  the  manner  in  which  Christ,  becoming  incarnate  among  us,  appeared
^'  in  the  likeness  of  men,"  and  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh  "  (Eom.  viii.  3  ;  2  Cor.  t.
21 ;  PhiL  ii.  6 — 8).  (2)  The  converse  of  this  is  in  the  Eucharist,  in  which  we  sym^
bolicaily  partake  of  the  pure  body  of  Christ.  As  he  became  assimilated  to  our  likeness
that  he  might  expiate  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  so  we  now  become  assimilated  to
his  pure  nature  that  we  may  inherit  the  rewards  of  his  righteousness.  There  is  a
mystical  incarnation  of  Christ  in  his  believing  people  (Eph.  iii.  16 — 19).  2.  It  was  to
he  eaten  in  the  holy  place  (ver.  26).  (1)  Observe,  not  in  the  most  holy  place ;  that
place  within  the  vail  in  which  the  Shechinah  abode  between  the  cherubim.  That  was
the  type  of  the  heaven  of  heavens,  where  the  "  angels  do  always  behold  the  face  of  God  "
^Matt.  xviii.  10).  No  sin  could  enter  there  (Isa.  xxxv.  8 — 10  ;  Ix.  20 — 22 ;  Eev.  xxi.
27 ;  xxiL  14, 15).  (2)  But  "  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,"  the
type  of  the  Church  in  its  earthly  aspect,  which  is  entered  by  way  of  the  laver  of  washing
and  the  altar  of  sacrifice.  It  is  while  we  re'nain  in  this  world  that  we  can  avail  our-
selves of  the  provisions  of  mercy.  3.  But  certain  sin  offerings  must  not  be  eaten.  (1)
The  priests  were  forbidden  to  eat  of  those  whose  blood  was  brought  into  the  tabernacle
to  reconcile  withal  (ver.  30 ;  see  also  ch.  iv.  5,  6,  16,  17).  (2)  In  this  the  gospel  is
superior  to  the  Law.  Jesus  has  carried  his  blood  into  the  holy  place  of  the  true  temple,
to  reconcile  withal  (Heb.  Lx.  11,  12).  Yet  we  may  eat  of  his  altar  (Heb.  xiii.  10 — ^12).
(3)  Those  who  serve  the  tabernacle  have  no  right  to  eat  of  our  altar,  because  the
tabernacle  law  forbids  them ;  therefore  to  avail  themselves  of  the  gospel  they  most
renounce  the  Law  (see  Gal.  v.  3,  4).  And  their  case  is  fearful  who  now  attempt  to
make  atonement  for  themselves,  for  they  "  shall  be  burnt  in  the  fire  "  (ver.  30).  Sudi
is  the  peril  of  those  who  trust  to  works  of  Niper<.ra0atinn  or  to  anything  but  ChrisC—
J.A.M.

Vers.  8—13. — Three  principles  of  piety.  We  gather  from  this  clause^
I.  That  holiness  becomes  the  house  of  God.  It  seems  generally  agreed  that
the  linen  garments,  in  which  the  priests  were  to  be  robed  when  engaged  in  sacrificial
acts  (ver.  10),  signified  the  purity  of  heart  which  should  characterize  the  worshipper  of
God  (see  Exod.  xxviii.  42 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  19).  Cert-ainly  it  is  only  the  "  pure  in  heart "
who  can  hope  to  "  see  God,"  either  by  faith  here  or  in  beatific  vision  hereafter  (see
Pb,  xdii.  5).

n.  That  thbbb  is  no  DBUDaEST  in  the  bxbvioe  of  God.  Very  homely  and
humble  details  of  sacred  work  were  to  be  done  by  the  officiating  priest.  He  was  to  be
"very  careful  as  to  the  clothes  he  wore,  changing  them  at  regulated  times  (vers.  10, 11) ;
he  was  to  "  take  up  the  ashes  .  .  .  and  put  them  beside  the  altar "  (ver.  10),  and  to
"carry  forth  the  ashes  without  the  camp,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  These  acts  were  mean
enough  in  themselves.  Elsewhere  they  would  have  been  accounted  menial,  but  in  so
sacred  a  service  as  the  direct  worship  of  Jehovah  they  acquired  sanctity,  and  even
dignity.  They  were  solemn  ceremonies,  reverently  performed.  The  slightest  engage-
ment in  the  worship  of  Gtod  deserves  to  be  esteemed  sacred  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  10).  Anj.
iiumble  deed  done  or  simple  word  spoken,  (1)  as  in  the  presence  of  the  observing  and
-approving  Master,  or  (2)  consciously  and  designedly  for  the  glory  of  his  name,  or  (3)
as  unto  one  for  whom  he  died  and  whom  he  loves  (Matt.  x.  40 — i2),  rises  to  higli
d-auk  in  the  esteem  of  Heaven.  The  cheerful,  loving  service  of  a  Divine  Bedeemer
lkviticus.  h


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  TI.  8— 30.


does  not  contain  one  act  of  drudgery ;  it  is  all  upon  the  high  level  of  holy,  happy,
elevating  service.

III.  That  there  must  bb  constanot  in  cub  conseobation  to  God.  "  The  fire
shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the  altar ;  it  shall  never  go  out "  (ver.  13).  As  soon  as  the
victim  was  slain  and  his  shed  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  altar,  there  was  forgiveness
and  acceptance,  and  the  burning  of  the  whole  animal  by  the  heaven-kindled  fire  in-
dicated the  accepted  consecration  of  the  offerer.  When,  therefore,  the  priest  was
instructed  to  keep  the  fire  perpetually  burning  on  the  altar,  it  signified  God's  readiness
to  receive  the  perpetual  devotion  of  the  Israelites  themselves  to  him  and  to  his  service.
To  us  the  most  instructive  lesson  it  conveys  is  that  we  must  keep  steadily  and
unfailingly  burning  the  fire  of  consecration  in  our  hearts ; — that  must  "  never  go  ou '  *

I.  The  passions  of  youth  must  not  be  permitted  to  extinguish  it.  2.  Nor  the  toll*
and  anxieties  of  our  prime.  3.  Nor  the  mysterious  and  perplexing  troubles  that,  like
whelming  billows  (Ps.  xlii.  7),  go  over  us.  4.  Nor  the  distressing  doubts  which  the
enemies  of  the  faith  raise  within  us.    5.  Nor  the  comforts  and  indulgences  of  prosperous

II,  rinds  in  our  life.  It  must  be  diligently  and  devoutly  fed  by  (1)  earnest  thought —
meditation  ;  (2)  regular  worship  with  the  people  of  God ;  (3)  steadfast  Christian  vork ;
and  (4)  the  private  believing  prayer  which  finds  such  utterance  as  this,  "  0  thou  who
earnest  from  above  1 "  etc. — C.

Vers.  14 — 18. — "Fellowship  with  the  Father."  In  these  renewed  directions  (see
ch.  ii.)  concerning  the  meat  offering,  we  have  the  striking  expression,  "  I  have  given  it
unto  them  for  their  portion  of  my  offerings"  (ver.  17).  So  that  this  sacrifice,  beside
furnishing  an  opportunity  to  the  people  of  acknowledging  their  indebtedness  to  God  as
the  generous  Giver  of  all  blessings,  provided  an  opportunity  to  the  priests  of  fellowship
with  God.  He  shared  these  "  his  offerings  "  with  his  ministers,  and  they  ate  with  him
"in  the  holy  place"  (ver.  16),  within  the  precincts  of  his  house.  "And  truly  our
fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with, his  Son  Jesus  Christ"  (1  John  L  3).  In  Divine
and  human  fellowship  under  the  gospel,  there  is —

I.  Feasting  together.  The  truest  Christian  counterpart  of  the  sacred  service
described  in  the  text  is  found  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  There  we,  who  are  all  "  priests
unto  God  "  (Rev.  i.  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  9),  meet  at  the  table  of  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  x.  21),  and
eat  and  drink  in  his  presence,  rejoicing  in  his  redeeming  love,  renewing  before  him
our  vows.

II.  Speaking  one  to  another.  1.  Ood  to  man  in  (1)  the  pages  of  revelation ;  (2)
the  words  of  those  whom  his  Spirit  prompts  to  remind  us  of  his  will  or  to  explain  it ;
(V\  the  direct  communications  of  his  Spirit.  2.  Mam  to  Qod  in  (1)  the  accents  of  praise ;
(2)  the  breath  of  supplication.

III.  Rejoicing  in  one  anotheb.  1.  Ood  in  man  (Deut.  xxxii.  9 ;  Ps.  xxxv.  27 ;
cxlvii.  11 ;  Hah.  iii.  18 ;  Eph.  v.  27 ;  Rev.  xxL  2).  2.  Man  in  Ood  (Ps.  xvL  5 ;  Ixxxiz.  16 :
cxlix.  2 ;  Phil.  iii.  3 ;  iv.  4).

IV.  Working  together.  We  are  "workers  together  with  him"  (2  Cor.  vL  1);
"  labourers  together  with  God  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  9).  While  God  is  working  in  us  and  through
us,  he  is  also  working  with  us ;  united  with  us  in  working  out  the  leconciliation  and
regeneration  of  the  world. — 0,

Vers.  27 — 29.— Communicated  lanctity.  When  any  victim  had  been  presented  in
sacrifice  to  God,  and  had  been  slain,  its  blood  (the  "  blood  of  atonement "),  and  also  its
flesh,  became  "mo.it  holy"  (ver.  29).  And  whatsoever  was  touched  by  the  one  or  the
other  received,  in  virtue  of  such  contact,  a  communicated  sanctity  (vers.  27,  28).  The
lesson  here  conveyed  is  that  whatsoever  comes  into  close  association  with  a  holy  one  or
a  holy  thing  does  thereby  acquire  a  measure  of  sacredness,  and  should  be  treated  accord-
ingly by  US.  This  imparted  sanctity  gives  back  again  to  that  which  acts  upon  it  aome
additional  importance;  it  reflects  that  which  it  receives  on  the  object  from  which  it
comes.     We  have  abundant  illustration  of  this  truth ;  sanctity  is  communicated

I.  Prom  the  God-Man  to  human  nature.  Man  is  for  more  to  God  and  to  the
spiritual  universe  now  that  the  «  Word  was  made  flesh,"  that  "  himseK  "  was  "  partaker
of  flesh  and  blood."  In  Jesus  Christ  the  Divine  touched  the  human,  and  henceforth  th«
human  is  holy.


OH.  TL  8—30.]  THE  .BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  ••

IL  From  the  life  and  death  op  Jesus  Chhibt  to  the  life  and  death  of  mbn.
Poverty,  shame,  sorrow,  tears,  the  grave, — are  not  these  other  than  they  were,  sacred
things,  since  he  "  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head ; "  since  the  crown  of  thorns  rested  on
that  sacred  head ;  since  the  Man  of  sorrows  bore  his  burden ;  since  "  Jesus  wept ; "  sinca
they  "  laid  him  in  a  sepulchre  "  ?

III.  Fboh  the  sebvice  to  the  banotuabt.  "  This  is  none  other  than  the  house
of  God."

rv.  Fbou  the  function  to  the  uinibteb.  "Esteem  them  very  highly  in  love
for  their  work's  sake."

V,  Fbom  the  bpieit  to  the  body.  The  exceeding  preciousness  of  the  human
§pirit  imparts  a  sanctity  to  the  body  which  is  its  residence  and  organ.

VI.  From  the  truth  to  the  Word.  We  must  deal  reverently  with  the  words  in
which  the  eternal  truth  of  God  is  uttered. — C.

Vers.  19 — 23. — Ministerial  function  and  ohligation.  This  in«truction  is  supple-
mentary to  that  given  in  Exod.  xxix.    We  may  gather  from  it^—

L  That  entrance  on  sacred  work  should  be  accompanied  with  special
BOLEUNITIES.  The  commencement  of  any  ministry  may  well  be  attended  with  such
observances  as  shall  impress  upon  the  mind  the  sanctity  and  weight  of  the  obligations
which  are  incurred.

IL  That  the  acoeftanob  of  baobed  obligations  should  be  beoabded  as  a  time
FOB  thankfulness  AS  WELL  AS  SERIOUSNESS  OF  SPIRIT.  The  priest  was  to  bring  a
"  meat  offering " — fine  flour  and  oil  (vers.  20,  21) — the  token  of  gratitude  for  God's
bountiful  provision.  There  are,  ii)  truth,  few  things  for  which  we  have  such  reason
to  be  thankful  to  God  as  for  his  providential  guidance  to  that  post  for  which  we  are
fitted,  at  which  we  can  usefully  expend  our  powers ;  more  particularly  if  this  be  one
in  close  connection  with  his  service.

III.  That  those  who  hold  baobed  offices  abb,  with  all  the  people  of  God,
etewabds  of  their  beculab  fosbebsionb.  The  priest,  as  well  as  the  layman  in  Israel,
wig  to  bring  his  meat  offering.  He,  too,  was  indebted  to  the  Divine  Sovereign  for
all  temporal  blessings,  and  should  make  suitable  acknowledgment  of  his  debt.  Those
who  now  serve  in  sacred  things,  in  the  gospel  of  the  Saviour,  are  men  who  receive  and
hold  secular  as  well  as  spiritual  treasures,  and  they,  too,  have  their  obligations,  which
they  must  not  disregard.

IV.  That  what  we  give  to  God  and  his  cause  should  be  given  absolutely,
without  thought  of  eetubn.  The  people  gave  their  offerings,  part  being  burnt  and
the  rest  being  the  portion  of  the  priests ;  but  every  "  meat  offering  for  the  priest  was  to
be  wholly  burnt:  it  was  not  to  be  eaten"  (ver.  23).  The  priests  were  not  to  take  ba,ck
again  for  their  own  use  that  which  they  had  presented  to  God.  What  they  offered  was
to  be  given  wholly,  utterly,  with  no  thought  of  receiving  it  again.  When  we  give  to
our  brother,  we  do  best  when  we  are  "  hoping  for  nothing  again  "  (Luke  vi.  35).  When
we  give  to  God,  either  in  worship  or  in  contribution  to  his  cause  and  kingdom,  we  do
best  when  we  are  filled  with  a  sense  of  his  immeasurable  goodness  to  us,  and  with
a  desire  to  do  something  to  his  praise.  We  should  feel  that  (1)  it  is  a  high  honour  to
be  allowed  to  give  anything  to  him,  and  that  (2)  the  utmost  we  can  give  is  a  poor
tribute  indeed  when  presented  to  him  who  gave  himself  for  us. — C.

Vers.  8 — 30. — Instructions  on  the  offerings  for  the  priest*.  Ver.  13,  "The  fire
shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the  altar ;  it  shall  never  go  out."

I.  The  perpetuity  of  religious  obligation.  1,  As  springing  out  of  the  rdation
hetvoten  man  and  God,  as  underlying  the  whole  of  human  existence.  "  In  him  we  live,
and  move,  and  have  our  being."  2.  The  aU-embracing  love  of  God.  The  fire  came
originally  from  him,  and  must  be  kept  up  to  betoken  his  ceaseless  care  of  his  creatures.
3.  The  positive  expression  of  religious  feeling  can  never  be  dispensed  with,  should
be  maintained  in  uninterrupted  order.

IL  The  maintenance  of  worship  is  A  duty  which  is  devolved  upoh  oonseobated
.-ebbonb,  and  their  official  position,  in  an  especial  manner.  Vain  to  expect  that  the  fire
will  not  go  out,  unless  appointed  persons  attend  to  it.  Mere  individualism  is  abuse  oi
liberty,  and  ends  in  irreligious  disorder  and  extinction  of  the  fire  of  God'i  house.


100


■I'HR  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  vi.  8— 30.


Friestorafl  is  no  argument  agjiinst  a  special  ministry  in  the  Church.  AH  must  help  to
maintain  the  fire,  but  some  must  take  the  command  as  addressed  to  them  m  a  special
manner  They  must  separate  themselves  to  the  work,  both  by  appropriate  manner  of
life  and"  recognition  of  special  duties.  Religion  is  not  only  in  temples,  but  if  the  fire
goes  out  there,  it  will  go  out  everywhere. — R.

Vera.  14 18.— Meat  offering.    "  All  the  males  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  shall  eat  of  it,'

with  unleavened  bread,  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  "  It  is  most
holy,  as  is  the  siu  offering,  and  as  the  trespass  offering."  "  Every  one  that  toucheth
them  shall  be  holy."

I.  The  ministry  op  bblioion  shottld  be  fulfillbd  in  the  spirit  op  thankpul
DBVOTION.  1.  The  best  of  the  Church  should  be  consecrated  to  its  highest  positions.
2.  Their  service  should  be  rendered  as  a  delight.  3.  Their  religious  earnestness  and
cheerfulness  should  be  cultivated  by  fellowship  and  brotherhood.  4  They  should  be
closely  united  with  the  people,  not  separated  from  them  by  spiritual  pride  and  a
misanthropic  asceticism.'

II.  Holiness  the  imperative  ebquirement  of  God's  ministers.  Not  mere  cere-
monial holiness.  1.  Holiness  of  character  and  life.  2.  Holiness  in  the  service  of  the
sanctuary — purity  of  worship,  singleness  of  heart,  orderliness  and  decency,  with  sim-
plicity and  manifest  sincerity.

in.   The   8ANCTIPTINQ  INFLUISNOB  OP  A  TKtJB  AND  PUBE  WORSHIP  EXTENDS  THROUGH

80CIBTT.  Every  one  holy  by  contact  with  the  holy.  1.  Z^e^ersMaswee/eciof  arealand
well-sustained  religious  service.  The  common  mistake  is  to  suppose  that  morality  leads
of  itself  to  religion  or  may  be  substituted  for  it.  2.  The  true  order  of  life  is  set  before  us
here  in  the  Law  of  Moses :  the  nearer  to  God,  the  holier ;  the  more  closely  connected
with  the  worship  of  God,  the  more  separated  from  and  defended  against  the  impurities
of  the  world.  3.  The  reaction  of  the  holy  life  on  the  sanctuary.  The  revival  of  religion
must  be  a  reciprocal  action  of  the  Church  on  the  ministry,  and  of  the  ministry  on  the
Church. — R.

Vers.  19 — ^23. — The  high  priest's  offering  in  the  day  when  he  is  anointed — a  per-
petual meat  offering ;  offered  not  during  the  days  of  the  anointing,  but  when  it  was
completed,  and  it  was  wholly  burnt.  Fine  flour  baked  as  an  oil-cake;  not  a  bleeding
sacrifice,  therefore,  but  only  a  thank  offering,  to  denote  that  expiation  was  always  made,
and  the  high  priest  offered  the  fruits  of  sanctification.     This  may  be  viewed —

I.  In  ITS  TYPICAL  APPLICATION  TO  THE  LoRD  Jesus  Christ.  1.  His  entire  consecra-
tion to  his  mediatorial  office.  2.  His  personal  perfection  as  needing  no  expiation,
offering  only  the  fine  flour  of  his  unspotted  humanity,  mingled  with  the  oil  of  the
Spirit  of  God,  and  with  the  fire  of  actual  human  experience  applied  to  it.  3.  His
acceptance  hy  the  Father  on  our  behalf;  "wholly  burnt."

II.  In  its  lesser  application  to  the  ministry  op  tub  sanctuary.  1.  The  true
ordination  not  a  mere  human  rite,  but  a  Divine  acceptance  of  personal  consecration.
"  I  have  chosen  you,"  said  Jesus,  "  and  ordained  you."  2.  The  minister  of  God  should
offer  his  fine  flour,  his  highest  gifts — his  intellect,  culture,  sifted  knowledge,  prepared
thought.  He  should  put  nothing  which  he  himself  has  not  toiled  to  make  worthy  on
the  altar.  3.  With  all  we  present,  the  oil  of  grace  must  be  mingled,  and  it  must  be  pre-
pared by  actual  fire  of  experience.  No  man  can  teach  and  minister  spiritual  blessings
to  others  who  is  not  himself  practically  acquainted  with  the  truth.  4.  "  Every  meat
offering  for  the  priest  shall  be  wholly  burnt :  it  shall  not  be  eaten."  No  ministry  can
be  divinely  blessed  which  is  not  fulfilled  in  the  spirit  of  single-hearted,  self-consuming
devotion.  We  must  hate  our  life  for  Christ's  sake,  and  take  up  his  cross,  if  we  are  to
follow  him. — R.

Vers.  24—30. — Special  regulationt  as  to  the  sin  offering.  Peculiar  sanctity  of  the
flesh  and  blood  of  the  sin  offering,  pointing  to  the  atonement.  In  all  cases,  whether
the  sin  offering  of  the  people,  or  of  the  priest,  or  of  the  great  day  of  atonement,  the
same  holiness  of  the  victim  and  of  the  blood  is  insisted  upon.     Here  there  is —

I.  The  necessity  op  atonement.  1.  As  prescribed  by  God,  coming  forth  from  his
infinite  holiness.     2.  As  connected  with  mediation,  not  in  atonement  dependent  upon


CH.  TO.  1—38.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


101


the  chance  merit  of  man,  but  the  gracious  promise  of  God's  free  and  sovereign  mercy
3,  Ab  set  forth  in  the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  victim,  clearly  indicating  a  substitutionary
merit

n.  The  typical  fulfilmbnt  op  the  sin  offebino  in  Jesus  Chbist,  at  once  the
High  Priest  and  the  Victim.  1.  Most  holy  in  his  person  and  his  blood.  2.  Connected
with  the  burnt  offering,  as  presented  in  the  same  place.  The  cross  was  a  whole  offering
in  the  fire  of  suffering,  in  the  consuming  righteousness  of  the  Divine  Law.  3.  Imparting
the  holiness  to  him  who  shall  touch  it.  Healing  virtue  from  Christ;  sanctification
from  the  cross.  4.  The  very  vessels  are  sanctified.  So  the  Spirit  of  Christ  cleanses
the  world.  The  diffusion  of  the  Christian  doctrine  and  life  lifts  up  all  that  belongs  to
human  existence  into  a  higher  sphere. — ^


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  Vn.

COHTHnJATION  OP  THE  SUPPLEMENTAL
SEQULATIONS  ADDRESSED  TO  THE  PBIESTS,
BESPECTINO  THE  BITUAL  OF  THE  SACBIEIOES.

This  chapter  treats  of  the  ritual  of  the
trespass  offering  and  the  peace  offerings,
as  the  last  chapter  treated  of  that  of  the
burnt  offering,  the  meat  offering,  and  the  sin
offering.  The  LXX.  version  attachea  the
flrei  ten  verses  of  this  chapter  to  oh.  vi.,
beginning  ch.  vii.  with  our  ver.  11.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Further  ritual  of  the  trespass
offering  (see  note  on  oh.  v.  14).  It  is  to  be
noted  that  the  blood  of  the  trespass  offering
is  not  to  be  placed  on  the  horns  of  the  altar,
as  was  the  rule  in  the  ordinary  sin  offering,
but  cast  against  the  inner  siJe  of  the  altar,
as  in  the  burnt  offuring  and  peaece  offering.
The  rump  in  ver.  3  should  be  translated  tail,
as  in  ch.  iii.  9.

Vers.  7 — 10  contain  a  general  precept
or  note  as  to  the  priests'  jportion  in  the  sin
offering,  trespass  offering,  burnt  offering,
and  meat  offering.  The  officiating  priest
was  to  have  the  fltsU  of  the  trespass  offering
and  of  the  sin  offering  (except  the  fat  burnt
on  the  aliar),  and  the  skin  of  the  burnt  offeiw
ing  and  the  cooked  meat  offerings  (except
the  memorial  burnt  on  the  altar),  while  the
meat  offerings  of  flour  and  of  parched  grains,
which  could  be  kept  longer,  were  to  be  the
property  of  the  priestly  body  in  general,  all
Uie  sons  of  Aaron, . .  .  one  as  much  as  another.
The  skins  of  the  peace  offerings  were  re-
tained by  the  offerer  ('  Mishna,  Sebach,'
12,3).  ,

Vers.  11 — 21. — Further  ritual  of  the  peace
offering  (see  note  on  ch.  iii.  1).  There  are
three  sorts  of  peace  offerings — thank  offerings
(vera.  12 — 15),  votive  offerings,and  voluntary
offerings  (vers.  16 — 18).  Of  these,  the  thank
offerings  were  made  in  thankful  memorial  for
past  mercies ;  votive  offerings  were  made
in  fulfilment  of  a  vow  previously  taken,  that


such  offering  should  be  presented  if  a  eertain
condition  were  fulfilled.  Voluntary  offer-
ings differ  from  votive  offerings  by  not
having  been  previously  vowed,  and  from
thank  offerings  by  not  having  reference
to  any  special  mercy  received.  The  tJiank
offering  must  be  eaten  by  the  offerer  and
his  friends,  on  the  same  day  that  it  was
offered  ;  the  votive  and  the  voluntary  offer-
ings, which  were  inferior  to  the  thank  offer-  .
ing  in  sanctity,  on  the  same  day  or  the
next.  The  reason  why  a  longer  time  was
not  given  probably  was  that  the  more  the
meal  was  delayed,  the  less  would  a  religious
character  be  attached  to  it.  The  necessity
of  a  quick  consumption  also  took  away  the
temptation  of  acting  grudgingly  towaids
those  with  whom  the  feast  might  be  shared,
and  it  likewise  precluded  the  danger  of
the  flesh  becoming  corrupted.  If  any  of  the
flesh  remained  till  the  third  day,  it  was  to
be  burnt  with  fire ;  if  eaten  on  that  day,  it
should  not  be  accepted  or  imputed  unto  >iiin
that  offered,  that  is,  it  should  not  be  re-
garded as  a  sacrifice  of  sweet  savour  to  God,
but  an  abomination  (literally,  a  stench),  and
whoever  ate  it  should  bear  his  iniquity,
that  is,  should  be  guilty  of  an  offence,
requiring,  probably,  a  sin  offering  to  atone  for
it.  Tiie  bread  gift  accompanying  the  animal
sacrifice  was  to  consist  of  three  kinds  of
unleavened  cakes,  and  one  cake  of  leavened
bread,  and  one  out  of  the  whole  oblation,
that  is,  one  cake  of  each  kind,  was  to  be
offered  by  heaving  and  then  given  to
the  officiating  priest,  the  remaining  cakes
forming  a  part  of  the  offerer's  festive  meal.
If  any  one  took  part  of  a  feast  on  a  peace
offering  while  in  a  state  of  Levitical  un-
cleanness,  he  was  to  be  cut  off  from  his
people,  that  is,  excommunicated,  without
permission  to  recover  immediate  communion
by  offering  a  sin  offering.  St,  Paul  joined
in  a  votive  offering  (Acts  xxi.  26).

Vers.  22 — 27. — Repetition  of  the  prohibi-
tion of  eating  the  fat  and  the  blood,  addressed
to  the  people  in  the  midst  of  the  instructioua


lot


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  vn  1 — 38


to  the  priests.  Ye  shall  eat  no  manner  of  fat
must  be  taken  to  mean  none  of  the  fat
already  specified,  that  is,  the  Internal  fat,
and,  in  the  case  of  the  sheep,  the  tail.  It  is
uncertain  whether  the  law  as  to  fat  was
regarded  as  binding  upon  the  Israelites
after  they  had  settled  in  Palestine.  Pro-
bably it  was  silently  abrogated  ;  but  the
[irohibition  of  blood  was  undoubtedly  per-
petual (Deut.  xii.  16),  and  it  is  bused  on  a
principle  which  does  not  apply  to  the  fat
(oh.  xvii  11).

Vers.  28 — 84. — Continuation  of  the  ritual
of  the  peace  offerings  (see  note  on  ch.  iii.  1).
The  equal  dignity  of  the  peace  offerings
with  the  other  offerings  is  vindicated  by
the  command  that  the  offerer  shall  bring  it
with  his  own  hands,  whereas  it  might  have
been  regarded  as  merely  the  constituent
part  of  a  feast,  and  so  sent  by  the  hand
of  a  servant.  The  breast  and  the  right
shoulder  were  to  be  waved  and  heaved  (for
"  heaved  "  does  not  merely  mean  "  taken  off,"
as  some  have  said).  The  waving  consisted  of
the  priest  placing  his  hands  beneath  those
of  the  offerer  who  held  the  piece  to  be  waved,
and  moving  them  slowly  backwards  and
forwards  before  the  Lord,  to  and  from  the
altar ;  the  heaving  was  performed  by  slowly
lifting  the  pieces  heaved  upwards  and  down-
wards. The  movements  were  made  to  show
that  the  pieces,  though  not  burnt  on  the
altar,  were  ;et  in  »  af  eoial  mannei  oodm-


erated  to  God's  service.  The  right  shmildet
was  most  probably  the  hind  leg,  perhaps
the  haunch.  The  Hebrew  word  is  generally
translated  "  leg "  (Deut.  xxviii.  35  ;  Ps.
oxMi.  10).  This  part  was  the  perquisite
of  the  officiating  priest ;  the  waved  breast
was  given  to  the  priests'  common  stock.
Afterwards  an  addition  was  made  to  the
priests'  portion  (Dent,  zviii.  3 ;  see  1  Cor.
ix.  13).

Vers.  35,  36.—  Conclusion  of  the  section.
This  is  the  portion  of  the  anointing  of  Aaron,
and  of  the  anointing  of  his  sons,  may  be
translated  simply,  This  it  the  portion  af
Aaron,  and  the  portion  of  his  sons,  as  the
word  "  mitehah  "  will  bear  the  meaning  of
portion  as  well  as  of  anointing.  This
rendering,  however,  is  not  necessary,  as  it
was  the  anointing  of  Aaron  and  his  sons
that  entitled  them  to  these  portions.

Vers.  37,  38.— Conclusion  of  Part  I.  The
law  of  the  burnt  offering  is  contained  in
ch.  1.  1 — 17 ;  vi.  8 — 13 :  of  the  meat  offering,
in  ch.  ii.  1—16 ;  vi.  14—23 :  of  the  sin  offer-
ing, in  ch.  iv.  1—35 ;  ▼.  1—13;  vi  24—30 :
of  the  trespass  offering,  in  ch.  t.  14^ — 19;  vi.
1 — 7;  vii.  1 — 6:  of  the  consecrations,  in  ch.
yL  19 — 23,  supplementing  Exod.  xxix.  1 — 37 :
of  the  sacrifice  of  the  peace  offerings,  in
oh.  iii.  1—17;  vii.  11—21;  28—34.  To-
gether, the  sacrifices  teach  the  lessons  of
self-surrender,  loyalty,  atonement,  satisfac-
tion, dedication,  peaoa


H0MILBTIC3.

Ver.  18.— Tiea^ened  bread  was  not  to  be  offered  on  tbe  altar,  for  ■  reason  Iwfore
assigned ;  but,  though  not  offered  on  the  altar,  it  may  yet  be  consecrated  to  God,  not  by
burning,  but  by  heaving.  Thus  there  are  lives  which  cannot  be  wholly  devoted  to
God  and  his  active  service,  and  yet  can  be  consecrated  to  him.  Leavened  bread  was
the  bread  coramonly  used,  and  the  secular  life  of  a  man  engaged  daily  in  the  occupa-
tions of  politics,  or  of  business,  or  of  labour,  may  be  sanctified,  and,  being  sanctified,  may
be  accepted  by  God  as  freely  and  fully  as  are  those  directly  given  up  to  his  especial
service.

Ver.  19. — TTiat  which  is  itself  unclean  makes  whatever  it  touchei  unclean  also.  So
in  the  moral  sphere,  "  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners "  (1  Cor.  xv.  33),
and  "  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  lump "  (1  Cor.  v,  6),  and  so  with  respejt
to  the  spread  of  heresy,  "Their  word  will  eat  as  doth  a  canker  (or  gangrene)"  (2
Tim.  ii.  17).

On  the  other  hand,  that  which  is  itself  holy  makes  that  which  it  touches  to  be  holy
(ch.  vi.  18).  Therefore,  when  the  Holy  One  was  on  the  earth,  "  the  whole  multitude
sought  to  touch  him :  for  there  went  virtue  out  of  him,  and  healed  them  "  (Luke  vi.  19) ;
and  they  "  brought  unto  him  all  that  were  diseased ;  and  besought  him  that  they  might
only  touch  the  hem  of  bis  garment:  and  as  many  as  touched  were  made  perfectly
whole"  (Matt.  xiv.  35,  36).  Thus  the  woman  with  an  issue  of  blood  "came  behind
him,  and  touched  the  border  of  his  garment:  and  immediately  her  issue  of  blood
stanched.  .  .  .  And  when  the  woman  saw  that  she  was  not  hid,  she  came  trembling,
find  fa'lins  down  before  him,  she  declared  unto  him  before  all  the  people  for  what
c«uge  she  had  touched  him,  a,n\  how  she  was  healed  immediately  "  (Luke  viii.  44 — 47).


CH.  ¥11,1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LBVITI0U8.  108

Hence,  when  mankind  had  fallen  in  Adam,  for  the  restoration  of  the  race  a  new  Head
was  found  in  Christ  Jesus,  into  whom  each  person  is  baptized,  and  by  a  mystical
contact  with  whom  he  may  be  sanctified.

Ver.  25. — To  eat  of  the  fat  of  which  men  offer  an  offering  made  with  fire  unto  the
Lord,  is  to  rob  God  of  his  chosen  offering.  The  injunction  condemns  sacrilege  in  all  its
forms.  Whoever  takes  to  his  own  use  things  dedicated  to  God,  "  eats  the  fet ; "  and  "  the
soul  that  eateth  it  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people."

Ver.  34. — The  wave  breast  and  the  heave  shoulder  were  to  be  the  priests',  as  well
as  the  meat  offering  (ver.  10)  and  other  portions.  Thus  is  taught  the  lesson  enforced
by  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  ix.  13,  14),  "  Do  ye  not  know  that  they  which  minister  about  holy
things  live  of  the  things  of  the  temple  ?  and  they  which  wait  at  the  altar  are  partakers
with  the  altar?  Even  so  hath  the  Lord  ordained  that  they  which  preach  the  gospel
should  live  of  the  gospel."  The  adequate  maintenance  of  the  Levitical  priesthood  was
carefully  provided  for  under  the  old  dispensation  by  means  of  offerings  and  of  tithes  j
and  "  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire  "  (Luke  x.  7),  and  "  let  him  that  is  taught  in
the  Word  commimicate  unto  him  that  teachetb  in  all  good  things "  (GaL  tL  &),  are
principles  of  the  new  dispensation  likewise.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ministerial  mpyort.  Ch.  vii. ;  cf.  1  Cor.  ix.  13 ;  x.  18.  We  have  in  this  chapter  a
detailed  account  of  the  disposal  of  the  offerings  already  referred  to.  The  leading  idea  of
the  passage  is  the  perquisites  of  the  priests,  and  the  Christian  counterpart  of  this  is
ministerial  support.    And  in  this  connection  let  us  observe —

I.  In  all  the  0FPEBING8  THE    FIRST   CONCERN  WAS   TO   ALLOCATE   TO   GoD   HIMSELF

HIS  DUB.  In  particular  he  had  appropriated  to  his  own  use,  that  is,  to  manifest
atonement,  the  hlood  of  all  the  sacrifices ;  and  consequently  it  was  never  to  be  eaten,
for  this  would  be  a  profane  use  of  such  a  sacred  thing  (vers.  26,  27).  It  is  only  when
we  come  to  the  realities  out  of  the  types  and  shadows,  that  we  find  Jesus  declaring,
"  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  hlood,  hath  eternal  life ;  and  I  will  raise  him
up  at  the  last  day.  For  my  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  my  blood  is  drink  indeed"
(John  vi.  54,  55).  Atoning  blood  can  only  be  partaken  of  hy  faith.  Moreover,  the
Lord  appropriated  the  fat — the  large  amount  of  suet  about  the  animal — which  was
absolutely  necessary  to  feed  the  flre.  This  was  to  be  devoted,  therefore,  to  this  sacred
use  and  withdrawn  from  all  profane  use.  There  were  other  portions,  such  as  the
sheep's  tail,  the  kidneys,  and  the  caul  above  the  liver,  which  were  burned  always  on
the  altar  as  God's  portion.  The  general  principle,  therefore,  is  plain  of  first  giving  unto
God  his  due.

Now,  in  this  particular  question  of  ministerial  support,  it  is  with  this  idea  of  steward-
ehip  unto  Ood  that  we  must  begin.  Men  must  first  realize  their  obligation  to  God
above  before  they  will  do  justly  by  his  ministers.  The  human  obligation  is  best
enforced  by  emphasizing  the  Divine.  If  men  give  God  his  due,  if  they  are  faithful
stewards  unto  him,  if  they  keep  zealously  the  first  table  of  the  Lav,  they  will  not
wrong  their  neighbours  by  disregarding  the  second  table  ;  above  1,  they  will  not
wrong  God's  ministers.

II.  After  God's  portions  were  dedicated,  the  best  of  the  residuk  became  the
PRIESTS*.  In  some  cases  the  priest  got  the  whole ;  for  example,  in  a  private  sin
offering  or  trespass  offering,  and  when,  as  in  the  peace  offerings,  the  remainder  was
shared  with  the  person  presenting  the  sacrifice,  the  priest's  portion  was  always  the  best.
The  wave  breast  and  the  heave  leg,  the  "  choice  cuts,"  as  we  would  now  call  them,  of
the  carcase,  were  assigned  to  the  priests.  In  fact,  there  is  peculiar  generosity  enjoined
in  supporting  the  officers  of  God.

There  is  a  fashion  in  a  business  age  of  regarding  the  minister  very  much  as  an
«ccle8iastical  tradesman^  who  is  to  be  dealt  with  on  business  principles ;  that  is,  as  much
work  is  to  be  got  out  of  him  as  possible  for  the  minimum  of  pay.  The  sooner  such
poor  notions  cease,  the  better  for  the  cause  of  God.     "And  we  beseech  you,  brethren,'


lot  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.vii.1— 3a


«»yi  the  apostle,  "  to  know  them  which  labour  among  you,  and  are  over  you  in  the-
Lord,  and  admonish  you;  and  to  esteem  them  very  highly  in  love  for  their  work's
sake''(l  Thess.  v.  12,  13).  If  ministers  are  rightly  regarded,  the  people  will  feel  it
to  be  their  duty,  as  Israel  was  instructed  to  do,  to  give  them  the  best  support  they  can.

III.   A  PROPERLY  SUSTAINED   PRIESTHOOD  WAS  IN  A  POSITION  TO  EXERCISE   FAITHFUL

DISCIPLINE  IN  THE  Church.  This  ministerial  support  chapter,  as  we  may  properly
regard  ch.  vii.,  is  most  particular  in  debarring  the  unclean  from  Church  privileges.
Whether  we  are  to  understand  the  "cutting  off  from  the  people"  as  death,  as  the
Vulgnte  appears  to  do,  or  as  only  excommunication,  one  thing  is  certain,  that  the
priesthood,  assigned  its  true  dignity  and  supported  accordingly,  were  thereby  encouraged
to  be  faithful  in  the  exercise  of  discipline.

And  this  relation  of  proper  ministerial  support  to  Church  discipline  is  most  im-
portant. It  is  when  the  office  is  degraded  in  men's  minds  to  a  mere  profession,  and
they  consequently  refuse  it  adequate  support,  that  they  are  unwilling  to  submit  to  the
discipline  God's  ministry  should  wield.  To  the  elevation  of  the  office  in  the  eyes  ol
men,  and  to  the  consequent  increase  of  its  support,  all  wise  members  of  the  Church,
of  Christ  should  devote  their  attention. — B.  M.  E.

Veri.  16 — 18. — Fidelity  to  precept  enforced.  The  peace  offering  was  essentially  a-
tribute  of  gratitude  and  praise.  It  was  especially  suited  to  national  festivities  aud
family  rejoicings.  Cakes  and  bread  accompanied  the  flesh  of  the  sacrificial  animal.
Three  classes  of  peace  offerins;  are  spoken  of,  viz.  for  thanksgiving,  or  for  a  vow,  or  a»
a  free-will  offering.  The  flesh  must  he  partaken  of  by  the  offerers  (the  priests  having
received  their  portion)  and  consumed  on  the  flrst  day  in  the  case  of  the  first-mentioned
class,  and  by  the  close  of  the  secund  day  in  the  case  of  the  others.  The  stress  laid
upon  this  command  may  set  in  clear  liglit  the  obligatoriness  of  Divine  instructions.

I.  Strict  observance  is  demanded,  even  though  the  significance  of  the
PRECEPT  BE  NOT  PERCEIVED.  Little  explanation  is  afforded  in  the  Law  of  the  many
ceremonies  instituted.  The  Israelites  were  treated  as  children,  whose  chief  virtue  ia
unquestioning  obedience.  Why  should  the  flesh  be  so  quickly  consumed?  The
devout  Israelite  might  not  know,  yet  must  he  rigidly  conform  to  the  order.  He  is  not
to  reason,  but  to  do.  This  course  may  be  recommended  to  the  many  who  wish  a  full
explanation  of  the  reasons  for  the  institution  of  the  ordinances  connected  with  the
Christian  Church.  Reliance  may  be  placed  upon  the  wisdom  of  the  Diviue  Legislator,
and  faith  rather  than  knowledge  may  glorify  God.  "  The  secret  things  "  (the  explana-
tions, the  reasons)  "  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God  ;  but  those  things  which  are  revealed  "
(the  facts,  the  commands)  "  belong  unto  us  for  ever,  that  we  may  do  all  the  words  of  the
Law."  That  Jesus  Christ  has  ordained  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  is  sufficient
to  lead  us  to  practise  them,  however  confused  may  be  our  apprehension  of  the  mysteries
und  principles  involved.  And  in  relation  to  the  counsels  addressed  to  us  for  the
guidance  of  our  lives,  and  the  events  that  are  seen  to  necessitate  certain  action  upon
our  parts,  it  may  still  be  said,  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know
hereafter."

II.  More  lioht  mat  be  expected  to  dawn  upon  ub  cpktinuallt  as  to  thb
MEANING  OF  DiviNE  ORDINANCES.  Faith  is  not  intended  to  exclude  or  supersede
knowledge,  but  to  form  a  basis  for  it,  an  avenue  through  which  it  may  pass  to  the
mind,  an  appendix  by  which  its  volume  may  be  supplemented.  Patient  and  prayerful
study  is  ever  rewarded  with  keener  appreciation  of  the  will  of  God.  If  the  Israelites
reflected  for  a  moment,  they  would  call  to  mind  warnings  against  desecrating  holy
things,  and  against  treating  what  was  offered  to  God  as  if  it  were  a  portion  of  common
food.  Surely  God  would  distinguish  thus  between  ordinary  slaughter  and  sacrificial
victims,  and  would  guard  against  that  additional  risk  ol  putrefaction  to  which  flesh  is
liable  in  a  hot  climate,  and  which,  if  it  occurred,  wouM  be  an  insult  to  his  majesty.
Forus  at  any  rate  the  types  and  ceremonies  of  Judaism  have  been  interpreted  by-
Christianity.  The  Great  Prophet  has  revealed  the  obscure,  and,  endowed  with  his
Spirit,  apostles  have  been  inspired  to  comment  authoritatively  upon  the  preceding
dispensation.  And  we  need  not  limit  our  aspirations  alter  an  intelligent  perception  oi
the  meaning  of  Christian  laws.  Events  as  they  occur,  and  reverent,  persevering  in-
vestigation, may  unfold  to  vis  with  increasing  clearness  the  ways  of  God.     But  we  ought


OH,  TO.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITIGUb.  lOo


not  to  delay  obseiTance  of  his  precepts  until  their  design  is  fully  maQifest.  That
serrsnt  is  slothful  who  refuses  to  work  by  candle-light,  and  waits  for  the  brightness  of
the  sun.

III.  PaBTIAL  disobedience  NEUTBALIZES  the  effect  of  a  BELiaiOnS  OBBEBVANOE,
AND  MAY  APFEAB  MOBB  OFFENSIVE  THAN  TOTAL  NEGLECT  OF  THE   DiVnJE  COMMANDS.

Let  the  worshipper  trifle  with  the  Law  and  venture  to  eat  the  flesh  on  the  third  day,
and  he  shall  find  to  his  cost  that  the  whole  of  his  offering  is  rejected ;  it  is  not  pleasing
to  God,  and  will  not  procure  him  favour.  His  effort  proves  useless,  it  shall  not  be
reckoned  to  his  credit.  Worse  still,  his  offering  "  shall  be  an  abomination "  in  the
eyes  of  God  ;  there  shall  be  no  grateful  odour  exhaled,  but  it  shall  be  a  stench  in  his
nostrils.  Sin  has  not  been  obliterated  but  augmented  by  the  sacrifice.  When  the
Earl  of  Oxford  would  honour  King  Heury  VII.  by  the  presence  of  a  large  body  of
retainers,  the  king  only  saw  in  the  men  an  infraction  of  the  law,  and  could  not  consent
to  have  his  laws  broken  in  his  sight.  Honour  and  dishonour  are  an  ill-assorted  pair.
The  partially  obedient  worshipper  shows  himself  as  knowing  God's  will  and  doing  it
not.  Total  abstinence  might  have  proclaimed  him  sinful  through  ignorance.  Half-
beartedness  is  often  as  productive  of  evil  efifects  as  flat  rebellion.  It  is  not  for  us  to
presume  to  say  what  may  be  disregarded  and  what  not.  To  follow  the  Lord  fully  ia
the  path  of  duty  and  of  safety. — S.  B.  A.

Yen.  29 — 34. — The  three/old  participation.  In  the  case  of  the  peace  ofiieilngs,  there
was  a  recognition  of  rights  due  to  God,  to  hia  priests,  and  to  the  people  presenting  the
victims.

L  The  fobtion  besebved  fob  God.  The  fat  parts  and  the  blood  were  not  to  be
eaten  by  man  ;  the  former  must  be  burnt  upon  the  altar,  the  latter  poured  out  at  its
foot.  ITiere  a/re  claims  Ood  will  not  waive.  The  homage  man  owes  to  his  Maker  can
never  be  remitted.  Pull  trust  and  unfaltering  obedience  can  be  demanded  only  by
an  Infinite  Being.  Life  must  be  acknowledged  as  dependent  upon  him.  "  The  blood
is  the  life,"  and  for  the  Israelite  to  innk.  it  is  to  be  cut  o£f  from  the  congregation.  The
choicest  portions  belong  to  God.  He  will  not  put  up  with  inferior  parts.  They  mock
him  who  fancy  that  a  remnant  of  time  and  money  and  strength  will  suffice  for  his
service.

IL  The  shabe  allotted  to  the  priests.  Ood  takes  care  of  his  chosen  servants,
provides  amply  for  their  wants.  The  priests  devoted  wholly  to  the  work  of  the
tabernacle  shall  not  be  forgotten,  but  considered  as  one  with  their  Master,  so  that
whenever  he  is  honoured  they  shall  be  likewise  thought  of.  To  wear  God's  uniform
is  to  be  well  cared  for,  to  receive  good  wages,  to  be  sure  of  a  pension.  Once  taken
into  his  employ,  our  future  comfort  is  assured.  And  those  who  preach  the  gospel
may  claim  to  live  by  it.  See  this  principle  enunciated  and  inculcated  in  1  Cor.  ix.
7 — 14.  Variety  is  secured.  Pood  to  eat,  skins  to  wear.  The  atonement  of  the  priest
"covered"  the  sinner,  and  the  covering  of  the  animal  was  naturally  appropriated  to  the
use  of  the  ofSciating  priest.  Both  flonr  and  flesh  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  priests.  The
quality  shall  not  be  inferior.  Portions  are  selected,  the  breast  and  the  shoulder,  which
were  counted  as  most  delicate  in  flavour  and  nutritious  in  substance.  Why  should
God's  messengers  yield  to  fear  lest  they  should  be  neglected  ?  He  feedeth  the  ravens,
clothes  the  lilies  in  splendour,  and  will  not  forsake  those  trhom  he  has  called  to  do  his
work  in  the  world.

III.  The  kemaindeb  handed  back  to  the  people.  We  have  not  to  do  with  an
avaricious,  unreasonable  God.  He  might  justly  have  claimed  the  absolute  disposal  of
all  brought  to  his  shrine  as  an  offering,  but  he  graciously  received  a  "  memorial "  for
himself  and  a  portion  for  his  ministers,  and  the  rest  was  returned  to  the  worshippers,
consecrated,  and  for  their  festal  enjoyment.  Let  us  but  acknowlerlge  God's  require-
ments, and  we  shall  flnil  that  we  are  not  debarred  from  the  innocent  pleasures  of  life,
but  can  enter  upon  them  with  sacred  enhancing  zest.  By  spending  money  in  the
purchase  of  ointment  for  the  Saviour,  Mary  did  not  deprive  herself  of  all  her  store,  but
rather  increased  the  satisfaction  with  which  she  indulged  in  the  customary  household
expenses.  We  are  sure  that  the  widow  who  cast  her  all  into  the  treasury  was  not
allowed  to  remain  utterly  destitute.  She  had  really  made  a  profitable  investment  of
her  little  capital.    Emptying  her  hands  was  only  preparatory  to  having  them  filled.


106  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  [oh.  vn.  1—38.

How  ennohUng  the  thought  of  being  sharers  wilh  God  and  his  servants  1  We  all  partake
of  the  same  food,  and  are  made  "  one  bread  and  one  body  "  (1  Cor.  x.  17).  There  is  a
better  sauce  than  hunger!  It  consists  in  previous  dedication  to  God.  Selfish  ex-
clusion of  the  rights  of  God  diminishes  the  intensity  and  narrows  the  sphere  of  our
delights.     Not  the  miser,  but  the  Christian  donor,  knows  the  joys  of  property. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  law  of  the  trespass  offering.  This,  like  the  other  offerings,  was
generally  considered  before  (see  chs.  v.  and  vi.  1 — 7).  The  repetition  here,  according
to  Hebrew  usage,  gives  emphasis  and  solemnity  to  the  injunctions.  The  subject  is
reopened  to  show  more  particularly  the  duties  and  privileges  of  the  priesthood  con-
cerning it.    And  we  notice  —

I.  That  the  teespass  offbrino  is  described  as  most  holt.  1.  It  was  most
holy  as  typifying  Christ.  (1)  Intrinsically  there  could  be  neither  sin  nor  holiness  in
the  animal  that  was  offei-ed  up.  It  was  not  a  moral  being.  Nor  could  it  be  most  holy
in  the  sense  of  removing  moral  guilt ;  for  it  could  not  do  this.  For  this  purpose  God
never  "required"  it;  never  "desired"  it  (I  Sam.  xv.  22;  Ps.  xl.  6;  li.  16 ;  Isa.  i.  11;
Hos.  vi.  6 ;  Heb.  x.  1 — 4).  (2)  But  the  guilt  offering  of  Calvary  can  literally  "  take
sin  away,"  and  so  accomplish  the  will,  the  desire,  and  the  requirement  of  a  just  and
merciful  God  (Ps.  xl.  6—8  ;  Heb.  x.  4 — 10).  Christ  is  therefore  indeed  "Most  Holy; "
and  the  guilt  offering  of  the  Law  was  so  called  putatively  as  typifying  him.  Accordingly,
2.  It  was  killed  at  the  north  side  of  the  altar.  (1)  "  It  is  most  holy.  In  the  place
where  they  kill  the  burnt  offering  shall  they  kill  the  trespass  offering "  (vers.  1,  2).
But  the  burnt  offering  was  killed  at  the  north  side  of  the  altar  (ch.  i.  11).  So  was
Calvary  at  the  north  side  of  Jerusalem.  (2)  Because  this  is  given  as  a  reason  why  the
trespass  offering  was  to  be  accounted  "  most  holy,"  the  Jews  have  countenance  here  for
their  tradition  that  the  less  holy  sacrifices  were  slain  at  the  south-west  corner  of  the
altar.  3.  It  was  eaten  in  the  holy  place.  (I)  "  Every  male  among  the  priests  shall
eat  thereof:  it  shall  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place:  it  is  most  holy"  (ver.  6).  This  was
what  the  Jews  distinguished  as  "  the  eating  within  the  curtains,"  in  allusion  to  the  court
of  the  tabernacle,  which  was  enclosed  with  curtains.  (2)  In  these  feastinga  the  priests
cultivated  fellowship ;  and  the  fellowship  was  religious  in  proportion  as  they  had  the
vision  of  their  faith  clear  to  look  to  the  end  of  the  things  to  be  abolished.  Faith  is  the
true  princifile  of  religious  fellowship.  (3)  The  females  "  among  the  priests "  might
eat  of  the  "  holy  things  ; "  but  of  the  things  distinguished  as  "  most  holy  "  they  had
no  right  to  eat.  Since  the  Fall  down  to  the  coming  of  the  "  Seed  of  the  woman,"  a
distinction  between  male  and  female  was  maintained,  but  now  it  is  abolished.  God's
curse  upon  the  woman  has  strangely  been  converted  into  the  greatest  blessing  to  man-
kind.    Even  in  anger  God  is  love.

II.  Sundry  directions  given  to  the  priests.  1.  With  the  blood  of  the  guOt
offering  they  were  to  sprinkle  the  altar.  (1)  The  altar  was  the  raised  platform  upon
which  the  sacrifices  were  offered  up  to  God.  The  eminence  of  Calvary  was,  more
particularly  considered,  the  altar  upon  which  the  Great  Sacrifice  was  offered.  But  in
the  grander  sense,  wlion  the  great  universe  is  viewed,  as  Paul  views  it,  as  the  true
temple  of  God,  the  earth  itself  was  the  altar.  The  welfare  of  the  universe  is  concerned
in  the  death  of  Christ  (Eph.  i.  10;  Phil.  ii.  9,  10;  Col.  i.  20).  (2)  The  sprinkling  of
the  altar  with  the  blood,  in  this  view,  would  show  that  the  earth,  the  coinmon'^in-
heritance  of  man,  which  was  cursed  for  his  sake,  is  redeemed  with  the  price  of  the
precious  blood  of  Jesus.  And  being  redeemed  by  the  price  of  his  blood,  it  is  destined
also  to  be  redeemed  by  the  power  of  his  arm  (see  Eph.  i.  14 ;  iv.  30).  What  glorious
things  are  in  reversion !  (3)  The  Mishna  records  a  tradition  thus  rendered  by  Bishop
Patrick :  "  That  there  was  a  scarlet  line  which  went  round  about  the  altar  exactly  iu
the  middle,  and  the  blood  of  the  burnt  offerings  was  sprinkled  round  about  above  the
line,  but  that  of  the  trespass  offerings  and  peace  offerings  round  about  below  it."  But
these  traditions  are  generally  refinements  without  authority.  Let  us  be  thankful  for
the  "  sure  word  of  prophecy."  2.  They  were  to  burn  the  fat  upon  the  altar.  (1)  Not
the  fat  mtermingled  with  the  flesh.  This  was  not  offered  upon  the  altar,  except  of
course,  m  the  holocaust;  nor  was  it  forbidden  as  food.  Had  it  been  so,  what  ei"-
barnissments  must  tender  consciences  have  suffered  !  There  is  nothing  unreasonable  in
the  service  of  God.    (2)  The  fat  burnt  was  chiefly  that  found  in  a  detached  state  viz


CH.  vn.  1— 38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  IW


the  omentum,  or  caul,  the  fat  of  the  mesentery  and  that  ahout  the  kidneys,  with  the
rump  or  fail  of  the  sheep.  This  last  was  in  the  East  so  enormous  that  it  had  in  some
cases  to  be  supported  by  a  little  cart  fastened  behind  the  animal  (see  Lndolf  s  '  History
of  Ethiopia,'  p.  53).  3.  They  had  the  privilege  of  claiming  the  skin  (vers.  7,  8).  (1)
This  privilege  probably  dates  from  the  days  of  Eden.  Immediately  after  the  Pall,  our
first  parents  covered  themselves  with  the  leaves  of  the  fig,  symbolically  to  express  their
sense  of  shame  on  account  of  their  sin.  In  exchange  for  these,  God  graciously  clothed
them  with  skins,  which  we  may  presume  were  those  of  animals  offered  in  sacrifice.
Here,  then,  was  the  robe  of  an  imputed  righteousness  to  cover  their  sin  and  shame
(2)  If  these  skins  were  those  of  animals  offered  in  sacrifice,  then  Adam  must  have
acted  as  a  priest,  and  of  course  by  Divine  appointment.  As  a  priest,  then  he  would
receive  the  skins.  To  this  hour  those  descendants  of  Adam  who  act  as  spiritual
priests  are  those  who  are  invested  with  the  robe  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  9 — 15. — The  peace  offering  of  thanksgiving.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  instruc-
tions concerning  the  trespass  offering,  we  'have  a  few  directions  concerning  the  meat
offering  (vers.  9, 10).  W  hatever  of  it  was  dressed  was  to  be  given  to  the  priest  that
offered  it,  to  be  consumed  by  himself  and  his  family.  But  that  "mingled  with  oil,
and  dry "  was  to  be  divided  amongst  the  sons  of  Aaron.  The  reason  appears  to  be
economical.  What  was  prepared  would  not  keep,  and  was  therefore  to  be  consumed
at  once ;  that  which  would  keep  was  to  be  divided,  to  be  used  according  to  convenience.
The  Grod  of  grace  is  also  the  God  of  providence.  And  his  providence  is  especially  con-
cerned for  those  who  seek  his  grace.  After  these  notes,  the  law  of  the  sacrifice  of  the
peace  offering  is  formally  considered.

I.  The  pbaob  orPBRiNa  of  thakksoivino.  1.  There  is  fitness  in  this  association.
(1)  The  peace  offering  has  its  name,  U'rhiv  (shelamim),  from  ohfl>  (shalem),  to  complete
or  make  whole.  It  was  instituted  to  express  the  manner  in  which  our  breaches  of  the
covenant  are  made  up  by  Christ.  How  the  variance  between  God  and  man  is  composed
through  his  atoning  sacrifice !  (2)  What,  then,  more  fitting  than  that  we  should  express
our  thankfulness  to  God  in  connection  with  the  peace  offering?  Praise  breaks  spon-
taneously from  the  heart  that  is  "  reconciled  to  God  through  the  death  of  his  Son  "  (see
Isa.  xii.  1).  2.  A  hread  offering  accompanied  this.  (1)  One  portion  of  this  bread
offering  was  unleavened  (ver.  12).  This  portion  was  presented  upon  the  altar.  As
leaven  symbolized  evil  dispositions,  no  trace  of  it  should  be  found  in  anything  that
touched  God's  altar  (ch.  ii.  11).  (2)  But  the  other  portion  was  leavened  (ver.  13).
This  portion  was  eaten  by  the  worshipper,  and  expressed  that  he  had  evil  dispositions
that  needed  purging  out.  What  a  difference  there  is  between  the  holy  God  and  sinful
man !  What  a  merciful  provision  is  that  of  the  gospel  of  peace,  that  reconciles  sinners
to  God  I

II.  The  thanksgiving  in  the  heave  offering.  (Vers.  14, 15.)  1.  This  was  taken
from  the  whole  oblation.  (1)  The  word  for  oblation,  nN»D  (masseatK),  denotes  that
which  'n  borne  or  carried,  from  «»:  {nasi),  to  bear  or  carry.  It  generally  describes
anything  which  was  carried  to  the  temple  to  Jbe  offered  to  God.  It  also  expresses
the  design  of  all  sacrifices  to  he  the  carrying  Or  bearing  of  sin  (see  Bxod.  xxviiL  38 ;
also  ch.  X.  17 ;  xvi.  21).  (2)  In  the  offerings  of  the  Law  this  was  typical ;  hut  in
the  oftering  of  Christ  real  (see  Isa.  liii.  4,  12 ;  John  i.  29,  margin ;  1  Pet.  iL  24),
(3)  Prom  the  number  of  these  typical  sin-bearers  borne  to  the  temple,  the  heave
offering  was  to  be  taken.  It  was  a  representative  of  the  whole  of  them,  and  suggested
that  what  was  specifically  expressed  in  it  might  be  predicated  of  any  of  them.  2.  It
was  lifted  tip  in  faith  and  gratitude  to  Oud.  (1)  The  heave  offering  had  its  name,  nnnn
(teruTTiah),  from  m  {rum,  to  lift  up),  because  it  was  lifted  up,  viz.  toward  heaven,  by  the
priest.  (2)  This  action  expressed  thankfulness  to  the  source  whence  all  blessings  come
to  us,  and  especially  those  of  redemption.  Christ  is  the  "Lord  from  heaven,"  the
"  heavenly  gift "  of  a  gracious  Father  ( see  John  iii.  18, 16,  31 ;  iv.  10 ;  vi.  32,  33 ;  1  Cor.
XV.  47 ;  Heb.  vi.  4).  3.  It  became  the  priest's  who  sprinkled  the  blood  of  the  peace
offering.  (1)  Those  who  inake  their  peace  with  God  through  the  blood  of  the  cross
not  only  offer  thanks,  hut  enjoy  the  blessings  of  thanksgiving.  Thus  a  grateful  heart
is  a  "  continual  feast."  (2)  It  was  eaten  the  same  day  that  it  was  offered.  In  the  very
act  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for  his  blessings  we  are  blessed.     Those  who  in  everything


lot  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  vn.  1— 30.

"  give  thanks  "  can  "  rejoice  evermore  "  (1  Thess.  v.  16 — 18).  (3)  It  was  shared  by  the
priest  in  his  own  community  (see  Numb,  xviii.  8, 11, 18, 19).  Shared  domestically.
Shared  religiously.    The  stranger  had  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter.;— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  16 — 27. — The  sanctity  of  the  service  of  Ood.  The  peace  offering  may  be  offered
for  thanksgiving,  in  which  case  it  has  appropriate  ceremonies  (vers.  12 — 15).  There  is
also  the  peace  offering  of  a  vow,  the  ceremonies  of  which  are  the  same  as  those  of  the
voluntary  offering  (ver.  16 ;  also  ch.  six.  5 — 8).  In  coimection  with  this  subject,  we
are  admonished  of  the  sanctity  of  the  service  of  God ;  and  similar  admonitions  are
given  in  what,  follows.

L  We  see  this  sanotiti  in  the  sanctions  op  the  law  of  the  peace  opfering.
1.  Consider  the  precept.  (1)  Look  at  it  in  the  letter.  "It  shall  be  eaten  the  same  day
that  he  offereth  his  sacrifice."  The  same  day  in  which  the  fat  is  burnt  on  the  altar,
the  flesh  is  consumed  by  the  worshipper  and  his  friends.  What  remains  must  be  eaten
on  the  morrow.  If  any  remain  over  to  the  third  day,  it  must  not  then  be  eaten,  but
burnt  with  fire,  (2)  The  first  reason  for  this  is  hygienic.  The  flesh  would,  of  course,
be  wholesome  on  the  day  it  was  killed,  and  so  it  would  continue  to  be  on  the  day
following.  But  on  the  third  day,  in  a  hot  climate,  it  would  tend  to  corruption.  The
laws  of  health  are  well  considered  in  the  Levitical  system,  upon  which  account  the
study  of  that  system  may  be  commended  to  the  votaries  of  social  science.  (3)  But
there  must  be  a  deeper  reason  still,  else  the  penalties  would  not  be  so  formidable  as
they  are.  The  peace  offering  was  undoubtedly  a  type  of  Christ  in  his  passion  (Eph.  ii.
13 — 18).  Our  Lord  was  two  days  in  the  tomb  after  his  death  without  seeing  corruption.
Then  rising  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day,  the  typical  sacrifices  of  the  Law,  having
answered  their  end,  were  abolished.  This  abolition  was  foreshadowed  in  the  burning
of  what  remained  of  the  peace  offering  on  the  third  day  (1  Cor.  xv.  3).  To  eat  of  the
typical  peace  offering  on  the  third  day  would  be  therefore  highly  improper,  as  it  would
suggest  return  to  the  "  beggarly  elements  "  offer  the  "  bringing  in  of  the  better  hope  "
(Gal.  iii.  3 ;  iv.  9—11, 30,  31 ;  v.  1—4).  (4)  If  the  "  third  day  "  represent  the  Christian
dispensation  in  which  typical  sacrifices  are  done  away,  how  are  we  to  view  the  "  two
days  "  during  which  they  were  serviceable  ?  There  were  exactly  two  great  dispensations
before  the  Christian,  in  which  typical  sacrifices  were  ordained,  viz.  first,  the  Patriarchal,
from  Adam  to  Moses  ;  and  secondly,  the  Levitical,  from  Moses  to  Christ.  2.  Consider
the  penalties.  (1)  If  the  flesh  of  the  peace  offering  be  eaten  on  the  third  day,  the
sacrifice  "shall  not  be  accepted."  The  reason  will  now  be  obvious.  In  the  third,  or
gospel,  dispensation,  there  is  a  better  Sacrifice.  Typical  sacrifices  are  now  out  of  place
and  worthless,  since  the  Antitype  is  come.  (2)  "  It  shall  not  be  imputed  to  him  that
offereth  it."  The  typical  sacrifices  were  useful  in  procuring  the  "  forbearance  of  God  "
until  the  true  atonement  should  be  made ;  but  now  it  is  made,  .Christ  will  profit  them
nothing  who  return  to  the  Law.  (3)  "  He  shall  bear  his  sin."  "  He  shall  be  treated  as
the  sacrifice  was  treated.    He  shall  himself  be  sacrificed  for  his  own  sin.

II.  This  sanctity  is  fubthek  seen  in  the  penalties  imposed  in  otheb  oabes.
Thus:  1.  When  the  flesh  of  sacrifice  is  mdawfully  eaten.  (1)  This  would  happen  if  it
had  touched  "  any  unclean  thing  "  (ver.  19).  Instead  of  being  eaten,  it  should  then  be
"  burnt  with  fire."  The  teaching  is  that  an  unclean  thing  is  of  no  use  for  purposes  of
atonement.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  could  not  be  accepted  were  he  not  immaculate.
(2)  It  would  happen  if  the  eater  were  unclean.  "  As  for  the  flesh,  all  that  be  clean
shall  eat  thereof"  (Hebrew,  "The  flesh  of  all  that  is  clean  shall  eat  the  flesh"),  ie
every  clean  person  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  his  peace  offering.  As  Christ  is  without
spot  of  sin,  so  is  his  flesh  meat  only  to  the  holy.  "  But  the  soul "  etc.  (vers.  20,  21).
To  the  wicked,  the  very  gospel  becomes  the  savour  of  death  (1  Cor.  xi,  29 ;  2  Cor.  ii.
15,  16).  2.  When  holy  things  are  profaned.  (1)  When  the  fat  is  eaten  (ver.  23)— the
fat  of  such  animals  as  were  offered  in  sacrifice.  There  is  no  law  against  the  eating  of
the  fat  of  the  roebuck  or  the  hart.  And  that  portion  of  the  fat  which  was  offered  in
sacrifice.  The  fat  mingled  with  the  flesh,  which  was  not  burnt  on  the  altar,  was  not
forbidden.  There  must  be  the  most  careful  avoidance  of  whatever  would  profane  the
sacrifice  of  Christ.  The  fat  even  of  an  animal  of  the  sacrificial  kind,  which  by  any  wjcideut
might  be  rendered  unfit  for  sacrifice,  mn  st  not  be  f  aten  (ver.  24).  The  moral  here  is  that
th  e  very  appearance  of  evil  must  be  avoided.   (2)  When  the  blood  U  eaten     This  law  is


«H.  VII.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  109


universal.  Blood,  viz.  of  ever)'  description  of  animal,  is  forbidden.  The  Jews  properlj
expound  this  law  as  forbidding  the  hlood  of  the  life  as  distinguished  from  the  gravy
And  the  reason  given  for  the  prohibition  is  that  the  life  maketh  atonement  for  the  Ufa
Our  life,  which  is  redeemed  by  the  life  of  Jesus  sacrificed  for  us,  must  be  wholly  given
to  God.  The  highest  sanctity  is  associated  with  tlie  blood  of  Christ.  (3)  "  That  soul
shall  be  out  off  from  his  people  "  (vers.  20,  21,  25,  27).  The  penalty  in  all  these  cases
is  extreme.  It  means  separation  from  religious  and  civil  privileges,  if  not  also  death.
The  penalties  of  the  Mosaic  Law  terminated  in  the  death  of  the  body ;  but  "  a  much
sorer  punishment "  is  reserved  for  those  who  despise  and  desecrate  the  blood  of  Christ
(Heb.  X.  28,  29).— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  28 — 38. — The  service  of  the  oblation.  In  the  service  of  the  oblation  of  the  peace
offering  there  are  two  actors,  viz.  the  oiferer  and  the  priest.  These  had  their  respective
duties,  which  are  severally  brought  under  our  notice  in  the  text.     We  have—

L  The  dutt  of  the  offerer.  1.  He  had  to  bring  his  oblation  unto  the  Lord,  (ly
The  "oblation"  here  is  not  the  "sacrifice,"  but  "of  the  sacrifice"  (vers.  28 — 30).  It
was  that  portion  of  the  sacrifice  which,  more  especially,  was  claimed  by  God,  viz.  the
fat  prescribed  to  be  burnt  upon  the  altar.  It  included  also  the  breast  and  right
shoulder.  (2)  This  he  was  to  bring  in  person.  "  His  own  hands  shall  bring  tlie
offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire,"  etc.  This  requisition  is  so  express  that  even
women,  who  under  other  circumstances  never  entered  the  court  of  the  priests,  did  so
when  they  had  offerings  to  bring.  The  Hebrew  name  for  oblation  (pip,  korhau)  is
derived  from  a  root  (3"ip,  koreb)  which  signifies  to  approach  or  draw  near.  By  the
introduction  of  our  Great  Hij^h  Priest,  we  personally,  under  the  gospel,  "  approach  "  or
"draw  nigh"  unto  Gud  (see  Heb.  vii.  19;  x.  21,  22).  We  cannot  save  our  souls  by
proxy.  We  cannot  acceptably  serve  God  by  proxy.  2.  He  had  to  bring  the  fat  laid
upon  the  breast.  (1)  What  our  version  construes  "  the  fat  with  the  breast "  (vcr.  30),
may  be  better  rendered,  as  it  is  by  the  learned  Julius  Bate,  "  the  fat  upon  the  breast,"
i.e.  laid  upon  the  breast  (comp.  ch.  viii.  26,  27).  The'  breast  was  that  appointed  to
be  waved  before  the  Lord ;  and  it  would  iippear  that  it  was  waved  with  the  fat  laid
upon  it.  The  breast  was  the  natural  symbol  of  heartiness  and  willingness.  This  action
would,  therefore,  express  the  cheerful  and  grateful  willingness  of  the  offerer,  and  his
earnest  desire  that  his  offering  might  be  graciously  accepted.  What  we  devote  to
God  should  be  heartily  given  (2  Cor,  ix.  7).  (2)  The  "  heave  shoulder "  was  also
brought.  This  was  the  right  shoulder.  It  had  its  name  from  the  ceremony  in  which
it  wasmovedup  and  down  before  the  Lord.  As  the  "breast"  symbilizid  affection,
so  the  "shoulder"  expressed  action,  and  the  "right"  shoulrer,  action  of  the  most
efficient  kind.  Love  expresses  itself  in  deeds  (Matt.  xxil.  "7 — •  ' ;  Luke  vL  46  ;  Eom
xiii.  9  ;  Gal.  v.  14 ;  Jas.  ii.  8).

II.  The  duty  of  the  priest.  1.  ITe  had  to  offer  vp  the  oblation.  (1)  The  Mishna
says  this  was  done  by  the  priest  placing  his  hands  under  those  of  the  offerer,  upon  which
the  wave  breast  was  laid,  and  then  moving  them  to  and  fro.  The  priest  certainly  had
a  hand  in  the  ceremony  of  waving  the  bieast  (see  Numb.  yi.  20).  And  if  we  regard
him  as  a  type  of  Christ  in  this,  then  the  teaching  appears  to  be  that  we  should  look  to
Jesus  to  sustain  the  fervency  of  our  love  in  the  offering  of  our  oblations  of  prayer  and
praise  and  service.  (2)  The  priest  in  the  next  place,  it  appears,  offered  up  the  fat  in
the  fire  of  the  altar  (ver.  31).  Then  the  ri,:;ht  shoulder  was  "given  to  the  priest  for
an  heave  offering  "  (ver.  32).  This,  we  are  told,  was  moved  up  and  down.  Thus  ihese
motions  of  the  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder  were  at  right  angles,  and  so  they
formed  the  figure  of  a  cross.  Houbigant  thinks  that  by  this  "  was  adumbrated  the
cross  upon  which  that  Peace  Offering  of  the  human  race  was  lifted  up,  which  was  pre-
figured by  all  the  ancient  victims "  (comp.  John  xxi.  18,  19 ;  2  Pet.  i.  14 ;  together
with  the  historical  tradition  concerning  the  crucifixion  of  Peter).  2.  The  breant  and
thovlder  were  then  claimed  by  the  priest.  (1)  They  had  these  by  a  Divine  ordinance
(vers.  31 — 34).  They  were  first  given  to  God,  and  now^  became  God's  gift  to  his
ministers.  What  is  given  to  sustain  the  ministry  should  not  be  regarded  by  the  giver
as  a  gratuity,  but  as  a  service  loyally  and  faithfully  rendered  to  God  (see  Numb,  xviii.
20 — 24).  Ministers  should  receive  their  support  as  from  the  hand  of  God  (see  2  Cor.
ix.  11 :  Phil.  iv.  18).     (2)  They  had  it  by  a  birthright.     It  was  given  to  "  Aaron  and


110  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  vn.  1—38.

his  sons."  Those  who  were  not  sons  of  Aaron  had  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter.  And
true  ministers  of  the  gospel  must  be  sons  of  Jesus ;  they  must  be  spiritually  bom,  or
they  are  intruders  into  sacred  functions  (see  Ps.  1. 16 ;  Acts  i.  25 ;  Kom.  L  5 ;  1  Tim.
i.  12 ;  2  Tim.  iv,  5).  (3)  They  had  it  also  by  consecration.  The  sons  of  Aaron,
though  as  their  birthright  were  served  from  the  altar,  had  no  title  to  serve  the  altar
until  anointed  for  that  service.  So  the  birth  of  the  Spirit,  by  which  we  become  sons  of
Jesus,  does  not  alone  constitute  ministers.  For  the  ministry  they  must  have  a  special
vocation.  Note :  "  Aaron  presented  his  sons  to  minister  unto  the  Lord,"  in  which  he
acted  as  the  type  of  Christ,  who  calls  and  qualifies  those  he  sends.  If  the  harvest  be
plenteous  and  the  labourers  few,  the  more  urgently  should  we  "  pray  the  Lord  of  the
harvest  that  he  would  send  forth  labourers."— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 10. — Emphatic  truths  or  things  Ood  lays  stress  upon.  The  great  particularity
and  the  occasional  repetition  shown  in  these  ordinances  point  to  the  truth  that  God
desired  his  people  to  attach  very  great  weight  to  them.  His  servants  were  to  under-
stand that  he  laid  great  stress  upon —

I.  The  WAT  IN  WHICH  HE  WAS  APPKOACHBD  IN  WOESHIP.  Distinctions  were  drawn
beween  different  offerings,  the  import  of  which  we  now  find  it  hard  to  trace.  Though,
indeed,  it  is  stated  that  "  as  the  sin  offering  so  the  trespass  offering ;  there  is  one  law
for  them"  (ver.  7),  yet  there  were  differences  in  the  way  in  which  the  blood  was
disposed  of  by  the  priests,  etc.  (of.  ver.  2  and  ch.  iv.  6,  7).  Minute  details,  were
entered  into  respecting  the  disposal  of  the  various  parts  of  the  animal  (vers.  3,  4,  8).
Precise  directions  were  given  regarding  the  eating  of  the  offerings  by  the  priests  (vers.
0,  9,  10).  It  appears  to  us  that  there  must  have  been  but  very  faint  moral  signi-
ficance in  these  arranj^enicnts  to  the  mind  of  the  Hebrew  worshipper.  But  if  this
were  so,  the  very  particularity  of  the  precepts  indicated  God's  determination  that  his
people  should  show  the  utmost  vigilance  and  attention  in  their  approaches  to  himself.
We  may  wisely  learn  therefrom  that,  though  our  Divine  Master  has  left  all  details  in
worship  to  our  spiritual  discernment,  he  is  far  from  indifferent  to  the  way  in  which
we  approach  him.  We  should  show  the  utmost  care:  1.  To  draw  nigh  to  his  throne
of  grace  in  a  right  spirit — a  spirit  of  reverence,  trust,  expectation,  holy  joy.  2.  To  %ise
those  methods  of  approach  which  are  most  likely  to  foster  the  true  spirit  of  worship—
having  enough  of  simplicity  to  favour  spirituality  of  mind ;  having,  at  the  same  time,
enough  of  art  and  effort  to  meet  the  cultivated  tastes  of  all  who  take  part  in  devotion,

II.  The  fact  that  sin  means  death  in  his  sight.  The  first  "  law  of  the  trespass
offering"  (ver.  1)  relates  to  the  killing  of  the  animal  and  the  sprinkling  of  its  blood
"  round  about  the  altar  "  (ver.  2).  The  thing  in  these  sacrifices  is  the  application  of  the
blood  for  atonement :  no  offering  on  the  altar,  no  eating  of  the  flesh,  until  life  had  been
taken,  tmtil  blood  had  been  shed  and  sprinkled.  The  sinner  must  own  his  worthiness
of  death  for  his  trespass,  and,  if  he  is  to  find  acceptance,  must  bring  a  victim,  whose  life
shall  be  forfeited  instead  of  his  own,  whose  atoning  blood  shall  make  peace  with  God.
This  is  the  foundation  truth  of  Old  Testament  sacrifices;  it  is  the  ground  truth  of  the
sacrifice  on  Calvary.

III.  The  truth  that  oue  vest  best,  cub  own  self,  is  to  be  ooksecbatxd  to
God.  The  best  of  the  slain  animals,  the  vital  parts,  had  to  be  presented  in  holy
sacrifice  on  the  altar  (vers.  3 — 5).  When  the  atoning  blood  has  brought  reconciliation,
we  are  to  present  our  best,  our  very  selves,  in  acceptable  sacrifice  to  our  Saviour.

IV.  The  truth  that  all  which  is  presented  to  God  is  to  be  beoabdbd  as
HOLT  IN  his  sight.  Only  the  priests  might  eat  of  the  flesh  of  the  offered  animal,  and
they  only  "in  the  holy  place,"  for  "  it  is  most  holy"  (ver.  6).  Everything  became
holy  when  brought  to  "  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  "  and  presented  to  Jehovah.  When
we  dedicate  ourselves  to  his  service  in  the  act  of  self-surrender,  we  yield  everything  to
him.  And  then :  1.  Our  bodies  become  a  living  sacrifice  (Bom.  xii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vL  13, 20).
2.  Our  whole  lives  are  to  be  lived  and  spent  before  him  as  holy  (1  Cor.  x.  31). — 0.

Vers.  14,  28—34. — The  kingdom  of  Ood:  lessons  from  the  heave  offering.  The
ceremony  of  the  heave  offering  and  wave  offering  was  a  striking  incident  in  the  rite
II.''  the  peace  offering.     "  According  to  Jewish  tradition  it  was  performed  by  laying  tiie

1  rU  oa  tike  hands  of  the  offerer,  and  the  priest,  putting  his  hands  again  underneath.


OH.  vn.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  Ill

then  moving  them  in  a  horizontal  direction  for  the  waving  and  in  s  vertical  one  for  tha
heaving  .  .  .  the  waving  was  peculiarly  connected  with  the  breast,  which  is  thence
called  the  wave  breast  (ver.  34),  and  the  heaving  with  the  shoulder,  for  this  reason
called  the  heave  shoulder  "  (ver.  34).  The  main  truth  to  which  this  symbolic  act  pointed
was  probably —

I.  God's  universal  sovbrbiontt.  As  these  parts  of  the  animal  were  solemnly
directed  upwards  and  downwards  and  laterally,  in  all  directions,  the  offerer  intimated
his  belief  that  the  realm  of  Jehovah  was  a  boundless  kingdom,  reaching  to  the  heaveni
above,  to  the  dark  regions  below,  to  every  corner  and  quarter  of  the  earth.  We  do  well
to  meditate  on  the  truth  thus  pictorially  presented ;  but  in  so  doing  we  are  necessarily
reminded  how  mucli  more  we  have  learned  both  from  revelation  and  human  science  of
the  wide  reach  of  his  reign.  We  may  think  of  his  Divine  kingdom  as  including :
1.  Heaven  and  all  its  worlds  and  inhabitants.  2.  Hades — the  grave  and  those  who  have
"gone  to  the  grave."  3.  The  earth  and  all  that  is  thereon :  (1)  all  human  beings ;  (2)
all  unintelligent  creatures ;  (3)  all  vegetable  life ;  (4)  all  inanimate  treasure — gold,
silver,  etc.    We  are  reminded  of  the  propriety  of —

II.  Our  formal  recognition  of  this  fact.  The  Hebrew  worshipper  was  encouraged
to  bring  his  peace  offering  to  the  altar,  and  then  to  go  through  this  simple  but  suggestive
ceremony,  thus  formally  acknowledging  the  truth.  No  similar  provision  is  made  for
our  utterance  of  it ;  but  it  is  open  to  us  to  declare  it  in  sacred  words  and  in  most
solemn  forms :  1.  In  adoration.  "  Thine,  0  Lord,  is  the  greatness  and  the  power  .  .  .
for  all  that  is  in  the  heaven  and  in  the  earth  is  thine,"  etc.  (1  Chron.  xxix.  10,  11 ;
1  Tim.  i.  17  ;  Deut.  x.  14 ;  Ps.  xxiv.  1).  2.  In  praise.  When  we  "  sing  unto  the  Lord,"
there  should  be  full  and  frequent  ascription  of  everything  "  in  the  heavens  above  and
the  earth  beneath  "  to  him  as  the  Author  and  Owner  and  Ruler  of  alL     We  also  see^

III.  Our  appropriate  action  thereupon.  The  Jewish  worshipper  was  directed  to
"  wave  "  and  "  heave  "  the  breast  and  shoulder ;  these  joints  in  particular  and  in  prefer-
ence to  any  other,  "probably  from  their  being  considered  the  more  excellent  parts."
When  the  fat  had  been  burned  upon  the  altar  (ver.  31),  these  joints  were  reserved  "  imto
Aaron  the  priest  and  unto  his  sons  for  ever  "  (ver.  34).  We  gather  therefrom  that  we
are  to  make  practical  recognition  of  the  truth  that  God's  kingdom  extends  everywhere,
and  includes  every  one,  by :  1.  Dedicating  our  best  to  his  service :  our  affections
(suggested  by  the  breast) ;  our  strength  (suggested  by  the  shoulder).  2.  Bringing  our
offerings  to  his  cause — for  the  support  of  those  who  minister  in  holy  things,  and  for  the
maintenance  of  those  various  agencies  which  are  working  for  the  glory  of  his
Name. — 0.

Vers.  11^18,  30. — Four  thoughts  on  sacred  service.  We  gather  from  these  words —
L  That  there  is  a  joyous  and  social  element  in  sacred  berviob.  There  were
not  only  sin  and  burnt  offerings,  but  also  meat  and  peace  offerings,  in  the  Hebrew
ritual.  Those  who  were  reconciled  unto  God  might  rejoice,  and  mi^t  rejoice  together,
before  him.  They  might  hold  festive  gatherings  as  his  servants  and  as  his  worshippers ;
they"  might  eat  flesh  which  had  been  dedicated  to  him,  and  bread,  even  leavened  bread
(ver.  13),  and  they  were  to  "  rejoice  in  their  feast "  (Deut.  xvi.  14).  The  prevailing  tone
of  the  true  Christian  life  is  that  of  sacred  joy.  Even  at  the  remembrance  of  the
SaTiour's  death  humility  and  faith  are  to  rise  into  holy  J07.

"  Aroand  a  table,  not  a  Umh,

He  willed  our  gathering-place  shonid  be.
When  going  to  prepare  our  home,
Our  Saviooi  said^  'Bemember  me.'**

Whether  in  ordinary  worship,  or  at  "  the  table  of  the  Lord,"  or  in  any  oth«r  Christian
festival,  we  are  to  "  rejoice  before  the  Lord  "  together.

IL  That  there  is  a  spontaneous  as  well  as  a  statutory  element  in  sacred
service.  "  If  he  offer  it  for  a  thanksgiving  then  he  shall  offer,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  "  ijf  the
sacrifice  ...  be  a  vow,  or  a  voluntary  offering,  it  shall  be  eaten,"  etc.  (ver  16).  God's
Law  says,  "  thoa  shall,"  but  it  finds  room  for  "  if  thou  shall."  There  are  many  things
compulsory,  and  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  cheerfully  and  unquestioningly  obey.  Ther<>
are  also  nany  things  optional,  and  we  may  allow  ourselves  to  act  as  devotional  an


11»  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  vn.  1—38.

generous  impnlses  may  moye  us.  The  mind  which  is  constitctipnally  legal  should
cultivate  the  spontaneous  in  worship  and  benefaction ;  the  impulsive  must  remembei
that  there  are  statutes  as  well  as  suggestions  in  the  Word  of  God.

III.  That  thekb  mat  be  not  cult  futility  but  even  guilt  in  connection  with
sacred  service.  Disregard  of  the  prohibition  to  eat  on  the  third  day  entirely  vitiated
the  wci:  *  luness  of  the  offering :  in  such  case  it  would  "  not  he  accepted,"  neither  "  imputed
unto  him  that  offered  it;"  it  would  be  counted  "an  abomination,"  and  the  soul  that  so
actai  was  to  "  bear  his  iniquity  "  (ver.  18).  The  service  we  seek  to  render  God  may  be ;
1.  Wholly  vitiated  so  as  to  be  entirely  unacceptable,  and  draw  down  no  blessing  from
above ;  or  may  even  be :  2.  Positively  uffensive  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  add  to  our  guilt,
if  it  be  (1)  unvidlling,  grudging ;  (2)  unspiritual,  soulless ;  (3)  slovenly,  careless,  the
offering  of  our  exhaustion  instead  of  our  energy ;  (4)  ostentatious  or  (still  worse)  hypo-
critical ;  (5)  much  mixed  with  worldly,  or  vindictive,  or  base  thoughts.

IV.  That  pkksonal  spiritual  participation  is  necessary  in  sacred  service.  "  His
own  hands  shall  bring  the  offerings"  (ver.  30).  God  would  be  approached  by  BQs
people  themselves,  and  though  he  had  graciously  granted  human  mediation  in  the  form
of  a  saciificing  priesthood,  yet  he  desired  that  every  Israelite  who  had  an  offering  to
present  should  bring  it  with  his  own  hand  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  Beligion  is  a
personal  thing.  We  may  accept  human  ministry,  but  we  must  come  ourselves  to
God  in  direct,  immediate  devotion  and  dedication.  Every  man  here  must  bear  his  own
burden  (Gal.  vi.  5).  There  is  a  point  beyond  which  the  most  ardent  affection,  the
most  earnest  solicitude,  the  most  burning  zeal  cannot  go — for  others.  They  must,
themselves,  approach  in  reverence,  bow  in  penitence,  look  up  in  faith,  yield  in  self-
surrender,  present  daily  sacrifices  of  gratitude,  obedience,  submission. — C.

Vers.  20,  21. — Divine  and  human  severity.  There  is  something  almost  startling
in  the  closing  words,  "That  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  peopls."  It  suggests
thoughts  of —

I.  Apparent  DimrE  BisyEBiTT.  1.  That  God  sometimei  »»mt  to  he  severe  in  his
dealings  with  men.  These  particular  injunctions  must  have  had  to  the  Jews  an
aspect  of  rigour.  An  Israelite  excommunicated  for  one  of  these  offences  probably  felt
that  he  had  been  hardly  dealt  with.  God's  dealings  have  an  occasional  aspect  of
severity  (see  Eom.  xi.  22).  So  with  us.  In  his  providence  comparatively  slight
faults,  errors,  transgressions,  are  sometimes  followed  by  most  serious  evils— disgrace,
sorrow,  loss,  death.  2.  That  the  light  of  after-days  often  explains  his  dealing  wttA  im.
We  can  see  now  that  the  para,mount  and  supreme  importance  of  maintaining  the
purity  of  Israel,  its  separateness  from  all  the  abominations  of  surroimding  heathendom,
made  the  most  stringent  regulations  on  that  subject  necessary  and  wise,  and  therefore
kind.  So  with  us.  Looking  back  on  the  way  by  which  we  have  been  led,  we  frequently
see  that  that  very  thing  which  at  the  time  was  not  only  distressing  but  perplexing,  was
the  most  signal  act  of  the  Divine  wisdom  and  goodness,  the  providential  ordering  for
which,  above  every  other  thing,  we  now  give  thanks.  3.  That  present  faith  should  .
rise  to  the  realization  that,  somewhere  in  the  futwre,  apparent  severity  will  hear  the
aspect  of  wise  and  holy  love.  "  What  we  know  not  now  we  shall  know  hereafter."
"  Then  shall  we  know,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).

I I.  Occasional  human  severitt.  1.  That  we  are  sometimes  obliged  to  seem  severe
towards  those  for  whom  we  are  responsible.  '  (1)  The  statesman  is  obliged  to  introduce
a  severe  measure ;  (2)  a  father  to  take  a  strong  and  energetic  course ;  (3)  a  Church  to
excommunicate  a  member.  2.  That  apparent  severity  is  sometimes  the  only  rightful
course  which  wise  and  holy  love  can  take.  It  is  the  action  which  is  (1)  r^'ie  to  itielf
(Jas.  iii,  17) ;  (2)  due  to  the  object  of  its  affection  (1  Tim.  L  20). — G.

Vers.  16 — 17. — Three  features  of  accqitcMe  service.  We  have  commanded  or  BUg-
•  ested  here —

I.  Careful  preservation  of  puritt.  The  "flesh  of  the  sacrifice  of  his  peac»
offering  "  was  to  be  eaten  on  the  very  day  of  its  presentation  (ver.  15) ;  that  of  another
kind  of  offering  might  be  eaten  partly  on  the  day  following  (ver.  16),  but  on  no  account
might  anything  offered  in  sacrifice  be  partaken  of  on  the  third  day  (vers.  17, 18).  It
naa  one  of  the  objects,  probably  the  primary  intention,  of  th'a  restriction, "that  nothing


CH.  VII.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK   OF  LEVITICUS.  113

offered  to  God  should  be  allowed  to  become  unsound.  No  danger  was  to  be  incurred
in  the  way  of  putrefaction.  Another  statute  in  defence  of  purity  in  worship !  In  th«
service  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  we  must  be  pure  in  thought,  in  word,  in  act.  He  ia
"  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil,"  etc.  (Hab.  i.  13),  and  can  find  no  pleasure  in  any
service  tainted  with  iniquity.  The  connection  in  which  this  restriction  occurs  suggests
that,  especially  in  those  religious  engagements  in  which  we  find  social  pleasure,  we
should  be  careful  to  maintain  purity  of  spirit,  integrity  of  heart.

II.  Careful  retention  of  sacrednbss  of  thought.  The  partaking  of  the  flesh  and
the  bread  which  had  been  presented  to  God,  though  these  were  eaten  at  home,  was  to
be  regarded  as  a  sacred  act.  It  was  sacramental.  Therefore  it  was  fitting  that  no  great
interval  of  time  should  come  between  the  act  of  presentation  and  the  consumption.
For  the  consequence  would  inevitably  be  that  the  sacred  festival  would  tend  to  sink  to
the  level  of  an  ordinary  meal.  Sacred  thoughts  would  be  less  vivid  and  less  frequent;
the  engagement  would  become  more  secular  and  more  simply  social  as  more  tim«
intervened.  We  learn  that  we  should  take  the  greatest  care  to  retain  in  our  mind  the
sense  of  the  sacredness  of  religious  acts  during  their  performance.  When  they  become
mechanical,  or  wholly  bodily,  or  simply  social ;  when  the  realization  of  the  religious  and
the  Divine  element  falls  out,  then  their  virtue  is  gone ;  they  are  no  longer  "  an  acceptable
offering  unto  the  Lord."  We  must  accomplish  this  end  by:  1.  Studious  spiritual
endeavour  to  realize  what  we  are  doing.  2.  By  wise  precautions,  judicious  measures,
which  will  tend  to  preserve  sanctity  and  to  guard  against  secularity  of  thought.

III.  Unselfishness  in  religious  service.  The  commandment  to  consume  every-
thing within  one  or  two  days  pointed  to  an  increase  in  the  number  of  partakers ;  it
suggested  the  calling  together  friends  and  dependents ;  also  the  invitation  of  the  poor
and  needy.  This  was  not  only  the  design  but  the  effect  of  the  injunction  (see  Deut.
xii.  18;  xvi.  11).  The  Israelites,  in  "eating  before  the  Lord,"  showed  a  generous
hospitality  while  they  were  engaged  in  an  act  of  piety  and  of  sacred  joy.  Let  unselfish-
ness be  a  prominent  feature  in  our  religious  institutions.  It  is  well  to  remember :  1.
That  selfishness  is  apt  to  show  itself  here  as  elsewhere.  2.  That  it  is  never  so  incon-
sistent and  unsightly  as  in  connection  with  the  service  of  God.  3.  That  it  is  a  painful
exhibition  to  the  Lord  of  love.  4.  That  the  more  generous  and  self-forgetting  we  are
in  sacred  things,  the  more  we  approach  the  spirit  and  life  of  our  Divine  Exemplar

(Phil.  iL  4^-8;P-a

Vers.  1 — 10. — ^The  trespass  offering,  burnt  offering,  and  meat  offering,  affording
tumort  to  the  minister  of  the  sanctuary  and  occasion /or  feasting.

L  It  is  the  intent  of  true  religion  that  those  consecrated  to  its  service  shoold  ba
provided  for  liberally.

n.  Acknowledgment  of  sin  and  atonement  made  lead  to  rejoicing,  and  the  festival
life  of  man  grows  out  of  reconciliation  with  God.

ni.  Ttfioallt;  Christ  the  High  Priest  is  rewarded  in  the  sanctification  of  his
people.    "  He  shall  see  of  the  trav^  of  his  soul,  and  be  satisfied." — B.

Vers.  11 — 21. — ^The  peace  offerings  and  thank  offerings.  The  unleavened  bread  and
the  leavened  bread,  both  offered.  The  offerings  must  be  quickly  eaten,  and  aU  un-
cleanness  must  be  avoided  as  iniquity.    Thus  are  taught —

I.  The  duty  of  thankfulness.  1.  It  should  be  cheer/id,  glad,  pure,  speedy.
2.  It  should  be  retigiousj  expressed  towards  God  as  the  Author  and  Giver  of  every
good  gift.    3.  It  should  be  social,  recognizing  both  the  house  of  God  and  family  life.

n.  The  necessity  of  eolinebb  in  all  things  and  at  all  times.  Thanks — vows —
voluntary  offerings ; — in  all  there  must  be  separation  to  God,  and  from  the  corrupt  ami
unclean.  1.  In  nothing  more  need  of  vigilance  than  in  expressing  the  hearts  more  joy-
fvl  feelings.  Possibility  of  prolonging  the  joy  till  it  becomes  corrupt.  Hilarity  over-
balancing the  soul.  Intemperance  in  enjoyments.  2.  The  undeanness  of  the  world  is
apt  to  ding  to  us.  We  should  especially  watch  against  carrying  the  impure  spirit  into
the  sanctuary.  The  mind  should  be  free,  the  heart  calm,  the  soul  hungering  and
thirsting  after  spiritual  delights,  when,  on  the  Lord's  day,  we  enter  the  courts  of  bis
house  to  offer  sacrifice.  3.  Fellowship  with  God's  ministers  and  his  services.  One
voice,  but  many  hearts.  True  mediation  when  all  alike  by  faith  depending  on  Christ. — B.

LEVITICUS.  I


lU  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  vn.  1— 3a

Vers.  22 — 27. — Instrtictions  for  the  people  on  the  fat  and  on  the  Wood.  The  pro-
hibiiioii  of  fat  was  to  secure  the  rights  of  Jehovah  from  iavasion.  The  fat  was  a  gift
sanctified  to  God.  The  prohibition  of  the  blood  was  to  keep  up  the  idea  of  atonement,
the  blood  being  regarded  as  the  soul  of  the  animal  which  God  had  appointed  aa  the
medium  of  atonement  for  the  soul  of  man.     Here  is —

I.  The  supbemaot  of  the  Divine  claims.  1.  The  recognition  by  the  conscience  in
doctrine,  in  the  place  religion  holds  in  the  life.  2.  The  social  state  should  be  regulated  on
this  principle.  Man  must  not  invade  God's  rights  if  he  would  retain  God's  blessing.
Observance  of  the  sabbath.  The  law  of  nations  rests  on  the  Law  of  God.  3.  The  »n-
dividual  believer  will  take  care  that  he  robs  God  of  nothing.  His  service  demands  the
fat,  the  choicest  faculties,  the  deepest  feelings,  the  largest  gifts.

n.  The  bighteousness  of  God  made  the  eiohteousnesb  of  man.  Life  for  life.
The  blood  sanctified,  the  blood  saved.  On  the  foundation  of  a  perfect  reconciliation
alone  can  a  true  humanity  be  preserved  and  developed.  Mistake  of  the  ancient  Greeks  in
worshipping  humanity  unredeemed,  leading  to  animalism,  and  eventually  to  the  sub-
stitution of  mere  art  for  morality,  therefore  the  degradation  of  humanity.  The  elevation
of  the  soul  is  the  elevation  of  the  whole  man ;  "  Im  ganzen,  guten,  schoenen  resolut  ra
leben,"  is  a  motto  only  to  be  adopted  in  the  Christian  sense.  "  He  that  saveth  bis  lift
shall  lose  it ; "  he  that  offers  it  up  to  God  shall  redeem  iU — B.

Vers.  28 — 38. — The  wave  hreast  and  the  heave  shoulder  given  to  the  priests.  Qoi't
share  and  his  ministers'  share  must  be  both  fully  given  and  carefully  set  aside  and
publicly  offered  up.     Generous  support  of  the  sanctuary.

L  Service  op  God's  hodse  requires  bpeciai,  offerings;  which  should  be:  1.
Large  and  freely  bestowed.  Eeciprocal  blessings ;  those  that  give  receive,  and  as  they
give,  they  receive.  2.  The  ministry  should  be  so  provided  for  that  the  service  rendered
be  joyful  and  unrestrained.  3.  The  subordinate  arrangements  of  the  sanctuary  should
partake  of  the  cheerfulness  which  flows  from  abundance.    A  festival  of  worship.

n.  Sanotifiuation  of  gifts.  Both  by  personal  preparation  and  by  systematic
beneficence.  Lay  aside  for  God  as  we  are  prospered.  God's  claims  should  precede  all
others.    The  blessing  of  the  sanctuary  overflows  into  common  life.

in.   PUBLICITT    A    POWERFUL     BTIMUHTS    AND    A    BINDINa    PLEDGE.         Waving    and

heaving  represented  extent  and  elevation.  Much  in  example.  Our  gifts  should  not  b«
ostentatiously  published,  but  yet,  if  held  up  to  God,  and  so  presented  as  to  set  forth  th«
viniversality  of  our  coni^ecration  to  him.  they  will  both  glorify  his  Name  and  incits
others  to  his  servica — B.


,  vm.  1—36.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUa


IW


PAET  II.
THE  INSTITUTION  OF  AN  HBREDITAEY  PRIESTHOOD.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  Vin.


Tm     OONSECRATIOH     OF     AARON      AND     BIB

«0S8  IB  the  natural  sequel  of  the  fore-
^ing  division  of  the  hook.  The  eacrificial
•yitem,  which  had  now  been  instituted  in
ito  completeness,  required  a  priesthood  to
•dminister  it.  Originally  the  head  of  each
Hebrew  family  was  priest  to  hia  own
bousehold,  to  offer  gifts  betokening  self-
•urrender  and  communion  with  God— burnt
sacrifices  and  sacrifices  similar  in  character
to  tlie  peace  offerings.  The  first  step  from
lience  to  the  hereditary  priesthood  was  the
liallowing  the  firstborn  of  the  Israelites  to
Ctod's  service,  after  the  Israelitish  firstborn
Imd  been  delivered  from  the  destruction
which  felhipon  the  firstborn  of  Egypt(Nmnb.
ai.  13).  The  second  was  the  substitution  of
ihe  tribe  of  Levi  for  the  firstborn  (Numb,  iii,
41—45),  on  account  of  the  zeal  which  the
lievites  exhibited  above  the  other  tribes  at
the  time  of  the  idolatry  of  the  golden  calf
<Exod.  zxxii.  26).  Now,  out  of  the  tribe  of
Levi  ie  chosen  the  one  family  of  Aaron,  to
'form  an  hereditary  priesthood,  consisting  at
■Ant  of  five  persons,  quickly  reduced  to
three  by  the  death  of  Nadab  and  Abihn,
trijis  small  body  would  have  been  sufficient
€or  the  needs  of  the  people  while  they
were  still  in  the  wilderness,  and  leading
<the  life  of  the  camp.  With  the  increase  of
the  nation  the  family  of  Aaron  and  his
4on8  increased  likewise,  nntil,  in  the  time
«f  David,  It  was  necessary  to  subdivide
it  into  twenty-foot  courses  for  the  orderly
fulfilment  of  the  functions  of  the  prieat-
liood.  As  the  institution  of  the  priesthood
was  necessary  for  oairyingout  the  sacrificial
«ysteni,  so  the  sacrifices  were  necessary  for
the  consecration  of  the  priests.  By  means
4>f  the  sacrifices  the  priests  are  consecrated,
Hoses  performing  en  the  occasion,  and  for
ihe  last  time,  the  priestly  functions.     Ap-


pended to  the  record  of  their  oonsecration  to
an  account  of  the  first  acts  of  the  newly
created  priests  (eh.  ix.},  and  of  the  death
of  two  of  them  (cb.  x.).  This  is  the  only
historical  section  in  the  book ;  and  the  death
of  the  blasphemer  (ch.  xxiv.)  Is  the  only
other  historical  event  recorded  in  it,  if  at
least  we  except  such  passages  as,  "  And  he
did  as  the  Lord  commanded  Moses "  (oh.
xvi.  84 ;  xxi  24 ;  xxiii.  44).

Vers.  1 — 5. — These  verses  contain  the
preliminaries  of  the  ceremony  of  consecra-
tion. Aaron  and  his  sons  are  to  be  brought
to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  together  with
all  that  is  necessary  for  the  performance  of
the  rite  that  is  about  to  take  place.  The
words  in  the  second  verse,  a  bullook  for
the  sin  offering,  and  two  rams,  and  a  basket
of  unleavened  bread,  should  be  translated,
the  bullooh  far  the  tin  offering  and  (he  tvso
rams  and  the  hatket.  The  garments,  tiie
anointing  oil,  (Ae  InMoclt,  &t  two  ram*,
and  the  baihet  of  unlaaeRtd  hreaA  and
cakes,  had  all  been  previously  enjoined,
when  Moses  was  on  the  mount  (Exod.  xxviil.,
xxix.,  XXX.).  These  previous  injunctions
are  referred  to  in  the  words,  This  Is  the
thing  which  the  lord  commanded  to  be  done
(ver.  5).

Ver.  6.— Washing,  robing,  anointing,
sacrificing,  are  the  four  means  by  the  joint
operation  of  which  the  oonsecration  is
effected.  The  washing,  or  bathing,  took
place  in  the  sight  of  the  people.  The  whole
of  the  person,  except  so  much  as  was  covered
by  the  linen  drawers  (Exod.  xxviil.  42),
was  washed.  The  symbolical  significance
is  clear.  Cleansing  from  sin  precedes
olothing  in  righteousneis  and  spiritual
unction.

Vers.  7— 9.— The  robing.  The  Tarlooa
articles  of  the  priestly  dress  had  been
appointed  and  described  before  (Exod.
xxviil.,  xxix.).  In  these  verses  we  see  tiie
order  in  which  they  were  put  on.  After  the
priests  had,  no  donbt,  changed  their  linen
drawers,  there  oame,  first,  the  ooat,  that
is,  a  close-fitting  tnnio  of  white  linen,
made  with  sleeves  and  oovering  ^e  whola
body;  next  the  girdle  (^  the  tnnio,  that


116


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  vui.  1 — 36i.


ii,  a  linen  meli  for  tying  the  tunic  ronnd
the  body,  ^vith  variegated  ends  hanging
on  each  side  to  the  ankles ;  thirdly,  the
robe,  that  is,  a  blue  veiituie,  woven  of  one
piece,  with  holes  for  the  head  and  arms  to
pass  through,  reaching  from  the  neck  to
below  the  knee,  the  bottom  being  orna-
mented with  blue,  purple,  and  scarlet  pome-
granates, alternating  with  golden  belU;
fourthly,  the  ephod,  which  consisted  of  two
shoulder-pieces,  or  epaulettes,  made  of
variegated  linen  and  gold  thread,  fastened
together  in  front  and  at  the  back  by  a
narrow  strap  or  band,  from  which  hung,
before  and  behind  the  wearer,  two  pieces  of
cloth  confined  below  by  the  curious  girdle  of
the  ephcd,  that  is,  by  a  sash  made  of  the  same
material  as  the  ephod  itself.  Into  the  ephod
were  sewn  two  onyxes,  one  on  each  shoulder,
in  gold  filigree  settings,  one  of  them  en-
graven with  the  names  of  half  of  the  tribes,
and  the  other  with  the  remaining  half;  and
from  two  rosettes  or  buttons  by  the  side  of
these  stones  depended  twisted  gold  chains
for  the  support  of  the  breastplate.  Fifth
came  the  breastplate,  which  was  a  square
pocket,  made  of  embroidered  linen,  a  span
long  and  a  span  broad,  worn  upon  the
breast  and  hanging  from  the  gold  chains
above  mentioned,  the  lower  ends  of  the  gold
chain  being  tied  to  two  rings  at  the  upper
and  outer  corner  of  the  breastplate,  while
the  upper  and  inner  corner  of  the  same  was
attached  to  the  ephod  by  blue  thread  run-
ning through  two  sets  of  rings  in  the  breast-
plate and  ephod  respectively.  The  outer
side  of  the  breastplate  was  stiffened  and
adorned  by  twelve  precious  stones,  set  in
four  rows  of  three,  each  stone  having  on  it
the  name  of  one  of  the  tribes  of  Israel.  The
breastplate  being  double  and  the  two  sides
and  the  bottom  being  sewn  up,  the  pocket
formed  by  it  had  its  opening  at  the  top.
Into  this  pocket  were  placed  the  TTrim  and
the  Thummim  which  were  probably  two
balls  of  different  colours,  one  of  wljicb  on
being  drawn  out  indicated  the  approval  of
God,  and  the  other  his  disapproval,  as  to
any  point  on  which  the  high  priest  con-
sulted him.  (The  Jewish  tradition,  that
the  Divine  answer  by  the  Urim  and  the
Thummim  came  by  a  supernatural  light
thrown  on  certain  letters  in  the  names  of
the  tribes,  has  no  foundation.)  The  last
part  of  the  dress  to  be  put  on  was  the  mitre,
or  head-dress  of  linen,  probably  of  the
nature  of  a  turban ;  to  which,  by  a  blue
string,  was  attached  the  golden  plate,  in  such
a  way  tliat  it  rested  lengthwise  on  the  fore-
^ad,  anil  on  this  plate  or  holy  crown  were
inscribed  the  words, "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."
The  investiture  took  place  as  the  Lord
commanded  Moses,  that  is,  in  accordance
with  the  initniotiont  given  in  Exod.  xzviii.


Its  purpose  and  its  meaning  in  the  eyes  of
the  people  would  have  been  twofoli ;  first,
after  the  manner  of  the  king's  crown  and
the  judge's  robe,  it  served  to  manifest  the
fact  that  the  function  of  priest  was  com-
mitted to  the  wearer;  and  next,  it  symbolized
the  necessity  of  being  clothed  upon  with  the
righteousness  of  God,  in  order  to  be  able  to
act  as  interpreter  and  mediator  between
God  and  man,  thus  foreshadowing  th»
Divine  Nature  of  him  who  should  be  the
Mediator  in  antitype.

Vers.  10,  II. — Tlie  anointing  is  still  man-
specifically  the  means  of  consecration  than
the  investing  or  the  washing.  (For  the-
anointing  oil,  which  is  here  re^rred  to  as  a-
thing  well  known,  see  Exod.  xxx,  22 — 25,.
where  its  component  parts  are  designated.)-
The  consecration  of  things  as  well  as  of  per-
sons is  sanctioned  by  the  action  of  Moses,.
who  anointed  the  tabemaole  and  all  that
was  therein,  and  sanctified  them.  They
were  thus  set  apart  for  holy  purposes.  By
all  that  was  therein  would-be  meant  the  ark,,
the  vail,  the  altar  of  incense,  the  candlesticks,.
the  table  of  shuw-bread.  After  the  taber-
nacle and  its  furniture  had  been  anointed,,
the  altar — that  is,  the  brazen  altar — and  all.
his  vessels,  both  the  laver  and  his  foot,  were
sprinkled ;  not  once  only ,  as  the  things  within,
the  tabernacle,  but  seven  times,  to  show  thai
it  was  specially  holy,  although  situated  only
.  in  the  court.  The  laver,  for  the  priests'  use,
was  between  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  and
the  brazen  altar  of  burnt  offering.  Its  footy
or  base,  is  described  in  Exod.  xxxviii,  8,
as  made,  according  to  the  translation  of
the  Authorized  Version,  "of  brass,  of  the
looking-glasses  of  the  women  assembling,,
which  assembled  at  the  door  of  the  taber-
nacle."

Ver.  12. — He  poured  of  the  anointing  oil
upon  Aaron's  head.  The  change  of  the  verb
poured  for  sprinkled,  indicates  that  the-
amount  of  "  the  precious  ointment"  poured
"upon  the  head,  that  ran  down  unto  the
beard,  and  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his^
garments  "  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  2),  was  far  gi'eater
than  that  with  which  the  furniture  of  the
tabernacle  had  been  anointed.  The  oil-
sprinkled  on  the  holy  things  sanctified
them  ns  means  of  grace.  Tlie  oil  poured:
upon  Aaron  represents  the  grace  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  coming  from  without,  but
diffusing  itself  over  and  throughout  the
whule  consecrated  man.

Ver.  13. — The  investiture  of  Aaron's  son»
— Nadab,  Abihu,  Eleazar,  Ithamar— foUowa-
the  consecration  of  their  father.  They  are
robed,  according  as  the  Lord  commanded
Moses  in  Exod.  xxviii.  40,  in  the  white
tunic,  the  sash,  and  the  cap.  But  there  i*.
no  statement  here  of  their  being  anointed
although  their  anointing  is  ordered  in  Bxod.


,  vni.  1— 36.J


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVlTICUa


117


nviii.  41,  and  etill  more  imperatiyely  in
Ezod.  zl.  IS  I'bey^  are  spoken  of  as
"anointed"  in  oh.  vii  36,  and  as  haying
"the  anointing  oil  of  the  Lord  upon  them  "
in  oh.  X.  7.  On  the  other  hand,  the  high
priest  is  specially  designated  aa  '*the  priest
iliat  is  anointed  "  (ch.  ir.  3).  It  is  probable
tiiat  the  personal  anointing  of  the  ordinary
priests  was  confined  to  their  being  sprinkled
with  oil,  as  described  below  in  ver.  30 ;  but
tiiat  they  were  regarded  as  virtually  anoiated
in  Aaron's  anointing.  The  Levites  bad  no
epeoial  dress  until  they  obtained  permission
from  Herod  Agrippa  II.  to  wear  the  priestly
robes  (Joseph., '  Ant.,'  xz.  9,  6).

Vers.  14—32. — After  the  bathing,  the
robing,  and  the  anointing,  follow  the  sacri-
iices  of  consecration — the  sin  oifering  (vers.
14—17),  the  burnt  offering  (vers.  18—21),
the  peace  offering  (vers.  22 — 32).

Ver.  14. — The  sin  offering.  This  was  the
first  sin  offering  ever  offered.  There  had
been  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices  akin  to
peace  offerings  before,  but  no  sin  offerings.
At  once  the  sin  offering  takes  its  place  as
the  first  of  the  three  sacrifices  before  the
burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings.'  Justifi-
cation comes  first,  then  sanctification,  and,
following  upon  them,  communion  with  God.
The  victim  offered  by  and  for  Aaron  and
his  sons  is  a  bullock,  the  same  animal  that
is  appointed  for  the  offering  of  the  high
priest  (oh.  iv.  3).

Vers.  15 — 17. — ^And  Moses  took  the  blood.
Moses  continues  still  to  act  as  priest,  and  the
new  sacrifice  is  once  offered  by  him.  He
performs  the  priestly  act  of  presenting  the
blood ;  but  on  this  occasion,  which  is  special,
the  blood  is  not  dealt  with  in  the  manner
prescribed  for  the  high  priest's  offerings  (oh.
iv.  6).  The  reason  of  this  is  that  Aaron
was  not  yet  high  priest,  and  also  that  the
offering  was  made  not  only  for  Aaron,  but
also  for  his  sons ;  and  further,  the  blood  as
well  as  the  anointing  oil  was  required  to
purify  the  altar,  and  sanctify  it  (see  Heb.
ix.  21).  Although  the  blood  was  not
"brought  into  the  tabernacle,"  yet  the
bullock  was  burnt  with  fire  without  the  oamp,
not  eaten  according  to  the  rule  of  ch.  vii.
26,  30.  This  was  necessary,  as  there  were
«s  yet  no  priests  to  eat  it.

vers.  18 — 21. — There  is  no  deviation  on
the  present  occasion  from  the  ritual  ap-
pointed for  the  burnt  offering.  After  the
fiin  offering,  righteousness  is  symbolically
imputed  to  Aaron ;  after  the  burnt  offering,
iioliness ;  then  follows  the  peace  offering  of
the  ram,  which  completes  and  iMlificiaUy
«fiteU  the  oooseoratioBi


Vers.  22— 29.— The  ram  offered  as  a  peace
offering  is  called  the  ram  of  consecration,  or
literally,  of  filling,  because  one  of  the  means
by  which  the  consecration  was  effected  and
exhibited  was  the  filling  the  hands  of  those
presented  for  consecration  with  the  portion
of  the  sacrifice  destined  for  the  altar,  which
they  waved  for  a  wave  offering  before  the
Lord,  previous  to  its  consumption  by  the
fire.  This  portion  consisted  of  the  internal
fat  and  tail,  which  was  usually  burnt  (oh.  vii.
31),  and  the  heave  offering  of  the  right
shoulder,  or  hind  leg,  which  generally  went
to  the  officiating  priest  (oh.  vii.  32),  and
one  of  each  of  the  unleavened  cakes.  After
this  special  ceremony  of  waving,  pecnliar  to
the  rite  of  consecration,  the  usual  wave
offering  (the  breast)  was  waved  by  Moses
and  consumed  by  himself.  Ordinarily  it
was  for  the  priests  in  general  (ch.  vii.  31).
The  blood  was  poured  on  the  side  of  the
altar,  as  Was  done  in  all  peace  offerings,  but
in  addition,  on  the  present  occasion,  it  was
put  upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear,  and  upon
the  thumb  of  the  right  hand,  and  upon  the
great  toe  of  the  right  foot  of  the  priests
who  were  being  consecrated,  symbolizing
that  their  senses  and  active  powers  were
being  devoted  to  God's  service.  The  same
ceremony  is  to  be  used  in  the  restoration  of
the  leper  (see  ch.  xiv.  14).

Ver.  30.-^The  sprinkling  with  oil  and
blood  completea  the  ceremony  of  anointing,
and  suffices  of  itself  for  the  sons  of  Aaron,
in  addition  to  their  virtual  participation  in
the  anointing  of  their  father  (ver.  12).  "  In
the  mingling  of  the  blood  and  oil  for  the
anointing  seems  to  be  taught  that  not
sacrifice  for  sin  alone  suffices;  but  that
with  this  must  be  joined  the  unction  of  the
Holy  Spirit "  (Gardiner).

Vers.  31,  32.— The  flesh  of  the  peace
offering  is  given  to  Aaron  and  his  sons  to
eat,  not  in  the  capacity  of  priests  (for  the
peace  offerings  were  not  eaten  by  the
priests),  but  as  the  offerers  of  the  sacrifice.

Vers.  33 — 36. — The  sacrificial  ceremonies
were  repeated  for  seven  days,  during  which
Aaron  and  his  sons  remained  in  the  court
of  the  tabernacle,  but  did  not  enter  the
holy  place,  abstaining  throughout  that  time
from  ministering,  as  the  apostles  did  during
the  interval  between  the  Ascension  and  the
day  of  Pentecost.  The  words,  Te  shall  not
go  out  of  the  door  of  the  tabernacle,  should
rather  be,  Ye  shall  not  go  away  from  the
entrance  of  the  tabernacle,  and  for  seven
days  shall  he  consecrate  yon,  should  rathef
be^  durirtq  aoMa  dayt  ye  aAoU  b*  anuetratti


118  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUa  [cH.  via.  1—38,


EOMILETIca

Yen.  1—S6.— Priesthood,  which  had  existed  from  th*  1)eglniiln|  of  tlM  world,  f»
now  for  the  first  time  made  the  exclusive  and  hereditary  function  of  one  family  so  tu
as  the  Israelitish  nation  is  concerned.

I.  AaBON  and  his  fiONS  ARE  APPOINTED,  NOT  BY  THE  KATIOK,  BUT  BT  GoD.      In  Exod.

zxviii.  1,  we  read,  "  And  take  thou  unto  thee  Aaron  thy  hrotber,  and  his  sons  with
him,  from  among  the  children  of  Israel,  that  he  may  ounister  unto  me  in  the  priest's
ofBce."  In  ch.  viii.  2 — 5,  "  Take  Aaron  and  his  sons  with  him.  .  .  .  And  Moses  said
unto  the  congregation.  This  is  the  thing  which  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  done."
In  Numb,  xviii.  7,  "  I  have  given  your  priest's  ofSce  unto  you  as  a  service  of  gift.*
In  1  Sam.  ii.  28,  "  Did  I  choose  him  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  be  my  priest,  to
offer  upon  mine  altar,  to  bum  incense,  to  wear  an  ephod  before  me?  and  did  I  give  nnto
the  house  of  thy  father  all  the  offerings  made  by  fire  of  the  children  of  Israel  ?  "  These
texts  and  the  whole  tenor  of  Holy  Scripture  clearly  declare  that  the  appointment  of
Aaron  and  his  sons  to  the  priesthood  was  the  act  of  God.  On  the  other  side,  there  is  no
statement  whatever  to  prove  or  to  indicate  that  they  were,  as  has  been  afSrmed,  merely
the  delegates  of  the  people,  so  far'as  the  priestly  capacity  of  the  latter  is  concerned.  Tho
only  passage  alleged  to  have  a  bearing  in  that  direction  is  the  following : — "  Take  th»
Levites  from  among  the  children  of  Israel,  and  cleanse  them.  .  .  .  And  thou  shalt
bring  the  Levites  before  the  Lord:  and  the  children  of  Israel  shall  put  their  hands
upon  the  Levites  "  (Numb.  viii.  6 — 10).  It  is  argued  that  the  laying  on  of  hands  upon
the  Levites  by  the  congregation  was  a  delegation  of  power  already  existing  in  tho
congregation  to  them.  If  this  were  so,  still  the  Levites  were  not  the  priests ;  the  act
would  have  been  a  delegation  of  the  right  and  function  only  which  the  LevitM
possessed — and  these  were  not  priestly  functions,  but  the  office  of  waiting  upon  the
service  of  the  tabernacle.  But  the  laying  on  of  hands,  in  itself,  mean*  no  more  than
setting  apart,  and,  in  the  case  of  the  Levite,  we  are  told  that  ite  special  meaning  was
setting  apart  as  an  offering  or  sacrifice.  "  And  Aaron  shall  offer  the  Levites  before  the
Lord  for  an  offering  of  the  children  of  Israel,  that  they  may  execute  the  service  of  the
Lord.  .  .  .  And  Aaron  offered  them  as  an  offering  before  the  Lord ;  and  Aaron  made
an  atonement  for  them  to  cleanse  them.  And  after  that  went  the  Levites  in  to  do  their
service  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  before  Aaron,  and  before  his  sons:  as  the
Lord  had  commanded  Moses  concerning  the  Levites,  so  did  they  unto  them"  (Numb.  viii.
11 — 22).  The  consecration  of  the  priests  was  entirely  distinct  from  the  dedication  of
the  Levites,  and  had  taken  place  previously  to  it.  The  priest  was  the  minister  of  God ;
the  Levite  was  the  minister  of  the  priest.  None  can  make  a  priest  of  God  but  God
himself.

II.  QnALiFiOATiONB  FOB  THE  FBiESTHOOD.  1.  Aaronic  descent  (see  Exod.  xxviiL ;
ch.  viii. ;  2  Chron.  xxxi.  17 — 19 ;  i'.zra  ii.  62 ;  Neh.  vii.  64).  2.  Physical  integrity
and  freedom  from  blemish.  "  No  man  that  hath'  a  blemish  of  the  seed  of  Aaron  the
priest  shall  come  nigh  to  offer  the  offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire :  he  hath  •
blemish ;  he  shall  not  come  nigh  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  God.  He  shall  eat  the  bread
of  his  God,  both  of  the  most  holy,  and  of  the  holy.  Only  he  shall  not  go  in  unto
the  vail,  nor  come  nigh  unto  the  altar,  because  he  hath  a  blemish ;  that  he  profane
not  my  sanctuaries"  (ch.  xxi.  21—23).  3.  Respectable  marriage  (ch.  xxi.  7);  in  the
case  of  the  high  priest,  marriage  with  one  previously  unmarried,  "in  her  virginity"
(ch.  xxi.  13).  The  two  last  qualifications  symbolize  the  integrity  of  heart  and>purity
of  life  and  surroundings  which  are  requisite  in  the  minister  of  God.  Further,  at  the
time  of  his  ministrations,  the  priest  must  be  free  from  any  ceremonial  uncleanness
(ch.  xiii.  3,  4),  nnd  must  abstain  from  wine  (ch.  x.  8, 10),  the  purity  and  coUectedness
demanded  of  Gud'tt  minister  at  all  times  being  specially  required  while  he  is  officiating.

TIL  Whbbein  THE  priest's  OFFICE  CONSISTED.  1.  It  Consisted  in  "  offering  gifts  and
sacrifices  for  sins"  (Heb.  v.  1),  this  expression  including  all  kinds  of  offerings  and  sacri-
fices by  which  men  drew  near  to  God,  together  with  the  burning  of  incense  symbolical  U
prayer.  The  priest's  action  was  necessary  for  the  offering  of  the  sacrificial  blood  and
burning  the  fie«h  upon  the  altar,  and  in  some  cases  for  consuming  a  portion  of  theTiotime


OH.  vin.  1— 36.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  114

themselves.  2.  It  consisted  in  bestowing  benedictions  (see  Numb.  vi.  23 — 27,  "  Speak
unto  Aaron  and  unto  his  sons,  saying,  On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless  the  children  of  Israel. . . .
And  they  shall  put  my  Name  upon  the  children  of  Israel ;  and  1  will  bless  them  "),  3.  It
consisted  in  mediating  between  God  and  man,  as  in  the  rebellion  of  Eorah,  Dathan,  and
Abiram,  when  "  Moses  s:ud  unto  Aaron,  Take  a  censer,  and  put  fire  therein  from  off  the
altar,  and  put  on  incense,  and  go  quickly  unto  the  congregation,  and  make  an  atonement
for  them :  for  there  is  wrath  gone  out  from  the  Jjord ;  the  plague  is  begun.  And  Aaron
took  as  Moses  commanded,  and  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  congregation ;  and,  behold,
the  plague  was  begun  among  the  people :  and  he  put  on  incense,  and  made  an  atone-
ment for  the  people.  And  he  stood  between  the  dead  and  the  living ;  and  the  plague  was
stayed  "  (Numb.  xvi.  46 — 48).  4.  It  consisted  in  their  being  the  teachers  of  the  people,
"  That  ye  may  teach  the  children  of  Israel  all  the  statutes  which  the  Lord  hath  spoken
unto  them  by  the  hand  of  Moses  "  (ch.  x.  11).  "  They  shall  teach  Jacob  thy  judgments,
and  Israel  thy  Law  "  (Deut.  xxxiii.  10).  "  For  the  priest's  lips  should  keep  knowledge,
and  they  should  seek  the  Law  at  his  mouth  "  (Mai.  ii.  7).  Besides  being  teachers,  they
were  judges  of  differences,  "  By  their  word  shall  every  controversy  and  every  stroke  be
tried  "  (Deut.  xxi.  5 ;  see  Deut.  xvii.  8 — 12  ;  2  Chron.  xix.  8 — 10).  They  were  also  leaders
of  the  people's  devotions :  "  Let  the  priests,  the  ministers  of  the  Lord,  weep  between
the  porch  and  the  altar,  and  let  them  say,  Spare  thy  people,  0  Lord,  and  give  not  thine
heribiige  to  reproach,  that  the  heathen  should  rule  over  them :  wherefore  should  thej
say  among  the  people.  Where  is  their  God  ?  "  (Joel  ii.  17).  5.  In  addition,  "  to  the
priests  belonged  the  care  of  the  sanctuary  and  sacred  utensils,  the  preservation  of  the
fire  on  the  brazen  altar,  the  ^burning  of  incense  on  the  golden  altar,  the  dressing  and
lighting  of  the  lamps  of  the  golden  candlestick,  the  charge  of  the  shew-bread  and  other
like  duties.  They  were  necessarily  concerned  in  all  those  multitudinous  acts  of  the
Israelites  which  were  connected  with  sacrifices,  such  as  the  accomplishment  of  the
Nazarite  vow,  the  ordeal  of  jealousy,  the  expiation  of  an  tmknown  murder,  the  deter-
mination of  the  unclean  and  of  the  cleansed  leprous  persons,  garments,  and  houses ;  the
regulation  of  the  calendar,  the  valuation  of  devoted  property  which  was  to  be  redeemed ;
— these  and  a  multitude  of  other  duties  followed  naturally  from  their  priestly  ofBce.
They  were  ^also  to  blow  the  silver  trumpets  on  various  occasions  of  their  use,  and,  in
connection  with  this,  to  exhort  the  soldiers  about  to  engage  in  battle  to  boldness,
because  they  went  to  fight  under  the  Lord  "  (Gardiner).

rV.  The  exeecise  of  the  peiest's  essential  functions  was  confined  bxchjsivelt
TO  THEIB  oedeb.  It  has  been  argued  that  the  o£Sce  of  performing  sacrifice  was  shared
by  (1)  the  Jewish  monarchs,  (2)  the  rulers,  (3)  the  Levites,  (4)  the  people  in  generaL
1.  The  first  hypothesis  has  been  supported  by  an  appeal  to  the  following  passages  :—
Solomon  "  came  to  Jerusalem,  and  stood  before  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,
and  offered  up  burnt  offerings,  and  offered  peace  offerings,  and  made  a  feast  to  all  hii
servants "  (1  Kings  iii.  15) ;  "  And  the  king,  and  all  Israel  with  him,  offered  sacrifice
before  the  Lord.  And  Solomon  offered  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings,  which  he  offered
unto  the  Lord "  (1  Kings  viii.  62,  63).  They  do  not,  however,  mean  more  than  that
Solomon  presented  the  offerings  for  sacrifice,  the  essential  part  of  which  ceremony  was
no  doubt  performed,  as  always,  by  priests.  Saul,  indeed,  sacrificed  at  Gilgal,  on  plea  of
necessity,  but,  in  spite  of  even  that  plea,  was  reproved  by  Samuel  as  having  "  done
foolishly  "  (1  Sam.  xiii.  13) ;  and  Uzziah  "  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord  to  burn
incense  upon  the  altar  of  incense ; "  but  Azariah  the  priest  "  withstood  Uzziah  the
king,  and  said  unto  bim,  It  appertaineth  not  unto  thee,  Uzziah,  to  bum  incense  unto
the  Lord,  but  to  the  priests  the  sons  of  Aaron,  that  are  consecrated  to  bum  incense :  go
out  of  the  sanctuary ;  for  thou  hast  trespassed ;  neither  shall  it  be  for  thine  honour
from  the  Lord  God.  .  .  .  And  the  leprosy  even  rose  up  in  his  forehead  before  the  priests
in  the  house  of  the  Lord"  (2  Chron.  xxvi.  16 — 20).  These  cases  disprove  the  priestly
power  of  the  monarch.  2.  The  supposition  that  the  nobles  could  perform  priestly
acts  rests  upon  the  fact  that  the  name  cohen  is  sometimes  applied  to  them  (2  Sam.
viii.  18 ;  1  Kings  iv.  2,  5) ;  but  the  word  (the  derivation  of  which  is  doubtful)  appears  to
have  a  wider  usage  than  that  of  "  priest,"  and  to  mean  also  '•  officers "  (of.  1  Chron,
xviiL  17).  3.  The  destruction  of  the  company  of  Korah,  because,  being  Levites,  they
"  sought  the  priesthood  also "  (Numb.  xvi.  10),  disposes  of  the  priestly  rights  of  the
tribe  Of  Levi.    4.  And  the  swallowing  up  of  Dathan  and  Abiram,  whose  sin  was  that


180  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUa  [oh.  vra.  1— 3&


of  desiring  to  equalize  themselves  with  the  family  of  Aaron,  on  the  plea  that  the  latter
"  took  too  much  upon  them,  seeing  that  all  the  congregation  were  holy,  every  one  of
them  "  (Numb.  xvi.  3),  disproves  the  right  of  all  the  congregation  to  exercise  priestly
function,  however  much  they  might  be,  in  a  sense,  a  nation  of  priests.  According  to  the
Mosaic  legislation,  the  spiritualty  and  temporalty  were  kept  apart,  nor  were  they  united,
except  when  royal  powers  came,  in  the  later  days  of  the  nation's  history,  to  be  attachea
to  the  office  of  high  priest — a  course  which  a  considerable  section  of  the  Christian
Church  attempted,  with  less  excuse,  to  follow  in  mediaeval  and  subsequent  times,  when
the  principle,  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world  "  (John  xix.  36)  became  obscured  or
forgotten.

V.  The  ceremonies  op  the  conbeceation.  1.  Bathing,  robing,  anointing,  signifying
cleansing,  justifying,  sanctifying.  2.  Sacrifices  in  their  behalf — sin  offerings,  burnt
offerings,  peace  offerings,  symbolizing  their  reconciliation  with  God,  the  surrender  of
themselves  to  him,  and  their  peace  with  him.  3.  Watching  for  seven  days  in  the
tabernacle  court,  each  day  renewing  the  sacrifices ;  giving  opportunity  for  self-recol-
lection, and  for  devoting  themselves  heart  and  soul  to  him  whose  special  servants  they
were  to  be.

VI.  The  Aaronic  priesthood  was  a  type  op  the  priesthood  of  Christ.  The
type  was  accomplished  in  the  Antitype,  and  the  Levitical  priesthood  is  now  wholly
abolished  (see  Heb.  vii.  and  viii.).

VII.  Likeness  yet  contrast  op  the  Christian  ministry.  We  learn  from  Eph.
iv.  8,  11,  12,  that  on  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven,  he  received  of  his  Father  the
gifts  of  the  holy  Ghost,  which  he  then  bestowed  upon  his  Ciiurch,  to  be  administered
and  dispensed  by  apostles,  prophets,  evangelists,  pastors,  and  teachers ;  the  grace  of
government  being  ministered  by  apostles,  and,  after  they  had  died  out,  by  bishops ;  the
grace  of  exposition  by  prophets  ;  the  grace  of  conversion  by  evangelists ;  the  grace  of
edification  by  pastors  and  teachers,  or  presbyters.  We  should  note  here  the  superiority
of  the  Christian  to  the  Jewish  ministry,  the  functions  of  offering  sacrifice  and  of
mediating  between  God  and  man  being  far  inferior  to  that  of  being  the  dispensers  to
man  of  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  himself;  and  the  error  of  any  who  think  to  dignify
and  elevate  the  character  of  the  Christian  ministry  by  assimilating  it  to  the  Jewish.

VIII.  The  need  of  an  outward  call  in  both  cases.  "  No  man  taketh  this  honour
unto  himself,  but  he  that  is  called  of  God,  as  was  Aaron  "  (Heb.  v.  4) ;  so  that  even
Christ  waited  to  be  "  called  of  God  "  before  commencing  his  ministry.  The  outward
sign  of  Aaron's  having  been  called  of  God  was  his  anointing,  and  the  other  ceremonies
of  initiation ;  and  every  subsequent  high  priest  had  to  be  anointed  and  initiated  in  the
same  manner  as  Aaron,  and  by  the  same  forms,  before  he  was  regarded,  and  before  he
could  become,  high  priest.  The  outward  siga  of  the  call  in  the  Christian  ministry  is
the  laying  on  of  hands.  So  it  was  in  the  case  of  the  seven  deacons  (Acts  vi.  6),  and  in
St.  Paul's  case  (Acts  xiii.  3),  and  in  that  of  Timothy  (1  Tim.  iv.  14).  And  all  subse-
quent ministers  of  Christ  have  to  be  appointed  in  like  manner  by  those  "  who  have
publiok  authority  given  unto  them  in  the  Congregation,  to  call  and  send  Ministers  into
the  Lord's  vineyard  "  (Art.  XXIII.).

IX.  All  Christians  are  a  royal  priesthood  (1  Pet.  ii.  9).  As  the  Israelites  were
a  kingdom  of  priests  (Exod.  xix.  5),  so  too  are  Christians  consecrated  to  God  in  baptism,
channels  of  grace  to  each  other,  and  therefore  each  in  a  special  manner  his  brother's
keeper.  Practical  duties  thence  flowino; — brotherly  affection,  loTing-kindneas,  care  for
the  soula  of  others,  tenderness  to  the  weak.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Priestly  consecration.  Ch.  viii.;  of.  Luke  iii.  21,  22;  Heb.  ir.  14 — 16;  v.;  vH,;
viii. ;  ix. ;  1  Pet.  ii.  4,  6,  9.  In  this  chapter  we  have  the  history  of  the  consecration  of
the  Aaronic  priesthood.  The  stages  were  briefly  these : — Lustration,  or,  as  we  would  now
Buy, baptism;  investiture;  anointing;  atonement;  dedication;  consecration;  and,  finally,
communion.  The  mediation  and  ministry  of  this  priesthood  were  essentially  dramatic
in  character,  hence  it  took  a  long  time  to  present,  in  the  .dramatic  form,  the  various
ideas  which  have  been  just  set  down  as  the  stages  of  consecration.     Not  only  so,  but


OH.  TOt  1— 36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  121


they  were  empli9«ized  by  a  sevenfold  repetition ;  for  seven  days  the  process  was  to  b«
repeated,  at  the  end  of  which  time  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  regarded  as  duly  set  apart
for  their  work.  Let  us,  then,  compare  the  consecration  of  the  high  priests  with  the
consecration  of  the  immortal  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ;  and,  secondly,  the  consecra-
tion of  the  minor  priests  with  the  consecration  of  believers,  who  are,  as  the  passage
cited  from  1  Peter  shows,  "  priests  unto  God."    .

L  The  consecration,  of  Aakon  compared  with  the  consecration  of  Chbist.
Now  we  have  in  this  comparison,  first  a  contrast,  and  then  a,  parallel.  It  will  be  useful
to  take  these  up  in  this  order —

1.  The  dements  of  contrast  in  the  consecrations.  And  here  we  notice:  (1)  That
Aaron's  consecration  implies  his  infirmity  and  sinfulness,  whereas  Christ  never  assumed
the  penitential  position.  The  baptism  of  Jesus  Christ  (Luke  iii.  21,  22)  is  the  historical
■counterpart  of  Aaron's  consecration.  And  although  John's  baptism  was  unto  re-
pentance, we  know  our  Lord  took  up  the  sinless  position  even  unto  the  end,  challeng-
ing all  comers  to  convince  him  of  sin  (John  viii.  46).  We  shall  see  presently  what
his  acceptance  of  John's  baptism  signified.  One  thing  meanwhile  is  clear,  that  he
professed  to  be  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  Now,  in  this
reopect  he  was  a  complete  contrast  to  Aaron.  Aaron,  in  the  consecration,  takes  up  the
penitential  position.  He  has  to  be  typically  washed  and  sprinkled  with  blood.  (2)
Aaron's  consecration  implied  a  temporary  high  priesthood,  while  Jesus  is  set  apart  to  an
everlasting  priesthood.  The  association  of  Aaron's  sons  with  him  in  the  priesthood
indicated  plainly  that  death  would  sooner  or  later  necessitate  a  successor.  Moreover,
there  are  sundry  indications  in  the  regulations  about  the  successors.  It  was,  therefore,
•only  a  temporary  office.  "  They  were  not  suffered  to  continue  by  reason  of  death."
But  Jesus  was  set  apart  to  an  everlasting  of&ce.  "  This  man,  because  he  continueth
■ever,  hath  an  unchangeable  priesthood "  (Heb.  viL  24 — ^28).  So  much  briefly  about
the  contrast.

2.  The  parallel  in  the  conseorationB.  And  here  we  have  to  notice :  (1)  Both  Aaron
and  Christ  are  formally  set  apart.  What  Moses  did  for  Aaron,  John  the  Bajitist  did
for  Christ.  Not,  of  course,  that  our  Lord's  priesthood  had  an  existence  only  after  his
baptism ;  we  merely  mean  that  the  baptism  in  the  Jordan  was  the  formality  with
which  his  ministry  began,  and  corresponded  to  the  consecration  of  Aaron  by  Moses.
The  crowd  at  the  tabernacle  door  to  witness  Aaron's  consecration  corresponded  to  the
crowd  of  candidates  at  the  Jordan  who  witnessed  the  baptism  of  Jesus,  though  its
eignificance  and  singularity  they  did  not  appreciate.  (2)  Both  Aaron  and  Christ
willingly  dedicated  themselves  to  their  work.  We  have  already  noticed  how  Aaron
needed  a  cleansing  by  water  and  blood,  which  Jesus  did  not.  The  sin  offering  is  what
Jesus  provided  for  others,  not  what  he  requires  for  himself.  But  when  we  enter  this
caveat  about  the  different  relations  of  the  two  persons  towards  atonement,  we  are  in  a
position  to  appreciate  the  parallel  between  them  in  personal  dedication.  This  was
what  Aaron's  burnt  offering  implied.  He  offered  himself  willingly  for  the  priestly
work.  And  the  same  dedication  of  self  we  find  in  the  baptism  of  Jesus.  He  claimed
baptism  after  all  the  people  (ditavra  rhv  \a6i/')  were  baptized  (Luke  iii.  21),  in  other
words,  after  the  movement  inaugurated  by  John  had  become  national.  John  did  not
at  first  understand  why  a  sinless  One  like  Jesus  should  demand  baptism  from  one  who
was  sinful.  But  Jesus  quieted  his  fears  by  the  assurance,  "  Thus  it  becometh  us  to
fulfil  all  righteousness"  (Matt.  iii.  15).  The  meaning  of  the  act  on  Christ's  part  can
only  have  been  that  he  dedicated  himself  to  the  fulfilment  of  all  that  was  needed  to
realize  the  national  hope.  Now,  the  national  repentance  was  in  hope  of  pardon,  and
so  Jesus'  dedication  at  the  Jordan  was  to  death  and  to  all  that  his  priesthood  implies,
that  the  people  may  have  their  place  as  pardoned  and  accepted  ones  in  the  kingdom  of
God  (cf.  Godet  upon  Luke  iii.  21,  22;  also  his  'Etudes  Bibliques,'  torn.  ii.  p.  105).
This  dedication  of  Jesus  at  the  Jordan  was  the  spirit  of  his  ministry,  and  above  all  of
his  death.  It  is  this  he  refers  to  in  the  momentous  words,  "  For  their  sakes  I  sanctify
(aytii(a)  myself,  that  they  also  may  be  sanctified  through  the  truth  "  (John  xvii.  19).
(3)  Both  Aaron  and  Jesus  received  certain  blessings  from  Ood  in  response  to  their  sdf-
dedication.  The  gracious  gifts  of  God  to  his  high  priests  may  for  brevity's  sake  bt
summed  up  into  three,  (a)  The  gift  of  revelation,  to  enable  them  to  understand
their  oflice,  and  faithfully  to  fulfil  it.    This  is  presented  in  the  investiture  of  Aaron,


122  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  'icB.'Vta.  1—36.

especially  in  the  arrangement  about  the  Urim  and  Thummim.  The  beautiful  garments
and  this  mysterious  portion  which  lay  upon  the  high  priest's  bosom  were  to  convey
certain  ideas  about  the  office,'  and  to  secure  in  him  the  oracular  man  (cf.  Ewald's
'  Antiquities  of  Israel,'  pp.  28& — 98).  Now,  in  the  baptism  of  Christ,  as  he  was  pray-
ing with  uplifted  eye,  he  saw  "  heaven  opened ; "  that  is,  the  source  of  light,  the  fountain
of  all  knowledge,  was  opened  to  him.  In  other  words,  he  obtained  and  had  continued
to  him  a  full  revelation  of  all  which  he  needed  for  his  work,  (i)  The  gift  of  unctios
OR  INSPIRATION,  to  enable  them  to  interpret  the  revelation  already  guaranteed.  This
was  indicated  by  the  anointing  of  Aaron,  not  only  on  the  head,  but  on  the  ear,  hand,
and  foot.  In  this  way  the  needful  inspiration  was  symbolized,  and  the  ritual  of  the
ram  of  consecration  coincided  therewith.  In  Christ's  case  the  perfect  inspiration  was
symbolized  by  the  descent  of  the  dove.  The  dove  being  an  organic  whole,  a  totality,
indicates  that  to  Jesus  there  was  communicated  the  entirety  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  the
purposes  of  his  priesthood.  "  The  Holy  Spirit  was  not  given  by  measure  unto  him,"
and  "  out  of  his  fulness  do  all  we  receive,  and  grace  for  grace "  (John  iii.  34 ;  i.  16).
(c)  The  gift  of  communion  and  abidino.  Aaron,  after  the  ritual  of  the  sin  offering,
burnt  offering,  and  consecration  offering  was  over,  and  the  best  portions  had  been  laid
upon  God's  altar,  was  called  to  communion  in  the  feast  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.
There  he  was  to  abide  in  the  enjoyment  of  fellowship  with  God,  and  in  this  spirit  was
to  do  all  his  work.  And  the  assurance  of  sonship  which  Christ  received  in  baptism
corresponded  to  this.  The  words  of  the  Father,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom
I  am  well  pleased;"  and  "Thou  art  my  beloved  Son;  in  thee  I  am  w'ell  pleased"
(Matt.  iii.  17 ;  Luke  iii.  22),  spoken  respectively  to  John  and  to  Jesus,  convey  the  state
of  sweet  assurance  of  sonship  in  which  our  Lord  lived  all  his  life.  It  was  this  sup-
ported him  when  he  foresaw  the  dispersion  of  the  disciples,  "  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,
yea,  is  now  come,  that  ye  shall  be  scattered,  every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave  me
alone :  and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  because  the  Father  is  with  me  "  (John  xvi.  32).  The
Great  High  Priest  performed  his  mediatorial  work  in  an  assurance  of  sonship  and  in  the
enjoyment  of  fellowship.  It  was  only  in  the  climax  of  his  sufferings  on  the  cross,
wlien  the  desolation  came  upon  him,  that  for  a  season  he  seemed  to  lose  sight  of  his
sonship,  and  was  constrained  to  cry,  •'  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "

II.    The   CONSECBATION   op  the    minor  priests  compared   with  the   COUbECBATION

OF  believers.     Now  here  we  have  to  notice —

1.  That  the  sons  of  Aaron  were  consecrated  along  with  Aaron.  It  was  one  con-
secration. Although  the  high  priest  received  special  anointing,  and  was  chief  of  the
group,  the  others  shared  his  consecration.  The  one  oil  and  the  one  consecrating  blood
went  upon  all.  The  one  burnt  offering  was  presented  on  behalf  of  all,  and  they  all
partook  of  the  one  feast  and  fellowship  at  last.  And  is  this  not  to  indicate  that  all
believers  share  in  the  consecration  of  Jesus,  their  Great  High  Priest  ?  It  is  the  Spirit
of  Christ  and  the  mind  of  Christ  which  is  made  over  to  them.  He  is  the  reservoir,  and
out  of  his  fulness  all  the  minor  receptacles  receive.

2.  This  fellowship  in  consecration  was  with  a  view  to  'fellowship  in  service.  The
priestly  service  was  so  arranged  that  all  had  a  share  in  it.  There  were,  of  course,
services  in  connection  with  atonement  which  only  the  high  priest  could  perform,  but
there  was  ample  work  about  the  tabernacle  for  all  the  minor  priests.  In  the  same  way
the  life  of  believers  is  to  be  a  consecrated  fellowship  with  Christ  in  work.  "  Fallow-
workers  with  God  "  is  the  great  honour  of  the  religious  life.  A  Divine  partnership  is
what  we  are  asked  to  enter  upon.  And  this  is  the  greatest  honour  within  the  reach  of
man. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  4,  6. — Tlie  installation  of  Aaron,  The  origin  of  any  order  of  men  is  traced
with  interest,  and  the  account  given  of  the  appointment  of  a  special  class  to  wait  upon
the  Lord  in  the  service  of  his  sanctuary  cannot  be  read  without  profit.

I.  The  assembliko  or  the  people  to  witness  the  installation.  1.  It  deeply
concerned  them ;  the  office  was  created  for  their  benefit.  We  may  witness  the  investiture
of  a  knight  of  the  Garter,  and  deem  it  a  gorgeous  scene,  but  one  bearing  no  practical
relationship  to  us.  Not  so  with  the  coronation  of  our  prince  or  the  ordination  of  our
pastor.  By  the  mediation  of  the  priests  the  Israelites  were  to  find  acceptance  with
God.     And  Jesus  Christ  has  been  inducted  into  his  lofty  position  for  the  advantage


OB.  vni.  1— 36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  123

of  his  people.  Why,  then,  turn  away  and  refuse  to  enjoy  this  best  of  privileges  ?  He
waits  to  intercede  on  our  behalf.  It  is  no  idle  ceremony  that  the  Word  of  God  records,
but  one  having  to  do  with  our  daily  sins,  fears,  trials,  troubles,  joys,  and  blessings.
The  titles  and  qualifications  of  Jesus  Christ  are  of  vital  moment  to  our  vfelfare.  2.  It
was  designed  to  impress  them  with  a  sense  of  the  dignity  and  authority  of  the  priesthood,
and  of  the  need  oj  holiness  in  order  to  have  access  unto  Qod.  How  important  the
functions  to  be  fulfilled  by  men  who  are  thus  solemnly  prepared  for  their  efficient
discharge!  And  how  august  the  Being  who  could  demand  such  qualifications  in  those
devoted  to  his  service  1  No  careful  student  of  the  Gospel  narratives  but  must  be  struck
with  the  manner  in  which  Jesus  Christ  was  fitted  for  his  office,  "  perfected "  by  his
obedience,  made  a  "a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest"  by  his  humiliation,  and  with
"  the  blood  of  his  cross"  making  reconciliation  with  God.  3.  The  presence  and  tacit
concurrence  of  the.people  signified  a  willingness  to  obey  the  priests,  to  honour  and  sup-
pm-t  them.  They  were  made  parties  to  the  transaction,  and  acquiesced  in  its  signifi-
cance. It  were  well  that  the  meaning  of  our  presence  at  various  meetings  were  better
realized,  and  that  we  did  more  fully  redeem  the  jAedges  thus  implicitly  given.  God
would  have  all  his  people  enter  into  contracts  with  a  clear  understanding.  To  secure
•  compact  by  concealment  of  the  obligations  imposed  is  no  part  of  his  plan  of  procedure.
IL  The  declaration  of  Moses  :  "  This  is  the  thing  which  the  Lord  commanded
to  be  done : "  1.  Reminds  us  of  the  caution  to  he  exercistd  lest  human  devices  should  he
thrust  forward  in  religious  notions  or  •practices.  Men  are  ready  to  formulate  their  own
ideas,  and  to  make  them  ordinances  of  God's  house  or  kingdom.  Ready,  too,  to  re-
nounce what  has  been  instituted,  to  abolish  observances  as  unnecessary,  or  to  relegate
certain  attitudes  of  the  Spirit  to  heathenism  and  infancy,  to  make  light  of  sin  and  of
the  need  of  a  high  priest  or  a  sacrifice.  2.  A  Divine  call  is  requisite  to  the  undertaking
^  religious  functions.  Moses  acted  as  the  representative  of  Jehovah,  empowered  to
consecrate  Aaron  and  his  sons.  "  So  also  Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be  made  a
high  priest,  but  he  that  said  untc  him,"  etc.  3.  Contained  an  intimation  that  he  who
appointed  could  also  dismiss  the  Aaronic  priesthood.  U'he  legislator  has  power  to
revoke  his  edicts.  It  was  God  who  caused  the  order  of  Aaron  to  be  succeeded  by  the
order  of  Meluhizedek.  4.  Indicates  the  intrinsic  superiority  of  the  prophetic  to  the
priestly  office.  Moses  institutes  Aaron,  the  prophet  consecrates  the  priest.  Priesthood
is  remedial,  adapted  to  a  peculiar  constitution  ot  things.  It  is  a  sort  of  interregnum
that  is  finally  to  pass  away  when  "  the  Son  shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to
God  the  Father."  It  is  connected  with  sin,  and  sin  is  being  destroyed.  Before  Adam
fell,  he  received  communications  from  God;  the  prophetic  revelation  preceded  the
priestly  sacrifices.  The  subordination  of  the  priests  is  often  evinced  in  the  Hebrew
records,  where  the  denunciations  of  the  prophets  show  that  the  priestly  ceremonies
were  intended  to  be  subservient  to,  not  exclusive  of,  mortd  sentiments  «nd
duties. — 8.  B.  A.

Vers,  6 — 12. — The  High  Priesthood  of  Christ,  To  direct  the  thoughts  of  a  congre-
gation to  Jesus  Christ  is  nwer  unseasonable.  I'he  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  warrants
the  assumption  that  in  the  rites  here  described  are  symbolized  the  characteristics  of
our  Great  High  Priest.  The  consecration  consists  of  two  parts — the  anointing  and
clothing  of  the  person  of  Aaron,  and  his  offering  of  sacrifices;  and  it  is  on  the  former
we  are  now  to  dwell,  reminding  us  of  that  Person  in  whom  "  all  beauties  shine,  all
wonders  meet,  all  glories  dwell."

I.  See  typified  the  purity  of  Christ  in  the  washing  of  the  priest  from  head  to
foot.  As  an  Eastern  climate  demands  thorough  ablution  for  cleanliness,  so  was  this  a
lesson  man  needed  to  learn,  that  only  purity  is  fit  to  come  into  contact  with  God.
Priesthood  bridged  the  gulf  between  sinful  man  and  a  Being  unsullied  by  admixture
of  evil.  liike  all  God's  dealings,  it  humbled  and  exalted  man.  Taught  plainly  that  he
was  too  polluted  to  approach  his  Maker,  with  equal  distinctness  he  was  shown  a  way
in  which  he  might  draw  near  with  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart.  The  material  and
ceremonial  purity  of  Aaron  was  eclipsed  by  the  total  freedom  from  taint  of  Christ.
He  bathed,  indeed,  in  the  crystal  waters  of  Jordan  at  his  entrance  upon  his  public
ministry,  but  those  waters  were  stained  compared  with  the  purity  of  his  soul.

II.  Observe  the  sflenooub  of  his  endowuekts.    Fur  every  post  a  certain  chs-


124  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  vm.  i— 3t}.


racter  is  requisite.  The  putting  on  of  garments  represented  the  hestowment  upon
Aaron  of  the  qualities  essential  to  the  proper  discharge  of  his  duties.  This  was
the  apparel  respecting  which  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  "Thou  shalt  make  holy
garments  for  Aaron  thy  hrother,  for  glory  and  for  beauty."  Looking  at  the  high
priest  thus  arrayed,  we  see  symbols  of  the  ornaments  and  graces  of  Jesus  Christ.
Note  the  choice  quality  of  the  attire.  Everything  of  the  best,  fine  linen,  gold
unalloyed,  stones  precious  and  rare.  The  oil  is  "costly  ointment."  Search  out
all  tiiat  is  best  in  human  nature,  all  that  challenges  admiration  and  excites  esteem,
and  an  example  of  all  is  found  in  Jesus  Christ.  Possessed  of  every  gift,  power,  and
skill,  loveliness  and  majesty,  perfect  in  intellect,  emotion,  and  will,  he  was  victorious
over  every  temptation,  and  unscathed  by  every  trial.  This  dress  of  Aaron  emblematized
positive  virtue ;  so  Christ  was  upright,  not  only  like  Adam  as  he  left  the  hands  of  God,
but  as  acquiring  and  exhibiting  every  grace  that  can  adorn  humanity.  There  was
virtue  in  exercise,  virtue  visible  and  potent.  The  tree  put  forth  its  leaves,  its  blossoms,
and  its  fruit.

IIL  The  high  priest  maintained  A  constant  bemembbanob  of  the  peoplb.  Hence
the  breast-plate  bearing  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes,  which  were  also  inscribed  upon
the  onyx  stones  of  the  shoulder.  The  people  were  borne  in  the  positions  that  indicated
power  and  sympathy.  "What  the  bosom  desires  the  arms  accomplish.  Let  others  write
their  names  upon  lofty  pillars  or  granite  rocks ;  let  statesmen,  warriors,  nobles,  inscribe
themselves  upon  the'  roll  of  fame ;  "  Give  me,"  says  the  Christian,  "  a  place  upon  the
Saviour's  breast ;  for  there  on  the  heart  of  Christ,  under  the  glance  of  infinite  mercy,
where  the  love  of  God  delights  to  rest,  are  the  names  of  all  his  followeis  graven
for  ever."

IV.  In  the  breast-plate  were  put  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  by  means  of  which  was
ascertained  and  made  known  the  will  of  God.  Revelation  of  God  was  thus  part  of
the  high  priest's  functions.  The  priestly  and  prophetic  offices  were  intertwined.
Though  we  may  'single  out  an  office  of  Christ  for  distinct  consideration,  as  we  may
distinguish  one  of  the  hues  of  the  rainbow,  yet  let  us  not  forget  that  it  is  the  combi-
nation which  is  of  such  surpassing  excellence  and  glory.  It  has  been  well  said  that
Christ  is  called  the  Wbdom  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  Word  in  the  New
Full  vocal  expression  was  reserved  for  the  time  when  he  could  joy  to  say, "  I  have
declared  unto  them  thy  Name,  and  will  declare  it."  It  is  by  the  priesthood  of  Christ
that  we  learn  in  particular  the  grace  of  God.  It  is  written  on  all  creation,  but  to  our
blurred  vision  the  ^letters  are  oft  obscure.  On  the  cross  of  Christ,  where  he  becomes
at  once  the  Offerer  and  Victim,  these  words  glisten  with  heavenly  radiance,  luminous
not  only  in  noontide  prosperity,  but  in  the  dark  midnight  of  affliction,  "  God  is  love."

V.  The  high  priesthood  is  an  office  of  authobitt,  and  this  authority  is  the
euPBEUAOY  OF  HOLINESS.  Upon  the  head  is  placed  the  mitre,  a  cap  or  turban,  and
upon  the  mitre  is  fastened  a  golden  plate  or  diadem,  inscribed  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord."
Christ's  is  a  royal  priesthood,  and  his  sway  is  the  result  of  his  consecration  to  God.  He
rules  by  right  of  character,  by  rijjht  of  rank,  by  right  of  work.  The  "holy  crown"  is
the  guarantee  for  the  acknowledgment  of  his  claims  to  hearty,  unreserved  obedience.
If  to-day  men  demand  authority  as  priests,  at  least  let  the  holiness  of  their  lives
support  their  pretensions.

VI.  By  the  pouring  of  the  oil  upon  Aaron's  head  we  see  intimated  bntibb  dedica-
tion TO  God's  sebvicb.  This  holy  unction  set  apart  the  high  priest  for  hallowed  toil,
and  became  an  emblem  of  the  fortifying,  sustaining,  vitalizing  presence  of  the  Spirit  of
God.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me,  because  he  hath  anointed  me."  It  is
the  oil  of  gladness,  the  dew  of  the  blessing  of  the  Lord.  It  is  a  token  of  perpetuity.
The  brightest  pageant  fades,  the  show  of  to-day  is  forgotten  ere  the  morrow  dawns,  but
the  priesthood  of  Christ  knows  neither  ebb  nor  flow. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  14 — 30. — The  triple  offering.  Under  the  Christian  dispensation  only  two
elasses  of  priests  remain — the  real  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ,  and  his  people  who  are
figurative  priests  offering  up  spiritual  sacrifices.  The  ceremonies  described  in  this
chapter  may  throw  light  upon  our  position  and  duties  as  the  followers  of  Christ,  and
remind  us  of  the  superiority  of  Christ  to  Aaron.

L  OUB    BBBGUBLANOE    TO  AABON   IN   THE    TBIPLE    OFFEBINa  WB   ARB    BEQUIBBD    VD


OH.  Tin.  1-36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  12S

MAKE.  1.  The  sin  offering.  Priesthood  commences  hy  self-abnegation,  the  confession
of  sin  and  renunciation  of  personal  merit.  By  this  offering  the  altar  is  sanctified
(ver.  15),  on  which  afterwards  all  other  gifts  will  in  due  course  he  laid.  Until  the
Saviour. has  heen  recognized  as  made  a  curse  for  us,  there  is  no  foundation  for  the  life
that  will  please  God.  The  house  must  he  cleansed  ere  its  worthiest  inhabitant  will
condescend  to  enter.  2.  The  burnt  offering.  Here  the  positive  side  begins,  of  devotion
to  Ood.  The  parts  of  the  ram  are  placed  upon  the  purified  altar,  and  the  flames  emit
an  odour  fragrant  to  God.  The  man  who  has  confessed  his  unworthiness  and  pleaded
the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ,  dedicates  himself  to  him  who  died  for  him.  He  is  not  his
own,  and  must  henceforth  glorify  God.  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  is
bis  cry.  3.  The  consecration  offering.  This  results  from  the  others,  and  is  their
natural  completion  by  bringing  full  hands  (consecration  equals  "  fulnesses  "  in  original)
to  God.  Entire  dedication  and  consequent  communion  with  God  its  signification.
The  blood  of  the  ram  is  sprinkled  upon  the  ear,  that  it  may  hearken  to  the  commands
of  God,  and,  whilst  attentive  unto  him,  disregard  the  whispers  of  evil.  Also  upon  the
right  hand,  that  all  its  acts  may  be  in  conformity  with  righteousness,  the  might  of  the
man  going  forth  in  holy  deeds.  And  upon  the  right  foot,  that  its  steps  may  be  ordered
by  the  Lord  and  its  owner  may  ever  tread  the  ways  of  obedience  and  sauctification.
Every  faculty  is  enlisted  in  the  service  of  God.  By  the  wave  and  heave  offerings  and
the  presentation  of  cakes  we  learn  the  necessity  of  looking  upon  all  our  property  and
all  that  supports  life  as  belonging  to  God,  who  must  have  his  special  share  and  be
glorified  thereby  as  well  as  by  our  joyful  use  of  the  remainder.  To  fill  the  hands  for
God  is  to  complete  our  consecration,  and  to  live  upon  heavenly  food  in  the  enjoyment  of
his  blessing.     By  giving  to  him  we  get  for  ourselves.

II.  The  superiority  or  Christ  to  Aaron.  1.  His  consecration  was  total,  whilst
Aaron's  was  hut  partial.  There  were  many  periods  when  the  high  priest  was  seeing
to  his  own  peculiar  wants  and  offering  for  his  own  especial  infirmities.  The  whole
career  of  Jesus  Christ  was  an  offering  for  others,  originated  and  executed  for  the  good
of  man  and  the  glory  of  his  Father.  He  "  came  not  to  do  his  own  will."  Aaron  might
lay  aside  his  robes  of  office  and  take  his  repose,  but  the  Son  of  man  was  ever  clothed
with  his  official  character.  And  this  is  still  clearer  when  we  remember  the  present
position  of  our  High  Priest  and  his  unceasing,  unintermitted  intercession.  2.  The
holiness  of  Aaron  was  ceremonial  and  symbolical,  that  of  Christ  is  literal  and  real,
Jesus  was  on  earth  holy,  harmless,  undefiled.  The  searching  eye  of  God  can  discern  in
his  righteousness  no  stain  nor  flaw.  So  far  was  Aaron  from  reaching  perfection  that,
because  of  rebellion  at  Meribah  (Numb.  xx.  24),  he  was  not  permitted  to  enter  the  land
of  promise.  3.  The  atonement  of  Jesus  Christ  is  actual,  that  of  Aaron  was  only  typii  al.
After  these  rites  of  consecration  were  observed,  the  priests  were  qualified  to  present  the
offerings  and  sacrifices  of  the  people  unto  God,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  them.
But  there  was  no  inherent  virtue  in  those  sacrifices  to  remove  the  guilt  of  sin ;  it  is  the
blood  of  Christ  that  has  power  to  cleanse  the  conscience  from  dead  works.  He  bore  our
sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree,  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness.  4.  The
wiesthood  of  Christ  is  perpetual,  that  of  Aaron  only  survived  by  successors.  The  high
priests  died  and  passed  away,  their  places  occupied  by'others.  Jesus  abides  for  ever ;
he  hath  an  unchangeable  priesthood,  after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  If,  then,  tho
Israelites  found  satisfaction  in  contemplating  the  functions  of  dying  men,  with  what
profound  delight  should  we  avail  ourjielves  of  the  intercession  of  him  who  ever  Uvea
to  save ! — S.  11.  A.

Yers.  1 — 6. — 7%e  baptism  of  Aa/fon  and  hit  sons.  Hitherto  this  book  consists  of
precepts  and  directions  concerning  the  sacrifices  and  services  of  the  tabernacle;  but
here  a  new  section  commences,  in  which  the  directions  are  described  as  carried  into
effect.  This  section  appropriately  commences  with  the  history  of  the  consecration  of
Aaron  and  his  sons,  with  whom  principally  was  to  rest  the  carrying  out  of  the  lawi.
The  verses  before  us  describe—

I.  Thb  fbgfarationb  fob  the  ceremont.  1.  These  were  directed  by  the  Lord.
(1)  He  had  formerly  given  very  particular  directions  from  the  summit  of  Mount  Sinai
(Ezod.  xxviiL,  xxix.).  In  pursuance  of  these  instructions,  the  holy  garments  wer*
made  and  other  preparations  completed.    Note ;  The  leadings  of  providence  should  be


126  THE  BOOK  OF  LEV1TICU8.  [cH.  vni.  1—36.

closely  followed.  (2)  Now  the  time  has  come  for  carrying  the  directions  of  Deity  into
fuller  accomplishraetit.  The  tabernacle  has  been  finished  and  occupied  by  the  presence
of  God ;  the  laws  have  been  published ;  and  the  next  thing  in  order  is  the  consecration
of  the  priests  to  serve  the  tabernacle.  The  Lord  is  a  God  of  order.  In  his  service  "  all
things"  should  be  done  "decently  and  in  order."  2.  Eis  directions  were  given  by  the
hand  of  Moses.  (1)  Moses  was  instructed  to  "  take  Aaron  and  his  sons,"  etc.  (vers.  2, 3).
These  instructions  he  punctually  obeyed  (ver.  4).  In  this  fidelity  Moses  was  a  type  ot
Christ,  with  these  differences :  (a)  Moses  was  faithful  "  as  a  servant,"  Christ  "  as  a  Son."
(6)  The  house  of  Moses  was  ceremonial  and  typical,  that  of  Christ  spiritual  and  living
(see  Heb.  iii.  1 — 6).  (2)  Moses,  who  was  instructed  to  consecrate  Aaron  and  his  sons,
had  himself  no  human  consecration.  He  was  an  extraordinary  servant  of  God.  We  do
not  read  of  the  apostles  of  Christ  receiving  any  baptism  of  water  or  ordination  by  im-
position of  hands.  God  can  send  by  whom  he  pleases  and  when  he  pleases,  without  any
human  sanction  (see  Gal.  i.  15 — 19).  3.  The  congregation  was  assemUed  to  witness  the
ceremony.  (1)  This  was  a  wise  arrangement,  to  inspire  them  with  proper  respect  for
the  servants  of  God.  They  were  prone  enough  to  say,  "  Ye  take  too  much  upon  you,
ye  sons  of  Levi"  Ministers. were  publicly  ordained  in  the  primitive  Church.  (2)  The
address  of  Moses  to  the  congregation  was  brief  and  to  the  point :  "  This  is  the  thing
which  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  done"  (ver.  5).  The  command,  which  was  given
from  Siniu,  the  congregation  were  acquainted  with.  The  time  to  carry  it  out  was  now
given  from  the  sanctuary  (ch.  i.  1).  We  should  look  to  God  for  guidance  in  reference
to  times  and  seasons,  as  well  as  to  the  services  to  be  rendered  for  him.

II.  The  baptism  op  Aaron  and  his  sons.  1.  This  was  the  initiatory  rite  of  the
consecration.  (1)  It  was  the  first  act  (ver.  6).  And  as  Moses  washed  Aaron  at  the
door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  so  was  Jesus  washed  by  John  at  his  entrance
upon  his  public  ministry  (see  Matt.  iii.  16 ;  iv.  1, 17).  Like  Moses,  John  also  was  a
Levite.  (2)  The  sons  of  Aaron  were  baptized  with  him.  To  them  also  it  was  the  rite
of  initiation.  So  are  the  sons  of  Jesus  initiated  into  his  discipleship  by  baptism  (see
Matt,  xxviii.  18 — 20,  margin ;  Acts  ii.  41 ;  x.  48).  The  initiatory  office  of  baptism  is
also  expressed  in  the  phrase  "  born  of  water  "  (John  iiL  5).  2.  It  set  forth  the  necessity
of  purity  in  the  servants  of  Qod.  (1)  Water,  being  one  of  the  great  purifiers  in  the
liingdom  of  nature,  is  used  in  Scripture  as  an  emblem  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Great
Purifier  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  (fsa.  xliv.  3 ;  John  vii.  38,  39).  Hence  a  dispute  about
"  baptism  "  is  called  a  "  question  about  purifying  "  (John  iii.  25,  26).  (2)  The  requisi-
tion of  baptism  declared  the  necessity  of  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  is  the
source  of  the  spiritual  birth  in  which  commences  the  spiritual  life  which  is  the  life  of
heaven.  3.  As  to  the  form  of  this  baptism.  (1)  The  record  here  is  simply  that "  Moses
brought  Aaron  and  his  sons  and  washed  them  with  water  "  (ver.  6).  But  by  reference
to  Exod.  XXX.,  we  learn  that  this  washing  was  done  at  the  laver.  In  allusion  to  the
ceremonial  baptisms  of  the  Law,  the  baptism  of  the  Spirit  under  the  gospel  is  described
as  the  "  laver  of  regeneration  "  (Titus  iii.  5,  6).  (2)  From  the  same  reference  in  Exodus
we  learn,  further,  that  the  washing  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  extended  to  their  "  hands  and
feet."  There  is  no  proof  that  they  were  bodily  plunged  in  the  laver.  We  are  reminded
how  Jesus  washed  his  disciples'  teet  (see  John  xiii.  8 — 10).  The  Jews  have  a  tradition
that  a  tap  was  turned  on,  from  which,  by  the  flowing  of  the  water  over  their  hands  and
feet,  the  washing  was  accomplished  (see  Brown's  'Antiquities,'  vol.  i.  p.  14B).  In
baptism,  the  element  should  be  active  and  the  subject  passive,  for  the  thing  signified,
the  Holy  Ghost,  certainly  is  not  passive  (see  Acts  ii.  16 — 18,  33;  x.  44 — 48). — J.  A.M.

Vers.  7-— 9.— 7%e  holy  garments  of  Aaron.  The  high  priest  of  the  Lovitical  dis-
pensation is  allowed  to  be  an  eminent  type  of  the  "  Great  High  Priest  of  our  profession."
His  attire  was  intended  to  foreshow  the  qualities  by  which  the  Redeemer  is  dis-
tinguished. Else  it  would  be  difficult  to  account  for  the  minute  care  with  which  they
were  designed,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  workmen  were  inspired  to  make  them
(see  Exod.  xxviiL  2 — 4 ;  xxxi.  3—6).    Let  us  attend  to —

L  The  coat  with  its  qirdlb.  1.  The  coat.  (1)  According  to  Josephus,  "it  was  a
tunic  circumscribing  the  body,  with  light  sleeves  for  the  arms,  and  reaching  to  the
heds"  ('Ant.,'  iii.  7).  It  was  white,  ib  denote  purity.  (2)  It  was  bound  with  the
girdle  about  the  loins.    This  also  was  white,  and  denoted  truth,  which  is  another


OH.  ¥111. 1—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  127

expression  for  ptirity  (see  Eph.  vi.  14).  (3)  The  coat  was  an  inner  garment,  and
bound  close  to  the  body  with  the  girdle,  to  suggest  that  purity  and  truth  should  b«
found  "  in  the  inner  parts  "  (Ps.  li.  6 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  33 ;  Rom.  ii.  29).  2.  There  were  alsa
breeches.  (1)  These  are  not  mentioned  here,  but  they  are  described  in  Exod.  xxviii.  42,
"And  thou  shalt  make  them  linen  breeches  to  cover  their  nakedness"  (Hebrew,
"the  flesh,"  etc.);  "from  the  loins  even  unto  the  thighs  they  shall  reach."  (2)
Thi'se  also  were  white,  expressive  of  purity,  and  without  these  the  priest  may  not
appear  in  the  presence  of  GJod.  They  imported  that  "  flesh  and  blood  cannot  enter  into
the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  until  "  clothed  upon  "  (see  Ezek.  xliv.  17, 18 ;  2  Cor.  v.  2,  3 ;
Rev.  iii.  18).

II.  The  bphod  with  its  bobb.  1.  The  ephod.  (1)  It  was  a  short  tunic,  according
to  Josephus,  reaching  to  the  loins.  It  consisted  of  a  rich  cloth  composed  of  blue,
purple,  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen,  interwoven  with  threads  of  gold,  and  wrought,
some  think,  into  figures  of  cherubim  and  palm  trees.  It  was  without  sleeves,  but
resting  upon  the  shoulders.  (2)  It  was  an  emblem  of  redemption.  Ephod  (msN)  comes
from  the  verb  (na  or  ms),  to  redeem.  This  is  the  derivation  given  by  Alexander  Pirie,
the  author  of  a  learned  '  Dissertation  on  Hebrew  Roots.'  2.  The  robe  of  the  ephod.  (1)
This,  and  the  holy  garments  in  general  which  were  associated  with  the  ephod,  from  it
derive  the  name  of  the  "  robe  of  righteousness  "  and  "  garments  of  salvation  "  (see  Isa.

'  Ixi.  10,  margin).  They  were  the  garments  in  which  the  typical  high  priest  carried  out
the  business  of  redemption.  (2)  The  colour  of  the  robe  was  blue — the  dye  of  heaven,
which  was  with  the  ancients  the  symbol  of  divinity.  This  over  the  coat,  the  eu^blem
of  purity,  would  mark  the  purity  of  Messiah  to  be  Divine ;  so,  not  derived,  but  essential
and  absolute.  (3)  Upon  the  hem  of  the  robe  round  about  were  "  golden  bells,"  which,
when  they  sounded,  indicated  the  sound  of  salvation.  And  they  were  on  the  "  hem  "
of  the  robe  when  the  high  priest  went  up  into  the  holy  place,  that  the  sound  might  be
heard  below.  The  sound  of  the  gospel  accordingly  was  heard  below,  as  a  "  sound  from
heaven,"  when  Jesus  went  up  into  the  heavens.  (4)  The  pomegranates  alternating
with  the  bells  suggested  the  fruit  which  follows  the  preaching  of  the  gospeL

III.  The  breastplate  with  the  Urim  and  Thttmmim.  1.  The  Urim  and  Thvm-
mim  were  the  stones  set  in  the  breastplate.  (1)  In  the  text  we  read  of  the  Urim  and
Thummim,  but  here  is  no  mention  of  the  stones.  In  the  parallel  place  (Exod.  xiix.
8 — 12)  the  stones  are  mentioned,  but  we  read  there  nothing  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim.
This  is  intelligible  if  they  be  the  same ;  but  if  not,  the  double  omission  in  things  so
important  is  inexplicable.  (2)  An  attentive  consideration  of  Exod.  xxviii.  29,  30  will
show  that  the  Urim  and  Thummim  are  the  substance  upon  which  the  names  of  the
tribes  were  engraven.  The  use  ascribed  to  the  stones  in  one  verse  is  in  the  next
ascribed  to  the  Urim  and  Thummim.  2.  They  represented  the  saints  as  cherished  in  the
heart  of  Christ.  (1)  The  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  were  there ;  and  the  spiritual
Israel  are  upon  the  heart  of  Jesus.  These  names  were  engraven  to  show  how  deeply
and  permanently  our  interests  have  entered  into  his  sympathies.  They  are  engraven
in  gems  to  show  how  precious  to  him  are  his  saints  (Mai.  iii.  17).  The  gems  were
various,  and  yet  all  were  united  in  the  breastplate  of  the  high  priest,  to  show  how  in-
dividuality can  be  preserved  in  those  who  are  imited  in  the  love  of  Jesus.  (2)  These
were  called  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  lights  and  perfections,  or  lights  and  perfect  ones.
So  are  Christiana  called  the  lights  of  the  world,  because  they  reflect  the  splendours  of
the  Light  of  the  world.  They  are  perfect  ones  also,. viz.  in  the  loveliness  of  Jesus
(Matt.  V.  15,  16;  Jyde  24).  (3)  The  breastplate  was  fastened  to  the  ephod  with
golden  chains,  which  were  also  connected  with  rings  in  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod,
from  which  it  was  forbidden  to  separate  it  (Exod.  xxviii.  28).  So  are  we  with  precious
bonds  girded  to  the  Redeemer,  from  which  blessed  union  it  would  be  sinful  and  disas-
trous to  become  dislinked.  (4)  There  were  also  connected  with  this  robe  of  redemp-
tion on  the  shoulders  of  the  high  priest  onyx  stones,  set  in  sockets  of  gold,  upon  which
the  names  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  were  again  engraven.  So  does  Jesus  bear  his  saints
upon  his  shoulder  as  well  as  upon  his  heart.  They  have  his  sustaining  power  as  well
as  the  animation  of  his  love.

rV.  The  mitbb  with  its  golden  plate.  1.  The  mitre.  (1)  This  was  like  a
turban  bound  round  the  head.  (2)  It  was  an  ornament  of  honourable  distinction.  The
term  here  used  ii  rendered  "diadem "in  Job  xxix.  14.    2.  The  golden  plate.    (1)  Thi«


128  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  vui.  1— 3».


was  upon  the  front  of  the  mitre.  It  appears  to  have  been  ornamented  with  flower*  and
leaves.  Possibly  there  is  an  allusion  to  this  when  the  Psalmist,  speaking  of  Messiah,
says,  "but  upon  himself  shall  his  crown  flourish."  This  plate  is  called  the  "holy
crown"  in  the  text.  (2)  The  inscription  upon  it  characterized  Christ.  The  words
were  "Holiness  unto  the  Lord,"  or  "The  Holy  One  of  Jehovah."  If  these  holy
garments  were  intended  to  create  respect  for  the  priesthood  among  the  people  of  Israel
how  we  should  reverence  the  glorious  Antitype ! — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  10 — 12. — LeviticcU  anointings.  The  subjects  of  these  anointings,  as  bronght
under  our  notice  in'  the  text,  are,  generally,  "  the  tabernacle  and  all  that  was  therein."
From  amongst  these  included  things  we  have  afterwards  particularly  specified,  "  the
altar  and  all  his  vessels,"  and  "  the  laver  and  his  foot."  The  anointing  of  Aaron  also
is  distinctly  mentioned.     We  shall  review  these  in  order.

L  The  tabbenagle.  1.  This  was  an  emblem  of  the  moral  universe.  The  holy
places  represented  the  heavens  (Heb.  viii.  1,  2).  Thus  (1)  the  most  holy  place,  where
the  shechinah  was,  represented  the  "  heaven  of  heavens,"  the  "  third  heaven,"  or  that
which,  by  way  of  distinction  and  excellence,  is  called  "heaven  itself"  (Heb.  ix.  24).
(2)  The  holy  place,  which  must  be  passed  through  in  order  to  reach  the  most  holy,
represented  those  regions  of  the  moral  universe  through  which  Jesus  passed  on  his  way
from  his  cross  to  the  throne  of  his  majesty  (Heb.  iv.  14 ;  vii.  26).  In  that  passage  he
was  "in  paradise,"  and  sometimes  manifesting  himself  to  his  disciples  (see  Ps.  xvi.  10;
Acts  ii.  23 — 32 ;  Luke  xxiii.  43 ;  xxiv.  15,  16,  31,  36,  51).  The  spiritual  world  is  not
far  from  us.  (3)  If  the  most  holy  place  represented  the  "  third  heaven,"  and  the  holy
place  leading  to  it  the  second,  then  the  court  of  the  priests  will  stand  for  the  first.  It
describes  the  "  kingdom  of  heaven  "  on  earth,  in  other  words,  the  spiritual  Church  of
God.  In  this  we  are  already  "  come,"  in  faith  and  hope  and  joy,  "  imto  Mount  Sion,
and  unto  the  city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,"  etc.,  and  hear  the  very
voice  of  Jesus  from  the  heavens  above  us  (see  Heb.  xii.  22 — 25).  (4)  The  courts  out-
side represented  the  Church  in  its  risible  part,  viz.  the  court  of  Israel,  the  court  of  the
women,  and  the  court  of  the  Gentiles.  The  distinctions  which  formerly  existed  here
are  now  done  away,  so  that  instead  of  three,  the  courts  are  one  (see  GaL  iii.  25 — 28 ;
Eph.  ii.  11 — 19).  It  is  well  to  be  found  in  these  courts,  for  all  outside  are  in  alienation.
But  we  should  not  rest  satisfied  with  the  profession  of  the  outer  court.  Without  the
spiritual  experience  of  the  court  of  the  priests  we  can  never  pass  into  the  heavens
"  whither  the  Forerunner  is  for  us  entered "  (Heb.  vi  19,  20).  2.  It  was  sanctifij-d
with  the  holy  anointing  oil  (ver.  10).  (1)  This  oil  represented  the  Holy  Spirit  in  his  gilts
and  graves  (comp.  Acts  i.  5  with  z.  38 ;  see  also  2  Cor.  i.  21 ;  1  John  ii.  20,  27).  It
was  oi  peculiar  composition.  The  formula  is  given  in  Exod.  xxx.  23 — 25 ;  but  on  pain
of  excommunication  it  must  not  be  put  to  common  use  (Exod.  xxx.  31 — 33).  The
person  and  offices  of  the  Holy  Ghost  must  be  held  in  the  greatest  reverence ;  to  profane
these  is  fatal  wickedness  (Matt.  xii.  31,  32).  (2)  With  this  oil  the  tabernacle  was
"  sanctified,"  that  is,  separated  to  God,  It  was  so  separated  to  him  for  services  of
worship.  Also  to  be  a  shadow  of  heavenly  things.  So  the  moral  universe  is  claimed
by  God.  The  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  the  principles  of  universal
sanctification.

II.  The  altab  and  the  laveb.  1.  The  altar  and  all  his  vesseh.  (1)  This  b
obviously  the  altar  ol  burnt  o&erings  which  stood  in  the  court  of  the  priests.  The
"  vessels  "  were  those  for  receiving  the  blood  of  the  sacrifices,  and  all  the  implements
used  in  connection  with  the  service  of  the  altar.  (2)  It  typified  Calvary,  the  altar
upon  which  the  Great  Sacrifice  of  the  gospel  was  offered.  And  taken  in  a  grander
lense,  in  consistency  with  the  magnificence  of  the  figure  in  which  the  tabernacle
represents  the  great  universe  of  God,  this  earth  was  the  altar  upon  which  our  Lord
was  oflered.  (3)  The  altar  was  sprinkled  with  the  oil  "  to  sanctify  it."  The  earth  is
thereby  marked  out  as  destined  to  be  sanctified  to  God,  and  sanctified  too  by  the  gifts
and  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  It  was  sprinkled  "  seven  times,"  to  show  the  perfectness
of  tiat  sanctification.  And  is  not  this  the  burden  of  prophetic  hope  (Ps.  xxxvii.  10,
11,  34 ;  Isa.  xi.  6 — 9)?  2.  The  laver  and  his  foot.  (1)  This  also  was  located  in  the
court  of  the  priests.  In  it  they  washed  their  hands  and  feet,  and  also  the  parts  of  the
sacrifices  requiring  washing  according  to  the  Law.    (2)  The  anointing  of  this  was  "  to


CH.  VIII.  1—36  1  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  12»

sanctify  it,"  oi  separate  it  to  God.  It  was  separated  to  him  for  the  purposes  of  the
ceremonial  service.  It  was  also  separated,  to  represent  the  "  laver  of  regeneration "
under  the  gospel,  or  the  "  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Titus  iii.  5).  Those  who  are
spiritually  baptized  into  Christ  are  anointed  with  the  gifts  and  graces  of  his  Holy
Spirit.

III.  Aakon.  1.  The  oil  was  poured  upon  Aaron's  head.  (1)  This  anointing  was
profuse.  "  Poured "  (see  Ps.  cxxxiii.  2).  (2)  It  was  "  to  sanctify  him."  He  was
thus  separated  to  accomplish  the  service  of  God  in  the  tabernacle.  He  was  also  sepa-
rated to  typify  the  Great  High  Priest  of  the  gospel.  2.  But  when  was  the  true  oU
poured  upm,  Jesus?  (1)  We  have  seen  that,  as  Aaron  was  washed  with  water,  so  was
Jesus,  viz.  at  the  Jordan  (notes  on  vers.  1^ — 6).  But  the  baptism  of  Jesus  there  was
not  so  truly  that  conferred  by  John  as  that  which  came  upon  him  from  heaven  (Matt
iii.  16).  (2)  The  second  act  in  the  consecration  of  Christ  appears  to  have  been  in  the
mount  of  transfiguration.  There  he  had  the  "  oil  that  maketh  the  face  to  shine,"  and
was  " anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness  above  his  fellows"  (Ps.  xlv.  7).  This  dazzling
lustre  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  so  profuse  as  to  stream  not  only  out  of  the  pores  of  his
sl?in,  but  to  brighten  all  his  raiment  (comp.  Ps.  cxxxiii.  2  ;  Matt.  xvii.  2).  (3)  As  at  the
Jordan  the  voice  of  the  Father  was  heard  from  the  excellent  glory  approving,  so  on
Tabor  the  same  voice  is  heard  again  (comp.  Matt.  ill.  17 ;  xvii.  5).  He  that  received
the  Spirit  "  not  by  measure  "  is  emphatically  the  Messiah,  the  Anointed  One. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  13 — 21. — TTie  vesting  of  the  priests  and  the  offerings  for  them.  In  the  order  of
the  ceremonies  at  the  consecration  of  the  priests,  after  the  anointing  of  Aaron,  we  have—

I.  The  clothqjq  op  Aaron's  sons.    (Ver.  13.)     1.  They  were  types  of  .Christiana.

(1)  The  high  priest,  as  we  have  seen,  was  a  type  of  Christ.  So  were  the  priests  in
general  types  also  of  him,  viz.  in  everything;  in  which  they  acted  as  representatives  of
the  high  priest.  (2)  But  under  usual  conditions  they  should  be  viewed  as  emblems
of  Christians.  This  is  evidently  taught  in  such  references  as  Exod.  xix.  6 ;  Heb.  x.
9 — 22;  1  Pet.  ii.  9;  Bev.  i.  6;  v.  10.  2.  Their  holy  garments  resembled  some  of
Aaron's.  (1)  Aaron  had  some  by  which  he  was  distinguished  from  his  sons,  and  so
has  Christ  unique  qualities.  In  everything  pertaining  to  bis  Divinity  he  stands  alone
He  claims  the  deepest  reverence.  (2)  The  coats  and  girdles  which  Moses  put  upon  the
sons  of  Airon  were  similar  to  those  articles  bearing  the  same  name  in  which  Aaron
was  cloth  3d.  In  Aaron's  case,  as  we  have  seen,  they  denoted  purity  and  truth  ;  and
so  do  they  denote  these  qualities  in  relation  to  his  sons  (see  Eph.  vi.  14 ;  Rev.  xix.  8).
(3)  This  identity  suggests  that  Christians  have  their  righteousness  in  virtue  of  their
association  with  Christ  (see  Jer.  xxiii.  6  ;  Eom.  iii.  22;  1  Cor.  i.  30;  Phil.  iii.  9).  Th  s
is  otherwise  shown  in  the  fact  that  the  claim  of  the  Levitical  priests  to  those  holy
garments  was  in  virtue  of  their  being  sons  of  Aaron.  Only  the  "  seed "  of  Messiah
(Isa.  liiii  10,  11),  are  clothed  in  the  "  white  linen  which  is  the  righteousness  of  the
saints."  3.  Moses  also  "put  bonnets  upon  them."  (1)  These,  like  the  coats,  were  made
of  white  linen,  and  so,  likewise,  expressed  purity.  They  were  similar  to  the  turban
of  Aaron,  minus  the  "  plate  of  the  holy  crown  of  pure  gold,"  and  its  fastenings  of  lace^
work  of  blue  (Exod.  xxxix.  30, 31).  (2)  These  bonnets  were  "  for  glory  and  for  beauty  "
(Exod.  xxviii.  40).  '  For  "  glory,''  i.e.  honour,  viz.  as  they  served  to  distinguish  tlie
priests  as  the  ministers  of  God.  If  a  messenger  be  despised,  his  message  may  be
brought  into  contempt.  And  for  "  beauty,"  viz.  as  they  represented  the  "  beauty  of
holiness."    True  Christian  honour  is  e'^ermore  the  associate  of  holiness.

II.  'J'he  offerings  for  the  priests.  In  respect  to  these  we  obaerve:  1.  The
priests  laid  their  hands  upon  the  heads  of  the  animals  (vers.  14,  18).  (1)  This  was  the
sign  of  the  confession  of  sin.  It  was  also  the  sign  of  the  transfer  of  sin,  so  constituting
the  animal  (in  type)  vicariously  a  sinner  or  sin-bearer,  liable  to  suffer  its  penalty.

(2)  The  next  thing  in  order,  therefore,  was  the  bleeding  of  the  animal,  in  considera-
tion of  which  the  offerer  stands  justified  or  released  from  the  obligation  to  suffer.

(3)  The  reference  in  all  this  to  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  Christ  and  our  justification
through  faith  in  him  cannot  be  mistaken.  (4)  But  why  did  Aaron,  the  type  of  Christ,
act  thus?  Christ  had  no  sin  of  his  own  to  confess,  and  needed  no  sacrifice  for  himselt
The  answer  is  that  Aaron,  in  this,  acted  not  as  a  type  of  Christ,  but  for  himself  as  a  sinful
man,  and  representatively  for  the  people  (see  Heb.  v.  1 — 3).    In  this  Aaron  is  amtragttd

liBVITICtJS.  K


130  THE  BOOK   OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  vin.  1— S«.

with  Jesus  (see  Heb.  vii.  26 — 28).  2.  The  altar  was  purified  with,  the  Wood  (vers.  15,
19).  (1)  The  earth,  as  the  altar  upon  which  the  great  Antitype  was  offered,  is  purified
by  his  blood,  (a)  As  respects  its  inhabitants.  (5)  As  respects  itself.  The  inheritance
of  man  is  also  redeemed  by  Christ  from  the  curse  of  sin.  (c)  The  full  effects  of  this  will
be  seen  "in  the  regeneration"  or  renewed  state  of  the  earth  indicated  in  prophecy.
(2)  The  altar  was  purified  with  the  typical  blood  "  to  make  reconciliation  upon  it."  So
is  this  earth  for  the  same  purpose  sanctifieu  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  There  is  no  other
planet,  at  least  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  thus  sanctified.  Therefore  if  we  be  not
Aere  "  reconciled  to  God  through  the  death  of  his  Son,"  there  is  no  hope  for  reconciliation
hereafter  or  elsewhere  (see  Heb.  x.  26,  27).  3.  The  offerings  were  presented  upon  the
altar.  (1)  In  the  case  of  the  sin  offering,  the  fat  was  burnt  upon  the  altar,  while  the
body  of  the  beast  was  burnt  without  the  camp  (ver.  16,  17).  Not  only  was  Christ
offered  up  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin  generally  upon  this  earth,  but  more  particularly  "  without
the  gate,"  viz.  of  Jerusalem  (comp.  Heb.  xiii.  11,  12).  (2)  In  the  case  of  the  burnt
offering,  the  whole  ram  was  burnt  upon  the  altar.  This  holocaust  showed  how
absolutely  God  claims  us,  and  therefore  how  completely  we  should  be  devoted,  and,  so
to  speak,  consumed,  in  his  worship  and  service  (Ps.  Ixix.  9;  John  iL  13 — 17).—
J.  A.  M.

Vers.  22 — 36. — The  ram  of  consecration.  This  and  the  ceremonies  connected  form
the  principal  subject  of  the  verses  now  recited.     We  notice —

I.  That  it  was  a  peace  offering.  1.  The  first  ram  was  a  burnt  offering.  (1)  It
was  wholly  consumed  upon  the  altar.  It  was  regarded  wholly  as  the  "  food  of  God "
(ch.  iii.  11 ;  xxi.  6;  Ezek.  xliv.  7;  MaL  i.  7,  12).  (2)  In  this  sacrifice  God  is  con-
templated as  a  righteous  Judge,  whose  justice  claims  everything  we  are  and  have,  and
who,  until  that  justice  is  satisfied,  can  have  no  fellowship  with  man.  2.  Burnt
offerings  were  usually  accompanied  hy  peace  offerings.  (1)  Of  these  a  portion  was
eaten  by  the  worshipper.  This  was  the  expression  of  peace,  reconciliation,  fellowship.
Constantly  associated  with  the  holocaust,  the  opportunity  of  ceremonially  feasting  with
God  was  never  wanting.  In  the  peace  offering  faith  discerns  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  to
lave  so  completely  met  the  claims  of  infinite  justice,  that  we  are  now  accepted  into
favour.  (2)  As  in  the  other  sacrifices,  the  hands  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  laid  upon
it  to  confess  their  sinfulness,  their  need  of  a  Saviour,  and  their  faith  in  the  Eedeemer
of  promise.  It  was  slain  accordingly,  to  foreshadow  the  death  of  Messiah.  The  fat
and  gall  were  burnt,  to  show  how  our  evil  passions,  the  old  man,  must  be  crucified  with
him,  that  the  body  of  sin  may  be  destroyed.

II.  That  its  blood  was  used  in  a  ebmabkablb  way.  1.  It  was  sprinkled  upon
Aaron.  (1)  Upon  his  person,  (o)  On  the  tip  of  his  right  ear,  to  express  obcdienct
(Exod.  xxi.  6).  And  our  Lord's  obedience  was  unto  death  (Phil.  ii.  8).  (6)  Ou
the  thumb  of  the  right  hand,  to  express  the  service  of  doing.  Christ  fulfilled  all
righteousness,  and  finished  the  work  that  was  given  him  to  do  (John  iv.  34  ■  v  17  •
ix.  4;  xyii  4;  Heb.  x.  5—7).  (c)  On  the  great  toe  of  the  right  foot,  to  "express  the
ways.    All  the  ways  of  Jesus  were  infinitely  pleasing  to  God  (Ps.  i.  6  •  xviii.  20  21  •


tively  taken  they  expressed  dffice.  Hence  from  the  earliest  times  a  person  introduced
into  office  IS  said  to  be  invested  in  it,  from  in,  used  intensitiveiy,  and  vestio,  I  clothe.
Ihe  office  of  the  high  priest  was  to  minister  in  the  very  presence  of  God  (see  Heb.  viif
1,  2).  (3)  Jesus,  who  was  washed  with  water  at  the  Jordan^  and  anointed  with  oil
on  the  mount  of  transfiguration,  received  the  final  baptism  of  his  consecration,  that
ol  his  own  blood,  in  Gethsemane  and  Calvary.  As  the  voice  of  God  accredited  him
in  each  of  the  earlier  baptisms,  so  it  accredited  him  again  as  he  was  about  to  enter  into
this  (comp.  Matt.  iii.  17;  xvii.  5;  John  xii.  27-33).  2.  If  was  sprinkled  upon
Aaron  s  sons.  (1)  Upon  their  persons  (ver  24).  The  sons  of  Aaron  were  here  treated
m  like  manner  as  Aaron  was,  to  show  how  in  all  these  things  Christians  are  called  to
be_  like  Christ  (see  Matt.  xx.  22,  23).  This  remark  will  bt  especially  applicable  to
ministers,  who  should  be  "examples  to  the  flock"  (see  Isa.  lxvi.21;  1  Cor  ix  13)
[2)  Upon  their  garments  (ver.  30).     The  office  of  the  priesthood  was  to  minister  in  thi  '


■OH.  vm.  1—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  131

presence  of  God  in  his  tabernacle.  So  the  spiritual  priesthood  have  access  to  God  in
heaven.  We  must  be  anointed  with  the  unction  of  the  Holy  One,  and  sprinkled
with  the  blood  of  Christ,  that  we  may  enter  into  that  most  holy  place  (Heb.  x.  19 — 22 ;
1  John  ii.  20,  27).

III.  That  it  filled  the  hands  of  Aaron  and  his  sons.  1.  It  was  treated  as  a
wave  offering.  (1)  The  breast  had  the  fat  laid  upon  it.  A  bread  offering  also  was
laid  upon  it.  The  whole  was  then  waved  before  the  Lord.  The  shoulder  also  was
heaved  (see  Exod.  xxix.  27).  Thus  God  was  praised  as  the  Creator  and  Dispenser  of
every  good  and  perfect  gift.  (2)  Moses  acted  as  priest  in  all  this  ceremony.  He  put
these  tilings  upon  the  hands  of  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  waved  and  heaved  them.  Prom
this  action  the  ram  of  consecration  took  its  name  (d^ss'jd  ^'n,  eil  miUuim),  the  ram  or
filling  up.  Thus  the  essence  of  the  consecration  was  the  filling  the  hand  with  the
oblation,  or  conferring  the  right  to  offer  sacrifices  to  God  (see  Ezek.  xliii.  26,  margin).
(3)  The  wave  breast  then  came  to  the  lot  of  Moses,  and  Aaron  and  his  sons  appear  to
have  shared  it  with  him  as  the  feast  upon  the  sacred  food  (see  ver.  31).  2.  The
€tremonies  of  the  consecration  Icuted  seven  dags.  (1)  Seven  is  the  numeral  of  perfection,
■o  at  the  close  of  the  seven  days  this  was  a  perfect  consecration,  intimating  that  all  the
powers  of  the  consecrated  ones  should  be  wholly  given  to  God.  (2)  They  "kept
the  charge  of  the  Lord,"  during  these  seven  days,  "  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle."
They  were  not  as  yet  qualified  to  enter  the  holy  place,  and  they  must  not  leave  the
court  of  the  priests  on  pain  of  death  (see  1  Kings  xix.  19 — 21 ;  Matt.  viii.  21,  22 ;
Luke  ix.  61,  62).  (3)  "  Aaron  and  his  sons  did  all  things  which  the  Lord  commanded
by  the  hand  of  Moses."  Had  Jesus  failed  in  any  point,  his  consecration  would  be
imperfect ;  he  could  not  have  become  our  Saviour. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  3 — 5. — A  time  for  puhlicitg.  The  solemn  inauguration  of  Aaron  and  his  sou
Into  their  sacred  oflBce  was  to  have  the  utmost  possible  publicity.     This  was —

L  A  Divine  instbuction.  The  Lord  said,  "  Take  Aaron  .  .  .  and  gather  thou  all
the  congregation  together,"  etc.  (vers.  1 — 3).  "  This  is  the  thing  which  the  Lord
commanded  to  be  done  "  (ver.  5).

XL  A  PROVISION  AGAINST  POPULAR  JEALOUSY.  The  sccue  described  in  Numb.  xvL
shows  only  too  well  how  necessary  it  was  to  convey  to  "  all  the  congregation ""  the
truth  that  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  divinely  appointed  to  their  office.  This  the  more
because  of  the  near  relationship  between  Moses  and  Aaron.

in.  A  PROVISION  FOB  POPULAR  ESTEEM.  It  Was  in  the  last  degree  desirable  that  the
people  should  have  an  exalted  idea  of  the  priesthood,  and,  more  especially,  of  the  high
priesthood.  Everything  which  would  contribute  to  this  would  be  of  real  religious
service.  It'  was,  therefore,  fitting  that  "  all  the  congregation  "  should  be  spectators  of
the  impressive  solemnities  of  the  inaugural  scene.

IV.  A  HELPFUL  INFLUENCE  ON  THEIR  OWN  MINDS.  It  was  of  equal  importance  to  the
Hebrew  commonwealth  that  the  priests  themselves  should  cherish  a  profound  sense  of
the  sacred  and  elevated  character  of  their  work.  For  any  irreverence  or  neglect  of  theirs
was  calculated  to  involve  the  community  in  sin  and  in  disaster  (see  1  Sam.  i.  17;
Mai.  ii.  8).  So  solemn  and  impressive  a  ceremony  as  this,  in  the  sight  of  all  the
people,  would  exert  a  salutary  influence  on  the  mind  both  of  father  and  sons.

In  ordiiiaiy  life,  piety  and  publicity  are  strangers.  Devotion  shuts  itself  in  the  inner
chamber  (Matt.  vi.  6),  or  climbs  up  into  the  fold  of  the  mountain  (Matt.  xiv.  23).  We
nourish  our  holiest  thoughts,  and  form  our  best  resolves,  not  in  the  glare  of  the  public
gathering,  but  in  the  secret  place,  when  alone  with  God.  Nevertheless,  there  are
occasions  when  we  should  not  shun  publicity ;  when  it  is  not  modesty  but  weakness
to  do  so.  When  we  avow  our  attachment  to  our  Saviour,  and  thus  "  confess  him  before
men "  (Matt.  x.  32) ;  still  more,  when  we  enter  upon  any  res]ponsible  office  in  con-
nection with  his  Church  (e.g.  the  Christian  ministry);  and  yet  more,  if  we  are
summoned,  as  Aaron  was,  to  any  post  of  unusual  eminence  and  responsibility,  we  do
well  to  take  the  vows  of  God  upon  us  before  "  all  the  congregation."  If  not  "  a  thing
which  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  done,"  it  is  (1)  a  Divine  suggestion  (Acts  vi.  7 ,
xiii  3;  1  Tim.  vi.  12);  (2)  instructive  to  the  people;  (3)  helpful  to  ourselves.  We
need  all  the  influences  we  can  gain  from  every  source  to  incite  us  to  zealous  labour,  and
to  strengthen  \n  against  temptation.     It  is  right  and  wise  to  avail  ourselves  of  all  the


ISa  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [on.  vm.  1—36.

help  we  gain  from  the  remembrance  that  we  have  confessed  Christ  our  Lord,  and
pledged  ourselves  to  do  his  work  before  "all  the  congregation,"  "before  many
Witnesses." — 0.

Vers.  6 — 9, 14. — The  human  and  Divine  priesthood — contract.  The  setting  apart  of
Aaron  for  his  life-work,  the  high  priesthood  of  Israel,  naturally  suggests  to  us  tha
entrance  of  our  Great  High  Priest  on  the  work  which  his  Father  gave  liim  to  do.
Between  Aaron  and  Christ  there  are  many  points  of  resemblance  (see  below) ;  there
are  also  significant  contrasts.  Respecting  "  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession  "  (Heb.
iii.  2),  it  is  not  the  case  that  there  was —

I.  Appointment  to  office  in  virtue  of  human  birth.  Aaron  was  chosen  to  the
office  of  high  priest,  partly  in  virtue  of  his  descent  from  Levi  (perhaps  partly  in  virtue
of  his  brotherhood  to  Moses).  His  personal  qualities  were  not  such  as  to  make  him
the  most  suitable  man  for  the  office,  independently  of  considerations  of  lineal  descent
and  human  relationship.  Jesus  Ohiist  did  not  owe  his  position  as  our  High  Priest  to
his  human  birth.  He  was  not,  indeed,  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  but  of  Judah,  "  after  the
flesh."  And  though,  through  his  mother,  he  was  a  son  of  David,  in  the  matter  of
human  descent,  this  was  not  in  any  way  material  to  his  ascent  to  royal  power.  His
right  of  office  came  not  thence.

II.  Imposing  inaugural  ceremony.  The  scene  described  in  this  chapter  was
striking,  imposing,  memorable ;  it  would  long  be  borne  in  mind,  never,  indeed,  for-
gotten by  those  who  witnessed  it.  It  formed  part  of  the  national-history.  Imagina-
tion on  our  part  readily  places  before  us  the  solemn  and  suggestive  ceremonies  which
riveted  the  eyes  of  the  congregation  of  Israel.  Through  no  such  solemnities  did  One
greater  than  Aaron  think  well  to  pass  as  he  entered  on  his  work.  It  is  said  that  his
contemporaries  expected  the  Messiah  to  descend  amongst  them  from  the  heavens  while
they  were  worshipping  in  the  temple.  This  he  distinctly  refused  to  do  (Matt.  iv.
5 — 7).  The  ceremony  of  the  baptism  by  John  was  simple  in  the  extreme.  Long
chapters  of  Old  Testament  Scripture  (Exodus  and  Leviticus)  are  occupied  in  narrating
the  inaugural  ceremonies  of  the  human  priesthood ;  five  verses  suffice  to  chronicle  those
of  the  Divine  (Matt.  iii.  13 — 17).  The  profounder  work  of  the  Lord  from  heaven  was
more  fittingly  commenced  by  that  quiet  scene  on  the  banks  of  Jordan.

III.  Outward  AND  VISIBLE  distinction.  (Vers.  7 — 9.)  The  appearance  of  Aaron  and
of  his  successors  in  their  pontifical  attire,  as  described  in  this  chapter,  with  rich  and
coloured  garments  about  them,  and  the  mitre  on  their  head  glittering  with  golden
diadem,  must  have  been  impressive  and  imposing  enough  in  the  eyes  of  the.  people.
How  striking  the  contrast  with  him  who  was  the  carpenter's  Son  of  Nazareth,  who
shunned  all  ostentation  and  parade  (Matt.  xii.  19),  who  had  "  no  beauty  "  (of  out-
ward appearance)  "  that  we  should  desire  him  "  (Isa.  liii.  2),  who  attracted  disciples
to  his  feet,  and  sinners  to  his  side,  only  by  the  wisdom  of  his  words,  and  the  grace  of
his  spirit  and  the  beauty  of  his  life !

IV.  Need  of  purification.  "  Moses  brought  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  washed  them
with  water  "  (ver.  6).  It  was  needful  that  they  should  go  through  a  ceremony  which
signified  the  putting  away  of  "  all  filfhiness  of  the  flesh  and  spini  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  No
need  of  this  in  the  case  of  the  holy  Saviour.  Whatever  his  baptism  signified,  it  did
not  mean  this.  He  was  "a  High  Priest,  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,"  reqtiiring  no
cleansing  streams  whatever  (Heb.  vii.  26  ;  see  John  xiv.  30).

V.  Need  of  pardon.  "  And  he  brought  the  bullock  for  the  sin  offering :  and  Aaron,''
etc.  (ver.  14).  Before  the  human  high  priest  could  be  admitted  to  the  altar,  his  own
sin  must  be  forgiven.  Christ  enten  d  on  his  work,  not  needing  to  present  any  oblation.
With  him,  as  he  was,  the  Divine  Father  was  "  well  pleased  "  (Matt.  iii.  17).

In  entering  on  any  work  to  which  we  may  be  called  of  God,  we  must  remember  that
(1)  we  have  need  to  purify  ourselves  of  the  sin-stains  that  aie  left  on  the  soul ;  (2)  we
have  need  to  seek  for  pardon  for  a  faulty  past  before  we  go  forth  to  a  new  future ;  (3)
we  may  be  careless  of  outward  distinctions,  considering  the  lowliness  of  our  Lord. — 0.

Vers.  7 — 9. — ITie  human  and  Divine  priesthood — comparison.  Between  the  priesthood
of  Aaron  and  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  there  are  not  only  points  of  contrast  (see
above)  but  also  of  resemblance.     The  "  holy  garments"  in  which  the  human  priest  wa«


OH.  viu.  1— 36.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  133

attired  supplied  marked  and  intentional  suggestions  of  the  attributes  and  the  work  o.
the  Divine.     Thus  we  are  reminded  by  Aaron's  appearance  of —

I.  Htb  personal  hoi-dtess.  "  The  stuff  of  all  of  them  was  linen,  and  .  .  .  most  be
understood  to  have  been  white."  This  was  associated  with  the  idea  of  bodily  cleanness,
and  hence  with  righteousness  of  soul  (see  Rev.  xix.  8).  The  High  Priest  of  our
profession  was  he  "  that  loved  righteousness,"  of  whom  it  was  true  that  "  the  sceptre  of
righteousness  was  the  sceptre  of  his  kingdom  "  (Heb.  i.  8,  9).

II.  His  all-sufficient  stkenqth.  The  girdle  with  which  Aaron  was  girded  (ver.  7)
was  suggestive  of  strength,  activity,  readiness  for  the  appointed  work.  To  "  gird  up
the  loins  "  was  to  be  prepared  for  immediate  and  effective  action.  Christ  is  he  who
always  stands  ready  and  mighty  to  save ;  prepared  at  the  moment  of  our  readiness  to
put  forth  his  arm  of  power,  and  to  redeem  us  with  the  "  saving  strength  of  his  right
hand."

III.  His  kepresentativb  chabactbb.  On  the  breastplate  of  the  ephod  (ver.  8)
were  the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  With  these  on  his  person  he  appeared
before  Grod  in  the  holy  place  ;  evidently  representing  them  and  appearing  on  their  behalf.
Our  Divine  Redeemer,  assuming  our  human  nature,  suffered  and  died  in  our  stead,  and
now  "  appears  in  the  presence  of  God /or  us  "  (Heb.  ix.  24).

IV.  His  spiritual  fitness  for  his  great  work.  The  "Urim  and  Thummim"
(ver.  8)  signified  "  lights"  and  "  perfections ;  "  they  were  the  means  by  which  Aaron
received  inspiration  from  Jehovah.  Our  Lord  was  one  "  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the
fulness  of  the  godhead  bodily  "  (Col.  i.  9),  particularly  (see  context)  Divine  wisdom.
He  is — not  merely  has,  but  is — "  the  truth  "  (John  xiv.  6),  and  He  is  "  the  wisdom  of
God  "  (1  Cor.  i.  24,  30 ;  Col.  ii.  3).  He  who,  in  the  exercise  of  absolute  wisdom,  knows
the  mind  of  the  Father,  and  "  knows  what  is  in  man "  also,  is  that  omniscient  One
who  is  perfectly  equipped  for  the  wondrous  problem  he  has  undertaken  to  work  out.

V.  The  final  triumph  of  his  cause.  "  He  put  the  mitre  upon  his  head  "  (ver.  9).
The  high  priest  of  Israel  had  a  touch  of  royalty — he  wore  a  crown  upon  his  head.  The
High  Priest  of  man  is  royal  also.  "  Upon  his  head  are  many  crowns."  He  is  "  exalted
to  be  a  prince  "  as  well  as  a  Saviour.  And  he  is  "able  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto
himself"  (Phil.  iii.  21;  see  Phil.  ii.  9,  10).

VI.  His  ultimate  design.  "  Upon  the  mitre,  even  upon  his  forefront,  did  he  put  the
golden  plate"  (ver.  9),  and  on  this  golden  diadem  were  inscribed  the  sacred,  significant
words,  "  Holiness  to  tlie  Lord  "  (Exod.  xxviii.  36).  Did  not  this  sentence,  placed  in  the
forefront  of  the  high  priest's  mitre,  signify  that  the  great  end  of  his  ministrations  was
the  establishment  among  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  of  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  ?  The  purpose
for  which  he  was  appointed  would  not  be  attained  until  that  great  and  noble  aim  was
reached.  For  that  he  lived  and  wrought.  That,  too,  is  the  end  of  the  Divine  priest-
hood. Christ  came  to  "put  away  sin  by  the  sacriflce  of  himself"  (Heb.  ix.  26),
to  establish  on  the  earth  that  kingdom  of  God  which  is  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy
in  the  Holy  Ghost."

Let  us  learn — 1.  The  exceeding  greatness  of  our  privilege.  In  Jesus  Christ  himself
(nnd  in  his  salvation)  are  these  great  excellencies ;  they  were  only  jipon  and  outside
the  Hebrew  priest.  2.  The  corresponding  guilt  of  (1)  defiant  rejection,  (2)  frivolous
disregard,  (3)  continued  indecision  (Heb.  ii.  3). — C.

Ver.  2. — Spiritual  apparel.  "  Take  Aaron  and  his  sons  with  him  and  the  garments."
Aaron  and  his  sons  were  about  to  be  invested.  Their  formal  investiture  of  the  priestly
office  was  to  be  signified  and  symbolized  by  their  putting  on  the  sacerdotal  garments.
The  robes  of  office  are  fully  described  (vers.  7 — 9).  These  "  holy  garments  "  (Exod.
xxviii.  2)  not  only  gave  an  imposing  and  inspiring  appearance  to  the  officiating  priests,
but  they  severally  and  separately  suggested  certain  spiritual  qualities.  The  white  linen
spoke  of  righteousness,  the  girdle  of  activity  or  strength,  etc.  (see  above).

We  who  are  servants  of  Jesus  Christ  are  also  priests  (1  Pet.  ii.  5  ;  Rev.  i.  6).  There
are  certain  things  in  which  we  are  to  be  robed.  We  are,  speaking  generally,  to  "  put
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (Rom.  xiii.  14) ;  to  put  on  "  the  new  man,"  etc.  (Eph.  iv.  24).
But  there  are  certain  graces  which  we  are  more  particularly  to  wear.

I.  The  robe  of  humility.  This  is  the  beginning  and  the  end,  the  first  and  the
last  grxce,  the  foundation  and  the  topstone  of  Christian  character  ■  we  may  call  it  an


j^34  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  vin.  1— S6.


under-garment  and  an  overcoat  of  the  Christian  wardrohe.   "  Be  clothed  with  humility"

II.  The  gaement  op  faith.  This  is  that  clothing  without  which  we  cannot  be
justified  before  God  now,  nor  permitted,  to  sit  down  to  the  heavenly  banquet  hereafter
(Matt.  xxii.  11, 12).  ,    ^  ,        .  ,  ^.  ^

III.  The  aiBDLE  of  tkuth.  (Eph.  vi.  14.)  It  is  truth,  heavenly  wisdom,  which
knits  all  other  things  together,  and  gives  play  and  power  to  the  spiritual  faculties.

IV.  The  SAKDAL8  OP  PEACE.    (Rom.  X.  15 ;  Eph.  vi.  15.)

V.  The  cbown  of  bighteouskess.  (2  Tim.  iv.  8.)  Righteousness  is  the  regal  thing,
when  that  is  gone  the  crown  is  fallen  from  our  head  (Lam.  v.  16).

To  those  who  " overcome"  (Rev.  iii.  5),  who  are  "  faithful  unto  death  "  (Rev.  ii.  10),
who  "  keep  the  faith "  (2  Tim.  iv.  7),  it  shall  be  given  to :  1.  Be  clothed  in  white
raiment "  (spotless  purity).  2.  To  receive  "  the  crown  of  life ''  (life  in  all  its  celestial
fulness  and  blessedness).  3.  To  wear  "  the  crown  of  righteousness"— "a  crown  of  glory
that  fadeth  not  away  "  (1  Pet.  v.  4).— C.

Vers.  6,  8,  23,  24,  30. — Equipment  for  special  work.  There  was  a  sense  in  which  the
whole  congregation  of  Israel  constituted  a  priesthood.  It  was  an  early  promise  that
they  should  be  a  "  kingdom  of  priests  and  a  holy  nation  "  (Exod.  xix.  6).  And  such,
indeed,  they  were,  so  far  as  they  entered  into  and  fulfilled  the  purposes  of  God.  They
were :  1.  Separate  from  surrounding  people  (holy  unto  the  Lord).  2.  Permitted  to  draw
near  to  God.  3.  Allowed  to  bring  the  sacrificial  victim  to  the  holy  place  and  slay  it;
indeed,  in  the  case  of  the  paschal  lamb,  they  acted  as  priests  without  aid  from  any  other
hand.

But  there  were  those  who  were :  1.  Separated  from  them,  and  were  thus  holier  than
they.  2.  Allowed  to  draw  nearer  to  the  Divine  presence.  3.  Designated  to  be  continu-
ally offering  up  sacrifices  to  Jehovah.  These  were  the  priests  and  the  high  priests  of
the  Lord  in  an  especial  sense,  and  they  needed  special  equipment  for  their  special  work.
From  this  chapter  we  select  four  principal  points^

I.  Special  cleansing  op  soul.  '  (Ver.  6.)

II.  Special  consecbation  op  spieit.  (Vers.  23,  24.)  One  of  the  most  significant
rites  in  the  entire  ceremony  of  consecration  was  the  taking  by  Moses  of  the  blood  of  th«
''  ram  of  consecration  "  (ver.  22),  and  putting  it  "  upon  the  tip  of  Aaron's  right  ear,  and
upon  the  thumb  of  his  right  hand,  and  upon  the  great  toe  of  his  right  foot."  The  inter-
pretation of  this  symbolism  hardly  admits  of  error.  What  other  truth  could  it  imjwrt  but
that  Aaron  was  thus  set  apart,  not  only  generally  for  the  service  of  the  Lord,  but  specially
in  every  member  of  his  frame,  in  every  faculty  of  his  mind  ?  He  was  to  have :  1.  An  open
ear,  to  welcome  every  word  of  the  Lord.  2.  A  ready  hand,  to  discharge  diligently  and
conscientiously  his  daily  duties.  3.  A  quick  foot,  to  run  in  the  way  of  God's  command-
ments.

HI.  Special  sympathy  with  men.  (Ver.  8.)  The  plate  on  which  were  inscribed
the  names  of  the  twelve  tribes  was,  as  the  word  indicates,  a  Jreost-plate :  so  that  the
high  priest  symbolically  bore  the  children  of  Israel  on  his  heart.  He  carried  their  burden
into  the  presence  of  God.

IV.  Special  endowment.  (Ver.  30.)  The  precious  ointment,  the  anointing  oil,
upon  the  head  that  ran  down  upon  Aaron's  beard,  that  went  down  to  the  skirts  of  his
garments  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  2),  probably  symbolized  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  of  God  outpoured
upon  the  heart,  affecting  the  whole  nature,  diflusing  the  delightful  fragrance  of  piety
and  virtue.

We  learn  from  these  particulars — 1.  That  we  must  not  covet  posts  of  special  diffi-
culty except  we  are  equipped  with  peculiar  qualifications.  Not  every  good  or  every
earnest  Cliristian  man  is  fitted  to  take  high  office  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  2.  That  if
we  feel  ourselves  summoned  to  special  work,  we  must  seek  all  possible  spiritual  equip-
ment. The  conditions  of  successful  service  are  those  indicated  above :  (1)  The  full
cleansing  of  our  souls  and  lives  from  Impurity  (Ps.  li.  7, 10, 11,  13 ;  Isa.  Iii.  11 ;  1  John
iii.  3).  (2)  The  dedication  of  our  whole  selves  to  the  service  of  Christ ;  heart  and  life ;
soul  and  body ;  having  every  faculty  of  the  mind,  every  organ  of  our  frame  (ear,  hand,
foot),  ready  for  sacred  work.  (3)  Tender  sympathy  with  men;  "f,  heart  at  leisure
from  itself  to  soothe  and  sympathize."    We  shall  do  but  little/or-  men  except  we  acquire


OH.  VIII.  1—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  135

the  blessed  art  of  sympathizing  with  them.  A  sympathetic  spirit  is  a  helpful,  influen-
tial, winning  spirit.  (4)  Endowment  of  all  needful  grace  from  on  high.  This  must  he
gained  from  Grod,  who,  in  answer  to  believing  prayer,  "  giveth  liberally."  Purity,  con-
secration, sympathy,  grace, — these  are  the  qualifications  for  high  office,  the  sources  of
power,  the  assurance  of  success. — C.

Vers.  33 — 36. — The  burden  of  the  Lord.  It  is  in  our  nature  to  love  distinction,  office,
power.  The  instincts  and  impulses  of  our  humanity  enter  with  us  into  the  service  of
the  Lord ;  they  belong  to  us  as  subjects  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  (see  Mark  x.  28,
35,  etc.).  But  here,  as  elsewhere,  distinctions  and  duties,  prizes  and  perils,  honours  and
anxieties  go  together.     Weare  reminded —

I.  That  protracted  preparation  mat  be  necesbart  for  high  office  in  the  Church
(ver.  33).  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  required  to  go  through  consecration  services  fur
seven  days.  It  seems  to  us  as  if  they  must  have  become  wearisome  by  exceeding
length.  But  for  such  services  as  he  and  they  were  to  tender,  such  preparation  was
none  too  long.  Consider  how  Moses  was  long  in  Midian,  and  Paul  in  Arabia,  preparing
for  after-work.  Our  Lord  himself  went  "  into  the  wilderness  "  and  into  "  desert  places,"
preparing  himself  for  his  Divine  ministry.  In  proportion  to  the  seriousness,  the  great-
ness of  the  work  we  have  to  do,  we  may  expect  to  find  the  extent  and  severity  of  the
preparatory  work.

II.  That  unpalatable  communications  mat  have  to  be  made,  in  conformity  with
God's  will.  Moses  might  have  shrunk  (probably  would  have  done  so)  from  voluntarily
imposing  such  protracted  services  on  Aaron ;  but  he  had  no  option.  God's  will  was
clear,  and  he  had  no  course  but  to  obey ;  "  so  I  am  commanded,"  said  he  (ver.  35).
Again  and  again  the  minister  of  Christ  has  to  say  or  do  things  he  would  gladly  leave
unsaid  or  undone.  But  in  such  cases  he  must  "  not  confer  with  flesh  and  blood  "
(Gal.  1.  16),  but  do  the  will  of  the  Master  he  serves  (see  1  Sam.  iii.).

III.  That  disobedience  to  the  clear  will  of  God  involves  great  danger:  "Keep
the  charge  of  the  Lord,  that  ye  die  not "  (ver.  35).  We  cannot  undertake  great  duties
without  incurring  the  most  serious  responsibilities  and  running  grave  risks.  If  we  take
the  post  of  "  watchman  unto  the  house  of  Israel,"  we  must  speak  the  true  and  faithful
word,  or  the  blood  of  souls  will  be  required  at  our  hand  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  7,  8).  They
who  stand  in  God's  house  and  speak  in  his  Name,  but  who  depart  from  his  Word,
grievously  mislead  their  brethren,  and  must  be  answerable  to  the  Lord  their  Judge  at
the  day  of  account.

IV.  That  an  obedient  heart  need  not,  and  will  not,  shrink  from  the  com-
mandments OF  THE  Lord.  (Ver.  36.)  Aaron  and  his  sons  did  not  question  or  hesitate ;
they  obeyed.  Doubtless  they  found,  as  we  shall  find,  that :  1.  What  seems  formidable
in  prospect  becomes  simple  and  manageable  in  actual  engagement.  2.  God  helps  with
his  inspiring  Spirit  those  who  go  with  alacrity  to  ttieir  work.  3.  There  are  unsuspected
pleasures  in  .sacred  service.  "His  commandments  are  not  grievous;"  his  "yoke  is
easy,  his  burden  light ; "  his  statutes  are  not  our  complaints  but  our  songs  in  the  house
of  our  pilgrimage  (Ps.  cxix.  54). — 0.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Public  inauguration  of  Divine  service.  I.  All  the  people  gathered
TOGETHER.  1.  Religion  is  universal,  as  human  necessity  and  sin.  God  and  man
reconciled  and  united  in  fellowship.  JSTo  human  condition  dispenses  with  worship.  We
should  labour  to  get  ail  the  people  to  the  tabernacle.  God  invites  them.  His  ministers
should  summon  them.  No  excuse  can  be  suffered  either  for  their  absence  or  for  the
lack  of  success  in  gathering  them  together.  We  shall  succeed  best  when  we  speak  to
them  in  the  Name  of  God  and  with  his  own  Word.  Lower  means  and  motives,  if
employed  at  all,  must  be  kept  in  subordinate  places.  2.  There  are  no  secrets  in  reli-
gion ;  no  esoteric  doctrine ;  no  rites  or  privileges  which  are  not  for  the  people.  If  the
priests  are  set  apart,  the  people  witness  their  consecration,  and  sanction  it  and  take
part  in  it.  The  priests  are  for  the  people.  A  Church  which  withholds  a  part  of  the
Lord's  Supper  from  the  congregation  cannot  be  a  true  Church.  In  the  commandment
to  gather  the  people  was  the  implicit  doctrine  of  universal  priesthood,  afterwards  (as  in
1  Pet.)  more  perfectly  expressed  when  the  great  High  Priest  had  come.

II.  The  foundation  on  which  all  relioion  stands  is  the  bkvealeo  Wobd  anb


136  THE  BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.  [oh.  viu.  1— 3&

WILL  OF  God.  The  Lord  spake  to  Moses.  Moses  did  as  the  Lord  commanded  him,
Moses  said  to  the  congregation,  "  This  is  the  thing  which  the  Lord  commanded  to  be
done."    Mere  will-worship  is  unacceptable  to  God.     We  must  beware  of  two  errors.

1.  Dependence  on  mere  tradition  in  contrast  with  the  Word.  No  need  of  a  8upple<
mentary  revelation,  for  it  implies  that  the  Word  was  not  sufficient— no  authority  in  it,
for  the  fathers  and  those  who  handed  on  the  tradition  were  liable  to  err  and  falsify.

2.  Expediency  may  mislead  us  into  disobedience;  fashion  in  worship;  convenience
oonsulted ;  pure  truth  hidden ;  man  usurping  God's  place.

III.  Public  consecration  of  priesthood.  The  people  saw  the  men,  their  garments,
the  consecrating  oil,  the  atoning  sacrifices,  the  basket  of  unleavened  bread.  1.  Spiritual
leaders  should  be  distinguishable,  both  personally  and  officially.  2.  We  should  remem-
ber they  are  men,  and  liable  to  sin,  and  needing  the  same  sacrifices  as  all  others.

3.  The  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth  is  their  main  qualification.  4.  They
are  nothing  unless  anointed,  i.e.  they  are  wholly  dependent  on  the  Spirit  of  God — not
a  line  of  succession,  but  a  personal  inspiration.  5.  Their  ministry  being  for  the
people,  among  the  people,  and  with  the  help  of  the  people,  let  the  people  by  their
assembly  sanction  tlieir  election  and  approve  their  consecration.  A  God-given  ministry
is  not  imposed  upon  congregations,  but  welcomed  by  their  free  choice. — E.

Ver.  6. — "And  Moses  brought  Aaron  and  Ms  sons,  and  washed  them  with  water*
Not  hands  and  feet  only,  as  in  daily  ministrations,  but  the  whole  body,  symbolizing
entire  spiritual  cleansing.

I.  Take  this  cleansing  as  man's  obedience.  It  set  forth :  1.  Confession  of  sin  and
dependence  on  Divine  grace.  2.  Personal  consecration — entire  devotion  to  the  service
of  God.  3.  As  performed  by  priests,  the  acceptance  of  a  place  in  the  priestly  office
and  before  the  altar  demanded  consiiicuous  holiness  and  purity.

II.  Thus  was  typified  the  Divine  promise.  1.  That  man  should  be  cleansed  really
by  the  Spirit.  2.  That  a  perfect  high  priesthood  should  be  provided.  3.  That  the
necessary  im]  lerfection  and  impurity  of  an  earthly  service  should  be  swallowed  up
hereafter  in  the  holy  perfection  of  the  heavenly  service,  when  all  that  approach  God
shall  be  like  him. — R.

Vers.  7 — 9. — Aaron's  dress.  Coat,  girdle,  robe,  ephod,  breastplate,  Urim  and  Thum-
mim,  mitre,  golden  plate,  and  crown,— all  significant,  and  fulfilled  in  Christ.  The  two
main  ideas  are  mediation  and  government.

I.  The  high  priest  is  clothed  as  mediator.  1.  To  offer  sacrifice  for  sins.  2,  To
enter  into  the  presence  of  Jehovah  as  intercessor.  3.  To  obtain  and  pronounce,  as
representative,  the  Divine  benediction.

II.  The  high  priest  is  clothed  as  king.  1.  With  power  to  guide,  counsel,  command
as  an  oracle.  2.  With  exalted  jiersonality  to  receive  homage  as  the  king  of  righteous-
ness, the  glory  of  God  revealed.  3.  As  crowned,  to  establish  and  maintain  his
kingdom  among  men — ruling  their  hearts  and  lives,  not  by  the  power  of  this  world,
but  by  the  priestly  power  of  fellowship  with  God,  for  man  is  himself  made  kingly  as
he  is  admitted  into  the  innermost  chamber  of  God's  presence. — K.

Vers.  10 — 12.— Anointing.  The  tabernacle,  the  altar,  the  vessels,  the  laver  and  its
foot,  Aaron  the  high  [uiest.  The  main  intention  to  lift  up  the  thoughts  of  all,  both
priests  and  people,  to  Jehovah  as  the  Source  of  all  good  gifts.  The  sprinkling  was
seven  times,  to  denote  the  covenant  relation  between  God  and  Israel.

L  The  service  of  God  requires  special  consecration— both  of  persons  and  places
and  instrumentalities.  1.  To  keep  the  world's  corruption  away.  2.  To  exalt  the
faculties  and  feelings.  3.  To  help  us  to  maintain  the  remembrance  of  the  Divine
covenant,  and  therefore  to  lay  hold  by  special  intercourse  with  God  of  his  gifts.  4.  To
enable  us,  by  concentration  of  efforts,  to  make  the  influence  of  religion  more  powerful
in  the  world.  Great  mistake  to  suppose  that,  by  brealiing  down  distinctions  between
the  believing  and  the  unbelieving,  the  multitudes  are  brought  nearer  to  God ;  on  the
contrary,  the  effect  is  to  lessen  the  spiritual  efScacy  of  religious  ordinances,  and  to
postpone  the  triumph  of  God's  poople.

II.  The  true  anointing  of  the  Spirit,  the  true  distinction  of  the  mlnistbt  anb


OH.  nc  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  137

OF  THE  MEANS  EMPLOTBD.  1.  Distinguish  between  the  rite  itself  and  its  fulfiliaent.
Man  anoints  with  oil,  God  with  the  Spirit.  The  two  baptisms  witli  water  and  with  the
Holy  Ghost.  2.  Special  responsibility  of  those  in  office  for  the  possession  of  spiritual
power.  We  must  not  worship  our  own  nets.  They  are  nothing  if  not  successful.
By  their  fruits  the  living  trees  will  be  known.  3.  God  will  be  inquired  of  to  bestow
his  grace ;  the  anointing  by  his  commandment  was  a  renewal  of  his  promise  to  bestow
his  gifts  when  they  are  asked.  It  was  a  covenant  ceremony,  and  represented  a
covenant  life.  4.  Spiritual  men  engaged  in  the  fulfilment  of  spiritual  duties  will,  as
much  as  possible,  separate  themselves  from  all  earthly  entanglements  and  incumbrances.
The  oil  was  poured  on  the  head  of  the  priest,  and  flowed  downwards  to  the  skirts  of  his
garments,  to  signify  that  he  must  be  totally  possessed  by  the  claims  of  his  office,  and
endowed  in  every  energy  and  act  by  the  bestowment  of  the  Spirit.  What  an  encourage-
ment to  holiness,  and  at  the  same  time  what  an  incentive  to  prayer  1  We  are  kings
and  priests.  If  we  forget  our  anointing,  we  not  only  lose  our  priestly  purity,  but  our
princely  power  over  the  world.  A  degraded  priesthood  the  curse  of  the  Church  and  the
plague  of  mankind.  A  revived  ministry  the  hope  of  the  future.  "  Brethren,  pray  for
us."     "  Ye  have  an  imction  from  the  Holy  One." — E.

Vers.  13 — 36. — The  sacrifices  of  consecration.  Aaron  and  his  sons.  Holy  week  of
separation.  "  So  Aaron  and  his  sons  did  all  things  which  the  Lord  commanded  by  the
hand  of  Moses."  Moses,  the  mediator  of  the  covenant,  consecrated  those  who  should
afterwards  fulfil  the  functions  of  the  sanctuary.  The  order  of  the  sacrifices  was :
1.  The  sin  offering.  2.  The  burnt  offering.  3.  The  peace  offering.  Or  (1)  expiation,
(2)  obedience,  (3)  acceptance — the  three  great  facts  of  the  covenant  life  of  God's  people.
That  all  these  should  be  included  in  the  consecration  of  the  priesthood  betokened  the
entire  subordination  of  that  mere  temporary  mediation  to  the  fundamental  relation
between  God  and  man.  No  priest  was  between  the  holiness  of  God  and  the  sinfulness
of  men  in  any  other  sense  than  as  a  servant  of  that  covenant  which  came  out  of  the
free  grace  of  God.    Here  there  is —

I.  The  true  basis  of  religion  set  forth.  It  rests  on  (1)  <A«  universal  necessity  of
man,  and  (^)  the  universality  of  Divine  grace.  Illustrate  from  history  of  man's  reli-
gions how  this  basis  has  been  ignored.  Priesthood  raised  above  people  as  though  holy
in  themselves.  Favouritism  in  heaven  the  exciting  motive  to  sacrifices.  Merit  in  man
the  measure  of  peace.

II.  The  typical'significance  of  the  Mosaic  economy  pointing  to  the  perfection  of
THE  DrviNE  provision  for  human  salvation.  All  the  priests,  Aaron  and  his  sons,
are  sinful,  and  require  sacrifices  of  atonement.  Their  confession  of  imperfection  was  itself
an  appeal  to  Gfld  to  supply  the  sinless  priest,  the  perfect  service,  the  everlasting  medi-
ation. Jesus  Christ  the  High  Priest.  1.  His  official  peiffection,  arising  out  of  his
personal  dignity  as  Son  of  God,  and  yet  able  to  sympathize  with  those  for  whom  he
intercedes  as  Son  of  man.  Spotless  purity  and  perfect  obedience  could  alone  satisfy
the  requirements  of  a  perfect  Law.  2.  Our  faith  in  Christ  sees  in  him  not  only  a  priestly
Person,  but  a  Sacrifice  actually  offered.  The  true  sacrificial  work  of  Christ  was  not
merely  his  humiliation  in  living  a  human  life,  but  his  death  on  the  cross,  which  was
supremely  the  offering  Up  of  his  blood,  his  life,  as  a  true  substitution  for  man.  The
death  of  the  victim  was  a  necessary  part  of  the  ceremony.  Thus  our  High  Priest  must
enter  the  holiest  with  blood,  and  no  blood  but  his  own  could  represent  the  whole
humanity  of  man  offered  up — ^no  sufferings  but  his  could  express  perfect  fulfilment  of
the  Father's  will.  3.  The  priesthood  of  Christ  secures  our  acceptance,  and  make*  our
religious  life  liberty,  not  bondage. — R.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IX.

Thb  fibst  priestly  acts  of  Aaron  and
HIS  SONS  are  recounted  In  the  chapter  follow-
ing that  which  narrates  their  consecration.

Vera.    1—6.— On   the  eighth  day.     The


seven  days  of  coosecration  being  now  over,
Aaron  for  the  first  time  offers  a  sin  offering
and  burnt  offerin";  for  himself,  and  a  sin  offer-
ing, a  burnt  offering,  a  peace  offering,  and  a
moat  offering  for  the  congregation.  He  ia
still  instructed  by  Moses  as  to  what  he  is
to  do,  but  it  is  through  him  that  the  oom-


138


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  n.  1—24.


maTid  is  given  to  the  people  to  present  their  I
offerings,  and  it  is  he  that  slays  the  victims
and  offers  their  blood.  His  oven  sin  offering
is  a  yonng  calf,  or  young  bull  calf,  whereas
the  sin  offering  commanded  for  the  high
priest  on  ordinary  occasions  was  a  _  young
bull,  further  advanced  in  age  (oh.  iv.  3) ;
and  in  presenting  the  blood  he  does  not  take
it  into  the  sanctuary  according  to  the  regu-
lations in  ch.  iv.  6,  but  uses  it  as  Moses
had  done  in  the  sin  offerings  of  the  previous
week,  the  purpose  of  the  difference  being  to
ehow  tliat  Aaron's  full  dignity  had  not  yet
devolved  upon  him.  This  did  not  take
place  until  he  had  gone  into  the  tabernacle
with  Moses  (ver.  23).  A  ram  is  again  taken
for  the  burnt  offering,  as  had  been  the  case
in  Moses'  sacrifice  of  the  previous  week.
The  children  of  Israel  now  present  a  kid,
the  offering  generally  made  by  a  prince,
that  for  the  congregation  being  a  young
bull.  In  the  words  for  to  day  the  lord  will
appear  unto  you,  Moses  promises  the  Divine
appearance  afterwards  vouchsafed  (ver.  23).

Ver.  7.— Make  an  atonement  for  thyself,
and  for  the  people.  By  means  of  the  sin
offering  for  the  high  priest,  whose  sin
brought  guilt  both  on  himself  and  upon
the  people  (ch  iv.  3).  After  lie  had  (sym-
bolically) purified  himself  and  them  of  thii
guilt,  he  was  to  offer  the  offering  of  the
people,  which  should  purify  them  from  the
guilt  contracted  by  their  own  sins,  and  make
an  atonement  for  them.

Vers.  8 — 14.  —  The  high  priest's  sin
offering  and  burnt  offering  for  himself.  The
meat  offering  does  not  appear  to  have  accom-
panied the  burnt  offering — the  law  having
not  yet  been  promulgated  which  ordered
that  the  two  sacrifices  should  always  be
presented  together  (Numb.  xv.  4).  The
burnt  offering,  with  the  pieces  thereof,  in
ver.  13,  should  rather  be  ffie  hurnt  offering
in  its  several  pieces.  The  sinfulness  of  the
Aaronic  priesthood  and  the  need  of  a
perfect  priest  is  indicated  by  this  sacrifice
(see  Heb.  vii.  24—27).

Vers.  15— 21.— The  people's  sin  offering,
burnt  offering,  meat  ofiering,  and  peace
offerings  follow.  The  meat  offering  is  said
to  have  been  bnmt  upon  the  altar,  beside  the
burnt   sacrifice    of    the    morning.      It    is

grobable  that,  on  this  occasion,  the  people's
umt  offering,  which  consisted  of  a  calf  and
a  lamb,  took  the  place  of  the  ordinary  morn-
ing sacrifice  of  a  lamb  (Exod.  xxix.  38).
Aaron  is  said  to  have  offered  the  burnt
offering  according  to  the  manner,  or,  as  it  is
given  in  the  margin,  ordinance,  that  is,  he
burnt  the  flesh  on  the  altar  (ch.  i.  7 — 9) ;
he  abo  bnmt  the  bandfnl  of  the  meat  offer-
ing, and  he  bnmt  the  fat  of  the  peace  offer-
ing, upon  the  altar.     He  had    previously.


burnt  the  fat  of  his  own  sin  offering,  and
the  flesh  of  his  bnmt  offering.  Fire,  there-
fore, was  present  upon  the  altar,  and  was
used  by  Aaron,  as  by  Moses,  for  sacrificial
purposes  before  the  fire  came  out  from  tha
Lord  as  described  in  ver.  24.

Ver.  22. — And  Aaron  lifted  up  his  hand
or  (according  to  the  more  probable  reading)
hands.  This  was  the  first  priestly  bene-
diction by  Aaion,  given  from  the  elevated
standing-place  which  he  occapied  by  the
side  of  the  altar.

Ver.  23. — Moses  (for  the  last  time)  and
Aaron  (for  the  first  time)  went  into  the  taber-
nacle in  the  character  of  priest.  During
this  visit  Moses  committed  to  Aaron  the
care  of  the  things  within  the  tabernacle,  as
he  had  already  given  him  the  charge  of  all
connected  with  the  sacrifices  of  the  court.
Not  till  after  this  is  Aaron  fully  initiated
into  his  office.  "No  man  taketh  this
honour  unto  himself,  but  he  that  is  called
of  God,  as  was  Aaron "  (Heb.  v.  4).  On
coming  out  from  the  tabernacle,  Moses  and
Aaron,  standing  near  the  door,  unite  in
blessing  the  congregation,  in  order  to  show
the  harmony  between  them  and  the  capacity
of  blessing  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  enjoyed
by  Aaron  as  by  Moses.  The  latter  has
now  divested  himself  of  that  part  of  his
office  which  made  him  the  one  mediator
between  God  and  his  people.  Aaron  is
henceforth  a  type  of  Christ  as  well  as
Moses.  While  giving  the  joint  blessing,
the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  all  the
people,  proceeding  from  the  ark,  and  en-
veloping the  lawgiver  and  the  priest  as  they
stood  together.

Ver.  24. — And  there  came  a  fire  out  from
before  the  Lord.  The  sacrifices  were  already
smouldering  on  the  altar,  a  ram,  a  calf,  and
a  lamb,  besides  the  internal  fat  of  a  young
bull,  a  kid,  a  bullock,  and  a  ram,  and  a
handful  of  flour.  They  would  have  con-
tinued smouldering  all  the  day  and 'the
night,  but  a  miraculous  fire  issued  from
the  tabernacle,  and  consumed  the  whole  in
the  sight  of  the  people.  So  fire  fell  and
consumed  Solomon's  sacrifice  at  the  dedica-
tion of  the  temple.  Jewish  tradition  re-
ports that  the  fire  was  always  kept  alive
until  the  reign  of  Manasseh,  when  it  became
extinguished.  When  the  people  saw  this
sight,  they  shouted,  and  fell  on  t'-eir  faces.
They  had  been  standing  in  a  state  of
intense  expectation,  awaiting  the  fulfilment
of  the  promise  that  the  Lord  would  appear
unto  them  to-day,  and  watching  the  acts  of
the  two  brothers ;  and  their  feelings  are  now
raised  to  the  utmost  enthusiasm  and  awe  by
the  appearance  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and
the  action  of  the  Divine  me.  See  2  Chron.
vu.  3.


OH.  IX.  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  139


HOMILETICa

Vers.  8 — 23. — The  first  act  of  the  new  priesthood  is  sacrifice,  by  which  reconciliation
was  ceremonially  effected ;  the  second  (vers.  22,  23),  a  double  benediction.  As  soon  as
the  people  are  reconciled  to  him,  God's  blessing  abundantly  pours  itself  on  them.  The
sacrifice  is:  1.  For  themselves,  showing  the  weakness  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood.  2.
For  the  people,  showing  its  power.

Ver.  24. — Miraculous  confirmation  of  the  new  polity  is  given  by  a  fire  issuing  from
the  presence  of  Grod.

I.  Instances  of  a  like  kind  of  Divine  agbnct  bt  fiee.  1.  The  case  of-  Qideon.
"And  the  angel  of  God  said  unto  him,  Take  the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  cakes,
and  lay  them  upon  this  rock,  and  pour  out  the  broth.  And  he  did  so.  Then  the
angel  of  the  Lord  put  forth  the  end  of  the  staff  that  was  in  his  hand,  and  touched
the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  cakes ;  and  there  rose  up  fire  out  of  the  rock,  and  con-
sumed the  flesh  and  the  unleavened  cakes  "  (Judg.  vi.  20,  21).  2.  The  case  of  Elijah.
"  Call  ye  on  the  name  of  your  gods,  and  I  will  call  on  the  Name  of  the  Lord :  and  the
3od  that  answereth  by  fire,  let  him  be  God.  And  all  the  people  answered  and  said,  It
Is  well  spoken.  .  .  .  Then  the  fire  of  the  Lord  fell,  and  consumed  the  burnt  sacrifice
and  the  wood,  and  the  stones,  and  the  dust,  and  licked  up  the  water  that  was  in  the
trench"  (1  Kings  xviii.  24 — 38).  3.  The  case  of  Solomon.  "Now  when  Solomon
had  made  an  end  of  praying,  the  fire  came  down  from  heaven,  and  consumed  the  burnt
offering  and  the  sacrifices ;  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house.  Aiui  the  priests
could  not  enter  into  the  house  of  the  Lord,  because  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the
Lord's  house"  (2  Chron.  vii.  1,  2).

II.  The  besult  in  bach  case  is  awe.  1.  "Gideon  said,  Alas,  0  Lord  God!  for
because  I  have  seen  an  angel  of  the  Lord  face  to  face.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  him,
Peace  be  unto  thee;  fear  not:  thou  shalt  not  die"  (Judg.  vi.  22,  23).  2.  "And  when
all  the  people  saw  it,  they  fell  on  their  faces :  and  they  said.  The  Lord,  he  is  the  God ;
the  Lord,  he  is  the  God  "  (1  Kings  xviii.  39).  3.  "  And  when  all  the  children  of  Israel
law  how  the  fire  came  down,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  upon  the  house,  they  bowed
themselves  with  their  faces  to  the  ground  upon  the  pavement,  and  worshipped,
and  praised  the  Lord,  saying,  For  he  is  good;  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever"
(2  Chron.  vii.  3).        '

III.  The  present  a  fittino  occasion  fob  a  mibaculotjs  intervention.  A  miracle
is  to  be  expected  at  the  introduction  of  any  new  system  which  emanates  from  God,
because  it  is  a  means  of  showing  Divine  approval  which  cannot  be  gainsaid ;  but  it  is
not  to  be  expected  frequently  afterwards,  or  it  would  lose  its  special  effect  of  impressing
by  its  strangeness.  The  institution  of  the  Law  is  such  an  occasion,  and  accordingly  fire
and  smoke  and  earthquake  showed  the  presence  of  God  on  Sinai.  The  institution  of  an
hereditary  priesthood  was  a  part  of  the  legislation  which,  being  a  vast  change  on  the  pre-
viously existing  system,  specially  required  a  sign  of  God's  approval  which  all  might  see.
The  erection  of  Solomon's  temple  was  a  like  occasion.  So  at  the  institution  of  the
Christian  dispensation,  miraculous  gifts  were  vouchsafed  to  the  apostles — speaking
with  tongues,  prophecy,  gifts  of  healing,  and  the  rest — which  were  not  intended  to
continue,  and  died  out  as  soon  as  the  Church  was  regarded  as  no  longer  coming  into
being,  but  fully  formed.  No  new  doctrine  must  be  accepted  except  upon  the  testimony
of  miracle,  but  a  succession  of  miracles  is  not  required  to  certity  doctrine  which  has
been  once  confirmed  by  miraculous  means.

IV.  SiMILABITY  YET  DIFFERENCE   OF   THE   PENTECOSTAL   FIEB.      It  WaS   given  at  the

institution  of  the  new  apostolic  ministry.  It  was  a  confirmation  of  its  authority  to
the  minds  of  the  recipients  as  well  as  others.  But  it  indicated  more  than  a  mere
Divine  approval  of  a  new  system.  It  symbolized  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and
therefore  it  did  not  consume  a  sacrifice,  but  "  it  sat  upon  each  "  of  those  who  were  to
be  the  instruments  of  the  Huly  Ghost  in  converting  the  world,  and  the  ministers  of  th«
new  dispensation.  The  fire  of  jealousy,  which  struck  to  the  earth  those  who  approached
the  Divine  presence  unbidden,  has  become  the  fire  of  love.


140  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  ix.  1—24.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS

A  tign  expected  and  received.  Ch.  ix. ;  cf.  2  Chron.  v.  13,  14;  Ezra  vi.  16 — 22;
Acts  i. ;  ii.  We  have  now  before  us  the  hopeful  fashion  in  which  Aaron  and  his  soni
entered  upon  their  work.  The  consecration  being  completed  on  the  eighth  day,  Moseg
directed  them  to  take  for  themselves  a  sin  offering  and  a  burnt  offering,  and  to  receive
at  the  hands  of  the  people  similar  offerings,  and,  in  addition,  a  bullock  and  a  ram  for
peace  offerings,  with  the  usual  accompaniment  of  a  meat  offering,  and  to  expect  a  sign
from  the  Lord  at  the  conclusion  of  the  service.  "  To-day,"  said  he,  "  the  Lord  will
appear  unto  you."  A  penitent  yet  consecrated  priesthood,  acting  on  behalf  of  a  penitent
and  consecrated  people,  are  warranted  in  expecting  a  sign  from  God  himself.  The  first
priestly  service  is  thus  filled  with  hope,  and  the  hope  was  realized  at  the  end  of  it.
The  following  lessons  are  plainly  taught  by  this  passage —

I.  The  one  indispensable  preliminabt  to  exaltation  prom  God  is  humiliation
BEFORE  HIM.  Both  priests  and  people  must  bring  their  sin  offering  and  appear  in
penitential  mood.  Unless  we  humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  we  need
not  expect  to  be  exalted  (Matt,  xxiii.  12;  1  Pet.  v.  6).  Hence  the  Law  of  the  Divine
dealings  has  been  to  "  hide  pride  from  man  "  (Job  xxxiii.  17).  It  is  only  when  we
have  pride  eliminated  that  we  have  room  for  blessing.

II.  CONSCIOnS   DEDICATION   TO   GOD   IS  AN   EARNEST   OP   BLESSING   ON   ITS  WAY.      The

priests  and  people  both  bring  their  burnt  offerings  as  well  as  their  sin  offerings.  They
realize  how  reasonable  it  is  to  dedicate  themselves  to  the  Lord,  who  has  been  so  merciful
in  his  dealings  with  them.  It  w-is  the  .same  with  Solomon  and  his  associates  at  the
dedication  of  the  temple.  It  was  the  same  with  the  disciples  previous  to  the  Pentecostal
baptism.  It  was  consecrated  men  and  women  who  expected  special  blessing.  And  it
is  the  same  still;  self-emptied,  self-dedicated  sinners  are  being  qualitied  for  special
blessing.

III.  The   UNION   of   numbers   in   desire  and   in    hope   is   also  a  sign   op  A  COMING

BLESSING.  The  people  assembled  in  their  thousands  before  the  tabernacle,  and  the
priests  co-operated  with  them  in  their  ofBces.  One  heart  and  hope  animated  the  host.
We  see  the  same  unity  at  the  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple.  "  It  came  even  to  pass,
as  the  trumpeters  and  singers  were  as  one,  to  make  one  sound,"  etc.  (2  ChroH.  v.  13).
We  see  the  same  unity  before  Pentecost.  "These  all  continued  with  one  accord  in
prayer  and  supplication,  with  the  women,  and  Mary  the  mother  of  Jesus,  and  with
his  brethren  "  (Acts  i.  14).  Such  a,  union  of  numbers  in  desire  and  in  hope  should  be
encouraged  continually.  It  need  not  be  disregarded.  It  is  a  sign  surely  that  blessing
is  on  its  way  when  such  happy  union  of  heart  and  hope  takes  place.

IV.  God's  eights  must  be  carefully  regarded  if  his  special  blessing  is  to  bb
OBTAINED.  The  priests  were  directed  to  lay  the  best  portions  on  the  altar,  to  pay  thus
their  due  to  God,  before  the  blessing  is  vouchsafed.  This  element  is  sometimes  over-
looked. People  make  "  systematic  beneficence  "  depend  upon  special  blessing,  instead
of  preceding  it.  But  it  is  manifest,  from  Mai.  iii.  10,  that  God  asks  for  proof,  in  the
payment  of  Divine  dues,  of  people's  desire  for  special  blessing.  It  is  idle  to  expect
great  blessing  from  above  if  men  wrong  God  as  they  do.  His  proportion  of  our  sub-
stance can  be  calculated  in  cool  blood  and  paid  conscientiously,  without  waiting  for  a
baptism  in  order  to  do  so,  and  if  we  are  prepared  to  exhibit  our  sense  of  obli<'ation  to
God  in  this  real  way,  we  may  hope  for  a  very  special  baptism.

V.  BENEDIC"riON  MAT  BE  PRONOUNCED  WITH  CONPIDENCE  IN  THE   LIGHT  OF  PROMISED

blessing.  At  the  conclusion  of  the  ritual,  Aaron  proceeded  to  bless  the  peo|ile.  Hii
benediction  preceded  the  Divine  manifestation.  It  was  pronounced  in  full  view  of  the
promise.  It  was,  as  we  shall  soon  see,  amply  redeemed.  And  does  not  this  fact  throw
light  upon  all  benediclions?  They  are  not  blessings  conveyed  through  the  person
pronouncing  them,  but  blessings  guaranteed,  so  to  speak,  to  proceed  from  God  himseU
on  the  ground  of  his  own  promise.  It  is  the  faithful  Promiser  the  people  are  to  look
to,  not  his  ofBcer  in  pronouncing  the  benediction.

VI.  God  was  pleased  to  manifest  himself  ab  consumino  fire  upon  his  altaBi
What  God  gave  was  additional  fire  to  the  sacred  deposit  already  bo  carefully  preserved.


OH.  IX.  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  141

An  intense  flame  rose  up  from  the  altar,  having  first  issued  from  the  tabernacle ;  and  aSl
the  people  rejoiced  because  of  it.  "  When  all  the  people  saw  it,  they  sliouted,  and  fell
on  their  faces."  God  is  a  consuming  fire  in  the  way  of  acceptance,  just  as  well  as  in
the  way  of  wrath.  The  psalmist  gives  us  clear  evidence  of  this  in  his  prayer,  "  Remember
all  thy  offerings,  and  accept  ('reduce  to  ashes,'  ™^^)  thy  burnt  sacrifice "-( Ps.  xx.  3).
The  case  of  Elijah  at  Carmel  goes  to  demonstrate  the  same  thing  (1  Kings  xviii.
24,  36).  And  when  we  reach  the  history  of  Pentecost,  with  the  Spirit  as  "  tongues  of
fire"  settling  down  on  the  disciples,  we  can  have  no  doubt  as  to  the  significance  of  the
manifestation  (Acts  ii.).  "  God  is  light,"  and  along  with  light  there  is  heat  and  sub-
limation. He  interposes  no  screen  to  prevent  the  heat-rays  from  reaching  men's
hearts.  They  become  fervent  in  spirit,  and  thus  serve  the  Lord  (Eom.  xii.  II).  It  is
this  visitation  we  all  need — God  accepting  us  as  "living  sacrifices,"  and  enabling  us
most  ardently  to  serve  him.  May  none  of  us  experience  the  consuming  fire  of  the
Divine  wrath,  but  that  of  the  Divine  love  and  mercy  1 — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  23,  24. — The  glory  of  the  Lord.  The  petition  of  Moses  was,  "  Show  me  thy
glory."  The  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  of  the  Almighty  are  visible  in  all  his  works,
and  "  the  heavens  declare  his  glory,"  but  man  longs  for  a  fuller  display  of  tlie  matchless
perfections  of  Deity.  The  artist  is  superior  to  his  handiwork,  and  to  view  God  is  a
greater  satisfaction  than  to  contemplate  the  evidences  of  his  existence  and  skill  that  lie
around  us.  To  behold  him  as  he  is,  to  "  see  his  face  "  in  its  undimmed  lustre, — this  is
reserved  as  the  special  joy  of  heaven.  In  the  mean  time,  it  was  permitted  the  Israelites
to  gaze  upon  material  manifestations  of  his  presence,  and  it  is  the  delight  of  Christians
to  catch  spiritual  glimpses  of  his  glory,  by  faith  seeing  him  who  is  invisible.

I.  The  form  assumed  by  the  globt  op  the  Lord.  1.  A  hrightness  manifest  to
all  the  people.  Compare  this  passage  with  Numb.  xvi.  42,  and  the  conclusion  is
natural  that  there  was  a  brilliant  illumination  of  the  cloud  that  ordinarily  rested
upon  the  tabernacle.  Therein  Jehovah  was  ever  visible,  but  now  revealed  in  such
wondrous  guise  that  his  glory  was  patent  to  the  dullest  eye.  Deity  no  longer  con-
cealed but  expressed.  When  Jesus  Christ  came  as  the  Word ,  the  evangelist  declares,  "  We
beheld  his  glory,  as  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father."  The  face  is  the  noblest  part  of
the  body,  the  dial-plate  of  character,  the  index  of  the  soul ;  hence  in  the  face  of  Jesus
Christ  we  behold  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God.  The  gospel  dispensa-
tion "  exceeds  in  glory  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  9),  for  it  is  the  "  ministration  of  the  Spirit,"  the
"ministration  of  the  righteousness"  of  God.  The  answer  to  the  request  of  Moses  was
contained  in  the  assurance  that  all  the  goodness  of  God  should  pass  before  him ;  and
when  there  is  an  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  so  that  many  turn  to  the  Saviour  and  rejoice  in
the  mercy  and  loving-kindness  of  God  who  will  have  all  men  to  be  saved,  then  is  the
glory  of  the  Lord  revealed  and  all  flesh  see  it  together.  2.  A  mighty  energy,  as  flaming
fire,  attesting  the  acceptance  of  the  sacrifices.  These  were  suddenly  consumed,  showing
that  the  power  of  God  can  accomplish  at  once  what  at  other  times  requires  a  long
period  under  the  operation  of  customary  laws.  There  is  not  merely  attractive  brilliancy
in  God,  there  is  majestic  might  which  may  be  used  for  or  against  us,  according  to  our
obedience  or  disobedience.  When  tongues  of  fire  sat  upon  the  disciples  at  Pentecost,
their  whole  being — body,  soul,  and  spirit,  mind,  affection,  and  will — seemed  immediately
permeated  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  they  spoke  with  boldness  and  witnessed  with
great  power,  so  that  thousands  were  added  to  the  Church.  Let  QkA  appear,  and  men
shall  be  saved,  not  in  units,  but  in  multitudes.  Who  can  tell  what  shall  be  the  result
of  Christ's  appearing  in  glory?  This  we  know,  that  the  offerings  upon  the  altar,  the
Christians  dedicated  to  his  service,  shall  be  transformed  into  bis  likeness,  the  imitation
not  gradual  as  in  ordinary  seasons,  but  instantaneous.  3.  The  unusual  glory  proceeding
from  the  ordinary  manifestation.  The  fire  "  came  out  from  before  the  Lord."  It  was.
not  a  different  power,  therefore,  but  the  usual  Shechinah  fire  exhibited  to  all  in  won-
drous operation.  The  truths  that  evoke  such  feeling  and  lead  to  such  holy  action  in
times  of  refreshing  and  revival,  are  those  which  have  been  previously  insisted  on,  only
now  accompanied  with  potency,  the  breath  of  the  Spirit  kindling  the  embers  into  a
glow,  and  causing  the  heat  so  to  radiate  as  to  affect  large  circles  of  humanity.  The
arm  of  the  Lord,  alway  present,  is  revealed ;  its  might,  perceived  by  the  few,  is  shown
to  the  many.


142  THE   BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.  [oh.  ix.  1—24.

n.  The  time  at  which  the  glory  of  God  appears.  1.  We  may  expect  it  at
eventful  stages  in  the  history  of  his  Church.  Here  at  the  establishment  of  the  order  of
priesthood,  to  sanction  it,  to  express  approval  of  the  men  appointed,  and  to  complete
their  consecration.  The  altar  fire  and  all  its  future  offerings  were  thus  hallowed.
When  some  principle  of  the  Divine  government  is  to  be  vindicated,  or  some  messenger
honoured  in  the  sight  of  the  people,  or  a  new  departure  made  in  the  accomplishment  of
his  purposes,  then  may  we  anticipate  displays  of  supernatural  beauty  and  force.  2.
When  his  instructions  have  been  respected,  his  commands  faithfully  observed.  There
had  been  seven  days  of  watching,  and  the  eighth  day  was  marked  by  confession  of  sin
and  dedicatory  sacrifices.  God  was  honoured,  and  evinced  his  delight  thereat.  Sanc-
tificaiion  precedes  the  manifestation  of  Divine  power  (Josh.  iii.  5 ;  ch.  ix.  4).  3.  When
it  has  been  prophesied  by  his  servants.  This  was  a  fulfilment  of  Moses'  prediction,  and
may  incite  us  to  study  Scripture  and  value  its  prophetic  statements.  It  is  remarkable
how  the  way  has  been  ever  prepared  for  "  mighty  works  "  by  previous  announcement,
as  if  to  fit  men  to  appreciate  the  miracles  and  to  recognize  them  as  coming  from  God.
The  herald  proclaims  the  advent  of  the  king.  4.  Whtn  his  servants  have  draum  nigh
to  his  presence,  and  invoked  a  blessing  upon  the  people.  Prayer  is  the  fleeting  breath
that  proves  of  such  marvellous  efiicacy  in  securing  tokens  of  God's  favour.  Would  we
see  the  glory  of  God  in  the  sanctuary  ?  then  let  us  try  to  approach  the  very  throne  of
Deity.  To  be  led  in  supplication  into  the  holiest  of  all  is  to  "  bring  all  heaven  before
our  eyes."  Jesus,  our  Prophet-Priest,  ascended  as  he  was  blessing  the  disciples ;  the  fruits
of  his  invocation  were  quickly  seen  at  Pentecost,  and  they  continue  to  enrich  and
gUdden  the  Church.

III.  The  effect  it  produces.  1.  Enthusiasm.  The  people  "shouted"  for  joy
and  thanksgiving,  they  gave  utterance  to  their  admiration  and  excitement.  That
Jehovah  should  condescend  thus  to  visit  his  children,  that  the  Infinite  One  should  so
openly  reveal  himself!  The  coldest  are  warmed  into  emotion,  the  hardest  surfaces
yield,  the  sternest  natures  cannot  repress  exclamations  of  astonishment  when  they  per-
ceive the  signs  of  a  presence  more  than  mortal.  2.  Reverence.  "  They  fell  on  their
faces,"  to  worship.  Awe  filled  their  minds  and  prostrated  their  bodies.  Never  should
excitement  lead  to  forgetfulness  of  the  respect  due  to  God.  And  if  it  be  otherwise,
there  is  reason  to  suspect  the  genuineness  of  the  professedly  Divine  exhibition  of
approval.    We  may  fear  lest  the  fire  has  been  begotten  not  of  heaven  but  of  earth.

Conclusion.  Will  any  refuse  to  behold  in  Christ  "  the  brightness  of  the  Father's
glory"?  Here  "all"  the  people  saw  the  glory.  Age,  sex,  or  rank  no  hindrance.
There  may  be  a  difference  in  the  apprehension  of  the  significance  of  the  spectacle,  but
it  should  awaken  gratitude  and  veneration  in  every  breast. — S.  E.  A.

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  eighth  day.  There  is  sacred  mystery  in  the  numbers  of  Holy
Scripture  well  worthy  of  attention.    We  have  an  example  before  us.

I.  On  this  day  the  consecrations  were  completed.  1.  The  eighth  is  a  day
signalized  by  sanctity.  _  (1)  All  children  were,  according  to  the  Law,  in  the  unclean-
ness  of  their  birth  until  the  eighth  day.  Then  they  received  circumcision,  and  thence-
forward were  recognized  as  holy,  having  the  seal  of  the  covenant  or  purification  of  God
upon  them  (ch.  xii.  2,  3).  (2)  The  young  of  beasts,  in  like  manner,  were  ceremonially
unclean  before  their  eighth  day.  They  were  therefore  unfit  to  be  offered  as  sacrifices.
But  on  the  eighth  day  and  thenceforward  that  unfitness  ceased ;  they  were  accounted
clean  (ch.  xxii,  27).  (3)  Persons  unclean  through  leprosy,  or  through  any  issue,  or  a
Nazarite  in  case  of  accidental  defilement  by  the  dead,  all  had  to  abide  seven  days  in
uncleanness.  The  eighth  day,  in  all  such  cases,  was  memorable  as  that  upon  which
they  were  accounted  clean  (ch.  xiv.  8—10 ;  xv.  13,  14 ;  Kumb.  vi.  9,  10).  (4)  So  here,
the  tabernacle,  the  altar,  all  the  vessels  of  the  ministry,  together  with  the  priests,  were
seven  days  in  the  process  of  purification,  and  on  the  eighth  day  the  purity  of  all
became  established  (comp.  Ezek.  xliii.  26,  27).  2.  These  things  point  to  go'^pel  times.
(1)  The  pollutions  of  the  birth  refer  to  original  sin.  This,  in  the  case  of  the  children,  i«
so  obvious  as  to  need  no  comment.  The  reason  of  the  law  of  uncleanness  in  relation  to
the  young  of  animals  is  that  in  the  Levitical  system  they  were  made  representatives  of
human  beings.  (2)  The  pollutions  of  adults  would  stand  for  sins  committed  "  after
the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression."    (3)  All  were  "purged  with  blood,"  ine


CH.  IX.  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  U3

blood  of  circumcision  or  that  of  animal  sacrifices,  which  anticipated  that  precious  blood
of  Christ  by  which  we  are  redeemed  from  "  all  sin."  3.  But  what  has  this  to  do  with
the  "  eighth  day  "  f  (1)  The  eighth  day  remarkably  characterizes  the  gospel.  Since  in
the  week  there  are  seven  days,  the  "  eighth "  day  and  the  "  first "  are  obviously  the
same.  Now,  it  was  on  the  "  first  day  of  the  week  "  that  Jesus  rose  from  the  dead
(Matt,  xxviii.  1).  On  the  first  day  he  seems  to  have  several  times  appeared  to  his
disciples  during  the  forty  days  of  his  sojourn  on  the  earth  after  his  resurrection.  On  the
first  day  he  ascended  into  heaven,  if  we  take  the  "  forty  days  "  to  be  clear  days.  The
memorable  day  of  Pentecost  is  calculated  to  have  fallen  upon  the  first  day  of  the  week.
The  early  Christians  kept  the  first  day  sacredly,  as  the  seventh  had  been  by  the  Jews
(see  Acts  xx.  7  ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  2).  This  was  called  "  the  Lord's  day  "  (Eev.  i.  10),  just
as  our  Eucharist  is  called  "  the  Lord's  Supper,"  because  he  instituted  it.  (2)  But  why
should  the  eighth  day  have  been  chosen  thus  to  characterize  the  gospel  ?  This  ques-
tion may  be  better  answered  as  we  proceed  to  notice —

II.  That  on  this  dat  the  Lord  was  to  appbae.  (Ver.  4.)  1.  T^is promise  had
an  immediate  fulfilment.  The  Shechinah  that  had  been  in  the  thick  darkness  of  the
most  holy  place,  shined  forth  in  brightness  upon  the  people  (ver.  23).  2.  It  had  a.
fuller  accomplishment  in  the  gospel.  (1)  Christ  is  the  true  Shechinah  ^omp.  Isa.  xL  5
with  Matt.  iii.  3 ;  see  also  Matt.  xvii.  2 ;  John  i.  14  ;  ii.  11 ;  xi.  40 ;  xiv.  9 ;  2  Cor.  iv,
4 ;  Col.  i.  15 ;  Heb.  i.  3).  (2)  The  Shechinah  also  appeared  after  our  Lord's  ascension,
viz.  in  the  wonders  of  the  memorable  day  of  Pentecost.  3.  The  crowning  manifesta-
tion is  reserved  to  the  great  day.  (1)  Then  Jesus  will  be  revealed  "  without  sin."
He  will  not  then  appear  amid  circumstances  of  humiliation,  as  in  his  first  advent.  (2)
He  will  be  revealed  "  in  all  his  glory."  (a)  "  His  own,"  Messiah's,  glory.  (6)  That
of  "  his  Father,"  as  "  the  God  of  glory."  (c)  "  With  the  glory  of  his  holy  angels,'
who  attend  the  "  King  of  glory  "  as  his  retinue.  4.  This  wUl  he  the  glory  of  the  eighth
day.  (1)  The  six  days  of  the  creation  week  are  supposed  by  Barnabas  to  represent
six  chiliads,  or  periods  of  a  thousand  years,  during  which  the  world  is  to  be  in  toil  and
sorrow.  The  sabbath  at  the  end  of  these  represents  the  thousand  years  of  John  (Rev.
XX.  6),  distinguished  as  "  the  Millennium."  The  Eabbi  Elias  and  other  authorities  are
cited  in  favour  of  this  view ;  and  it  is  countenanced  by  the  course  of  the  fulfilment  of
prophecy.  (2)  At  the  close  of  this  age  is  the  final  judgment,  which  introduces  a  still
more  glorious  state,  described  as  "  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth "  (see  Rev.  xxi.  and
xxii.).  This,  then,  is  the  eighth  day.  As  the  Millennium  (Rev.  xx.)  is  the  fulfilment
of  the  Jewish  sabbath,  so  is  the  superior  blessedness  to  follow  the  fulfilment  of  the
Christian  (Heb.  iv.  6 — 9,  margin).  Then  will  everything  in  earth  and  heaven  be
consecrated.

III.  Then  will  the  value  op  the  Great  Sacripiob  appear.  1.  As  averting  the
evils  of  sin.  (1)  Who,  without  the  purification  of  the  gospel,  can  encounter  the
brightness  of  that  Epiphany  (Mai.  iii.  2)  ?  (2)  But  those  who  possess  this  purity
need  have  no  fear  of  the  horrors  of  the  "  outer  darkness  "  (Eev.  xxi.  7,  8 ;  xxii.  14,  15).
2.  As  procuring  ineffable  bliss.  (1)  The  consecration  of  the  eighth  day  resulted  from
the  ceremonies  of  the  days  preceding.  So  will  the  purity  of  the  heavenly  state  rise
out  of  the  tragedies  and  horrors  of  Calvary.  (2)  The  summoning  of  the  sacrifices  on
the  eighth  day  was,  amongst  other  things,  to  witness  this.  All  were  summoned,  viz.
sin,  burnt,  peace,  and  bread  offerings.  In  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  we  have  all
that  was  foreshadowed  by  Levitical  oblations  of  every  kind.  (3)  The  song  of  Moses
and  of  the  Lamb  will  swell  the  rapture  of  heaven. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  8 — 24. — Aaron's  first  priestly  services.  Moses  officiated  as  the  priest  of  the
Lord  until  the  consecration  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  was  completed.  Now  they  enter
upon  their  functions,  and  the  verses  recited  furnish  us  with  an  account  of  their  first
services.     In  reviewing  these  we  notice —

L  The  offbrinqs.  1.  Aaron's  offering  for  himself.  (1)  The  Jews  say  this  was
intended  to  make  atonement  for  his  sin  in  connection  with  the  golden  calf.  Possibly
this  may  have  been  so ;  for  we  have  no  record  elsewhere  of  any  formal  atonement  for
that  offence.  Aaron,  doubtless,  had  many  offences  to  atone  for.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ
is  not  only  for  sins,  but  also  for  sin.  (2)  Aaron's  own  hands  slew  this  victim  What
•  graph  c  confession  of  sin  was  this !    What  an  unequivocal  acknowledgment  of  Ml


144  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  ix.  1—24.

deserving  to  die !  Our  confession  of  sin  before  God  should  be  with  deep  conviction  and
reality.  (H)  He  put  the  blood  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar.  These  were  fronting  thf
vail,  behind  which  was  the  ark  of  the  covenant  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  This  putting
of  the  blood  with  the  finger  before  the  face  of  God  was,  as  it  were,  pointing  it  out  to
him,  calling  his  attention  to  it. '  So  should  the  faith  of  the  sinner  point  out  to  God's
mercy  the  blood  of  the  cross  which  satisfies  his  justice.  (4)  Aaron's  sons  served  with
bim  at  the  altar.  They  brought  the  blood  to  have  it  sprinkled. '  This  was  the  con-
fession of  their  part  in  the  guilt  of  their  father.  Guilt  is  hereditary  and  relatively
distributive  (see  Numb.  xvi.  32, 33 ;  Josh.  vli.  24,  25).  It  was  also  an  expression  of
their  faith  in  the  blood  of  the  common  Redeemer.  (5)  This  offering  of  Aaron  for  his
own  sin  before  he  could  offer  for  the  people  suggests  the  imperfection  of  the  Levitical
priesthood,  and  therefore  the  necessity  of  the  priesthood  of  the  gospel  (see  Heb.  v.  3 ;
vii.  26 — 28 ;  ix.  7 — 14).  2.  The  offerings  for  the  people.  (1)  Aaron  himself  slew  also
these  victims  (vers.  15,  16).  This  he  did  as  the  representative  of  the  people.
Individuals  were  directed  to  slay  their  own  victims  (com p.  ch.  i.  5,  11 ;  iii.  4,  8,  13).
But  these  were  for  the  congregation.  (2)  The  sons  of  Aaron  helped  him  here  also.
.They  "  presented  unto  him  the  blood,  which  he  sprinkled  upon  the  altar  round  about."
They  also  brought  the  fat  of  the  inwards  to  him  (vers.  18 — 20).  This  was  suggestive
of  the  nature  of  the  Levitical  priesthood,  which  was  destined  to  pass  from  hand  to  hand.
The  comparison  here  is  favourable  to  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  which  is  "  unchangeable  "
(Heb.  viL  23 — 25).  (3)  The  breast  and  shoulder  were  waved  and  heaved,  and  after-
wards came  to  the  lot  of  Aaron  and  his  sons.  Here  we  are  taught  that  it  is  God's  order
that  "  they  which  preach  the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel "  (see  1  Cor.  ix.  13, 14 ;
Matt.  X.  10).

11.  The  BLBSSiNO.  1.  The  blessing  from  the  altar  (ver.  22).  (1)  As  Aaron,  standing
upon  the  altar,  pronounced  his  first  blessing  upon  the  people,  this  shows  the  Source  firom
whence  all  blessing  springs.  Even  in  heaven,  the  Great  Sacrifice  of  the  altar  of  Calvary
will  be  the  burden  of  the  song  of  the  redeemed  (Rev.  v.  9 — 14).  (2)  In  blessing,  Aaron
acted  as  the  type  of  Christ,  who,  while  Le  moved  about  upon  this  earth,  which  was
the  altar  of  his  sacrifice,  dispensed  blessings  in  a  thousand  forms.  Witness  (a)  the
beatitudes  in  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  (6)  The  miracles  of  beneficence,  (c)  His
official  benedictions.  (3)  As  Aaron,  standing  upon  the  altai',  lifted  up  his  hands,
blessed  the  people,  and  then  went  into  the  holy  place,  so  Jesus,  standing  on  the  Mount
of  Olives,  after  lifting  up  his  hands  and  blessing  his  di.sciples,  ascended  into  the  holy
place  of  the  heavens  (comp.  Luke  xxiv.  50,  51).  2.  The  blessing  from  the  holy  place.
(1)  Coming  forth  from  the  holy  place,  Aaron  again  blessed  the  people.  The  words  of
the  benediction  are  given  in  Numb.  vi.  23 — 27.  Between  these  and  those  of  the
apostolic  benediction,  which  sets  forth  the  genius  of  the  gospel,  there  is  remarkable
correspondence  (see  2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  (2)  In  response  to  this  second  benediction, "  the
glory  of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  all  the  people."  We  are  here  reminded  how  Jesus,
before  ascending  into  heaven,  encouraged  his  disciples  "  not  to  depart  from  Jerusalem,
but  wait  for  the  promise  of  the  Father,"  and  how,  "  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was
fully  come,"  that  promise  was  verified.  (3)  "  And  there  came  a  fire  out  from  before
the  Lord,"  etc.  (ver.  24).  This  was  the  emblem  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  baptism,  like
fire,  searches  into  substances,  while  water  can  only  wash  the  surfaces  (Matt.  iii.  11,  12).
So  in  the  baptism  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  tongues  of  flame  sat  on  the  disciples  (Acts
ii.  3).  (4)  The  consuming  of  the  fat  of  the  inwards  on  the  altar  by  the  sacred  fire
foreshowed  how  the  body  of  our  sins  is  destroyed  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  who,
"  through  the  Eternal  Spirit,  offered  himself  without  spot  to  God  "  (Heb.  ix.  14).  It
also  describes  the  manner  in  which  the  wicked  will  be  treated  who  persist  in  their
rebellion  against  Gud  (Ps.  xxxvii.  20).  Those  whose  sins  are  not  consumed  in  the
fires  of  love  will  themselves  be  consumed  in  the  fires  of  wrath. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Appearing  together  before  Ood,  It  is  true  that  we  are  always  "  in  the
presence  of  the  Lord."  "  He  is  not  far  from  any  one  of  us."  "  He  compasses  our  path
and  our  lying  down :  he  besets  us  behind  and  before."  There  is  no  man  who  at  any
moment  may  not  use  the  prophet's  words,  "The  Lord,  before  whom  I  stand."  But  it
is  also  true  that  God  would  have  us  place  ourselves  consciously  and  in  company  before
him ;  that  we  should  gather  together  at  his  house  and  worship  in  "  his  holy  temple."
We  gain  thoughts  on  this  subject  from  our  text,  viz. —


«H.  IX.1— 24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  145

L  God's  call  ro  his  own  peesbnce.  (Vers.  5, 6.)  It  was  at  the  Lord's  own  command
that  "  all  the  congregation  drew  near  and  stood  before  "  him.  The  entire  scene  was
due  to  explicit  Divine  direction.  It  is  God  himself  who  calls  us  to  his  presence.  We
may  venture  to  ask  why  he  does  so,  and  to  answer  by  suggesting :  1.  That  it  is  a  part
of  his  Divine  satisfaction  in  us  to  receive  our  united  homage  and  thanksgiving ;  and  2.
That  he  knows  that  public  worship  is  best  suited  to  impress  our  minds  and  strengthen
our  souls  in  heavenly  wisdom.  Bat  we  are  certain  that  it  it  his  will,  for  whatever
reasons.  "  Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together,"  etc.  (Heb.  x.  25 ;  see
Acts  ii.  42).  The  presentation  of  ourselves  before  God  should  be  measured  thus :  (1)
multiplied  by  (a)  our  sense  of  God's  pleasure  with  our  worship;  (6)  our  need  of
spiritual  refreshment  and  elevation ;  (c)  usefulness  to  others  by  way  of  encouragement
in  piety.    (2)  Limited  by  home  duties  and  the  other  claims  of  our  outer  life.

n.  The  human  instrument  in  this  sacbed  summons.  (Vers.  1,  3.)  Here  we  have
a  double  human  instrumentality :  Moses  called  Aaron,  etc.  (ver.  1),  and  Aaron  was  in-
structed to  take  on  himself  the  duty  of  summoning  the  children  of  Israel  to  bring  their
sacrifices  before  the  Lord  (ver.  3).  God  continually  speaks  to  us  through  man.  Some
.men  are  his  spokesmen  in  an  especial  sense  and  in  a  large  degree ;  all  of  us  are  to  be
listeners  to  those  who  speak  in  his  name.  Those  who  speak  for  him  are  to  be  faithful
»nd  earnest  in  summoning  his  people  to  "  stand  before  the  Lord."  Does  the  prophet
ask,  "  What  shall  I  cry  ?  "  Surely,  one  answer  of  the  heavenly  voice  is, "  0  come,  let
us  worship  and  bow  down:  let  us  kneel  before  the  Lord  our  Maker"  (Isa.  zL  6;
Ps.  xov.  6 ;  see  Ps.  c.  2,  3,  4).

III.  The  spirit  in  which  we  should  respond.  We  should  come  before  the  Lord :
1.  In  a  spirit  of  humility.  Aaron  himself  was  to  take  a  sin  ufieving  (ver.  2),  and  this
after  all  the  sacrifices  described  in  the  preceding  chapter.  The  people  also  were  to
present  a  sin  offering  (ver.  3).  Though  we  may  be  in  a  state  of  reconciliation  with  God,
we  have  need  of  the  spirit  of  penitence  at  all  times,  and,  when  we  draw  near  to  the
throne  of  grace,  should  ask  that  the  mercy  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ  may  cover  our
offences  and  shortcomings.  2.  In  a  spirit  of  consecration.  Aaron  was  to  take  a  ram
for  a  burnt  offering  (ver.  2);  the  people  a  calf  and  a  lamb  for  the  same  kind  of  sacrifice
(ver.  3).  They  were — as  we  are — to  be  ready  to  consecrate  themselves  unto  the  Lord,
to  offer  themselves  in  spiritual  sacrifice  on  his  altar.  We  are  to  go  up  to  God's  house
ready  to  renew  our  vows  unto  him.  3.  In  a  spirit  oi  gratitude  and  joy.  The  children
of  Israel  were  not  to  omit  the  meat  offering  or  the  peace  offering  (ver.  4).  We  are  to
take  with  us  before  God  a  heart  full  of  thanksgiving  for  his  bounty ;  also  of  social,
sacred  joy.  We  are  to  rejoice  together  before  him.  4.  In  a  spirit  of  devout  expectation.
The  Hebrew  worshippers  were  to  look  for  the  manifestation  of  Jehovah  i  "  To-day  the
Lord  will  appear  unto  you  "  (ver.  4).  We,  too,  are  to  expect  that  God  will  be  with  us ;
that  he  will  draw  nigh  unto  us  when  we  draw  nigh  unto  him  (Jas.  iv.  8);  that  Christ
our  Lord  will "  manifest  himself  unto  us,"  will "  come  unto  iis,  and  make  his  abode  with
ns"  (John  xiv.  21— 23).— C.

Ver.  7. — Sacrifice  for  sin.  We  may  look  first  at  our  subject  simply  as  an  incident
in  human  history,  apart  from  the  consideration  of  its  place  in  the  inspired  record.
Then  we  have —

I.  A  REPRESENTATIVE  SCENE  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  MAH.  The  most  eminent  civilian  in
the  nation  says  to  the  most  eminent  ecclesiastic,  "  G«  unto  the  altar,  and  offer  thy  sin
offering,  .  .  .  and  make  an  atonement  for  thyself,  and  for  thy  people."  Under  every
flky,  in  every  age,  we  have  the  sad,  solemn  facts  of  which  these  words  are  the, ex-
pression. 1.  Man  conscious  of  sin,  saying,  "  I  ought "  and  "  I  ought  not,"  knowing  In
-his  heart  that  he  has  done  that  which  should  have  been  left  undone,  and  has  omitted
to  do  that  which  he  should  have  done ;  with  the  language  of  conscious  guilt  upon  his
lips.  2.  Man  seeking  reconciliation  with  an  offended  God,  feeling  and  owning  that,  in
addition  to  other  duties;  and  even  above  all  other  considerations,  he  must  seek  and  find
a  way  by  which  God,  by  which  the  Supreme  Power,  may  be  conciliated.  3.  Man
aeeking  restoration  by  sacrifice ;  practically  acknowledging  that  death  is  due  to  sin,
dramatically  appealing  to  the  offended  Power  to  accept  the  life  of  the  slain  animal
Instead  of  his  own ;  "  making  atonement "  for  sin.  The  priest  at  the  altar  is  a  picture
4rhich  all  nations  have  presented — a  picture  of  humanity  conscioui  of  its  guilt  seeking
umnous.  l


J.-LP  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  ix.  1—24,

mercy  and  restoration,  hoping  to  attain  it  by  a  substitutionary  sacrifice.  The  want  is
deep  and  wide;  how  shall  it  be  met?  It  was  met,  in  the  first  instance,  by  the  ritual
undei  the  Law,  by —

II.  God's  tehfobabt  pbovision.  "  The  Lord  commanded  "  Moses  to  say  to  Aaron,
"  Go  unto  the  altar,"  etc.  This  act  of  religious  service  was  done  by  Divine  direction.
Elsewhere  men  were  blindly  groping  after  him,  and  endeavouring  to  find  a  way  of
approach  and  reconciliation.  Here,  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  was  a  people,  the  nucleus
of  a  nation,  which  "knew  what  it  worshipped"  (John  iv.  22),  which  was  taught  of
God  himself.  The  Hebrew  nation  had  been  divinely  instructed,  and  by  its  sacrifices
declared  :  1.  That  God  had  included  all  under  sin,  both  priest  and  people,  "for  thyself
and  for  the  people."  2.  That  sin  was  deserving  of  death.  3.  That  a  sin  offering  would
be  accepted  by  the  merciful  and  righteous  One.  4.  That  only  a  separated  and  holy  man
might  approach  the  altai-  in  sacrifice.  5.  That  the  sin  offeiing,  having  been  presented
and  accepted,  by  the  Holy  One,  all  who  would  might,  in  sacred  symbolism  (the  burnt
offering),  consecrate  themselves  to  the  service  of  a  gracious  God.  But  we  must  look
further  to—

III.  The  Divinb  intention  which  lay  behind.  "This  commandment  of  the
Lord  "  was  not  fitial.  It  was  adequate  for  the  purpose.  It  was  good  for  a  time,  for  a
dispensation ;  but  it  did  not  meet  the  wants  of  the  race.  Nor  did  it  realize  "  the
eternal  purpose  which  he  purposed"  (Eph.  iii.  11),  nor  exhaust  the  possibilities  of  the
Divine  wisdom  and  grace.  "  It  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should
take  away  sins"  (Heb.  x.  4).  God  would  manifest  his  power  and  love  in  a  far  mightier
way  than  this.  1.  The  altar  should  give  place  to  the  cross.  2.  The  victim  from  the
herd  and  flock  to  the  Lamb  of  God  himself.  3.  The  fallible,  changing  priesthood  to
the  holy,  ever-living  Saviour.  4.  The  many  offerings  continually  repeated  to  the  "one  "
Sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever "  (Heb.  x.  12).

1.  With  the  pagan  and  the  Jew,  we  share  the  common  human  consciousness  of  sin
and  need.  2.  With  the  Jew,  in  distinction  from  the  pagan,  we  have  a  divinely  sanc-
tioned method  of  approach  and  reconciliation.  3.  With  immcasuraMe  advantage  over
Jew  and  pagan,  we  all  have  access  at  all  times  through  the  one  Mediator,  and  can  plead
at  every  hour  the  one  all-sufScient  Sacrifice  for  sin.  How  great  and  high  the  privilege  I
How  serious  and  solemn  the  responsibility  1 — 0.

Vers.  8 — 21. —  I7ie  priest  at  the  altar.  Aaron  now  eaters  on  the  great  and  high  work
to  which  he  is  appointed — that  of  God's  chosen  high  priest.  He  "  went  unto  the  altar."
As  we  follow  him  in  that  first  official  act  (ver.  8)  and-  see  him,  with  the  help  of  his
sons  (ver.  9),  slaying  the  calf  or  the  goat  (vers.  8,  15),  putting  the  blood  on  the  horns,
or  pouring  it  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  (ver.  9),  we  are  reminded  of  fundamental  truth
which  does  not  belong  to  one  dispensation  or  one  race,  but  to  man  everywhere  and
always.

I.  The  bad  assumption— univeksai,  ouilt.  Some  truths  are  rather  assumed  than
enunciated  in  Scripture :  this  is  one.  Not  that  it  is  not  stated  (Rom.  iii.  9,  23 ;  GaL
iii.  22,  etc.).  But  it  is  more  often  taken  for  granted.  Thus  in  this  scene.  Aaron  and
his  sons  present  sin  offerings  for  themselves.  It  is  assumed  that  there  are  not  only
"sinners  of  the  Gentiles"  needing  mercy,  but  that  the  "holy  nation"  itself,  the
priestly  family  itself,  nay,  the  high  priest  himself,  is  numbered  among  the  sinful.
This  accords  with  our  experience.  '  1.  A  large  proportion  of  men  are  notoriously,
presumptuously  guilty ;  their  lives  proclaim  aloud  that  they  are  transgressors  against
God.  2.  Of  the  rest,  a  very  large  proportion  are  confessedly  guilty ;  they  allow  freely
that  they  have  sinned  by  omission  and  commission.  3.  The  rest  are  evidently  mistaken
concerning  themselves.  If  not  apparent  to  human  eye,  it  is  obvious  to  the  Divine  that
their  lives  are  faulty  and  their  souls  stained.  There  is  not  one  exception  in  the  wholo
camp,  in  the  entire  congregation,  in  the  nation,  in '  oe  race.  All  have  sinned,  and  ueed
atonement.

n.  The  fibst  deep  need  of  the  bodl— Div  jie  mercy.  The  first  sacrifice  presented
by  Aaron  for  himself  was  "  the  calf  of  the  tin  offering  "  (ver.  8) ;  the  first  for  the
people  was  "  the  goat  which  was  the  sin  offering  "  (ver.  15).  Man  can  do  nothing  in
God's  service  till  he  is  pardoned  and  accepted.  "  Forgiveness  of  sins  "  is  the  first  4eat
need  of  the  soul,  as  it  is  the  first  great  gift  if  the  gospel  (Luke  xxiv.  47  ;  Acts  ii''38  •


OH.  IX.  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  147

xxvi.  18,  etc.),  "  There  is  forgiveness  with  God,  that  he  may  be  feared  "  (Ps.  cxxx.  4).
There  would  be  no  "  fear,"  no'reverenoe,  no  worship,  no  service  of  the  Holy  One,  if  for-
giveness of  sin  were  not  attainable  at  once.  That  is  the  starting-point  and  condition
of  human  devotion.

III.  The  attendant  spiRiTnAi.  step — sblf-subbendek.  When  Aaron  had  presented
the  sin  offering  for  himself,  he  had  not  concluded  his  oblation  ;  "  he  slew  the  burnt
offering  "  also  (ver.  12).  So  with  "  the  people's  offering  "  (vers.  15, 16).  The  signifi-
cance of  this  second  sacrifice  was  that  the  worshipper  consecrated  himself  on  the  altar
(to  the  service)  of  Jehovah.  A  perfect  picture  of  sacred  and  abiding  truth.  We  cannot
go  in  humility  and  penitence,  seeking  mercy  through  Christ  Jesus,  without  offering
ourselves  to  him  who  has  bought  us  with  the  price  of  his  own  blood.  The  soul  longing
for  reconciliation  with  God  offers  itself  freely  in  holy  service  unto  him,  lays  itself  on  his
altar,  a  "  whole  burnt  offering  unto  the  Lord."  A  living  faith  in  Christ  implies  the
eager  taking  of  everythiug  from  him,  and  the  cheerful  giving  of  everything  to  him.

IV.  The  cbbtain  issue — ^a  blessed  spiritual  estate.  A  "  meat  offering "  and
"  peace  offerings  "  (vers.  17,  18)  came  after  the  other  two.  Sin  forgiven,  self  surrendered,
— then  comes  a  sense  of  reconciliation,  grateful  acknowledgment  of  God's  kindness,  a  holy
joy  in  him  (Bom.  v.  1, 11).  The  assurance  in  the  heart  of  Divine  forgiveness,  and  the
consequent  surpassing  peace  and  elevated  joy,  may  not  immediately  follow.  In  the
Divine  life,  the  peace  offering  does  not  always  cume  directly  after  the  burnt  offering.
But  it  win  come ;  it  does  come ;  and  then,  "  oh,  the  blessedness  of  the  man  whose  trans-
gression is  forgiven  1 "  etc.  (literal  translation,  Ps.  zxxii.  1).  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find  "
(Matt.  Tii.  7).— 0.

Ver.  22. — Sbly  invocation.  This  was  an  imposing  act  of  piety,  one  which  our
imagination  easily  presents  to  our  minda,  and  which  affects  us  as  profoundly  interesting.
The  high  priest,  after  solemnly  and  with  holy  awe  offering  the  sacrifices  of  himself  and
the  people,  comes  forth  from  the  Divine  presence,  and  with  hands  lifted  up  to  heaven,
utters,  amid  intense  silence,  the  sacred  words,  "  The  Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee,"  etc.
(Numb.  vi.  23 — 26).  It  was  a  scene  fitted  to  subdue  and  sanctify  the  heart.  It  was
also  a  heautiful  act  of  piety.  There  is  an  admirable  conformity  to  what  is  fitting  and
excellent  in  the  nature  of  things,  that  the  man  who  had  gone  with  the  people's  burden
of  sin  into  the  presence  of  God,  and  who  had  there  sought  and  found  for  the  peopl*  the
Divine  mercy,  should,  as  he  came  from  the  holy  place,  bring  to  the  people  the  blessing
of  the  Most  High.     It  was  also  an  instinctive  act  of  piety.     It  teaches  us —

L  That  he  who  would  bless  his  race  must  first  be  bight  with  God.  Aaron
could  not  have  ventured  on  the  holy  invocation,  if  he  himself  had  not  been  in  the
conscious  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour.  We  must  not  expect  to  render  any  sub-
stantial religious  service  to  our  generation,  if  we  have  not  ourselves  returned  unto  ojr
Father,  and  been  reconciled  unto  him  through  Christ.  Without  all  contradiction,  the
less  is  blessed  of  the  better,  and  "  he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater
than  "  any  one  who  stands  without.

II.  That  the  nearer  a  man  is  to  God  the  more  effectual  is  r  :b  holy  invoca-
tion. It  was  directly  after  offering  sacrifice,  and  in  close  connection  with  that  act,
iLjmediately  after  standing  at  the  altar  of  Jehovah,  that  Aaron  "  lifted  up  his  hand  and
blessed  the  people."  It  is  not  the  official  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ — all  we  are  brethren
— ^but  it  is  the  man  who  "  walks  with  God,"  who  "  stands  before  God  "  continually,
who  "  abides  in  Christ,"  who  is  "  beloved  of  the  Lord,"— it  is  he  whose  word  of  holy,
earnest  invocation  will  most  avail  to  bless.

in.  That  there  are  many  unknown  bbnefactobs  of  oub  b*ob  who  bbino  down
THE  blessing  OF  GoD  UPON  US.  "  More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer  than  this  world
dreams  of" — by  interceding  prayer,  by  the  earnest,  believing  invocation  of  the  holy.
Who  shall  say  what  essential  service  some  have  rendered  who  have  quietly  and  secretly
brought  down  the  blessing  from  on  high  ?  Perhaps  the  uplifting  of  holy  hands  in  the
silent  chamber  may  have  done  more  to  end  the  great  campaign  which  is  lasting  through
the  centuries,  than  some  notable  and  noisy  lives  men  talk  much  of.

IV.  That  those  who  have  interceding  kindred  should  bealize  their  sfEciAi.
responsibility.  They  are  the  subjects  not  only  of  direct  human  influence,  but  of  thost
Divine  influanoas  which  are  thus  drawn  down  from  above.


148  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  ix.  1— 2i.


V.  That  Chbist  alone  can  confer  the  pbaob  wb  need.  "  The  Lord  .  .  .  give
thee  peace,"  uttered  the  Hebrew  priest  (Numb.  vi.  26).  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you,  my
peace  I  give  unto  you,"  said  the  Lord  from  heaven  (John  xiv.  27).  Aaron's  was  a
human  invocation ;  Christ's  was  a  Divine  hestowal,  Aaron  might  hopefully  invoke ;
Christ  positively  confers.  "  In  him  is  life,"  and  all  that  makes  life  precious  in  the
sight  of  God ;  it  is  in  his  right  hand  to  bestow  fulness  of  life  on  us.  Let  us  be  attracted
to  him,  be  attached  to  his  service,  abide  in  him,  walk  with  him,  and  he  will  "  lay  his
hand  upon  us,"  and  bless  us  with  all  those  heavenly  blessings  which  reside  in  him  and
are  in  his  power  to  impart. — 0.

Vers.  23,  24. — Tlie  manifested  presence.  The  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  promise  (yer.  6)
by  the  manifested  presence  of  Jehovah  suggests —

I.  Its  consistency  with  othek  Divkb  manifestations.  QoA  so  revealed  hit
presence  when  he  did  visibly  appear  to  man,  that  there  should  be  no  delusion  in  the
matter.  None  could,  none  did,  mistake  the  "  glory  of  the  Lord  "  for  the  Lord  himself
(Exod.  iii.  2  ;  xxiv.  16,  17 ;  xxxiii.  9 ;  2  Chron.  vii.  1 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  38 ;  Isa.  vi.  1).

II.  Its  threefold  significance.  It  plainly  intimated :  1.  God's  presence  in  the
midst  of  the  camp.  2.  His  acceptance  of  their  sacrifice  and  his  pleasure  in  his
people.  3.  His  approval  of  the  Aaronic  appointment,  and  of  the  way  in  whish  his
service  had  been  conducted.  This  emphatically,  for  the  time  chosen  was  the  f  rst  day
on  which  the  high  priest  had  served  at  his  altar.

III.  Its  immediate  effect  on  the  mind  of  the  MULTrruDK.  When  "  all  the  people
saw,"  they  were  incited  to  ( 1)  rapturous  delight :  "  they  shouted ; "  and  (2)  reverential
prostration  :  they  "  fell  on  their  faces."  At  such  a  vision  reverence  and  joy  mingled
within  them,  and  stirred  their  souls  to  intense  spiritual  emotion.  A  visible  appearance,
acting  strongly  on  the  soul  through  the  senses,  produces  an  immediate  and  powerful
present  effect.  How  deep  it  will  descend,  and  now  long  it  will  last,  depends  on  the
sincerity,  spirituality,  fulness  of  the  meditation,  prayer,  resolution,  which  follows  the
awe-inspiring  spectacle.  Far  more  depends  on  the  wisdom  with  which  the  next  hour
(day)  is  spent,  than  on  the  excitements  of  the  moment.

lY.  Its  Christian  counterpart.  There  is  in  the  Christian  dispensation :  1.  The
temporary  miraculous  element.  Here  we  have,  as  the  counterpart,  the  "  cloven  tongues
like  as  of  fire  "  (Acts  ii.  3).  2.  That  that  which  is  more  important  is  the  permanent
supernatural  element.  Here  we  have  the  Divine  illumination,  the  baptism  of  the  Holy
Ghost,  ^'ot  the  "glory  of  the  Lord"  visible  to  the  eye,  but  the  grace  of  God  appre-
hended by  the  understanding  mind;  not  the  outward  appearance,  but  the  inward
influence  and  indwelling ;  not  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  outside  the  tabernacle,
but  the  very  Spirit  of  the  living  God  within  the  temple  of  the  human  body  (I  Cor.  iii.  16 ;
vi.  19).  When  we  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  to  "  behold  the  beauty  of  the  Lord,"
to  "  see  his  glory  ...  in  the  sanctuary  "  (Ps.  xxvii.  and  Ixiii),  we  go  up  to  behold  no
visible  grandeurs,  but  to  do  that  which  is  better  far  for  all  spiritual  well-being :  (1)  to
realize  his  nearness  to  us  ;  (2)  to  learn  and  welcome  his  truth  ;  (3)  to  pour  out  our  hearts
before  him  in  adoration,  praise,  and  prayer ;  (4)  to  open  our  souls  to  receive  his  in-
dwelling, sanctifying  Spirit. — C.

Vers.  1 — 24. — Subject:  God's  glory  manifested  in  the  hlessedne$i  of  his  people.  The
priests  enter  upon  their  office,  offer  sacrifices  for  themselves  and  the  pe-'pk-,  and  receive
tokens  of  Jehovah's  presence  and  blessing.  "  And  Aaron  lifted  up  his  hand  towards
thf  people,"  etc.  (vers.  22 — 24).  The  main  facts  described  are :  1.  The  joint  blessing  ot
the  mediator  of  the  Law  and  the  high  priest  on  the  people,  the  solemn  conclusion  of
the  consecration  and  inauguration.  2.  The  glory  of  the  Lord  appearing  unto  all  the
people.  3.  The  fire  from  before  the  Lord  consuming  the  burnt  offering  and  the  fat.
4.  The  whole  people  beholding  the  sign,  accepting  it  as  from  God,  and  rejoicing  in  jt
with  adoring  homage.

I.  Man  blessed  in  God.  1.  Religion  as  revenled  and  set  forth  in  tlie  mediation  of
law  and  sacrifice,  the  only  true  element  of  fellowship  between  the  creature  and  Cr'tator.
Natural  reli<:ion  a  spurious  substitute  and  insiifficlent.  Moses  and  Aaron  both  typical
of  him  in  whom  God  invites  us  to  receive  the  fulness  of  grace.  2.  The  blessings  pro-
nounced and  puhlished.     Tn  the  promisns  of  Scripture,  in  the  history  of  redempt;  m,  il


OH.  I.  1 — 7.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


149


the  individual  experience  of  believers.    Godliness  liath  the  promise  of  both  worlds  in
the  best  sense.    Old  and  new  covenants  really  one.

II.  DrviNB  QLOBY  MANIFESTED  in  response  to  man's  faithfulness.  1.  Look  for  it
especially  in  connection  with  the  sanctuary.  After  great  confession  and  universal  seek-
ing of  God's  favour.  An  outpoured  grace  in  revived  religion,  in  manifest  success  in
spiritual  service,  in  the  fellowship  of  priests  and  people  with  one  another,  in  the  provi-
dential signs  of  Divine  interposition  for  the  Church's  extension.  2.  Unto  all  the  people.
The  blessing  of  religion  is  for  the  multitude,  for  the  nation,  for  the  world.  Tet  those
who  would  see  the  glory  must  come  around  the  centre  of  its  manifestation  in  the  holy
place.  We  can  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  creation,  in  providence,  in  the  written  Word,
only  as  we  are  taught  by  the  Spirit  and  recognize  the  true  order  of  the  Divine  kingdom,
which  places  the  throne  of  righteousness,  the  mercy-seat,  in  the  midst,  and  makes  the
glory  to  radiate  from  that.

III.  Eeliqious  jot  and  praise  stirred  up  by  signs  of  grace.  1.  Heartfelt  and  out-
spoken. 2,  Uniting  all  in  common  exaltation.  3.  Deeply  humble  and  adoring.  4,  Not
dependent  on  external  niiiracle,  but  finding  occasion  in  every  proof  of  fire  from  hetiTen,  in
the  Ohuich  and  in  the  world. — R.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTKB  X.

The  death  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  the
SONS  OF  Aabon  (vers.  1 — 7).  The  first  day
of  Aaron's  ministry  had  not  yet  closed.-  He
had  offered  the  sacrifices,  and  had  entered
into  the  holy  place  with  Moses,  and  had
returned  to  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,
where  the  people  had  been  standing  in  mute
expectation,  and  God  had  shown  his  ap-
proval and  his  confirmation  of  him  in  his
priestly  acts  by  consuming  the  sacrifices,  as
they  lay  on  the  altar,  with  a  miraculous  fire
emblematio  of  himself,  when  a  rash  act  on
the  part  of  his  two  eldest  children  changed
the  day  from  one  of  rejoicing  to  one  of
mourning.  It  would  seem  that  Nadab  and
Abihu,  being  already  in  a  state  of  exaltation
from  the  events  of  the  day,  in  which  they
had  taken  so  prominent  a  part,  felt  bound,
when  the  fire  came  forth  from  God,  and  the
poople  shouted  and  fell  on  their  faces,  to
Mice  sD£ie  step  whereby  to  acknowledge  on
tLo  part  of  the  people  the  graciousness
displayed  so  visibly  by  the  Lord.  Moses
and  Aaron  had  been  parted  from  them  when
they  went  into  the  tabernacle,  and  were
now  facing  the  congregation,  the  ministers
rather  of  God  to  man  than  of  man  to  God,
and  Nadab  and  Abihu  appear  to  have  re-
garded themselves  as  rhe  representatives  of
the  people.  Without  waiting  for  instruc-
tions, they  rose  from  their  prostration,  anri,
preparing  to  make  a  return  to  God  for  his
gift  of  fire  by  the  ofiering  of  incense  sym-


bolical of  prayer,  they  lit  their  censers
from  one  of  the  fires  which  had  been  made
for  boiling  the  sacrificial  flesh,  and,  putting
incense  upon  them,  started  forward,  with  the
intention  of  carrying  the  burning  incense
to  the  golden  altar  of  prayer  in  the  holy
place.  They  reached  the  door  of  the  taber-
nacle, where  Moses  and  Aaron  were  stand-
ing, when  they  were  met  by  a  blast  of  the
same  fire  which  had  already  swept  to  the
brazen  altar,  and  they  fell  dead.  They
had  acted  presumptuously.  They  had  not,
like  Eleazar  amd  Ithamar,  waited  for  the
Divine  command,  but,  in  their  haste,  they
had  irreverently  broken  the  custom,  which
rested  upon  a  Divine  command,  of  taking
the  fire  for  the  altar  of  incense  from  the
altar  of  burnt  sacrifice  alone.  The  fact
that  this  offence  was  the  transgression  oi
a  positive  rather  than  of  a  moral  precept,
would  have  made  the  lesson  the  more
complete  and  emphatic.  They — the  newly
ordained  priests — had,  with  whatever  good
intentions,  done  what  God  had  not  com-
manded, and  in  doing  it  had  done  what  he
had  forbidden.  Like  Uzzah  afterwards
(2  Sam.  vi.  7),  they  died  for  it,  that  others
might  fear  to  do  the  same.  Will-worship
(Col.  ii.  23)  received  thereby  an  emphatin
condemnation,  and  priests  and  people  were
taught,  in  a  manner  not  to  be  forgotten,
that  "to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice "
(1  Sam.   XV.  22).

Ver.  1.— Nadab  and  Ahibu  are  said  to
have  each  taken  his  oeuser.    This  ia  the


150


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  X.  1—1,


flnt  time  that  the  word  nsed  in  the  original
u  translatbd  "  cenBer."  It  means  any
Teasel  or  pan  that  will  hold  embera  or
tinder  (aee  Ezod.  xxt.  88;  zxvii.  3,  23;
xxviii.  8).  They  put  fire  therein,  and  put
inoense  thereon.  No  doubt  they  used  the
incense  ordered  in  Exod.  xxx.  84.  They
are  not  found  fault  with  for  the  incense,
but  for  the  fire  that  they  used.  They
offered  strange  fire,  that  is,  fire  not  taken
from  the  altar  of  burnt  offering,  which  tl.ey
might  have  feared  to  approach  after  the
miracle  that  had  occurred.  In  oh.  xvi.  12
it  is  ordi-red  that,  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,
the  incense  fire  should  be  taken  from  the
brazen  altnr,  and  this  was  no  doubt  the
rule  on  all  occasions,  though  the  law  has
not  been  recorded.

Ter.  2. — And  tiiere  went  ont  firs  from  the
Lord,  and  devoured.  These  are  the  exact
words  used  in  ch.  ix.  24  of-the  fire  that  con-
sumed the  sacrifices.  The  fire  was  the  same ;
its  source  was  the  same ;  its  effect  was  the
same,  and  yet  how  different  I  They  died
before  the  lord ;  that  is,  they  were  struck
dead  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.

Ver.  S. — This  is  that  the  Lord  spake  (see
i'xod.  xix.  22;  xxviii.  11;  xxix.  44;  ch,
viii.  33).  God  will  be  sanctified  either  by
the  obedience  or  by  the  punishment  of  those
that  come  nigh  him,  that  is,  bis  priests.  If
they  have  greater  privileges,  they  have
greater  perils  (of.  Matt.  xi.  21).  Aaron  held
his  peace — in  submission  (see  Ps.  xxzix.  9 ;
Job  i.  22),  acknowledging  that  Moses  had
justified  the  act  of  God  in  executing  so
terrible  a  judgment.

Ver.  4. — Uzziel  was  the  youngest  brotlier
of  Amram  (see  Exod.  vi."  18 — 22).  His
■ona,  Uishael  and  Elzaphan,  were  therefore
second  cousins  of  Kadab  and  Abihu,  who
are  here  called  their  brethren.  (Cf.  the  use
of  the  term  "  brothers  of  the  Lord,"  applied
probably  to  his  first  cousins  in  the  New
Testament.)


Ver.  5. — They  went  near,  and  carried  them
in  their  coats  out  of  the  camp.  Their  eoati
were  the  tunics  which  tliey  had  put  on  as
their  priestly  attire  (ch.  viii.  18).  The
lightning  flash  which  had  struck  tliem
down  had  not  injured  their  clothes.  As
Mishael  and  Elzapban  became  ceremonially
defiled  by  contact  witU  the  corpses,  and  as
the  Passover  was  now  at  hand,  it  has  been
thoiiglit  that  it  was  in  reference  to  their
case  that  the  concession  was  made,  that
those  defiled  by  a  dead,  body  might  keep
the  Passover  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the
second  instead  of  the  first  month  (Numb.
iz.6^11).  The  defilement  caused  by  death
ceased  when  Christ  had  died.

Ver.  6. — Uncover  not  your  heads.  They
are  to  abstain  from  ell  the  conventional
signs  of  mourning,  in  order  to  show  that
they  acknowledged  the  justice  of  the  ponish-
ment.  The  whole  house  of  Israel,  that  is,
the  people  in  general,  might  mourn  the
death  of  their  priests,  but  the  high  priest
and  his  remaining  sons  must  prove  their
submission  to  the  Divine  chastisement  by
crushing  their  individual  feelings  of  sorrow.
A  murmur  on  their  part  would  have  brought'
God's  wrath  on  themselves  and  on  the
whole  congregation,  which  they  represented
(ch.  iv.  3).  Uncover  not  your  heads  may  be
otherwise  translated,  Let  not  your  hair  fall
dishevelled  (see  ch.  xxi.  10).

Ver.  7.  -The  priests  are  not  to  be  taken
away  from  their  duties  at  the  door  of  the
tabernacle,  that  is,  the  court  in  front  of  the
tabernacle,  even  for  the  sake  of  burying
their  dead.  They  had  now  been  in  the
court  for  eight  days  continuously,  and  they
had  to  remain  there  until,  in  the  fuliilment
of  their  public  function,  they  had  eaten  the
sacrificial  meal.  Cf.  Matt.  viii.  21,  22,
"  Lord,  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my
father.  But  Jesus  said  unto  him.  Follow
me."   God's  service  oomes  before  all  things.


H0MILBTIC8.

Vera.  1,  2. — The  lin/ulntBi  of  man  mars  the  fuU  effect  of  the  good  purpo»e$  of  Ood
on  the  very  day  of  the  consecration  of  the  priests.

I.  The  sin  of  Nadab  and  Abihu.  Presumption.  They  chose  their  own  method
of  returning  thanks  and  giving  praise  to  God,  a  method  unsanctioned  by  God's  com-
mand, unauthorized  by  their  official  superiors.

IL  Theib  punishment.  Death.  We  might  have  thought  that  a  lesser  penalty
would  have  sufficed  for  such  a  sin,  if  we  had  not  had  their  example  before  us.

IIL  Itb  UEHS0N8.  1.  The  necessity  of  oiedienee  to  positive  preoqiU  as  well  a$  monU
commands.  Moral  commands,  which  rest  for  their  basis  on  some  reason  which  we  can
apprehend,  being  in  their  nature  of  far  greater  importance  than  positive  preceptt,
which  are  binding  rimply  because  they  have  been  ordered,  we  are  tempted  to  nnder-
▼»l>»  *l»e  latter.  We  say,  « I  know  God's  purpose,  and  will  carry  it  out ;  it  is  slavish  to
be  bound  by  the  letter.  He  will  prefer  the  course  which  has  now  become  the  best
to  that  which  he  commanded   under  perhaps  altered  circumstances."     TWi  aiijes


OH.  X.  1—7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  161

from  pride.    We  make  ourselves  judges  of  God's  purposes,  in  respect  to  which  we  are
in  truth  ignorant  or  can  at  best  guess  blindly.     There  may  be  a  thousand  other  objects
of  the  Divine  counsels  beside  that  which  we  think  that  we  see,  which  we  regard  as  the
only  one.    The  questions  which  alone  we  must  ask  are,  "  Does  this  injunction  come
from  God?  and  does  it  affect  me  ?  "    If  so,  we  must  obey  it  without  respect  to  conse-
quences, and  we  may  not  substitute  for  it  a  course  of  action  which  appears  to  our-
selves better  adapted  to  effect  the  end  which  w^e  suppose  to  be  in  view.    2.  The  special
necessity  of  this  obedience  in  Divine  worship.     God  knows  how  he  virills  to  be  wor-
shipped, and  why  he  should  be  so  worshipped.    Man  does  not.    Under  the  old  dis-
pensation, the  forms  of  worship  appointed  by  him  were  typical.     What  they  were
typical  of  he  knew,  but  man  did  not ;  therefore  man  could  not  judge  of  their  pro-
priety.   Under  the  new  dispensation,  he  has  by  positive  injunction  appointed  two  rites
— the  sacrament  of  Baptism  and  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper.    To  dispense  with
either  of  them  would  be  an  act  of  the  highest  presumption.     He  appointed  certain
forms  by  which  they  were  to  be  administered.     Human  authority  may  not  in  baptism
change  water  for  any  other  element,  or  substitute  other  words  than  those  appointed,  nor
may  it  alterjthe  form  of  the  consecration  in  the  administration  of  the  Holy  Communion ;
nor  when  Christ  has  said,  "  Drink  ye  all  of  this,"  may  it,  without  sin,  enjoin,  "  Ye
shall  not  all  drink  of  it."    3.  Human  authority  to  he  obeyed  where  Ood  has  not
spoken.     There  must  be  regulations  of  some  kind  for  Divine  worship,  and  these  it  is  the
office  of  the  Church  to  supply,  ordaining,  abolishing,  and  changing,  as  it  seems  good
from  time  to  time.     "  Every  particular  or  national  Church  hath  authority  to  ordain
.  .  .  ceremonies  or  rites  of  tlie  Church;"  and  also  "to  change  and  abolish"  them
when  "ordained  by  man's  authority,  so  that  all  things  be  done  to  edifying"  (Art.
XXXIV.).     When  once  ordained,  they  have  a  binding  force  over  the  conscience  until
abolished  by  the  same  authority.    "  Whosoever  through  his  private  jud;j;ment,  will-
ingly and  purposely,  doth  openly  break  the  tradition  and  ceremonies  of  the  Church,
which  be  not  repugnant  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  be  ordained  and  approved  1:^
common  authority,  ought  to  be  rebuked  openly  (that  others  may  fear  to  do  the  like),
as  he  that  offendeth  against  the  common  order  of  the  Church,  and  hurteth  the  authoritj
of  the  Magistrate,  and  woundeth  the  consciences  of  the  weak  brethren  "  (Ibid.).
Although  the  intention  be  good,  though  the  purpose  be  to  improve  the  worship  o)
God,  and,  as  in  the  case  of  Nadab  and  Abiliu,  to  light  up  in  the  sanctuary  the  goldm
altar  of  incense  and  prayer,  yet,  if  a  man  act  without  the  authority  of  hia  Church,  he  is
guilty  of  presumption,  and  will  have  to  bear  his  iniquity.

Ver.  2. — Fire  was  the  instrument  of  the  destruction  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  whilst
just  before  it  had  been  the  means  of  consuming  the  sacrifice,  and  in  passing  to  the  altar
it  had  probably  bathed  Moses  and  Aaron  in  its  harmless  flames  as  they  stood  at  the
door  of  the  tabernacle.  Thus  it  is  that  the  same  thing  serves  as  a  means  of  glorifica-
tion or  of  destruction,  according  to  the  qualities  of  that  with  which  it  comes  in  contact.
The  discipline  of  daily  life  makes  one  a  saint,  another  a  more  determined  sinner.  The
discipline  of  suffering  softens  one  heart,  hardens  anothei-.  The  difficulties  of  religious
belief  make  one  the  more  submissive,  another  an  unbeliever.  God  is  the  joy  of  the
believer  and  the  misery  of  the  infidel.  And  so  we  may  suppose  that  it  will  be  here-
after. The  presence  of  God  will  be  the  exceeding  great  reward  of  those  who  have
sought  him,  and  that  same  presence  would  be  the  torture  of  those  who  have  not  sub-
mitted their  wills  to  his.  It  may  be  that  this  in  itself  will  be  sufficient  to  constitute
the  punishment  of  the  unrighteous  in  the  world  to  come.

Ver.  8.— Increase  of  privilege  involves  increase  of  danger.  The  nearer  men  are
brought  to  God,  the  more  liable  they  are  to  chastening  at  his  hands.  This  is  more
particularly  the  case  with  those  who  are  made  his  ministers.  What  might  pass  un-
punished in  others  will  be  punished  in  them.  What  would  be  allowed  in  others  will
not  be  allowed  in  them  (ven  6).  Had  Nadab  and  Abihu  not  been  called  to  be  priests,
they  would  not  have  met  thefr  untimely  fate ;  and  had  Aaron,  Eleazar,  and  Ithamar
been  la/men,  they  would  have  been  permitted  to  make  use  of  the  ordinary  signs  oi
mourning  for  their  dead.  But  God's  work  must  come  before  any  other  duty,  and  if  it
be  not  done  as  God  has  willed  it  to  bo  done,  a  sorer  punishment  will  fall  upon  those


152  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  x,  1—7


who  have  specially  devoted  themselves  to  the  immediate  service  of  God  than  on  others.
This  is  a  solemn  thought  for  those  who  are  ordained  to  he  the  ministew  of  God.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Counterfeit  fire.  Ch.  x.  1 — 11 ;  cf.  Acta  v.  We  have  considered  the  consecrafon
hoth  of  the  high  priest  and  of  the  minor  priests,  and  how,  entering  upon  their  office  in
expectation  of  a  sign,  they  got  it  in  the  outflash  of  the  "  consuming  fire."  But  sad  to
say,  two  of  the  minor  priests  so  provoke  the  Lord  hy  their  presumption  that  they  are
instantly  consumed.  Having  already  contrasted  the  high  priest's  consecration  with
Christ's  haptism,  and  the  descent  of  the  fire  with  the  effusion  of  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost,
we  cannot  resist  the  parallel  presented  by  the  case  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira.  to  this
case  of  Nadab  and  Abihu.  If  believers  are  rightly  regarded  as  "  priests  unto  God,"
then  the  case  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  is  one  of  presumption  in  an  assumed  priesthood.
The  parallel  will  help  us  to  definite  ideas  about  the  sin.

L  Honour  is  oftentimes  too  much  for  some  minds.  And  it  is  generally  a  minor
class  of  mind  that  gets  intoxicated  with  position  and  success.  Nadab  and  Abihu,
elevated  to  the  priesthood,  are  so  elated  as  to  suppose  that  everything  becomes  them.
Moreover,  allied  with  this  mental  intoxication  and  excitement  there  often  is  physical
intoxication.  Indulgence  is  thought  a  proper  thing  for  the  upstart,  and  so  he  feeds  his
presumption  by  excess.  The  probabilities  are  in  favour  of  supposing  that  Nadab  and
Abihu  had  indulged  in  wine  or  strong  drink  immediately  on  their  elevation  to  the
priesthood  (cf.  vers.  9,  10),  and,  in  consequence,  were  incapacitated  for  distinguishing
between  the  holy  fire  and  its  unholy  counterfeit.  It  is  not  every  one  who  can  stand  a
"  full  cup,"  or  walk  with  it  steadily.  If  with  honour  there  comes  not  a  quiet  spirit,  it
becomes  a  curse  rather  than  a  blessing.

II.  Self-confidence  is  the  natural  result  op  the  intoxication  of  bucoms.
Nadab  and  Abihu,  in  their  folly,  think  that  they  can  guide  themselves  in  priestly  duty.
Their  venerable  uncle,  Moses,  is  not  to  be  consulted  by  such  dignitaries  as  they  are.
They  can  approach  the  Divine  presence  in  a  perfectly  new  and  ori^iinal  way.  The  fire
wnich  came  odginally  from  heaven,  and  which  has  been  most  carefully  preserved  as  a
sacred  deposit,  is  not,  they  believe,  a  bit  better  than  fire  they  themselves  can  kindle.
They  will  not  depend  upon  it,  but  furnish  a  good  fire  themselves.  Their  spirit  is  self-
confidence  all  through.  The  licence  of  innovation  was  most  uncalled  for  at  such  a
time,  fleeing  that  the  ritual  was  only  in  process  of  reception  from  heaven.  There  was
no  excuse  for  their  course  at  all.

III.  God  never  grants  a  manifestation,  but  Satan  gets  up  through  self-
confident  MEN  A  counterfeit.  Nadab  and  Abihu  believed  they  could  produce  as
good  a  fire  as  God.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  believed  that  hypocrisy  could  conduct  itself
as  creditably  as  Pentecostal  devotion.  To  every  suggestion  of  a  "  year  of  grace,"  there
comes  the  counter-suggestion  of  a  "  year  of  delusion."  All  fire  is  equally  common,  or,
for  that  matter,  equally  sacred,  to  the  self-confident  mind.  Special  inspirations  are  in-
credible. Censers  can  be  filled  on  the  most  rational  principles,  and  God  does  not  refuse
any  man's  person.

Paul,  in  1  Cor.  xiii.,  conveys  the  idea  of  counterfeit  eloquence,  a  loveless  exhibition
of  oratory  that  casual  observers  might  pronounce  angelic ;  of  counterfeit  enthusiasm,,
and  even  faith,  so  that  neither  mysteries  nor  uiountains  can  retard  the  loveless  spirit's
prayers;  of  counterfeit  martyrdoms,  giving  up  the  body  to  be  burned  after  giving  up
fortune  to  the  poor ;  and  yet,  because  love  is  wanting  in  such  cases,  they  constitute  an
unacceptable  and  profitless  service.    '

IV.  Those  who  presume  with  their  counterfeits  must  accept  of  the  judgment
they  deserve.  Nadab  and  Abihu,  despising  the  Divine  fire,  and  coming  into  com-
petition with  their  own,  are  consumed  by  it.  In  a  moment  they  experience  liow  OtoA
is  a  "  consuming  fire"  to  all  presumption.  Ananias  and  Sapphira  feel  the  same.  They
fall  before  the  deserved  vengeance  of  the  Most  High.  God  offers  us  the  greit  alterna-
tive— either  sanctifloatiun  through  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  destruction  from  the
jresence  of  the  Lord  and  the  glory  of  his  power.     God  will  be  sanctified  in  some  way :


OH.  X.  1—7.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  153

if  the  wrath  of  man  does  not  turn  to  praise,  it  will  glorify  God  in  being  restrained
(Ps.  Ixxvi,  10).

Y.  It  is  clear  that  God  only  accepts  what  he  himself  inspibks.  This  is  the
lesson  of  this  sad  providence.  We  must  bring  back  to  God  what  he  has  given.  Inde-
pendent offerings  are  not  acceptable.  To  come  to  him  in  a  way  of  our  own  devising,
instead  of  by  Jesus  Christ ;  to  come  to  him  in  a  self-confident  spirit,  instead  of  in  the
humility  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  to  come  to  him  with  proud,  cold  hearts,  instead
of  with  warm  and  ardent  ones,  is  to  be  sent  empty  away.  He  refuses  all  such  counter-
feit offerings ;  he  must  have  Divine  fire  or  none. — R.  M.  E.

Submission  in  bereavement.    Ch.  x.  3 — 7 ;  12 — 20 ;  of.  2  Sam.  xii.  15 — ^23 ;  Job  i.

18 — 21 ;  John  xi ;  1  Tliess.  iv.  13 — 18.  The  conduct  of  Aaron  under  the  bereavement
is  most  instructive.  He  holds  his  peace  and  is  prepared  to  do  whatever  Moses  commands.
And  here  we  have  to  notice —

I.  God's  service  and  glort  must  take  prbcbdbncb  op  every  other  oonsidera-
TiOK.  The  surviving  priests  were  to  leave  the  mourning  and  the  funeral  arrangements
to  their  brethren.  The  bereavement  is  not  to  interfere  with  their  priestly  service  and
consecration.  God  asserts  his  claims  as  paramount.  "  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother
more  than  me,"  said  God  incarnate,  "  is  not  worthy  of  me :  and  he  that  loveth  son  or
daughter  more  than  me  is  not  worthy  of  me  "  (Matt.  x.  37).  It  is  ideally  possible,
therefore,  to  be  so  filled  with  a  sense  of  consecration  to  God  that  every  other  con-
sideration is  made  to  dwindle  into  insignificance.  Is  not  this  what  we  shall  realize  in
heaven  ?

II.  Submission  to  God's  clearly  expressed  will  is  a  relief  to  the  soul  which
HAS  BEEN  uncertain  BEFORE  IT.  The  thought  that  God  willed  the  death  of  those
dear  to  us,  has  a  wonderfully  calming  influence  upon  us.  We  may  see  no  reason  for
the  stroke,  and  God  may  not  for  a  long  season  show  us  his  reason,  but  we  can  believe
he  has  one  and  a  good  one,  and  that  "he  doeth  all  things  well."  The  death  of  Nadab
aud  Abihu  was  as  clearly  a  token  from  God  as  the  previous  manifestation.  Job,  again,
shows  the  same  submissive  spirit  under  a  still  greater  bereavement  (Job  i.  18 — 21).  So
did, David  on  the  death  of  his  child  (2  Sam.  xii.  15 — 23).  So  did  Mary  and  Martha  on
the  death  of  Lazarus  (John  xi.).  All  these  worthies  rested,  as  we  all  may  rest,  and
there  is  no  other  rest  but  in  the  will  of  an  all-wise  God.  Uncertainty  is  trying,  but
even  the  certainty  of  bereavement  and  of  sorrow  has  an  element  of  rest  in  it.

III.  Aaron  is  cautioned  against  ant  use  of  wine  or  strong  drink  when
ENGAGED  IN  PRIESTLY  SERVICE.  Doubtless  the  primary  significance  of  this  injunction
was,  as  already  noticed,  that  Nadab  and  Abihu  had  erred  therein.  But  it  seems  to
carry  also  a  beneficial  caution.  For  at  no  time  are  people  more  tempted  to  resort
to  wine  and  strong  drink  than  when  in  bereavement.  A  little  stimulus,  they  fancy,
will  sustain  them.  So  they  take  to  "the  bottle"  to  replenish  their  courage.  The
result  is  that  they  fall  into  deeper  troubles  than  ever.  Aaron  is^  the  better  of  this
injunction  to  abstain  at  this  time  when  his  sorrow  is  so  keen.

IV.  Sorrow  necessitated  fasting  instead  of  feasting.  After  the  terrible  trial,
Aaron  and  his  surviving  sons  had  no  appetite  for  the  feasting  to  which  they  were
entitled ;  and  so  they  seem  to  have  burned  the  sin  oBering  in  its  entirety  instead  of
eating  of  it.  Moses,  in  directing  the  sorrowing  priests  to  proceed  to  the  feast  of  fellow-
ship, made  no  due  allowance  for  their  condition.  Aaron  instinctively  saw  the
incongruity  of  feasting  when  his  heart  was  so  sore,  and  therefore  he  acted  in  the  spirit
of  the  Law,  which  disposed  of  what  could  not  be  used  in  the  fire  of  the  altar.

And  might  not  those  who  turn  a  house  of  mourning  into  a  house  of  feasting  learn  a
lesson  of  propriety  here  ?  Eating  and  drinking  in  connection  with  wakes  and  funerals
have  been  carried  oftentimes  to  most  unseemly  excess.  The  whole  spirit  of  sorrow
evaporates  before  the  copious  offerings  to  the  "belly-god,"  and  instead  of  spiritual
profit  there  is  spiritual  deterioration.

Fasting  is  an  effort  of  nature  to  say  a  word  for  the  spirit  within.  Sorrow  takes
the  edge  off  appetite,  and  rebukes  feasting  that  the  soul  may  have  a  season  of  repair.
If  the  sad  heart  gets  fair  play,  it  will  emerge  from  its  sorrows  purified  and  elevated.

V.  The  spirit  may  sometimes  most  properly  supersede  the  letter.  We  have
seen  how  fatal  was  the  innovation  of  the  presumptuous  priests.     But  in  this  same


154  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  x.  1—7


chapter  we  come  across  an  innovation  on  the  part  of  Aaron,  at  which  Moses  and  Gtod
were  content.  There  is  all  the  difference  between  rigidity  which  must  not  be  broken,
and  a  law  whose  spirit  can  move  freely  amid  its  forms.  It  was  the  latter  which  God
gave.  There  are  necessities  which  arise  from  time  to  time  and  are  themselves  laws  to
the  spiritual  mind.  We  should  be  jealous  of  ourselves  in  the  exercise  of  our  liberty,
but,  at  the  same  time,  we  ought  to  realize  our  freedom  as  God  givea  it  to  us  is  bis  Law.
— E.  M.  B.

Vers.  1,  2. — Disobedience  swiftly  punished.  What  a  contrast  between  the  tw»
scenes !  Aaron  and  Moses  entering  the  tabernacle  and  returning  to  bless  the  people
and  to  participate  in  the  rejoicing  caused  by  the  appeaiance  of  God's  glory,  and  Nadab
and  Abihu  approaching  the  same  sacred  place  only  to  be  consumed  by  the  fire  of
judgment,  their  off'erings  rejected,  themselves  destroyed!  The  judgments  of  God
are  not  pleasing  to  contemplate,  but  they  are  necessary  to  completeness  of  view,  and
to  the  I'egetting  in  lis  of  due  caution  when  we  venture  into  his  presence,  lest  our  holy
boldness  degenerate  into  a  presumptuous  disregard  of  his  regulations.

I.  The  act  of  bash  disobedience.  1.  We  see  two  brothers  sinning  against  God.
Brothers  may  be  mutually  helpful  or  injurious.  To  witness  the  union  of  members  of
a  family  in  pious  zeal  is  delightful,  but  too  often  relationship  is  provocative  of  harm
rather  than  of  blessing.  Elder  brothers,  beware  of  leading  your  younger  relations
into  sin!  2.  Two  that  were  intimately  related  to  holy  men  were  not  thereby  shielded
from  thoughtless  action  and  severe  judgment.  Aks !  that  the  children  of  godly  parents
s'lould  ever  belie  their  ancestry.  Here  the  sons  of  Aaron  and  nephews  of  Moses  dis-
hunoured  their  relationship.  3.  Two  young  men  brought  destruction  upon  themselves
and  grief  upon  their  friends.  They  died  childless,  and,  if  more  than  youths,  could  yet
hardly  have  attained  to  any  great  fge.  Eloazar,  the  next  brother,  was  perhaps  not
twenty  at  this  time,  for  he  was  not  included  in  the  list  of  the  men  forbidden  to  see  or
enter  the  land  of  promise.  We  are  apt  to  censure  the  evil  deeds  of  young  men  too
gently,  and  to  look  upon  j'outh  as  moi-e  of  an  excuse  than  God  seems  here  to  regard  it
iixperience  proves  that  if  youth  naturally  inclines  to  sin,  so  also  is  it,  equally  with  ag«_
visited  with  righteous  retribution.  4.  Two  that  had  been  openly  dedicated  to  the  service
o/  Qod  were  unmindful  of  his  precepts.  They  had  just  been  consecrated  as  priests.
This  did  not  prevent  them  from  violating  the  Law,  nor  protect  them  from  the  conse-
quences of  their  behaviour.  There  is  danger  as  well  as  honour  involved  in  waiting
upon  God.  If  Peter  had  not  been  called  to  the  lofty  position  of  disciploship,  he  had
not  denied  his  Master.  By  smiting  these  two  priests,  sons  of  the  high  priest,  Jehovah
taught  the  people  that  sin  could  be  committed  byj  and  would  not  be  pardoned  in,  the
most  exalted  of  the  nation.  It  was  a  conspicuous,  forcible  demonstration  of  the  majesty
and  holiness  of  God.  5.  Two  that  had  recently  beheld  the  glory' of  the  Lord  forgot  the
obedience  their  position  demanded.  Perhaps  it  vi'as  the  very  excitement  consequent  on
such  a  scene  that  unduly  elevated  them,  so  that,  becoming,  giddy,  they  reeled  into  the
abyss  of  impetuous  self-will  and  awful  penalty.  We  must  guard  against  imprudent
familiar  handling  of  Divine  things  after  the  grace  of  God  has  visited  us  with  wondrous
revelations  of  his  mercy  and  favour.  It  is  evident  that  even  if  displays  of  supernatural
power  were  frequent,  they  would  not  prove  a  security  against  transgression.  Some  have
turned  the  grace  of  God  manifested  in  full  and  free  salvation  through  Christ  into  a
covering  for  licentiousnes  and  i  reverence

II.  The  QLooiiT  chanqe  effected  by  snt.  1.  A  day  of  hallowed  joy  hecomes  a  day
of  mourning.  This  is  the  bitter  chequered  experience  of  life.  The  sunny  skies  soon
grow  dark  with  clouds,  the  quiet  waters  are  lashed  into  tempestuous  fury.  Men  art
almost  afraid  of  seasons  of  ecstatic  rejoicing,  as  if  a  reaction  must  quickly  ensue ;  the
gladness  seems  itself  a  presentiment  of  coming  trouble.  Sorrow  treads  close  upon
the  heels  of  mirth.  Sin  may  well  excite  in  us  sentiments  of  aversion  when  we  see  how
it  lias  disfigured  the  fair  features  of  creation's  landscape,  changing  songs  into  sighs  and
smiles  into  tears.  Many  a  day  that  began  with  singing  and  prayer  has  ended  with
wailing  and  remorse.  2.  The  fire  of  Divine  approval  is  changed  into  the  fire  of  Divine
wrath.  The  men  became  a  sacrifice  to  God's  glory  indeed,  but  were  not  an  offering
voluntarily  laid  upon  his  altar.  It  seemed  fitting  that  the  punishment  should  bear  an
analogy  to  the  sin.     Strange  fire  was  punished  with  hallowed  fire.     Q'he  conception  ol


cH.  1. 1— -.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  ISa

a  mild  Deity  unmoved  to  indignation  at  acts  unaocordant  with  his  will  is  not  justified
by  Scripture,  nor  is  it  in  harmony  with  the  utterances  of  conscience  or  the  testimony
home  by  the  existent  laws  of  his  moral  government  of  the  world.  3.  Not  even  the
profession  of  desire  to  honour  Ood  excuses  the  wilful  neglect  of  his  injunctions.  To
substitute  human  inventions  for  scriptural  institutions  is  a  dangerous  practice.  Reason
may  discern  little  difference  of  moment,  but  it  is  not  safe  to  argue  that  therefore  the
particular  observance  is  immaterial,  and  rests  on  no  rational  ground  of  distinction.  The
loyalty  that  will  presume  to  alter  the  king's  ordinances  is  of  doubtful  character  and
certain  of  rejection. — S.  E.  A.

Ver.  3. — A  bereaved  parent  Who  can  stand  in  the  presence  of  death  unmoved  ?  A
gulf  separates  us  from  the  departed  friend :  the  past  is  like  a  dream.  The  partnership
between  soul  and  body  has  been  dissolved,  and  already  the  clay  tabernacle,  deprived  of
its  tenant,  shows  signs  of  crumbling  into  decay.  The  form  is  the  same,  but  the  ani-
mating principle  has  fled.  The  casket  has  been  rifled  of  its  jewel ;  we  survey  the  husk,
but  the  l^ernel  has  vanished.

I.  Herb  was  an  instance  of  sudden  death.  This  is  the  more  startling.  The
festival  is  changed  into  a  funeral.  .  The  active  frame  is  motionless,  the  busy  brain
that  teemed  with  thought  is  still ;  we  call  aloud,  but  there  is  no  reply ;  we  bend  down
to  touch  the  lips,  but  we  receive  no  responsive  kiss.  How  weak  is  man,  when  a  stroke
deprives  him  of  all  his  faculties,  removes  him  from  earthly  ken,  and  his  place  knows
him  no  more  I

II.  It  is  sad  when  ohildebn  die  before  thbib  parents.  Then  the  cup  of  bereave-
ment contains  an  added  element  of  bitterness.  The  natural  order  is  inverted.  Pathetic
was  the  expression  of  Burke's  grief  at  the  loss  of  his  only  son.  "  I  am  stripped  of  all
my  honours ;  I  am  torn  up  by  the  roots,  and  lie  prostrate  on  the  earth.  I  have  none
to  meet  my  enemies  in  the  gate.  They  who  ought  to  have  succeeded  me  have  gone
before  me.  They  who  should  have  been  to  me  a  posterity  are  in  the  place  of  ancestors."
To  see  the  budding  rose  suddenly  blighted,  all  the  promise  of  life  unrealized,  is  enough
to  rend  a  parent's  heart  with  disappointment.  *

III.  It  is  sadder  still  when  death  is  the  direot  result  of  thouqhtless,  binfui,
CONDUCT.  Then  no  gleam  of  light  tempers  the  darkness.  If  the  flower  be  transplanted
to  adorn  the  heavenly  garden,  there  will  be  joy  at  the  thought  to  alleviate  the  sorrow.
But  when  the  removal  appears  like  that  of  tares  to  be  burned,  who  shall  assuage  the
pangs  of  bereavement  ?  Children !  strive  so  to  live  that  if  Providence  call  you  away
in  early  life,  the  memory  left  behind  may  be  sweet  and  fragrant,  pleasant  and  reassur-
ing. Let  us  not  too  hastily  assume  the  death  of  the  youthful  to  be  a  Judgment.  We
may  have  no  Moses  at  our  side,  as  here,  to  interpret  the  harrowing  scene.  We  would
not  rush  instantly  to  adverse  conclusions,  nor  misconceive  the  dispensation.  Even  in
the  case  before  us  we  are  not  warranted  in  deciding  upon  the  ultimate  fate  of  Nadab
and  Abihu.  Death  is  truly  in  every  case  a  particular  instance  of  a  general  law.  "  This
is  it  that  the  Lord  spake,  saying,  I  will  be  sanctified,"  etc.  It  ever  reminds  us  of  its
connection  with  sin,  and  every  time  we  are  called  to  stand  by  the  grave  we  should  be
impressed  with  a  deeper  sense  of  the  enormity  and  awfulness  of  sin  in  God's  sight.
Beholding  the  effect,  let  us  hate  the  cause.

IV.  Aaron  furnishes  an  example  of  fitting  behaviour  under  trial.  He  could
not  rejoice  to  see  the  withering  of  his  cherished  hopes ;  God  expects  no  such  unnatural
t:iumphing  over  the  instincts  of  affection.  But  he  refrained  from  murmuring,  he
"  held  his  peace."  "  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my  mouth,  because  thou  didst  it."
Open  the  quivering  lips,  and  the  pent-up  agony  of  the  spirit  may  find  vent  in  the
utterance  of  expostulations  and  reproaches  unworthy  of  a  child  of  God.  Job's  wife
tempted  him  to  "  curse  God  and  die,"  but  he  "  sinned  not  with  his  lips."  He  was,
indeed,  able  to  say, "  Shall  we  receive  good  at  the  hands  of  God,  and  shall  we  not
receive  evil  ?  "  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;  blessed  be  the  Name
of  the  Lord."    It  was  after  this  that  he  "  uttered  that  he  understood  not."

V.  To  repress  repining  is  accepted  as  tacit  acquiescence  in  the  equity  of
Divine  jtrpaMENTS.  His  ways  are  often  mysterious,  but  his  wisdom  cannot  err  nor
his  love  prove  unkind.  The  greatest  degree  of  affection  for  our  fellow-creatures  must
never  be  allowed  to  lessen  our  supreme  regard  for  the  glory  of  the  Creator,    "  It  is


156  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  x  1—7,

the  Lord :  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good."  Listen  to  the  Toioe  from  under  the
trees  of  the  Giarden  of  Gethsemane  :  "  Father,  not  my  will,  but  thine  he  dune."  Fond
parents  have  sacrificed  their  children  for  the  good  of  the  commonwealth,  how  much
more  shall  they  be  content  to  leave  them  in  the  hands  of  God,  to  be  dealt  with  accord-
ing to  his  infinite  justice  and  mercy  !  It  was  the  glory  of  the  Father  that  necessitated
the  surrender  of  his  beloved  Son  to  death  for  the  redemption  of  the  world. — 8.  R.  A.

Vers.  6,  7. — Restrictions  and  infirmities  of  religious  service.  That  honour  involTeB
responsibility  is  implied  in  many  of  these  ordinances,  and  is  recognized  in  the  judgment
passed  on  the  conduct  of  men  occupying  conspicuous  positions  in  society  and  in  the
Church.  To  be  dedicated  to  God's  service  was  an  inestimable  privilege  conferred  on
Aaron  and  his  family.  Their  time  and  labour  were  bestowed  upon  high  and  holy
employments.  The  seal  of  God  was  stamped  upon  their  brow,  the  people  regarded  them
with  respect  and  provided  for  their  maintenance.  Compare  the  honourable  position  of
ministers,  missionaries,  yea,  all  the  followers  of  Christ  now,  and  note  that  there  are
special  restrictions  consequent  upon  their  consecration,  and  common  infirmities  to
which  they  are  subject  equally  with  others.

L  The  bbstrictions.  1.  Forbidden  to  mingle  with  the  world  in  its  engagements.
"  Not  go  out  of  the  sanctuary,"  at  least  for  a  season,  they  are  deprived  of  the  liberty
others  enjoy.  Pursuits  which  may  be  harmlessly  indulged  in  by  others  are  unbecoming
to  them.  2.  Prohibited  from  contact  with  all  that  is  defiling.  They  must  not  touch
the  dead  bodies  of  their  relations  ;  the  cousins  of  Aaron  shall  perform  the  last  ofiBces  for
their  brethren.  What  concord  hath  the  Spirit  of  life  with  death  ?  To  profane  the  holy
unction  is  to  incur  the  Divine  displeasure.  "  Neither  filthiness,  nor  foolish  talking,
nor  jesting,  which  are  not  convenient."  "  Have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works
of  darkne.^s."  3.  Free  manifestation  of  grief  at  Ood's  visitations  not  permitted.  The
usual  relief  found  in  expression  is  excluded ;  there  must  be  no  signs  of  mourning  upon
the  priests.  Let  it  sufBce  for  the  nation  to  "  bewail  the  burning."  How  shall  the  oil
of  gladness  consort  with  mourning  ?  The  people  of  God  are  not  to  be  demonstrative  in
their  sorrow  at  his  chastisements,  lest  it  be  misconstrued,  and  others,  taking  occasion
from  their  example,  go  further  and  even  denounce  the  ways  of  God,  and  so  "  wrath  come
upon "  them.  We  must  remember  the  wisdom  of  the  Almighty  and  ^the  glory  due
unto  his  Name.  Will  not  the  world  entertain  hard  thoughts  concerning  him  if  we  his
servants  are  over-loud  in  lamentation  ?

II.  The  infirmities  which  are  not  prevented.  1.  They  are  subject  to  the  common
losses  and  bereavements.  There  is  no  special  providence  in  this  respect.  Even  Aaron
and  his  sons  have  to  bow  before  afflicting  dispensations.  If  it  were  otherwise  great
part  of  the  discipline  of  Ufe  would  be  omitted  from  the  training  of  God's  chiefest
scholars.  2.  They  also  feel  the  natural  pangs  of  sorrow.  It  is  evidently  so  in  the
present  case,  or  the  command  to  refrain  from  the  usual  manifestations  of  grief  would
not  have  been  issued.  God's  ministers  are  not  expected  to  become  hard-hearted  and
callous,  but  they  are  not  to  give  way  to  outbursts  of  anguish.  3.  They  are  liable  to
commit  acts  displeasing  to  God.  Nadab  and  Abihu  are  a  solemn  warning  of  the
possibility  of  transgression.  Even  Christians  of  repute  fall  into  grievous  sin.  They  get
hurried  away  by  worldly  passion,  and  offer  unacceptable  worship.

Conclusion.  Observe  the  influence  of  our  behaviour  upon  (1)  the  honour  of  God,
and  (2)  the  welfare  of  our  fellows.  He  who  expects  great  things  of  us  will  also,  if  we
ast  him,  accord  us  the  necessary  strength  to  enable  us  to  comply  with  his  demands.
Whilst  conscious  of  the  importance  attaching  to  all  our  actions,  we  need  not  be  depressed
with  a  load  of  anxiety.     We  may  "  rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway." — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Nadab  and  Abihu.  When  the  fire  of  God  came  upon  the  sacrifices,
"  the  people  shouted,  and  fell  on  their  faces."  While  thus  in  an  attitude  of  prayer,
Nadab  and  Abihu  snatched  their  censers,  put  fire  into  them,  and  put  incense  upon  the
fire,  as  though  to  send  up  the  prayers  of  the  people  to  God.  In  this  they  sinned,  and
in  consequence  paid  a  fearful  penalty.     Let  us  consider —

I.  The  nature  of  their  sin.  W^e  are  told :  1.  That  they  offered  strange  fire  to
Ood.  (1)  The  censers  were  right.  They  were  doubtless  those  made  under  the  direc-
ticm  of  Bezaleel  and  Aholiab  according  to  patterns  shown  in  the  mount  (Exod.  xxv.


OH.  X.  1—7,]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  167

40).  (2)  The  composition  of  the  incense  also  was  right ;  we  have  no  intimation  to
the  contrary.  Under  proper  conditions,  therefore,  the  incense  might  appropriately
ascend  with  the  "prayers  of  the  saints  "(see  Luke  i.  9, 10;  Eev.  viii.  3,  4).  (3)  But
the  fire  was  wrong.  It  was  a  fire  of  their  own  kindling :  not  that  which  came  forth
from  the  Lord.  It  therefore  represented  their  own  spirit  rather  than  the  Spirit  of  God.
No  prayer  can  be  acceptable  that  is  not  divinely  inspired  (see  Isa.  1. 10, 11 ;  Bom.  viii.
26,  27 ;  Jas.  iv.  3).  It  matters  not  how  correct  the  form  of  words :  the  censer  is
nothing;  or  how  orthodox  the  sentiment:  the  composition  of  the  incense  is  nothing;
without  the  sacred  fire  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1,  2).  2.  That  ihey  acted  without  direction.  (1)
This  is  the  force  of  the  words,  "  which  he  commanded  them  not."  Their  crime  was
not  in  doing  what  was  forbidden,  but  in  doing  what  was  not  enjoined.  AVill-worship
is  offensive  to  God.  No  body  of  uninspired  men  has  any  business  to  "  decree  rites
and  ceremonies."  We  should  study  the  written  Word  to  "  prove  what  is  that  good  and
acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God"  (see  Deut.  iv.  2;  Prov.  xxx.  6;  Bom.  xii.  2;
Eev.  xxii.  18,  19).  (2)  These  transgressors  were  moved  by  a  criminal  pride.  What
had  been  done  hitherto  was  done  by  Aaron,  his  sons  only  helping  him ;  and  done
under  the  direction  of  Moses.  They  set  divinely  constituted  authority  at  naught,
which  amounted  to  the  despising  of  the  authority  of  God.  It  was  the  very  sin  of
Korah  and  his  company  (see  Numb.  xvi.).  (3)  They  introduced  confusion.  One
priest  at  a  time  should  offer  incense  in  order  to  foreshadow  that  One  true  Priest
whose  mehts,  as  incense,  invests  with  acceptable  fragrance  and  gives  direction  to  the
prayers  of  the  saints  (see  Fsa.  cxli.  2,  margin ;  Bom.  viii.  34 ;  Heb.  ix.  24  ;  Kev.  viii.  3,
4).  Here  two  at  once  rush  in.  These  foreshadow  the  confusion  of  that  antichrist
which  would  make  "priests"  and  "saints"  and  "angels"  rivals  of  the  one  only
Mediator  (1  Tim.  ii.  5, 6).

II.  The  lessons  of  the  punishment.  1.  Qod  is  not  to  he  trifled  with.  (1)  He
*'  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  "  to  him  (see  Exod.  xix.  22 ;  Deut.  xxxii.
48 — 51 ;  Isa.  v.  16;  Ezek.  xx.  41).  (2)  He  is  "a  consuming  fire."  He  will  consume
our  sins  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  in  his  mercy,  or  he  will  make  ub  a  sacrifice  and
consume  us  in  his  anger.  "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  2.  His  vengeance
is  often  retributive.  (1)  They  sinned  by  fire  ;  they  suffered  by  fire  (see  Prov.  i.  81 ;
Isa.  iii.  10,  11 ;  Hos.  viii.  11).  (2)  They  preferred  a  fire  of  their  own  kindling  to  the
fire  of  God ;  God's  fire  put  their  censers  out,  together  with  the  light  of  their  life.  Twice
we  are  reminded  that  they  had  no  children,  viz.  Numb.  iii.  4 ;  1  Chron.  xxiv.  2.  So
completely  was  their  light  extinguished  1  "  Quench  not  the  Spirit."  3.  His  retributions
are  sometimes  summary.  (1)  Their  presumption  was  hasty  and  their  destruction  was
fiwift  (see  2  Pet.  ii.  1).  (2)  They  found  "  no  space  for  repentance."  They  "  died  before
the  Lord,"  in  presence  of  the  mercy-seat,  but  finding  no  mercy.  No  wrath  is  more  terrible
than  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb."  (3)  As  their  sin  foreshadowed  that  of  the  Babylonish
antichrist,  so  did  their  punishment  betoken  his  (see  2  Thess.  ii.  3 — 8 ;  Rev.  xviii.  8).
That  judgment  will  be  "  before  all  the  people."  In  it  God  will  be  signally  "  glorified."
4.  Mourning  for  the  dead  has  its  laws  and  limitations.  (1)  It  must  not  interrupt  the
flervice  of  God  (vers.  6,  7 ;  see  Neh.  vi.  3 ;  Matt.  viii.  21,  22 ;  xii.  47 — 49).  (2)  "  Aaron
held  his  peace."  Did  not  murmur  against  God.  Moses  soothed  him  by  showing  that
it  was  a  necessary  act  of  justice.  Wherein  God  is  glorified  we  should  bis  content.  (3)
It  must  not  have  expression  in  the  holy  place,  which  is  a  type  of  heaven.  There  the
wisdom  and  justice  of  the  judgments  of  God  will  be  so  manifest  that  the  punishment
of  the  wicked  cannot  be  mourned.  (4)  But  mourning  is  proper  in  the  camp  (vers.  4 — 6).
The  funeral  procession  through  the  camp  of  those  corpses,  wrapped  in  the  very  vestments
in  which  the  deceased  too  vainly  gloried,  would  be  an  affecting  sight.  Nadab  and
Abihu,  who  had  been  in  the  mount,  beholding  the  glory  of  the  Lord  (Exod.  xxiv.  1),
are  now  by  wrath  issuing  from  that  same  glory  brought  very  low.  When  a  king  falls
he  often  finds  a  scafibid  at  the  foot  of  hia  throne.  "  Be  not  high-mindpxl,  but  fear." —
J.  A.  M.

Yen.  1—3. — Sin  and  penalty  in  sacred  things.  The  story  of  the  guilt  and  doom
of  the  sons  of  Aaron  constitutes  a  sad  episode  in  the  recital  of  the  sacred  precepts  of  the
Law.    We  look  at —

I.  The  chaeacteb  of  the  TEANSftEBssioN.    It  appears  (from  ver.  16,  comnared  with


158  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  x.  1—7.


ch.  ix.  16)  that  this  forbidden  act  was  done  very  soon  indeed  after  the  solemnitiea
described  in  the  preceding  chapter  (ix.).  Otherwise  we  should  have  inferred  that  it  was
familiarity  with  sacred  rites  which  had  bred  irreverent  unconcern,  and  issued  m
disobedience.  We  seem  shut  up  to  the  conclusion  that  these  young  men,  even  when
the  solemn  inaugural  scenes  were  fresh  in  their  memories,  and  the  commandments
of  the  Lord  clearly  before  their  minds,  deliberately  and  wantonly  took  fire  from  another
source  than  the  heaven-kindled  flame  on  the  brazen  altar  (ch.  ix.  24).  Their  action
was  therefore,  not  only  a  defiant  violation  of  the  Law  they  had  received  from  Moses,  the
servant  of  Jehovah,  but  it  was  a  perverse  disregard  of  the  manifest  will  of  God,  made
known  in  special  supernatural  disclosure.

II.  The  explanation  op  the  punishmbnt.  (Vet.  2.)  This  may  seem  severe,  has
seemed  so  to  some.  Why  not  exclusion  from  ofBce  or  excommunication  from  the
congregation  of  the  Lord?  Why  the  extreme  penalty  for  one  act  of  error  in  worship?
The  answer  is  manifold.  1.  Their  deed  was  (as  has  been  said)  an  act  of  wilful  and
wanton  disobedience.  2.  It  was  committed  by  those  -who  were  in  high  position.  3.  It
was  a  sin  on  the  part  of  men  in  the  enjoyment  of  high  privilege,  and  in  the  exercise  of
no  slight  influence.  4.  It  was  an  evil  thing  done  in  the  holy  place  and  before  the  very
face  of  God ;  it  was  disobedience  in  connection  with  the  public  worship  of  Jehovah —
the  supreme  sphere  of  activity,  in  regard  to  which  it  was  of  vital  consequence  to  the
nation  that  everything  should  be  done  aright.  5.  One  signal  mark  of  high  displeasure
might  be  mercy  as  well  as  justice — inspiring  holy  awe  and  saving  many  others  from

similar  transgressions.

in.  The  lessons  which  the  bin  and  the  penalty  leave  behind  them.  We
learE  from  this  solemn  and  painful  scene :  1.  That  God's  will  must  be  sedulously
regarded  in  our  approaches  to  himself :  "  I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  me  "
(ver.  3).  2.  That  God  will  vindicate  his  Law  in  unmistakable  ways:  "before  all  the
people  I  will  be  gloiifled "  (ver.  3).  3.  That  there  is  no  exemption  from  exposure  to
temptation :  not  (1)  sonship  of  the  holy ;  (2)  being  in  a  holy  place ;  (3)  engagement
in  holy  t-imgs ;  (4)  recency  of  special  privilege.  4.  That  the  heinousness  of  sin
depends  on  many  things  beside  the  nature  of  the  overt  act.  5.  That  between  sin  and
suffering  there  will  be  found  a  striking  correspondence.  With  fire  they  sinned,  and  by
fire  they  were  consumed.  God  makes  meet  penalty  to  overtake  transgression  :  what-
soever a  man  sows,  that  he  reaps  (Gal.  vi.  7).  Sins  against  the  soul  lead  to  spiritual
injury;  against  the  body,  to  weakness,  disease,  and  death;  against  society,  to  social
dishonour  and  shame,  etc. — C.

Vers.  1,  3. — "  Strange  flre."  "  I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that  come  ni^h  me."
Oreat  and  small  things  in  thi  worship  of  Qod.  Doubtless  it  seemed  to  Nadab  and
Abihu  a  matter  of  bo  consequence  at  all  that  they  should  take  fire  from  one  altar  rather
than  from  another.  To  us  it  may  seem  a  comparatively  smaM  thing,  when  viewed
in  connection  with  the  terrible  doom  that  immediately  ensued.  Obviously,  however,
it  was  a  great  thing  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  act  of  punishment  by  which  he  showed
his  high  displeasure,  and  the  words  of  the  text,  sufficiently  prove  this.  The  seriousness
of  this  iiarticular  transgression  on  the  part  of  the  sons  of  Aaron  arose  from  several
attendant  considerations  (see  Homily  on  "  Sin  and  penalty,"  etc.) :  its  seriousness  to
us,  in  the  fact  that  we  may  be  disregarding  as  small  and  insignificant  that  which,
in  God's  sight,  is  great  and  even  vital ;  that  we  may  be  approaching  him  with  what  we
think  acceptable  service,  when  he  is  prepared  to  reject  it  as  "  strange  fire,"  and  condemn
us  severely  for  our  disregard  of  his  revealed  will.  In  connection  with  the  worship
of  God,  there  is —

I.  The  appabently  and  intbinbically  small.  So  for  as  the  things  thenuelTes
are  concerned,  it  is  of  no  consequence  to  that  most  High  Gh)d  "  who  dwelleth  not  in
temples  made  with  hands,"  what  is  (1)  the  style  of  architecture  of  our  sanctuaries,
(2)  the  character  of  their  furniture,  (3)  the  order  of  the  services,  (4)  the  number  of
ministrants  who  serve  at  pulpit  or  desk,  (6)  the  particular  text  chosen  for  the  day,
etc.  The  judgment  of  good  and  faithful  men  may  differ  on  these  things,  and  their
differences  may  be  of  no  moment  in  the  sight  of  God;  in  no  way  invalidating  the
service  rendered,  or  lessening  or  lowering  the  blessing  gained.  But  even  ia  couuection
with  tiha  smaller  matters,  as  also  apart  from  that  connection,  there  i*—


BH.  X.  1-7]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  159


II.  The  actuallt  and  intrinsically  great.  It  is  of  the  most  serious  importune*
that:  1.  In  all  things,  weightier  and  lighter,  we  should  study  to  follow  tbe  will  ol
Christ.  His  will  is  reveafed  in  his  own  words,  and  in  the  acts  and  words  of  his  apostles.
Thence  we  must  studiously  deduce  his  desire  concerning  us.  2.  We  should  make  all
things  conduce  to  a  reverential  spirit.  "  God  will  he  sanctified,"  etc.  The  service
which  does  not  tend  to  impress  the  worshipper  with  the  greatness,  majesty,  holiness,
wisdom,  faithfulness  of  God,  is  fatally  defective,  is  essentially  faulty.  3.  We  should
exalt  Jesus  Christ  as  a  Saviour  from  sin.  The  prominence  and  priority  given  to  the
sin  offering  in  this  book  point  clearly  to  the  truth  that  "  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh
away  the  sin  of  the  world  "  should  have  the  principal  place  in  Christian  worship.  He,
the  Divine  Son,  is  also  to  be  "sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh."  4.  We  should
present  the  entire  truth  of  revelation ;  not  that  part  which  we  prefer,  which  falls  in  with
our  tastes  or  acquirements,  but  the  "  whole  counsel  of  God."  Guiltily  disregarding
these  imperative  matters,  we  (1)  not  only  do  not  offer  acceptable  sacrifice,  but  (2)  render
ourselves  obnoxious  to  our  Master's  Divine  dissatisfaction,  to  his  displacement  of  us  from
his  service,  to  his  severe  lobukcs  (Eev.  ii.,  iii.).  The  slightest  deviation  from  the  will  of
Christ,  if  caused  by  faulty  negligence,  and  still  more  if  due  to  wilful  disobedience,  is  a
serious  transgression;  on  the  other  hand,  faithfulness  in  small  things,  rendered
cheerfully  and  in  a  loving  bpirit,  is  certain  of  Divine  acceptance  and  approval. — 0.

Vers.  3 — 7. — SeTf-restraint  and  utterance.  "  And  Aaron  held  his  peace,"  etc  The
sequel  to  the  sad  story  of  the  sin  and  death  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  carries  with  it  three
lessens  we  shall  do  well  to  learn.

I.  That  a  man  is  less  honoured  by  exalted  opftcb  than  bt  lofty  aotion.  We
pay  a  certain  respect  to  Aaron  as  the  first  high  priest  of  the  ancient  Law,  type  of  the
"  High  Priest  of  our  profession."  But  we  pay  a  higlier  honour  to  him  and  feel  a  deeper
reL'ard  for  him,  as  one  who  acted  nobly  at  a  most  trying  time.  Such  a  scene  might
well  have  unmanned  him.  We  could  not  have  blamed  him  had  he  given  way  to  violent
agitation,  even  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  There  is,  in  sorrow,  a  descending  scale,  and
his  was  at  the  very  bottom  of  its  dark  depths.  Bereavement,  the  saddest  of  all  losses ;
the  death  of  a  child,  the  saddest  of  all  bereavements ;  the  death  of  two  sons  in  their
manhood,  the  saddest  form  which  the  loss  of  children  can  assume ;  its  startling,  awful
suddenness ;  its  occurrence  under  the  aggravating  conditions  of  guilt  and  dishonour ;— ■
such  was  the  staggering  blow  that  fell  on  Aaron  then !  There  is  a  nobleness  of  self-
restraint  which  is  truly  touching,  which  excites  our  hearty  admiration,  in  the  fact  that
"  Aaron  held  his  peace."  He  did  not  give  way  to  tempestuous  emotion  or  to  querulous
complaint ;  he  acted  as  became  him :  standing  where  he  stooil  in  the  near  presence  of
God,  he  bore  the  blow  in  sacred  silence,  he  opened  not  his  mouth,  he  was  dumb,
because  he  felt  the  Lord  had  done  it  (Ps.  xxxix.  9).  There  is  nothing  manlier,  nobler,
more  admirable  than  calmness  in  the  overwhelming  hour.  It  is  bom  of  (1)  devout-
ness,  a  profound  sense  of  the  presence  and  sovereignty  of  God ;  and  of  (2)  self-culture,
the  training  of  our  own  spirit,  the  "  keeping  of  our  heart "  (Prov.  iv.  23).

II.  That  the  devout  heart  will  recognize  the  rightnbss  op  subordinating
PERSONAL  SENTIMENT  TO  THE  8EBVICE  OF  GoD.  (Ver.  6.)  This  melancholy  occurrence
had  taken  place  in  vindication  of  the  honour  of  God  (ver.  3).  The  one  feeling  which
was  to  fill  the  hearts  of  those  who  stood  before  God  was  an  unquestioning  acceptance
of  the  severe  and  afflictive  decree  of  the  Holy  One.  To  show  the  ordinary  signs  of
sorrow  might  be  open  to  misconstruction ;  might  appear  as  a  protest  against  the  death-
penalty.  In  the  cause  of  righteousness  the  natural  feeling  of  father  and  sons  must  be
energetically  suppressed.  And  it  was  done.  There  come  times  in  our  history  when,
in  the  highest  interests  of  all,  in  the  service  of  God  and  of  our  kind,  we  are  called
upon  to  make  parental,  conjugal,  fraternal,  friendly  emotions  give  place  to  calmness
of  spirit.  When  that  hour  comes,  we,  if  we  have  Aaron's  spirit,  shall  obay  as  he
obeyed.

III.  That  God  desires  us  to  oivb  plat  to  hukan  feelino  when  his  Law  is  hot
BROKEN  OB  HIS  SERVICE  HINDERED  THEREBY.  1,  The  relatives  of  the  dead  were  to
carry  their  bodies  decently  and  reverently  "  from  before  the  sanctuary  "  (ver.  4).
2.  The  whole  house  of  Israel  were  to  "bewail  the  burning  which  the  Lord  had
kindled  "  (ver.  6).     Where  the  lamentation  was  natural,  and  where  there  was  no  peril


180


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  X.  8—20,


of  Itai  Mng  misinterpreted,  it  was  not  only  allowed  but  encouraged  of  God.  Stoicism
is  no  part  of  Christianity.  We  are  to  be  natural  and  sympathetic.  Jesus  "  rejoiced  in
spirit  and  "  wept "  himself.  He  intimated  his  wish  that  we  should  act  naturally,  in
accordance  with  our  surrounding  circumstances  and  inward  spirit  (Matt.  ix.  15 — 17 ;
John  xvi.  20 — 22  ;  Jas.  v.  13).  Sympathetic  as  well  M  natmal :  "  rejoice  with  them
that  do  rejoice,  and  weep,"  etc.  (Rom.  xii.  15). — C.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Strange  fire ;  and  Jehovah's  judgment  upon  U.  Ver.  3,  "  Then  Mose*
said  unto  Aaron,  This  is  that  the  Lord  spake,  saying,  I  will  be  sanctified  in  them  that
come  nigh  me,  and  before  all  the  people  I  will  be  glorified.  And  Aaron  held  his
peace."

L  A  GBBAT  OFTENCB  against  the  holiness  of  God.  1.  Defilement  of  his  worship.
Violation  of  his  written  Word.  Introduction  of  self-will  and  mere  human  device.
Abuse  of  the  joyful  spiiit  of  praise  to  insolent  self-assertion  and  disregard  of  decencies
aad  reverence.  2.  Special  profanation  of  the  sanctuary  by  disobedience  of  priests.
Holy  offices  dishonoured  is  a  fearful  evil.  3.  Hiding  of  God's  glory  with  false  glory.
1  'itualism.  Mere  show  of  human  talent.  Abuse  of  music.  Forgetfulness  of  God  in
his  service.     Temptation  to  vain-glory.

n.  A  SOLEMN  VINDICATION  of  the  sauctity  of  God's  house  and  Law.  Strange  fire
offended,  true  fire  punished.  1.  Profitableness  of  the  study  of  providence,  especially
ecclesiastical  history,  as  revealing  the  "  consuming  fire  "  of  righteousness  in  the  Church.
2.  Eepresentative  character  of  all  God's  people,  and  especially  those  in  prominent
|iusition.  God  glorified  in  us,  whether  by  life  or  by  death.  3.  Double  aspect  of  all
Divine  visitations  of  judgment,  as  confirming  at  once  the  strength  of  the  Law  and  the
faithfulness  of  the  covenant,  therefore  both  warning  and  encouragement.  "  Aaron  held
liis  peace,"  for  he  could  only  acknowledge  the  righteousness  of  God.  Grace  is  above
nature,  and  controls  and  exalts  it.

III.  A  GKEAT  LESSON  on  the  infirmity  of  man  and  the  necessity  of  redemption.
Immediately  that  the  temple  service  was  inaugurated,  man  spoiled  it,  as  it  were,  by  hij
sin.  Compare  the  inauguration  of  earthly  life  spoiled  by  the  sin  of  Adam  and  Eve;
the  new  world  after  the  Flood  by  Noah's  sin  (Gen.  ix.);  defection  in  the  new  land  of
Canaan  (Judg.  ii.  13) ;  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi .) ;  the  corruption  of  the  early  Church
(Acts  XX.  29,  etc.) ;  the  final  apostacy  (Rev.  xx.  7 — 10).  On  what  can  we  depend  but
the  preserving  mercy,  the  rescuing  grace  of  him  who  has  redeemed  us  ?  The  "  strange
fire  "  was  thus  solemnly  condemned  only  for  the  sake  of  calling  out  faith  and  attaching
the  people  of  God  the  more  firmly  to  that  fire  of  his  love  which,  while  it  consumed  the
Sacrifice  on  the  cross,  did  also  prepare  the  way  for  all  into  the  holiest,  that  all  might  be
king*  and  priests  unto  God  through  Christ. — B.


EXPOSITION.


Tbs  oommahd  to  abstain  fbom  wine
<ver8.  8 — 11).  The  law  given  to  Aaron
(some  manuscripts  read  Moses)  against  the
use  of  wine  by  tbe  priests  during  their
ministrations,  by  its  juxtaposition  with  what
has  gone  before,  has  led  to  the  probable
supposition  that  Nadab  and  Abihu  had
acted  under  the  excitement  of  intoxicating
drink.  It  is  possible  that  the  sacrificial
meals  on  the  peace  offerings  had  begun,  and
that  at  the  same  time  that  the  congregation
was  feasting,  the  two  priests  had  refreshed
themselves  with  wine  after  their  long  ser-
vice. The  special  ceremonial  meal  of  the
priests  had  not  yet  been  eaten


Ver.  10. — Wine  and  other  luirUAluatiUs
liquors  (-OB",  whence  the  Greek  word  aUepa,
Luke  i.  13,  was  made  from  dates,  or  barley,
or  honey)  are  forbidden  to  the  priests  during
their  mmistrations,  that  they  may  put  a
difference  between  holy  and  unholy ;  that  is,
that  their  minds  may  not  be  confused,  but
be  capable  of  distinguishing  between  right
and  wrong,  what  ought  and  what  ought
not  to  be  done.  Nadab  and  Abihu,  on  the
contrary,  had  not  distinguislied  between  the
sacred  and  profane  Are,  or  between  God'i
commands  and  their  own  unregulated  im-
pulses. If  they  had  partaken  too  freely  of
the  wine  provided  for  the  drink  offerings,
their  sin  would  be  similar  to  that  of  the
Corinthians  in  their  abuse  of  the  Lord's
Supper.     As  to  the  use  of  wine  by  tlic


OH.  X.  8— 20.J


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


161


minister  of  God  under  the  New  Testamput,
Bee  1  Tim.  iii.  2,  8;  v.  23.  The  spiritual
emotion,  which,  in  the  service  of  God,  shows
itself  in  pouring  out  the  feelings  in  "  psalms
and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,"  is  con-
trasted, in  Eph.  V.  18,  19,  with  the  physical
excitement  caused  by  wine,  the  former  being
commended  and  the  latter  forbidden.

Ver.  11. — That  ye  may  teaoh  the  children
of  IsraeL  This  shows  that  one  part  of  the
priest's  office  was  teaching  the  Law  (of.
Deut.  xzIt.  8 ;  Mai.  ii.  7).

Vers.  12 — ^20. — ^Moses  takes  care  that  the
remaining  part  of  the  ritual  of  the  day
shall  be  carried  out  in  spite  of  the  terrible
interruption  that  has  occurred.  Under  his
instructions,  Aaron  and  Eleazar  and  Ithamar
eat  the  remainder  of  the  meat  offering  (oh.
iz.  17),  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,  and
reserve  the  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder
to  eat  in  a  clean  place,  that  is,  not  neces-
sarily within  the  court ;  but  he  finds  that  the
sin  offerings  (oh.  ix.  15),  which  ought  to  be
«aten  by  the  priests,  had  been  burnt.  The
rule  was  that,  when  the  blood  was  presented
in  the  tabernacle,  the  flesh  was  burned;
when  it  was  not,  the  flesh  was  eaten  by  the
priests.  In  the  present  case,  the  blood  had
not  been  brought  within  the  holy  place,  and
yet  the  flesh  had  been  burned  instead  of
beinp  eaten.  Moses  was  angry  with  Eleazar
and  Ithamar,  and  demanded  an  explanation.
Aaron's  plea  of  defence  was  twofold.  1.  His
sons  had  fulfilled  aright  the  ritual  of  their
own  sin  offering  and'  burnt  offering,  that
is,  the  offerings  made  for  tlie  priests,  and  it
had  been  rather  his  duty  than  theirs  to  see
that  the  ritual  of  the  sin  offering  of  the
congregation  had  been  properly  carried  out.
2.  The  state  of  distress  in  which  he  was,
and  the  near  escape  that  he  had  had  from
ceremonial  defilement,  and  the  sense  of
sin  brought  home  to  him  by  his  children's
death,  had  made  him  unfit  and  unable  to
eat  the  sin  offering  of  the  people,  as  he
should  have  done  under  other  circumstances.
With  this  plea  Moses  was  content.  It  was
true  that  the  letter  of  the  Law  had  beeii
broken,  but  there  was  a  sufBcient  cause  for
it  (see  Hos.  vi.  6 ;  Matt.  xii.  7).  It  appears
from  hence  that  the  expiation  wrought  by
the  sin  offering  was  not  complete  until  the
ivhole  ceremony  was  accomplished,  the  last
net  of  which  was  the  eating  of  the  flesh  by
the  priests  in  one  class  of  sin  offering,
and  the  burning  the  flesh  outside  the  camp
in  the  other.  It  has  been  questioned,  what
is  the  full  meaning  of  the  expression,
God  hath  given  it  yon — the  flesh  of  the  sin
offering — ^to  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  oon-
^egation,  to  make  atonement  for  them
before  flie  lord.  Aiohdeacon  Freeman  ex.
presses  the  view  of  A  Lapide,  Keil,  and


many  others  when  he  says  that,  by  eating
the  flesh  of  the  offering,  the  priests  "  in  a
deep  mystery  neutralized,  tlirough  the  holi-
ness vested  in  them  by  their  consecration,
the  sin  which  the  offerer  had  laid  upon  the
victim  and  upon  them"  ('Principles  of
Divine  Service,'  pt.  ii.).  Oehler,  on  the
other  hand  (Herzog's  'Cyclop.,'  i.),  main-
tains that  the  priests  did  no  more  by  this
act  than  declare  the  removal  of  the  sin
already  taken  away;  with  which  accords
PhUo's  explanation  ('  De  Vict.,'  13,  quoted
by  Edersheim,  'Temple  Service,'  ch.  vi.)
that  the  object  of  the  sacrificial  meal
was  to  carry  assurance  of  acceptance
to  the  offerer,  "since  God  would  never
have  allowed  his  servants  to  partake  of
it  had  there  not  been  a  complete  removal
and  forgetting  of  the  sin  atoned  for."
Neither  of  these  explanations  seems  to
be  altogether  satisfactory.  The  former  at-
tributes more  meaning  to  the  expression
bear  the  iniquity  than  it  appears  to  have
elsewhere ;  e.g.  Exod.  xxviii.  38  and  Numb
xviii.  1,  where  Aaron  is  said  to  bear  the  ini-
quity of  the  holy  things  and  of  the  sanctuary ;
and  Ezek.  iv.  4 — 6,  where  the  prophet
is  said  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  Isrtiel  and
Judah.  The  latter  interpretation  appears
too  much  to  evacuate  the  meaning  of  the
words.  It  is  quite  certain  that  the  part
of  the  ceremony  by  which  the  atonement
was  wrought  (if  it  was  wrought  by  any
one  part)  was  the  offering  of  the  blood
for  the  covering  of  the  offerer's  sins,  but
yet  this  action  of  the  priests  in  eating  the
flesh  of  the  victim  was  in  some  way  also
connected  with  the  atonement,  not  only  with
the  assurance  of  its  having  been  wrought ;
but  in  what  way  this  was  effected  we  are
not  told,  and  cannot  pronounce.  The  words
bear  the  iniquity  are  equivalent  to  making
atonement  for  by  taking  the  sin  in  some
sense  upon  themselves  (of.  Isa.  liii.  11,  "He
shall  bear  ttieir  iniquities,"  and  John  i.  29,
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away
[or  beareth]  the  sin  of  the  world  ").  Accord-
ingly, Bishop  I^atrick  comments :  "  The  very
eating  of  the  people's  sin  offering  argued
the  sins  of  the  people  were,  in  some  sort,
laid  upon  the  priests,  to  be  taken  away  by
them.  From  whence  the  saeriflce  of  Christ
may  be  explained,  who  is  said  to  bear  our
iniquity  (as  the  priest  is  here  said  to  do),  all
our  sins  being  laid  on  him,  who  took  upon
him  to  make  an  expiation  for  them  by  the
sacrifice  of  himself.  For  the  priest,  hereby
eating  of  the  sin  offering,  receiving  the
guilt  upon  himself,  may  well  be  thought  to
prefigure  One  who  should  be  botii  Priest  and
Sacrifice  for  sin;  which  waa  accomplished
in  Christ "  (on  Lev.  x.  17>


LXVITIOUS.


162


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  x.  8— 2a


H0MILETIC8.

Ver.  11.— That  priestB  are  teachers  is  assumed  all  through  the  Old  Testament  The
rniitrast  in  this  respect  which  has  been  found  by  some  between  the  prophets  and  tlie
priests,  the  former  being  the  spiritual  guides  of  the  people,  and  the  latter  the  organs
of  a  dull  ceremonial  routine  or  even  rude  slayers  of  beasts,  has  no  foundation  m
fact.  It  is  true  that  the  primary  work  of  the  priest  was  to  teach  by  type  and  rite,  and
the  primary  work  of  the  prophet  to  declare  God's  will  by  word  of  mouth ;  but  they
were  co-ordinate,  not  hostile,  influences  and  powers,  having  the  same  end  in  view,
which  they  carried  out,  partly  by  the  same,  partly  by  different  means.  If  the  prophet
sharply  reproves  the  priests,  it  is  because  they  are  bad  priests,  not  because  they  are
priests  (Mai.  ii.  1) ;  and  when  he  strikes  at  the  priest,  he  sometimes  strikes  at  the
prophet  in  the  same  breath  (Jer.  v.  30,  31).

The  minister  of  the  gospel  is  the  successob  and  repeebestativb  of  both  peiest
AND  PBOPHET.  He  has  to  conduct  the  public  worship  of  God,  which  must  always  be
a  solemn  occupation,  though  now  disembarrassed  of  the  minute  regulations  of  the
Judaic  Law,  and  he  is  a  channel  through  whom  the  Divine  blessing  flows ;  in  this  he
represents  the  priest.  He  is  the  expounder  and  preacher  of  God's  Word ;  herein  he
represents  the  prophet.  He  teaches  God's  commandments  and  applies  them  to  the
consciences  of  individuals ;  herein  he  does  the  work  of  both  priest  and  prophet.  But
he  holds  a  highei-  nffioe  than  either  one  or  the  other,  inasmuch  as  he  is  the  dispenser
of  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  for  the  good  of  man,  which  were  purchased  for  man  by
Christ's  death,  received  by  him  of  his  Father  at  his  ascension,  and  shed  forth  upon
his  Church  in  the  form  of  graces  dispensed  by  the  apostoUc  ministry  (see  Eph.  iv.  7 — 11).


HOMILIES  Bv  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  8 — 11. — Ahstinence  enjoined.  Without  asserting  positively  that  inflammatory
drink  was  the  cause  of  the  unhallowed  presentation  made  by  the  sons  of  Aaron,  wa
may  believe  that  it  was  the  wise  and  merciful  intention  of  the  prohibition  herein  con-
tained to  guard  against  a  possible  source  of  similar  heedless  attendance  upon  God  in
his  sanctuary.

I.  The  functions  of  the  priests.  1.  To  observe  the  various  rites  connected  with
the  worship  of  God.  2.  To  see  that  nothing  unholy  entered  the  precincts  of  the
tabernacle.  The  incense,  which  might  suffice  without,  would  be  an  insult  to  Jehovah
within.  The  fire,  useful  for  common  cooking  purposes,  would  be  counted  "strange
fire"  if  presented  to  the  Lord.  3.  To  advise  the  people  concerning  the  distinction
made  by  the  Law  between  things  clean  and  unclean.  There  was  the  food  permissible
to  be  eaten,  the  diseases  requiring  separation,  the  times  in  which  ceremonial  unclean-
ness  was  contracted,  etc.  AH  these  matters  were  under  the  supervision  of  the  priests.
4.  To  instruct  the  people  generally  in  the  statutes  of  the  Lord.  In  the  absence  of
written  documents,  this  was  a  very  important  part  of  the  duties  of  the  priests,  and
furnished  one  of  the  reasons  for  afterwards  locating  their  cities  amongst  the  diflerent
tribes  of  Israel.  This  teaching  was  the  origin  of  the  present  exposition  of  Scripture  by
the  preacher,  being  now  the  chief  feature  of  the  minister's  oEBce.  Is  the  acquaintance
of  the  people  with  the  Bible  at  all  commensurate  with  the  many  advantages  they
enjoy?  The  Israelites  may  rise  up  in  the  day  of  judgment  to  condemn  the  ignorance
of  modem  civilization.

II.  The  importance  of  rightly  disohakqinq  these  functions.  Consider  the
happy  results  tliat  would  flow  from  a  proper  fulfilment  of  their  obligations,  and  the
dire  effects  of  lax  observance  of  the  regulations  of  the  priesthood.  In  this  latter  event
God  would  be  insulted  and  profaned,  his  indignation  would  destroy  the  slothful  servants,
and  the  nation  of  Israel  would  relapse  into  a  state  of  idolatry  and  disgrace.  No  priest
lived  or  died  unto  himself.  The  progress  and  comfort  of  others  were  inseparably  bound
up  with  his  due  attendance  at  the  altar.

III.  The   necesbitt   of   ABSTAinrma   fbou   whatever   impairs   olbabness   at


OH.  X.  8— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  163

THOUGHT  AND  STEADINESS  OP  CONDUCT.  The  effects  of  "wine"  or  "strong  drink"
are  yarious  in  different  men  and  at  different  stages.  Carelessness,  excitement,  stupe-
faction,'— either  might  ensue,  and  bring  upon  the  offender  the  wrath  of  Qod.  The
principle  is  obvious  that  the  service  of  Qod  may  require  abstention  from  enjoyments
otherwise  permissible.  As  the  number  of  priests  was  at  this  time  so  limited,  the  in-
junction of  the  text  practically  enforced  almost  continuous  abstinence  upon  them.
Enthusiasm  stimulated  by  unworthy  means,  boldness  engendered  by  false  heat,  an
inability  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God,  imagination  running  riot  among  his
precepts, — these  are  offensive  to  God  in  his  servants,  and  expose  the  possessors  to  his
judgments.  To  walk  not  in  the  path  of  danger  is  better  than  to  calculate  upon  suc-
cessfully encountering  its  risks.  The  householder  who  cuts  off  the  supply  of  gas  is  in
no  fear  of  an  explosion,  nor  needs  continually  to  examine  the  pipes.  This  prudent
method  is  to  be  commended  where  the  light  furnished  is  unsteady,  or  supeifluous  because
of  the  shining  of  the  purer  light.  Drink  not  at  the  ruddy  stream,  and  you  will  not
dread  its  poison. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  8 — 11. — Sobriety  in  the  priesthood.  The  Jews  say  that  Nadab  and  Abibu
were  inebriated  when  they  sinned  in  offering  strange  fire,  and  that  this  law,  forbidding
intoxicants  to  the  priests  while  serving  in  the  holy  place,  was  given  in  consequence.
It  is  remarkable  that,  whereas  both  before  and  after  this  God  spake  "  by  the  hand  of
Moses,"  the  instruction  before  us  was  given,  immediately,  "  to  Aaron."  The  reasons
for  the  prohibition  are —

I.  That  MmisTBRS  should  be  -rbcollbctbd  in  the  pkbsbncb  ot  God.  1.  He  was
present  in  the  tabernacle.  (1)  In  the  text,  as  in  many  places,  it  is  distinguished  as  the
"  tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  The  original  (nyin  ^ns,  ohel  tnohghed)  might  per-
haps be  better  rendered,  "  tabernacle  of  meeting."  This  would  not  exclude  the  idea
of  the  congregation  or  meeting  of  the  people^  while  it  recognizes  another  more  impor-
tant truth,  viz.  that  the  tabernacle  was  the  place  appointed  for  Ood  to  meet  with  his
people  (comp.  Exod.  xxv.  22 ;  xxix.  42,  43 ;  xxx.  6, 36).  (2)  Apart  from  this  criticism,
the  fact  is  patent  that  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence  was  there.  Where  the
Shechinah  is,  the  ground  is  holy ;  and  it  behoves  the  worshipper  to  put  away  irreverence,
and,  with  clearness  of  intellect  as  well  as  fervour  of  holy  zeal,  to  wait  upon  the  Lord
(see  Exod.  iii.  5 ;  xix.  12 ;  Josh.  v.  15).  (3)  We  should  never  forget  that  in  our
Christian  assemblies  God  is  no  less  certainly  present  (see  Matt,  xviii.  20 ;  Luke  xxiv.
36;  Eev.  i.  13).  2.  And  Ood  is  jealous  of  his  honour.  (1)  This  important  truth  is
here  intimated  in  the  caution, "  lest  ye  die."  Confused  by  inebriation,  some  error  might
be  committed  which  would  involve  fatal  consequences  (see  context).  (2)  Now,  since
this  enactment,  to  taste  the  cup  whose  effects  may  expose  to  the  liability  of  committing
such  an  error,  is  itself  a  crime  to  be  visited  with  death.  The  spirit  of  this  instruction
is  that  we  must  not  tempt  Satan  to  tempt  us ;  that  we  are  only  safe  when  at  the
utmost  distance  from  sin.  (3)  Abstinence  at  other  times  was  not  obligatory  upon  the
priests,  but  they  might  become  Nazarites  if  they  pleased.  Gospel  ministers  should  be
sober  men  (1  Tim.  iii.  3).

II.  That  they  need  thbib  faculties  to  keep  their  chak&b.  1.  They  have  to
Judge  in  holy  things.  (1)  In  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  some  food  was  "most
holy,"  and  had  to  be  eaten  beside  the  altar  (ver.  12).  This  must  not  be  eaten  by
"  females  among  the  priests."  Yet  a  son  of  Aaron  who  had  such  a  blemish  as  would
preclude  his  attendance  at  the  altar  may  eat  of  it  (ch.  xxi.  22).  In  some  cases
"  holy  "  meats  might  be  eaten  by  the  priests  and  their  families,  but  not  by  ordinary
Israelites  (ver.  14);  while  in  others  the  offerer  had  his  share  of  the  offering.  (2)
Holy  things  might  be  polluted  by  accident.  Thus  a  defiled  person  touching  them
would  profane  them  (ch.  vii.  19) ;  or  the  flesh  of  the  peace  offering  eaten  on  the  third
day,  even  by  a  priest,  is  profaned,  and  the  priest  punishable  (ch.  vii.  18 ;  xix.  7,  8).
Unclean  persons  must  not  eat  of  the  holy  things  on  pain  of  excommunication  (ch.  vii.
20,  21).  (3)  For  the  carrying  out  of  all  these  laws,  together  with  those  of  the  distinc-
tion between  persons,  animals,  and  things.,  clean  and  unclean,  the  priest  needed  a  clear
head,  (a)  that  he  might  save  his  soul  alive,  (6)  and  that  he  might  fittingly  typify
Christ,  whose  judgment  in  moral  and  spiritual  causes  is  true.  (4)  Therefore  he  must
abstain  from  wine  and  strong  drinks  (see  Isa.  xxviii.  7).     And  ministers  of  the  gospe)


1«4  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  x.  8— 20.


must  be  sober.  If  not  types,  they  are  "  ambassadors,"  of  Christ.  They  need  a  sound
judgment  to  pronounce  clearly  and  firmly  against  the  efforts  of  antichrist  to  profane
the  laver  and  the  altar  in  the  sanctuary.  2.  They  have  to  teach  the  statutes  of  the  Lord,
(1)  The  Law  is  the  standard  of  appeal.  It  was  spoken  by  the  Lord  from  Sinai.  It
was  "  given  by  the  hand  of  Moses,"  who  authenticated  it  to  be  the  Word  of  God  by
many  miracles.  The  gospel  is  the  "  engrafted  Word  "  ( Jas.  i.  21), "  spoken  to  us  by  the
Son  of  God,  confirmed  by  them  that  heard  him,  and  authenticated  by  signs  and  wonders
and  divers  miracles  and  distributions  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Heb.  i.  1,  2  ;  ii.  3,  4).  (2)
'i'he  duty  of  teaching  the  laws'  of  the  Old  Testament  devolved  upon  the  priests  (Deut.
xxiv.  8  ;  Neh.  viii.  2,  8  ;  Jer.  xviii.  18 ;  Mai.  ii.  7).  Christian  ministers  now  stand.in
a  similar  relation  to  the  Church  under  the  New  Testament.  (3)  If  sobriety  was
necessary  in  the  teachers  of  the  Law,  it  is  surely  no  less  necessary  in  those  who  teach
the  vital  truths  of  the  gospel  (2  Tim.  ii.  15 ;  Titus  i.  7 — 9).  Ministers  of  the  New
Testament  may  become  Nazarites  if  they  please ;  they  should  at  least  be  Nazarites
when  "  holding  forth  the  Word  of  life."— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  12 — 15. — The  eating  of  the  holy  things.  In  the  words  of  the  last  paragraph
God  speaks  immediately  to  Aaron ;  here  Moses  resumes,  addressing  now  "  Aaron  and
his  sons  that  were  left"  or  who  had  escaped  the  terrible  judgment  in  which  Nadab  and
Abihu  were  involved.     He  repeats  his  instructions  concerning —

I.  The  meat  offering  remaining  of  the  offerings  made  by  fire.  1.  This
was  accounted  "most  holy."  (1)  This  is  equivalent  to  calling  it  the  "bread  of  God"
(comp.  xxi.  6,  22),  It  was  therefore  "  most  holy,"  .as  typifying  Christ  (John  vi.  33).
He  is  "  most  holy  "  in  the  mystery  of  his  birth,  as  "  coming  down  from  heaven  "  (Luke
i.  35).  Also  in  his  death,  by  which  he  was  able  to  "  give  his  life  unto  the  world."  (2)
It  was  the  priests'  due,  or  appointment,  viz.  from  God.  For  it  was  first  given  to  God,
and  now  came  from  him.  So  Jesus,  whom  we  bring  to  God  as  the  Atoning  Sacrifice  for
our  sin,  God  gives  to  us  for  the  nourishment  of  our  souls.  To  the  spiritual  pricsthi  'od  he
is  still  the  "  Bread  of  God  that  cometh  down  from  heaven."  2.  It  was  to  be  eaten,  viz.
(1)  "  Beside  the  altar."  Jesus  becomes  the  food  of  his  people  after  his  passion.  The
bread  of  the  Eucharist  was  "  broken  "  before  it  was  "  given  "  to  the  disciples  to  eat  (Matt.
xxvi.  26 ;  John  xii.  24 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  23—26).  The  Lord's  table  is  furnished  from  the
altar  that  was  without  the  camp  (Heb.  xlii.  10 — 12).  (2)  It  was  to  be  eaten  "  without
leaven."  There  was  neither  "  malice  "  nor  "  wickedness  "  in  Jesus,  nor  should  there
be  in  those  who  seek  his  fellowship  (1  Cor.  v.  6 — 8).  He  is  the  Truth — Truth  itself —
Truth  essential ;  fellowship  with  him,  therefore,  must  be  in  "  sincerity  and  truth."  (3)
It  was  to  be  eaten  "  in  the  holy  place."  The  joys  of  the  Christian  profession  should  be
sought  in  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.  Odd  persons,  who  stand  aloof  from  Church
communion,  are  not  serving  God  according  to  his  order.

II.  The  wave  breast  and  heave  shouldeb.  1.  2%ese  were  accounted  "holy."
(1)  They  were  so  because  they  had  been  offered  to  God.  Julius  Bate  construes  the
words  rendered  "  wave  breast  and  heave  shoulder  "  (ver.  14),  "  the  breast  that  is  2>re-
sented,  and  the  shoulder  that  is  lifted  up."  This  at  least  expresses  the  spirit  of  the
original.  (2)  The  "holy"  as  well  as  "most  holy"  bread  is  the  same  as  the  bread  of
God  (see  on.  xxi.  22),  and  equally  points  to  Christ.  Both  were  alike  the  priests'  due  or
appointment  (Exod.  xxix.  24).  2.  The  holy  things  were  to  be  eaten  in  a  clean  place.
(1)  This  marks  the  difference  between  the  "  holy  "  and  the  "  most  holy."  "The  "  most
holy  "  must  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place,  in  the  court  of  the  priests,  and  therefore  by  the
priests  alone,  but  the  "  holy "  may  be  eaten  in  the  houses,  and  therefore  by  the
daughters  of  the  priests.  (2)  The  moral  teaching  is  that  while  the  "  most  holy "
communion  with  Christ  is  by  the  altar-side  in  his  Church,  we  may  have  "  holy "
communion  with  him  in  our  families.  The  ordinary  meals  of  godly  persons  will  be
received  as  from  God  with  thanksgiving,  and  thereby  become  in  a  sense  sacramental
(see  1  Cor.  x.  18 — 31).  (3)  The  one  limitation  is  that  the  holy  things  of  the  peace
offerings  must  be  eaten  "  in  a  clean  place."  Viewed  in  the  letter,  this  means  that  the
house  must  not  be  polluted  by  the  dead,  or  by  a  leper,  or  anything  for  which  the
purifications  of  the  Law  may  be  required.  Viewed  in  the  spirit,  the  teaching  is  that  if
we  would  have  communion  with  Christ  in  our  families,  vicious  dispositions  and  ungodly
strangers  must  be  excluded.  "The  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  against  God"
(see  2  Cor.  tI.  14—18;  Jas.  iv.  4;  1  John  ii.  15).— J.  A.  M.


CH.X.  8— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  166

Veri.  16 — 20. — Moses  and  Aaron  an  allegory.  Moses  may  be  taken  as  the  im-
personation of  the  Law  which  was  given  by  his  hand  (see  Luke  xvi.  29 ;  Acts  xv.  21)
Hence  the  "  body  of  Moses,"  about  which  Michael  disputed  with  Satan,  is  by  some
supposed  to  denote  the  substance  of  the  Law  (Jude  9).  In  this  view  he  appeared  upon
the  mount  of  transfiguration,  surrendering  to  Christ,  who,  in  like  manner,  impersonated
his  gospel  (Matt.  xvii.  3 — 5).  So  the  vail  over  Moses'  face  represented  the  shadows  in
which  the  Law  invested  the  glory  of  the  Lord  until  the  death  of  Christ,  when  the  dark-
ness passed  away  and  the  true  light  shined  forth. .  Hence,  when  the  vail,  that  is  to  say,
the  flesh  of  Christ,  was  torn  in  death,  the  vail  of  the  temple  was  rent  from  the  top
throughout  (Matt,  xxvii.  50,  51 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  7 ;  Heb.  ix.  3,  8 ;  x.  19,  20).  Aaron's
function  was  to  bring  out  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  Law ;  and  so  he  was  a  type  of
Christ,  who  came  not  to  destroy  but  to  fulfil  it.  Bearing  tliese  things  in  mind,  light
may  be  let  in  upon  the  remarkable  passage  before  us.    We  have  here —

I.  The  anger  of  Moses.  1.  Looh  at  the  history  in  the  letter.  (1)  Moses  had  given
instructions  to  Aaron  and  his  sons  respecting  the  goat  which  was  to  be  offered  for
the  sin  of  the  people  (see  ch.  ix.  15,  16).  (2)  These  instructions  were  not  fully  carried
out.  The  goat  was  killed  and  its  fat  burnt  upon  the  altar ;  but  the  flesh  was  not
eaten  in  the  holy  place.  (3)  Moses  made  search,  and  behold  the  goat  was  burnt,  pro-
bably without  the  camp  (ch.  iv.  12;  vi.  11).  This  angered  him,  and  led  him  to
question  the  "sons  of  Aaron  who  were  left"  or  had  escaped  the  fire  that  consumed
their  brethren,  as  to  why  they  had  deviated  from  his  directions.  2,  Noia  look  at  the
moral.  (1)  It  should  have  been  eaten  in  the  holy  place,  because  it  was  "  most  holy,"
that  is  to  say,  the  "bread  of  God"  (ch.  vi.  16, 17 ;  xxi.  22) ;  that  wliich  wrath  was  to
feed  upon.  This  significantly  pointed  to  Christ.  After  declaring  himself  to  be  the
"bread  of  God  which  oometh  down  from  heaven,"  he  explains,  "  the  bread  that  I  will
give  is  my  flesh,  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the  world "  f  John  vi.  51).  How
remarkably  the  mysteries  of  the  bread  offering  and  the  "flesh  of  the  siii  offering,
associated  on  the  Levitical  altar,  are  again  associated  in  this  gospel  explanation  I  (2)
By  the  fire  of  God  feeding  upon  the  sin  offering,  it  bore  "  the  iniquity  of  the  congrega-
tion, to  make  atonement  for  them  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  17).  But  this  is  said  of  the
eating  of  the  flesh  by  Aaron  and  his  sons.  By  eating  the  flesh  of  the  sin  offering,  then,
Aaron  was  to  appear  as  in  the  place  of  it  (comp.  1  Cor.  x.  7).  This  significantly
indicated  that  the  true  sin  offering  was  not  to  be  an  animal,  but  a  man.  (3)  The  rule
is  laid  down  that  if  the  blood  was  not  brought  in  within  the  holy  place,  the  flesh
should  be  eaten  in  the  holy  place  (ver.  18).  That  rule  showed  that  the  Law  priests  were
typically  to  bear  the  iniquity  of  the  people,  until  that  High  Priest  should  come  who
would  carry  his  own  blood  into  the  holy  place  not  made  with  hands.  In  that  event
their  functions  were  destined  to  cease.

II.  The  explanation  of  Aabon.  1.  Tlie  anger  of  Moses  was  with  the  tons  of
Aaron.  (1)  We  are  not  told  that  he  felt  any  anger  towards'  Aaron.  We  see  a  pro-
priety in  this  when  we  consider  that  Aaron  was  a  type  of  Christ.  Moses  directed
Aaron  all  through  the  ceremonials  of  his  consecration,  and  so  Christ  in  this  world,  in
which  he  was  consecrated  to  his  priesthood,  was  "  made  under  the  Law."  But  the
Law  could  have  no  anger  against  Christ,  "  who  fulfllled  all  its  righteousness,"  and  in
every  way  "  magnified  and  made  it  honourable."  (2)  But  against  the  sons  of  Jesus,
who  are  far  from  being  as  jjerfect  as  their  Head,  the  Law  may  have  occasion  for  anger.
2.  But  Aaron  speaks  in  his  ovjn  person  for  hit  sons.  (1)  (See  ver.  19.)  So  Jesus
takes  the  faults  of  his  children  upon  himself  (see  Matt.  viii.  16,  17  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24).
(2)  And  speaking  for  them  thus,  Aaron  was  able  to  appease  Moses.  Not  only  was
Moses  "  satisfied,"  as  in  the  text,  but  what  Aaron  urged  was  "  well  pleasing  in  his
eyes,"  as  in  the  Hebrew.  So  triumphantly  is  Jesus  able  to  deliver  us  from  the  anger
of  the  Law  (Eom.  v.  9,  20,  21).  3.  But  what  is  the  import  of  Aaron's  words  (ver.  19)  ?
^1)  Here  he  concedes  that  the  sin  offering  had  been  offered,  and  that,  under  usual  con-
ditions, to  have  complied  with  all  the  directions  of  Moses  would  have  been  proper.
But  he  explains,  "  such  things  have  befallen  me,"  referring  to  his  parental  sorrow  in
the  loss  of  his  sons  under  most  distressing  circumstances.  He  was,  therefore,  a
mourner,  not  outwardly  (see  vers.  4 — 7),  but  in  spirit,  so,  had  he  eaten  the  sin  offering,
would  it  have  been  accepted  by  the  Lord,  viz.  who  looketh  upon  the  heart  ?  Moses  had
nothing  to  reply  to  this  (comp.  Dent.  lii.  7 ;  1  Sam.  i.  7,  8;  Hos.  ix.  4).    (2)  But


166  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  x.  8— 20.

was  there  not  a  prophetic  meaning  in  these  words  of  Aaron?  As  Caiaphas  "  spake  not
of  himself,  but  being  high  priest  that  year,  he  prophesied  that  Jesus  should  die  for  that
nation"  (John  x.  50,  51),  does. not.  Aaron  as  truly  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy  here  say
that  the  death  of  the  priest  sets  aside  the  type  (see  Col.  ii.  14)  ?  (3)  The  consent  of
Moses  shows  how  the  Law  bears  testimony  to  Christ,  and  is  itself  to  vanish  ag  a
shadow  when  the  substance  takes  its  place.  ,  (4)  It  also  shows  that  it  is  proper  to
break  the  Law  in  the  letter,  when  to  do  so  is  necessary  to  its  observance  in  the  spirit.
The  spirit  of  the  Law  is  the  gospel. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  8 — 10. — Wine  and  worship.  The  prohibition  of  the  text  only  extends  to  the
priest  about  to  officiate  in  the  worship  of  Grod ;  "  when  ye  go  into  the  tabernacle."  It
had  no  reference  to  the  domestic  use  of  wine ;  nor  did  it  separate  "  strong  wine  "  from
sacred  service  altogether  (Exod.  xxix.  42  ;  Numb,  xxviii.  7).  Perhaps,  as  some  think,
it  was  consequent  upon  the  foregoing  scene.  But  if  not  so  closely  connected- with  it  as
to  be  occasioned  by  it,  the  fact  that  its  announcement  followed  that  scene  in  order  of
time  suggests  the  truth —

I.  That  fbom  the  worship  of  God  eveby  temptation  should  be  eeligiottslt
EXCLUDED.  If  intoxicants  would  have  even  the  slightest  effect  on  the  understanding
so  that  error  might  be  committed,  they  should  be  scrupulously  avoided ;  and  so  with
any  and  every  source  of  peril,  whatever  it  may  be.  Whatsoever  would  lead  the  mind
away  from  God  and  his  truth ;  whatsoever  would  interfere  with  the  purity,  sincerity,
spirituality  of  public  worship,  should  be  shunned.  It  may  be  beautiful  attire,
ornamentation,  music,  rhetoric,  philosophizing,  etc.  Every  man  mnst  judge  for  him-
self ;  "  happy  is  he  who  condemneth  not  himself  in  that  thing  which  he  alloweth "
(Rom.  xiv.  22).

II.  That  in  the  worship  of  God  evert  faculty  should  be  in  fullest  bxeecise.
If  intoxicants  are  anywise  injurious,  tliey  enfeeble,  they  make  the  body  drowsy,  the
intellect  clouded,  the  spirit  heavy  and  unaspiring.  To  the  worship  of  God  we  should
bring  our  best ;  not  by  any  means  the  lame  and  the  blind,  etc.  (Mai.  i.  8),  nor  the
second  best,  but  the  very  best  we  can  bring — the  flower  in  the  bud,  the  fruit  adorned
with  its  bloom ;  not  the  wearied  bodily  frame  that  sinks  to  sleep  while  God  is  being
approached;  not  the  mind  that  has  lost  its  elasticity  and  strength,  but  our  most
viligant  and  wakeful,  our  most  vigorous  and  energetic  self.  We  should  bring  to  his
altar  the  power  that  can  discern  between  the  evil  and  the  good,  between  the  acceptable
and  the  offensive  (ver.  10) ;  and  the  power  that  can  rise  on  fleetest  and  most  enduring
wing  into  the  heavens  of  joyful  praise  and  earnest  prayer  and  saving  truth.

III.  That  fob  the  woeship  op  God  there  should  be  careful  peepabation.
The  priests  were,  in  virtue  of  this  and  other  precepts,  to  consider  carefully  beforehand
what  they  should  do  and  what  they  should  avoid,  that  they  might  be  ready  to
minister  unto  the  Lord.  Whether  our  ofiering  of  spiritual  sacrifices  unto  God  in  his
sanctuary  (1  Pet.  ii.  5)  be  acceptable  or  not,  depends  not  more  on  the  provision  which
is  prepared  in  the  house  for  us  than  on  the  conscientious  preparing  of  our  heart  before
we  go  up  unto  it. — C.

Ver.  11. — Instruction  as  well  as  sacrifice.    These  words  point  to—

I.  A  SEcoNDAET  DUTY  OF  THE  PRIESTHOOD— INSTRUCTION.  No  doubt  the  primary
object  of  their  appointment  was  sacrifice.  Their  function  was,  first  of  all,  to  mediate
between  God  and  the  people,  to  stand  at  his  altar  and  present  sacrifices  unto  him.
But  this  did  not  constitute  their  whole  duty ;  they  were  to  "  teach  the  children  of
Israel  all  the  statutes  which  the  Lord  had  spoken."  No  doubt  the  whole  tribe  of  Levi
was  associated  with  the  priesthood  in  "teacliing  Jacob  the  judgments  and  Israel  the
Law  "  of  the  Lord  (see  Deut.  xxxiii.  8 — 11 ;  Mai.  ii.  7 ;  Hos.  iv.  6).

II.  The  twofold  task  this  instruction  involved.  The  priests  and  Levites  would
have :  1.  To  make  known  the  particular  precepts  of  the  Law,  so  that  the  people  might
biing  their  proper  sacrifices,  come  at  tlie  appointed  seasons  to  the  sacred  festivals,
shun  all  those  things  which  were  prohibited,  act  rightly  in  their  various  domestic
and  social  relations,  etc.  2.  To  explain  the  spirit  and  significance  of  the  ritual,  so
that  when  the  worshippers  came  to  the  tabernacle  they  might  not  only  go  through  the
right  forms,  but  also  enter  into  the  spirit  of  them ;  so  that  they  should  be  affected  by


OH.  X.  8— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  165


a  sense  of  sin,  by  a  hope  of  forgiveness,  by  a  desire  to  dedicate  themselves  unto  Ood,
by  a  spirit  of  holy  joy  in  Qod  and  of  brotherly  love  toward  their  fellows.  To  com-
municate all  the  particulars  of  the  Law,  and  leave  uninterpreted  their  spiritual
significance,  would  have  been  to  omit  an  essential  part  of  their  sacred  duty  as
religious  instructors  of  the  nation.    We  may  be  reminded  of —

III.  The  obliqations  op  the  Christian  ministey/  The  privilege  of  those  who
minister  for  Christ  is  also  twofold:  1.  To  lead  souls  with  them  to  God;  to  suggest
those  thoughts  and  words  through  which  the  worshippers  may  address  themselves  to
him  and  make  their  own  personal,  direct  appeal  to  him.  2.  To  instruct  in  Christian
truth.  And  this  instruction  is  to  combine  two  things :  it  is  (1)  to  make  known  the  will
of  God  as  stated  in  the  sacred  Scriptures ;  (2)  to  impress  that  will  on  the  conscience  of
the  congregation.  The  Christian  minister  seeks  to  enlighten  and  to  enforce.  Then  he
must  leave  those  whom  he  serves,  to  act ;  they  must  then  "  bear  their  own  burden."
Thus  we  come  to —

IV.  The  duty  of  the  Christian  coNaREOATiON.e  That  is  to  avail  themselves  of  the
work  of  the  minister.  1.  To  follow  him  spiritually  and  sympatlietically  to  the  throne
of  grace  and,  with  him,  draw  nigh  to  God  in  prayer.  2.  To  seek  to  understand  the
mind  of  God  as  it  is  stated  and  explained.  3.  To  apply  to  themselves  and  their  own
need  the  exhortations  which  are  given. — C.

Vers.  12 — 20. — The  spirit  of  obedience.  The  words  of  Moses  appear  to  have  followed
closely  upon  the  incidents  described  in  the  opening  verses  of  the  chapter.  Thus
viewed,  they  show —

I.  That  the  bin  of  some  jrcrsT  not  interfere  with  the  service  of  others.
(Ver.  12.)  Consternation  or  resentment  might  have  led  Aaron  and  "  his  sons  that  were
left "  to  leave  the  remainder  of  their  sacred  duties  undischarged.  This  must  not  be.
The  sin  of  the  two  sons  must  not  inteirupt  the  service  of  the  Most  High.  His  worship
must  not  cease  because  two  men  have  erred.  Men  often  plead  the  inconsistencies  and
transgressions  of  others  as  an  excuse  for  their  own  shortcoming.  They  decline  to
worship  God,  or  to  sit  down  to  the  table  of  the  Lord,  or  to  work  in  the  vineyard  of  the
Great  Husbat:dman  because  of  their  resentment  against  the  wrong-doing  of  their
fellows.  This  may  satisfy  themselves,  but  it  will  have  no  weight  at  all  in  the  balances
of  the  Divine  Judge.

n.  That  the  sin  of  some  need  not  interfere  with  the  privilege  of  others.
(Ver.  14.)  The  whole  congregation  were  to  "  bewail  the  burning  which  the  Lord  had
kindled"  (ver.  6).  But  they  were,  nevertheless,  to  "eat  in  a  clean  place  of  the
sacrifices  of  peace  offerings."  The  saddest  things  need  not  interpose  to  prevent  our
enjoyment  of  the  sacred  privileges  with  which  God  has  provided  us.

in.  That  responsible  men  mat  well  be  vigilant  in  all  matters  pertaininq
TO  THE  service  OF  GJoD.  (Vcrs.  16 — 18.)  Moses  "diligently  sought"  the  goat  which
should  not  have  been  burnt,  but  eaten,  fie  showed  a  holy  solicitude  to  conform  to  the
exact  requirements  of  "  the  Law  of  the  Lord,"  and  a  commendable  concern  when  he
thought  he  discovered  a  slight  departure  therefrom.  In  Christ  Jesus  we  are  not
bound  by  any  minute  commandments  like  those  which  regulated  the  temple  service  of
the  Jews.  But  there  is  room  enough  in  the  Church  of  Christ  for  holy  vigilance  on  the
part  of  those  who  are  "over  others  in  the  Lord."  They  should  watch  keenly  to
observe  and  to  correct  the  slightest  departure  from  the  spirit  of  the  Master ;  from  the
spirit  (1)  of  reverence,  or  (2)  of  earnestness,  or  (3)  of  humility,  or  (4-)  of  charity.

IV.  That  the  spirit  of  obedience  is  everything  in  the  sight  of  God.  There  is
something  profoundly  touching  in  the  excuse  (ver.  19)  which  Aaron  urged.  His  sons
who  "  were  left "  had,  spite  of  their  bereavement  and  their  fraternal  sorrow,  "  offered
their  sin  offering  and  their  burnt  offering  before  the  Lord ; "  they  had  laid  great  restraint
upon  their  feelings ;  they  had  striven  to  render  the  service  required  of  them.  And  when
"  such  things  had  befallen  him ; "  when  Aaron  "  held  his  peace,"  indeed,  but "  his  sorrow
was  stirred ; "  when  his  parental  heart  was  bleeding, — would  the  eating  of  the  flesh  of  the
goat  in  such  a  "day  of  desperate  grief"  have  been  an  acceptable  service  in  the  sight  of
the  Lord  ?  Would  an  act  in  which  there  must  have  been  so  large  a  measure  of  con-
straint have  been  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  God  ?  Moses  was  content  with  Aaron's
plea ;  he  felt  that  it  was  sound.    We  may  infer  that  he  was  right  in  accepting  it.    Had


168  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  x.  8— 20,

Aaron  repined,  or  had  he  resented  the  retributire  act  of  God,  he  would  certainly  have
sinned.  But  this  he  did  not.  He  summoned  himself  and  his  sons  to  continue  in  the
service  of  the  Lord,  and  only  stopped  at  the  point  where  overcoming  sorrow  laid  it*
arresting  hand  upon  him.  Gh)d  desires  of  us  (1)  the  will  to  serve  him,  (2)  the  faith
in  him  which  uncomplainingly  accepts  his  decisions  when  these  are  painfm  and  per-
plexing, and  (3)  the  endeavour,  to  the  height  of  our  power,  to  continue  at  our  post.
When  the  spirit  of  obedience  is  thus  in  our  hearts,  he  does  not  exact  a  strict  measure
of  work  to  be  accomplished  by  oiu:  hands. — C.

Ter.  12. — That  which  is  left  to  us.  "  His  sons  that  were  left»"  Happily  and  merci-
fully, it  is  not  often  that  we  suffer  such  a  breach  in  our  life  or  iu  our  home  as  that  which
Aaron  was  called  upon  this  day  to  endure ;  but  inroads  are  made,  suddenly  or  gradually,
upon  our  sources  of  joy.  Accident  (as  we  call  it),  disease,  treachery,  misfortune,  the
hand  of  time, — these  talie  away  our  treasures ;  they  strip  the  goodly  tree  of  its  branches,
as  well  as  of  its  leaves.  But  "  though  much  is  taken,  much  abides."  The  good  man
has  always  consolation  in  that  which  is  left  to  him.     There  is  left  to  us —

I.  Some  human  ArFECTioif.  If  not  "  sons  that  are  left,"  or  daughters,  yet  friendi
whose  attachment  has  grown  with  the  growing  years.

n.  Some  human  esteem.  There  are  those — it  may  be  many,  at  any  rate  a  few —
who  hold  us  in  genuine  regard ;  who  honour  us,  and  pour  on  our  wounded  spirit  th«
precious  ointment  of  their  esteem.

IU.  Solacing  memories  of  faithful  work.

IV.  The  consciousness  of  our  own  integrity  (Ps.  xli.  12).

V.  The  abiding  favour  and  friendship  of  the  Lord  (Ps.  cxxv.  2).

VI.  The  hope  of  eternal  life  in  the  presence  of  God  (2  Tim.  iv.  6). — 0.

Vers.  8 — 20. — The  ministers  of  God's  house  must  be  examples  of  purity  and
obedience.

I  The  influence  of  personal  chabacteb  on  the  work  of  the  teacher,  "  that  ye  may
teach  the  children  of  Israel  all  the  statutes,"  etc.  (ver.  11).  1.  Self-control  and
temperance  necessary  to  a  wise  judgment  and  a  correct  life.  Possibly  the  offence  of
Nadab  and  Abihu  owing  to  intemperance.  2.  The  teacher  needs  the  respect  of  the
taught  to  uphold  him  in  his  work.  3.  The  difference  between  the  holy  and  the  unholy,
the  clean  and  the  unclean,  should  be  seen  as  well  as  heard  described.

n.  The  suppoBT  OF  the  ministry  may  be  safely  left  to  come  out  of  the  faithful
discharge  of  duty.  If  the  priests  are  at  their  post,  they  will  get  their  portion  (vers
12—15).     "  It  shall  be  thine  by  a  statute  for  ever."

in.  The  EKEOBS  AND  OMISSIONS,  as  well  as  sins  of  the  ministry,  should  be  "  diligently
sought  after."  But  in  tlie  spirit  of  charity,  not  with  harsh  and  censorious  judgment
Aaron's  excuse  was  the  overwhelming  stress  of  natural  feeling.  Ministers  are  but  men.
Domestic  affliction  often  clouds  their  mind  and  burdens  their  spirit.  Moses  was  content
when  he  understood  that  the  law  of  nature  was  honoured ;  and  there  is  no  true  sanctity
in  observances  which  violate  the  first  principles  of  humanity,  and  subvert  the  natural
feehngs  of  the  human  heart.  The  slavish  system  of  Rome  exalts  religious  law  at  the
expense  of  natural  justice,  and  destroys  man  while  it  professes  to  save  him.  No  true
religion  ii  crueL    The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  the  spirit  of  mercy. — S.


OH.  XL  1 — i7.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


16»


PAET  III.    .

UNCLEANNESS,  CEEEMONIAL  AND  MORAL :  ITS  REMOVAL

OR  ITS  PUNISHMENT.

Sbotion  L


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XL


TBI  two  preceding  parts  having  made  mani-
fest the  way  of  approach  to  God  by  means
of  sacrifice  and  the  appointed  priesthood  of
mediation,  there  follows  a  part  having  for  its
snbiect  that  which  keeps  man  apart  from  God,
namely jUnoleanness,  whether  ceremonial  un-
cleanness,  which  may  be  removed  by  cere-
monial observances,  or  moral  uncleanness,
that  is,  unrighteousness,  which,  so  far  as  it
is  a  ceremonial  offence,  may  be  also  dealt
with  ceremonially,  but  in  respect  to  its
moral  character  demands  punishment.  This
part  consists  of  four  sections.  The  first
section,  comprising  chs.  xi. — xv.,  treats  of
ceremonial  uitcleanness,  caused  (1)  by  un-
clean food  (ch.  xi.);  (2)  by  childbirth
(oh.  xii.);  (3)  by  the  leprosy  of  man  and
of  garments  and  of  houses  (chs.  xiii.,  ziv.) ;
(4)  by  issues  (oh.  xv.).  The  second  section
deals  with  the  uncleanness  contracted
every  ear  by  the  whole  congregation,
to  be  annually  atoned  for  on  the  great  Day
of  Atonement  (ch.  xvi.),  followed  by  a
parenthetical  chapter  as  to  the  place  in
which  aamfice  is  to  be  offered — sacrifice
being  the  means  by  which  purification  from
uncleanness  is  to  be  effected  (ch.  xvii.).  The
third  section  is  on  moral  uncleanness,  or  sin
(chs.  xviii.,  xix.),  and  its  punishment  (oh.
XX.).  The  fourth  relates  to  the  ceremonial
and  moral  uncleanness  of  priests  (chs.  xxi.,
xxii.).

The  idea  underlying  ceremonial  unclean-
nesB  is  not  peculiar  to  the  Jews.  With  the
Greeks  the  idea  of  moral  beauty  was  bor-
rowed from  physical  beauty,  and  the  standard
of  moral  excellence  was  the  beautiful.  With
the  Hebrews  physical  ngUuess  is  taken  as


the  symbol  of  moral  ugliness  or  deformity :
whatever  is  foul  is  the  type  of  what  is  evil.
That  which  we  have  a  natural  admiration
for  is  good,  said  the  Greek ;  that  which  wo
have  a  natural  repugnance  for  represents  to
us  what  is  evil,  said  the  Hebrew.  In  either
case,  taste  appears  to  take  the  place  of  moral
judgment ;  but  in  Greek  philosophy,  moral
taste  and  moral  judgment  had  come  to  be
identical,  while  the  Hebrew  knew  that  what
taste  condemned  was  not  therefore  of  itself
evil,  but  only  symbolical  and  representative
of  evil.

Another  principle  underlies  the  Hebrew^
theory  of  uncleanness.  It  is  that  whatever
is  itself  foul,  and  therefore  symbolical  of
sin,  conveys  the  quality  of  foulness,  and
therefore  of  ceremonial  uncleanness  to  any
one  it  comes  in  contact  with,  and  often  to
anything  which  it  touches.  Thus  a  dead
body,  quickly  assuming  a  loathsome  appear-
ance in  the  East,  where  the  setting  in  of
corruption  is  very  rapid,  is  unclean  itself,
and  conveys  uncleanness  to  those  who  touch
it.  The  leper  is  unclean,  and  transmits  un-
cleanness by  his  touch;  and  certain  foul
diseases  and  fluxes  from  the  human  body
have  the  same  effect.  These  and  such  iikt
things,  being  always  repulsive,  always  caust
uncleanness;  but  there  are  others  whicu,
while  in  some  associations  they  are  utterly
repellent,  in  others  are  not  so.  For  example,
there  are  some  vermin  and  insects  which  are
pretty  to  the  eye,  but  the  thought  of  eating
them  creates  a  natural  feeling  of  disgust.
These,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  repulsive,
that  is,  as  creeping  or  flying  creatures,  are
not  unclean,  nor  does  their  touch  produce
uncleanness,  but  as  objects  of  food  they  are
"  an  abomination."


170


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XL  1 — 47.


Hence  we  are  able  to  explain  the  distinc-
tion of  clean  and  unclean  animals.  It  does
not  rest  upon  a  sanitary  basis,  though  the
prohibition  to  eat  carnivorous  and  other
animals  repulsive  to  the  taste  it  probably  in
accordance  with  the  rules  of  health.  Nor
ia  it  baaed  on  political  reasons,  though  it  is
probnble  that  the  distinction  kept  the  Jews
apart  from  other  nations,  and  so  served  an
important  political  purpose.  Nor  is  the
injunction  in  the  main  theological,  though
wu  know  that  in  later  times  the  favourite
interpretation  was  that  the  clean  animals
represented  the  Jews,  and  the  unclean
animals  the  Gentiles  (Acts  x.  28).  Bather
it  wag  that  certain  creatures  were  for-
bidden because  they  were  offensive  to  the
taste,  and,  being  so  offensive,  they  were
symbolical  of  vicious  things,  which  must  be
avoided,  lest  they  make  those  that  partake
of  them  or  touch  them  to  become  vicious
like  themselves.

Vers.  2 — 8  contain  the  regulations  relating
(o  the  eating  of  quadrupeds;  vers.  9 — 12,
those  relating  to  fish;  vers.  13 — 19,  those
relating  to  birds;  vers.  20 — 23,  those  re-
lating to  flying  insects ;  vers.  29,  30,  those
relating  to  unwinged  creeping  things ;  vers.
4:1 — 44,  those  relating  to  vermin.  Vers.  23
—28  and  31—40  extend  the  defiling  effect
to  the  simple  touch  of  the  dead  carcases  of
nnimals,  whether  edible  or  not.

Ver.  I. — The  Lord  spake  onto  Hoses  and  to
Aaron.  Aaron,  having  now  been  consecrated
high  priest,  is  joined  with  Moses  as  the
recipient  of  the  laws  on  cleanness  and  un-
deanness  in  ch.  xi.  1;  xiii.  1;  xiv.  33;
XV.  1.  His  name  is  not  mentioned  in
<!h.  xii.  1 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xvii.  1 ;  xviii.  1 ;  xix.  1 ;
»i.  1 ;  xxi.  1,  16;  xxii.  1,  17,  26.  Probably
here  is  no  signification  in  these  omissions.

Ver.  2.  —These  are  the  beasts  that.ye  shall
eat.  In  order  that  the  Israelites  might
know  how  to  avoid  the  uncleanness  arising
from  the  consumption  of  unclean  flesh,
plain  rules  are  given  them  by  which  they
may  distinguish  what  flesh  is  clean  and
what  is  unclean.  The  first  rule  is  that  any-
thing  that  dies  of  itself  is  unclean,  whether
it  be  beast,  bird,  or  fish.  The  reasons  of
this  are  plain :  for  (1)  the  flesh  still  retains
the  blood,  which  no  Israelite  might  eat ;  and
<2)  there  is  something  loathsome  in  the  idea
of  eating  such  flesh.  Next,  as  to  beasts,  a
class  is  marked  off  as  edible  by  two  plainly
discernible  characteristics,  and  instances
«re  given  to  show  that  where  there  is  any
doubt  owing  to  the  animals  possessing  one


of  the  characteristic  marks  only,  the  rule  it
to  be  construed  strictly.  As  to  fish  and  in-
sects, equally  plain  rules,one  in  each  case,  are
laid  down ;  but  as  birds  are  not  readily  dis-
tinguished into  large  classes,  the  Dimes  of
those  tliat  are  unclean  are  given  one  by
one,  the  remainder  being  all  of  them  per-
missible. Thus  the  simple  Israelite  would
run  no  risk  of  incurring  uncleanness  by
inadvertently  eating  unclean  food,  whether
of  beast,  bird,  fish,  or  insect.  The  object  of
the  regulations  being  to  exclude  all  meats
natuially  offensive  to  the  human  taste,  all
carnivorous  quadrupeds  are  shut  out  by  the
rule  of  chewing  the  cud  (ver.  3),  with  the
same  puipose,  birds  of  prey  and  birds  that
eat  offal  are  proMbited  (vers.  13 — 19),  and
scaleless  fish  on  account  of  their  repulsive
appearance  (vers.  9 — 12),  as  well  as  beetles,
maggots,  and  vermin  of  all  sorts.  In  the
case  of  beasts  and  fish,  the  rules  laid  down
to  mark  off  those  things  that  are  offensive,
being  general  in  their  applicatiou,  are  such
as  to  include  in  the  forbidden  class  some  few
which  do  not  appear  naturally  loathsome.
This  is  owing  partly  to  the  difficulty  of
classification,  partly  to  a  change  of  feeling
which  experience  has  wrought  in  the  senti-
ments of  mankind  with'  regard  to  such
edibles  as  swine's  flesh  and  shell-fish.

Vers.  3,  4. — Whatsoever  parteth  the  hoot,
and  is  clovenfooted,  should  rather  be  trans-
lated. Whatsoever  parteth  the  hoof,  and  com-
pletely divides  it.  The  camel  parts  but  does
not  wholly  divide  the  hoof,  as  there  is  a
ball  at  the  back  of  the  foot,  of  the  nature
of  a  heel.  f

Ver.  5. — ^The  eoney,  Hebrew,  shaphan;
the  Hyrax  Syriacus,  or  wabr,  still  called
in  Southern  Arabia  tsofun,  a  little  animal
similar  to  but  not  identical  with  the  rabbit.
"  They  live  in  the  natural  caves  and  clefts
of  the  rooks  (Ps.  oiv.  18),  are  very  gre-
garious, being  often  seen  seated  in  troops
before  the  openings  of  their  caves,  and
extremely  timid,  as  they  are  quite  defence-
less (Prov.  XXX.  26).  They  are  about  the
size  of  rabbits,  of  a  brownish-grey  or
brownish-yellow  colour,  but  white  under
the  belly;  they  have  bright  eyes,  round
ears,  and  no  tail.  The  Arabs  eat  them,  but
do  not  place  them  before  their  guests"
(Keil).

Ver.  6. — The  hare,  because  he  oheweth  the
cud,  hut  divideth  not  the  hoof.  There  is
little  doubt  that  the  same  animal  as  our
hare  is  meant.  Neither  the  liare,  however,
nor  the  hyrax  chews  the  cud  in  the  strict
sense  of  the  words.  But  fhey  have  the  ap-
pearance of  doing  so.  The  rule  respecting
chewing  the  cud  was  given  to  and  by
Moses  as  a  legislator,  not  as  an  anatomist,
to  serve  as  a  sign  by  which  animals  might
be  known  to  be  clean  for  food.    Phenomenal


DH.  XI.  1 — 47.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


171


not  Boientifio  language  is  used  here,  as  in
Josh.  X.  12,  "as  we  miglit  speak  of  whales
and  their  congeners  as  fiah,  when  there  is  no
need  of  scientiflo  aoouiaoy  "  (Clark).  "  AH
these  marks  of  distinction  in  the  Levitical
law  are  wisely  and  even  necessarily  made
on  the  basis  of  popular  observation  and
belief,  not  on  that  of  anatomical  exactness.
Otherwise  the  people  would  have  been  con-
tinually liable  to  error.  Scientifloally,  the
camel  would  be  said  to  divide  the  hool,  and
the  hare  does  not  chew  the  oud.  But  laws
for  popular  use  must  necessarily  employ
terms  as  they  are  popularly  understood.
These  matters  are  often  referred  to  as  scien-
tific errors;  whereas  they  were  simply
descriptions,  necessarily  popular,  for  the
understanding  and  enforcement  of  the  law  "
(Gardiner).

Yer.  7. — The  swine,  thongh  he  divide  the
hoof,  and  be  clovenfooted.  Here,  again,  the
description  ia  not  according  to  anatomical
analysis,  but  to  ordinary  appearance.  The
pig  appears  to  be  cloven-footed,  and  it  would
be  misleading  to  give  any  other  account  of
his  foot  in  ojjinary  speech,  but  soientificiiUy
speaking,  he  has  four  toes.  The  prohibition
of  the  use  of  swine's  flesh  does  not  arise
from  the  fear  of  trichinosis  or  other  disease,
bul  from  the  disgust  caused  by  the  car-
nivorous and  filthy  habits  of  the  Eastern  pig.
The  repulsion  originally  felt  for  swine's
flesh  was  natural,  and,  where  the  animal  is
carnivorous,  is  still  natural,  but  where  its
habits  are  change(i,  and  it  has  become
simply  graminiyorous,  the  feeling  has  ceased
to  exist.

Ver.  8. — Of  their  carcase  shall  ye  not  touch.
This  prohibition  is  founded  upon  the  same
feeling  of  disgust  as  the  prohibition  of
eating  their  flesh.  Whatever  is  foul  must
be  avoided.

Vers.  9 — 12. — Whatsoever  hath  flns  and
scales.  The  absence  of  fins  and  scales,  or
their  apparent  absence — for  phenomenal
language  is  used,  as  before — gives  to  fish
a  repulsive  look,  on  which  is  grounded  the
prohibition  to  eat  them.  Eels  and  shell-fish
are  thus  forbidden,  though  a  long  course  of
experience  has  now  taken  away  the  feeling
of  repulsion  with  which  they  were  once
looked  upon.  The  flesh  of  the  beasts  for-
bidden to  be  eaten  is  only  described  as
unclean,  but  that  of  the  prohibited  fish,
birds,  insects,  and  vermin,  is  designated  as
an  abomination  unto  yon.

Vers.  13 — 19. — The  unclean  birds  are  those
vihich  are  gross  feeders,  devourers  of  flesh
or  offal,  and  therefore  offensive  to  the  taste,
beginning  with  the  eagle  and  vulture  tribe.
Tt  is  probable  that  the  words  translated  owl
(ver.  16),  night  hawk  (ver.  16),  cuekow  (ver.
16)  should  be  rendered,  ostrich,  owl,  gull,
Bnd  perhaps  for  swan  (ver.  18),  heron  (vei.


19),  lapwing  (ver.  19),  should  be  substituted
ibis,  great  plover,  hoopoe.  In  the  case  of  the
bat,  we  have  again  phenomenal  language
used.  Being  generally  regarded  as  a  bii'd,
it  is  classed  with  birds.

Vers.  20— 23.— AU  fowls  that  creep  should
rather  be  rendered  all  winged  creeping  things,
that  is,  all  flying  insects.  None  are  allowed
except  the  Sultatoria,  or  locust  family.  The
word  translated  beetle  signifies  a  sort  of
locust,  like  the  other  three  words.  That  the
locust  was  a  regular  article  of  food  in  Pales-
tine is  amply  proved.  "It  is  well  known
that  locusts  were  eaten  by  many  of  the
nations  of  antiquity,  both  in  Asia  and  Africa,
and  even  the  ancient  Greek  thought  the
cjoodas  very  agreeable  in  flavour  (Arist.'Hist.
An.,'  5,  30).  In  Arabia  they  are  sold  in  the
market,  sometimes  strung  upon  cords,  some-
times by  measure,  and  they  are  also  dried  and
kept  in  bags  (or  winter  use.  .  .  .  They  are
generally  cooked  over  hot  coals,  or  on  a  plate,
or  in  an  oven,  or  stewed  in  butter,  and  eaten
either  with  salt  or  with  spice  and  vinegar,  the
head,  wings,  and  feet  being  thrown  away.
They  are  also  boiled  in  salt  and  water,  and
eaten  with  salt  or  butter.  Another  process
is  to  dry  them  thoroughly,  and  then  grind
them  into  meal,  and  make  cakes  of  them"
(Keil).  (Of.  Matt.  iii.  4.)  The  expression
goeth  upon  all  four,  means  grovelling  or
going  in  a  horizontal  position,  in  contrast
with  two-legged  birds,  just  spoken  of.

Vers.  24 — 28. — These  verses  contain  an
expansion  of  the  warning  contained  in  ver.
8,  to  the  effect  that  the  touch  of  the  dead
bodies  of  the  forbidden  animals  was  deflling,
as  well  as  the  consumption  of  their  flesh.  A
further  mark  of  an  unclean  animal  is  added
in  ver.  27 :  Whatsoever  goeth  upon  his  paws;
that  is,  whatever  has  not  hoofs,  but  goes
stealthily,  like  beasts  of  prey  of  the  cat  land.
It  includes  also  dogs.

Vers.  29,  30. — The  creeping  things  that
oreep  upon  the  earth.  This  class  contains
things  that  go  on  their  belly,  but  have  not
wings,  like  the  previous  class  of  creeping
things  (vers.  20 — 23).  By  the  words  trans-
lated tortoise,  ferret,  chameleon,  lizard,  snail,
mole,  different  varieties  of  the  lizard  are
probably  meant.  The  mouse  is  joined  by
Isaiah  with  "  eating  swine,'s  flesh  and  the
abomination  "  (Isa.  Ixvi.  17).

Vers.  31  —  38. — As  the  little  animals  just
mentioned — weasels,  mice,  and  lizards — are
more  likely  than  those  of  a  larger  size  to  be
found  dead  in  domestic  uteusils  and  clothes,
a  further  warning  as  to  their  defiling  cha-
racter is  added,  with  rules  for  daily  use.
The  words  translated  ranges  for  pol  s  (ver.  35)
should  rather  be  rendered  covered  vots,  that
is,  pots  or  kettles  with  lids  to  them.  Seed
which  is  to  be  sown,  that  is,  beed  corn,  is
not  defiled   by  contact    with    thete  dead


172


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  XL  1—47.


ftnimals,  nnlesB  it  has  been  wetted  by  water
being  put  on  it,  in  which  case  the  moisture
would  convey  the  corruption  into  the  seeds.

Vers.  39,  40. — The  loathsomeness  of  the
bodies  of  even  clean  animals  that  have  died
a  natural  death,  makes  them  also  the  means
of  conveying  defilement  to  any  one  who
touches  them.

Vers.  41 — 43. — The  last  olasa  is  that  of
vermin,  which  constitute  a  part  of  the  un-
winged  creeping  class  already  spoken  of
(vers.  29,  80).  Whatsoever  goeth  upon  the
belly  indicates  snakes,  worms,  maggots;
whatsoever  goeth  upon  all  four,  things  that
grovel,  as  moles,  rats,  hedgehogs;  whatso-
ever hath  more  feet,  or  doth  multiply  feet,
centipedes,  caterpillars,  spiders.

Vers.  44 — 47.— These  concluding  verses
give  a  religious  sanction  to  the  previous
regulations,  and  make  tliem  matters  of  sacred,
not  merely  sanitary  or  political,  oblis-ation.
They  were  to  sanctify  themselves,  that  ia,


to  avoid  nncleannesB,  because  God  is  holy,
and  they  were  God's.  They  were  thus
taught  that  ceremonial  cleanness  of  the
body  was  a  symbol  of  holiness  of  heart,  and
a  means  of  attaining  to  the  latter.  For  I  am
the  Lord  that  bringeth  you  up  out  of  the  land
of  Egypt.  It  is  possible  that  Egypt  may  be
named  as  being  the  land  of  animal-worship.
To  be  your  Ood ;  ye  shall  therefore  be  holy,
for  I  am  holy.  The  only  way  by  which  there
can  be  communion  between  God  and  man  is
the  way  of  holiness.

Jewish  industry  and  care  has  counted  the
number  of  letters  in  the  Pentateuch,  and
marked  by  the  use  of  the  letter  i  in  larger
type,  in  the  word  pna,  which  occurs  in
ver.  42,  that  that  letter  is  the  middle
letter  of  the  whole  work,  from  the  beginning
of  Genesis  to  the  end  of  Deuteronomy.  It
is  easy  to  see  what  a  protection  to  the  text
such  minute  and  scrupulous  care  must  be.


HOMILETICa
Meats  distinguished  into  dean  and  unclean  now  for  the  first  time.

I.  OeIQINALLT   man's  liberty  with   EBSPECT   to  EATOrO   FLESH   WAS  UNBESTBICTED.

Such  is  St.  Paul's  teaching :  "  Meats,  which  God  hath  created  to  be  received  with
thanksgiving  of  them  which  believe  and  know  the  truth.  For  every  creature  of  God  is
good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received  with  thanksgiving"  (1  Tim.  iv.  3,  4).
"  Unto  the  pure  all  things  are  pure  "  (Titus  1.  15).  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the
fulness  thereof"  (1  Cor.  x.  26).  "  I  know,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  that
there  is  nothing  unclean  of  itself"  (Rom.  xiv.  14).  And  our  Lord  has  taught,  that
"  tliere  is  nothing  from  without  a  man,  that  entering  into  Mm  can  defile  him"  (Mark
vii.  15).

II.  The  restraints  now  ditkoduced  were  only  temporary.  They  were  only
intended  to  servo  a  purpose  for  a  time,  while  the  principle  underlying  them  is  of  perma-
nent application.  So  the  sabbatical  law  is  of  permanent  obligation,  but  the  form
which  that  law  took  in  the  Mosaic  dispensation  was  temporary,  and  has  been  abro-
gated without  injury  to  the  binding  force  of  the  sabbatical  law,  that  one  seventh  oi
our  time  should  be  given  to  God.

m.  The  purpose  of  these  restraints.  Their  object  was  educational.  They
were  mtended  to  teach,  in  a  manner  that  the  Israelites  were  capable  of  apprehending
and  that  was  consonant  with  the  rest  of  the  Mosaic  legislation,  an  abhorrence  of  spiritual
evil,  by  fostering  an  abhorrence  of  physical  foulness  which  was  taken  as  the  represen-
tative of  moral  evil.

IV  Their  LESSON  WAS  taught.  When  the  time  of  the  institution  of  the  new  dis-
pensation had  arrived,  the  distinction  between  good  and  evil  had  been  taught  by  the
difference  between  lair  and  foul,  or  if  not  taught,  it  could  be  now  taught  in  a  better  way
than  by  sensible  types  and  figures.  Teaching  by  word  had  taken  the  place  of  teaching
by  images.  "

V.  'Their  intention  was  perverted.  The  more  carnal  minded  amono-  the  Jews
rested  in  the  letter  of  the  command,  and  added  other  material  injunctions  to°it  « in  the
washing  of  cups,  and  pots,  brasen  vessels,  and  tables"  (Mark  vii.  4).  With  them  the
command  had  failed  in  its  purpose,  and  they  satisfied  themselves  with  a  mere  external
observance  of  the  letter.  This  our  Lord  sharply  reproved:  «  There  is  nothing  from
without  a  man,  that  entermg  mto  him  can  defile  him:  but  the  thing,  which  come  out

of  him  those  are  they  that  defile  the  man Do  ye  not  perceive,  that  whatsoever

thing  firom  without  entereth  into  the  man,  it  cannot  defile  him;  because  it  entereth  not


OH.  XI.  1—47.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  173

Into  his  heart,  but  into  the  belly,  and  goeth  out  into  the  draught,  purging  all  meats?*
And  he  said,  That  which  cometh  out  of  the  man,  that  deflleth  the  man.  For  from
within,  out  of  the  heart  of  men,  proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  fornications,  murders,
thefts,  covetousness,  wickedness,  deceit,  lasciviousness,  an  evil  eye,  blasphemy,  pride,
foolishness :  all  these  evil  things  come  from  within,  and  defile  the  man "  (Mark  vii
15 — 23).     This  teaching  prepared  the  way  for  the  abolition  of  the  restriction.

VI.  Restoration  of  the  obioinai.  libebty.  First  taught  by  the  vision  of  St.
Peter.  "  Peter  went  up  upon  the  housetop  to  pray  about  the  sixth  hour :  and  he
became  very  hungry,  and  would  have  eaten :  but  while  they  made  ready,  he  fell  into
a  trance,  and  saw  heaven  opened,  and  a  certain  vessel  descending  unto  him,  as  it  had
been  a  great  sheet  knit  at  the  four  corners,  and  let  down  to  the  earth  :  wherein  were  all
manner  of  fourfooted  beasts  of  the  earth,  and  wild  beasts,  and  creeping  things,  and
fowls  of  the  air.  And  there  came  a  voice  to  him,  Eise,  Peter ;  kill,  and  eat.  But  Peter'
said,  Not  so,  Lord ;  for  I  have  never  eaten  anything  that  is  common  or  unclean.  And
the  voice  spake  unto  him  again  the  second  time,  What  God  hath  cleansed,  that  call
not  thou  common.  This  was  done  thrice :  and  the  vessel  was  received  up  again  into
heaven  "  (Acts  x.  9 — 16).  The  first  purpose  of  this  vision  was  to  show  the  acceptance
of  the  Gentiles,  who,  according  to  the  now  received  Jewish  interpretation,  were  repre-
sented by  the  unclean  beasts ;  but  that  was  not  the  only  lesson  taught ;  there  was  also
involved  the  conception  that  the  whole  system  of  clean  and  unclean  meats  was
abolished.  This  doctrine,  as  we  have  seen,  was  adopted  and  enforced  by  St.  Paul,  and
he  says  that  it  is  as  a  Christian  that  he  has  learnt  this  lesson,  "  I  know,  and  am
persuaded  by  (in)  the  Lord  Jesus,  that  there  is  nothing  unclean  of  itself.  .  .  .  All
things  indeed  are  pure"  (Rom.  xiv.  14 — 20).  "Meat  commeiideth  us  not  to  God"
(1  Cor.  vii.  8).  "For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink;  but  righteousness,
and  peace,  and  jdy  in  the  Holy  Ghost "  (Rom.  xiv.  17).

VII.  Pbohibition  op  blood,  and  things  strangled,  continued  bt  the  Codnoil
OF  Jerusalem.  The  Council  of  Jerusalem,  in  deciding  the  terms  on  which  the  Gentiles
should  be  admitted  to  the  Christian  Church,  forbade  the  eating  of  things  offered  to  idols,
and  blood,  and  things  strangled.  The  flrot  of  these  restrictions  rested  on  a  different
principle ;  the  second  and  third  are  a  continuation  of  the  Mosaic  regulations,  and  the
reason  why  they  are  retained  is  given.  "  For  Moses  of  old  time  hath  in  every  city
them  that  preach  him,  being  read  in  the  synagogue  every  sabbath  day"  (Acts  xv.  21).
Inasmuch  as  the  Christian  Church  consisted  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  the  former  of  these
regarded  themselves  as  bound  by  the  Mosaic  legislation,  the  Synod  of  Jerusalem  desired
that  the  Gbntiles  should  concede  to  their  brethren  so  far  as  not  to  partake  of  those  things
which  Jewish  Christians  thought  themselves  bound  to  abstain  Irom,  lest  there  should
be  a  schism  between  the  two  divisions  of  the  Church.  This  law  had  become  one  of
charity  solely,  and  would  naturally  be  abrogated,  or  rather  cease  to  bind,  when  the
occasion  for  it  ceased.  As  in  the  parallel  case  of  meats  offered  to  idols,  "  no  man  "  was
to  "  put  a  stumbling-block  or  an  occasion  to  fall  in  his  brother's  way  "  (Rom.  xiv.  18).
"  It  is  good  neither  to  eat  flesh,  nor  to  drink  wine,  nor  anything  whereby  thy  brother
stumbleth,  or  is  offended,  or  is  made  weak  "  (Rom.  xiv.  21).  "  If  meat  make  my  brother
to  offend,  I  will  eat  no  flesh  while  the  world  standeth,  lest  I  make  my  brother  to  offend  "
(1  Cor.  viii.  13).  But  no  flesh  was  now  forbidden  by  a  positive  regulation  of  God.  The
rule  had  become  one  of  charity,  and  when  the  number  of  Jewish  Christians  ceased  to  be
considerable  in  relation  to  Gentiles,  it  naturally  came  to  an  end.

Ver.  44. — "  Fe  ihall  be  holy  ;  for  I  am  holy."  This  is  the  pervading  principle  of  both
dispensations.

I.  Oeiginallt  man  was  cebatbd  ih  the  image  of  God.  (Gen.  i.  27.)  St.  Paul
tells  us  that  the  likeness  consisted  "  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness"  (Bph.  iv.  24).
The  likeness  continued  until  man  fell.  After  the  Fall,  God's  image,  though  not  oblite-
rated, was  no  longer  reflected  in  man,  except  in  a  blurred  and  perverted  manner,  as
in  a  cracked  mirror.    Man  ceased  to  be  holy,  and  his  communion  with  Gbd  was  lost.

n.  The  desiebd  effect  of  revealed  religion  is  to  bbcoteb  the  lost  iuagb
AND  80  TO  BEBTOBE  COMMUNION  BETWEEN  GoD  AND  MAN.    Under  the  old  dispensa"

*  Or, "  Thii  he  said,  making  all  meats  clean  "  (Revised  Version/.


174  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xi.  1—47.

tion,  a  legal  and  conventional  holiness  was  brought  about  by  means  of  the  sacrifices
and  purifications.  Man  was  replaced  in  a  state  of  symbolical,  though  not  real  holiness,
and  so  far  and  so  long  as  that  state  was  maintained  by  ceremonial  rites  and  cleansings,
the  relation  ot  communion  with  God  was  symbolically  restored  and  preserved.  In  the
new  dispensation,  that  which  was  symbolized  only  before,  became  really  effected  in  the
case  of  those  who,  having  been  adopted  in  Christ,  were  sanctified  by  the  operation  of
the  Holy  Spirit  in  their  heart,  and  thus  "  put  on  the  new  man,  which,  after  God,  is
created  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness  "  (Eph.  iv.  24).

in.   HlGHEB  CONCEPTION   OP   HOLINESS  UNDER   THE   GOSPEL    THAIT  THE  LaW.      Under

the  Law,  on  the  principle,  "  Ye  shall  be  holy,"  is  founded  the  command  to  abstain
from  ceremonial  uncleanness  or  defilement;  "Ye  shall  therefore  sanctify  yourselves,
.  .  .  neither  shall  ye  defile  yourselves  with  any  manner  of  creeping  thing  that
creepeth  on  the  earth ''  (ch.  xi.  44).  In  the  New  Testament,  the  same  principle  is
invoked  as  the  ground  of  avoiding  moral,  not  physical,  uncleanness,  "  For  this  is  the
will  of  God,  evien  your  sanctification,  that  ye  should  abstain  from  fornication  ...  for
OtoA  hath  not  called  us  unto  uncleanness,  but  unto  holiness  "  (1  Thess.  iv.  3 — 7).  And
the  very  text  before  us  is  quoted  for  the  purpose  of  urging  upon  the  Christians  no  mere
ritual  purification,  but  the  highest  spirituality  of  life.  "  As  he  which  hath  called  you
is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation  ;  because  it  is  written,  Be  ye  holy :
for  I  am  holy  "  (1  Pet.  i.  15, 16).

IV.  Pkactical  conclusion.  "  Having  therefore  these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let
us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  fllthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the
fear  of  God "  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  "  What  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in  all  holy
conversation  and  godliness?  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  11).  Carnal  cleanness  is  not  sufficient ;  moral
uprightness  is  not  sufficient ;  our  aim  must  be  holiness,  as  God  is  holy,  and  as  this
holiness  was  manifested  in  Christ.


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHOEa

The  religious  tise  of  nature.  Ch.  xi. ;  cf.  Ps.  civ.,  cvii. ;  Job  xxxviii. — ^xli. ;  Matt
xiii. ;  2  Sam.  xxii.  34.  We  pass  now  to  the  relation  in  which  the  Lord's  people  are  to
stand  to  animated  nature.  So  far  from  treating  it  with  indifference,  they  were  bound
to  regard  certain  animals  as  clean  and  certain  others  as  unclean,  and  to  regard  their
use  of  and  contact  with  them  as  of  religious  importance.  The  temptation  to  use  nature
as  something  outside  religious  considerations  was  hereby  avoided,  and  the  Jew  was  led
to  regard  every  animal  as  having  some  religious  significance  to  him.  A  literal  watch-
fulcess  was  thus  inculcated  of  the  most  painstaking  character.  The  Jew,  wherever  he
went,  was  on  his  guard  against  the  unclean,  and  was  providing  for  his  use  only  what
was  legally  clean  and  pure.

I.  Natubb  is  a  bevel ation  of  God  if  we  only  had  its  key.  It  is  too  often
forgotten  that  nature  was  the  first  revelation  of  God  to  his  creatures.  The  Bible  is
the  supplementary  revelation  necessitated  by  sin.  To  our  first  parents  before  the  Fall,
nature  had  a  deeper  meaning,  most  probably,  than  it  has  yet  had  to  us.  The  inter-
pretation of  nature  is  most  important,  and  there  is  no  need  that  it  should  be  "  agnostic  "
or  irreligious.  Provided  scientific  fact  be  welcomed,  there  is  no  detriment,  but  rathi  r
there  is  gain,  in  looking  at  our  surroundings  in  a  religious  spirit.  Science  is  not  bound
to  become  a  department  of  theology,  and  to  be  running  up  into  theological  statements ;
neither,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  hound  to  indulge  in  atheistic  ones.  The  "  argument  of
design  "  may  not  be  a  part  of  science,  but  it  is  just  as  true  that  the  argument  of  cJicmce,
which  is  the  only  alternative,  is  no  part  of  true  science  either.  But  while  science  is
under  no  obligation  to  become  theological,  it  is  right  that  nature  should  be  regarded
religiously.     Natural  religion  has  its  sphere  just  as  well  as  supernatural  religion.  °

II.  We  instinctively  use  animated  nature  to  illustrate  the  characteristics
OP  MANKIND.  The  animals  become  our  picture  alphabet,  by  whose  help  we  spell  out
character,  Indeed,  so  close  are  the  affinities  beween  the  lower  animals  and  the  succes-
sive stages  of  human  character,  that  one  ingenious  foreign  writer  points  out  an  analogy
between  the  development  in  nature  and  the  development  in  individual  human  nature.


oa  XI.  1—47.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  175

"  Man  passes  still  to-day,"  says  M.  Secretan,'  "  through  the  form  of  the  ape,  and  he
passes  through  it  visibly ;  the  embryonic  evolution  continues  itself  in  the  transforma-
tions of  the  first  age,  the  spiritual  development  allies  itself  to  the  corporeal  evolution,
it  is  regulated  by  the  same  laws.  Just  as  the  human  body  reproduces  in  summary
form  the  whole  history  of  organized  nature,  the  spirit  of  a  civilized  person  reproduces
in  abridgment  the  whole  history  of  the  human  spirit,  and  the  two  histories  are  in-
separable. The  characteristic  of  the  ape,  imitation  without  intelligence,  is  also  the
characteristic  of  the  child  when  he  is  put  in  possession  of  his  organs.  This  phase  is
essential;  the  child  would  not  leam  to  eat,  he  would  not  learn  to  walk,  lie  would  not
learn  especially  to  speak,  and  by  consequence  to  think,  were  he  not,  during  some  period
and  in  certain  respects,  a  little  parrot  and  a  little  ape.  Simian  imitation  is  the  process
by  which  the  acquisitions  of  the  species  are  appropriated  by  the  individual.  Simian
imitation,  by  which  1  mean  the  reproduction  of  movements  of  which  the  intention  is
not  comprehended,  is  the  normal  and  desired  transition  between  instinct  and  the  reflec-
tive intelligence,  which  is  the  properly  human  condition."  There  seems,  therefore,  to
be  a  reason  in  the  very  nature  of  things  for  the  illustration  of  moral  or  immoral
qualities  from  the  animals.  Amid  other  uses  served  by  the  lower  creation,  there  is
certainly  this  one  of  furnishing  illustrations  of  character.  Our  Loid's  parables  embody
the  principle  of  the  spiritual  significance  of  nature  in  its  broadest  applications.

III.  By  the  division  of  the  animals  heke  proposed  important  moral  qualities
ARE  commended  AND  IMMORAL  ONES  CONDEMNED.  A  Scientific  divisiou  was  not  needed
for  a  religious  purpose.  A  popular  division,  easily  apprehended,  would  serve  infinitely
better.     The  distinctions  drawn  are  such  as  may  be  seen  at  a  glance.

1.  Quadrupeds.  The  clean  are  those  who  divide  the  hoof  and  chew  the  cud.  In
other  words,  the  ruminants  are  to  be  regarded  as  the  clean.  All  other  quadrupeds  are
to  be  accounted  unclean.  That  there  may  be  no  mistake,  the  camel,  coney,  hare,  and
swine  are  emphasized  as  unclean,  because  possessing  only  on^  of  the  required  cha-
racteristics. The  flesh  of  the  ruminants  is  generally  considered  as  more  wholesome
than  that  of  the  other  quadrupeds;  but  this  would  scarcely  determine  the  division.
Let  the  fact,  however,  be  noted  that  reflection  finds  its  fitting  illustration  in  the
rumination  of  these  animals,  and  that  they  are  justly  regarded  as  both  sure-footed  and
cleanly;  then  we  see  a  moral  purpose  in  the  distinction.  If  the  Lord's  people  were  to
associate  with  these  animals  and  use  them  for  food,  while  the  other  quadrupeds  were
to  be  avoided,  it  was  to  teach  them  to  reflect  faithfully  upon  what  God  gave  them,  to
be  steadfast  in  running  the  race  he  sets  before  them,  and  to  be  pttre  in  their  walk  and
conversation.  That  such  moral  ideas  were  associated  with  the  clean  animals  is  corrobo-
rated by  such  passages  as  2  Sam.  xxii.  34 ;  Ps.  xviii.  33 ;  Hab.  iii.  19 ;  with  which  may
be  compared  1  Sam.  ii.  9.

2.  Fishes.  Here,  again,  the  clean  ones  are  those  which  have  both  fins  and  scales.  All
that  have  not  these  two  characteristics  are  to  be  deemed  an  abomination,  such  as
sharks,  eels,  and  the  swarmers  generally  (VJ?*)-  That  moral  characteristics  are  illus-
trated in  fish  as  well  as  in  quadrupeds  is  acknowledged  by  the  common  usage  of
language.  Do  we  not  call  men  of  a  rapacious  disposition  "  sharks ; "  and  say  of  men
of  uncertain  and  cunning  ways  that  they  "wriggle  like  eels"?  It  seems  certain,
therefore,  that  the  distinction  here  made,  while  perhaps  having  some  foundation  in  the
quality  of  the  flesh,  is  primarily  to  illustrate  disposition,  and  to  guard  the  Jews  against
the  selfishness  and  rapacity  associated  with  the  unclean  fishes.

It  could  hardly  be  locomotion  which  is  referred  to  in  this  animal  kingdom,  since  some
of  the  unclean  fishes,  for  example,  the  sharks,  are  remarkable  for  their  speed.  More-
over, the  fact  of  sharks  and  some  other  fishes  having  scales,  though  of  almost  micro-
.scopic  character,  is  no  argument  against  the  fidelity  of  the  record.  The  Law  was
given  primarily  to  a  people  of  simple  and  not  scientific  habits — not  to  microscopists.
Its  popular  style  and  adaptation  to  common  life  are  among  its  highest  recommendations.

3.  Birds.  Here,  again,  when  the  words  are  looked  carefully  into,  the  distinction
seems  to  be  that  clean  birds  are  such  as  feed  on  grain  and  grasses,  while  the  carnivorous
birds  are  excluded  as  unclean.  In  no  more  striking  way  could  unholy  appetites  be
illustrated  and  condemned.     Eestraint  and  purity  were  thus  inculcated.

4.  Reptile*.     Of  these  permission  is  given  to  eat  four  kinds  of  locust,  all  of  which

'  'Disoours  Lai'ques,'  p.  72,


176  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  XL  1—47.

are  distinguished  as  Itapert,  and  not  runnert.  Locomotion  in  this  case,  rather  than
food,  is  the  ground  of  the  distinction.  When  besides,  we  remember  the  migratory  character
of  these  insects,  there  is  conveyed  an  excellent  illustration  of  the  stranger  apMt,  which
alights  on  eartli  only  so  far  as  is  needful,  and  takes  more  kindly  to  the  Mr,  If  God's
people  should  be  "  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  earth,"  if  they  should  be  setting  their
affections  on  things  above,  the  locust  tribes,  which  the  Jews  were  allowed  to  eat,  most
admirably  illustrated  the  required  spirit.

On  the  other  hand,  the  mole,  the  mouse,  the  lizard  (3*,  not  "  tortoise,*"  as  in  English
Version),  gecko  (np«»,  not  "  the  ferret,"  as  in  English  Version),  monitor  (r6,  from  its
great  strength — not  "  the  chameleon  "),  lizard  and  sand-lizard  (isnh,  from  lying  on  the
ground — not  "  snail,"  for  they  are  eaten  by  Jews  and  Orientals,  as  not  unclean),  and
chameleon  are  to  be  regarded  as  unclean.  Earthliness  and  ugliness — in  one  word,  the
repulsiveness  of  sin — seem  indicated  by  this  distinction.

We  have  thus  inculcated,  by  this  easy,  popular  division  of  the  animals,  important
moral  qualities  to  be  cultivated  and  immoral  qualities  to  be  avoided.  Animated  nature
became  thus  a  mirror  for  human  nature.  The  living  world  around  man  was  thus  made
to  take  up  a  parabolic  language  and  promote  his  sanctification.

IV.  The  defiling  chaeactee  op  death  THROuaH  natural  causes  was  to  be  con-
STANTLT  REC08NIZBD.  Bven  a  clcau  animal  which  had  died  of  itself  was  not  to  be
eaten  or  touched  with  impunity.  Defilement  was  the  result  of  such  contact.  The
lesson  of  mortality  as  the  penalty  of  sin  was  thus  illustrated.  Men  might  devote  an
animal  to  death  for  sacrificial  purposes  or  for  their  own  use,  but  when  death  came  as
the  debt  of  nature,  at  once  its  defiling  character  must  be  realized,  and  purification  sought
accordingly.

The  laws  of  this  chapter  entailed  constant  watchfulness.  No  careless  living  was
possible  under  the  Jewish  regime.  In  the  same  spirit  surely  should  we  "  watch  and
pray,  lest  we  enter  into  temptation.''  In  the  same  spirit  should  we  ask  ourselves,  What
spiritual  lessons  is  surrounding  nature  communicating  to  our  spirits  ?  Not  in  vain,  and
not  for  mere  utility,  has  such  an  environment  been  thrown  around  us. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Clean  and  unclean.  As  man  is  made  after  the  image  of  QoA,  so  is  the
outward  and  sensible  world  constituted  as  a  kind  of  apographa  to  represent  the  spiritual
world  which  is  the  subject  of  faith  (Rom.  i.  20).  The  key  to  unlock  the  mysteries  of
this  system  is  to  be  found  in  the  Scriptures  of  truth ;  and  animals,  according  to  it,  are
to  be  viewed  as  representing  men.

I.  Thk  Law  distributes  them  into  two  classes.  1.  The  dean.  The  marks  of
cleanness  are  :  (1)  That  they  "  divide  the  hoof."  By  the  division  of  the  hoof,  as  in  the
ox  and  sheep,  the  animal  is  able  so  to  order  its  steps  as  not  to  throw  up  the  mud  upon
itself,  as  the  horse  does  whose  hoof  is  not  cloven.  (2)  They  "  chew  the  cud."  So  their
food  is  more  perfectly  prepared  for  digestion.  The  manner  in  which  this  is  done,  while
the  creature  rests,  is  so  suggestive  of  thoughtfulness  and  meditation  that  it  is  described
as  ruminating.  (3)  The  clean  animals  were  therefore  chosen  to  represent  the  Israelites,
who  were  a  holy  nation.  They  were  ceremonially  holy :  (a)  So  walking  in  the  ways  of
Ood's  commandments  as  not  to  be  polluted  with  the  abominations  of  idolatry.  (6)  So
meditating  upon  the  Law  as  inwardly  to  digest  it  to  their  nourishment  (see  Ps.  i.  2 ;  1  Tim.
iv.  13 — 15).  (c)  Thus  also  they  became  morally  greatly  superior  to  the  nations  around
them.  2.  The  unclean.  (1)  The  Gentiles  in  contrast  to  the  Jews  were  so,  ceremonially,
and  were  therefore  shut  out  from  communion  with  the  Jews.  But  it  was  competent  to
them  to  be  made  holy  by  becoming  proselytes.  (2)  They  were  in  general  idolaters,  and
so  morally  abominable.  It  was  mainly  to  keep  the  Israelites  from  being  contaminated
with  the  idolatries  of  their  neighbours,  that  these  laws  were  instituted  (see  ver.  45 ;
XX.  23 — ^25 ;  Deut.  xiv.  1 — 3).  3.  There  are  hut  two  classes  of  men.  (1)  Though  some
animals  divide  the  hoof,  they  are  not  clean  unless  they  also  chew  the  cud.  The  hog  is  cf
this  order,  and  is  filthy  to  a  proverb  (2  Pet.  i.  22).  So  it  does  not  make  men  clean  to
have  the  faculty  for  walking  cleanly  when  their  disposition  otherwise  leads  them  to
wallow  in  the  mire  of  sin.  (2)  Though  some  chew  the  cud,  yet  if  they  divide  not  the
hoof  they  are  unclean.  The  "  camel,"  the  "  coney,"  and  the  "  hare,"  or  whatever
creature,  the  word  najnss  may  describe,  are  of  this  order.  For  what  good  is  tha
semblance  of  meditation  and  repentance,  if  the  walk  of  the  life  be  not  clean  (Jaa,  L  20)  T


VH.H.  1— 47.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  177


I


(3)  As  there  are  varieties  of  clean  and  also  of  unclean  animals,  so  are  there  varieties  and
degrees  of  goodness,  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  wickedness  on  the  other,  amongst  men.  Still
the  classes  are  but  two.  The  one  is  led  by  Christ,  the  other  by  Satun  (Matt.  xii.  30 ;
XXV.  2,  32,  33).    To  which  class  do  you  belong  ?

II.  The  Law  dt  the  lettee  is  now  changed.  1.  The  gospel  is  f roily  preached  to  the
Oentiles.  (1)  They  are  not  now  under  obligation  to  be  proselyted  to  Judaism.  This
subject  was  delated  in  the  early  Church,  and  settled  at  the  Council  of  Jerusalem.  (2)
The  same  decision,  which  was  at  the  instance  of  Peter  to  whom  the  Lord  had  assigned
that  distinction  (see  Matt.  xvi.  19),  released  the  Jews  also  from  the  yoke  of  the  Law
(see  Acts  xv.).  2.  This  was  according  to  prophetic  indication.  (1)  Under  the  figure
of  the  unclean  wolf  dwelling  with  the  lamb,  etc.,  Isaiah  (xi.)  describes  the  Gentile
and  Jew  as  to  be  wonderfully  reconciled  in  the  days  of  Messiah.  (2)  To  show  that  the
Jew  must  have  no  fellowship  with  the  Gentile,  the  Law  forbade  the  yoking  together  of
the  clean  ox  with  the  unclean  ass  (Deut.  xxii.  10).^  But  prophecy  anticipates  the
blessedness  of  the  time  when  the  seed,  viz.  of  the  gospel,  should  be  sown  beside  all
waters — not  those  of  Judaea  only,  but  of  the  wide  world ;  and  that  in  this  business  the
ox  and  the  ass — the  Jew  and  the  Gentile — should  become  fellow-workers  (see  Isa.  xxxii.
20;  comp.  also  Deut.  XXV.  4 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  9—11;  1  Tim.  v.  18).  3.  Peter's  vision  in-
structed him  that  this  time  was  come.  (1)  The  animals  contained  in  the  sheet  were
those  described  as  unclean  in  the  Law,  and  represented  the  Gentiles.  Peter,  therefore,
when  commanded  to  kill  and  eat,  hesitated,  for  that  he  "  had  never  eaten  anything  that
was  common  or  unclean."  He  therefore  held  that  "  it  was  an  unlawful  thing  for  a  man
that  is  a  Jew  to  keep  company  or  come  unto  one  of  another  nation."  (2)  But  the  linen
sheet  which  enclosed  the  animals  was  the  emblem  of  purity ;  and  they  were  thrice  lifted
into  the  heavens.  To  these  symbols  agreed  also  the  voice  which  said,  "  What  God  hath
cleansed  that  call  not  thou  common."  (3)  When  therefore  Peter  had  all  this  corroborated
by  the  counter-vision  of  Cornelius,  he  was  convinced  that  henceforth  he  "  should  not
call  any  man  common  or  unclean."  For  the  universality  of  the  mercy  of  the  gospel
had  been  testified  in  that  the  sheet  was  knit  at  the  four  corners,  showing  that  the
Gentiles  were  to  be  gathered  together  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  world.

III.  The  Law  in  its  spikit  still  abides.  1.  For  the  gospel  is  that  spirit.  (1)  The  glory
on  the  face  of  Moses  was  veiled  to  the  Jews.  So  concerned  were  they  with  the  letter  that
they  could  not  steadfastly  look  upon  the  true  glory  of  their  own  Law.  Moses  therefore
put  a  vail  upon  his  face,  viz.  the  vail  of  the  letter.  This  vail  is  still  upon  their  hearts,
and  must  so  remain  until  they  turn  to  the  Lord,  or  becojne  converted  to  Chriai.  (2)
When  Moses  turned  to  the  Lord,  from  whom  he  derived  his  glory,  he  took  off  tne  vail ;
and  it  is  the  same  glory  which  falls  uyon  us.  The  only  difference  is  that  in  the  spirit
of  the  Law  we  see  the  glory  of  the  Lord  reflected  from  the  face  of  Moses  ;  but  in  the  spirit
of  the  gospel  we  see  the  same  glory  as  Moses  himself  saw  it,  immediately,  in  the  face  of
Jesus.  (3)  Thus  passing  from  the  Law  to  the  gospel,  a  spiritual  person  is  changed  from
glory  to  glory.  This  brightening  transfiguration  is  effected  "  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,"
or,  as  the  margin  construes  it,  "  by  the  Lord  who  is  the  Spirit,"  viz.  of  the  Law.  The
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Law.  2.  The  gospel  insists  upon  moral  purity.
(IV  We  have  seen  that  the  law  of  yoking  together  the  ox  and  the  ass  is  repealed  under
the  gospel.  This  was  as  to  the  letter.  But  we  shall  find  it  still  insisted  upon,  viz.  as
to  the  spirit.  For  Paul  clearly  refers  to  it  (2  Cor.  vi.  14)  when  he  forbids  the
unequal  yoking  together  of  Christians  and  infidels.  (2)  In  the  spirit  of  it  Christ  came
not  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil,  the  Law,  and  that  to  the  jot  and  tittle  (Matt.  v.  17 — 20).
What  a  rebuke  is  here  to  the  antinomian  !  What  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jew  is  the
antinomianism  in  false  theories  of  Christianity!  Christians  who  neglect  the  study  of
the  Law  miss  the  benefit  of  many  glorious  views  of  precious  gospel  truth.  How  just  is
the  remark  of  Augustine,  that  "  the  Old  Testament,  when  rightly  understood,  is  one
great  prophecy  of  the  New  " ! — J.  A.  M.

Vera.  9 12. — The  waters  and  their  inhabitants.    "Here,"  says  Maimonides,  "the

exposition  of  this  sentence, '  A  word  spoken  according  to  his  two  fares  is  as  apples  of
gold  in  (ni'SB-o)  maschyoth  of  silver '  (Prov.  xxv.  11).  Maschyoth  are  a  kind  of  lattice
or  network  having  very  small  interstices.  Therefore  '  when  a  word  spoken  according
to  both  its  faces'  (that  is,  according  to  its  exterior  and  interior  signification)  is  likened
LKvrnouB.  „


178  THE  UOUK  OF  LEVITICUS,  [ch.  xi.  1— 47.

to  '  apples  cf  gold  in  network  of  silver,'  the  meaning  is  that  the  exterior  sense  is  good
and  precious  as  silver,  but  the  interior  is  much  more  excellent  as  gold.  An  apple  of
gold  covered  with  a  silver  network,  viewed  at  a  distance,  seems  to  be  all  silver ;  but  if  by
the  worth  and  beauty  of  the  silver  you  be  attracted  to  view  it  more  narrowly,  you  may
discover  the  apple  of  gold  that  is  vailed  within.  So  are  the  words  of  the  Law  in  the
letter  useful  and  excellent  for  direction  in  morals,  or  for  the  outward  government  of  the
Church,  while  the  interior  part  or  spirit  is  of  superior  excellence  to  build  up  the  believer
in  the  sublime  mysteries  of  faith."    According  to  this  principle,  let  us  consider  here —

I.  The  mystery  of  the  waters.  1.  They  denote  multitudes  of  peoples.  (1)  This
is  expressed  in  such  passages  as  Isa.  Iv.  5  and  Eev.  xvii.  15.  (2)  The  reason,  perhaps,
is  that  they  lave  the  shores  of  the  earth  and  are  the  highway  of  commerce.  At  all
times  they  sustain  a  multitude  of  navigators ;  and  at  one  time,  in  the  ark  of  Noah,
the  entire  population  of  the  world  was  afloat.  (3)  In  the  text  the  waters  are  distri-
buted into  "  seas "  and  "  rivers."  2.  The  sea  may  be  diversely  considered.  (1)  Before
the  formation  of  light,  when  its  consistency  was  muddy,  it  was  called  the  deep,  or
the  abyss,  and  was  the  symbol  of  hell  (Gen.  i.  2  ;  Luke  viii.  31 ;  Rom.  x.  7  j  Rev.  xx.
3).  (2)  Under  the  action  of  light,  the  earthy  particles  precipitated,  and  the  upper  por-
tion became  gradually  clearer  and  more  liquid.  Then  the  mass  received  the  name  of
"  seas"  (Geii.  i.  10).  In  this  condition  the  waters  became  stocked  with  living  creaturei
and  capable  of  supporting  fleets,  when  it  became  a  figure  of  the  peoples  of  the  world.
(3)  When  disturbed  by  fierce  winds,  and  the  sediment  from  the  bottom  worked  up,  at
if  the  abyss  of  hell  had  been  moved,  the  state  of  the  wicked  is  described  (see  Isa.  Ivii
20).  The  winds  by  which  the  wicked  are  stirred  are  their  passions,  and  the  eflfects  ar«
turbulence  and  insurrection  (see  Ps.  Ixv.  7 ;  cvii.  26 ;  Jude  13).  (4)  We  carry  waves
and  storms  within  us ;  they  threaten  to  drown  us  ( jas.  L  6) ;  none  can  save  us  from
ourselves  but  that  Jesus  who  miraculously  stilled  the  tempest  (Matt.  viii.  26).  3.  Riven
also  may  be  variously  considered.  (1)  They  are  taken  in  a  good  sense  when  they  keep
their  channels,  for  then  they  are  sources  of  blessing.  The  river  of  Eden  represented
the  covenant  of  God,  which,  branching  into  "four  heads,"  showed  how  tlie  blessings  oi
the  gospel  were  to  be  carried  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  world  (Gen.  ii.  10 ;  I'sa.  xxxvi.
8;  xlvi.  4;  Ixv.  9;  Rev.  xxii.  1).  The  peaceful  jaeopZe  of  the  covenant  would  also  b«
represented.  (2)  Rivers  are  taken  in  a  bad  sense  when  they  overflow  their  banks,  in
which  case  they  become  muddy,  and  carry  desolation  where  they  rush.  Hence  they
are  compared  to  invading  armies  and  to  ungodly  men  moved  to  violence  (Judg.  v.  21 ,
Ps.  liix.  15;  Isa.  viii.  7,8  ;  xviii.  2;  lix.  19;  Rev.  xii.  15).

II.  The  inhabitants  of  the  waters.  1.  The  clean  are  distinguished  by  fins  and
scales.  (1)  The  fins  are  their  instruments  of  locomotion.  By  means  of  these  they
rise  to  the  surface  and  swim  in  purer  water  under  the  clearer  light  of  the  heavens.  Thui
they  teach  us  that  a  holy  people  should  be  active,  not  in  tlie  darkness  of  sin  and  igno-
rance, but  in  the  day  of  goodness  and  truth  (John  iii.  21 ;  viii.  12 ;  ix.  4,  5).  (2)  The
scales,  which  have  a  beautiful  metallic  lustre,  suggest  the  idea  of  armour;  and,  when
the  creature  swims  near  the  surface,  these  brilliantly  reflect  the  glories  of  the  sun.
They  teach  us  to  "  put  on  the  armour  of  light "  (Rom.  xiii.  12  ;  Bph.  vi  7).  2.  The
unclean  are  those  withoyi  fins  and  scales.  (1)  Those  destitute  of  both,  like  the  eel,
shun  the  light,  and  bury  themselves  in  the  mud  at  the  bottom.  They  teach  us  to
avoid  the  corresponding  habits  of  the  wicked,  who  rush  into  sin  and  ignorance  and
wallow  in  moral  filth  (Job  xxiv.  13 — 17 ;  John  iii.  19,  20 ;  Bph.  v.  13).  (2)  Those
who  have  fins  but  no  scales  are  covered  with  a  thick  glutinous  matter,  which  in
appearance  contrasts  unfavourably  with  the  silver  and  golden  armour  in  which  the
clean  creatures  are  clad.  If  they  use  their  fins  to  rise  out  of  their  depths,  it  is  to  make
havoc  upon  shoals  of  brighter  creatures.  So  are  the  wicked  bloodthirsty  and  voracious,
wiio  therefore  should  be  shunned.  (3)  In  the  imagery  of  the  prophets,  anti-Christian
kingdoms  are  sometimes  described  as  great  sea-monsters  (see  Dan.  vii.  2,  3  ;  Rev.  xiii.
1).     Such  kingdoms  must  be  held  in  aliomination  by  the  thoughtful  student  of  the

Law,  and  the  time,  earnestly  longed  fur,  when  the  Lamb  wiU  appear  on  Mount  Sion.

J.A.M.

Vers.  13 — 25. — Flying  creatures.  So  conflicting  are  the  opinion*  of  the  learned  ai
to  many  of  the  animals  indicated  in  the  Hebrew  names  in  the  verses  before  us,  that  it


«]fc  XL  1— 47,]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  1T»

appears  hopeless  to  expect  certainly  to  identify  them.  This  fact  in  itself  ought  to  «Dn-
vince  the  Jew  that  the  Law,  in  the  letter,  is  abolished ;  for  he  cannot  tell  whether  he
bas  not  repeatedly  eaten  abominable  things,  or  that  contact  with  the  carcases  of  such
lias  not  made  him  unclean.  As  to  the  spirit  of  the  Law,  there  are  broad  indications
«f  clciinness  and  uncleanness  to  which  we  may  profitably  attend.

I.  The  dnoleak  are  in  general  birds  of  fret.  1.  Conspicuovs  amongst  thege
«re  the  eagles,  (1)  There  is  little  doubt  that  first  name  (yffi)  is  truly  rendered  "  eagle."
The  term  expresses  the  propensity  of  that  creature  for  lacerating  and  tearing  in  pieeet
ibe  flesh  of  its  prey.  (2)  Its  associates  in  the  group  (vers.  13,  ll)  are  similar  in  nature.
The  "  ossifrage,"  or  bone-lreaker,  is  probably  the  sea-eagle,  whose  habit  is  to  break
twnes  to  get  at  the  marrow.  The  "  ospray "  has  its  name  in  the  Hebrew  from  its
strength,  and  is  generally  understood  to  be  the  black  eagle.  The  "  vulture " — if  that
truly  renders  the  original — is  one  of  the  largest  and  most  formidable  of  the  eagle  kind.
And  what  is  construed  the  "  kite,"  being  in  the  same  group,  is  probably  some  other
'description  of  eagle.  2.  These  are  emblems  of  evil  spirits.  (1)  This,  indeed,  is  true  of
«U  unclean  birds,  in  proof  of  which  see  Matt.  xiii.  4,  compared  with  19,  and  Ber.  xviii.
2.  They  are  so :  (2)  From  their  traversing  the  air  (see  Eph.  ii.  2).  This  is  eminently
the  case  with  eagles,  whose  flight  is  towering,  and  whose  nests  even  are  in  inaccessible
mountain  heights.  (3)  From  the  formidableness  of  their  attacks.  From  dizzy  heights
they  swoop  down  upon  their  prey.  They  are  armed  with  powerful  talons,  and  strong,
«harp,  hooked  beaks  fitted  to  inflict  dreadful  wounds,  tearing  as  they  grip  the  flesh  of
their  quivering  victims  (Job  xxxix.  30).  3.  They  also  represent  wicked  men.  (1)
Wicked  men  are  the  "  children  of  Satan,"  and  naturally  exhibit  the  family  likeness.
The  kings  of  Babylon  and  Tyre  are  compared  to  the  eagle  (Ezek.  xvii.  3,  7).  The  per-
-flecutors  of  the  people  of  God  are  likewise  so  compared  (Lam.  iv.  19).  The  Boman
armies,  whose  standards  were  eagles,  are  called  eagles  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  xxiv.  28).
^2)  The  lesson  for  us  is  to  avoid  the  disposition  of  the  wicked,  and  to  beware  of  their
lelontless  voracity  and  diabolical  cruelty.    God  is  stronger  than  the  "  powers  of  the

II.  Some  unclean'  birds  are  prowlers  of  the  night.  1.  This  characterizes  the
mext  group  (vers.  15 — 19).  (1)  The  Hebrew  name  for  the  "  raven  "  (aiy)  is  that  com-
monly used  for  evening.  Our  name  "  raven "  probably  comes  from  their  ravening.
The  raven  Noah  sent  forth  from  the  ark,  which  wandered  to  and  fro,  and  resting  upon
-floating  carcases  or  what  dry  thmg  it  could  find,  was  an  emblem  of  an  unclean  dark
«pirit,  which  is  cast  out  from  the  Church  of  God,  and  from  the  hearts  of  his  people,
«nd  wanders  among  the  moral  carcases,  the  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  (comp.  Zech.
xiiL  2 ;  Matt.  xii.  43).  (2)  Keep  close  to  Jesus,  lest,  departing  from  him,  we  may
invite  this  unclean  spirit  to  return  with  seven  others  more  wicked  than  himself.
2.  With  the  raven  owls  are  associated  (vers.  16 — 19).  (1)  These  are  creatures  whose
-vision  will  not  endure  the  blaze  of  day,  but  who  have  wonderful  sight  in  the  dark.
That  rendered  "  hawk  "  has  its  name  here  (nsi)  from  the  swiftness  of  its  flight ;  but
in  Dan.  xiv.  13  (ran)  from  the  sharpness  of  its  sight.  (2)  They  are  distinguished
from  each  other  by  particular  habits.  That  in  our  version  called  the  "  night  hawk  "
i^snn)  is  the  screech-owl.  Its  screams  are  violent ;  and  these  birds  in  general  make
'earful  and  doleful  sounds  in  the  night.  This  does  not  argue  favourably  for  the  happi-
ness of  evil  spirits.  (3)  Wicked  men  also,  like  owls,  hate  the  light.  When  honest
{leople  of  the  day  are  sleeping,  these  prowlers  are  plotting  mischief  Witness  the
I>urglarie5,  the  murders,  the  prostitutions,  the  debaucheries,  practised  by  them  under
the  cover  of  darkness.

III.  Unclean  birds  are  grovelling  in  theie  habits.  1.  Such  are  the  "fowls  that
^reep  going  upon  all  four,"  (1)  The  bat  is  a  creature  of  this  class.  It  has  claws
Attached  to  its  leathern  wings,  which  serve  it  instead  of  feet  to  crawl  by.  (2)  This
description  includes  also  insects  from  which  exceptions  are  taken  in  the  verse  following.
2.  The^  are  types  of  wicked  intelligences.  (1)  Some  devils  have  a  passion  for  enshrining
themselves  in  organic  bodies.  The  incarnation  of  Satan  in  the  serpent  was  not  the  last
•ttempt.  There  were  demoniacal  possessions  in  our  Lord's  day ;  and  when  expelled  from
liuman  beings,  they  preferred  the  bodies  of  swine  to  having  no  organic  habitation.  (2)
Wicked  men  grovel  in  the  most  revolting  moral  filth.  3.  In  what  contrast  to  these  ar*
4he  good  I    (1)  The  dove  sent  forth  by  Noah  is  a  figure  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  gracious


180  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  XI.1-4Z.

Messenger  and  Dispenser  of  peace  to  the  Church ;  but  who  is  often  grieved  by  the-
impurities  of  men  (Matt.  iii.  16).  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  is  peace ;  and  those  wh»
exemplify  it  are  called  doves  (Matt.  z.  16).  (2)  The  lark  also  is  a  clean  creature,  who
soars  high  and  sings  gloriously  in  the  light  of  the  morning.  How  angelical  1  how
saintly  1  (3)  While  winged  insects  that  could  not  leap  from  the  ground  were  unclean,
to  show  that  those  men  are  morally  so  who  are  whoUy  given  to  the  cares  of  this  worl.1 ;
those  with  benders  above  their  feet,  in  our  version  called  "  legs,"  those  with  crouching
joints  to  stoop  and  spring  with,  as  locusts  and  grasshoppers,  for  the  opposite  reason  are
clean.    The  Baptist  lived  principally  upon  locusts  in  the  wilderness.— -J.  A.  M.

Vers.26 — 47. — Uncl«in,  creeping,  and  dead  thingt.  It  is  evident,  from  the  concluding:
verses  of  this  chapter  (see  vers.  43,  44),  that  these  laws  were  designed  to  teach  tha
nature  of  the  holiness  of  God.  It  therefore  follows,  unless  that  holiness  consist  in  not
eating  the  flesh  or  touching  the  carcases  of  certain  creatures,  which  it  would  be  absurd
to  suppose,  these  creatures  must  in  their  habits  represent  evils  which  men  should
abominate,  and  clean  creatures,  on  the  contrary,  virtues  which  they  should  cultivate^
Let  us  therefore  seek  the  spiritual  lessons  from —

I.  The  imcLEAN  ckbepijjq  things  that  cbeep.  These  are  opposed  to  creeping  things-
that  leap,  some  of  which  are  clean  (see  vers.  21,  22).  Their  steady  attachment  to  the
earth,  never  rising  above  it,  represents  an  inveterate  worldliness  which  a  holy  people
must  hold  in  abhorrence.  Samples  are  given  under  the  following  groupings  (see  veir.
42),  viz. :  1.  Those  that  have  no  feet,  "  Whatsoever  goeth  upon  the  belly."  (1)  Serpentg,.
snakes,  vipers,  and  worms  of  all  kinds  are  included  under  this  description.  The  serpent
has  given  its  name  to  Satan  ever  since  he  enshrined  himself  in  a  creature  of  that  kind
(see  Glen.  iii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  3 ;  Bev.  xii.  9  ;  xx.  2).  And  wicked  men  are  the  "  children
of  the  devil,"  and  so  are  described  as  the  "  seed  of  the  serpent,"  and  a  "  generation  of
vipers  "  (Gen.  iii.  15 ;  Matt.  iii.  7).  (2)  Serpents  are  abominable  for  their  unclean^
habits,  lurking  in  the  dust  or  mire,  and  eating  their  meat  from  the  dust  (Gen.  iii.  14 ;
Isa.  Ixv.  25 ;  Micah  vii.  17).  Worms  are  bred  in  corruption  and  feast  upon  carrion^
(Exod.  xvi.  20 ;  Job  vii.  5 ;  xix.  24 ;  Acts  xii.  23).  What  a  picture  of  those  wha
wallow  in  sin !  Serpents  are  double-tongued  (Ps.  cxl.  3),  teaching  us  to'abhor  deception.
They  nourish  poison,  which  is  deadly  (Numb.  xxi.  9),  teaching  us  to  detest  malignity
(see  Isa.  xii.  24,  margin ;  Hom.  iii.  13).  The  worm  of  the  damned  dieth  not  (Isa.  Ix  vi.  24  ;
Mark  ix.  44).  2.  Those  that  have  four  feet,  "  Whatsoever  goeth  upon  all  four."  (1).
The  weasel  and  the  ferret  are  remarkable  for  their  stealthy  sliding  motion  in  closing
upon  their  prey.  They  teach  us  that  slyness  and  treachery  are  an  aggravation  of
violence,  which  should  be  held  in  abomination.  The  "  mouse  "  (ver.  29)  is  to  be  taken  a»
the  representative  of  everything  of  the  mus  kind  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  say  what  animal
is  meant  by  the  word  (av)  rendered  "  tortoise."  By  some  it  is  thought  to  be  the  crocodile ;
by  others  the  toad.  Its  name  indicates  some  habit  of  swelling,  and  may  teach  us  ta
abominate  all  impudence,  ostentation,  and  vanity.  (2)  The  animal  called  "  chameleon  "■
(ver.  30)  is  by  some  thought  to  be  the  mongoose,  a  creature  which  eats  snakes,  rats,,
mice,  and  other  vermin ;  while  Bochart  concludes  that  the  cJiameleon  is  intended  by  the
word  we  translate  "  mole."  Creatures  of  the  lizard  kind,  excepting  the  aquatic  sort,,
such  as  the  crocodile,  live  on  flies.  God  makes  some  unclean  creatures  useful  in  exter-
minating others ;  so  he  deals  amongst  wicked  nations,  punishing  them  by  one  another
in  their  turn.  3.  Those  that  have  more  feet.  (1)  Under  this  description  we  have  centi-
pedes, caterpillars,  perhaps,  and  innumerable  creatures,  with  legs  more  in  number  than
four.  Amongst  these  there  is  scope  for  naturalists  to  describe  qualities  all  which  wil
convey  moral  lessons.  (2)  The  one  thing  we  mark  in  creatures  that  "multiply  feet,*
as  the  Hebrew  expresses  it,  is  the  slowness  yet  steadiness  and  stillness  of  their  progress.
The  stealthy,  insinuating  false  teachers  who  troubled  the  early  Churches,  and  who  have
their  representatives  in  modern  times,  are  compared  to  these  creeping  things  (see  2  Tim.
iii.  6 ;  Jude  4).

n.  Thk  laws  of  contamination.  These  are  ranged  under  two  heads :  1.  Th*
polluting  of  persons.  (1)  This  is  done  by  their  touching  the  carcase  of  an  unclean
creature.  Whatsoever  is  unfit  for  food  must  not  be  touched  (see  Gen.  iii.  3).  Whom
we  cannot  commune  with  we  must  aroia.  (2)  It  may  be  done  by  their  touching  the
:arca«e  of  a  creature  originally  clean  that  has  died  of  itself.    Because  in  this  case  it


xa.  XI.  1—47]  THE  BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.  18!


40uld  not  be  a  type  of  Christ,  who  died  voluntarily,  for  he  had  no  sin  of  his  own  tc
doom  him  to  die.  All  intercourse  of  Christians  should  be  in  Christ,  who  is  our  life.  2.
ThepoUuting  of  thingn.  (1)  Vessels  of  any  sort  are  lendered  unclean  by  contact  with
the  carcase  of  an  unclean  thing.  These  represent  human  beings  in  the  capacity  of
•lervants,  whether  to  God  or  man  (Rom.  ix.  21 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  20,  21).  Some  being  polluted
■■re  to  be  broken,  to  show  that  sin  leads  to  destruction  (Rom.  ix.  22).  Others  may  be
purified  by  water,  to  show  that  sin  may  be  removed  by  the  sanctifying  grace  of  the  Spirit
of  God.  There  is  a  happy  time  coming  (see  Zech.  xiv.  20,  21).  (2)  Clean  meat  may
liecome  polluted  by  contact  with  anything  unclean.  This  law  teaches  that  "  evil  com-
munications corrupt  good  manners."  (3)  If  an  unclean  thing  fall  into  a  fountain  or
well  in  which  there  is  plenty  of  water,  it  does  not  render  the  water  unclean  (ver.  36).
The  living  water  is  an  emblem  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  cannot  be  rendered  unholy  by
anything  that  sinners  may  do.  For  a  like  reason,  perhaps,  seed  that  is  to  be  sown,
which  is  a  figure  of  Christ,  cannot  be  rendered  impure  (ver.  37).  But  if  water  be  put
^[jon  the  seed  for  any  other  purpose,  the  figure  is  changed  and  the  case  is  altered
<ver.  38).— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  11 — 13. — 77ie  abominable  thing.  All  the  "  unclean  "  animals  were  spoken  of  as
-"  abominable."  The  Israelites  were  to  learn  to  regard  all  creatures  which  were  forbidden
^or  food  as  offensive  in  their  sight.  Many  of  those  prohibited  were,  foi  one  reason  or
another,  objects  of  natural  aversion ;  fitting,  tlierefore,  to  be  types  and  pictures  of  "  that
abominable  thing  which  God  hates  "  (Jer.  xliv.  4).  Probably  nothing  in  nature  affords
such  a  vivid  conception  of  that  which  is  loathsome  and  disgusting  as  certain  members
of  the  animal  world.  "The  ugliness  and  spitefulness  of  the  camel,  .  .  .  the  filthy
isenguality  of  the  hog,  the  voracious  appetency  of  the  dog,  the  wolf,  and  the  hyena,  the
ravage  ferocity  Of  the  tiger,  the  sluggishness  of  the  sloth,  the  eagle  clutching  innocence
in  its  talons,  the  vulture  gorging  on  putrescence,  the  slimy  fish  that  creeps  among  the
-mud,  the  snake  watching  in  the  grass,  the  scaly  thing  that  crawls  on  all  the  land  and
in  all  the  sea;" — here  we  have  a  striking  and  almost  terrible  picture  of  the  repulsive-
•ness  of  sin.  The  training  of  the  Hebrew  mind  to  look  on  "  unclean  "  animals  with
^eatest  aversion  helped  them  to  view  sin  in  the  light  in  which  God  would  have  us
•regard  it,  viz. —

I.  As  A  THINO  WHICH  HE  HATES  UTTEBLT.  "  It  IS  Bveu  an  abomination  unto  him,''
■it  is  "  that  abominable  thing  which  he  hates."  He  is  "  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold
■evil,  and  cannot  look  on  iniquity."  The  falseness,  the  impurity,  the  grossness,  the
oppression,  the  selfishness,  the  profanity,  the  ingratitude  of  human  nature,  are  as  unen-
durable in  God's  sight — things  from  which  he  turns  with  as  pained  and  troubled  an  eye —
es  are  the  most  revolting  actions  of  the  unclean  among  the  beasts  of  the  field  or  the  ivptiles
that  crawl  on  the  earth,  in  our  esteem.  Language  fails  to  express  the  idea ;  the  vilest
babits  of  the  lowest  creatures  will  alone  convey  the  thought  of  the  repulsiveness  of  sin
in  the  sight  of  God.

II.  As  A  THING  WHICH  THE  HOLT  HATE.  Holy  angels,  the  "  spirits  of  just  men
made  perfect,"  holy  men  on  earthj — all  holy  spirits,  like  the  Holy  One  himself,  hate
sin,  shrink  from  the  sight  of  it,  regard  it  "  even  as  an  abomination."  David  records
for  us  his  intolerance  of  iniquity  (Ps.  ci.).  Peter  tells  us  of  the  vexation  of  Lot's  righteous
6oal  with  the  unlawful  deeds  and  filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked  (2  Pet.  ii.  7,  8).
The  message  that  cumes  from  the  attitude  of  the  holy  is,  "  Ye  that  love  the  Lord,
kate  (n)j7"(Ps.  xovii.  10).

III.  As  A  THINO  WHICH  WE  MUST  LEAKN  TO  HATE.  1.  If  We  are  numbered  among
the  holy,  we  are  hating  sin  ;  as  far  as  our  spirit  is  sanctified  by  the  truth  and  ty  the
Spirit  of  God,  so  far  sin  is  to  us  "  that  abominable  thing."  2.  But  we  need  to  learn
more  of  its  hideousness,  and  to  shrink  from  it  with  more  of  Divine  repugnance.  3.  And
if  we  are  practising  any  evil  Labit,  and  therefore  cherishing  it,  and  not  only  enduring
but  even  loving  ^i.  there  must  cume  a  time  of  disenchantment  when  the  evil  thing
will  assume  to  our  eye  its  own  hateful  aspect.  It  is  (1)  a  painful  thing  to  consider
tiiat  we  may  be,  with  so  many  others,  liking  that  which  we  should  be  loathing ;
choosing  and  cherishing  that  which  we  should  be  indignantly  repelling  or  expelling.
((2)  A  needful  thing  to  keep  an  open  eye  to  see  that  to  which  we  may  now  be  blind ;
io  be  willing  to  learn  that  which  our  true  friends  may  have  to  tearh  us ;  to  be  read  v


182  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xi.  l-r4T,

and  eager  to  receive  enlightenment  from  God  (Ps.  cxxxix.  23).  (3)  A  fearful  thing
to  think  how  many  live  and  die  in  the  love  of  that  which  is  loathsome,  ftnd  will  only
learn  in  retributive  scenes  what  an  abominable  thing  is  sin. — 0.

Ver.  3. — Eedlth  a  duty  as  well  as  a  blessing.  Undoubtedly  there  were  moral  and
religious  grounds  for  the  legislation  of  this  chapter  (see  subsequent  Homilies).  It  was
designed  to  express  and  convey  religious  truth.  But  we  may  well  believe  that  the
Divine  purpose  therein  was,  in  part,  sanitary.  It  was  chiefly  as  the  Father  of  their
spirits  and  Sovereign  of  their  souls  that  God  thus  spoke  on  the  "  clean  and  the  un-
clean ; "  but  it  was  also  as  the  Author  of  their  bodily  frames.  He  desired  that  those
who  were  to  be  known  for  ever  as  his  people  should  be  healthy  in  frame  as  well  as
pure  in  heart.  The  injunctions  given  in  this  chapter  tended  to  that  result.  Those
animals  there  allowed  are  the  best  fitted  for  food.  Human  scienos  confirms,  here  as
elsewhere,  Divine  instruction.  "  The  grain-eating  and  ruminative  animals,  whicb
divide  the  hoof  and  chew  the  cud,  are  altogether' the  most  healthful  and  delightful  for
the  table."  The  flesh  of  swine,  interdicted  by  sacred  Law,  has  been  proved  to  be  the
source  of  hurtful  and  repulsive  maladies.  No  nation  on  earth  has  been  healthier  than
the  Hebrew.  While  providing  for  the  religious  education  and  moral  security  of  his
people,  God  was  concerning  himself  for  their  bodily  well  being.

Health  is  the  greatest  of  earthly  blessinu;s.  Without  it  we  can  do  little  and  enjoy
nothing.  With  it  we  can  accomplish  much  and  triumph  over  almost  every  obstacle  in
our  way.  A  sound  constitution  is  a  thing  to  be  profoundly  thankful  for.  But  it  is  for
us  not  only  to  accept  this  great  gift  thankfully,  but  also  to  guard  it  diligently  and
religiously.  There  are  four  reasons  why  we  should  regard  it  as  a  sacred  duty  to  pre-
serve the  health  of  our  body  by  those  obvious  means  which  are  within  our  reach
(activity,  moderation,  cleanliness,  contentedness,  etc.).

I.  Because  the  human  body  is  the  fair  workmanship  or  God.  That  which  ©ui
heavenly  Father  has  made  so  exquisitely  (Ps.  cxxxix.  14)  we  should  treat  as  a  thing
to  be  protected,  to  be  preserved  in  its  excellency.  "Everything  is  beautiful  in  ita
season  ; "  every  period  and  phase  of  our  humanity — smiling  in&ncy,  blithe  childhood,
sunny  youth,  vigorous  young  manhood,  grave  prime,  grey-headed  age,  etc.

II.  Because  the  human  bodt  is  the  home  and  oroan  of  the  human  spirit.  In
our  bodies  we  ourselves  dwell — our  thinking,  reasoning,  loving,  hoping,  striving  selves.
Our  bodily  faculties  are  the  organs  of  our  spiritual  activities ;  therefore  they  are  sacred.

III.  Because  the  human  body  is  the  dwelling-place  op  the  Holy  Ghost.  (1  Cor.
iii.  16, 17  ;  vi.  19,  20;  2  Cor.  vi.  16).

IV.  Because  health  is  a  condition  of  usefulness.  It  is  true  that  men  have  been
found  (like  Kichard  Baxter)  io  work  for  years  in  sickness  and  pain,  but  it  is  only  a  few
rare  spirits  that  can  triumph  thus  over  bodily  infirmity.  If  we  desire  to  bear  the  fullest
possible  witness  and  to  do  the  noblest  possible  work  for  our  God  and  our  generation,
we  must  not  be  indifferent  to  the  state  of  our  body.  The  stronger  and  healthier  we
are  in  our  physical  frame  the  more  cheerful  will  be  the  tone  of  our  spirit,  the  more
attractive  will  he  the  aspect  of  our  life,  the  more  strenuous  and  the  longer  continued
will  be  the  kbours  of  our  hand. — C.

Vers.  4 — 47. — Clean  and  unclean — a  lesson  on  tin.  Why  all  these  minute  distinc-
tions? Why  disallow  many  creatures  for  food,  the  flesh  of  which  is  not  unwholesome?
What  means  all  this  elaborate  system  of  the  clean  and  the  unclean,  of  that  which  may
be  taken  and  that  which  must  be  strictly  and  piously  shimned  ?    It  was —

I.  An  early  lesson  in  a  religious  school.  The  people  of  God  were  in  process
of  spiritual  cultivation ;  they  were  being  thus  trained  for  our  benefit,  that  they  might
give  to  all  lands  and  times  a  body  of  sacred  truth  which  it  took  them  long  to  leam.
God  would,  with  this  end  in  view,  implant  within  them,  deeply  rooted,  the  idea  of
holiness.  This  distinction  of  clean  from  unclean  was  a  daily  lesson  in  sanctity,  in
the  conception  of  separateness  of  the  pure  from  the  impure,  of  that  which  might  be
partaken  of  from  that  which  might  not  be  touched,  of  that  which  could  be  liked  and
chosen  from  that  which  was  to  be  detested  and  avoided.  They  could  not  fail  to  under-
stand, they  could  not  fail  to  be  profoundly  impressed  with  the  thought,  that  all  around
them  Wire  things  which,  for  God's  sake,  in  obedience  to  his  plain  commandment,  they


CH.  XI.  1—47.]  THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  183


must  shrink  from  and  shun.  So  the  idea  of  holiness,  of  sacred  separation,  of  freedom
from  that  which  defiles  (ver.  44),  was  planted  within  the  soul,  and  grew  in  the  nation ;
and  it  was  ready  when  the  time  came  for  the  great  redeeming  purpose  of  God  to  be
revealed.    There  was  a  people  well  schooled  in  the  essential  idea  of  holiness.

II.  A  BEMTNDER  ov  THE  PREVALENCE  OP  SIN.  Connecting  unoleanness,  defilement,
with  so  many  living  creatures,  there  would  he  before  their  eyes  continual  reminders
of  that  which  was  evil ;  they  would  be  constantly  or  frequently  put  in  remembrance
that  they  lived  in  a  world  of  sin  and  danger.  "  All  living  nature  ,  .  .  transmuted
into  a  thousand  tongues  to  remind  and  warn  of  sin  and  uncleanness.  The  living  monitor
would  meet  the  devout  Jew  at  every  point,  and  call  to  him  in  words  of  sacred  admo-
nition from  every  direction.  Looking  out  at  his  door,  the  passing  of  a  camel  or  a  bird
of  prey  would  be  a  memorial  to  him  ...  to  guard  the  approaches  of  uncleanness.
Sitting  down  under  his  vine  or  fig  tree,  or  going  forth  to  gather  flowers,  the  insects
crawling  on  the  leaves  would  be  monitors  of  the  presence  of  evil,"  etc.  (Seiss).

III.  A  PICTURE  OP  THE  MANY-SIDED  NATURE  OF  SIN.  The  uuclean  animals  being
associated  in  )iis  mind  with  sin,  the  Jew  would  naturally  connect  particular  sins
with  those  animals  whose  habits  suggested  the  thought :  the  fox  would  remind  him
of  the  evil  of  treachery  and  low  cunning ;  the  tiger,  of  ferocity ;  the  hog,  of  sensuality ;
the  vulture,  of  gluttony,  etc. ;  he  would  see  before  him  living  pictures  of  various  forms
Df  sin,  and  would  be  reminded  that  evil  in  every  form,  temptation  in  every  phase,
were  about  him,  and  that  vigilance  was  needful  at  every  hour  of  his  life,  at  every
step  of  his  course.

We  may  learn  from  these  thoughts :  1.  That  holiness  includes,  if  it  is  not  contained
in,  separateness  of  soul  and  life  from  that  which  is  evil.  Though  not  minute  legal
precepts,  yet  other  voices  say  clearly,  forcibly,  imperatively  to  us,  "  Be  ye  separate ;
touch  not  the  unclean  thing."  2.  That  sin,  with  its  taint  and  temptation,  is  on  every
hand;  and  not  only  all  around  us  but,  what  is  more  and  worse,  within  us.  "Watch
and  pray,"  say  the  heavenly  voices.  3.  That  sin  is  multiform  in  our  day  and  land
as  it  was  in  theirs.  It  approaches  by  every  avenue,  drapes  itself  in  every  costume,
assumes  every  air  and  attitude,  must  be  promptly  recognized,  wisely  parried,  stoutly
fought,  patiently  and  repeatedly  subdued. — C.

Vers.  4 — 47. — Clean  and  unclean  —three  side  truths.  I.  That  GtoD  does  some  thinqb
TO  PROVE  us.  There  were  plain,  palpable  reasons  of  a  sanitary  or  moral  nature  for  many  of
these  prohibitions ;  for  many  others  there  were,  doubtless,  valid  reasons  which  escape  our
view.  Probably  some  remain  for  which  there  was  no  reason  in  the  nature  of  the  case,
but  it  seemed  good  to  the  Divine  Ruler  of  Israel  to  issue  them  as  tests  of  obedience.
Such  was  the  prohibition  of  the  forbidden  fruit  in  Edefi.  Such  were  certain  statutes
on  other  subjects.  Occasionally  these  laws  regulating  the  dietary  must  have  been
severely  testing.  The  fisherman,  e.g.,  must  have  been  sometimes  tried  when  he  landed
fine  palatable  fish  which  were  forbidden,  and  which  had  to  be  cast  again  into  the  sea.
God's  dealing  may  seem  arbitrary  to  us.  Enough  that  he,  our  Father,  who  has
given  us  so  much,  who  has  indeed  given  us  everything  we  are  and  have,  and  to  whom
we  are  looking  for  everything  we  shall  be  and  shall  enjoy  in  the  furthest  future,  holds
out  of  reach  or  takes  back  again  that  which  we  would  fain  have  or  keep.  God  tries
us,  and  we  must  submit  with  filial  trustfulness  and  cheerfulness.

II.  That  in  doubtful  oases  wb  do  well  to  abstain.  "  There  was  a  difficulty  in
determining  the  case  of  the  camel  whether  or  not  it  really  divides  the  hoof  wholly,  and
the  case  of  the  hare  whether  it  really  chews  the  cud."  These,  however,  are  prohiijited.
We  are  often  placed  in  circumstances  in  which  we  are  doubtful  as  to  the  legality  of
pleasures  to  be  enjoyed  or  profits  to  be  realized.  In  such  cases  it  is  well  to  keep  our
"  hands  off."  Abstinence  will  result  in  an  infinitesimal  loss ;  indulgence  might  end  in
serious  mischief  (see  1  Thess.  v.  22).

III.  That  wb  abb  most  importantly  affected  by  the  things  which  wb
AFFBOPRIATB.  Stringent  and  detailed  dietary  laws  may  seem  to  us  to  be  a  redundant
part  of  revelation.  They  would  not  have  been  added,  probably,  but  for  the  direct
religions,  aspect  they  wore.  But,  apart  from  their  primary  object,  they  teach  us  the
valuable  lesson  that  it  is  a  matter  of  serious  if  not  supreme  importance  to  be  appro-
priating right  things  every  day.   1.  Right  food  for  the  tody.  Many  men  are  less  devout^


184  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  m.  1— 47.

less  nsefal,  less  excellent  and  admirable  in  heart  and  life,  because  of  the  unguarded
and  intemperate  way  in  which  they  eat  and  drink.  We  may  be  neither  gluttons  nor
drunkards ;  yet  we  may  lower  our  character  and  lessen  our  influence  by  ill-regulated
appetite  in  eating  and  drinking.  Profoundly  true  and  urgently  denianded  as  were
the  words  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  xv.  11),  "not  that  -which  goeth  into  the  mouth  defileth
a  man,"  we  may  be  sure  that  Jesus  Christ  would  have  us  exercise  such  self-
restraint,  and,  if  need  be,  such  self-denial  as  will  keep  us  from  all  gvossness  of  thought
and  habit,  from  all  degeneracy  of  spirit  (Matt.  xvi.  24 ;  see  1  Cor.  x.  31).  2.  Bight
thoughts  for  the  mind.  That  which  the  mind  is  appropriating,  day  by  day,  is
determining  its  nature.  It  makes  all  the  differeuce  whether,  mentally,  we  are  eating
and  drinking  that  which  is  pure,  wholesome,  clean,  refining,  or  that  which  is  gross,
noxious,  unclean,  deteriorating.  How  immeasurably  important  the  companions  we
choose,  the  books  we  read,  the  conversations  in  which  we  indulge !  3.  Right  resolutiont
for  the  sovl.  The  soul  is  entertaining  desires  and  coming  to  conclusions,  on  larger  and
lesser  things,  every  da3'.  If  these  be  unworthy,  it  is  growing  in  evil;  if  these  be
honourable  and  excellent,  it  is  growing  in  rectitude,  in  spiritual  beauty,  in  usefulness,
as  the  days  and  months  go  by. — C.

Vprs.  46,  47. — Clean  and  unclean — the  abolition  of  the  law.  "This  is  the  law"
(ver.  46).     But  "it  is  the  law"  no  longer;  consider —

I.  The  fact  that  this  Levitical  law  has  been  set  aside.  1.  Perhaps  by  the
word  of  our  Lord  in  Mark  vii.  15,  especially  taking  the  translation  of  ver.  19,  "  This  he
said,  making  all  meats  pure  "  (Farrar,  'Life  of  Paul,'  vol.  i.  p.  276).  2.  Certainly  by
the  heavenly  voice  and  the  apostolic  conduct  (Acts  x.  14,  '48).  3.  By  united  apostolic
agreement  (Acts  xv.  22 — 29).  4.  By  inspired  Epistles  (1  Cor.  viii.  8;  Bom.  xiv.  4;
1  Tim.  iv.  3,  4).  Clearly  we  are  not  under  any  obligation  to  observe  these  statutes.
Ve  learn  from  this  our  immunity —

II.  That  such  pictohial  teaching  is  not  now  needed.  What  moral  and
■piritual  lessons  were  to  be  conveyed  by  these  injunctions  and  by  the  habits  of  thought
and  deed  they  created,  have  been  learnt;  the  rudimentary  lesson  is  no  longer  needed.
We  are  supposed  to  understand  or  to  be  able  to  learn  in  other  ways  what  God  means
by  holiness,  how  hatefid  sin  is  in  his  sight,  how  prevalent  it  is,  how  manifold  in  its
shapes  and  colours,  how  sedulously  it  is  to  be  avoided.

III.  That  God  trusts  us  to  act  aright  in  this  matter  op  bodily  nourish-
ment. The  Law  treated  the  race  as  if  it  were  in  its  religious  childhood;  the  gospel
as  if  it  had  attained  to  manhood  (Gal.  iv.  1,  23).  Christ  our  Lord  trusts  us  to
act  wisely  and  faithfully.  W&  must  honour  his  Divine  confidence  in  us.  We  shall  do
80  by :  1.  Intelligent  study  of  what  is  really  wholesome  and  health-giving.  2.  Modera-
tion in  the  use  of  that  which  is  "good  for  food."  3.  Endeavour  to  make  the  body  the
active  servant  of  the  souL — C.

Vers.  24 — 28,  39,  40. — The  significance  of  death.  "  Whosoever  toucheth  the  carcase
•hall  be  unclean."  What  is  the  meaning  of  these  minute  and  striniient  regulations
touching  the  dead  bodies  of  animals,  both  clean  (vers.  39,  40)  and  unclean  (vers.  24 —
28)?    The  answer  to  this  question  is  in  the  fourfold  consideration —

I.  How  MUCH  God  makes  of  death.  Death  is  the  key-note  of  very  much  of  sacred
Scripture.  "  Thou  shalt  die  "  is  a  constantly  recurring  refrain.  "  And  he  died  "  is
a  continually  repeated  statement.  It  was  the  death  of  the  slain  victim  at  the  altar  that
made  expiation  for  the  smner.  It  is  the  death  upon  the  cross  which  constitutes
the  sacrifice  for  the  world's  sin.  The  death  of  the  soul  is  the  awful  punishment
of  guilt  hereafter  as  it  is  on  earth.  It  was  the  death  of  these  animals  that  made  their  '
carcases  unclean.   In  the  Old  Testament  and  New,  God  makes  much  of  death.

II.  The  sigxificance  of  death.  Death  is  odious  and  intolerable  in  God's  sight :
it  must  be  made  to  seem  so  in  man's ;  for :  1.  It  is  the  consequence  of  sin  in  man.  2.  It
is  th&  picture  of  sin  in  man.  3.  It  is  a  reminder  of  the  painful  and  hateful  presents,
of  sin  in  man.

III.  The  avoidablenbss  op  sin.  The  fact  that  the  dead  carcase  could  be  and  must
be  avoided,  and  that  contraction  of  ceremonial  defilement  could  be  prevented,  indicated
to  the  Jew  and  now  intimates  to  us  that  sin  may  be  and  must  be  shimned.    Two


OH.  XL  1—47.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LE\'iTlCUS.  185

tMngs  were  and  are  neoossary :  1.  Carefulness ;  scrupulous  regard  to  the  known  laws
(yers.  32,  34,  38).  2.  Self-sacrifice ;  things  made  unclean  must  be  broken  up,  disused,
castaway,  at  whatever  cost  (vers.  33,  35).

IV.  The  removal  of  the  stain  of  sin.  "It  must  be  put  into  water;  ...  so
it  shall  be  cleansed  "  (ver.  32).    "  There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood,"  etc. — C.

Ver.  44. — Sacred  separation.  "  Ye  shall  therefore  sanctify  yourselves."  The  root-
thought  of  sanctity  is  separateness.  A  man  sanctifies  himself  when  he  separates  him-
self irom  that  which  is  evil  and  impure;  so  with  a  nation  or  a  family.  These  strict
laws  concerning  the  clean  and  the  unclean  had  important  reference  to—

I.  National  separation.  1.  God  purposed  to  establish  a  holy  nation.  He  designed,
by  varioiiB  methods,  to  separate  for  himself  a  people  free  from  the  idolatry  and  the  im-
morality of  the  race.  2.  He  therefore  determined  to  separate  Israel  from  international
intercourse.  The  people  of  God  were  not  to  have  any  outside  social  relations,  were  not
to  intermarry  with  neighbouring  nations.  3.  Therefore,  beside  geographical  obstacles
and  positive  prohibitions,  God  interposed  a  precise  and  separating  dietary.  This  created
a  strong  barrier  between  his  people  and  all  others.  The  laws  of  food  affect  us  power-
fully in  our  social  relations.  Free  intercourse  is  impossible  without  hospitality,  and
hospitality  is  impossible  where  distinctions  as  to  eating  and  drinking  are  not  only
numerous  but  sacred  and  binding.  A  Hebrew  could  not  sit  down  to  the  table  of  an
Egyptian  or  an  Arab  without  offending  his  host  and  sinning  against  his  God.  More-
over, such  distinctions  would  generate  and  foster  feelings  of  moral  aversion  toward  those
who  did  not  observe  them,  and  this  would  be  another  strong  fence,  helping  to  maintain
separateness.  The  Jews  may  have  carried  this  far  beyond  the  original  intention  of  the
Divine  Legislator;  but  at  that  point  in  the  religious  history  of  the  world,  all  considera-
tions were  second,  longo  intervallo,  to  the  one  supreme  end  of  keeping  Israel  separate
and  pure.  God  has,  in  his  providence,  divided  the  human  race  into  nations  by  separating
seas  and  mountains ;  there  are  many  obvious  advantages  in  this :  it  makes  government,
and  therefore  order  and  security,  a  possible  thing.  It  makes  possible  national  influence
for  good.  How  much  of  benefit  and  blessing  to  Europe  and  the  world  has  arisen
and  will  arise  from  the  fact  that  he  who  is  Lord  of  the  sea  and  the  rock  has  cut  a
channel  and  filled  it  with  the  dividing  waters  between  the  continent  and  this  Heaven-
tauo;ht  land  of  ours  (Ps.  cxlvii.  20) !

II.  Family  separation.  "God  setteth  the  solitary  in  families"  (Ps.  Ixviii.  6).
But  he  thereby  not  only  makes  the  lonely  to  be  social  and  joyous ;  he  separates  one
small  group  of  souls  from  all  others.  The  family  unites  its  members  into  one  fellowship ;
it  also  divides  the  nation  into  separate  circles.  It  is  a  fence  which  shuts  out  as  well  as
it  shuts  in.  It  is  one  of  the  most  imperative  and  sacred  duties  which  God  lays  upon
us  who  are  parents  to  see  that  no  injurious,  no  poisonous,  no  ruinous  element,  in  the
shape  of  a  contaminating  human  soul,  is  admitted  within  the  gates  of  family  life.

in.  Individual  sepaeation.  With  us  (speaking  generally)  God  wills  how  separate
the  nation  shall  be;  the  human  parent  determines  how  separate  the  family  shall  be;
each  individual  soul  must  decide  how  separate  he  and  his  life  shall  be.  There  is
a  sin-stained,  corrupted  world  encompassing  us ;  we  must  choose,  for  ourselves,  how  far
we  will  enter  it,  how  free  our  intercourse  with  it  shall  be.  There  are,  however,  some
general  princi|iles.  1.  We  must  have  something  to  do  with  it  (John  xvii.  15;  1  Cor.
9).  2  We  must  impose  some  restraints  on  ourselves ;  we  must  draw  some  lines  of
limitation;  we  must  "sanctify  (separate)  ourselves."  3.  We  should  refrain  from
familiar  association  with  the  openly  ungodly ;  for  by  such  familiarity  we  should  identify
ourselves  with  their  principles  and  countenance  their  evil  ways.  4.  We  should  avoid
intimacy  with  the  irreligious  and  undecided ;  for  if  we  mingle  continually  with  those
who  walk  on  lower  spiritual  ground,  we  shall  surely  fall  to  their  level  (Prov.  xiii.
20).— C.

Ver.  45. — ffigh  reasons  for  holineti.  The  height  of  human  character  depends  on  the
nature  of  the  motives  by  which  men  allow  themselves  to  be  governed.  It  is  certain
(1)  that  we  are  all  actuated  by  a  great  variety  of  motives;  (2)  that  we  are  affected  by
many  considerations  in  our  choice  of  the  better  path;  (3)  that  of  the  right  motives
which  actuate  us  snme  are  much  higher  than  others ;  (4)  that  while  it  is  well  to  be


IM  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUa  [oh.  ii.  1—47


moved  by  every  honourable  impulse,  we  should  seek  to  be  mainly  moved  by  the  highest
and  best  of  all.

Here  we  have  three  of  the  highest  posrible  motives  for  the  best  possible  estate,  three
high  reasons  for  holiness.

L  60D,  IN  HIS   SOTEBEIONTT,  COMMANDS  IT,  AND   IT  18  CUB  BIOHEBT  DUTY  TO  OBEY

HIM.  "  I  am  .  .  .  yofur  Qod :  ye  shall."  Duty  is  one  of  the  highest  of  all  considera-
tions, if  not  positively  the  very  highest.  Our  duty  to  obey  God  when  he  says  "  ye
shall"  is  clearly  the  highest  of  all  duties.

II.  God  himself  is  the  Holt  One,  and  it  is  our  hiqhkbt  honoub  to  be  like  him.
"  Te  shall  be  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."  He  is  the  "  Holy  One  of  Israel,"  the  "  holy,  holy,
holy  Lord  God  of  hosts."  "  He  is  light,  and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  There  is  no
conceivable  ambition  man  can  cherish  that  is  so  high  as  the  aspiration  to  be  like  God,
the  righteous  Father  of  souls  (see  Matt.  v.  48).

III.  Ck)D,  OtIB  EeDEEMEB,  DES1EE8  IT,  AND  IT  IS  OUB  HIGHEST  SATISFACTION  TO  PLEASE

HIM.  "  I  am  the  Lord  that  bringeth  you  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  If  there  were
•nything  we  desired  to  withhold  from  him  who  is  "  our  God,"  the  God  from  whom  we
came,  to  whom  we  belong,  and  before  whom  we  stand,  still  there  can  be  nothing  we
will  keep  back  from  him  who  is  our  Redeemer,  who  has  "  brought  us  out  of  the  land
of  Egypt,  out  of  the  house  of  bondage."  "  To  Jesus,  our  Atoning  Priest,"  we  bring
(1)  our  promptest  and  devoutest  attention,  (2)  our  unquestioning  faith,  (3)  our  most
cheerful  obedience.     We  run  to  keep  his  commandments. — C.

Ver.  45. — Holiness  and  its  requirements.  When  a  man  has  purified  himself  and
taken  upon  himself  vows  of  devotedness  to  God,  then  is  he  prepared  to  be  the  recipient
of  Divine  communications.  After  Aaron's  consecration,  he  is  instructed  both  separately,
and  conjointly  with  Moses  (ch.  z.  8;  xi.  1).  The  legislator  and  the  priest  act  in
harmony  under  a  theocracy ;  the  laws  of  God  are  the  statutes  of  the  nation.

I.  The  sanctification  required  of  the  people  op  God.  1.  It  is  a  necessary  eon-
sequence  of  his  character  and  of  the  relationship  they  sustain  to  him.  What  the  Master
loves,  the  servant  must  love ;  what  the  King  is,  that  his  subjects  become.  Sanctity  is
the  glory  of  God.  To  be  untarnished,  free  from  taint,  this  is  his  prerogative  and
separates  him  from  all  idol  gods.  Holiness  is  not  so  much  one  special  attribute  as
the  all-embracing  purity,  the  bright  cloud  that  invests  his  excellences  with  spotless
splendour.  Evil  flies  from  his  presence.  Unless,  therefore,  his  people  manifest  this
separation  from  impurity,  how  can  he  take  delight  in  them  and  bless  them  ?  Unless
they  reflect  something  of  his  image,  how  can  he  acknowledge  them  as  his  children  ?
He  says,  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."  2.  3%e  intention  of  Qod  has  been  signified  in
delivering  his  people  from  bondage.  He  declares  himself  Jehovah,  the  bringer-up  of
the  Israelites  from  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  order  to  be  to  them  for  a  God  (Elohim).  This
same  design  is  expressed  in  ch.  xx.  26,  "  I  the  Lord  am  holy,  and  have  severed  you
from  other  people,  that  ye  should  be  mine."  To  what  purpose  was  the  yoke  of  idolatrous
sinful  Egypt  broken,  if  Israel  remained  impure  and  unholy  ?  The  intent  of  Jehovah
would  be  frustrated.  A  similar  line  of  argument  is  pursued  in  1  Pet.  i.  15 — 19,  where
the  precept  of  the  text  is  enforced  by  reference  to  the  cost  of  redemption — not  corruptible
things,  but  the.  precious  blood  of  Christ  being  the  price  of  our  ransom.  We  make  the
grace  of  God  and  the  gift  of  his  Son  of  none  effect  if  we  continue  in  the  former  sins.
3.  This  same  deliverance  is  appealed  to  as  a  claim  upon  his  people's  gratitude  and
obedience.  The  very  kindness  of  Jehovah  in  emancipating  the  nation  and  guiding  them
through  the  wilderness  constituted  a  valid  reason  for  abstaining  from  all  that  God  for-
bade. Unworthy  are  they  of  being  the  recipients  of  mercy  who  do  not  feel  themselves
bound  thereby  to  please  this  merciful  Lord.  Shall  not  the  love  of  Christ  constrain  us
to  live  unto  him,  acknowledging  that  we  are  henceforth  not  our  own?  Conduct
actuated  by  such  motives  is  not  servitude.  It  accords  with  the  dictates  of  reason,
conscience,  and  emotion.  Compared  with  the  bondage  from  which  Christ  releases  u*
his  yoke  is  easy,  and  his  burden  light  indeed.

II.  What  this  banotifioation  involves.  1.  Adherence  to  distinctions  unknown
to  the  world  in  general.  Some  animals  were  to  be  regarded  as  totally  unfit  for  food,
others  unclean  under  certain  conditions.  It  was  not  the  business  of  these  teachers  to
make  the  distinctions,  but  to  explain  and  enforce  them.    The  popular  classification  was


OH.  3u.  I— i7.J  THK  BOOK' OF  LEVITICUS.  187


adopted — it  would  be  the  only  one  intelligible.  Even  in  trivial  matters  GoiTi  people
are  to  be  distinguished  from  the  heathen.  These  distinctions  were  not  simply  arbitrary  j
they  depended  on  considerations  sanitary,  ethical,  and  instinctive.  Thankful  for  the
relief  the  gospel  afifords  us  from  the  burdensome  ceremonies  of  the  Law,  knowing  that
"  every  creature  of  God  is  good,"  we  have  yet  to  do  all,  whether  we  eat  or  drink,  to  the
glory  of  God.  His  gifts  are  to  be  received  with  thanksgiving,  sanctified  by  the  Word
of  God  and  prayer.  We  are  not  "  subject  to  ordinances  that  perish  with  the  using,"
yet  are  we  to  set  our  affection  on  things  above,  and  to  mortify  our  members  which  are
upon  the  earth ;  observances  which  the  majority  of  mankind  practise  not.  The  line
of  division  between  things  pure  and  defiling  is  plainly  marked  if  we  apply  our  eyes  to
.survey  it.  Others  may  call  us  bigoted,  narrow-minded,  straight-laced,  but  we  prefer
the  commendation  of  our  Master  to  the  good-will  of  men.  2.  Possible  loss  of  property/.
How  vexatious  to  an  Israelite  to  be  obliged  to  destroy  a  vessel  because  it  was  polluted
(ver.  33),  or  a  cooking-range  (ver.  35),  or  some  moistened  seed  (ver.  38)  1  Many  like
a  religion  that  costs  them  nothing,  that  is  not  particular  about  tritles.  Very  real  is
that  man's  religion  who  refuses  to  employ  ill-gotten  gain  or  dishonest  measures,  and
who  would  renounce  connection  with  a  firm  rather  than  be  a  party  to  unjust  proceed-
ings. Pity  that  so  much  evil  should  be  condoned  and  defiling  association  suffered  for
sake  of  the  profit  it  brings  1  If  thy  hand  or  thy  foot,  cause  thee  to  stumble,  cast  it  off.
3.  Continued  care  and  trouble.  To  touch  a  dead  animal  necessitated  ablution  of  the
clothes,  and  the  vessel  which  should  be  accidentally  made  "unclean"  must  be
thoroughly  washed,  and  both  man  and  utensil  remained  ceremonially  unclean  till  the
evening.  At  any  moment  an  Israelite  might  be  compelled  to  repair  the  inroads  of
pollution,  and  constant  caution  was  requisite  to  abstain  from  needlessly  incurring  stain.
The  sanctity  God  desires  is  a  life-long  work,  and  lovers  of  ease  had  better  not  under-
take it.  To  be  like  him  who  was  "  holy,  undefiled,  separate  from  sinners,"  is  to  take
up  the  cross  and  deny  one's  selfc  "  Watch  and  pray  unceasingly  "  must  be  our  motto.
Thanks  be  to  him  who  hath  opened  a  "  fountain  for  sin  and  uncleanness,"  wherein  at
all  seasons  we  may  bathe  and  come  forth  white  as  snow  1  Thus  shall  we  show  forth
the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  us.  Let  us  learn  to  welcome  the  opportunity  of
testifying  our  love  to  him  who  gave  himself  for  us. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  1 — 47. — Holiness.  Ver.  45,  "  For  I  am  the  Lord  that  bringeth  you  up  out  of
the  land  of  Egypt,  to  be  your  God :  ye  shall  therefore  be  holy,  for  I  am  holy."

L  The  basis  on  which  holiness  bests.  The  Divine  call.  1.  All  religion  must
find  its  real  strength  as  well  as  its  root  in  Divine  love.  "  We  love  him  because  he  first
loved  us."  A  redeemed  life  must  be  holy.  "  He  that  hath  this  hope  in  him  purifieth
himself,  even  as  he  is  pure."  We  begin  our  holiness  with  the  cross  of  Christ.  He  has
cleansed  us  with  his  blood,  therefore  we  must  be  clean.  2.  The  deliverance  effected  by
God  for  his  people  is  made  the  pledge  of  an  eternal  life  by  the  special  covenant,  which
separated  them  from  all  others.  We  must  have  fact  and  positive  revelation  and  direct
promise  to  fall  back  upon.  He  also  calls  us  to  himself,  declares  himself  our  God.  He
says,  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy."  Likeness  to  God  is  our  rule ;  fellowship  with  God
is  our  strength  and  joy.

II.  Thk  natubb  and  method  op  holiness.  1.  The  holiness  which  God  requires
is  personal  holiness — holiness  in  lile,  manners,  habits,  food,  everything  which  concerns
the  man  himself.  The  distinctions  of  clean  and  unclean  animals,  etc.,  refer  to  natural
laws  of  health  and  life.  2.  Holiness  must  be  the  characteristic  of  Qod's  people  as  a
community.  The  laws  of  cleanliness  separated  the  nation  as  a  whole  from  other
nations.  They  applied  to  all  classes,  and  to  every  individual.  The  Church  must  be  a
holy  Church.  The  lack  of  discipline  is  a  terrible  hindrance  to  the  advance  of  religion.
We  must  keep  off  the  unclean.  The  covenant  blessing  will  not  be  given  unless  the
covenant  law  be  observed.  "Let  a  man  examine  himself."  Defilement  of  sacred
things  is  judgment  to  ourselves.  3.  The  holiness  of  this  world's  life  is  a  promise  and
prediction  of  the  higher  holiness  of  the  everlasting  life.  The  clean  and  unclean  animals
were  distinguished  that  the  taint  of  dea  th  migh  t  be  removed  in  the  case  of  those  fit  for  food.
The  distinction  itself  seemed  to  say  all  would  be  clean  to  you  if  it  were  not  for  death.
When  we  are  above  the  conditions  of  earthly  life,  then  to  be  holy  will  be  to  be  nally
like  God — ^not  in  a  mere  negative  purity  of  not  being  contaminated,  not  Binning;  but


138


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XII.  1 — 8.


being  spiritually  created  afresh,  with  immortal  natures,  with  perfect  hearts  to  serve
Grod,  with  life  interpenetrated  by  his  Divine  f^lory.  The  holiness  of  the  best  Christian
on  earth  is  but  an  imperfect  thing,  largely  a.  holiness  of  external  regulation  and  separa-
tion from  the  unclean ;  but  the  holiness  of  the  angelic  nature  will  be  a  real  and  positivs
larticipation  of  the  Divine. — li.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  Xn.

Unoleannesb  debited  fbou  ohildbibth.
As  there  is  a  natural  disgust  felt  for  some
kinds  of  food,  which  serves  as  a  fonndation
for  the  precepts  of  the  last  chapter,  so
there  is  an  instinct  which  regards  some  of
the  concomitants  of  childbirth,  and  some
diseases,  as  foul  and  defiling.  In  accord-
ance with  these  instincts,  purifying  rites
are  commanded  for  the  restoration  of  those
affected  to  ceremonial  cleanness.  These
instincts  and  consequent  regulations  re-
specting women  in  childbirth  are  found  in
very  many  different  nations.  "  The  Hindoo
law  wouounced  the  mother  of  a  new-born
chMd  to  be  impure  for  forty  days,  required
the  father  to  bathe  as  soon  as  the  birth  had
taken  place,  and  debarred  the  whole  family
for  a  period  from  religious  rites,  while  they
were  'to  confine  themselves  to  an  inward
remembrance  of  the  Deity ; '  in  a  Brahmin
family  this  rule  extended  to  all  relations
within  the  fourtli  degree,  for  ten  days,  at
the  end  of  which  they  had  to  bathe.  Ac-
cording to  the  Parsee  law,  the  mother  and
child  were  bathed,  and  the  mother  had  to  live
in  seclusion  for  forty  days,  after  which  she
had  to  undergo  other  purifying  rites.  The
Arabs  are  said  by  Burckhardt  to  regard
the  mother  as  unclean  for  forty  days.  The
ancient  Greeks  suffered  neither  childbirth
nor  death  to  take  place  within  consecrated
places;  both  mother  and  oliild  were  bathed,
and  the  mother  was  not  allowed  to  approach
an  altar  for  forty  days.  The  term  of  forty
days,  it  is  evident,  was  generally  regarded
as  a  critical  one  for  both  the  mother  and
the  child.  The  day  on  which  the  Romans
gave  the  name  to  the  child— the  eighth  day
for  a  girl,  and  the  ninth  for  a  boy— was
called  ZtMtrioiM  dies,  'the  day  of  purifica-
tion,' because  certain  lustral  rites  in  behalf
«f  the  child  were  performed  on  the  occasion,


and  some  sort  of  offering  was  made.  The
amphidromia  of  the  Greeks  was  a  similar
lustration  for  the  child,  when  the  name  was
given,  probably  between  the  seventh  and
tenth  days  "  (Clark).

Vers.  2— 4.— She  shall  be  nnolean  seven
days.  The  mother  is  to  be  unclean  seven
days,  and  after  that  to  be  in  the  blood  of  her
purifying  three  and  thirty  days  (ver.  4).
The  dittierence  between  these  two  states
maybe  seen  by  looking  on  to  ch.  xv.  19 — 28,
and  comparing  that  passage  with  ver.  4  of
this  chapter.  In  the  first  stage,  during  the
seven  days,  she  made  all  that  she  touched
unclean ;  in  the  seuond  stage,  during  the
thirty-three  days,  she  was  only  required  to
touch  no  hallowed  thing,  nor  come  into  the
sanctuary,  as  she  was  progressing  towards
cleanness.  The  number  of  days  during
which  she  is  to  be  altogetlier  unclean  is  to
be  according  to  the  days  of  the  separation
for  her  infirmity,  tliat  is,  seven  days,  as  in
the  case  of  lier  montiily  courses  (see  ch.
XV.  19).  In  the  eighth  day  the  flesh  of  his
foreskin  shall  be  circumcised.  The  Levitical
legislation  recognizes  the  regulation  as  to
the  day  of  the  circumcision  made  at  the
time  of  the  covenant  with  Abraham.  "And
1)0  that  is  eight  days  old  (or  a  son  of  eight
days)  shall  be  circumcised  among  you,
every  man  child  in  your  generations"
(Gen.  xvii.  12).  Until  the  days  of  her  puri-
fying be  fulfilled.  "  When  in  a  state  of  im-
purity, the  Hebrews  were  forbidden  to  enter
the  sanctuary,  to  keep  the  Passover,  and  to
partake  of  hdly  food,  whether  of  sacrificial
meat,  of  sacred  offerings  and  gifts,  or  of
shew-bread,  because  the  clean  only  were  fit
to  approach  the  holy  God  and  all  that
appertains  to  him  (Lev.  vii.  19—21  •  xxii
3;  Numb.ii.  6;  xvui.  11;  1  Sam.  xxi  5)"
(Kalisch).

Ver.  5.— If  she  bear  a  maid  child,  then
she  shaU  be  nnolean  two  weeks ;  ...  and  she
BhaU  continue  in  the  blood  of  her  pnriMne
threescore  and  six  days.  The  reason  why
the  duration  of  the  mother's  uncleanness  u
twice  as  long  at  a  girl's  birth  as  at  a  boy's
would  appear  to  be  that  the  uncleannesi
attached  to  the  chUd  as  weU  as  to  the
mother,  but  as  the  boy  was  placed  in  a  state
of  ceremonial  purity  at  once  by  the  act  of  oir-


CH.  XIL  1 — 8.]


THE   BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.


189


cnmoision,  which  took  place  on  the  eighth
day,  he  thereupon  ceased  to  be  unclean,  and
the  mother's  uncleannesa  alone  remained ;
whereas  in  the  case  of  a  girl,  both  mother
and  child  were  unclean  during  the  period
that  the  former  was  "in  the  blood  of  her
purifying,"  and  therefore  that  period  had
to  be  doubly  long.  See  Luke  ii.  20,  where
the  right  reading  is,  "Whea  the  days  of
their  purification,  according  to  the  Law  of
Moaes,  were  accomplished."  For  eight
days  the  infant  Saviour  submitted  to  legal
uncleanness  in  "fulfilling  all  righteous-
ness" (Matt.  iii.  IS),  and  therefore  the
whole  forty  days  were  spoken  of  as  "  the ,
days  of  their  purification."

Vers.  6,  7. — The  previous  verses  having
stated  the  conditions  and  the  term  of  continu-
ance of  the  uncleannesa  arising  from  child-
birth, the  three  final  verses  describe  the
offerings  to  be  made  by  the  woman  for  her
purification.  She  shall  bring  a  lamb  of  the
ftnt  year  for  a  burnt  offering,  and  a  yonng


pigeon,  or  a  turtledove,  for  a  sin  olfering.
Two  things  are  noticeable  hero :  first,  that
the  burnt  offering,  symbolizing  self-devo-
tion, is  far  more  costly  and  important  than
the  sin  offering,  which  had  not  to  be  offered
for  any  individual  personal  sin,  but  only  for
human  sin,  "  which  had  been  indirectly
manifested  in  her  bodily  condition  "  '^Keil) ;
and  secondly,  that  in  this  one  case  the  sin
offering  appears  to  succeed  the  burnt  offer
ing  instead  of  preceding  it.  No  doubt  the
changed  order  is  owing  to  the  cause  just
mentioned ;  the  idea  of  sin,  though  it  may
not  be  altogether  put  aside  (Oen.  iii.  16),  is
not  to  be  prominent,  as  though  it  were
peculiar  to  the  special  woman  who  was
purified.

Yer.  8. — If  she  he  not  able  to  bring  a  lamb.
A  concession  is  made  to  poverty,  which  in
later  times  appears  to  have  been  largely
acted  on.  It  was,  as  we  know,  taken  ad-
vantao-p  if  by  the  mother  of  our  Lord
(Luke  ii.  21).


HOMILETICS.


Ver.  6. — Generation,  conception,  and  birth,  not  having  anything  sinful  nece»«arily
donnected  with  them,  the  sin  offering  in  this  case  is  rather  an  intimation  of  original  sin
than  an  atonement  for  actual  sin ;  the  "  sorrow  "  attached  to  childbirth  being  especially
connected  with  the  fall  of  man  as  a  result  of  Eve's  share  in  bringing  it  about  (Gen.  iii.
16).  There  is  nothing  in  the  Bible  to  countenance  ascetic  or  Manichajan  views  of  marriage
intercourse.  Where  any  prohibitory  injunctions  are  given  on  the  subject,  the  purpose
is  to  avoid  ceremonial,  not  moral,  uncleanness  (Exod.  zix.  15 ;  1  Sam.  xxi.  4 ;  cL  ch.
XT.  18).

Ver.  8. — Some  fifteen  hundred  years  after  this  law  of  purificatinn  after  childbirth  had
been  given  to  and  by  Moses,  a  man  child  was  born  in  a  country  which  did  not  at  the
time  of  the  legislation  of  Moses  belong  to  the  Israelites,  and  which  those  whom  Moses
addressed  had  never  seen.  The  country  was  Palestine,  the  city  Bethlehem.  The  birth
took  place  in  a  stable,  for  the  mother  was  poor.  For  eight  days  she  remained  unclean,
and  on  the  eighth  day  the  child  was  circumcised,  and  "  his  name  was  called  Jesus "
(Luke  ii.  21).  For  thirty-three  days  longer  she  continued  "iu  the  blood  of  her
purifying  "  (ch.  xii.  4),  and  then  "  when  the  days  of  their  purification  according  to  the
Law  of  Moses  were  accomplished,  they  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,  to  present  him  to
the  Lord,  and  to  offer  a  sacrifice,  according  to  that  which  is  said  in  the  Law  of  the
Lord "  (Luke  ii.  22,  24).  Had  the  mother  been  wealthy,  she  would  have  offered  a
lamb  for  a  burnt  offering,  and  a  young  pigeon,  or  turtle-dove,  for  a  sin  offering,  but
though  of  the  house  and  lineage  of  David,  she  was  poor,  and  her  sacrifice  was  therefore
"a  pair  of  turtledoves,  or  two  young  pigeons" — one  of  the  birds  being  for  a  burnt
offering,  betokening  the  devotion  of  her  life  afresh  to  God  after  the  peril  that  she  had
gone  through ;  the  other  for  a  sin  offering,  recognizing  her  share  in  the  penalty  of  Eve
as  partaker  in  original  sin.  "  On  bringing  her  offering,  she  would  enter  the  temple
through  '  the  gate  of  the  firstborn,'  and  stand  in  waiting  at  the  gate  of  Nicanor,  from
the  time  that  the  incense  was  kindled  on  the  golden  altar.  Behind  her,  in  the  court  ot
the  women,  was  the  crowd  of  worshippers,  while  she  herself,  at  the  top  of  the  LeVites'
steps,  which  led  up  to  the  great  court,  would  witness  all  that  passed  in  the  sanctuary.
At  last  one  of  the  officiating  priests  would  come  to  her  at  the  gate  of  Nicanor,  and  take
from  her  hand  the  poor's  offering,  which  she  had  brought.     The  morning  sacrifice  wa»


190  THE  BOOK' OF  LEVITICUS.  [.jh.  xn.  1-S.

ended,  and  but  few  would  linger  behind  while  the  offering  for  her  purification  was
actually  made.  She  who  brought  it  mingled  prayer  and  thanksgiving  v\ith  the
service.  And  now  the  priest  once  more  approached  her,  and,  sprinkling  her  with  the
sacrificial  blood,  declared  her  cleansed.  Her '  firstborn '  was  next  redeemed  at  the  hand
of  the  priest  with  five  shekels  of  silver ;  two  benedictions  being  at  the  same  time
pronounced— one  for  the  happy  event  which  had  enriched  the  family  with  a  firstborn,
the  other  for  the  law  of  redemption  "  (Edersheim,  '  Temple  Service ').  It  was  probably
as  she  descended  the  steps  that  Simeon  took  the  babe  from  her  arms,  and  blessed  God
and  them,  and  that  Anna  "  gave  thanks  likewise  unto  the  Lord,  and  S])ake  of  him  to  all
them  that  looked  for  redemption  in  Jerusalem  "  (Luke  ii.  38).  "  And  when  they  had
performed  all  things  according  to  the  Law  of  the  Lord,  they  returned  into  Galilee,  to
their  own  city  Nazareth  "  (Luke  ii.  39).  Thus  obediently  did  the  virgin  mother  of  the
Lord  submit  herself  to  the  regulations  of  the  Levitical  Law,  and  thus  humbly  and
graciously  did  the  infant  Saviour  begin  from  the  day  of  his  birth  to  "  fulfil  all  righteous-
ness "  (Matt.  iii.  15)  in  his  own  person,  though  by  the  hands  of  others.

Lessons — 1.  To  obey  the  positive  laws  and  to  submit  to  the  positive  institutions  of
the  religious  community  to  which  we  belong.  2.  To  take  measures,  when  we  have
even  involuntarily  and  without  sin  on  our  part  ceased  to  be  in  open  communion  with
God  and  God's  people,  to  recover  that  communion.  3.  To  see  that  the  measures  which
we  take  with  this  end  are  appointed  by  God  or  by  his  authority,  and  are  in  accordance
with  his  will.  4.  To  be  sure  that  such  steps  as  we  take  be  accompanied  by  an
acknowledgment  of  sin  and  a  throwing  ourselves  for  acceptance  on  the  merits  of  the
sacrifice  of  the  cross  (which  is  our  sin  offering),  and  a  consecration  of  ourselves  to  God's
service  (which  is  our  burnt  offering).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1— S. — The  purification  of  the  CJmrch.  At  the  commencement  of  his  treatise
on  this  Book  of  Leviticus,  Cyril  of  Alexandria  truly  says,  that  as  the  Word  of  God
came  into  the  world  arrayed  in  flesh,  in  which  bodily  appearance  he  was  seen  of  all,
while  his  divinity  was  seen  only  by  the  elect ;  so  has  the  written  Word  a  letter,  or
outward  sense,  which  is  obvious  to  ordinary  perception,  and  an  inward  meaning  which
must  be  spiritually  discerned.  According  to  this  rule,  the  purification  of  the  Church  is
the  subject  of  the  text,  which  is  presented  under  two  aspects.     It  is —

I.  DiSTBiBUTivELT  CONSIDERED.  The  neccssity  of  the  spiritual  birth  may  be  col-
lected :  1.  From  the  impurity  of  the  natural.  (1)  This  is  expressed  in  the  ceremonial
nncleanness  of  the  mother.  In  case  of  the  birth  of  a  son,  she  had  to  remain  forty  days
in  a  state  of  impurity.  During  this  period  she  must  not  touch  any  hallowed  thing,
else  it  became  polluted ;  and  she  must  not  enter  the  holy  place  of  the  temple.  In  case
her  child  were  a  daughter,  the  term  of  this  uncleanness  was  doubled.  "  Who  can  bring
a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean?"  (2)  Her  uncleanness  is  in  her  blood,  which  is  the
same  as  saying  it  is  in  her  nature.  To  be  "  born  of  blood  "  is  therefore  a  periphrasis
for  a  natural  birth  in  depravity,  and  it  is  consequently  opposed  to  the  spiritual  birth
(see  John  i.  13).  (3)  This  maternal  uncleanness  is  also  described  as  her  "  infirmity,"
in  allusion  to  the  pain,  sorrow,  and  weakness  through  which  she  passes ;  and  calls  to
remembrance  the  curse  upon  the  original  offence  (Gen.  iii.  16).  The  birth  amidst  this
"  infirmity  "  shows  the  utter  helplessness  and  sorrowfulness  of  our  moral  state  by
nature.  (4)  No  wonder,  then,  that  the  child  also  should  be  accounted  unclean.  Until
the  eighth  day  he  had  no  sign  of  the  covenant  upon  him.  But  an  infant  could  not
have  "  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression ; "  therefore  this  exclusion
from  the  covenant  from  the  birth  evinces  hereditary  depravity  and  guilt  (Ps.  Ii.  5  •
Eph.  ii.  3).  2.  From  the  rite  of  circumcision.  (1)  It  was  the  sign  of  introductioD
into  the  covenant  of  God  (Gen.  xvii.  9—14).  This  supposes  a  spiritual  birth,  since  the
pollutions  of  the  natural  birth  excluded  the  child  from  the  favour  of  God.  (2)  The
sign  expressed  this  moral  change  to  be  the  cutting  off  all  that  was  forward  in  fleshly
desires  (see  Deut.  x.  16 ;  Bom.  ii.  28,  29  ;  Phil.  iii.  3).  These,  however  necessary  to
the  natural  man,  must  not  rule  us  here ;  for  when  the  seven  days  of  the  world  are


OH.  xn.  1— 8.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  191

over,  they  will  be  no  more  (see  Matt.  xxii.  30 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  50 ;  2  Cor.  v.  2 — 4 ;  see  also
Homiletio  notes  on  oh.  ix.  1 — 7).  (3)  Hence,  the  "  baptism  of  the  Holy  Spirit "  is
another  way  for  expressing  the  "  circumcision  of  the  heart,"  and  therefore  it  is  called
the  "circumcision  of  Christ,"  or  of  Christianity  (Col.  ii.  11, 12).  By  parity  of  reason,
the  "  baptism  of  water "  corresponds  to  the  "  circumcision  which  is  outward  in  the
flesh."  (4)  Circumcision  was  proper  to  express  the  necessity  of  a  spiritual  birth  in  the
dispensation  of  the  covenant  before  Christ  came,  as  it  figured  his  sacrificial  death  (the
"  cutting  off"  of  the  "  Holy  Seed  "),  through  which  we  claim  the  blessings  of  salvation.
Now  he  has  come,  the  type  is  fittingly  abolished,  and  the  baptismal  water  introduced,
which  is  the  emblem  of  the  purifying  spirit  of  the  gospel.

II.  CoLLECTivELT  coNsiDEREaj.  1.  The  Chwch  is  the  mother  of  the  children  of  God.
(1)  Every  man  was  intended  to  be  a  figure  of  Christ.  The  first  man  was  such
(Rom.  V.  14).  This  privilege  is  shared  by  his  male  descendants  (Gen.  i.  26,  27 ;  1  Cor.
xL  7).  So  every  woman  was  intended  to  be  a  figure  of  the  Church  of  God  (1  Cor.
xi.  7^9).  The  marriage  union,  therefore,  represents  the  union  between  Christ  and  his
Church  (Eph.  v.  22 — 32).  And  the  fruit  of  marriage  should  represent  the  children  of
God  (see  Isa.  liv.  1—8 ;  xlix.  20—23 ;  Gal.  iv.  25—31).  (2)  But  all  this  may  be  reversed.
Men,  through  perversity,  may  come  to  represent  Belial  rather  than  Christ.  Women  may
become  idolatrous,  and  represent  an  anti-Christian  rather  than  a  Christian  Church.
Thus  Jezebel,  who  demoralized  Ahab,  became  a  type  of  those  anti-Christian  State
Churches  which  demoralize  the  kings  of  the  nations  (see  Eev.  ii.  20 — 23 ;  xvii.).  2.
7n  her  present  state  she  is  impure.  (1)  Under  the  Law  she  was  far  from  perfect.  The
elaborate  system  of  ceremonial  purifications  imposed  upon  her  evinced  this.  Her
history  and  the  judgments  she  suffered  go  to  the  same  conclusion.  The  uocleanness  of
the  mother  in  the  text  is  not  an  exaggerated  picture.  (2)  Nor  is  she  perfect  under  the
gospel.  The  saints  are  in  her.  Many  of  her  children  have  experienced  the  circumcision
of  the  heart.  But  many  more  have  only  had  that  which  is  outward  in  the  flesh.  The
"tares" — ^hypocrites  and  unbelievers — are  miogled  with  the  "wheat,"  a  state  of  things
which  is  destined  to  continue  "  until  the  harvest "  (Matt.  xiii.  30,  39).  3.  But  she  is
in  the  process  of  her  purification.  (1)  The  first  stage  in  this  process  was  marked  by  the
rite  of  circumcision.  During  the  time  prior  to  thiit  event,  she  was  in  her  "  separation,"
viz.  from  her  husband  and  friends,  and  those  in  necessary  attendance  upon  her  were
unclean.  This  indicates  the  great  difference  which  the  cutting -off  of  the  Great,
Purifier  of  his  people  makes  to  the  spiritual  liberty  of  the  Church  (Bom.  vii.  1 — 4).  (2)
Still  the  period  of  her  uncleanness  was  extended  to  forty  days  from  the  beginning.  Her
"separation"  terminated  on  the  eighth  day,  but  during  the  whole  period  she  must  not
eat  the  Passover,  nor  the  peace  offerings,  nor  come  into  the  sanctuary  (ver.  4).  These
forty  days  may  be  presumed  to  be  similar  in  typical  expression  to  the  forty  years  of  the
Church  in  the  wilderness  before  it  was  fit  to  enter  Canaan  (see  Deut.  viii.  2,  16).  (3)
In  the  case  of  the  birth  of  a  female  this  period  of  forty  days  was  doubled.  This  may
be  designed  to  show  that  under  the  gospel,  where  the  distinction  of  male  and  female  is
abolished  (Gal.  iii.  28 ;  Col.  iii.  11),  still  the  wilderness  state  of  the  Church  is  con
tinued.  Our  Lord  was  forty  days  upon  earth  before  he  entered  into  his  glory,  and
in  that  state  represented  the  state  of  the  Church  that  is  spiritually  risen  with  him,  but
not  yet  glorified.  (4)  The  entrance  of  the  mother  into  the  temple  when  her  purifica-
tion was  perfected  represented  the  state  of  the  Church  in  heaven  (see  Eph.  v.  27).  The
offerings  with  which  she  entered  showed  that  her  happiness  is  the  purchase  of  the
Eedeemer's  passion.  Her  feasting  upon  the  holy  things  expressed  those  joys  of  the
heavenly  state  elsewhere  described  as  "  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb "  (Rev.
Xix.  7— 9).— J.  A.  M.

Born  in  sin.    Ch.  xii. ;  of.  Gen.  iii.  16  ;  Ps.  Ii.  6 ;  Luke  ii.  21 — 24 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  15.

From  the  division  of  the  animals  into  clean  and  unclean,  and  the  sanctity  thereby
inculcated,  we  are  invited  to  proceed  to  those  personal  liabilities  to  uncleanness  foi
which  due  rites  were  provided.  The  first  of  these  takes  life  at  its  fountain-htad,  and
refers  to  the  uncleanness  connected  with  birth.  Motherhood  involved  a  longer  oi
ehortor  period  of  ceremonial  separation — forty  days  in  the  case  of  a  son,  seventy  days
in  the  case  of  a  daughter,  after  which  a  burnt  ofi'ering  and  a  sin  offering  are  to  be  pre-
sented to  the  Lord,  and  atonement  made  for  her  that  she  may  be  clean.


IW  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [on.  :ui.  1— 8.


I.   Let   V»   8TABT   WITH   THE    PHYSICAL    FACT   THAT  NATUBB    HAS   ASSOCIATED    WITH
OHILDBIBTH  A  SENSE  ON  THE  MOTHEE's  PAST  OP  PEBSONAL  IWCLEANNESS.      The  "  isSUe  of

her  blood"  (ver.  7)  stamps  the  physical  process  with  defilement.  No  mother  can
avoid  this  sense  of  personal  unoleanness,  not  even  the  blessed  Virgin  (Luke  iii.  22 — 24).
Upon  the  fact  it  is  needless  to  dwell.

n.  The   HOBAL   OOnNTEBPAET  TO   THIS   18  THE  FACT  THAT  SIN  18  TBANSMITTED  BY

OKDINABT  GENEEATioN.  As  Davld  puts  it  in  Ps.  li.  5,  "  Behold,  I  was  sbapen  in
iniquity ;  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  Prom  generation  to  generation  is
the  legacy  of  evil  transmitted.  Hereditary  sin  must  be  recognized  as  a  much  wider
phenomenon  than  "  hereditary  genius."  The  law  of  heredity  must  be  accepted  as  at
the  bottom  of  human  experience.  If  the  mother,  in  spite  of  all  her  fondness  for  her
babe,  finds  that  she  has  transmitted  sinful  qualities ;  if  this  is  the  universal  experience
in  ordinary  generation,  then  the  sense  of  unoleanness,  physically  induced,  contracts  a
moral  significance.

m.   THEBB  18  AT  THE   SAME  TIME  A  SENSE   OF  JOT   AND  TBIUMPH  ASSOCIATED  WITH

THE  BIRTH  OP  CHILDREN.  If  there  is  an  element  of  sorrow  and  of  judgment,  as  God
indicates  by  his  utterance  at  the  Fall  (Gen.  iii.  16),  there  is  also  an  element  of  triumph,
caught  from'  the  "  protevangelium,"  which  speaks  of  victory  through  the  woman's  seed
(Gen.  iii.  15).  Our  Lord  even  speaks  of  it  as  an  appropriate  figure  of  the  coming
apostolic  joy :  "  A  woman  when  she  is  in  travail  hath  sorrow,  because  her  hour  is  come :
but  as  soon  as  she  is  delivered  of  the  child,  she  remembereth  no  more  the  anguish,  for
joy  that  a  man  is  born  into  the  world  "  (John  xvi.  21).  The  sorrow  is  the  prpl*trin«r/
of  joy,  the  joy  is  its  crown.

IV.  The  two  elements  op  jot  and  judoment  had  thbib  exfbession  in  thb

BURNT  AND  SIN  OFFERING  THE  MOTHER  WAS  DIRECTED  TO  PRESENT  TO  THB  LOBD.      The

ritual  is  the  same  whether  it  be  a  son  or  a  daughter.  The  difference  in  the  time  of
Reparation  was  due  to  a  supposed  physical  fact  that  "  a  female  child  causes  the  mother
more  labour  and  a  longer  illness.  This  belief,"  continues  Ewald, "  (even  though  it  may
have  little  ground  in  fact),  was  itself  caused  by  the  well-known  primitive  disfavour
with  which  the  birth  of  a  girl  was  regarded."  •  No  moral  significance  is  to  be  attached,
therefore,  to  the  difference  in  the  duration  of  the  mother's  separation.  But  at  the  end
of  either  period  there  is  to  be  brought  a  burnt  offering  and  a  sin  offering.  The  burnt
offering  is  to  be,  if  the  mother  can  afford  it,  "  a  Iamb  of  the  first  year,"  while  the  sin
.offering  is  only  to  be  "a  young  pigeon"  or  a  "turtledove."  It  is  evident,  therefore,
that,  while  a  poor  mother  might  bring  as  her  burnt  offering  a  "  turtledove  "  or  "  young
pigeon,"  the  ritual  attaches  emphasis  to  the  burnt  offering  rather  than  to  the  sin
offering.  It  has  even  been  supposed  that  the  burnt  offering  took  precedence  in  the
order  of  time  in  this  particular  instance.  At  all  events,  the  joy  of  consecration,  which
the  burnt  offering  expresses,  is  more  emphatic  in  this  ritual  than  the  atonement  for
unavoidable  defilement,  which  is  expressed  by  the  sin  offering.  The  undertone  of
judgment  is  certainly  discernible,  but  high  above  it  sound  the  notes  of  grateful,  holy
joy.  The  mother  rejoiced  that,  though  unavoidably  imclean  in  her  child-bearing,  the
Lord  bad  put  away  her  uncleanness,  and  she  was  ready  to  dedicate  herself  and  her  child
unto  the  Lord  in  the  rite  of  the  burnt  offering.

V.  This  bitual  receives  peculiar  emphasis  from  its  celebration  bt  the  Vibgih
UOTHBB.  Mary  had  the  usual  physical  concomitants  in  the  birth  of  Jesus,  we  have
every  reason  to  believe,  the  termination  of  which  this  ritual  of  purification  was  intended
to  celebrate.  The  sense  of  unclianness  was  manifestly  hers,  since  she  enters  upon  the
ritual  as  no  exception  to  the  general  rule  and  law.  Not  only  so,  but  Luke  boldly
states,  "when  the  days  of  their  purification,  according  to  the  Law  of  Moses,  were
fulfilled"  (toC  KaSapuriJLOv  auray,  not  avTTJs),  including  Jesus  along  with  Mary,  fur
Oosterzee's  notion  that  it  is  Jose/  h  and  Mary,  not  Jesus  and  Mary,  will  not  satisfy  the
case.  In  what  sense,  then,  was  Jesus  associated  with  his  mother  in  a  ritual  of  purifica-
tion? It  is  certain  that  there  was  not  transmitted  to  Jesus  any  sinful  disposition  or
qualities,  as  in  ordinary  generation.  His  whole  life  belied  this  idea.  He  was  "  holy,
narmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  But  this  does  not  prevent  the  idea
being  accepted  that  there  was  transmitted  in  his  extraordinary  generation  responsihilUy

'  Vwald'f  '  Antiqnitiee  of  Israel,'  p.  156 ;  of.  also  Weemae  on  <  The  Ceremonial  Law,'  p.  A.


rii.  XII.  1—8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVIT1U08.  193


for  hitman  sin.  In  other  words,  Jesus  Christ  was  born  with  a  liability  on  account  of
the  sins  of  others.  Having  entered  into  the  human  family,  having  condescended  to  be
born,  he  became  liable  for  the  responsibilities  and  debts  of  the  human  family,  and  the
ritual  so  regarded  hira.  Not  only  so,  but  our  Lord  had  entered  upon  his  "bloody
passion"  when  at  eight  days  old  he  had  passed  through  the  painful  operation  of  circum-
cision. The  rites  in  the  temple  thirty-three  days  after  only  expressed  in  legal  form  the
liability  on  account  of  human  sin  upon  which  he*  had  already  entered.  But  if  the
atonement  of  the  sin  offering  has  thus  a  distinctive  meaning  in  this  exceptional  case,
the  burnt  offering  had  also  its  fulfilment.  Mary  dedicated,  not  only  herself,  but  her
Son,  according  to  the  Law  of  the  Lord,  "  Every  male  that  openeth  the  womb  shall  be
called  holy  to  the  Lord."  Simeon  and  Anna  recognized  in  the  infant  the  deilicated
Messiah.    Thus  did  Mary,  as  mother  of  Jesus,  fulfil  all  righteousness.

VI.  Wb  abb  BUEELT  taught  here  the  general  principle  that  it  IB  THROUGH
SORROW   AND   HUMILIATION   THAT   TRIUMPH   IB   REACHED.      The    hope    of    a    triumphant

woman's  seed  sustained  Jewish  motheia  in  their  sorrow.  They  looked  for  salvation
through  child-bearings  according  to  the  idea  of  the  apostle  (1  Tim.  ii.  15).  God's
meaning  was  through  the  child-bearing  (Sict  ttjs  reHvoyoytas),  that  is,  the  motherhood  of
the  Virgin.  Yet  the  hope  sustained  multitudes  of  mothers  in  their  agonies.  At  length
the  Conqueror  of  the  devil  appeared.  He  came  as  an  infant,  and  braved  the  dangers  of
development,  and  became  "  the  Man  of  sorrows,"  and  passed  through  death  to  victory
To  the  same  law  we  must  constantly  conform.  Humiliation  is  the  price  of  exaltation
in  the  case  of  Jesus  and  of  all  his  people.  The  apostles  had  their  season  of  sorrow  in
connection  with  Christ's  crucifixion,  and  so  sore  it  was  that  our  Lord  does  not  hesitate
to  compare  it  to  a  woman's  travail ;  but  at  Pentecost  they  got  the  joy  and  exhilaration
which  compensated  for  all.  The  law  of  the  kingdom  is  that  we  euter  it  through  much
tribulation.  "He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted "  (Luke  xiv.  11).  When
we  humble  ourselves  under  a  sense  of  sin,  when  we  humble  ourselves  under  a  sense
of  unprofitableness,  then  are  we  treading  the  path  which  leads  to  power  «nd
triumph. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 8. — J%e  statutes  on  Tnatemity.     We  may  seek —

L  The  explanation  or  this  statute.  And  we  shall  find  the  explanation  (1)  not
in  the  notion  that  any  actual  sin  is  involved  in  it ;  (2)  but  in  the  fact  that  there
is  connected  with  it  that  which  is  painfully  suggestive  of  sin.  (There  was  nothing
actually  "  unclean "  in  the  camel  or  hare,  but  it  was  constituted  so  because  it  was
fairly  suggestive  of  it.)  1.  The  sorrow  of  maternity  (John  xvi.  21)  points  clearly
to  the  primeval  curse,  and  therefore  to  the  primeval  sin  (Gkn.  iii.  16).  2.  The  birth
of  a  human  child  means  the  entrance  into  the  world  of  one  in  whom  are  the  germs
of  sin  (Ps.  li.  5 ;  Iviii.  3 ;  Eph.  ii.  3). .  3.  Maternity  suggests  the  sexual  relation,  and
that  suggests  the  abounding  and  baneful  sin  of  impurity.  Hence  sin  is  associated
with  the  birth  of  the  human  infant,  and  the  physical  condition  (ver.  7)  attending  it  is
typical  of  sin,  constitutes  "  uncleanness,"  and  necessitates  purification.

IL  The  thoughts  we  gain  from  this  statute.  We  learn :  1.  The  communica-
tiveness of  sin.  We  transmit  our  follies,  our  errors,  our  iniquities,  by  ordinary
generation.  Our  children,  because  they  are  our  children,  will  go  astray,  and  will  be
in  danger  of  those  very  errors  into  which  we  ourselves  have  fallen.  Those  who  become
parents  must  take  the  responsibility  of  bringing  into  the  world  children  like  themselves,
who  will  inherit  their  dispositions,  their  habits  of  thought,  their  character.  Sin  is
communicated  from  generation  to  generation  through  heredity,  and  also  through  the
contagiousness  of  evil  example.  There  is  nothing  more  diffusive.  2.  The  extension
of  the  consequences  of  sin.  How  sin  sends  forth  its  stream  of  sorrow !  The  pangs
of  maternity,  answered  by  the  opening  cry  of  the  infant  as  it  enters  the  world — do
these  not  siieak  the  truth,  that  a  world  of  sin  is  a  world  of  sorrow,  that  succeeding
generations  of  sinners  are  succeeding  generations  of  sufferers,  and  that  this  wjU  be
so  to  the  end  of  the  world  ?  3.  The  removableness  of  guilt  from  the  sight  of  Ood.  The
'  uncleanness "  of  the  mother  was  not  irremovable.  It  did  temporarily  but  did  not
permanently  separate  her  from  the  sanctuary  (ver.  4).  After  a  limited  retirement  she
might  come  with  her  sin  oifering  and  her  burnt  offering  to  "  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  "
(ver.  6).     If  she  were  poor  she  might  bring  an  offering  within  the  reach  of  the  poorest

LEVITICUS.  a


!94  THE  BOOK   OF   LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xu.  1—8.


(ver.  8),  and  the  priest  would  "  make  atonement,"  and  she  would  "  he  clean  "  (ver.  8).
Whatever  guilt  we  contract,  whether  in  communicating  evil  to  others  or  as  the  indirect
consequence  of  the  sin  of  others,  by  whatsoever  our  souls  have  been  defiled,  our  lives
stained  and  corrupted,  we  may  all  come  to  the  cross  of  the  Redeemer,  and  through  his
atoning  sacrifice  be  made  clean  in  the  sight  of  God.  And  thus  coming,  our  sin  offering
will  not  he  unaccompanied  by  a  burnt  offering ;  the  forgiveness  of  our  sin  will  be
followed  by  the  dedication  of  our  whole  selves  to  the  service  of  the  Lord. — 0.

Vers.  2 — 7. —  Woman  under  the  Law  and  under  the  gospel.  Every  childbirth
re-echoes  in  the  ears  of  woman  the  sentence  passed  upon  her  ancestress  Eve.  That
such  a  season  of  rejoicing  should  be  attended  with  such  throes  of  agony  speaks  loudly
of  the  curse  entailed  by  sin.  There  is  no  earthly  pleasure  entirely  free  from  its  shadow,
pain.  Great  movements  of  society,  deep  thoughts,  even  inspiring  melodies,  are  not
ushered  into  the  world  without  the  pangs  of  travail.

I.  The  Law  reminds  cjs  here  of  woman's  connection  with  the  primal  sin.  1.  She
is  to  be  considered  "  unclean  "  for  a  fixed  period  after  bringing  forth  a  child.  In  the
first  part  of  "  separation  for  her  infirmity,"  she  communicates  defilement  to  whatever
she  touches,  and  must  therefore,  as  far  as  possible,  remain  apart.  But  in  the  succeed-
ing thirty-three  or  sixty-six  "  days  of  her  purifying,"  she  may  fulfil  her  domestic  duties,
only  she  must  not  come  into  contact  with  hallowed  things,  not  partake  of  sacrificial
meals,  nor  enter  the  sanctuary.  Thus  the  fulfilment  of  her  maternal  hopes  renders  her
unfit  for  a  season  to  join  in  the  worship  of  the  holy  God.  She  is  led  to  rejoice  with
trembling;  she  is  at  once  exalted  and  depressed.  She  sees  that  the  new  life  is  not
separate  from  corruption,  is  allied  to  uncleanness  and  death,  and  in  order  to  be  redeemed
requires  hallowing  by  obedience  to  God's  ordinances.  2.  To  cleanse  the  mother  from
the  stains  of  childbirth  and  to  allow  of  restored  fellowship  with  God,  atonement  is
requisite.  First  a  burnt  offering,  that  the  life  spared  and  secluded  temporarily  may
be  wholly  surrendered  in  spirit  to  the  Author  and  Sustainer  of  life.  Then  a  sin  offer-
ing to  expiate  all  ceremonial  offences  connected  with  the  begetting  of  children.  If
these  rites  appertain  simply  to  the  parent,  yet  must  the  knowledge  of  them  afterwards
acquaint  the  child  with  the  state  of  separation  from  God  into  which  it  was  the
unwitting  instrument  of  introducing  the  parent,  and  there  is  at  least  a  hint  that  th*
origin  of  life  is  not  free  from  taint.

II.  The  Law  indicates  the  inferior  esteem  in  which  woman  was  anciently
HELD.  1.  The  uncleanness  contracted  by  bearing  a  female  child  lasted  twice  as  long
as  when  a  hoy  was  born.  This  has  indeed  been  explained  on  physiological  grounds,  as
formerly  maintained.  But  there  is  ample  warrant  f  r  the  other  view  (see  1  Sam.  i.
11 ;  Jer.  xx.  15,  and  John  xvi.  21,  for  the  joy  caused  by  the  birth  of  a  male  child).  In
ch.  xxvii.  5,  the  female  is  esteemed  at  half  the  price  of  the  male.  Each  mother  of  a
male  might  cherish  the  hope  that  to  her  was  granted  the  promised  seed — the  Messiah.
2.  No  rite  of  initiation  into  the  covenant  for  the  female.  The  Jews  regarded  circum-
cision as  the  badge  of  honour,  the  mark  of  privilege  and  blessing.  Woman  entered  the
nation  without  special  recognition.  She  was  not  capable  of  becoming  the  head  of  a
family,  on  whose  proved  nationality  so  much  depended,  for  if  she  married  she  became
a  member  of  her  husband's  family.

,.  ™^-  '^^^  GOSPEL  dignifies  THE  POSITION  OF  WOMAN.  1.  It  abolishes  before  the  Lord
distinctions  of  sex.  "There  is  neither  male  nor  female;  ye  are  all  one  in  Christ
Jesus."  "There  is  neither  circumcision  nor  uncircumcision."  Woman  has  equal  rights
with  man,  saving  only  what  natural  modesty  forbids  her  claiming,  and  what  is°the
general  law  promulgated  from  the  first  (Gen.  iii.  16),  that  the  husband  shall  rule  over
her.  Both  men  and  women  are  baptized  (Acts  viii.  12)  and  endowed  with  the  Spirit.
2.  It  is  the  glory  of  woman  to  have  been  the  medium  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of
God.  Her  shame  is  removed.  Even  the  poverty  of  woman  is  ennobled  by  the  example
of  the  Virgin  Mary  bringing  her  "  pair  of  turtledoves  or  two  young  pigeons."
8.  Woman's  quick  appreciation  of  truth  and  steadfast  fidelity  are  specially  notable
under  the  preaching  of  Christ  and  the  apostles.  Eeady  to  adore  the  Lord  as  an  infant,
to  supply  his  wants  during  his  ministry,  to  bathe  his  feet  with  repentant,  grateful  tears,
to  anomt  him  before  his  burial,  to  follow  him  on  the  road  to  Calvary,  to  be  nearest  to
hira  at  the  cross,  and  the  first  at  his  grave  on  the  Resurrection  morn,  woman  occupiei


OH.  xiu.  1-.-46.]


THE  BOOK  OP   LEVITICUS.


US


s  place  iu  the  gospel  records  alike  conspicuous  and  honourable.  Nor  are  the  faith  and
love  and  devotion  of  woman  less  marked  in  the  Acts  and  the  Epistles.  Well  has
woman  striven  to  erase  the  stigma  of  the  first  transgression.  Eighteen  centuries  of  the
continually  progressive  elevation  of  woman  in  the  social  and  mental  scale  have  only
attested  the  cardinal  principles  of  Christianity.  The  position  of  woman  in  any  nation
now  serves  as  an  index  to  the  stage  of  civilization  which  it  has  reached. — S.  R.  A.

Chs.  xii. — ^xv. — Ceremonial  purifications.  For  defilement  from  secretions  and  from
leprosy.  The  double  object — to  exalt  the  sacred  laws,  to  honour  the  natural  laws  of
health  and  cleanliness.     Thus  we  are  taught —

I.  Religion  pebserves,  purifies,  exalts  human  nattjkb.  The  facts  of  family  life
are  to  be  connected  with  the  sanctuary.  The  more  we  think  of  both  the  joyful  and
the  sorrowful  events  of  our  individual  and  sociiil  life  as  intimately  bound  up  with  our
religion,  the  better  we  shall  be  prepared  to  find  God's  blessing  always  both  preserving
and  sanctifying.

XL  All  regulations  which  concern  the  bodily  life  and  the  temporal  happi-

BEB8  OF  MEN  SHOULD   BE   SURROUNDED  WITH  RELIGIOUS  REVERENCE.      ScienCC   IS   a   CUrSe

to  the  world  unless  it  is  the  handmaid  to  religion.  Our  bodies  are  the  temples  of  the
Holy  Ghost.     Our  earthly  life  is  the  threshold  of  eternity.

III.  Typically.  Leprosy  represents  human  depravity  and  misery.  We  see  it
brought  into  relation  to  the  cleansing  blood  of  atonement.  The  sin  which  works
death  both  by  the  individual  acts  and  by  contact  with  others,  both  in  person  and  in
condition,  is  cleansed  away  both  in  guilt  and  in  power.  The  leper  is  not  excluded  from
mercy,  but  is  dealt  with  by  the  priest  as  having  his  place  in  the  covenant.  Our  vileness
does  not  shut  us  out  from  the  love  of  God,  but  his  love  is  revealed  as  an  atoning  love.
"  He  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost,"  but  it  is  "  those  who  come  unto  God  by
him."— K.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIIL


UHOLEANNESS  derived   PROM   LEPROSY  OB
CONTACT  WITH   LEPERS  AND  LEPROUS  THINGS

{chs.  xlii.,  xiv.).  A  third  cause  of  unoleanness
li  found  in  a  third  class  of  offensive  or
lepulsive  objects.  There  is  no  disease  which
produces  so  foul  an  appearance  in  the  human
form  as  leprosy.  There  was,  therefore,  no
disease  bo  suitable  for  creating  ceremonial,
because  representing  spiritual,  uncleanness.
The  name  leprosy  has  been  made  to  cover
•  number  of  diseases  similar  but  not  identical
in  character.  There  are  many  spurious
forms  of  leprosy,  and  many  diseases  akin
to  leprosy  which  do  not  now  come  under
discussion.  The  disease  here  dealt  with  is
elephantiasis,  especially  in  its  anaesthetic
form,  which  is  otherwise  called  white  leprosy.
The  two  varieties  of  elephantiasis — the  tuber-
colated  and  the  ansesthetiu — are,  however,
so  closely  connected  together  that  they
cannot  be  separated,  the  one  often  running
into  the  other.     The  first  symptom  of  the


malady  is  a  painless  spot,  which  covers  an
indolent  ulcer.  This  uloer  may  continue
unprogressive  for  months  or  for  years,
during  which  the  peison  affected  is  able  to
do  his  ordinary  business ;  but  at  the  end  ol
these  periods,  whether  longer  or  shorter,
it  produces  a  more  repulsive  and  foul  dis-
figurement of  the  human  face  and  frame
than  any  known  disease,  the  features  of  the
face  changing  their  character,  and  part
of  the  body  occasionally  mortifying  and
dropping  off.  Death  at  last  comes  suddenly,
when  a  vital  part  of  the  body  has  been
affected.

The  home  of  leprosy  has  in  all  ages  been
Syria  and  Egypt  and  the  countries  adjacent
to  them,  but  Europe  has  not  escaped  the
scourge.  In  the  Middle  Ages,  no  European
country  was  free  from  it;  London  had  at
one  time  six  leper  houses ;  oases  were  found
not  unfrequently  in  Scotland  till  the  middle
of  the  last  century;  and  there  was  a  death
certified  by  medical  science  to  have  resulted
from  leprosy  in  the  city  of  Norwich  in  tlw


in


THE   BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.


[oh.  xih  1 — 46


of  his  sons  the  priests ;  that  is,  to  the  high
priest  or  to  the  ordinary  priest,  and  those
descendants  of  Aaron  who  were  disqimlified
by  physical  infirmities  from  officiating  at
the  altar  were  ptrmitted  to  act  as  examiner*
in  leprosy.

Ver.  3 — When  the  hair  in  the  plagne  ia
turned  white.  This  is  the  first  symptom,
and  the  most  noticeable  as  the  commence-
ment of  the  disease.  The  hair  around  the
spot  loses  its  colour  and  becomes  thin  and
weak,  the  separate  hairs  being  hardly
stronger  or  individually  thicker  than  down.
The  second  symptom  is  when  the  plague  in
sight  be  deeper  than  the  skin  of  his  flesh}
that  is,  below  the  upper  skin,  or  cuticle,
and  in  the  real  cutis.  These  two  symptoms
distinguish  real  leprosy  from  other  a£feo-
tions  which  at  first  bear  a  similar  appearance.

Vers,  i — 8. — In  case  the  symptoms  are
not  decisive,  then  the  priest  shall  shut  up
him  that  hath  the  plague  seven  days.  The
words  thus  translated  would  perhaps  be
better  rendered,  then  the  priest  shall  hind  np
the  part  affected  for  seven  days.  The  priest
is  to  delay  his  judgment  for  a  week,  snd,  if
necessary,  for  a  second  week,  during  which
period  the  patient  is,  according  to  the
rendering,  either  to  be  confined  to  his  house
or,  more  probably,  to  have  the  spot  bandaged.
■Whether  the  disease  be  or  be  not  leprosy
will  probably  have  declared  itself  by  the
end  of  that  time ;  and  if  the  plague  be  some-
what dark  on  the  fourteenth  day,  that  is,  if
it  has  begun  to  lose  its  colour  and  to  fade
away,  and  has  not  spread  in  the  skin,  the
priest  is  to  decide  that  it  is  not  real
leprosy,  and  pronounce  the  man  clean.  He
is  still,  however,  to  be  kept  under  super-
vision, and  if  the  spot  is  found  to  spread,  he
is  to  be  pronounced  unclean,  as  it  is  proved
to  be  a  leprosy.

Vers.  9— 11.— The  method  of  procedure
in  the  case  of  a  doubtful  leproty  having
been  laid  down  in  the  previous  verses,  the
rule  for  dealing  with  an  unmistakable  case
is  here  given.  When  the  characteristic
white  spot  and.  white  hair  are  present  (if
the  rising  be  white  in  the  skin,  and  it  have
turned  the  hair  white),  and  if  a  third
symptom  be  present— if  there  be  quick  raw
flesh  in  the  rising,  that  is,  if  there  be  an

»  The  following  description  is  given  by  the  physician  who  attended  the  sufferer  -•'  The
case  of  leprosy  occurred  m  a  man  aged  fifty-eight.  He  had  suffered  for  ma„y  years  from  a
severe  scaly  disease  of  his  skm  ,•  the  last  two  or  three  years  of  his  life  it  assuVed  theTm
VT^^^r^T^  ^!  one  reads  of  as  having  occurred  in  former  times.  His  skin  bec^Z
thick,  hard,  and  hypertrophical,  and  formed  one  mass  of  large  scales,  covering  tCwhoTof
his  body,  including  his  face  and  head,  both  of  which  were  greatly  swollen  indeed  hi
•eemed  as  if  he  were  encased  in  a  large  scaly  envelope.  The  movement  of  his  \ZuJ^
duced  deep  pamfu],  and  bleeding  fissures.  The  nails  also  became  misshapen  rough  a^
ragged,  and  were  replaced  by  scaly  incrustatioM.  After  lingering  for  some  monTS  tW«
^^T^'^tt:^^^^"  ''''■    ^''^''-«  tl^ecase  wafaty|ic^casTof"^at^:„^J


yeai  ISRO.'  The  object  of  the  regulations
relating  to  leprosy  is  no  more  sanitary  than
of  those  relating  to  unclean  meats.  Like  the
latter,  they  may  have  served  a  sanitary
purpose,  for  leprosy  is,  according  to  the
prevailing  medical  opinion,  slightly,  though
only  slightly,  contagious.  Because  leprosy
was  hirleous  and  foul,  it  therefore  made  the
man  affected  by  it  unclean,  and  before  he
could  be  restored  to  communion  with  God
and  his  people,  he  must  be  certified  by  God's
priest  to  be  delivered  from  the  disease.
As  in  the  previous  cases,  physical  ugli-
ness and  defilement  represent  spiritual
depravity  and  viciousness.  "  The  Levitical
law  concerning  leprosy  reveals  to  us  the
true  nature  of  sin.  It  shows  its  hideousness
and  its  foulness,  and  fills  us  with  shame,
hatred,  and  loathing  for  it.  And  it  reveals
to  us  the  inestimable  benefit  which  we
have  received  from  the  incarnation  of  the
Son  of  God,  'the  Sun  of  Eighteousness,
with  healing  in  his  wings '  (Mai,  iv.  2) ;  and
fills  us  with  joy,  thankfulness,  and  love  to
him  for  his  infinite  goodness  to  us  "  (Words-
worth). Leprosy,  the  most  loathsome  of
all  common  diseases,  is  the  type  and  symbol
of  sin,  and  the  ceremonial  uncleanness
attaching  to  it  is  a  parable  of  the  moral
foulness  of  sin,

Ver.  2. — The  word  translated'  plague  of
leprosy  literally  means  stroke.  It  seems  to
be  used  in  the  sense  of  spot.  Then  shall  he
be  brought  unto  Aaron  the  priest.  That  the
regulations  respecting  leprosy  were  not
sanitary  arrangements,  as  has  been  some-
times represented,  is  indicated  by  the  autho-
rity over  the  leper  being  vested  in  the  priest
ittther  than  in  the  physician,  and  the
question  of  whether  a  man  was  a  leper  or
no  being  decided  by  the  former  rather  than
the  latter.  It  is  to  be  noted  also  that  the
priest  is  not  made  unclean  by  his  contact
with  the  leper,  because  he  is  in  the  per-
formance of  his  duty.  The  supposed  leper
may  be  brought  either  to  Aaron  or  unto  one


«H.  xra.  1 — 46.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LP^VITIOUS


197


nicer  underneath  the  white  scab,  there  is
to  be  no  delay,  as  in  the  previous  case,  but
judgment  is  to  be  passed  at  once.  The
priest  shall  prononuoe  him  unclean,  and  shall
not  shut  him  np;  for  he  is  manifestly
unclean.

Vers.  12 — 17. — If  a  leprosy  break  out
abroad  .  .  .  and  cover  all  the  skin.  There
was  a  form  of  disease  similar  to  true  leprosy,
and  bearing  the  name  of  leprosy,  and  by
some  thought  to  be  the  final  phase  of  true
leprosy,  which  was  yet  not  to  cause  legal
uncleannesB.  It  was  distinguisliable  from
the  leprosy  which  caused  uncleanuess  by
a  diffusion  of  the  white  flakes  over  the
whole  body,  and  by  the  absence  of  any
patches  bearing  the  appearance  of  raw  flesh
(vers.  12,  13).  Eeal  leprosy  might  pass  into
this  harmless  kind  or  phase,  and  it  was
known  to  have  done  so  as  soon  as  the  raw
patches  of  flesh  had  disappeared  (vera.
16,  17).  When  this  had  taken  place,  the
priest  pronounced  him  dean.

Vers.  18— 23.— The  method  of  discri-
minating between  a  leprous  spot  and  the
reappearing  scar  of  an  old  ulcer.  A  reap-
pearing ulcer  is  to  be  regarded  as  leprous
if  it  hai'U  the  characteristic  marks  of  leprosy ;
that  is,  if  it  be  below  the  cuticle,  and  the
hairs  round  it  are  turned  white.  If  it  has
not  these  marks,  it  has  to  be  watched  for
■even  days,  and  if  in  that  time  it  does
not  spread,  it  is  to  be  declared  a  burning
boil,  or  rather  an  ulcerous  scar,  in  which
case  the  priest  shall  pronounce  him  clean.

Vers.  24 — ^28. — Tlie  method  of  discrimi-
nating between  a  leprous  spot  and  the  scar
of  a  burn.  If  there  he  any  flesh,  in  the  skin
whereof  there  is  a  hot  burning.  This
rendering  indicates  that  the  authors  of  the
Authorized  Version  thought  a  disease  of
the  nature  of  a  carbuncle  to  be  meant ;  but
it  is  better  to  take  the  words  literally  as
they  are  translated  in  the  margin,  If  there
be  any  flesh,  in  the  shin  whereof  there  is  a
burning  of  fire  ;  that  is,  a  scar  &om  a  bum.
The  leprous  spot  and  the  scar  are  to  be  dis-
tinguished as  in  the  previous  case.  An  old
ulcer  or  burn  is  a  more  likely  place  for  a
leprous  spot  to  appear  than  any  part  of  the
body  which  is  sound,  just  as  in  the  moral
sphere  sin  flxes  on  some  old  wound  of  the
soul  to  burst  out  in.

Vers.  29 — 37. — The  method  of  discrimi-
nating between  a  leprous  spot  on  the  head
or  beard  and  an  ulcer  in  the  same  place.
The  symptoms  of  leprosy  are  the  same  as
before,  except  that  the  hairs  in  this  case  are
of  a  reddish-yellow  colour  instead  of  white.
The  treatment  is  also  the  same,  with  the
addition  of  shaving  the  head  or  beard  except
at  the  place  where  the  suspicious  spot  has
appeared.  In  ver.  31  the  priest  is  ordered
to  shut  up  (or  bandage)  the  patient,  if  (1)


the  spot  be  only  In  the  upper  cuticle,  and
(2)  there  is  no  black  hair  in  it.  We  should
have  expected  rather  from  the  second  con-
dition if  there  be  black  hair  in  it,  or  if  there
be  no  yellow  hair  in  it ;  and  Keil  accordingly
proposes  to  omit  the  negative  or  to  change
the  word  "black"  for  "yellow,"  the  two
words  in  the  original  being  easily  inter-
changeable. The  present  reading  is,  how-
ever, defensible.  The  fact  of  the  spot  being
not  below  the  cuticle  was  a  very  favourable
symptom ;  there  being  no  black  hair  was  a
very  unfavourable  symptom.  Under  these
circumstances,  the  priest  delays  his  judgment
in  the  ordinary  way.

Vers.  38,  39.— The  method  of  discrimi-
nating between  leprous  spots  and  freckled
spots.  In  case  the  spots  in  the  skin  of  their
flesh  be  darkish  white ;  that  is,  of  a  dull  or
pale  white,  then  it  is  only  a  freckled  spot
that  groweth  in  the  skin.  This  is  "the
harmless  bohak  (^a\<j>6s,  LXX.),  which  did  not
defile,  and  which  even  the  Arabs,  who  still
call  it  baJiak,  consider  harmless.  It  is  an
eruption  upon  the  skin,  appearing  in  some-
what elevated  spots  or  rings  of  ungual
sizes  and  a  pale  white  colour,  which  do  not
change  the  hair ;  it  causes  no  inconvenience,
and  lasts  from  two  months  to  two  years"
(Keil).  The  man  or  woman  who  has  this
is  dean.

Vers.  40 — 44. — ^Leprosy  appearing  on  the
bald  head.  Though  leprosy  makes  the  hair
drop  off  around  the  leprous  spot,  baldness
is  in  itself  no  sign  of  leprosy,  whctlier  at  the
back  or  front  of  the  head  (vers.  40,  41 ) ;  but
as  the  bald  head  is  a  not  unusual  place
for  the  leprous  spot  to  appear,  any  eruption
upon  it  is  therefore  to '  be  watched  and
tested  as  before.

Vers.  45,  46. — The  cases  for  examination
having  been  discussed,  the  law  for  the
treatment  of  the  man  in  whom  leprosy  has
been  proved  to  exist  is  pronounced.  The
leper  in  whom  the  plague  is  is  to  be  ex-
clu.led  from  the  camp,  lest  others  should
contract  defilement  from  him.  lie  is  for
the  same  reason  to  ory.  Unclean,  unclean,
lest  any  wayfarer  should  unwittingly  come
in  contact  with  him ;  and  his  clothes  shall
be  rent,  and  his  head  bare,  and  he  shall  put
a  covering  upon  his  upper  lip,  these  being
the  signs  of  mourning  for  the  dead.  The
bared  or  dishevelled  head  (see  ch.  x.  6)
and  the  covered  lip  are  incideutally
mentioned  as  signs  of  mourning  in  Ezek.
xxiv.  17,  and  the  covered  upper  lip  as  a
mark  of  shame  in  Micah  iii.  7.  By  the
expression,  He  shall  dwell  alone,  is  meant
he  shall  dwell  apart  from  those  who  were
clean.  Of  course,  lepers  would  naturally
associate  with  each  other,  and  so  we  And
that  they  actually  did  (Luke  xvii.  12).  Ai
their  presence  was  supposed  to  defile  any


198


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  sm.  1 — 46w


place  tbat  they  entered,  they  were  punished
m  later  times  with  forty  stripes  if  they  did
not  observe  the  restraints  laid  down  for
them.  "They  were,  however,  admitted  to
the  synagogue,  where  a  place  was  railed  off
for  them,  ten  handbreadths  high  and  fonr
cubits  wide,  on  condition  of  their  entering
the  house  of  worship  before  the  rest  of  the
congregation  and  leaving  it  after  them"
(Edvrsheim, '  Temple  Seivice').    The  ezcla-


sion  of  the  leper  was  not  for  the  purpoie  of
avoiding  contagion,  nor  to  serve  as  a  penalty
for  having  contracted  so  loathsome  a  disease,
but  primarily  to  prevent  the  spread  of  cere-
monial uncleanness  communicated  by  his
touch,  and  typically  and  mystically  to  teaoh
that  the  fate  brought  upon  a  man  by  unre-
moved  sin  ia  separation  ftom  the  people  of
God  here  and  hereafter.


HOMILETICa

Vera.  1  iL^Leprosff  4s  regarded  a»  the  type  of  sin  In  a  more  especfal  way  thaa
other  foul  and  ugly  things.  Affections  of  the  body  often  serve  as  means  of  representing
to  ourselves  the  affections  of  the  mind.  This  is  witnessed  to  by  ordinary  langu^e.
The  words,  "  see,"  "  perceive,"  "  feel,"  originally  expressive  of  bodily  acts,  have  come
to  signify  mental  acts,  and  so  in  other  cases,  "healthy,"  "diseased,"  "upright,"
"debased,"  are  words  which  we  apply  to  men  in  their  moral  even  more  than  in  their
physical  capacity  (of.  Isa.  i.  5,  6,  "  The  whole  head  is  sick,  and  the  whole  heart  faint.
From  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  bead  there  is  no  soundness  in  it ;  but  wounds,
and  bruises, and  putrifying  sores:  they  have  not  been  closed,  neither  bound  up,  neither
mollified  with  ointment ").  Points  of  similarity  between  leprosy  as  it  affects  the  body
and  sin  as  it  affects  the  soul  are —

I.  Its  mysterious  obioin.  Whether  by  hereditary  transmission  or  for  other
untraceable  causes,  it  makes  its  appearance  in  the  flesh  of  those  whom  it  attack*
without  any  special  personal  act  of  theirs  to  have  brought  it  on.

II.  Its  slight  beginning.  It  appears  to  be  as  nothing — as  a  mere  spot  in  the  skin,
such  as  often  comes  and  goes  without  injury.

III.  Its  painlessness  in  its  first  stages.  It  does  not  interfere  with  the  common
pleasures  or  occupations  of  life.  There  is  a  spot  which  a  keen  eye  may  obserre,
but  it  causes  no  trouble,  and  men  go  on  anticipating  no  evil  from  it.

IV.  The  slowness  of  its  growth.  "Sometimes  months,  sometimes  years,  even
to  the  extent  of  twenty  or  thirty  years,  intervene  between  the  first  appearance  of  the
spots  and  their  development"  (Gardiner).  "Very  frequently,  even  for  years,  before
the  actual  outbreak  of  the  disease  itself,  white  yellowish  spots  are  seen  lying  deep  in.
the  skin  "  (Trusen, '  Krankheiten  der  Alten  Hebr.').  In  other  cases  it  develops  more
rapidly,  according  to  the  part  of  the  body  in  which  it  has  fixed  itself,  and  the  general
health  of  the  patient.

V.  Its  iNSiDiousNESs.  After  it  has  long  continued  without  producing  mischief,  the
person  affected  recovers  hope,  and  thinks  that  no  harm  will  come  of  it,  but  the  evil
remains,  and  waits  its  time  for  exhibiting  itself,  hiding  itself  meantime  and  lingering
in  the  system.

VI.  Its  resistless  probrbss  if  not  eradicated  immediately  that  it  appears.
"  It  is  asserted  that  it  yields  to  medical  treatment  in  its  earliest  stages,  when  the  spots
first  appear,  and  a  number  of  distinct  cases  of  cure  are  recorded.  After  the  leprosy  ha*
once  acquired  a  certain  degree  of  development,  there  is  no  known  means  of  cure
Everything  hitherto  attempted  has  been  found  to  rather  aggravate  than  mitigate  the
disorder.  It  is  certain  that,  after  it  has  once  become  developed  to  any  considerable
extent,  it  is  incurable  by  any  remedies  at  present  known,  although  spontaneous  cures,
do  sometimes  occur  "  (Gardiner).

VII.  Its  final  hideousness.  First  it  affects  the  hair  around  the  spot,  and  changes.
Its  colour  and  its  character  till  at  last  it  falls  off.  "The  spots  afterwards  pierce
through  the  cellular  tissues  and  reach  the  muscles  and  bone.  Hard  gelatinous
BwelliDgs  are  formed  in  the  cellular  tissue ;  the  skin  gets  hard,  niugh,  and  seamy
lymph  exudes  from  it,  and  forms  large  scabs,  which  fall  off  from  time  to  time  and
under  these  there  are  often  offensive  running  sores.  The  nails  then  swell,  curl  up  anA
fall  off,  entropmm  is  formed,  with  bleeding  gums,  the  nose  stopped  up,  and  aeon-


OH.  xui.  1— 46.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  IM


siderable  flow  of  saliva "  (Trusen).  "  A  characteristic  of  the  disease  is  the  horribly
repulsive  features  of  its  later  stages,  when  the  face  becomes  shockingly  disfigured,
and  often  the  separate  joints  of  the  body  become  mortified  and  drop  ofi"  one  by  one  "
(Gardiner).

VIII.  The  sufferino  entailed  by  it  at  last.  As  if  to  make  up  for  the  pain-
lessness of  its  earlier  stages,  it  not  only  causes  in  its  final  stage  a  constant  pain  of  body,
but  a  distress  of  mind  and  horror  on  the  part  of  the  sufferer  at  having  become  so
loathsome  and  offensive  an  object  to  himself  and  to  others.

IX.  Its  unexpected  ending.  "A  characteristic  of  the  disease  is  its  usually  sudden
and  unexpected  termination  at  the  last,  when  the  leprosy  reaches  some  vital  organ,
and  gives  rise  to  secondary  disease,  often  dysentery,  by  which  life  is  ended  "  (Gardiner).
"  The  patient  gets  thin  and  weak,  diarrhoea  sets  in,  and  incessant  thirst  and  burning
fever  terminate  his  sufferings  "  (Trusen).

X.  Its  likeness  to  a  living  death.  "Leprosy  was  not  merely  the  emblem
of  sin,  but  of  death,  to  which,  so  to  speak,  it  stood  related,  as  does  our  actual  sinfulness
to  our  state  of  sin  and  death  before  God.  A  rabbinical  saying  ranks  lepers  with  those
who  may  be  regarded  as  dead  "  (Edersheim).

In  all  these  respects,  by  the  bodily  state  of  the  leper  was  manifested  and  parabolically
set  forth  the  state  of  the  soul  given  up  to  the  dominion  of  sin.  Like  leprosy,  sin  springs
up  mysteriously  in  the  heart,  owing  to  some  previously  existing  corruption ;  at  first  it
does  not  cause  pain,  but  it  promises  pleasure,  and  gives  some  enjoyment  to  the  senses  ;
its  true  character  is  often  not  developed  for  years,  but  it  gradually  takes  more  and  more
possession  of  the  soul,  till  it  becomes  unconquerable  by  any  internal  or  human  power ;
then  it  shows  itself  in  its  true  form,  repulsive  instead  of  attractive,  full  of  pain  instead
of  pleasure,  ending  in  a  sudden  destruction  and  a  death  of  the  soul.

Conclusion.  1.  Negative.  Avoid  those  things  which  will  bring  the  soul  into  a
state  analogous  to  the  leprous  body.  "  Enter  not  into  the  path  of  the  wicked,  and  go  not
in  the  way  of  evil  men.  Avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it  and  pass  away."  "  For
the  lips  of  a  strange  woman  drop  as  an  honeycomb,  and  her  mouth  is  smoother  than
oil :  but  her  end  is  bitter  as  wormwood,  sharp  as  a  two-edged  sword.  Her  feet  go  down
to  death ;  her  steps  take  hold  on  hell.  .  .  .  Remove  thy  way  far  from  her,  and  come
not  nigh  the  door  of  her  house :  lest  thou  give  thine  honour  unto  others,  and  thy  years
unto  the  cruel :  lest  strangers  be  filled  with  thy  wealth ;  and  thy  labours  be  in  the
house  of  a  stranger;  and  thou  mourn  at  the  last,  when  thy  flesh  and  thy  body
are  consumed,  and  say.  How  have  I  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  despised  reproof;
and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice  of  my  teachers,  nor  inclined  mine  ear  to  them  that
instructed  mel"  "Let  not  thine  heart  decline  to  her  ways,  go  not  astray  in  her
paths.  -For  she  hath  cast  down  many  wounded;  yea,  many  strong  men  have  been
slain  by  her.  Her  house  is  the  way  to  hell,  going  down  to  the  chambers  of  death  "
(Prov.  iv.  14, 15 ;  v.  3—13 ;  vii.  25—27).  2.  Positive.  Seek  those  things  which  will
give  health  and  strength  to  the  souL  "  Happy  is  the  man  that  findeth  wisdom,  and
the  man  that  getteth  understanding.  For  the  merchandise  of  it  is  better  than  the
merchandise  of  silver,  and  the  gain  thereof  than  fine  gold.  She  is  more  precious  than
rubies :  and  all  the  things  thou  canst  desire  are  not  to  be  compared  unto  her.  Length
of  days  is  in  her  right  hand ;  and  in  her  left  hand  riches  and  honour.  Her  ways  are
ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace.  She  is  a  tree  of  life  to  them
that  lay  hold  upon  her:  and  happy  is  every  one  that  retaineth  her"  (Prov.  iii.
13—18).

Vers.  45, 46. — 2%e  extrwion  of  the  leper  from  the  camp  it  a  type  of  exeommtmieatioit
from  the  Christian  Church.  The  right  of  separating  fr&m  the  community  such  as  will
not  submit  to  discipline  belongs  to  all  bodies  secular  and  ecclesiastical.  Civil  societies
exercise  this  right  by  inflicting  the  penalties  of  death,  imprisonment,  or  exile ;  the
Church's  penalty  is  suspension  of  communion,  or  excommunication.  (For  an  ac-
count of  Jewish  and  Christian  excommunication,  as  founded  on  scriptural  authority,
see  article  in  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  iii.  appendix.)

The  purpose  of  the  exclusion  of  the  leper  was  to  prevent  legal  uncleanness  being
spread  by  his  means :  the  purpose  of  the  excommunication  of  the  sinner  is  twofold —  _
partly  for  his  own  benefit,  partly  for  that  of  the  community.    The  power  of  admitting '


200  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xin.  1—46


into  the  Church  and  excluding  from  it  by  the  use  of  the  proper  means  was  promised  tf
St.  Tetir  (Matt.  xvi.  19),  and  given  to  all  the  apostles  (Matt,  xviii.  15—18;  John  xx
23).  The  power  of  admission  was  exercised  every  time  that  baptism  was  administered,
that  jf  exclusion  was  exercised  by  St.  Paul  in  the  case  of  the  incestuous  Corinthian
(1  Cor.  V.  3 — 5),  and  in  the  case  of  Hynienasus  and  Alexander  (1  Tim.  i.  20).  _  St.  Paul
incidentally  states  that  the  purpose  of  their  excommunication  was  (1)  "  to  deliver  such
an  one  unto  Satan,  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the
day  of  the  Lord  Jesus ; "  and  (2)  "  to  purge  out  the  old  leaven,  that  ye  may  be  a  new
lump"(l  Cor.  V.  5,  6).  So  far  as  the  effect  on  others  is  concerned,  the  severance
of  the  leper  has  an  analogous  object  with  that  of  the  severance  of  the  sinner ;  but
the  effect  of  the  Church's  discipline  on  the  soul  of  the  sinner  ought  to  have  a  result
which  the  penalty  inflicted  on  the  leper  could  not  bring  about.  What  this  result
should  be  is  shown  in  the  case  of  the  incestuous  Corinthian.  The  reproof  was  stern
and  the  punishment  sharp,  but  it  produced  repentance,  and  then  the  continuance  of  the
infliction  of  the  penalty  ceased.  "  SufBcient  to  such  a  man  is  this  punishment,  which
was  inflicted  of  many.  So  that  contrariwise  ye  ought  rather  to  forgive  him,  and
comfort  him,  lest  perhaps  such  a  one  should  be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch  sorrow.
Wherefore  I  beseech  you  that  ye  would  confirm  your  love  toward  him "  (2  Cor.  ii.
6 — 8).  Church  discipline  is  a  condition  of  the  well-being  of  the  Church,  and  it  must  be
put  in  practice  in  the  case  of  both  immorality  (1  Cor.  v.)  and  heresy  (1  Tira_.  i.  20),
but  no  Church  discipline  can  have  good  results  which  has  not  for  its  first  object  the
good  of  the  sinner,  and  which  is  not  exercised  in  the  spirit  of  love.  There  have  been
periods  in  the  history  of  the  Church  when  a  sincere  desire  to  prevent  contamination  by
supposed  heterodox  teaching  has  wrought  far  more  harm  than  could  have  been  produced
by  any  amount  of  liberty  or  licence,  whether  of  thought,  or  speech,  or  act.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES,

The  diagnosis  of  sin  as  illustrated  in  the  leprosy.  Ch.  xiii. ;  cf.  2  King*  v. ;  Ps.
Ixxxviii. ;  Matt.  viii.  1 — 4 ;  Luke  v.  12 — 15.  The  preceding  chapter  brings  forward
sin  as  an  inheritance  through  ordinary  generation.  No  thorough  sense  or  treatment
of  sin  can  be  reached  unless  it  is  recognized  as  a  nature.  But  God  went  further  in  his
education  of  his  people.  He  took  one  disease  with  unmistakable  characteristics ;  he
legislated  about  it,  doomed  the  possessor  of  it  to  a  certain  treatment,  and  so  made  plain
to  all  his  attitude  towards  sin.

The  case  of  Naaman  (2  Kings  v.)  demonstrates  that  leprosy  was  not  treated  in  Syria
as  it  was  among  the  Jews.  Though  a  leper,  he  could  enjoy  the  society  of  his  family,
wait  upon  his  king,  and  command  the  army.  The  disease  entailed  no  penalties  at
Damascus  such  as  existed  in  Samaria.  No  sanitary  solution,  therefore,  of  this  Mosaic
law  will  satisfy  the  conditions;  we  must  look  to  moral  and  spiritual  considerations
for  the  solution.^  Hence  we  are  constrained  to  start  with  the  canon  of  interpretation
that  leprosy  was  a  disease  selected  for  treatment  among  the  Jews  to  illustrate  the  treat-
ment of  sin.

I.    As   BOON  AS  THE  DISEASE   IS   SUSPECTED,  THE  PERSON  IS  TO  60,  OR  BE  BROUGHT,  NOT

TO  A  PHTsiciAN,  BUT  TO  ONE  OF  THE  PRIESTS.  This  took  it  out  of  the  Category  of
diseases  curable  by  ordinary  means.  Hence  the  term  for  "  leprosy  "  (njnx,  from  Vl»,
to  strike  down)  signifies  "the  stroke  of  God."  It  was  deemed  a  Divine  infliction,
which,  if  not  divinely  cured,  would  terminate  fatally,  and,  though  not  disseminated  by
contact,  was  transmissible  from  parent  to  child.  In  handing  it  over  in  such  circum-
stances for  religious  treatment,  there  was  afforded  one  of  the  most  striking  illustrations
of  the  nature  of  sin.  Sin  is  a  disease  which  none  but  the  Divine  Physician  can  cure.
All  effort  at  self-cure,  all  effort  after  merely  human  cure,  is  unavailing.  Of  course,
sinners  are  induced  to  believe  in  the  curability  of  the  incurable,  else  there  would  be  nc
sale  for  many  a  "  patent  medicine,"  and  no  opening  for  many  a  spiritual  in.posture.
But  God  has  made  it  sufficiently  plain,  by  statement  and  illustration,  that  sin  is  i

'  Of  Trench  'On  the  Miracles.'  Uie  chapter  on  '  The  Cleansmg  of  the  Leper.'


at  xm.  1—46.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  tOl

disease  with  which  only  he  himself  can  deal.     Hence  he  handed  its  symbol,  the  leprosy,
to  a  priest,  and  not  to  a  physician.

II.  The  pbibst,  is  investigatino  the  disease,  is  to  ascbbtain  tthetheb  it  is
iuPEKEiciAi.  OB  VITAL.  It  may  be  only  a  "scab"  or  a  "burning  boil,"  a  mere
superficial  eruption,  in  which  case  the  priest  is  to  comfort  the  patient  with  the
assurance  that  he  is  clean.  But  if  the  disease  is  seen  to  go  down  into  the  vitals  of  the
patient,  to  be  deep  and  hidden,  then  the  priest  is  to  pronounce  him  unclean.

For  sin  is  no  superficial  matter,  but  a  vital  and  fatal  evil.  It  eats  below  the  appear-
ances into  the  very  vitals  of  the  being,  and,  unless  divinely  checked,  must  run  its  fatal
course.

III.  The  penalty  or  pbonouncbd  leprosy  is  a  living  death,  and  a  consequent
EXCLUSION  PEOM  THE  CAMP  OP  GoD.  "  The  leper  in  whom  the  plague  is,  his  clothes
shall  be  rent,  and  his  head  bare,  and  he  shall  put  a  covering  upon  his  upper  lip,  and
shall  cry,  Unclean,  unclean.  All  the  days  wherein  the  plague  shall  be  in  him  he  shall
be  defiled ;  he  is  imclean  :  he  shall  dwell  alone ;  without  the  camp  shall  his  habitation
be  "  (vers.  45,  46).    It  is  instructive  to  analyze  this  sentence.    And —

1.  The  leper  was  to  regard  himself  as  virtually  a  dead  man.  This  is  implied  by
the  rent  clothes  and  the  bare  head,  the  signs  of  Oriental  mourning,  He  was  to  be  his
own  chief  mourner.  .  The  same  idea  was  carried  out  in  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  mass
for  the  dead  was  said  over  the  leper.  Longfellow  refers  to  thu  ia  hia  '  Golden
Legend,'  when  he  says  of  Prince  Henry —

"  Why,  In  Saint  BochuB
They  made  him  stand,  and  wait  his  duom ;
And,  as  if  he  were  condemned  to  the  tomb|
Began  to  mutter  their  hocus-pocus.
First,  the  mass  for  the  dead  they  chauuted.
Then  three  times  laid  upon  his  head
A  shovelful  of  churchyard  clay,
Saying  to  him,  as  he  stood  undaunted,
*  This  is  a  sign  that  thou  ait  dead ;
Bo  in  thy  heart  be  penitent  1 '
And  forth  from  the  chapel  door  he  went
Into  disgrace  and  banishment,
Clothed  in  a  cloak  of  liodden  gray,
And  beating  a  wallet,  and  a  bell.
Whose  sound  should  be  a  perpetual  knell
To  keep  all  travellers  away."

In  tbe  leper  we  have,  therefore,  the  finest  possible  illustration  of  what  iplrltnal  death
is.  It  is  not  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  but  a  state  of  consciousness.  A  sense  of
hopeless  doom  goes  to  make  up  this  living  death.  Here  have  we  vividly  presented
what  "  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  must  mean.  2.  The  leper  was  to  cry  out  as  he
met  a  passenger, "  Unclean,  unclean  1 "  That  is,  he  was  to  encourage  the  consciousness  of
personal  uncleanness.  In  no  way  could  a  penitent  spirit  be  more  powerfully  illustrated.
A  perpetual  humiliation  was  thus  kept  up,  a  sense  of  vileness  and  uncleanuess,  which  is
wholesome  for  the  soul.  Doubtless  the  sense  of  uncleanness  might  be  impenitent ;  the
poor  leper  might  regard  himself  as  a  victim  of  providence  instead  of  one  deserving  the
stroke.  But  his  cry  is  a  very  vivid  representation  of  what  humiliation  for  sin  should  be.
3.  The  leper  must  isolate  himself  from  the  society  of  the  pure,  and  dwell  without  the
camp.  Isolation  is  what  the  leper  is  required  to  enter,  and  what  we  may  be  sure  he
does  enter  willingly.  To  a  doomed  man  like  him,  contact  with  the  clean  and  pure
would  be  painful.  Isolation  would  be  easier  to  bear  than  society.  So  is  it  with  sin.
It  is  an  isolating,  repellent  power.  The  sinner  would  not  choose  the  society  of  the
holy.  Heaven  would  be  a  more  painful  place  for  a  sinful  soul  than  Gehenna  itself.
Hence  we  find  in  Eev.  xxi.  that  while  the  new  Jerusalem  is  to  have  nothing  that
defileth  within  it,  no  precaution  to  ensure  this  is  needed ;  the  gates  remain  open,  for
sinners  would  not,  even  if  they  could,  court  the  society  of  the  holy.

The  isolating  power  of  sin  maybe  illustrated  from  the  case  of  Byroa.  Two  quofak
tions  are  worth  giving  in  this  connection.


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xui.  1— 4ft


"  I  loved— but  those  I  loved  are  gone ;

Had  friends — my  early  friends  are  Sed*
How  cheerless  feels  the  heart  alone,

When  all  its  former  hopes  are  dead !
Though  giiy  companions  o'er  the  bowl

Dispel  awhile  the  sense  of  ill ;
Though  pleasure  stirs  the  maddening  sonl.

The  heart — the  heart — is  louuly  still."

And  Bg^n  in  the  stanzas  written  at  Missolonghi,  when  he  was  thirty-six—

"My  days  are  in  the  yellow  leaf;

The  flowers  and  fruits  of  love  are  gone:
The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  griuf
Are  mine  alone  I

"  The  fire  that  on  my  bosom  preys
Is  lone  as  some  volcanic  isle  ;
No  torcli  is  kindled  at  its  blaze —
A  funeral  pile."

Was  it  not  to  taste  the  full  consequences  of  human  sin  that  our  Lord  had  to  enter  the
desolation  which  constrained  the  cry  on  the  cri)S3,  "  My  Grod,  my  God,  why  hast  thou
forsaken  me?"

IV.  On  the  other  hand,  the  priest  is  directed  how  he  mat  ascertain  whkn
THE  LEPEOST  HAS  BEEN  CUBED.  For  this  direction  contemplates  cases  of  cure,  where
"  the  stroke  of  God "  in  the  leprosy  has  been  followed  up  by  the  mercy  of  God  in
removing  it.  Now,  one  general  principle  runs  through  the  cases  of  cure.  If  the  priest
has  evidence  that  the  disease  has  all  come  to  the  suiface,  then  he  is  to  pronounce  the
leper  clean.  The  spiritual  counterpart  of  this  is  not  far  to  seek.  If  sin  be  hidden,  it
the  sinner,  like  the  Psalmist,  keep  silence  about  it,  then  his  bones  wax  old  through  his
roaring  all  the  day  long,  and  his  moisture  is  turned  into  the  drought  of  summer  (Ps.
xxxii.  3,  4).  But  if  the  sinner  confesses  his  sin,  acknowledges  all  he  knows,  and  that
there  is  much  besides  known  only  to  the  Lord — in  a  word,  if  the  sinner  makes  "  a  clean
breast "  of  everything,  then  is  the  cure  of  God  in  process  of  accomplishment.  The
lesson  here  is  consequently  the  great  desirability  of  a  full  and  heartfelt  confession  of
sin.    There  is  hope  of  a  man  when  he  hides  nothing  from  the  Lord.

V.  Man  should  be  as  careful  about  his  environment  ab  about  himself.
It  is  evident  from  the  possibility  of  leprosy  infecting  garments,  and  even  houses,  that
the  disease  was  contemplated  as  having  a  much  wider  range  than  the  person  of  the
leper.  The  directions  given  to  the  priest,  moreover,  contemplate  the  purification  of
man's  surroundings.  Every  effort  is  to  be  made  to  stamp  out  the  plague.  The  pure  or
purified  are  to  be  surrounded  by  the  pure.

Now,  this  conveys  the  spiritual  lesson  surely  of  man  taking  the  utmost  pains  to  have
a  pure  atmosphere,  so  to  speak,  in  which  to  cultivate  purity  of  life.  Wherever  sin  is
allowed  free  play,  it  vriU  extend  its  ravages  to  man's  environment.  The  world  itself  is
a  different  world  through  man's  sin.  The  duty  of  God's  people  in  this  case  is  plain.
"  The  very  appearance  of  evil "  mast  be  avoided  (1  Thess.  v.  522).  We  must  carefully
keep  ourselves  unspotted  from  the  world  (Jas.  i.  27).  Whenever  we  find  sin  tempt-
ing us,  we  must,  if  possible,  have  it  removed  and  consumed.  Does  it  meet  us  in
literature  ?  let  us  avoid  it,  and,  if  possiblfe,  destroy  it.  And  even  the  ravages  of  sin
in  the  wotld  itself  must  be  contemplated  in  the  hope  of  having  them  one  day  completely
removed.  Let  sin  be  slain  in  the  light  of  day  is  the  great  practical  lesson  of  this
chapter. — R.  M.  B.

Vers.  1 — 59. — Leprosy.  That  leprosy  is  a  type  of  sin  is  evident  from  David's  allu-
«ion  in  confessing  his  own  horrible  offences  (see  Ps.  li.  7).  This  also  appears  from  the
words  of  Jesus  to  the  only  leper,  out  of  the  ten  cleansed  by  him,  who  returned  to  give
glory  to  God:  "  Thy  faith  hath  saved  ihee"  (see  Luke  xvii.  11 — 19).  The  others  had
faith  which  availed  them  to  remove  the  leprosy  of  the  body ;  but  this  man's  faith
availed  to  remove  the  leprosy  of  the  soul.    Hence  this  plague  often  came  as  a  judgment


CH.  xin.  1— 46.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITIOUa  203

from  Heaven  upon  sin  (see  Numb.  xii.  10 ;  2  Kings  v.  27  ;  2  Chron.  xxvi.  19),  from  which
ciroumstarice,  perhaps,  it  had  its  name  (npi»),  tsaraath,  from  (pnv),  tsaro,  to  smite.  As
there  is  no  disease  whose  description  engages  so  much  space  in  Scripture,  leprosy  must
be  regaided  as  a  very  special  type  of  sin.

I.  It  is  a  plaque  most  loathsome.  .  1.  So  it  is  described.  (1)  According  to  Scrip-
ture it  appeared  in  a  "  rising,"  or  "  scab,"  or  "  bright  spot "  (ver.  2).  Prom  one  or
more  of  these  centres  it  "spread"  (vers.  8,  12,  22,  36),  exhibiting  "quick  raw  flesh"
(vers.  10,  15),  and  this  as  it  dried  turned  to  a  white  scurf  (ver.  13).  Job  is,  by  some,
supposed  to  have  been  aflSicted  with  leprosy  (see  Job  vii.  5).  (2)  Travellers  give
frightful  accounts  of  it.  Maundrell  describes  it  as  he  witnessed  it  in  Palestine,  and
states  it  to  be  "  the  utmost  corriiption  of  the  human  body  at  this  side  the  grave."  2.  /»
not  this  a  true  picture  of  sin  »  (1)  View  it  in  the  haunts  of  the  "  criminal  classes."
What  spectacles  are  witnessed  in  police  courts !  what  distortion  of  features,  what  muti-
lations, the  humanity  almost  battered  out  of  them  through  the  violences  of  dissipation  I
(2)  No  less  loathsome  to  the  eye  of  God  are  the  hearts  of  many  who  outwardly  seem
respectable  (Jer.  xvii.  9).  Sin  is  called  "  corruption,"  and  seducers  to  sin  "  corrupters  "
(Eph.  iv.  22 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  19).     Learn  to  loathe  sin.

II.  It  IS  A  DISEASE  DEEPLY  SEATED.  1.  Surfcux  tvUs  may  te  mistaken  for  sin.
(1)  When  symptoms  go  no  deeper  than  the  skin,  they  are  no  proof  of  leprosy  (vers.  4,
84).  Erroifs  of  judgment  sometimes  are  mistaken  for  sins.  Sincere  Christians  should
be  careful  not  to  condemn  themselves  when  God  does  not  condemn  them.  (2)  Surface
evils  may  be  very  painful.  There  were  "burning  boils,"  which  did  not  compromise
the  cleanness  of  the  sufferer  (vers.  23,  28).  So  may  we  smart  under  reproaches  and
scandals  raised  by  the  malignity  of  enemies,  and  perhaps  sometimes  through  our  own
unwisiom,  which  Gud  will  not  impute  to  us  for  sin.  2.  When  the  evil  is  in  the  flesh
'there  is  undeanness.  (1)  This  was  a  capital  test  of  leprosy  (vers.  3,  20,  30).  This
disease  may  be  handed  down  from  father  to  son  (see  2  Kings  v.  27).  So  sin  is  "  that
which  cometh  out  of  the  heart "  (Matt.  xv.  18^-20 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  7 ;  Titus  i.  15 ;  Heb.
xii.  15,  16).  Like  its  type,  sin  also  is  hereditary  (Rom.  v.  12).  (2)  Mental  rebellion
against  God  is  of  the  worse  kind.  Hence  the  enipliasis  with  which  the  undeanness
of  the  leper  is  pronounced  whose  leprosy  is  in  his  he  id  (see  vers.  43,  44),  Satan  is
intellect  without  God.    Keep  a  pure  faith  and  it  will  keep  you.

III.  It  is  a  MALADY  FBAKFCLLY  CONTAGIOUS.  1.  Stich' was  the  figure.  (1)  Leprosy
works  secretly  at  first,  and  for  years  may  be  concealed.  Its  early  appearance  may  be
limited  to  a  pimple ;  but  so  rapidly  does  it  spread  that  "  seven  days  "  may  be  suflficient
for  it  to  become  pronounced  (vers.  22,  27,  36).  (2)  It  may  pass  from  the  leper  to  his
neighbour.  Robinson  says,  "  That  it  was  contagious,  all  histories,  sacred  and  profane,
agree "(' Theological  Dictionary ').  It  was  therefore  necessary  to  provide  that  lepers
should  dwell  apart  (ver.  46 ;  Numb.  xii.  15 ;  2  Chron.  xxvii.  21).  (3)  Property  as  well
as  persons  caught  the  plague.  Garments  had  to  be  destroyed  for  it  (ver.  52).  Houses
also  (ch.  xiv.  45).  2.  The  reality  answers  to  the  figure.  (1)  Sin  in  the  individual
gathers  strength  by  habit,  and  infects  the  faculties  until  the  heart  is  sick,  the  head
faint,  and  the  whole  man  is  a  mass  of  moral  putrescence  (Isa.  i.  6).  (2)  By  precept  and
example  he  demoralizes  his  neighbours,  and  brings  down  the  judgments  of  Heaven
upon  .them  (Josh.  vii.  1,  11,  12 ;  Eccles.  ix.  18).  (3)  The  plague  of  sin  affects  the
material  prosperity  of  individuals  and  of  nations.  No  wonder  the  leper  should  be
accounted  ceremonially  unclean,  and  the  sinner  avoided  by  the  holy  universe. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 59. — The  priesfs  adjudication.  We  have  considered  the  plague  of  leprosy
as  an  emblem  of  sin ;  the  adjudication  upon  it  will  suggest  thoughts  concerning  the
treatment  of  sin.  In  this  business  the  principal  actor  was  the  priest,  who  must  be
viewed  as  the  type  of  Christ.  The  judgment  in  this  case  will  be  disciplinary  rather
than  final ;  for  when  Messiah  will  come  to  judge  the  world  at  the  last  day,  he  will
appear  not  as  a  priest  but  as  a  king.  We  are  now  concerned  with  the  functions  of  the
priest.

I.  He  had  to  exahike  the  suspected  person.  1.  In  this  he  proceeded  according
to  the  Law.  (»>  He  had  his  rules  for  determining  the  presence  of  the  plague.  (2)  So
by  the  Word  of  God  is  our  moral  cleanness  or  undeanness  to  be  determined  (Rom.
ii.  13 ;  iii.  20 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25 ;  Jas.  i.  22—25  ;  ii.  9).     (3)  Conviction  is  carried


204  THE   BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xiu.  1— Id


home  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  2.  When  the  case  was  dubious  judgment  was  deferred.
(1)  Meanwhile  the  suspected  person  was  "  shut  up  "  (vers.  4,  21,  31)  that  opportunity
might  be  given  for  the  manifestation  of  the  symptoms.  So  are  sinners  "  shut  up  "  by
the  Law  to  the  faith  of  the  gospel  (see  Horn.  xi.  32,  margin ;  Gal.  iii.  23).  (2)  At  the
end  of  "  seven  days  "  judgment  was  given ;  or,  if  the  symptoms  were  not  then  sufficiently
manifest,  a  second  period  of  seven  days  was  allowed,  which  was  the  final  term.  Could
these  periods  refer  to  the  dispensations  of  our  probation  ?  In  this  case  the  leper  must
be  taken  to  personate  a  class  of  sinner  according  to  the  type  of  his  disease,  whether
proceeding  from  the  "rising,"  or  the  "boil,"  or  the  "scab."  In  any  case,  a  sufficient
probation  is  given  us  in  this  world  for  the  manifestation  of  our  real  character,  which
probation  we  should  be  careful  to  improve.  3.  A  leprous  garment  was  treated  as  repre-
senting its  owner.  (1)  It  had  to  be  inspected  by  the  priest  for  his  judgment  and
sentence,  as  though  it  had  been  a  person.  In  case  the  pbgue  in  it  were  not  pronounced,
it  had  to  be  "shut  up"  and  examined  again  after  the  same  intervals  of  "  seven  days"
(vers.  50,  54).  The  expense  and  trouble  of  this,  particularly  if  it  had  to  be  brought
from  a  distance,  would  be  as  much  as  the  garment  was  worth,  so  that  the  Law  is  un-
accountable unless  it  was  intended  to  serve  a  typical  purpose.  (2)  Agabus  the  prophet
made  Paul's  girdle  emblematically  to  represent  that  apostle  (Acts  xxi.  11).  The
"  owner "  of  a  leprous  house,  obviously  for  the  same  reason,  had  to  "  come'  and  tell
the  priest"  (ch.  xiv.  35).  (3)  The  washing  of  the  garment  in  this  case  suggests  the
washing  of  regeneration.

II.  He  had  to  pbonouncb  upon  him.     1.  In  some  cases  the  verdict  was  an  acquittal.
(1)  If  the  suspected  leprosy  proved  to  be  but  a  surface  evil,  the  subject  was  pronounced
clean  (ver.  6).     Jesus  does  not  mark  as  sins  infirmities  which  spring  not  from  an  evil
nature.     The  person  acquitted,  however,  had  to  wash  his  clothes  (ver.  34).     There  is
no  person  so  faultless  as  not  to  need  the  laver  of  regeneration.  (2)  If  a  leper  be  "  white
all  over,"  no  proud  flesh,  no  ichor,  being  visible,  he  is  pronounced  clean  (ver.  13).     The
virulence  of  the  disease  is  over ;  God's  mercy  has  reached  him ;  the  sinner  is  forgiven.
But  the  marks  of  an  old  dissipation  often  remain  after  forgiveness.    Though  now  clean,
there  can  be  no  question  that  he  had  been  a  leper.   (3)  Another  case  is  given.    A  leper,
supposing  his  disease  gone,  presents  himself  to  the  priest  for  his  cleansing;  but  the
priest,  discovering  "  raw  flesh,"  sends  him  away  unclean ;  in  time,  however,  he  becomes
cured,  returns  to  the  priest,  and  on  the  second  application  is  pronounced  clean  (ver.
17).    This  case  is  like  that  of  the  sinner  whose  repentance  is  not  perfect,  and  at  the
altar  he  discovers  that  until  he  is  reconciled  to  a  brother  whom  he  had  wronged  hii
gift  cannot  be  accepted ;  the  reconciliation  made,  he  returns  and  finds  the  favour  of
God  (Matt.  v.  23,  24).     2.  In  other  cases  the  judgment  was  "  Unclean."    (1)  When
the  plague  is  pronounced,  as  in  cases  of  "old  leprosy,"  deliberation  was  unnecessary;
judgment  came  speedily  (vers.  10,  11).    So  with  the  openly  wicked  (Ps.  ix.  16 ;  Prov.
V.  22 ;  xi.  5).    (2)  In  all  cases  evidence  must  be  clear.    Time,  therefore,  was  given  for
the  plague  to  pronounce  itself.    So,  before  judgment  could  overtake  the  Amorites,  their
iniquity  must  be  full  (Gen.  xv.  16 ;  see  also  Dan.  viii.  23  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  32,  33 ;  1  Thess.
ii.  16).     (3)  Jesus  is  unerring  in  his  judgments.    He  is  the  faithful  as  well  as  merciful
High  Priest.    3.  Tlie  sentence.    (1)  The  leper  has  to  dwell  without  the  camp  (ver.  46).
So  must  the  open  sinner  be  put  out  of  the  Church  (see  1  Cor.  v.  11 — 13).     Hypocrites
and  unbelievers,  though  in  the  Church  in  the  visible  part,  are  not  recognized  by  God
as  members  of  the  Church  in  the  spiritual  part.    (2)  The  leper  has  to  behave  as  an
excommunicate  seeking  for  the  mercy  of  God.    His  clothes  are  rent  to  express  extreme
grief  and  sorrow.     His  head  is  bare,  turban  less,  to  express  deep  humiliation.    He  put
a  covering  upon  his  upper  lip ;  had  his  jaw  tied  up  with  a  linen  cloth  as  a  corpse,  to
express  his  state  as  that  of  a  living  death  (see  2  Kings  v.  7 ;  Ezek.  xxiv.  17),  and  he
was  to  cry  "  Unclean ! "  (ver.  45).    When  we  confess  that  we  are  dead  in  trespasses  and
sins,  and  sorrow  to  repentance,  there  is  hope  for  us  in  God.     (3)  But  as  the  garment
that  remains  unclean  after  two  washings,  to  save  it  from  destruction  must  have  the
leprous  piece  rent  from  it ;  so  if  a  "  right  hand  "  or  "  right  eye  "  prevent  us  from  realizing
the  benefits  of  redemption,  they  must  be  separated  (ver.  56).    But  if  all  efforts  to  save
the  garment  fail,  then  its  doom  is  to  be  burnt  (see  Matt.  v.  29, 30 ;  xviii.  8, 9).— J.  A.  M.

Vera.  45,  46. — A  picture  of  sin.    The  stringent  rules  for  the  treatment  of  the  leper


uH.  xm.  1— 46.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  205

»re  not  sufBciently  explained  by  sanitary  considerations.  The  Jews  saw  in  the  leper
a  symbol  of  the  sinner  visited  with  the  displeasure  of  God.  His  was  a  stroke  of
smiting  ("plague  of  leprosy  ")  from  the  hand  of  Jehovah,  which  made  him  "utterly
unclean "  (ver.  44).  The  instructions  of  this  chapter  may  convey  to  us  important
truth  respecting  the  sinner's  condition.  To  behold  it  thus  forcibly  depicted  may
administer  a  wholesome  warning.

I.  The  cobbuption  effected  by  sin.  Cannot  but  shudder  at :  1.  Its  loathsomeness,
destroying  man's  appearance,  making  him  offensive  to  the  sight.  How  abominable  is
wickedness  to  the  pure  eyes  of  God,  and  if  our  moral  sense  were  keener,  what  constant
shocks  should  we  receive  from  the  wicked  conduct  of  men  I  What  want  of  taste  to
indulge  in  sin  1  what  disharmony  of  relationship  it  introduces !  2.  Note  its  tendency  to
spread  until  it  becomes  total.  The  commission  of  one  crime  often  leads  to  another
which  still  more  impairs  the  soul;  the  inordinate  gratification  of  appetit«  m  one
direction  is  provocative  of  intemperance  in  another ;  to  lose  modesty  is  often  to  lose
natural  affection.  At  last  the  whole  constitution  betrays  the  effects  of  sin,  body,  mind,
and  spirit  are  alike  unpleasant  to  contemplate.  3.  Its  destruction  of  vital  power.  It
was  termed  by  the  Jews  a  "  living  death."  Of  its  worst  form,  where  the  limbs  mortify
and  drop  off,  no  special  mention  is  made  in  the  Law ;  indeed,  the  supposition  is  that,
after  the  expiration  of  a  certain  time,  the  disease  will  have  so  spread  as  to  become  harm-
less, and  the  man  may  be  termed  "clean"  (ver.  17).  The  disease  appears  to  have
become  more  malignant  in  subsequent  ages,  and  thus  to  typify  even  more  accurately
the  waste  of  strength  produced  by  evil  habits.  The  mental  and  moral  faculties  are
enervated  by  sin,  the  sinner  is  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will.  To  understand  a
principle  we  must  push  its  application  to  extreme  consequences,  and  if  we  would
entertain  fitting  conceptions  of  sin  we  must  regard  it  not  when  most  refined,  not  when
in  its  commencement,  but  in  its  gross  final  results.  To  dread  fire,  thiak  of  the  con-
flagration that  visits  a  town  with  disorder  and  ruin !

II.  The  exclusion  it  entails  from  holt  privileges.  The  leper  was  separate
from  the  people  and  the  sanctuary.  1.  Contact  with  the  sinner  defiles,  except  in
appointed  cases,  where  the  servant  of  God  in  fulfilment  of  duty  (as  the  priest  in
examination)  seeks  out  the  moral  leper.  If  men  mingle  with  sinners,  having  Christ's
end  in  view,  to  do  them  good,  the  association  is  pardoned.  Otherwise  "one  sinner
destroyeth  much  good,"  "  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners."  Men  should
naturally  shun  the  company  of  the  debased  as  they  would  the  presence  of  those
afOicted  with  an  infectious  disease.  2.  The  semhlance  of  sin  must  be  guarded  against.
All  that  appears  like  it  (vers.  5,  6)  needs  suspicious  treatment.  Better  to  err  on  the
safe  side,  not  pronouncing  at  first  decidedly,  but  watching  the  operation  of  a  plan,  or
society,  or  principle,  and  ere  long  its  true  character  will  be  manifested  by  development.
3.  Continuance  in  sin  means  separation  from  the  Church  and  the  fellowship  of  right-
minded  people.  The  leper  must  "  dwell  alone,  without  the  camp."  Our  Lord  and  his
apostles  insisted  on  the  maintenance  of  discipline  in  Christian  bodies.  The  persistent
sinner  will  find  himself  eventually  cut  off  from  intercourse  with  his  former  friends,  for
ungodliness  is  an  effectual  barrier,  creating  uncongeniality  of  sentiment  and  behaviour.
t.  Dismission  from  the  presence  of  Ood  is  the  worst  penalty  of  sin.  The  Psalmist
might  lament  his  enforced  absence  irom  the  tabernacle  where  he  had  seen  the  power
and  glory  of  God ;  but  how  much  more  the  man  who  was  so  near  the  hill  of  Zion,  and
yet  so  far  off  by  reason  of  symbolical  impurity  !  Sin  kept  God  and  man  asunder,  and
to  remove  it  came  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  awful  sentence  finally  pronounced  upon
the  unrighteous  is  "  Depart  from  me  1 "  What  absence  of  joy  and  peace  and  love  is
contained  in  the  words,  "  the  outer  darkness  " !

III.  The  expressions  op  feeling  that  befit  the  sinner's  state.  1.  Orief.
The  leper  wore  the  garb  of  mourning.  There  needs  the  godly  sorrow  that  worketh
repentance.  Eeflect  not  simply  upon  the  sad  consequences  of  sin,  estrangement  from
God,  deprivation  of  his  favour,  but  upon  their  source,  and  learn  to  hate  sin  as  an
abomination.  2.  Humiliation.  The  uncovered  head  attested  the  leper's  shame.  "I
abhor  myself"  is  fitting  language  for  polluted  lips.  3.  Acknowledgment  of  guilt.
Listen  to  the  cry,  "  Unclean ! "  The  upper  lip  was  shrouded  in  a  covering  that
enjoined  general  silence,  except  on  the  approach  of  a  stranger,  who  might  be  thereby
defiled.    "  We  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing."    When  sin  lies  heavily  upon  the  conscience.


206  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xin.  1— 46.


it  is  felt  to  be  no  time  for  ordinary  conversation,  much  less  for  frivolous  gossip,  though
under  such  a  veil  anxiety  is  often  hid.

CoNOLDSiON.  By  the  Law  was  the  knowledge  of  sin,  but  by  the  gospel  is  proclaimed
its  remedy,  forgiveness  and  sanctification  through  Christ.  The  priest  was  not  depen-
dent upon  his  own  judgment,  but  was  guided  by  fixed  rules  in  deciding  upon  leprous
cases.  Yet  he  did  not  heal ;  the  sufferer  was  left  to  nature's  care,  and  to  indulge  the
vague  hope  of  recovery.  The  gospel  bids  all  sinners  lay  aside  their  fears  and  rejoice  in
a  panacea  that  never'fails.  The  interposition  of  God  by  prophets  which  resulted  in
miraculous  cures  of  leprosy  prepared  the  way  for  the  marvellous  works  of  the
Redeemer,  who  evinced  by  his  restoring  the  body  to  health  his  power  also  to  heal  the
soul.  Thus  what  was  faintly  foreshadowed  under  the  old  dispensation  has  been
brightly  revealed  in  the  new.  The  enumeration  of  the  feelings  appropriate  to  the
Biiinor  is  incomplete,  therefore,  without  adding  to  them  hope,  in  the  sense  not  of  wishful
longing,  but  of  certain  anticipation  of  salvation. — S.  K.  A.

Ver.  3. — "  It  is  a  plague  of  leprosy."  The  chosen  type  of  tin — its  individual  aspect.
The  conjecture  that  leprosy  was  contracted  by  the  children  of  Israel  in  the  hot  and
dusty  brick-fields  of  Egypt  is  probable  enough.  The  definition  that  it  was  "  any
seveie  disease  spreading  on  the  surface  of  the  body  in  the  way  described  in  the  chapter,
and  so  shocking  of  aspect  .  .  .  that  public  feeling  called  for  separation,"  is  near
enough  for  our  purpose.  There  can  be  no  question  that  it  was  the  divinely  choien
type  of  sin.

All  disease  is  pictorial  of  sin.  It  is  to  our  bodily  frame  the  very  thing  that  sin  ig
to  our  soul.  Sin  is  the  derangement  or  disorder  of  the  soul,  as  sickness  is  of  the  body.
It  is  an  inward  disorder,  showing  itself  in  some  outward  manifestation  of  a  displeasing
or  painful  character.  It  is  something  wrong  within — some  faculty  (organ)  not  doing
what  it  was  made  to  do,  or  doing  what  it  was  not  meant  to  do,  causing  disturbance  and
distress.  But  leprosy  was  selected  by  the  Divine  Ruler  of  Israel  as  a  disease  which
should  be  regarded  by  his  people  as  specially  typical  and  suggestive  of  sin.  It  was
admirably  fitted  so  to  be,  whether  looked  at  in  its  individual  or  in  its  social  aspect.  We
will  take  the  former  first.

I.  The  obscurity  of  its  obioin^.  By  what  sad  and  strange  process  came  it  to
pass  that  man's  bodily  frame — fashioned  by  the  Divine  Creator,  mule  clean  and  pure,
wholesome  and  fair — has  become  the  seat  of  such  a  foul  disorder  ?  How  can  it  be  that
the  little  child  whose  flesh  is  beautiful  and  spotless,  the  very  picture  of  all  that  is  clean
and  sweet,  grows  up  into  a  man  who  is  "full  of  leprosy,"  covered  from  head  to  foot
with  revolting  sores  ?  And  whence  came  sin  into  the  sovd  and  life  of  man  ?  How  came
it  here  to  blot  and  mar  God's  fair  creation?  How  comes  it  to  pass  that  into  the  heart
of  the  innocent  and  lovely  child  there  enters  the  very  vilest  spirit,  showing  itself  in  the
most  shocking  words  and  the  most  revolting  deeds,  in  later  life  ?

II.  Its  stubboknness.  When,  after  seven  days,  the  Hebrew  priest  could  see  no
signs  of  true  leprosy,  he  did  not  pronounce  the  patient  clean :  he  shut  him  up  other
seven  days  (ver.  5),  and  examined  him  again.  Leprosy  was  a  tenacious  and  stubborn
disease,  disappearing  and  reappearing.  After  a  long  interval  it  might,  under  exciting
cause,  come  once  again  to  the  surface.  How  like  the  afliction  of  the  soul — sin !  How
tenacious  is  its  hold  on  the  human  heart !  It  disappears  and  we  are  grateful,  con-
gratulatory, triumphant.  But  the  inducing  circumstances,  the  favourable  conditions
uise  and  conspire,  and  behold  there  is  its  hateful  face  again.  We  "would  do  good,"
we  resolve  to  do  good,  but,  alas !  "  evil  is  present  with  us  "  once  more  (Rom.  vii.  21).

III.  Its  dbathpulness.  The  outward  appearance  was  due  to  inward  derangement ;
the  springs  of  health  were  poisoned ;  the  internal  processes  necessary  to  health  were
stayed ;  and  the  consequence  was  that  feature  after  feature,  limb  after  limb,  decayed
and  fell  away.  The  man  was  in  a  constant  process  of  dissolution.  It  was  death  above
the  ground— death  in  a  living  form !  Sin  is  death.  The  soul  that  lives  in  sin  is  "  dead
while  it  lives."  It  is  not  that  which  it  was  created  to  be,  does  not  that  which  it  was
created  to  do.  Its  spiritual  faculties  (the  organs  and  members  of  the  soul)  &re  in  a  state
of  continual  dissolution,  becoming  feebler  and  feebler,  till  they  are  wholly  lost.  It  is  a
living  death.

IV.  Its  iNcuRABLBNEss  BY  MAN.   The  Jews  did  not  bring  the  physician  to  the  leper  ;


«a.  xm.  1— 46.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  207

they  regarded  leprosy  as  a  visitation  from  God,  and  considered  it  incurable  by  human
art.  Sin  is  incurable  by  mere  human  methods.  Rules  for  the  regulation  of  human
conduct ;  pledges  or  vows  of  abstinence  from  particular  temptations ;  parental,  magis-
terial, social  vigilance ;  penalties  inflicted  by  ourself  or  by  others  for  disobedience ; —
these  are  well  enough  in  their  way.  They  are  sometimes  desirable,  sometimes  necessary ;
but  they  do  not  cure.  Nothing  human  will  cure  the  souI'b  disorder ;  only  the  Almighty
Hand  can  minister  to  the  "  mind  diseased."

When  Jesus  Christ  would  prove  to  John  that  he  was  indeed  the  "  One  that  should
come,"  and  that  there  was  no  need  to  "  look  for  another,"  he  added  to  the  recital  of  his
benefactions,  "the  lepers  are  cleansed"  (Matt,  xi,  5).  It  was  a  true  mark  of  the
Messiah.  The  coming  Saviour  was  he  who  had  power  to  cure  the  incurable,  to  touch
the  foulest  of  the  foul  with  the  finger  of  the  Divine  mercy  and  sovereign  power,  and  to
make  even  him  whole  and  pure.  To  that  Divine  Physician  the  man  fullest  of  the
leprosy  of  sin  may  go  and  say,  "  Lord,  if  thou  wilt  thou  canst  make  me  clean "
(Luke  V.  12).— C.

Ver.  5. — The  choien  type  of  sin — its  social  aspect.  We  have  seen  (vide  previous
Homily)  how  true  a  picture  is  leprosy  of  sin  in  its  individual  aspect ;  we  now  regard  the
subject  in  its  more  social  aspect.  What  this  terrible  disease  was  to  a  man  as  a
member  of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,  that  is  sin  to  a  man  as  a  member  of  society
to-day.

I.  Its  loathsombnbss.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  leprosy  from  which  the
Israelites  suffered  was  a  contagious  disorder.  It  is  also  possible  that  the  dread  of
contagion,  though  there  was  no  actual  danger  (as  in  cholera),  may  have  had  its  influence
in  the  matter.  But  there  is  no  convincing  evidence  that  it  was  contagious.  There  are
indications  that  it  was  not  (action  of  the  priests,  etc.) ;  and  the  exclusion  of  the  leper
from  the  camp  is  fully  accounted  for  in  another  way.  The  loathsomeness  of  the  disease
is  a  sufficient  explanation.  Whoever  has  seen  any  one  suffering  acutely  from  a  kindred
malady  will  perfectly  understand  and  appreciate  this  legislation  on  that  ground  alone.
It  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  recover  altogether  from  the  mental  effect  of  sc
shocking  and  so  repulsive  a  spectacle.  The  vision  haunts  the  memory  for  years.  In
this  aspect  leprosy  is  a  striking  picture  of  sin ;  for  that  is  a  thing  odious  and  abominable
in  the  last  degree — ^loathsome  to  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  hateful  to  all  holy  souls.  In
its  viler  forms  it  is  a  thing  which  we — even  with  our  imperfect  purity — cannot  "  look
upon"  (Hab.  i.  13);  how  much  more  horrible  and  hateful  must  it  be  in  his  sight
whose  thoughts  of  holiness  as  well  as  of  mercy  are  as  much  higher  than  ours  as  the
heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth  (Isa.  Iv.  9) !

II.  Its  diffusiveness.  Though  not,  probably,  contagious,  leprosy  was  diffusive
and  communicable  from  parent  to  child.  It  was  one  of  the  crucial  tests  in  the  case  that
it  spread  over  the  skin  (vers.  7,  8),  that  it  "spread  much  abroad"  (vers.  22,  27).  As
this  typical  disease  spread  from  one  part  of  the  body  to  another,  from  one  limb  and
organ  to  another,  until  it  sometimes  covered  the  entire  frame,  so  siu,  of  which  it  was
the  divinely  chosen  type,  is  a  thing  that  spreads.  It  is  an  emphatically  diffusive,
a  communicable  thing.  It  spreads :  1.  Prom  faculty  to  faculty  of  the  same  human
spirit ;  one  sin  leads  on  to  another,  as  theft  to  violence,  or  drunkenness  to  falsehood,
or  impurity  to  deception.  2.  From  parent  to  child.  3.  From  man  to  man,  through
the  whole  "  body  politic."  It  spreads  much  abroad  through  any  and  every  body,
civil  or  ecclesiastical,  into  which  it  enters.

III.  Its  separating  effect.  "  He  shall  dwell  alone :  without  the  camp  shall  his
habitation  be "  (ver.  46).  Leprosy  separated  between  husband  and  wife,  parent  and
children,  friend  and  friend ;  it  sundered  one  human  life  from  that  of  the  commonwealth,
»nd  was  a  source  of  sad  and,  so  far  as  the  preciousness  of  life  was  concerned,  a  fatal
loneliness.  Sin  is  the  separating  power.  1,  It  comes  between  man  and  God  (Isa.
lix.  2).  It  places  him  outside  the  gates  of  the  spiritual  kingdom ;  it  deprives  a  man  of
all  fellowship  with  the  heavenly  Father ;  it  leads  him  out  into  a  "  far  country  "  of  aliena-
tion, of  dread,  of  dissimilarity.  2.  It  comes  between  man  and  man.  It  is  the  endless
and  bitter  source  of  estrangement,  animosity,  war ;  it  makes  lonely  the  life  that  should
be  full  of  sweet  and  elevating  fellowship.

IV.  Its  PITIF0LNESS.     Who  could  see  the  poor  leper,  with  rent  clothes,  with  bare


toe  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xm.  1—46


head,  with  oovejed  lip,  passing  through  the  camp,  crying,  "  Unclean,  unclean  1  **  on  W«
way  to  a  dreary  and,  it  might  be,  life-long  solitude  and  not  be  affected  with  a  tender
pity  ?  He  might  be  "  unclean,"  but  he  was  miserable,  he  was  lost ;  the  light  of  his  life
had  gone  out.  Sin  is  not  more  condemnable  than  it  is  pitiable.  Blame  the  erring,
reproach  the  faulty,  remonstrate  with  the  foolish  and  the  mischievous  (1  Tim.  v.  20)^
but  pity  those  whom  sin  is  shutting  out  from  all  that  is  best  below,  and  will  exclude
from  all  that  is  bright  and  blessed  above.  Remember  the  "  great  love  (of  pity)  where-
with he  loved  us,  even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins  "  (Eph.  ii.  4,  5),  and  pity  with  a  pro-
found compassion  and  help  with  an  uplifting  hand  those  who  are  still  down  in  the
mire  of  sin,  still  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God. — C.

Yer.  3. — Conviction  of  sin.  "  And  the  priest  shall  look  on  him,  and  pronounce  him
unclean."  In  the  Hebrew  commonwealth :  1.  There  were  those  who  were  reasonably
suspected  of  leprosy,  i.e.  of  "  uncleanness."  2.  It  was  a  matter  of  the  gravest  con-
sequence to  know  whether  these  suspicions  were  well  founded  or  not.  For  ascertained
leprosy  meant  unfitness  to  approach  God  in  worship,  exclusion  from  the  fellowship  of
his  people,  etc.  3.  It  was  the  function  of  the  priest  to  decide  positively  in  the  matter.
The  priest  was  to  "  look  on  him,  and  pronoimce  him  unclean,"  or,  on  the  other  hand,  to
rule  that  he  was  clean  (ver.  6).

In  every  commonwealth  to-day,  in  the  whole  human  world—

L  There  abb  those  eeasonablt  suspected  of  sin.  These  are  not  the  few  excep-
tions ;  they  are  the  multitude  without  exception  (Ps.  xiv.  23).

n.  It  is  a  matter  op  the  gravest  consequence  to  know  whether  wb  abb  sinful
OB  NOT.  For  sin  means  (1)  unlikeness  to  God ;  (2)  separation  from  God ;  (3)  condemnation
by  Gkid,  both  here  and  hereafter;  (4)  exclusion  from  the  home  of  the  holy.  Hence  we
must  ask —

ni.   WfiO  ARE  THEY  ON  WHOM  THIS  OEEAT  DECISION   IB  DEVOLVED.      It  reStS  wlth  DO

human  priest  to  decide  on  our  state  before  God.  Our  own  heart  must  condemn  us  if  we
are  to  have  that  txmviction  of  sin  which  leads  to  contrition  for  sin  and  to  "  repentance
and  remission  of  sin."  1.  God  will  be  our  Divine  Helper.  He  helps  us  to  a  right  con-
clusion by  his  informing  Word  and  by  his  illuminating  Spirit.  2.  Our  fellow-men  will  be
human  helpers ;  they  will  guide  us  to  an  understanding  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and,
directed  by  their  own  experience,  will  lead  us  to  judge  truly  concerning  our  spiritual
condition.  Their  aid  will  be  ministerial,  not  authoritative.  3.  We  ourselves  must
decide  in  the  last  resort.  This  is  one  of  those  grave  matters  in  which  "  every  man
must  bear  his  own  burden."  We  must  recognize,  with  the  eyes  of  our  own  soul,  the
signs  and  tokens  of  guilt  in  our  heart  and  life.  It  must  be  the  deliberate  utterance  of
our  own  judgment,  as  well  as  the  sigh  of  our  own  spirit,  and  the  cry  of  our  own  lips,
"  I  have  sinned  against  the  Lord ; "  "  Unclean,  unclean ! "  When  we  look  at  our  inner
selves  as  well  as  outer  life ;  when  we  consider  what  we  have  left  undone  of  all  our
obligations,  as  well  as  what  we  have  done  that  has  been  forbidden ;  when  we  contrast
our  hearts  and  lives  with  the  precepts  of  Gtod's  holy  Law  and  the  ideal  of  human  per-
fection in  the  example  of  our  sinless  Saviour ;  we  shall  have  no  hesitation  in  concluding
that  we  are  "  utterly  unclean,"  that  we  deserve  exclusion  from  the  friendship  of  God  and
the  fellowship  of  the  holy,  and  that  it  is  our  heavenly  wisdom  to  seek  at  once  his  blessed
presence  who  will  say  to  us,  "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ? "  and  to  gain  at  once  the
touch  of  his  mighty  hand  who,  in  answer  to  oiir  earnest  prayer,  will  respond  by  saying,
I  will ;  be  thou  clean." — 0.

Vers.  40 — 44. — Affections  of  tht  mind.  We  learn  lessons  concerning-^
L  The  blemish  of  mental  peculiaeitt.  (Ver.  40.)  Evidently  baldness  was  an
unusual  and  an  unsightly  thing  among  the  Israelites.  Otherwise  it  would  not  have
excited  notice  and  could  not  have  created  derision  (2  Kings  ii.  23  ;  Isa.  iii.  24 ;  Ezek.
vii.  18).  It  was  regarded  as  an  unbecoming  peculiarity.  Affecting  the  head,  we  may
regard  it  as  a  type  of  mental  peculiarity  which  does  not  amount  to  a  serious  ait,
but  is  yet  unusual  and  unbecoming.  Many  men  who  are  substantially  sound  in
heart  and  life,  loving  that  which  is  highest  and  doing  that  which  is  just  and  right,  are
yet  affected  and  afliicted  by  mental  peculiarities — oddities,  crotchets,  fancies,  awkward-
ness or  crookedness  of  mental  habit ;  things  which  are  not  formidably  bad,  but  which,


«H.  xin.  1— 46.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  209

liecause  they  are  superficial,  strike  the  eye,  provoke  general  remark,  and  stand  in  the
way  of  effective  service.  1,  It  is  right  that  those  who  observe  them  in  others  should
remember  that  they  are  only  blemishes,  and  nothing  more ;  detracting  in  some  degree
from  "the, beauty  of  holiness,"  but  not  inconsistent  with  real  and  even  admirable
excellence.  "  He  is  bald,  yet  he  is  clean  "  (vor.  40).  2.  It  is  right  that  those  who  possess
them  should  reflect,  and  act  on  the  reflection,  that  these  things,  though  only  blemishes,
may  importantly  diminish  the  power  of  the  possessor  to  influence,  guide,  and  win  other
people.  The  candle  (character)  is  of  much  more  importance  than  the  candlestick
^mental  habit),  but  if  character  be  obscured  by  some  darkening  "  bushel,"  and  not  put
on  the  candlestick  of  pleasant  and  agreeable  habits,  it  will  not  "  give  light  to  all  that
■are  in  the  house  "  (Matt.  v.  15).

II.  The  evu.  of  ebbob.  There  might  come  on  the  bald  head  a  spot,  a  sore ;  thii
might  be  a  "  white  reddish  sore " — leprous  (vers.  42,  43).  But  it  might  not ;  it
might  be  nothing  but  a  boil  or  some  cutaneous  disorder,  which  was  not  leprosy.  In
that  case  the  patient  would  be  treated  as  described  in  vers.  2—4.  There  would  be
something  wrong,  but  it  was  not  the  unclean  thing,  leprosy.  There  is  a  mental  disease
^hich  is  something  more  serious  than  peculiarity  and  something  less  serious  than
guilty  perversity.  It  is  error ;  the  arrival  at  wrong  conclusions.  There  may  be  but
small  faultiness  in  coming  to  convictions  which  are  not  correct,  but  there  may  b«
positive  disaster  resulting  therefrom.  A  man  may  innocently  take  the  wrong  road,
but  his  innocency  will  not  save  him  from  walking  into  the  bog  or  over  the  precipice
-to  which  it  leads.  Error  is  not  the  worst  thing  in  the  world,  but  it  is  a  seriously  bad
«nd  dangerous  thing.  When  we  are  earnestly  warned,  by  obviously  thoughtful  and
^odly  men,  that  we  are  wrong  in  our  judgments,  it  biscomes  us  to  listen  patiently
and  consider  well  whether  we  are  in  the  right  track,  or  whether  we  have  mistaken  a
&lse  path  for  the  "  path  of  life."

m.  The  sin  op  mental  pebversitt.  (Vers.  43,  44.)  There  is  great  significance  in
ihe  sentence  "  the  priest  shall  pronounce  him  utterly  unclean."  The  man  who  had
leprosy  in  the  head  was  accounted  unclean  in  an  especial  degree :  he  was  utterly
■unclean.  Sin,  of  which  this  malady  was  so  striking  a  type,  never  assumes  so  dangerous
a  phase  as  when  it  appears  in  the  form  of  a  perverted  judgment  or  a  darkened  con-
science. When,  by  sinning,  a  man  has  blunted  his  spiritual  perceptions  so  that  he
"  calls  evil  good,  and  good  evil,"  he  is  in  the  last  stage  of  moral  decline ;  death  is  near
at  hand.  If"  our«ye  be  evil"  (if  our  judgment  be  perverted,  our  faculty  of  spiritual
perception  be  diseased),  our  "  whole  body  is  full  of  darkness ; "  if  "  the  light  that  is  in
Tis  "  (our  own  mental  and  spiritual  faculty)  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  I "
(Matt.  V.  23).  Witness  the  Pharisees  in  their  treatment  of  our  Lord.  We  may  well  be
actively  on  our  guard  against,  and  may  well  be  earnest  in  prayer  that  God  will  deliver  ua
from,  that  of  wh  ich  leprosy  in  the  heaid  is  the  painful  picture, — a  guilty,  blinding,  ruinooa
.perversity  of  mind. — C.

Ver.  46. — 2%e  right  and  duty  of  exeommunkation.  "  He  shall  dwell  alone ;  without
the  camp  shall  his  habitation  be."  The  right  of  expulsion  from  the  Jewish  camp  would
be  fo\mded,  in  the  mind  of  Moses,  on  the  Divine  commandment  (text ;  Numb.  v.  2,  etc.).
"That  was  all-sufficient  for  the  great  legislator.  We  may,  however,  "justify  the  ways
of  God  to  men  "  to  our  mind  by  the  considerations :  1.  That  if  the  disease  were  not
positively  contagious,  the  dread  of  contagion  would  be  most  harmful  to  the  community.
2.  That  the  exceeding  repulsiveness  of  the  leper  was  ample  reason  for  his  being  kept
from  the  sight  of  men,  women,  and  children.  3.  That  the  most  important  and
salutary  lesson  concerning  sin  was  thereby  vividly  enforced,  viz.  that  the  sinner  is,
-through  his  iniquity,  separated  from  all  that  is  purest  and  best.  Unquestionably,  with
this  and  other  clear  commandments  from  Jehovah,  it  was  both  the  right  and  the  duty
of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth  to  expel  the  leper  from  the  camp.  Excommunication
from  human  society  is  a  sad  and  severe  measure ;  but  it  is,  in  many  cases,  lawful  and
even  obligatory.  The  foul  and  the  "  unclean  "  must  be  separated  sometimes,  even  now
and  here,  from  the  holy  and  the  pure.    Excommunication  may  be —

L  The  bight  and  duty  op  the  nation.  1.  The  nation  has  a  right  to  transporv
or  imprison  those  of  its  members  who  have  committed  crime,  and  who  have  shown
-4h»t  their  presence  "  in  the  camp  "  is  noxious  and  dangerous  to  the  rest.    2.  The  nation

LEVITICUS.  »


210


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  xin.  47 — 59.


is  bound  to  exclude  from  town  and  city  those  who  endanger  its  morals.  The  opium-
seller,  as  such,  is  righteously  excluded;  the  man  who  would  sell  poisons  without
restriction  is  disallowed ;  and  an  unlimited  number  of  dramshops,  with  their  terrible
enticements,  is  (or,  surely,  should  be)  prohibited.  A  community  has  the  right  to  say,
"  We  will  not  allow  any  man,  for  the  sake  of  gain,  seriously  to  imperil  the  morals,  the
health,  and  the  lives  of  the  people ;  if  you  want  to  practise  these  things,  you  must  go
'without  the  camp.'"

II.  The  eight  and  duty  op  the  social  and  the  tamily  ciRaLB.  1.  We  ought
not  to  admit  to  our  intimacy  any  "  unclean "  human  spirit.  We  should  fence  our
social  circles  so  that  no  man  sits  down  to  our  table  or  our  hearth  to  infect  and  poison
our  own  minds.  2.  But  it  is,  in  an  esi  ecial  degree,  both  cur  right  and  our  duty,
as  parents,  to  guard  the  family  circle  from  the  intrusion  of  "  the  imclean."  What
untold  evils,  what  unimaginable  sorrows,  have  befallen  family  life,  because  parents  have
not,  with  holy  vigilance,  saved  their  sons  and  daughters  from  the  companionship  of
the  corrupt !  Of  every  "  unclean "  soul  let  the  human  father  say,  with  sternest
inflexibility,  "  Without  the  camp  shall  his  habitation  be."

III.  The  liiQHT  AND  DUTY  OF  THE  Chukch.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  this.
1.  It  is  the  divinely  appointed  way.  It  was  instituted  by  our  Lord  himself  (ILitt.
xviii.  17,  18).  It  was  enjoined  by  the  Apostle  Paul  (1  Cor.  v.  2,  5,  11;  Titus  iii.  10);
it  was  also  practised  by  him  (1  Tim.  i.  20).  2.  It  is  the  legitimate  and  becoming
method.  Any  interference  by  a  Christian  Church  with  civil  rights  gees  beyond  the
Word  of  the  Lord,  brings  the  Church  into  conflict  with  the  secular  power,  and  is  likely
to  lead  to  confusion  and  trouble.  Exclusion  from  its  own  fellowship  is  a  natural  and
incontestable  right.  3.  It  is  sometimes  the  only  course  that  is  open.  It  is  needful  for
the  purity  of  the  Church  itself;  the  leaven  must  not  injure  the  whole  lump.  It  is
needful  also  for  the  offender.  And  it  is  well  to  remember  these  two  things  in  such  a  sad
necessity :  viz.  (1)  that  excommunication  was  resorted  to  in  apostolic  times  with  a
distinct  view  to  the  benefit  of  the  offender  (1  Cor.  v.  5  ;  1  Tim.  i.  20) ;  and  (2)  that  of
two  cases  reported  in  Scripture,  one  relates  the  restoration  of  the  excommunicated
member  (2  Cor.  ii.  6 — 8).  Let  the  Church  make  paramount  the  preservation  of  its  own
purity,  but  let  it  encourage,  expect,  and  welcome  penitence. — 0,


EXPOSITION.


Lefbost  in  clothes  (vers.  47 — 59).  To
account  for  the  use  of  the  name  leprosy  in
this  connection,  an  ingenious  theory  has
been  propounded  that  the  same  cause  pro-
duced a  like  effect  in  the  human  frame  in
clothes  and  in  houses.  "There  is  here
described  a  disease  whose  cause  must  have
been  of  organic  growth,  capable  of  living
in  the  human  being  and  of  creating  there  a
foul  and  painful  disease  of  contagious
character,  while  it  could  also  live  and  re-
produce itself  in  garments  of  wool,  linen,
or  skin ;  nay,  more,  it  could  attach  itself  to
the  walls  of  a  house  and  there  also  effect
its  own  reproduction.  Animalcules,  always
capable  of  choice,  would  scarcely  be  found
■o  transferable,  and  we  are  therefore  justi-
fied in  sijpposing  that  green  or  red  fungi,
•o  often  seen  in  epidemic  periods,  were  the
pnotean  disease  of  man  and  his  garment  and
hia  house  "  (Dr.  Mitchell,  '  Five  Essays  ',\
It  i>  not  necessary  to  have  r<>courBe  to  this


tempting  bnt  unproved  hypotheais,  Inaa-
much  as  the  similarity  of  appearance  pre-
sented by  the  two  affections  is  enough  to
account  for  their  going  by  the  same  name.
Leprosy  in  garments  and  in  leather  is  •
mildew  which  cannot  be  got  rid  of^  called
leprosy  by  analogy.  Like  other  causes  of
uncleanness,  it  makes  the  material  unclean,
because  it  gives  a  repulsive  appearance  to
it,  reminding  the  beholder  of  the  disease
which  it  resembles.  "  Leprosy  in  linen  and
woollen  fabrics  or  clothes  consisted  in  all
probability  in  nothing  but  so-called  mildew,
which  commonly  arises  from  damp  and  want
of  air,  and  consists,  in  the  case  of  linen,  of
round,  partially  coloured  spots,  which  spread
and  gradually  eat  up  the  fabric,  until  it  falls
to  pieces  like  mould.  In  leather,  the  mildew
consists  more  strictly  of '  holes  eaten  in,'  and
is  of  a  greenish,  reddish,  or  whitish  colour,
according  to  the  qieoiesof  the  delicatecrypto-
garni  by  which  it  has  been  fonued"  (KeilX


OH.  xui.  47—59.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


ni


Ver.  47. — Whether  it  be  a  woollen  gar-
ment, or  a  linen  garment.  Wool  and  flax
■le  the  two  materials  for  clothes  mentioned
in  Deut.  xxil.  11 ;  Prov.  xxxi.  13 ;  Hos.  ii.  7.

Ver.  48. — Whether  it  be  in  the  warp,  or
woo£  It  is  hardly  possible  that  such  a
fault  as  leprosy  or  mildew  could  appear  in
one  set  of  the  threads  without  affecting  the
otliers,  provided  that  both  were  equally  good
when  they  were  made  up  into  the  cloth ;  but
it  is  quite  possible  that  a  heap  of  yam,  used
either  for  the  warp  or  for  the  woof,  might
have  been  injuriously  affected  before  it  was
woven,  and  then  the  fault  would  naturally
make  its  appearance  where  the  mischief  had
been  originally  done.  Whether  in  a  skin,  or
in  anything  made  of  skin.  An  example  of  the
first  would  be  a  sheepskin  cloak ;  the  second
would  designate  anytliing  made  of  leather.


Vers.  49— 59.— The  priest  is  to  deal  with
the  texture  as  nearly  as  may  be  in  the  same
way  that  he  dealt  with  the  human  subject,
in  order  to  discriminate  between  a  tempo-
rary discolouration  and  a  real  leprosy.  He
shall  shut  up  it  that  hath  the  plague  seven
days  (ver.  50),  may,  as  before,  mean,  Ua
shall  bind  up  the  place  affected  seven  days.
If  the  priest  judges  that  it  is  leprosy,  he  is
to  burn  the  gnrmunt,  if  not,  to  tear  out  the
piece  affected,  whether  it  he  in  the  warp,  or
in  the  woof,  that  is,  in  whatever  part  it
appears,  and  to  wash  the  remainder  twice.
The  expression,  whether  it  be  bare  within  or
without,  literally,  whether  U  be  bald  in  the
head  thereof  or  in  the  forehead  thereof,
means,  "  whether  the  fault  appear  in  the
front  01  in  the  back  of  the  texture."


EOMILETICS.

Vers.  47 — 59. — On  pwrity  of  garments.  There  are  passages  fa  different  parts  of
Holy  Scripture  which  it  is  necessary  to  put  together  in  order  to  get  a  comprehensive
view  of  what  only  at  first  siAt  appears  to  be  a  slight  subject.

L  The  first  result  of  the  Fall  was  a  consciousness  of  sin  on  the  part  of  Adam  and
Eve,  which  caused  a  sense  of  their  nakedness.  This  nakedness  they  in  vain  attempted
to  cover  by  aprons  of  fig  leaves  (Gen.  iii.  7).  But  their  self-made  covering  was  not
sufficient ;  they  "  were  afraid  because  they  were  naked,  and  they  hid  themselves  from  the
presence  of  the  Lord  God  amongst  the  trees  of  the  garden"  (Gen.  iii.  8,  10).  God's  first
gift  to  man  after  sentence  had  been  passed  upon  him  was  that  of  clothes :  "  Unto  Adam
also  and  to  his  wife  did  the  Lord  God  make  coats  of  skins,  and  clothed  them''  (Oen.  iii.
21).  This  gift  is  the  more  significant  in  that  the  Hebrew  word  used  for  "  atonement "
is  "  covering."  Here,  then,  in  God's  first  gift  to  man  was  foreshadowed  his  future  gift
of  an  atonement.  "  The  outward  and  corporeal  here  manifestly  had  respect  to  the
inward  and  spiritual.  The  covering  of  the  nakedness  was  a  gracious  token  from  the  hand
of  God  that  the  sin  which  had  alienated  them  from  him  and  made  them  conscious  of
uneasiness  was  henceforth  to  be  in  his  sight  as  if  it  were  not ;  so  that  in  covering  their
flesh,  he  at  the  same  time  covered  their  consciences. ...  It  was  done  purposely  to  denote
the  covering  of  guilt  from  the  eye  of  Heaven — an  act  which  God  alone  could  have
done  "  (Fairbairn, '  Typology  of  Scripture ').  The  more  that  we  consider  the  force  of
the  Hebrew  term  for  "atonement,"  the  more  significance  shall  we  attach  to  the  first  gift
of  coats.  "  To  expiate,  literally,  to  cover  up,  does  not  mean  to  cause  a  sin  not  to  have
been  committed,  for  that  is  impossible ;  nor  to  represent  it  as  having  no  existence,  for
that  would  be  opposed  to  the  earnestness  of  the  Law ;  nor  to  pay  or  compensate  it  by
any  performance ;  but  to  cover  it.  before  God,  t.e.  to  deprive  it  of  its  power  to  come
between  us  and  God  "  (Kahnis).

II.  We  have  seen  with  what  care  God  appointed  "  holy  garments  "  for  the  Jewish
priesthood,  "  for  glory  and  for  beauty  "  (Exod.  xxviii.  2,  40 ;  xxxix.  1 — 43 ;  ch.  viii.
7 — 9),  and  special  instructions  are  afterwards  given  as  to  the  dress  to  be  worn  by  the
high  priest  when  he  entered  the  holy  of  holies  (ch.  xvi. ;  cf.  Fs.  cxxxii.  9).

ill.  Uucleanness  derived  from  the  touch  of  unclean  things  entailed  washing  tha
clothes  worn  at  the  time  (ch.  xi.  28,  40 ;  xvi.  26).

IV.  In  Zech.  iii.  3 — 5  we  read,  "  Now  Joshua  was  clothed  with  filthy  garments,
and  stood  before  the  angel.  And  he  answered  and  spake  unto  those  that  stood  before
him,  saying.  Take  away  the  filthy  garments  from  him.  And  unto  him  he  said,  Be-
hold, I  hare  caused  thine  iniquity  to  pass  from  thee,  and  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change
of  raiment.  And  I  said.  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head.  So  they  set  a  fair
mitre  upon  his  head,  and  clothed  him  with  garments.    And  the  angel  of  the  Lord


212  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [cH.  xm.  47— 5ft


stood  by."  Here  we  are  directly  taught  that  filthy  garments  typify  iniquity,  and  that
the  removal  of  filthy  garments  typifies  the  passing  away  of  iniquity.  Isaiah  explain*
the  meaning  of  the  putting  on  of  new  garments :  "  He  hath'  clothed  me  with  tha
garments  of  salvation,  he  hath  covered  me  with  the  robe  of  righteousness,  as  a  bride-
groom decketh  himself  with  ornaments,  and  as  a  bride  adorneth  herself  with  her
jewels  "  (Isa.  Ixi.  10).

From  these  passages  of  the  Old  Testament  we  find  that  clothing  Is  connected  with
the  idea  of  atonement,  that  God  will  not  be  approached  except  in  holy  garments,  that
loul  garments  typify  iniquity,  that  garments  which  have  contracted  ceremonial  un-
cleanness  must  be  washed,  that  clean  garments  typify  salvation  and  righteousness.

From  the  New  Testament  we  learn  what  are  the  materials  of  the  robe  of  salvation.
They  are  the  righteousness  of  Christ  imputed  .to  man — such  is  the  argument  of  the
Euistle  to  the  Komans  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians — and  the  righteousness  in-
wrought in  man  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost — "  for  the  fine  linen  is  the
righteousness  of  saints  "  (Rev.  xix.  8).  If  these  form  the  materials  of  the  Christian's
spiritual  raiment,  there  will  appear  no  leprosy  or  mildew  either  in  warp  or  woof.  But
if  in  place  of  one  of  these  there  be  employed  human  merit  or  sanctity  or  other  material,
the  plague  will  appear  in  the  garment.  "  And  the  priest  shall  rend  it  out  of  the  garment,
or  out  of  the  skin,  or  out  of  tht  warp,  or  out  of  the  vioofi  and  if  it  appear  still  in  the
garment,  either  in  the  warp,  or  in  the  woof,  or  in  anything  of  skin;  it  is  a  spreading
plague ;  thou  shalt  burn  that  wherein  the  plague  is  with  fire."  But  there  Is  this  difference
between  leprosy  in  the  garment  and  leprosy  in  the  flesh,  that  in  the  former  case  the  man
may  still  be  saved  :  "  It  shall  be  revealed  by  fire ;  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's
work  of  what  sort  it  is.  .  .  .  If  any  man's  work  shall  be  burned,  he  shall  suffer  loss :  but
he  himself  shall  be  saved ;  yet  so  as  by  fire  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  13-  -15).  And  therefore  St.  Jude,
in  special  reference  to  this  passage,  writes,  "  And  of  some  have  compassion,  making  a
difference :  and  others  save  with  fear,  pulling  them  out  of  the  fire ;  hating  even  the
garment  spotted  by  the  flesh  "  (Jude  22, 23).  The  Christian  is  to  hold  in  abhorrence  "  the
garment "  defiled  with  a  like  disease  to  that  which  attacks  "  the  flesh,"  and  is  to  cast
it  into  the  fire,  but  at  the  same  time  he  is  to  "  pull "  the  wearer  himself  "  out  of
the  fire,"  "  saving  "  him  "  with  fear."  If  the  disease  be  true  leprosy,  but  has  not  pene-
trated deeper  than  the  garment,  the  garment  must  be  burnt,  but  the  wearer  may  still
be  "  saved ;  yet  so  as  by  fire ; "  it  will  be  a  work  of  "  fear  "  and  anxiety.  If  it  be  not-
true  leprosy,  and  even  if  it  be — for  here  the  antitype  transcends  the  type — it  will  bo
possible  to  "  wa.<ih  hi.i  robes  and  make  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  "  (Bey.
vii.  14).

Warning — "  I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire,  that  thou  mayest  b»
rich;  and  white  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed,  and  that  the  shame  of  thy
nakedness  do  not  appear  "  (Rev.  iii.  18).  "  Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth,  and  keepeth
his  garments,  lest  he  walk  naked,  and  they  see  his  shame  "  (Rev.  xvi.  15).  "  Friend,
how  earnest  thou  in  hither  not  having  a  wedding  garment?  And  he  was  Bpeechless"
(Matt  xiii.  12).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa

Vers.  47 — 59.— Impure  surroundings.  Our  garments  are  our  immediste  sunonnd-  ,
ings,  and  there  may  be  in  them  as  well  as  in  ourselves  that  which  is  offensive  and
"  unclean."  There  was  an  impurity  in  the  garment  as  well  as  in  the  human  body
against  which  the  Law  provided.  The  classing  of  clothes  and  houses  with  the
human  skin  as  leprous,  "  has  moved  the  mirth  of  some  and  the  wonder  of  others  .  •  .
but  the  analogy  between  the  insect  which  frets  the  human  skin  and  that  which  frets
the  garment  that  covers  it,  between  the  fungous  growth  that  lines  the  crevices  of  the
epidermis  and  that  which  creeps  in  the  interstices  of  masonry,  is  close  enough  for  the
purposes  of  ceremonial  law."  The  legal  provision  here  made  for  the  leprous  garment
suggests  to  us —

L  Thb  mpuRB  SUEROUNDINQS  BY  WHICH  WE  MAT  BE  ENVIRONED.  These  BTO  many :
1.  Depraved  tastes  and  cravings  in  our  body  (for  the  body  is  the  immediate  clothing  of
the  spirit).    2.  Unholy  companionships.    3.  Corrupt  political  associations.    4.  Impure,


OH.  XIV.  1 — 32.J


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


213


demoralizing  books  (or  any  form  of  hurtful  literature).  5.  Injurious  occupation — that
which  wounds  the  conscience  or  enfeebles  the  inner  life.  6.  A  deadening  Church— a
religious  society  where  the  form  without  the  power  of  godliness  is  left.

II.  The  divinely  sugqbstkd  tbbatment  op  them.  We  gather  from  these  verses
that  we  should :  1.  Exercise  vigilance  in  detecting.  With  the  same  carefulness  with
which  the  priest  made  himself  sure  in  the  matter  of  the  leprous  garment  (vers.  50 — 57),
we  must  make  certain  whether  there  be  in  any  of  our  surroundings— or  of  those  for
whom  we  are  responsible — the  plague  whicn  will  work  spiritual  mischief  in  the  heart
and  ultimate  ruin  to  the  character.  2.  Make  serious  effort  to  cleanse.  If,  after  seven
days,  there  had  been  no  spreading  of  the  plague,  the  priest  was  to  wash  the  garment
(ver.  54),  and  if  the  plague  departed,  it  was  to  be  washed  a  second  time,  and  then  it
was  clean  (ver.  58).  All  that  was  salvable  was  to  be  saved.  If  by  vigorous  and
repeated  washing  any  spotted  garment  could  be  preserved,  it  was  not  to  be  destroyed.
All  that  is  reformable  in  our  institutions  and  surroundings  must  be  reformed.  We
must  cleanse  where  we  can  make  pure  and  where  it  is  unnecessary  to  destroy.  But
sometimes  we  must :  3.  Unscrupulously/  destroy.  When  unmistakable  signs  of  leprosy
appeared,  the  priest  was  to  "  burn  that  garment ; "  it  was  to  "  be  burnt  in  the  fire  "  (ver.
52).  When  we  find  in  anything  that  surrounds  us  and  that  is  exerting  an  influence
upon  U8,  that  which  is  really  hurtful  to  us — that  which  would  lead  us  astray  from  God,
we  must  sacrifice  it  altogether,  at  whatever  cost  (see  Mark  ix.  43 — 47).  Our  belong-
ings muit  be  put  into  the  fir*  rather  than  be  permitted  to  stain  our  souL — C.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIV.


ThB  VOBU  of  FUBIFIOATION  OF  THE   LEFEB

(oil.  xiv.  1 — 32).  This  is  the  most  minute  of
all  the  forms  of  purification,  those  for  purifi-
cation from  contact  with  a  dead  body  (Numb.
xix.)  and  for  the  oleanBlng  of  a  defiled
Nazarite  (Numb,  vi.)  being  alone  to  be
compared  with  it  is  th's  respect.  Some
purifications  were  accomiflished,  as  we  have
seen,  in  a  very  summary  manner :  one  who
touched  the  carcase  of  a  beast  that  had
died  a  natural  death  had  only  to  wash  his
clothes  (ch.  xi.  40).  The  greater  and  more
significative  the  defilement,  the  more  care-
ful and  the  more  significative  must  be  the
cleansing.  Leprous  uncleanness  excluded
the  leper  both  from  the  camp  and  from  the
Bfinotuary,  from  the  rights  both  of  citizen-
ship and  of  Church-membership,  with  which
the  rights  of  the  family  were  also  associated ;
consequently  there  had  to  be  a  double  form
of  restoration,  each  with  its  special  cere-
monies. The  manner  of  the  first  reconcilia-
tion is  detailed  in  vers.  1 — 8,  of  the  second
in  vers.  9—32.

Yer.  2. — This  shall  be  the  law  of  the  leper
in  the  day  of  his  cleansing.  The  ceremonies
in  the  first  stage  of  cleansing,  which  restored
the  outcast  to  the  common  life  of  his  fellows,
were  the  following:  1.  The  priest  formally
examined  the  leper  outside  the  camp,  and


made  up  his  mind  that  he  was  clean.  2.  An
earthen  vessel  was  brought  with  fresh  water,
and  one  of  two  bird'j  was  killed,  and  its
blood  was  allowed  to  run  into  this  water.
3.  The  other  bird  was  taken  and  dipped  in
the  vessel,  with  a  piece  of  cedar  wood  and
hyssop,  which  had  first  been  tied  together
by  a  band  of  scarlet  wool ;  and  the  leper  was
sprinkled  seven  times  with  the  blood  and
water  dripping  from  the  feathers  of  the
living  bird.  4.  The  priest  pronounced  the
man  clean.  5.  The  bird  was  let  fly  into
the  open  field.  6.  The  man  washed  his
clothes,  shaved  his  whole  body,  and  bathed.
7.  He  returned  within  the  camp,  but  not
yet  to  his  tent.

Ver.  3. — The  priest.  The  agent  is  still
the  priest,  not  the  physician.  The  priest
shall  go  forth  out  of  the  camp.  "  May  we
not  (as  Hesychius  suggests)  see  a  figure
here  of  the  compassion  of  our  Great  High
Priest,  who  has  gone  forth  out  of  heaven
itself,  the  camp  of  angel  hosts,  and  has
come  down  to  earth,  not  only  to  examine
but  to  heal  the  moral  leprosy  of  sin,  '  to
seek  and  to  save  the  lost '  (Luke  xix.  10),
and  who  carefully  examines  and  scrutinizes
all  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  (Heb.  iv.  12)  ?
And  he  was  exempt  from  all  contagion  of
sin  while  he  lived  and  moved  among  sinners
(Matt.  ix.  11 ;  Luke  xv.  1),  and  was  '  holy,
harmless,  and  undefiled'  (Heb.  vii.  26)"
(Wordsworth).  And  the  priest  shall  look.  In
later  times  it  was  ordered  that  the  examina-
tion was  not  to  take  place  on  the  sabbath,
nor  in  the  early  morning,  nor  vi  the  late
afternoon,  nor   inside  a  house,  nor    m   i


814


THE  BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.


[oh.  XIV.  1— 32>


cloudy  day,  nor  in  the  glare  of  midday,  and
that  the  priest  must  have  good  eyesight,
and  only  determine  one  case  at  a  time ;  nor
was  he  allowed  to  pronounce  judgment  on
his  own  kindred.  And,  behold,  if  the  plague
of  leprosy  be  healed  in  the  leper.  The  plague
of  leprosy  is  healed  before  the  ceremony  of
purification  begins,  but  the  leper  is  not
pronounced  clean  until  he  has  been  sprinkled
with  the  blood  and  water  (ver.  7).

Ver.  4. — Cedar  wood,  and  scarlet,  and
hyssop.  "  Cedar  wood,  and  hyssop,  and
scarlet "  are  also  to  be  burnt  with  the  red
heifer  for  the  ashes  for  the  water  of  separa-
tion (Numb.  xix.  6),  and  they  appear  to
have  been  commonly  employed  in  purifica-
tions (Heb.  ix.  19).  The  antiseptic  proper-
ties of  cedar  made  it  peculiarly  suitable  for
such  occasions.  The  hyssop  "  was  probably
not  the  plant  which  we  call  hyssop,  the
Hyssopus  officinalis,  forit  is  uncertain  whether
this  is  to  be  found  in  Syria  and  Arabia,  but
a  species  of  origanum  resembling  hyssop,
the  Arabian  zater,  either  wild  marjoram,  or
a  kind  of  thyme "  (Keil  on  Exod.  xii.  21).
The  Psalmist's  cry, "  Purge  me  with  hyssop,
and  I  shall  be  clean  "  (Ps.  li.  7),  shows  the
common  use  to  which  it  was  put.  In  the
present  case,  the  sweet  smell  both  of  the
wood  (one  cubit's  length  of  which  was  used)
and  of  the  herb  would  have  still  further
adapted  them  for  symbolizing  the  redemp-
tion of  the  leper's  flesh  from  corruption  and
putrefaction.  The  scarlet  was  probably  a
band  of  scarlet  wool  with  which  the  cedar
and  the  hyssop  were  tied  —  not  to  the  bird
(for  we  have  no  account  of  their  being  after-
wards removed),  but  (as  in  the  burning  of
the  red  heifer)  one  to  the  other.  The
colour  of  the  wool  was  appropriate,  not  only
because  it  was  about  to  be  dipped  in  the  blood
and  water,  but  also  because  it  symbolized
the  purified  and  now  healthy  blood.

Ver.  5. — One  of  the  birds  be  killed  in  an
earthen  vessel  over  running  water.  A
small  quantity  of  water  was  placed  in  an
earthenware  dish,  and  one  of  the  birds  was
killed  over  the  dish  in  such  a  way  that  the
blood  dripped  into  the  water.  "The  water
was  needed,  as  there  would  not  have  been
Bufiicient  blood  in  the  bird  for  the  seven
sprinklings  which  were  to  be  made.  It  was
to  be  running,  literally,  living,  water ;  that
is,  fresh  water  taken  from  a  fountain  or  a
running  stream,  in  order  that  it  might  be
as  pure  '  as  possible.  Symbolically,  the
cleansing  power  of  water  as  well  as  of  blood
Is  indicated.

Ver.  6.— Ag  for  the  living  bird,  he  shall
take  it  The  wings  and  tail  of  the  bird
were  extended,  and  in  this  position  it  was
dipped  into  the  blood  and  water  in  the
Withenware  dish,  and  with  it,  the  bunch
de  up  of  cedar,  hyssop,  and  scarlet  wool.


Ver.  7. — And  he  shall  sprinkle  upon  him
that  is  to  be  cleansed  from  the  leprosy  seven
times.  It  is  not  certnin  whether  the  seven
sprinklings  were  made  upon  the  forehead
of  the  person  to  be  cleansed,  or  on  the  back
of  his  hand.  The  feathers  of  the  bird  and
the  bunch  of  hyssop  would  be  specially  in-
strumental in  the  seven  sprinklings.  And
shall  pronounoe  him  olean.  Having  assured
himself  that  he  was  healed  (ver.  3),  the
priest  now  pronounces  him  to  be  clean.  He
looses  as  well  as  binds.  It  had  been  his
office  to  declare  the  man  a  leper,  and  thereby
to  shut  him  out  from  the  people  of  the  Lord
(ch.  xiU.  8, 15,  22,  25,  36,  44,  46),  Now  he
pronounces  him  to  be  no  leper,  and  there-
fore, after  some  further  ceremonies,  readmits
him  (vers.  8,  20,  31).  And  shaU  let  the
living  bird  loose  into  the  open  field.  The
symbolism  of  the  two  birds,  which  has  been
much  misinterpreted,  is  essentially  the  same
as  that  of  the  two  goats  on  the  day  of
atonement,  though  each  ceremony  has  its
distinctive  features.  The  hilling  of  the
living  bird  was  not  a  true  sacrifice,  as  was
the  olfering  of  the  goat  to  Jehovah,  but  by
its  death  it  represented  the  state  in  which
the  leper  had  legally  been,  and  to  which  he
would  have  been  physically  reduced  had
not  a  remedy  been  found.  The  desfthly
and  unclean  state  of  the  leper  haJ/ing
been  symbolically  transferred  from  the  dead
bird  to  the  liviag  bird  by  the  latter's  being
sprinkled  in  the  former's  blood,  tlie  living
bird  stands  in  the  position  of  the  scape-
goat, on  whom  the  sins  of  the  people  were
laid.  The  bird  is  then  let  loose  into  tha
open  field ;  literally,  upon  the  face  of  the
field;  and  it  flies  off,  carrying  with  it  the
leper's  uncleauness,  and  assuring  bim  by
every  forward  movement  that  it  makes  that
the  living  death  has  passed  from  him,  just
as  each  step  of  the  scapegoat  appeared  to
the  Israelites  to  remove  their  sins  from
them.  A  large  number  of  commentators,  on
the  other  hand,  consider  the  released  bird  to
symbolize  the  health  and  freedom  now  given
back  to  the  leper,  and  they  dwell  on  the
rapid  and  uncontrolled  movement  of  birds
as  being  peculiarly  suitable  for  representing
this  recovered  liberty.  But  this  interpreta-
tion, to  which  there  are  many  objections,
appears  to  be  altogether  incompatible  with
the  fact  that  the  same  ceremony  is  used  in
the  cleansing  of  the  leprous  liouse,  whereas
the  house  could  certainly  not  be  represented
as  "recovered  to  unrestrained  liber^"
(Lange).  The  common  patristic  view,  that
the  two  birds  represent  the  two  natures  of
the  one  Great  Sacrifice  ofiered  to  redeem
man  from  sin,  seems  to  be  out  of  place  here

Ver.  8. — After  the  healed  leper  has  washed
his  clothes,  and  shaved  oif  all  his  hair,  and
washed  himself  with  water,  so  as  to  leave  nc


OH.  XIV.  1—32.]


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


ai5


remnant  of  his  former  defilement  that  can
be  removed,  the  flrat  stage  of  his  purifica-
tion is  over.  He  is  restored  to  the  camp,  but
not  yet  to  the  sanctuary,  nor  to  his  position
as  head  or  member  of  his  family.  He  has
still  to  undergo  another  week's  purgation,
and  until  that  time  has  elapsed .  he  may
not  live  in  his  tent.

Vers.  9 — 32. — The  ceremonies  in  the
second  stage  of  cleansing,  which  restored
the  late  outcast  to  his  home  and  to  his
covenant-right,  were  the  following:  1.  At
the  end  of  seven  days  he  repeated  the  process
of  wasliing,  shaving,  and  bathing.  2.  On
the  eighth  day  he  brought  a  lamb  for  a
trespass  offering,  a  log  of  oil,  a  meat  offer-
ing, a  sin  offering,  and  a  burnt  offering.  3.
The  priest  that  officiated  at  the  cleansing  pre-
sented him  and  his  offerings  at  the  door  of
the  tabernacle.  4.  He  offered  the  trespass
offering  and  the  log  of  oil  for  him.  5.  He
slew  the  trespass  offering  and  put  some
of  the  blood  of  it  on  different  parts  of  the
man's  body.  6.  He  poured  some  of  the  oil
into  hia  left  hand,  and  having  sprinkled
some  of  it  seven  times  before  the  Lord,  he
placed  some  of  it  on  those  parts  of  the  man's
body  on  which  the  blood  had  been  placed,
and  poured  the  rest  upon  his  head.  7.  He
offered  the  sin  offering,  the  burnt  offering,
and  the  meat  offering.

Ver.  9. — But  it  shall  he  on  the  seventh
day.  The  pause  for  seven  days,  followed
by  placing  the  blood  on  the  tip  of  the  right
ear,  and  on  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand,
and  on  the  great  toe  of  the  right  foot,  and
the  subsequent  anointing  with  oil,  irresistibly
call  to  miud  the  ceremonies  of  the  consecra-
tion of  priests  (ch.  viii.  35,  23,- 24,  12.  30),
and  no  doubt  tliey  are  intended  to  do  so.
The  whole  nation  was  in  a  sense  a  priestly
nation,  and  the  restoration  of  the  lapsed
member  to  his  rights  was  therefore  a  quasi-
oonsecration.

Ver.  10. — On  the  eighth  day  he  shall  take
two  he  lambs  without  blemish,  and  one  ewe
lamb  of  the  first  yeajc  without  blemish,  and
three  tenth  deals  of  fine  fiour.  Every  sacrifice
is  to  be  provided  and  offered  by  the  restored
leper,  eicept  the  peace  offering.  It  is  cer-
tainly singular  that  the  peace  offering  should
be  omitted,  and  that  the  trespass  offering
should  be  required.  The  former  fact  may
ha  accounted  for  by  the  supposition  that
though  the  peace  oifering  was  not  required,
the  late  leper  was,  after  his  other  sacrifices,
pnt  in  a  position  where  he  might  offer  it
when  he  would  of  his  own  free  will.  But  the
requirement  of  the  trespass  offering  is  more
difficult  to  explain.  Wliat  wrong  had  the
leper  done?  and  what  satisfaction  had  he
to  make  ?  The  usual  answer  to  this  ques-
tion is  that  he  had  wronged  Jehovah  in
that,  however  involuntarily,  he  had  failed


to  bring  him  the  offerings  and  service  which
he  would  have  brought  had  he  not  been
excluded  from  the  camp.  But  this  Is  a
very  forced  explanation,  and  it  is  incom'
patible  with  other  parts  of  the  Law.  For
the  leper  was  not  the  only  unclean  person
who,  owing  to  his  uncleanness,  was  prevented
from  offering  bis  gifts  and  worship  at  the
tabernacle  or  temple.  The  woman  who  had
an  issue  of  blood  for  twelve  years  (Luke
viii.  43)  during  that  time  would  have  been
excluded  from  the  sanctuary.  But  no  tres-
pass offering  is  required  of  those  that  have
been  unclean  through  issues.  We  must,
therefore,  look  for  some  other  explanation  ,
of  the  requirement  in  the  case  of  the
cleansed  leper.  And  a  simpler  one  is  at  hand.
Leprosy  was  the  type  of  sin — of  all  sin
whatsoever.  When,  therefore,  the  expiatory
sacrifices  were  demanded,  both  kinds — the
trespass  offering  and  the  sin  offering — had
to  be  offered,  because  expiation  had  to  be
made  for  the  uncleanness  which  represented
all  unrighteousness — trespasses  aa  well  as
sins.  It  might  be  that  the  man  had  not
committed  a  trespass;  he  might  also  not
have  committed  sin ;  but  he  had  been
stricken  with  the  foul  disease  which  sym-
bolized both  one  and  the  other,  and  there-
fore he  had  to  offer  on  his  cleansing  the
sacrifice  appropriate  to  each.  There  is  a
difference^in  the  ritual  of  the  trespass  offer-
ing in  the  present  case,  intended  perhaps
to  distinguish  it  from  those  trespass  offerings
which  were  made  when  a  man  had  in  his
mind  a  certain  wrong  or  injury  which  he
had  committed,  and  for  which  he  wished  to
make  compensation.  On  this  occasion  (1)
the  animal  presented  was  not  required  to
be  of  a  paiticular  value,  as  in  the  ordinary
trespass  offerings ;  (2)  it  was  waved,  where-
as the  ordinary  trespass  offerings  were  not
waved ;  (3)  it  was  waved  by  the  priest,
whereas  other  wave  offerings  were  waved
not  by  the  priest,  but  by  the  offerer,  whose
hands  were  guided  by  the  priests.  Nor  (4)
did  the  offering  of  oil  accompany  the  pre-
sentation of  other  trespass  offerings.  For
whatever  reason  it  be,  the  most  character-
istic feature  of  the  sacrificial  cleansing  of  the
leper  is  the  trespass  offering,  and  the  way
that  it  was  dealt  with.

Ver.  12. — The  log  of  oil,  amounting  to
something  more  than  half  a  pint,  is  waved
by  the  priest,  together  with  the  lamb  for  the
trespass  offering,  as  a  wave  offering  before
the  lord,  in  order  that  a  special  consecra-
tion may  be  given  them.  They  thus  be-
come qualified  for  the  purposes  for  which
they  are  presently  used.

Ver.  14. — And  the  priest  shall  take  some
of  the  blood  of  the  trespass  offering,  and  the
priest  shall  put  it  upon  the  tip  of  the  right
ear  of  him  that  is  to  be  tUeansed.    The


216


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  XIV  1 — 3a


Mishna  desoribet  the  ceremony  as  follows : —
"The  leper  stands  before  the  trespass  offer-
ing, lays  his  baud  upon  it  and  kills  it.
Two  priests  catch  up  the  blood  one  in  a
vessel,  the  other  in  his  liand.  He  who
catches  it  up  in  the  vessel  goes  and  throws
it  on  the  side  of  the  al^,  and  he  who
catches  it  in  his  hand  goes  and  stands  before
the  leper.  And  the  leper  who  had  pre-
viously bathed  in  the  court  of  the  lipers,
goes  and  stands  in  the  gate  of  Nicanor.
Babbi  Jehudah  says  he  needs  not  bathe.
He  thrusts  in  bis  head  (viz.  into  the  great
court,  whioli  he  may  not  yet  enter),  and  the
priest  puts  of  the  blood  upon  the  tip  of  his
ear ;  he  thrusts  in  his  hand,  and  he  puts  it
upon  the  thumb  of  his  hand ;  he  thrusts  in
his  foot,  and  he  puts  it  upon  the  great  toe
of  his  foot"  ('Ncgaim,'  xiv.  7,  quoted  by
Edersheim, '  Temple  Service,' oh.  xviii.).  No
doubt,  the  ear,  the  thumb,  and  the  great  toe
■  are  selected  for  the  purpose  of  showing,  as  in
the  case  of  the  consecration  of  the  priest,
that  the  senses  and  the  active  powers  of  the
restored  Israelite  must  be  dedicated  hence-
forth to  God.

Vers.  IS — 18. — And  the  priest  shall  take
gome  of  the  log  of  oil,  and  pour  it  into  the
palm  of  Ms  own  left  hand.  This  ceremony
is  altogether  peculiar  to  this  purification.
The  joint  use  of  blood  and  oil  is  not  singular
^see  oh.  viii.  30),  but  elsewhere  there  is  no
fprinkllng  of  the  oil  ,  .  .  seven  times  before
the  Lord,  and  in  the  consecration  of  priests
there  was  no  anointing  of  the  different
members  with  oil  as  well  as  with  blood.
The  Mishna  (as  before  cited)  continues  the
description  of  the  ceremony  as  follows: —
"  The  priest  now  takes  from  the  log  of  oil
and  pours  it  into  the  palm  of  his  colleague,
though  if  he  poured  it  into  his  own.  it  were
valid.  He  dips  his  finger  and  sprinkles
seven  times  towards  the  holy   of  holies,


dipping  each  time  he  sprinkles.  He  goes
before  the  leper,  and  on  the  spot  where  he
had  put  the  blood  he  puts  the  oil,  as  it  is
written,  '  Upon  the  blood  of  the  trespass
offering.'  And  the  remnant  of  the  Oil  that
is  in  the  priest's  hand,  he  pours  on  the  head
of  him  that  is  cleansed,  for  an  atonement;
If  he  so  puts  It,  he  is  atoned  for,  but  if  not,
he  is  not  atoned  for.  So  Babbi  Akibo.
Babbi  Jochanan,  the  son  of  Nuri,  saith.
This  is  only  the  remnant  of  the  ordinance,
whether  it  be  done  or  not,  the  atonement
is  made;  but  they  impute  it  to  him  (the
priest),  as  if  he  had  not  made  atonement."
The  double  sprinkling  with  blood  and  oil
betokened  dedication  as  in  the  case  of  the
priests,  the  blood  specially  denoting  recon-
ciliation, and  the  oil  the  strengthening  power
of  God  by  which  the  new  life  was  to  be  led.

Vers.  19,  20. — The  priest  shall  offer  the
sin  offering.  The  sin  offering  is  due,  ac-
cording to  the  regulation  given  in  ch.  v.  3,  in
consequence  of  the  man  having  been  in  a
state  of  uncleannees.  It  is  followed  by  the
burnt  offering  and  the  meat  offering,  and
then  the  man  is  restored  to  his  state  of  legal  -
cleanness,  and  of  communion  with  God  as
well  as  with  his  fellows.

Vers.  21 — 32. — ^And  if  he  be  poor,  and  can-
not get  so  much.  The  concession  to  poverty
consists  in  the  substitution  of  two  turtle-
doves, or  two  young  pigeons,  for  the  two
lambs  required  for  the  sin  offering  and  the
burnt  offering,  and  one  tenth-deal  of  flour
for  three  tenth-deals  of  flour  in  the  meat
offering.  But  no  difference  is  made  as  to
the  lamb  required  for  the  trespass  offering,
or  the  log  of  oil.  These  must  be  provided  by
the  poor  as  well  as  by  the  rich,  and  the
ceremonies  used  at  their  offering  must  be
the  same  for  poor  and  rich,  as  they  are
essential  t  the  rit«L


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 32. — The  cleansing  of  the  leper  represenU  the  absolution  of  the  sinner,
as  his  exclusion  from  the  camp  represented  spiritual  excommunication.

I.  The  law  op  Christian  excommunication  and  absolution.  "  I  will  give  unto
thee  the  keys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth
•hall  be  bound  in  heaven :  and  whatsoever  thou  shalt  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed
In  heaven"  (Matt.  xvi.  19).  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in
heaven :  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth  shall  be  loosed  in  heaven "  (Matt,
xviii.  18).  "Whose  soever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted;  and  whose  soever  sins
ye  retain,  they  are  retained  "  (John  xx.  23).

.  II.  The  use  of  keys.  1.  To  admit.  2.  To  shut  out.  3.  To  readmit.  1.  Th«i
spiritual  keys  are  used  by  God's  ministers  for  the  purpose  of  admission,  whenever  they
introduce  into  Christ's  kingdom,  the  Church,  a  new  member  by  the  use  of  the  initiatory
nte  of  baptism,  which  they  are  commissioned  to  employ  for  that  end.  2.  'They  are  used
for  the  purpose  of  exclusion,  whenever  the  Church,  or  any  duly  constituted  section  of
the  Church,  following  the  example  of  the   Corinthian    Church,  as  instructed  and


OH.  XIV.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  217

guided  by  St.  Paul,  shuts  out  from  its  fold  onewho  has  been  guilty  of  gross  immorality
(1  Cor,  V.)  or  of  depraving  the  faith  (I  Tim.  i'.  20),  and  continues  obstinate  in  his  sin.
S.  They  are  used  for  the  purpose  of  read  mission,  when  the  Church  has  become
satisfied  that  the  sinner  whom  she  had  excluded  from  her  fold  has  ceased  to  be  a
sinner,  and  thereupon,  like  the  Corinthian  Church,  once  more  under  the  direction  of
St.  Paul,  "  forgives  him  and  comforts  him,  lest  such  an  one  should  be  swallowed  up
with  overmuch  sorrow,"  and  confirms  its  love  towards  him  (2  Cor.  ii.  7,  8).

III.  The  forms  fob  admission,  exclusion,  and  rbadmission  in  the  old  and
NEW  dispensations.  The  form  of  admission  into  covenant  with  himself  is,  as  we  should
expect,  fixed  by  Divine  authority  in  both  dispensations.  In  the  old  dispensation  it
was  circumcision.  "  Every  man  child  among  you  shall  be  circumcised.  And  ye  shall
circumcise  the  flesh  pf  your  foreskin ;  and  it  shall  be  a  token  of  the  covenant  betwixt
me  and  you.  And  he  that  is  eight  days  old  shall  be  circumcised  among  you,  every
man  child  in  your  generations,  .  .  ,  and  my  covenant  shall  be  in  your  flesh  for  an
everlastintr  covenant "  (Gen.  xvii.  10 — 13).  In  the  New  Testament  it  is  baptism  in  the
Name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  Go  ye  therefore,  and
teach  (make  disciples  of)  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the  Name  of  the  Father,  and  ol
the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Matt,  xxviii.  19).  "  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  Gkd
by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  For  as  many  of  you  as  have  been  baptized  into  Christ
have  put  on  Christ "  (GaL  iii.  26,  27).  These  forms  are  unchangeable  by  any  human
authority.

The  form  of  exclusion  from  the  covenant  people  was  not  so  definitely  fixed  under  the
old  as  the  new  dispensation.  In  the  former  it  is  ordained  that  for  various  transgressions
a  soul  shall  be  cut  off.  "  The  uncircumcised  man  child  whose  flesh  of  his  foreskin
is  not  circumcised,  that  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  his  people;  he  hath  broken  my
covenant"  (Gen.  xvii.  14).  "If  a  man  shall  lie  with  a  woman  having  her  sickness,  .  ,  ,
both  of  them  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  their  people  "  (ch.  xx.  18).  But  it  is  only
in  the  case  of  leprosy  that  the  method  of  exclusion  is  given  in  detail.  There  we  have
seen  that  it  is  to  consist  of  a  careful  examination  on  the  part  of  God's  priest,  and  a
pronunciatiou  by  him  of  the  undoubted  existence  of  the  uncleanness  in  the  person
suspected,  after  which  the  latter  is  to  exhibit  all  the  signs  of  one  mourning  for  himself
as  dead,  to  dwell  alone,  and  "  without  the  camp  shall  his  habitation  be  "  (oh.  xiii.  45, 46).
Sq  in  the  New  Testament  the  power  of  "  binding "  as  well  as  of  "  loosing,"  and  of
"retaining"  bound  as  well  as  of  " forgiving,"  is  granted,  and  the  obligation  of  exerting
this  power  is  involved  in  its  grant ;  but  no  especial  form  by  which  it  is  to  be  done
is  given.  It  is  only  in  the  case  of  the  incestuous  Corinthian  that  we  have  an  example
of  the  way  in  which  St.  Paul  judges  that  it  shall  be  done.  Prom  thence  it  appears
that  the  decision  is  to  be  passed  by  the  chief  Church  officer,  in  the  name  of  Jesus
Christ,  and  promulgated  by  the  assembled  Church,  the  result  being  that  the  offender
is  translated  from  the  kingdom  of  Christ  to  the  outer  world,  the  kingdom  of  Satan,
"for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  that  the  spirit  may  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord
Jesus"(lCor.  V.  3— 5).

Nor  is  there  any  form  definitely  appointed  either  in  the  old  or  in  the  new  dis-
pensation for  the  readmission  of  those  that  had  been  cast  out.  No  doubt  in  the  old
dispensation,  it  was  always  effected  by  the  means  of  sacrifice,  but  we  have  a  definite
statement  of  the  form  adopted  only  in  the  case  of  reconciliation  after  leprosy.  This
form  we  have  seen  to  be  very  elaborate  and  significative.  Similarly  in  the  new
dispensation,  we  find  no  form  authoritatively  given  for  the  restoration  of  the  penitent ;
only  we  have,  as  before,  the  instance  of  the  incestuous  Corinthian,  from  which  we  learn
that  after  sufficient  punishment  such  a  one  is  to  be  forgiven  and  taken  back  to  the
love  of  the  brethren ;  and  we  have  the  general  principle  laid  down  elsewhere,  "  If  a
man  be  overtaken  in  a  fault,  ye  which  are  spiritual,  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of
meekness ;  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted  "  (Gal.  vi.  1).

The  fact  of  a  divinely  authorized  form  being  given  for  admission  into  covenant  with
God,  but  none  for  exclusion  from  it  by  excommunication  or  readmission  to  it  by
absolution,  is  significant.  The  first  is  under  the  new  dispensation  a  sacrament  ordained
of  Christ;  the  others  are  ecclesiastical  rites,  valuable  for  the  well-being  of  the  Church,
but  not  appointed  by  its  Founder  as  a  necessary  condition  of  its  existence.
IV.  The  office  of  the  priest  in  ct.eansino.    1,  Hi  did  not  cure  the  leprosy.


218  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  loB.  xiv.  1— 3a


"  If  the  plague  of  leprosy  be  healed  in  the  .leper  "  (ver.  3),  then  the  priest  shall  begin  th«
cleansing  ceremonies.  The  healing  of  the  disease  was  the  work  of  God,  2.  The  action
of  the  priest  i^  necessary  for  the  cleansing.  If  the  healing  is  the  work  of  God,  the
cleansing  is  the  work  of  the  priest.  It  is  a  complex  ceremonial  act,  the  result  of  which
is  not  to  deliver  from  the  leprosy,  but  to  serve  as  an  assurance  to  the  man  himself  and  to
the  whole  community  that  he  is  delivered  from  it,  and  therefore  fit  to  be  reinstated,  and
by  that  act  reinstated,  in  the  position  of  full  communion  which  he  had  lost.  So  with
absolution;  it  is  God  alone  that  forgives  and  heals  sin.  But  after  this  has  been
accomplished,  still  it  is  necessary  that  a  solemn  ecclesiastical  ceremony  should  reinstate
in  the  communion  of  the  faithful  one  who  has  been  formally  severed  from  it.  And
where  the  formal  act  of  severance  has  not  taken  place,  but  a  man's  distressed  con-
science tells  him  that  he  has  separated  himself  from  God,  and  can  hardly  allow  him
to  believe  in  his  forgiveness,  the  solemn  declaration  of  that  forgiveness  by  God's
minister  serves  as  an  assurance  to  the  trembling  soul,  and  restores  to  him  the  senga
oi  peace  which  was  lost.

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS.

The  deansing  of  sin  as  illustrated  in  the  cleansing  of  the  leper.  Ch.  xiy. ;  cf.  2
Kings  V. ;  Matt.  viii.  1 — i ;  Luke  v.  12 — 15.  We  have  seen  the  possibility  of  a  cure  of
leprosy  in  the  directions  for  its  diagnosis  given  to  the  priests.  The  cured  leper  had
also  to  be  cleansed  before  admitted  to  the  society  of  the  faithful.  In  this  chapter  we
have  the  cleansing  of  the  leper  detailed.  In  this  we  are  to  discern  the  cleansing
of  sin.

Naaman's  case  is  instructive  upon  this  point.  He  was  ctired  by  Divine  power.  But
he  was  not  ceremonially  cleansed  or  received  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Chiu"ch  of  God.
In  his  case  the  two  elements  of  cure  and  cleansing  were  separated.  But  when  our  Lord
directed  the  cured  leper  to  go  and  offer  for  his  cleansing  the  gift  that  Moses  commanded
for  a  testimony  unto  them,  the  elements  were  united.  In  the  case  of  the  cure  of  the
leprosy  of  sin  and  its  concomitant,  the  cleansing,  the  Great  Physician  who  cures  and
the  Priest  who  cleanses  are  one.    It  is  our  Divine  Saviour  who  accomplishes  both.

I.  We  must  not  confound  the  odbb  with  the  cleansing  op  sin.  The  cure  of  sin
is  the  sanctification  of  the  inward  nature,  the  imparting  of  the  principle  of  righteous-
ness, the  regeneration  of  the  once  unholy  nature.  This  is  quite  distinct  from  the
cleansing  which  proceeds  from  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  the  latter  case  there  is  a
justification  through  faith  in  his  blood,  so  that  we  are  accepted  as  we'l  as  pardcned  on
the  ground  of  his  merits.  The  one  is  a  work  of  God  in  us,  the  other  is  a  work  of  God
on  us.  We  are  not  accepted  because  we  are  regenerated ;  we  are  accepted  "  in  the
Beloved."  The  leper  was  not  accepted  on  the  ground  of  his  cure,  but  on  the  ground  of
his  sacrifice.  The  ritual  of  the  leper  is,  therefore,  admirably  adapted  to  keep  the  two
ideas  distinct  of  justification  and  sanctification.

II.  The  restoration  of  the  leper  embraced  two  stages,  which  have  theib
COUNTERPART  Qf  THE  EXPERIENCE  OF  THE  SINNER.  These  Stages  are,  first,  the  restora-
tion of  the  leper  to  the  society  of  the  living,  and,  secondly,  his  restoration  to  the  society
of  the  saints.

1,  Bestoration  to  the  society  of  the  living.  The  priest  was  directed  to  go  to  the  leper
outside  the  camp,  and  if  he  was  satisfied  about  his  cure,  then  he  was  to  receive  on  the
leper's  behalf  "  two  live  birds,  and  cedar  wood,  and  scarlet,  and  hyssop."  One  of  these
is  to  he  killed  in  an  earthen  vessel  over  running  water,  and  its  blood  mingled  with  t'le
water  in  the  vessel.  Of  the  cedar  wood,  scarlet  wool,  and  hyssop  the  priest  is  to  mai.e
a  brush,  in  which  he  is  temporarily  to  tie  the  remaining  live  bird,  and  having  dipped
them  in  the  blood  and  water,  he  is  to  sprinkle  therewith  the  leper  seven  times,  pro-
nouncing him  clean,  and  then  let  the  live  bird  free.  The  leper  is  then  to  wash  his
clothes,  shave  off  all  his  hair,  wash  himself  carefully,  and  come  into  the  camp,  waiting,
however,  a  week  before  taking  up  his  permanent  abode  in  his  own  tent.

Now,  it  seems  clear  that  in  this  first  stage  of  the  leper's  restoration  the  live  bird,
baptized  with  water  and  blood,  and  then  let  loose  to  join  its  mates  in  the  open  fields,
was  a  symbol  of  the  healed  leper,  now  to  be  reptored  to  the  fellowship  of  men.    It  hai


OH.  XIV.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  219

been,  indeed,  eaid  that  the  live  bird  here  is  parallel  to  the  live  goat  on  the  Day  of
Atonement,  and  should  rather  be  supposed  to  carry  the  leper's  sin  away.  Bnt,  inasmuch
as  the  live  bird  here  receives  a  similar  baptism  to  the  leper  himself,  the  first  interpreta-
tion is  preferable.  Living  water  and  blood,  therefore,  are  the  elements  of  the  feper's
purification — symbols  of  the  Spirit  and  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  brush  of
hyssop  was  the  means  by  which  these  were  applied  to  the  leper,  and  might  fittingly
represent  the  Word  of  God,  immortal  like  the  cedar,  humiliating  like  the  hyssop,  and
invigorating  like  the  "coccus-wool,"  by  which  the  atonement  and  Spirit  of  Christ  are
applied  to  the  sinful  soul.  It  is  thus  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  and  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  that
the  soul,  dead  through  the  leprosy  of  sin,  is  restored  to  the  society  of  the  living.  "  And
you  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  "  (Eph.  ii.  1).

2.  Restoration  to  the  society  of  the  saints.  After  seven  days'  sojourn  in  the  camp,  but
not  in  his  own  tent,  the  leper  was  allowed  to  approach  the  tabernacle  with  two  he-lambs
without  blemish,  one  ewe-lamb  without  blemish  of  the  first  year,  and  three  tenth-deals
of  fine  flour  for  a  meat  offering,  mingled  with  oil,  and  one  log  of  oil.  These  were  to
be  used  as  a  trespass  offering,  a  sin  offering,  and  a  burnt  offering.  These  suggest
respectively  a  sense  of  unprofitablenens  or  shortcoming,  atonement,  and  personal  con-
secration. The  blood  of  the  trespass  offering  is  to  be  applied  to  the  right  ear,  thumb  of
right  lutnd,  and  great  toe  of  the  right  foot,  and  the  oil  of  consecration  to  be  added
thereto.  This  corresponds  exactly  to  the  consecration  of  the  priests  (oh.  viii.).  It
suggests  that  it  is  out  of  a  sense  of  past  unprofitableness  that  future  consecration  comes
(of.  Luke  xvii.  5 — 10).  It  is  when  we  realize  how  we  have  wron!;ed  our  Lord  that  we
are  prepared  to  live,  not  unto  ourselves,  but  unto  him  who  died  for  us,  as  our  atoning
Sacrifice,  and  rose  again  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15).  In  case  of  the  poverty  of  the  leper,  he  is
instructed  to  bring  one  lamb  for  the  trespass  offering,  with  turtle-doves  or  young
pigeons,  in  place  of  two  additional  lambs,  for  the  sin  offering  and  burnt  offering,  and  a
rayiller  meat  offering.  But  the  emphasis  being  laid  on  the  trespass  offering  is  surely
to  show  that  a  sinner,  when  quickened  by  the  Lord,  is  to  sincerely  'ament  the
ppsffitless,  isolated  life  he  lived,  and  to  resolve  to  dedicate  himself  with  f  jil  purpose  of
heart  to  the  service  of  the  Saviour  whose  blood  has  taken  away  his  bin.  The  saints
are  those  who  begin  in  a  sense  of  trespass  a  life  of  grateful  devotion.

III.  Man's  home  is  to  be  cleansed  and  eestored  in  the  same  spirit  as  himsblf.
ITie  priest  is  directed  to  investigate  a  plagued  house,  and  if  by  the  use  of  prompt
measures  the  plague  is  stayed  and  extirpated,  then  the  first  part  of  the  ritual  is  to  be
carried  out.  One  live  bird  is  to  be  killed  over  the  running  water,  and  the  house
sprinkled  with  the  blood  and  water  as  before,  and  then  the  other  live  bird  liberated.
Thus  was  the  restoration  of  the  house  to  the  society  of  its  mates,  so  to  speak,  sym-
bolized. We  have  already  taken  this  to  indicate  the  careful  purification  of  our
environment,  and  there  is  no  more  important  duty  attaching  to  the  religious  man.
Atonement  is  due,  not  only  for  the  sin  as  it  affects  the  person,  but  for  sin  in  its
ravages  in  the  world.  This  blighted  world  of  ours  has  need  of  atoning  blood,  and
purification  even  by  fire,  before  it  can  be  restored  to  the  favour  of  God.  Christ
has  consecrated  it  through  his  blood,  and  his  providence  and  Spirit  will  yet  make
the  requisite  arrangement  for  its  complete  purification  and  restoration  to  the  holy.
— K.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — ^20. — Restoration  suggestions.  The  ceremonies  here  enjoined  in  the  event  of
leprosy  being  healed  suggest  four  things.

L  Ah  ktbeestino  fabbaoe  in  the  life  of  cub  Lord.  Our  Saviour's  experiences
may  be  divided  into :  (1)  his  sufferings  and  death ;  (2)  his  life  (and  example) ;  (3)  his
works.  Of  these  the  last  may  be  the  least  important,  but  they  will  never  be  M«im-
portant.  They  \nll  always  remain  one  strong,  convincing  proof  of  his  Godhead.  And
of  these  works  the  healing  of  leprosy — ^incurable  by  human  art — was  one  of  the  most
decisive.  In  this  work  of  mercy,  more  vividly  than  in  any  other,  we  see  him  before  us
as  the  Divine  Healer  of  the  sin-smitten  heart  of  man.  Great  interest  belongs,  therefore,
to  the  incident  related  in  Luke  v.  12 — 15.  And  in  the  instruction  given  in  ver.  14  we
see  our  Divine  Lord :  (1)  mindful  of  the  Law  of  Moses,  which  he  ever  honoured  (Matt,
iii.  15 ;  v.  17) ;  (2)  while  desirous  of  avoiding  a  noisy  and  hurtful  notoriety,  taking  due
measures  to  establish  the  leality  of  his  work.


220  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITIOUS.  [ch  xiv.  1— 32

n.  The  oonsidbbation  wb  owe  to  oub  fellow-men.  In  virtue  of  the  Divine
precept  the  leper  might  not  enter  human  society.  But  this  was  not  the  only
ground  of  exclusion ;  by  reason  of  the  character  of  his  malady  he  was  wholly  unfit  to
enter.  Once  exiled,  therefore,  he  might  not  retui-n  until  every  guarantee  had  been
given  that  he  was  "  whole,"  until  numerous  and  prolonged  ceremonies  of  cleansing  had
removed  all  stigma  from  him,  and  made  him  likely  to  receive  a  cordial  welcome  back.
Hence  the  elaborate  ceremonial  of  the  text :  (1)  priestly  examination  (vers.  2,  3) ;  (2)
the  ceremony  of  the  two  birds  (vers.  4 — 7) ;  (3)  personal  ablution  (ver.  8) ;  (4)  further
exclusion  for  a  week  (ver.  8) ;  (5)  additional  ablution,  etc.  (ver.  9) ;  (6)  offerings  at  the
altar,  attended  with  peculiar  rites  with  the  blood  and  oil  (vers.  10 — 20).  When  by
any  folly  or  guilt  of  ours  we  have  incurred  the  distrust  or  dislike  of  our  brethren,  it  is
due  to  them  that  we  should  give  them  every  possible  guarantee  of  our  "  cleanness,"
Dur  integrity  of  heart  and  life,  before  they  abandon  their  suspicion  and  give  us  again  their
cordial  confidence.  Society  has  a  right  to  require  that  the  man  whom  it  has  necessarily
shunned  is  pure  of  his  moral  and  spiritual  malady.  We  may  be  unable  to  gain  any
certificate  of  character,  but  we  may,  to  regain  confidence  and  readmission  to  human
fellowship,  (1)  show  ourselves  as  humble,  earnest  worshippers  in  the  house  of  the  Lord;
(2)  seek  the  open  confidence  of  the  acknowledged  servants  of  Christ ;  (3)  give  the  pledge
of  a  scrupulously  virtuous  life,  that  we  are  really  "  washed  and  sanctified  ...  by  the
Spirit  of  our  God  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).

III.  The  obligations  of  office.  Those  who  hold  high  office  have  sometimes  unin-
viting duties  to  discharge.  The  priests  of  Israel  held  honoiu-able  rank  in  the  nation ;
doubtless  they  received  a  large  share  of  public  deference,  and  were  regarded  as  those  who
occupied  an  enviable  position.  But  their  duties  embraced  some  o£Sces  from  which  the
humblest  in  the  land  might  shrink.  They  had  to  make  a  most  careful  examination  of
the  man  who  believed  himself  healed  of  leprosy.  Probably,  in  their  eagerness  to
return  to  the  camp,  these  afflicted  ones  often  sought  readmission  when  the  disease  was
still  upon  them.  But  the  priest  must  examine  all  who  came,  clean  or  unclean.  Those
who  now  hold  honourable  positions  in  society  (the  minister,  the  medical  man,  etc.)  must
hold  themselves  ready,  not  only  to  do  those  duties  which  are  inviting  and  congenial,
but  those  also  which  are  unpleasant  and  even  painful,  whether  to  the  flesh  or  to
the  spirit.

IV.  The  outlook  of  human  misbbt.  What  was  the  prospect  of  the  exiled  leper?
Human  art  had  given  him  up  as  incurable,  and  human  fellowship  had  cast  him  out  as
unworthy.  What  could  he  hope  for  ?  There  were  only  two  possible  remedies — a  Divine
cure  or  the  grave ;  the  one  blessed  enough  but  sadly  improbable,  the  other  sad  enough
but  a  welcome  certainty.  If  for  a  while  we  look  at  lejffosy  as  the  picture,  not  of
human  sin,  but  of  human  misery,  we  may  be  reminded  that,  for  a  Christian  man,  there
are  two  remedies:  (1)  deliverance  in  time  from  affliction  (Ps.  xxx.  11);  (2)  comfort  in
affliction  during  life,  and  then  "  the  glory  which  shall  be  revealed  "  (Rom.  viiL  18).
Though  the  night  of  weeping  be  life-long,  "  yet  joy  cometh  in  the  morning  "  of  the
everlasting  day. — 0,

Vers.  4—9, — Admission  (or  readmission).  When  leprosy  had  departed  from  the
flesh,  he  who  had  been,  but  no  longer  remained,  a  leper  was,  in  the  sight  of  Jehovah
and  of  his  people,  still  ceremonially  unclean.  He  was  in  a  bodily  condition  which
made  him  readmissible  to  Divine  and  human  fellowship,  but  he  must  first  "  be
cleansed  "  (ver.  4)  before  he  would  be  readmitted.  The  ceremonies  here  prescribed
give  a  picture  of  our  readmission  to  the  favour  of  God  and  the  fellowship  of  his
people.

1,  Saoeificb  of  another's  life.  As  a  "clean  bird"  (ver.  4)  was  taken  and  its
blood  was  shed  (ver.  5),  as  the  life-blood  of  the  pure  and  innocent  creature  was  poured
out  that  the  leper  might  be  clean  and  pure  in  the  sight  of  God,  so  is  the  life-blood  of
the  spotless  Lamb  shed  fur  us.  There  must  be  for  our  acceptance  and  admission,  or
readmission  after  backsliding,  a  "  sacrifice  for  sin."

IL  Pebbonal  application  or  that  sacrifice.  "  He  shall  sprinkle  upon  him  that
is  to  be  cleansed  .  .  .  seven  times  "  (ver.  7),  "  The  living  bird  "  was  to  be  "  dipped
in  the  blood  of  the  bird  that  was  killed."  Here  is  the  truth  that  if  the  "  blood  of
Christ"  is  to  be  effectual  for  our  salvation,  it  must  be  applied  to  our  individual  con-


OH.  HT,  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  221

acience.  We  wbo  seek  to  be  cleansed  from  all  iniquity  and  condemnation,  must
ourselves  personally  apply  for  mercy  througli  the  shed  blood  of  the  Bedeemer.  By
an  act  of  living  faith  we  must  bathe  in  the  "  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness."

III.  Pbrsonal  PUTTIN8  AWAY  OF  DEFILEMENT.  The  leper  was  to  "wash  his  clothes,
and  shave  off  all  his  hair,  and  wash  himself  in  water,  that  he  may  be  clean."  And
again,  after  a  week's  interval,  was  to  shave  and  to  wash,  removing  all  his  hair,  even  to
the  eyebrows  (ver.  9) ;  everything  about  him  that  could  in  any  possible  way  be  defiled
by  the  plague  was  to  be  carefully  removed.  So,  if  we  are  to  be  admitted  (or  readmitted)
to  God's  favour  and  man's  communion,  we  must  deliberately  put  away  from  ourselves,
from  heart  and  life,  every  evil  way,  everything  which  is,  or  may  be,  tainted  with
iniquity  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).

IV.  Divine  aoknowledqment  of  oxjb  integmty.  Everything  here  pointed  to  the
fact  that  the  Divine  Euler  of  Israel  was  prepared  to  acknowledge  the  cleanness  of  the
leper.  The  water  was  to  be  "  running  water  "  (ver.  5) — ^pure,  as  opposed  to  that  which
was  stagnant  and  foul ;  "  cedar  wood  "  was  to  be  used  (ver.  6),  type  of  that  which  is
fragrant  and  healthful;  the  "scarlet"  wool  (ver.  6)  hinted  the  red  and  healthy  blood,
which  had  been  impure  but  was  so  no  longer;  "hyssop"  (ver.  6)  was  suggestive  of
fragrance ;  but  that  which,  above  all,  was  indicative  of  God's  acknowledgment  of  the
wholeness  of  the  leper  was  the  action  respecting  the  living  bird :  that  was  released,
let  "loose  into  the  open  field"  (ver.  7).  This  either  signified  that  the  uncleanness
of  the  leper  was  borne  away  on  the  wings  of  the  bird,  where  it  should  never  be  found
again  (a  similar  institution  to  the  scapegoat,  ch.  xvi.  22,  23),  or  that  the  leper  was
thenceforth  free  to  go  whithersoever  he  pleased.  Either  way,  it  expressed  symbolically
the  truth  that  there  was  reinstatement  for  the  man  who  had  been  healed  in  the  privi-
leges he  had  forfeited.  We  have  in  the  Scriptures  every  possible  assurance  that  "  repent-
ance toward  God,  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  are  followed  by  fulness
of  Divine  favour.  The  returned  prodigal  has  the  kiss  of  reconciliation,  the  ring  and
robe  of  honour,  and  the  feast  of  joy.  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with
God  .  .  .  and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God  "  (Rom.  v.  1,  2).  The  soul  that  is
healed  of  its  sore  disease  is  pronounced  clean  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  is  free  of  its
Father's  house,  to  enter  its  many  rooms  and  partake  of  its  many  joys. — G.

Vers.  10 — 20. — Final  rites  of  readmission.  By  the  series  of  final  rites  of  restora-
tion  recorded  in  these  verses,  the  leper  once  more  took  his  place  as  one  of  a  holy
nation  admitted  to  the  presence  of  God :  he  was  "  presented  befure  the  Lord  at  the  door
of  the  tabernacle,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  His  formal  acceptance  at  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and
entrance  again  on  the  privileges  of  the  peculiar  people,  reminds  us  that  our  entrance,
whether  in  the  first  instance  or  after  backsliding  and  return,  upon  the  fulness  of  sacred
privilege  must  be —

I,  Attended  with  humilitt.  The  leper  was  to  bring  his  sin  offering,  which  must
be  slain  in  the  holy  place  (vers.  13,  19).  Over  the  head  of  the  animal  he  was  to
confess  his  sin,  and  then,  with  his  guilt  thus  transferred,  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering
atoned  for  past  wrong.  All  approaches  to  God  by  the  human  spirit  should  be
accompanied  with  a  sense  of  unworthiness.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit :  for  theirs
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  (Matt.  v.  3).

II.  In  the  spirit  of  consbobation.  The  leper  was  to  bring  his  burnt  offering  as
well  as  his  sin  offering  (vers.  13,  19,  20).  By  this  he  symbolically  presented  himself
wholly  unto  the  Lord,  laid  himself  on  the  altar  of  sacred  service.  When  we  turn,  or
return,  imto  God  it  must  be  in  the  spirit  of  full,  unreserved  dedication.  We  are  to
"  present  our  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  our  reasonable
(i.e.  rational,  spiritual)  service  "  (Rom.  xii.  I),

m.  In  the  spiBrr  of  thankfol  joy.  The  leper  was  to  bring  "three  tenth  deals  of
fine  flour  for  a  meat  offering,  mingled  with  oil "  (vers.  10,  20).  This  was  a  sacrifice
of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  rendered  under  a  sense  of  deep  indebtedness  for  Divine
bounty.  It  was  certainly  suitable  enough  in  the  case  of  the  leper,  whose  malady  had
been  removed  by  the  healing  hand  of  God.  Nor  is  the  consciousness  of  our  deep
indebtedness,  the  presentation  of  our  utmost  thanks,  one  whit  less  becoming,  less
demanded  and  required  of  God,  when  we  come  to  his  house,  or  to  the  table  of  the  Lord,
after  months  or  years,  or  (it  may  be)  a  life  of  absence,  negligence,  estrangement.    It


222  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xiv.  1—32.


should  be  with  hearts  overflowing  with  holy  gratitude  and  sacred  joy  that  we  present
ourselves  before  him.

IV.  With  a  sense  of  Qod'b  full  acceptance  of  our  whole  heart  and  life.
There  was  one  very  significant  ceremony  through  which  the  leper  who  was  being
cleansed  had  to  pass  :  the  priest  was  to  put  some  of  the  blood  of  the  trespass  offering
upon  the  tip  of  the  right  ear,  and  the  thumb  of  the  right  hand,  and  the  great  toe
of  the  right  foot  (ver.  14).  Afterwards  the  priest  did  the  same  thing  with  the  oil,
pouring  the  remnant  of  the  oil  upon  the  leper's  head  (vers.  17,  18).  The  amplication
of  the  blood  of  atonement  to  these  bodily  extremities  indicated  God's  acceptance  of  the
leper  throughout  the  entire  man ;  every  part  of  him  was  now  holy  unto  the  Lord  ;
even  every  part  of  that  bodily  frame,  which  had  been  the  very  picture  and  type  of
•U  uncleanness.  The  application  of  the  oil  denoted  that  the  leper  was  thenceforth
to  regard  himself  as  God's  accepted  servant  in  every  sphere  of  human  action ;  he  wag
to  be :  1.  A  reverent  waiter  and  watcher  before  God,  eagerly  learning  his  will.  2.  An
active,  industrious  minister,  doing  his  work  in  every  way  open  to  him.  3.  A.  conscientious
exemplar,  wallsing  in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  blameless.  We,  too,  returning  unto  God,
pleading  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  offering  ourselves  unto  him,  reverently  rejoicing  in  his
mercy,  are  to  understand  and  realize  that  (1)  God  accepts  us  unreservedly  as  his  own,
»nd  (2)  expects  us  to  bo  eager  to  serve  him  in  every  open  way — learning,  labouring,
living  to  his  praise. — 0.

Vers.  21 — 32. — Divine  considerateness.  If  there  had  been  one  parenthetical  verse
Introduced  or  added  intimating  that  Divine  allowance  would  be  made  for  the  poor,  we
should  have  thought  that  sufficient  for  the  purpose.  But  we  have  more  than  that
here.  We  have  legislation  for  the  poor  fully  stated,  and  the  whole  body  of  injunctions
restated  for  their  especial  benefit  (vers.  21 — 32).  This  brings  out  into  bold  relief
God's  mindfulness  of  the  peculiar  necessities  of  men — his  Divine  considerateness.  We
eee  illustrations  of  this  in —

I.  Saobificbs  BiiouGHT  TO  HIS  ALTAR.  Notably  this  kindly  provision  for  the  poor
in  the  case  of  the  healed  leper ;  but  not  this  alone  (see  ch.  v.  7 ;  xii.  8).

II.  Gifts  brought  to  his  treasury.  The  widow  with  her  two  mites  cast  in  more,
weighed  in  the  balances  of  heaven,  than  did  the  rich  with  their  abundance  (Mark  vii.
41—44;  see  2  Cor.  viii.  12).

III.  Our  powers  in  Christ's  service.  To  him  who  having  received  two  talents
gained  two  others  beside  them,  was  accorded  by  the  Lord,  when  he  returned  and
reckoned  with  his  servants,  approval  quite  as  cordial  as  that  rendered  to  him
who  having  received  five  talents  gained  five  talents  more  (Matt.  xxv.  19 — 23).
Equally  cordial  would  have  been  the  welcome  to  him  who  had  been  entrusted  with
only  one,  if  he  had  gained  one  talent  beside  that.

IV.  Our  strugole  with  temptation.  When  the  agonizing  Master  returned  and
found  those  he  left  to  watch  and  pray  "  asleep,  for  their  eyes  were  heavy,"  he  gently
rebuked  them ;  but  he  considerately  extenuated  their  fault  by  saying,  "  The  spirit
indeed  is  willing,  but  the  flesh  is  weak  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  40, 41).  "  He  knoweth  our  frame ;
he  rememhereth  that  we  are  dust."

V.  OuB  endurance  of  evil.  God  sends  us  privation,  sickness,  disappointment,
perplexity,  loss,  bereavement,  exceeding  great  sorrows,  burdens  grievous  to  be  borne;
he  calls  upon  us  to  "endure  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible,"  to  be  "in  subjection  to
the  Father  of  spirits."  He  expects  that  we  shall  not  repine  and  rebel,  but  submit  and
serve.  Yet  he  who  knows  all  men,  and  who  knows  "  what  is  in  man  "  (John  ii.  25),
who  created  us  and  made  us  what  we  are,  understands  and  weighs  our  peculiar  personal
difficulties,  temperaments,  dispositions ;  he  knows  how  much  we  strive  to  yield  and
acquiesce,  and  "judges  righteous  judgment."  He  is  just,  yet  merciful,  we  say.  We
may  also  say,  He  is  just,  and  therefore  merciful  He  has  the  requisite  justice  of  Divine
considerateness.

Let  us — 1.  Take  heart  to  serve  so  gracious  and  considerate  a  Lord.  2.  Feel  impelled
to  serve  him  all  the  more  faithfully  and  devotedly  because  he  is  so  worthy  and
righteous  a  Master.  3.  Try  to  copy  his  grace  and  hia  righteousness  in  our  dealingf
with  our  fellows  (Luke  vL  36).— a


CH.  xiT,  1— 32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  223


Vers.  1—20. — Thorough,  purification.  Spiritual  disease  is  often  neglected  by  persons
who  are  extremely  anxious  respecting  some  disease  of  the  physical  frame.  For  the  former
they  seek  no  remedy,  and  display  no  concern  as  to  its  ultimate  issue,  whereas  the  latter
is  viewed  with  unceasing  distress.  Would  that  every  spiritual  leper  entertained  just
conceptions  regarding  his  state !  The  ceremonies  of  this  chapter  are  pregnant  with
interest  for  us  to-day.     Two  stages  in  the  leper's  cleansing  are  set  before  us.

I.  The  return  to  the  camp.  1.  The  supposition  that  the  leper  might  recover
from  his  leprosy  and  be  clean  shows  man's  superiority  to  inanimate  nature.  When
endeavours  are  being  made  to  confound  matter  and  mind,  and  to  reduce  man  to  a  level
with  the  earth  on  which  he  lives,  it  is  not  unworthy  of  notice  that  the  legislator  here
marks  a  vital  distinction  between  a  man  and  a  dwelling.  The  latter,  if  on  investigation
pronounced  utterly  unclean,  was  destroyed  (ver.  45),  and  so  with  garments  (ch.  xiii.  52),
but  the  leprous  man  ever  contained  possibilities  of  recovery.  Let  us  hold  fast  to  the
truth  here  imaged,  and  delight  in  the  thought  that  no  sinner  is  beyond  hope  of
amendment.  2.  As  the  priest  journeyed  outside  the  camp  to  the  leper  (ver.  3),  we
are  reminded  of  him  who  "  suffered  without  the  camp,"  who  in  his  condescending  love
left  his  Father's  throne  to  dwell  with  the  outcasts  of  earth,  and  who  in  his  abode  with
men  selected  not  the  richest  and  purest,  but  the  poor  and  the  sinful,  as  the  recipients  of
his  intimacy  and  favour.  3.  The  death  of  the  one  bird  showed  forth  the  condition
from  which,  by  God's  grace,  the  leper  had  been  rescued ;  the  flight  of  the  other  bird,
previously  dipped  in  the  blood,  symbolized  the  enjoyment  of  life  granted  through
the  death  of  the  appointed  victim.  How  aptly  does  this  apply  to  our  deliverance
through  Jesus  Christ,  so  that  "  we  have  passed  from  death  untolife  "1  Delight  in  our
present  position  should  be  combined  with  thankful  remembrance  of  the  means  by
which  it  has  been  secured  to  us.  4.  The  concomitants  indicated  the  completeness
of  the  new  life  received.  There  is  no  reason  to  reject  the  general  interpretation  that  the
cedar  wood  was  an  emblem  of  uncoiruptness,  the  scarlet  wool  or  braid  of  freshness  and
fulness  of  life,  and  the  hyssop  with  its  detergent  properties  of  cleanness.  These  were
employed  in  the  preparation  of  the  "  water  for  separation  "  (Numb.  xix.).  Jesus  Christ
came  that  we  might  "  have  life,  and  have  it  more  abundantly."  He  brought  "  life  and
incorruption  to  light  through  the  gospel."  He  quickens  those  "  dead  through  trespasses
and  sins."  Life  that  invigorates  the  entire  spirit  is  his  "  free  gift."  5.  What  trouble
was  necessary,  and  would  be  willingly  incurred,  in  order  to  regain  temporal  advantages!
Unless  cleansed  by  ablution  of  himself  and  clothes,  and  the  removal  of  hair  from  the
head,  no  entrance  into  the  assembly  of  his  brethren  was  permissible.  Yet  how  readily
would  all  be  performed,  just  as  to-day  no  efforts  are  deemed  too  great  to  allow  of  par-
ticipation in  valued  social  or  political  movements!  But  for  the  cleansing  from  sin  any
commandment  is  accounted  vexatious !  Few  care  to  sacrifice  time  or  labour  to  become
citizens  of  the  heavenly  commonwealth.

IL  The  return  to  the  tent.  1.  The  provision  for  restoring  the  leper  proves  that  God
has  no  desire  to  exclude  men  unnecessarily  from  religious  privileges.  The  seven  days'
interval  served  to  guard  against  a  possible  error  on  the  part  of  the  priest,  and  impressed
the  leper  with  a  deeper  conviction  of  the  holiness  of  God.  It  is  only  sin  that  bars  men
from  the  light  of  God's  presence,  and  only  obstinate  persistence  in  sin  that  need  cause
despair  of  forgiveness.  "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have  life  "  was  our
Lord's  indictment  of  men's  impenitent  folly.  2.  See,  once  more,  the  function  of  the
priest  to  appear  between  man  and  God.  "The  priest  that  maketh  him  clean  shall
present  the  man  before  the  Lord,"  and  "  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  him
before  the  Lord."  We  have  our  Advocate  with  the  Father,  in  whose  name,  and  sheltered
by  whose  intercession,  we  may  approach  boldly  the  throne  of  grace.  Hereafter  he  shall
present  us  holy  and  without  blemish,  and  unreprovable  before  him  (Col.  1. 22 ;  Jude  24).
Having  Christ  to  introduce  us,  who  can  be  afraid?  3.  The  cleansing  not  complete
without  an  atonement.  All  marks  of  disease  may  have  disappeared,  or  at  least  the  fear
of  infection  may  have  vanished,  and  yet  to  enter  upon  the  fresh  period  of  existence  is
not  sufficient  unless  the  past  transgressions  be  remembered  and  atoned  for.  To  forsake
rin  is  well,  but,  in  addition,  the  sin  of  the  past  must  be  confessed  and  pardoned.  The
sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  enables  the  sinner  to  start  upon  his  pilgrimage  with  shoulders
eased  from  the  burden  of  guilt.  A  gulf  separates  him  from  the  land  of  iniquity  •nr'
•tumbling;  he  is  free  to  commence  again  under  happier  auspices.     The  old  score  is


224  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xiv.  1—32.

wiped  out;  a  clean  tablet  marks  the  returned  prodigal's  position.  4.  The  purification
must  be  coextensive  with  the  di  sease.  Leprosy  affected  the  whole  man ;  hence  the  tips  of
the  ear,  the  hand,  and  the  foot  must  be  touched  with  the  atoning  blood,  that  all  parts
may  be  redeemed  from  corruption.  All  spheres  of  ictivity  must  be  brought  under  the
power  of  the  cross  of  CJhrist.  5.  The  cleansing  Becomes  a  consecration  of  the  entire
man.  The  resemblance  of  this  rite  to  that  enjoined  at  the  setting  apart  of  the  priests
to  their  holy  office  cannot  fiil  to  be  observed.  The  leper  offered  a  trespass  offering  to
compensate  for  breaches  of  the  commandment  committed  by  reason  of  his  absence
through  sin  from  the  sanctuary,  a  sin  offering  because  of  transgressions  inadvertently
committed,  a  burnt  offering  as  an  act  of  individual  worship  in  which  there  was  self-
surrender  to  the  Lord,  and  a  meat  offering,  the  natural  accompaniment  testifying
grateful  homage.  And,  besides  blood,  oil  also  was  sprinkled  upon  the  leper,  and  poured
upon  his  head,  and  sprinkled  seven  times  (the  covenant  number)  before  the  Lord,  so
that  we  have  here  a  recognition  of  the  truth  that  Israel  was  intended  to  be  a  "  kingdom
of  priests."  Typical  of  the  sanctification  required  in  the  people  of  God,  reaching  to
every  part  of  their  cliaracter,  until  all  is  brought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of
Christ.  "  As  ye  presented  your  members  servants  to  uncleanness  and  to  iniquity  unto
iniquity,  even  so  now  present  your  members  servants  to  righteousness  unto  sanctifica-
tion." 6.  The  consecrated  man  is  fit  for  the  discharge  of  ordinary  duties  and  the
enjoyment  of  lawful  pleasures.  After  the  sacrifices,  the  man  could  once  more  enter  his
tent  and  mingle  with  his  family,  and  pursue  his  wonted  avocation.  Jehovah  proved
himself  in  these  regulations  the  God  of  the  families  of  Israel.  He  piotected  their
relationships  and  imparted  to  them  his  blessing.  It  is  a  mistaken  idea  to  place  affection
for  our  kindred  before  love  to  God.  Regard  for  God  is  the  surest  guarantee  for  the  per-
formance of  human  obligations.  Well  for  the  land  if  this  were  oftener  remembered  in
the  establishment  of  households  and  in  the  contracting  of  domestic  ties !

Conclusion.  Only  when  "  clean  "  could  the  leper  send  for  the  priest.  We  go  to
Jesus  Christ  with  all  our  guilt;  he  looks  upon  us  and  pronounces  us  clean,  he  touches
us,  and  lo  I  we  are  healed ;  for  there  is  sanatory  power  in  his  look  and  touch.  What  the
Saviour  exemplified  when  on  earth,  he  is  constantly  effecting  now  from  heaven. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  cleansing  of  the  leper — ceremonies  outside  the  camp.  As  leprosy  is
evidently  a  remarkable  emblem  of  sin,  so  must  the  cleansing  of  the  leper  represeut  the
purification  of  the  sinner,  and  the  laws  of  the  cleansing,  the  provisions  of  the  gospel.
I'he  text  brings  under  our  notice —

I.  'J'he  conditions  eequieed.  These  were:  1.  That  the  leprosy  he  healed.  (1)
Healing  and  cleansing  are  distinct  things.  The  priest  did  not  heal.  Before  pro-
ceeding to  cleanse  he  had  to  see  that  the  leprosy  was  healed  (ver.  3).  Our  Lord  healed
k'pers,  and  then  sent  them  to  the  priest  to  be  cleansed  (see  Matt.  viii.  2 — 4 ;  Mark  i.
40—44 ;  Luke  v.  12 — 14 ;  xvii.  14).  (2)  The  gospel  of  this  is  that  repentance  is  not
.salvation.  The  body  may  be  healed,  outward  reformation  may  be  considerable,  while
the  heart  is  morally  putrescent  (see  Matt,  xxiii.  25 — 28).  The  leper,  though  healed,
unless  also  cleansed,  must  not  enter  the  holy  place  or  eat  of  the  holy  things.  A  genuine
change  of  heart  will  manifest  itself  in  a  pure  life.  When  these  exist  together,  fellow-
ship with  God  is  established.  2.  That  the  priest  certify  the  fact.  (1)  "  He  shall  be
brought  unto  the  priest,"  viz.  for  this  purpose.  He  is  brought  by  his  friends,  or  they
apprise  the  priest  of  his  condition.  Those  are  the  true  friends  of  sinners  who  bring
them  to  Jesus  in  person  or  in  prayer.  (2)  "  The  priest  shall  ko  forth  out  of  the  camp."
This  did  Jesus,  who  came  to  seek  and  save  the  lost.  The  Pharisees  found  fault  with
him  for  mingling  with  "  publicans  and  sinners"  when  he  acted  as  the  priest  among  the
'fP*f!V-^u^  The  repentance  that  satisfies  Jesus  is  getjume  (see  Luke  xviii.  10^141.
And  this  he  certifies  in  his  olEces  of  cleansing.  '

J^«?i,?"T^tr'''-"T-  }•  I'"  f'^-J^'O-  (1)  This  consisted  of  two  birds.  We
n^itlii    .T,  f^^g^l^r   tor  the  buds  must  be  together  viewed  as  one  sacrifice.

Umtedly  they  were  intended  to  prefiguje  the  one  true  Sacrifice  for  sins.  (2)  The  birds
wete  ahve,  to  represent  him  that  ^ath  life  in  himself."  (3)  They  were  "clean  "  Thev
f^'ti^  T"^'"^  °i  quai  s-any  y,iid  birds  of  the  clean  kinds.  Cleanness  was  requisite
to  foreshadow  One  whose  birth  and  life  were  spotlessly  pure.  2.  Its  treatment.  (1)  One
bird  was  killed  over  running  or  «Uving"  water,  which  was  the  emblem  of  the  livin"


CH.  XIV.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  22S

purifying  Spirit  of  GKxl.  Blood  and  water  together  flowed  from  the  opened  side  of
Jesus  (see  John  six.  34,  35 ;  1  John  v.  6,  8).  The  infinitely  superior  virtue  of  the
blood  of  Christ  lay  in  that,  being  God  as  well  as  man,  he  was  able  to  offer  himself
through  the  eternal  Spirit  without  spot  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14).  (2)  The  "  living  bird  "  was
dipped  "  in  the  blood  of  the  bird  that  was  killed,"  to  show  that  our  guilt  was  laid  upon
the  sold  of  Jesus  as  well  as  upon  his  body.  This  truth  is  indeed  expressed  in  the  Mood
shed ;  for  the  "  blood  is  the  life  of  the  flesh."  But  to  impress  it  upon  us  it  is  here  pre-
sented under  another  figure  (see  Isa.  liii.  10 — 12).

III.  Its  APPEOPBiATiON.  This  was :  1.  Thr(mgh  the  sprinkling  of  Wood.  (1)  The
atonement  availed  the  leper  nothing  without  the  application  of  the  blood  to  his  person.
So  the  blood  of  Christ  avails  only  to  those  who  appropriate  its  benefits  by  faith.
(2)  The  blood  was  sprinkled  upon  the  leper  "  seven  times "  to  express  perfection  and
sufficiency,  and  to  point  to  the  seventh  period  or  rest  of  the  gospel  (Heb.  iv,  10),  in
which  the  atonement  by  Christ  satisfies  all  the  promises  of  the  types.  Then  he  was
pronounced  "  clean."  (3)  The  next  thing  was  to  let  the  living  bird,  stained  with  the
blood  of  that  killed  in  sacrifice,  loose  in  the  open  field.  What  a  lively  picture !  As
the  leper  is  assured  that  he  is  clean  he  sees  his  guilt  carried  away,  and  loses  sight  of
it  as  the  bird  disappears  in  the  wood.  So  does  Christ  bear  our  sins  into  oblivion.
2,  Through  the  washing  of  water.  (1)  The  leper  was  to  wash  his  clothes  and  appear
in  clean  white  linen,  the  emblem  of  the  "righteousness  of  the  saints."  (2)  He  bad
also  to  shave  off  all  his  hair,  which  had  been  dishonoured  by  the  plague,  that  a  new
growth  might  crown  him  in  purity.  (3)  He  had  likewise  to  wash  his  flesh ;  and  that
too  "  seven  times,"  to  express  the  thoroughness  of  his  purification  (comp.  2  Kings  v.  10;
also  Ps.  IL  2).  But  the  true  purifier  is  that  sevenfold  Spirit  of  the  gospel,  issuing  as
the  river  of  life,  from  the  throne  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  (Bev.  v.  6 ;  xxii.  1).  3.  By
the  ministry  of  the  word.  (1)  The  blood  was  sprinkled  upon  the  leper  by  means  of  a
whisk  composed  of  "  cedar  wood,  and  scarlet,  and  hyssop."  A  branch  of  hyssop  seems
to  have  been  tied  to  a  handle  of  cedar  by  a  thread  of  scarlet  wool.  But  the  materials
used  were  evidently  intended  as  emblems,  else  they  would  not  have  been  so  carefully
specified.  And  we  find  these  very  materials  on  another  occasion,  thrown  into  the  fire
of  the  altar,  to  be  consumed  with  the  red  heifer  (see  Numb.  xix.  6).  (2)  As  to  the
hyssop,  and  cedar,  they  seem  to  be,  as  it  were,  at  the  extremes  in  the  kingdom  of  trees,
and  so  generally  represent  that  kingdom.  For  Solomon  in  his  wisdom  "  spake  of  treefc,
from  the  cedar  tree  that  is  in  Lebanon  even  unto  the  hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  th«
wall"  (1  Kings  iv.  33).  We  kno-vv  that  the  servants  of  God  are  compared  to  trees
(Ps.  i.  3 ;  xcii.  12 ;  Isa.  Ixi.  3).  They  are  various  in  their  abilities,  yet  all  serviceable
as  ministers  and  instruments  of  the  gospel  (1  Cor.  xii.  21).  (3)  As  to  the  wool ;  it  ir
from  the  fleece  of  an  animal  proper  for  sacrifice,  and  its  colour  is  that  of  blood.  A
cord  of  the  same  colour  was  hung  from  her  window  by  Rahab,  to  express  faith  in  the
blood  of  the  Passover  to  protect  her  and  her  house  from  destruction.  It  would  not  be
lawful  in  her  to  sacrifice  a  lamb  and  sprinkle  its  blood ;  but  she  did  what  she  might,
and  expressed  her  faith  by  this  sign  (Josh.  iii.  18,  19).  The  scarlet  cord  of  a  common
faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ  binds  his  servants  together,  and  in  their  unity  makes  them
efficient  instruments  in  carrying  his  gospel  to  mankind.  (4)  If  it  be  asked  why
should  the  cedar  and  scarlet  and  hyssop  be  burnt  with  the  red  heifer,  the  answer  is
that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  faithful  ministers  may  be  "  offered  upon  the  sacrifice  and
service "  of  the  faith  of  those  they  benefit  (see  Acts  ix,  4 ;  2  Cor.  L  6,  6 ;  iv.  10 ;  Phil
iL  17;  UL  10;  Col.  i.  24;  2  Tim.  L  8;  ii.  10).— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  10 — 32.— Z%e  cleansing  cf  the  leper— ceremony  in  the  tabemaele.  The  cere-
monies for  the  cleansing  of  the  leper  were  distributed  into  two  series.  The  first  were
conducted  "  outside  the  camp."  This  suggests  that  the  leper  must  be  taken  not  only
as  a  type  of  sinners  in  general,  but  of  the  "  sinners  of  the  Gentiles "  in  particular
(comp.  Heb.  xiii.  10 — 12).  The  ceremony  in  the  tabernacle,  therefore,  must  refer  to
the  reception  of  the  Gentiles  by  the  gospel  into  the  fellowship  of  the  saints.  We
notice —

L  The  fbebsmtation.  1.  This  took  place  on  the  eighth  day.  (1)  The  ceremonies
in  the  camp  extended  over  seven  days,  on  the  last  of  which  the  leper  was  then  pro-
nounced clean.    He  was  now,  therefore,  eligible  to  leave  his  alienation,  and  minglo

LEVITIonS,  n


226  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xiv.  1—32,


with  the  children  of  Israel  as  a  fellow-citizen.  (2)  Entering  the  sanctuary,  he  came
into  Church  recognition.  For  the  court  of  the  priests  represented  the  Church  in  the
visible  part  (see  on  ch.  viii.  10—12),  This  was  on  the  eighth  day,  which,  in  the
week,  corresponds  with  the  first  day,  a  day  so  memorable  for  great  events  of  the  gospel
that,  as  the  "  Lord's  day,"  it  came  to  replace  the  Jewish  "  sabbath  "  (see  on  ch.  ix.
1_7).  The  Hebrew  term  for  eight  (niOB'),  Bhemenah,  is  derived  from  (pu)  shemen,  fat
or  oil ;  and  the  oil  and  fat  so  extensively  used  in  connection  with  the  offerings  and
baptisms  of  the  Law  represented  the  Spirit  of  God  in  his  illuminations  and  joy-
inspiring  graces.  The  eighth  day,  or  day  of  oil,  was,  therefore,  appropriately  the
emblem  of  the  "  days  of  the  Son  of  man,"  the  dispensations  of  the  Spirit.  2,  ffe  was
introduced  by  the  priest.  (1)  He  was  presented  "  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  11).  As  a
commoner  might  be  presented  by  a  peer  to  a  monarch  at  a  levee,  so  was  the  leper  pre-
seuted  by  the  priest  to  the  Lord,  who,  in  his  Shechinah,  was  enthroned  upon  the
mercy-seat.  So  are  the  spiritual  priests  of  the  gospel  introduced  by  the  Great  High
Priest  of  our  profession  (see  Heb.  x.  21,  22).  (2)  Being  recognized  by  the  King  of
glory,  he  became  fit  for  the  best  society,  and  could  freely  mingle  with  the  congregation
of  Israel,  or  princes  of  God.  So  when  God  accepts  the  sinner,  though  he  had  been  a
sinner  of  the  Gentiles,  that  becomes  his  passport  to  the  Church  (see  Acts  x.  47).
3.  The  leper  did  not  appear  empty.  (1)  It  would  have  been  a  departure  from  all
precedent  in  the  Bast  to  be  presented  to  a  monarch  without  bringing  gifts.  When  the
Queen  of  Sheba  came  to  Solomon,  she  was  laden  with  rich  presents  (1  Kings  x.  10).
(2)  But  when  we  come  into  the  presence  of  God,  what  have  we  to  bring  ?  The  leper
brought  three  blemishless  lambs ;  one  for  a  trespass  offering,  another  for  a  sin  offering,
and  the  third  for  a  burnt  offering.  He  brought  also  three  tenth-deals  of  fine  flour
mingled  with  oil,  for  a  bread  offering,  together  with  a  log  of  oil.  And  we  can  bring
Christ,  with  the  Spirit  of  his  grace,  the  antitypes.  (3)  But  "  shall  we  offer  unto  the
Lord  that  which  cost  us  nothing  ?  "  There  was  a  commercial  value  in  the  gifts  of  the
leper ;  but  our  "  Gift "  is  "  unspeakable,"  infinitely  above  all  merchandise,  such  as  we
could  never  procure  for  ourselves.  With  him  we  must  consecrate  ourselves,  and  our
property  "as  God  may  prosper  us"  (Rom.  xii.  1;  1  Cor.  xvi.  2).

II.  The  cekemonies  of  the  presentation.  1.  77ie  sacrifices  were  of  all  the  kinds.
(1)  The  lamb  for  the  trespass  offering.  This  was  to  make  atonement  for  transgression,
in  order  to  justification.  (2)  The  ewe-lamb  for  a  sin  offering.  This  was  to  make
atonement  for  impurity,  in  order  to  sanctification.  (3)  The  burnt  offering,  to  make
atonement  for  irreverences  and  imperfections  in  adoration.  And  with  this  was  associ-
ated the  bread  offering,  to  express  gratitude  and  communion.  (4)  The  order  is
admirable.  When  our  trespasses  are  furgiven,  and  our  hearts  deansed  from  sin,  then
are  we  in  the  moral  state  to  adore  with  gratitude.  2.  The  baptisms  were  ample.
(1)  The  washings  at  the  laver  in  the  tabernacle  appear  to  have  been  exclusively  those
of  the  sacrifices  and  priests.  The  baptisms  of  the  Israelites  were  in  their  dwellings
(Luke  xi.  38).  The  leper  was  washed  with  water  outside  the  camp.  Cornelius  and
his  company,  in  whom  the  kingdom  of  heaven  was  opened  to  the  Gentiles  by  Peter's
key,  received  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  before  they  had  any  visible  Church
recognition  (Acts  x.  44 — 48).  (2)  The  leper's  baptisms  of  blood  began  outside  the
camp.  The  blood  of  the  bird  was  there  seven  times  sprinkled  upon  the  leper.  But
now,  in  the  tabernacle,  he  is  again  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  the  trespass  offering.
It  was  put  on  the  tip  of  his  right  ear,  to  engage  him  in  future  to  hear  the  Law  of  God ;
on  the  thumb  of  his  right  hand,  to  engage  him  to  do  the  will  of  God ;  and  on  the  great
toe  of  his  right  foot,  to  engage  him  to  walk  in  his  holy  ways.  (3)  As  there  was  no
baptism  of  water  ministered  to  the  leper  in  the  tabernacle,  so  was  there  no  baptism  of
oil  ministered  to  him  outside  the  camp.  Coming  into  the  sanctuary,  he  sees  the  oil
first  "  sprinkled  seven  times  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  16).  Then  oil  was  put  upon  him
over  the  blood  on  the  tip  of  his  right  ear,  the  thumb  of  his  right  hand,  and  the  great
toe  of  his  right  foot  (ver.  17).  The  remnant  of  the  oil  was  then  poured  upon  his  head.
In  this  an  "  atonement  was  made  for  him  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  18).  Bishop  Patrick
Bays,  "  The  blood  seems  to  have  been  a  token  of  forgiveness ;  the  oil  of  healing."
Together  they  show  the  intimate  connection  between  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Spirit  of
God  in  the  work  of  redemption  and  salvation.  3.  The  circumstances  of  the  poor  are
'■nnsidered.    (1)  He  may  substitute  doves  for  the  lambs  of  the  burnt  offering  and  siD


.  XIV.  33—67.]


THE  BOOK  OJP  LEVITICUS.


227


offering,  and  one  tenth-deal  of  flour  for  three.  "  My  son,  give  me  thine  heart ; "  and  with
that  the  caivea  of  thy  lips  shall  ho  accepted  instead  of  the  calvei  of  the  staU.  (2)  Bat
the  lunh  of  the  trespass  ofTering  he  must  bring.  "  This  may  well  he  looked  upon  as  a
figure  of  the  Lamb  of  Qod,  who  alone  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  whole  world"  (Old
KUe).— J.  A.  M.


EXPOSITION.


Thb  utbost  or  a  bousi,  ahd  its
OLBANsiHO  (vers.  3»— 53).  The  subject  of
leprosy  in  houses  must  be  regarded  from
the  same  point  of  view  as  that  of  leprosy
in  clothes.  The  regulations  respecting  it
are  not  sanitary  laws,  as  Lange  repre-
sents them,  but  rest,  as  Eeil  argues,
upen  an  ideal  or  symbolical  basis.  The
same  thought  is  attached  to  all  species  of
uncleEinness.  Something — it  matters  not
what — produces  a  foul  and  repulsive  ap-
pearance in  the  walls  of  a  house.  That  is
in  itself  sufficient  to  make  that  house  un-
clean ;  for  whatever  is  foul  and  repulsive  is
representative  of  moral  and  spiritual  defile-
ment, and  therefore  is  itself  symbolically
defiling  and  defiled.  It  has  been  suggested
that  the  special  cause  of  the  affection  of  the
houses  in  Canaan  was  saltpetre  exuding
from  the  materials  employed  in  their  build-
ing, or  iron  pyrites  in  the  stone  used.  This
may  have  been  so,  or  more  probably  it  was
the  growth  of  some  fungus.  Whatever  it
was,  the  appearance  created  by  it  was  so
similar  to  that  of  leprosy  in  the  human
body,  as  to  derive  its  name  from  the  latter
by  analogy.

Ver.  84. — When  ye  be  come  into  the  land
of  Canaan,  which  I  give  to  yon  for  a  posses-
sion. This  is  the  first  instance  of  a  law
being  given  which  has  no  bearing  on  the
present  condition  of  the  Israelites,  but  is  to
regulate  their  conduct  when  they  had  come
into  the  promised  land.  From  the  time  of
Abraham  downwards,  the  assurance  of  their
entrance  into  that  land  had  been  possessed
by  the  people  of  Israel  (Gen.  zvii.  8),  and
the  expectation  of  the  speedy  fulfilment  of
that  promise  had  been  quickened  by  their
exodus  from  Egypt,  and  the  preparations
made  to  march  tiirough  the  wilderness.
There  would,  therefore,  be  nothing  sur-
prising to  them  in  receiving  instruction-i  to
guide  their  conduct  when  the  entrance
should  have  been  effected.  As  the  question
is  one  of  leprosy,  it  is  natural  that  it  should
be  treated  of  with  the  leprosy  of  the  human
subject  and  the  leprosy  of  garments;  but
as  it  is  not  of  immediate  application,  it  is


placed  at  the  and,  and  dealt  with  after  the
rest  of  the  subject  has  been  discussed,  being
appended  to  the  law  of  cleansing  the  leper,
instead  of  preceding  it.  And  I  pnt  the
pla^m  ef  leprosy  in  •  house  of  the  land  of
your  poBsessioa  lliis  expression  has  led
to  the  idea  that  the  l«praey  of  houses  was
a  special  infliction  at  God's  hand  in  a
manner  different  from  other  inflictions  or
diseases ;  but  the  words  do  not  mean  tliat.
All  that  is  done  is  in  a  sense  done  by  God,
inasmuch  as  bis  providence  rules  over  all ;
and,  therefore,  by  whatever  secondary  eanse
a  thing  may  be  brought  about,  it  is  he  that
does  it.  It  is  God  that  feeds  the  birds
(Luke  xii.  24),  God  that  clothes  the  grass
(Luke  xii.  28),  nor  does  one  sparrow  fall  to
the  ground  without  him  (Matt.  x.  29).  It  is
he,  therefore,  that  puts  the  plague  in  a  hotue,
as  the  Lord  of  all  things  (cf.  Isa.  xlv.  6,  7,
"  I  am  the  Lord,  and  there  is  none  else.  I
form  the  light, and  create  darkness:  I  make
peace,  and  create  evil :  I  the  Lord  do  all
these  things").  The  expression  militates,
though  not  strongly,  against  the  notion
that  the  house  caught  the  leprosy  from  the
leper  that  lived  in  it.

Vers.  35 — 44. — The  examination  of  the
suspected  house  by  the  priest.  First,  the
house  is  to  be  emptied  of  its  furniture,  lest
the  latter  should  contract  a  ceremonial,  un-
cleannesB  in  case  the  house  were  found  to
be  leprous,  but  not,  it  will  be  noted,  lest  it
should  convey  contagion  or  infection.  Then
the  priest  is  to  examine  the  discolouration,
and  if  it  bear  a  suspicious  appearance,  the
house  is  to  be  shut  up  for  seven  days.  It
at  the  end  of  that  time  the  spot  has  spread,
he  is  to  have  the  part  of  the  wall  in  which
it  shows  itself  taken  down  and  carried
away,  and  built  up  again  with  new  stones
and  mortar  and  plaster,  the  parts  adjoining
to  the  infected  place  having  been  first  well
scraped.  If  this  treatment  does  not  succeed
in  getting  rid  of  the  mischief,  the  priest  is
to  determine  that  it  is  a  fretting  leprosy^
the  house :  it  is  unclean.

Ver.  45. — As  the  leper  was  removed  from
the  camp,  so  the  leprous  house  is  to  be
utterly  pulled  down ;  the  house,  the  stones
of  it,  and  the  timber  thereof,  and  all  the
morter  of  the  house;  and  all  its  materials
carried  forth  out  of  tile  oity  into  an  nnolean
.  place.


228


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  XIV.  33—57.


Vers.  46,  47. — The  leprous  house  conveys
uncleannesB  to  those  that  enter  it,  but  of
so  slight  a  nature  that  it  ceases  with  the
evening,  and  requires  only  that  the  clothes
of  the  wearer  be  washed.  Such  a  regula-
tion would  have  been  ineffectual  for  pre-
venting the  spread  of  infection,  if  that  had
been  its  purpose.

Vers.  48 — 53. — The  ceremony  of  cleansing
the  house  ia  as  similar  to  that  of  cleansing
the  leper  as  ciroumstanees  will  permit.  In
case  there  is  no  reappearance  of  the  mischief
aftei  the  new  stones  and  plastering  have
been  put  in,  the  priest  shall  prononnce  the
house  clean,  hecause  the  plague  is  healed.
First,  the  priest  assures  himself  that  the
plague  is  healed,  tlien  he  pronounces  the
himse  clean,  and  still  after  that  the  cleansing
is  to  take  place  (ot.  vera.  3,  7,  8).    The


cleansing  is  effected  by  the  same  ceremony
as  that  of  the  leper  himsdf,  by  the  two
birds,  and  cedar  wood,  and  scarlet,  and
hyssop.  The  use  of  this  ceremony  in  the
cleansing  of  a  house  shows  that,  in  the  case
of  the  leper,  the  symbolical  meaning  of
letting  go  the  living  bird  out  of  the  city
into  the  open  fields  cannot  be,  as  hag  been
maintained,  the  restoration  of  the  cleansed
man  to  his  natural  movements  of  liberty  in
the  camp.  If  a  bird's  flight  represints  the
freedom  of  a  man  going  hither  and  thither
as  he  will,  it  certainly  does  not  represent
any  action  that  a  house  could  take.

Vers.  54 — 57. — These  verses  contain  the
concluding  formula  for  chs.  xiii.,  xiv.  The
various  names  of  leprosy  and  its  kindred
diseases  are  resumed  from  ch.  xiii.  2.


HOMILBTIC&

Vers.  33 — 53. — On  uncleanness  in  houses.  There  are  two  metaphors  commonly
used  in  Holy  Scripture  for  designating  God's  covenant  people.  They  are  (1)  God's
household ;  (2)  God's  house.

I.  God's  household.  As  the  household  of  God  the  Father, "  of  whom  the  whole  family
in  heaven  and  earth  is  named "  (Eph.  iii.  15),  they  are  the  members  of  that  august
brotherhood  gathered  together  in  Christ,  of  which  God  himself  is  the  spiritual  Father,
into  which  all  that  are  adopted  in  Christ  are  incorporated,  ceasing  to  be  "  strangers  and
foreigners,"  and  becoming  "fellow-citizens  with  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of
God"  (Eph.  ii  19).

II.  God's  hcubb.  The  representation  that  God's  people  form  his  house  is  of  a  more
singular  character,  and  less  capable  of  bring  immediately  grasped.  It  is  even  more
commonly  employed  than  the  other.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  we  read
of  Christians,  that  is,  the  collective  body  of  Christians,  being  "  God's  temple  "  (1  Cor.
iii.  16; ;  "  for  ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God ;  as  God  hath  said,  I  will  dwell
in  them,  and  walk  in  them ;  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people "
(2  Cor.  vi.  IG).  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  St.  Paul  dwells  at  length  on  the  idea
of  the  Christian  Church  being  built  up  of  living  stones  into  a  temple  for  God's  Spirit :
"  Ye  are  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,  Jesus  Christ  being
himself  the  chief  comer  stone;  in  whom  all  the  building  fitly  framed  together  groweth
unto  an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord:  in  whom  ye  also  are  builded  together  for  an
habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit"  (Eph.  ii.  20 — ^22).  And  in  the  Epistle  to
Timothy,  he  speaks  of  "  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God,  the
pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  15).  Similarly,  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to
the  Hebrews,  having  described  Christ "  as  a  Son  over  his  own  house,"  continues, "  whose
house  are  we  "  (Heb.  iii.  6) ;  and  St.  Peter  writes,  "  Ye  also,  as  lively  stones,  are  built
up  a  spiritual  house"  (1  Pet.  ii.  3).  Just  as  God's  Spirit  dwells  within  the  heart  of
each  individual  Christian,  so,  and  in  a  more  special  manner,  he  dwells  within  the
Church,  his  house  not  being  made  by  hands,  or  constituted  of  wood  and  stone,  but  of
the  spirits  of  those  who  form  the  Church.

III.  God's  house  mat  never  be  destboted,  but  it  may  bk  defiled.  "  Upon  this
rock"  (that  is,  upon  himself  as  confessed  by  St.  Peter),  "  I  will  build  my  Church,  and
the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it"  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  But  though  not
destructible  by  thepower  of  evil,  it  may  yet  be  defiled.  "  If  any  man  defile  the  temple
of  God,  him  shall  God  destroy;  for  the  temple  of  God  is  holy,  which  temple  ye  are"
(1  Cor.  iii.  17).  That  which  defiles  God's  house  is  unrighteousness  and  falsehood,
just  as  physical  and  ceremonial  uncleanness  defiles  the  camp  (Deut.  xxiii.  12).  If  the
latter  l»  allowed  to  continue  in  the  camp,  God  will  symbolically  "  turn  away "  firom


OH.  XIV.  33—57.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  229

it ;  "  for  the  Lord  thy  Ood  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  camp,  to  deliver  thee,  and  to  give
up  thine  enemies  hefore  thee ;  therefore  shall  thy  camp  be  holy :  that  he  see  no  unclean
thing  in  thee,  and  turn  away  from  thee"  (Deut.  xxiii.  14\  If  the  former  be  found,
"  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  "  will  be  "  grieved  "  (Eph.  iv.  30),  and  "  vexed,"  so  that  God
is  turned  into  an  "  enemy  "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  10).

IV.  The  oleansing  of  God'b  house.    As  soon  as  there  is  aprimd/acie  appearance
of  immorality,  or  irreligiousness,  or  superstition  in  a  National  Church,  a  diligent
examination  should  be  made  by  those  placed  in  authority  by  God.    Perhaps  it  is  only
an  appearance,  which  will  die  away  of  itself.    If  it  does  so,  no  further  measures  are
needed.    But  "if  IheplagtK  spread  in  the  walls  of  the  house;  then  the  priest  shall  com-
mand that  they  take  away  the  stones  in  which  the  plague  is,  and  they  shall  cast  them
into  on  unclean  place  without  the  city :  and  he  shall  cause  the  house  to  be  scraped  within
round  about,  and  they  shall  pour  out  the  dust  that  they  scrape  off  without  the  city
into  an  unclean  place"    Those  whose  ofBce  it  is,  must  not  shrink  from  removing  the
stones  in  which  the  mischief  is  found,  that  is,  of  casting  out  those  who  are  incurably
affected  with  irreligion,  immorality,  or  superstition.     "  And  they  shall  take  other  stones,
and  pat  them  in  the  place  of  those  stories ;  and  he  shall  fake  other  mMier,  and  shall
plaister  the  house."    Discipline  must  be  exercised  by  substituting  sound  teachers  and
members  of  the  flock  for  those  that  have  become  unsound.     This  is  the  work  of
reformation.    This  is  what  was  done  for  the  Jewish  Church  by  Joash,  when  he  "  was
minded  to  repair  the  house  of  the  Lord.  ...  So  the  workmen  wrought,  and  the  work
was  perfected  by  them,  and  they  set  the  house  of  God  in  his  state,  and  strengthened
it "  ^  Chron.  xxiv.  4 — ^13) ;  and  by  Hezekiah,  when  he  said  unto  the  Levites,  "  Sanctify
now  yourselves,  and  sanctify  the  house  of  the  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  and  carry  forth
the  filthiness  out  of  the  holy  place.     For  our  fathers  have  trespassed,  and  done  that
which  was  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  our  God,  and  have  forsaken  him.  .  .  .  And  the
priests  went  into  the  inner  part  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  to  cleanse  it,  and  brought  out
»11  the  uncleanness  that  they  found  in  the  temple  of  the  Lord  into  the  court  of  the
house  of  the  Lord.   And  the  Levites  took  it,  to  carry  it  out  abroad  into  the  brook  Kidron  "
(2  Chron.  xxix.  5 — 16) ;  and  by  Josiah,  when  "  he  began  to  purge  Judah  and  Jerusalem
.  .  .  when  he  had  purged  the  land  and  the  house  he  sent  ...  to  repair  the  house
of  the  Lord  his  God  .  .  .  and  they  gave  the  money  to  the  workmen  that  wrought
in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  to  repair  and  amend  the  house:  even  to  the  artificers  and
builders  gave  they  it,  to  buy  hewn  stone,  and  timber  for  couplings,  and  to  floor  the
houses  which  the  kings  of  Judah  had  destroyed  "  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3 — 11).    And  this  is
what  was  done  for  the  greater  part  of  the  Christian  Church  in  the  West  in  the  sixteenth
century.    But  if  these  measures  prove  ineffective,  "  if  the  plague  come  again,  and  break
out  in  the  house,  after  that  he  hath  taken  away  the  stones,  and  after  he  hath  scraped
the  house  and  after  it  is  plaistered ;  then  the  priest  shall  come  and  look,  and,  behold,
if  the  plague  be  spread  in  the  house,  it  is  a  fretting  leprosy  in  the  house  :  it  is  unclean.
And  he  shall  break  down,  the  house,  the  stones  of  it,  and  the  timber  thereof,  and  all
the  morter  of  the  house ;  and  he  shall  carry  them  forth  out  of  the  city  into  an  unclean
place."    So  it  was  with  the  Jewish  Church.    The  reformations  of  Joash,  of  Hezekiah,
of  Josiah,  were  ineffectual,  and  the  Babylonian  captivity  followed.    And  so  it  will  be
with  the  various  National  Churches  of  Christendom :  any  one  of  them  to  which  the
taint  of  impurity  in  life  or  doctrine  obstinately  adheres,  will  be  destroyed  utterly  when
God's  forbearance  shall  have  at  length  come  to  an  end.

V.  WABNiNa.  "  Remember  therefore  from  whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  repent,  and
do  the  first  works ;  or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will  remove  thy  candle-
atick  out  of  his  place,  except  thou  repent"  (Rev.  ii.  5).  "  Repent ;  or  else  I  will  come
unto  thee  quickly,  and  will  fight  against  them  with  the  sword  of  my  mouth  "  (Rev.  ii.
16).  "Remember  therefore  how  thou  hast  received  and  heard,  and  hold  fast,  and
repent.  If  therefore  thou  shalt  not  watch,  I  will  come  on  thee  as  a  thief,  and  thou
shalt  not  know  what  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee  "  (Rev.  iii.  3).  "  As  many  as  I  love,
I  rebuke  and  chasten :  be  zealous  therefore,  and  repent.  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door,
and  knock :  if  any  man  hear  my  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and
will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me  "  (Rev.  iii.  19,  20).


230  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xiv.  33— 57.


HOMILIES  BY  VATIIOUS  AUTHORS.

Veri.  38 — 53. — Cleansing  the  corrupt  house.  That  the  Divine  Lawgirer  should,  in
this  tabernacle  period  of  Israel's  history,  anticipate  a  time  when  their  future  houaei
would  he  affected  by  some  disorder  similar  to  leprosy  in  the  human  skin,  and  that  ha
should  direct  a  treatment  of  such  houses  closely  corresponding  with  that  of  the  human
leper,  is  exceedingly  remarkable.  Nothing  could  possibly  impress  the  Hebrew  mind
more  powerfully  with  the  idea  that  "the  face  of  the  Lord  was  against"  that  spiritual
evil  of  which  leprosy  was  the  chosen  type.  How  direct  the  argument  and  forcible  the
conclusion  that,  if  not  only  every  remotest  particle  of  leprosy  itself  was  to  be  ruthlessly
put  away  but  also  anything  which  to  the  bodily  eye  had  even  a  near  resemblance  to  it,
and  was  thus  suggestive  of  it, — how  offensive,  how  intolerable,  in  the  sight  of  God  must
that  evil  thing  itself  be  held !     Here  are —

,  I.  Three  main  principles  on  the  subject  of  corruption.  In  God's  view,  as  we
gain  it  from  his  Word,  1.  Corruption  (impurity)  may  attach  to  the  "house"  or  com-
munity as  well  as  to  the  individual.  We  read  of  "the  iniquity  of  the  house  of
Israel,"  and  of  "the  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Judah"  (Ezek.  iv.  5,  6);  of  "the
house  of  Israel  dealing  treacherously  with  God"  (Jer.  iii.  20),  etc.  2.  That
earnest  effort  should  be  made  to  cleanse  it  from  corruption.  The  leprous  house  of
stone  was  to  be  cleansed:  the  stones  in  which  the  plague  was  were  to  be  taken
away  (ver.  40) ;  the  house  was  to  be  scraped  round  about,  and  its  unclean  dust  cast  out
of  the  camp  (ver.  41) ;  other  stones  were  to  be  placed  and  other  mortar  used  instead
(ver.  42) :  the  leprous  part  was  to  be  removed  and  the  house  renovated.  So  must  the
contaminated  community  purify  itself,  removing  that  fropi  it  which  is  evil  and  cor-
rupting— its  Achan,  its  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  its  Simon  the  sorcerer,  its  guilty
member  (1  Cor.  v.),  etc.  3.  That,  all  efforts  failing,  the  house  will  be  destroyed.  "He
shall  break  down  the  house,  the  stones  of  it,"  etc.  (ver.  45).  A  community  of  any  kind
that  is  incurably  corrupt  (1)  had  better  be  broken  up  deliberately  by  the  hand  of  man ;
but  if  not  (2),  will  certainly  be  dissolved  in  time  by  the  hand  of  God.  The  history  of
the  world  abounds  in  proofs  that  moral  and  spiritual  corruption  lead  on  to  feebleness,
decay,  dissolution.

II.  Three  main  applications  of  the  principles.  To  any  leprous  "  house,"  to  any
community  into  which  seeds  of  corruption  have  been  introduced,  these  principles  will
apply.  They  may  with  peculiar  appropriateness  be  referred  to :  1.  The  nation.  The
"  house  of  Judah  "  and  the  "  house  of  Israel "  were  continually  warned  that  they  had
erred  from  the  ways  of  the  Lord  and  become  corrupt,  that  they  must  cleanse  themselves
from  their  impurities,  or  that  they  would  be  abandoned  by  God  to  their  doom.  Assyria,
Judaea,  Egypt,  Greece,  Rome,  the  Ottoman  Empire,  provide  striking  and  eloquent  illus-
trations. 2.  The  family.  The  "  house  of  Eli "  and  the  "  house  of  Saul "  illustrate  the
principles  of  the  text;  so  also  many  a  "house"  in  Christian  times  that  has  risen  to
honour  and  influence,  that  has  grown  leprous  (corrupt),  that  has  not  heeded  the
warnings  of  the  Word  of  God  to  put  away  the  evil  of  its  doings,  and  that  has  fallen  into
decay  and  has  disappeared.  3.  The  Church.  This  is  the  "house  of  God"  on  e«rth
(1  Tim.  iii.  15 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  20 ;  Eph.  ii.  19 ;  Heb.  iii,  6).  This  house  may  show  signs
of  leprosy ;  and  in  individual  Churches  corruption  may  break  out — in  doctrine  (Galatia),
in  public  worship  (Corinth),  in  morals  (Pergamos,  Thyatira),  in  spiritual  life  (Ephesua,
Sardis,  Laodicea).  The  corrupt  Church  must  be  cleansed,  or  it  will  be  disowned  of
the  Divine  Lord,  and  it  will  perish  in  his  high  displeasure  (Bev.  ii.  5,  16,  23,  27;
iiL  3, 17—19). — 0.

Vers.  83 — 57. — Leprosy  in  a  house.  Prom  the  first  of  these  verses  it  is  concluded
that  leprosy  was  not  an  ordinary  disease,  but  a  plague  inflicted  immediately  by  a  judg-
ment from  God.  That  it  was  so  inflicted  in  some  instances  upon  persons  cannot  be
disputed  (see  Numb.  xii.  10 ;  2  Kings  v.  27 ;  xv.  5),  and  God  threatens  to  curse  tha
house  of  the  wicked  with  such  a  plague  (Zech.  v.  4).  The  Jews  view  it  in  this  li^t,
nnd  conaequently  regard  leprosy  as  incurable  except  by  the  hand  of  God.     But  ia


CH.  XIV.  33— 57.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  231

Scripture,  what  God  permits  is  often  represented  aa  his  doing ;  and  evils  that  Satan
inflicts  may  require  the  power  of  God  to  remove.

I.  What  are  we  to  understand  bt  the  house  ?  1.  There  is  the  obvious  literal
meaning.  It  is  an  ordinary  habitation  (differing,  indeed,  from  the  tents  in  which  the
Israelites  sojourned  in  the  wilderness},  composed  of  stones,  and  mortar,  and  wood,  and
plaster.  2.  It  must  also  have  a  moral  interpretation.  (1)  If  in  the  person  leprosy
lias  a  twofold  meaning,  viz.  a  literal  and  moral;  and  if  the  garment  plagued  with
leprosy  has  a  moral  as  well  as  a  literal  meaning,  so,  by  parity  of  reason,  must  the
house.  (2)  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  for  sanitary  reasons  simply  the  leprosy  in
the  house  should  occupy  the  space  it  takes  in  the  Scriptures.  (3)  Over  and  above  the
sanitary  regulations,  we  find  regulations  for  the  ceremonial  cleansing,  in  which  are
sacrifices  and  sprinklings,  "  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  house  "  (vers.  48 — 53).
These  in  other  cases  are  admitted  to  have  reference  to  the  provisions  of  the  gospel  for
moral  purposes,  and  therefore  should  be  so  considered  here.  3.  It  should  he  taken  to
represent  a  community.  (1)  It  is  used  sometimes  to  describe  a.  family.  Thus  we  read
of  the  "  house  of  Cornelius,"  and  of  Noah  saving  "  his  house  "  (Acts  x.  2 ;  Heb.  xi.  7).
{2)  It  is  also  used  to  express  a  lineage.  Thus  we  read  of  a  long  war  raging  between
the  "  house  of  Saul "  and  the  "  house  of  David  "  (2  Sam.  iii.  1).  (3)  The  larger  com-
munity of  a  nation  is  called  a  "house."  Thus  we  read  repeatedly  of  the  "house  of
Israel,"  the  "  house  of  Judah,"  and  Egypt  is  spoken  of  as  the  "  house  of  bondage  "
(Deut.  viii.  14).  (4)  An  ecclesiastical  community  is  in  like  manner  described  as  a
house.  Paul  speaks  of  the  "  house  of  God,  which  is  the  Church  of  the  living  God  "
(1  Tim.  iii.  15 ;  see  also  Heb.  iii.  2 — 6 ;  x.  21 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  17).  4.  A  leprous  house  is
a  demoralized  community.  (1)  Thus  a  family  of  wicked  persons,  or  in  which  are
members  scandalous  for  irreligion  and  vice,  is  morally  a  leprous  house.  Such  was  the
house  of  Eli.  (2)  A  lineage  of  wickedness  also  is  a  leprous  house.  Such  was  the
house  of  "Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  who  made  Israel  to  sin."  Such  that  of  Omri.
(3)  A  nation  given  to  idolatry  such  as  Israel  became  before  the  Assyrian  captivity,  and
Judah  before  the  Babylonish,  may  be  regarded  as  a  leprous  house.  So  are  modern
nations  demoralized  by  atheism,  infidelity,  sabbath  desecration,  drunkenness,  and  dissi-
pation, leprous  houses.  (4)  A  Church  holding  out  the  poison  cup  of  "  damnable
heresy  "  to  intoxicate  nations,  encouraging  vice  by  "  indulgences,"  and  "  red "  with
the  "  blood  of  the  saints  and  martyrs  of  Jesus,"  is  a  house  fearfully  smitten  with  the
plague  of  leprosy.

II.  What  treatment  should  it  receive  ?  1.  The  leprosy  should  be  reported  to  the
priest  (vers.  34,  85).  (1)  The  Priest  is  Christ,  to  whom  we  must  carry  all  our  concerns
in  prayers-domestic,  political,  ecclesiastical.  The  voice  of  suffering  cries  to  him  for
judgment  upon  oppressors  (Jas.  v.  4),  and  the  voice  from  the  ashes  of  the  martyrs
loudly  imprecates  judgment  upon  their  persecutors  (Rev.  vi.  9 — 11).  (2)  Faithful
ministers  of  Christ  should  be  apprised  of  the  symptoms  of  the  plague  of  heresy  or
immorality,  that  they  might  use  their  good  oflBces  and  influence  to  stop  the  mischief.
(3)  Any  of  the  spiritual  priesthood,  persons  of  recognized  sanctity  and  probity,  might
be  informed  of  theajpreading  of  moral  leprosy,  whether  it  be  in  the  family,  or  State,
or  Church.  2.  Warning  should  be  given  to  those  concerned.  (1)  The  priest  himself
gives  the  warning.  The  premonitions  of  Jesus  are  written  in  his  Word,  It  tells  us  of
days  of  judgment  upon  nations,  upon  Churches,  upon  individuals.  (2)  Faithful
ministers  of  Christ  will  utter  his  words.  No  false  notions  of  "  charity  "  will  prevent
them  from  sounding  the  alarm.  (3)  The  use  of  the  warning  is  to  have  everything
removed  from  the  leprous  house  before  the  priest's  inquisition  for  judgment;  for  what-
ever he  finds  in  the  unclean  house  will  be  concluded  to  be  unclean  (see  Rev.  xviii.  4).
3.  It  will  be  duly  inspected.  (1)  Christ  moves  in  all  communities,  though  unseen,  and
more  particularly  amongst  the  candlesticks,  or  Churches.  His  eyes  are  as  flames  of  fire,
searching  into  all  secrets  of  the  "  reins  and  hearts  "  (Rev.  i.  12 — 16,  23).  (2)  The
light  of  God's  Word  should  be  let  in  to  discover  the  heresy  that  may  plague  any
Church,  and  to  rebuke  the  laxity  of  discipline  which  may  connive  at  licentiousness
(Rev.  ii.  14 — 16,  20 — 23).  4.  It  will  be  shut  up  for  seven  days.  (1)  The  priest  him-
self withdraws.  Jesus  cannot  abide  in  a  foul  community.  (2)  Whoever  enters  it
during  this  interval  becomes  unclean  (ver.  46).  Where  Jesus  cannot  abide,  his  people
should  not  go.    (3)  He  that  lieth  in  the  house  or  eateth  in  It  shall  wash  big  clothes


232


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITIOUS.


[oh.  XV.  1— sa


(ver.  47).  Fellowship  in  such  a  community  compromises  righteousness.  What  is  th«
condition  of  those  who  are  perverted  to  hei'esy  !  5.  Efforts  towards  a  reformation  should
le  made.  (1)  Where  the  plague  may  appear  superficial,  the  place  must  be  scraped ;
where  it  has  eaten  deeply,  the  stones  affected  must  he  removed  and  new  ones  substi-
tuted, and  the  whole  plastered  afresh.  (2)  However  painful  the  process,  the  scraping
of  discipline  must  be  endured  (Job  xxii.  23).  There  must  be  an  excision  of  scandalous
offenders  (1  Cor.  v.  13).  6.  The  sequel.  (1)  If  the  plague  remain  through  the  days
of  trial,  breaking  out  afresh,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  for  reformation,  when  the
case  is  hopeless,  then  comes  the  visitation  of  judgment.  The  house  is  demolished  and
the  wreck  carried  outside  the  city  to  an  unclean  place  (see  Eev.  xxii.  15).  (2)  If  the
reformation  has  proved  successful,  the  house  abides.  The  ceremonies  of  the  shedding  and
sprinkling  the  sacrificial  blood  (vers.  48 — 53)  show  that  salvation  is  through  faith  in
the  merits  of  Christ.  To  those  merits  we  are  indebted  for  a  present  and  an  everlasting
salvation. — J.  A.  M.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTBB  XV.

Rumma  issues  from  the  human  bodt.
These  are  the  fourth  cause  of  ceremonial
unoleauness.  We  are  not  to  look  for  a  moral
basis  for  the  regulation  on  account  of  any
vicious  habit  connected  with  such  issues.
They  are  foul  and  repulsive,  and  simply  for
that  reason  they  are  causes  of  ceremonial
unoleanness  to  those  who  suffer  from  them,
and  to  those  who  come  in  contact  with
persons  suffering  from  them.

Vers.  2 — 15. — The  first  case  of  an  issue.
It  appears  to  be  identical  with  the  disease
called  by  physicians  gonorrhea,  or,  per-
haps, blenoirhea  (cf  ch.  xxii.  4 ;  Numb,
v.  2).

Vers.  16,  17. — The  second  case  of  an
issue  (ef  cli,  xxii.  4 ;  Deut.  xxiii.  10 ;  Gen.
xxxviii.  9,  10).

Ver.  18. — The  third  case  of  an  issue  (cf.
Exod.  xix.  15;  1  Sam.  xxi  5;  1  Cor.  vii.  5).

Yen.  19— 24.— The  fourth  case    of  an


issue — that  of  ordinary  menstruation  (ct
chs.  xii.  2 ;  xx.  18).

Vers.  25— 30.— The  fifth  case  of  an  isme
— that  of  excessive  menstruation,  or  men-
struation occurring  at  the  wrong  time.
Tliis  was  probably  the  disease  of  the  woman
"who  had  an  issue  of  blood"  (Matt.  ix.  20;
Mark  v.  25 ;  Luke  viii.  43).

Ver.  28. — If  she  be  cleansed  of  her  issue.
In  tlie  first  and  the  fifth  cases,  the  presen-
tation of  two  turtlo-doves  or  two  young
pigeons  as  a  sin  offering  and  a  burnt  offer-
ing is  enjoined  as  the  ceremonial  cleansing
required.  In  the  other  cases  a  sacrifice  i>
not  demanded.

Ver.  31. — That  they  die  not  in  their  nn-
cleanness,  when  they  defile  my  tabemaoI»
that  is  among  them.  The  main  purpose
in  the  laws  of  uncleanness  is  to  keep  first
God's  house  and  then  God's  people  free
from  the  danger  of  defilement  by  foul  things
presenting  themselves  freely  before  him
and  among  them.  These  foul  thiog8,sym-
bolizing  sinful  things,  create  a  ceremonial
defilement  symbolizing  moral  defilement


HOMILETICS.  -f...

Ver.  25. — The  figure  of  the  "  woman  which  was  diseased  with  an  issue  of  blood  tuielve
years  "  seems  to  rise  up  before  us  as  we  read  this  verse.  Jesus  was  going  on  an  errand
of  mercy  to  heal  the  daughter  of  Jairus,  and  as  he  went  the  people  thronged  him.
"  And  a  certain  woman,  which  had  an  issue  of  blood  twelve  years,  and  had°suffered
many  things  of  many  physicians,  and  had  spent  all  that  she  had,  and  was  nothing
bettered,  but  rather  grew  worse,  when  she  had  heard  of  Jesus,  came  in  the  press  behind"
and  touched  his  garment"  (Mark  v.  25 — 27).

I.  The  woman's  state  of  ceremonial  unoleanness.  For  twelve  years  she  had
not  been  allowed  within  the  precincts  of  the  temple,  and  had  been  unable,  therefore,
to  take  part  in  the  public  worship  of  God  as  appointed  m  the  books  of  Moses.  And
dunng  the  whole  of  the  same  long  period  she  had  been  in  a  state  of  separation  from  all
about  her:  whoever  touched  her  became  unclean  ;  the  bed  she  lay  upon  was  unclean;
the  seats  that  she  sat  upon  were  unclean  ;  whoever  touched  the  bed  that  she  lay  upon
or  the  seat  that  she  sat  upon  was  unclean.  No  wonder  if  for  this  reason  alone  "  »h«
had  spent  all  her  living  upon  physicians  "  (Luke  viii.  iS).


OH.  XV.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  23»

n.  Heb  state  of  physical  suFFEBiNa.  She  was  afflicted  with  an  exhausting  disease,
wasting  her  vital  powers,  and  she  suffered  not  only  from  that  cause,  but  also  &om  the
vain  attempts  made  by  many  physicians  to  relieve  her,  as  well  as  from  the  anxiety  of
mind  inseparable  from  her  state  of  ceremonial  impurity.

III.  What  she  souaHT.  Not  to  be  cleansed  as  by  a  priest — this  could  not  be  until
she  had  been  cured — but  to  be  healed  as  by  a  physician.  "  For  she  said,  If  I  may
touch  but  his  clothes,  I  shall  be  whole  "  (Mark  v.  28).  The  Great  Physician  accepts
her,  and  fulfils  her  desire ;  for  however  imperfect  her  faith  might  be,  and  however
uninstructed  she  might  herself  be,  yet  there  was  faith  in  her  sufficient  "  to  make  ter
whole  "  (Matt.  ix.  22).

IV.  How  the  healino  was  wrought.  The  cure  was  effected  by  the  power  of
Christ  conveyed  through  the  touch  of  his  garment,  on  the  condition  of  the  woman's
faith.  In  each  of  the  miracles  he  uses  such  means  as  he  thinks  fit,  and  often  different
means,  probably  with  the  purpose  in  each  case  of  awaking  the  spirit  of  the  person  to  be
healed  so  as  to  become  capable  of  receiving  the  spiritual  gift.  As  in  the  case  of  the
lepers  on  whom  he  laid  his  hand,  instead  of  becoming  himself  unclean,  he  becomes  the
channel  of  renewed  life  and  health  to  those  whom  he  touches.

V.  The  cebbmonial  clbansinq  still  to  be  effected.  As  the  leper,  after  he  had
been  healed  by  our  Lord,  had  to  "  go  and  show  himself  to  the  priest,  and  offer  the  gift
that  Moses  commanded  "  (Matt.  viii.  4),  so  no  doubt  the  woman  cured  of  the  issue  of
blood  had  to  fulfil  the  legal  requirement  for  her  cleansing,  by  offering  her  sin  offering
and  her  burnt  offering  on  the  eighth  day  after  her  healing.

VI.  Spibitual  application  of  the  mibaclb.  Sin  can  only  be  healed  by  the  power
of  God  through  Christ  brought  into  spiritual  contact  with  the  soul  of  the  sinner,  and
there  must  be  something  of  faith  and  love  in  the  heart  of  the  sinner,  however  imperfect
its  manifestation  may  he,  in  order  that  tliat  spiritual  contact  between  God's  Spirit  and
hia  spirit  may  take  place.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Beertt  tint.  Ch.  xv. ;  cf.  Ps.  xix.  12  ;  1  Tim.  i.  13.  We  have  already  had  occasion
to  discern  as  a  clear  lesson  of  the  old  ritual  that  sin  is  a  nature.  The  old  law  did  not
confine  itself  to  overt  acts,  but  insisted  on  "  sins  of  ignorance "  being  regarded  as
elements  of  guilt  (cf.  ch.  iv.).  Then  again  we  have  sin  shown  to  originate  in  birth
(oh.  xil.) ;  we  have  its  tangible  effects  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  law  of  the  leprosy
(chs.  xiii.,  xiv.) ;  and  now  we  have  the  analysis  of  sin  completed  in  these  laws  about
Issues.

I.  It  18  a  physical  fact  that  men  and  women  mat  become  unclean  without
any  act  of  volition  on  their  part.  Into  the  particulars  of  menstruation  and  of
gonorrhea  benigna  it  is  unnecessary  to  enter.  The  chapter  before  us  states  the  fact,
and  asserts  the  legal  uncleanness  which  is  thereby  entailed.  If  involuntary  results
entail  uncleanness,  it  is  clear  that  voluntary  elements  entering  in  (ver.  18)  must  increase
the  sense  of  uncleanness.  Experience  confirms  the  Divine  decision.  There  is  •  sense  of
uncleanness  which  arises  as  soon  as  the  man  or  woman  becomes  conscious  of  the  issue.

II.  It  is  evident  from  this  that  sm  has  a  sphere  of  operation  beyond  conscious
volition.  Just  as  physically  a  man  or  woman  contracts  uncleanness  during  the  un-
consciousness of  sleep,  so  morally  we  find  sinful  issues  coming  forth  from  the  evil  heart
and  nature  ere  ever  we  are  aware.  In  strict  conformity  with  this  fact,  Jonathan
Edwards  was  accustomed  to  analyze  his  dreams,  believing  that,  in  these  involuntary
movements  of  the  mind,  the  moral  tendencies  of  the  indwelling  spirit  may  often  be
detected,  and  by  greater  watchfulness  subdued.  "  No  mind,"  says  Dr.  Shedd,  "  that
thinks  at  all  upon  sin  can  possibly  stop  with  the  outward  act.  Its  own  rational
reflection  hurries  it  away,  almost  instantaneously,  from  the  blow  of  the  murderer —
from  the  momentary  gleam  of  the  knife — to  the  volition  within  that  strung  the  muscle
and  nerved  the  blow.  But  the  mind  cannot  stop  here  in  its  search  for  the  essential
reality  of  sin.  When  we  have  reached  the  sphere — the  inward  sphere — of  volitions,
we  have  by  no  means  reached  the  ultimate  ground  and  form  of  sin.  We  may  suppose
that  because  we  have  gone  beyond  the  outward  act — because  we  are  now  within  the


234  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xv.  1—33.


man — ^w«  have  found  sin  in  its  last  form.  Bnt  we  are  mistaken.  Closer  thinking,  and
what  is  still  better,  a  deeper  experience,  will  disclose  to  us  a  depth  in  our  souls  lower
than  that  in  which  volitions  occur,  and  a  form  of  sin  in  that  depth,  and  to  the  bottom
of  it,  very  diflerent  from  the  sin  of  single  volitions.  The  thinking  mind  which  cannot
stop  with  mere  effects,  but  seeks  for  first  causes,  and  especially  the  heart  that  knows
its  own  plague,  cannot  stop  with  that  quite  superficial  action  of  the  will  which  mani-
fests itself  in  a  volition.  The  action  is  too  isolated — too  intermittent — and,  in  reality,
too  feeble,  to  account  for  so  steady  and  uniform  a  state  of  character  as  human  sinfulness.
For  these  particular  volitions,  ending  in  particular  outward  actions,  the  mind  instinc-
tively seeks  a  common  ground.  For  these  innumerable  volitions,  occurring  each  by
itself  and  separately,  the  mind  instinctively  seeks  one  single  indivisible  nature  from
which  they  spring.  When  the  mind  has  got  back  to  this  point,  it  stops  content,  because
it  has  reached  a  central  point."  This  most  important  truth,  then,  is  most  powerfully
presented  by  this  law  regarding  issues.  We  are  held  responsible  for  much  more  than
the  voluntary  element  in  life.

III.  The  petjitlbssnbss  of  these  outcomes  op  nattjbb  should  also  bbceivb  a
PASsrua  NOTICE.  The  issues  spoken  of  in  this  chapter  are,  with  one  exception,  fruitless
issues.  In  no  plainer  way  could  the  fruitless  issues  of  man's  evil  nature  be'illustrated.
If  "  out  of  the  heart  are  the  issues  of  life,"  out  of  man's  evil  heart  of  unbelief  are  issues
of  fruitlessness  and  death.

IV.  For  these  unclbannesses,  mvoLuuTABT  and  seoket,  God  peovidbd  a
riTTiNQ  atonement.  It  is  very  noticeable  that,  while  the  reality  of  the  guilt  in  these
cases  is  made  manifest,  it  is  the  smallest  sacrifice,  two  turtle-doves,  or  two  young
pigeons,  which  God  requires.  There  is  no  exaggeration  in  dealing  with  the  secret  sins.
Done  in  ignorance,  they  are  not  placed  upon  the  same  level  with  voluntary  transgres-
sions.    At  the  same  time,  they  are  not  wiuked  at.

The  sin  offering  is,  of  course,  a  type  of  Christ,  our  Atoning  Sacrifice.  It  is  on  the
ground  of  his  atonement  that  we  ask  cleansing  from  secret  faidts  (Ps.  xix.  12)  as  well
as  from  conscious  transgressions.  In  truth,  we  are  encouraged  to  come  and  to  acki.ow-
ledge  that  sin  is  a  much  larger  matter  than  we  are  conscious  of,  that,  in  fact,  it  goci
beyond  all  our  conceptions,  but  at  the  same  time  is  within  the  reach  and  grasp  of  our
Lord's  atoning  power.  If  he  thus  sets  our  secret  sins  in  the  light  of  his  countenance,
it  is  that  he  may  have  them  entirely  removed.  Saul  may  have  committed  his  sins  oi
persecution  ignorantly  in  unbelief,  but  he  needs  to  obtain  mercy  on  aocoimt  of  them
(L  Tim.  ii.  18).  Superficial  views  of  sin  would  lead  men  to  imagine  that  a  sin  done  in
ignorance  is  not  a  guilty  thing.  God  thinks  differently,  because  he  looks  intu  the
heart  and  discerns  the  deep-seated  source.

The  burnt  offering  was  to  express  the  renewed  sense  of  consecration  which  the
cleansing  brings.     Out  of  defilement  the  soul  passes,  by  Divine  grace,  into  devotion.

The  whole  analysis  of  sin  in  these  chapters  (xiii. — xv.)  is  profound  and  philosophical.
In  fact,  portions  of  Scripture  apparently  repulsive  become  replete  with  wholesome
truth  when  handled  humbly  and  reverently. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 33. —  Uncleanneas.  Had  sin  never  entered,  there  had  been  no  disease.  Disease*
are  consequences  of  sin ;  their  symptoms  are  therefore  taken  as  emblems  of  it.  So  when
our  Lord  miraculously  "  healed  all  manner  of  sickness,  and  all  manner  of  disease,"  he
evinced  ability  to  remove  all  corresponding  moral  evil.  The  examples  specified  in  the
Law  are  typical  or  representative,  and  are  such  as  have  symptoms  pronounced  and
visible.

L  Those  who  had  issues  in  the  flbsh  were  unclean.  1.  Out  of  a  pure  heart
are  the  issues  of  life  (see  Prov.  iv.  23).  (1)  The  blood,  which  is  the  life  of  the  flesh,
issumg  from  the  heart,  passes  along  the  arteries  to  the  extremities  of  the  body,  and
carries  nourishment  to  every  part.  (2)  This  is  a  fine  emblem  of  the  heart  of  the
"  good  treasure,  whose  influence  upon  any  corporation,  whether  domestic,  civic,  oi
ecclesiastic  is  lite-gmng  (Luke  vi.  45).  But :  2.  Out  of  a  foul  heart  are  the  issues  of
death,  a)  If  the  blood  is  poisoned  at  its  source,  the  poison  is  carried  to  the  extremities,
and  will  break  out  m  ulcers  and  purulent  issues.  (2)  As  these  symptoms  declare  the
badness  of  the  blood  at  the  heart,  which,  if  not  purified,  must  terminate  in  mortification
«id  death,  so  are  they  appropriate  emblems  of  moral  impurity  (see  Matt,  xii  34  35  ■


OH.  XV.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  235

Mark.  vii.  20 — 23 ;  Jas.  i.  21).  (3)  Or  if  the  blood,  which  is  the  life,  flow  away  from
the  body,  that  also  is  a  fitting  emblem  of  sin  which  is  spiritual  death.  Therc^fore  the
woman  who  has  an  issue  of  blood  is  accounted  unclean,  as  being  in  that  condition  in
which  the  streams  of  the  fountain  of  life  are  diverted  from  their  uses  of  health  and
nourishment.  Those  who  reject  the  life-giving  eflScaoy  of  the  gospel  are  morally  dead,
%nd  must,  if  they  remain  so,  rot  in  their  iniquities  (see  Lam.  i.  9, 17 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  17).
3.  The  Law  enjoined  the  separation  of  the  undean.  (I)  They  must  not  come  into  the
tabernacle.  They  are  unfit  to  stand  in  God's  presence  or  to  mingle  with  his  people.
They  must  not  eat  of  the  holy  things.  They  are  in  no  moral  condition  to  hold  fellow-
ship withGod  and  his  Church  (see  Ps.  xxiv.  4 ;  Matt.  v.  8).  (2)  They  have  to  remove
outside  the  camp,  like  the  leper  (see  Numb.  v.  2,  3).  There  they  must  remain  until  they
are  healed  and  cleansed.  (3)  They  transgress  these  bounds  at  their  peril.  They  may
be  stoned  to  death  by  the  people,  or  God  himself  may  deal  with  them  (ver.  31 ;  Exod.
xix.  12,  13).  The  profane  under  the  gospel  have  a  "  much  sorer  punishment "  (see
Heb.  X..26— 31).

II.  They  rendered  unclean  whatever  thbt  touched.  1,  This  signified  the
contagion  of  sin.  (1)  Persons  were  rendered  unclean  by  contact  with  them  (vers.  7,  19,
26).  We  cannot  have  fellowship  with  sin  and  with  Gkid  (1  Cor.  v.  11 ;  xv.  33  ;  2  Cor.
vi.  15 — 18 ;  Bph.  iv.  29 ;  Jas.  iv.  4).  (2)  Things  touched  by  them  were  also  rendered
unclean.  The  bed,  the  chair,  the  saddle,  etc.  (vers.  4,  12,  20).  These  things  may
represent  men  in  their  properties  or  attributes,  or  in  their  usages,  which  are  all
damaged  by  the  influence  of  sin  (1  Thess.  iv.  4).  (3)  Those  who  touched  things
rendered  unclean  by  contact,  also  became  unclean  (vers.  5,  6,  21 — 23).  What  a  picture
of  the  spreading  power  of  evil  example  I  How  careful  should  we  be  to  save  ourselves
from  the  untoward  generation  1  2.  Even  when  cured  they  must  he  cleansed.  (1)
Genuine  repentance  may  cure  sinful  habits,  but  does  not  cancel  guilt  nor  purify  from
sin.  The  utmost  it  could  do  is  to  prevent  accumulations  of  guilt ;  the  old  score  remains
to  be  dealt  with.  It  does  not  touch  the  depravity  of  the  heart  (see  Matt,  xxiii.  25).
(2)  Time  is  given  to  test  the  cure.  Where  the  disease  was  rooted,  "  seven  days"
of  quarantine  were  required  (see  vers.  13,  24,  28).  The  repentance  of  a  moment  after
a  Ufe  of  evil  habits  may  prove  illusive.  (3)  Where  no  disease  existed,  but  uncleanness
was  contracted  by  contact,  the  quarantine  was  "  until  the  even."  The  time  here
indicated  was  that  of  the  evening  sacrifice,  which  pointed  significantly  to  the  evening
of  the  Jewish  day,  otherwise  called  the  "  end  of  the  world  "  or  age,  viz.  when  Jesus
"  appeared  to  put  away  sin  [sacrifices]  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,"  and  remove  ritual
obligations.  3.  Observe  the  ceremonies  of  cleansing.  (1)  Some  who  were  made  clean
by  contact  had  to  wash  their  hands  (ver.  11 ;  comp.  Luke  xi.  38 — 41).  This  was  when
they  were  passive  when  the  contact  was  inflicted.  But  if  they  neglected  to  rinse  their
hands,  then  they  were  as  though  they  were  active,  so  they  had  to  wash  their  flesh  and
their  clothes,  and  be  unclean  until  the  even.  No  special  sacrifices  were  prescribed.
They  availed  themselves  of  the  daily  sacrifice  ever  on  the  .altar.  So  in  our  contact
with  the  moral  filth  of  this  world,  which  is  often  unavoidable,  we  have  the  fountain
of  the  house  of  David  ever  flowing,  to  enable  us,  almost  without  an  interruption,  to
walk  in  the  light  (see  2  Cor.  vii.  1;  1  John  i.  7;  oomp  John  .xiii.  10).  (2)  The
person  healed  of  an  issue  had  to  bathe  his  flesh  and  wash  his  clothes  on  the  seventh
day,  when  he  became  "clean."  So  far  he  cleansed  himself.  The  spirit  of  the  Law  was
fulfilled  thus  far  if  he  put  away  all  his  evil  ways  (see  Isa.  i.  16  ;  Matt.  xv.  20;  Jas.  iv.
8).  He  was  clean  so  far  as  repentance  could  make  him  so,  which  was  externally  only,
or  before  his  fellow-men.  (3)  He  still  needed  the  removal  of  sin  from  his  soul.  He
had,  therefore,  now  on  the  eighth  day,  to  bring  his  sin  offering  and  burnt  offering,  that
with  these  the  priest  should  "  make  an  atonement  for  him  before  the  Lord  for  his  issue  "
(vers.  14, 15,  29,  30).  Christ  is  the  Healer  and  Cleanser  (comp.  Matt.  viii.  16, 17,  with
Isa.  liii.  4,  5).^J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 33. — Personal  purity.  It  is  not  permissible  to  treat  this  chapter  in  any  detail ;
to  do  so  would  be  to  act  inconsistently  with  the  very  object  of  the  legislation,  viz.,
the  encouragement  of  all  delicacy  of  thought  as  well  as  propriety  of  conduct.  But  the
fact  that  such  a  chapter  as  this  (with  others  like  it)  is  found  in  Scripture  is  suggestive
and  instructive.    We  gather —


236


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XYI.  1—34


I.  That  personal  pcrity  was  and  is  a  matter  of  the  vert  qbeatest  oon-
SBQUBNCE  IN  THE  SIGHT  OF  GoD.  Into  the  relation  of  the  sexes,  and  into  the  thoughts,
words,  and  actions  which  belong  to  that  relation,  sin  has  introduced  confusion  and
degradation.  That  which  should  have  been  the  source  of  nothing  but  pure  and  holy-
joy  has  become  the  ground  on  which  the  very  worst  and  most  debasing  consequences  of
sin  are  exhibited.  Save,  perhaps,  in  some  phases  of  heathen  idolatry,  tiiere  is  nothing  in
which  man  has  shown  so  grievous  a  departure  from  the  will  of  God,  and  so  pitiful  a
spectacle  of  uttermost  degradation,  as  in  the  realm  of  the  sexual  relations.  It  was  the
design  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  train  for  himself  a  people  which  should  be  free  from
the  flagitious  and  abominable  corruption  into  which  the  heathen  nations  had  sunk.
But  he  desired  to  go  further  than  this :  to  promote  and  foster,  by  careful  legislation,,
not  only  (i)  moralitj'  in  its  more  general  sense,  but  also  (2)  decency  of  behaviour,  and
even  (3)  delicacy  of  thought.  The  Jews  were  taught  and  trained  to  put  far  away  from
them  everything  that  was  unclean.  With  this  view  it  was  made  unlawful  not  only
for  those  who  had  knowingly  violated  moral  laws,  but  for  those  who  had  unwittingly
offended  the  laws  of  ceremonial  cleanness,  to  draw  near  to  their  God  or  to  their  fellows.

II.  That  specific  instructions  thereon  are  a  matter  of  holt  expedienct.
It  was  needful  that  the  children  of  Israel  should  receive  particular  and  precise  instruc-
tions, for  they  were  to  be  separated  from  all  surrounding  nations  in  their  customs,  and
so  in  their  character — notably  in  this  matter  of  purity..  Moreover,  they  were  admitted
to  the  near  presence  of  God,  and  must  therefor^  be  clear  of  all  impurity ;  death  would
be  the  penalty  of  defiling  the  tabernacle  of  God  (ver.  31).  Special  admonitions  and
special  care  are  needed :  1.  In  the  case  of  those  who  are  placed  in  circumstances  of
peculiar  delicacy.  2.  In  the  case  of  those  who  are  bound  to  be  above  all  suspicion  of
any  kind  of  indelicacy.  3.  In  the  case  of  the  young,  who  may  be  led  into  evil,  the
magnitude  and  consequences  of  which  they  cannot  know.  Parental  warning,  wisely
and  timely  given,  may  save  sons  and  daughters  from  much  bodily  mischief  and  spiritual
suffering.

III.  That,  in  this  matter,  we  most  consider  what  is  due,  hot  only  to  our-
selves, BUT  to  others  also.  All  those  details  of  Divine  precept,  by  which  every
person  and  article  anywise  brought  into  contact  with  the  unclean  man  or  woman  (vers.  4
— 12,  20 — 24,  26 — 27)  became  unclean,  bring  out  the  important  truth  that  impurity  is
an  essentially  communicable  evil.  It  is  so  physically ;  "  let  sinners  look  to  it."  It  is  so
spiritually.  How  guilty  in  the  very  last  degree  are  those  who  drive  a  nefarious  trade
in  corrupt  literature !  How  shameful  to  put  indecent  thought  into  print  to  pollute  the
young!  How  demoralizing  to  the  soul,  how  displeasing  to  God,  how  scrupulously  to
be  avoided,  the  questionable  conversation  that  borders  on  the  indelicatfl  and  impure
(Eph.  T.  3, 4, 12  i  Col.  iii.  8) !— C.


PAET    III.

Section  IL
EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVL

The  oibemonial  pdrifioation   op   the

WHOLE  congregation  ON  THE  GREAT  DAT

OF  Atonement.  This  chapter,  containing
the  account  of  the  institution  of  the  cere-
monial to  be  used  on  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment, would  take  its  place  chronologically
immediately  after  the  tenth  chapter,  for
the  instructions  conveyed  in  it  were  de-
livered to  Moses  "after  the  death  of  the
tieo  mnu  of  Aaron,  when  they  offered  before


the   Lord  and  died"  (vur.  1),  when  tile

fate  of  Nadab  and  Abihn  would  naturally
have  led  Aaron  to  desire  a  more  perfect
knowledge  than  had  as  yet  been  imparted
to  him  as  to  the  manner  in  which  ha  was
to  present  himself  before  the  Lord.  Logic-
ally it  might  either  occupy  its  present
position,  as  being  the  great  and  culminating
atoning  and  cleansing  ceremony,  or  it  miglit
be  relegated  to  a  place  among  the  holy  days
in  ch,  xiiii.,  where  it  is,  in  feet,  shortly
noticed.    That  it  is  placed  here  shows  that


OB   XVL  1 — 34.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


287


the  moat  essential  charaoteiistio  of  the  Bay
in  the  judgment  of  the  legislatoT  is  that  of
its  serving  as  the  occasion  and  the  means  of
"  making  an  atonement  for  the  holy  sanctuary,
and  making  an  atonement  for  the  tahernacle
of  the  congregation,  and  for  the  altar,  and  for
making  an  atonement  for  the  priests,  and  for
all  the  people  of  the  congregation  "  (ver.  33).

Annually  there  gathered  over  the  camp,
and  over  the  sanctuary  as  situated  in  the
midst  of  the  camp,  a  mass  of  defilement,
arising  in  part  from  sins  whose  guilt  had
aot  been  removed  by  the  punishment  of  the
offenders,  and  in  part  from  uncleannesses
which  had  not  been  cleansed  by  sacrifices  and
the  prescribed  ceremonial  rites.  Annually
this  defilement  had  to  be  atoned  for  or  covered
away  from  the  sight  of  God.  This  was  done
by  the  solemn  observance  of  the  great  Bay
of  Atonement,  and  specially  by  the  high
priest's  carrying  the  blood  of  the  sacrifices
into  the  holy  of  holies,  into  which  he  might
enter  on  no  other  day  of  the  year ;  while  the
consciousness  of  deliverance  from  the  guilt
of  sin  was  quickened  on  the  part  of  the
people  by  their  seeing  che  scapegoat  "  bear
away  upon  him  all  their  iniquities  unto  a
land  not  inhabited"  (ver.  22).

Ver.  2. — Speak  onto  Aaron  thy  brother,
that  he  come  not  at  all  times  into  the  holy
place  within  the  vail  before  the  mercy  seat,
which  is  upon  the  ark;  that  he  die  not.
I^adab  and  Abihu  having  died  for  their  rash
presumption  in  venturing  unbidden  into  the
tabernacle,  it  was  natural  that  Aaron,  who
had  as  yet  but  once  penetrated  into  the
holy  of  holies,  should  be  struck  with  fear,
and  that  he  should  desire  Bivine  instruc-
tion as  to  the  times  and  manner  in  which
he  was  to  appear  before  the  Lord,  lest  he
should  be  struck  dead  like  his  sons.  If  the
attempt  to  enter  the  outer  chamber  of  the
tabernacle  had  been  so  fatal  to  them,  what
might  not  be  the  result  to  him  of  entering
wilhin  the  vail  which  hung  before  the  mercy-
seat  which  is  upon  the  ark  1  The  mercy-seat
— capporeth,  i\aari]piov,  propitiatorium —
formed  the  top  of  the  ark,  and  was  the  place
where  God  specially  exhibited  his  Pre-
sence, on  the  occasions  of  his  manifestation,
by  the  bright  cloud  which  then  rested  upon
it  between  the  cherjibim.  It  was  this  Pre-
sence which  made  it  perilous  for  Aaron  to
appear  within  the  vaU  unbidden  or  without
the  becoming  ritual ;  for  man  might  not  meet
God  unless  he  were  sanctified  for  the  purpose
(Exod.  xix.  14,  21—24 ;  1  Sam.  vi.  19).  The
words,  for  I  wiU  appear  in  the  oloud  upon
the  meioy  seat,  refer  to  the  Bivine  Presence


thus  visibly  manifested  (see  1  Eingi  viii.
10—12),  and  not,  as  theyihave  strangely  been
misinterpreted,  to  the  cloud  of  smoke  raised
by  the  incense  burnt  by  the  high  priest  on
his  entrance.  They  do  not,  however,  prove
that  the  manifestation  was  constantly  mere,
still  less  that  it  was  continued,  according
to  Jewish  tradition,  in  later  times.  "  The
reason  for  the  prohibition  of  Aaron's
entrance  at  his  own  pleasure,  or  without  the
expiatory  blood  of  sacrifice,  is  to  be  fonnd  in
the  fsct  that  the  holiness  communicated  to
the  priest  did  not  cancel  the  sin  of  his
nature,  but  only  covered  it  over  for  the  per-
formance of  his  ofBoiKl  duties ;  and  so  bng
as  the  Law,  which  produced  only  the  know-
ledge of  sin,  and  not  its  forgiveness  and
removal,  was  not  abolished  by  the  complete
atonement,  the  holy  God  was  and  remained
to  mortal  and  sinful  man  a  consuming  fire,
before  which  no  one  could  stand  "  (Keil).

Ver.  3. — Thus  shall  Aaron  come  into  the
holy  place.  "Thus"  would  be  translated
more  literally  by  With  this.  He  most
come  supplied  with  the  specified  offerings,
dressed  in  the  appointed  manner  and
using  the  ceremonial  here  designated.  The
efiBcaoy  of  the  acts  of  the  high  priest  on  this
day  and  throughout  his  ministrations  de-
pended not  upon  his  individual  but  on  his
official  character,  and  on  his  obedience  to
the  various  commandments  positively  en-
joined. Personal  worthiness  would  not
qualify  him  for  his  service,  nor  personal  un
worthiness  hinder  the  effect  of  his  liturgical
acts  (cf.  Art.  XXVL,  '  Of  the  Unworthiness
of  tlie  Ministers,  which  hinders  not  tlie  effect
of  the  Sacrament').  Aaron's  special  offer-
ings for  himself  on  this  great  day  are  to  be
a  young  bullock  for  a  sin  offering,  and  a  ram
for  a  burnt  offering.

Ver.  4. — His  special  garments  for  the
occasion  are  the  holy  linen  coat, . . .  the  linen
breeches, ...  a  Unen  girdle, , . .  and  the  linen
mitre.  In  the  original  the  definite  article  is
not  expressed.  The  reading  should  therefore
be.  He  shall  put  on  a  holy  linen  coat,  and  he
shall  ham  linen  breeches  upon  his  flesh,  and
shall  be  girded  with  u  linen  girdle,  and  with
a  linen  mitre  shall  be  attired.  The  clothing
was  white  from  head  to  foot,  differing  therein
from  the  dress  of  the  ordinary  priest,  inas-
much as  the  sash  or  girdle  of  the  latter  was
of  variegated  materials,  and  differing  also
in  the  shape  of  the  mitre.  The  white
clothing  was  not  intended  to  symbolize
himiility  and  penitence,  as  some  have
thought,  for  white  is  not  the  colour  in  which
penitents  are  naturally  dressed.  Bather  it
was  symbolical  of  the  purity  and  holiness
which  the  ceremonies  of  the  day  sym«
tmlically  effected,  and  which  was  specially
needed  to  be  exhibited  in  the  person  of  the
high  priest.    In  the  visions  of  Ezekiel  and


238


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  XVI.  1 — 34.


Daniel,  the  angel  of  God  is  clothed  in  linen
(Ezek.  ii.  2,  3,  11;  x.  2,  6,  7;  Oan.  x.  5;
xii.  6,  7).  And  the  colour  of  the  angelic
laiment  is  described  in  the  Gospels  as  white :
"his  countenance  was  like  lightning,  and
his  raiment  white  as  snow "  (Matt,  xxvili.
8);  "they  saw  a  young  man  sitting  on
the  right  side,  clothed  in  a  long  white

farment "  (Mark  xvi.  5) ;  "  two  men  stood
y  them  in  shining  garments  "  (Luke  xxiv.
4) ;  she  "  seeth  two  angels  in  white  sitting  "
(John  XX.  12).  So,  too,  the  wife  of  the
Lamb,  in  the  Book  of  the  Bevelation,  has  it
"  granted  to  her  that  she  should  be  arrayed
in  fine  linen  clean  and  white :  for  the  fine
linen  is  flie  righteousness  of  saints"  (Bev.
xix.  7,  8).  The  white  linen  dress  of  the
high  priest,  therefore  (which  must  have
given  the  appearance  of  the  English  surplice
tied  in  at  the  waist),  was  intended  to  sym-
boli2e  the  purity  and  brightness  which
forms  the  characteristic  of  angels  and
saints,  and,  above  all,  of  the  King  of
saints.  "  The  white  material  of  the  dress
which  Aaron  wore  when  performing  the
highest  act  of  expiation  under  the  Old
Testament  was  a  symbolical  shadowing
forth  of  the  holiness  and  glory  of  the  one
perfect  Mediator  between  God  and  man,
who,  being  the  radiation  of  the  glory  of
God  and  the  image  of  his  nature,  effected
by  himself  the  perfect  cleansing  away  of
our  sin,  and  who,  as  the  true  High  Priest,
being  holy,  innocent,  unspotted,  and  separate
from  sinners,  entered  once  by  his  own  blood
into  the  holy  place  not  made  with  hands,
namely,  into  heaven  itself,  to  appear  before
the  face  of  God  for  us  and  obtain  everlasting
redemption  (Heb.  i.  3;  vii.  26;  ix.  12,  24)"
(Eeil).  The  symbolism  of  the  holy  gar-
mentt  u  indicating  holiness  and  purity,  is
strengthened  by  the  command  that  Aaron
is  to  wash  his  flesh  in  water,  and  so  put
them  on.

The  high  priest's  acts  on  this  day,  so
far  as  they  are  recounted  in  this  chapter,
were  the  following.  1.  He  bathed.  2.  He
dressed  himself  in  his  white  holy  garments.
3.  He  offered  or  presented  at  the  door  of
the  tabernacle  a  bullock  for  a  sin  offering
for  himself  and  his  bouse.  4,  He  presented
at  the  same  place  two  goats  for  a  sia  offer-
ing for  the  congregation.  5.  He  cast  lots
on  the  two  goats,  one  of  which  was  to  be
sacrificed,  the  other  to  be  let  go  into  the
wilderness.  6.  He  sacrificed  the  bullock.
7.  He  passed  ftom  the  court  through  the
holy  place  into  the  holy  of  holies  with  a
ceoMX  and  incense,  and  filled  the  space
beyond  the  vail  with  a  cloud  of  smoke  from
the  incense.  8.  He  returned  to  the  court,
and,  taking  some  of  the  blood  of  the  bullock,
passed  again  within  the  vail,  and  there
eprinkled  the  blood  once  on  the  front  of  the


mercy-seat  and  seven  times  before  it.  9.  He
came  out  again  into  the  court,  and  killed  the
goat  on  which  the  lot  forsacritice  had  fallen.
10.  For  the  third  time  he  entered  the  holy
of  holies,  and  went  through  the  same  process
with  the  goat's  blood  as  with  the  bullock's
blood.  11.  He  purified  the  other  part  of
the  tabernacle,  as  he  had  purified  the  holy
of  holies,  by  spiinkling  with  the  atoning
blood,  as  before,  and  placing  sonie  of  it  on
the  horns  of  the  altar  of  incense  (Exod.  xxx.
10).  12.  He  returned  to  the  court,  and
placed  the  blood  of  the  bullock  and  goat
upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice,
and  sprinkled  it  seven  times.  13.  He  offered
to  God  the  remaining  goat,  laying  his  hands
upon  it,  confessing  and  laying  the  sins  of
the  people  upon  its  head.  14.  He  consigned
the  goat  to  a  man,  whose  business  it  was  to
conduct  it  to  the  border  of  the  wilderness,  and
there  release  it.  15.  He  bathed  and  changed
his  linen  vestments  for  his  commonly  worn
high  priest's  dress.  16.  He  sacrificed, one  after
the  other,  the  two  rams  as  burnt  offerings
for  himself  and  for  the  people.  17.  He  burnt
the  fat  of  the  sin  offerings  upon  the  altar.
18.  He  took  measures  that  the  remainder
of  the  sin  offerings  should  be  burnt  without
the  camp.  In  Numb.  xxix.  7 — 11 ,  twelve
sacrifices  are  commanded  to  be  offered
by  the  high  priest  on  this  day,  namely,  the
morning  and  evening  sacrifice ;  a  burnt  offer-
ing for  the  people,  consisting  of  one  young
bullock,  one  ram  (as  already  stated),  and
seven  lambs ;  and  one  goat  for  a  sin  offering ;
so  that  in  all  there  were  fifteen  saerifioes
offered,  besides  the  meat  and  drink  offerings.
The  punctiliousness  of  the  Jews  in  later
times  was  not  content  that  the  ceremonies
should  begin  on  the  day  itself.  Preparations
commenced  a  full  week  previously.  On  the
third  day  of  the  seventh  month,  the  high
priest  moved  from  his  house  in  the  city
into  the  temple,  and  he  was  twice  sprinkled
with  the  ashes  of  the  red  heifer,  by  way  of
precaution  against  defilement.  He  spent
the  week  in  practising  and  rehearsing,  under
the  eye  of  some  of  the  elders  of  the  Sanhe-
drim, the  various  acts  that  he  would  have  to
perform  on  the  great  day,  and  on  the  night
immediately  preceding  it  he  was  not  allowed
to  sleep,  in  case  of  his  sudden  death  or
disqualification,  a  substitute  was  appointed
to  fulfil  his  function.

Yer.  5. — And  be  shall  take  of  the  con-
gregation of  the  children  of  Israel  two  kids
of  the  goats.  It  was  necessary  that  the
sacrifice  offered  for  a  person  or  class  of
persons  should  be  provided  by  the  offerer
or  offerers.  The  two  kids  of  the  goatt,  or
rather  the  two  he-goats,  constituted  togethef
but  one  sin  offering.  This  is  importtmt  for
the  understanding  of  the  seqneL

Yer.  6. — And  Aaron  shall  offer  his  tmlloek


CH.  XVI.  1 — 34.]


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


239


.  . .  and  make  an  atonement  for  Mmself,  and
for  his  house.  The  first  step  is  an  expiatory
offering  to  reconcile  the  ofSciating  priest
and  the  remainder  of  the  priestly  house  to
God.  This  was  necessary  before  his  offer-
ings for  the  people  could  be  accepted.  It
indicates  the  defects  inherent  in  a  priest
whose  nature  was  only  that  of  man,  which
is  compassed  about  with  infirmities.  The
offering  here  commanded  is  not  the  slaying,
but  the  solemn  presentation,  of  the  bullock
to  the  Lord.  In  after  times  the  following
form  of  confession  was  used  by  the  high
priest  when  he  laid  his  hand  upon  the
bullock : — "  O  Lord,  I  have  committed  ini-
quity ;  I  have  transgressed  ;  I  have  sinned,
I  and  my  house.  O  Lord,  I  entreat  thee,
cover  over  tlie  iniquities,  the  transgressions,
and  the  sins  which  I  have  committed,  trans-
gressed, and  sinned  before  thee,  I  and  my
house ;  even  as  it  is  written  in  the  Law  of
Moses  thy  servant,  'For  on  that  day  will
he  cover  over  for  you,  to  make  you  clean ;
from  all  your  transgressions  before  the  Lord
ye  shall  be  cleansed  "  (Edersheim,  '  Temple
Service  ')■

Vera.  7,  8. — It  must  be  carefully  noted
that,  as  the  two  goats  made  one  sin  offering
(ver.  5),  so  they  are  both  presented  before
the  Lord  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  of  the
congregation.  By  this  solemn  presentation
they  became  thu  Lord's,  one  as  much  as
the  other.  After  this,  Aaron  is  to  cast  lots
upon  the  two  goats.  The  two  goats,  of  the
same  size  and  appearance  as  far  as  possible,
stood  together  near  the  entrance  of  the  court.
And  by  them  was  an  urn  containing  two
lots.  These  the  high  priest  drew  out  at  the
same  moment,  placing  one  on  the  bead  of
one  goat,  the  other  on  the  head  of  the  other
goat.  According  as  the  lot  fell,  one  of  the
goats  was  taken  and  at  once  offered  to  the
Lord,  with  a  view  to  being  shortly  sacrificed ;
the  other  was  appointed  for  a  scapegoat,
and  reserved  till  the  expiatory  sacrifides  had
been  made,  when  it  too  was  offered  to  the
Lord,  and  then  sent  away  into  the  wilder-
ness. After  the  lot  had  been  chosen,  the
two  goats  were  distinguished  from  each
other  by  having  a  piece  of  scarlet  cloth  tied,
the  first  round  its  neck,  the  second  round
its  horn.  One  lot  for  the  Lord,  and  the
other  lot  for  the  scapegoat.  The  last  word
is  in  the  original  la-azdzel,  and  being  found
only  in  this  chapter,  it  has  caused  a  great
discrepancy  of  opinion  among  interpreters
as  to  its  meaning.  It  has  been  diversely
regarded  as  a  place,  a  person,  a  thing,  and
an  abstraction.  The  first  class  of  inter-
preters explain  it  as  some  district  of  the
wilderness ;  the  second  understand  by  it  an
evU  spirit ;  the  third  take  it  as  a  designation
of  the  goat;  the  fourth  translate  it,  "for
removai"    The  first  interpretation  may  be


summarily    rejected.     If  a  localized  spot
were  meant,  that  spot  would  hare  Iseen  left
behind  by  a  people  constantly  on  the  move.
The  second  hypothesis — that  azazel  was  an
evil    spirit,  or    the    evil    spirit — has  been
embraced  by  so  considerable  a  number  of
modem  expositors,  that  it  is  necessary  to
dwell  upon  it  at  some  length.    But,  indeed,
it  has  little  to  recommend  it.    It  has  been
argued  that  azazel  must  be  a  proper  name,
because   it    has  no  article  prefixed  to   it,
la-azdzel.     This    is    a    grammatical  error.
When    a    noun    expresses    an  ofSce   or   a
function,  and  has  the  preposition  le  or  la
prefixed  to  it,  it  does  not  take  an  article  in
Hebrew  any  more  than  in  French ;  e.g.  in
the  verse,  "  Jeliu  .  .  ,  shalt  thou  anoint  to  be
king  (or  for  king)  over  Israel ;  and  Blisha
....  shalt  thou  appoint  to  be  prophet  (or  for
prophet)  in  thy  room"  (1  Kings  xix.  16),
the  Hebrew  is  le-meleh  and  U-navi,  without
the  article.     The  same  idiom  will  be  ibund
in  I  Sam.  xxv.  30;  2  Sam.  vii.  14.    With
greater  plausibility   it  is  argued  that  ver.
8  contrasts  Jehovah  and  Azazel,  and  that  if
la-Yehovahhs  translated  "  for  Jehovah,"  or
"  for  the  Lord,"  la-azazel  must  be  translated
"  for  Azazel."    It  may  be  allowed  that  there
•is  a  prima  facie  likeliliood  that,  where  wnnls
are    thiis  contrasted,    if  one  designates  a
person,  the  other  would  designate  a  person.
But  it  is  an  incredibly  rash  assertion  that
this  is  always  the  case.    All  depends  upon
tlie  idea  wliich  the   speaker  or  writer  has
in  his  mind   and  desires   to  express.     As
part  of  the   same   argument,  it   is    urged
that   the  preposition,  being   the  same   in
both  clauses  of  the  sentence,  must  be  trans-
lated by  the  same  word.    This  is  certainly
not  the  case.     The  natural  meaning  of  le
with  a  proper  name  is  "  for,"  and  with  a  word
expressing  the  perfoiinanoe  of  some  function
(technically  called  nomen  agentie)  it  means
"  to  be  "  (see  the  passage  quoted  above  from
I.Kings  xix.  16).    Unless,  therefore,  azazeJ
be  a  proper  name  (which  has  to  be  proved,
not  assumed)  the  preposition  need  not  and
ought  not  to  be  translated  by  "  for  "  but  by
"to  be."    The  word  le  is  used  with  great
latitude,  and  often  in  a  different  sense  in
the  same  sentence ;  e.g.  Exod.  xii.  24 ;  ch.
xxvi.  12.     The  objections  to  the  theory  that
azazel  means  an  evil  spirit    are   of  over-
whelming force.    It  will  be  enough  to  name
the    following.       1.   The  name    azazel   is
nowhere    else  mentioned.     This  could  not
be,  if  he  were  so  important  a  being  as  to
divide  with  Jehovah  the  sin  offering  of  the
congregation  of  Israel  on  the  great  Day  of
Atonement.    2.  No  suitable  etymology  can
be  discerned.    The  nearest  approach  to  it
is  very  forced — "  the  separated  one."   3.  The
notion  of  appeasing,  or  bribing,  or  mocking
the  evil  spirit  by  presenting  to  him  a  goat.


240


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,


[oh.  xvl  1-


-34.


is  altogether  alien  from  the  spirit  of  the
rest  of  the  Mosaic  institutionB.  Where  else
is  there  anything  like  it?  4.  The  goat  is
presented  and  offered  to  Jehovah  equally
with  the  goat  which  is  slain.  To  take  that
which  has  been  offered  (and  therefore  half
sacrifieed)  to  God  and  give  it  to  Satan,  would
be  a  daring  impiety,  which  is  inconceivable.
That  la-azdzd  means  "  for  removal "  is  the
opinion  of  Bahr,  Tholuck,  Winer,  and  others.
There  is  nothing  objectionable  in  this  inter-
pretation, but  the  form  of  the  word  azSzel
points  rather  to  an  agent  than  to  an  abstract
act.  Azazel  is  a  word  softened  (according
to  a  not  unusual  custom)  from  azalzel,  just
as  Ttoltav  is  a  softened  form  of  kav-kav,  and
as  Babel  is  derived  from  Balbel  (Gen.  xi.  9).
Azalzel  is  an  active  participle  or  participial
noun,  derived  ultimately  from  azal  (con-
nected with  the  Arabic  word  azala,  and
meaning  removed),  but  immediately  from
the  reduplicate  form  of  that  verb,  azazal.
The  reduplication  of  the  consonants  of  the
root  in  Hebrew  and  Arabic  gives  the  force
of  repetition,  so  that  while  azal  means
removed,  azalzal  means  removed  by  a
repetition  of  acts.  Azalzel,  ot  azazel,
therefore,  means  one  who  removes  by  a
series  of  acts.  "  In  this  sense  the  word
azazel  is  strictly  expressive  of  the  function
which  is  ascribed  lo  the  scapegoat  in  vers.
21,  22 ;  namely,  that  he  '  be  sent  away,  bear-
ing upon  him  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children
of  Israel  into  the  wHdernesB.'  It  properly
denotes  one  that  removes  or  separates ;  yet
a  remover  in  such  sort  that  the  removal  is
not  effected  by  a  single  act  or  at  one
moment,  but  by  a  series  of  minor  acts  tend-
inf;  to  and  issuing  in  a  complete  removal.
Nc  word  could  better  express  tlie  move-
m(nt  of  the  goat  before  the  eyes  of  the
people,  as  it  passed  on,  removing  at  each
stap,  in  a  visible  symbol,  their  sins  further
and  further  from  them,  until,  by  continued
repetition  of  the  movement,  they  were
carried  far  away  and  removed  utterly"
(Sir  W.  Martin, '  Semitic  Languages').  That
it  is  the  goat  that  is  designated  by  tlie  word
azazel  Is  the  exposition  of  the  LXX.,
JosephuB,  Symmachus,  Aquila,  Theodotion,
the  Vulgate,  the  Authorized  English  Ver-
sion, and  Luther's  Version.  The  interpre-
tation is  founded  on  sound  etymological
giounds,  it  suits  the  context  wherever  the
word  occurs,  it  is  consistent  with  the  re-
maining ceremonial  of  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment, and  it  accords  with  the  otherwise
Irnown  religious  beliefs  and  symbolical
practices  of  the  Israelites.  The  two  goats
were  the  single  sin  offering  for  the  people ;
the  one  that  was  offered  in  sacrifice  sym-
bolized atonement  or  covering  made  by
shedding  of  blood,  the  other  symbolized
the  utter  removal  of  the  sins  of  the  people,


which  were  conveyed  away  and  lost  In
the  depths  of  the  wilderness,  whence  there
was  no. return.  Cf.  Ps.  ciii.  12,  "As  far
as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  he
removed  our  transgressions  from  us ; "  and
Micah  vii.  19,  "  He  will  turn  again,  he  will
have  compassion  upon  us ;  he  will  subdue
our  iniquities ;  and  thou  wilt  cast  all  their
sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  The
eighth  verse  should  be  translated  as  it  stands
in  the  Authorized  Version,  or,  if  we  ask
for  still  greater  exactness.  And  Aaron
shall  east  lots  upon  the  two  goats;  one  lot
for  the  Lord,  and  one  lot  for  a  remover  oj
sins.

Vers.  9,  10. — These  verses  might  be  trans-
lated as  follows : — And  Aaron  shaU  bring  in
the  goat  upon  which  the  lot  for  the  Lord
fell,  and  shall  offer  him  for  a  sin  offering.
But  the  goat,  upon  which  fell  the  lot  far  a
remover  of  sins,  shall  be  presented  alive  befnre
the  Lord,  to  mahe  an  atonement  with  him,
and  lo  send  him  away  for  a  remover  of  sins
into  the  wilderness.  We  are  justified  in
inserting  the  words,  "of  sins,"  after  "a
remover,"  because  "the  use  of  the  word
aial,  from  which  the  word  rendered  by
'remover'  is  derived,  is  confined  in  the
Hebrew  dialect  to  the  single  purpose  or
institution  which  is  here  under  considera-
tion ;  so  that  this  particular  word  must  have
conveyed  to  the  mind  of  a  Hebrew  hearer
or  reader  this  notion  of  a  removal  of  sins,
and  none  other "  (Sir  W.  Martin,  '  Semitic
Languages ').  The  goat  is  both  presented
before  the  Lord,  and  subsequently  (ver.  20)
offered  to  him,  the  priest  laying  his  handi
upon  him  and  making  a  confession  of  the
sins  of  the  people.  After  he  has  thus
become  the  Lord's,  how  could  he  be  given
up  to  Satan  7  The  purpose  of  his  being
set  apart  is  to  make  an  atonement  with  him
(not /or  him,  as  some  commentators  explain
it  wrongly).  As  atonement  was  made  by
the  blood  of  the  sacrificed  goat  ceremonially
covering  sin,  so  it  was  also  made  by  the
live  goat  symbolically  removing  sin.  But
the  atonement  in  both  cases  has  reference
to  God.  How  could  an  atonement  be  made
by  an  offering  to  Satan,  unless  Satan,  not
God,  was  the  being  whose  wrath  was  to  be
propitiated,  and  with  whom  reconciliation
was  sought  ?

Ver.  11. — After  having  q^er«d  the  bnllook
for  his  own  sin  offering,  and  presented  the
two  goats,  which  constituted  tlie  sin  offering
of  the  people,  and  offered  one  of  them,  Aaron
kills  the  bollook  for  the  sin  offering.  A  oon-
siderable  interval  had  to  elapse  before  he
could  make  use  of  the  bullock's  iblood  for
purposes  of  propitiation,  and  during  this
interval,  occupied  by  his  entrance  into  the
holy  of  holies  vrith  the  incense,  the  blood
was  held  by  an  attendant,  probably  by  one


CH.  xvL  1—34.]


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUa


241


of  his  ions,  and  prnvented  from  coagulating
by  being  kept  in  motion.

Vers.  12, 13.— This  is  tlie  first  entry  of
the  high  priest  into  the   holy  of   holies.
He  takes  with  him  a  oenser — literally,  the
oeruer,  that  is,  the  censer  that  he  was  to
nse  on  the  occasion — ^fall  of  hurning  ooals  of
fire  £rom  oif  the  altar ;  and  his  hands  are  fall
of  Bveet  incense  beaten  small;  his  object
being  to  fill  the  holy  of  holies  with  the
smoke  of  the  incense  which  may  serve  as
at  least  a  thin  vail  between  himself  and  the
Presence  of  the  Lord,  that  he  die  not  (cf.
Exod.  xxxiil.  20,  "Thou  canst  not  see  my
face:  for  there  shall  no  man  see  me,  and
live; "  of.  also  Gen.  xxxii.  30;  Dent.  v.  24;
Judg.  vl  22 ;  xiii.  22).    Here  we  see  taught
the  lesson  of  the  vision  of  God,  as  he  is,
being  impossible  to  the  human  faculties.   He
must  be  vailed  in  one  way  or  another.    After
passing  through  the  outer  chamber  of  the
tabernacle,  the  high  priest  found  himself
in  the  smaller  chamber  where  stood  the
ark.    Immediately  he  threw  the  incense  on
the  ooals  of  the  oenser,  until  the  holy  of
holies  was  filled  with  the  smoke,  after  which,
according  to  later  practice,  he  offered  a
prayer  outside  the  vail.     The  following
form   of  prayer,   breathing,   however,   the
spirit  of  ages  long  subsequent  to  the  taber-
nacle, or  even  the  first  temple,  is  found  in
the  Talmud :  — "  May  it  please   thee,   O
Ijord  our  God,  the  God  of  our  fathers,  that
neither  this  day  nor  this  year  any  captivity
30me  upon  us.    Yet  if  captivity  befall  us
this  day  or  this  year,  let  it  be  to  a  place
where  the  Law  is  cultivated.   May  it  please
thee,  O  Lord  our  Goil,  the  God  of  our  fatheis,
that  want  come  not  upon  us  this  day  or  thin
year.    But  if  want  visit  us  this  day  or  this
year,  let  it  be  due  to  the  liberality  of  our
charitable  deeds.     May  it  please  thee,  O
Lord,  the  God  of  our  fathers,  that  this  year
may  be  a  year  of  cheapness,  of  fulness,  of
intercourse  and  trade;   a  year  with  abun-
dance of  rain,  of  sunshine,  and  of  dew ;  one
in  which  thy  people  Israel  shall  not  require
assistance  one  from  another.    And  listen
not  to  the  prayers  of  those  who  are  about
to  set  out  on  a  journey  (against  rain).    And
as  to  thy  people  Israel,  may  no  enemy  exalt
himself  against  them.     May  it  please  thee,
O  Lord  our  God,  the  God  of  our  fathers,
that  the  houses  of  the  men  of  Saron  (exposed
to  flooils)  may  not  become  their  graves"
Cildersheim,  'Temple  Service').

\ur.  14. — The  second  entry  of  the  high
priest  into  the  holy  of  holies  took  plaoe  very
soon  after  the  first  entry.  Immediately
that  he  had  returned  after  lighting  the
incense,  and  perhaps  offering  a  prayer,  he
took  of  the  blood  of  the  bullook,  which  he
had  previously  killed,  went  back  without
delay,  and  spruikled  it  with  bis  finger  upon

liBVITIOUS.


the  mercy  seat  eastward,  that  is,  on  the
front  of  the  ark  beneath  the  Presence  en-
throned upon  the  mercy  seat,  and  shrouded
by  the  smoke  of  the  incense;  and  before
the  mercy  seat,  that  is,  on  the  ground  in
front  of  it,  he  sprinkled  of  the  blood  with  bia
finger  seven  times.  In  after  times,  when
the  ark  was  gone,  the  high  priest  sprinkled
upwards  once  and  downwards  seven  times.

Ver.  15. — The  third  entry  was  made  as
goon  as  he  had  killed  the  goat  which  formed
a  moiety  of  the  sin  offering  of  the  congrega-
tion, when  he  brought  his  blood  likewise
within  the  vail,  and  did  with  that  blood  as  he
did  with  the  blood  of  the  bullook,  sprinkling
it  the  same  number  of  times  as  before.  "  By
the  entrance  of  the  high  priest  into  the
holy  of  holies  is  set  forth  that  atonement
could  only  be  effected  before  the  throne  of
Jehovah"  (Clark).

Ver.  16. — The  two  sprinklings,  first  with
the  bullock's  blood,  then  with  the  goat's
blood,  on  the  front  of  the  ark  and  on  the
ground  before  it,  effected  the  symbolical
atonement  which  was  required  annually  even
for  the  holy  of  holies  because  it  was  pitched
in  the  midst  of  sinful  men.  There  remained
the  outer  chamber  of  the  tabernacle  and  the
altar  of  burnt  sacrifice  to  be  atoned  for.
Accordingly,  the  high  priest  proceeds  to  do
so  for  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,
that  is,  to  make  a  similar  atonement  by
similar  means  outside  the  vail  as  he  had
made  inside  it.  He  would  therefore  have
made  one  sprinkling  with  the  blood  upon
the  vail,  and  seven  sprinklings  before  it,
after  which  he  placed  the  blood  upon  the
horns  of  ,the  altar  of  incense,  according  to
the  command  given  itf  ExoJ.  xxx.  10.  In
later  times  it  became  customary  also  to
sprinkle  the  top  of  the  altar  of  incense  seven
times.

Ver.  17.— There  shall  be  no  man  in  the
tabernacle  of  the  congregation.  From  the
first  entry  until  the  work  of  atonement  was
completed,  both  for  the  holy  of  holies  and
for  the  tabernacle,  no  one  but  the  high
priest  was  to  be  allowed  within  the  door  of
the  tabernacle,  not  only  that  there  might
be  no  witness  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  awful
vail,  hut  also  that  the  rite  of  purification
might  not  be  interfered  with  by  an  impure
presence.  Even  on  the  Day  of  Atonement
the  dwelling-place  of  God,  typical  of  heaven,
was  closed  to  the  eye  and  foot  of  man,  "  the
way  into  the  holiest  of  all  being  not  yet
made  manifest"  (Heb.  ix.  8),  until  the
Divine  High  Priest  opened  the  way  for  his
people  by  his  own  entrance.

Vers.  18, 19.— The  holy  of  holies  and  tiw
outer  chamber  of  the  tabernacle  having  been
reconciled,  the  high  priest  shall  go  out  nnt
the  altar  that  is  before  the  Lord— that  if
the  altar  of  burnt  saoriflce  in  the  cmr  '■


242


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  svi.  1 — 34.


Btaiiding  in  front  of  the  tabernacle,  not  the
al  tar  of  incenae,  as  has  been  supposed  by  some
— and  shall  take  of  the  blood  of  the  bullock,
and  of  the  blood  of  the  goat,  and  put  it  upon
the  homa  of  the  altar  round  about.  And  he
shall  sprinkle  of  the  blood  upon  it  with  his
finger  seven  times.  This  completes  the
ceremony  of  "  making  an  atonement  for  the
holy  mnetuary,  and  making  an  atonement  for
the  taiemaole  of  the  congregation,  and  for
theallar"  (yet.SS.)

Vers.  20,  21.— The  second  part  of  the
ceremonies  of  the  day  now  commences.  It
waa  not  enough  that  the  defilement  of  the
sanctuary  should  be  covered,  and  the  sins
of  the  priesta  and  people  atoned  for  by  the
blood  of  the  sacrifices.  There  remained  a
conaoiouBneas  of  sin.  How  waa  this  to  be
taken  away?  To  effect  this,  Aaron  pro-
oeeda  to  the  unique  ceremony  of  tlie  day  by
which  the  utter  removal  of  sin  from  the  recon-
ciled people  ia  typified.  He  shall  bring  the
live  goat ;  this  should  be  translated  offer  the
live  goat.  It  is  the  word  used  above  i'or  the
offering  of  the  goat  that  was  alain,  and  it  is
the  word  always  used  for  offering  sacrifices  to
the  Lord.  The  first  goat  had  been  oifered  in
the  usual  manner,  the  offerer  laying  hia  hand
on  hia  head  and  perhaps  praying  over  him.
Now  the  eecond  goat  is  oflered,  the  high
priest  having  to  lay  both  his  hands  upon  the
head  of  the  live  goat,  and  confess  over  him  all
the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel,  .  .  .
putting  them  upon  the  head  of  the  goat.
The  confession  of  sins,  at  first  extempore,
would  naturally,  aa  time  progressed,  become
stereotyped  into  a  liturgical  form,  as  it  is
found  in  the  Mishna :  "  O  Lord,  they  have
committed  iniquity ;  they  have  transgressed;
they  have  ainned, — thy  people,  the  house  of
Israel.  0  Lord,  cover  over,  I  entreat  thee,
their  iniquities,  'their  transgressions,  and
their  sins,  which  they  have  wickedly  com-
mitted, transgresaed,  and  sinned  before  thee,
— thy  people,  the  house  of  Israel.  As  it  is
written  in  the  Law  of  Moses  thy  servant,
saying,  'For  on  that  day  shairit  be  covered
over  for  you,  to  make  you  clean ;  from  all
your  sins  before  the  Lord  ye  shall  be
cleansed ' "  (Edersheim, '  Temple  Service  ')•
During  this  confession  of  sins  the  people
remained  prostrate  in  humiliation  and
prayer  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,  and
it  was  the  custom  of  the  high  priest  to  turn
towards  them  as  he  pronounced  the  last
words,  "  Ye  shall  be  cleansed ."  At  the  con-
clusion of  the  confession,  the  high  priest
handed  over  the  goat  to  a  fit  man,  that  is,  to
a  man  who  waa  standing  ready  to  take  charge
of  him,  and  sent  him  away  by  his  hand  into
the  wilderness.

Ver.  22.— Then  the  goat  went  forth,
bearing  upon  him  all  their  iniquities.  The
slain  goat  had  symbolized  and  ceremonially


wrought  full  atonement  or  covering  of  sins ;
but  in  order  to  impress  upon  the  mind  of
the  nation  a  joyful  sense  of  entire  liberation
from  the  burden  of  sin,  the  second  symbol
of  the  disappearing  goat  ia  used;  so  that
not  only  sin,  but  the  consciousness  and  the
fear  of  the  taint  and  presence  of  gin,  might
be  taken  away  from  the  cleansed  and  de-
livered people.     The  goat  ia  to  bear  the
iniquities  of  the  people  unto  a  land  not  in-
habited.   The  latter  words — in  the  original,
eretz  gezerah — would  be  more  correctly  trans-
lated, a  land  cut  off,  that  is,  completely  iso-
lated from  the  surrounding  country  by  some
barrier  of  rook  or  torrent,  which  would  make
it  impossible  for  the  goat  to  come  back
again.     Thus  the  sins  were  utterly  lost,  as
though  they  had  never  been,  and  they  could
not  return  to  the  sanctified  people.    The
Hebrew  word  gazar,  to  out  (1  Kings  iii.  25  ;
Ps.  cxxxvi.  13),  is  represented  in  Aral)io
by  jazara,  and  the  substantive  gezerah  by
Jazirah,  which  means  an  island,  or  an  area
surrounded  by  rivers.     The  word  is  still
in  use  in  countries  where  Arabic  is  spoken,
as  the  designation  of  a  district  divided  from
the  neighbouring  territories  by  rivers  cutting
it  off,  and  making  it  a  sort  of  island  or
peninsula.    Into  such  a  district  as  this,  the
man  who  led  the  goat  was  to  let  ^^^  go.
In  later  times,  contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the
Mosaic  appointment,  the  goat  was  pushed
oyer  a  projecting  ledge  of   rook,   and  so
killed,  a  device  of  man  clumsily  introduced
for  the  purpose  of  perfecting  a  symbolism
of  Divine  appointment.    H  "^as  more  in
accordance   with    the    original    institution
that  "  the  arrival  of  the  goat  in  the  wilder-
ness waa  immediately  telegraphed  by  the
waving  of  fiags,  from  station  to  station,  till
a  few  minutes  after  its  occurrence  it  was
known  in  the  temple,  and  whispered  from
ear  to  ear,  that  the  goat  had  borne  upon
him  all  their  iniquities  into  a  land  not
inhabited  "  (Edersheim,  <  Temple  Service ').
Both  the  goat  that  was  sacrificed  and  the
goat  that  served  as  remover  of  ^ins  typified
Christ.    The  first  presents  liim  to  our  faith
as  the  Victim  on  the  cross,  the  other  as  the
Sin-bearer  on  whom  the  Lord  laid  "the
iniquity  of  us  all"  (laa.  liii.  4;  of.  2  Cor.  v.
21 ;  Gal.  iii.  13).    "The  reason  for  making
use  of  two  animals  is  to  be  found  purely  ia
the  physical  impossibility  of  combining  all
features  that  had  to  be  set  forth  in  the  sin
oflering  in  one  animal "  (Keil).

Vers.  23,  24.— In  later  times  another
scene  was  interposed  at  this  point.  The
high  priest,  having  sent  away  the  man  with
the  goat,  recited  the  passages  of  Scripture
which  commanded  the  observance  of  the
Day  of  Atonement  (chs.  xvi. ;  xxiii.  27 — 32;
Numb.  xxix.  7—11),  and  offered  prayera
in  which  the  people  might  mentally  join.


OH.  XVL  1— 34.J


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


2i3


Then  he  went  back  into  the  tabernacle  of
the  congregation  (not  into  the  holy  of  holies),
•nd,  as  all  the  special  atoning  and  purifying
■ervices  of  the  day  were  now  over,  he  there
took  off  his  linen  dress,  and  put  it  away;
and  after  bathing  in  the  holy  place,  that  is,
in  that  part  of  the  sanctuary  set  apart  for
that  purpose,  he  put  on  his  ordinary  high-
priestly  garments,  and  sacrificed  first  a  goat
for  a  sin  offering  (Kumb.  xxix.  16),  next
hia  own  burnt  offering  of  a  ram,  and  then
the  burnt  offering  of  the  people,  which  was
•Iso  a  ram  and  other  victims  (Ibid.)-

Ver.  25. — After  the  flesh  of  the  burnt
Merifioe  had  been  placed  in  order  on  the
ritar,  the  fat  of  the  sin  offering,  that  is,  of
the  bullock  (ver.  6)  and  of  the  goat  (ver.  15)
and  of  the  other  goat  (Numb.  xxix.  16),  is
placed  upon  it,  and  burnt  upon  the  altar,
according  to  the  regular  practice.

Ver.  26. — The  man  that  let  go  the  goat
which  served  for  a  remover  of  sins  is  to
wash  his  clothes,  and  bathe  his  flesh  before
he  oomes  into  the  camp.  This  is  not  ordered
on  account  of  any  special  defilement  attach-
ing to  the  scapegoat,  but  only  because  it
had  been  the  symbolical  sin-bearer,  and
therefore  conveyed  legal  uncleanness  by  its
tonch.  The  man  who  bore  the  flesh  of  the
other  gont  to  be  burnt  had  to  do  exactly  the
■ame  thing  (ver.  28).

Vers.  27,  28.— As  the  blood  of  the  bullock
and  the  goat  which  had  been  offered  in  the
special  expiatory  sacriflces  of  tbe  day  had
been  carried  within  the  sanctuary  (vers.  14,
15),  their  bodies  had  to  be  burnt  without
the  camp  (ch  .v.  12)  Our  lord  being  the
antitype,  not  only  of  Aaron  as  the  Great
Uigh  Priest,  but  also  of  the  expiatory  sacri-
fices as  tlie  Great  Sin  Offering,  the  author
of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  notices  that
the  fact  of  Christ's  having  "  suffered  without
the  camp "  serves  as  an  indication  that  his
blood  had  in  its  atoning  effects  been  carried
by  him  into  heaven,  the  antitype  of  the  holy
of  holies  (Heb.  xiii.  12).  The  flesh  of  the
other  goat,  offered  as  a  sin  offering,  would
have  been  eaten  by  the  priests  in  the
evening,  at  a  sacrificial  meal  (ch.  x.  17, 18).

Vers.  29 — 31. — The  ceremonies  of  the
Day  of  Atonement  are  not  appointeil  for
once  only,  but  they  are  to  be  of  annual
observance.  This  shall  be  a  statute  for  ever
unto  you,  as  long  as  the  nation  should  exist,
that  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the  tenth  day
of  the  month,  ye  shall  afBict  your  souls,  and
do  no  work  at  all.  The  seventh  is  the
sacred  month,  in  which  the  first,  the  tenth,
the  fifteenth,  and  following  days  are  ap-
pointed as  holy  seasons.  The  Day  of  Atone-
ment is  the  single  fast  of  the  Jewish  Church
occurring  once  a  year  only.  On  it  all  the
members  of  that  Church  were  to  afflict  their
umli,  on  pain  of  death  (ch.  xxiii.  29).    The


fast  began  on  the  evening  of  the  ninth  day,
and  ended  on  the  evening  of  the  tenth,  whoi
it  was  succeeded  by  general  feasting.  During
the  whole  of  the  twenty-four  hours  no  work
at  all  was  to  be  done.  In  this  respect
the  Day  of  Atonement  was  put  on  a  level
with  the  sabbath,  whereas  on  the  annual
festivals  only  "  servile  work  "  was  forbidden
(see  oh.  xxiii.  7,  21,  25,  35).  On  this  day,
therefore,  as  on  the  weekly  sabbath,  it
was  not  permitted  to  collect  manna  (Exod.
xvi.  26),  or  to  plough  or  reap  (Exod  xxxiv.
21),  or  to  light  a  fire  (Exod.  xxxv.  3),  or  to
gather  wood  (Numb.  xv.  32—36),  or  to
cari'y  corn  or  fruit  (Neh.  xiii.  15),  or  to
sell  food  or  other  goods  (Neh.  xiii.  16),  or
to  bear  burdens  (Jer.  xvii.  22,  23),  or  to  set
out  grain  for  sale  (Amos  viii.  5).  And  these
regulations  applied  to  strangers  that  so-
journed among  them  as  well  as  to  them-
selves. It  was  a  sabbath  of  rest ;  literally,  a
sabbath  of  mbbatism.  The  purpose  of  the
abstinence  from  food  and  lahour  was  to
bring  the  soul  of  each  individual  into
harmony  with  the  solemn  rites  of  purifica-
tion publicly  performed  not  by  themselves,
but  by  the  high  priest.

Vers.  32,  33. — That  there  may  be  no
mistake,  it  is  specifically  enjoined  that  not
only  Aaron,  but  the  priest,  whom  he  shall
anoint,  and  whom  he  shall  consecrate— mean-
ing, the  high  priest  that  shall  be  anointed,
and  shall  be  consecrated — to  minister  in  the
priest's  office  in  his  father's  stead — that  is,  to
succeed  from  time  to  timo  to  the  high
priesthood — shall  make  the  nionement,  and
shall  put  on  the  hneu  clothes,  sven  the  holy
garments.  Again  it  may  be  noticed  tha't
the  white  robes  are  termed,  not  the  peniten-
tial, but  the  holy,  garments.

Ver.  St. — Thi  shall  be  an  everlasting
statute  unto  you.  It  lasted  as  long  as  the
earthly  Jerusalem  lasted,  and  until  the
heavenly  Jerusalem  was  instituted,  when  it
had  a  spiritual  fulfilment  once  for  all.  "  Of
old  there  w^s  an  high  priest  that  cleansed
the  people  with  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats,
but  now  that  the  true  High  Priest  is  come,
the  former  priesthood  is  no  more.  It  is  a
providential  dispensation  of  God  that  the
city  and  temple  of  Jerusalem  have  been
destroyed;  for  if  they  wire  still  standing,
some  who  are  weak  in  faith  might  be  dazzled
by  the  outward  splendour  of  the  literal
types,  and  not  drawn  by  faith  to  the  spiritual
antitypes.  If  there  are  any,  therefore,  who,
in  considering  the  Levitical  ritual  of  the
great  Day  of  Atouement,  and  in  looking  at
the  two  he-goats — the  one  saorifioed,  the
other  let  go,  charged  with  sins,  into  the
wilderness — do  not  recognize  the  one  Christ
who  died  for  our  sins  and  took  away  our
sins,  and  do  not  see  there  the  '  everlasting
statute'    of   which  God   here   speaks    by


244


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  XVI.  1—34.


Moses,  let  him  go  np  thrice  a  year  to  Jera-
aalem,  and  there  search  for  the  altar  which
has  crumbled  in  the  dust,  and  offer  up  his
■victims  there  without  a  priest.  But  no;
thanks  be  to  God,  the  earthly  priesthood
and  temple  are  abolished,  that  we  may
raise  our  heart  to  the  heavenly,  and  look
up  with  faith  and  love  and  joy  to  him  who


offered  himself  once  for  all,  and  who  ever
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us  "  (Origen,
'  Horn.'  X.,  as  quoted  by  Wordsworth).  And
he  did  as  the  lord  oommanded  Moses ;  that
ls>  Mo;ies  announced  to  Aaron  the  Law
which  was  to  be  oonied  out  about  five
montha  later.


HOMILETICa.

Vera.  1—28.— Union  and  eommuninn  with  Qod  is  that  wWcli  the  nndepraved  heart
of  man  most  longs  for,  and  which  religion  is  especially  intended  to  bring  about.  That
this  may  be  effected,  the  barrier  of  sin,  and  of  that  which  represents  sin — ceremonial
uncleanness — must  he  broken  down.  If  sin  and  uncleanness  cannot  be  taken  away  so  as
to  he  as  though  they  had  not  been,  they  must,  according  to  their  nature,  be  either
punished  as  justice  demands,  or  be  so  covered  over  as  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  sight
of  the  Divine  eye.  This  covering  or  atonement  is  wrought  by  sacrifices  for  sin,  and
ceremonial  purifications.  Hence  the  public  and  private  sin  offerings,  and  the  various
forms  of  cleansing.  But  in  spite  of  penalties  inflicted  and  sacrifices  offered,  a  mass  of
crime  and  sin  and  uncleanness  accumulates  year  by  year,  which  has  not  been  avenged
or  cleansed,  and  this  defilement  affects  the  very  tabernacle  of  God  and  his  holy  things,
as  well  as  the  congregation  of  living  men.  Therefore  an  annual  atonement  and  le-
conciliation  were  required,  which  were  effected  each  year  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement.

L  The  Ceremonies.

1.  Bathing.

2.  Eobing  in  white  garments.

3.  The  sin  offerings.

4.  The  entry  into  the  holy  of  holies.

6.  The  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  the  sin  offerings  on  the  ark  and  before  the  mercy-
seat.

6.  The  scapegoat.

II.  Thbib  MBANiNO.    All  IS  typical  oi  Christ.

1.  Washing  with  his  blood  and  in  the  waters  of  baptism.

2.  Clothing  with  his  righteousness.

3.  Christ  the  Sin  Offering  on  the  cross.

4.  Christ's  ascension  and  entry  into  heaven  (Heh.  ix.,  x.).

5.  Christ's  life-blood  offered  on  the  cross,  and  carried  by  him  into  heaven.

6.  Christ  the  Sin-bearer  and  the  Bemover  of  sins.

III.  The  lessons.  1.  Beeondliution  between  Qod  and  man  has  been  effected.  For
Christ  has  come  and  has  offered  himself  as  a  sin  offering.  The  mass  of  sins  which
gathered  over  mankind  age  after  age,  has  been  covered  or  atoned  for  by  the  blood  of
Christ,  shed  by  him  upon  the  cross ;  and  those  who  were  alienated  are  now  reconciled.
Christ  is  the  all-prevailing  Peacemaker,  who  has  united  man  with  man,  and  man  wiih
Qod.  "  He  is  our  peace,  who  hath  made  both  (Gentile  and  Jew)  one,  and  hath  broken
down  the  middle  wall  of  partition  between  us ;  .  .  .  for  to  make  in  himself  of  twain  one
new  man,  so  making  peace ;  and  that  he  might  reconcile  both  unto  God  in  one  body  by
the  cross,  having  slain  the  enmity  thereby.  .  .  .  For  through  him  we  both  have  access
by  one  Spirit  unto  the  Father.  Now  therefore  ye  are  no  more  strangers  and  foreigners,
but  felluw-oitizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the  household  of  God  "  (Eph.  ii.  14 — 19).  And
this  reconciliation  was  wrought  by  one  offering,  once  for  all  offered.  The  high  priest's
atonement  was  made  annually,  for  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  could  not,  effectually  and
permanently,  but  only  symbolically  and  temporarily,  take  away  sins  (Heb.  x.  4).  "  But
this  man,  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for  ever,  sat  down  on  the  right  hand
ef  God.  .  .  .  For  by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified  "
(Heb.  X.  12—14).  And  it  was  wrought  for  all  mankind.  How,  then,  are  all  to  share  in
it }    By  realizing  their  adoption  in  Christ,  which  has  been  potentially  bestowed  upon


OH.  XVL 1— 34.]  THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  245

the  whole  family  of  mfm,  and  is  made  effective  to  each  individual  by  his  "  belief  "  in  the
Word  of  trath,"  and  his  being  "  sealed  "  in  baptism  "  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise  "
(Eph.  i.  13).  The  spiritual  bathing,  nnd  clothing  in  white  garments,  which  are  now  the
privileges  of  every  Christian,  derive  their  sacramental  force  solely  from  the  Sacrifice  of
the  cross.

2.  Christ  hu  opened  for  «i  the  way  to  heaven.  Christ  is  not  only  the  antitype  of
the  sin  offering  made  for  the  congregation,  but  also  of  the  high  priest  who  sacrificed  the
offering ;  for  he,  the  Priest,  offered  himself,  the  Victim.  The  holy  of  holies,  wherein
the  presence  of  God  exhibited  itself,  was  the  type  of  heaven.  Into  this  place  "  went  the
high  priest  alone  once  every  year,  not  without  blood,  which  he  offered  for  himself,  and
foi'  the  errors  of  the  people :  the  Holy  Ghost  this  signifying,  that  the  way  into  the
ho'lest  of  all  was  not  yet  made  manifest "  (Heb.  ix.  7,  8).  Alone,  the  high  priest
eutered  beyond  the  mysterious  vail,  and  no  one  might  be  present,  even  in  the  outer
chamber  of  the  tabernacle,  at  the  time  of  his  entrance,  nor  while  he  was  fulfilling  his
finctions  before  the  ark.  He  could  not  take  any  one  with  liim.  Nut  even  after  the
aionement  had  been  made,  could  those  who  had  been  reconciled,  whether  priests  or
people,  enter  there.  The  vail  was  drawn  again,  and  all  was  'shrouded  in  silence  and
mystery  as  before.  But  "  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands,
which  are  the  figures  of  the  true ;  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence
of  God  for  us "  (Heb.  ix.  24).  At  his  ascension  he  entered  heaven,  and  (unlike  the
high  priest)  there  he  remained  at  the  right  hand  of  God  (Heb.  x.  13),  having  received  gifts
for  men  from  his  Father,  and  having  bestowed  them  upon  his  Church  by  the  operation
of  his  Spirit  (Eph.  iv.  8 — 11).  And  not  only  so,  but  he  opened  the  way  to  all  his
followers.  He  was  the  mystical  Head,  and  where  the  Head  was,  there  the  Body  would
be  likewise.  By  his  death  he  purchased  for  man  an  entrance  into  the  presence  uf  God,
and  an  eternal  continuance  before  the  throne.  "  Having  therefore  boldness  to  enter  into
the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  by  a  new  and  living  way,  which  he  hath  consecrated
for  us  through  the  vail,  that  is  to  say,  his  flesh ;  and  having  an  high  priest  over  the
house  of  God ;  let  us  draw  neav  with  a  true  heart  in  full  assurance  of  faith,  having
our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience,  and  our  bodies  washed  with  pure  water  "
<Heb.  X.  19—22).

3.,  Ohritt  has  home,  and  borne  away,  our  sins.  "  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  griefs,  and
carried  our  sorrows :  yet  we  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted.
But  he  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities  :  the  chas-
tisement of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed.  All  we  like
sheep  have  gone  astray ;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ;  and  the  Lord  hath
laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all "  (Isa.  liii.  4 — 6).  "  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the
sins  of  many  "  (Heb.  ix.  28).  "  Who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  Ms  own  body  on  the  tree,
that  we,  being  dead  to  sins,  should  live  unto  righteousness :  by  whose  stripes  ye  were
healed"  (1  Pet.  ii.  24).  Christ,  by  his  sacrifice,  not  only  earns  for  us  forgiveness  of  sin,
but  also  gives  us  a  consciousness  of  their  forgiveness.  Those  who,  in  self-abasement
and  self-abandonment,  have  thrown  themselves  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  have  arisen
assured  of  the  pardon  of  their  sins,  as  though  they  had  seen  and  felt  the  burden
of  them  ti^ken  off  from  their  necks,  and  carried  step  by  step  into  a  land  cut  off,  from
whence  no  return  for  them  is  possible.  If  there  are  any  who  feel  overcome  by  the
weight  of  their  sins,  they  are  taught  here  that,  if  they  cannot-  bear  them,  there  is
One  who  can  bear  them,  and  that,  though  they  cannot  free  themselves  from  them,  yet
they  can  be  freed.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the
world  1"  (John  i.  29).

IV.  Wakning.  Washed,  robed,  reconciled,  and  delivered  from  sin,  and  from  the
consciousness  of  sin, — what  more  could  have  been  done  for  us  that  God  has  not  done  ?
What  return  are  we  to  make  ?  We  are  to  live  as  children  of  God.  "  Let  us  hold  fast
the  profession  of  our  faith  without  wavering;  (for  he  is  faithful  that  promised;)  and
let  us  consider  one  another  to  provoke  unto  love  and  to  good  works  "  (Heb.  x.  23,  24).
Further  warning.  The  danger  of  falling  away  after  having  been  forgiven  and  admitted
to  the  privileges  of  sonship.  "  For  if  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the
knowledge  of  the  truth,  there  remaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins,  but  a  certain  fearful
coking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation,  which  shall  devour  the  adversaries  "
Heb.  x.  26,  27).    One  imclean  spirit  may  be  exchanged  for  seven  (Matt,  ziii,  43 45),


246  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xvi.  1— 34L

"See  that  ye  refuse  not  him  that  speaketh.  .  .  .  For  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire*
(Heh.  xii.  25,  29).

Vers.  29 — 34.—  The  annual  reiteration  of  the  purification  made  on  the  Day  p^
Atonement  testifies  to  the  imperfections  of  the  Law.  "  For  the  Law  can  never  with
those  sacrifices  which  they  offered  year  by  year  continually  make  the  comers  there-
unto perfect.  For  then  would  they  not  have  ceased  to  be  offered?  "  (Heb.  x.  1,  2).  Had
they  done  their  work  perfectly,  a  repetition  of  them  would  not  have  been  required^
"  because  that  the  worshippers  once  purged  should  have  had  no  more  conscience  of  sins  "
(Heb.  X.  2).  There  was  a  triple  imperfection — in  the  priest,  in  the  victim,  in  the  effect
of  the  sacrifices.  The  Levitical  priesthood  was  forpied  of  sinful  men,  as  was  testified;
by  the  sin  offering  which  the  high  priest  had  first  to  offer  for  himself  before  he  could
offer  one  for  the  people:  here  there  was  no  perfect  mediator.  The  victims  were  a.
bullock  and  a  goat ;  but  "  it  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should
take  away  sins "  (Heb.  x.  4) :  here  there  was  no  perfect  sacrifice.  The  atonement
had  to  be  repeated  annually :  here  there  was  no  perfect  result  from  the  offering  made.
By  its  very  imperfection  tbe  Law  points  forward  to  and  awakens  the  desire  for  a  better
covenant,  with  a  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec,  "holy,  harmless,  undefiled,
separate  from  sinners  "  (Heb.  vii.  26),  with  a  sacrifice  which  could  sanctify  (Heb.  x.
10),  and  which  is  and  cau  be  only  "  once  offered,"  because  it  is  "  a  full,  perfect,  and
sufficient  Sacrifice,  Oblation,  and  Satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  "  (Serrioe-
for  Holy  Communion).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 34. — 7%e  great  Day  of  Atonement  (vers.  29 — 34).  One  day  fn  the  yeai
set  apart  to  the  most  solemn  representation  possible  of  the  two  facts — ^the  sin-
fulness of  man,  the  righteous  love  of  God.  Atonement  underlying  the  whole  of  the
ceremonial  Law,  but  the  insufficiency  of  the  daily  sacrifices,  set  forth  by  the  separation  of
one  day  for  the  special  sacrifice,  thus  pointing  to  one  atonement  in  which  all  other  atone-
ments should  be  perfected.  Solemn  warning  in  the  death  of  the  two  sons  of  Aaron,  pro-
claiming the  unchangeableness  of  Divine  Law,  and  unapproachableness  of  God  in  his-
infinite  righteousness.  Necessity  that,  while  the  cloud  upon  the  mercy-seat  spoke  of
holiness  and  majesty,  there  should  be  a  more  emphatic  testimony  to  love  and  mercy.
Yet  that  testimony  must  be  in  the  way  of  Law  and  ordinance,  therefore  itself  main
taining  that  God  is  just  while  he  is  merciful.  These  preliminary  considerations  preparo-
U3  to  take  the  "great  Day  of  Atonement"  as  a  typical  prophecy  fulfilled  in  the  reve-
lation of  Christ.     Notice —

1.  The  mediation  between  GJod  and  man  must  bb  a  pehfeot  mediation.
1.  Personal  perfection.  For  ordinary  ministration,  washing  feet  and  hands  sufficient.
For  the  great  day,  entire  cleansing.  This  must  be.  A  fellow-creature,  imperfect  and
sinful,  may  be  employed  as  a  chanuel  of  communication  between  God  and  ns,  but  not
as  the  efficient  Mediator  undertaking  for  both.  The  spotlessness  of  Jesus  must  be
more  than  relative,  more  than  oharacter ;  it  must  be  absolute,  therefore,  only  as  we  see
it  in  the  Incarnation.  Nor  can  we  find  satisfaction  in  the  humanity  of  Christ  unlesS'
we  believe  that  it  was  capable  of  rendering  to  God  an  infinitely  acceptable  sacrifice;
therefore,  while  it  was  flesh,  it  must  have  been  free  from  all  taint  of  sin.  We  lay
our  sins  on  him ;  then  he  must  be  himself  absolutely  sinless,  or  else  our  sins  will  be-
increased  by  his.  Only  in  the  pre-existenoe  of  the  Second  Person  in  the  Trinity  can  w*
find  a  support  for  this  doctrine  of  personal  perfection  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.

2.  Official  perfection.  The  high  priest  must  be  clothed  in  spotless  garments.
"  Holy  garments."  He  put  off  his  "  golden  garments,"  and  put  on  the  white  linen,
emblematical  of  official  perfection.  The  continual  repetition  of  the  sacrifices  and  the
priestly  ablutions,  together  with  the  special  priestly, offerings,  represented  the  necessary
Imperfection  of  the  ceremonial  atonement.  The  priest's  office  was  seen  in  its  height  ot
dignity  in  the  high  priest's  office  ;  the  high  priest's  office  in  its  most  solemn  duty,
to  enter  the  holiest  once  a  year  and  make  atonement  for  all.     But  the  true  Hi<'b  Priest


CH.  XVI.  1—34.]  THK   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  241

and  the  true  mediation  were  yet  to  come.  The  ministry  of  Christ  was  a  perfect  offering
of  man  to  Ood,  in  his  active  and  passive  obedience,  and  a  perfect  revelation  and
auu/rance  of  Divine  favour  to  man ;  in  the  facts  of  hii  earthly  life,  promising  healing
and  restoration  for  human  woes,  and  life  from  the  dead ;  in  the  development  of  a  perfect
humanity  by  example;  in  the  unfolding  and  proclamation  of  the  heavenly  kingdom,
which  actually  commenced  in  his  person,  and  proceeded  in  ever-widening  spheres  of
ipiritual  life  in  his  Church;  in  his  risen  glory  and  the  bestowment  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
which  were  the  completion  of  his  oflicial  work  as  Mediator,  for  he  said  that  if  he  went
to  the  Father  (that  is,  as  Mediator),  he  would  send  the  Comforter.  Thus  the  vail  was
taken  away,  and  the  way  into  the  holiest  made  manifest  (Heb.  ix.  8 ;  x.  19 — 23).  Our
High  Priest  is  not  one  of  an  imperfect  succession  of  Aaron's  sons,  hut  after  the  order  of
Meloliisedec,  coming  forth  directly  from  God,  and  standing  in  unique  perfection ;  the
pledge  at  ome  of  Divine  acceptance  and  the  spiritual  liberty  of  the  gospel.

II.  Vicarious  atonement.  The  three  facts  of  tlie  day  were :  1.  The  blood  of  the
victims  shed  and  sprinkled.  2.  The  living  way  opened  between  the  throne  of  God  and
his  people.  3.  The  public,  solemn  putting  away  of  sins  and  their  loss,  as  guilt,  in  the
wilderness.  In  the  true  atonement,  thus  represented,  these  are  the  essential  factors —
expiation,  reconciliation,  restoration.

1.  Expiation.  The  blood  of  the  bullock,  the  blood  of  the  goat,  brought  in  before  the
mercy-seat,  sprinkled  seven  times,  etc.  No  remission  of  sins  without  blood.  A  tribute
to  the  holiness  of  God,  therefoie  to  the  perfection  of  the  Divine  government.  No  peace
can  be  true  and  abiding  which  has  not  its  roots  in  the  unchangeableness  of  God.
Notice  how  the  modern  feeling  of  the  steadfastness  and  uniformity  of  nature
vindicates  the  necessity  of  a  forgiveness  of  sin  which  is  a  maintenance  of  Law.
The  sufferings  of  Christ  must  be  viewed,  not  as  the  arbitrary  assignment  of  a
penalty,  but  as  the  sufferings  of  the  sacrificial  Victim,  i.e.  of  him  whose  blood,  that  is,
his  life,  was  freely  offered  to  seal  the  covenant,  and  who,  being  in  the  form  of  a  servant,
obeyed  even  unto  death  ;  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  Law,  therefore  both  having
a  fleshly,  mortal  nature,  and  being  in  a  position  of  obedience,  wherein  he  must,  as  a  true
Son,  "  fulfil  all  righteousness."  The  cross  was  an  open  conflict  between  righteousness
and  unrighteousness,  in  which  the  true  representative  Seed  of  the  woman,  the  true
Humanity,  was  bruised,  and,  as  a  Victim,  laid  bleeding  and  dying  on  the  altar ;  but  in
which,  at  the  same  time,-  the  acceptance  of  the  offering,  as  proved  by  the  Resurrection
and  Ascension,  was  a  manifestation  of  tlie  victory  of  righteousness  and  the  putting  away  of
sin.  The  universality  of  the  expiation  was  represented  by  the  offering  for  priests  and
people  alike,  for  the  holy  place,  for  the  very  mercy-seat,  for  all  the  worship  and  religious
life  of  the  congregation.  Apart  from  the  merit  of  the  Saviour's  blood,  there  is  no  accept-
ance of  anything  which  we  offer  to  God.  The  attempt  to  eliminate  all  distinctive
recognition  of  expiation  from  religious  worship,  is  the  folly  of  our  times  in  many  who
reject  the  teaching  of  Christianity.  A  temple  without  a  sacrifice,  without  the  blood
which  is  the  remission  of  sins,  is  a  contradiction  of  the  first  truth  of  Scripture,  that
man  is  a  fallen  being,  and  can  therefore  be  acceptable  to  God  only  on  God's  own  revealed
terms  of  atonement.

2.  Reconciliation  (vers.  11 — 14).  The  true  conception  of  salvation  is  not  a  mere
deliverance  from  the  punishment  of  sin,  but  living  fellowship  between  God  and  his
creature.  The  life  of  man  is  the  outcome  of  God's  wisdom,  power,  goodness,  unchange-
able and  everlasting.  He  carries  eternity  and  divinity  in  his  very  nature  and  existence.
His  future  blesse&ess,  yea,  his  very  being,  must  be  secured  in  God's  favour.  The
burning  coals  of  fire  from  off  the  altar,  and  the  sweet  incense  beaten  small,  rising  up  as
a  cloud  before  the  mercy-seat,  betoken  the  intermingling  of  the  Divine  and  human  in  the
life  of  God's  reconciled  children.  This  is  maintained  by  the  offerings  of  faith  and  prayer  :
the  light  of  Divine  truth  penetrating  the  mind  and  life  of  man,  the  heart  rejoicing  in
God  and  seeking  him  by  a  constant  reference  of  all  things  to  him,  and  dependence  of
daily  life  on  his  mercy.  When  thus  the  will  and  love  of  God  underlie  all  our  existence
and  pervade  it,  there  is  an  open  way  between  this  world  and  heaven  ;  the  two  are  inter-
mingled. Man  l)ecomes  what  he  was  made  to  be — a  reflection  of  his  Maker's  image.
"  I  will  say.  It  is  my  people,  and  they  shall  say.  The  Lord  is  our  God."  Christianity  has
the  only  true  message  of  hope  for  the  world,  bucause  it  proclaims  reconciliation  between
the  infinite  perfection  of  God  and  the  polluted  and  iuiperleot  humanity  which  he  has
redeemed.


248  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [cii.  xvi.  1— 34.

3.  Restoration  (vers.  20 — 28).  Tlie  scapegoat— an  emblem  of  the  entire  deliver-
ance of  man  from  the  guilt  and  mbery  of  sin.  The  necessity  of  this  proclamation  of
a  new  world.  Heathen  minds  recognized  the  evil  of  sin,  but  lay  under  the  spell  of
fatalistic  despair.  "  No  symbol  could  so  plainly  set  forth  the  completeness  of  Jehovah's
acceptance  of  the  penitent,  as  a  sin  offering  in  which  a  life  was  given  up  for  the  altar,
and  yet  a  living  being  survived  to  carry  away  all  sin  and  uncleanness."  The  com-
mencement of  all  renovation  of  character  and  life  is  the  sense  of  entire  forgiveness,
perfect  peace  with  God.  The  sins  are  gone  into  the  wilderness,  they  have  not  to  h»
cleansed  away  by  any  efforts  of  ours.  Spiritual  restoration  lies  at  the  root  of  all  other.
"  2%e  kingdom  of  Qod  "  is  first  "  righteousness,"  then  "peace,"  and  then  "joy  in  the  Holy
Ghost."  This  is  the  Divine  order  of  restoration.  But  as  the  priest  put  his  hand  upon
the  head  of  the  goat,  and  confessed  over  him  all  the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel,
so  in  the  Divine  work  of  grace  on  behalf  of  man,  there  must  be  the  living  faith  which
blends  the  penitent  submission  of  the  human  will  with  the  infinite  suflBciency  of
the  Divine  righteousness  and  power. — ;E.

Ver.  31. — "  A  sabbath  of  rest."  "  Ye  shall  afflict  your  souls."  The  true  penitence  ia
the  true  peace.  The  "  sabbath  "  represents  the  joyful  acceptance  of  the  creature,  and
his  entrance  into  the  Divine  satisfaction.  The  Lord  rested,  and  he  invites  man  to  rest
with  him.  Sin  is  the  only  obstacle  to  that  reconciliation  and  fellowship  which  blends
man's  sabbath  with  God's  sabbath.  "  Once  a  year  "  the  Jews  celebrated  this  restoration,
to  us  a  statute  of  daily  life — every  day  a  sabbath. — R.

The  climax  of  sacrificial  worship,  the  Day  of  Atonement.    Ch.  xvi. ;  of.  John  i.  29;

1  Cor.  V.  7 ;  Heb.  ix.  x.  The  sacrifices  already  considered  all  bring  out  with  more
or  less  emphasis  the  idea  of  atonement.  But  to  render  this  cardinal  idea  of  our
religion  still  more  emphatic,  it  was  ordained  that  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  in
each  year  should  be  a  day  of  special  humiliation  on  the  part  of  the  people,  and  special
ritual  on  the  part  of  the  priests.  The  dirsctions  about  it  ware  apparently  given  imme-
diately after  the  presumption  and  death  of  Nadab  and  Abihu,  the  sons  of  Aaron.
They  must  have  ventured,  we  think,  into  the  very  "  holiest  of  all,"  with  their  censers
of  unholy  fire.     The  stages  in  atonement  may  be  set  forth  in  the  following  way : —

L  Thebe  is  the  voluntabt  humiliation  of  the  high  priest.  The  Day  of
Atonement  was  the  high  priest's  day ;  he  undertook  the  atoning  work,  and  no  man  was
to  venture  near  the  tabernacle  (ver.  17)  while  he  was  engaged  in  it.  The  first  thing
required  of  him  was  humiliation.  He  had  to  lay  aside  his  glorious  garments  in  which
he  usually  ministered,  and  to  assume  plain  white  linen  one.s ;  he  had  to  bring  a  sin
offering  for  himself  and  household  ;  he  had  thus  to  humble  himself  under  the  mighty
hand  of  God,  before  he  could  be  exalted  by  admission  to  the  Divine  presence.  Now,  it
requires  the  high  priest  with  his  sin  offering  to  typify  with  any  adequacy  Jesus  Christ.
For  he  is  both  our  High  Priest  and  our  Sin  Offering.  He  humbles  himself  to  die  as  a
Sacrifice  upon  the  cross ;  he  is  a  voluntary  Saoritice — he  offers  himself  (Heb.  vii.  27).
The  humiliation  of  our  High  Priest  can  only  be  judged  by  our  conception  of  the  glory
of  Divinity  which  he  temporarily  resigned,  added  to  the  depth  of  ignominy  into  which
in  his  crucifixion  he  came.  All  this  was  necessary  that  a  way  of  reconciliation  mi^ht
be  opened  up  for  sinners.

II.  The  high  priest  was  required  next  to  perfume  the  audience  oeambeb
WITH  INCENSE.  He  proceeded  with  a  censer  of  coals  from  off  the  altar,  and  a  handful
of  incense,  and  was  careful  to  fill  the  holy  of  holies  with  the  fragrant  cloud.  Here  again
does  it  require  the  incense,  in  addition  to  the  priest,  to  typify  the  relations  of  Jesus  to
our  atonement.  The  work  of  atonement  begins  in  his  intercession.  Think  how  he
prayed  during  his  life  on  earth — how  earnest  his  prayer  in  Gethsemane  was  when  he
sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood ;  think,  further,  how  his  intercession  is  continued
in  the  heavenly  places.  Prayer  is  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end  of  the  redemptive
work.  Without  this  incense,  even  the  blood  of  the  unblemished  lamb  would  lose  much
of  its  effect.

It  seems  evident  from  this  that  we  must  put  away  those  hard  and  business-like
illustrations  of  atonement,  as  a  hard  bargain  driven  on  the  one  side  and  paid  literally
and  in  full  on  the  other.     We  must  allow  a  sufficient  sphere  in  our  conceptions  for  th«


OH.  XVL 1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  241>

play  of  intercession  and  appeal,  and  remember  that,  while  it  is  a  God  of  justice  who  is
satisfied,  he  proves  himself  in  the  transaction  a  God  of  grace.

III.  AFTEB  the   incense  THEBB   is   BBOnOHT  IN   THB   BLOOD,  FIB8T   OF  HIS  OWN   BIN

OFFEBINQ,  AND  THEN  OF  THE  pbofle's.  The  blood  of  JeBus  ChHst  is  symbolized  hy
both,  and  the  act  of  sprinkling  it  before  God  is  also  to  be  attributed  to  our  Great  High
Priest.  "  For  Christ  is  not  entered  into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands,  which  are  the
figures  of  the  true ;  but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us."
"  Neither  by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but  by  his  own  blood  he  entered  in  once
into  the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us "  (Heb.  ix.  24,  12).
Now,  the  presentation  of  blood  unto  God,  and-  the  sprinkling  of  it  seven  times  in  the
appointed  place,  represented  the  appeal  which  the  self-sacrifice  of  Jesus,  his  Son,  is
so  well  calculated  to  make  to  the  Divine  mercy  in  the  interests  of  guilty  men.  The
law  of  mediation  is  that  self-sacrifice  stimulates  the  element  of  mercy  in  the  Judge.'
And  if  it  be  objected  that  surely  God  does  not  require  such  an  expensive  stimulant,
the  reply  is  that  the  self-sacrificing  Son  and  the  stimulated  Father  and  Judge  are  in
essence  one.  The  act  is  consequently  a  Divine  self-sacrifice,  to  stimulate  the  element
of  mercy  towards  man,  and  make  it  harmonize  with  justice.  Here  then  we  have
remission  of  sins  secured  through  the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Pardon  and
reconciliation  are  thus  put  within  the  reach  of  the  sinner.

IV.  But  the  high  peiest  was  expected  not  only  to  secubb  the  paedon  of

BINS,   BUT   also    TO  PUT    IT    AWAY    BY   THE    DISMISSAL    OF    THE    SCAFEOOAT.        For    the

pardon  of  sin  is  not  aU  man  needs.  He  requires  sin  to  be  put  away  from  him.  He
needs  to  be  enabled  to  sing,  "As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  hath  he
removed  our  transgressions  from  us"  (Ps.  ciii.  12).  Now,  this  putting  away  of  sin
was  beautifully  represented  in  the  dismissal  of  the  scapegoat.  This  second  sin  offer-
ing, after  having  the  sins  of  the  people  heaped  upon  its  head  by  the  priestly  conl'ession,
is  sent  away  in  care  of  a  faithful  servant  to  the  wilderness,  there  to  be  left  in  loneliness
either  to  live  or  die.  Here  again  we  have  a  type  of  Jesus.  He  is  our  Scapegoat.  He
carried  our  sins  on  his  devoted  head  into  that  wilderness  of  desolation  and  loneliness,
which  compelled  from  him  the  cry,  "My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"
There  did  be  fully  atone  for  them,  and  secured  their  annihilation.  As  we  meditate
upon  this  portion  of  his  mediation,  we  are  enabled  by  the  Spirit  to  realize  that  sin  is
put  away  through  Christ's  sacrifice  of  himself  (Heb.  ix.  26).  That  desolation  of  tlie
Eedeemer  into  which  he  entered  for  us  interposes  itself,  so  to  speak,  between  us  and
our  sins,  and  we  feel  a  wholesome  separation  from  them.  How  can  we  ever  love  sin
when  we  realize  that  it  led  our  Lord  to  this  ?

V.  The   HIGH   peiest,  having  thus   disposed  op  sin,  ebsumbd   his  olobtous

OABMBNTS,  AND  OFFEEED  THE    BUENT   OFFEBING    FOE  HIMSELF   AND   THB   PEOPLE.      The

stages  already  noticed  have  been  prayer,  the  remission  of  sins  through  the  shedding  of
blood,  and  the  putting  away  of  sin  through  the  dismissal  of  the  victim.  Now  comes
dedication  as  the  crowning  purpose  of  the  atonement,  and  which  the  burnt  offering  all
along  has  indicated.  It  is  Christ  who  offers  this  burnt  offering,  and  is  the  Burnt  Offer-
ing. That  is  to  say,  he  has  offered  for  men  a  perfect  righteousness,  as  well  as  afforded
us  a  perfect  example.  Our  consecration  to  God  is  ideally  to  be  a  perfect  one — hut
really  how  imperfect!  but  Christ  is  made  unto  us  sanctification ;  we  are  complete  ie-
him ;  we  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved ;  and  we  learn  and  try  to  live  as  he  lived,  holy  as
he  was  holy.

Moreover,  upon  the  burnt  offering  was  presented  the  fat  of  the  sin  offering,  the  Lord
thus  emphasizing  his  satisfaction  with  the  atonement,  and  his  acceptance  of  it.  The
remainder  of  the  sin  offering,  as  a  sacred  thing,  is  cairied  to  a  clean  place  without  tha
camp,  and  there  burned.  In  no  more  beautiful  way  could  God  convey  the  assurance  to
his  people  that  the  ritual  of  atonement  was  complete  and  acceptable  to  him.  It  is
when  we  gratefully  dedicate  ourselves  to  God,  which  is  our  reasonable  service,  that  we
receive  the  assurance  of  acceptance  in  the  Beloved.

VI.  The  washing  of  the  theee  men  ofpiciatino  on  the  Day  op  Atonement

CONVEYS    SUBELY    THB    IDEA    OF    THE    CONTAMINATING    POWEK    OF  SIN.      For    the    high

priest,  before  be  puts  on  the  glorious  garments  and  presents  thd  bmut  offering,  is
'  Of.  Mozley,  ut  supra,  p.  169.


260  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xvi.  1— 34

required  to  wash  himself  in  water.  The  man  who  piloted  the  scapegoat  to  the  wilder-
ness has  also  to  perform  careful  and  complete  ablutions.  And  so  has  the  man  who
took  the  remains  of  the  sin  offering  beyond  the  camp.  For  all  three  had  to  deal  with
sin,  and  are  ceremonially  affected  by  it.  Most  vivid  must  have  been  the  impression
thug  produced  upon  .the  people^  Sin  would  appear  the  abominable  thing  which  Qod
hates,  when  it  is  so  defiling.

We  have  here  the  climax  of  the  sacrificial  worship.  The  Day  of  Atonement  would
be  a  rest  indeed  to  the  sin-burdened  people.  At  the  tabernacle  they  see  in  ritual
how  God  could  be  reconciled  to  man,  and  how  he  could  pardon  and  put  away  sin.  As
the  smoke  of  the  burnt  offering  passed  up  to  heaven,  many  a  soul  felt  that  a  burden  was
gone,  and  that  the  heavens  were  smiling  once  more.  May  the  experience  of  the  day
of  atonement  abide  in  our  hearts  still,  for  we  need  it  as  much  as  the  pilgrims  long-
ago.— E.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — i. — The  high  priest  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.  The  Jevnsh  high  priest  was
an  eminent  type  of  Christ.  He  was  this  on  ordinary  occasions  of  his  ministry,  in
respect  to  which  Jesus  is  called  "the  High  Priest  of  our  profession"  (Heb.  iii.  1).
But  he  was  especially  so  upon  this  great  occasion  of  his  entrance  into  the  most  holy
place.

I.  The  most  holt  place  of  the  temple  was  a  type  or  heaven.  1.  The  taber-
nacle was  a  figure  of  the  universe.  (1)  It  represented  the  material  universe.  In
allusion  to  this,  Paul  speaks  of  the  universe  as  the  great  house  built  by  the  hands  of
God  (see  Heb.  iii.  3,  45.  And  our  Lord,  also,  alluding  to  the  temple  with  its  many
courts  and  offices,  speaks  of  the  universe  as  his  Fathers  house  (John  xiv.  1).  (2)  It
likewise  represented  the  moral  vmiverse.  In  this  light  it  is  also  viewed  by  Paul  in  the
same  connection  as  that  in  which  he  likens  it  to  the  material  (see  Heb.  iii.  6).  In
many  places  of  Scripture  the  petople  of  God  are  described  under  the  similitude  of  the
temple  (see  1  Cor.  iii.  16;  2  Cor.  vi.  16;  Bph.  ii.  21,  22  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5).  2.  The  holy
places  signified  the  heavens.  (1)  Amongst  the  coverings  were  what  our  version  calls
"  badgers'  skins,"  but  the  original  word  (tynn),  techesh,  in  ancient  versions  is  explained
to  denote  a  colour,  viz.  Hue.  The  covering  may  have  been  composed  of  rams'  skins
dyed  Wue,  as  the  other  covering  was  of  "  rams'  skins  dyed  red."  Blue  was  the  proper
colour  to  suggest  the  air,  while  the  red  would  suggest  the  golden  glow  of  the  light  in
the  ethereal  heavens.  (2)  Josephus,  speaking  of  the  gate  of  the  porch  of  the  temple,
which  stood  always  open,  styles  it  an  "  emblem  of  the  heavens."  And  the  vail  leading
from  the  porch  to  the  holy  place,  made  like  Babylonish  tapestry  (Josh.  vii.  21)  of  blue,
purple,  scarlet,  and  fine  twined  linen,  he  compares  to  the  elements  ('Wars,'  t.  5).
Josephus  also  describes  the  branched  candlestick,  with  its  seven  lights,  as  emblems  of
the  planets  of  the  solar  system.  (3)  But  whatever  may  be  said  of  details,  the  broad
fact  is  not  left  to  conjecture  or  even  to  tradition ;  for  Paul  tells  us  plainly  that  the
holy  places  were  patterns  of  the  heaven's  (Heb.  iv.  14 ;  ix.  23).  3.  The  most  holy  place
figured  the  supreme  heaven.  (1)  This  must  be  obvious  from  the  fact  that  the  Shechinah
was  there.  God  appeared  then  in  regal  state  upon  his  throne  of  glory.  The
cherubim  around  him  represented  the  powers  of  creation,  physical  and  intellectual,
which  all  wait  upon  him  to  fulfil  his  will  everywhere  in  the  great  universe.  Their
faces  were  so  placed  that,  while  they  all  looked  inward  upon  the  propitiatory,  they  also
looked  outward  in  all  directions  upon  the  house.  (2)  This  innermost  sanctuary  Paul
accordingly  describes  as  "heaven  itself" — an  expression  synonymous  to  the  "third
heaven,"  and  "heaven  of  heavens"  (Heb.  ix.  24;  2  Cor.  xii.  2,  Deut.  x.  14;  Ps.
cxv.  16).     It  is  the  p.ilace  of  God  and  of  angels.

II.  The  bnteanck  of  the  high  priest  into  the  most  holy  place  adtthbrated  that
Of  Jesus  into  heaven.  (See  Heb.  viii.  1,2;  ix.  11,  12,  23, 24.)  1.  Ee  entered  in  his
white  garments.  (1)  Not  in  his  "  golden  robes."  These  are  vulgarly  supposed  to  have
oeen  his  nobkr  vestments,  and  it  is  thought  that  entering  in  his  white  garments  he
appeared  in  "  mean  "  attire,  to  express  "  humiliation  "  and  "  mourning  "  (see  Matthew
Henry,  in  loc).  (2)  but  is  this  opinion  just?  Where  are  the  white  robes  of  the  high
priest  so  described  in  Scripture?  Is  it  not  rather  the  other  way  (see  Bzek.  xliv.  17)?
Are  the  seven  angels  (Rev.  xv.  6)  described  as  in  mean  attire  ?  As  a  matter  of  fact
did  Jesus  meanly  or  mourningly  enter  heaven  ?     Was  it  not  rather  his  entrance  "  into


CH.  XVI.  1— 34.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  251

his  gloiy  "  after  his  "  sufferings  "  were  "  finished  "  (Luke  xxir.  26)  ?  (3)  The  white
robes  represented  the  glorious  body  of  his  resurrection  (see  1  Tim.  vi.  14 — 16 1  Heb.
ix.  24,  25).  And  a  specimen  of  the  quality  of  these  garments  was  given  on  the  mount
of  transfiguration,  when  the  light  of  his  glory  was  so  white  that  no  fuller  on  earth  could
make  linen  to  compare  with  it  (see  Matt.  xvii.  2 ;  Mark  ix.  3).  2.  Note  now  the  allusion
to  Nadab  and  Abihu.  (1)  (See  ver.  1 ;  refer  also  to  ch.  x.  i,  2.)  This  terrible  event
occurred  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai  (Numb.  iii.  4),  where  the  Law  was  given,  and  where
these  very  men  were  called  up  with  Aaron  to  witness  the  glory  of  the  Lord  (Exod.
xxiv.  1).  Whatever  Induced  them  to  offer  strange  fire,  tliey  became,  in  the  sequel,
a  figure  of  Jesus,  who  came  not  with  legal  righteousness,  and  whom  the  fire  of  God  was
to  search  to  the  utmost.  (2)  Aaron  now  became  a  similar  type  (see  ver.  2).  He
was  to  die  if  he  came  near  Jehovah,  and  so  represented  Jesus,  who,  in  the  union  of  his
manhood  with  the  Godhead,  was  to  die.  This  issue  was  only  averted  from  Aaron  by
the  substitution  of  animal  sacrifices,  which  were  to  procure  the  "  forbearance  of  God,"
until  Immanuel  should  put  away  typical  sin  sacrifices  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself.
(3)  To  avert  death  from  Aaron,  God  appointed  that  incense  also  should  be  fumed
before  the  mercy-seat,  in  the  cloud  of  which  he  would  appear  (vera.  2, 12, 13).  The  cloud
tempered  the  fierceness  of  the  fire  of  the  presence  of  God,  and  snowed  that,  in  virtue  of
the  inteicession  of  Christ,  man  may  see  God  and  live.— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  5 — 28. — The  sacrifices  of  the  Day  of  Atonement.  Upon  ordinary  occasions
sacrifices  might  be  offered  by  common  priests,  who  might  act  as  representatives  of  the
high  priest  or  as  representatives  of  the  people,  and  so  be  types  of  Christ,  or  types  ol
Christians.  But  upon  this  day  the  high  priest  must  act  in  person,  which  leaves  no
doubt  as  to  these  transactions  being  eminently  emblematical  of  Christ  and  of  his  great
work.    We  notice —

L  T  JE  orrEBiNQS  fob  Aakon  and  his  house.  (See  ver.  6.)  1.  In  these  Christ  i§
viewed  in  his  relation  to  his  Church.  (1)  The  Christian  Church  is  the  house  or  family
of  Jesus  (Heb.  iii.  6).  (See  Ps.  cxxxv.  19,  where  the  "  house  of  Aaron,"  as  opposed  to
the  "  house  of  Israel,"  may  be  spiritually  construed  to  denote  the  Christian  as  opposed
to  the  Hebrew  Church.)  (2)  To  his  Church  Jesus  stands  in  the  relations  of  (a)  I'riest,
(6)  Sacrifice,  (c)  Bondsman.  He  bears  our  sin  in  his  own  person,  and  dies  for  us,  as
Aaron  would  have  died  for  his  own  sin  and  that  of  his  house,  had  not  the  sin  sacrifices
been  substituted  to  procure  the  forbearance  of  God  until  our  competent  Aaron  should
appear  to  satisfy  all  the  claims  of  justice  and  mercy.  (3)  Aaron,  in  making  atone-
ment for  himself  and  his  house,  evinced  that  Christ  should  be  a  priest  having  compas-
sion (see  Heb.  v.  2,  3).  For  though  Jesus  had  no  sin  of  his  own,  yet  did  he  take  upon
him  our  nature,  with  its  curse,  so  as  to  be  "  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities  "
(comp.  Heb.  vii.  28,  margin;  ii.  18;  iv.  15).  What  a  blessed  assurance  for  ust
2.  But  Christ  cannot  be  of  the  family  of  Aaron.  (1)  Aaron  for  himself  and  for  all  his
house  needed  sacrifices  to  atone  for  their  own  sins ;  how  then  could  they  put  away  sin
from  others  ?  This  they  could  only  do  typically  and  ceremonially  (see  Heb.  vii.  26,
27).  (2)  Provision  was  made  in  the  family  of  Aaron  for  the  transmission  of  the  priest-
hood from  hand  to  band;  it  was  therefore  never  contemplated  that  any  member  of  that
house  should  have  the  priesthood  in  perpetuity.  But  this  we  must  have  in  the  ofiSce
of  a  perfect  Priest.  His  intercession  must  have  no  interruption  (see  Heb.  vii.  2.) — 25).
(3)  To  fulfil  these  conditions,  Christ  is  come,  a  high  priest  after  the  order  of  Melchisedec
(Ps.  ex.  4 ;  Heb.  vii.  15 — 22).  He  sprang  from  Judah,  of  which  tribe  Moses  spake
nothing  concerning  priesthood  (Heb.  vii.  11 — 14).  We  may  praise  God  fir  the
perfection  of  the  priesthood  of  Christ,  which  needs  no  supplement  in  the  o£Bces  of
mortals.

IL  The  offerings  fob  the  people.  1.  TTiere  was  the  burnt  offering.  (1)  This,
under  ordinary  circumstances,  for  the  individual  might  be  a  bullock,  or  a  ram,  or  a  he-
goat,  or,  in  case  of  poverty,  a  pigeon ;  but  in  this  case  for  the  nation,  as  in  the  conse-
cration of  the  priests,  the  ram  is  specified  (ch.  i.  3, 10,  14 ;  viii.  18).  It  is  suggested
that  this  animal  was  chosen  for  the  offensiveness  of  its  smell,  in  order  to  represent  the
odiousness  of  sin.  (2)  In  this  case  also  the  high  priest  in  person,  and  alone,  officiated.
No  one  was  to  remain  with  him  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  (ver.  17).
What  an  expressive  figure  of  Christ  (see  Isa.  Ixiii.  3,  5 ;  Zech.  xiii.  7  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  31,


152  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xvl  1— 34.

66 ;  John  xvi.  32) !  No  one  could  help  Jesus  in  his  great  work  of  atonement.  2.  The
sacrifice  of  the  two  goats  now  claims  attention.  (1)  Two  are  brought-,  to  foreshadow
what  one  could  not  adequately,  viz.  that  one  part  only  of  the  compound  person  of
Christ  could  die,  while  both  parts  were  necessary  for  his  making  atonement.  The
animal  on  which  the  lot  fell  to  be  the  scapegoat  was  to  stand  alive  before  the  Lord,  to
make  atonement  with  Mm  (ver.  10 ;  see  Heb.  viii.  3 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18).  The  "  some-
what "  which  our  high  piiest  has  to  offer  is  his  humanity,  which  his  Godhead  supported
and  rendered  infinitely  efficacious  for  the  expiation  of  sin.  (2)  In  casting  lots  upon
the  goats,  one  for  the  Lord,  and  the  other  for  the  scapegoat,  we  are  taught  that  the
Bufferings  of  Christ  were  ordered  by  the  providence  of  God  (see  Acts  iv.  28).  This  is
amply  evinced  in  the  wonderfully  detailed  anticipations  of  prophecy.  (3)  Aaron  laid
his  two  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  creature  that  was  to  be  the  scapegoat,  and  con-
fessed the  sins  of  the  congregation.  These  were  such  as  may  not  have  been  atoned  for
by  the  usual  sacrifices.  And  they  are  summed  up  as  "  iniquities  "  and  "  transgres-
sions "  and  "  sins  "  (ver.  21).  Laden  with  these,  (4)  he  was  sent  away  "  by  the  hand
of  a  man  of  opportunity  "  (ver.  21,  margin).  Such  was  Simon  the  Cjrrenian,  who  bore
the  cross  on  which  the  atonement  was  to  be  made  for  sin  (Matt,  xxvii.  32  ;  see  Gal.  vi.
14 ;  Eph.  ii.  16 ;  CoL  ii.  14).  Jesus  was  hurried  along  to  his  execution  by  the  rabble
rather  than  by  any  officer  appointed  to  lead  him.  And  as  the  man  of  opportunity  was
to  be  unclean  until  he  had  bathed  his  flesh  and  washed  his  clothes,  so  will  the  blood
of  the  murder  of  Jesus  be  upon  the  Jews  until  it  is  cleansed  by  their  repentance  and
faith  (comp.  Matt,  xxvii.  25  and  Joel  iii.  21).  (5)  The  scapegoat  was  to  go  away
with  its  burden  into  a  "  a  land  not  inhabited,"  or  "  land  of  separation,"  a  "  wilder-
ness," a  place  in  which  it  might  be  lost  sight  of.  This  was  designed  to  teach  us  how
effectually  our  sins  are  borne  away  into  olilivion  by  Christ  (Ps.  ciii.  12  ;  Isa.  xxxviiL
17  ;  Micah  vii.  19  ;  John  i.  29  ;  Heb.  viii.  12).  To  set  forth  this  important  truth,  it  was
also  ordered  that  the  bodies  of  those  beasts  whose  blood  was  brought  into  the  sanctuary
by  the  high  priest  for  sin,  were  burnt  without  the  camp  (ver.  27 ;  Heb.  xiii.  11, 12).
So,  like  the  "  man  of  opportunity,"  whoever  burnt  the  sin  offering  became  unclean,
and  so  remained  until  he  had  washed  (see  Zech.  xiii.  1).  Have  we  been  purified  from
all  complicity  in  the  guilt  of  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus  ? — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  29 — 34. — The  Day  of  Atonement.  In  this  summary  we  have  the  design  of  th«
statute.

I.  Atonement  was  made  fob  the  tabebnaolb.  1.  The  work  of  Christ  affects  the
material  universe.  (1)  The  tabernacle,  we  have  seen  (see  on  vers.  1 — 4),  was  a  type  of
the  universe,  material  and  moral ;  and  that  the  holy  places  represented  the  heavens.
The  sprinkling  of  the  tabernacle  and  its  holy  places,  therefore,  teaches  that  the
imiverse  is  affected  by  the  atonement  of  Christ  (vers.  15 — 19,  33 ;  Heb.  ix.  12,  23,  24 ;
Rev.  v.  6).  (2)  Aaron,  as  the  type  of  Christ,  entered  into  the  holiest  place,  but  then
only  once  in  the  year,  nor  could  he  without  dying  open  an  entrance  into  it  even  for
his  son,  who,  in  his  turn,  could  only  enter  there  as  the  type  of  Christ.  This  showed
that,  while  the  tabernacle  stood,  the  way  into  the  holiest  was  not  made  manifest.  But
the  vail  was  not  only  rent  in  the  torn  flesh  of  Jesus,  so  that  he  himself  became  the
Way,  but  he  entered  heaven  himself  once  for  all  (Heb.  x.  19,  20).  (3)  Do  we  avail
ourselves  of  the  privileges  of  our  spiritual  priesthood  (Heb.  x.  21,  22)  ?  2.  The  work
of  Christ  influences  the  moral  universe.  (1)  Angels,  therefore,  manifested  interest  in
the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glories  that  should  follow  (Exod.  xxv.  20 ;  Dan.  viii.
13 ;  1  Pet.  i.  11—13).  The  sprinkling  of  the  holy  places  teaches  that,  through  the
atonement  of  Christ,  holy  angels  are  reconciled  to  us.  By  the  sanctifying  power  of  his
grace  we  are  brought  into  sympathy  with  them.  (2)  They  are  now,  therefore,  interested
in  the  welfare  of  the  Church  ;  and  are  themselves  a  part  of  the  great  family  of  Jesus
(see  Dan.  xii.  5,  6  ;  Eph.  i.  10;  iii.  10,  15 ;  Phil.  ii.  9—11).

II.  Atonement  was  made  fob  the  people.  1.  None  were  exempted  from  the  need
cf  it.  (1)  Aaron  and  his  house  were  in  the  same  category  with  the  people  in  this
respect.  Though  types,  they  were  yet  sinful  men.  (2)  But  through  the  blood-
shedding  of  this  day,  all  stood  "  clean  from  all  sins  before  the  Lord,"  t.e.  he  looked
upon  them  and  accepted  them  as  clean.  So  in  the  great  day  of  judgment  will  he
look  upon  us  and  accept  us  as  clean  through  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesuc


OH.  XVI.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  253

Christ  (Jude  24).  2.  It  was  a  general  expiation.  (1)  It  occurred  but  once  in  the
year.  It  was  to  atone  for  iniquities,  transgressions,  and  sins,  which,  through  igno-
rance, inadvertency,  or  perhaps  neglect,  had  not  been  atoned  for  by  ordinary  sacrifices.
Christ  not  only  atones  for  particular  sins,  but  for  sin  itself.  (2)  It  was  repeated  every
year.  The  utmost  the  Jewish  priest  could  do  was  to  call  sin  to  remembrance,  and
point  to  a  greater  than  himself,  who  needed  not  to  repeat  his  offering  (see  Heb.  x.
1-3).

III.  The  Dat  op  Atonement  was  to  be  kept  as  a  sabbath.  1.  In  it  they  were  to
afflict  their  souls.  (1)  (See  ver.  31 ;  also  Ps.  xxxv.  13 ;  Isa.  Iviii.  6,  7,  13  ;  Dan.  x.  3,
12.)  (2)  Resting  from  the  toil  of  the  world,  with  afSicted  souls,  while  their  sins  were
called  to  their  remembrance,  suggests  that  repentance  towards  God  must  accompany
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (Acts  xx.  21).  2.  In  it  they  were  to  rest.  (1)  This
suggested  relief  from  the  burden  of  sin.  What  a  gracious  sabbath  in  the  soul  is  the
sensie  of  sins  forgiven  1  (2)  1'his  would  be  all  the  more  expressive  upon  the  year  of
jubilee,  which,  every  forty-ninth  year,  came  in  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  (ch.  xxv.  9).
3.  The  time  was  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month.  (1)  Dr.  Lightfoot  computes  that
this  was  the  anniversary  of,  the  day  on  which  Moses  came  the  last  time  down  from  the
mount,  bringing  with  him  the  renewed  tables,  and  having  the  glory  shining  in  his  face.
(2)  Jesus  appears  literally  to  have  ascended  into  the  heavens,  as  his  type  passed  behind
the  vail,  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh  month  (see  reasoning  conducting  to  this
conclusion  in  the  appendix  of  Mr.  Guinness's  work  on  'The  Approaching  End  of  the
Age ').  It  was  the  time  of  the  vintage,  and  marks  the  fulness  of  the  atonement  (see
Mark  xii.  1 — 9  ;  comp.  Rev.  xix.  15).  (3)  It  may  prove  that,  on  some  anniversary  of
this  day,  Jesus  will  come  down  from  heaven,  in  a  glory  immeasurably  brighter  than
that  in  which  Moses  descended  from  the  mount,  to  set  up  his  kingdom  upon  this  earth
(see  Acts  i.  11).  The  vintage  of  his  wrath  upon  his  enemies  precedes  the  sabbath  of
his  kingdom,— -J.  A.  M.

Ver.  6. — A  solemn  ceremony.  There  was  risk  involved  in  drawing  nigh  to  the
manifested  presence  of  the  Deity.  God  desired  not  that  the  judgment  upon  Kadab
and  Abihu  should  be  repeated ;  rather  would  he  be  "  sanctified  "  by  reverent  approach
at  appointed  seasons  in  appointed  ways.  The  Almighty  can  cause  the  wrath  of  man
to  praise  him,  but  he  prefers  to  be  honoured  by  the  affection  that  seeks  diligently  to
observe  his  precepts.  Hence  the  directions  issued  concerning  the  great  Disiy  of  Atone-
ment, on  which  the  high  priest  was  to  come  into  closest  contact  with  Jehovah.  Let
us  consider  those  directions  so  far  as  they  related  to  the  purging  away  of  the  unclean-
ness  of  the  priests.

I.  The  fact  that  the  high  pbiest  was  to  make  atonement  fob  himself  and
HIS  HOUSE.  1.  It  prevented  pride,  keeping  alive  in  his  breast  a  sense  of  infirmity.  The
expression,  "  for  his  house,"  means  his  sons,  and  afterwards  all  who  were  of  the  priestly
order.  The  pomp  of  office  requires  some  guarantee  against  undue  exaltation.  A  lofty
position  is  apt  to  turn  a  weak  man's  head,  and  his  fall  becomes  the  more  calamitous.
It  is  certain  that  the  highest  in  the  Church  of  Christ  cannot  claim  exemption  from  sin.
2.  It  enkindled  sympathy  with  those /or  whom  he  had  to  exercise  his  sacred  functions
(see  this  beautifully  insisted  on  in  the  Epistle  to  Heb.  v.  2,  3).'  Note  likewise  the
superiority  of  Christ's  sympathy  because  of  exquisite  holy  tenderness  of  spirit,  un-
blunted  by  passion.  Jesus  Christ  acquired  a  fellow-feeling  by  his  humiliation  iu
becoming  man,  and  in  being  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are,  whereas  Aaron  was
exalted  to  be  a  high  priest,  and  needed  to  remember  his  humanity.  If  Aaron  forgot
this,  and  treated  the  worshippers  gruffly,  not  only  would  their  feelings  be  wounded,
but  his  intercession  would  be  so  much  the  less  efficacious,  for  even  under  the  Law
sentiment  was  requisite  as  well  as  symbol.  3.  Its  priority  to  the  atonement  made  for
the  people  emphasized  the  truth  that  only  the  cleansed  can  make  others  clean,  only  the
sinless  can  rightly  intercede  for  the  sinful.  Because  Jesus  Christ  is  holy,  he  sanctifies
his  followers.  He  who  was  eminently  forgiving-  could  pray  to  his  Father  to  forgive  his
murderers.  None  but  believers  saved  through  grace  should  preach  the  gospel.  4.  It
prophesied  the  eventual  supersession  of  Aaron's  order  by  a  perfect  priesthood.  There
was  evidence  of  defect  in  its  very  face.  Not  always  could  God  be  satisfied  with  or
man  rejoice  in  imperfect  mediation.     An  intercessor  needing  forgiveness  for  himself,  a


264  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xvi.  1—34.

purifier  who  had  constantly  to  cleanse  himself,  pointed  to  the  advent  of  One  who
should  have  no  need  to  offer  up  yearly  sacrifice  on  his  own  account,  whose  purity
should  be  real,  not  merely  ceremonial  and  Bymbolical.

II.  The  ceremony  enjoined.  1.  The  attire.  The  gorgeous  clothing  of  colour,
gold,  bells,  and  pomegranates,  was  laid  aside,  the  whole  body  washed  in  water,  and  a
garb  of  white  linen  donned.  It  was  a  day  in  which  the  fact  of  sin  was  prominent,  and
splendour  ill  befitted  such  an  occasion.  Besides,  the  high  priest  was  not  to  look  upon
himself  this  day  as  representing  Gh)d  to  the  people,  but  as  presenting  the  people  to
God,  and  a  humble  demeanour,  indicated  by  plain  attire,  was  appropriate  to  this
function.  Then,  too,  the  white  linen  spoke  of  the  holiness  which  the  day's  services
were  to  secure.  It  was  the  garment  of  salvation,  in  which  God  manifested  his  willing-
ness to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  people  from  their  gins.  2.  The  sacrifices,  a  sin  offering
and  a  burnt  offering.  Leaving  consideration  for  the  present  of  what  was  peculiar  to
the  day  in  the  former,  here  note  (1)  that  a  harmony  is  observable  in  all  God's  laws.
Whilst  this  sin  offering  had  its  special  rites,  in  other  respects  it  was  to  be  treated
according  to  the  general  rules — a  portion  consumed  on  the  altar,  and  the  carcase  burnt
outside  the  camp.  A  likeness  is  traceable  in  the  dealings  of  God,  whether  ordinary  or
extraordinary.  Underlying  features  are  discerned  similar  to  those  ascertained  in  other
departments.  Miracles  have  their  customary  analogies  and  laws;  the  operations  of
the  Spirit  proceed  on  familiar  lines  and  principles ;  the  worship  and  service  of  heaven
will  present  some  of  the  aspects  that  have  marked  the  gatherings  in  the  sanctuaries
of  earth.  (2)  Again  we  observe  how  purification  precedes  consecration.  The  burnt
offering  followed  the  sin  offering.  After  fresh  ablution,  the  high  priest  arrayed  himself
in  his  usual  vestments,  and  proceeded  to  place  the  holocaust  upon  the  altar,  to  be  the
emblem  of  unreserved  surrender  to  God's  glory.  Having  been  bought  with  the  precious
blood  of  Christ,  and  thus  redeemed  from  sin,  we  are  enabled  to  dedicate  ourselves  to
the  service  of  God.  It  is  in  vain  that  men  attempt  the  latter  without  the  former.
3.  The  entrance  ivto  the  holy  of  holies.  How  solemn  and  full  of  awe  the  moment  in
which  the  priest  drew  aside  the  vail  and  came  near  to  the  Divine  presence  1  He  was
alone  with  God  1  It  was  dark  but  for  the  mysterious  light  that  appeared  between  the
cherubim,  and  the  glowing  coals  on  which  he  put  the  incense.  Not  too  clearly  might
man  contemplate  even  "  the  cloud "  that  was  the  enwrapment  of  Jehovah ;  the  cloud
of  incense  must  cast  an  additional  covering  over  the  mercy-seat.  Not  lingering  to
indulge  profane  curiosity,  the  high  priest  sprinkled  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering  upon
the  front  of  the  mercy-seat,  and  upon  the  floor  of  the  holy  place.  What  a  view  was
thus  obtained  of  the  majesty  of  God!  what  thoughts  of  his  condescension  in  permitting
a  sinful  creature  to  have  such  access  to  him !  May  not  we  learn  the  impiety  of  seeking
to  pry  too  closely  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Divine  existence  ?  Prayer  becomes  us  in
appearing  before  him ;  then  do  we  know  most  of  God,  and  protect  ourselves  from  death.
And  the  prayer  is  made  efficacious  through  the  atoning  blood.  The  ark  containing
the  commandments  which  we  have  transgressed  is  covered  by  the  golden  plate  of
Divine  mercy,  and  that  mercy  is  everlastingly  secured  by  the  atonement  wherewith
it  is  honoured  and  appealed  to.

Conclusion.  The  privilege  of  the  high  priest  was  nothing  to  what  we  enjoy.  What
boldness  we  may  use  in  entering  into  the  holiest  by  the  blood  of  Jesus!  What
remission  of  sins,  what  freedom  from  guilt,  what  liberty  and  gladness  are  ours !  Our
High  Priest  has  entered  as  our  Forerunner,  not  for  us  merely,  into  heaven  itself  (Heb.
ix.  8).  As  Aaron  came  forth  from  the  sanctuary  to  the  Israelites,  so  shall  Christ
appear,  apart  from  sin,  to  them  that  wait  for  him  unto  salvation.  He  shall  "receive
us  unto  lumself." — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  29 — 34. — The  Day  of  Atonement.  This  was  a  day  second  to  none  in  import-
ance. The  rites  then  celebrated  were  the  most  awe-inspiring  of  all,  and  concerned
the  whole  nation,  which  stood  watching  outside  the  sacred  enclosure  of  the  tabernacle.
Not  the  slightest  deviation  from  the  established  ritual  was  allowable;  it  was  too
significant  and  solemn  in  character  to  permit  of  alteration.

I.  It  was  A  DAT  OF  UNiVERflAL  ATONEMENT.  The  high  prfcst  made  atonement  for
himself  and  the  order  of  priests,  for  the  people  of  the  congregation,  for  the  brazen
allar,  for  the  tabernacle,  and  for  the  sanctuary.     Thus  was  taught  the  truth  that  sin


OT.  xvL  1—34.1  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  -  255


mingles  with  the  holiest  of  men  and  their  deeds,  with  the  holiest  things  and  places.
Defilement  attaches  to  our  highest  acts  of  worship,  to  our  best  thoughts  and  pra3'ers.
The  tabernacle  needed  cleansing  because  of  the  "  uncleanness  "  of  the  people  (ver.  16)
among  whom  it  was  situated.  The  noblest  men  receive  some  degree  of  contamination
fi-om  their  surroundings,  and  the  purest  principles  have  some  alloy  adhering  to  them
through  use.  Mere  ignorance  of  specific  transgressions  was  not  sufBcient  to  obviate
the  necessity  of  atonement.  Sin  was  there,  though  they  should  discern  it  not.  "  I
know  nothing  against  myself,  yet  am  I  not  hereby  justified."  Could  any  spectacle
more  vividly  impress  upon  the  mind  the  reality  of  sin  and  the  need  of  its  removal  ?

II.  It  was  A  DAT  OF  HUMILIATION.  "  Ye  shall  afflict  your  souls."  The  word  implies
■elf-denial  and  consequent  fasting.  Not  lightly  was  sin  to  be  regarded !  We  are  ever
ready  to  extenuate  our  guilt  and  to  minimize  its  enormity.  The  transgressions  in  respect
of  which  a  sin  offering  was  prescribed  were  not  high-handed  apts  of  rebellion,  but  such
as  resulted  from  man's  frailty,  from  natural  depravity.  Yet  this  was  not  deemed  an
excuse  of  itself,  it  only  showed  the  importanpe  of  providing  for  its  atonement.  No  man
with  a  perception  of  the  magnitude  of  his  iniquity  can  retain  a  heart  at  ease,  a  con-
science at  rest.  If  there  be  such  quietude,  it  is  an  evidence  of  the  deadening  influence
of  sin.  Though  sin  has  been  overruled  to  the  glory  of  God,  it  is  in  itself  abominable,
and  must  be  viewed  with  abhorrence.   Well  may  we  bow  before  God  in  deepabasementl

m.  It  was  A  DAT  or  BEST.  No  work  of  any  kind  was  permitted — it  was  a  "  sabbath
of  sabbaths."  All  the  attention  of  the  people  was  concentrated  upon  the  ceremony
observed  by  the  high  priest.  What  a  rebuke  here  to  those  who  cannot  spare  time  to
think  of  their  state  before  God  I  Surely  the  transcendent  importance  of  religion  justifies
occasional  abstention  from  ordinary  labour.  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain
the  whole  world  and  forfeit  eternal  life  ?  The  constitution  of  our  minds  does  not  enable
us  to  think  seriously  of  many  things  at  once.  Let  not  the  concerns  of  the  soul  be
thereby  shelved.  If  we  will  not  afford  the  necessary  period  here,  there  will  come  a  long
season  of  forced  meditation,  when  the  subject  of  sin  and  its  forgiveness  shall  pierce  us
through  and  through  with  unutterable  remorse.

IV.  It  was  A  rixED  dat.  God,  in  his  merciful  forethought,  set  apart  the  tenth  day
of  the  seventh  month,  lest  the  Israelites  should  forget  the  duty  incumbent  upon  them.
There  are  many  advantages  in  having  a  time  determined  upon  for  religious  worship.
It  comes  regularly,  and  even  children  look  for  it.  It  prevents  excuses,  ensures  due
remembrance,  and  leads  to  fitting  preparation.  What  is  to  be  done  at  any  time  is
practically  for  no  time.  But  the  observance  of  such  days  needs  to  be  gviarded  against
degenerating  into  formalism  and  routine.  And  under  the  gospel  no  adventitious
sacramentarian  importance  must  be  annexed  to  these  seasons,  otherwise  we  fall  under
the  censure  of  the  apostle,  as  observing  "  days,  and  months,  and  seasons,  and  years."
Oh !  for  wisdom  to  distinguish  between  the  true  and  the  false  in  ordinances !

V.  It  was  A  DAT  OP  teablt  observance.  The  imperfection  of  other  sacrifices  and
purifications  was  thus  clearly  demonstrated,  for  however  attended  to  they  did  not
exclude  the  Day  of  Atonement.  And  the  yearly  repetition  of  the  day  itself  told  the  same
tale,  pointed  the  same  moral  of  the  impotence  of  the  sacrifices  of  the  Law  to  "  make  the
comers  thereunto  perfect "  (see  Heb.  x.  1 — 4).  The  day  served  its  purpose  indeed,  but
only  by  shadow  and  prefiguration.  Compared  with  the  Crucifixion,  it  was  but  a  "  splen-
did failure  "  to  pacify  the  conscience,  cleanse  the  heart,  and  quicken  the  life  of  those
who  participated  in  its  effects.

VI.  It  was  A  DAT  OF  HtJMILIATION  THAT  PREPARED  THE  WAY  FOB  A  JOYOUS  FESTIVAL,

After  five  days  commenced  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  distinguished  for  its  rejoicing  beyond
all  others.  The  ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  closed  with  a  burnt  offering,  in
which  the  people  symbolically  renewed  their  self-dedication  to  the  worship  and  service
of  God;  and  very  appropriately  the  chief  feature  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was  the
large  number  of  burnt  offerings  presented,  as  if  the  people  should  testify  their  gladness  at
the  thought  of  pardoned  iniquity,  and  of  belonging  to  a  God  who  so  graciously  blessed
them  and  granted  the  increase  of  their  fields.  The  man  whose  sia  is  forgiven  and  put
away  is  truly  happy.  He  can  devote  himself  to  God  with  glad  ardour.  The  cloud  that
brought  the  storm  and  darkness  has  passed  to  the  far  horizon,  and  now  it  is  brightened
with  many  hues  from  the  dazzling  sun.  Grief  on  account  of  sin  is  not  designed  to  mar
permanently  the  pleasure  of  our  days.  The  depression  is  succeeded  by  elevation  of  soul


266  •  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xvi.  1— 34.

The  surgeon's  lance  may  hare  pained  iis,  but  now  we  aie  tranquil  through  the  reliei
afforded.— S.  R.  A.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  peril  of  privilege.  Was  it,  then,  necessary  to  contemplate  the  possi-
bility of  Aaron's  dying  at  his  post  ?  Was  he,  the  chosen  servant  of  God,  who  had  been
60  solemnly  inducted  into  his  ofSce  (chs.  yiii.,  is.),  in  actual  peril  of  death  as  he
ministered  unto  the  Lord?  Could  he  draw  too  near  to  God,  so  as  to  endanger  his  very
life  ?  It  was  even  so.  His  two  sons,  Nadab  and  Abihu,  had  paid  the  extreme  penalty
of  their  sin  in  the  service  of  Jehovah  j  "  they  offered  before  the  Lord,  and  died  "  at  their
post.  And  if  Aaron  had  violated  the  precepts  here  given,  it  is  certain  that  from  "  the
cloud  upon  the  mercy  seat"  would  have  flashed  the  fatal  fire  which  would  have
destroyed  the  high  priest  himself.  We  are  not  afraid  now  (1)  of  such  condign  and
signal  punishment  as  befell  the  sons  of  Aaron :  God  does  not  visit  us  thus  in  these  days ;
nor  (2)  of  coming  too  often  or  drawing  too  near  to  God. .  The  barriers  which  then  gtood
between  the  manifested  Deity  and  the  common  people  are  removed.  We  may  "  come
at  all  times"  to  the  mercy-seat,  and  are  in  much  greater  peril  of  God's  displeasure  for
"  restraining  prayer,"  than  for  intniding  into  his  presence  without  need.  Nevertheless,
privilege  has  its  own  peculiar  peril,  and  the  penalty  is  very  serious :  it  is  death ;  not
physical,  but  spiritual,  eternal  death.    There  may  be  in  our  case —

L  Fbesuhftion  fbom  official  position.  It  is  only  too  possible  that  those  who
"  offer  before  the  Lord  "  may  come  to  regard  their  official  duties  as  things  which  avail
before  him,  independently  of  the  spirit  in  which  they  are  rendered.  "  Many  will  say,
....  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy  Name  . . .  and  in  thy  Name  done  many  wonderful
works  ?  And  then  will  1  profess  unto  them,  1  never  knew  you  "  (Matt.  vii.  22,  23).  Many
may  say,  "  Have  we  not  preached  thy  gospel,  taught  thy  truth,  evangelized  in  thy
Name?"  etc.,  and— trusting  in  their  official  works  instead  of  looking  to  their  inner  spirit,
and  instead  of  attaching  themselves  to  Christ  in  penitence  and  faith — be  condemned  at
his  bar.

n.  FoEMALiSM  FBOM  FAMHiiABiTT.  It  is  all  too  possible  for  those  who  "offer  before
the  Lord  "  to  die  a  spiritual  death,  because  they  lose  all  real  and  living  appreciation  of
the  things  they  say  and  do.  There  is  a  subtle  but  powerful  tendency  in  the  human
mind  to  do  mechanically  and  unintelligently  that  with  which  it  is  exceedingly  familiar.
Not  even  the  most  sacred  words  or  solemn  rites  are  proof  against  it.  We  may,  at  the
desk,  or  pulpit,  or  even  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  take  words  upon  our  lips  which  find
no  answer  in  the  soul.  We  may  be  obnoxious  to  our  Lord's  reproach  (Matt.  xv.  8).
To  use  sacred  language  without  sacred  feeling  is  to  move  away  from  the  fountain  of  life ;
to  have  entered  the  precincts  of  habitual  formalism  is  to  have  passed  the  outer  portals
of  the  kingdom  of  death.

III.  Disobedience  fbom  disbesabd  to  the  wnx  of  God.  We  are  not  bound  to
a  rigid  correspondence  with  every  minute  New  Testament  practice.  There  are  some
matters  in  which  changed  circumstances  demand  other  methods.  But  we  are  bound  to
search  the  Scriptures  to  find  the  will  of  our  Lord  in  the  worship  we  render  and  the  work
we  do  for  him.  If  we  follow  nothing  better  than  "  the  traditions  of  men,"  or  our  own
tastes  and  inclinations,  we  may  find  ourselves  in  the  wilderness — a  long  way  from  the
water  of  life.

Whatever  position  we  occupy  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  however  much  of  "  the  honour
that  Cometh  from  man "  we  may  enjoy,  it  is  essential  that  we :  1.  Cherish  the  spirit
of  humility,  and  exercise  a  living  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Realize  the  truth
we  speak,  and  spiritually  participate  in  the  services  we  conduct.  3.  Have  supreme
regard  to  the  will  of  our  Master,  seeking  to  learn  that  will  as  devoutly,  patiently,
studiously,  as  we  can.  These  things  must  we  do  "  that  we  die  not "  before  the
Lord.— O.

Vers.  2 — 17. — Type  and  antitype— the  priest.  The  high  priest  offering  sacrifices  for
the  sin  of  the  people  was  a  clear  type  of  "  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession,"  who
offered  the  one  sacrifice  for  sin,  who  became  the  Propitiation  for  our  sin,  even  for  the
sins  of  the  whole  world  (1  John  ii.  2).    We  have —

L  FODB  FiATHBES  OF  BEBBMBLAUOB.  1.  Aaron  Botcd  Under  Divine  direction.  He
was  appointed  by  God  to  take  the  post  he  took,  and  was  charged  to  do  everything  h«


OH.  XVL 1— 34,]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  26T

did.  He  might  not  deviate  in  any  particular  from  the  instructions  which  came  from
heaven.  "  Aaron  shall "  is  the  continually  recurring  strain  ;  almost  every  other  versa
contains  this  formula;  departure  from  direction  was  utter  failure  in  his  work  and
death  to  himself  (ver.  2).  2.  Aaron  divested  himself  of  his  rich  attire — he  yran  not
'.he  ephod  with  precious  stones,  nor  the  mitre  glittering  with  golden  crown ;  this  splendid
ittire  he  laid  by  on  this  occasion,  and  he  put  on  the  simple  linen  coat,  and  was  girded
Tith  a  linen  girdle,  and  wore  a  linen  mitre  (ver.  4).  3.  Aaron  did  his  priestly  work
ilone.  "  There  shall  be  no  man  in  the  tabernacle  when  he  goeth  in  .  .  .  until  he
jome  out "  (ver.  17).  No  other  foot  but  his  might  enter  within  the  vail ;  no  other  hand
tfut  his  might  sprinkle  the  blood  on  the  mercy-seat.  4.  Aaron  bore  a  heavy  burden
for  the  people.  "  So  laborious  and  trying  was  his  work  that,  after  it  was  over,  the
people  gathered  round  him  with  sympathy  and  congratulation  that  he  was  brought
through  it  in  safety."  So  Christ,  the  great  antitype,  (1)  was  appointed  of  God  (Heb,
V.  4,  5) ;  he  was  "  the  Anointed,"  the  Sent  One ;  he  "  came  to  do  his  Father's  will,"
and  though  under  no  such  minute  commandments  as  those  which  regulated  the  actions
of  Aaron,  he  was  ever  consulting  the  will  of  the  Father,  doing  "nothing  of  himself "
(John  V.  19 — 30 ;  viii.  28 ;  ix.  4).  (2)  Divested  himself  of  the  robe  of  his  divinity,
and  put  on  the  frail  garment  of  our  humanity  (John  i.  14 ;  Heb.  ii.  14 ;  Phil.  ii.  7Y
(3)  "  Trod  the  winepress  alone."  "  Ye  shall  leave  me  alone,"  said  he  (John  xvi.  32).
and  alone  he  agonized  in  the  garden,  and  alone  he  suffered  and  died  on  the  cross.  His
was  a  most  lonely  life,  for  not  even  his  most  loved  disciple  understood  the  meaning  of
his  mission ;  and  his  was  a  lonely  death,  none  of  those  who  stood  weeping  by  being
able  to  take  any  part  in  the  sacrificial  work  he  then  wrought  out.  (4)  Bore  so  heavy
•  burden  for  us  that  his  heart  broke  beneath  it.

II.  Three  points  of  contrast.  1.  Aaron  was  compelled  to  present  offerings  for
himself  (vers.  6,  11 — 14).  2.  Had  to  present  an  offering  that  was  provided  for  him  ;  a
bullock  had  to  be  brought  from  the  herds  of  Israel  (ver.  6),  or  he  would  have  been  a
priest  without  an  offering.  3.  Could  offer  no  availing  sacrifice  for  deliberate  transgres-
sions :  presumptuous  sin  had  already  paid  the  penalty  of  death.  But  Christ  Jesus,
our  Great  High  Priest,  (1)  needed  not  to  present  any  sacrifice  for  himself;  the  holy,
harmless,  unclofiled  One,  separate  from  sinners,  did  not  need  to  offer  up  sacrifices  first
for  his  own  sins  (Heb.  viL  26,  27).    (2)  Had  no  need  to  procure  a  victim,  for  himself

"...  came  down  to  be
The  offering  and  the  priest."

He  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself  (Heb.  ix.  26).  (3)  Offered  a
sacrifice  which  avails  for  all  sin.  His  blood  "  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  "  (1  John  i.  7  ;
1  Cor.  vL  11 ;  Eph.  L  7  ;  Heb.  ix.  14 ;  vii.  25,  etc.).— C.

Vers.  7 — 10,  15,  21,  22. — Type  and  antitype — the  offering.  The  most  striking
feature  of  the  whole  service  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement  was  the  action  of  the  high
priest  in  regard  to  the  two  goats  brought  to  the  tabernacle  door  (ver,  7).  They  clearly
point  to  that  "  Lamb  of  God  "  who  came  to  "  take  away  the  sin  of  the  world  "  (John
i.  29).  That  there  were  two  goats  rather  than  one  presents  no  difSculty  at  all ;  there
might  well  have  been  more  than  one  to  typify  the  Sacrifice  which  they  foreshadowed.
We  learn —

L  That  God  adihts  vicaeious  suFFEBiNa  into  his  biqhteous  bealm.  The  inno-
cent goat  would  shed  its  blood,  would  pour  out  its  life,  that  the  guilty  human  souls
might  not  die,  but  live.  It  was  a  Divine  appointment,  and  shows  clearly  that  the
propitiatory  element  was  allowed  by  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  The  vicarious  principle
has  a  large  place  in  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth.  Involuntarily  and  also  voluntarily
we  suffer  for  others  and  others  for  us.  Man  bears  the  penal  consequences  of  his
brother's  sin.  He  does  so  when  he  cannot  avoid  so  doing  ;  and  he  does  so  frequently
with  his  own  full  consent ;  indeed,  by  going  far  out  of  his  way  on  purpose  to  bear  it.
Ticarious  suffering  runs  through  the  whole  human  economy.  But  there  is  only  One
who  could  possibly  take  on  himself  the  penalty  of  the  world's  sin — only  One  on  whom
could  possibly  be  "  laid  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  That  one  is  the  spotless  "  Lamb  of
God,"  that  Son  of  God  who  became  sin  for  man ;  he,  "  for  the  suffering  of  death  wa«
made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,"  and  took  on  him  a  mortal  form.    "  Surely  he

LEVITICUS.  B


268  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xvi.  1— 34

hath  borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows ;  ...  he  was  wounded  for  our  trans-
gressions, he  was  bniiseil  for  our  iniquities,"  etc.  (Isa.  liii.  4,  5 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24).

IL  That  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  avails  to  remove  completely  all  condemna-
tion. When  the  children  of  Israel  saw  the  live  goat,  over  whose  head  their  sins  had
been  confessed,  being  led  awtiy  into  the  waste  wilderness  where  it  would  never  more
be  seen  (ver.  22),  they  had  a  very  vivid  assurance  made  through  their  senses  to  their
soul  that  "  their  transgressions  were  forgiven,  and  their  sins  covered."  No  such
dramatic  assurance  have  we  now,  but  we  may  have  the  utmost  confidence  that  our
sins  are  forgiven  us  "  for  his  Name's  sake  ; "  that  "  there  is  no  condemnation  to  us  who
are  in  Christ  Jesus,"  to  us  "  who  have  redemption  through  his  blood,  even  the  forgive-
ness of  sins  "  (Acts  xiii.  39 ;  Eom.  v.  9).  Trusting  in  the  slain  Lamb  of  Grod,  we  m»y
see,  by  the  eye  of  faith,  all  our  guilt  and  all  our  condemnation  borne  away  into  th»
land  of  fcirgetfulness,  where  God  will  remember  it  no  more  for  ever.

III.  That  no  sacrifice  will  avail  anything  without  activb  pabtioipation
ON  ODR  PART.  TJseless  and  unavailing  altogether  the  slaying  of  the  one  goat  and  the
sending  away  of  the  other  without  the  act  of  confession  and  the  imposition  of  hands
by  the  high  priest  (ver.  21) ;  this  part  of  the  solemn  ceremonial  was  essential ;  apart
from  that  everything  would  have  been  vain.  And  without  our  personal  spiritual  partici-
pation the  sacrifice  of  the  Lamb  of  God  will  be  all  in  vain.  1.  There  must  be  the  con-
fession of  our  sin ;  a  confession  of  sin  which  springs  from  contrition  for  sin,  and  is
attended  by  a  determination  to  put  all  sin  away  (repentance).  2.  Faith  in  the  Divine
Eedeemev.  "  Our  faith  must  lay  its  hand  on  that  dear  head  of  his."  3.  And  this
must  be  the  action  of  our  own  individual  soul.  Whatever  guidance  and  encouragement
we  may  gain  from  the  ministers  of  Christ,  we  ourselves  must  repent  and  believe.— C.

Vers.  29 — 31. — The  great  anniversary — sacred  seasons.  The  Jews  had  other  special
days  beside  the  Day  of  Atonement.  They  had  their  weekly  sabbath,  the  new  moon
sacrifices,  their  festivals  or  "  holy  convocations "  (ch.  xxiii.),  etc.  But  this  was  the
"  grand  climacteric ; "  there  were  "  high  days  "  during  the  year,  but  this  was  the  day  of
the  year  to  every  devout  Israelite.  No  other  was  comparable  to  it  in  solemnit}'  and
sacred  importance.  Several  features  of  peculiar  interest  combined  to  raise  it  above  all
other  occasions.  1.  It  was  the  one  annual  solemnity  prescribed  by  the  Law.  2.  It
was  a  day  of  perfect  rest  from  labour  (vers.  29,  31).  3.  It  was  the  one  day  of  universal
fasting  enjoined  or  encouraged  in  the  Law  (vers.  29,  31).  4.  It  was  a  day  of  self-
examination  and  spiritual  humiliation  (ver.  29).  5.  On  that  day  the  high  priest  went
perilously  near  to  the  manifested  presence  of  God — then,  and  then  only,  entering
within  the  vail,  and  standing  in  presence  of  the  mercy-seat  and  the  mysterious,  awful
Shechinah  (ver.  12).  6.  On  that  day  unusual  sacrifices  were  offered  unto  the  Lord,  and
a  striking  spectacle  witnessed  by  the  whole  camp,  the  live  goat  being  led  away  into
the  wilderness  (ver.  21).  7.  Then,  also,  the  people  felt  themselves  in  an  unusually
blessed  relation  to  Jehovah — free,  as  at  no  other  time,  from  all  their  sin ;  they  were
"  clean  from  all  their  sins  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  30).  We  may,  therefore,  well  pro-
nounce this  the  great  anniversary  of  the  Hebrew  Church.  It  must  have  had  hallowing
influences  in  both  directions  of  time :  it  must  have  been  anticipated  with  interest  and
awe;  it  must  have  left  behind  it  sacred  shadows  of  holy  feeling — of  unity,  reverence,
joy  in  God.     The  holding  of  this  anniversary  "  by  statute  for  ever ''  suggests  to  us —

I.  That  in  Christ  Jesus  the  observance  of  days  is  an  optional  thing.
There  are  valid  grounds  for  believing  that  it  is  the  will  of  Christ  we  should  observe
the  Lord's  day  as  the  disciples  of  him  who  is  "  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life."  But
the  enforcement  of  the  observance  of  sacred  days  by  statute  binding  on  the  Christian
conscience  is  expressly  disallowed  (Gal.  iv.  10,  91 ;  Rom.  xiv.  5,  6  ;  CoL  ii.  16).

II.  That  it  is  wise,  as  a  matter  of  Christian  liberty,  to  observe  some
ANNIVERSARIES.  God  has,  in  his  providential  arrangements,  made  certain  points  to  be
regularly  recurring.  Time  is  so  measured  that  we  must  be  periodically  reminded  of
interesting  events.  God  put  the  lights  in  the  firmament  in  order  that  they  might  not
only  "  give  light  upon  the  earth,"  but  that  they  might  be  "  for  signs  and  for  seasons,
mnd  for  days  and  for  years  "  (Gen.  i.  14).  1.  A  Church  should  observe :  (1)  the  day  of  its
institution,  OT  (2)  the  day  on  which  it  was  conscious  of  revival,  or  (3)  any  particular
d*y  which  is,  to  itself,  fruitful  of  sacred  suggestions.     2.  Individual  Christian  men  may


«jn.  XTL  1— 34.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  258

observe  (1)  the  last  day  of  the  old  year,  (2)  the  first  day  of  the  new  year,  (3)  th«
•nnlversary  of  their  birthday,  or  (4)  the  anniversary  of  the  day  which  has  the  most
liallowed  associations  to  their  mind, — the  day  of  religious  decision  or  that  of  reception
Into  the  visible  Church  of  Christ.

IIL  That  therb;  is  a  twofold  usb  wb  mat  make  of  stroH  anniversaries.
L  Solemn  retrospect;  with  careful  retreading  of  past  experiences,  free  and  full  acknow-
ledgment of  God's  goodness  and  our  own  manifold  shortcomings,  simple  faith  in  the
Divine  promise  of  forgiveness  through  Christ.  2.  Thoughtful  forecast ;  with  studious
«onsideration  of  what  may  yet  be  done  for  the  Master  and  mankind,  devout  recon-
aecration  of  self  to  the  service  of  the  Saviour,  believing  prayer  for  Divine  guidance  and
guardianship  through  future  years. — C.

Vers.  33,  34:.-~The  imperfect  ritual  and  the  All-aufflcient  Sacrifice.  If  we  place  our-
selves at  the  standpoint  of  a  devout  and  inquiring  Hebrew  worshipper,  we  can  suppose
ourselves  to  ask,  on  the  morning  and  evening  of  the  Day  of  Atonement —

I.  Why  this  austjal  ceremony?  Have  not  numerous  sacrifices  been  presented
all  the  year  round  without  intermission  ?  Have  not  daily  ofiferings  been  laid  on  the
altar,  morning  and  evening?  and  double  sacrifices  every  sabbath  day?  and  special
oCFerings  every  month  ?  And  have  not  the  people  been  bringing  their  presentations,
from  flock  and  herd,  as  piety  has  dictated,  or  special  circumstances  have  required,  all
through  the  seasons?  Have  not  these  "come  up  with  acceptance"  before  the  altar  of
Jehovah  ?  Has  not  sin  been  atoned  for  ?  What  need,  then,  of  these  annual  solemnities,
af  this  very  special  ceremony  at  the  tabernacle  ?

And  if  to  such  reflecting  worshipper  it  should  occur  that  the  blood  of  lambs  and
bullocks,  of  doves  and  pigeons,  was  no  real  substitute  for  the  forfeited  life  of  men,
^rould  he  not  take  a  further  step  in  his  inquiry,  and  ask —

II.  Can  this  suffice,  all  other  failing?  What  is  there  in  the  ceremonies  of
iliis  sacred  day  which  will  avail,  if  all  the  year's  sacrifices  are  insufScient  ?  Will  the
"^t  that  one  man  will  stand  in  the  inner  instead  of  the  outer  side  of  a  separating  vail,
and  sprinkle  blood  on  one  article  of  tabernacle  furniture  rather  than  another, — will  this
make  the  difference  between  the  adequacy  and  the  inadequacy  of  animal  sacrifice  for
liuman  sin  ?  Will  the  ceremony  of  slaying  one  goat  and  leading  the  other  out  into  the
-wilderness  constitute  the  one  needful  thing  that  is  wanted  to  remove  the  guilt  of  s
aation?  Surely  something  more  and  something  greater  is  wanted  stilL  To  these
suggested  and  probable  inquiries  of  the  Hebrew  worshipper,  we  reply —

III.  These  typical  solemnities  did  not  suffice.  It  was  a  striking  mark  of
their  insufficiency  that  the  very  altar  and  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  even  the
"  holy  sanctuary  "  itself  (ver.  33 ;  see  ver.  16  and  Heb.  iv.  21),  had  to  be  "  atoned  for."
Even  they  became  affected  by  the  "  uncleanness  of  the  children  of  IsraeL"  Hero  was
imperfection  legibly  written  on  the  holy  things.  And  our  instructed  reason  tells  us
that  these  things  were  inherently  unsatisfactory.  "  It  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of
fculls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sins  "  (Heb.  x.  4).  Such  "  gifts  and  sacrifices  could
not  make  him  that  did  the  service  perfect "  (Heb.  ix.  9  ;  vii.  18,  19).  They  only  served
€or  a  time,  and  drew  their  temporary  sufficiency  from  the  fact  that  they  were  to  be  com-
pleted and  fulfilled  in  one  Divine  Offering,  which  should  be  presented  in  "  the  fulness
<of  time."     And  thus  we  come  to —

IV.  The  one  All-availing  Sacrifice.  In  the  one  Great  Sacrifice  at  Calvary,  the
<ieath  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  there  is  everything  which  a  guilty  race  requires.  1.
Uo  need,  now,  for  annual  sacrifices ;  "  in  those  sacrifices  there  is  a  remembrance  again
jnade  of  sins  every  year  "  (Heb.  x.  3).  "  But  this  man,  after  he  had  offered  one  sacrifice
fcr  sins  for  ever,"  etc.,  "by  one  offering  he  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are
sanctified"  (Heb.  x.  14).  Not  "once  a  year,"  but  once  for  all,  once  for  everl  2.  No
aeed  for  purifying  the  holy  place.  He  hath  passed  into  the  heavens ;  has  sat  down  at
-the.  right  hand  of  God.  The  "  uncleanness  "  of  man  cannot  stain  his  throne  of  grace.
3.  No  question  as  to  the  efficacy  of  his  atonement.  "  If  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,"
«tc.  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14).  4.  No  limit  to  the  application  of  his  atoning  death.  The
<sroes_  of  Christ  is  that  on  which  not  merely  "  all  the  people  of  the  congregation  "  (ver.
-33),  out  all  human  souls  in  every  land  and  through  every  age  may  look,  in  which  they
.may  glory,  at  which  they  may  leave  their  sin  and  fear,  from  which  they  may  daio
iiieir  inextinguishable  hope  and  their  everlasting  joy, — 0.


200


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  xvn.  1—18


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTBB  XVIL
ThlB  chapter  finds  its  natural  place  here
as  the  supplement  of  all  that  has  gone  before.
The  first  part  6f  the  book  contains  the  insti-
tution or  regulation  of  the  sacrificial  system
(chs.  L— vii.).  This  chapter,  therefore,  which
gives    injunctions  as  to  the    place   where
all  sacrifices  are  to  be  offered,  might  well,
as  Knobel  has  remarked,   have  taken  its
place  as  ch.  viii.    The  second  part  contains
the  institution  of  the  hereditary  priesthood
(chs.  viii. — X.).  This  chapter,  therefore,  which
forbids  for  the  future  aU  offering  of  sacri-
fices in  the  open  fields,  and  commands  that
they  shall  be  brought  "  unto  the  priest,  anto
the  door  of  the  talernaele  of  the  congregation,"
would  still  more  fitly  find  its  place  after
oh.  X.     But  the  first  two  sections  of  tlie
third  part  (chs.  xi. — xvi.)  contain  the  laws
and  rules  respecting  cleansing  from  cere-
monial   defilement,  and  tliis  cleansing  is
to   be    mainly  effected  by  the    means  of
sacrifice.    Therefore  the  rule  as  to  the  place
where   sacrifice   shall  be  offered   is   most
naturally  given    here,  where  it  is   found
(ch.  xvii.),  forming  a  close  not  only  to  Parts
I.  and  II.,  but  also  to  the  two  sections  of  Part
III.,  which  contain  the  regulations  as  to
purification  by  sacrifice.    It  is  altogetljer  a
mistake  to  make  a  Second  Book  begin  with
oh.  xvii.,  as  is  done  by  Lange  and  Keil.

The  first  injunction  contained  in  the
chapter  (vers.  2 — ^7)  is  very  generally  under-
stood to  mean  that  while  the  Israelites  lived
in  the  wilderness,  all  animals  fit  for  sacrifices
which  were  slain  for  food  should  be  so  far
Tegaided  as  sacrifices  that  they  should  be
brought  to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  and
slain  in  the  court,  an  offering  of  the  blood
and  fat  being  made  to  the  Lord.  Thus  the
ordinary  slaughtering  of  domestic  animals,  it
is  said,  became  sanctified,  and  the  dignity  of
life  made  clear :  God  is  the  Lord  of  life ;  he
gave  it,  and  it  must  not  be  taken  away
unless  the  blood,  which  is  the  vehicle  of
life,  be  offered  to  him  by  being  presented
sacrificially  on  his  altar,  or,  where  this  is
Bot  possible,  as  in  the  case  of  wild  animals,
by  being  reverently  covered  with  earth.
Such  •  rule  as  this  respecting  the  slaughter-


ing of  domestic  animals,  difBcuU  to  carry
out  in  any  case,  would  become  impossible  to
obey  after  the  camp  had  been  expanded
into  a  nation,  and  it  is  therefore  supposed
that  it  is  by  anticipation  repealed  in  Dent
xii.  15  ("  Notwithstanding  thou  mayest  kill
and  eat  flesh  in  all  thy  gates,  whatsoevei
thy  soul    lusteth  after,  according   to   the
blessing  of  the  Lord  thy  God  which  he
hath  given  thee  "),  while  the  regulations  as
to  restricting  the  offering  of  sacrifice  to  the
court  of  the  temple,  and  as  to  pouring  blood
on  the  earth,  are  there  emphatically  enforced.
This  view  of  the  text  is  erroneous,  and  must
be    rejected.      The    injunction   does    not
refer  to  the  ordinary  slaughter  of  domestic
animals    for  food,  but   only  to  sacrifices.
Hitherto  it  had   been  the  right  and  the
duty  of  the  head  of  each  family  to  offer
sacrifice  for  his  household,  and  this  he  did
wherever  he  thought  proper,  according  to
the   ancient  patriarchal  practice,  and  most
naturally  in  the  open  fields.    This  duty  and
liberty  is    now    abolished.      The   Aaronie
priesthood  has  superseded  the  older  priestly
system,  and  henceforth  every  sacrifice  is  to
be   offered  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,
and  by  the  hand  of  Aaron's  sons.     The
change  was  most  momentous,  but  it  could
not  but  be  made  after  the  consecration  of
Aaron  and  his  sons  for  an  hereditary  priest-
hood,  A  second  reason  for  the  change  being
made  was  the  immediate  danger  to  which  a
rude  and  Superstitious  people  was  exposed,
of  offering  the  parts  which  they  were  bound
to  set  aside  for  the  altar  of  God  to  some  other
deity,  if  God's  priests  and  altar  were  not  at
hand.    The  imaginations  of  the  Israelites,
corrupted  by  their  stay  in  Egypt,  peopled
the  fields  with  beings  answering  to  the  Pa»
and  the  satyrs  of  the  Greeks ;  and  to  these
the  sacred  portions  of  the  animals  slaughtered
elsewhere  than  at  the  tabernacle  were  offered.

Ver.  3. — What  man  soever  there  be  of  the
house  of  Israel,  that  killeth  an  ox,  or  lamb,
or  goat.  The  use  of  the  word  killeth,  instead
of  sacrijiceih,  is  one  of  the  chief  causes  of
the  error  referred  to  above,  which  represents
this  command  as  applying  to  the  slaughtei
of  domestic  animals.  But  it  is  always  per-
missible to  use  a  generic  in  place  of  »
specific  term,  and  its  use  proves  nothing


«H.  XVII.  1 — 16.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


261


Probably  the  sacred  writer  uses  it  as  a  less
eacred  term,  and  therefore  more  suitable  to
(jacrifices  offered  to  the  spirits  of  the  fields
•nd  woods.  If  ordinairy  slaughtering  were
meant,  there  is  no  reason  why  pigeons  and
tnrtle-doves  should  not  be  added  to  the  oz,
or  lamb,  or  goat.  That  every  ox,  or  larrib,  or
goat,  to  be  killed  in  the  camp,  or  .  .  .  out  of
the  camp,  for  the  food  of  more  than  600,000
men,  should  be  brought  to  so  confined  a
•pace  as  the  court  of  the  tabernacle  for
daughter,  where  the  animals  for  the  daily,
weekly,  annual,  and  innumerable  private
flacrifices  were  also  killed,  appears  almost
incredible  in  itself.  How  would  the  drivers
have  made  their  way  into  it?  and  what
would  have  soon  been  the  state  of  the
eourt?  It  is  true  that  animal  food  was
not  the  staple  sustenance  of  the  Israelites
in  the  wilderness;  but  not  unfrequently,
after  a  successful  war  or  raid,  there  must
have  been  a  vast  number  of  cattle  killed
for  feasting  or  reserved  for  subsequent
«ating.

Ver.  4. — In  case  a  man  offers  a  sacrifice
elsewhere  than  at  thedoor  of  the  tabernacle
of  the  congregation,  .  .  .  blood  shall  be  im-
puted nnto  that  man;  that  is,  it  shall  no
longer  be  regarded  as  a  sacrifice  at  all,  but
•n  unjustifiable  shedding  of  blood,  for  which
lie  is  to  be  out  off  from  among  his  people,
that  is,  excommunicated.

Ver.  5.— To  the  end  that  the  children  of
Israel  may  bring  their  sacrifices.  This  pas-
sage tells  us  the  purpose  of  the  previous
command :  it  is  to  prevent  sacrifices  being
aacrifioed  (the  word  is  twice  used  in  the
original)  in  the  open  field,  or  anywhere  else
than  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle.  It  follows
that  the  command  refers  to  sacrifice,  not  to
mere  slaughtering.  Clark,  taking  the
opposite  view  of  the  command,  is  obliged
to  change  the  translation,  scuyrificea  whith
they  offer  in  (he  open  field,  into  "  beasts  for
•laughter  which  they  now  slaughter  in  the
open  field  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ') ;  but
fae  has  no  authority  for  doing  so.  Zdbach
means  always,  in  the  Pentateuch,  to  slay  in
«acrlfice.  These  field  sacrifices,  when  offered
to  the  Lord  in  the  proper  place  and  with
the  proper  ceremonies,  would  become  peace
offerings  unto  the  lord.

Ver.  6. — The  priest,  that  is,  the  Levitical
priest,  is  henceforth  to  sprinkle  the  blood
apon  the  altar  of  the  Lord  .  .  .  and  bum  the
fat  for  a  sweet  savour,  which  were  the  two
|iarts  of  the  sacrifice  which  were  essentially
priestly  in  their  churacter.  The  old  priestly
function  of  the  head  of  the  family  is  dis-
«Uowed.

Ver.  7.— And  they  sha'l  no  more  offer  their
aacriflces  unto  devils,  after  whom  they  have
^ne  a  whoring.  The  word  rightly  trans-
lated deviU  memns,  literally,  shaggy  goats


(see  2  Chron.  xi.  15;  Isa.  xiii.  21 ;  xxxiv.  U;
where  the  word  occurs).  It  is  generally  sup-
posed that  the  Israelites  borrowed  their  wor
ship  of  the  goat-like  spirits  of  the  woods
and  fields  from  Egypt.  That  goat-worship
prevailed  there  in  a  very  foul  shape  we  know
(Herod.,  ii.  42),  but  sacrifices  in  the  opeo
fields  are  rather  a  Persian  habit  (Herod..
i.  132).  Pan-worship,  however,  was  common
to  most  if  not  to  all  agricultural  nations.
The  injunction  which  follows.  This  shall
be  a  statute  for  ever  nnto  them  throughout
their  generations,  which  cannot  be  confined
to  the  last  few  words  or  verses,  shows  that
the  command  of  ver.  3  refers  to  sacrifices,  not
to  ordinary  slaughtering.  Had  slaughtering
been  meant,  the  statute  could  not  have  been
intended  to  be  more  than  temporary  in  its
obligation.  The  importance  attributed  to
the  regulation  is  further  shown  by  the
declaration  previously  made,  that  whoever
transgressed  it  should  be  cut  off  from  among
his  people,  or  excommunicated.  In  fact,  it
makes  an  era  in  the  history  of  the  chosen
people.  The  old  patriarchal  priesthood
having  ceased,  and  the  Aaronio  priesthood
substituted  for  it,  the  tabernacle  is  ap-
pointed to  serve  as  a  religious  centre  to  the
race.  Whenever,  from  this  time  onwards,
sacrifices  were  offered,  without  offence,  elsft-
where  tlian  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle  or
temple,  as  by  Samuel  (see  1  Sam.  xiii.  8),
and  by  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  32),  it  was  done
by  the  direct  order  or  dispensation  of  God.

Vers.  8,  9. — So  essential  is  the  regulation
to  the  maintenance  of  the  Israelitish  polity,
that  it  is  extended  to  the  strangers  which
sojourn  among  them,  not  confined  to  those
who  were  of  the  house  of  Israel;  and  the
penalty  of  excommunication  is  appointed
for  both  classes  alike  in  case  of  disobedience.
It  may  be  noticed  that  this  verse  assumes
that  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings  are
offered  by  the  strangers  that  sojourn  among
them,  as  well  as  by  the  Israelites  by  race.

Vers.  10,  11. — The  appointment  made
just  above,  that  the  blood  of  all  animals
slain  in  sacrifice  should  be  offered  to  the
Lord  on  his  altar  in  the  court  of  the  taber-
nacle, leads  naturally  to  a  reiteration  of  the
prohibition  of  the  eating  of  blood,  and  a
statement  of  the  reason  of  that  prohibition.
"But  flesh  with  the  life  thereof,  which  is
the  blood  thereof,  shall  ye  not  eat,"  was  given
as  a  command  to  Noah  (Gen.  ix.  4).  It  has
already  been  repeated  twice  in  the  Book  of
Leviticus  (chs.  iii.  17;  vii.  26),  and  it  is
still  again  found  in  ch.  xix.  26 ;  Deut.  xii.
16 ;  XV.  23.  The  present  is  the  locus  clussicus
which  explains  the  earnestness  with  which
the  rule  is  enforced.  It  begins  with  an  ex-
tension of  the  obligation  from  the  Israelites
to  the  sojourners  among  them,  and  with  a
solemn  declaration  that,  in  case  of  trans-


262


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  xvn.  1 — Iti


gression,  (Sod  will  take  into  his  own  hands
the  pnmshment  of  the  offenders ;  not  only
is  he  to  be  cut  off  or  excommunicated  by
political  or  ecclesiastical  authority,  but  God
himself  will  set  his  face  against  that  soul
that  eateth  blood,  and  wiU  out  him  off  from
among  his  people,  by  death,  or  such  means
as  he  chooses  to  adopt.  Then  follows  the
reason  for  the  prohibition.  For  the  life  of
the  flesh  is  in  the  blood.  The  blood  may
not  be  eaten  because  it  is  the  vehicle  of  life,
literally,  the  soul  of  the  fleeh,  that  is,  it  is
the  seat  o/  the  animal  life  of  the  body.
"  It  is  the  fountain  of  life,"  says  Harvey ;
"the  flist  to  live,  tlie  last  to  die,  and  the
primary  seat  of  the  animal  soul;  it  lives
and  is  nourished  of  itself,  and  by  no  other
part  of  the  human  body."  In  consequence
of  possessing  this  character,  it  is  to  be  re-
served, to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls
upon  the  altar ;  for  thus  only  blood  became
qualified  for  the  purpose  of  atonement.
The  clause,  for  it  is  the  blood  that  maketh
an  atonement  for  the  soul,  should  be  trans-
lated, foT  the  hhod  maketh  atonement  by
meant  of  the  eoul,  i.e.  by  means  of  the  life
which  it  contains.  It  is  because  the  blood
is  the  vehicle  of  the  animal's  life,  and  re-
presents that  life,  that  it  serves  to  cover,  or
make  atonement  fur,  the  soul  of  the  offerer
of  the  sacrifice,  who  presents  it  instead  of
his  own  life.

Ver.  12. — This  verse  emphatically  restates
that  the  atoning  power  of  the  blood,  as  being
the  seat  of  life,  is  the  reason  that  the  eating
of  it  u  forbidden,  and  the  same  statement


is  repeated   in    a  different    oonnezion  i»
ver.  14.

Vers.  13,  14.— Negatively,  it  has  beem
ordered  that  blood  shall  not  be  eaten ;  posi-
tively, that  it  is  to  lie  offered  to  God.  Bo*
there  may  be  cases  where  the  latter  com-
mand cannot  be  carried  ont,  as  when  ani-
mals are  killed  in  hunting.  On  snck
occasions  the  man  who  kills  the  animo^
whether  he  be  an  Israelite  or  a  sojoumez^
is  to  pour  out  the  blood  thereof,  and  eoves
it  with  dust,  regarding  it  as  a  sacred  thing.

"Vers.  15,  16. — There  is  still  another  poB-
sible  case.  The  blood  of  an  animal  may
not  have  been  shed,  or  not  shed  in  such  »
way  as  to  make  it  flow  abundantly,  as  when
the  animal  has  died  a  natural  death,  or  been-
killed  by  wild  beasts.  In  this  case,  as  th»
blood  still  remains  in  the  body,  the  flesb
may  not  be  eaten  without  defilement.  Tho
defilement  may  be  cleansed  by  the  unclean
man  washing  his  clothes  and  bathing,  but
if  he  neglect  -to  do  this,  he  shall  bear  hi»
iniquity,  that  is,  undergo  the  consequence
of  his  transgression,  which  he  would  not
have  undergone  had  he  been  ceremonially
cleansed  (o^  Exod.  xzii.  SO;  eh.  xi.  39;
Deut.  xiv.  21).  The  prohibition  of  the
eating  of  blood  was  continued  by  the
Council  of  Jerusalem,  but  the  observance  of
the  regulation  was  no  longer  commanded  aa
a  duty  binding  on  all  men,  but  as  a  concee-
sion  to  Jewish  feelings,  enabling  Jewisk
and  Gentile  converts  to  live  together  i»
comfort  t^see  1  Sam.  xiv.  32 ;  Ezek.  •»•»•''"
35 ;  Acts  XT.  20).


EOMILETICS.

Vers.  1—9. — Sacrifice  is  not  in  itself  enough;  there  must  be  uniformity  in  th*
manner  in  which  it  is  offered,  and  identity  of  place  in  which  it  is  made.  The  seTen
first  chapters  of  the  Book  of  Leviticus  have  given  a  minute  statement  of  the  ceremome»
which  are  always  to  be  unfailingly  observed.  Incidentally,  it  had  been  taught  in  these
chapters  that  the  place  of  sacrifice  was  the  court  of  the  tabernacle,  but  now-  every  other
place  of  sacrifice  is  stringently  forbidden.

1.  The  tabernacle  and  aftebwabds  the  temple  webe  thb  oentbb  of  thb
Jewish  Chttrch,  and  thbeefoeb  of  the  Jewish  State.  Every  community  which  i»
to  be  permanent  must  have  a  central  idea,  and  that  idea  must  be  embodied  in  some
formula,  or  still  better  in  some  institution.  The  tabernacle  or  the  temple  was  such  ait
institution  to  the  Jew.  It  summed  up  in  itself,  and  was  the  symbol  to  the  Jew  of  all
that  he  valued.  It  was  the  rallying  point  of  the  nation,  the  thing  that  each  citlzea
was  willing  to  live  for  and  die  for,  whatever  other  differences  might  divide  him  from
his  fellows.  This  gave  a  strength  and  nnity  to  the  different  tribes,  which  would  other-
wise have  probably  all  fallen  apart,  and  though  it  was  not  strong  enough  to  prevent
the  great  schism,  Jeroboam's  plan  of  supplying  its  place  by  an  unreal  substitute
showed  its  force  ;  it  survived  the  destruction  ot  the  material  temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
preserved  the  exUed  fragments  of  the  nation  during  the  Captivity,  and  inspired  courage
to  return  to  Jerusalem  and  rebuild  what  they  had  lost.  Nay,  even  now  its  memory
keeps  together  the  scattered  members  of  a  dispersed  nation,  and  forms  them  into  on«
people.


OH.  xvu.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  268

II.  The  tabeenaolb  ob  temple  was  the  effective  sign  of  unity  to  tue  Jews
BECAUSE  IT  CONTAINED  THE  ARK.  The  ark  was  the  visible  symbol  of  the  presence  of
God  among  his  chosen  people.  Therefore  the  hearts  of  the  people  went  out  towards
the  sanctuary  with  adoration  and  love.  Therefore  all  the  sacrificial  rites  had  to  be
performed  before  the  door  of  the  sanctuary,  not  only  while  they  lived  in  the  wilderness,
but  when  they  were  settled  in  Canaan.  The  journeys  up  to  Jerusalem  at  the  three
great  festivals  intensified  their  love  for  the  temple,  and  made  them  feel  their  union  aud
communion  with  one  another  and  with  God.  Nor  did  the  institution  of  synagogues
throughout  the  laud  interfere  with  this  feeling,  as  the  worship  conducted  in  them  was
recognized  as  being  of  an  inferior  description  to  that  which  could  be  celebrated  at  the
temple  alone.  The  temple  was,  in  the  estimation  of  the  Jew,  the  local  abiding-place
of  God  upon  earth.    Even  when  the  ark  and  the  mercy-seat  were  gone,  it  retained  this

.  character  above  every  other  spot.

III.  The  idea  of  a  local  presence  of  God.  in  ant  given  place  on  earth  is
ABOLISHED.  "  Believe  me,  the  hour  cometh,  when  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain,
nor  yet  at  Jerusalem,  worship  the  Father.  ...  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when
the  true  worshippers  shall  woj  ship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth :  for  the  Father
seeketh  such  to  worship  him.  God  is  a  Spirit:  and  they  that  worship  him  must
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth  "  (John  iv.  21 — 24).  "  For  from  the  rising  of  the
Bun  even  unto  the  going  down  of  the  same  my  Name  shall  be  great  among  the  Gentiles  ;
and  in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered  unto  my  Name,  and  a  pure  offering  :  for  my
Name  shall  be  great  among  the  heathen,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (Mai.  i.  11).  There
is  no  local  or  material  centre  to  the  Christian  Church ;  no  one  city  holy  because  it
contains  the  temple ;  no  one  temple  holy  because  it  contains  tEe  visible  presence  of
God ;  no  one  high  priest  on  earth  holy  because  alone  privileged  to  enter  into  that
presence.    The  spiritual  has  superseded  the  material.

IV.  The  UNITY  of  the  Christian  body  is  to  be  otherwise  maintained.  Its  unity
is  commanded  and  prayed  for  by  Christ :  "  Holy  Father,  keep  through  thine  own
Name  those  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  that  they  may  be  one,  as  we  are."  "  Neither
pray  I  for  these  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on  me  through  their
word ;  that  they  all  may  be  one ;  as  thou,  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they
also  may  be  one  in  us :  .  .  .  that  they  may  be  one,  even  as  we  are  one :  I  in  them,  and
thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one  "  (John  xvii.  11,  20 — 23).  And  it
is  enjoined  by  the  apostle,  "  Endeavouring  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond
of  peace  "  (Eph.  iv.  3).  So  far  and  at  such  times  as  Judaical  and  materializing  views
have  prevailed  in  the  Church,  attempts  have  been  made  to  preserve  this  unity  in  the
Jewish  manner,  by  making  an  earthly  head  of  the  Church,  round  which  the  members
might  gather.

V.  The  true  bonds  of  unity  in  the  Christian  Church.  1.  The  common  posses-
sion of  the  "  one  Spirit "  (Eph.  iv.  4),  who  unites  all  the  members  by  the  internal  cohe-
sion of  unanimity  and  love.  2.  The  common  possession  of  the  "  one  Lord"  (Eph.  iv.
5),  the  invisible  Head  of  the  body,  from  whom  there  flows  down  into  the  members  a
life  shared  by  all  alike.  3.  The  common  possession  of  the  "  one  God  and  Father  of
all "  (Eph.  iv.  6),  whose  Fatherhood  makes  us  all  brethren.  4.  The  common  possession
of  "  one  faith  "  (Eph.  iv.  5),  "  once  (for  all)  delivered  to  the  saints  "  (Jude  3).  5.  The
common  possession  of  "  one  hope  "  (Eph.  iv.  4)  of  eternal  life.  6.  The  common  posses-
sion of  "  one  baptism "  (Eph.  iv.  5),  by  which  we  were  made  members  of  the  "  one
body  "  (Eph.  iv.  4).  7.  The  common  possession  of  the  other  sacrament  appointed  to
continue  "  till  he  come  "  (1  Cor,  xi.  26).  8.  The  common  possession  of  the  ministry
instituted  "  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for.  the  work  of  the  ministry,  for  the
edifying  of  the  body  of  Christ :  .  .  .  that  we  may  grow  up  into  him  in  all  things,
which  is  the  head,  even  Christ "  (Eph.  iv.  12—15).

VI.  The  nationality  a»d  indbpbndbncb  of  Churches  not  incompatible  with
Catholic  unity.  If  there  were  one  visible  head  of  the  Church  on  earth,  or  one
divinely  constituted  earthly  centre  of  Christendom,  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  an
independent  or  a  National  Church.  But  this  conception  of  the  Church  Catholic,  partly
Judaical,  partly  feudal,  is  wholly  false.  The  possession  of  the  above-named  qualifica-
tions makes  a  particular  Church  partaker  in  Catholic  unity,  the  ideal  Chi-istian  Church
consisting  of  a  federal  union  of  such  Churches  in  union  and  commuiiion  oue  with


864  THE   BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xvu.  1—16.

another,  agreeing  in  their,  belief,  but  not  necessarily  uniform  in  their  ceremonies  and
rites  (Alt.  XXXIV.).

Vers.  10 — 13. — The  eating  of  Hood  is  strictly  prohibited ;  therefore  onr  Lord's  wordi
must  have  sounded  so  much  the  more  strange  in  the  ears  of  the  Jews,  when  he  said,
"  Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in
you  "  (John  vi.  53).  The  reason  why  blood  may  not  be  eaten  is  that  the  life  of  the
flesh  is  its  blood  (ver.  11).  Eating  the  blood  was  the  same  thing  as  eating  the  life  of
the  animal.  Therefore  his  Jewish  auditors  would  understand  our  Lord  to  mean  by
the  words,  "  Whoso  eateth  my  flesh,  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternal  life  ;  and  I
will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day "  (John  vi.  54),  that  whoso  became  a  partaker  of
his  life,  would  thereby  become  a  possessor  of  eternal  life,  and,  possessing  that,  would
share  in  its  privileges — resurrection  and  immortality  (see  Wordsworth,  ad  Zoc.)  There'
is  an  eating  and  drinking  of  Christ's  flesh  and  blood,  that  is,  a  partaking  of  his  life
and  Spirit,  which  may  be  accomplished  without  any  outward  act  whatever  ;  but  no
doubt  a  special  method  of  performing  this  mysterious  act  was  instituted  when  "  Jesus
took  bread,  and  blessed  it,  and  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said.  Take,
eat ;  this  is  my  body.  And  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  it  to  them,
saying.  Drink  ye  all  of  it ;  for  this  is  my  Ijlood  of  the  new  testament,  which  is
shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins "  (Matt.  xxvi.  27,  28).  It  may  well  be
questioned  whether  a  Church  which  forbids  its  members  to  drink  of  that  cup  doea
not  shut  them  out  from  a  full  partaking  of  the  life  of  Christ,  so  far  as  that  blessing
is  imparted  by  that  ordinance.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

C^raee  he/ore  meat.  Ch.  xvii. ;  cf.  1  Cor.  x.  31.  From  the  perfect  atonement  God
provides,  we  are  invited  next  to  turn  to  the  morality  he  requires.  And  no  better
lieginning  can  be  made  than  the  acknowledgment  of  God  in  connection  with  our  food.
The  beautiful  way  the  Lord  secured  his  ovnx  recognition  as  the  bountiful  Giver  was  by
enacting  that  blood,  since  it  is  the  means  used  in  atonement,  must  be  devoted  to  no
meaner  use.  Hence  it  was  to  be  carefully  put  away,  either  by  the  priest  at  the  taber-
nacle, or  by  the  himtsman  in  the  dust  of  the  wilderness,  and  the  animal  used  as  a
peace  offering  before  God  (ver.  5).  What  we  have  consequently  in  this  chapter  is  the
religious  use  of  food,  or,  as  we  have  put  it,  "  Grace  before  meat."  In  this  connection
let  us  observe —

I.  That  God  has  implanted  some  memento  of  himself  in  all  ouk  food.  Vege-
table as  well  as  animal  life,  of  which  we  are  reminded  at  every  meal,  is  the  sign  manual
of  the  living  God.  It  is  worse  than  stupidity  not  to  recognize  in  the  food  we  eat  the
gifts  of  his  bounteous  hand.  "  Every  good  gift  and  every  perfect  gift  is  from  above,
aud  Cometh  down  from  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness,  neither
shadow  of  turning"  (Jas.  i.  17).  Why  personify  nature  into  a  giver  as  a  mere  sub-
terfuge for  gross  ingratitude  ?  The  Divine  hand  is  behind  the  whole,  and  an  honest
heart  can  see  it  and  will  bless  it  as  the  source  of  all !

II.  God  reminds  us  at  eveby  meal  of  atonement  as  the  pbbliminabt  to  peace
AND  fellowship.  For  all  our  food  once  thrilled  with  organic  life.  There  is  literally
the  saciifice  of  life,  vegetable  and  animal,  in  every  meal.  Vegetarians  sacrifice  micro-
scopic life,  after  all  their  efforts  to  sacrifice  nothing  but  vegetable  life.  Thus  our  race
is  reminded  of  the  first  principle  of  atonement,  every  time  we  sit  down  at  the  table
which  a  bounteous  providence  has  spread.  In  fact,  it  is  our  own  fault  if  every  feast  be
not  in  a  certain  sense  sacramental.  The  Supper  of  the  New  Testament,  as  well  as  the
Passover  of  the  Old,  embodies  the  sacrifice  of  life  in  order  to  the  support  of  man.  It  is
on  this  principle  that  the  world  is  constituted.  If,  then,  we  listened  to  the  voice  of
Nature  as  we  ought  to  do,  we  would  hear  her  calling  in  every  feast  for  the  grateful
recognition  of  that  principle  in  atonement  to  which  we  have  referred.  Peace  and  com-
munion are  really  based  in  the  order  of  nature  upon  the  sacrifice  of  life.    "  Vicarious


CH,  xvu.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  205

sacrifloe  "  is  a  principle  of  vast  range,  and  the  atonement  of  Jesus  is  but  a  single  appli-
cation of  it.

III.  The  recoonition  of  God  in  evert  pleasure  will  make  it  doubly  delightful.
It  is  evident  that  God  contemplated  hunting  as  something  which  might  be  enjoyed
religiously.  The  blood  of  the  animal  was  to  be  carefully  covered  with  dust  in  the
hunting-fleld.  Such  a  recognition  of  God  may  be  carried  into  all  legitimate  enjoyment.
As  Charles  Lamb  suggests  saying  grace  before  entering;  upon  new  books,  as  somethina;
more  fitting  than  a  formal  grace  before  gluttony,  let  ua  by  all  means  carry  the  good
custom  into  everything.  We  may  develop  our  muscular  powers  in  a  religious  spirit.
Let  us  have  religion  in  bodily  exercise,  religion  in  our  social  enjoyments,  religion  in
business,  religion  in  politics,  religion  in  all  things.  "  Whether  ye  eat  or  drink,  or
whatsoever  ye ^ do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  We  should  recognize  a  "muscular
Christianity,"  and  a  mercantile  Christianity,  and  a  Christianity  "which  doth  not
behave  itself  unseemly  "  in  society ;  in  a  word,  the  adaptability  of  the  religions  ppirit
to  all  lawful  relations.    The  sooner  we  recognize  and  realize  this,  the  better. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — ^16. — Statutes  concerning  Wood.  The  sacredness  of  blood  is  everywhere
marked  in  Scripture.  The  chapter  before  us  contains  some  of  the  more  important
statute^  concerning  it.

I.  In  respect  to  the  blood  of  sacrifice.  1.  It  must  le  Irought  to  the  door  of  the
talemade.  (1)  This  requisition  does  not  apply  to  animals  ordinarily  killed  for  food
(comp.  Deut.  xii.  15,  21).  (2)  It  applies  to  the  blood  of  sacrifices,  (a)  To  the  blood
of  those  offered  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle.  As  a  matter  of  course,  the  blood  of  such
sacrifices  would  be  sprinkled  and  poured  out  at  the  altar.  (6)  To  the  blood  of  those
also  offered  outside  the  camp  (vers.  3,  5).  Sacrifices  were  formerly  offered  wherever
the  providence  of  God  might  indicate  (Gen.  xii.  8 ;  Job  i.  5).  God  still  reserved  to
himself  the  right  to  sanction  the,  offering  of  sacrifices  where  he  pleased  (see  Judg.  vi.
26  ;  xiii.  19  ;  1  Sam.  vii.  9  ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  18 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  23).  Without  such  sanc-
tion, the  altar  of  the  tabernacle  is  the  one  place  appointed  for  the  shedding  of  sacrifi-
cial blood.  (3)  Public  worship  is  encouraged  by  this  law  (Heb.  x.  25).  2.  The  penalty
of  disobedience  is  excision.  (1)  The  statute  was  enacted  to  prevent  idolatry.  Sacrific-
ing elsewhere,  they  might  be  tempted  to  sacrifice  to  devils  (ver.  7).  The  heathen  thought
the  spirit  of  their  god  resided  in  his  idol ;  such  spirits  are  here  called  "  devils."  All
idolatry  is  from  Satan,  and  is  devilish  (1  Cor.  x.  20).  The  word  (a^^ry•^rh)  here  trans-
lated "devils"  is  elsewhere  rendered  "  goats."  Perhaps  the  idols  in  which  these  spirits
of  devils  were  supposed  to  reside  were  of  the  goat-like  form.  Goats  were  worshipped
in  Egypt,  and  probably  also  in  Canaan.  (2)  Blood  is  imputed  to  him  that  sheds  blood
in  sacrifice  elsewhere  than  at  the  altar  of  the  tabernacle  (ver.  4).  To  bring  the  blood
to  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  taught  the  worshipper  to  discern  Christ,  through  whose
blood  we  enter  heaven.  To  miss  this  lesson  was  to  degenerate  into  abominable  and
fatal  idolatry  (see  Isa.  Ixvi.  3).  This  law  applied  to  proselytes  as  well  as  to  native
Israelites  (vers.  8, 9).  There  is  but  one  way  to  God  for  the  Jew  and  Greek  (Horn.  iii.
30).     "  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned  "  (see  ver.  4).

II.  In  respect  to  food.  1.  Blood  as  food  is  absolutely  forbidden.  (1)  The  prohi-
bition is  among  the  Noachian  precepts.  He  who  reserved  the  tree  of  knowledge  of
good  and  evil  in  his  grant  of  vegetables  to  man  for  food,  reserved  blood  in  his  grant  of
animals  (Gen.  ix.  4,  5).  Being  a  Noachian  precept,  this  law  is  obligatory  upon  the
human  family  at  large.  (2)  The  prohibition  of  blood  was  formally  incorporated  into  the
Levitical  code  (see  ver.  10 ;  also  chs.  iii.  17  ;  vii.  26  ;  Deut.  xii.  25).  The  abrogation  of
the  Levitical  Law,  however,  does  not  repeal  the  Noachian  precept.  Unless,  therefore,
it  can  be  shown  that  the  Noachian  precept  is  abrogated,  it  is  still  unlawful  both  to  Jew
and  Gentile  to  eat  blood.  (3)  So  far  from  being  repealed,  this  precept  is  re-enforced  under
the  gospel  (Acts  xv.  28,  29).  This  "  burden  "  our  Lord  still  lays  upon  the  Churches,
even  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (see  Rev.  ii.  14 — 24).  The  significance  of  this
term  "  burden  "  must  not  be  overlooked  (comp.  Acts  xv.  28  with  Rev.  ii.  24).  2.  Two
reasons  for  the  prohibition  are  assigned.  These  are:  (1)  That  "the  life  of  the  flesh  is
m  the  blood."  This  is  philosophically  true.  Cut  a  nerve,  you  paralyze  a  member,  but
it  lives ;  out  oflf  the  blood,  the  member  mortifies.  Blood  flows  to  a  wound,  becomes
vascular  there,  knits  the  living  parts,  and  it  heals.     The  vitality  of  the  blood  is  seen


266  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xvil  1—16.

in  its  power  of  maintaming  its  temperature  against  the  extremes  of  heat  and  cold.
The  lesson  of  this  reason  is  to  teach  us  the  value  of  life.  Hence  in  connection  with
the  Noachian  precept  prohibiting  the  eating  of  blood,  we  have  also  the  law  guarding
the  life  of  man  by  the  penalty  of  death  to  the  murderer.  (2)  That  "  it  is  the  blood  that
maketh  an  atonement  for  the  soul "  (ver.  11).  That  should  not  be  treated  as  a  commoii
thing  which  is  the  principle  of  atonement,  and  the  type  of  the  precious  blood  of  Christ.
(3)  For  these  reasons  also  things  strangled  are  forbidden,  tilings  which  died  alone,  or
were  torn ;  things  not  so  killed  as  to  let  the  blood  properly  flow  from  them.  Thus  the
slaying  of  every  animal  used  for  food  in  the  sacrificial  way  would  remind  the  eater  of
the  necessity  of  sacrifice  for  sin  (see  1  Cor.  x.  31).  3.  The  penalty  here  also  is  excision.
(1)  If  things  strangled  were  eaten,  the  transgressor  became  unclean  (see  1  Sam.  xiv.
32,  33).  He  must  wash  his  clothes,  for  his  profession  hath  been  polluted.  He  must
wash  his  flesh,  for  his  person  is  defiled.  If  he  neglect  this  repentance  and  purification,
he  shall  bear  his  iniquity ;  he  is  obnoxious  to  excision  (ver.  16  ;  ch.  v.  17 ;  Numb.  ix.
13).  (2)  What,  then,  can  be  said  for'a  Church  which  professes  literally  to  drink  the
blood  01  Christ  in  the  cup  of  the  Mass  ?  Is  not  that  Church  thereby  guilty  of  out-
raging the  law  of  all  the  dispensations  ?  It  would  evade  this  impeachment  by  im-
pudently authorizing  the  eating  of  blood.  But  no  impudence  can  evade  the  penalty :
"  But  flesh  with  the  life  thereof,  which  is  the  blood  thereof,  shall  ye  not  eat.  And
surely  your  blood  of  your  lives  will  I  require."  Does  not  this  plainly  say  that  God
will  require  the  blood  of  the  life  of  the  blood-eater  ?  David  abhors  the  practice  of  the
Syrians,  who  made  libations  of  blood  to  their  gods,  and  prophetically  denounces  and
rejects  our  antichristian  idolaters  (see  Ps.  xvi.  4).  Drunk  as  she  is  with  the  blood  of
the  saints  and  the  martyrs  of  Jesus,  God  will  give  her  blood  to~ drink,  for  she  is  worthy.
—J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 7. — One  place  of  sacrifice.  It  is  of  the  essence  of  law  to  be  impartial.  Its
precepts  apply  to  all  without  distinction.  "Aaron  and  his  sons  and  all  the  children  of
Israel"  are  here  included  in  the  scope  of  the- Divine  commands.  Let  none  deeni  him-
self too  humble  or  too  exalted  to  incur  displeasure  by  infraction  of  the  Law.

I.  We  see  that  A  lawful  action  mat  be  unlawfully  performed.  A  wrong
time  or  place  mny  vitiate  a  deed  otherwise  permissible.  Animals  were  given  to  man
as  food,  and  to  slaughter  and  eat  them  was  not  in  itself  sin,  but  after  the  issue  of  this
prohibition  it  became  sin  to  do  so  without  presenting  them  at  the  tabernacle.  "  Blood
shall  be  imputed  unto  that  man ;  he  hath  shed  blood."  So  the  homicide  justifiable  in
war  becomes  murder,  and  the  intercourse  of  matrimony  fornication,  and  the  "  word
spoken  in  season  "  a  casting  of  pearls  before  swine,  by  reason  of  impropriety  of  person
or  season.

II.  The  people  of  God  must  expect  restrictions  to  be  placed  upon  theib
LiBERTT.  The  nations  may  follow  their  own  devices  and  desires,  the  chosen  people  are
under  a  covenant  to  obey  the  commands  of  the  Legislator.  They  are  assured  that  his
wisdom  and  kindness  will  prevent  the  adoption  of  unnecessary  and  inequitable  pro-
hibitions. For  all  his  precepts  there  are  the  best  possible  reasons,  and  therefor©
obedience  is  cheerfully  rendered.    Note  the  noble  reply  which  Milton  puts  into  the

mouth  of  the  seraph  Ahdiel,  to  the  taunts  of  Satan  ('  Paradise  Lost,'  bk.  vi.  170 181).

Whilst  the  Israelites  were  in  the  wilderness,  and  the  tabernacle  abode  in  the  midst  of
the  camp,  no  hardship  was  involved  in  attending  to  this  injunction,  and  it  restrained
them  from  evil  practices,  disciplining  them  against  the  time  that  they  should  enter  the
land  of  promise  and  have  the  injunction  removed.  Besides,  animal  food  was  scarce  in
the  wilderness,  as  we  learn  from  the  complaints  of  the  people.

in.   To   RECOONLBB   GoD   IN  OUE   COMMON   ACTIONS   AND    ENJOYMENTS  HALLOWS   LIFB

—Mi  KES  IT  A  RELIGIOUS  SERVICE.  The  slaiu  animal  is  consecrated  as  a  peace  offering
its  blood  being  sprinkled  on  the  altar,  the  fat  burnt  for  a  "sweet  savour  unto  tho
Lord,"  and  the  remainder  partaken  of  with  gratitude  and  joy.  God  is  honoured  and
man  profited.  Alas!  that  so  many  can .  continually  receive  God's  mercies  without
acknowledgment,  no  blessing  invoked,  and  no  emotion  of  holy  gladness  sweetening  the.
repast !  The  Christian  ideal  is  to  do  all  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  and  to  the  glory  of  God
IV.  To  REFUSE  TO  GoD  HIS  EIGHTS  IS  TO  COMMIT  IDOLATRY.  The  Israelites  were
certain  to  turn  the  slaughter  of  an  animal  into  a  festival,  and  the  question  was,  to  whom


CH.  XVII.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  1167

should  the  feast  he  dedicated  ?  Homage  to  the  demons  of  the  field  could  not  h»
sanctioned,  it  was  a  hreach  at  once  of  the  first  and  seventh  commandments.  It  i*
frequently  forgotten  that  a  neutral  attitude  in  respect  of  God  is  impossible ;  we  are
either  on  his  side  or  against  him.  Intellectualism,  materialism,  scientificism,  agnosti-
cism, it  matters  not  by  what  name  our  rejection  of  the  claims  of  religion  is  covered,  it
really  designates  the  setting  up  of  an  idol  upon  the  throne  of  the  heart,  and  we  adore
the  enemy  of  God.

V.  The  peobationaet  chabactbb  of  many  op  God's  requirements  is  herb  hade
VISIBLE.  In  Deut.  xii.  the  precept  of  the  text  is  repealed  as  relating  to  the  settled
condition  of  life  in  Palestine,  when  it  would  manifestly  be  difficult  to  comply  with  the
law.  By  that  peiiod  the  precept  had  served  its  purpose  in  training  the  Israelites  to
abstain  from  evil  pr.ictices.  and  to  honour  Jehovah  with'  all  their  substance.  And  we
to-day  have  our  wilderness  system  of  probation  and  training,  many  rules  designed  to
meeten  us  for  the  society  of  just  men  made  perfect.  The  injunction  of  the  text  pointed
to  the  transitory  nature  of  the  Law  as  a  whole.  It  has  been  abrogated  by  the  gospel,
the  dispensation  of  promise,  the  land  of  liberty  and  rest.  Yet,  as  in  their  residence  in
Palestine,  the  Israelites  continued  to  observe  the  spirit  of  the  repealed  Law,  so  do  we,
under  the  gospel,  retain  the  principles  that  underlay  the  Mosaic  legislation.  To
acknowledge  God  in  every  meal  and  mercy,  to  hallow  the  secular  and  to  promote  it  to
the  sacred,  this,  as  it  is  the  object  of  Christian  endeavour,  is  the  spirit  of  the  command
we  have  been  considering  in  Leviticus.  And  equally  so,  the  principles  and  spirit  of
our  Christian  earthly  life  will  be  recognizable  in  the  higher  worship  and  service  of
heaven.    The  accident  changes,  the  essence  alters  not. — S.  B.  A,

Vers.  1 — 7. — Features  of  Christian  service.  It  is  open  to  question  whether  the
prohibition  (vers.  3,  4)  extends  to  all  animals  killed  for  food,  or  only  to  those  slain  in
sacrifice.  The  former  view  is,  in  my  judgmfent,  the  correct  one ;  for  (1)  the  instruction
is  explicit  enough  (vers.  3,  4),  and  without  qualification ;  (2)  the  limitation  is  after-
wards allowed  in  consideration  of  the  change  of  circumstance  (Deut.  xii.  20,  21);  and
(3)  the  difficulty  in  the  case  is  less  on  consideration  than  it  at  first  appears.  It  is
objected  that  this  would  be  a  burdensome  prohibition;  but  (a)  it  only  lasted  (see
above)  while  they  were  in  the  camp,  near  to  one  another,  and  all  near  to  the  tabernacle ;
and  (6)  much  less  flesh  was  eaten  there  and  then  than  is  eaten  here  and  now.  A  more
largely  vegetable  diet  would  probably  be  wholesome  for  us ;  it  was  undoubtedly  so  in
the  desert  of  Arabia.  When  we  more  carefully  consider  this  precept,  we  see  its  benefi-
cent character ;  we  perceive —

I.   A   FATAL   EVIL,   FROM   WHICH  IT   WAS    DESIGNED    TO   SAVE   THEM.      The    practices

of  Egypt  clung  to  them ;  among  these  was  demon-worship  (ver.  7),  They  had  gone
after  those  demons,  and  offered  sacrifices  to  them.  If  any  animal  might  be  killed
anywhere  for  food,  and  the  blood  of  it  might  not  be  eaten  (chs.  iii.  17 ;  vii.  26),  there
would  be  a  strong  temptation  to  the  superstitious  to  pour  it  out  in  sacrifice  to  those
demons  of  whose  malignant  interposition  they  were  afraid.  This  temptation  must,
at  all  cost,  be  guarded  against.  It  would  introduce  or  foster  that  idolatrous  usage  from
which  it  was  the  supreme  object  of  all  these  statutes  to  keep  Israel  free.  And  if  no
animal  might  be  slain  save  at  the  tabernacle  door,  there  would  be  no  danger  of  this
disastrous  lapse  into  Egyptian  superstition.

IL  The  good  it  was  designed  to  do  them.  It  would  confer  a  threefold  boon
npon  them.  1.  It  would  bring  them  often  to  the  tabernacle,  and  so  to  the  near  presence
and  worship  of  God ;  it  would  multiply  their  sacrifices  (vers.  5,  6).  2.  It  would  lead
them  to  associate  their  material  blessings  with  the  Divine  hand ;  presenting  them  unto
the  Lord,  they  could  not  fail  to  be  reminded  that  they  were  his  gifts.  3.  It  would  help
them  to  look  on  Jehovah  as  their  Divine  Friend.  These  became  peace  offerings  (ver.  6),
and  the  essential  thought  of  such  offering  was  human  fellowship  with  God.

We  detect  here  some  useful  suggestions  as  to  the  true  character  of  Christian  service.
1.  We  mitst  not  make  our  Christian  worship  too  deprecatory  in  its  character.  There
is  something  painfully  and  dangerously  like  demon-worship  in  the  devotion  of  some
men ;  they  seldom  rise  above  the  deprecatory  in  their  thought,  as  if  God  were  a  being
go  stern  and  so  reluctant  to  forgive  that  his  people  should  spend  all  their  devotional
breath  in  deprecating  his  wrath.    Surely  to  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesui


^68  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xni.  1— 16


Christ  we  should  bring,  beside  this,  our  adoration,  praise,  gratitude,  trust,  love,  conse-
cration, etc.  2.  We  must  learn  to  connect  daily  hlessings  with  the  Divine  hand.  We
should,  in  thought  though  not  in  act,  bring  everything  we  have  to  "  the  door  of  the
tabernacle,"  trace  each  good  thing  we  enjoy  to  the  generous  Giver  of  all,  to  his  heart  of
love  as  well  as  to  his  hand  of  bounty.  3.  We  should  bless  God  for  revealing  himself  to
vs  as  our  Divine  Friend,  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Ghrist.  Jesus  Christ  has  taught  us  to
\.hink  and  feel  that  we  are  the  friends  and  guests  of  God  (John  xv.  14, 15;  xiv.  23;
Bev.  iii.  20).— 0.

Vers.  10 — 16. — Atoning  death.  We  have  here  a  repetition  of  a  law  which  had
already  been  twice  delivered  (chs.  iiL  17 ;  vii.  23 — 26).  Its  full  and  formal  restatement
is  very  significant,  and  this  the  more  because  of  the  emphatic  utterance  of  Divine  dis-
pleasure in  the  event  of  disobedience.  "  I  will  even  set  my  face  against  that  soul  .  .  .
and  will  cut  him  off,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  Obviously,  the  highest  importance  was  attached
by  God  to  the  observance  of  this  injunction  not  to  eat  "  any  manner  of  blood."  We
regard —

I.  Thk  pbimakt  significance  of  this  law.  This  is  clearly  indicated  in  vers.
11  and  12.  We  shall  understand  it  if  we  consider  the  subject  thus :  1.  Happy  and
harmonious  relations  between  Jehovah  and  his  people  were  maintained  by  continual
sacrifices  at  his  altar.  2.  In  these  sacrifices  the  life  of  the  slain  animal  was  accepted
by  God  as  an  atonement  for  the  forfeited  life  of  the  human  transgressor.  3.  But  the
blood  of  the  animal  was  regarded  as  the  seat  and  source  of  its  life.  Whpn  its  blood
was  shed  its  life  was  taken,  and  the  shed  blood  was  sprinkled  before  the  vail  or  poured
on  the  altar  (ch.  ii.  6,  7),  as  standing  for  the  life  which  had  been  offered  by  man,  and
been  accepted  by  God.  "The  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,"  therefore,  however  insufficient
of  itself  for  the  high  purpose  of  atonement  for  human  sin,  was  yet  the  outward  and
visible  means  which  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  was  pleased  to  appoint  for  reconciliation
between  himself  and  his  people.  Therefore  it  was  to  be  held  sacred;  the  idea  of  it
must  not  be  vulgarized,  as  it  would  inevitably  be  if  blood  were  used  as  common  food
at  ordinary  meals.  Its  sanctity  must  be  carefully  fdnced.  Men  must  associate  with  it,
in  their  minds,  nothing  but  the  forfeited  life,  the  atonement,  with  which  it  was  so
closely  connected.  All  their  domestic  and  social  customs  (vers.  13,  15,  16)  must  be
so  ordered  that  the  blood  of  animals,  anywhere  and  anywise  slain,  should  speak  of  those
sacrifices  at  the  altar  in  which  the  ening  souls  of  men  sought  and  found  the  mercy  and
the  favour  of  their  God.

II.  Its  significance  to  oubsblvbs.  It  suggests  to  us  the  truth  that,  as  the
disciples  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  also  should  count  very  sacred  in  our  esteem  the  thought  of
atoning  blood.  1.  For  we,  too,  are  redeemed  by  "  precious  blood  "  (see  1  Pet.  L  18, 19 ;
Eph.  1.  7;  Heb.  ix.  12 — 14;  Eev.  v.  9).  It  may  not  have  been  needful  that,  in  the
literal  sense,  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  man  should  flow,  but  it  was  needful  that  his
life,  of  which  the  blood  is  the  source  and  the  symbol,  should  be  laid  down.  2.  Our
Lord  has  given  us  a  permanent  institution,  the  object  of  which  is  to  keep  before  our
minds  the  shedding  of  his  blood  for  our  sins  (Matt.  xxvi.  28 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  26).  3.  By
their  words,  he  and  his  apostles  laid  the  greatest  stress  on  his  atoning  death  as  the
source  of  our  life  and  hope  (John  xii.  32  ;  vi.  53  ;  Luke  xxiv.  46,  47  ;  Heb.  ix.  14 ;
1  John  i.  7,  etc.).  4.  His  atoning  death  was  the  object  of  our  soul's  trust  when  we
entered  our  Christian  course,  and  will  be  at  the  hour  when  we  shall  complete  it.  5.  It
is  the  will  of  Christ  that  we  should  keep  it  continually  in  view  throughout  our  life.
It  is  our  wisdom  as  well  as  our  duty  so  to  do,  inasmuch  as  the  contemplation  of  his
death  for  our  sins  will  minister  (1)  to  our  humility ;  (2)  to  our  gratitude ;  (3)  to  a
consecrated  life  of  cheerful  obedience  and  submission.--0.

Vers.  1 — 9.— Sanctity  of  animal  life.  All  God's  people  commanded  to  observe
restrictions  as  to  the  shedding  of  blood.  Door  of  the  tabernacle  connected  with  the
sphere  of  common  Ife  ;  thus  religion  and  its  duty  threw  sacredness  over  all  things.

L  The  dominion  of  man  over  the  lowek  creation.  1.  Appointed  by  God  (see
Gen.  i.  26  and  Ps.  viii.).  2.  Limited  in  its  extent,  by  necessity,  humanity  of  feeling,
provision  for  the  higher  purposes  of  human  life.  3.  Capable  of  being  blended  wUh  the
Law  of  the  sanctuary.    We  should  afford  all  creatures  dependent  on  us,  as  much  a*


CH.  XVII.  1- 16.]  THE  BOOK   OF   LEVITICUS.  269


possible  OUT  own  sabbath  of  bodily  rest.  We  should  make  it  a  religious  duty  to  pro-
tect them  from  injury  and  suffering.  In  so  far  as  we  use  them  for  food,  an  offering  of
them  should  not  be  to  the  god  of  sensuality,  but  to  him  whose  Law  requires  temperance,
self-restraint,  and  reverence  for  the  lower  nature,  that  it  may  support  the  higher.  All
with  thanksgiving.

II.  Power  of  life  and  death  is  in  and  from  God.  As  entrusted  to  man,  whether
over  the  lower  animals  or  over  his -fellows,  it  is  a  powei  to  be  exercised  as  in  the  sight
of  God  and  at  the  door  of  his  house.  1.  Shedding  of  blood  a  solemn  responsibility.
In  common  life,  lest  we  be  guilty  of  cruelty  and  idestruction  of  a  true  and  valuable
element  in  the  world's  welfare.  In  execution  of  law,  lest  we  give  to  that  which  repre-
sents the  Divine  will  the  appearance  of  injustice  and  wantonness.  Even  in  healthy
sport,  care  must  be  takeh  lest  there  be  an  overbalance  of  the  mind  towards  shedding  of
blood  or  disregard  of  suffering.  In  all  questions  of  difBculty,  bring  the  matter  to  the
door  of  the  tabernacle.  2.  The  sacredness  of  blood  points  to  atonement.  The  devoted
and  slaughtered  animal  was  received  back  again  as  a  Divine  gift  for  the  use  of  the
offerer,  thus  lifting  up  death  into  life.  Sacrifice  is  not  God's  delight  in  death,  but  his
promise  of  salvation.  The  sanctity  attached  to  the  blood  of  victims  prepared  the  way
to  the  higher  sanctity  attached  to  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  Old  and  New  Testaments
explain  one  another.

III.  Preservation  from  idolatry  and  false  worship  in  the  positive  eegula-
■nOHB  OF  THE  Law.  Mistake  of  supposing  that  mere  negative  religion  will  purify  men
from  corruption.  Against  the  worship  of  devils  we  are  never  safe  except  as  we  are
engaged  in  the  worship  of  the  true  God. — B.

Vers.  10 — 16. — Ver.  11,  "  The  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood :  and  I  have  given  it
to  you  upon  the  altar  to  make  an  atonement  for  your  souls  :  for  it  is  the  blood  that
maketh  an  atonement  for  the  soul."

I.  The  natural  basis  op  atonement.  1.  The  preciousness  of  life.  The  blood  is
the  seat  of  life.  2.  The  exchange  of  the  altar,  blood  for  life,  a  lower  for  a  higher,
requires  a  supphmentary  value,  which  is  represented  by  the  altar  itself.  3.  The  lam-
proclaimed  at  the  first  against  the  shedding  of  blood  taken  up  into  the  higher  law  of
redemption ;  righteousness  becoming  at  the  altar  of  God  the  refuge  of  man.

n.  Atonement  for  the  soul  provided  by  Divine  love.  "  I  have  given  it  you  to
make  an  atonement."  1.  All  atonement  must  proceed  from  Divine  love,  otherwise  it  will
be  heathenish  as  effecting  a  change  in  God.  Christ  is  set  forth  a  propitiation.  2.  Atone-
ment is  made,  i.e.  by  being  offered,  the  blood  shed  at  the  tabernacle  door,  offered  upon
the  altar.  Thus  the  sacrifice  is  a  revelation  and  consecration  of  the  bond  of  union  in
the  covenant  relation  between  God  and  man.  3.  The  blood,  while  representing  the  life,
also  represents  the  obedience  active  and  passive  of  Christ,  which  was  both  a  rendering
up  to  God  of  a  perfect  humanity,  and  an  exaltation  of  the  Law  in  the  sufferings  and
death  of  Calvary ;  the  old  man  crucified,  the  new  man  glorified.  4.  All  human  merit
is  excluded  :  "  I  have  given  it  you."  No  amount  of  sacrifice  would  be  of  any  avail
except  it  be  according  to  the  will  of  God.  We  give  back  to  him  of  his  own.  Hence
the  difference  between  the  Jewish  sacrifices  and  those  of  pagan  nations,  and  between
the  morality  which  is  founded  on  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  that  which  proceeds  from
luere  self-will  or  an  unjustifiable  and  false  exaltation  of  human  nature  as  it  is.  He
that  is  not  clean  as  God  makes  him  clean  shall  "  bear  his  iniquity."  Necessity  of
insisting  on  this  doctrine  of  atonement  in  the  present  day.  Falsehood  as  to  humanity,
in  the  way  of  all  true  progress.  Those  who  boast  are  not  those  who  make  sacrifices  to
elevate  man.  "  Survival  of  the  fittest "  a  cruel  remedy  for  the  world's  miseries.
Christ's  doctrine  is  elevation  of  the  lowest.  Atonement  for  your  souls  is  the  beginning
of  all  true  life. — R.

Ver.  11. — 7%e  sanctity  of  the  atoning  blood.  No  act  was  more  strongly  denounced
than  that  of  eating  any  manner  of  blood.  The  man  guilty  of  that  deed,  whether  an
Israelite  or  a  stranger  sojourning  in  the  land,  was  threatened  with  the  displeasure  of
Qod  and  severest  penalty.  It  seemed  to  partake  of  the  nature  of  a  ceremonial  rather  than
a  moral  offence,  yet  it  must  be  remembered  that  violations  of  ritual  become  moral
transgressions  when  they  are  committed  against  the  known  will  of  the  recognized


270  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xvn.  1—16.

Legislator.  This  is  especially  the  case  when,  as  here,  the  Lawgiver  condescends  to
explain  the  reason  upon  which  the  prohibition  is  founded.  Such  explanation  ought
to  secure  intelligent  observance  of  the  enactment.  And  that  enactment  was  but  the
reissue  of  the  former  decree  that  gave  animals  to  man  for  food,  but  annexed  •  prohi-
bition against  tasting  the  blood  (Gen.  ix.  4).

I.  The  fact  stated,  that  the  shbddino  op  blood  constitutes  an  atonement.  Illus-
trated by  the  numerous  sacrifices  of  the  patriarchs,  and  the  provisions  of  the  Law  that
sacrifices  should  form  s  part  of  all  national  and  individual  festivals,  as  well  as  of  all
offerings  to  wipe  away  inadvertent  transgression.  See  i*  in  the  sprinkling  of  the  book
and  vessels  and  people  at  the  ratification  of  the  covenant.  It  is  confirmed  by  the  well-
nigh  universal  practice  of  heathen  nations,  and  is  proved  by  direct  Scripture  statements
in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments.  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission  "  (Heb.
ix.  22).  It  typified,  therefore,  the  offering  of  Jesus  Christ,  whose  blood  redeems  us
"  from  our  vain  manner  of  life "  (1  Pet.  i..  18).  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  Son
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  This  Mosaic  way  of  speaking  is  ingrained  in  the  apostles,
showing  how  they  regarded  the  death  of  Jesus  as  the  fulfilment  of  the  types  of  the
Law.

II.  The  truth  implied  that  the  chief  vibtub  op  blood  as  an  atonement  is
DBBIVBD  FKOM  God's  APPOINTMENT.  "  I  have  given  it  unto  you  "  indicates  that  the
blood  of  animals  had  no  intrinsic  e£Scacy  to  atone  for  sin.  And  the  same  truth  is
shadowed  forth  in  the  words,  "  upon  the  altar."  There  was  no  difference  in  itself
between  blood  ordinarily  spilt  and  that  presented  before  God,  but  the  presentation
constituted  the  difference.  To  sprinkle  the  blood  upon  the  altar  was  to  bring  it
emblematically  into  the  very  presence  of  the  Deity.  "God  set  forth"  Christ  Jesus
"  to  be  a  propitiation,  through  faith,  by  his  blood."

III.  The  reason  afforded  for  the  selection  of  blood,  that  it  is  the  vehicle  ov  lipb.
Physiology,  and  especially  recent  investigations  with  the  microscope,  confirm  the
dictum  of  Scripture,  that  "  the  blood  is  the  life."  It  nourishes  and  sustains  the  whole
physical  frame ;  if  it  deteriorate  in  quality  the  body  weakens,  if  it  diminish  in  quantity
power  is  lessened.  1.  By  such  an  atonement  Ood  is  recognized  as  Lord  o/life  and  of  all
its  consequences.  He  gave  and  takes  away,  to  him  alone  should  life  be  offered.  Thus
the  sanctity  of  life  was  enforced.  Man  was  not  to  feast  upon  that  which  was  God's
prerogative ;  blood  must  be  poured  upon  the  ground  like  water,  thus  returning  to  the
«arth.  2.  The  enormity  of  sin  is  represented,  as  enacting  the  utmost  for  an  atonement
that  can  be  rendered.  "  Life  is  the  most  cherished  of  possessions,  since  man  is  power-
less to  create  or  to  restore  it."  The  crowning  proof  of  Christ's  compassion  was  that  he
gave  "  his  life  "  a  ransom  for  the  many,  and  the  gift  revealed  the  awfulness  of  sin  to
require  such  a  redemption.  3.  It  represents  the  substitution  of  one  life  for  another,
death  being  the  sentence  pronounced  upon  the  sinner.  "  When  thou  shalt  make  his
soul  an  offering  for  sin  "  was  Isaiah's  prediction  of  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  It  may  be
observed  that  the  word  in  the  text  translated  "  soul "  and  "  life "  is  tie  same,  corre-
sponding to  the  use  made  of  the  equivalent  Greek  word  in  Matt.  xvi.  25,  26.  That  but
for  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  we  must  have  been  subject  to  eternal  death,  is  the  plain
import  of  many  passages  in  the  Word  of  God.

IV.  The  futube  advent  typified  op  one  who  should  by  his  ofpeeino  fulfil
ALL  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  A  PERFECT  ATONEMENT.  Every  Israelite  might  not  perceive
in  the  insufficiency  of  his  sacrifices  a  prediction  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  but  there  it  was
portrayed  visibly  enough.  An  innocent,  holy,  human  victim,  a  voluntary  offering,
being  himself  the  Lawgiver,  and  by  incarnation  subjecting  himself  to  the  Law,  making
adequate  acknowledgment  of  the  righteousness  of  God  and  of  the  ill  deserts  of  God's
rebellious  sinful  children,  revealing  to  man  at  once  the  loving  heart  of  God  and  the
hatefulness  of  sin  which  had  estranged  man  from  his  Father  in  heaven,  by  his  death
exhibiting  the  length  to  which  sin  will  go,  and  the  willingness  of  Divine  holiness  and
love  to  submit  to  extreme  degradation  and  anguish  in  order  that  the  curse  might  be
removed  and  man's  heart  won, — this  is  the  atonement  of  truest  efficacy,  a  mighty  moral
power  with  God  and  man.  This  is  the  death  that  gives  life  to  the  world,  the  blood
that  cries  out,  not  for  vengeance,  but  for  mercy,  that  sanctifies  not  merely  to  the
purifying  of  the  flesh,  but  to  the  purging  of  the  conscience  from  dead  works  to  serve
the  living  God.    And  the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  Christ  was  the  signal  for  releaaa  fivm


OH.  XTIII.  1—30.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


27]


the  ceremonies  and  restrictions  imposed  by  the  Mosaic  Law.    The  prohibition  of  the
text  had  served  its  purpose.

CoKCLUSiON.  With  what  rejoicing  should  we  approach  our  altar,  the  cross  of  Christ
(Heb.  liii.  10)  I  And  what  guilt  we  incur  if  we  slight  the  blood  of  Christ  as  little
available  for  salvation,  or,  though  professing  to  believe,  yet  by  conduct  show  that  we
count  the  blood  of  (he  covenant  an  tuholy  thing ! — S.  B.  A.


PART  III.

Seotion  IIL

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVIII.

IIOBAL  VNOLEAiniESS  AND  ITS  FUNISHMGllT.

This  being  the  subject  of  the  three  follow-
ing chapters  (chs.  xviii. — xx.),  they  naturally
form  a  sequence  to  chs.  xl. — xvii.,  which
have  dealt  with  ceremonial  uncleaunesa  and
its  purification.  It  is  a  remarkable  thing
that,  except  by  implication  in  connection
with  the  sin  offerings  and  the  trespass  ofi'er-
ings  and  the  ceremonies  of  the  Day  of
Atonement,  there  has  not  yet  been  a  single
moral  precept,  as  such,  in  the  Book  of
Leviticus,  and  there  has  been  very  little
recognition  of  sin  as  distinct  from  pollution.
All  has  been  ceremonial.  I3ut  the  cere-
monial is  typical  of  the  moral,  and  from  the
consideration  of  ceremonial  uncleanness  and
its  remedy,  we  now  proceed  to  the  con-
sideration of  moral  uncleanness  and  its
penalty.  It  is  to  be  noticed  too  that,  while
the  ensuing  laws  are  commanded  as  the
positive  injunction  of  God  (vers  2, 30),  which
of  itself  is  sufQcieut  to  give  them  their
authority  and  force,  they  are  still  founded,
like  the  ceremonial  prohibitions,  upon  the
feelings  of  repugnance  implanted  in  the
mind  of  man.  To  enter  into  the  marriage
relation  with  near  relatives  is  abhorrent  to  a
sentiment  in  mankind  so  widely  spread  that
it  may  be  deemed  to  have  been  originally
nniTersal,  and  the  same  abhorrence  is  enter-
tained towards  other  foul  sins  of  lust.  Ugli-
ness, which  creates  disgust  by  its  ugliness,
symbolizes  sin;  immorality,  which  inspires
abhorrence  by  its  immoral  character,  proves
itself  thereby  to  be  sin.  The  section  deals  first
with  sin  in  the  inarriage  relation,  next  with
sezoal  impurities  connected  with  marriage,
then  with  other  cases  of  immorality,  and


lastly  with  the  penalties  inflicted  on  these
sins  in  their  character  of  crimes.

Vers.  1 — 5  form  an  introduction  to  the
Hebrew  code  of  prohibited  degrees  of
marriage  and  of  forbidden  sins  of  lust.  The
formal  and  solemn  declaration,  I  am  the
Lord  your  God,  is  made  three  times  in  these
five  verses.  This  places  before  the  people
the  two  thoughts:  1.  That  the  Lord  is
holy,  and  they  ouglit  to  be  like  him
in  holiness ;  2.  That  the  Lord  has  com-
manded lioliness,  and  they  ought  to  obey
him  by  being  holy.  Because  the  Lord  ia
their  Gud,  and  they  are  his  people,  tbey
are,  negatively,  to  refrain  from  the  vicious
habits  and  lux  customs  prevalent  in  the  land
of  Egypt  wherein  they  dwelt,  and  in  the
laud  of  Canaan  whither  they  were  going,  the
sensuality  of  which  is  imlirectly  condemned
by  the  injunctions  which  command  puiity
in  contrast  to  their  doings ;  and,  positively,
they  are  lo  keep  God's  statutes,  and  his  judg-
ments, as  laid  down  in  the  following  code,
which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them.
The  latter  clause  is  of  special  importance,
because  it  is  repeated  in  the  same  connection
by  Ezekiel  (Kzek.  xx.  11,  13,  21),  and  in  the
Levitical  confession  in  the  Book  of  Nehemiah
(Neh.  ix.  29),  and  is  quoted  by  St.  Paul  in
a  controversial  sense  (Eom.  x.  5 ;  Gal.  iii.  12).
Its  full  meaning  is  that  bv  obedience  to
God's  commands  man  attains  to  a  state  of
existence  which  alone  deserves  to  be  called
true  life — "  the  life  which  connects  him  with
Jehovah  through  his  obedience"  (Clark).
And  this  involves  the  further  truth  that
disobedience  results  in  death.  Accordingly,
St.  Paul  uses  the  text  as  being  the  testimony
of  tlie  Law  with  regard  to  itself,  that  salva-
tion by  it  is  of  works  in  contrast  with  faith.
(Of.  Luke  X.  28.)  We  have  no  evidence  to
tell  us  what  were  the  doings  of  the  land  of
Canaan  in  respect  to  the  marriage  relation,
but  this  chapter  is  enough  to  show  that  the
utmost  laxity  prevailed  in  it,  and  we  may
be  sure  that  their  religious  rites,  like  those
of  Midian  (Numb,  xxv.),  were  penetrate!


Z72


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  xvin.  1-


-30.


with  the  spirit  of  lioentlouBnesa.  With
regard  to  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  we
have  fuller  information.  We  know  that
among  the  Egyptians  marriage  with  sisten
and  half-sisters  was  not  only  permissible,
but  that  its  propriety  was  justified  by
their  religious  beliefs,  and  practised  in  the
royal  family  (Died.  Sio.,  L  27 ;  Dio.  Cass.,
xlii.).  Other  abominations  condemned  in
this  chapter  (ver.  23)  also,  as  we  know,
existed  there  (Herod.,  ii.  46),  and  if  queens
could  be  what  in  later  times  Cleopatra  was,
we  may  imagine  the  general  dissoluteness
of  the  people.  Among  Persians,  Medes,
Indians,  Ethiopians  and  Assyrians,  marriage
with  mothers  and  daughters  was  allowed,
and  from  the  time  of  Cambyges,  marriage
with  a  sister  was  regarded  as  lawful  (Herod.,
iii.  31).  The  Athenians  and  Spartans  per-
mitted marriage  with  half-sisters.  All
these  concessions  to  lust,  and  other  unclean
acts  with  which  the  heathen  world  was  full
(ver.  22;  Eom.  i.  27),  were  fallings  away
from  the  law  of  purity  implanted  in  the
heart  of  man  and  now  renewed  for  the
Hebrew  people.

Ver.  6. — The  next  thirteen  verses  contain
the  law  of  incest,  or  the  prohibited  degrees
of  marriage.  The  positive  law  of  marriage,
as  implanted  in  the  human  heart,  would
be  simply  that  any  man  of  full  age  might
marry  any  woman  of  full  age,  provided
that  both  parties  were  willing.  But  this
liberty  is  at  once  controlled  by  a  number
of  restrictions,  the  main  purpose  of  which
is  to  prevent  incest,  which,  however  much
one  nation  may  come  to  be  indifferent  to  one
form  of  it,  and  another  to  another,  is  yet
abhorrent  to  the  feelings  and  principles  of
mankind.  The  Hebrew  restrictive  law  is  con-
tained in  one  verse.  None  of  yon  shall  ap-
proach to  any  that  is  near  of  Ion  to  him,  to
uncover  their  nakedness :  I  am  the  Lord.  All
that  follows  (vers.  9 — 18)  is  simply  an  ampli-
fication and  an  explanation  of  the  words,
lueor  of  kin  to  him.  These  words  would  bo
literally  rendered,  Jleeh  of  his  flesh,  or  less
probably  (as  in  the  margin),  remainder  of
his  flesh.  They  certainly  include  within
tho  compass  of  their  meaning  those  that
are  near  by  affinity,  as  much  as  those  that
are  near  by  consanguinity.  This  is  proved  by
the  instances  given  below,  where  no  differ-
ence is  drawn  between  blood  relations  and
relations  by  marriage,  the  latter  being  sup-
posed to  become  the  former,  in  consequence
of  the  marriage  that  has  taken  place,
Nearness  of  kin  is  generally  counted  by
"degrees;"  but,  unfortunately,  this  word  is
Itself  ambiguous,  for  it  is  used  in  different
senses  by  canonists  and  by  civilians.  So  far  as
the  direct  line  is  concerned,  the  same  method
of  calculation  is  observed  by  the  canon  and
by  t^   civil    law.    There   is   one  degree


from  the  son  to  the  mother,  two  degrees  to
the  grandmother ;  one  degree  from  the  fathef
to  the  daughter,  two  degrees  to  the  grand-
daughter. But  this  is  not  so  with  the  colla
teral  lines.  A  brother  and  sistev,  for  example,
are  regarded  by  the  canon  law  as  in  the  first
degree  of  kinship,  because  there  is  only  on«>
step  to  the  father,  in  whom  their  blood  meets .
but  the  civil  lawyers  consider  them  as  being
in  the  second  degree,  because,  as  they  cal-
culate, there  is  one  btep  from  the  brother
to  the  father,  and  a  second  from  the  father
to  the  sister.  An  aunt  is,  according  to
the  canonists,  in  the  second  degree  of  pro-
pinquity, because  there  are  two  steps  from
her  nephew  to  his  f<randfather,  who  is
likewise  her  father,  in  whom  their  blood
unites ;  but,  according  to  the  civilian's  cal-
culation, there  are  three  steps,  namely,  from
her  nephew  to  his  randfather,  two  steps,
and  a  third  from  that  grandfather  to  his
daughter  the  aunt ;  and  therefore  the  aunt
and  nephew  are  in  the  third  degree  of  pro-
pinquity. The  case  of  an  uncle  and  niece
is  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  a  nephew  and
aunt.  On  the  same  principle,  according  to
the  canonists,  first  cousins  are  in  the  second
degree  of  kinship;  according  to  the  civilians,
in  the  fourth.  Propinquity  by  afBnity  is
calculated  in  just  the  same  way;  so  that  the
brother's  wife  is  in  the  same  degree  of  rela-
tionship as  the  brother,  and  wife's  sister  as
the  sister  by  blood.  In  the  code  before  us,
confirmed  by  iiiat  in  Deuteronomy,  mar-
riage is  forbidden  with  the  following  blood
relations:  mother  (ver.  7),  daughter  (ver.  17),
sister  (ver.  9;  ch.  xx.  17;  Deut.  xxvii.  22),
granddaughter  (ver.  10),  aunt  (vers.  12,  13;
ch.  XX.  19);  and  with  the  following  relation!
by  afiBnity :  mother-in-law  (ver.  17 ;  oh.  xx.
14 ;  Deut.  xxvii.  23),  daughter-in-law  (ver.
15;  ch.  XX.  12),  brother's  wife  (ver.  16;  oh.
XX.  21),  stepmother  (ver.  8;  ch.  xx.  11;
Deut.  xxii.  30 ;  see  Gen.  xlix.  4 ;  1  Cor.  t.
1),  stepdaughter  and  step-granddaughter
(ver.  17),  uncle's  wife,  or  aunt  by  marriage
(ver.  14 ;  oh.  xx.  20) ;  patting  aside  for
the  present  the  question  of  who  is  meant
by  a  wife  to  her  sister,  in  ver.  18.  In
these  lists,  according  to  the  canonists'
method  of  reckoning,  the  mother,  the  daugh-
ter, and  the  sister  are  related  in  the  first
degree  of  consanguinity ;  the  wife's  mother,
the  wife's  daughter,  the  stepmother,  the
daughter-in-law,  the  brother's  wife,  are  re-
lated in  the  first  degree  of  affinity.  The
granddaughter  and  the  aunt  are  in  the
second  degree  of  consanguinity ;  the  wife's
granddaughter  and  the  uncle's  wife  in  th»
second  degree  of  affinity.  According  to  the
civilians'  reckoning,  the  following  would  be
the  degrees  of  propinquity:— The  mother
and  the  daughter  would  be  in  the  first  de-
gree of  consanguinity;  the  wife's  mother,  tbt


CH.  XVIII.  1 — 30.


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


273


wife's  daughter,  the  stepmother,  the  daugh-
ter-in-law, would  be  in  the  first  degree  of
affinity.     The  sister  and  the  granddaughter
would  be  in  the  second  degree  of  consan-
guinity ;  the  brother's  wife  and  the  wife's
granddaughter  would    be    in    the  second
degree  of  affinity.  The  aunt  by  blood  would
be  in  the  third  degree  of  consanguinity,
and  the  uncle's  wife,  or  aunt  by  marriage,
would  be  in   the  third  degree  of  affinity.
The  wife's  sister,  with  regard  to  whom  it  is
questioned  whether  she  is  referred  to  or  not
in  ver.  18,  is  in  the  first  degree  of  affinity
(a  man's  wife  being  regarded  as  himself)
according  to  the  canonists'  reckoning,  and  in
thee  econd  acoordin  g  to  the  civilians'.   There
is  no  mention  made  in  the  code  of  the  grand-
mother, the  niece,  and  the  cousin-german.
All  of  these  are  in  the  second  degree  of  con-
sanguinity according  to  the  canon  law ;  and
according  to  the  civil  law,  the  grandmother
would  be  in  the  second  degree,  the  niece  in  the
third,  and  the  cousin-german  in  the  fourth.
It  may  reasonably  be  supposed  that  by  the
expression,  None  of  you  shall  approach  to
<my  that  is  near  of  Mn  to  him,  to  uncover  their
nakedness,  intercourse  is  forbidden  lietween
all  those  who  are  related  by  consanguinity
or  affinity  in  the  first  and  second  degrees
accordini;  to  the  canonists'  reckoning  (except
coufiins-german,   whose  case    is  considered
below);  in  the  first,'Second,  and  third  de-
grees according  to  the  civilians'  method  of
calculating;  whether  they  are  mentioned  by
nam  ?  in  the  list  or  not.   It  is  only  by  implica-
tion, not  by  direct  injunction,  that  marriage
«ven  with  a  daughter  is  forbidden  (ver.  17).
Vers.  7,  8. — ^Incest  with  a  stepmother  is
placed  next  after  that  with  a  mother.     On
account  of  the  unity  caused  by  marriage
("  they  shall  be  one  flesh,"  Gen.  ii.  24),  the
atepmotUer's  nakedness  is  the  father's  naked-
ness.   The  tie  of  affinity  is  thus  declared  to
be  similar  in  its  efliects  to  the  tie  of  consan-
guinity. Reuben's  sin,  by  which  he  forfeited
his  birthright,  is  connected  with  this  offence,
but  is  of  a  more  heinous  character,  as  his
father  was  alive  at  the  time  of  his  trans-
gi-ession  (Gen.  xlix.  4).    It  is  one  of  the  sins
which  Ezekiel  enumerates  as  those  which
brought  the  judgment  of   God  on  Israel
(Ezek,  xxii.  10).  "  That  one  should  have  his
father's  wife"  is  declared  by  St.  Paul  to  be
"  such  fornication  as  is  not  named  among
the  Gentiles,"  and  to  call  for  the  excommu-
nication of  the  offender  (1  Cor.  v.  1 — 5).
Adonijah'smarriagewithAbishagiSostrongly
xesented  by  Solomon  on  political  grounds,
is  not  denounced  as  morally  reprehensible,
probably  because  Abishag  was  not  the  wife
of  David  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  the  mar-
riage with  his  son  to  be  abominable  in  the
«ye  of  the  law  (of.  1  Kings  i.  4  with  Amos
ii.  7).  Absalom's  "  going  in  unto  his  father's

T,EVIT(CUS.


concubines  "  was  regarded  as  the  final  act
which  made  reconciliation  with  his  father
impossible  (2  Sam.  xvi.  22;  xx.  3).  The
history  of  the  Church  has  shown  that  mar-
riage with  the  stepmother  has  had  to  be
again  and  again  prohibited  by  Council  after
Council  (see  Smith  and  Cheetham's  'Dic-
tionary of  Antiquitiei,'  «.v.  'Prohibited
Degrees ').

Ver.  9. — In  the  third  place,  incest  with
a  sister  is  forbidden,  and  it  is  specific-
ally stated  that  under  the  term  "sister"
is  meant  the  half-sister,  the  daughter  of
thy  father,  or  .  .  .  thy  mother,  .  .  .  bom
at  home,  as  would  naturally  be  the  case
if  she  were  the  father's  daughter,  or
bom  abroad,  that  is,  the  daughter  of
the  mother  by  a  previous  marriage,  when
she  belonged  to  a  different  household,  Ta-
mar's  appeal  to  Amnon,  "  I  pray  thee  speak
unto  the  king ;  for  he  will  not  withhold  me
from  thee,"  eSiibits  to  us  the  poor  woman
grasping  at  any  argument  which  migbt  save
her  from  her  half-brother's  brutality,  and
does  not  indicate  that  such  marriages  were,
in  the  time  of  David,  permissible  (2  Sam.  xiii.
29).  The  exact  degree  of  relationship  which
existed  between  Abraham  and  Sarah  is  not
altogether  certain  (cf.  Gen.  xx.  12  with  xi.
29).  Ezekiel  reckons  this  sin  in  the  cata-
logue of  the  iniquities  of  Jerusalem  (Ezek.
xxii.  11).

Ver.  10. — The  fourth  case  of  incest  which
is  prohibited  is  that  with  a  granddaugliter,
whether  the  daughter  of  son  or  daughter,
for,  as  they  are  descended  from  the  grand-
father, their's  is  thine  own  nakedness.

Ver.  1 1. — Incest  with  a  half-sister  on  the
father's  side  is  again  forbidden.  Perhaps
"  the  prohibition  refers  to  the  son  by  a  first
marriage,  whereas  ver.  9  treats  of  the  son
by  a  second  marriage  "  (Keil).

Vers.  12 — 15. — I'ifthly,  incest  with  a  pa-
ternal or  maternal  aunt  is  forbidden;  sixthly,
with  an  aunt  by  marriage :  seventhly,  with
a  daughteriin-law.  The  last  of  these  finds
its  place  in  Ezekiel's  catalogue  of  abojuiua-
tions  (Ezek.  xxii.  11 ;  cf.  Gen.  xxviii.  18,
26).

Ver.  16.— The  eighth  case  of  incest  is
intercourse  with  a  brother's  wife.  Yet  this
is  commanded  under  certain  circumstances
in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  and  was  prac-
tised in  patriiirohal  times  (Gen.  xxxviii.  8).
The  following  are  the  circumstances  under
which  it  is  commanded.  ••  If  brethren  dwell
together,  and  one  of  them  die,  and  have  no
child,  the  wife  of  the  dead  shall  not  marry
witliout  unto  a  stranger :  her  husband's
brother  shall  go  in  unto  her,  and  take  her
to  him  to  wife,  and  perform  the  duty  of  an
husband's  brother  unto  her  "  (Dent.  xxv.  5).
It  has  been  asked,  "How  can  the  same  tiling
be  forbidden  as  immoral  in  LevitiouB,  and

T


r4


THE  BOOK  OP  LBVITICU8.


[oh.  xvm.  1 — 80.


eommanded  as  a  duty  in  Deuteronomy?"
Bishop  Wordsworth  replies,  "In  a  special
case,  for  a  special  reason  applicable  only  to
the  Jews,  God  was  pleased  to  dispense  with
that  lav,  and  in  the  plenitnde  of  his  omni-
potence to  change  the  prohibition  into  a
eommand.  .  .  .  God  cannot  command  any-
thing that  is  sinful.  For  sin  is  '  transgres-
sion of  the  Law'  (1  John  iii.  4),  and
whatever  he  commands  is  right.  But  it
would  be  presumptuous  to  say  that  we  may
dispense  with  God's  law  concerning  mar-
riage, because  he  in  one  case  dispensed  with
it;  as  it  would  be  impious  to  affirm  that
murder  is  not  immoral,  and  may  be  com-
mitted by  us,  because  God,  who  is  the  sole
Arbiter  of  life  and  death,  commanded  Abra-
ham to  slay  his  son  Isaac."  The  leyirate
marriage  was  not  a  concession  to  the  desires
of  the  second  brother,  but  a  duty  enjoined
for  a  family  or  tribal  purpose,  and  it  was
plainly  at  all  times  most  distasteful.  Thus
Onan  refused  to  perform  his  duty  to  Br's
wife  (Gen.  zxxviii.  9);  the  legislation  in
Deuteronomy  anticipates  objection  on  the
part  of  the  brother,  and  institutes  an  in-
sulting ceremony  to  be  gone  through  by
him  if  he  declines  to  do  his  duty  to  his  dead
brother  (Deut.  xxv.  9,  10),  which  we  see
carried  out  in  some  of  ite  details  in  the
ease  of  Ruth's  kinsman  (Buth  iv.  7,  10).
Indeed,  in  such  a  marriage,  the  second  hus-
band seems  rather  to  have  been  regarded  as
the  continuation  of  the  first  husband  than
•8  having  a  substantive  existence  of  his  own
M  a  married  man.  He  performed  a  function
In  order  "that  the  name  of  his  brother
which  is  dead  may  not  be  put  out  of  Israel "
(Deut.  xxv.  6),  "to  raise  up  the  name  of
the  dead  upon  his  inheritance,  that  the
name  of  the  dead  be  not  cut  off  from  among
his  brethren"  (Ruth  iii.  10).  The  second
husband's  position  may  be  compared  to  that
of  the  concubine  presented  by  Rachel  to
her  husband.  "Behold  my  maid  Bilhah,
go  in  unto  her;  and  she  shall  bear  upon  my
knees,  that  I  may  also  have  children  by
her"  (Gen.  xxx.  3).  The  whole  object  of
the  rule  was  that,  as  the  elder  brother  could
not  keep  up  the  family  by  begetting  an
heir,  the  younger  brother  should  do  it  for
him  after  his  death.

Ver.  17. — The  ninth  form  of  incest  pro-
hibited is  intercourse  with  a  stepdaughter,
or  step-granddaughter,  or  mother-in-law.
The  expression  made  use  of,  Thon  ahalt  not
uncover  the  nakedness  of  a  woman  and  her
daughter,  covers  the  case  of  a  man's  own
daughter,  and  it  is  singular  that  it  is  only
in  this  incidental  manner  that  it  is  specifi-
cally named.  But  it  has  been  already  dis-
posed of  by  the  general  command,  Ifone  of
you  thall  approach  to  any  that  i$  nmr  of
ktm  to  him,  to  uncover  their  nakednem.    The


daughter  being  nearest  of  kin,  this  com-
mand was  sufficient  without  further  specifi-
cation. The  niece  and  probably  the  wife's
Bister  are  forbidden  by  the  same  general
rule  (see  following  note).

Ver.  18. — Neither  shalt  thon  take  a  wife
to  her  sister,  to  vez  her,  to  nncover  her
nakedness,  beside  the  other  in  her  life  time.
Do  these  words  refer  to  the  marriage  of  two
sisters  or  not?  It  has  been  passionately
affirmed  that  they  do,  by  those  who  are
opposed  to  permission  being  granted  for
marriage  with  a  deceased  wife's  sister,  and
by  those  who  are  in  favour  of  that  measure,
each  party  striving  to  derive  from  the  text
an  argument  for  the  side  which  they  are
maintaining.  But  Holy  Scripture  ought
not  to  be  made  a  quarry  whence  partizans
hew  arguments  for  views  which  they  have
already  adopted,  nor  is  that  the  light  in
which  a  commentator  can  allow  himself  to
regard  it.  A  reverent  and  profound  study
of  the  passage  before  us,  with  its  context
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  words  have
no  bearing  at  all  on  the  question  of  mar-
riage with  a  deceased  wife's  sister,  and  thus
it  may  be  removed  from  the  area  and
atmosphere  of  angry  polemics.  It  is  cer-
tain that  the  words  translated  a  wife  to  her
lister  may  be  translated,  in  accordance  vrith
the  marginal  rendering,  one  wife  to  another.
The  objections  made  to  such  a  version  are
arbitrary  and  unconvinciiig.  It  is  in  ac-
cordance with  the  genius  of  the  Hebrew
language  to  take  "father,"  "  son,"  "  brother,"
"  sister,"  in  a  much  wider  acceptation  than
is  the  case  in  the  Western  tongues.  Any-
thing that  produces  or  causes  is  metaphori-
cally a  "father;"  anything  produced  or
caused  is  a  "  son ; "  any  things  akin  to  each
other  in  form,  shape,  character,  or  nature^
are  "brothers"  and  "sisters."  This  is  the
name  given  to  the  loops  of  the  ciutains  ot
the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxvi.  3,  5,  6),  the
tenons  of  the  boards  (Exod.  xxvi.  17),  and
the  wings  of  the  cherubim  (Ezek.  L  11, 23).
Indeed,  wherever  the  expression,  "  a  man  to
his  brother,"  or  "a  woman  to  her  sister,"  is
used  (and  it  is  used  very  frequently)  in
the  Hebrew  Scriptures,  it  means  not  two
brothers  or  two  sisters,  but  two  things  or
persons  similar  in  kind.  This  doea  more
than  raise  a  presumption — it  creates  a  high
probability — that  the  expression  should  be
understood  in  the  same  way  here.  But  •
difficulty  then  arises.  If  the  right  reading
is,  Neither  ehaU  thou  take  one  wife  to  another,
does  not  the  verse  forbid  polygamy  alto-
gether, and  is  not  polygamy  permitted  by
Exod.  xxi  7—11 :  Deut.  xxi.  15—17;  xviL
17  ?  Certainly,  if  so  important  a  restriotioa
was  to  be  made,  we  should  expect  it  to  b«
made  directly,  and  in  a  manner  which  ooiiM
not  be  disputed.    Is  there  any  way  oat  tt


OH.  xvm.  1—30.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUa


275


the  difficulty?  Let  ub  examine  each  word
of  the  Law.  Neither  shall  than  take  one  wife
to  another,  to  vex,  to  wncover  her  nakedneei
upon  her. in  her  life  time.  The  two  words,  to
vex,  have  not  been  sufficiently  dwelt  on.
The  Hebrew,  tsarar,  means  to  distress  by
packing  closely  together,  and  bo,  to  vex,
or  to  annoy  in  any  way.  Here  is  to  be
found  the  ground  of  the  prohibition  con-
tained in  the  law  before  us.  A  man  is  not
to  take  for  a  second  wife  a  woman  who  is
likely,  from  spiteful  temper  or  for  other
reasons,  to  vex  the  first  wife.  Bachel  vexed
Leah;  Peninnah  vexed  Hannah;  the  first
pair  were  blood  relations,  the  second  were
not ;  but  under  the  present  law  the  second
marriage  would  in  both  cases  have  been
equally  forbidden,  if  the  probability  of  the
provocation  had  been  foreseen.  It  follows
that  polygamy  is  not  prohibited  by  the  text
before  us,  but  that  the  liberty  of  the  poly-
gamist  is  somewhat  circumscribed  by  the
application  of  the  law  of  charity.  It
follows,  too,  that  the  law  has  no  bearing
on  the  question  of  marriage  wi_th  a  deceased
wife's  sister,  which  is  neither  forbidden  nor
allowed  by  it.  Are  we  then  to  conclude
that  the  Law  of  Moses  leaves  the  case  of
the  wife's  sister  untouched  ?  Not  so,  for  the
general  principle  has  been  laid  down,  None
of  you  shall  approach  to  any,  that  is  near
of  kin  to  him,  to  uncover  hit  nakedTiess,  and,
as  we  have  seen,  the  expression,  near  of  kin,
includes  relations  by  affinity  equally  with
blood  relations ;  as  therefore  the  wife's  sister
is  in  the  canonists'  first  degree  of  affinity
(and  in  the  second  according  to  the  civilians),
it  is  reasonably  inferred  that  marriage
with  her  is  forbidden  under  the  above  law,
and  this  inference  is  confirmed  by  marriage
with  the  other  sister-in-law — the  brother's
wife — being,  as  the  rule,  prohibited.  It
can  hardly  be  doubted  that  marriage  with
the  grandmother  and  with  the  niece — both
in  the  second  degree  of  consanguinity  ac-
cording to  the  canonists,  and  the  third  de-
gree according  to  the  civilians — and  incest
with  a  daughter  are  forbidden  under  Uie
same  clause.

The  present  verse  completes  the  Levitical
codeof  prohibited  degrees.  The  Boman  code  of
restrictions  on  marriage  was  almost  identical
with  the  Mosaic  tables.  It  only  differed  from
them  by  specifically,  naming  the  grandmother
and  the  niece  among  the  blood  relations  with'
whom  a  marriage  might  not  be  contracted,
and  omitting  the  brother's  wife  among  rela-
tives by  affinity.  In  the  time  of  Claudius,
a  change  was  introduced  into  it,  for  the  pur-
pose of  gratifying  the  emperor's  passion  for
Agrippina,  which  legalized  marriage  with  a
brother's  daughter.  This  legalization  con-
tinued in  force  until  the  time  of  Consian-
tiua,  who  made  marriage  with  •  niece  a


capital  crime.  The  imperial  code  and  th«
canon 'law  were  framed  npon  the  Mosaio
and  the  Eoman  tables,  and  under  them  no
question  arose,  except  as  to  the  marriage  of
the  niece,  the  deceased  wife's  sister,  and
the  first  cousin.  Marriage  with  the  niece
was  forbidden  by  Constantius,  as  we  have
said,  in  the  year  355,  on  penalty  of  capital
punishment  for  committing  the  offence,
and  marriage  with  a  deceased  wife's  sister
was  declared  by  the  same  emperor  to  be
null.  The  canons  of  Councils  and  the
declarations  of  the  chief  Church  teachers
are_  in  full  accordance  vrith  the  imperial
legislation,  condemning  these  marriages
yv ithout  a  dissentient  voice.  The  only  case
in  which  no  consensus  is  found  is  that  of
the  marriage  of  first  cousins.  By  the  earliest
Boman  law  these  marriages  had  been  dis-
allowed (Tacitus, 'Annal.,'  xii.  6),  but  in
the  second  century  b.o.  they  had  become
common  (Livy,  xlii.  34),  and  they  continued
to  be  lawful  till  the  year  a.d.  384  or  385,
when  Theodosius  condemned  them,  and
made  them  punishable  by  the  severest
penalties  possihle.  This  enactment  lasted
only  twenty  years,  when  it  was  repealed  by
Arcadius,  a.d.  404  or  405.  No  adverse
judgment  respecting  the  marriage  of  first
cousins  was  pronounced  by  the  Church
until  after  the  legislation  of  Theodosius,
but  it  appears  that  that  legislation  was  pro-
moted at  her  instance,  and  ftom  that  time
forward  the  tendency  to  condemn  these  mar-
riages became  more  and  more  pronounced.
See  the  canons  of  the  Councils  of  Agde,
Bpaone,  Auvergne,  Orleans,  Tours,  Auxerre,
in  the  sixth  century,  and  of  the  Council  in
TruUo  in  the  seventh  century.  The  reformers
of  the  sixteenth  century  in  England,  en-
trenching themselves,  as  usual,  behind  the
letter  of  Scripture  and  the  practice  of  the
primitive  Church,  forbade  marriages  of  con-
sanguinity and  affinity  in  the  first,  second,
and  third  degrees  according  to  the  reckoning
of  the  oivU  law,  and  in  the  first  and  secoml
degrees  according  to  the  reckoning  of  the
canon  law,  excepting  those  of  first  cousins,
on  which  the  early  Christians  pronounced
no  decisive  judgment.

Ver.  19. — The  marriage  restrictions  having
been  laid  down,  there  follows  in  the  fivo
next  verses  the  prohibition  of  five  sexual
impurities  unconnected  with  marriage  except
by  their  subject-matter.  The  first  ia  to
approach  unto  a  woman  to  uncover  her
nakedness,  as  long  as  she  is  pat  apart  for
her  uncleanness,  that  is,  either  for  seven  days
at  the  time  of  her  ordinary  Ulnesses  (ch.  xv.
19),  or  any  longer  time  that  her  illness
might  last  (oh.  iv.  25),  or  for  forty  days  after
the  birth  of  a  man  child  (ch.  xii.  2 — 4),  or  foi
eighty  days  after  the  birth  of  a  girl  (ch.  xii
5).    The  penalty  for  the  offence  within  tL.


27«


TEE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  xvin.  1 — 30,


seven  d«ya  is  death  if  committed  wilfully
(ch.  IX.  18)  ;  if  fallen  into  unknowingly,  a
ceremonial  penalty  of  seven  days'  nnclean-
ness  is  incurred  (oh.  xv.  24).  It  is  twice
referred  to  by  EzeUel  as  a  gross  sin  (Ezek.
xviii.  6  ;  xxii.  10).

Ver.  20. — The  second  prohibition  is,  Thou
shalt  not  lie  carnally  with  thy  neighbour's
wife — a  prohibition  already  made  in  other
words  in  the  ten  commandments.  The
punishment  for  adultery  id  death  by  stoning
(ch.  XX.  10;  Deut.  xxii.  22;  Jo  ,n  ix.  .5) —
a  more  severe  penalty  than  was  usually,
inflicted  in  other  nations.

Ver.  21. — Tlie  tliird  prohibition  is.  Thou
shalt  not  let  any  of  thy  seed  pass  through
the  fire  to  Molech,  The  words  the  fire  are
pro[ierly  inserted,  though  not  expressed  in
the  original  (of.  Dent,  xviii.  10;  2  Kings
xxii.  10).  What  was  the  nature  and  |iur-
pose  of  the  idolatrous  rite  in  question  is,
however,  uncertain.  It  is  generally  as-
Bun.ed  that  reference  is  made  to  the  practice
of  offering  children  in  sacrifice  to  Molech,
Deut.  xii.  31,  Ezck.  xvi.  20,  and  Ps.  cvi.
37  being  quoted  in  support  of  that  view.
But  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  this  was
the  case.  It  might  have  been  a  rite  by
which  children  were  dedicated  to  Molech —
a  baptism  by  fire,  not  resulting  in  the  death
ef  tlie  child.  Its  mention  here,  in  close
connection  with  carnal  sins,  has  led  some  to
regard  it  as  an  impure  rite ;  but  this  is  a
mistaken  inference,  for  the  prohibition  of
adultery  naturally  suggests  the  prohibition
of  a  spiritual  unfaithfulness,  lliat  it  was
some  kind  of  idolatrous  ceremony  is  shown
by  the  addition  of  the  words,  neither  shalt
thou  profane  the  name  of  thy  God.  But  if
the  children  were  burnt  to  death  in  honour
of  the  idol,  from  the  beginning,  we  should
expect  to  find  a  notice  of  the  fact  in  less
ambiguous  language  than  the  expression,
pass  through  the  fire,  conveys,  earlier  than
the  days  of  Ahaz.  It  is  easy  to  imagine
that  what  began  as  a  dedication  ceremony
may  have  become  converted  into  an  absolute
sacrifice,  retaining  still  its  original  designa-
tion. Molech  was  a  Canaanitish  and  Phoeni-
cian deity,  the  name  meaning  King,  just  as
Baal  means  Lord  (see  Selden,  '  De  Diis
Syris,'  i.  6).  Jarchi,  quoted  by  Wordsworth,
describes  the  idol  as  "  made  of  brass,  having
the  face  of  an  ox,  with  arms  stretched  out,  in


which  the  child  was  placed  and  bnmt  with
fire,  while  the  priests  were  beating  drums,
in  order  to  drown  the  noise  of  its  shrieks,
lest  the  fathers  might  be  moved  with  pity
thereby."  The  place  where  the  children
were  offered,  in  the  later  period  of  the
Jewish  history,  was  the  valley  of  Hiunom
(Jer.  vii.   31  ;  xxxii.  35 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  10).

Ver.  22. — The  fourth  prohibition  foibidi
the  sin  of  Sodom  (see  Gen.  xix.  5;  Judg.
xi.  22;  Rom.  i.  27;  1  Cor.  vi.  9;  1  Tim.
i.  10).     The  penalty  is  death  (ch.  xx.  13).

Ver.  23.— The  fifth  pruhibition  (see
Herod.,  ii.  16).  The  penalty  is  death  (oh.
XX.  15).

Vera.  24 — 30. — These  verses  contain  a
warning  against  the  sins  of  incest  and  im-
purity already  specified.  The  reason  why
the  Canaanites  were  cast  out  before  the
Israelites  was  that  they  were  defiled  in  all
these  things,  . .  .  and  the  land  was  defiled  by
thim.  Gud  visited  the  iniquity  of  these
debased  races,  and  the  land  itself  vomited
out  hei:  inhabitants  on  account  of  their
abominations.  Thefate  of  the  Canaanites  was
therefore  a  witness  to  them  of  what  would
be  their  fate  if  they  did  like  them.  Defile
not  ye  yourselves  in  any  of  these  things.
...  Ye  shall  not  commit  any  of  these  abomi-
nations, .  .  .  that  the  land  spue  not  yon  out
also,  when  ye  defile  it.  Special  penalties
are  appointed  for  particular  sins  further  on.
Here  there  are  but  two  punishments  de-
nounced, one  for  individual  sinners,  the
other  national.  The  individual  sinner  is  to
be  cut  off  from  the  nation  by  excommu-
nication, For  whosoever  shall  commit  any
of  these  abominations,  even  the  souls  that
commit  them  shall  be  cut  off  from  among
their  people.  The  nation,  if  it  does  not
thus  purify  itself  by  cutting  off  from  itself
the  authors  of  these  corruptions,  is  to  perish
like  the  Canaanites.  The  words  vomiteth
(ver.  25)  and  spued  out  (ver.  28)  are  in  that
tense  of  the  Hebrew  verb  which  is  generally
called  by  grammarians  a  preterite,  but  this
tense  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  past  time ;
the  time  refen'ed  to  depends  on  the  context.
The  previous  verbs,  "I  cast  out,"  "I  do
vitit,"  being  present  in  sense,  the  two  verbs,
"vomiteth  out  (her  inhabitants),"  and
"spued  out  (the  nations  that  were  befow
you),"  aie  present  also  (see  Introduction).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1—18. — The  restraints  thrown  about  marriage  hy  OocCs  Law  are  not  meabt  to
confine  within  the  narrowest  limits  that  which  is  a  necessary  evil,  but  to  guard  a  holy
institution,  and  prevent  its  being  corrupted  by  abuse.  Manichffianisni  and  asceticism,
which  is  essentially  Manichaean  in  its  character,  denounce  the  body  and  the  bodily
afFections  as  being  In  themselves  bad ;  stoicism  strives  to  crush  out  or  eradicate  natural


OH.  xvni.  1— 30.J  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  277

feelings,  to  make  place  for  a  passionless  calm.  God's  Law  and  the  doctrine  of  the
Church  declare  that  it  is  the  abuse,  not  the  use,  of  the  body  that  is  wrong  ;  and,  like
the  better  fortos  of  philosophy,  occupy  themselves  with  regulating,  controlling,  ruling
man's  passions,  instead  of  vainly  attempting  to  kill  them.  "  Marriage  is  honourable
in  all,  and  the  bed  undefiled:  but  whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will  judge"
(Heb.  xiiL  4).»

I.  Mabeiagb  was  instituted  as  the  fbiueyal  law  at  the  obbation  of  woman.
"  So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in  the  image  of  God  created  he  him ;  male
and  female  created  he  them.  And  God  blessed  them,  and  God  said  unto  them,  Be
fruitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth  "  (Gen.  i.  27,  2d).  "  And  Adam  said.
This  is  now  bone  of  my  bones,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh :  she  shall  be  called  Woman,
because  she  was  taken  out  of  Man.  Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his
mother,  and  shall  cleave  unto  his  wife :  and  they  shall  be  one  flesh  "  (Gen.  ii.  23,  24).

n.  Paballel  between  the  mabeiaoe  law  and  the  sabbatical  law.  1.  The  sab-
batical law,  in  like  manner  as  the  marriage  law,  was  instituted  at  the  creation  (Gen.
ii.  3).  2.  Both  laws  took  a  special  form  tor  the  patriarchal  and  Israelitish  Churches.
3.  In  both  cases  an  alteration  was  made  by  the  authority  of  our  Lord,  the  obligation
of  the  laws  stUl  continuing  as  before.  The  form  which  the  law  of  the  sabbath
took  for  the  Jewish  people  may  be  seen  in  the  seventh  commandment  and  other
Mosaic  injunctions  respecting  the  seventh  day.  The  law  of  marriage  likewise  under-
went a  change  from  its  original  character,  and  instead  of  enjoining  monogamy,  it
allowed  polygamy ;  and  "  because  of  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts,"  it  permitted
divorce  for  light  causes  (see  Matt.  xix.  3 — 12).  The  manner  of  observing  the
sabbatical  law  was  changed  for  Christians  by  the  authority  which  our  Lord  declared
himself  to  possess  for  the  purpose  (Matt.  xii.  8),  and  which  the  constant  habit  of  the
earliest  Christians,  of  assembling  on  the  first  day  of  the  week  and  regarding  it  as  the
commemoration  of  the  Resurrection  day,  proves  him  to  have  exercised.  In  like  manner,
he  restored  the  law  of  monogamy  (Matt.  xlx.  8),  and  withdrew  the  licence  for  divorce,
except  in  the  one  case  of  admtery  on  the  part  of  the  wife  (Malt.  xix.  9).  In  respect  to
the  Levitical  restraints  on  marriage  he  made  no  change,  as  is  again  proved  to  us  by  the
universal  recognition  of  these  obligations  on  the  part  of  the  early  Christians.

III.  Additional  sanctity  was  added  to  mabbiaqe  by  Chmstianitt.  In  the
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  St.  Paul  points  out  the  analogy  which  exists  between  the
relation  of  husbands  to  wives,  and  of  wives  to  husbands,  and  the  relation  of  Christ  to
the  Church,  and  of  the  Church  to  Christ.  "  The  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife,  even
as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  Church  :  and  he  is  the  saviour  of  the  body.  Therelbre  as
the  Church  is  subject  unto  Christ,  so  let  the  wives  be  to  their  own  husbands  in  every-
thing. Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ  also  loved  the  Church,  and  gave
himself  for  it.  .  .  .  For  no  man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  flesh ;  but  nourisheth  and
cherisheth  it,  even  as  the  Lord  the  Church :  for  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,
and  of  his  bones.  For  this  cause  shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  mother,  and  shall  be
joined  unto  his  wife,  and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh.  This  is  a  great  mystery  :  but  I
speak  concerning  Christ  and  the  Church  "  (Eph.  v.  23 — 32).  An  inference  has  been
drawn  from  these  words  that  Christ  instituted  holy  matrimony  as  a  sacrament  of  the
Christian  Church.  Such  inference  is  altogether  I'alse.  Marriage  was  not  considered  one
of  seven  sacraments  until  the  days  of  the  Schoolmen ;  but  the  passage  exhibits  the  holi-
ness of  marriage  in  a  new  light,  and  gives  a  new  reason  for  its  being  regarded  as  holy.
The  "  mystery  "  is  the  analogy  which  exists  between  married  persons  and  Christ  and  the
Church.  St.  Paul  quotes  the  words  of  institution  from  the  Book  of  Genesis,  showing  what
a  high  estate  matrimony  is,  and  gives  this  further  reason  for  its  holiness,  which  had
not  previously  been  known  to  exist.  Such  a  thought  as  this  takes  marriage  out  of  the
sphere  of  carnal  things,  refining,  purifying,  and  sanctifying  it  in  a  manner  not  yet
appreciated  wherever  celibacy  is  regarded  as  a  higher  and  holier  condition.

IV.  The  causes  foe  which  matrimony  was  oedained.  "  First,  It  was  ordained  for
the  procreation  of  children,  to  be  brought  up  in  the  fear  and  nurture  of  the  Lord,  and
to  the  praise  of  his  holy  Name.  Secondly,  It  was  ordained  for  a  remedy  against  sin,
and  to  avoid  fornication.  •  ,  .  Thirdly,  It  was  ordained  for  the  mutual  society,  help,

*  "  Let  marriage  he  had  in  honour  among  all,  and  kt  the  bed  be  undefiled :  for  fornicators
•nd  adulterers  God  will  judge."— Eevised  Version.


279  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  leu.  xviii.  1—30.


and  comfort,  that  the  one  ought  to  have  of  the  other,  both  in  prosperity  and  adversity  "
(Form  of  Solemnization  of  Matrimony).  The  third  of  these  causes  has  been  too
often  forgotten  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  the  second  has  been  too  much  dwelt
upon ;  the  consequence  of  which  has  been  a  low  estimate  of  marriage,  and  tberefora
of  woman.  St.  Paul's  words  ought  to  show  us  that  it  is  this  characteristic  which
gives  its  Christian  aspect  to  marriage.

V.  Duties  of  husbands  and  wives  towards  bach  othbb.  On  the  one  side,  love  and
protection  (Eph.  v.  25) ;  on  the  other  side,  love  and  submission  (Eph.  v.  24,  33).

Vers.  19—23. — The  preservation  of  the  marriage  relationship  in  its  purity  is  the
safeguard  against  sins  of  lust,  which  will  be  sure  to  invade  a  society  wherever  licen-
tiousness or  asceticism  has  dishonoured  marriage.

Vers.  24 — 30. — Dissolute  morals  in  respect  to  the  relations  of  the  sexes  ii  always
a  symptom  which  precedes  the  ruin  of  an  empire  or  the  fall  of  a  nation.  It  is  both  a
sign  and  a  cause — ^a  sign  of  a  general  corruption,  which  will  show  itself  elsewhere  and
under  other  forms ;  and  a  cause  of  the  coming  evils,  as  indulgence  in  bocyiy  pleasures
and  Sybarite  excesses  takes  away  the  firmness  of  will  and  readiness  to  endure  hardness
which  are  necessary  conditions  of  both  soldiers  and  citizens  doing  their  duty  to  the
State.  When  a  country  is  sunk  in  dissoluteness  there  is,  generally  speaking,  no  reno-
vation for  it  except  by  the  irruption  of  a  new  race,  as  of  the  Israelites  in  Canaan,  or  of
the  barbarous  nations  on  the  breaking  up  of  the  old  Roman  Empire.  The  moral  reason
of  the  extermination  of  the  Canaanites  was  the  danger  of  their  hcentiousness  spreading,
•8  has  ofteu  been  the  case,  to  the  conquerors  (fit  Kumb.  xxr.  17, 18).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

UntBorldHneu.  Oh.  xviii.;  cf.  Rom.  xii.  2,  The  next  element  In  the  morality
required  of  the  Lord's  people  is  non-conformity  to  this  world.  We  are  such  Imitative
creatures  that  we  are  prone  to  do  as  our  neighbours  do,  without  questioning  the  pro-
priety of  their  conduct.  Whenever  we  adopt  the  ordinary  standard  of  life,  without
inquiring  how  it  is  related  to  the  Divine  standard,  we  are  conforming  to  the  worldly
spirit.  The  worldly  conduct  may  be  much  higher  in  one  age  than  in  another,  and  in
one  country  than  in  another ;  but  the  essence  of  worldlinest  is  tmquestioning  conformity
to  the  standard  of  owr  neighbimrs.

In  the  present  chapter  we  have  a  fearful  picture  of  the  morality,  or  rather
immorality,  of  Canaan.  It  may  be  read  in  connection  with  Rom.  i.  18 — 32,  as  showing
the  depth  to  which  unrestrained  desire  may  descend.  Not  only  do  the  Canaanites
appear  to  have  indulged  in  the  most  reckless  licentiousness  with  nearest  relatives,  but
also  to  have  indulged  in  sodomy,  and  even  to  have  descended  to  carnal  intercourse  with
beasts.  That  is  to  say,  they  gave  up  their  high  vantage-ground  as  intellectual  and
moral  beings,  and  descended  to  the  level  of  brute  beasts  (cf.  2  Pet.  ii.  12).  We  would
require  to  go  to  the  dark  places  of  heathenism,  which  are  still  "  full  of  the  habitations  of
cruelty  "  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  20),  to  find  an  exact  parallel  at  present  for  Canaan.  The  progress
of  civilization  has  smoothed  the  surface  of  society,  however  little  it  may  have  touched
its  heart.  But  what  we  must  notice  is  that  the  principle  of  worldly  conformity  may
be  just  as  active  in  our  boasted  civilization,  as  in  the  darkest  haunts  of  heathenism.

I.  Tub  highest  civilization  is  no  suppicient  kbason  fob  a  oebtain  line  of
conduct.  The  Israelites  had  been  developed  in  Egypt,  which  was  then  at  the  head  of
civilization.  It  would  be  a  very  great  temptation,  therefore,  to  these  liberated
bondmen  to  walk  according  to  the  customs  and  ordinances  of  Egypt.  They  would  be
tempted  to  do  many  things  on  no  higher  ground  than  that  they  had  seen  them  done  in
Egypt.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that  the  Lord  admonishes  them  in  these  terms :  "  After
the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  wherein  ye  dwelt,  shall  ye  not  do  "  (ver.  3).

And  yet  is  not  this  exactly  the  position  taken  up  by  many  at  this  hour  ?  They  do
many  things  "  on  the  very  highest  authority."  The  reason  of  the  course,  its  moral
value,  is  never  thought  of,  but  simply  the  precedent  which  can  be  produced  for  it.    This


OH.  xvin.  1— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  279

spirit  of  "  simian  imitation  "  is  worldliness  pure  and  simple.  The  highest  civilization
is  not  necessarily  moral,  much  less  religious :  why  should  I  conform  to  the  demands  of
a  capricious  code  of  laws,  which  may  have  no  valid  moral  principle  within  them  at  all  ?
God  surely  has  not  given  us  reflection  and  conscience  to  be  ignored  in  such  a  way  ai
this.

II.   PKEVAILINa    CUSTOM    18    NO    SXJT'FICIBNT    HBASON    EITHER    FOR    A    CERTAIN    LINK

OF  COND0OT.  The  Israelites,  in  coming  into  Canaan,  would  find  the  inhabitants
the  freest  and  easiest  possible  in  the  matter  of  morals.  No  restraint  appears  to  have
been  put  upon  their  passions.  They  did  whatever  was  right  in  their  own  eyes.  Their
lusts  were  their  law.  Now,  were  the  Israelites  to  go  into  the  land  in  the  "jolly-good-
fellow  "  style,  they  would  be  popular  at  once.  The  entrance  into  Canaan  would  in
such  a  case  have  been  an  easy  and  triumphal  march.  Conformity  to  prevailing
custom  would  have  made  the  immigration  a  God-send  to  the  beastly  inhabitants.  It
would  have  given  novelty  to  their  desires.  Hence  God  warns  his  people  in  the  words,
"  And  after  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Canaan,  whither  I  bring  you,  shall  ye  not  do :
neither  shall  ye  walk  in  their  ordinances  "  (ver.  3).

The  snare  of  popularity  prevails  at  present  as  powerfully  as  it  did  when  Israel  was
about  to  enter  Canaan.  There  is  a  great  disposition  with  professedly  religious  people,
"  when  at  Rome,  not  to  quarrel  with  the  pope."  Conformity  to  prevailing  custom  is
a  popular  rdle  to  play.  It  costs  nothing,  except  indeed  the  sacrifice  of  principle,  and  it
gains  in  the  worldly  sense  much.  But  no  thinking  mind  imagines  it  is  a  rule  of
human  conduct  which  will  stand  a  moment's  consideration.  Why  should  I  yield  to
what  may  be  a  senseless  and  even  an  immoral  custom,  simply  because  it  is  a  custom  ?
I  have  not  been  endowed  with  reason  for  such  an  irrational  result  as  this.

III.  When    men    bacrifige    their    manhood    to   worldly   conformity,  they

FIND    eventually    THAT    THEY    HAVE    TAKEN    A    SUICIDAL    COURSE.      The     COUrSO    of

the   Canaanites  was  a   suicidal  one.     The    land    was    spuing  .them   out  (ver.   28).
The  selfish,  lustful  lives  they  led,  the  brutalities  they  practised,  became  their  scourge,
■   and  they  were  fading  away.     The  same  result  is  found  among  the  heathen  nations.
The  sacrifice  of  manhood  to  bestiality  must  pay  the  penalty  of  eventual  extinction.

And  though  at  first  sight  the  operation  of  the  principle  may  be  retarded  by
the  higher  morale  of  civilization,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  suicidal  character
of  worldly  conformity  is  a  real  experience.  An  individual  loses  mental  as  well  as
moral  power,  who  conforms  without  question  to  the  worldly  customs  of  his  time,  and
thus  sacrifices  his  manhood.  The  easy-going,  popular  individual,  who  does  this,  that,
and  the  other,  for  fear  of  being  thought  singular,  is  found  to  have  very  little  strength  of
mind  to  begin  with,  and  less  every  day  he  lives.  In  fact,  nature  is  constructed  upon
the  principle  that  the  despised  talent  of  manhood  is  forfeited  when  not  employed,  and
there  is  a  clear  descent  in  the  scale  of  being.

IV.  God  has  given  us  sufficiently  plain  statutes  and  laws  to  ee-
infokcb  us  IN  OUR  COMBAT  WITH  THE  WORLD.  "Ye  shall  do  my  judgments,  and
keep  mine  ordinances,  to  walk  therein  :  I  am  the  Lord  your  God.  Ye  shall  therefore
keep  my  statutes,  and  my  judgments ;  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them :  I  am
the  Lord  "  (vers.  4, 5).  "  And  be  not  conformed  to  this  world :  but  be  ye  transformed  by
the  renewing  of  your  mind,  that  ye  may  prove  what  is  that  good,  and  acceptable,  and
perfect  will  of  God  "  (Rom.  xii.  2).  Transformation,  "transfiguration"  (^ero/uip^oCfl-fle;
of.  Matt.  xvii.  2  ;  Mark  ix.  2)  as  we  might  call  it,  that  is,  a  bringing  of  ourselves  in  to
conformity  to  a  Divine  ideal ;  this  is  what  unworldliness  consists  in.  We  do  not  cease
to  be  worldly  when  we  surrender  half  a  dozen  suspicious  pleasures.  We  cease  to  be
"  worldly "  only  when  we  refuse  to  accept  of  the  prevailing  worldly  standard  as  our
law  of  life,  and  seek  earnestly  to  know  "  what  is  that  good,  and  acceptable,  and  perfect
will  of  God."

And  to  help  us  to  this  God  has  not  only  given  us  a  book  so  plain  and  practical  upon
matters  of  daily  life  that  he  that  runs  may  read  ;  but  he  has  also  embodied  this  ideal
in  the  perfect  manhood  of  his  Son.  We  have  simply  to  ask  the  question,  "  What
would  Christ,  were  he  in  our  circumstances,  do?"  and  instantly  we  are  enabled  to
decide  on  an  appropriate  and  an  unworldly  course  of  action.  It  is  this  manly  rule  of
life  to  which  we  are  called.  To  bow  down  to  the  customs  of  even  the  best  society  or
the  highest  civilization  without  inquiring  how  these  customs  stand  towards  the  Divine


280  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xvm.  1— 38

Law,  is  to  sacrifice  ovir  birthright  of  manliness  for  a  mess  of  the  rudest  pottage.—
B.  M*  EL

Vers.  1' — 30. — Abominable  doings.  This  chapter  contains  laws  against  abominationi
practised  by  the  heathen,  together  with  reasons  why  they  must  be  avoided  by  the
people  of  God.    Foremost  amongst  these  reasons  is —

I.  That  thbt  abb  forbidden  by  God.  This  is  the  highest  reason,  for  il.  He  is
the  supreme  Arbiter  of  men  (vers.  5,  6,  24) :  "  I  am  the  Lord."  (1)  He  is  our  Creator.
1 1  is  power  over  the  work  of  his  hands  is  absolute.  It  is  our  wisdom  to  confess  this
without  gainsaying.  (2)  He  is  our  Governor.  He  has  not  abandoned  his  creation  to
mechanical  laws.  The  providence  of  his  intelligence  is  everywhere  and  ever  active.
This  his  people  saw  in  the  miracles  of  the  Exodus.  (3)  Moral  beings  are  morally
responsible  to  a  God  of  holiness  and  truth.  His  will  is  law.  It  is  truth.  It  is  puvily.
2.  He  is  the  covenant  Friend  of  his  people  (vers.  1,  4,  30) :  "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God. "
(1)  The  covenant  relationship  is  set  forth  in  this  declaration.  It  therefore  suggests  all
the  promises.  Blessings  pertaining  to  this  life ;  also  to  that  which  is  to  come.
What  glorious  blessings !  (2)  Gratitude  is  appealed  to  here.  Love  should  constrain
us.  The  obedience  of  love  is  the  purest.  It  is  most  acceptable  to  God.  It  is  most
perfect ;  for  the  whole  being  is  in  it.

II.  That  the  heathen  have  practised  them.  1.  They  were  the  doings  of  tfa
Egyptians  (ver.  3).  (1)  The  corrupt  state  of  heart  which  prompted  them,  and  which
»  as  ag<j;ravated  by  their  repetition,  was  that  from  which  the  children  of  Israel  suffered
cruel  and  relentless  persecutions  and  oppressions.  The  bitter  experience  they  had  of
these  abominations  should  lead  them  scrupulously  to  avoid  them.  (2)  If  they  had
learnt  to  follow  their  vices,  it  is  time  to  unlearn  them,  now  that  they  have  been
delivered  from  Egypt.  Providence  furnishes  men  with  opportunities  favourable  to
lepentance  and  reformation.  We  are  answerable  for  these.  2.  They  were  the  doings  of
the  Canaanites.  (I)  Customs  common  to  the  heathen  should  be  viewed  with  sus-
picion by  the  people  of  God.  The  practices  of  custom  come  to  be  called  "  ordinances  "
(see  ver.  3).  Ordinances  of  man  must  not  be  confounded  with  ordinances  of  God.  (^)
We  need  admonition  here.  It  is  easy  to  flow  with  the  stream ;  difficult  to  stem  the
torrent.  We  miMt  bi'^e  ourselves  to  this.  We  should  look  to  God  to  nerve  our
resolution.

III.  That  THE  MATTER  IS  vital.  1.  Qodleads  his  people  into  temptation.  (1)  Thu»
he  led  his  people  into  Egypt.  Now  he  conducts  them  in  amongst  the  Canaanites.  "  Shall
there  be  evil  in  a  city  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ?  "  (see  Isa.  xlv.  7  ;  Amos  iii.  6).
(2)  Yet  is  not  God  the  Author  of  mm'al  evil.  Physical  may  exist  apart  from  moral
evil.  Witness  the  afflictions  of  Job  (see  also  John  ix.  1 — 3).  (3)  God  leads  men  into
temptation,  not  that  they  may  fall  into  it,  but  that  they  may  learn  to  resist  it,  and  so
form  a  strong  moral  character.  2.  There  is  life  in  the  Law  to  those  who  can  keep  it.
(1)  In  so  far  as  it  is  fulfilled,  it  brings  the  benefits  of  a  wise  and  good  code  (Deut.  iv.  8 ;
Neh.  ix.  13,  14;  Ps.  cxlvii.  19,. 20).  (2)  But  who  can  so  fulfil  it  as  to  ensure  eternal
life?  Not  one  (see  Luke  x.  25—28;  Rom.  x.  5).  (3)  Therefore  faith  is  declared  to
be  the  principle  of  justification  (Hab.  ii.  14).  Upon  this  Paul  founds  his  reasoning
(Gal.  iii.  10 — 14 ;  Rom.  i.  16,  17  ;  Phil.  iii.  9).  3.  Suin  is  denounced  upon  the
transgressor.  (1)  Faith  is  the  principle  of  a  true  obedience.  The  transgressor  of  the
Law  denies  his  faith  and  comes  under  the  curse  (Heb.  x.  38  ;  Deut.  xxvii.  26 ;  Jer.  xi.  3).

S2)  For  his  sake  the  land  is  cursed  (ver.  25).  So  defiled  may  it  become  as  to  be  unfit
or  the  tabernacle  of  God.  The  curse  upon  the  ground  for  man's  sake  came  in  the  form
!  of  »  deluge  of  water ;  it  will  yet  come  in  a  flood  of  fire  (Gen.  iii.  17  ;  v.  29  ;  2  Pet.  iii.
7).  (3)  The  transgressor  is  cut  off  from  among  his  people  (ver.  29  ;  comp.  1  Cor.  iii,
17).  The  abomination  in  which  he  is  held  is  vigorously  set  forth  under  the  figure  of
the  land  vomiting  and  spuing  out  its  inhabitants  (vers.  25,  28).  So  were  the  Egyptians
ejected.  So  were  the  ancient  Canaanites  (see  Gen.  xv.  16 ;  Rev.  iii.  16).  So  in  turn
were  the  Israelites  (Ezek.  xx.  11,  13,  21).  We  should  not  be  highminded,  but  fear
(Rom.  xi.  19—21;  Heb.  iv.  11).  "Lay  the  ear  of  your  faith  to  the  gates  of  the
bottomless  pit,  and  hear  the  doleful  shrieks  and  outcries  of  damned  sinners,  whom
earth  hath  spewed  out,  and  her  has  swallowed,  and  tremble  lest  this  be  your  portion
at  the  last"  (M.  Henry).— J.  A.  M.


OH.  xvm.  1— 80,]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  281

Vers.  1 — 4. — Tivo  aspects  of  sin.  There  are  many  ways  in  which  sin  may  be
regarded.    Directed  by  these  words,  we  may  look  at  it  in —

I.  Its  uglt  aspect  as  seen  in  human  illusibations.  The  children  of  Israel  were
warned  to  separate  themselves  in  every  way  from  "  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Egypt "
and  from  "  the  doings  of  the  land  of  Canaan  "  (ver.  3).  These  were  to  be  a  beacon  eo
them  i  they  were  things  to  be  hated  and  shunned.  To  those  who  had  not  been  brought
down  themselves  to  the  same  low  moral  level,  these  doings  would  appear  the  shameful
things  they  were — base,  corrupt,  vile.  It  is  well  for  us  to  glance  at,  though  not  to
dwell  upon,  sin  in  its  last  and  worst  developments,  in  its  final  issues ;  to  see  and  under-
stand what  it  leads  to  and  ends  in.  Look  at  intemperance,  dishonesty,  cruelty,  cupidity,
profanity,  impurity,  as  these  sins  are  seen  in  their  full  development  and  complete  out-
working ;  see  how  utterly  vile  and  hideous  they  appear  to  those  in  whom  any  purity
is  left.  Tou  would  not  resemble  these ;  you  start  and  shrink  at  the  very  thought  of  it ;
then  do  not  move  one  inch  down  the  smooth  decline,  do  not  take  one  step  along  "  the
primrose  path  of  dalliance  "  with  temptation.  If  we  would  keep  well  away  from  the
beginnings  of  evil,  we  shall  find  a  strong  inducement  to  purity  and  honour  by  one
thought  of  "  the  doings  of  the  land  "  of  impurity  and  shame.

II.  Its  evil  aspect  as  gatheebd  from  the  commandments  of  God.  "  I  am  ths
Lord  your  God  ...  Ye  shall  not  do  ...  Ye  shall  do  my  judgments,  and  keep  mine
ordinances,  to  walk  therein :  I  am  the  Lord  your  God."  These  solemn  and  weighty
words  introduce  the  prohibition  of  various  evil  lusts ;  these  unholy  passions  were  not
only  to  be  loathed  and  shunned  because  of  the  shamefulness  of  them  in  themselves
and  because  of  the  evil  consequences  they  would  entail,  but  also  and  chiefly  because
they  were  imperatively  disallowed  by  God.  "I  am  the  Lord  ...  ye  shall  not  do
these  things,"  etc.  God's  decisive  disapproval  is  enough  for  us ;  it  is  final ;  it  should
be  all-prevailing.  For :  1.  His  sovereignty  suffices,  without  further  thought.  He  is  "  the
Lord  our  God."  Surely  our  Divine  Creator,  he  from  whom  we  came,  in  whom  we  live,
without  the  continual  exercise  of  whose  power  we  should  cease  to  be,  to  whom  we  owe
all  that  we  are  and  have,  has  sovereign  right  to  decide  concerning  us,  what  things  wc
may  do  and  what  things  we  shall  shun.  It  is  enough,  it  is  more  than  enough,  that  the
Lord  our  God  says,  concerning  anything,  "Ye  shall  not  do  it."  2.  Nevertheless,  there
is  the  further  thought  that  &od  knows  best  what  is  good  and  evil.  He  who  made  us,
who  "  knows  what  is  in  man,"  who  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and  linows  what
are  the  tendencies  and  issues  of  all  things,  can  surely  decide  better  than  we  can  what
are  the  desirable  relations  we  should  hold  with  our  fellows ;  how  near  we  may  approach
them ;  what  may  be  our  alliances  and  intimacies  with  them,  etc. ;  which  is  the  right
and  true  path  in  which  to  walk.  3.  And  there  is  this  additional  thought  that  his  Divine
interest  in  us  is  equal  to  his  Divine  knowledge  of  us.  We  are  sure  that  God  will  not
deny  us  any  reallyi  desirable  thing ;  that  he  seeks  our  happiness  and  well-being ;  that
if  he  limits  our  Uberty  or  narrows  our  delights,  it  is  purely  because  he  is  working  out
our  true  and  lasting  good.

Therefore,  if  we  would  not  "  condemn  ourselves  in  those  things  which  we  allow "
(Eom.  xiv.  22),  we  must  not  only  shrink  from  those  evils  which  show  themselves  in
the  "  doings  of  the  land  "  of  ungodly  men,  but  also  consult  the  commandment  of  the
Lord.  We  must  ask  ourselves  what  those  actions  and  relations  are  which  he  has
forbidden.  We  must  remind  ourselves  of  his  sovereignty  over  us,  his  knowledge  of
us,  and  his  good  pleasure  toward  us ;  we  must  also  sedulously  banish  from  our  mind
as  well  as  put  away  from  our  life  the  evil  thing  to  which  we  may  be  tempted. — 0.

Ver.  5. — Life  in  obedience.  The  Apostle  Paul,  both  in  his  letter  to  the  Romans
(x.  5),  and  in  that  to  the  Churches  of  Galatia  (iii.  12),  brings  this  passage  to  prove
that  salvation  under  the  Law  was  by  obedience  rather  than  by  faith.  We  may
approach  the  main  thought  of  the  text  by  twp  preliminary  remarks  on  the  relation  of
these  two  principles  of  life,  showing  the  consistency  of  the  Law  and  the  gospeL  We
maintain —

I.  That,  dmdee  thb  Law,  mbkb  conformity  op  conduct  without  faith  was
UNACCEPTABLE  TO  GoD.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  God's  requirements  of  hi*
ancient  people  were  satisfied  vrith  a  purely  mechanical  obedience.  They  were  not  only
to  "  walk  in  his  ways,"  but  they  were  also  to  "  fear  the  Lord  their  God,  and  to  love  hin


282  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICQS.  [ch.  xvm.  1—30.


and  to  serve  him  with  all  their  heart  and  with  all  their  soul "  (Deut.  x.  12 ;  see  also
Deut.  Ti.  5 ;  xi.  13 ;  xxx.  16,  20).  They  were  not  only  to  act  righteously  toward  their
neighbour,  but  to  love  him  (oh.  xix.  18).  They  were  to  "  afflict  their  souls  "  on  the
Day  of  Atonement  and  Reconciliation  (ch.  xvi.  29).  There  can  he  little  doubt  that  it
was  the  duty  of  the  priests  and  Levites  to  instruct  the  Hebrew  worshippers  to  present
their  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,  believing  and  feeling  that  he  was  there  to  receive  their
offering  and  to  accept  their  penitence  and  their  faith.

II.  That,  uudbr  the  gospel,  a  liyino  taith  is  constantly  associated  with
ACTIVE  obedience.  We  are  not  saved  by  works,  but  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  (Rom.  iii.
28  ;  v.  1 ;  Eph.  ii.  8,  etc.).  Yet  the  faith  which  saves  is  a  "  faith  which  worketh  by
love"  (Gal.  v.  6  ;  Jas.  ii.  18,  20,  22,  etc.).

But  the  primary  truth  which  is  taught  in  this  passage  is  rather  this —

III.  That  spibitual  obedienob  is  the  seceet  and  the  source  of  true  human
LDT!.  1.  It  is  the  secret  of  all  real  life.  What  is  human  life  ?  In  what  does  it
actually  consist?  The  life  of  the  brute  consists  in  the  performance  of  its  animal
functions,  in  its  outward,  sensible  existence.  But  the  life  of  a  man  consists  in  some-
thing higher.  We  live  when  our  souls  live,  when  we  live  before  God  and  nnto  him ;  if  a
man  will  do  God's  will  and  keep  his  statutes  and  his  judgments,  "Ae  shalllivein  them;"
he  will  find  his  true  life  in  the  doing  and  the  keeping  of  these ;  "  this  is  life  eternal,  to
know  thee,"  etc.  (John  xvii.  3).  To  know  God,  to  know  him  as  he  is  revealed  to  us
in  Christ  Jesus,  to  worship  him,  to  rejoice  in  him,  to  love  and  to  please  him,  to  be
gratefully  and  cheerfully  obedient  to  his  will  in  all  things, — this  is  human  life  ;  all  else
is  immeasurably  below  it.  There  is  nothing  worth  calling  life  apart  from  the  holy  and
happy  service  of  God ;  a  spiritual  not  a  servile  obedience  is  the  secret  of  life  on  earth.
2.  It  is  also  tJie  source  of  the  higher  human  life  which  is  beyond.  The  Jew  who  kept
God's  statutes  not  only  found  a  true  life  in  his  obedience,  but  he  also  gained  a  true  life
through  his  obedience.  God  bestowed  on  him  his  Divine  favour,  conferred  on  him  all
those  outward  blessings  which  were  then  regarded  as  the  highest  token  of  the  favour
of  the  Eternal;  he  lived  in  the  smile  and  the  benediction  of  Jehovah.  Our  hope  i«
brighter  and  more  far-reaching  than  his.  He  had  some  glimmering  of  the  blessedness
beyond,  but  it  was  faint  and  feeble.  We  know  that  if  our  faith  in  a  Divine  Redeemer
is  manifested  in  a  lasting  spiritual  obedience,  we  "  shall  live  "  a  life  of  which  the  Jew
had  little  thought,  and  of  which  we  ourselves  can  only  form  some  struggling  anticipa-
tion. We  know  that  if  "  we  are  faithful  unto  death,"  we  shall  have  "  a  crown  of  life."
The  obedience  of  faith,  continued  to  the  end,  will  introduce  us  to  the  life  which  is
(1)  one  of  celestial  fulness ;  (2)  free  from  present  care,  sorrow,  sin ;  (3)  everlasting. — '^■

Yen.  6 — 23. — Impurity — its  extent  and  source.  There  are  times  when  and  con-
ditions under  which  it  is  both  our  right  and  our  duty  to  speak  on  this  subject.  W«
may  offend  delicacy  by  speech,  and  must  therefore  be  careful  what  we  say.  But  we
may  neglect  obligation  and  opportunity  by  silence,  and  must  therefore  use  fitting  occa-
sion for  speech.  There  is  a  time  to  warn  the  young  against  an  evil  which  may  slay
them  with  a  mortal  wound.     We  may  glance,  and  only  glance,  at —

I.  The  fearful  length  to  which  impurity  may  pass.  God  made  man  male  and
female  that,  related  to  one  another  thus,  they  might  be  happy  in  one  another's  fellow-
ship ;  that  husband,  wife,  and  child  might  complete  the  harmony  of  human  life.  But
for  the  confusing  and  disturbing  element  of  sin,  there  would  have  been  nothing  but  holy
conjugal  affection  and  happy  human  homes.  How  dark  and  sad  a  contrast  to  this  does
society  present !  How  melancholy  the  thought  that  impurity  should  not  only  have
tainted  so  many  souls,  but  should  have  taken  so  may  forms !  that  not  only  have  the'
natural  relations  of  the  sexes  been  too  unlimited,  too  unrestrained,  but  that  sin  of  this
description  has  taken  unnatural,  shocking,  and  abominable  forms!  that  its  dark
and  shameful  manifestations  are  such  as  we  hardly  like  to  name,  and  do  not  dare  to
think  of  (vers.  22,  23)  1  Only  a  holy  compulsion  will  induce  us  even  to  make  passing
reference  to  such  things.  So  low,  to  such  dark  depths,  into  such  a  "far  country"  of
vileness  does  the  sin  of  impurity  extend.

II.  That  guilty  indulgence  is  the  only  explanation  of  this  evil  proobbs*.
How  can  such  things  be  ?  is  the  simple  question  of  the  pure  heart.  How  by  any  pos-
sibility can  human  nature  sink  into  such  a  gulf  of  depravity  ?    How  can  w*  account


CH.  xvin.  1— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  283

for  it  that  the  soul  which  once  knew  the  innocency  of  childhood  finds  an  awful
pleasure  in  such  shameful  deeds  ?  The  answer  is  undoubtedly  here.  The  very  possi-
bility of  it  is  a  part  of  the  penalty  of  the  sins  which  have  been  committed.  Sins  of
impurity  leave  a  stain  upon  the  soul ;  the  seducer  has  not  only  to  suffer  the  rebuke  of
God,  the  reproaches  of  the  one  he  has  wronged  and  ruined,  and  the  stings  of  his  own
conscience — some  day  to  be  awakened,  but  he  has  to  "  bear  his  iniquity  "  in  a  depraved
taste,  in  a  stained  and  injured  nature,  in  a  lowered  and  baser  appetite.  In  this,  as  in
other  matters,  perhaps  more  fearfully  than  in  most,  "  he  that  sinneth  against  God
wrongeth  his  own  soul "  (Prov.  viii.  36).  Let  the  man  who  gives  way  to  impurity
remember  that  he  is  travelling  on  a  downward  course  that  ends  in  saddest  depravation
of  soul,  and  that  will  leave  him  open  to  those  more  vile  temptations  which  would  dis-
grace and  even  disgust  him  now.

III.  Teib  tkub  tbeatmbnt  of  this  destkotino  sin.  Trace  the  evil  back  from  its
worst  developments  to  its  mildest  form ;  from  its  fullest  crime  to  its  source  in  the  souL
Incest,  adultery,  fornication,  seduction,  indecency,  indelicate  conversation,  the  ijnpwre
thought.  This  last  is  the  source  of  alL  It  is  that  which  must  be  assailed,  which  must
be  expelled.

In  this  matter  of  the  relation  of  the  sexes,  there  are  three  main  truths.  1.  Ood
gives  to  most  of  us  the  joy  of  conjugal  love,  and  this  is  to  be  sanctified  by  being  accepted
as  his  gift  (Jas.  i.  17).  Where  it  is  denied  we  must  be  well  satisfied  with  other  mercies
BO  freely  given.  2.  Its  lasting  happiness  is  only  assured  to  the  pure  of  heart.  With
all  others  its  excellency  will  soon  fade  and  die.  3.  Therefore  let  us,  by  all  possible
means,  guard  our  purity:  (1)  by  avoidance  of  temptation  (evil  company,  wrong
literature) ;  (2)  by  energetic  expulsion  of  unworthy  thoughts ;  (3)  by  realization  of
the  presence  of  the  heart-searching  Holy  One  ;  (4)  by  earnest  prayer ;  let  us  "  keep  our
heart  beyond  all  keeping,"  etc.  (Prov.  iv.  23). — 0.

Vers.  24 — 30. — The  penalty  of  sin  The  disastrous  consequences  of  iniquity  are
clearly  and  strongly  expressed  in  these  concluding  words  of  the-  chapter.  We  have  the
truth  brought  out-;—

I.  That  by  sin  wb  ookbupt  ourselves.  "  Defile  not  ye  yourselves  in  any  of  these
things  "  (ver.  24) ;  "  that  ye  defile  not  yourselves  therein  "  (ver.  30).  Our  Lord  tells
us  that  "  out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  fornications,"  etc.,
and  that  "  these  things  defile  a  man "  (Matt.  vii.  19,  20).  And  Paul  tells  us  that
we  "  are  the  temple  of  God,"  and  that  "if  any  man  defile' the  temple  of  God,  him  shall
God  destroy"  (L  Cor.  iii.  16,  17).  Those  sins  which  a  man  commits  against  his  own
spirit  or  his  own  body — those  wrongs  which  a  man  does  himself — end  in  positive  and
serious  injury.  They  enfeeble,  tliey  degrade,  they  brutalize,  they  bring  down  a
man's  tastes  and  appetites  to  the  meanest  levels,  they  lay  and  leave  his  nature  open  to
the  worst  temptations.  In  the  practice  of  vice  a  man  sinks  down  daily  until  he
becomes  thoroughly  corrupt,  averse  to  all  that  is  holy,  prone  to  everything  impure.

II.  That  by  sin  wb  contaminate  bwibtt.  "  In  all  these  the  nations  are  defiled  "
(ver.  24) ;  "  and  the  land  is  defiled  "  (vers.  25,  27).  Societies  as  well  as  individuals
become  corrupt.  Even  one  Achan  defiled  the  whole  camp  of  Israel  and  paralyzed  its
power.  One  incestuous  member  of  the  Corinthian  Church  infected  and  stained  that
Christian  society.  How  much  more  will  many  evil-doers  corrupt  the  community  1  It
may  not  take  a  large  number  of  unholy,  impure,  unrighteous  souls  to  make  a  Church
or  society  "  defiled  "  in  the  sight  of  the  Holy  One,  no  longer  a  fit  dwelling-place  for  his
Holy  Spirit,  a  community  to  be  abandoned  to  itself,

III.  That  bt  sin  we  incub  the  high  displbasubb  op  Almightv  Go».  "  Ye  shall
not  commit  any  of  these  abominations "  (vers.  26,  27,  29),  "  of  these  dbominaUe
customs  "  (ver.  30).  The  Holy  One,  in  his  righteous  indignation,  threatens  that  "  the
land  shall  spue  them  out "  if  they  indulge  in  such  iniquities.  No  stronger  language
could  be  employed  to  indicate  the  uttermost  conceivable  detestation  and  abhorrence
which  God  has  of  such  sins  as  these  described.  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the
hands  of  the  living  God  "  (Heb.  x.  31) ;  and  it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  have  done  or  to  have
become  that  which  God  regards  with  Divine  abomination,  to  be  the  object  of  his  awiiil
resentment  and  indignation ;  to  have  to  feel  that  he,  the  Divine  Father  and  th*
righteous  Judge,  cannot  look  on  us  without  terrible  aversion.


284  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xvui.  1— 30,

IV.  That  by  snt  wb  abb  detbbminino  our  doom.  (Ver.  29.)  Whether  by  being
"  cut  off  from  among  the  people  "  we  understand  excommunication  and  exile  or  death,
the  penalty  is  severe.  It  is  certain  that  ver.  28  points  to  stern  rejection  and  utter
destruction.  1.  It  is  certain  that  by  open  sin  we  expose  ourselves  to  exile  from  the
Christian  Church,  and  even  to  banishment  from  all  decent  and  honourable  society.
The  Church,  the  family,  and  the  social  circle  must  exclude  the  wanton  offender  for  the
sake  of  their  pure  and  innocent  members.  2.  Also  that  by  continuance  in  deliberate  sin,
whether  open  or  secret,  whether  of  the  body  or  of  the  soul,  we  shall  be  rejected  trom
the  city  of  God.  "  There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  it  any  thing  that  defileth,  neither
whatsoever  worketh  abomination  "  (Eev.  xxi.  27). — C.

Vers.  1 — 30. — ^Ver.  6,  "  Te  shall  therefore  keep  my  statutes,  and  my  judgments :
which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them :  I  am  the  Lord."

I.  Thk  true  mokalitt  is  based  upon  the  true  BELiaioN.  1.  Special  need  of
insisting  on  this  in  times  when  men  seek  to  make  light  of  religious  obligation.
2.  Historical  confirmation :  Egypt,  Persia,  Greece,  Rome, — all  corrupt  because  degenerate.
No  protection,  as  luxury  increases,  from  relaxation  of  manners  save  in  religious  safe-
guards. 3.  The  life  of  faith  is  life  in  commandments.  The  Lord  is  both  the  Object  of
faith  and  the  Ruler  of  life.  The  commandments  do  not  give  faith  or  dispense  with
it,  but  reveal,  test,  and  approve  it.

II.  The  world  without  God  is  a  would  of  aboudtations  and  death.  All
God's  laws  contribute  to  health  and  happiness.  His  judgments  on  the  nations  were
the  clearing  away  of  moral  iilth  and  disorder.  The  state  of  the  heathen  is  an
indisputable  evidence  of  man's  natural  depravity  and  ruin.  Intellect,  physical  prowess,
wealth,  learning, — all  were  rendered  useless,  and  worse  than  useless,  by  moral  weakness.

m.  Judgment  and  mercy  went  hand  in  hand  in  the  Divine  dispensation.
The  offender  was  excommunicated  that  he  might  have  opportunity  for  repentance —
which  made  a  warning  to  all.  The  land  was  to  be  kept  from  defilement  that  it  might
be  the  land  of  God's  people.  The  sanctity  of  the  bodily  life,  of  personal  purity,  of
domestic  relationship,  of  the  family,  and  so  of  the  nation,  are  all  made  to  depend  on  the
sanctity  of  the  first  and  deepest  of  all  relations — that  between  man  and  God.  "  I  am
the  Lord."    The  land  is  mine  first,  then  yours.    The  Law  is  your  safety  and  peace.— B.

Vers.  1 — 5. —  Obedience  enjoined.  A  nation's  importance  is  not  to  be  reckoned
according  to  its  size,  but  more  according  to  the  character  of  its  people  and  of  the  great
men  who  have  belonged  to  it.  That  must  ever  be  a  distinguished  nation  which  has
had  a  Moses  ruling  over  it,  a  man  with  whom  God  spoke  face  to  face,  instructing  him
by  what  rules  to  govern  the  people.  Those  rules  form  a  code  second  to  none  in  lustory
for  purity,  justice,  and  completeness.  At  the  head  of  a  number  of  separate  precepts
stands  the  special  injimction  of  the  text,  calling  upon  the  Israelites  to  respect  the
entire  Law.

L  A  reminder  that  in  every  place  there  are  evil  practices  to  be  shunned.
The  present  position  of  every  individual  is  an  isthmus  connecting  the  continent  of  the
past  and  the  future.  Israel  in  the  wilderness  journeying  from  Egypt  to  Canaan  was
but  like  many  between  youth  and  manhood,  school  and  business,  activity  and  retire-
ment. Such  a  transition  state  may  be  profitably  used  as  a  time  of  thought  and
resolution.  In  no  position  must  we  expect  freedom  from  temptation.  The  conduct
of  the  Egyptians  and  of  the  Canaanites  must  alike  be  avoided  (ver.  3).  And  those  who
defer  religious  decision  until  a  season  of  immunity  from  danger  arrives,  may  tarry
in  vain.  The  wilderness  has  its  lawless  manners  as  well  as  the  settled  country.
How  necessary  to  be  upon  our  guard  lest  we  be  corrupted  by  the  customs  of  our
neighbours  1  Happy  the  college,  the  mart,  the  home,  that  is  less  likely  to  contaminate
than  to  purify  1

II.  Compliance  with  the  laws  of  God  is  thb  best  pbbsebvative  against
miTATiNO  spFUL  CUSTOMS.  He  runs  quickest  away  from  evil  who  pursues  the  good
in  front  of  him.  Simply  to  retreat  from  danger,  backing  from  it,  is  a  slow  and  insecure
method.  We  want  more  than  negative  righteousness,  we  need  positive  fulfilment
of  holy  commands  to  ensure  us  against  adopting  odious  habits.  It  is  not  safe  to  take
tnm  as  our  iiattems  of  behaviomr.    "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God  as  beloved  children."


OH.  xvm.  1— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  286

Egyptians  and  Canaanites  were  equally  unfit  to  be  followed.  The  Apostle  Paul  did  not
set  up  his  own  life  as  a  model  except  in  so  far  as  he  also  imitated  Christ  (1  Cor.  xL  1).
Obedience  is  here  described  in  three  ways,  as  doing  the  judgments  of  God,  keeping  his
ordinances,  and  walking  therein  (ver.  4).  Great  is  the  privilege  that  moderns  enjoy  in
having  so  many  copies  of  God's  Word  multiplied  as  to  he  easily  accessible  to  all.  Surely
we  ought  to  meditate  therein  day  and  night,  that  we  may  ordei:  our  steps  thereby.

III.  Obedience  mat  be  stimulated  by  reflection.  1.  Upon  the  right  of  Ood
to  issue  commands.  "  I  am  Jehovah "  is  his  claim  to  attention  as  the  Fount  of  law,
and  a  claim  which  no  thoughtful  mind  should  reject.  The  ever-living  Almighty  Holy
One  possesses  in  himself  every  attribute  that  demands  our  homage.  To  withhold  it  is
to  violate  congruity,  to  act  in  a  manner  out  of  harmony  with  what  fitness  requires.
2.  Upon  ov/r  acceptance  of  his  lordship  over  us.  "  1  am  the  Lord  your  God."  We
have  entered  iuto  covenant  relationship  with  him,  and  we  break  the  terms  of  agreement
if  we  fail  to  keep  his  statutes.  The  plural  form  of  "God"  may,  without  forcing,
be  taken  here  to  indicate  that  the  Israelites  had  deliberately  bound  themselves  to  the
one  Jehovah  as  their  "  Gods,"  instead  of  the  idols  of  the  nations  round.  Go'd  is  our
Father,  how  shall  we  be  disobedient  children  ?  our  King,  how  can  we  act  as  rebellious
subjects  ?  our  Lawgiver,  how  can  we  dare  to  transgress  his  commandments  ?  3.  Upon
the  blessedness  attained  by  observance  of  Ood's  statutes.  "  Which  if  a  man  do,  he
shall  live  in  them."  Man  thought  to  increase  his  power  by  tasting  forbidden  fruit,
but  lie  lost  his  life,  and  only  regained  it  in  proportion  as  he  returned  to  obedience.  It
is  true  that  the  impossibility  of  perfectly  keeping  the  Law  foreshadowed  the  necessity
of  another  way  of  salvation,  but  according  as  the  Israelites  adhered  to  the  Law  in  letter
and  spirit,  so  they  experienced  happiness  and  the  favour  of  God,  which  is  life  indeed.
We  rejoice  in  the  gospel  plan  of  faith  in  Christ,  not  as  making  the  Law  inoperative,  but
as  enabling  us  to  fulfil  its  aim,  to  accomplish  its  real  design — sanctifioation  of  life ;  and
therein  delivered  from  thraldom,  we  enter  upon  the  life  eternal  that  comprehends  all
blessing.  We  listen  to  the  Law  now,  not  as  if  it  were  the  stern  prescription  of  a  hard
Taskmaster,  but  as  the  instruction  of  a  loving,  all-wise  Friend,  which  the  more  closely
we  follow,  the  more  prosperous  our  career  will  be.  "  Freely  we  serve,  because  we  freely
love."— S.  B.  A.

Vers.  24,  25. — Abominations  denounced.  Some  chapters  of  law,  as  of  history,  aie
not  pleasant  reading.  That  they  should  have  been  found  necessary  is  a  proof  of  the
fearful  depravity  into  which  man  may  fall,  sinning  against  natural  instincts,  hurried
away  and  blinded  by  passion  so  as  to  overstep  the  bounds  of  decency.  The  prohibi-
tions of  this  chapter  were  designed  to  hallow  marriage  and  the  family  relationship.
Their  observance  would  tend  to  benefit  the  entire  nation,  for  the  laws  of  God  are  framed
with  benevolent  wisdom.    To  sin  against  them  is  to  wrong  one's  own  soul.

I.  The  denunciations  and  thbeateninos  evince  God's  hatred  op  abominable
CONDUCT.  "  That  the  land  spue  not  you  out  also."  "  The  souls  that  commit  them
shall  be  cut  off  from  among  their  people."  Strong  is  the  language  applied  to  sinful
practices — they  are  " wickedness "  (ver.  17),  "abomination"  (ver.  22),  "confusion"
(ver.  23).  The  Law  will  have  no  compromise,  admits  of  no  alternative  amongst  God's
people,  the  command  is,  "  Thou  shalt  not."  Wickedness  is  not  to  be  tolerated  even  in
the  stranger  (ver.  26) ;  he  is  not  obliged  to  conform  to  all  the  ceremonies,  but  he  must
rigidly  abstain  from  every  moral  offence.  The  New  Testament  relaxes  not  one  jot  in
condemnation  of  all  that  is  impure  and  filthy  in  conduct  and  even  language  (see  Bom.
i.  18,  32;  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10;  Bph.  v.  3-5;  Rev.  xxi.  8).

II.  The  delay  between  sin  and  punishment  is  a  mark  op  the  kindness  and
LONG-SUPPERINO  OP  GoD.  (See-Peter's  argument  in  2  Epist.  iii.  9.)  In  Gen.  xv.  16
it  was  expressly  declared,  "  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."  They  were
allowed  four  hundred  years  to  repent,  or  to  fill  up  the  cup  of  their  iniquity,  and  they
chose  the  latter.  This  is  the  clearest  answer  to  any  who  would  impugn  the  justice  of
God's  dealing  with  the  Canaanites  in  exterminating  them  with  fire  and  sword.  Oh,
the  folly  of  men  who  abuse  precious  time  by  laughing  at  solemn  announcements  of
coining  woe,  instead  of  employing  it  in  making  their  peace  with  Qodl  By  every
moment  that  intervenes  between  the  sinner  and  dealjh  God  urges  him  to  wek  pardon
•nd  •mendmeut.


286


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XIX  1—37


III.  The  instances  eecoeded  show  the  certain  visitation  of  sin  with  God's
DISPLEASURE.  Delay  is  no  guarantee  of  final  immunity  from  punishment.  The  heathen
were  at  last  driven  out  of  the  land,  and  likewise  the  Israelites  who  succeeded  felt  the
wrath  of  God  on  account  of  the  shameful  customs  in  which  they  indulged.  Qod  ii
impartial,  and  does  not  spare  sin  in  his  people  or  his  enemies.  As  the  denunciation
shows  God  in  principle  and  language,  so  the  fulfilment  of  his  threat  demonstrates  him
in  act,  and  is  a  further  vivid  evidence  of  his  dislike  of  all  wickedness.  Nathan  was
God's  messenger  to  rebuke  and  threaten  David,  as  afterwards  John  the  Baptist  de-
nounced Herod  for  taking  his  brother's  wife.  Just  retribution  foretells  a  day  of
judgment,  when  inequalities  of  punishment  shall  be  righted  and  God's  equity  triumph-
antly vindicated.  Here  we  see  sufficient  to  establish  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  a
moral  government  (Eccles.  viii.  11 — 13).

IV.  The  climax  of  sin  is  reached  when  nature  herself  seems  to  abhor  the
SINNER.  Graphic  is  the  picture  of  the  land  loathing  its  burden  and  vomiting  forth  its
inhabitants.  As  a  leprosy  infected  walls  and  garments,  so  the  abominations  of  the
heathen  defiled  the  land  itself  that  it  stank.  The  results  of  immorality  upon  the  state
of  society  and  of  individuals  have  been  appalling.  Eventually  everything  has  sunk
into  ruin,  disintegration  and  corruption  have  prevailed.  The  population  decreases  by
sickness  and  barrenness  and  murder.  The  arts  and  sciences  decny,  literature  is  blighted,
philanthropy  unknown.  The  text  reminds  us  that  a  closer  connection  exists  between
man  and  inanimate  nature  than  we  sometimes  think  (see  this  also  suggested  in  Itom.
viii.  20  and  Gen.  iii.  17).

Conclusion.  If  the  subject  is  painful,  the  lesson  may  be  salutary.  Sin  is  widespread.
"  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  We  may  be  glad  of  the
healthful  influence  of  Christianity,  rightly  directing  public  opinion,  and  erecting  it
into  a  safeguard  against  evil.  "  Having  these  promises,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from
%&  filthineas  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God." — S.  R.  A.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTBB  XEK.


From  the  prohibition  of  moral  nnclean-
nees  exhibiting  itself  in  the  form  of  incest
and  licentiousness,  the  legislator  proceeds
to  a  series  of  laws  and  commandments
against  other  kinds  of  immorality,  inculcat-
ing piety,  righteousness,  and  kindnesB.
Chapter  xix.  may  be  regarded  as  an  ex-
tension of  the.  previous  chapter  in  this
direction,  after  which  the  subject  of  oh.
xviii.  is  again  taken  up  in  ch.  xx.  The
precepts  now  given  are  not  arranged  sys-
tematically, though,  as  Keil  has  remarked,
"while  grouped  together  rather  according  to
a  loose  association  of  ideas  than  according  to
any  logical  arrangement,  they  are  all  linked
together  by  the  common  purpose  expressed
in  the  words,  'Ye  shall  be  My ;  for  Hhe  Lord
your  God  am  holy.' "  They  begin  by  inculcat-
ing (in  vers.  3, 4)  duties  which  fall  under  the
heads  of  (1)  the  fifth  commandment  of  the
Decalogue,    (2)  the  fourth,    (3)  the  first,


(4)  the  second.  These  four  laws  are,  to
their  positive  aspects,  (1)  the  religious  law
of  social  order,  on  which  a  commonwealth
rests ;  (2)  the  law  of  positive  obedience  te
God's  command  because  it  is  his  command;
(3)  the  law  of  piety  towards  the  invisible
Lord;  (4)  the  law  of  faith,  which  trusts
him  without  requiring  visible  emblemi
or  pictures  of  him.  In  vers.  11,  14,  16,  35,
36,  obedience  is  inculcated  to  the  eighth  and
the  ninth  commandments,  which  are  the  laws
of  honesty  and  of  truthfulness ;  in  ver.  12  to
the  third  commandment,  which  is  the  law
of  reverence;  in  vers.  17,  Is,  33,  34,  to  the
sixth  commandment,  which  is  the  law  oi
love;  in  vers.  20,  29,  to  the  seventh  com-
mandment, which  is  the  law  of  purity ;  in
vers.  9,  10,  13,  the  spirit  of  oovetousness  is
prohibited,  as  forbidden  in  the  tenth  com-
mandment, which  is  the  law  of  charity.
Thus  this  chapter  may  in  a  way  be
regarded  as  the  Old  Testament  counterpart
of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  inasmuch  as  it
lays  down  the  laws  of  conduct,  as  the  latter
lays  down  the  principles  of  action,  in  as  com-


OB.  XIX.  1 — 37.]


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


tS7


iwehensive  thongh  not  in  bo  systematio  a
nanner  as  the  ten  commandments.

Ver.  2.— Ye  shall  be  holy :  for  I  the  Lord
yonr  God  am  holy.  The  religious  motive  is  put
forward  here,  as  in  the  previous  chapter,  as
the  foundation  of  all  morality.  It  is  God's
will  that  we  should  be  holy,  and  by  being
holy  we  are  like  God,  who  is  to  be  our
model  BO  far  as  is  possible  to  the  creature.
So  in  the  new  dispensation,  "  Be  ye  therefore
perfect,  even  as  jour  Father  which  is  in
heaven  is  perfect"  (Matt.  v.  48).  "  As  he
trbich  hath  called  yon  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy
m  all  manner  of  conversation"  (1  Pet.  i.  15).

Ver.  3. — Ye  shall  fear  every  man  h&
mother,  and  his  father.  The  words  fear
and  reverence  are  in  this  connection  inter-
changeable. So  Eph.  V.  3.S,  "  Let  the  wife
ice  that  she  reverence  her  husband,"  where
the  word  "  reverence "  would  be  iuore
exactly  translated  by  "  fear."  St.  Paul
points  out  that  the  importance  of  the  firth
commandment  is  indicated  in  the  Decalogue
by  its  being  "  the  first  commandment  with
promise,"  that  is,  with  a  promise  attached  to
it  (Eph.  vi.  2).  The  family  life  is  built
upon  reverence  to  parents,  and  on  the  family
is  built  society.  Obedience  to  parents  is  a
duty  flowing  out  of  one  of  the  first  two  laws
instituted  by  God — the  law  of  marriage  (Gen.
ii.  24).  The  second  law  instituted  at  the
same  time  was  that  of  the  sabbath  (Gen.  ii.
S),  and  in  the  verse  before  us  observance  of
the  sabbatical  law  is  Irkewise  inculcated,  in
the  words  that  immediately  follow — ye  shall
keep  my  sabbaths.

Ver.  4. — Tnm  ye  not  unto  idola.  The  word
used  for  idols,  elilim,  meaning  nothings,  ii
contrasted  with  Elohim,  God.  Ps.  oxt.
exhibits  this  contrast  in  several  of  its  par-
ticulars. Cf.  St.  Paul's  statement,  "We
know  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world,
and  that  there  is  none  other  God  but  one  "
(1  C!or.  viii.  4).  "  If  the  heart  of  man
becomes  benumbed  to  the  use  of  images  of
false  gods  of  any  kind,  he  sinks  down  to  the
idols  which  are  his  ideals,  and  becomes  as
dumb  and  nnspiritual  as  they  are  "  (Lange).
The  remainder  of  the  verse  forbids  the
transgression  of  the  second  commandment,  aa
the  earlier  part  of  the  verse  forbids  the
transgression  of  the  first  commandment:
nor  make  to  yourselTes  molten  gods,  as  was
done  by  Jeroboam  when  he  set  up  the  calves
(1  Kings  xii.  23).

Vers.  S — 8. — The  unsystematic  character
of  this  chapter  is  indicated  by  prohibitions
under  the  fifth,  fourth,  first,  and  second
eommandments  (vers.  3,  4)  being  succeeded
by  a  ceremonial  instruction  respecting  the
peace  offerings,  repeated  from  oh.  vii.  16 —
18.  The  words,  ye  shall  offer  it  at  yonr
ovn  will,  should  rather  be,  for  your  accept-
ante,  as  in  ch.  L  3.    In  the  seventh  chapter  a


distinction  is  drawn  between  the  peaea
offerings  that  are  thank  offerings,  whiok
must  be  eaten  on  the  first  day,  and  tb«
peace  offerings  which  are  vow  or  voluntary
offerings,  which  may  be  eaten  on  the  fint
or  second  day.  In  the  present  r€»umi  thi*
distinction  is  not  noticed.  Whoever  trans-
gresses this  ceremonial  command  is  to  bear
his  iniquity  and  to  be  out  off  from  among
his  people,  that  is,  to  be  excommunicated
without  any  appointed  form  of  reconciliation
by  means  of  sacrifice.

Vers.  9,  10. — The  injunction  contained
in  these  verses,  to  not  whoUy  reap  th*
comers  of  thy  field,  neither  . . .  gather  tha
gleanings  of  thy  harvest,  is  twice  afterward*
repeated  (ch.  xxiii.  22 ;  Dent.  xiiv.  19—22),
In  Deuteronomy,  the  oliveyard  is  specified
together  with  the  harvest-field  and  tha
vineyard,  and  it  is  aiided  that,  if  a  sheaf
be  by  chance  left  behind,  it  is  to  remain  for
the  benefit  of  the  poor.  The  object  of  this
law  is  to  inculcate  a  general  spirit  of  mercy,
which  is  willing  to  give  up  its  own  exact
rights  in  kindness  to  others  suffering  from
want.  The  word  here  used  for  vineyard
covers  also  the  oliveyard.  The  expression,
neither  shalt  thou  gather  every  grape  of  thy
vineyard,  would  be  more  literally  rendered,
neitlier  ehalt  than  gather  the  ecattering  of
thy  vineyard,  meaning  the  berries  (grapes
or  olives)  which  had  fallen  or  which  were
left  singly  on  the  boughs.

Ver.  11. — Stealing,  cheating,  and  lying
are  classed  together  as  kindred  sins  (see  ch,
vi.  2,  where  an  example  is  given  of  theft  per-
formed by  means  of  lying ;  of.  Eph.  iv.  25  ;
Col.  iii.  9).

Ver.  12.— And  ye  shall  not  swear  bj  my
name  falsely.  These  words  contain  a  posi-
tive permission  to  swear,  or  take  a  solemn
oath,  by  the  Name  of  God,  and  a  prohibition
to  swear  falsely  by  it  (see  Matt.  v.  33).

Ver.  13. — Cheating  and  stealing  are  again
forbidden,  and,  together  with  these,  other
forms  of  oppression  although  legal.  The  com-
mand to  pay  labourers  their  hire  promptly —
which  covers  also  the  case  of  paying
tradesmen  promptly — ^is  repeated  in  Deut.
xxiv.  14  (cf.  Jas.  v.  4).

Ver.  14. — ^Ihou  shalt  not  enrse  the  deal
The  sin  of  cursing  another  is  in  itself
complete,  whether  the  curse  be  heard  by
that  other  or  not,  because  it  is  the  outcome
of  sin  in  the  speaker's  heart.  The  suffering
caused  to  one  who  hears  the  curse  creates
a  further  sin  by  adding  an  injury  to  the
person  addressed.'  Strangely  in  contrast
with  this  is  not  only  the  practice  of  irr»
ligiouB  men,  who  care  little  how  they  curse
a  man  in  his  absence,  but  the  teaching
which  is  reg;arded  by  a  large  body  of
Christians  as  incontrovertible.  "  No  harm
is  done  to  reverence  but  by  an  open  manife^


2S8


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  XIX.  1 — 3?


Ution  of  insult,     How,  then,  can  a  son  sin
gravely  when  lie  curses  his  father  without
the   latter'a  knowing  it,  or  mocks  at  him
behind  his  back,  inasmuch  as  in  that  case
there  is  neither  insult  nor  irreverence  ?  And
1  think  that  the  same  is  to  be  said,  even
though    he   does  this    before    others.     It
must  be  altogether  understood  that  he  does
not  sin  gravely  if  he  curses  his  parents,
wliether  they  are  alive  or  dead,  unless  the
curses  are  uttered  with  malevolent  mean-
ing."    This  is  the  decision  of  one  that  is
called  not  only  a  saint,  but  a  "  doctor  of  the
Church  "  (Ligunri, '  Theol.  Moral.,'  iv.  334).
"  Whoso  curseth  his  father  or  his  mother,  his
lamp  shall  bo  put  out  in  obscure  darkness,"
says  the  Word  of  God  (Prov,  xx.  20).     Nor
put  a  stumblingbloelc  before  the  blind,  but
Shalt  fear  thy  God.    By  the  last  clause  the
eye  is  directed  to  God,  who  can  see  and
punish,  however  little  the  blind  man  is  able
to  help  himself.    (Cf.  Job  xxlx.  15,  "I  was
eyes  to  tl  e  blind.and  feet  was  I  to  the  lame.")
Ver.  15. — Justice  is  to  be  done  to  all.  The
less  danger  of  respecting  the  person  of  the
poor  has  to  be  guarded  against,  as  well  as  thei
greater   and  more  obvious  peril  of  honour-
ing the  person  of  the  mighty.    The  scales
of  Justice  must  be  held  even  and  her  eyes
bandaged,  that  she  may  not  prefer  one  appel-
lant to  another  on  any  ground  except  that
of  merit  and  demerit.     "  If  ye  have  respect
to  persons,  ye  commit  sin,  and  are  convinced
of  the  law  as  transgressors  "  (Jas.  ii.  9).

Ver.  IG. — Thou  shalt  not  go  up  and  down
as  a  talebearer  among  thy  people.  For  the
evil  done  by  mere  idle  talebearing,  see
Bishop  Butler's  sermon,  '  Upon  the  Govern-
ment of  the  Tongue,'  and  four  sermons  by
Bishop  Jeremy  Taylor,  on  '  The  Good  and
Evil  Tongue;  Slander  and  Flattery;  the
Duties  of  the  Tongue.'  Neither  shalt
thou  stand  against  the  blood  of  thy
neighbour ;  that  is,  thou  shalt  not  en-
danger his  life,  which  is  the  result  of  the
worst  kind  of  talebearing,  namely,  bearing
false  witness  against  him.  Thus  the  effect
of  tlie  false  witness  of  the  two  men  of  Belial
against  Naboth  was  that  "  they  carried  him
forth  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned  him  with
stones,  that  he  died"  (1  Kings  xxi.  13;  of.
Matt.  xxvi.  60 ;  xxvii.  4).

Ver.  17. — On  the  one  side  we  are  not  to  hate
oiu:  brother  in  our  heart,  whatever  wrongs  he
may  commit ;  but  on  the  other  side,  w  e  are  in
any  wise  to  rebuke  our  neighbour  for  h  is  wrong
doing.  So  our  Lord  teaches,  "  If  thy  brother
trespass  against  thee,  rebuke  him"  (Luke
xvii.  3);  and  he  appoints  a  solemn  mode  of
procedure,  by  which  this  iraternal  rebuke  is
to  be  conveyed  in  his  Church:  "If  thy
brother  shall  trespass  against  thee,  go  and
tell  him  his  fault  between  thee  and  him
alone:    if  he  shall  hear  thee,  thou  hast


gained  thy  brother.  But  if  he  will  not  hcM
thee,  tl.en  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more
that  in  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses
every  .word  may  be  established.  And  if  hp
shall  neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto  the
Chuioh ;  but  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  Church,
let  him  be  unto  thee  as  an  heathen  man  and
a  publican  "  (Matt,  xviii.  15—17).  There-
fore St.  Paul  warns  his  delegates,  Timothy
and  Titus,  "  Them  that  sin  rebuke  before
all"  (1  Tim.  v.  2(l).  "Reprove,  rebuke"
(2  Tim.  iv.  2).  "Eebukethem  shaiply"
(Titus  i.  13).  "  Rebuke  with  all  authority  "
(Titus  ii.  15).  •  By  withholding  reproof  in  a
bitter  spirit,  or  from  a  feeling  of  cowardice,
we  may  become  partakers  of  other  men's
sins,  Whoever  fails  to  rebuke  his  neighbour
when  he  ought  to  do  so,  hears  sin  on  Ml
account  (the  more  correct  and  les.'i  ambiguous
rendering  of  the  words  translated  in  the
Authi.rized  Veision,  suffer  sin  upon  him,
of.  Numb,  xviii.  22,  32).  God's  people  are
their  brothers'  keepers  (Gen.  iv.  9).

Ver.  18. — Revenge  aud  malice  are  for-
bidden as  well  as  hatred,  and  the  negative
precepts  culminate  in  the  positive  law,  Thou
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  aa  thyself,  which
sums  up  in  itself  one  half  of  the  Decalogue
(Matt.  xxii.  40).  "  For  he  that  loveth  another
hath  fulfilled  the  Law.  For  this,  Thou  shalt
not  commit  adultery.  Thou  shalt  not  kill,
Thou  shalt  not  steal.  Thou  shalt  not  beai
false  witness.  Thou  shalt  not  covet;  and  if
there  be  any  other  commandment,  it  is
briefly  comprehended  in  this  saying,  namely.
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.
Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour :  there-
fore love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law  "  (Rom.
xiii.  8—10).

Yer.  19.— Te  shall  keep  my  statntes.
Having  arrived  at  the  general  conclusion,
"  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thy  self,"in
the  previous  verse,  the  legislator  pauses,  and
then  presents  a  collection  of  further  laws,
arranged  as  before  in  no  special  order  The
first  is  a  mystical  injunction  against  the
confusion  of  things  which  are  best  kept
apart,  illustrated  in  three  subjects — diverse
kinds  of  cattle  in  breeding,  mingled  seeds
in  sowing  a  field,  and  mixed  materials
in  garments.  In  Deut.  xxii.  10,  a  further
illustration  is  added,  "  Thou  shalt  not  plow
with  an  ox  and  an  ass  together."  The  exist-
ence of  mules,  which  we  find  frequently  men-
tioned in  the  later  history  (2  Sam.  xiii.  29;
xviii.  9  ;  1  Kings  i.  33),  may  be  accounted  for
by  supposing  that  the  positive  precept  with
regard  to  breeding  cattle  here  laid  down  wa«
transgressediOr  that  the  mules  were  imported
from  abroad  (see  1  Kings  x.  25).  The  word
used  here  and  in  Deut.  xxii.  11  for  a  gar-
ment mingled  of  linen  and  woollen,  ia
shaatenex,  an  Egyptian  word,  meaning  pro-
bably mixed.  The  difSculty  raised  on  this


OH.  XIX,  1—37.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LBVITIOUS.


289


verse  by  the  allegation  that  the  high  priest's
dress  was  made  of  mixed  materials,  is  met
by  the  answer  that,  if  it  were  of  mixed
materials  (which  is  uncertain,  for  wool  is  not
mentioned  in  Ezod.  xxviii.,  nor  is  it  quite
determined  that  shesh  means  linen),  the
mixture  was  not  such  as  is  here  forbidden.
The  moral  meaning  of  the  whole  of  this
injunction  is  exhibited  in  the  following
passages  from  the  New  Testament,  "Ye
cannot  drink  the  cup  of  the  Lord,  and  the
cup  of  devils"  (1  Cor.  i.  21).  "Be  ye  not
unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers :
for  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with
unrighteousness?  and  what  communion  hath
liglit  with  darkness?  and  what  concord  hath
Olirist  with  Belial  ?  or  what  part  hath  he
that  believeth  with  an  infidel  ?  and  what
agreement  hath  the  temple  of  God  with
idols?"  (2Cor.  vi.  14—16).  "Hecannotlove
the  Lord  Jesus  with  his  heart,"  says  Hooker,
"  who  lendeth  one  ear  to  hia  apostles  and
another  to  false  teachers,  and  who  can  brook
to  see  a  mingle-mangle  of  religion  and  su-
perstition "  ('  Berm.'  v.  7,  quoted  by  Words-
worth).

Vers.  20 — ^22. — A  diatinotion  is  drawn
between  adultery  with  a  free  woman,  or  a
betrothed  free  virgin,  which  was  punish-
able with  death  (cli.  xx.  20;  Deut.  xxii.  23),
and  with  a  slave  betrothed  to  another  man
(probably  a  slave  also).  In  the  latter  case  a
lesser  punishment,  no  doubt  that  of  scourg-
ing (according  to  the  Mishna  to  the  extent
of  forty  stripes),  was  to  be  inflicted  on  one
or  both,  according  to  the  circumstances  of
the  case.  The  words,  she  shall  be  scourged,
should  be  translated,  there  shall  he  investi-
gation, followed,  presumably,  by  the  punish-
ment of  scourging,  for  both  parties  if  both
were  guilty,  for  one  if  the  woman  was
unwilling.  The  man  is  afterwards  to  offer
a  trespass  offering.  As  the  offence  has  been
a  wrong  as  well  as  a  sin,  his  offering  is  to
be  a  trespass  offering  (see  on  ch.  v.  14).  In
this  case  f  he  fine  of  one-fifth  could  not  be
inflicted,  as  the  wrong  done  could  not  be
estimated  by  money,  and  the  cost  of  the  ram
seems  to  be  regarded  as  the  required  satis-
taction.  No  mention  is  made  of  damages  to
be  paid  to  the  man  to  whom  the  slave-girl
was  betrothed,  probably  because  he  was  him-
self a  slave,  and  had  not  juridical  rights
against  a  freeman.

Vers.  23— 25.— The  eating  of  the  fruit  of
young  trees  by  their  owners  for  five  years  is
forbidden,  on  the  principle  that  such  fruit  is
unclean  until  it  has  been  sanctified  by  the
offering  of  a  crop  as  firstfruits  to  the  Lord  for
the  use  of  the  servants  of  the  tabernacle,  and
a  full  crop  is  not  to  be  expected  until  the
fourth  year  from  the  time  that  the  trees
:vere  planted.  The  fruit  is  at  first  to  be
ouuted  as  nnoiroumoised,  being  regarded  in

LKVITICnS.


a  position  similar  to  that  of  the  heathen,
that  is,  unolean,"from  not  having  been  yet
sanctified  by  the  offering  of  the  ftrstfruita.
This  sanctiflcation  takes  place  in  the  fourth
year.

"Vers.  26— 28.— After  a  repetition  of  the
fundamental  ceremonial  law  against  eating
things  which  have  the  blood  in  them  (the
LXX.  rendering,  eV!  twc  opeay,  "  upon  the
mountains,"  arises  from  a  mistaken  reading),
follow  prohibitions  (1)  to  use  enchantment,
literally,  to  tehisper  or  mutter  after  holding
communication  with  lerpents  (if  the  word
nichesh  be  derived  from  nachaah,  a  serpent) ;
(2)  to  observe  times,  or  rather,  according  to
a  more  probable  etymology,  ezercite  the  evil
eye ;  (3)  to  round  the  oomers  of  your  heads,
tliat  is,  use  a  sort  of  tonsure,  as  was  done
by  some  Arabian  tribes  (Herod.,  iii.  3)  in
honour  of  their  god  Orotal,  and  by  the
Israelites  as  a  form  of  mourning  (Deut.  liv.
1 ;  Isa.  xxii.  12) ;  (4)  to  mar  the  corners  of
thy  beard,  a  fashion  of  mourning  which  ac-
companied the  tonsure  of  the  head  (see  oh
xii.  5;  Isa.  xv.  2;  Jer.  xlviii.  37);  (5)  to
make  any  cuttings  in  your  flesh  for  the  dead,
another  form  of  mourning,  associated  with
the  two  previously  mentioned  practices  (see
ch.  xxi.  5 ;  Deut.  xiv.  1 ;  Jer.  xvi.  6 ;  xli.  3 ;
xlviii.  37) ;  (6)  to  print  any  marks  upon  you,
that  is,  tattoot  hemselves  in  memory  of  the
dead.  All  these  customs  were  unbecoming
the  dignity  of  God's  people,  and  had  been
connected  with  idolatrous  practices.

Ver.  29. — Do  not  prostitute  thy  daughter.
This  is  a  peremptory  prohibition,  applying
to  every  Jewish  maiden,  introduced  in  this
place  with  a  primary  relation  to  the
sanctiflcation  of  lust  by  the  dedication  of
young  girls  at  some  heathen  temples ;  but  by
no  means  confined  in  its  application  to
such  practices.  All  legal  sanction  of  the
sin  of  prostitution  is  forbidden,  for  wliatever
purpose  it  may  be  given ;  and  the  certain
result  of  such  sanction  is  indicated  in  the
final  words  of  the  verse,  lest  the  land  fall  to
whoredom,  and  the  land  become  fall  of
wickedness  (of.  Deut.  xxiii.  17).

Ver.  30. — The  command  in  this  verse
differs  from  that  in  ver.  3  by  adding  the
injunction  to  reverence  my  sanctuary  to
that  requiring  the  observance  of  tlie
sabbath.  It  is  a  matter  of  experience  that
where  the  sabbath  is  not  kept,  God's  sanc-
tuary is  not  reverenced,  and  that  that
reverence  increases  or  falls  away  according
as  the  obligation  of  the  sabbatical  law,
whether  in  its  Jewish  form  or  its  Christian
form,  be  more  or  less  recognized.  The
sabbatical  ordinance  is  necessary  as  a  pre-
vious condition  of  religious  worship.  With-
out it,  the  business  and  pleasure  of  the  world
are  too  strong  to  give  way  to  the  demands
upon  time  made  by  the  stated  service  of


290


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  XIX.  1 — 37.


God.  The  retta  J»  repeated  in  oh.
xxvi.  8.  "When  the  Lord's  day  is  kept
holy,' and  a  holy  reverence  for  the  Lord's
sanctuary  lives  in  the  heart,  not  only  are
many  sins  avoided,  but  social  and  domestic
life  is  pervaded  by  the  fear  of  God,  and
cliaracterized  by  devoutness  and  propnety
(KeU).

Ver.  31.— This  verse  contains  •  pro-
hibition of  all  dealings  with  those  that  have
familiar  spirits  or  are  wizards.  The  punish-
ment of  such  persons  is  appointed  in  the
next  chapter.  Both  in  the  Old  and  the  New
Testament,  the  real  existence  of  evil  spirits
and  their  power  of  communicating  with  the
human  spirit  is  assumed.

Ver.  32.— Beverence  for  the  old  is  incul-
eated  as  being  a  part,  not  merely  of  natural
respect,  but  of  the  fear  of  God.  In  the  East
this  virtue,  implying  deference  on  the  part
of  the  strong  to  the  weak,  and  of  the  inex-
perienced to  the  wise,  exists  in  larger  in-
fluence for  good  than  in  the  West,  where,
however,  its  place  has  been,  but  only
partially,  supplied  by  the  greater  delerence
paid  by  man  to  woman  (of.  Prov.  xvi.  31 ;
XX.  29).  ,      .

Vers.  33, 34.— The  command  already  given
"  neither  to  vex  a  stranger,  nor  oppress
him"  (Exod.  xxii.  21),  on  tlie  pathetic  ground
that  "  ye  know  the  heart_  of  a  stranger,
seeing  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of
Egypt"  (Exod.  xxiii.  9),  is  broadened  in
these  venei  to  the  positiTe  law,  thou  ahalt


love  him  as  thysell  "The  royal  law  of
ver.  18  is  expressly  extended  to  the
stranger,  and  notwithstanding  the  national
narrowness  necessary  to  preserve  the  true
religion  in  the  world,  the  general  brother-
hood of  mankind  is  hereby  taught  as  far  as
was  possible  under  the  circumstances "
(Gardiner).

Vers.  35,36. — These  verses,  beginning  with
the  same  words  as  ver.  15,  Ye  shall  do  no
TinrighteousnesB  in  judgment,  contain  anothi  r
and  wider  application  of  that  principle.  Ver.
15  prohibited  unrighteousness  in  the  judge,
or  in  one  who  was  in  the  position  of  a  judge;
these  verses  forbid  it  in  merchants  and
tradesmen.  It  is  the  more  necessary  to
condemn  dishonesty,  in  unmistakable  terms,
as  men  who  make  a  profession  of  religion,
and  therefore  would  be  shocked  at  steakng,
have  often  less  scruple  in  cheating.  Here
and  in  Deuteronomy,  where  the  Law  is
a  religions  sanction  is  given  to


the  command ;  "  Eor  all  that  do  such  things,
and  all  that  do  unrighteously,  are  an
abomination  unto  the  Lord  thy  God "
(Deut.  XXV.  16).  Of.  Prov.  xi  1,  "  A  false
bulance  is  abomination  to  the  Lord  :  but  a
just  weight  is  his  delight;"  and  Xx.  10,
"  Divers  weights^  and  divers  measures,  both
of  them  are  alike  abomination  to  the  Lord; "
see  also  Micah  vi  10, 11  and  Ezek.  xlv.  10.
Ver.  37. — Moral  precepts  are  rested  on
their  right  foundation — the  oommand  of
God  and  the  rehgious  motive.


EOMILETICS.

Ver.  1.— Morality  has  a  hasif  of  its  own.  The  moral  pliilogopher.  If  asked,  "  Why
should  I  act  morally  ?  "  replies,  "  Because  it  is  right  for  you  to  do  so."  If  asked  further,
"  Why  is  it  right  for  me  to  do  so  ?  "  he  replies,  "  Because  your  conscience  tells  you  that
it  is."  K  asked  why  conscience  should  be  obeyed  rather  than  passion,  he  replies,
"  Because  it  possesses  greater  authority,  even  if  it  has  less  power ; "  and  in  proof  of  this
he  points  to  the  approval  or  disapproval  which  it  stamps  upon  acts  according  to  their
character.     Morality  can  be  proved  to  be  reasonable,  apart  from  religion.

But  it  cannot  be  enforced.  If  a  man  denies  that  his  conscience  commands  him  to
perform  a  moral  action,  the  verdict  of  the  general  conscience  of  mankind  may  be  quoted
against  him  as  contrary  to  that  of  his  own,  but  he  can  repudiate  the  authority  of  that
verdict  so  far  as  he  is  himself  concerned.  He  can  reasonably  maintain  that  the  general
conscience  may  be  misled  by  prejudice  or  superstition,  and  that  his  own  conscience  is
more  enlightened  than  that  of  the  mass.  In  this  manner  the  philosopher,  or  any  one
who  regards  himself  as  a  philosopher,  finds  a  way  of  evasion  ready  at  hand.

With  the  masses,  moral  teaching,  unaccompanied  by  religious  sanction,  is  still  less
effectual.  The  general  good  of  mankind,  or  the  duty  of  obeying  the  highest  principle
of  our  nature,  has  never  restrained,  and  never  will  restrain,  the  mass  of  mankind  from
yielding  to  the  force  of  strong  passion  or  desire.

In  the  present  chapter  we  find  the  moral  duties — those  of  the  second  table  as  much
as  the  first — rested  upon  a  religious  basis.  They  are  God's  commands,  whether  that
command  be  given  by  written  precept  or  by  an  instinct  engraven  on  man's  heart.  And
because  they  are  God's  commands  in  both  these  ways,  they  are  to  be  obeyed.  Thus
there  is  an  appeal  from  man's  mind  to  something  higher  than  himself,  to  which  man


OH.  xn,  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  291

will  submit.  The  effort  to  preserve  morality  in  a  nation  without  religious  sanction  and
religious  motive  is  like  the  attempt  to  keep  alive  the  flame  of  a  fire,  when  the  fuel  from
which  the  flame  is  derived  has  been  withdrawn.  One  generation  may  continue  moral ;
the  next  will  certainly  be  licentioui.  "  I  am  the  Lord  "  is  a  basis  of  morality  which
oaver  fails.

Ver.  3. — The  lawi  of  ttibmisston  (1)  to  human  authority  and  (2)  to  taered  ordinances,
for  the  LorcPs  take,  are  enjoined  in  this  verse.

1.  The  family  is  an  institution  of  God's  appointment  (Gen.  i.  28 ;  ii.  24).  The  com-
mand to  children  to  honour  their  father  and  mother  is  distinguished  in  the  Decalogue
by  a  blessing  attached  to  it  (Exod.  xz.  12;  Eph.  vi.  2);  and  a  special  blessing  is
bestowed  on  the  house  of  the  Eechabites  for  obeying  it  (Jer.  xxxv.  18).  St.  Paul
enjoins  the  observance  of  the  duty,  both  as  an  act  right  in  itself  and  as  positively  com-
manded in  God's  Law  (Eph.  vi.  1,  2).  The  father's  duty  is  "  nurture  and  admonition
of  the  Lord"  (Eph.  vi.  4),  including  guidance,  remonstrance,  reproof  (1  Sam.  ii.  23).
By  means  of  this  institution  the  character  of  every  member  of  the  commonwealth  is
formed,  at  the  moment  when  alone  it  is  plastic,  by  the  influence  best  adapted  for
turning  it  to  good.  Contrast  the  system  adopted  by  Rousseau  for  dealing  with  his
children,  and  the  probable  results  on  parents,  children,  and  the  State.  Cf.  the  Form
of  Solemnization  of  Matrimony:  "Marriage  was  ordained  for  the  procreation  of
children,  to  be  brought  up  in  the  fear  and  nurture  of  the  Lord,  and  to  the  praise  of
his  holy  Name."

An  analogous  position  to  that  of  the  parent  is  afterwards  held  by  the  civil  magistrate
in  respect  to  the  subject,  and  by  the  pastor  in  respect  to  a  member  of  his  flock.  There-
fore, in  order  to  carry  out  the  commandment,  a  man  hu  not  only  "  to  love,  honour,  and
succour  his  father  and  mother,"  but  also  "  to  honour  and  obey  the  queen,  and  all  that
are  put  in  authority  under  her:  to  submit  himself  to  all  his  governors,  teachers,
spiritual  pastors  and  masters :  to  order  himself  lowly  and  reverently  to  allTiis  betters  "
(Church  Catechism).  On  the  other  hand,  the  authorities  in  the  State  and  in  the
Church  have  their  duties  also,  not  now  the  same  as  those  of  the  parent  towards  the
child,  on  account  of  the  changed  position  of  him  who  was  onco  a  child,  but  nevertheless
analogous  to  them.  So  in  other  cases,  wherever  men  stand  in  a  relation  to  each  other
similar  to  that  of  parent  and  child,  obligations  similar  to  those  which  bind  pai  eiits  ami
children  arise.

2.  Sabbatical  observance  appears,  at  first  sight,  a  small  thing  to  place  on  s  level,  as
here,  with  the  fifth  commandment,  or,  as  in  the  Decalogue,  with  the  first,  second,  and
third  commandments ;  but  when  we  examine  into  it  closely,  we  find  that  this  dispro-
portion does  not  exist.

I.  Its  msTiTunoN.  It  shares  with  the  ordinance  of  marriage  alone  the  characteristic
of  having  been  instituted  at  the  creation  of  the  world.  "  And  God  blessed  the  seventh
day,  and  sanctified  it :  because  that  in  it  he  had  rested  from  all  his  work  which  God
created  and  made "  (Gen.  ii.  3).  BeLug  coeval  with  creation,  the  sabbatical  law,  Uke
the  marriage  law,  is  of  universal  obligation  on  all  mankind.

IL  Its  Jewish  foem.  The  sabbatical  law  was  observed  during  the  period  pre-
ceding the  Mosaic  Law  (Exod.  xvi.  22 — 30).  For  the  Jews  it  took  the  form  given  it
in  the  fourth  commandment  (Exod.  xx.  8 — 11 ;  Deut.  v.  12 — 15)  and  other  Mosaic
injunctions  (Exod.  xxxi.  13, 14 ;  xxxv.  2,  3 ;  Numb.  xv.  32 — 36).  To  them  it  comme-
morated the  rest  after  the  Creation  and  the  rest  after  the  toils  of  Egypt,  while  it  looked
forward  to  the  rest  of  Canaan  while  they  wandered  in  the  wilderness  (Ps.  xcv.  11),  and,
arter  they  had  entered  Canaan,  to  the  still  further  rest  of  the  Messianic  kingdom
(Heb.  iv.  8) ;  and  it  was  to  be  kept  with  such  severity  that  no  work  at  all  was  to  be
done  upon  it,  even  to  the  extent  of  gathering  sticks  or  lighting  a  fire.

III.  Ends  sbbvbd  by  the  Jewish  fobm.  1.  It  formed  a  very  noticeable  distinction
between  the  Jews  and  the  neighbouring  nations,  and  so  it  was  a  preservative  from
idolatry.  2.  It  served,  like  circumcision,  as  a  symbol  constantly  reminding  them  that
they  were  God's  people,  and  shpuld  live  in  accordance  with  their  profession.  "  More-
over also  I  gave  them  my  sabbaths,  to  be  a  sign  between  me  and  them,  that  they
might  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  that  sanctify  them  "  (Ezek.  xx.  12).

IV.  The  Christian  roBU.     Christ  declared  his  lordship  over  the  sabbath  day  (Matt,


292  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xix.  1—37.

lii.  8),  but  he  did  not  exercise  that  lordship  for  the  purpose  of  destroying  it  M  an  institu-
tion, but  merely  of  adapting  the  primary  law  of  the  sabbath  to  altered  circumstances.  The
Jewish  sabbath,  as  such  (that  is,  in  its  peculiarities),  ceased  to  be  binding,  but  the  obli-
gation of  sabbatical  law  continued,  and  the  ordinance  took  a  changed  form.  By  apostohc
authority,  as  proved  by  apostolic  practice,  the  Christian  sabbath  was  kept  on  the  first
day  of  the  week — the  anniversary  of  Christ's  resurrection — and  the  severity  of  its
character  was  abrogated.  As  God  had  rested  on  the  seventh  day  after  his  labour  of
creation,  so  Christ  had  rested  in  the  grave  on  the  seventh  day  after  his  labour  of
redemption.  Why  should  the  seventh  day  be  any  longer  kept  ?  "  The  Jewish  sabbath
died  out  in  the  course  of  the  first  generation  of  Christians,  as  circumcision  died  out,  as
the  temple,  as  the  Law  itself  died  out.  .  .  .  The  Lord's  day  was  a  Divine  and  more
immortal  shoot  from  the  same  stock.  It  was  rooted  in  the  primitive  law  of  the
Creation.  It  recognized  and  adopted  the  old  weekly  division  of  time,  that  perpetual
and  ever-recurring  acknowledgment,  wherever  it  was  celebrated  in  all  the  world,  of  the
Divine  blessing  and  promises.  It  had  the  Divine  sanction  of  the  tables  of  stone — ^those
tables,  written  by  Grod's  own  finger,  and  therefore  greatly  superior  in  sanctity  and
enduring  weight  to  the  temporary  enactments  of  the  ceremonial  law.  It  took  up  the
old  series  of  commemorations  and  sacred  anticipations.  It  bade  the  true  Israel  of  God
record  with  gratitude  and  keep  in  mind,  by  the  weekly  institution  and  its  recurring
festival  of  rest  and  praise,  the  creation  of  mankind,  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  the
entrance  of  the  people  into  the  promised  land,  the  return  from  captivity,  the  coming  of
the  Messiah ;  and  to  look  forward  under  the  dispensation  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  the
crowning  and  final  mercy  of  the  long  scheme  of  Providence,  the  eternal  rest  in  heaven
which  yet  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  "  (Bishop  Moberly, '  The  Law  of  the  Love
of  God').

V.  The  ends  of  the  sabbatical  institution.  1.  To  reserve  a  certain  suflBcient
part  of  time  free  for  spiritual  interests.  2.  To  teach  the  lesson  of  obedience  to  positive
precept  in  religious  things.  The  appointment  of  one-seventh  of  our  time  for  this
purpose  is  wholly  arbitrary.  There  is  no  account  to  he  given  of  it  except  that  it  is
God's  will.  There  is  no  other  account  to  be  given  of  weeks.  Months  and  years  have
their  reasons  in  physical  nature ;  not  so  weeks.  God  has  commanded,  and  because  he
has  commanded,  the  weekly  rest  is  observed  by  those  who  love  God ;  and  not  only
is  the  weekly  rest  observed,  but  a  loving  obedience  is  paid  to  all  religious  institutions
and  ordinances  established  by  lawful  authority.

VI.  Effect  on  the  njDrviDUAL  Christian's  life.  "  The  Christian  man,  desirous  of
loving  God  with  all  the  aflection  of  his  heart,  with  all  the  rational  intelligence  of  his
mind,  with  all  the  devotion  of  his  life,  with  all  the  energy  of  his  strength,  in  the  love
taught  him  under  the  fourth  law,  will  yield  himself  up  gratefully  and  relisiously  to
obey  all  duly  ordered  positive  laws  of  the  Church  of  God.  The  Sunday  and  its  sacred
observance  will  be  to  him  the  centre,  and  furnish,  so  to  speak,  the  form  of  his  own  way
of  life,  and  that  of  all  his  family  and  dependents.  He  will  regard  it  every  time  it
returns  as  God's  holy  day  of  rest,  the  weekly  commemoration  of  the  primeval  rest  of
God  and  of  all  the  signal  mercies  of  the  elder  covenant.  Knowing  himself  to  be
of  the  true  Israel  of  God,  he  will  not  forget  the  blessings  connected  by  God  himself
with  the  sabbatical  institution,  vouchsafed  to  his  fathers  in  the  faith.  He  will  celebrate
it  weekly  as  the  feast  of  the  Lord's  resurrection,  and  all  the  blessings  of  that  resurrec-
tion ;  as  the  feast  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Giver  of  peace  and  rest  in  the  Church,  as  the
weekly  antepast  of  that  glorious  and  unending  rest  in  the  presence  of  God  which  still
remaineth  for  the  people  of  God.  It  will  be  to  him  a  day  of  rest,  peace,  prayer,  praise,
and  holy  joy ;  no  mournful  and  austere  time,  but  on  the  contrary,  a  thankful  happy
time.  He  will  remember  his  Lord's  injunction  not  to  forbid  or  refuse  works  of  necessity
or  mercy  on  that  day.  He  will  gratefully  shut  up  the  records  of  the  cares,  the
interests,  and  the  occupations  of  the  week,  and  give  that  holy  day  to  God ;  not  dis-
charging himself  of  his  duties  of  worship  by  an  attendance  in  God's  house  or  holding
himself  at  liberty  to  make  his  own  convenience  or  inclination  the  rule  of  obedience;
but  faithfully,  dutifully,  and  completely  sanctifying  that  day  to  rest,  worship,  and  the
thought  of  God  and  heaven.  And  the  other  days,  the  train  of  Sunday,  will  borrow
of  Its  light ;  each  having  its  own  sacred,  special  commemoration  belonging  to  it,  and
«>aoh  refleotmg  some  of  the  brightness  of  the  Sunday  just  preceding  and  catching  more
and  more  from  that  which  follows"  (Moberly,  '  The  Law  of  the  Love  of  God ').


OH.  XIX.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  293

VII.  Kbbults  of  its  neglect.  1.  To  the  individual :  (1)  an  unloying  spirit  arising
from  a  consciousness  of  disobedience  to  a  command ;  (2)  a  habit  of  refusing  to  submit
to  positive  injunctions,  and,  growing  out  of  that,  »  habit  of  choosing  which  of  God's
commandments  he  will  obey ;  (3)  a  loss  of  religious  opportunities,  and  consequently  a
gradual  falling  away  from  the  habit  of  public  worship,  and  therefore  from  the  spiritual
life ;  (4)  a  sense  of  being  overwhelmed  by  the  business  and  worries  of  life  which  con-
tinue without  cessation,  and  thence  a  want  of  calm  peacefulness  and  cheerfulness.
2.  To  a  nation  :  (1)  growth  of  ungodliness  and  irreligion ;  (2)  increase  of  self-indulgence
and  mere  amusement- seeking ;  (3)  growing  oppression  of  the  poor,  who  are  made  to
serve  the  amusements  or  requirements  of  the  rich  instead  of  enjoying  their  weekly  rest
and  refreshment  of  body  and  mind  and  soul;  (4)  the  displeasure  of  God,  whose
primeval  law  is  disobeyed,

Ver.  i. — This  verse  contains  the  laws  of  piety  and  of  faith.  "  Turn  ye  not  unto  idols  "
forbids  the  worship  of  false  gods ;  "  nor  make  to  yourselves  molten  gods  "  forbids  in  addi-
tion the  sin  of  worshipping  the  true  God  under  the  form  of  a  molten  shape.

I.  The  great  temptation  to  the  Jews  down  to  the  time  of  their  captivity  appears  to
have  been  that  of  taking  the  gods  of  the  nations  round  about  them  as  their  gods ;
Baal,  Ashtoreth,  Molech,  Chemosh,  drew  off  their  affections  from  Jehovah.  They  did
not  desire  apparently  to  give  up  the  worship  of  God  altogether,  but  to  combine  the
worship  of  false  gods  with  it,  that  is,  to  transler  a  part  of  the  religious  affections  which
were  due  to  God  to  some  other  object.  This  is  done  in  the  present  day,  (1)  by  the
Boman  Catholic  Church,  which  sanctions  the  transference  of  worship  which  ought
to  be  confined  to  God,  from  him  to  St.  Mary  and  other  saints ;  and  the  moral  and
religious  regard,  which  is  due  to  God  alone,  not  only  to  saints,  but  to  a  living  man,  who
has  been  called  the  idol  of  the  Vatican  ;  (2)  by  worldly  men,  who  occupy  their  thoughts
and  feeling  to  such  an  excessive  degree  with  the  things  of  sense  as  to  shut  out  Divme
and  spiritual  things ;  (3)  by  sojihists,  who,  by  the  exercise  of  a  subtle  intellect  in  a
presumptuous  spirit,  shut  out  God  from  their  ken,  and  worship  the  universe,  or  humanity,
or  nothing.

II.  The  Jews  were  also  guilty  of  the  kindred  sin  of  worshipping  Jehovah  under  the
form  of  an  idol.  This  was  the  sin  of  Aaron's  calf,  which  represented,  not  any  strange
god,  but  Jehovah  himself  (Exod.  xxxii.  5),  and  this  was  the  case  witli  Jeroboam's  two
calves  of  gold  (1  Kings  xii.  26 — 33).  This  offence  is  committed  by  any  Christians
who  adore  a  representation  of  the  Deity,  sculptured  or  painted,  or  any  sign  or
symbol  of  him,  of  whatever  material  or  appearance  it  may  be.  It  is  the  sin  of  men
or  Churches  which  have  faith  to  believe  that  there  is  a  God,  but  so  feeble  a  faith  that
they  require  visible  symbols  of  his  presence  instead  of  bravely  trusting  in  the  Unseen.
The  Israelites  said  to  Aaron,-"  Up,  make  us  gods,  which  shall  go  before  us  ;  for  as  for
this  Moses,  the  man  that  brought  us  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  we  wot  not  what
is  become  of  him."  When  they  could  not  see  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  they  required
a  visible  image  of  God.  They  could  not  trust  him  unseen ;  they  required  proof  of  his
nearness;  and  this  craving  of  a  feeble  faith  led  them  to  prefer  the  symbol  of  "  a  calf
that  eateth  hay  "  (Deut.  iv.  15)  to  no  similitude  at  all.  "  Other  nations,  surrounding
the  Jews  on  every  side,  had  their  visible  objects  of  worship,  making  their  task  of  Divine
duty  and  faith  more  easy.  But  to  acquiesce  in  their  unseen  God,  I  am ;  to  obey  with-
out immediate  continual  consciousness  of  his  nearness ;  to  trust  in  his  protection  at
times  when  they  had  no  sensible  aid  to  help  them  to  realize  to  their  imagination  his
power ;  to  let  loose,  as  it  were,  their  prayers  into  the  air,  without  having  sume  repre-
sentative figure,  or  emblem,  at  the  least,  at  which  to  point  them  ; — all  this  was  too
difficult  a  task  for  a  feeble  faith  in  things  invisible  and  spiritual "  (Moberly,  '  The  Law
of  the  Love  of  God ').

The  same  feebleness  of  faith  has  produced  the  worship  of  images  in  the  Christian
Church.  It  was  not  till  the  seventh  century  that  they  crept  into  use  for  aids  in
worship,  and  when  they  were  approved  in  the  eighth  century  by  the  second  Council  of
Nicea,  that  Council  was  at  once  rejected,  and  its  doctrine  of  images  was  repudiated  by
the  Council  of  Frankfort  and  the  bishops  of  Charlemagne's  empire.

In  like  manner,  a  feeble  faith  craves  for  full  light,  for  demonstration,  for  infallibility,
where  Q<xi  has  only  given  twilight  moral  certainty,  and  an  authority  which  is  not  abso-


294  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xix.  1— «7,

Inte.  It  crares  for  immediate  resolution  of  spiritual  difficulties  where  God  demands  a
patient  dealing  with  them ;  it  asks  after  a  sign  where  no  sign  is  to  be  giren ;  it  seeks
out  for  itself  mediators  instead  of  going  straight  to  GtoA.

Not  only  does  the  use  of  images  in  worship  arise  from  a  feeble  faith,  bnt  It  makes
that  faith  feebler  and  feebler,  and  thus  leads  to  materialism.  After  a  while  the  symbol
becomes  substituted  for  the  thing  symbolized  by  it,  and  the  affections  which  the  emblem
was  intended  to  excite  toward  an  unseen  object,  do  not  pass  beyond  the  external  sign.
Materialism  and  weakness  of  faith  are  the  spiritual  effects  of  worshipping  images  and
craving  after  visible  symbols.

"  A  brave  contentment  with  an  invisible  God,  showing  itself  in  faithful  and  strong-
hearted  maintenance  of  piety  in  the  absence  (if  it  should  so  please  God)  or  the
apparent  scantiness  of  signs,  tokens,  miracles,  and  other  visible  indications  of  the
presence  and  protection  of  the  Omnipresent  and  Omnipotent,  and  a  like  courageous
and  faithful  abstinence  from  making  to  themselves  unauthorized  images,  symbols,  and
emblems  of  him  who  communicated  with  the  people  without  similitude,  must  be
the  particular  quality  or  part  of  Divine  love  enjoined  under  the  second  law.  The
peculiar  affection  enjoined  is  the  brave,  trusting,  spiritual  faith  in  God  invisible,
spiritual,  absent  to  our  sense,  dim  in  his  tokens,  obscure  sometimes  in  his  providences,
not  demonstrable  in  his  evidences,  not  invariable  in  his  benefits.  .  .  .  Possessed  of  this
spiritual  faith  in  the  Unseen,  a  man  walks  along  his  narrow  path'  of  life  with  a  confidence,
security,  and  cheerfulness  which  establish  at  once  his  comfort  and  his  safety  "  (Moberly,
'  The  Law  of  the  Love  of  God ').

Vers.  9,  10. — The  law  of  kindness  is  a  necessary  complement  to  the  other  laws,  to
make  up  the  perfect  character.  A  stern,  just  man  is  not  the  Christian  ideal.  The
mercy  and  loving-kindness  of  God  must  be  our  model,  as  well  as  his  other  qualities.

"  The  quality  of  mercy  ...  is  twice  blessed  ;
It  blesseth  him  that  gives,  and  him  that  takes."

The  man  who  leaves  something  for  others  that  he  might  have  taken  for  himself,  sneh
as  the  gleanings  of  his  field,  rises  from  the  level  of  justice  to  that  of  generosity,  and
is  educated  to  understand  the  noble  impulses  of  a  liberal  heart  and  the  blessedness
described  in  the  one  saying  of  our  Lord  that  is  not  recounted  in  the  Gospels,  "  It  is
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."

Vers.  11, 13,  35,  36. — Stealing  is  forbidden  hy  the  law  of  man,  and  hy  the  Law  of
CM.  It  is  forbidden  by  the  law  of  man  in  order  to  prevent  injury  being  done  to  a
citizen,  and  its  sanction  is  fear  of  punishment.  Remove  the  fear  of  punishment,  and
the  goods  of  another  will  no  longer  be  respected.  It  is  forbidden  by  the  Law  of  God
because  it  is  displeasing  to  God ;  because  honesty  and  uprightness  are  in  themselves
right ;  because  to  defraud  another  is  in  itself  wrong.  Take  away  the  fear  of  punish-
ment, and  there  will  remain  as  scrupulous  a  care  not  to  trespass  on  the  rights  of  another
as  before.  The  law  of  honesty,  as  inculcated  by  God,  has  a  dominating  power  and
influence  in  all  conditions  of  life.

Cheating  is  to  stealing  as  equivocation  is  to  lying.  Both  are  equally  immoral.  Cheat-
ing and  equivocating  only  differ  morally  from  stealing  and  lying  by  being  more  mean
and  cowardly.  The  law  of  man  cannot  prevent  cheating.  It  can  indeed  send  inspectors  to
see  that  there  are  "jmt  balances,  just  weights,  a  just  ephah,  and  a  just  hin ; "  but  that  is  not
enough  to  prevent  cheating.  The  only  thing  that  will  do  this  is  the  fear  of  the  Lord
and  the  consciousness  that  the  unjust  appropriation  of  anything,  however  small,  is  con-
trary to  the  will  of  God.  Hence  we  may  see  the  infinite  importance  for  the  well-being
of  a  country  that  the  moral  teaching  of  children  in  public  schools  be  rested  upon  a
religious  basis.  The  precept  is  reproduced  in  the  New  Testament :  "  Let  him  that  stole
steal  no  more:  but  rather  let  him  labour,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is
good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth"  (Eph.  iv.  28).

Lying  is  joined  with  stealing  and  cheating,  not  only  because  it  may  be  used  as  a
means  of  cheating  (oh.  vi.  2),  but  because  it  is  a  fraud  in  itself  and  a  ran  against  upright-
ness and  honesty.    The  essence  of  the  sin  consists  in  deceiving  our  neighbours.    "  Men,


OB.  xrx.  1— 37.J  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  296

as  men,"  says  Bishop  Taylor,  "  have  a  right  to  truth ; "  "  for  there  is  in  mankind  a
universal  contract  implied  in  all  their  intercourses,  and  words  being  instituted  to
declare  the  mind,  and  for  no  other  end,  he  that  hears  me  speak  hath  a  right  in  justice
to  be  done  him  that,  as  far  as  I  can,  what  I  speak  be  true ;  for  else  be  by  words  does
not  know  your  mind,  and  then  as  good  and  better  not  speak  at  all"  ('Ductor  Dubi-
tantium/  3,  2,  5).    There  are  certain  classes  of  men  who  have  not  a  right  to  truth,
such  as  madmen,  and  sick  persons  under  special  circumstances;  and  in  these  cases
it  is  justifiable  to  say  to  them  what  is  best  for  them,  whether  true  or  not ;  and  in  case
of  declared  war  the  right  to  truth  ceases,  and  is  known  to  cease,  so  that  no  immoral
deception  takes  place  when  false  news  is  spread  or  stratagems  adopted.    But  in  time
of  peace  and  in  ordinary  cases,  "  Thou  shall  not  deceive  thy  neighbour  "  is  the  rule  of
conduct.    Whether  this  deception  takes  place  by  means  of  a  lie,  or  of  an  equivocation,
or  of  a  mental  reservation  makes  no  difference  in  the  morality  of  the  act.    The  defence  of
equivocation  rests  upon  a  confusion  of  two  things  totally  different — ^material  truth  and
moral  truthfulness.    The  statement  that  the  sun  rises  or  sinks  is  materially  false,  be-
cause it  remains  stationary.    But  the  man  who  makes  such  a  statement  is  morally  truth-
ful, ifhe  makes  it  not  intending  to  deceive  his  neighbour  and  knowing  that  he  will  not  be
deceived.    A  statement  that  the  sun  had  not  risen  (in  the  morning)  or  gone  down  (in
the  evening),  if  made  with  the  purpose  of  deceiving  the  person  addressed,  and  with  an
ulterior  object  on  the  part  of  the  speaker,  although  materially  true,  would  imply  moral
untruthfulness  on  the  part  of  the  speaker,  and  therefore  is  a  lie.    Bishops  Taylor  and
Sanderson  were  some  of  the  first  theologians  who,  recurring  to  the  severer  morality  of
Augustine  and  the  early  Fathers,  cast  away  with  scom  the  puerile  confusion  between
moral  truthfulness  and  material  truth  on  which  the  system  of  modem  Roman  casuistry
in  this  department  rests.     "  He  that  tells  a  lie,"  says  Bishop  Taylor,  "  and  by  his  mental
restriction  says  he  tells  a  truth,  tells  two  lies  "  ('  Ductor  Dubitantium,'  iii.  28).     On  the
other  hand,  the  Church  of  Home  teaches  that  the  person  addressed  may  be  deceived  to
any  amount,  provided  that  the  deception  is  effected  by  a  form  of  words  which  is  true  in
some  sense  apprehended  by  the  speaker,  though  untrue  in  the  sense  understood  by  the
other  party.    Accordingly,  it  is  taught  by  an  authority  that  may  not  be  gainsaid  by  any
member  of  that  communion,  that  if  a  man  prefixes  the  words  "  I  say  that "  to  a  sentence,
he  may  with  a  good  reason  make  any  false  statement  that  be  pleases,  because  in  his
own  mind  he  means  only  to  declare  that  he  is  making  use  of  the  words  following  that
prefix,  not  that  he  is  asserting  their  truth,  as  the  person  that  he  addresses  supposes  him
to  be  doing  (S.  Alfonso  de'  Liguori, '  Theol.  Moral.,'  iv.  451).     Contrast  with  this  the
injunctions  of  the  apostle,  "  Wherefore  putting  away  lying,  speak  every  man  truth  with
his  neighbour:  for  we  are  members  one  of  another"  (Bph.  iv.  25);  "Lie  not  one  to
another,  seeing  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds  "  (Col.  iii.  9) ;  and  the
command  of  the  prophet,  "  Speak  ye  every  man  the  truth  to  his  neighbour ;  execute
the  judgment  of  truth  and  peace  in  your  gates :  and  let  none  of  you  imagine  evil  m
your  hearts  against  his  neighbdUr ;  and  love  no  false  oath :  for  all  these  are  things  that
I  hate,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Zech.  viii.  16,  17) ;  and  the  teaching  of  the  early  Church,  "  A
man  lies  when  he  thinks  something  to  be  false  and  says  it  as  though  true,  whether  it
be  true  or  false.     Mark  the  addition  that  I  have  made.     Whether  it  be  really  true  or
false,  yet,  if  a  man  thinks  it  false  and  assert  it  as  trud,  he  lies,  for  he  is  aiming
to  deceive.  .  .  .  His  heart  is  double,  not  single ;  he  does  but  bring  out  what  he  has
there"  (St.  Augustine,  '  Serm.'  133);  and  the  teaching  of  the  reformed  Church,  "Our
result  is  that  the  party  swearing  after  this  manner  both  sinneth  in  his  equivocal  oath,
and  is  notwithstanding  that  tacit  equivocation  bound  in  conscience  unto  the  performance
of  his  promise  in  that  sense  which  the  words  yield  of  themselves,  and  are,  without  con-
straint, apt  to  beget  upon  the  minds  of  others.    Unless  he  act  accordingly,  he  is  not
guiltless  of  perjury  "  (Sanderson, '  Obligation  of  Oaths ').   In  the  Book  of  the  Revelation
we  read,  "  But  the  fearful,  and  unbelieving,  and  the  abominable,  and  murderers,  and
whoremongers,  and  sorcerers,  and  idolaters,  and  all  liars,  shall  have  their  part  in  the
lake  which  burneth  with  fire  and  brimstone  "  (Rev.  xxi.  8).

Ver.  12, "  Te  shall  not  swear  hy  my  Name  falsely,  neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  Name
of  thy  Ood"  contains  three  injunctions :  First,  a  command  that  on  due  occasions  we  are
to  make  appeal  to  God  by  solemn  oath ;  secondly,  a  prohibition  of  perjury ;  thirdly,  a
command  to  reverence  God's  Name.


296  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xix.  1— 37.

L  To  swEAB  BT  God's  Name  is  commanded,  as  being  a  becoonttion  of  Hm  a»
guPBSME  LoBD.  Thus  in  Deuteronomy  we  read,  "  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God,
and  serve  him,  and  shalt  swear  by  his  Name  "  (vi.  13) ;  in  the  Psalms,  "  Every  one  that
sweareth  by  him  shall  glory  (or  be  commended) "  (Ixiii.  11) ;  in  Isaiah,  "  He  that
sweareth  in  the  earth  shall  sweai-  by  the  God  of  truth  "  (Ixv.  16) ;  in  Jeremiah,  "  Thou
shalt  swear.  The  Lord  liveth,  in  truth,  in  judgment,  and  in  righteousness "  (iv.  2) ;
"  Thy  children  have  forsaken  me,  and  sworn  by  them  that  are  no  gods  "  (v.  7) ;  "  And
it  shall  come  to  pass,  if  they  will  diligently  learn  the  ways  of  my  people,  to  swear  by
my  Name,  The  Lord  liveth ;  as  they  taught  my  people  to  swear  by  Baal ;  then  shall
they  be  built  in  the  midst  of  my  people  "  (xii.  16).

II.  God  sweabs  bt  himself.  "  By  myself  have  I  sworn,  saith  the  Lord,  for  because
thou  hast  done  this  thing,  and  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son :  that  in
blessing  I  will  bless  thee  "  (Gen.  xxii.  16, 17).  "  I  have  sworn  by  myself,  the  word  is
gone  out  of  my  mouth  in  righteousness,  and  shall  not  return.  That  unto  me  every  knee
shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall  swear  "  (Isa.  xlv.  23).  "  For  when  God  made  promise  to
Abraham,  because  he  could  swear  by  no  greater,  he  sware  by  himself,  saying,  Surely
blessing  I  will  bless  thee,  and  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thee.  .  .  .  Wherein  God,
willing  more  abundantly  to  show  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the  immutability  of  hi*
counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath :  that  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was
impossible  for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation  "  (Heb.  vi.  13—18).

III.  God's  command  hade  of  none  effect  bt  Jewish  tbaditions.  These  are
summed  up  in  the  following  passage  of  Fhilo  Judseus : — "  Let  the  word  of  the  good
man  be  a  firm  oath,  immovable  trust,  free  from  falsehood,  based  on  truth.  But  if
this  be  not  sufficient,  and  necessity  compel  him  to  swear,  he  should  swear  by  the
health  or  sacred  age  of  his  father  or  mother  if  they  are  alive,  or  by  their  memory  if
they  are  dead.  For  they  are  images  and  representations  of  Divine  power,  inasmuch
as  they  brought  into  being  those  that  did  not  exist  before.  They  too  deserve  praise
who,  when  they  are  compelled  to  swear,  suggest  the  thought  of  reverence  both  to  the
bystanders  and  to  those  who  impose  the  oath  by  the  limitation  and  unwillingness

which  they  show.     For,  saying  aloud,    '  Yes,  by  ,'  and,    '  No,  by  . ,'   and

adding  nothing,  under  the  appearance  of  sudden  interruption,  they  show  that  they  do
not  swear  a  complete  oath.  But  let  a  man  add  thereto  what  he  pleases,  such  as  the
earth,  the  sun,  the  stars,  the  heaven,  the  whole  world,  provided  he  does  not  add  the
highest  and  most  awful  Cause"  ('De  Special.  Legibus').

IV.  Christ  forbids  swearing.  "  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said  by  them  of
old  time,  Thou  shalt  not  forswear  thyself,  but  shalt  perform  unto  the  Lord  thine  oaths :
but  I  say  unto  you,  Swear  not  at  all ;  neither  by  heaven ;  for  it  is  God's  throne :  nor
by  the  earth ;  for  it  is  his  footstool :  neither  by  Jerusalem ;  for  it  is  the  city  of  the  great
King.  Neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head,  because  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair
white  cr  black.  But  let  your  communication  be.  Yea,  yea;  Nay,  nay:  for  whatsoever
is  mure  than  these  cometh  of  evil"  (Matt,  v,  33 — 37).  Nearly  the  same  words  are
repeated  in  Jas.  v.  12.

V.  Cheist's  command  limited  in  its  extent.  His  prohibition  refers  to  ordinary
swearing,  not  to  solemn  oaths  taken  in  courts  of  justice  or  under  similar  circumstances.
This  is  plain  by  the  fact  that  at  his  own  trial  he  replied  to  the  adjuration  of  the  high
priest,  which  adjuration  was  the  Jewish  manner  of  taking  an  oath  in  a  court  of  justice,
"  Jesus  held  his  peace.  And  the  high  priest  answered  and  said  unto  him,  I  adjure  thee
by  the  living  God,  that  thou  tell  us  whether  thou  be  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  God.  Jesus
said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  said  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  63,  64).  Because  the  high  priest's  words
were  "  the  voice  of  swearing  "  (ch.  v.  1),  Jesus  broke  his  silence  and  spoke  in  obedience
to  the  adjuration ;  and  oaths  are  spoken  of  with  approval  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
(Ti.  13—18).

VI.  What  an  oath  is.  It  is  an  appeal  to  the  tribunal  of  God,  the  person  swearing
(or  adjured)  calling  God  to  witness  to  the  truth  of  his  words.  Its  purpose  is  "  an  end
of  all  strife  "  (Heb.  vi.  16).  When  no  circumstantial  evidence  is  forthcoming,  the  only
means  of  arriving  at  truth  is  the  awe  of  God  solemnly  invoked  by  an  oath,  and  the
dread  of  ofiending  him  by  perjury.  Where  either  sophistical  casuistry  or  •  secret — still
mor«  an  open — scepticism  undermines  or  destroys  the  sense  of  the  obligation  of  oaths  in
a  nation,  that  nation  is  hurrying  on  its  way  to  destruction.


«H.  xnc  1— 37.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  297

VII.  Pebjcbt,  The  more  solemn  an  oath  is,  the  greater  is  the  sin  of  perjury.  If
to  swear  by  God's  Name  is  a  method  of  arriving  at  truth  appointed  by  God  himself,  to
■wear  by  ms  Name  falsely  subverts  the  purpose  of  the  command  and  insults  the  majesty
of  God.

VIII.  Ibbetebenos.  Not  only  deliberate  perjury  but  any  kind  of  irreverenoie  is  for-
bidden by  this  injunction.  "  The  Christian  man  .  .  .  will  endeavour  to  recognize  with
faithful  respect  that  holy  Name  wherever  it  meets  him  in  his  walk  of  life.  As  it  is  an
appellation  of  the  most  high  God,  he  will  never  utter  it  hastily  or  thoughtlessly.  He
will  surely  not  use  it  at  all  except  he  have  occasion  to  speak  of  it  seriously  aud  carefully.
It  is  needless  to  say  how  totally  he  will  refrain  from  such  wanton  profanation  as  that  of
garnishing  his  common  speech  by  using  the  Name  or  referring  to  the  doings  of  the
Most  High ;  still  less  how  impossible  it  would  be  for  him  to  allege  the  sacred  Name,
literally  or  by  implication,  in  support  of  falsehood  ;  nay,  how  impossible  it  would  be
that  he  should  assert  what  is  false  at  all,  seeing  that  the  Name  of  God  is  all  around
him,  and  that  the  most  secularly  sounding  asseverations  are  nothing  else  than  allega-
tions of  that  Name.  He  will  be  much  on  his  guard  in  prayers,  lest,  while  he  utters  the
sacred  Name  and  the  words  which  belong  to  it,  his  mind  should  wander  away  from  the
thoughts  which  ought  to  accompany  it,  and  he  should  break  the  commandment.  He  will
not  shrink  from  the  seemly  reverence  which  the  Church  orders  to  be  paid  to  the  Nama
of  Qhriat "  (Moberly,  •  The  Law  of  the  Love  of  God ').

Vers.  18, 84. — ^We  have  the  testimony  of  our  Lord  (Matt.  xxii.  9)  and  of  the  Apostle
St.  Paul  (Bom.  xiii.  9  ;  Gal.  v.  14)  that  to  obey  the  injunction,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy
neighhotir  as  thyself"  is  to  fulfil  all  the  commandments  of  the  second  table  of  the  Law ;
and  for  that  reason  St.  James  calls  it  a  royal  law  (Jas.  ii.  8).  Here,  therefore,  the
Levitical  Law  culminates  in  its  highest  point,  so  far  as  our  duties  towards  men  are  con-
cerned. Lest  the  Jew  should  confine  the  idea  of  thy  neighbour  to  his  own  kindred  and
race,  an  equal  love  is  specifically  commanded  for  the  stranger  that  dwelleth  with  you.  Not
only.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  Jewish  neighbour  as  thyself,  but  also  Thou  slialt  love  the  stranger
that  dwelleth  among  you  as  thyself.  The  force  of  the  comparison,  as  thyself,  may  be
studied  in  Bishop  Butler's  sermon  'Upon -the  Love  of  our  Neighbour.'

But  though  the  Law  culminates  in  the  two  kindred  commands,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the
Lord  thy  God;"  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself;"  Christianity  does  not.
Christianity  goes  beyond  the  highest  point  to  which  the  Law  soars.  Not  only  does  it
name  the  neighbour  and  the  stranger  as  those  whom  we  are  to  love,  but  also  the  enemy.
"Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate  thine
euemy.  But  I  say  unto  you.  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to
them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you,  and  persecute  you  ;
that  ye  may  be  the  children  of  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  "  (Matt.  v.  43 — 45).  The
motive  in  the  gospel  is  also  higher  than  the  Law.  In  the  Law  the  motive  in  the  case
of  the  stranger  is  human  sympathy  arising  from  common  suffering,  "for  ye  were
strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt."  In  the  gospel  it  is  the  desire  to  be  like  God  in  his  deal-
ings with  men,  "  for  he  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendetb
rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust "  (Matt.  v.  45),  "  for  he  is  kind  unto  the  unthankful
and  to  the  evil.  Be  ye  therefore  merciful,  as  your  Father  also  is  merciful "  (Luke  vi.
35,  36).

Ver.  19. — ^The  moral  meaning  of  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  not  sow  thy  field  with
mingled  seed,"  receives  an  illustration  from  the  parable  of  the  "  man  which  sowed  good
seed  in  his  field :  but  while  men  slept,  his  enemy  came  and  sowed  tares  among  the
wheat,  and  went  his  way.  But  when  the  blade  was  sprung  up,  and  brought  forth  fruit,
then  appeared  the  tares  also "  (Matt.  xiii.  24 — 26).  God's  servant  must  sow  of  the
best ;  if  the  tares  are  mixed  with  the  good  seed,  it  must  be  the  enemy's  doing,  not  his.
One  of  the  preparations  made  by  the  Jews  for  an  approaching  Passover  was  to  go  over
the  fields  near  Jerusalem,  and  root  up  plants  that  had  grown  from  mingled  seeds.  But
in  the  spiritual  sphere  this  is  not  to  be  done.  If  the  enemy  has  succeeded  in  introduc-
ing the  tares,  they  are  for  the  sake  of  the  wheat  to  be  let  to  grow  together  until  th(
harvest  (Matt.  xiii.  30).


298  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xix.  1—37.

Ver.  32. — Bespeet/or  old  age  is  not  only  inculcated  m  a  preservative  against  the  mle
of  brute  force,  but  as  a  part  of  the  fear  of  Qoi,  the  parent's  relation  to  the  child  repre-
senting that  of  God  to  his  creature.

Ver.  37. — Moral  commandments  have  a  double  sanction.  They  are  to  be  obeyed
(1)  because  they  carry  their  own  sanction  with  them,  (2)  because  they  are  commanded.
In  the  latter  respect  all  Divine  injunctions  stand  on  a  level.  All  transgressions  of
what  is  commanded  are  equally  sin,  but  they  are  not  equal  sins.  A  man  who  steals  is
not  guilty  of  an  equally  heinous  sin  with  the  man  who  commits  murder,  but  he  is
equally  guilty  of  sin,  because  both  murder  and  theft  are  forbidden.  All  God's  statutes,
and  all  his  judgments  are  to  be  observed  without  exception,  in  order  to  be  righteous
according  to  the  righteousness  of  the  Law.  "  For  Moses  describeth  the  risjhteousness
which  is  of  the  Law,  That  the  man  which  doeth  those  things  shall  live  by  them  "  (Bom.
X.  5).  "  This  do,  and  ye  shall  live  "  (Luke  xi.  28).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS

Vers.  1,  2,  4,  5,  12,  26—28,  30—32,  36,  Zl.—Beligwn,  and  superstition.  It  is  not
always  easy  or  even  possible  to  distinguish  between  religion  and  superstition.  We  may
fall  into  the  latter  when  we  are  seeking  to  practise  the  former ;  or  we  may,  from  undue
fear  of  the  latter,  neglect  the  former.  In  this  chapter  the  Jews  were  taught  (and  we
are  thereby  encouraged)  to  avoid  the  one,  and  to  perfect  the  other  in  the  fear  of  God.

I.  Thb  8UPBB8TITI0N  WHICH  WAS  TO  BE  SHUNNED.  1.  Clearly  and  decisively  every-
thing that  was  in  any  way  idolatrous  was  condemned;  "turn  ye  not  unto  idols"
•(ver.  4).  2.  All  that  was  distinctively  or  closely  connected  with  heathen  worship  was
also  forbidden:  the  use  of  enchantments,  the  superstitious  observance  of  lucky  oi
unlucky  times,  also  superstitious  cutting  of  the  hair  or  of  the  flesh  (vers.  26 — 28) ;
resorting  to  wizards,  etc.  (see  1  Chron.  x.  13).  There  is  amongst  us  much  adoption  of
practices  which  are  idle  and  vain,  not  warranted  in  Scripture  nor  founded  on  reason.
Such  things  are  to  be  deprecated  and  shunned.  They  are  (1)  useless ;  (2)  harmful,  as
taking  the  place  in  our  thought  which  belongs  to  something  really  good  and  wise ;
(3)  displeasing  to  the  CM  of  truth.

n.  The  bbligion  which  was  to  be  oniTrvATED  and  pbactised.  The  Jews  were  to
cherish  and  cultivate,  even  as  we  are,  (1)  sanctity  like  that  of  God  himself  (ver.  2),
entire  separateness  of  spirit  and  so  of  conduct  from  every  evil  thing ;  (2)  reverence  foi
his  holy  Name  (ver.  12),  and  consequent  abstention  from  everything  bordering  on  pro-
fanity ;  (3)  regard  for  divinely  appointed  ordinances — the  sabbath  and  the  sanctuary
(ver.  30) ;  (4)  gratitude  for  his  redeeming  mercy  (ver.  36),  "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God,
which  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt ; "  (5)  spontaneous  dedication  to  his  service
(ver.  5).  "  At  our  own  will "  we  must  bring  ourselves  and  our  offerings  to  his  altar ;
(6)  daily,  hourly  consultation  of  his  holy  will,  "  Therefore  shall  ye  observe  all  my
statutes,  and  all  my  judgments,  and  do  them  *  (ver.  37). — 0.

Vers.  3,  32. — "  Honour  to  whom  honour.''  It  is  uncertain  whether  we  shall  receive
the  honour  which  is  due  to  us.  Possibly  we  may  be  denied  some  to  which  we  are
entitled ;  probably  we  have  experienced  this  wrong  already,  in  larger  or  smaller  measure,
and  know  the  pain  of  heart  which  attends  it.  Let  us,  therefore,  resolve  that  we  will
give  that  which  is  due  to  others.  The  two  passages  connected  in  the  text  remind  us
that  we  should  pay  deference  to —

I.  Those  who  oakrt  the  wbioht  op  tears.  "Thou  shalt  rise  up  before  the  hoary
head,  and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man."  "Respect  the  burden,  madam,"  sala
Napoleon,  inviting  a  lady  to  move  out  of  the  way  of  one  who  was  carrying  a  heavy
weight.  Those  who  have  travelled  far  on  the  rough  road  of  life,  and  are  worn  with
many  and  sad  experiences,  on  whom  the  privations  of  age  are  resting, — these  carry  a
heavy  weight,  a  burden  we  should  respect.  They  are  as  wounded  soldiers  on  whom  the
battle  of  life  has  left  its  scars,  and  these  are  marks  of  honour  that  demand  the  tribute
of  youth.

IL  Those  who  have  attained  to  wisdom.    The  young  are  apt  to  think  that  they


OH.  XIX.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  »9

can  reach  the  heights  of  wisdom  without  laboriously  climhing  the  steeps  of  experienoBu
They  find  that  they  are  wrong.  Time  proves  to  each  generation  of  men  that  wisdom,
whether  it  be  that  of  earth  or  of  heaven,  is  only  gained  by  the  discipline  of  life.  There
are  men  who  pass  through  human  life  and  learn  nothing  in  the  passage  ;  the  folly  of
youth  cleaves  to  them  still.  Such  men  must  be  comparatively  unhonoured,  receiving
only  the  respect  which  is  due  to  old  age  as  such.  But  when  men  have  gathered  the
fruits  of  a  long  and  large  experience— and  especially  when  men  of  intelligence  and
piety  have  stored  up  the  truth  which  God  has  been  teaching  them  as  he  has  led  them
along  all  the  path  of  life — they  are  worthy  to  receive  our  sincerest  honour,  and  we  must
know  how  to  "rise  up  before  the  hoary  head"  in  their  case.  With  all  and  more  than
all  the  respect  we  pay  to  the  learned,  we  should  receive  men  whom  God  has  been  long
teaching  in  his  school — those  who  have  learnt  much  of  Jesus  Christ.

III.  Those  who  have  laid  us  under  special  obligation.  1.  Aged  men  who  have
lived  a  faithful  life  have  done  this.  For  they  have  lived,  not  only  for  themselves,  but
for  their  kind.  They  have  wrought,  struggled,  suffered  in  order  that  they  might  help
us  and  others  to  walk  in  the  li}:;ht,  to  enter  the  kingdom,  to  enjoy  the  favour  of  God ;
and  they  have  earned  our  gratitude  by  their  faithful  service.  2.  Our  parents  have  done
this  also.  "  Ye  shall  fear  every  man  his  mother,  and  his  father."  What  benefits  our
parents  have  conferred  on  us,  what  kindnesses  they  have  rendered  us,  what  sacrifices
they  have  made  for  us,  what  anxious  thought  and  earnest  prayer  they  have  cherished
and  offered  on  our  behalf, — who  of  us  shall  reckon  ?  The  debt  we  owe  to  them  for  aU
they  have  done  for  us  is  the  heaviest  of  all,  next  to  that  supreme  indebtedness  under
which  we  stand  to  God.  But  it  is  not  only  the  obligation  we  have  thus  incurred
which  demands  our  filial  reverence ;  it  is  the  fact  that  our  parents  are —

IV.  Those  who  stand  in  a  special  belationshif  to  us.  1.  We  should  remember
that  fatherhood  is  the  human  relationship  which  most  closely  resembles  and  most  fully
reveals  that  in  which  God  himself  stands  to  us  all.  Christ  came  to  reveal  the  Father
unto  man  as  the  Father  of  souls.  Therefore  it  is  to  be  highly  honoured.  2.  Father-
hood (parenthood,  for  the  mother  is  not  to  be  left  out  of  our  thought)  in  the  best  state
of  human  society  has  received  the  largest  share  of  honour.  We  may  gather  from  this
fact  that  it  is  a  divinely  implanted  instinct,  only  absent  when  the  race  has  miserably
degenerated  under  sin.  3.  Honour  given  to  parents  as  such  is  imperatively  required
by  God.  It  was  a  patriarchal  and  Jewish,  as  it  is  now  a  Christian,  virtue.  After  the
injunction  stand  these  significant  words,  "I  am  the  Lord."  "Children,  obey  your
parents  in  the  Lord "  (Eph.  vi.  1).  Filial  disobedience  and  unkindness  are  grievous
sins  in  bis  sight.  Filial  love,  honour,  and  considerateness  are  well-pleasing  unto  the
Lord.— 0.

Vers.  9, 10, 13, 14,  33,  34. — Considerateness.    We  gather  from  these  verses^

I.  That  the  feae  of  God  will  bueblt  lead  to  the  love  of  man.  That  piety
which  begins  and  ends  in  acts  of  devotion  is  one  that  may  be  reasonably  suspected :  it
is  not  of  the  scriptural  order.  True  piety  is  in  consulting  the  will  of  the  heavenly
Father  (Matt.  vii.  21),  and  his  will  is  that  we  should  love  and  be  kind  to  one  another
(Eph.  iv.  32).  Philanthropy  is  a  word  which  may  not  have  its  synonym  in  the  Old
Testament,  but  the  Hebrew  legislator  was  not  ignorant  of  the  idea,  and  the  Hebrew
people  were  not  left  without  incitement  to  the  thing  itself.  Hence  these  injunctions  to
leave  some  corn  in  the  corners  of  their  fields,  and  the  scattered  ears  for  the  reaping  and
gleaning  of  the  poor  (ver.  9);  to  leave  also  some  clusters  of  grapes  which  had  been  over-
looked for  needy  hands  to  pluck  (ver.  10) ;  to  take  no  advantage  of  the  weaker  members
of  their  society,  the  deaf  and  the  blind  (ver.  14) ;  and  to  show  kindness  to  the  stranger
(ver.  34).

II.  That  considerateness  is  a  grace  which  is  peculiarly  pleasing  to  God.
The  Jews  were  expressly  enjoined  to  (1)  show  kindness  to  the  poor  (ver.  10) ;  (2)  to  be
careful  of  those  who  suffered  from  bodily  infirmity  (ver.  14)  ;  (3)  to  interest  themselves
In  the  stranger  (vers.  33,  34).  There  is  something  particularly  striking  in  the  command-
ment that  they  were  to  refrain  from  cursing  the  deaf.  Even  though  there  might  be  no
danger  of  giving  positive  pain  and  exciting  resentment,  yet  they  were  not  to  direct
harsh  words  against  any  one  of  their  more  unfortunate  brethren.  This  legislation  tot
the  weak  and  the  necessitous  presents  a  very  pleasant  aspect  of  the  Law.    It  also


aOO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ck.  xix.  1— 37.

reminds  us  of  some  truths  which  come  home  to  ourselves.  We  may  observe:  1.  That
power  is  apt  to  be  tyrannical.  The  history  of  nations,  tribes,  individuals,  is  the  history
of  assertion  and  assumption.  The  strong  have  ever  shovra  themselves  ready  to  take
advantage  of  the  weak.  Hence  the  oppression  and  cruelty  which  darken  the  pages  of
human  history.  2.  That  God  would  have  us  be  just  to  one  another.  In  most  cases>
if  not  in  all,  we  can  take  no  credit  for  our  superior  strength,  and  build  no  claim  on  it.
In  many  cases,  if  not  in  most,  we  can  impute  no  blame  to  others  for  their  weakness :
the  unfortunate  are  not  necessarily  the  undeserving,  and  we  have  no  right  to  make
them  suffer.  3.  But  beyond  this,  God  would  have  us  be  specially  kind  to  the
necessitous  tecause  they  are  needy.  Here  are  these  statutes  in  respect  of  the  poor,  the
afflicted,  and  the  stranger.  The  devotional  Scriptures  speak  more  fully  of  this  sacred
duty  (Ps.  xli.  1,  2  ;  Ixii.  13 ;  cxii.  9,  etc.).  The  prophets  utter  their  voice  still  more
forcibly  (Isa.  Iviii.  6 — 8 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  7 ;  Neh.  v.  10 — 12 ;  Jer.  xxiL  16 ;  Amos  iv.  1,
etc.).  Our  Lord  has,  with  strongest  emphasis,  commended  to  us  considerateness  to-
ward the  weak  and  helpless  (Matt.  x.  42 ;  xviii.  6,  10,  14 ;  xxv.  34 — 40,  etc.).  His
apostles  spoke  and  wrote  in  the  same  strain  (Kom.  xii.  15 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  26,  etc.).  But
that  which,  above  everything,  should  lead  us  to  be  considerate  toward  the  poorer  and
weaker  members  of  our  community  is  the  thought  that  to  do  so  is  so  truly  and
tmpJiatically  Divine.  God  himself  has  ever  been  acting  on  this  gracious  principle.  He
interposed  to  save  the  children  of  Israel  because  they  were  weak  and  afUcted.  Again
and  again  he  stretched  out  his  arm  of  deliverance,  saving  them  from  the  strong  and  the
mighty  of  the  earth.  On  this  Divine  principle  he  deals  with  us  all.  He  "  knows  our
franje,  and  remembers  that  we  are  dust."  "  Like  as  a  father  pities  his  children,  so  he
pities  them  that  fear  him."  Our  Saviour  dealt  with  exquisite  considerateness  in  all  bis
relations  to  his  undiscerning  and  unappreciative  disciples ;  and  now  he  is  dealing  with
gracious  forbearance  toward  us  in  all  the  weakness,  poverty,  shortcoming  of  om*  service.
We  are  never  so  much  like  our  merciful  Master  as  when  we  speak  and  act  considerately
toward  those  who  are  ijoorer,  weaker,  and  more  helpless  than  ourselves. — C.

Vers.  11, 13, 15, 16,  35,  36. — Integrity,  The  Jews  have  always  been  considered  a
cimning  and  crafty  race ;  they  have  been  credited  with  a  willingness  to  overreach  in
business  dealings.  Men  would  rather  have  transactions  with  others  than  with  them,
lest  they  should  find  themselves  worsted  in  the  bargain.  This  suspicion  may  he
well  founded ;  but  if  it  be  so,  it  ought  to  be  remembered  that  it  is  the  consequence
of  the  long  and  cruel  disadvantages  under  which  they  have  suffered,  and  is  not  due  to
anytliing  in  their  own  blood  or  to  any  defect  in  their  venerable  Law.  From  the
beginning  they  have  been  as  strictly  charged  to  live  honourable  and  upright  lives
before  man  as  to  engage  regularly  in  the  worship  of  God.  They  have  been  as  much
bound  to  integrity  of  conduct  as  to  devoutness  of  spirit.  In  these  few  verses  we  find
them  called  to —

I.  Integeity  in  daily  TBANSAcnous — HONESTY.  "  Ye  shall  not  steal,  neither  deal
falsely  "  (ver.  11).  "  Thou  shalt  not  defraud  thy  neighbour,  neither  rob  him  "  (ver.  13 ;
see  vers.  35,  36).  Nothing  could  be  more  explicit  than  this,  nothing  more  comprehen-
sive in  suggestion.  No  member  of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth  could  (1)  deliberately
appropriate  what  he  knew  was  not  his  own,  or  (2)  rob  his  neighbour  in  the  act  of
trading,  or  (3)  deal  falsely  or  unrighteously  in  any  transaction  or  in  any  relation,  with-
out consciously  breaking  the  Law  and  coming  under  the  displeasure  of  Jehovah.  The
wordB  of  the  Law  are  clear  and  strons;,  going  straight  to  the  understanding  and  to  the
conscience.  Every  man  amongst  them  must  have  known,  as  every  one  amongst  us
knows  well,  that  dishonesty  is  sin  in  the  sight  of  God.

II.  Integkity  in  official  duty — ^JTJSTIOB.  (Ver.  15.)  It  is  a  pitiful  thought  that,
in  every  nation,  justice  has  been  open  to  corruption ;  that  men  placed  in  honourable
post!  in  order  to  do  justice  between  man  and  man  have  either  sold  it  to  the  highest
Didder  or  surrendered  and  betrayed  it  from  craven  fear.  God's  clear  word  condemns
such  rank  injustice,  and  his  high  displeasure  follows  the  perpetrator  of  it.  He  who
undertakes  to  judge  his  fellows  must  do  so  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  if  he  swerves
from  his  integrity  in  his  public  acts,  he  must  lay  his  account  with  heaven  if  not  with
man.

HL  Iftegbity  in  wobd — tedth.     "Ye  shall  not  lie  one  to  mother"  (tw.  11)


OH.  XIX.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  801


This,  too,  is  a  universal  sin.  Some  nations  may  be  more  prone  to  it  than  others.  Tha
weak  and  the  oppressed  are  too  ready  to  take  refuge  in  it;  it  is  the  resort  of  the  feeble
and  the  fearful.  But  it  is  also  used  with  shameful  freedom  and  shocking  unconcern,  as
an  instrument  of  gain  and  power.  God  has  revealed  his  holy  hatred  of  it.  "  Ye  shall
not  lie."  "  Lying  lips  are  abomination  to  the  Lord ; "  "  the  Lord  hateth  a  lying
tongue  "  (Prov.  xii.  22 ;  vi.  17).  Under  the  gospel  of  Christ,  we  are  earnestly  warned
against  it  (Eph.  iv.  25  ;  Col.  iii.  9).  We  are  reminded  that  it  is  (1)  a  wrong  done  to
our  fellow-men  ("we  are  members,"  etc.),  and  (2)  closely  associated  with  heathen
habits  (the  "old  man,"  etc.);  and  we  may  remember  that  it  is  (3)  a  habit  most
demoralizing  to  ourselves,  as  well  as  (4)  something  which  utterly  separates  us  from  our
Lord,  being  so  contrary  to  his  Spirit  and  so  grievous  in  his  sight. — C.

Vers.  17,  18. — Love — its  root  and  its  fruit.  Two  things  lend  a  special  interest  to
this  passage.  1.  It  was  twice  quoted  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  xix.  19  and  xxii.  39).
2.  It  shows  us  the  Law  as  closer  to  the  gospel  than  we  are  apt  to  think ;  it  proves  that,
under  the  old  dispensation,  God  was  not  satisfied  with  a  mere  mechanical  propriety  oi
behaviour,  that  he  demanded  Tightness  of  feeling  as  well  as  correctness  of  conduct.  We
have —

I.  The  bboao  pbinoiple  of  God's  bequieement.  Man  is  to  "love  his  neighbour
as  himself"  (ver.  18).  No  man,  indeed,  can  (1)  give  as  much  time  and  thought  to
each  of  his  neighbours  as  he  does  to  himself,  and  no  man  (2)  is  so  responsible  for  the
state  of  others'  hearts  and  the  rectitude  of  their  lives  as  he  is  for  his  own.  But  every
man  can  and  should,  by  power  of  imagination  and  sympathy,  put  himself  in  his
brother's  place;  be  as  anxious  to  avoid  doing  injury  to  another  as  he  would  be  unwil-
ling to  receive  injuijr  from  another ;  and  be  as  desirous  of  doing  good  to  his  neighbour
who  is  in  need  as  he  would  be  eager  to  receive  help  from  him  if  he  himself  were  in
distress.     This  is  the  essence  of  the  "  golden  rule  "  (Matt.  vii.  12).

II.  The  root  from  which  this  fbelinq  will  spbino.  How  can  we  do  this  ?  it
will  be  asked.  How  can  we  be  interested  in  the  uninteresting ;  love  the  unamiable ;
go  out  in  warm  affection  toward  those  who  have  in  them  so  much  that  is  repulsive  ?
The  answer  is  here,  "  I  am  the  Lord."  We  must  look  at  all  men  in  their  relation  to
God.  1.  God  is  interested,  Christ  is  interested  in  the  worst  of  men,  is  seeking  to  save
and  raise  them ;  do  we  not  care  for  those  for  whom  he  cares  so  much  ?  2.  They  are
all  God's  children ;  it  may  be  his  prodigal  children,  living  in  the  far  country,  but  still
his  sons  and  daughters,  over  whom  he  yearns.  3.  The  most  unlovely  of  men  are  those
for  whom  our  Saviour  bled,  agonized,  died.  Can  we  be  indifferent  to  them  ?  4.  They
were  once  not  far  from  the  kingdom,  and  may  yet  be  holy  citizens  of  the  kingdom  of
God.  When  we  look  at  our  fellow-men  in  the  light  of  their  relation  to  God,  to  Jesus
Christ,  we  can  see  that  in  them  which  shines  through  all  that  is  repelling,  and  which
attracts  us  to  their  side  that  we  may  win  and  bless  them.

III.  The  FBUIT8  which  holt  love  will  beab.  There  are  two  suggested  in  the
text.  1.  Forbearance ;  "  not  hating  our  brother  in  our  heart,"  "  not  avenging  or
bearing  any  grudge  against "  him.  Without  the  restraints  and  impulses  of  piety  we  are
under  irresistible  temptation  to  do  this.  Unreasonable  dislike  on  our  brother's  part,
injustice,  ingratitude,  unkindness,  inconsiderateness,  features  of  character  which  are
antipathetic  to  our  own, — these  things  and  such  things  as  these  are  provocative  of  ill
will  dislike,  enmity,  resentment,  even  revenge  on  our  part.  But  if  we  remember  and
realize  our  brothers  relation  to  the  common  Father  and  Saviour,  we  shall  rise  to  the
noble  height  of  forbearance;  we  shall  have  the  love  which  "beareth  all  things,
believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  7).  2.  Besto-
ration  hy  remonstrance ;  "  Thou  shalt  in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neighbour,  and  not  suffer
sin  upon  him."  Instead  of  nursing  and  nourishing  our  indignation,  allowing  our
brother  to  go  on  in  the  wrong,  and  permitting  ourselves  to  become  resentful  as  well  as
indignant,  we  shall  offer  the  remonstrance  of  affection;  we  shall  "reprove,  rebuke,
exhort  with  all  longsuffering  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).  We  shall  try  to  win  our  brother  back
to  that  path  of  truth  or  righteousness  which  he  has  forsaken ;  so  shall  we  "  gain  our
brother  "  (Matt,  xviii.  15),  instead  of  "suffering  sin  upon  him."  This  is  the  conquest
of  love,  the  crown  of  charity. — C.


302  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xix.  1-37.

Ver.  19. — Aids  to  purity.    We  shall  first  consider^

I.  What  was  the  peimary  pubpokt  of  this  tbiplk  law.  We  need  not  be  surprised
if  we  find  here  another  aid  to  purity  of  heart  and  life,  another  fence  thrown  up  against
immorality.  Idolatry  and  immorality,  both  of  the  very  worst  description,  had
covered  and  dishonoured  the  land  of  Canaan.  It  was  of  the  last  importance  that
the  people  of  God  should  be  guarded  in  every  possible  way  against  infection  and  guilt.
Therefore  the  wise  and  holy  Lawgiver  instituted  various  measures  by  which  his  people
should  be  perpetually  reminded  that  they  must  be  absolutely  bee  from  these  heinous
crimes.  And  therefore  precepts  which  intimated  the  will  of  Jehovah  in  this  matter  were
bound  up  with  their  daily  callings  and  their  domestic  life.  Our  text  is  an  illustration.
In  the  management  of  their  cattle,  in  the  cultivation  of  their  fields,  in  the  making  and
wearing  of  their  clothes,  God  was  whispering  in  their  ear,  "  Be  pure  of  heart  and  life."
Everything  impressed  upon  their  minds — these  precise  injunctions  among  other
statutes — that  there  must  be  no  joining  together  of  that  which  Gmd  bad  put  asunder,
no  mingling  of  those  who  should  keep  apart,  no  "  defilement "  (see  Deut.  xxii.  9),  no
"  confusion  "  (ch.  xx.  12).  By  laws  which  Imd  such  continually  recurring  illustration
they  would  have  inwrought  into  the  very  texture  of  their  minds  the  idea  that,  if
they  wished  to  retain  their  place  as  the  people  of  God,  they  must  be  pure  of  heart
and  life.

IL  Secomdaby  tbutes  which  this  IiAW  suooests.  1.  It  suggests  simplicity  in  worship ;
there  may  be  such  an  admixture  of  the  divinely  appointed  and  the  humanly  imported,
of  the  spiritual  and  the  artistic,  of  the  heavenly  and  the  worldly,  that  the  excellency
and  the  acceptableness  will  be  lost  and  gone.  2,  It  suggests  sincerity  in  service ;  in  the
service  of  the  sanctuary  or  the  sabbath  school,  or  in  any  sphere  of  sacred  usefulness,
there  may  be  such  a  mingling  of  the  higher  and  the  lower  motives,  «f  the  generous  and
the  selfish,  of  the  nobler  and  the  meaner,  that  the  "wood,  hay,  and  stubble"  weigh
more  than  the  "  gold,  sUver,  and  precious  stones  "  in  the  balances  of  heaven,  and  then
the  workman  will  "  lose  his  reward."  3.  It  suggests  also  the  wisdom  of  taking  special
cecurities  against  specially  strong  temptations.  God  gave  his  people  very  many  and
(what  seem  to  us)  even  singular  securities  against  the  rampant  and  deadly  evil  which
had  ruined  their  predecessors  and  might  reach  and  slay  them  also.  The  circumstances
and  conditions  of  the  time  demanded  tliem.  Exceptional  and  imperious  necessity  not
only  justifies  but  demands  unusual  securities.  Let  those  who  are  tempted  by  powerful
and  masterful  allurements  to  (1)  intemperance,  (2)  avarice,  (3)  worldliness,  (4)  passion,
take  those  special  measures,  lay  upon  themselves  those  exceptional  restraints  which
others  do  not  need,  but  without  which  they  themselves  would  be  in  danger  of
transgression. — 0.

Vers.  23 — 25. — TTie  range  of  sin  and  thfi  rule  of  Ood.  There  is  much  uncertainty  as
to  the  intention  of  the  Lord  in  this  prohibition.    I  regard  it  as  a  lesson  concerning —

I.  The  depth  and  bbeadth  of  the  taint  of  sin.  The  Israelites  were  to  regard
the  very  soil  of  Canaan  as  so  polluted  by  the  sins  of  its  former  inhabitants  that  the
fruit  which  came  from  it  must  be  treated  "  as  uncircumcised  "  (ver.  23).  Idolatry
and  impurity — the  two  flagrant  sins  of  the  Canaanites — are  evils  which  strike  deep  and
last  long  in  the  taint  which  they  confer.  Their  consequences  are  penetrating  and  far-
spreading.  So,  in  larger  or  lesser  degree,  is  all  sin.  It  leaves  a  taint  behind ;  it  pollutes
the  mind ;  it  mars  the  life  ;  it  makes  its  fruit,  its  natural  growth  and  outcome,  to  be
"  as  uncircumcised,"  to  be  unholy  and  unclean.  And  this  is  to  an  extent  beyond  our
human  estimate.  If  the  Israelites  had  concluded  that  the  iniquities  of  the  Canaanites
were  to  be  regarded  as  polluting  the  very  soil,  they  would  not  have  reckoned  that
three  years  would  be  required  to  free  the  land  from  the  taint  of  evil.  But  God  made
the  purifying  process  extend  over  this  protracted  time.  He  knows  that  the  stain  of  sin
goes  deeper  and  lasts  longer  than  we  think  it  does.  What  an  argument  this  for
expelling  the  idolatrous  and  unclean  from  our  heart  and  life,  for  cultivating  and  cherish-
ing the  holy  and  the  pure !

IL  The  bakoe  of  God'b  olaihs.  (Ver.  24.)  Jehovah  claimed  the  firstfruits  of  the
land  when  the  soil  was  cleansed :  "  all  the  fruit  thereof  shall  be  holy  to  praise  the  Lord,"
It  WM  to  be  given  (probably)  to  the  priests.  Thus  God  reasserted  and  confirmed  his
clum  to  all  the  produce  of  the  land.  TMs  law  would  remind  them  that  the  whole  soil  was


(w.  XIX.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  SOI

his,  and  that  he  had  Bovereign  right  to  dispose  of  it  as  he  willed,  erery  thing  being  of  him
and  belonging  to  him.  God  claims  all  as  his ;  and  his  claim  is  righteous.  For  we  hav4
nothing  but  that  which  we  have  received  from  him ;  we  are  nothing  but  that  which
he  has  created  and  preserved.  "  All  our  springs  are  in  him,"  and  all  that  we  hold  and
occupy  is  his  property.  When  we  forget  our  derivation  from  him  and  our  dependence
upon  him,  he  reminds  us,  by  some  providential  privation,  that  we  are  falling  from  the
spirit  of  reverence,  gratitude,  and  submission  which  is  the  very  life  of  our  soul.  And
it  is  well  for  us  voluntarily  to  set  aside  to  his  service  the  firstfruits  of  our  labour,  that
we  may  be  thus  powerfully  and  practically  reminded  that  we  owe  our  very  being  and  our
whole  substance  to  his  bounty  and  his  grace.

III.  The  beneficence  of  the  Divine  bule.  By  this  provision  God  sought,  as
he  is  ever -seeking,  (1)  spiritual  well-being  and  (2)  temporal  prosperity.  By  teach-
ing them  the  truths  which  this  abstinence  suggested,  and  by  requiring  of  them  the
patient  waiting  and  the  childlike  obedience  involved  in  the  fulfilment  of  his  will,  he
was  disciplining  and  perfecting  their  spiritual  nature.  By  giving  them  leave  to  pluck
and  partake  for  themselves  after  the  fourth  year,  he  provided  for  their  bodily  wants  and
appetites.  These  two  ends  Gtod  has  continually  in  view  in  all  his  providential  dealing
with  ourselves.  He  seeks  our  present  satisfaction,  and  also— and  far  more— our  spiritual
well-being  j  out  pleasure  as  children  of  time  and  sense,  and  ova  perfection  as  children  of
the  Father  of  spirits,  as  followers  of  the  righteous  Leader,  as  temples  of  the  Holy
Ghost.— C.

Ver.  30. — 2%r«e  helps  to  spiritual  progress.  "  There  are  many  adversaries,"  it  is
true;  many  drawbacks,  hindrances,  difficulties  in  the  way  of  spiritual  advancement.
But  there  are  these  three  powerful  aids.

I.  One  sacred  day  in  every  seven.  "Ye  shall  keep  my  sabbaths."  Gkxl  has
wrested  from  an  exacting,  rapacious  world  one-seventh  of  human  life,  and  given  it
to  us  for  the  culture  of  the  soul,  for  spiritual  growth,  for  sacred  usefulness.  The
observance  of  the  sabbath  is  an  act  of  (1)  filial  obedience  to  God,  and  (2)  wise  regard
for  our  own  true  welfare.

II.  A  place  foe  social  worship.  "  Ye  shall  reverence  my  sanctuary."  We  have
all  the  advantage  of  social  influences,  the  impulse  which  comes  from  association,  to
impress,  to  direct,  to  establish  tLj  soul  in  heavenly  wisdom.  We  should  worship
regularly  at  the  sanctuary,  because  (1)  we  should  not  draw  so  near  to  God  elsewhere,  or
gain  in  any  other  place  such  spiritual  nourishment ;  (2)  worship  there  helps  to  devotion
everywhere.

III.  Dbvotedness  of  heart  to  a  Divinb  Being.  "I  am  the  Lord."  Not  the
ineffectual  endeavour  to  fill  and  feed,  to  nourish  and  strengthen  the  soul  with  admirable
abstractions ;  but  holy  thought  and  sanctifying  feeling  gathered  round  a  Divine  One  ;
directed  toward  him  who  says,  "  Trust  me,  lore  me,  follow  me,  exalt  me." — 0.

Social  morality.  Ch.  zix.;  cf.  Matt.  xxii.  35 — 10;  Bom.  xlL;  7as.,  passim.
From  the  primary  principle  of  unworldliness,  we  now  have  to  proceed  to  sundry  details
about  social  morality.  Although  these  details  are  given  indiscriminately,  it  is  yet
possible  to  discern  certain  great  principles  among  them.     And —

I.  All  social  morality  is  made  to  rest  on  odb  relation  to  God  HiMBELr.
In  the  Decalogue  we  have  social  morality,  that  is,  our  duty  to  man,  based  upon  our
duty  to  God ;  the  "  second  table  "  rests  upon  the  first.  It  is  the  same  here.  God
brooks  no  rival  (ver.  4).  He  sets  himself  as  our  model  of  holiness  (ver.  2).  He  calls  man
to  fellowship  through  the  peace  offering  (vers.  5 — 8).  His  Name  must  be  subjected  to
no  profanation  (ver.  12),  and  the  sabbaths  are  to  be  strictly  kept  (ver.  30).  In  other
words,  we  have  the  four  commandments  of  the  first  table  strewn  up  and  down  these
details,  and  exhibiting  the  fountain-head  of  social  morality  in  faithfulness  to  God.

It  is  significant  that  all  the  efforts  to  make  out  an  "  independent  morality  "  by  th«
elimination  or  ignoring  of  God  are  proving  failures.  He  is,  after  all,  the  sine  qud  ncn
of  real  morality  as  well  as  of  salvation.  It  is  when  his  Name  is  feared  and  reverenoed
as  it  ought  to  be  that  man  acts  aright  in  his  various  relations.

II.  Compassion  for  the  poor  and  afflicted  results,  of  necessity,  fboh  a  dux
KKOABD  FOB  GoD.    For  God  is  compassionate,  and  so  should  his  people  be.    Hence  tlM


304  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xix.  1— 37.

exhortation  of  vers.  9, 10,  about  leaving  in  harvest-time  what  would  be  a  help  to  the
poor  and  the  stranger.  This  is  grounded  upon  the  great  fact,  "  I  am  the  Lord  your
God."  Hence  also  the  warning  not  to  curse  the  deaf,  nor  to  put  a  stumbling-block  in
the  way  of  the  blind,  but "  thou  shalt  fear  thy  God  "  (ver.  14).  This  consideration  for  the
afflicted  and  for  the  poor  ia  a  most  important  element  in  social  morality.  Our  asylums
for  the  deaf,  the  dumb,  and  the  blind  are  embodiments  of  this  great  social  duty.  The
poor-law  system,  if  a  little  more  Christian  sympathy  were  engrafted  upon  it,  is  a  noble
tribute  to  a  sense  of  national  obligation  towards  the  poor.  Better  organizations  even
than  these  wili  yet  be  the  fruit  of  the  religious  spirit.  How  to  apply  the  principle  that
^'  he  that  will  not  work  shall  not  eat,"  and  at  the  same  time  show  the  due  measure  of
compassion,  is  a  problem  demanding  most  careful  solution.

III.  Meboantile  mobalitt  is  stbiotlt  enjoined.  All  stealing,  lying,  and  dis-
honest dealing  is  denounced  (ver.  11).  No  advantage  is  to  be  taken  of  a  neighbour  or
•of  a  servant  (ver.  13).  All  arbitration  is  to  be  without  respect  of  persons  (ver.  15).
Weights,  measures,  and  balances  are  all  to  be  just  and  true  (vers.  35,  36).  This
branch  of  social  morality  requires  the  strictest  attention  from  the  Lord's  people.  It  is
here  that  continual  contact  goes  on  between  them  and  the  world.  If  religion,  therefore,
do  not  produce  a  higher  type  of  mercantile  morality  than  the  world,  it  will  be
discredited.  Nothing  injures  religion  so  much  as  the  mercantile  immoralities  of  its
professors.  Fraudulent  bankrupts,  dishonest  tradings,  overreachings, — these  are  what  go
to  lessen  the  influence  of  religion  among  men.  It  is  just  possible  that  we  may,  in  our
eagerness  to  be  always  presenting  the  truth  of  the  gospel  to  our  fellow-men,  have  failed
to  enforce  sufficiently  the  morality  which  must  be  the  great  evidence  of  our  religious
life.  At  present,  in  this  peculiarly  mercantile  age,  this  department  of  morality  needs
most  earnest  attention.

IV.  PuBiTT  IS  TO  BE  CULTIVATED  IN  ALL  SOCIAL  RELATIONS.  Not  Only  was  im-
morality discountenanced  (ver.  29),  and  punishment  and  trespass  :>flferings  directed  in
cases  where  immorality  had  occurred  (vers.  20 — 22),  but  the  very  cultivation  of  the
land,  the  rearing  of  cattle,  the  making  of  garments,  and,  in  a  word,  all  their  associations
were  to  be  pervaded  by  the  principle  of  purity  (vers.  19,  23 — 25).  For  the  use  made
-of  cattle,  and  of  seed,  and  of  raw  material,  might  be  prejudicial  to  purity  in  idea.  Thus
■carefully  does  the  Lord  fence  round  his  people  with  precautions.

V.  Superstition  is  to  be  discouraoed.  No  enchantment  was  to  be  used,  ncr  were
chey  to  round  the  corners  of  their  heads  or  beards ;  they  were  to  make  no  cuttings  in
their  flesh  for  the  dead,  or  print  marks  upon  themselves  (vers.  26 — 28).  Nor  were
•they  to  have  recourse  to  familiar  spirits  or  wizards,  to  be  defiled  by  them  (ver.  31).
God  treats  his  people  as  intelligent,  rational  beings ;  and  so  he  discourages  all  resort
to  unmeaning  and  pretended  inspirations.

VI.  It  is  CLEABLT  shown   that   love  is  the   essence   op   all    social  '  HOBALITT.

Vengeance  is  discouraged  (ver.  18) — it  is  the  outcome  of  hatred,  which  is  unlawful
when  borne  towards  a  brother  (ver.  17).  The  form  of  blood-feud  (ver.  16),  which
-existed  and  exists  among  the  Oriental  and  wandering  tribes,  is  denounced.  In  fact,  the
Law  is  brought  to  this  simple  issue,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself  "  (ver.  18).
It  is  upon  this  that  our  blessed  Lord  seizes  as  the  essence  of  the  Divine  Law  (Matt,
xxii.  35 — 10).  Paul  also  brings  this  out  clearly  and  emphatically  (Bom.  xiii.  9,  10).
And  this  suggests —

1.  That  (here  is  a  legitimate  self-love.  There  is  a  "  better  self"  which  it  is  our  duty
to  love  and  cherish,  just  as  there  is  a  "worse  self"  which  it  is  our  duty  to  detest  and
mortify.  VSThen  we  consider  this  "  better  self,"  we  do  not  sufler  sin  upon  it,  we  try  to
keep  it  pure  and  subject  unto  Christ.  We  try  to  be  faithful  with  ourselves.  We
foster  wluit  is  good  and  holy  within  us.  All  this  is  most  distinct  from  selfishness.  The
selfish  man  is  his  own  worst  enemy  ;  the  man  who  cultivates  proper  self-love  is  his  own
best  friend.

2.  This  self-love  is  to  measure  our  love  to  omr  neighbour.  Now,  our  Lord  brought  out,
by  the  parable  of  the  "  Good  Samaritan,"  who  is  our  neighbour.  Every  one  to  whom
our  heart  leads  us  to  be  neighbourly.  Neighbourhood  is  a  matter  of  the  heart.  We
must  cultivate  it.  We  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  discerning  the  objects  of  our  love.
Let  us  then  love  them  as  we  do  ourselves.  The  golden  rule  is  the  essence  of  the  Divine
.Law.     "  Do  imto  others  as  ye  would  that  they  should  do  unto  you."


OH.  XIX.  1-37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  305

It  is  evident  from  this  that  Judaism  was  not  intended  to  be  an  eKclusive  and  selfish
system,  so  far  as  outsiders  were  concerned.  Men  did  not  work  it  out  properly,  aad  this
WM  why  it  became  so  narrow  and  selfish. — B,  M.  E,

Vers.  1 — 8. — Purity  in  worship.  The  laws  set  out  in  this  chapter  were  before  com-
municated to  Aaron  and  his  sons ;  now  they  are  given  to  the  people  (vers.  1,  2).  It  is
the  privilege  and  duty  of  God's  people  to  acquaint  themselves  with  his  will.  They
should  learn  the  Law  from  the  lips  of  Moses.  They  should  learn  the  gospel  from  the
lips  of  Jesus.  It  is  a  maxim  of  antichrist  that  "  Ignorance  is  the  mother  of  devotion."
The  mother  of  devotion,  viz.  to  superstition,  it  is  (see  1  John  IL  20,  21).

1.  The  people  of  the  holt  God  must  be  holt.  (Ver.  2.)  1.  TTiey  must  he  separate
from  sinners.  (1)  The  people  of  God  are  distinguished  by  purity  of  heart.  Of  this
God  alone  can  take  full  cognizance.  (2)  Also  by  purity  of  life  (Titus  ii.  14).  This  is
witnessed  both  by  God  and  man.  2.  They  must  be  separated  to  Ood.  (1)  This  is
implied  in  the  reason,  viz,  "for  I  am  holy"  (see  Pet.  i.  15,  16).  Clur  Lord  puts
it  strongly  :  "  Be  ye  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect "  (Matt.
V.  48).  This  cannot  be  understood  absolutely.  It  must  be  interpreted  relatively,  viz.
that  as  in  his  relations  to  us  God  is  perfect,  so  are  we  to  be  perfect  in  our  corresponding
relations  to  him.  But  what  are  these  ?  (2)  As  his  servants,  (a)  We  have  our  work
assigned  by  his  appointment.  (6)  He  pays  us  our  wages.  In  this  life.  In  that  to
come.  (3)  As  his  children,  (o)  We  have  assurance  of  our  adoption  (Rom.  viii.  16 ;
Gkil.  iv.  6).  (6)  Consequently  also  concerning  our  heirship  (Bom.  viiL  17  ;  GJal.  iv.  7).
(c)  We  have. also  blissful  fellowship  (John  xvii.  21;  1  Cor.  i.  9;  1  John  i.  3,  7).
3.  (jrace  makes  us  to  differ.  (1)  This  was  ceremonially  described  in  the  Law.  m
order  to  partake  of  the  holy  things,  the  people  must  be  made  ceremonially  holy  by
ablutions.  (2)  The  truth  of  this  is  seen  in  the  promise  of  the  gospeL  Before  wo  can
have  spiritual  communion  with  God  we  must  be  sanctified  at  the  laver  of  regeneration,
viz.  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost.

II.  Thbib  holiness  will  be  expressed  in  pube  worship.     1.  They  keep  the  sablaths

of  the  Lord.    (1)  They  cease  from  the  toil  of  the  world.    So  far  the  observance  is  out-

wari    They  also  rest  from  the  labour  of  sorrow  and  sin.     This  is  an  inward  and

spiritual  observance.    (2)  They  appear  in  the  convocations  of  God's  people.    This

worship  may  be  public  without  any  corresponding  beauties  of  spiritual  holiness.     But

the  true  worshipper  mingles  with  the  spiritual  and  heavenly  portions  of  the  Church

as   well  as  with  the  visible   congregation   (see   Eph.  iii.   15 ;    Heb.   xii.  22 — 24).

(3)  Parents  are  held  responsible  for  instructing  their  children  in  the  due  observance

of  the  sabbath.     So  in  the  fourth  commandment  in  the  Decalogue,  "  Thou,  and  thy

son,  and  thy  daughter."    (4)  Hence  in  the  text  (ver.  3),  the  injunction  to  keep  God's

sabbaths  is  associated  with  another  touching  the  respect  due  from  children  to  parents

(oomp.  Exod.  IX.  8 — 12).     Parents  are  God's  representatives  to  their  children,    (o)  In

their  paternity.     (6)  In  the  providence  they  exercise  during  the  helplessness  and

dependence  of  infancy  and  youth,    (c)  In  their  authority.    This  is  from  God,  and  it

should  be  religiously  maintained.     Those  who  are  allowed  to  break  God's  sabbaths

will  disobey  their  parents.    2,  ^Hiey  keep  themselves  from  idols.    (1)  They  will  not

"  turn  "  to  them.     We  are  so  surroimded  by  them,  that  we  cannot  turn  from  the  true

jyorship  without  encountering  them.     (2^   They  will  not  "make"  to  themselves

"  molten  gods."    The  allusion  here  is  to  Aaron's  calf,  which  he  intended  to  represent

■  Jehovah  Elohim.    But  in  our  godly  parents,  the  work  of  God's  hands,  we  have  truer

representations  of  the  living  Father  than  can  possibly  proceed  from  our  own  hands.

(3)  Idolatry  is  folly.    Idols  are  nothings  (dyhn;  comp.  1  Cor.  viii.  4).    3.  They  serve

Ood  with  reverence.    (1)  They  fear  God,  but  not  as  slaves.    They  offer  peace  offerings

to  him  which  are  offerings  of  friendship.     They  uffer  these  also  "  at  their  own  free

will "  (ver.  5).     A  constrained  is  an  imperfect  service.     "  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."

(2)  They  worship  him  in  faith.    They  will  eat  the  peace  offering  the  same  day  on

which  it  is  offered.    They  recognize  the  privileges  of  an  early  communion.    What

remains  over  on  the  second  day  they  will  eat.    The  dispensations  of  the  types  are

two,  viz.  the  patriarchal  and  Mosaic.    But  if  any  remain  to  the  third  day,  this  they

bum  with  fire.     Thus  they  express  their  faith  in  the  Christian  dispensation  which

■hould  abolish  the  types  by  fulfilling  them,  and  which  should  bring  in  better  hopes,

LBvmcuB.  *


30«  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xix  1—37.

(3)  To  return  to  the  legal  dispensation  is  now  to  provoke  the  anger  of  the  Lord.
Cyril  of  Alexandria  argues  that  those  who  fail  to  see  any  spiritual  meaning  in  the  Law
are  still  bound  to  keep  it  in  the  letter.  But  even  that  could  do  them  no  good,  for
according  to  the  text,  "  If  it  be  eaten  at  all  on  the  third  day,  it  is  abominable ;  it  shall
not  be  accepted.  Therefore  every  one  that  eateth  it  shall  bear  his  iniquity,"  etc,
(vers.  7,  8).  To  rejecters  of  the  gospel  now  there  is  nothing  but  hopeless  excision. —
J.  A.  M.

Vers.  9 — 14. — Kindliness.  In  the  earlier  portion  of  this  chapter  purity  of  worship,
with  its  associated  reverence  for  the  authority  of  God,  in  his  representatives,  viz,
natural  jiarents,  and  his  institutions,  as  the  sabbath,  are  enjoined.  In  the  verses  follow-
ing our  duties  towards  our  fellows  come  more  prominently  before  us,  and  in  the  text  that
class  of  those  duties  whose  spirit  is  kindliness.  Charity  is  sister  to  piety.  We  have
here  enjoined —

I.  A  GENEROUS  CONSIDERATION  FOR  THE  POOB.  1.  The  needs  of  the  gleaner  are  to  be
respected.  (1)  In  reaping  the  harvest,  owners  are  instructed  to  spare  the  corners  of
their  crops  for  the  poor.  What  falls  from  the  hand  of  the  reaper  is  not  to  be  gathered
up  again,  but  left  to  the  gleaner.  So  in  gleaning  the  vintage,  the  loose  branches  must
be  left  to  the  poor  and  the  stranger.  (2)  We  must  not  consider  that  to  be  wasted  which
goes  to  the  poor.  (3)  The  harvest  and  vintage  are  seasons  of  joy.  Such  seasons
should  be  seasons  also  of  charity.  Kindliness  purifies  and  so  heightens  joy.  2.  The
authority  of  God  must  he  remembered.  (1)  "  I  am  Jehovah  thy  Elohim."  This  gives
the  poor  and  the  stranger  a  Divine  right  in  the  gleanings,  which  now  to  disregard  becomes
impiety  and  injustice.  Those  who  refuse  their  rights  to  the  poor  will  have  to  answer
for  it  to  God  (Ps.  ix.  18 ;  xii.  5 ;  Ixxxii. ;  Isa.  x.  1 — 4).  (2)  The  Divine  example
should  inspire  and  guide  us.  "  He  openeth  his  hand,  and  satisfieth  every  living  thing."
Man  must  not  attempt  to  close  the  hand  of  God  by  refusing  to  the  poor  their  due.
(3)  The  blessing  of  God  is  promised  to  those  who  consider  the  poor  (see  Deut.  xxiv.
19;  Ps.  xli.  1;  Prov.  xiv.  21).

II.  A  CAREFUL  AVOIDANCE  OP  INJUSTICB.  1.  Wrong  must  not  le  practised  stealthily.
(1)  "  Ye  shall  not  steal " — ye  shall  not  injnre  your  neighbour  in  a  concealed  way.  To
reap  the  harvest  too  narrowly  would  be  to  filch  from  the  poor  his  due.  (2)  "  Neither
shall  ye  deal  falsely."  Thus  there  must  be  no  concealing  of  faults  in  articles  offered
for  sale.  There  must  be  no  false  representation  of  values  either  in  vending  or  pur-
chasing. 2.  Ides  must  not  he  uttered.  (1)  "  Neither  lie  one  to  another."  When  a
lie  is  acted  in  false  dealing,  the  next  thing  is  to  utter  a  lie  to  cover  the  wrong.  One
falsehood  calls  up  another  to  keep  it  in  countenance.  (2)  "  And  ye  shall  not  swear
by  my  Name  falsely."  Upon  the  principle  that  lies  are  called  in  to  countenance  the
concealment  of  a  wrong,  oaths  are  suborned  to  countenance  lies.  Thus  sin  begets  sin ;
and  sin,  in  its  offspring,  becomes  increasingly  degenerate.  (3)  This  last  is  frightful
wickedness.  "  Neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  Name  of  thy  God."  It  is  appealing  to
the  God  of   truth  to  confirm  a  lie !      3.    Nor   must  wrong  he  openly  perpetrated.

(1)  "  Thou  shalt  not  defraud  thy  neighbour,  neither  rob  him."  Power  must  not  be
abused  in  oppression.  Many  of  the  forms  in  which  this  was  done  are  described  by
Job  (ch.  xxiv.).  (2)  "  The  wages  of  him  that  is  hired  shall  not  abide  with  thee  all  night
until  the  morning."  It  is  the  means  of  his  living ;  and  once  earned,  no  more  belongs
to  the  employer  than  does  the  property  of  any  other  person.  Huge  injustice  is
practised  by  those  who  take  long  credit  from  tradesmen,  who  thereby  are  put  to  the
utmost  straits  to  meet  their  business  claims  and  those  of  their  families.

in.    A  TENDER  RESPECT  FOB  THE  CONDITION  OF  THE  AFFLICTED.     1.  "  ThoU  sholt  not

cwrse  the  deaf."  (1)  Thou  shalt  not  be  enraged  should  a  deaf  man  be  unable  to  render
the  service  o^  one  who  has  his  hearing.  So  it  is  unreasonable  to  blame  for  not  having
rendered   service  those  who  were   not   informed  that   such  service   was   expected.

(2)  Thou  shal  t  not  curse,  in  his  presence,  a  man  that  is  deaf,  because  he  is  deaf  and
cannot  hear  it.  So  neither  in  his  absence  must  a  man  be  cursed,  who  is  in  the  same
case  with  the  deaf,  and  cannot  defend  himself.  2.  "  Nor  put  a  stumblingblock  before  the
blind."  (1)  To  do  this  literally  would  be  a  wanton  cruelty.  (2)  Traps  must  not  be
laid  for  the  unwary  to  their  hurt,  viz.  in  things  material  or  in  things  spiritual  (sea
Kom.  xiv.  13).    3.  "But  thou  shalt  fear  thy  Qod."    (1)  Afflictions  do  not  spring  from


OH.  XIX.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  307

the  dust.  They  come  from  God  or  are  permitted  by  him.  To  take  advantage  of  them
or  to  trifle  with  them  is  therefore  to  tempt  the  Lord.  (2)  The  fear  of  the  retributiva
justice  of  Heaveu  should  restrain  (see  Luke  xvii.  1).  Biblical  history  abundantly
proTes  that  the  law  of  retaliation  is  a  law  of  God. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  15 — 18. — Justice.  Aa  charity  is  sister  to  piety,  so  is  justice  related  to  both.
This  virtue  is  enjoined  upon  us —

I.  In  ebspect  to  conduct.  1.  In  judgment  Justice  should  be  impartial.  (1)  Pity  for
the  poor  is,  in  the  abstract,  good.  Yet  must  it  not  lead  us  to  favour  them  against  the
right  (Exod.  xxiii.  3).  (2)  Bespect  for  those  who  enjoy  rank  and  station  is  not  only
lawful  but  laudable.  But  this  must  not  lead  us  to  favour  them  in  judgment  (see  Jas.
ii.  1 — 4).  (3)  The  balances  of  justice  are  those  of  the  sanctuary.  They  are  true.
They  must  be  held  by  an  impartial  hand.  It  must  not  tremble  under  the  excitement
of  pity,  or  of  hope,  or  fear.  2,  In  dealings  Justice  should  be  strict.  (1)  "  Thou  shalt  not
go  up  and  down  as  a  talebearer  among  thy  people."  Pedlaring  is  the  vice  here  inter-
dicted. This  is  rather  the  meaning  of  the  word  (h<3-i)  rendered  "  talebearer."  Tramps,
who  have  no  settled  residence,  are  oftentimes  dishonest,  and  otherwise  so  dangerous  to
society,  that  every  nation  has  its  vagrant  acts  to  control  them.  (2)  The  Jews  in  their
dispersion  are  much  given  to  pedlaring.  It  has  been  to  them  a  necessity  owing  to  the
unfriendly  laws  of  the  nations  with  respect  to  them.  How  dreadfully  their  sin  has  been
visited  upon  their  head  when  their  necessities  urge  them  to  violate  their  law !  (3)  Ped-
lars have,  amongst  other  evils,  been  notorious  tale-bearers.  By  the  slanders  they  have
circulated  not  only  has  the  peace  of  families  been  invaded,  but  communities  and  nations
have  been  embroiled.  The  Jews  say,  "  One  evil  tongue  hurts  three  persons — the
fpeaker,  the  hearer,  and  the  person  spoken  of"  (see  Frov.  xi.  13 ;  xx.  19).  3.  The  evils
of  injustice  are  serious.  (1)  "  Neither  shalt  thou  stand  against  the  blood  of  thy  neigh-
bour." Some  are  wicked  enough  of  purpose  to  compass  the  blood  of  the  innocent  by
falsehood  (Prov.  ii.  11,  12 ;  Bzek.  xxii.  9).  (2)  Slander  may  have  this  result  without
the  intention  of  the  slanderer.    Who  can  control  a  conflagration  ?  (see  Jas.  iii.  6)

II.  In  bespect  to  motive.     1.  "  Thou  shalt  not  hate  thy  brother  in  thine  heart,"

(1)  He  is  thy  brother.  He  has  a  common  fatherhood  with  thee  in  God.  He  has  a
common  nature  with  thee.  (2)  He  is  therefore  amenable  with  thee  to  the  same  tribunal.
God,  the  Judge  of  all,  surveys  not  the  conduct  only,  but  also  the  motive.  2.  "  Thuu  shalt
in  any  wise  rebuke  thy  neighbour."  (1)  Not  to  reprove  his  sin  is  to  hate  him.  This  is
eminently  so  when  he  hath  trespassed  against  thee.  ^  To  conceal  it  in  such  a  case  is  to
nurse  wrath  against  the  opportunity  for  revenge  (2  Sam.  xiii.  22).  Such  conduct  is
utterly  at  variance  with  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  (see  Matt,  xviii.  15  ;  Luke  xvii.  3).

(2)  To  "  suffer  sin  upon  him  "  is  to  be  an  accomplice  in  his  sin.  The  words  may  be
construed,  "  nor  bear  his  sin.''  This  suggests  that  the  accomplice,  with  the  guilt,  is
also  obnoxious  to  the  punishment  of  the  sinner.  Men  wreak  their  vengeanc6  upon
themselves.  (3)  In  rebuking  we  should  remember  that  the  sinner  is  our  "  neighbour."
It  should  be  done  in  a  neighbourly  way.  Thus,  as  far  as  practicable,  privately.
"  Charity  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins,"  viz.  from  others,  though  not  from  the  sinner.
And  kindly.  It  is  thus  more  likely  to  be  well  received,  as  it  ought  to  be  (see  Ps.  cxli.  5 ;
Prov.  xxvii.  5,  6).  3.  The  root  of  justice  is  love.  (I)  "Thou  shalt  not  avenge."  This
is  another  way  of  saying,  "Thou  shalt  forgive."  With  the  spirit  of  vengeance  there  can  be
no  peace  in  the  world.  God  says,  "  Vengeance  is  mine ; "  he  claims  the  right  to  avenge
because  he  alone  is  superior  to  all  retaliation.  (2)  "  Nor  bear  any  grudge."  Thou  shalt
not  insidiously  watch  the  children  of  thy  people.  How  the  Jews  violated  this  law  in
their  malignity  against  Jesus !  (see  Mark  iii.  2 ;  Luke  vi.  7 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xx.  2).  (3)  Con*
trariwise,  "  Tliou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  This  is  the  spirit  of  the  Law
as  well  as  of  the  gospel.  The  same  Holy  Spirit  of  love  is  the  author  of  boti  (see  Matt.
vii.  12 ;  xxU.  39 ;  Eom.  xiii.  9,  10 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  19  ;  Gal.  v.  14).— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  19 — 28. — Fidelity  to  Ood.    In  the  verses  before  us  we  note  the  injunction—

I.  That  the  statutes  of  the  Loed  must  be  kept.    These  require :  1.  That  tker«

he  no  unnatural  mixtures.    (1)  For  the  examples  furnished,  sound  economic  and

hygienic  reasons  may  be  given  (ver.  19).     (a)  Cattle  which  God  ordered  "  after  their

kind  "  (Gen.  i.  25),  ar«  not  to  be  let  to  gender  with  diverse  kinds.     Hybrids  are  degene-


308  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xix.  3  — 37.

rated  creatureB ;  they  are  monsters ;  and  they  are  withal  unfruitful,  (b)  Mingled  seed
must  not  be  sown  in  the  field.  The  plants  of  both  kinds  in  such  a  case  are  found  to  be
inferior  (Deut.  xxii.  9).  The  land  also  is  impoverished,  (c)  Garments  of  mingled  flax
and  wool  are  not  to  be  worn.  The  mixture  would  induce  electrical  disturbances
impairing  to  health.  (2)  But  the  spirit  of  the  law  is  moral.  The  people  of  God  are
taught  by  it  to  avoid  everythiijg  that  would  compromise  their  simplicity  and  sincerity
(2  Cor.  vi.  14).  They  must  avoid  marriages  with  the  ungodly.  In  business  they  must
be  careful  not  to  join  in  ungodly  partnerships.  In  friendships  they  must  choose  those
who  are  of  the  household  of  faith  (Jas.  iv.  4).  2.  That  atonement  be  made  for  sin.
(1)  The  case  (ver.  20)  is  that  of  a  slave  dishonoured  and  still  held  in  bondage,  who,
through  a  subsequent  offence,  which,  if  she  were  free,  would  merit  death  (see  Deut.
xxii.  24),  is  now  punished  with  scourging.  The  degree  of  guilt  is  modified  by  circum-
stances ;  and  punishment  is  moderated  accordingly  (Luke  xii.  47,  48).  (2)  But  before
the  man  can  be  forgiven  he  must  confess  his  sin  over  a  guilt  offering.  He  must  bring
a  ram.  This  was  a  well-known  type  of  Christ,  without  whose  atonement,  no  matter
what  scourging  our  sin  may  have  brought  upon  us,  there  can  be  no  forgiveness.  3.  That
the  fruit  of  a  tree  uncircumdsed  must  not  he  eaten.  (1)  For  this  law  there  are  good
economic  reasons.  It  hurts  a  young  tree  to  let  the  fruit  ripen  upon  it ;  and  therefore
to  circumcise  it,  or  pinch  off  the  blossoms  of  the  first  three  years,  wUl  improve  the
quality  of  its  fruit.  In  the  fourth  year,  then,  the  fruit  will  be  in  perfection.  (2)  But
the  spirit  of  this  law  also  is  moral,  (o)  Trees  are  taken  as  emblems  of  men  (Ps.  i.  3 ;
Matt.  iii.  10;  Isa.  Ixi.  3 ;  Jude  12).  (6)  First  thoughts  and /onoord  desires  are  vanity,
and  must  be  rejected  as  coming  from  the  flesh  (see  Uol.  ii.  11).  To  let  them  ripen  is  to
injure  the  character,  (c)  In  the  fourth  year,  when  the  fruit  is  in  perfection,  it  is  con-
secrated to  God  as  the  "  flrstfruit,"  which  therefore  is  twt  always  that  which  comes  first
in  order  of  time,  but  the  hest.  The  service  we  render  to  God  after  the  removal  of
inordinate  desire  by  converting  grace,  is  our  flrstfruit,  or  best  service,  (d)  As  to  the
fourth  year,  Christ  who  is  the  "  Flrstfruit "  and  "  Firstborn  of  every  creature,"  or  Anti-
type of  the  flrstborn  of  every  kind  of  creature,  appeared  amongst  us  in  the  fourth
millennium  of  the  world.  And  when  he  comes  again  it  will  be  to  introduce  the  fourth
dispensation,  viz.  the  millennial.  The  three  dispensations  preceding  we  need  scarcely
specify  to  be  the  Patriarchal,  Levitical,  and  Christian,  (e)  In  the  fifth  year  and  thence-
forward, the  fruit  was  sanctified  to  the  use  of  the  owner.  The  consummation  of  our
felicity  will  he  in  that  glorious  state  to  succeed  the  millennium,  the  "  new  heavens  and
new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."    We  note —

II.  That  the  customs  or  the  heathen  must  not  be  followed.  1.  Nothing,
mutt  he  eaten  with  the  Wood.  (1)  At  the  time  when  animal  food  was  granted  to  man
the  blood  was  reserved.  The  reservation  corresponded  to  that  of  the  tree  of  know-
ledge of  good  and  evil  when  vegetable  food  was  granted.  In  each  instance  the  prohibi-
tion was  given  to  common  progenitors  of  the  race,  and  therefore  universally  obligatory.
Noah  stood  to  the  "  world  that  now  is  "  in  a  similar  relation  to  that  in  which  Adam
stood  to  nmiVind  at  large.  (2)  The  Noachian  precepts  in  general  were  violated  by  the
heathen,  auJ  in  particular  this  precept  respecting  blood.  The  psalmist  refers  to  the
custom  amongst  the  Syrians  when  he  says,  "  Their  drink  offerings  of  blood  will  I  not
offer  "  (Ps.  xvi.  4).  And  in  these  words  there  is  a  prophetic  abhorrence  of  antichrist,
who  not  only  sets  aside  the  Law  of  God  by  authorizing  the  eating  of  blood,  but  professes
to  drink  the  very  blood  of  Jesus  in  the  cup  of  the  Mass.  (3)  The  penalties  of  this
abomination  are  tremendous.  As  in  Eden  the  eating  of  the  forbidden  fruit  became
death,  so  in  the  Noachian  precept  God  requires  the  blood  of  the  lives  of  those  who  will
eat  flesh  with  the  life  thereof  which  is  the  blood  (Gen.  ix.  4,  5).  Babylon  who  is  also
"drunk  with  the  blood  of  tho  saints  and  martyrs  of  Jesus,"  is  therefore  doomed  to
drink  blood,  for  that  she  is  worthy  (Rev.  xvii.  6 ;  xvi.  3 — 6).  2.  Superstition  must  'he
shunned.  (1)  Thus  augury  is  to  be  discouraged  (ver.  26).  This  (wn:)  nachash,  or
divining,  may  have  been  by  fire  or  serpents.  "  Nor  observe  times,"  nor  consult  the
clouds.  The  heavens  were  their  gods,  and  the  clouds  they  naturally  regarded  as  their
aspects  toward  men,  as  indicating  their  intentions.  The  revealed  word  of  the  true  God
is  sufficient  for  all  lawful  purposes  of  sacred  knowledge.  (2)  Distractions  for  the  dead
are  to  be  discouraged.  The  heathen  customs  of  cutting  the  hair  and  the  flesh  evinced
tne  insanity  of  idolatry.  Where  the  faith  of  a  true  religion  is  we  have  no  need  to  mourn
for  the  dead  as  those  who  have  no  hope. — J.  A.  M.


SH.  XIX.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  808

Vers.  29 — 37. — Thefea/r  of  God.  Of  this  excellent  things  are  spoken  by  Solomon.
It  is  the  "beginning  of  knowledge,"  "hatred  to  evil,"  "strong  confidence,"  a
"  fountain  of  life,"  "  prolongs  days,"  and  "  gives  riches  and  honour."    So  here —

L  It  IB  A  souKCB  OP  pmiiTT.  1.  To  the  famUy.  (1)  There  is  a  connection
twtween  vers.  29  and  30.  Those  who  keep  Ghid's  sabbaths  will  not  profane  their
daughters  either  to  idolatry  or  for  gain.  The  fear  of  God  nourished  by  the  one  will
prevent  the  other.  (2)  In  keeping  God's  sabbaths  his  sanctuary  is  reverenced.  This
furnishes  an  additional  motive  to  social  purity.  For  the  sanctuary,  whether  it  be
composed  of  canvas,  or  of  stone,  or  of  flesh  and  blood,  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Who  then  can  properly  reverence  it  under  one  form  and  desecrate  it  under  another  ?
(see  1  Cor.  iii.  16,  17 ;  vi.  18,  19 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16)  2.  To  the  nation.  "  Lest  the  land,"
etc.  (ver.  29).  (1)  The  family  is  the  root  of  the  nation.  All  nations  ex,tant  are  sprung
fiom  the  family  of  Noah.  (2)  Nations  are  blessed  or  cursed  in  their  families.  (3)  God
asserts  himself  here,  "  I  am  Jehovah  "  (ver  30).  The  character  of  God  is  seen  in  his
laws.    It  is  pledged  to  maintain  them.

II.  It  abus  against  the  foweb  of  devils.  1.  Familiar  spirits  are  more  than
myths.  (1)  Their  existence  is  not  here  challenged,  but  admitted  (ver.  31 ;  see  also
Acts  xvi.  16,  where  the  fact  is  put  beyond  question).  (2)  Pretenders  to  the  un-
enviable distinction,  as  well  as  persons  actually  possessed  of  such  devils,  are  here  held
up  to  reprobation.  2.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  will  preserve  us  from  them.  (1)  Their
power  is  greatest  over  the  "  children  of  disobedience."  The  desperately  wicked  are
given  over  by  God  to  Satan  (Bph.  ii.  2 ;  1  Tim.  i.  20).  Such  persons  may  seek
wizards,  or  wise  ones.  (2)  But  godly  persons  will  avoid  them.  They  could  not  so
reflect  upon  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  that  he  should  leave  anything  for  our
advantage  to  be  communicated  by  wicked  spirits.  Spiritualism  is  a  devilish  delusion.
Pride  and  selfishness  will  lead  men  into  the  snare.  (3)  In  this  prohibition  God  asserts
himself,  "  I  am  Jehovah  thy  Elohim."  He  is  our  covenant  Friend,  who  will  so  fully
satisfy  our  lawful  desires  that  we  shall  not  need  recourse  to  wicked  expedients.  He
will  also  be  our  defence  against  the  devices  of  the  devil.

III.  It  inspires  couetesy.  1.  Respect  for  age  (ver.  32).  (1)  With  age  there
should  be  the  wisdom  of  experience,  and  this  should  be  honoured  by  youth.  Caryl  well
says,  "  He  that  wears  the  silver  crown  should  be  honoured  in  his  capacity  as  well  as  he
that  wears  the  golden  crown"  (2)  In  respecting  age  we  are  to  "  fear  Jehovah  Eloliim,"
our  covenant  God,  whose  blessings  are  from  father  to  son  and  from  generation  to
generation  (Gen.  xvii.  7 ;  Isa.  li.  8  ;  Luke  i.  50).  In  the  aged  man  we  should  see  the
representative  of  the  "Ancient  of  days"  (Dan.  vii.  22).  (3)  It  is  a  sad  sign  of  the
degeneracy  of  a  nation  when  the  child  behaves  himself  proudly  against  the  ancient
(Job  XXX.  1, 12 ;  Isa.  iii.  4,  5).  2.  Civility  to  strangers.  (1)  "  Thou  shalt  not  vex,"
or  oppress,  "  him ; "  but  treat  him  as  though  he  were  a  native.  "  Thou  shalt  love  him
as  thyself."  How  tradition  obscured  this  law  when  the  question  was  prompted,  viz.
"Who  is  my  neighbour?"  (2)  The  Hebrew  is  reminded,  in  connection  with  this
injunction,  how  bitterly  he  suffered  in  the  land  of  Egypt  from  the  operation  of  the
opposite  principle.  He  is  also  reminded  how  odious  to  God  was  that  cruel  oppression
from  which  he  brought  him  out,  and  therefore  how,  if  he  would  conciliate  hu  favour,
he  must  act  from  a  different  principle.

IV.  It  promotes  justice.  1.  In  judgment.  (1)  In  the  administration  of  law,
(2)  In  arbitration.  2.  In  dealings.  (1)  Measures  and  weights  must  be  true  to  the
standards.  These  were  kept  in  the  tabernacle,  and  afterwards  in  the  temple  (ch.  xxvii.
25 ;  1  Chron.  xxiii.  29).  Eeligion  and  business  must  not  he  divorced.  (2)  To  use
falss  balances,  or  weights,  or  measures  is  worse  than  open  lobbery.  It  is  abominable
hypocrisy.  ^  It  is  robbing  under  the  very  colour  of  equity.

God  claims  the  authorship  of  these  laws  (vers.  36,  37).  1.  They  are  worthy  of  him.
He  must  be  infatuated  with  ignorance  or  wickedness  who  would  laud  the  "  Roman
virtue"  in  opposition  to  the  "narrow  spirit"  of  the  Mosaic  code.  2.  They  were
eminently  calculated  to  secure  the  happiness  of  the  nation  at  home,  and  to  promote  its
credit  abroad.  3.  Let  us  "observe"  the  Law  of  God  to  understand  it,  and,  under-
standing, "  keep  "  it.    Then  happy  shall  we  be. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1,  'i.—"  Te  shall  be  holy :  for  I  the  Lord  your  God  am  holy."     Holiness


810  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUa.  [oh.  xn.  1— «7.


1.  The  ruiVERBAL  eequibbmbnt.  "Speak  unto  all  the  congregation,"  etc.  L  N«
exception.  "All  have  sinned."  2.  The  nature  of  man  requires  him  to  be  holy.  The
relation  between  man  and  God.  The  laws  of  God  not  mere  arbitrary  decrees,  but
the  expression,  in  positive  relation  to  the  freedom  of  man,  of  the  Eternal  Reality  of  the
universe.  3.  The  universality  of  revelation  is  the  imiveraality  of  responsibility.
"  Their  line  is  gone  out  in  all  the  earth."  "  Having  not  the  Law,  they  are  o  law  unto
themselves."  "What  was  said  to  the  Jews  was  said  to  the  world.  The  blessednesB
of  humanity  is  the  realization  of  the  Divine  image.    A  holy  God,  a  holy  universe.

IL  The  universal  motive.  "  For  I  am  holy."  1.  Dependence  upon  God  the
root  of  religion,  not  as  mere  blind  dependence,  but  that  of  the  children  on  the  Father,

2.  Gratitude  the  constant  appeal  of  the  heart.  The  Lord  your  God,  who  has  dene  so
much  for  you,  requires  your  holiness.  3.  The  Divine  command  ia  related  to  and
blessed  with  the  Divine  provision  of  grace  in  a  specific  system  of  holiness,  in  which
the  people  of  God  are  held  up.  Be  holy,  for  I  have  prepared  for  your  holiness.  We  ar«
"  created  in  Christ  Jesus  unto  good  works,  which  God  hath  before  ordained  that  we
should  walk  in  them  "  (Bph.  ii.  10).    Work  out  salvation,  for  God  worketh  in  you.

TTT.  The  mediating  ministbt.  "  The  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saymg.  Speak  unto  all
the  congregation."  1.  Here  is  the  gracious  method  by  which  our  holiness  is  made  possible.
The  holy  Ood  speaks.  The  holy  men  of  Ood  speak  as  they  are  moved  by  the  Holy
Ghost.  The  holy  Word  speaks,  everywhere  and  always.  The  holy  life  is  maintained
among  the  holy  people.  2.  The  holiness  of  humanity  [will  be  achieved  as  a  fact
through  a  holy  ministry  of  the  people  of  God  to  the  world  at  large ;  of  the  consecrated
few  to  the  many.  The  hope  of  a  revived  Church,  in  a  revived  ministry.  The  spiritual
leaders  should  feel  their  responsibility,  both  in  teaching  and  in  example.  3.  Personal
holiness  must  underlie  all  other.  The  purification  of  temples  and  services  is  not  the
sanctification  God  requires.  He  says  not,  "  Be  ye  punctilious  in  worship  and  profuse
in  ritual ; "  but  "  Be  ye  personally  holy,  let  your  holiness  be  a  transcript  of  mine,  which
is  the  holiness  of  will,  of  work,  of  thought,  of  character. — B.

Vers.  3 — 37. — The  holy  Law  in  the  holy  life.  I.  Revbbenoe  fob  pabemtb.  True
religion  is  seen  in  common,  everyday  life.  If  we  love  God,  we  love  man.  Family
peace  and  order  is  best  preserved  by  appeal  to  deep,  religious  motives.  Natural
affection  is  not  sufficient  against  fallen  human  nature.  "  God  says.  Thou  ahalt,"  must
be  the  support  of  natural  feeling.

II.  Sabbath  eeeping.  Not  as  a  Jewish  regulation,  but  as  both  the  demand  of
physical  nature  and  the  gracious  provision  of  God  for  us.  "  The  Son  of  man  is  Lord
of  the  sabbath ; "  therefore,  while  preserving  it  from  abuse  to  the  oppression  of  human
liberty,  sanctifying  it  for  the  higher  place  it  occupies  in  the  Christian  scheme.

III.  Absolute  sbpakation  fbom  idolatet  and  all  heathenism.    Holy  religion.

IV.  Willinqhood  in  bbligion.  Ver.  5,  "  At  your  own  will,"  or  "  that  you  may
be  accepted,"  i.e.  do  it  as  unto  God,  by  his  Word,  for  his  glory,  in  dependence  on  his
grace,  with  hearty  resignation  of  self  to  him.

V.  Philanthboft  and  compassion  fob  the  poob.  The  true  charity  is  a  practical
remembrance  of  the  needy  and  suffering,  beginning  at  home,  from  our  own  personal
possessions.     God  is  the  Lord  of  all.     All  are  brethren,

VI.  Honesty  of  dbalinq  is  only  to  be  maintained  by  religion.  Mere  social
considerations  and  political  economy  will  never  purify  trade  and  sanctify  men's
faitercourse  with  one  another.     Truth  is  safe  in  no  keeping  but  that  of  the  sanctuary.

Vn.  Pbopanity  in  speech  and  in  act  is  an  evil  to  be  cured  by  positive  religion.

Vin.  The  justice  op  the  life  is  the  justice  of  the  heart  in  expression.  The  law
that  is  kept  sacred  within  will  be  honoured  without  respect  of  persons,  and  not  by  mere
negation,  but  in  active  benevolence.

IX.   BeAL  NEIOHBOUBLINESS  is  LOVB  of  man  PBOOEEDINa  FBOH  LOVE  OF  GoD.     No

injury  must  be  done  either  by  word  or  deed,  either  by  neglect  of  another's  interests  or
unholy  wrath  against  another  or  encouraging  him  to  sin  by  withholding  due  rebuke.
All  summed  up  in  the  positive  precept,  "  Love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  All  the
various  prascriptions  of  the  Jewish  law,  both  negative  and  positive,  regard  the  pure  and
holy  development  both  of  individual  and  national  life.  Beligion  is  the  root,  social
morality  is  the  blossom  or  the  plant,  national  prosperity  is  the  precious  fruit,  of  whiok.


CH.  XX.  1 — 27.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


311


if  we  would  preaerv*  the  seed  and  perpetuate  the  blessing,  we  must  see  to  it  that  we  find
the  very  inmost  centre  and  kernel,  which  is  the  love  of  God  as  the  Father  of  all,  and
the  love  of  men  as  the  brethren  of  the  same  Divine  family. — B.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XX.


The  inbjeot  of  ch.  xviii.  is  resumed  In
this  chapter ;  but  that  which  was  before  con-
sidered as  sin  only  is  now  regarded  as  crime,
and  penalties  are  attached  according  to  the
heinousness  of  the  offence.  For  example,
the  sin  of  "  giving  of  his  seed  to  Moleeh,"  or
which  is  the  same  thing,  "  letting  any  of  his
seed  pass  through  the  fire  to  Molecli,"  iiad
been  forbidden  as  a  sin  in  oh.  xviii.  21 ;  now
it  is  condemned  as  a  crime.  The  various
penalties  assigned  in  this  chapter  are  (1)
turning  with  fire  (ver.  14) ;  (2)  stoning  with,
etones  (vers.  2, 27) ;  (3)  being  put  to  death  in
a  manner  not  specified  (vers.  9, 10, 11, 12,  13,
15,  16) ;  (4)  being  cut  off  from  among  his
people,  either  by  God  himself  (vers.  4,  5,  6)
or  by  an  agency  not  specified  (vers.  17,  18) ;

(5)  bearing  his  iniquity  (vers.  17,  19,  20);

(6)  childlessness  (vers.  20,  21).  The  first  of
these  penalties,  burning  with  fire,  does  not
mean  that  those  on  whom  it  was  inflicted
were  burnt  alive,  but  that  their  dead  bodies
were  burnt  after  they  had  been  stoned  to
death,  as  in  the  case  of  Achan  (Josh.  vii.
25).  It  is  the  punishment  for  taking  a
mother  and  daughter  together  into  the
same  harem  (ver.  14).  Stoning  with  stones
is  appointed  for  crimes  which  are  at  once
offences  against  religion  and  morals,  viz.
giving  of  his  seed  to  Moleeh  (ver.  2),  and
witchcraft  (ver.  27).  The  other  form  of
putting  to  death,  which  no  doubt  was
strangling,  is  the  penalty  assigned  to
cursing  parents  (ver.  9),  adultery  (ver.  10),
marriage  or  intercourse  with  a  stepmother
(ver.  11)  or  stepdaughter  (ver.  12),  the
sin  of  Sodom  (ver.  13),  and  bestiality  (vers.
15,  16).  Cutting  off  from  Ms  people  may  be
effected  either  by  death  (vers.  4,  5,  and
perhaps  6),  which  is  the  penalty  for  Molech-
worship,  connivance  at  Molech-worship,  and
dealing  with  witches ;  or  by  excommunica-
tion (vers.  17,  18),  which  was  the  punish-
ment for  intercourse  with  a  sister,  or  with
one  who  was  unclean  by  reason  of  her
monttuy    sickness    (see    Kxod.   xxxi     141


The  phrase,  hearing  his  iniquity,  means
that  the  man  continues  in  the  state  of  a
criminal  until  he  has  been  cleansed  either
by  suffering  the  punishment  of  his  offence
or  making  atonement  for  it,  which  some-
times he  might,  sometimes  he  might  not,
do.  The  man  wlio  committed  incest  with
a  sister  would  "  bear  his  iniquity  "  (ver.  17),
because  he  would  be  put  in  a  state  of  ex-
commuuication  without  permission  of  restora-
tion by  means  of  sacrificial  offerings.  And
so  with  the  man  who  took  his  aunt  by  blood
(ver.  19)  or  by  marriage  (ver.  20)  as  his
wife, — he  would  not  be  allowed  to  recover
his  status  by  offering  sacrifice.  Childless-
ness, the  punishment  for  marrying  an  uncle's
or  brother's  wife,  probably  means  that  in
those  oases  tlie  offender's  children  should  not
be  counted  as  his  own,  but  should  be  entered
in  the  genealogical  register  as  his  uncle's
or  his  brother's  children.  (Of.  Deut.  xxv.
10,  where  it  is  noticeable  that  the  penalty
is  retained,  even  though  the  marriage  with
the  brother's  wife,  which  had  been  pro-
hibited in  general,  had  in  the  particular
case  become  a  duty  for  famUy  or  tribal
reasons.)

Vers.  2,  3. — The  close  connection  between
giving  of  his  seed  onto  Moleeh  and  defiling  my
sanctuary,  and  profaning  my  holy  name,  i»
explained  and  illustrated  by  Ezekiel  in  the
judgment  on  Aholah  and  Aholibah.  "  'I'hej
have  caused  their  sons,  whom  they  bare
unto  me,  to  pass  for  them  through  the  fire,
to  devour  them.  Moreover  this  they  have
done  unto  me :  they  have  defiled  my  sanc-
tuary in  the  same  day,  and  have  profaned  my
sabbaths.  For  when  they  had  slain  their
children  to  their  idols,  then  they  came  the
same  day  into  my  sanctuary  to  profane  it ;
and,  lo,  thus  have  they  done  in  the  midst  «f
mine  house"  (Ezek.  xxiii.  37 — 30).  Not  only
was  tlie  juxtaposition  and  combination  of  the
worship  of  Moleeh  and  Jehovah  an  offence
to  him  whose  name  is  Jealous,  but  at  the
time  that  Molech-worship  was  carried  on
in  the  valley  of  Hinnom,  idols  were  set  up
in  the  court  of  the  temple  itself,  as  we  leara
from  the  Book  of  Kings  and  from  Jeremiah
"  But  they  set  their  abominations  in  the
bouse,  which  is  calleil  by  my  Name,  to  defile
it.    And  they  built  the  high  places  of  BaaU


812


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XX.  1 — ^27.


which  are  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom,
to  cause  their  Bona  and  their  daughterB  to
pass  through  the  fire  unto  Molech ;  which
I  commanded  them  not,  neither  came  it  into
my  mind,  that  they  should  do  this  abomi-
nation, to  cause  Judah  to  sin  "  (Jer.  xxxii.
34,  35).    And  of  Manasseh  it  is  related,
'  He  built  altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,
of  which  the  Lord  said.  In  Jerusalem  will
I  put  my  Name.    And  he  built  altars  for  all
the  host  of  heaven  in  the  two  courts  of  the
house  of  the  Lord.    And  he  made  his  son
pass  through  the  fire  "  (2  Kings,  xxi.  4—6).
Vers.  4,  5. — There  is  to  be  no  connivance
with    Moleoh-worship.      The    penalty    is
death,  and  is  to  be  carried    out  by  the
proper  tribunals,  whose  business  it  was  to
see  that  the  stoning  took  place.     So  in
Deuteronomy  the  duty  of  killing  those  who
entice  to  idolatry  is  laid  down.     "Thou
shalt  not  consent  unto  him,  nor  hearken
unto  him ;  neither  shall  thine  eye  pity  him,
neither  shalt  thou  spare,  neither  shalt  thou
conceal  him :    but  thou  shalt  surely  kill
him ;  thine  hand  shall  be  first  upon  him  to
put  him  to  death,  and  afterwards  the  hand
of  all  the  people  "  (Deut.  xiii.  8,  9).     In  the
case  of  Molech-worship  God  declares  that,
if  the  tribunals  of  the  nation  fail  to  adjudge
the  penalty  of  death  to  the  offender,  he  will
himself  take  the  matter  into  his  hands,  and
eut  him  off  with  his  family  and  all  that
follow  him  in  his  sin  of  unfaithfulness.

Ver.  6. — God  will  also  himself  cut  off
from  among  his  people  any  that,  not  content
with  lawful  and  godly  knowledge,  turn  after
Buoh  as  have  familial  spiiits,  and  after
wizards,  to  go  a  whoring  after  ibem.

Vers.  7,  8. — A  positive  command.  Sanctify
yourselves  therefore,  and  be  ye  holy:  for  I
am  the  Lord  your  God,  is  introduced  early
in  the  list  of  penalties  to  show  what  is  the
main  purpose  of  the  latter.  The  only  way
in  which  the  nation  can  recover  holiness
lost  by  the  sins  of  its  members,  is  by  the
punishment  of  the  latter,  or  by  their  purifica-
tion by  means  of  sacrifice,  according  to  the
natvure  of  the  offence.

Ver.  9. — See  above,  the  note  on  oh.  xix.
14,  which  shows  how  God's  word  is  made
of  none  effect  by  man's  traditions.  God
says  that  a  man  who  oniseth  his  father  or  his


mother  shall  he  sarely  put  to  death.  Human
authority,  incontrovertible  throughout  a
great  part  of  Christendom,  declares  that
in  most  cases  it  is  no  grave  sin.

Ver.  10. — The  Hebrew  punishment  for
adultery  is  more  severe  than  that  of  most
other  nations.  Death  is  again  pronounced
as  the  penalty  of  both  adulterer  and  adul-
teress in  Deut.  xxii.  22.  The  crime  is  that
of  a  man  with  a  married  woman,  whether  the
man  be  married  or  not ;  it  is  not  that  of  a
married  man  with  an  unmarried  woman,
which,  in  a  country  where  polygamy  was
allowed,  cotUd  not  be  regarded  in  the  same
light.

Vers.  11,  12. — It  should  be  noted  that
intercourse  with  a  stepmother  or  daughter-
in-law  are  put,  by  the  punishment  inflicted
upon  them,  on  the  same  level  with  adultery
and  unnatural  crimes  (vers.  10,  13,  15,  1&).
Vers.  13— 19.— (See  ch.  xviii.  22, 17,  23,
9. 19,  12.)

Vers.  20, 21.— They  shall  die  childless ;  . . .
they  shall  be  childless.  "  It  cannot  be  sup-
posed that  a  perpetual  miracle  was  to  be
maintained  through  all  the  ages  of  Israel's
history ;  but  the  meaning  evidently  is  that
the  children  of  such  marriages  should  be
reckoned,  not  to  their  actual  father,  but  to
the  former  husband  of  the  woman.  In  the
strong  feeling  of  the  Israelites  in  regard  to
posterity,  this  penalty  seems  to  have  been
sufBcient "  (Gardiner).

Vers.  22,  23.— The  fact  of  the  nations  of
Canaan  being  abhorred  by  Ood  because  they
committed  aU  these  things  shows  that  the
Levitical  code  forbidding  aU  these  things  was
no  part  of  any  special  law  for  that  nation
alone,  but  a  republication  of  that  Law  which
is  binding  on  all  nations  because  written
on  the  conscience.  The  prohibited  degrees
in  the  Book  of  Leviticus  form  a  part  of  the
moral,  not  of  the  ceremonial,  law,  and  are,
therefore,  of  permanent  and  universal,  not
only  of  temporary  and  national,  obligation.
Vers.  24 — 26. — The  Israelites  are  to  avoid
all  defilement,  moral  and  ceremonial,  because
they  are  God's  own  possession,  separated
from  other  people,  and  holy  unto  him.

Ver.  27.— Those  that  deal  in  witchcraft
are  to  be  stoned.


HOMILBTICa

Vers.  1,  21. — TTie  difference  between  the  religious  and  the  seeulm"  law  is  more  marked
in  modem  nations  than  in  the  Hebrew  commonwealth ;  the  primary  object  of  the  first
being  to  forbid  and  prevent  sin ;  of  the  second,  to  protect  life  and  property.  The  dis-
tinction is  shown  by  the  separation  of  the  eighteenth  and  the  twentieth  chapters ;  but
as  in  the  Mosaic  legislation  both  the  law  which  denounces  sin  and  the  law  which
pronounces  penalties  for  crime  proceeded  from  God,  it  was  not  necessary  that  the
boundaries  between  the  two  should  be  marked  and  defined  with  the  same  exactness


OK.  XX.  1—27.]  THL  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  313


as  when  man  is  legislator;  for  man  cannot  venture  to  gauge  the  relative  enormities
of  sins,  and  assign  to  them  their  respectiTe  punishments,  except  so  far  as  he  is  led  by
the  hand  by  the  revelation  of  God.  He  can  only  judge  of  wrongs  and  injuries  to  his
fellow-men.  In  the  present  age  of  the  world,  when  the  State  and  the  Church  are
no  longer  identical,  as  they  were  in  the  case  of  the  Israelites,  each  law  fulfils  its
function  best  by  confining  itself  to  its  proper  sphere.  The  religious  law,  basing  itself
on  the  Divine  Law,  prphibits  and  denounces  sin ;  the  secular  law,  being  an  elabora-
tion by  the  human  intellect  of  the  idea  of  justice  in  its  various  applications  to  the
events  of  human  life,  condemns  and  punishes  crimes,  by  which  wrong  is  done  to
others.

Vers.  6,  27. — The  pursuit  of  knowledge  hy  right  means  is  one  of  the  highest  and
noblest  occupations  of  the  intellect  of  man,  but  the  seeking  after  knowledge  by  unlawful
means  is  so  criminal  as  to  lead  God  to  cut  off  the  presumptuous  seeker  from  among
his  people.  It  was  grasping  after  a  forbidden  knowledge  by  unrighteous  means  that
brought  death  into  the  world  (Gen.  iii.  6).  All  dealing  in  necromancy  and  witchcraft
involves  this  sin  on  the  part  of  the  inquirer  into  futurity,  whether  those  whom  they
consult  be  merely  deceivers  or  not.

Ver.  9. — Just  as  the  negative  law,  "  Thou  shalt  do  no  murder,"  involves  the  positive
law,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,"  so  the  law  forbidding  to  curse  a  father  or  a
mother  contains  within  it  the  law  of  reverential  submission  to  parents  and  to  all  in
authority.

Ver.  26. — The  command,  "  Te  shall  he  holy  unto  me :  for  I  the  Lord  am  holy,"  is
binding  upon  Christians  far  more  strongly  than  on  the  Israelites.     For—

I.  Christians  have  a  power  given  them  wherebt  they  can  be  holt  which  the
Israelites  had  not.  St.  Paul,  having  declared  that  the  final  purpose  of  God's  election
and  our  adoption  in  Christ  is  "  that  we  should  be  holy  and  without  blame  before  him
in  love  "  (Eph.  i.  4),  goes  on  to  say  that  to  those  who  believed,  on  hearing  the  gospel  of
their  salvation  preached,  there  was  given  the  earnest  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  with  which
they  were  sealed  unto  the  day  of  redemption  (Eph.  i.  13,  14).  The  Spirit  of  holiness
is  given  to  every  baptized  Christian  soul,  in  a  way  in  wliioh  he  was  not  imparted  to  the
Israelites,  the  dispensation  of  types  and  shadows  having  given  place  to  that  of  spiritual
realities,  and  the  promised  Comforter  having  been  sent,  not  only  to  be  with  us,  but  to
be  in  us  (John  xiv.  16,  17  ;  xvi.  7 — 15).

II.  Christians  have  in  Christ  an  example  of  Divine  holiness  which  the
Israelites  had  not.  They  are  therefore  able  to  realize  more  fully  than  the  Israelites
the  manner  in  which  they  are  to  "  be  holy,  for  the  Lord  your  God  is  holy."  They  see
before  them  the  example  of  One  who  is  God,  and  who  emptied  himself  of  his  glory  and
power,  and  was  made  man,  and  lived  a  life  of  perfect  holiness  on  earth.  On  this  model
they  can,  by  the  help  of  that  Spirit  vouchsafed  to  each  Christian,  form  their  own  lives.
It  is  an  ideal  never  to  be  attained,  but  yet  to  have  an  ideal  is  an  inexpressible  help.

III.  Christians,  by  theib  union  with  Christ  as  their  Head,  receive  from  him
OF  his  holiness.  God  has  given  Christ  "  to  be  the  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,
which  is  his  body  "  (Eph.  i.  22,  23),  and  has  gathered  "  together  in  one  all  things  in
Christ"  (Eph.  i.  10),  that  we  "may  grow  up  into  him  in  all  things,  which  is  the  Head,
even  Christ :  from  whom  the  whole  body  .  .  ,  maketh  increase  .  .  .  unto  the  edifying
of  itself  in  love  "  (Eph.  iv.  15,  16).  "  Christ  is  the  Head  of  the  Church,  as  the  husband
is  head  of  the  wife  "  (Eph.  v.  23),  and  "  we  are  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and
of  his  bones  "  (Eph.  v.  30).  The  Word  is  "  full  of  grace  and  truth  .  .  .  and  of  his
fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace"  (John  i.  14 — 16).  From  the  mystical
union  between  Christ  and  his  Church  there  flow  down  graces  upon  those  who  are  the
members  of  his  Church.

IV.  Christians  can  by  faith  appropriate  to  themselves  op  the  holiness  of
Christ.  By  faith  the  holiness,  whereby  satisfaction  was  made  by  Christ  for  the  sin-
fulness of  all  mankind,  may  be  so  realized  by  the  believing  Christian  as  to  be  regarded
as  though  it  were  his  own  in  respect  to  his  own  sins.


S14  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xx.  1—27.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Htiman,  sacrijtces.  Oh.  xi.  1 — 5 ;  cf.  Gen.  xxii.  1 — 19 ;  Micah  vL  7.  In  this  chaptor
we  come  to  a  catalogue  of  capital  crimes.  Upon  the  whole  list  of  cases  we  need  not
dwell ;  but  the  first  has  some  interest  as  raising  the  question  of  "  human  sacrifices."
How  early  the  terrible  practice  of  offering  "  the  fruit  of  the  body  "  in  atonement  for  "  the
sin  of  the  soul "  arose,  we  can  scarcely  say.  It  has  been  supposed  to  be  as  early,  at  all
events,  as  the  time  of  Abraham.  Some  entertain  the  notion  that  the  sacrifice  of  Isaac
was  primarily  a  temptation  to  imitate  the  custom  existing  in  the  land.  But  if  the
horrible  custom  existe4  in  Abraham's  day,  nothing  could  more  clearly  convey  that  the
Divine  pleasure  rested  in  other  sacrifices  altogether  than  the  details  of  the  escape  of
Isaac.  The  custom  of  human  sacrifices  was  widespread,  as  investigations  show.^  Here
and  elsewhere  the  Lord  seta  his  face  against  them.  Let  us  see  if  we  can  grasp  tha
principle  involved.

I.  Human  sacrifice  ib  the  natxjbal  cliuax  of  the  sacrificial  idea.  "If  no
scruples,"  says  Ewald,  "held  a  man  back  from  giving  the  dearest  he  had  when  a
feeling  in  his  heart  drove  him  to  sacrifice  it  to  his  God  just  as  it  was,  then  he  would
easily  feel  even  the  life  of  a  beloved  domestic  animal  not  too  dear  to  be  given  up  at  his
heart's  urgent  demand.  Nay,  only  in  the  offering  up  of  life  or  soul,  as  the  last  that
can  be  offered,  did  it  seem  to  him  that  the  highest  was  presented.  But  the  logical  con-
sequence of  such  feelings  was  that  human  life  must  ultimately  be  looked  upon  as  incom-
parably the  highest  and  most  wondrous  offering,  whether  the  life  offered  be  that  of  a
stranger  or,  as  that  which  is  dearest  to  one,  that  of  one's  own  child,  or  even  of  one's
self.  Thus  human  sacrifice  was  everywhere  the  proper  crown  and  completion  of  all
these  utterances  of  the  fear  of  God."  The  case  of  Abraham  is  one  in  point.  When  God
for  wise  purposes  demanded  the  surrender  of  the  only  begotten  and  well-beloved  son,
Iiaac,  he  asked  the  patriarch  for  the  greatest  conceivable  sacrifice;  and,  so  far  as
intention  is  concerned,  Abraham  made  the  sm'render.  It  has  been  called  on  tha
patriarch's  part  a  "  magnificent  and  extraordinary  act  of  romantic  morals." '  While,
therefore,  it  was  in  reality,  as  we  shall  see,  a  condemnation  of  human  sacrifices  as  such,
it  illustrates  their  real  spirit.

II.  Human  sacrifice  is  at  the  same  time  such  a  monstrous  and  extra vaoant

EXPRESSION  OF  THE   SACRIFICIAL  IDEA  THAT  NOTHING  BUT  A  DiVINB   COMMAND  WOULD

warrant  the  ENTERTAINMENT  OP  IT.  What  distinguishes  Abraham's  case  in  con-
nection with  the  proposed  sacrifice  of  Isaac  from  that  of  all  other  sacrifices  of  human
life  is  that  he  had  a  command  of  God  to  go  upon,  while  the  others  followed  the
devices  of  their  own  hearts.  So  sacred  should  human  life  appear  to  men,  that  the  idea
of  taking  it  away  should  only  be  entertained  under  the  most  solemn  sanctions.  Besides,
but  for  the  sin-distorted  mind  of  man,  it  would  appear  that  the  consecration  of  human
beings  as  "  living  sacrifices,"  is  in  itself  far  higher  and  nobler  than  their  death  (Rom.
xii.  1).  To  take  innocent  infants  and  place  them  in  the  flaming  arms  of  Molech  must
appear  a  most  monstrous  and  exaggerated  expression  of  the  sacrificial  idea.

But  would  God,  in  any  circumstances,  command  human  sacrifices  ?  As  a  matter  of
fact,  men  were  sacrificed  through  capital  punishment.  The  present  chapter  is  full
of  capital  crimes.  Men  died  under  the  directiou  of  God  for  their  crimes.  This,  how-
ever, is  not  the  sacrificial  idea,  which  involves  the  sacrifice  of  the  innocent  in  the  room
of  the  guilty.  This  was  doubtless  what  led  the  infants  to  be  favourite  sacrifices  with
the  heathen — the  innocency  of  the  sufferer  constituted  the  greater  appeal  to  the  angry
deity.    We  observe,  then —

III.  That  God  fobbade,  under  the  penalty  op  death,  human  bacripioeb,  and
IN  the  onlt  case  where  he  seemed  to  demand  a  human  sacrifice  he  had  fbo-
yiDED  A  substitute.  He  marie  the  offering  of  children  to  Molech  a  capital  crime.
This  was  not  aimed  at  the  idolatry  only,  but  at  the  unwarranted  exaggeration  of  the
sacrificial  idea.     Besides,  in  the  case  of  Isaac,  just  when  Abraham  was  about  to  slay

•Of.  Smith's  'Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  i.v.  'Molech;'  also  Ewald's  references,  note
p.  69,  of  his  '  Antiquities  of  Israel.'

'  Mozley'a  'Ruling  Ideas  in  Early  Agci,'  p.  (i2:  see  also  the  chapter  on  *Humao
Baerifices.'


OH.  IX.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  315

him,  God  interposed  with  a  provided  substitute.  All  God  required  in  Abraham's
peculiar  case  was  the  spirit  of  surrender.  He  guards,  therefore,  his  prerogative  of  deal-
ing with  life,  and  enjoins  his  people  only  to  take  human  life  away  when  he  directs  them.
They  are  not  to  presume  to  offer  such  a  sacred  gift  as  human  life  upon  his  altar  in  the
way  of  sacrifice.  They  may  dedicate  themselves  and  their  children  as  living  beings  to
his  service,  but  their  death  he  requires  not  in  such  a  voluntary  fashion  at  their  hands.

IV.  At  the  same  time,  we  find  human  life  bequlakly  sacrificed  in  the  oeder
OF  DiVDfE  PROVIDENCE  AND  AT  THE  CALL  OF  DUTY.  That  Is  to  Say,  though  We  have
not  monstrous  and  unhallowed  sacrifices  required  of  God  at  his  altars,  he  does
make  demands  on  men  and  women  to  surrender,  like  Abraham,  their  sons,  or  to  sur-
render themselves  at  the  call  of  duty.  This  is  indeed  as  real  a  sacrifice  as  in  the  arms
of  Molech,  and  at  the  same  time  a  far  nobler  one.  In  fact,  tdf-sacriflce  seems  to  be  a
law  of  providence  in  the  case  of  all  who  would  be  truly  noble  in  their  careers.  The
voluntary  element,  coming  in  along  with  the  sweet  reasonableness  of  the  sublime
necessity,  vindicates  the  morality  of  the  whole  transaction.  Men  and  women  cheer-
fully lay  down  their  lives  in  gradual  sacrifice  to  duty's  call,  or  sometimes .  in  sudden
and  immediate  sacrifice.     And  the  act  is  moral  as  well  as  heroic.

V.  This  leads  to  a  last  observation,  that  human  sacrifice  had  its  great
CULMINATION  AND  CLIMAX  IN  THAT  OF  Jesus  Cheist.  For  what  God  did  not  require
from  Abraham — the  actual  sacrifice  of  his  son — he  has  required  of  himself.  The  demand
for  a  human  sacrifice  made  only  apparently  in  the  case  of  Isaac,  was  made  really  in
the  case  of  Christ.  An  innocent,  sinless  human  being  was  once  commanded  by  his
God  and  Father  to  lay  down  his  life  and  bear,  in  doing  so,  the  sins  of  man.  Hence
we  find  him  saying,  "  Therefore  doth  my  Father  love  me,  because  I  lay  down  my  life,
that  I  might  take  it  again  "  (John  x.  17).  It  would  seem  a  harsh  command,  a  cruel
necessity,  were  it  not  that  the  Father  and  Son  are  essentially  one,  and  the  command-
ment that  the  Son  should  die  was  virtually  Divine  self-sacrifice.  "  He  who  is  sent
is  one  in  being  with  him  who  sends."  The  atonement  of  Christ  is  really  the  sdf-
tacrifice  of  Ood.

Hence  the  only  human  sacrifice  demanded  is  God  incarnate  responding  to  bimself.
The  necessity  for  thus  atoning  for  human  sin  at  the  expense  of  self-sacrifice  is  in  the
main  mysterious.  But  its  very  mystery  makes  it  more  deeply  profitalile  to  faith.  How
great  must  God's  love  be  when  it  leads  him  to  lay  down  his  own  life  and  die  ignomi-
niously  in  the  interests  of  men  I  The  ram  which  was  offered  in  the  stead  of  Isaac  is
the  type  of  the  self-sacrificing  Jesus  who  was  offered  for  us. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Sin  at  its  worst.  There  is,  perhaps,  no  development  of  sin  which  is
more  shocking  to  the  renewed  mind  of  man,  and  more  offensive  to  the  pure  and
gracious  heart  of  God,  than  that  which  is  here  condemned.     The  verses  intimate —

I.  That  sin  sometimes  leads  to  a  shockino  distoktion  of  the  human  judgment.
How,  we  naturally  ask,  could  men  ever  come  to  believe  in  the  desirableness  of  such
inhuman  rites  as  those  here  prohibited  ?  That  any  Divine  Being  could  possibly  be
conciliated  by  the  infliction  of  a  cruel  death,  by  the  offering  up  of  little  children  to
consuming  fires,  by  this  presentation  on  the  part  of  their  own  parents !  How  revolting
and  incredible  seem  such  ideas  1  There  is  no  account  to  be  given  of  it  but  that  sin,
as  it  goes  on  its  maleficent  path,  not  only  disfigures  the  life  and  corrupts  the  heart,  but
also  degrades  and  distorts  the  understanding  of  men.  It  ends  in  the  "  evil  eye  "  and
so  in  the  "  great  darkness  "  of  the  soul  (Matt.  vi.  23).

II.  That  God  cannot  and  will  not  permit  the  qlory  which  is  due  to  himself
TO  BE  GIVEN  TO  ANOTHER.  "  I  will  Set  my  facc  against  that  man  "  (ver.  3).  God  has
emphatically  said,  "  My  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another  "  (Isa.  xlii.  8).  The  "  face  of
the  Lord  is  against "  them  that  withhold  their  homage  from  the  Creator,  and  offer
worship  and  tribute  to  false  gods.  This,  (1)  not  on  the  selfish  ground  that  he  can
claim  and  secure  something  for  himself  which  he  desires,  after  the  manner  of  men,  but
(2)  on  the  ground  that  it  is  in  itself  right  and  fit  that  men  should  worship  the  one  true
God,  and  (3)  also  because  idolatry  is  not  only  a  guilty  but  a  mischievous  principle
working  every  imaginable  harm  to  those  who  commit  it.  If  we  are  keeping  back  from
God  and  giving  to  another  or  to  ourselves  the  thought,  interest,  affection,  regard,  which
is  due  to  him,  we  must  remember  that  we  make  the  Almighty  our  enemy ;  his  "  face
tM  against  lu."


316  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xx.  1—27.

III.  That  dblibebate  transgression  makes  all  worship  unacceptable,  if  vofi
siNTDL.  The  man  who,  while  flagrantly  violating  the  Law  of  Jehovah  by  "  giving  hi«
seed  unto  Molech,"  presented  himself,  at  the  same  time,  before  the  tabernacle,  was  only
"  defiling  the  sanctuary  "  of  the  Lord  and  "  profaning  his  holy  Name  "  (ver.  3)  by  such
worthless  devotion.  God  did  not  desire  to  see  in  his  presence  a  man  who  was  wilfully
and  wantonly  committing  such  a  heinous  sin.  No  man  is  more  welcome  to  the  throne
of  grace  than  the  penitent  sinner  who  is  burdened  with  a  sense  of  guilt  and  who  craves
the  mercy  and  help  of  the  Divine  Saviour.  But  let  not  that  man  who  is  cherishing
sin  in  his  soul  think  that  his  offering  is  accepted  of  the  Lord.  It  is  hypocrisy,  pro-
fanation (see  Ps.  1.  16 ;  Isa.  i.  11,  12).

rV.  That  dnbepbntbd  sin  must  beab  its  doom.  "  He  shall  surely  be  put  to  death,"
•  etc.  (ver.  2) ;  "I  wiU  cut  him  off  from  among  his  people "  (ver.  3).  There  is  no
provision  here  stated  of  mercy  for  the  penitent.  Probably  none  was  allowed;  the
exigencies  of  the  situation  demanded  death  under  any  circumstances.  Under  the
present  dispensation  there  is  an  offer  of  Divine  mercy  to  the  penitent,  whatever  their
sins  may  be,  however  many,  however  great.  But  the  impenitent  must  lay  their
account  with  the  fact  that  they  have  offended  One  who  "  will  by  no  means  clear  the
guilty,"  who  will  "  surely  "  punish  and  destroy.

V.  That  connivance  at  deadly  sin  is  a  guilty  participation  in  wrong,  and
MUST  SHARE  ITS  MISERABLE  DOOM.  (Vers.  4,  5.)  There  are  evils  at  which  no  friend-
ship however  dear,  no  kinship  however  close,  may  dare  to  wink.  We  must  unsparingly
denounce  and  even  determinedly  expose.

VI.  That  those  who  are  responsible  foe  the  Church's  welfare  must  wabn
REPEATEDLY  AGAINST  THE  MOST  DANGEROUS  SINS.  Again,  "  Thou  shalt  say,"  etc.
(ver.  1).— C.

Ver.  6. — Credulity  and  faith.  This,  also,  is  an  injunction  which  Moses  had  given
before,  and  which  he  was  instructed  to  repeat  (see  oh.  xix.  31).  Our  thought  may  be
directed  to —

I.  The  PREVALENCE  OF  IMPOSTURE.  There  has  never  been  a  time  nor  a  land  without
its  "  familiar  spirits,"  its  "  wizards,"  or  impostors  of  some  kind  and  name.  Men  have
claimed  the  powef  of  gaining  extraordinary  access  to  the  spiritual  world,  or  super-
human knowledge  of  the  future,  and  they  have  imposed  on  the  ungoverned  curiosity  of
their  simple  neighbours.  The  presence  of  such  workers  in  magic  is  almost  universal.  The
love  of  power  and  the  love  of  money  will  account  for  it.    So  must  it  be  while  there  is—

II.  The  CORRESPONDING  PREVALENCE  OF  CREDULITY.  The  number  of  "  the  simple  "
is  very  large  everywhere.  Men  and  women  are  always  to  be  found,  iti  pitiful  abimdance,
who  will  respond  to  any  claim  made  upon  their  belief.  There  is  hardly  an  absurdity
too  glaring,  a  falsehood  too  palpable  to  be  discredited  by  all.  Let  the  impostor  only  be
confident  and  pretentious  enough,  and  he  will  find  a  number  who  will  listen  with
eagerness  and  believe  without  question  or  proof.

III.  Its  ut'i'er  delusiveness.  The  entire  system  is  false  and  rotten  throughout;
it  is  a  mass  of  trickery,  delusion,  and  disappointment.  1.  Those  who  practise  it  soon
impose  upon  themselves ;  they  come  to  believe  that  they  are  really  admitted  to  the
secrets  of  the  other  world,  and  they  are  the  victims  of  their  own  roguery.  Sin  tests  no
one  so  hard  as  the  sinner  himself;  its  rebound  is  terrible  and  deadly.  He  who,  with
guilty  selfishness,  would  deceive  his  fellows,  will  soon  entangle  his  foot  in  his  own  net
and  perish  in  his  own  snare  (Ps.  vii.  15;  ix.  15).  2.  They  also  grossly  deceive  their
neighbours.  They  who  listen  to  their  voice  believe  that  they  are  holding  intercourse
with  heaven,  or  are  gaining  instruction  from  those  supernaturally  endowed,  when  the
truth  is  they  are  only  dealing  with  men  who  are  unusually  wicked,  and  who  should  only
be  heard  to  be  disregarded  or  denounced.

IV.  Its  sinfulness  in  the  bight  op  God.  Resort  to  imposture  is  positively  wrong
In  this  book  God  uttered  and  repeated  his  Divine  prohibition,  and  he  strengthened  his
law  by  attaching  the  heaviest  penalties  to  disobedience :  "  I  will  even  set  my  face
against  that  soul,  and  will  cut  him  off,"  etc.  The  heinousness  of  the  practice  probably
lay  in  the  fact  that  it  was  a  deliberate  departure  from  the  Lord  himself.  There  was  his
house,  and  there  were  his  ])rophets  to  resort  unto ;  to  pass  these  by  in  order  to  consult
pretenders  and  impostors  was  to  forsake  God  and  to  go  "  a  whoring  "  after  other  beings
and  other  things.     And  thus  our  thought  is  directed  to —


OH.XX.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  317

y.  Thb  excellekot  of  a  reasonable  faith.  The  children  of  Israel  had  lucb
•ccess  to  the  spiritual  world  and  such  knowledge  of  the  future  as  it  was  good  for  men
to  have.  Was  not  Gbd  himself,  in  manifested  presence  and  in  revealing  grace,  in
their  camp  ?  Was  he  not  speaking  to  them  as  to  the  future  that  was  before  them  ?
Was  he  not  ready  to  give  them  prophets  who  would  not  impose  on  them  with  shameful
lies,  but  guide  them  with  the  word  of  truth  ?  We,  too,  have  all  we  need  without
having  recourse  to  subtle  and  spiritualistic  arts.  We  have :  1.  The  Word  of  God  upon
our  tables  and  in  our  minds.  2.  The  devout  counsels  of  wise  and  holy  men.  3.  The
promised  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Fictitious  arts  are  sinful  and  delusive.  The
wisdom  that  is  from  God  is  not  only  sound  but  sufficient.  That  which  is  more  than
this  "  cometh  of  evil." — 0.

Vers.  7,  8. — Sanctity — demand,  inducement,  promise.  Once  "again"  (ver.  2)
Moses  utters  the  Divine  will  in  this  great  matter  of  holiness  (see  chs.  xi.  44 ;  xix.  2).
We  have —

I.  GiOd's  iMPEBATrvB  DEUAND  OF  SANCTITY.  "  Sanctify  yourselves."  "  Ye  shall
keep  my  statutes,  and  do  them."  The  Creator  of  the  universe,  the  Atithor  of  our  being,
the  Father  and  Sustainer  of  our  spirits,  has  sovereign  right  to  speak  to  us  in  such
decisive  tones.  He  demands  of  us  that  we  shall  be  "holy,"  i.e.  (1)  that  we  shall
expel  from  heart  and  life  all  those  sinful  habits  by  which  men  have  defiled  themselves :
thus  shall  we  "  be  severed  from  other  people "  (ver.  26),  whose  spirit  and  life  are
hateful ;  and  (2)  that  we  shall  approach  him,  honour  him,  and  pay  him  the  tribute
he  asks  of  us,  and  also  act  righteously  and  blamelessly  toward  our  fellows,  "  keeping
his  statutes  and  doing  them."

II.  The  high  inducement  he  presents  to  us.  "  Be  ye  holy :  for  I  am  the  Lord  your
God."  We  may  gird  ourselves  to  good  and  great  things,  animated  by  different  motives ;
of  these  some  may  be  higher,  others  lower.  God  summons  us  to  be  holy  for  the
highest  reason  of  all,  viz.  because  we  shall  thus  resemble  him.  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am
holy"  (1  Pet.  i.  16).  Other  reasons  abound:  holiness  (1)  is  the  best  thing  in  itself;
(2)  saves  us  from  many  and  great  spiritual  evils ;  (3)  delivers  us  from  dark  and  awful
penalties ;  (4)  allies  us  to  the  noblest  created  beings,  etc. ;  but  the  best  and  loftiest  of
all  considerations  is  that  (5)  it  makes  us  like  God,  the  Holy  One,  himself.  His  spirit
is  our  spirit ;  his  principles,  our  principles ;  his  life,  our  life.  We  are  "  the  children  of
our  Father  who  is  in  heaven."

III.  His  promised  help.  "  I  am  the  Lord  which  sanctify  you."  The  action  of  GJod
upon  our  souls  has  been  treated,  both  by  the  foolish  and  by  the  wicked,  as  a  reason  for
human  impassiveness.  Foolish  men  have  said, "  God  is  working  for  as  and  in  us,  there-
fore it  would  be  irreverent  for  us  to  attempt  to  do  anything ;  we  should  only  interfere."
Wicked  men  have  said,  "  God  works  for  us,  therefore  we  may  safely  live  in  comfortable
unconcern  and  guilt  while  we  wait  his  time  of  deliverance."  The  "children  of
wisdom  "  have  said,  "  God  is  ready  to  work  with  us,  therefore  let  us  strive  with  all  our
Boergies,  for,  with  lus  help,  we  shall  not  strive  in  vain."  This  is  the  apostle's  argument :
"Work  out  your  own  salvation,  ...  for  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you,"  etc.
(Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  All  our  endeavours  might  be  unavailing ;  we  might  contend  against
the  strong  current  of  sin  and  be  baffled  and  borne  along  its  stream,  but  if  God  himself
is  sanctifying  us,  we  shall  prevail.  Let  us  go  forth  unto  the  struggle,  for  we  shall
assuredly  succeed.  God  sanctifies  us  in  such  wise  that  he  acts  with  us  while  he  acts
in  us  and /or  us.  He  sanctifies  us  by  (1)  the  truth  of  his  Word  (John.  xvii.  17)  :  this
we  are  to  consult ;  by  (2)  the  privileges  of  the  sanctuary  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  28) :  of  these
we  are  to  avail  ourselves ;  by  (3)  his  providential  discipline  (Heb.  xii.  10) :  to  this  we
are  to  submit ;  by  (4)  the  indwelling  of  his  Holy  Spirit  (Bom.  it.  16)  :  for  this  we  are
earnestly  to  pray  and  expectantly  to  wait. — C.

Ver.  9  Oatter  clause). — The  unforgiven.  "His  blood  shall  be  upon  him;"  "thdr
blood  shall  be  upon  them  "  (vers.  13, 16,  27).  These  words  have  a  deeper  significance
than  a  mere  repetition  of  the  sentence,  "He  shall  be  put  to  death."  They  signify
this :  his  sin  cannot  he  forgiven  him.  It  was  the  blood  of  the  animal  that  "  made
atonement  for  the  soul "  (ch.  xvii.  11).  It  was  the  shed  blood,  therefore,  that  was
associated,  in  thought,  with  the  penalty  due  to  sin.    And  when  the  legislator  said,


S18  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xx.  1—27


"  His  blood  shall  be  upon  him,"  he  meant  his  penalty  shall  rest  upon  him — it  shall
not  be  borne  and  taken  away  by  the  blood  of  the  substituted  victim.  In  other  words,
"  He  shall  bear  his  iniquity,"  or  the  penalty  of  his  iniquity,  himself  (see  ch.  vii.  18).
There  have  always  been,  and  there  will  always  be,  in  the  world  "  the  unforgiven ; "
men,  like  Cain,  who  bear  about  them  the  brand  of  an  unpardonable  offence ;  sons  and
daughters  who  have  erred  and  have  not  been  taken  back  into  parental  love ;  'criminals
that  have  lost  the  place  in  society  which  they  have  no  hope  of  regaining;  forlorn
wretches  that  have  so  sinned  against  their  conscience  that  they  cannot  forgive  them-
selves, and  have  abandoned  themselves  to  a  terrible  despair.  But  what  of  the  Divine
forgiveness  or  refusal  to  forgive  ?     We  are  taught —

I.  That  provision  was  made  in  the  Law  fob  the  pardon  of  many  offences.
This  was  the  end  of  all  the  sin  and  trespass  offerings,  and  on  the  Day  of  Atonement "  all
the  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  all  their  transgressions"  were  "borne
away  "  into  the  uninhabited  land,  into  the  wilderness  of  oblivion  (oh.  xvi.  21,  22).

II.  That  undeb  the  Law  there  were  offences  which  could  not  be  thus
ATONED,  AND  WERE  NOT  FOEOIVEN.  Those  who  wrought  sbamcful  acts  of  idolatry  or
immorality  could  bring  no  oblation  to  the  altar ;  they  could  look  for  no  mercy ;  no  blood
of  atonement  was  availing ;  their  "  blood  was  upon  them ;"  they  died  before  the  Lord.

m.  That,  under  the  oospel,  mercy  ib  offered  fob  the  woest  tbansgbessobs  if
THERE  BE  PENITENCE  AND  FAITH.  The  One  "  Unpardonable  sin  "  (Mark  iii.  29)  is  either
(1)  a  sin  which  was  possible  in  the  days  of  the  Incarnation  and  is  absolutely  beyond
commission  now,  or  (2)  consists  in  that  hardening  of  the  heart  against  the  Spirit's  in-
fluence which  results  in  final  impenitence.  &ut  where  there  is  repentance  toward  God
and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  there  ia  an  open  gate  into  the  kingdom  of  God's
mercy,  into  eternal  life.  No  heinousness  of  offence,  no  multiplicity  of  transgressions,
bars  the  way.  "By  him  all  that  believe  are  justified  from  all  things,  from  which  they
could  not  be  justified  by  the  Law  of  Moses  "  (Acts  xiii.  39).

IV.  That  mant  souls,  though  walking  in  the  light  of  the  gospel,  are  content
TO  BANK  AMONG  THE  UNFOEGIVEN.  In  the  light,  in  the  full  sunshine  of  privilege  and
opportunity,  there  are  thousands  of  men  who  do  not  find,  because  they  will  not  seek,
the  mercy  and  the  friendship  of  God.  They  live  unforgiven;  "their  blood  is  upon
them,"  They  go  through  life  (1)  with  an  oppressive  sense  of  condemnation  upon
them;  (2)  excluding  themselves  from  purest  spiritual  blessedness  (Ps.  xxxii.  1,  2);
(3)  voluntarily  unfitted  for  the  highest  service  man  can  render  his  brother.

V.  That  the  impenitent  pass  into  thb  futueb  with  unforgiven  sin  upon  their
SOUL.  How  terrible  to  pass  beyond  the  line  which  bounds  the  period  of  probation
with  our  "  blood  upon  us ;  "  to  pass  on  (1^  to  condemnation  and  reproach  at  the  bar  of
God,  (2)  to  exile  from  the  heavenly  city,  (3)  to  the  retribution  which  the  justice  of  God
must  inflict  1  Go,  in  the  day  of  grace,  to  the  "  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the
sin  of  the  world,"  through  whom  there  is  "remission  of  sins"  (Luke  xxiv.  47). — 0.

Ver.  23  (latter  part). —  Ood's  displeasure  with  ourselves.  "  They  committed  all  these
things,  and  therefore  I  abhorred  them."    This  expression  arrests  ua  by —

I.  Its  somewhat  startling  strength.  "  I  abhorred  them."  Does  God  positively
abhor  man?  the  Creator  his  creature?  the  Father  his  child?  Are  we  to  understand
that  the  Lord,  who  is  "  gracious  and  full  of  compassion,  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in
mercy,"  feels  an  actual  abhorrence  of  those  beings  to  whom  he  is  so  nearly  and  inti-
mately related,  those  human  spirits  he  formed  for  himself,  to  reflect  his  own  image
and  to  enjoy  his  own  immortal  blessedness?  The  word  startles  us;  it  may  well
alarm  us ;  it  suggests  the  question.  Is  it  possible  that  we  also  may  become  such  that
our  God  may  be  compelled  to  look  on  us  with  a  displeasure  which  amounts  to  ab-
horrence ?     We  look  atr—

II.  The  sad  and  solid  truth  which  it  contains.  "  God  hates  the  sin  and  loves
the  sinner,"  we  say,  and  truly.  Yet  this  sentence  does  not  cover  the  whole  truth  of
the  case.  G«d  does  pity  the  sinner,  and  seeks  to  save  him.  But  he  is  displeased  uHth
him  also.  Of  anything  like  malignity  or  ill  will  we  rejoice  to  know  that  the  holy  and
gracious  One  is  absolutely  incapable;  but  we  are  bound  to  believe  that  he  feels  a
sacred  and  holy  resentment  against  those  who  violate  the  laws  of  righteousness.
1.  Scripture  plainly  afBrms  that  he  does.  "  Therefore  I  abhorred  them ; "  "  God  is  angry


OH.XX.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICDb.  819

with  the  wicked  every  day "  (Ps.  vii.  11);  "  the  Lord  hath  heen  sore  displeased  with
your  fathers  "  (Zeoh.  i.  2) ;  "  they  vexed  his  Holy  Spirit "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  10) ;  "  he  looked  on
them  with  anger  "  (Mark  iii.  5) ;  to  "  them  that  obey  unrighteousness  "  God  will  render
"  indignation  and  wrath  "  (Rom.  ii.  8).  2.  It  is  impossible  wholly  to  separate  the  act
from  the  agent.  An  act  has  no  moral  qualities  at  all  apart  from  the  disposition  and
character  of  him  who  does  it.  If  our  indignation  is  aroused  by  any  shameful  deed,  it
is  because  some  one  has  wrought  that  which  is  wrong,  and  our  feeling  must  extend
to  the  perpetrator  as  well  as  to  the  crime.  In  theory  it  must  do  so;  in  fact  it  does  so.
'We  cannot  see  our  own  children  doing  that  which  is  guilty  without  being  displeased
with  them  as  well  as  excited  with  indigaation  against  the  wrong  they  have  done.  Our
feelings  of  holy  anger,  indignation,  righteous  grief,  etc.,  may  not  be  precisely  identical
with  those  which  are  in  the  heart  of  God  when  he  looks  down  on  the  sins  of  his  human
children,  but  they  answer  to  them ;  they  correspond  with  them ;  they  enable  us  to
understand  how  he,  our  Divine  Father,  feels  toward  us  when  we  do  those  things  which
are  offensive  and  grievous  in  his  sight.  Let  us  lay  it  well  to  heart  that  by  (1)  our
positive  transgressions  of  his  holy  Law,  (2)  our  keeping  back  from  him  the  love  and  the
service  which  are  his  due,  (3)  the  continued  rejection  of  his  overtures  of  mercy  and
reconciliation  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  are  offending,  displeasing,  grieving  God.  These  our
sins  are  drawing  down  upon  our  own  souls  the  awful  anger,  the  high  displeasure,  of
that 'Almighty  God  in  whom  we  live,  who  has  ourselves  and  our  future  in  his  right
hand  of  power,  whom  it  is  our  chief  duty,  and  should  be  our  first  desire,  to  conciliate
and  please.     We  glance  at—

III.  The  welcome  truth  with  which  it  is  consistent.  While  God  hates  sin  and
is  divinely  displeased  with  the  sinner,  he  yet  pities  the  sinner  and  seeks  to  save  him.
He  condemns,  but  he  invites.  "  IsEpbraimmy  dear  son?  .  .  .  since  I  spake  against
him,  I  do  earnestly  remember  him  still "  (Jer.  xxxi.  20).  As  a  human  father  over  his
lost  son  or  erring  daughter,  only  with  immeasurably  deeper  love,  he  yearns  over  his
wayward  children,  and  goes  out  to  welcome  them  home,  when,  returning  to  themselves,
they  return  unto  him  (Luke  xv.  11 — 24). — C.

Ver.  24. — Three  aspects  of  human  life.  The  verso  suggests  three  thoughts  concern-
ing our  human  life —

I.  The  excellency  of  our  estate.  "  A  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey.''
God  gave  the  Israelites  an  excellent  inheritance  when  he  led  them  into  the  land  of
promise.  For  beauty,  variety  of  scenery,  fertility,  etc.,  it  was  all  that  could  be  desired.
Our  present  estate  as  citizens  of  time  is  one  rich  and  full,  a  "  land  flowing,"  etc.  We
have  :  1.  The  beauty  and  grandeur  of  the  world.  2.  Human  love  in  its  manifold  forms,
conjugal,  parental,  filial,  fraternal,  etc.  3.  SufBciency  of  all  kinds  of  palatable  food.
4.  Intellectual  gratifications.  5.  Spiritual  relationships  and  the  sacred,  enduring  joys
which  belong  to  these.

II.  The  tenure  undeb  which  we  hold  possession.  "  I  will  ^ve  it  unto  you  to
possess  it."  We  reckon  that  we  "  possess  "  many  things.  We  call  them  "  ours."  We
endeavour  to  secure  them  to  ourselves  by  carefully  drawn  documents  and  witnesses.
But  what,  when  all  has  been  done  that  can  be  done,  is  the  tenure  under  which  we  hold
everythiog?  It  is  not  the  consent  of  man,  but  the  will  of  God.  God  said  to  Israel
concerning  the  country  of  the  Canaanites,  "  Ye  shall  inherit  their  land,  and  I  will  give  it
unto  you  to  possess  it."  He  thought  well  to  take  it  away  from  its  former  occupants
and  give  it  to  them.  There  were,  no  doubt,  the  best  reasons  for  this  exchange  ;  but
Jehovah  evidently  assumed  his  perfect  right  to  dispose  as  seemed  well  to  him  of  his  own.
God  always  has  the  best  grounds  on  which  to  deal  with  us,  raising  up  or  laying  low ;
he  never  acts  capriciously ;  but  he  often  acts  without  assigning  reasons  to  us,  and  in
such  wise  that  we  cannot  make  any  conjecture  thereupon  that  is  even  probably  true.
We  must  recognize  the  fact  that  we  hold  everything  at  his  wiU,  and  be  perfectly  ready
to  lay  it  down  or  to  hand  it  on  to  another  at  the  bidding  of  the  Supreme.  This  is
true  of  (1)  our  property  and  position,  (2)  our  mental  powers,  (3)  our  health,  and  (4)
our  life  on  earth.

III.  The  painful  need  to  separate  ourselves  from  others.  "  I  am  the  Lord
your  God,  which  have  separated  you  from  other  people."  By  their  daily  habits  and
social  customs  (ver.  25),  the  Jews  were  cut  off  from  intercourse  with  other  people :


330  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xx.  1— JJ7.

intermarriages  were  strictly  prohibited  (Deut.  vii.  3,  4) ;  they  were  to  maintain  a
studied  separateness  from  all  surrounding  nations.  The  conscientious  service  of  God
our  Saviour  involves  some  separatengss  on  our  part.  1.  We  have  to  form  ourselvei
into  separate  societies,  Christian  Churches.  From  these  we  are  bound,  in  faithfulness,
to  exclude  those  who  do  not  profess  to  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  will  produce
resentment  on  their  part,  and  cause  them  to  ascribe  to  pride  that  which  is  due  to
simple  loyalty  to  the  Master,  2.  We  have  to  separate  ourselves  from  those  persons  and
things  whose  association  would  be  injurious  to  the  cause  of  Christ ;  from  (1)  unholy
friendships,  (2)  institutions  and  customs  which  have  evi^  features  or  evil  tendencies,
(3)  the  abounding  spirit  of  worldliness  and  selfishness.  We  are  bound  to  make  it  clear
and  plain  to  all  that  we  are  "  on  the  Lord's  side,"  and  on  the  side  of  all  those  righteous
and  holy  principles  which  he  commends  to  us. — C.

Vers.  1 — 27. — Sin  unto  death.  The  offences  described  in  this  chapter  were  mentioned
before.  Such  is  our  obtuseness  that  we  need  "  line  upon  line."  Adorable  is  that  good-
ness of  God  which  takes  such  pains  with  us.     We  have  here —

I.  Pkesumptuous  snre  and  thbeb  penalty.  1.  Parents  giving  their  seed  to  Molech.
(1)  This  infernal  god  was  the  King  of  Tophet  (Isa.  xxx.  33),  and,  in  malignity,  not  to
be  distinguished  from  Satan.  The  sacrifices  he  demanded  were  human.  By  a  refine-
ment of  cruelty  he  required  parents  to  immolate  their  own  offspring.  They  were  offered
to  him  in  the  horrible  torments  of  fire.  Nothing  could  be  more  devilish.  (2)  In  de-
nouncing death  as  the  penalty  for  this  sin,  the  reason  given  is  that  it  "  defiled  the
sanctuary  and  profaned  the  holy  Name  "  of  God  (ver.  3).  The  temple  and  the  Shechinah
were  in  the  land,  and  to  commit  this  wickedness  there  was  consequently  to  commit  the
highest  crime  against  the  most  awful  sacredness.  Also  the  body  of  man  is  the  temple
of  God,  and  to  give  that  temple  to  Molech  was,  in  this  sense,  to  defile  the  temple  of
God  (see  1  Cor.  vi.  15 ;  i.  21).  (3)  The  penalty  is  denounced  in  order  upon  the
Hebrew  first.  Having  more  light,  he  is  in  a  higher  degree  responsible,  and  therefore
is  the  first  named  to  suffer  (comp.  Rom.  ii.  9).  Let  not  Protestant  Christians  forget
their  great  responsibility.  (4)  But  the  "  strangers  that  sojourn  in  Israel "  are  amenable
to  the  same  punishment.  They  must  not  abuse  their  hospitality  by  showing  an
example  of  wickedness.  This  consideration  should  restrain  the  licentiousness  in  foreign
countries  of  some  of  our  travellers.  2.  Persons  having  dealings  with  necromaney.
(1)  The  principals  in  this.  Those  "  who  have  familiar  spirits,"  or  demons  attendant
upon  them  and  obedient  to  their  calls.  "  Wizards,"  or  wise  ones,  viz.  to  pry  into  the
"  depths  of  Satan  "  (ver.  27).  Such  persons  are  accounted  guilty  of  the  highest  crime,  and
were  doomed  to  suffer  death  by  stoning,  without  mercy.  (2)  Their  customers.  Those
who  have  recourse  to  such  abandoned  persons  lo  discover  things  which  it  has  not  pleased
OtoA  to  reveal.  Such  pruriency  into  Divine  mysteries  is  defiling  (ver.  6 ;  ch.  xix.  31).
(3)  Those  who  would  be  sanctified  by  God  must  first  sanctify  themselves  from  these
abominations.  If  they  refuse  to  do  this,  God  will  sanctify  himself  of  them  by  cutting
them  off  (vers.  6,  8).  3.  Children  who  curse  their  parents.  (1)  Those  guilty  of  this
irreverence  must  be  woefully  destitute  of  the  fear  of  God  (see  ch.  xix.  32).  Our  fathers
according  to  the  flesh  are  to  us  representative;!  of  our  Father  in  heaven.  (2)  So  heinous
is  this  crime  that  it  must  be  punished  with  dflath.  There  is  no  atonement  for  it.  "  His
blood  shall  be  upon  him."  He  must  be  made  himself  the  sacrifice  for  his  sin.  What
an  admonition  to  the  fast  youth  of  modem  times!  4.  Excesses  in  uncleanness.
(1)  Death,  in  one  form  or  another,  is  the  penmlty  for  the  horrible  crimes  specified  (vers.
ICf— 21).  "  Their  blood  shall  be  upon  them ; "  "  they  shall  be  cut  off  from  among  their
people  ; "  "  they  shall  bear  their  iniquity ; "  ''  they  shall  be  stoned ; "  "  they  shall  be
burnt ; "  "  they  shall  die  childless."  (2)  In  this  last  the  retribution  must  come
speedily.  Their  cutting  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living  must  be  before  any  issue  could
come  of  their  crime.  It  may  also  imply  that  any  issue  they  may  have  already  should
he  involved  in  the  punishment  of  their  sin  (comp.  Numb.  xvi.  32 ;  Josh.  vii.  24).

n.  The  besponsibilitt  of  witnesses.  1.  To  withhold  testimony  against  sin  is  to
incur  its  guilt.  (1)  It  is  here  taken  as  complicity  in  the  crime.  He  that  "  hides  his
eyes  from  the  man  "  that  giveth  his  seed  to  Molech,  so  as  to  let  him  escape  the  hands  of

i'ustice,  is  said  to  "commit  whoredom  with  Molech"  (vers.  4,  5).     What  a  lesson  k
tere  to  "peaceable"  Christians  who  let  swearers  and  other  public  offenders  go  un»


OB.  XXI.  1—24.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


321


reproved  I  (2)  He  that  "  hides  his  eyes,"  in  this  case,  is  visited  with  excommunication.
For  complicity  in  this  gross  idolatry,  here  described  as  "  whoredom,"  God,  as  a  jealous
husband,  gives  his  writing  of  divorcement.  "  I  will  set  my  face  against  that  man,  .  .  .
and  will  cut  him  off  from  among  bis  people."  Not  only  is  he  expelled  from  the  Church,
but. also  from  the  nation,  if  not  in  addition  doomed  to  suffer  a  violent  death  (comp,
ohs.  xvii.  10 ;  xxvi.  17 ;  Jer.  xliv.  11—14 ;  Bzek.  xiv.  7—9 ;  xv.  7).  (3)  For  this
culpable  want  of  zeal  for  the  honour  of  God,  the  tacit  accomplice  in  the  abominations
of  Molech  involves  also  his  family  in  his  punishment  (ver.  5).  How  many  illustra-
tions of  this  principle  have  we  in  the  history  of  the  kings !  (see  Exod.  xx.  7).  Sin  is  a
desperate  evil,  and  requires  a  strong  hand  to  deal  with  it.  2.  The  testimony  against
sin  is  a  satuiiification  to  the  witness  (vers.  7,  8).  (1)  The  faithful  witness  thereby
sanctifies  himself,  (a)  He  clears  himself  of  all  complicity.  (5)  He  approves  himself
to  God  as  zealous  for  his  truth,  purity,  and  honour,  (c)  He  fulfils  the  part  of  a  true
patriot ;  for  nations  are  exalted  by  righteousness  and  ruined  by  crime.  Public  duty
may  cost  us  inconvenience,  but  it  must  not  be  neglected.  (2)  He  is  sanctified  by  the
Lord  (ver.  8).  God  will  honour  them  that  honour  him.  (a)  He  will  bring  them  to
dwell  in  the  land  (ver.  22).  This  possession  was  the  earnest  of  the  better  Canaan.
It  was  a  "  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey."  (5)  He  will  watch  over  them  as  a,
proprietor  over  precious  treasure.  "  They  shall  be  mine  "  (ver.  26 ;  Exod.  xix.  5,  6 ;
Deut.  vii.  6;  Ps.  cxxxv.  4).  "Blessed  are  the  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord." —
J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 27. — Punishments  assigned  to  presumptuous  sins.  I.  The  law  op  sooibtt
BESTS  ON  THE  HiGHBH  Law  OP  GoD.  All  legislation  should  be  thus  divinely  sanctioned.
The  Bible  is  not  a  statute-book  for  nations,  but  a  book  of  principles— to  give  light  to
the  mind  and  heart  of  man  as  man.  We  must  not  enforce  human  law  on  Divine
grounds,  but  we  can  use  Divine  revelation  to  ascertain  the  most  satisfactory  laws.

n.  Punishments  vary  from  age  to  age  and  country  to  country,  but  the  reason  of
punishment  remains.    The  honour  of  the  Law  satisfied  is  the  way  of  life  opened.

III.  The  comparison  between  the  Law  and  the  gospel  suggested  by  this  chapter
reveals  the  grace  of  God,  the  progress  of  humanity,  the  ultimate  destiny  of  the  race.
The  gradual  extinction  of  the  sins  is  the  extinction  of  the  laws  which  provided  against
them.  "  If  ye  be  led  of  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not  under  the  Law  "  (see  Gal.  v.,  and  comp.
Jas.  i.,  ii.).  The  perfect  law  of  liberty  is  a  fulfilment  of  the  old  law,  and  therefore  a
blotting  out  of  the  handwriting  of  ordinances  and  nailing  of  them  to  the  cross  of
Christ.— E.


PART    III.

Sectics  IV.

Thb  Unolbannbss  and  Disqttamfication  of  Priests.

EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEK  XXI.
The  two  remaining  chapters  of  this  division
of  the  book  (ohs.  xxi.,  xxii.)  deal  with  the
case  of  defilements  attaching  to  the  priest-
hood, over  and  above  those  which  affect
other  men,  whether  ceremonial  (ohs.  xxi  1 — 6,
10 — 12;  xxii.  1 — ^9)  or  moral  (oh.  xxi.  7—9,
13 — 15);  with  the  physical  defects  dis-
qualifying men  of  the  priestly  family  from
ministering  at  the  altar  (ch.  xxi.  16—24);
with  the  privilege  of  eating  of  the  holy
things  (oh.  xxii.  10 — 13);  ending  with  the

LEVITICUS.


injunction  that  the  saoriflciaJ  victims,  no
less  than  the  priests  who  sacrificed  them,
should  be  unblemished  and  perfect  of  their
kind.

Vers.  1—6. — The  first  paragraph  refers
to  ceremonial  uncleanness  derived  to  the
priest  from  his  family  relations.  The  priest
may  not  take  part  in  any  funeral  rites,  th«
etfect  of  which  was  legal  defilement,  except
in  the  case  of  the  death  of  his  father,
mother,  son,  daughter,  brotl:er,  and  un-
married Bister.  These  are  all  that  appear
to  be  mentioned.  But  what,  then,  are  we  to
understand  regarding  his  wife?    Was  the


82S


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUa


[oh.  XXL  1 — 24i


priest  allowed  to  take  part  in  mourning
ceremonies  for  her  or  not?  It  is  thought  by
come  that  her  case  is  met  by  ver.  4,  But
lie  shall  not  defile  himself,  being  a  chief  man
among  his  people,  to  profane  himself.  'I'he
literal  translation  of  this  verse  is,  He  ehall
not  he  defiled,  a  lord  (baaV)  among  his  people.
The  word  baal,  or  lord,  is  commonly  used  in
the  sense  of  husband.  The  clause,  therefore,
may  be  understood  to  forbid  the  priest  to
mourn  for  his  wife,  being  rendered.  He  shall
not  defile  himself  as  an  husband  (i.e.  for  his
wife)  among  his  people.  Tliis,  however,
is  something  of  a  forced  rendering.  The
words  are  better  understood  to  mean,  He  shall
not  defile  himself  as  a  master  of  a  house  among
his  people  ;  that  is,  he  may  not  take  part  in
the  funeral  rites  of  slaves  or  other  members
of  the  household,  which  ordinarily  brought
defilement  on  tlie  master  of  a  house.  Then
is  the  priest  forbidden  to  mourn  for  his
wife?  This  we  can  harJly  believe,  when
he  might  mourn  for  father  and  mother,  son
and  daughter,  brother  and  sister.  Nor  is  it
necessary  to  take  this  view.  For  the  case
of  the  wife  is  covered  by  the  words.  For  his
Mn,  that  is  near  unto  him,  ...  he  may  be
defiled.  The  wife,  being  so  closely  attached
to  the  husband,  is  not  specifically  named,
because  that  was  not  necessary,  but  is
included  under  the  expression,  his  kin,  that
is  near  unto  Mm,  just  as  daughter,  grand-
mother, niece,  and  wife's  sister,  are  covered
by  the  phrase,  "  near  of  kin,"  without  being
specifiially  named  in  ch.  xviii.  (see  note  on
ch.  xviii.  18).  Even  when  mourning  is  per-
mitted, the  priest  Is  to  use  no  excessive  forms
of  it,  still  less  any  that  have  been  used  by
idolaters.  They  shall  not  make  baldness  upon
their  head,  neither  shall  they  shave  off  the
comer  of  their  heard  (see  oh.  xix.  27),  nor
make  any  cuttings  in  their  flesh  (see  ch.
xix.  28).  And  the  reason  why  they  are  to
avoid  ceremonial  uncleanness  in  some  cases,
and  to  act  with  sobriety  and  gravity  in  all,
ia  that  they  are  dedicated  to  God,  to  offer
the  oiferings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire,  the
bread  of  their  God;  that  is,  the  sacrifices
which  are  consumed  by  the  fire  of  the  altar
symbolizing  the  action  of  God  (see  note  on
ch.  ilL  11).

Vers.  7 — 9. — Moral  uncleanness  or  de-
filement passes  to  the  husband  and  father
from  an  immoral  wife  or  daughter,  and
therefore  the  priest  is  to  be  specially  careful
in  the  selection  of  his  wife;  and  his
daughter,  if  site  leads  a  licentious  life,  is  to
be  stoned  to  death,  and  then  burnt  with  fire,
because  she  profaneth  her  father  (of.  1  Sam,
U.  17).  In  a  similar  spirit,  St.  Paul  gives
directions  as  to  the  families  of  those  to  whom
the  ministry  of  the  Spirit  is  assigned  (1  Tim.
lii.  11;  Titus  i.  6).  Keil  would  unite
V*r.  4  in  sense  with  Teis.  7 — 9,  and  argues


that  he  shall  not  defile  himself,  being  a  chief
man  among  his  people,  to  profane  himself,
refers  to  the  kind  of  marriage  which  the
priest  is  to  make,  but  the  interposition  of
vers.  5  and  6  forbid  this  explanation  of
ver.  4.

Vers.  10 — 15. — The  high  priest,  opon
whose  head  the  anointing  oil  was  poured,
and  that  is  consecrated  to  put  on  the  gar-
ments, symbolizing  in  his  person  the  Holy
One  in  a  _  more  special  manner  than  the
other  priests,  has  to  aim  so  much  the  more
at  symbolical  holiness.  He  may  not,  there-
fore, incur  legal  uncleanness  by  taking  part
in  the  funeral  rites,  even  of  his  father  or
mother,  not  being  permitted  to  absent  him-
self from  the  sanctuary,  which  he  would
have  to  do  if  he  had  thus  ceremonially  de-
filed himself.  Nor  is  it  enough  that  he
should  abstain  from  taking  an  immoral  or  a
divorced  wife ;  he  may  only  wed  a  virgin  and
of  his  own  people,  whereas  the  other  priests
might  marry  widows  and  the  daughters  of
strangers  dwelling  among  the  Israelites.
In  the  ordinances  for  priests  given  in  Ezek.
xliv.,  the  ordinary  priests,  as  well  as  the
high  priest,  are  forbidden  to  marry  widows,
unless  they  be  the  widows  of  priests  (Ezek.
xliv.  22).

Vers.  16— 24.— Perfection  of  the  body
being  typical  of  perfection  of  the  mind
and  of  the  whole  man,  and  symbolical
perfection  being  required  of  the  priest  of
God,  none  may  be  admitted  to  the  priest-
hood with  bodily  defects,  or  excrescences,
or  grievous  blemishes.  The  translation
dwarf,  in  ver.  20,  is  better  than  the  mar-
ginal rendering  "  too  slender,"  or  withered.
Being  the  descendants  of  Aaron,  these
priests,  blemished  as  they  were,  were  to  be
supported  as  the  other  priests  were  sup-
ported. He  shall  eat  the  bread  of  his  God,
both  of  the  most  holy,  and  of  the  holy ;  that
is,  the  priests'  portions  of  the  meat  offerings
(chs.  ii.  3,  10 ;  vi.  17),  of  the  sin  offerings
(ch.  vi.  29),  of  the  trespass  offerings  (ch.
vii.  1),  of  the  shewbread  (ch.  xxiv.  9),  which
were  most  holy,  and  of  the  heave  offerings,
wave  offerings,  firstfruit  offerings,  firstlings,
and  things  devoted  (Numb.  xi.  11 — 19),
which  were  holy.  "They  were  also  ap-
parently employed  in  the  less  formal  and
conspicuous  duties  of  the  priests,  such  as
examining  lepers,  and  any  other  funotinns
which  did  not  bring  them  nigh  unto  the
altar.  But  they  were  not  to  profane  God's
sanctuaries,  by  which  is  meant  the  holy  of
holies,  the  holy  place,  and  the  court  in
which  the  altar  stood.  To  none  of  these  is
the  blemished  priest  to  be  admitted  for  the
purpose  of  officiating,  though  he  might  enter
the  court  and  probably  the  holy  place  for
other  purposes,  and  might  eat  the  offering!
of  the  priests  in  the  axsoustomed  place.


ijH.  XXL  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  «23


HOMILETICS.

Vers,  7— 9.^TOe  marriage  of  the  dergy,  according  to  the  discipline  of  the  reformed
Churches,  is  one  of  the  points  on  which  the  latter  bear  a  marked  superiority  to  the
Latin  Church,  which  forbids  its  bishops  and  priests  to  marry ;  and  to  the  Greek  Church,
which  expects  its  priests  to  be  married  before  ordination,  forbids  them  to  marry  a
■econd  time,  and  requires  celibacy  in  its  bishops.

I.  It  is  more  scriptural.  In  the  Old  Testament,  the  priests  had  the  liberty  of
marriage ;  in  the  New  Testament,  the  bishops  or  presbyters  had  the  liberty  of  marriage,
and  Timothy  and  Titus  are  instructed  by  St.  Paul  to  select  married  men  for  the  clerical
office  (1  Tim.  iii.  2,  4;  Titus  i.  6).

II.  It  is  more  primitive.  The  misinterpretation  of  St.  Paul's  words,  "  the  husband.
of  one  wife  "  (which,  rightly  interpreted,  mean  "  a  man  faithful  to  one  woman  "),  led
in  early  time  to  the  Greek  discipline ;  but  the  Latin  practice,  condemned  by  the  Greeks
in  the  Council  in  TruUo,  was  not  enforced  upon  the  whole  of  the  Western  Church  until
the  eleventh  century,  nor  is  it  universal  in  it  now.

III.  It  is  more  human.  The  attempt  to  crush  instead  of  regulate  God-given  in-
stincts, whether  by  philosophical  sects  or  religious  bodies,  has  always  led  to  unspeakable
evils.  In  the  present  case  it  has  led  to  (1)  immorality,  as  testified  by  the  history  of
every  country  in  which  the  practice  has  existed;  (2)  inhumanity,  as  exliibited  in  the
Inquisition  and  at  the  stake,  such  as  a  celibate  priesthood  could  alone  have  been  guilty
of;  (3)  disloyalty,  which  is  naturally  felt  by  those  who,  having  their  natural  ties  to
their  country  severed, -become  the  spiritual  police  of  a  foreign  power.

IV.  Duties  connected  with  it.  1.  For  each  individual  clergyman — to  determine
whether  marriage  will  or  will  not  "  serve  better  to  godliness "  (Art.  XXXII.).  2.  To
select  a  wife  who  will  be  "  a  help  meet  for  him  "  (Gen.  ii.  20).  3.  To  be  "  a  man  of
one  woman"  (1  Tim.  iii.  2;  Titus  i.  6),  that  is,  faithful  to  his  wife.  4.  To  "rule  well
his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection  with  all  gravity*'  (1  Tim.  iii.  4);
"having  faithful  children  not  accused  of  riot  or  unruly"  (Titus  i.  6).  5.  "To  be
diligent  to  form  and  fashion  himself  and  his  family  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,
and  to  make  both  himself  and  it,  as  much  as  in  him  lieth,  wholesome  examples  and
patterns  to  the  flock  of  Christ "  (Ordering  of  Priests).  6.  For  the  wife  and  family — to
follow  his  godly  monitions,  and  to  abstain  from  amusements  of  doubtful  character  or
tendency.

V.  Minor  advantages  attached  to  it.  It  gives  occasion  for  the  growth  in  the
olergy  of  those  graces  of  character  which  come  from  the  cultivation  and  exercise  of  the
affections — love,  cheerfulness,  self-restraint  for  the  sake  of  others,  hopes  and  fears  for
others — all  of  which  are  a  prevention  of  selfishness.  It  gives  a  willing  and  unpaid  body
of  assistants  in  ministerial  work  which,  though  not  purely  spiritual,  has  yet  to  be  done
by  the  clergy.  It  forms  a  natural  link  between  the  clergyman  and  his  parishioners.  It
ensures  the  education  of  a  considerable  class  throughout  the  country  in  the  principles
of  religion.  It  spreads  the  practices  of  a  religious  household  to  households  beyond  the
clergyman's  home,  by  the  natural  effects  of  intermarriage  and  friendly  intercourse.  It
gives  a  safe  home  to  many  girls  seeking  domestic  service.  It  dissipates  the  false  idea
that  the  state  of  celibacy  is  a  purer  and  more  chaste  condition  than  that  of  matrimony.
It  gives  an  opportunity  of  learning  by  experience  the  working  of  young  people's
tninds  and  hearts,  and  women's  feelings,  which  is  not,  as  a  rule,  to  be  otherwise  safely
attained  by  the  clergy.


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS,

Priestly  qwaliflcations.  Ch.  xxi. ;  of.  Heh.  vii.  26 — 28 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  1 — 12.  Prom  the
moralities  of  the  common  people  we  have  now  to  pass  to  the  morality  of  the  priestly
class.  As  special  officers,  they  require  special  qualifications.  Not  that  there  are  to  be
two  moralities  in  the  Church  of  God.  This  idea  is  most  baneful.  Bather  do  th«
Divine  iregulationi  contemplate  the  rise  of  the  whole  people  eventually  into  An  ideftl,


324  THE  BOOK  OF  LETITICUS.  [ch.  xxi.  1— 24

which  both  classes  are  only  distantly  striving  after.  The  priests,  by  conforming  ta
certain  regulations,  were  really  showing  to  the  people  what  all  should  eventually  be  a»
the  people  of  God.  Keeping  this  in  view,  we  may  profitably  notice  three  requisite!
of  the  priesthood.

I.  Physical  perfection.  God  ordained  that  he  should  be  served  only  by  men  phy-
sically perfect.  A  physical  blemish  disqualified  a  man  from  office,  though  not  from
support.  This  was  surely  to  show  that  it  is  the  perfect  whom  Grod  purposes  to  gathei
around  him.  It  is  not  descent  nor  connection,  but  personal  perfection,  which  qualifies,
for  Divine  service.

Now,  in  this  present  life,  the  ideal  was  only  once  realized,  viz.  in  the  person  of  the
Great  High  Priest,  Jesus  Christ.  He  was  physically  and  he  was  spiritually  perfect.
He  wds  "  holy,  haiinless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  In  him,  therefore,  God
secured  a  perfect  servant.

And  although  God's  servants  do  not  as  yet  realize  this  idea  of  personal  perfection,
they  are  on  the  way  to  realize  it.  This  constitutes  the  kernel  of  our  Christian  hope.
The  will  of  God  is  our  sanctification ;  that  is,  our  perfect  adaptation  in  body,  soul,  and
spirit  for  his  service.  Through  the  grace  of  God  we  are  "  going  on  to  perfection,"  and
a  time  is  coming  when  we  shall  be  presented  "  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such
thing  "  before  God.  Hence  we  take  this  physical  perfection  required  of  the  priests  as.
a  promise  of  perfection  through  grace  in  God's  own  time,  that  we  may  all  serve  him
as  priests  in  the  sanctuary  on  high.

II.  Domestic  pubitt.  The  Jewish  priesthood  were  educated  in  the  family  for  their
work  in  the  Church  of  God.  Celibacy  and  i.solation  were  not  deemed  conducive  to
sanctity  of  service.  The  priest  was  to  be  the  head  of  a  household,  particular  in
selecting  a  pure  and  suitable  wife,  and  ruling  his  household  well.  It  may  bo  safely
asserted  that  it  is  only  in  such  circumstances  that  a  full  experience  of  humau  nature
and  society  can  ordinarily  be  secured.  The  family  is  the  Divine  unit,  the  trainin"-
school  for  the  larger  society,  the  Church.  Unless  the  priests,  therefore,  had  a  proper
position  at  home,  and  governed  properly  their  own  households,  they  were  not  likely  to
rule  well  in  the  Church  of  God.  Eli's  case  is  surely  one  in  point.  A  slack  hand
at  home,  he  showed  similar  slackness  in  his  public  administration,  atid  the  interests  ol
religion  suffered.

And  just  as  in  the  former  case  physical  perfection  betokened  the  personal  perfectioit
of  the  future  life  which  the  Lord's  servants  are  to  secure,  so  the  domestic  purity  of  the
priesthood  betokens  the  perfect  society  into  which  the  Lord's  people  are  to  come.  We
see  a  similar  adumbration  of  this  in  the  New  Testament  direction  about  bishops  and
deacons  being  the  husbands  of  proper  wives  and  ruling  their  households  well.  The
^'.ovemment  in  families  is  the  preparation  for  the  government  in  the  Church  of  Gtod.
The  reason  is  that  the  Church  is  the  larger  family.  And  so  is  the  completed  Church
above  to  be  a  perfect  family.  We  are  on  the  way  to  a  family  circle  and  a  family  liie
of  which  the  home  circle  on  earth  is  the  shadow.  God  will  give  his  people  the  oppor-
tunity of  serving  him  amid  perfect  social  conditions.

It  is  in  following  up  this  thought  that  the  Church  collectively  is  likened  to  a  pure-
and  perfect  bride — the  Lamb's  wife.  It  is  the  same  thought  which  likens  heaven  t»
an  everlasting  home.  And,  indeed,  society,  as  thus  constituted  and  secured,  is  but  the
outcome  of  that  Divine  nature  which,  as  a  Trinity  in  unity,  secured  for  itself  perfect
society  from  everlasting,  and  creates  the  same  in  the  glorious  purposes  of  grace.'

III.  Public  spibit.  We  mention  this  as  a  third  characteristic  of  the  priesthood.
This  was  illustrated  in  perfection  by  the  high  priest,  who  was  to  allow  no  private
sorrow  to  interfere  with  his  public  service.  The  other  priests  were  allowed  more  liberty
in  this  regard,  although  theirs  also  had  very  definite  limits ;  but  the  one  great  princi]>ie
reinforced  by  these  regulations  was  public  spirit.  The  priest  was  to  feel  that,  as  a  public
officer,  a  representative  man,  it  was  his  duty  to  sacrifice  the  personal  and  private  to  the
common  weal.

Now,  it  is  instructive  to  observe  that  it  was  this  principle  which  Jesus  carried  out
all  through.  His  life  and  death  were  the  sacrifice  of  the  pri  rate  and  the  personal  to
the  public  need.     The  same  spirit  is  imparted  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  is  more  or  les»

'  Cf.  Pressens^s  admirable  volume, '  La  Famille  Ohrdtienne,'  jpawim.


•H.  XXI.  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  828

fitithfuUy  carried  out  by  the  Lord's  people.  Moreover,  we  are  on  the  way  to  its  perfect
illustration  in  the  felicities  of  the  heavenly  world.  There  none  shall  be  for  self  or  for
*  party,  but  all  for  the  common  weal.  Lord  Macaulay  represents  ancient  Borne  aa  the
•mbodiment  of  public  spirit.

"Then  none  wag  for  a  party;

Then  all  were  for  the  State ;
Then  the  great  man  helped  the  poor,

And  the  poor  man  loved  the  great;
Then  lands  were  fairly  portioned ;

Then  spoils  were  fairly  sold ;
The  Bomans  were  like  brothen

In  the  hrave  days  of  old,"

However  faithfully  this  reflects  the  condition  of  things  in  the  golden  age  of  Bome,
cne  thing  is  certain,  that  the  public  spirit  it  indicates  sliall  have  its  perfect  embodiment
in  the  society  above.  Public  life,  divested  of  all  suspicion  of  selfishness,  will  cha-
racterize God's  redeemed  ones.  All  personal  and  private  interests  shall  then  merge
themselves  in  the  common  weal,  and  as  his  servants  serve  God,  they  shall  see  his  face
and  live  out  his  public  spirit. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 24. — Law  of  holiness  for  the  priests.  In  all  circumstances  and  relations  of
life  the  priests  must  be  an  example  of  purity.  The  higher  the  office,  the  more  conspicuous
the  example,  and  therefore  the  more  solemn  the  duty  of  preserving  both  body  and  soul
fiom  defilement.

I.  The  blamblessness  of  the  MmisTHT  a  neoessitt  of  the  Chukch's  life.
1.  Spiritual  leaders  a  natural  requirement  and  a  Divine  appointment.  We  want
teachers  both  in  word  and  act.  The  priesthood  of  the  old  dispensation  was  abolished,
Irat  in  the  new  there  are  those  who,  both  by  their  superior  knowledge  and  piety  and  by
tbeir  consecration  of  life  to  the  sanctuary,  become  the  responsible  leaders  of  the  Church.
%  An  impure  priesthood  the  greatest  calamity  to  the  cause  of  religion.  Like  priest,
fflce  people.  The  corruptions  of  the  Middle  Ages  mainly  traceable  to  the  defilement  of
those  who  should  have  been  first  and  foremost  in  faithfulness  to  truth  and  duty.  The
hindrance  to  the  spread  of  Christianity  now  is  largely  the  indifference  axA  blindness
and  worldliness  of  those  who  serve  the  sanctuary.  The  life  of  the  public  representative
«f  religion  should  be  above  reproach  in  all  things.

II.  God's  house  and  cause  should  have  the  choicest  and  best  of  human  oapaoitt
AMD  enebqy  devoted  TO  IT.  1.  That  the  Church  itself  may  be  edified  and  become  a
praise  unto  God.  Our  religion  demands  and  satisfies  our  highest  efforts.  The  truth
of  God's  Word  is  inexhaustible  food  for  the  mind  and  delight  to  the  heart.  Endless
«cope  for  the  development  of  human  powers  ia  the  service  of  God.  Worship  should  be
spotlessly  pure,  a  glorifying  of  humanity  in  the  light  of  Divine  favour.  2.  The  world
is  won  to  God,  not  by  hiding  the  graces  of  God's  people,  but  by  making  the  light  to
■hine  before  men.  No  limit  to  the  demand  upon  the  talents  and  energies  of  the  Church.
We  should  urge  those  naturally  gifted  and  superior  to  take  their  proper  places.  Yet
natural  defects  can  be  wonderfully  supplied  by  special  Divine  gifts.  Much  work  has
been  done  by  the  physically  weak,  and  even  by  those  whose  characters  were  faulty. — ^E.

Vers.  1 — 15. — Distinctions  and  degrees  in  obligation.  In  the  kingdom  of  God  there
is,  as  a  rule,  but  one  law  for  all  subjects.  What  applies  to  one  applies  to  another.  The
•ame  principles  of  righteousness  are  obligatory  on  both  sexes,  on  all  classes,  conditions,
nations,  generations  of  men.  This  is  importantly  true ;  but  it  is  a  truth  cubject  to
certain  not  unimportant  qualifications.     Of  this  latter  we  have—

L  Illustbations  in  the  Mosaic  Law.  1.  Respecting  ceremonial  defilement  certain
distinctions  were  drawn.  (1)  The  commonalty  were  bound  to  avoid  all  defilement  (by
touching  the  dead,  etc.),  whenever  it  was  practicable  to  do  so;  but  it  was  anticipated
that  they  would  be  compelled,  sometimes,  to  become  unclean,  and  legal  purifications
w««  accordingly  enjoined.  (2)  But  the  priests  were  to  take  peculiar  care  not  to  incur
this  ceremonial  defilement  (vers.  1 — 4).  Allowance  was  made  for  natural  human  feel-
ing (vers.  2,  3),  but  the  occasions  when  they  might  permit  themselves  to  become


32«  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxi  1— 24

unclean  were  carefully  prescribed.  (3)  And  the  high  priest  was  not  permitted  to  incnz
defilement  by  "  going  in  to  any  dead  body  "  under  any  circumstances  whatever,  not
even  "  for  his  father,  or  for  his  mother  "  (ver.  11).  2.  So,  respecting  marriage  alliances :
(1)  the  whole  people  were  under  certain  severe  prohibitions  (Deut.  vit.  3, 4) ;  but  (2)  the
priests  were  more  circumscribed  (ver.  7) ;  and  (3)  the  high  priest  was  still  more  limited
in  his  choice  (vers.  13,  14).  The  Hebrew  nation  was  holy  unto  the  Lord,  and  waa
required  to  separate  itself  from  the  actions  of  surrounding  peoples  ;  the  priests  were
peculiarly  holy,  and  must,  therefore,  be  especially  careful  to  walk  in  purity ;  the  high
priest  was,  in  position  and  function,  the  holiest  of  all,  and  on  him  it  was  most  particu-
larly incumbent  to  shun  every  possible  defilement,  and  to  do  that  which  was  purest  and
worthiest  in  the  sight  of  God.     We  have  to  consider  what  are —

II.  The  illustkations  of  this  pbikciple  under  the  gospel.  1.  Eespecting  the
avoidance  of  evil,  we  may  saj-  that  (1)  the  members  of  the  Church  of  Christ  are  bound
to  avoid  all  appearance  of  wrong.  They  who  bear  the  Name  of  the  holy  Saviour,
though  humblest  members  of  the  smallest  Church,  are,  as  professed  followers  of  his^
bound  to  walk  as  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ,  in  all  purity  of  heart  and  blameless-
ness  of  life ;  but  (2)  ministers  of  his  Church,  and  their  sons  and  daughters  (vers.  9, 15),
are  especially  bound  to  shun  everything  which  would  bring  discredit  on  the  holy  Name
of  the  Divine  Eedeemer  (see  1  Tim.  iii.  2 — 7 ;  Titus  i.  6 — 9).  2.  And  respecting  the
contraction  of  intimate  alliances  (especially  the  life-long  alliance,  marriage),  we  may
contend  that  (1)  all  who  are  the  avowed  followers  of  Christ  are  bound  to  be  circumspect
in  this  most  important  matter  (see  1  Cor.  vii.  39 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  14).  The  subject  of  form-
ing a  life-long  alliance,  by  which  such  serious  spiritual  consequences  must  inevitably
follow  to  two  human  souls,  aud  such  great  and  immeasurable  results  may  follow,  affect-
ing numbers  of  Imman  hearts  and  lives,  and  reaching  to  the  most  distant  time,  is  not  to
be  dismissed  to  the  region  of  harmless  but  helpless  humour,  nor  is  it  to  be  left  to  the
direction  of  careless  fancy  or  of  worldly  policy ;  it  is  a  matter  for  the  exercise  of  the
fullest,  profoundest,  heavenliest  wisdom  which  man  and  woman  can  command.  (2)  01
those  who  minister  in  the  t;hurch  of  Christ,  it  is  yet  more  urgently  demanded  that  in
the  intimacies  they  form  aud  the  life-long  friendships  they  contract,  they  shall  have
regard  not  to  a  transient  whim,  nor  to  worldly  advantage,  but,  first  and  foremost,  to  tbs
glory  of  Christ  and  the  well-being  of  those  whom  they  live  to  serve. — 0.

Vers.  16 — 24. — Unhlemislied  service.    We  gain  three  truths  from  these  verses.

I.  The  pbimabv  truth,  intended  for  the  Hebp.ew  nation.  The  special  instructioB
contained  in  this  passage  is  that  the  altar  of  God  was  to  be  honoured  in  every  possible
way ;  therefore  to  be  preserved  from  everything  that  would  bring  it  into  disregard  ;
and  therefore  to  be  unapprOached  by  any  priest  who  had  a  bodily  blemish.  It  was  im-
possible for  the  people  to  dissociate  the  altar  itself  from  those  who  ministered  thereat  j
if,  therefore,  any  physical  disfigurement  had  been  allowed,  and  those  who  were  uncomely
or  misshapen  haa  been  permitted  to  officiate,  the  sacred  ordinances  of  God  would  have
suffered,  in  some  degree,  from  the  association  in  thought  of  the  man  with  the  thing.
The  priest  with  a  blemish  might  not  "  come  nigh  unto  the  altar,  .  .  .  that  he  profane
not  my  sanctuaries  "  (ver.  23).  We  may  learn,  in  passing,  that  it  is  almost  impossible
to  overestimate  the  influence  for  good  or  ill  which  is  unconsciously  exerted  by  those
who  minister,  in  any  function,  in  the  Church  of  Christ  on  the  popular  estimate  of  their
office.

II.  The  secondary  TBirrH,  applicable  to  us  all.  In  a  typical  system  it  i*
necessary  that  the  body  should  frequently  represent  the  soul,  the  organs  of  the  one
picturing  the  faculties  of  the  other.  The  requirement  of  a  perfect  bodily  frame  o»
the  part  of  those  who  "  approached  to  offer  the  bread  of  their  God "  (ver.  17),
intimated  to  them,  and  now  indicates  to  us,  the  essential  and  eternal  truth  that
the  best  it  to  he  brought  to  the  service  of  Ood :  not  that  with  which  we  can  most  easily
part,  but  the  very  best  that  we  can  bring.  1.  Not  the  unattractive  service  ("  flat
nose,"  "  scabbed,"  etc.),  but  that  which  is  as  beautiful  and  inviting  in  its  form  as  wa
can  make  it.  2.  Not  unacquaintance  with  our  subject  ("a  blind  man"),  but  the
fullest  possible  acquisition  and  understanding.  3.  Not  an  example  which  is  defective^
a  walking  which  is  irregular  (a  "  lame  man,"  "  crookbackt "),  but  an  upright,  honour-
able demeanour,  "  walking  in  the  commandments   of  the   Lord  blameless."    4.  Not


OH.  XXL  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITIOUSi  327

•  feeble  and  faltering  delivery  ("  brokenlianded "),  but  a  facile,  skilful  "  handling  of
the  Word  of  God."  We  may  note,  before  we  pass,  that  the  God  whom  we  serve  is
expectant,  but  is  not  inconsiderate.  He  who  refuses  to  allow  a  priest  with  any  blemish
"  to  approach  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  God,"  expressly  desired  that  such  priest
should  "  eat  the  bread  of  his  God,  both  of  the  most  holy,  and  of  the  holy  "  (ver.  22) ;  ha
might  not  serve,  but  he  should  not  suffer,  on  account  of  a  bodily  misfortune.  God
requires  of  us  that,  in  approaching  him,  we  should  bring  not  our  exhaustion  but  our
freshness,  not  our  hurried  but  our  patient  preparation,  not  our  remnants  but  our
substance,  not  our  worthless  belongings  but  our  worthiest  self;  at  the  same  time,
he  makes  every  allowance  for  our  weakness,  our  infirmity,  our  human  feebleness
and  frailty : '"  he  knoweth  our  frame ;  he  remembereth  that  we  are  dust."

III.  A  FUBTHEE  TRUTH,  BELATDia  TO  THE  FUTURE  LIFE.  We  dare  not  hope  to
render  to  God  any  absolutely  unblemished  service  here.  "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves"  (1  John  i.  8).  Here  our  holiest  services  are  marred  by
spiritual  imperfection.  It  should  be  our  aim,  our  prayer,  our  endeavour,  to  make
our  worship,  our  work,  and  our  life  as  little  blemished  as  may  be ;  to  make  all  our
service  as  elevated  in  spirit  and  motive  as  may  be ;  and  doing  this,  we  may  look
confidently  and  joyously  onward  to  the  time  when  "  his  servants  shall  serve  him  "
in  the  very  fulness  of  their  strength  and  joy,  and  when  their  service  shall  be  not
only  undimmed  by  any  gathering  tear,  but  unstained  with  any  rising  thought
of  sin. — C.

Vers.  1 — 24. — 2%e  perfection  of  the  priesthood.  The  priests,  when  officiating,  and
eminently  so  the  high  priest,  were  types  of  Christ.  It  was,  therefore,  needful  that  they
should  be  holy  and  without  blemish.  They  were  also  types  of  Christians,  in  which
capacity  also  they  must  be  holy,  for  true  Christians  are  so,  though  not  always  without
Wemish.    In  any  case,  then —

I.  The  priests  must  be  holt.  1.  They  must  le  holy,  as  types  of  Christ.  (1)  They
"offered  the  bread  of  their  God."  So  the  "offerings  made  by  fire"  are  called  (ver.  6).
The  fire  of  the  altar  of  Calvary  is  the  Godhead  in  which  the  body  of  Christ  became  a
sacrifice  upon  which  the  justice  and  mercy  of  God  can  feast.  Christ,  as  our  Priest,  thus
offers  himself  unto  God.  (2)  They  are  "  crowned  "  with  the  "  anointing  oil  of  their
God  "  (vers.  10, 12).  The  anointing  represented  the  lustre  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  grace.
When  Jesus  was  "  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness "  on  the  holy  mount,  he  was
"  crowned  with  glory  and  honour,"  and  that  too  "  for  the  suffering  of  death  "  (comp.
Heb.  ii.  9 ;  2  Pet.  i.  17).  Thus  was  he  "  consecrated  to  put  on  the  garments  "  of  his
resurrection,  to  enter  the  holy  places  for  us  (ver.  10).  2.  They  must  not  defile  them-
selves by  mourning  for  the  dead.  (1)  If  not  officiating,  they  mi.nht  defile  themselves
for  kindred  of  the  first  degree.,  For  a  mother,  father,  son,  daughter,  brother,  and  for
a  sister  that  is  a  virgin.  Biit  not  for  a  sister  that  is  married.  She  is  "  one  flesh  "  with
her  husband,  incorporated  in  another  family.    (2)  For  his  wife  he  shall  not  mourn

aie  ver.  4,  margin;  also  Ezek.  xxiv.  16 — 18).  The  wife  of  the  true  Priest  is  his
urch ;  and  she  can  never  die ;  the  gates  of  Hades  cannot  prevail  against  her  (Matt.
xvi.  18).  Even  her  members  do  not  suffer  through  death ;  it  is  but  the  gate  of  their
promotion  (John  xi.  25,  26).  (3)  He  must  not  make  marks  of  distraction — baldness,
quarters  in  the  beard,  cuttings  in  the  flesh  (ver.  5).  What  has  the  type  of  Christ  to
do  with  the  abominations  of  the  heathen?  In  profaning  themselves  they  profaned
their  God  (see  ver.  6 ;  and  comp.  John  i.  14).  (4)  The  priest  officiating  must  not
mourn ;  nor  shall  he  leave  the  sanctuary  to  defile  it.  Jehovah  dwells  in  the  sanctuary
of  Christ's  Body.  The  priesthood  can  never  leave  that  sanctuary  (ver.  12 ;  Heb.  vii.
23 — 28).  3.  They  must  be  holy  in  their  marriage.  (1)  No  priest  must  marry  a  whore,
or  one  deflowered  or  divorced  (ver.  7).  The  Babylonish  harlot,  then,  however  impudent
*nd  specious  her  pretensions,  cannot  be  the  Bride  of  Christ,  Those  who  would  be
joined  to  Christ  must  not  seek  membership  with  her  (Rev.  xvii.  1 — 5 ;  xviii.  4).  (2)
The  bride  of  the  high  priest  must  be  a  virgin  of  his  own  people  (vers.  13, 14).  The
descriptions  of  the  true  Church  of  Christ  are  widely  different  from  those  of  the  woman
•f  the  seven-hilled  city  (see  2  Cor.  xi.  2 ;  Eph.  v.  27 ;  Rev.  xii.  and  xxi.).  (3)  His
children  must  be  holy  (ver.  14).  They  are  the  children  of  the  truth ;  the  seed  of
Abraham's  faith.    If  his  daughter  play  the  whore,  she  defiles  him ;  and  to  purify  him<


328


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  MU.  1—33.


self  he  must  give  her  up  to  be  burnt  with  fire  (ver.  9;  Gen.  xxxviii.  24).  Such,
accordingly,  is  to  be  the  fate  of  the  scarlet  lady  (Rev.  xvii.  16,  17 ;  zviii.  9,  10 ;
xii.  2,  3).

11.  The  petests  must  be  without  blemish.  1.  Those  who  typified  Christ  must
he  so  (1)  We  have  an  enumeration  of  blemishes,  any  of  which  would  disqualify  for
that  iacred  office  (vers.  18 — 20).  No  doubt  Jesus  was  physically,  as  well  as  raeutally
and  spiritually,  a  perfect  human  being.  Those  expressions  in  Isaiah  (lii.  14;  liii.  2)
obviously  had  reference  to  his  sufferings  and  humiliations.  (2)  He  that  had  a  blemish
among  the  sons  of  Aaron  "  must  not  come  nigh  to  offer  the  bread  of  his  God."  Had
not  Christ  been  perfectly  free  from  sin,  he  could  not  have  atoned  for  us  (ver.  17 ;  1  Pet.
i.  19).  (3)  "  He  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  vail "  (ver.  23).  He  shall  not  represent  him
that  is  the  Way  to  heaven,  who  is  qualified  to  sanctify  the  people  with  his  own  blood
(Heb.  viL  26 — 28;  xiii.  10).  2.  Blemished  priests  might  represent  Christians.  (1)
"The  bread  of  their  God  they  may  eat"  (ver.  22).  Men  that  have  infirmities  may
live  on  Christ;  but  he  that  represents  that  Bread  must  be  without  blemish.  (2)
Blemished  ones  might  eat  of  the  holy  things,  but  unclean  ones  must  not.  Between
infirmities  and  sins  there  is  a  wide  difference.  Infirmities  do  not  exclude  men  from
fellowship  with  God,  but  sins  do  (Isa.  lix.  1,  2;  Bom.  viii.  35 — 39).  Those  who
eat  the  bread  of  the  Eucharist  should  be  holy  in  life,  else  they  profane  the  Name
they  profess  to  revere.  (3)  Too  frequently  have  blemished  priests  represented  gospel
ministers.  The  New  Testament  gives  laws  to  ministers  and  their  wives ;  and  those
who  instruct  others  should  do  so  by  example  as  well  as  precept  (1  Tim.  iii.  11 ;  iv.  12).
They  should  not  be  "  blind,"  viz.  to  the  meaning  of  God's  Word.  They  should  not  be
"lame"  in  hand  or  foot,  but  able  to  show  an  example  in  working  and  walking.
They  must  have  nothing  superfluous  nor  deficient.  "  They  must  not  be  wise  above,"
or  wise  without,  "  that  which  is  written."  The  priest  who  was  "  holy  to  his  God  "  was,
therefore,  to  be  holy  to  his  people  (vers.  6 — 8) ;  and  so  must  the  gospel  minister  be
esteemed  for  his  work's  sake  (1  Tfaess.  v.  13).— J.  A.  M.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXII.


This  chapter,  which  is  a  continuation  of
«h.  xxi,  (1)  commands  that  the  ceremo-
nially defiled  priest  shall  not  officiate  or
partake  of  the  sacrificial  offerings;  (2)  de-
clares who  may  and  who  may  not  partake
of  the  priests'  portions  of  the  sacrifices;
(8)  orders  that  every  sacrificial  victim  be
unblemished.

Vers.  1 — 9. — In  the  previous  chapter,  the
priests  have  been  commanded  to  avoid  oo-
oasiona  of  ceremonial  defilement,  but  there
are  times  in  which  they  must  be  unclean.
At  these  times  they  are  here  instructed
that  they  must  abstain  from  their  priestly
functions,  and  not  even  eat  of  the  priest:)'
portions  until  they  have  been  cleansed.
The  commaTiil  to  Aaron  and  to  his  sons,  that
they  separate  themselves  from  the  holy
things  of  the  children  of  Israel,  in  ver.  2,
must  be  read  in  the  light  of  the  following
venes,  and  understood  to  mean  that  they
are  to  separate  themselves  from  the  holy  things
when  they  are  unclean.  The  different  forms
of  uncleanness  which  are  to  produce  this
effect  are  enumerated  in  vers.  4 — 6.  In
most  oases  the  nncleanneaa  would  not  last


beyond  sunset  on  the  day  on  which  it  was
incurred,  but  occasionally,  as  when  a  priest
became  a  leper,  a  permanent  disqualification
would  be  caused,  or  one  that  lasted  for  a
considerable  length  of  time.  The  law
with  respect  to  abstaining  from  holy  things
while  unclean  is  to  be  of  permanent  obliga-
tion. Whoever  disobeys  it  is  to  be  out  oft
from  Ood's  presence;  that  is,  he  is  to  be
excluded  from  the  sanctuary  by  being  de-
prived of  his  priestly  ofBce.  Ver.  8  repeats
the  prohibition  of  eating  flesh  containing
blood.

Vers.  10 — 13. — The  previous  paragraph
having  forbidden  the  priests  to  eat  of  the
holy  things  while  in  a  state  of  ceremonial
uncleanness,  naturally  leads  to  the  question,
Who  has  the  right  of  eating  them  ?  The
answer  is,  the  priest's  family.  The  members
of  the  priest's  family  here  specified  are  those
only  about  whom  any  question  might  have
arisen,  namely,  the  slaves,  who,  as  being
incorporated  into  the  priest's  household,  have
a  right  of  eating  of  the  priestly  food  not
enjoyed  by  lodgers  in  his  house  or  by  ser-
vants hired  with  his  money;  and  married
daughters  who  have  returned  to  their  father's
roof  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  their
husband,  or  of  heing  divorced,  without  an}


OH.  XXII.  1—33.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVlTICUa


a^s


children  of  their  own.  Under  these  cir-
cumstances, it  ia  ruled  that  they  become  once
more  a  part  of  the  priest's  family,  and  able
to  exercise  the  privileges  of  that  position^
The  priest's  wife  and  bons  and  unmarried
daughters  are  not  here  mentioned,  as  no
question  arose  about  them.

Ver.  11. — As  the  sacrificial  meals  made  a
part  of  the  stipends  of  the  priestly  body,
any  one  who  inadvertently  took  a  share  in
them  by  eating  of  the  holy  thing  unwittingly,
when  he  had  no  right  to  do  so,  bad  to  refund
the  Tidne  of  the  meat,  with  one  fifth,  that  is,
twenty  per  cent.,  added  to  it.  He  thus  ac-
knowledged that  he  had  "committed  a
trespass  in  the  holy  things  of  the  Lord,"  the
case  falling  under  the  rule  given  in  oh.  v.
15, 16,  "  And  he  shall  make  amends  for  the
harm  that  he  hath  done  in  the  holy  thing,
and  shall  add  the  fifth  part  thereto,  and
give  it  unto  the  priest."  In  the  fifth  chapter
a  trespass  offering  of  a  ram  is  also  ordered,
which,  though  not  specified,  is  probably
understood  here  also.

Vers.  15, 16. — These  verses  present  some
difficulties  of  construction.  The  rendering
of  the  Authorized  Version  is  as  follows:
And  they  shall  not  profane  the  holy  things
of  the  children  of  Israel,  which  they  offer
unto  the  Lord;  or  suffer  them  to  bear  the
iniquity  of  trespass,  when  they  eat  their  holy
things :  for  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  them.  If
this  rendering  is  accepted,  it  would  mean
that  the  priests  are  not  to  profane  the  holy
things  by  any  irregularity  on  their  part  as
to  the  eating  of  them,  nor  to  suffer  laymen
to  incur  the  guilt  of  a  trespass  by  eating
them.  The  marginal  rendering,  which  is  to
be  preferred,  gives  the  passage  as  follows:
And  they  thtM  not  profane  the  holy  things
of  the  children  of  Israel,  which  they  offer  unto
the  Lord  ;  or  lade  themselves  with  the  iniquity
of  trespass  in  their  eating.  According  to
this  translation,  the  meaning  would  be  that
laymen  (who  had  been  spoken  of  in  the
previous  verse)  should  not  profane  the  holy
things,  or  become  guilty  of  a  trespass  (as
defined  in  ver.  15)  by  eating  them.  Tech-
nically and  literally,  David  was  guilty  of
this  trespass  in  an  aggravated  form,  when
he  and  his  followers  ate  the  shewbread  at
Kob  (1  Sam.  xxi.  6),  for  the  shewbread  was
not  only  holy,  but  most  holy.  But  his  act  is
excused  by  our  Lord,  on  the  plea  of  necessity
(Matt.  xii.  3,  4),  even  though  it  was  done  on
the  sabbath  day  (1  Sam.  xxi.  5,  margin).

Vers.  17 — 25.— Just  as  the  priests  who
offer  to  the  Lord  are  to  be  ceremonially  and
morally  holy,  so  the  animals  offered  to  him
are  to  be  physically  perfect,  in  order  (1)  to  be
types  of  a  future  perfect  Victim,  (2)  to  sym-
bolize the  "perfect  heart  "which  God.  requires
to  be  given  to  him,  and  (3)  to  teach  the  duty
of  offering  to  him  of  our  best.    V/hatsoever


hath  a  blemish,  that  shall  ye  not  offer.  The
list  of  blemishes  and  malformations  which
exclude  from  the  altar  is  given;  they  are
such  as  deform  the  animal,  and  make  it  less
valuable:  blind,  or  broken,  or  maimed,  or
having  a  wen,  or  scurvy,  or  scabbed,  ye  shall
not  offer  these  unto  the  Lord,  nor  any  animal
that  is  bruised,  or  crushed,  or  broken,  or  cut,
that  is,  castrated  in  any  manner.  The  clause
following  the  mention  of  castration — neither
shall  ye  make  any  offering  thereof  in  your
land — literally  translated,  neither  shall  ye
malce  in  your  land,  probably  forbids  castra-
tion altogether,  not  merely  the  offering  of
castrated  animals  in  sacrifice.  The  expres-
sion, Ye  shall  offer  at  your  own  will,  should
be  understood,  as  before, /or  ^ottr  acceptanee
(see  note  on  ch.  ii.  1).  Only  one  exception
is  made  as  to  blemished  offerings ;  an  animal
that  hath  any  thing  superflaous  or  lacking  in
his  parts  may  be  offered  for  a  freewill  offer-
ing, but  not  for  a  tow  (for  the  distinction  of
these  oiSerings,  see  note  on  ch.  vii.  16).
These  rules  as  to  unblemished  victims  are
to  apply  to  the  offerings  of  strangers  as  well
as  of  Israelites.

Vers.  26,  27. — Extreme  youth  is  to  be
regarded  as  a  blemish  in  an  animal  in  the
same  way  as  other  defects.  During  the
young  creature's  first  week  of  existence  it  IM
not  considered  as  having  arrived  at  the  per-
fection of  its  individual  and  separate  life,
and  therefore  only  from  the  eighth  day  and
thenceforth  it  shall  be  accepted  for  an  offer-
ing made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord.  Up  to  what
age  an  animal  migfht  be  offered  is  not  stated.
Gideon  is  narrtited  as  offering  a  bullock  of
seven  years  old  (Juilg.  vi.^  25).

Ver.  28. — A  lesson  of  charity  is  added.  A
young  animal  and  its  mother  are  not  lo  be
killed  (though  reference  is  specially  made
to  sacrifice,  the  general  word,  not  the  sacri-
ficial term,  for  slaying  is  used)  on  the  same
day,  just  as  the  kid  is  not  to  be  seethed  in
iU  mother's  milk  (Exod.  xxlli.  19 ;  Dent,
xiv.  21),  nor  the  mother  bird  be  taken  from
the  nest  with  the  young  (Deut.  xxii.  6).
Thus  we  see  that  the  feelings  of  the  human
heart  are  not  to  be  rudely  shocked  by  an
act  of  apparent  cruelty,  even  when  no  harm
is  thereby  done  to  the  object  of  that  act.
Mercy  is  to  be  taught  by  forbidding  anything
which  may  blunt  the  sentiment  of  mercy  in
the  human  heart.

Vers.  29,  30. — Two  forms  of  peace  offer-
ings, the  vowed  and  the  voluntary  offerings,
having  been  mentioned  in  vei.  21,  the  law
as  to  the  third  form,  thanksgiving  offerings,
is  repeated  from  ch.  vii.  15  (where  pee  note).

Vers.  31—33. — These  verses  form  the  con-
clusion of  the  Section  and  of  the  Part,  en-
joining obedience  to  God's  commandments,
reverence  for  his  Name,  and  oonteqnent
holiness.


SaO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxii.  1- 33.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  17 — 26. — The  perfection,  demanded  in  the  sacrificial  victims  contains  a  typical,
a  gymbolical,  and  a  moral  lesson.

I.  They  mdst  be  perfect,  that  they  may  be  types  of  Christ.  The  perfect
Victim  must  not  be  represented  by  anything  imperfect.  There  are  but  few  points  in
which  the  perfection  of  Christ,  both  absolute  and  in  relation  to  the  work  which  as  the
appointed  Victim, he  was  to  fulfil,  could  be  foreshadowed  by  the  animals  offered  in
sacrifice,  but  this  was  one — that  they  should  be  without  blemish  and  perfect  of  their
kind.  "The  blood  of  Christ  who  through  the  Eternal  Spirit  offered  himself  without
spot  to  God,"  is  the  antitype,  we  are  taught  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  to  "  the
blood  of  bulls,  and  of  goats,  and  the  ashes  of  an  heifer,  sprinkling  the  unci  tan,"  which
"  sanctifieth  to  the  purifying  of  the  flesh  "  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14).  For  "  ye  know,"  says
St.  Peter,  "  that  ye  were  redeemed  .  .  .  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb
without  blemish  and  without  spot "  (1  Pet.  i.  18, 19)  ;  "  who  did  no  sin  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  22) ;
who  "  gave  himselt  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweetsmelling  savour  "
(Eph.  V.  2).  The  physical  freedom  Irom  blemish  on  the  part  of  the  auimal  typifies  the
"  spotlessness  "  of  Christ.

II.  They  must  be  perfect,  that  they  may  symbolize  the  perfect  heart  with
WHICH  ALL  SEKVICE  MUST  BE  DONE  TO  GoD.  They  Symbolized  the  integrity  of  soul
with  which  the  offerer  made  his  offering,  and  the  purity  of  intention  required  of  all
who  present  themselves  or  anything  that  they  do  to  God  and  his  service.  A  gift  to
God  is  unacceptable,  and  not  accepted,  if  there  be  in  it  anything  superfluotis,  viz.  self-
display,  or  ant/thing  lacking,  namely,  the  s]iirit  of  love.  God  chose  those  whom  he
afterwards  called  into  his  Church  to  "be  holy  and  without  blame  (or  blemish)  betore
him  in  love  "  (Eph.  i.  4),  "  that  ye  may  stand  perfect  and  complete  in  all  the  will  ot
God  "  (Col.  iv.  12),  "  that  ye  may  be  perfect  and  entire,  wanting  notliing  "  (Jas.  i.  4).
Imperfection  must  always  mark  man  and  his  work,  seeing  that  "  the  infection  of
nature  doth  remain,  yea  in  them  that  are  regenerated  "  (Art.  IX.) ;  but  the  Christian
must  not  rest  satisfied  with  aiming  at  anything  but  the  highest.  His  purpose,  however
marred,  must  be  to  please  God  perfectly.

III.  They  must  be  perfect,  because  what  we  give  to  God  must  be  costly  to  us.
"  And  the  king  said  unto  Araunah,  Nay ;  but  I  will  surely  buy  it  of  thee  at  a  price :
neither  will  I  offer  burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord  my  God  of  that  which  doth  cost  me
nothing.  So  David  bought  the  threshingfloor  and  the  oxen  for  fifty  shekels  of  silver  "
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  24).  "  And  if  ye  offer  the  blind  for  sacrifice,  is  it  not  evil?  and  if  ye
offer  the  lame  and  sick,  is  it  not  evil  ?  offer  it  now  unto  thy  governor ;  will  he  be
pleased  with  thee,  or  accept  thy  person  ?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (Mai.  i.  8).  "  But
cursed  be  the  deceiver,  which  hath  in  h\s  flock  a  male,  and  voweth,  and  sacrificeth  unto
the  Lord  a  corrupt  thing :  for  I  am  a  great  King,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  my  Name
is  dreadful  amoug  the  heathen  "  (Mai.  i.  14).  The  cost  of  our  gifts  to  God  need  not  be
absolutely  great — the  widow's  two  mites,  which  make  a  fai  thing,  may  be  more  than
all  that  the  rich  cast  into  the  treasury  (Mark  xii.  41 — 44).  Whatever  we  give,  it  must
bo  of  our  best,  the  best  effort  of  our  intellect,  the  best  affections  of  our  hearts.  What-
ever we  are  most  attached  to,  that  we  must  be  prepared  to  give  up,  if  God  demands
the  sacrifice  at  our  hands.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 33. — Eblinest  of  priests  and  sacrifices.  While  much  that  appertained
only  to  a  temporary  dispensation,  still  great  principles  included  in  the  formal
regulations,  as —

I.  Religion  sanctifies,  preserves,  and  perfects  the  whole  humanity  of  man.  1.  It
preserves  the  true  order — God  first,  the  creature  subject  to  the  Creator.  2.  It  utilizes
the  central  power  of  human  nature,  the  moral  and  spiritual.  The  mind  is  the  man,
and  the  mind  is  not  mere  intellect,  but  moral  consciousness  and  aspiration  after  God.


OH.  ixii.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  831

3.  It  puts  the  individual  and  the  social  in  their  true  relation  to  that  which  supports
both — the  positive  and  public  worship  of  God.  The  temple  at  Jerusalem  represented
the  centre  of  the  nation,  Jehovah's  throne.  Humanity  can  be,  will  be,  developed  into
a  true  family  of  nations  only  round  the  house  of  God.  All  non-religious  influences  are
disintegrating  to  the  nation  and  the  world.

II.  The  life  of  man  is  the  sanotification  of  all  otheb  life  on  the  bahth.
The  lower  natures  depend  on  the  higher.  God  has  taught  us  by  his  Law  not  only  to
use  them,  but  to  reverence  them  and  to  hallow  their  instincts  and  the  laws  of  nature
as  exhibited  in  them.  Science  may  discover  secrets,  but  it  will  not  protect  the  weak.
The  reverence  for  that  which  is  below  us  is  even  more  a  yielding  up  of  our  nature  t
the  Spirit  of  God  than  the  mere  bowing  prostrate  before  that  which  is  above  us.  Tije
selfishness  and  tyranny  of  the  stronger  over  the  weaker  can  only  be  cast  out  by
religion.

III.  Ail  law  is  consistent  with  fbee  agency.  "  At  your  own  will."  The  true
service  of  God  is  that  which  the  heart  renders.  We  blend  our  will  with  God's  will  in
the  acceptable  life.  At  your  will,  but  by  the  regulations  of  the  Law.  The  mere
capricious  individualism  of  the  present  day  is  no  true  liberty,  but  becomes  the  most
degrading  bondage.  The  covenant  relation  of  Jehovah  with  his  people  lay  at  the
foundation  of  their  obedience :  "  I  hallow  you,"  therefore  hallow  my  commandments
and  my  Name.  In  that  loving  bond  of  sanctification  all  believers  find  their  strength.
They  are  not  their  own,  they  are  bought  with  a  price.  Paul  rejoiced  to  be  a  "  slave  of
Jesus  Christ."  The  Jews  made  their  Law  unto  death,  not  life,  because  they  departed
from  its  simplicity  and  forgot  its  spirituality,  and  "made  the  Word  of  God  of  none
effect  by  their  traditions,"  forging  their  own  fetters.  The  key-note  of  the  Law  is
redemption.  "  I  am  the  Lord  which  brought  you  out  of  Egypt,"  etc.  The  key-note
of  redemption  is  love.— B.

Priestly  disqualiJicaHont.  Ch.  xxii. ;  cf.  Matt.  ixv.  31 — i6.  We  saw  that  inherited
infirmity,  such  as  is  mentioned  in  vers.  18 — 21  of  last  chapter,  while  it  excludes  from
ofBce,  does  not  exclude  from  sustenance.  We  now  come  across  a  disqualification
sufficient  to  exclude  from  both  oifice  and  support,  and  this  is  contracted  d^filement.
Any  priest  venturing  before  God  with  uncleanness  upon  him  will  be  cut  off  from  his
presence.     We  are  taught  hereby —

I.  That  it  is  contkacted,  not  transmitted,  defilement  which  necessitates  com-
plete EXILE  from  Jehovah.  The  priest's  child  providentially  ticarred  or  maimed,
whose  blemish  has  been  from  the  womb,  and  in  which  he  had  no  voluntary  share,  which
excluded  properly  from  office,  is  not  excluded  from  sustenance  from  the  altar ;  while,  on
the  other  hand,  he  who  has  through  negligence  or  waywardness  contracted  defilement
is,  while  it  lasts,  excluded  altogether  from  the  privileges  of  the  priesthood.

The  bearing  of  such  an  arrangement  upon  the  question  of  original  sin  is  plain  on  the
least  thought.  The  fact  of  original  sin  will  not  be  questioned  by  any  one  who  studies
intelligently  the  question  of  heredity.  Moreover,  "  representative  responsibility,"  as  a
principle  of  providence,  shows  how  we  are  held  responsible  for  acts  of  others  in  which
we  have  had  no  conscious  share.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  consolatory  to  think  that
transmitted  evil  will  not  of  itself  condemn  its  possessor  to  perpetual  exile  from  God.
When  an  infant  dies,  who  has  never  been  sufficiently  advanced  to  contract  any
conscious  defilement,  who  has  never  added  to  original  sin  any  actual  transgression,  it  is
comforting  to  think  that  the  righteous  Governor  will  not  exclude  any  such  from  the
privilege  of  approaching  him,  but  will  pm'ge  away  their  inheritance  of  evil,  and  fit  theni
for  his  everlasting  fellowship.  We  believe  in  the  salvation  of  the  great  multitude  whu
die  before  coming  to  the  years  of  discretion.

n.  Casual,  as  distinguished  from  permanent,  connection  with  the  priesthood
disqualifies  a  person  from  partaking  of  thp  things  of  the  altar.  No  mere  casual
guest,  or  even  a  hired  servant  of  a  priest's,  was  to  eat  of  the  holy  things.  If  a  servant
had  been  purchased,  and  so  became  personally  incorporated  with  the  priestly  family,  he
might  «at  of  them.  There  is  a  corresponding  casual  and  a  corresponding  permanent
association  with  the  Lord's  work.  Only  those  who  enter  on  it  with  whole  hearts,  whe
dedicate  themselves  to  it,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  need  expect  to  participate  in  it8  privi
leges ;  while  the  mere  casual  associate  will  find  himself  excluded  in  the  end.


332  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxn.  1— SJlL

III.  The   sacrifices   were    to   be    as    unblemished   as    the    OFFIOIATINa   PRIESTS  ;

ANT  PiiYsiuAL  DEFECT  DISQUALIFIED  THEM  FROM  ACCEPTANCE.  The  Unblemished  cha-
racter of  the  sacrifices  teaches  the  same  truth  which  we  have  already  considered.  Ab
the  sacrifices  were  practically  substitutions,  their  perfection  was  to  teach  man  not  only
that  his  Substitute  must  be  perfect  if  God  would  accept  him,  but  that  he  himself  must
be  perfected,  if  he  is  to  serve  God  in  the  great  hereafter  in  a  priestly  spirit.  At  the
same  time,  man  is  encouraged  in  the  present  state  to  offer  what  he  can,  even  though  it
be  not  perfect.  God  does  not  insist  on  the  absolute  perfection  of  the  work  of  his
people.  If  it  is  willing  (ver.  23) — if  it  is  really  a  "freewill  offering" — ^then  God  will
accept  it  in  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  given.  The  perfection  is  to  be  kept  steadily  in
view  as  the  ideal  to  which  we  must  always  be  struggling ;  meanwhile,  we  are  to  be
doing  all  we  can  with  willing  minds,  even  though  our  work  is  often  poor  at  best.

IV.  Inhuman  acts  disqualify  sacrifices  otherwise  acceptable.  Thus  a  bullock,
sheep,  or  goat,  would  not  be  acceptable  till  after  the  eighth  day.  It  would  have  been
inhuman  to  have  denied  it  its  week  with  its  dam.  Moreover,  may  not  the  seven  days
with  the  dam,  like  the  seven  days  before  the  man-child's  circumcision,  represent  a
perfect  period  spent  under  parental  care,  and  thus  become  an  emblem  of  the  providen-
tial use  of  the  family  institution?

Again,  the  dam  and  the  young  were  not  to  be  put  to  death  on  the  same  day.  It  has  an
inhuman  appearance  about  it,  like  the  seething  of  a  kid  in  its  mother's  milk ;  and  God
arranged  that  the  terms  of  the  fifth  commandment  should  be  illustrated  by,  and  not
transgressed,  even  among  the  lower  animals.

While,  therefore,  sacrificial  worship  entailed  much  suffering  on  the  part  of  the  innocent
victims,  there  was  a  humane  element  to  run  through  the  service  of  the  priests,  and
inhumanity  would  disqualify  them  from  sacrificially  serving  God. — E.  M.  E.

Ver.  3. — The  service  of  lAiiention.  There  were  certain  bodily  conditions  which,
under  the  Levitical  institutions,  were  suggestive  of  spiritual  impurity,  and  those  who
suffered  from  them  were  accounted  ceremonially  unclean.  Priests  thus  affected  were
disqualified  for  the  ministry  of  the  tabernacle,  and  were  deprived,  for  a  time,  of
sacerdotal  privileges :  they  might  not  "  go  unto  the  holy  things."  Any  priest  who
was  disobedient  to  this  precept  would  be  "cut  off  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."
To  those  who  were  thus  unfortunate  there  was  one  service  left, — the  service  of
obedient  abstention.  They  would  be  disappointed ;  they  might  feel  somewhat
humiliated ;  but  there  was  left  to  them  the  opportunity  of  fulfilling  the  acceptable
service  of  offering  not  or  eating  not  "  unto  the  Lord  "  (see  Bom.  xiv.  6).

It  often  happens  to  us  that  by  some  misfortune — perhaps,  as  here,  some  bodily  afflic-
tion— ^we  are  disabled  and  detained  from  active  service ;  it  may  be  from  (1)  Christian
work,  or  (2)  public  worship,  or  (3)  daily  duty  (business  or  household  activities).
That  which  is  unavoidable  and  for  which  we  are  not  responsible  may  shut  us  out  from
many  valued  privileges.  In  this  case  we  must  render  the  service  of  abstention.
We  can —

I.  Submit  in  patiencb.

II.  Believe  with  cheerful  confidence  :  have  faith  to  accppt  the  truth  that
"  they  also  serve  wlio  only  stand  and  wait ; "  that  God  is  as  well  pleased  with  the  pasure
service  of  those  whom  he  desires  to  "  be  stiU,"  as  with  those  who^

"...   at  his  bidding  speed.
And  post  o'er  land  and  ocean  without  rest."

in.  Wait  in  hope.  The  hour  will  come,  here  or  hereafter,  sooner  or  later,  when  all
bodily  disabilities  will  have  disappeared,  and  fullest  access  be  given  to  the  presence  of
the  Lord. — 0.

Vers.  10—15. — The  guUt  of  profanation.  That  which  had-  been  offered  in  sacrifice
was  "  holy  unto  the  Lord  ; "  these  were  "  holy  things  "  (ver.  10) ;  "  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify
them"  (ver.  16\  They  might  only  be  partaken  of  by  the  priests  and  their  families.
Hence  we  have  here  a  precise  limitation  of  membership  of  the  family ;  it  included  the
returned  daughter  and  the  permanent  servant,  but  did  not  include  the  hireling  or  the
visitor,  etc.     We  mav  note,  in  passing,  (1)  the  regard  which  God  paid  (and  still  pays)


OH.  XXII.  1— S3.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  88*

to  the  sanctity  of  family  life,  and  our  duty  to  guard  it ;  (2)  the  fact,  on  the  other  hand,
that  mere  hlood  relationship  does  not  suffice  to  secure  the  favour  of  God ;  witness
Nadab  and  Abihu.  The  son  of  the  holiest  minister  of  Christ  may  be  a  seiTant  of  the
eyil  one,  and  an  enemy  of  God.    But  the  lesson  of  the  text  is —

I.  That  Gob  would  have  ns  sep abate  bomb  things  from  othebb  which  we  must
TREAT  AS  BAORED.  "  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  them  "  (ver.  16).  That  which  is  closely
connected  with  himself  is  particularly  "  holy," — his  Name,  his  truth,  his  worship ;  alsb
our  own  spiritual  and  immortal  nature  \  i'he  world  which  is  to  come,  etc.

II.  -That  we  abe  undbb  some  temptation  to  disbegabd  his  holt  will.  Forget-
fulness,  the  spirit  of  levity  and  untimely  humour,  the  contagiousness  of  human
example,  that  tendency  towards  the  formal  and  mechanical  which  belongs  to  our  frail
humanity, — these  things  will  account  for  it.  The  forms  which  this  irreverence  or  pro-
fanation takes  are  manifold :  (1)  taking  in  vain  the  holy  Name  of  God,  our  Father,
Saviour,  Sanctifier;  (2)  misuse  of  scriptural  words — those  especially  which  are  of
pecvdiar  sacredness;  (3)  irreverence  in  prayer  or  praise;  (4)  the  utterance  of  Divine
truth  by  unhallowed,  unappreciative  lips ;  (5)  the  partaking  of  the  sacramental  elements
by  those  who  are  unreconciled  to  God ;  (6)  misappropriation  of  substance  which  has
been  dedicated  to  the  service  of  Christ.

IIL  That  hinistebs  of  Chbist  bhould  be  bpeciallt  on  theib  suabd  aoainst
thib  common  and  offensive  bin.  There  are  two  reasons  why  those  who  minister  in
holy  things  should  "watch  and  pray"  against  the  commission  of  this  wrong-doing.
1.  They  are  under  special  temptation  to  commit  it.  Their  very  professional  familiarity
with  the  truth  and  service  of  God  is  likely  to  beget  irreverence,  utterance  without
feeling,  action  without  inspiration.  2,  Their  example  is  more  influential.  Irreverence
on  the  part  of  the  minister  is  certain,  in  time  if  not  immediately,  to  tell  on  the  people.
It  will  be  communicated  to  them ;  or,  at  the  very  least,  it  will  seriously  lessen  and  lower
the  impression  which  would  otherwise  be  made  on  their  hearts  and  lives. — C.

Vere.  17 — 30. — Characteristic*  of  acceptable  service.  The  very  fact  that  all  the
points  here  referred  to  have  been  fully  brought  out  before  lends  strong  emphasis  to
them  as  matters  of  vital  importance  in  the  estimation  of  God.  If  our  worship  and
service  are  to  be  acceptable,  there  must  be —

L  Spontaneity  of  spirit.  "  Ye  shall  offer  at  your  own  will "  (ver.  19) ;  "when  ye
will  offer  .  .  .  offer  it  at  your  own  will "  (ver.  29).  There  is  a  wilfulness  in  worship
which  is  blamable  (Col.  ii.  23);  but  there  is  a  willingness,  a  "cheerfulness  in  giving,"
which  is  peculiarly  acceptable  unto  God.  The  service  which  is  rendered  of  necessity,
under  strong  constraint  and  against  the  inclination  of  the  spirit,  has  the  least
virtue,  if,  indeed,  it  have  any  at  all.  That  which  proceeds  from  a  heart  in  fullest
sympathy  with  the  act,  delighting  to  do  the  wiU  of  God  (Ps.  xl.  8),  is  well  pleasing
unto  him.

II.  CoMPABATiVB  EXCELLENCY.  "  Ye  shall  ofFer  ...  a  male  without  blemish,  .  .  .
whatsoever  hath  a  blemish,  that  shall  ye  not  offer :  for  it  shall  not  be  acceptable  for
you,"  etc.  (vers.  19 — 22).  If  the  Hebrew  worshipper  brought  that  creature  from
flock  or  herd  which,  as  being  blemished,  was  least  valuable,  he  did  that  which  was
offensive  rather  than  acceptable.  He  put  his  Creator  and  Redeemer  (ver.  33)  in  the
second  place,  and  his  own  material  interests  in  the  first  place.  He  was  to  bring  his
best  to  the  holiest.  We,  too,  must  avoid  this  fatal  error — must  rise  to  this  spiritual
height.  We  must  not  put  off  our  Redeemer  with  that  which  we  shall  miss  the  least —
in  kind,  in  substance,  in  time ;  we  must  bring  to  his  altar  the  sweetness,  the  strength,
and  the  beauty  of  all  that  we  have  to  bring ;  we  must  reserve  the  choice  treasures  for  his
hand  of  love.  So  far  as  may  be  in  a  world  of  imperfection,  our  offering  to  a  Divine
Saviour  "  shall  be  perfect  to  be  accepted  "  (ver.  21).

III.  Reoabd  fob  a  solemn  pledoe.  Absolute  perfection,  the  positively  whole  and
unblemished  animal,  might  be  difScult,  or  in  some  cases  impossible,  to  secure.  Hence
some  relaxation  from  the  rule  was  allowed  in  the  case  of  the  free-will  offering.  But  in
the  redemption  of  a  vow  no  such  departure  was  permitted  (ver.  23).  Any  vow  which
was  made  unto  God  was  considered  to  be  in  the  last  degree  obligatory  (Deut.  xxiil
21,  22 ;  Bccles.  v.  4,  5 ;  Ps.  IxxvL  11).  When  "  God's  vows  are  upon  us,"  when  we
stand  pledged  before  him  (1)  to  ^scharge  certain  fimotions,  or  (2)  to  abstain  from


834  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  [oh.  xxii.  1—33,

certain  evils  or  perils,  we  should  feel  that  we  are  bound  with  peculiarly  strong  bonds
to  make  our  sacrifice,  of  whatever  kind  it  be,  in  its  fulness  and  integrity,

IV,  Absence  of  impuritt.    (Ver.  20 ;  see  ch.  vii.  15 — 18.)

V.  Peefbebnob  of  the  Divine  will  to  human  gbatifioation,  "Strangers"
might  bring  their  offerings  to  the  house  of  the  Lord.  It  was  a  pleasing  and  gratifying
thing  to  witness  the  stranger  bringing  his  bountiful  tribute  to  the  altar  of  Jehovah.
It  gratified  the  national  feeling.  But  nothing  might  be  accepted  from  the  foreigner  which
was  not  worthy  to  be  laid  on  the  altar  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  His  will  to  receive
only  unblemished  offerings  must  outweigh  their  readiness  or  eagerness  to  receive  out-
side testimony  to  the  excellency  of  their  institutions.  We  may  be  too  eager  to  welcome
the  tribute  of  the  stranger;  we  must  require  of  him  that  he  worship  in  sincerity  and
purity.  The  honour  and  the  will  of  God  should  be  more  to  us  than  the  passing
gratification  we  gain  from  Any  source  whatever.  Whatever  we  lose,  he  must  be
honoured  and  obeyed. — C.

Vers,  27,  28. — The  culture  of  kindness.  The  words  of  the  text  remind  us,  by  con-
trast, of  two  truths  which  are  of  value  to  us  as  disciples  of  Christ.  1.  That  the  humas
spirit  is  never  too  young  to  be  offered  to  God,  whether  (1)  in  parental  devotion  or  (2)
in  self-dedication  (ver.  27),  2.  That  two  generations  of  the  same  family  may  offer
themselves  simultaneously  to  the  service  of  God.  Parent  and  child  have  not  unfre-
quently  made  profession,  in  the  same  hour,  of  attachment  to  Christ,  and  have  simul-
taneously "  given  themselves  unto  the  Lord."  But  the  main  lesson  to  be  learnt  is  th»
cuUwe  of  kindness.  This  was  the  end  of  the  Divine  precept.  There  would  be  an  ap-
parent ruthlessness  in  taking  away  the  young  immediately  irom  its  dam,  and  also  in
slaying  mother  and  offspring  together  on  the  same  day.  Therefore  these  acts  must  be
avoided.  Everything  shoiild  be  done  to  foster  kindness  of  heart,  considerateness  of
feeling,  as  well  as  justice,  purity,  righteousness  of  life.  The  culture  of  kindness  is  an
act  of  piety.    It  is  well  to  consider —

I.  The  two  spheres  in  which  it  should  be  exhibited.  1.  The  human  world:
the  home;  the  social  circle;  mankind  at  large.  2.  The  animal  world.  Everything
that  has  life  has  feeling,  and  has  a  claim  on  our  considerateness.  We  may  add  to  its
pleasure  or  may  multiply  its  pain;  may  prolong  or  shorten  life.

II.  The  two  motives  by  which  we  should  be  actuated.  1.  The  inherent
excellency  of  kindness.  Unkindness  is  a  shameful,  shocking,  deteriorating  thing ;
kindness  is  intrinsically  beautiful,  admirable.^  2.  The  will  of  God.  These  his  laws
(and  see  Deut.  xxii.  6 ;  xxv.  4)  are  an  indication  of  his  will ;  and  we  may  be  sure  it  is
the  will  of  him  who  creates  and  sustains  sentient  life  that  his  human  children  should
be  kind  to  the  dumb  creatures  of  his  thought  and  skill.

III.  The  two  sources  of  cultivation.  1.  That  of  our  own  minds.  We  must
impress  on  ourselves  that  it  is  no  less  a  tyrannical  and  cruel  thing  to  use  our  great
power  to  oppress  the  feeble  creatures  at  our  feet  than  it  would  be  for  others  of  vastly
superior  size  and  strength  to  our  own  to  oppress  and  injure  us.  We  must  remind
ourselves  of  those  obvious  considerations  which  will  foster  kind  feelings  and  restrain
from  hurtful  actions.  2.  That  of  those  who  teach  us.  The  parents  and  teachers  of
youth  who  do  not  inculcate  kindness  toward  the  feeble,  whether  of  the  animal  or  the
human  world,  sadly  neglect  their  duty  to  their  charge.  Young  people  may  grow  up
ignorant  of  languages  or  sciences,  and  they  may  yet  be  admirable  and  useful  men  and
women ;  but  those  who  have  not  learnt  to  hate  cruelty  and  to  admire  kindness  will
have  a  blot  on  their  character  which  no  attainments  will  hide. — G.

Vers.  1 — 16, — The  eating  of  the  holy  things.  We  have  seen,  in  the  preceding
chapter,  that  blemishes  which  precluded  a  priest  from  ministering  at  the  altar  did  not
hinder  him  from  eating  of  the  holy  things.  The  ordinary  Israelite,  therefore,  wouW
not,  by  similar  blemishes,  be  debarred  from  the  privileges  of  his  religion.  There  are,
however,  other  things  which  would  disqualify.  These  are  now  brought  under  out
notice,  together  with  the  provisions  by  which  they  might  be  removed.    Consider

I,  DiSQUALinOATIONS  FOB  EATINO  OF  THE  HOLT  THINGS.      1,    With  respeCt  to  priestk

(1)  A  priest  would  be  disqualified  by  any  uncleanness  in  his  flesh ;  thus,  if  he  were  a
leper.    The  reason  is  that  leprosy  was  a  notable  emblem  of  sin.    Or  if  he  had  any


.  XXII.  X-.33.]  THE   BOOK  OF   LEVITICaS.  8U


mnning  issue.  Such  things  are  in  themselves  loathsome,  and  evince  a  corrupt  state  ol
the  body,  and  therefore  fittingly  represent  moral  corruption.  This,  under  every  dis-
pensation, excludes  men  from  that  fellowship  with  God  which  was  shadowed  in  the
eating  of  the  holy  things.  (2)  He  would  he  disqualified  by  contact  with  a  human
corpse,  or  with  the  carcase  of  any  unclean  animal.  The  moral  lesson  here  is  that  "  evil
communications  corrupt  good  manners,"  that  the  "  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity
against  God."  2.  With  respect  to  the  families  of  priests.  (1)  The  stranger  that
sojourneth  in  Israel  must  become  regularly  proselyted  to  entitle  him  to  the  privileges
of  the  Law.  So  those  who  would  enjoy  the  corresponding  spiritual  privileges  of  th«
gospel  must  first  become  disciples  of  Jesus.  (2)  The  hired  servant  in  the  family  of  a
priest  is  not  sufficiently  incorporated  in  the  famjly  to  entitle  him  to  eat  of  the  holy
things.  And  there  are  servants  of  the  gospel — persons  who  take  a  commendable
interest  in  its  outward  prosperity^-who  yet  are  not  of  the  "  household  of  faith,"  and
have  no  experience  of  its  spiritual  mysteries.  (3)  The  daughter  of  a  priest,  by  marrying
a  stranger,  forfeits  her  right  to  eat  of  the  holy  things.  If  now  in  her  father's  house,
she  is  simply  a  visitor,  and  has  to  be  provided  with  common  food.  By  yoking  with
the  ungodly,  the  children  of  God  forfeit  his  favour,  and  are  only  tolerated  in  the  Church
•s  visitors.  3.  These  laws  may  not  be  invaded  with  impunity.  (1)  If  by  accident
they  were  transgressed,  there  was  mercy  for  the  offender  when  he  made  reparation.
This  was  the  original  value,  with  a  fifth  part  added  (ver.  14).  Paul  obtained  mercy
for  his  sin  against  the  gospel  of  Christ,  "because  he  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief."
(2)  For  the  wilful  presumptuous  transgression  of  the  Law  there  was  no  mercy  in  its
provisions.  "That  soul  shall  be  cut  off  from  my  presence"  (ver.  3).  "They  shall
therefore  keep  mine  ordinance,  lest  they  bear  sin  for  it,  and  die  therefore,  Uf  they
profane  it"  (ver.  9).  There  is  a  law  of  extremity  also  under  the  gospel  (Matt,  xiL
31,  32 ;  Acts  v.  1—11 ;  Heb.  vi.  4—6 ;  x.  26—29 ;  1  John  v.  16).

II.  How  THESE  DISQUA.LIFICATI0N8  MAT  BE  REMOVED.  1.  In  some  cases  hy  Statute,
(1)  Thus  the  servant  of  the  high  priest,  bought  with  his  money,  though  formerly  an
alien,  is  now  so  incorporated  into  his  family  that  he  may  freely  eat  of  the  holy  things.
Being  purchased,  he  is  permanently  under  the  power  of  the  priest,  and  has  no  option
to  leave  his  service.  So  we,  being  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ  and  by  a  thorough
repentance  and  conversion,  renouncing  all  freedom  to  act  against  his  will,  may  claim
the  privileges  of  his  service.  (2)  Those  bom  in  the  house  of  the  priest,  viz.  to  his
slaves  or  permanent  servants,  are  also  reckoned  as  belonging  to  his  family,  and
privileged  to  fare  as  his  own  children.  This  birth  into  the  household  expresses  more
than  mere  natural  descent  from  a  godly  ancestry.  The  children  of  the  covenant  made
with  Abraham  were  not  thuse  naturally  descended  from  him,  but  those  who  were  also
the  children  of  his  faith.  Natural  birth  in  a  godly  family  now  gives  the  initiation  to
goodness,  but  the  privileges  of  the  gospel  can  only  be  enjoyed  by  those  who  follow  up
their  advantages.  (3)  The  daughter  of  a  priest,  as  we  have  seen,  by  marrying  a
stranger,  forfeited  her  right  to  eat  of  the  holy  things.  She  was  the  figure  of  a  back-
slider. But  if  there  were  no  issue  of  the  marriage,  and  her  husband  were  dead,  and  she
return  to  the  house  of  her  father  as  in  her  youth,  she  may  again  partake  of  the  holy
things.  This  teaches  us  God's  mercy  to  the  wanderer  from  Christ  who  returns  to  him
with  a  true  conversion  (see  Luke  xv.  11).  2.  In  some  cases  by  ordinance.  (1)  If  a
man  contract  pollution  by  contact,  he  "  shall  not  eat  of  the  holy  things,  unless  he  wash
his  flesh  with  water  "  (vers.  4 — 6).  As  the  baptism  of  water  was  necessary  to  qualify  the
ceremonially  impure  to  eat  of  the  holy  things  which  were  typical,  so  is  the  baptism  of
the  Boly  Ohost  required  to  remove  moral  impurity,  and  give  us  the  privilege  of  real
fellowship  with  God  (Heb.  x.  22).  (2)  After  this  washing,  "and  when  the  sun  is
down,  he  shall  be  clean,  and  shall  afterward  eat  of  the  holy  things "  (ver.  7).  The
natural  or  civil  day  began  at  sunrise;  the  holy  day  at  sunset,  viz.  when  nature  is
involved  in  the  shadow  of  death.  So  it  is  in  the  turning  from  nature  to  grace  that  we
enter  into  the  privileges  of  fellowship  with  God. — J,  A.  M.

Vers.  17 — 3S.—Laws  of  the  oblations.  These  naturally  follow  those  concerning  tht
priests,  which  form  the  subject  of  the  earlier  portion  of  this  chapter.  They  may  b«
considered—

L  With  bespect  to  thr  baobificeb.    1.   TTiese  must  be  the  animaU  prescribtS,


SS§  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxii.  1-33.

(1)  Clean  creatures.  To  offer  swine  upon  God's  altar  would  be  an  outrageous  insult  to
his  purity.  It  would  be  figuratively  equivalent  to  asking  his  acceptance  and  approval
of  passions  and  conduct  the  most  filthy  and  loathsome.  To  attempt  to  foreshadow  in
the  sacrifice  of  a  hog  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  would  be  against  the  most  sacred  propriety
a  horrible  blasphemy.  (2)  Clean  creatures  of  kinds  specially  selected  by  QoA,  These
are  "  of  the  beeves,  of  the  sheep,  or  of  the  goats  "  (ver.  19).  The  roebuck  and  the  hart
are  clean  creatures,  but  not  of  the  kinds  selected,  so,  however  they  may  be  fitted  to
represent  saints,  viewed  under  particular  aspects,  they  were  too  wild  and  intractable
to  be  made  fit  emblems  of  Christ.    2.  They  must  he  individuals  without  blemish.

(1)  They  must  be  free  from  disease.  Therefore,  if  they  have  "  scurvy,"  or  a  "  wen,"
or  a  "  running  scab,"  which  are  symptoms  of  a  diseased  state  of  the  blood,  they  are  pro-
nounced unfit.  For  disease  is  generally  taken  as  an  emblem  of  sin,  and  in  this  sense
the  reason  should  be  understood,  "  because  their  corruption  is  in  them "  (ver.  25).

(2)  There  must  be  no  natural  deformity,  such  as  having  any  part  too  much  extended,
or,  on  the  other  hand,  too  much  contracted.  "  We  are  shapen  in  iniquity."  From  our
birth  we  are  mai-red  with  moral  deformities.  But  not  so  Jesus.  He  was  in  his  birth
the  "  holy  thing."  (3)  They  must  have  no  acquired  blemish — no  blindness,  lameness,
fracture,  or  mutilation  of  any  kind.  By  actual  transgression  we  have  fallen  upon  moral
disasters.  But  Christ  "fulfilled  all  righteousness,"  and  must  not  be  foreshadowed  by
any  imperfect  creature.  (4)  The  same  perfection  was  required  in  the  sacrifice  that  was
required  in  the  priests.  The  best  service  and  the  best  sacrifice  should  be  given  to  the
best  Being  (see  Mai.  i.  8, 12 — 14).  The  priest  and  the  sacrifice  were  alike  types  of  the
same  Lord  Jesus,  our  Priest  and  Sacrifice.  (5)  But  who  is  to  judge  of  the  fitness  of
the  victim  ?  The  Jews  say  the  sagan,  or  suffragan  high  priest,  had  to  determine  this.  Now,
Annas  sustained  that  office  under  Caiaphas,  and  he  accordingly  sent  Jesus  bound  to
Caiaphas,  viz.  as  a  Sacrifice  fit  to  be  offered  (see  John  xviii.  12 — 14, 24).  The  offerer  also
had  to  pass  his  judgment  upon  the  creature  he  selects  from  his  herd  or  fiock.  If  Pilate
be  viewed  as  a  representative  person  in  this  capacity,  we  hear  him  say, "I  find  no  fault
in  this  man."  But  God  himself  is  the  ultimate  Judge ;  and  has  he  not  emphatically
approved  of  Christ?  (See  Matt.  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  5 ;  John  xii.  28.)  3.  Blemished  creatures
may  6e  given  as  free-will  offerings,  (l)  These  were  not  prescribed  in  the  Law,  though
permitted.  They  were  things  which  piety  might  add  to  what  was  essential.  They
were  not  types  of  Christ,  so  they  might  be  imperfect.  (2)  Piety  will  give  to  God  the
most  perfect  thing  she  possesses  when  she  would  acknowledge  his  worthiness  to  be
honoured.  But  she  would  also  express  with  humility  the  imperfection  of  her  best
services,  and  this  she  mi^ht  do  most  appropriately  in  the  offering  of  a  blemished  obla-
tion. (3)  But  when  the  free-will  offering  is  for  a  vow,  then  an  imperfect  thing  will
not  be  accepted.  In  this  case  the  offering  is  prescribed  in  the  Law  because  it  is  beyond
the  power  of  the  offerer  to  retract  (see  Acts  v.  4).  And  the  sacrifice  for  a  vow  was  a
figure  of  Christ,  who  is  pledged  in  the  covenant  of  our  redemption  (see  Fs.  xxii,  25 :
il.  6,  7).

II.  With  bebpect  to  their  offebino.  1.  They  may  not  be  offered  tffl  after  th»
eighth  day.  (1)  For  this  there  was  a  reason  of  humanity.  The  creature  must  remain
"  seven  days  under  the  dam."  The  Laws  of  God  are  framed  to  inculcate  kindliness
and  tenderness  of  heart.  (2)  It  has  also  a  reason  of  health.  For  the  animal  is  scarcely
formed  in  the  first  week  of  its  life.  Its  hair  and  its  hoofs  are  not  grown.  It  is  not
wholesome  food.  (3)  But  the  typical  reasons  are  the  more  important.  The  "  eighth
day  "  was  that  upon  which  circumcision  took  place.  The  import  of  both  rites,  that  of
circumcision  and  that  of  sacrifice,  is  the  same.  Both  represent  the  cutting  off  of  the
Holy  Seed  out  of  the  land  of  the  living,  to  secure  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  to  men.
The  Jews  say  that  the  eighth  day  was  specified  so  that  a  sabbath  must  be  included,  for  that
"  the  sabbath  sanctifies  all  things."  No  doubt,  when  the  great  sabbath  of  the  eighth
day  arrives,  which  is  that  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth,  all  things  in  that  state  will  be
sanctified.  That  state  will-  be  the  consummation  of  the  blessings  of  the  covenant.
2.  An  animal  and  its  young  may  not  be  killed  the  same  day.  (1)  This  law  respects
fowls  as  well  as  larger  creatures  (see  Deut.  xxii.  6).  It  inculcates  tenderness  of  heart.
(2)  But  it  has  also  a  gospel  import.  It  teaches  that  utter  desolation  is  inconsistent
with  the  idea  of  atonement.  Life  is  spared  because  life  is  sacrificed.  The  death  of
Christ  is  vicarious ;  it  is  for  the  life  of  the  world.    3.  It  should  be  eaten  the  same  dag


OM.  xzin.  1 — 5.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


837


on  which  it  it  killed.  (1)  The  moral  here  is  that  we  must  not  delay  to  avail  ourselves
of  the  bene6ts  of  redemption  in  Christ.  On  the  morrow  (ver.  30)  it  may  be  too  late.
(2)  On  the  third  day  it  will  he  certainly  too  late  (see  ch.  vii.  15 ;  xiz.  6,  7).  The  third
day,  or  age,  is  that  of  our  resurrection  (see  Eos.  vi.  2).  If  we  neglect  salvation  until
then,  it  caimot  be  realized.  Let  us  improve  the  opportunities  of  our  probation,  i.  They
thould  be  offered  devoutly.  (I)  The  Name  of  God  must  not  be  profaned.  God's  Name
is  hallowed  by  keeping  his  commandments  (vers.  31,  32).  The  Name  of  God  will  be
hallowed  when  his  kingdom  is  come,  for  then  his  will  shall  be  done  upon  earth  as  it  is
in  heaven  (Matt.  tL  9, 10).  (2)  He  is  to  be  recognized  as  our  Redeemer.  "  I  am  the
Lord  which  hallow  you,  that  brought  you  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  to  be  your  God."
That  redemption  was  only  a  figure  of  the  great  redemption  through  which  God  hallows
hii  people  in  truth,  of  which  $Ma  tb»  oblations  of  the  Law  were  figum.  Thi*  ia  never
ta  M  nrfotten. — J.  A.  IL


PART  IV.

HOLT  DAYS  AND  SEASONS:  WEEKLY,  MONTHLY,  ANNUAL,
SEPTENNIAL,  AND  EVEEY  HALF-CENTURY.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTBB  XXm.


Tan  Part  conslBts  of  chs.  xxiii.  and  zzv.,
with  ch.  xziv.  parenthetioally  introduced.

Bvery  Tellgion  must  have  its  round  of
holy  days  and  seasons:  1.  To  give  occasion
for  manifesting  joyous  thankfulness  to  the
Giver  of  all  good  things.  2.  To  keep  alive
the  memory  of  past  events  around  which
teligions  associations  cling.  3.  To  impress
upon  the  hearts  of  the  worshippers  those
•acred  mysteries  which  are  regarded  as
essential  characteristics  of  the  system.

1.  The  duty  and  happiness  of  rejoicing
before  the  Lord  And  a  prominent  place
under  the  Mosaic  dispensation,  as  they
must  in  any  religion  where  man  feels
himself  in  a  covenant  relation  with  Gbd,
brought  nigh  to  him  by  himself,  and  no
longer  estranged  from  him  who  is  his  only
true  life  and  happiness.  Accordingly,  the
first  thought  of  the  annual  Jewish  festivals
is  that  of  joyous  thankfulness,  such  as  is
becoming  to  reconciled  children  grateful  to
their  Father  for  the  many  bounties  that
they  receive  at  his  liands.  The  first  gift  of
God  of  which  man  becomes  conscious  is
that  of  the  daily  sustenance  provided  for
faim,  and  therefore  we  should  expect  holy
-days  to  be  appointed  to  commemorate  the
laTiTious.


goodness  of  God  in  bestowing  the  gifts  of
the  earth.  The  first  aspect,  therefore,  in
which  to  regard  the  three  great  annual
festivals — the  Passover,  Pentecost,  and  the
,  Feast  of  Tabernacles — ^is  that  they  were
days  of  thanksgiving  for  the  fruits  of  the
earth  dispensed  by  God  to  man.

First,  with  regard  to  the  Passover.  We
read  at  vers.  10,  11,  "  When  ye  be  come  into
the  land  which  I  give  unto  you,  and  shall  reap
the  harvegt  thereof,  then  ye  ehaU  bring  a  sheaf
[or  an  omcr]  of  the  Jirstf raits  of  your  harvest
unto  the  priest :  and  he  shall  wave  the  sheaf
before  the  Lord,  to  be  accepted  for  you :  on
the  morrow  after  the  sabbath  the  priest  shall
wave  it."  The  words,  '*  the  morrow  after  the
sabbatli,''  mean,  as  we  shall  see,  the  day  after
the  first  day  of  Unleavened  Bread,  that  is,
the  second  day  of  the  feast,  Nisan  16,  which
fell  early  in  April,  when  the  first  barley  was
ripening  in  Palestine.  On  the  14th  day  of
Nisan  (the  day  of  the  Paschal  sacrifice)  a  cer
tain  quantity  of  standing  barley  was  marked
oB,  by  men  specially  appointed  for  the  pur-
pose, in  a  field  ploughed  the  previous  autumn
and  sown  at  least  ten  weeks^  before  the
Passover,  but  not  prepared  artificially  iu
such  a  way  as  to  hasten  the  crop.  On  the
following  day,  Nisan  15,  at  sunset,  three
men  wwe  sent  to  the  selected  flsid,  and,  tn

z


338


THE  BOOK  OF   LEVITICUS.


(cH.  xKin.  1--6.


the  presence  of  witnesses,  cut  the  ears  of
com  before  marked,  and  brought  them  into
the  temple.  On  the  next  day,  Nisan  16,
this  com,  whether  in  the  form  of  a  sheaf  or
of  flour,  was  offered  to  the  Lord  by  being
waved  before  him,  and  then  consigned  to
the  priest.  Here,  by  the  presentation  of
the  flrstfruits  of  the  year,  an  acknowledg-
ment is  made  that  the  products  of  the  earth
are  by  right  God's.  This  is  one  of  the
objects  of  the  Feast  of  the  Passover.

Secondly,  as  to  Pentecost.  After  the  sheaf,
or  omer,  had  been  offered  on  Nisan  16,  it  was
allowable  to  make  the  new  year's  barley
into  bread,  but  the  dedication  of  the  grain
crops  was  not  complete  until  a  portion  of
the  wheat  crop  had  also  been  offered.  This
was  done  a  week  of  weeks  later,  at  the
Feast  of  Pentecost,  forty-nine  days  after
the  presentation  of  the  barley,  and
fifty  days  after  the  first  day  of  Unleavened
Bread.  On  this  day,  two  leavened  loaves,
of  the  same  size  as  the  shewbread  loaves,
were  waved  before  the  Lord,  aud  then  de-
livered to  the  priest.  These  loaves  were
made  out  of  ears  of  com  selected  and  reaped
as  the  barley  had  been  seven  weeks  before,
and  then  threshed  and  ground  in  the
temple.  They  were  regarded  as  the  first-
fruits  of  the  wheat  harvest,  though  they
were  not  made  of  the  first  cut  wheat ;  and
from  their  presentation  the  festival  has
the  name  of  the  Feast  of  Harvest  (Exod.
zxiii.  16);  the  Feast  of  the  Pirstfruits  of
the  'Wheat  Harvest  (Exod.  xxiv.  22);  the
Day  of  the  Firstfruits  (Numb,  xxviii.  26) ;
while,  from  its  date  relatively  to  the  Pass-
over, it  is  called  the  Feast  of  Weeks  (Exod.
xxxiv.  22 ;  Deut.  xvi.  10).  The  name.
Feast  of  Pentecost,  is  found  only  in  the
Apocrypha  (Tobit  ii.  1;  2  Mace.  xii.  32),
and  in  the  New  Testament  (Acts  ii.  1 ;
XX.  16 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  8).  The  meat  offerings
might  not  be  made  of  the  new  year's  floiir
until  these  two  loaves  had  been  offered.

Thirdly,  with  regard  to  the  Feast  of
Tabernadei.  The  festivalg  connected  with
the  WMona  of  the  year  and  the  products  of
the  toil  were  not  ended  until  the  Feast  of
Ingathering  (Exod.  zxiii.  16;  xxxiv.  22),
or  Tabernacles  (ver.  31;  Deut.  xvi.  13;
Ezra  iii.  4 ;  Zech.  xiv.  16 ;  Jer.  vii.  2),  had
been  celebrated.  This  festival  ooouiMd
about  the  beginning  of  Ootober,  and  oom-


memorated  the  final  gatliering  in  of  all  the
fruits  of  the  year,  specially  of  the  olives
and  the  grapes.  It  was  observed  by  a
general  dwelling  in  booths  made  of  the
branches  of  palms,  willows,  olives,  pinca,
myrtles,  and  other  close-growing  trees  (ver.
40 ;  Neb.  viii.  15),  in  which  all  the  Israelite
males,  with  the  exception  of  the  sick,  lived
for  seven  days,  and  kept  harvest  home.

2.  The  second  aspect  in  which  to  regard
the  annual  festivals  is  the  historical  one.
The  Passover  is  characterized  by  its  histori-
cal associations  to  a  greater  degree  than
either  of  the  other  festivals.  ,  The  whole
national  life  of  the  Israelites  received  its
character  from  the  Egyptian  Exodus,  and  ac-
cordingly the  anniversaries  of  their  religious
year  began  with  its  commemoration.  It  was
the  events  which  had  taken  place  in  Egypt
which  gave  to  the  Paschal  sacrifice  and  the
Paschal  feast  their  primary  signification;
and  while  to  us  the  Passover  festival  serves
as  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  those  events,  to
the  Jew  it  served  as  a  memorial  of  them,
preventing  them  from  ever  being  forgotten
or  disregarded  (cf.  Exod.  xiii.  3 — 16).  The
ancient  Christian  Fathers  suggested  that
the  Feast  of  Pentecost  commemorated  the
institution  of  the  old  dispensation  at  Sinai,
as,  to  Christians,  it  recalled  the  institution
of  the  new  Law  by  the  gift  of  the  fiery
tongues  at  Jerusalem.  This  suggestion  was
adopted  by  Maimonides  and  the  later  school
of  Hebrew  commentators,  and  it  is  a  very
probable  conjecture;  but  as  no  appearance
of  it  is  found  in  the  Old  or  New  Testaments,
nor  even  in  early  Hebrew  writers,  it  cannot
be  regarded  as  a  certainty.  Historically,  the
Featl  of  Tahemades  is  generally  considered
to  commemorate  the  dwelling  in  tents
througliout  the  forty  years'  wandering  in
the  wilderness ;  but  if  this  were  so,  it  would
have  been  called  the  Feast  of  Tents,  for  the
words  "tent"  and  "tabemacle"  differ,
and  the  Israelites  did  not  dwell  in  taber-
nacles in  the  wilderness.  Bather,  it  com-
memoratea  the  first  encampment  of  the
Israelites  after  setting  forth  from  Egypt,
which  took  place  at "  Sucooth,"  the  jneaning
of  which  word  is  "tabemacle"  (Exod.  xii.
37).  Thus,  as  the  event  historipally  associ-
ated with  the  first  harvest  festival,  the
Passover,  was  the  setting  forth  from  Egypt,
that  associated  with  the  last,  th)>  V<M«t  <■/


OH.  xuii.  1^ — 5.]


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


«M


Tabernacles,  was  the  resting  at  the  end  of
the  first  day's  journey  at  Succoth,  where
the  people  now  felt  that  they  were  free,  and
began  to  rejoice  in  their  &eedom.

8.  The  typical  character  of  the  feasts,
as  well  as  their  historical  character,  is  more
apparent  in  the  Passover  than  in  the  other
two  feasts.  St.  Paul's  testimony  on  this
point  is  sufficient:  "For  even  Christ  our
Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us :  therefore  let
US  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven,
neither  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wicked-
ness, but  with  the  unleavened  bread  of
sincerity  and  truth  "  (I  Cor.  v.  7).  Here  we
have  the  typical  character  of  the  Paschal
lamb,  and  of  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,
authoritatively  declared  to  us.  The  blood
of  the  lamb  slain  on  the  night  before  the
Exodus,  being  the  means  whereby  the
Israelites  were  delivered  from  the  destruction
which  fell  on  all  the  rest  of  the  inhabitants
of  the  land,  typified  the  still  more  efficacious
bloodshedding  by  which  the  redemption  of
Christ's  people  was  wrought.  The  Feast  of
Pentecost,  if  it  commemorated  the  gift  of  the
Law  at  Mount  Sinai,  pointed  thereby  to  the
giving  of  the  better  Law  on  the  day  when
the  Holy  Ghost  descended  upon  the  apostles
in  Jerusalem ;  and  in  any  case,  as  a  Feast  of
Firstfruits,  it  was  emblematic  of  those  first-
fruits  of  the  Christian  Church  presented  to
God  on  that  day  (Acts  ii.  41).  The  Feast  of
TabernacZes.in which  God's  people  commemo-
rated their  rejoicing  in  their  newly  found
liberty  after  the  slavery  of  Egypt,  awaits  its
full  typical  fulfilment  in  the  spiritual  joy  of
the  redeemed  after  they  have  been  delivered
&om  the  burden  of  the  flesh  and  the  sufier-
ings  of  the  world ;  but  its  typical  meaning
is  partially  fulfilled  in  the  blessed  peace  and
joy  spread  abroad  in  the  hearts  of  the
children  of  God  by  reason  of  their  adoption
in  Christ,  whereby  we  have  obtained  an
inheritance  with  the  saints  (Eph.  i.  11, 18).
In  the  annual  fast  held  on  the  10th  of
Tisri,  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  the
typical  element  outweighs  any  other.  The
present  and  the  past  sink  away  in  compari-
son with  the  future.  The  day  suggests  no
thought  of  the  seasons  or  of  the  products  of
the  earth,  and  it  recalls  no  event  of  past
history.  It  teaches  a  lesson — the  need  of  re-
eoDoiliation ;  and  by  the  entrance  of  the
Ugb  priest  into  the  holy  of  holies  with  sacri-


ficial blood,  and  by  the  ceremony  of  the
scapegoat,  it  typically  foreihadows  how  that
reconciliation  is  to  be  efieoted.

The  monthly  festivals  had  a  purpose
different  from  the  annual.  They  occurred
on  the  new  moon,  or  the  first  day  of  each
month,  and  their  intention  was  to  dedicate
each  month  to  God.  Only  one  of  these
monthly  festivals  is  mentioned  in  this  chap-
ter—the Feast  of  Trumpets.  It  is  the  feast
of  the  new  moon  of  the  sacred  seventh
month,  with  which  the  civil  year  began.
Because  it  was  New  Year's  Day,  it  had
more  ceremonies  attached  to  it  than  the
first  days  of  the  other  months.  Whereas
the  feasts  of  the  new  moons  in  other  months
only  sanctified  the  special  month  which  they
began,  the  Feast  of  Trumpets  sanctified  also
the  whole  year,  and  was  therefore  an  annual
as  well  as  a  monthly  feast.

The  weekly  festival  was  the  sabbath  (see
Exod.  XX.  10 ;  Deut.  v.  15).  This  feast
sanctified  each  week,  as  the  monthly  feasts
sanctified  each  month;  and  like  the  annual
festivals,  it  looked  both  backwards  and
forwards  :  backwards,  to  the  sanctification
bestowed  upon  it  "  Because  that  in  it  he  had
rested  from  all  his  work  which  God  created
and  made"  (Gen.  ii  3);  forwards,  to  the
great  sabbath  in  which  Christ  rested  in  the
grave,  and  yet  further  onwards  to  another
sabbath  still  to  be  enjoyed  by  the  people
of  God.

The  sabbatical  year  and  the  jubUee  were
extensions  of  the  sabbatical  principle —
certain  civil  and  religious  institutions  and
regulations  being  attached  to  each  of  them.

Ver.  2. — Concerning  the  feasts  of  the  Lord,
which  ye  shall  proclaim  to  be  holy  oonvoca-
tions,  even  these  are  my  feasts.  The  trans-
lation should  rather  be.  The  appointed  times
which  ye  shall  proclaim  to  be  holy  convocations,
these  are  my  appointed  times.  The  appointed
times  (mo'adim)  include  the  great  fast  as
well  as  the  festivals,  and  the  weekly  and
monthly  as  well  as  the  annual  holy  days.
The  primary  purpose  with  which  the  follow-
ing enumeration  of  holy  days  is  introduced,
is  to  give  a  list  of  the  holy  convocations.
While  the  Israelites  were  stUl  dwelling  in
the  wilderness,  a  holy  convocation  appears  to
have  been  a  religious  assembly  of  all  tha
males  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle.  After
the  settlement  in  Canaan,  a  religious  gather-
ing for  prayer  or  festive  rejoicing  in  all  their
dwellings,  that  is,  wherever  they  lived,
would  have  satisfied  the  command  to  hoM


940


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  xxm.  1 — 5.


•  holy  convocation,  exce|t  on  the  three
peat  festivalB,  when  all  who  could,  "  kept
the  feast "  at  Jerusalem.  There  were  in  all
■even  holy  convoeationt  in  the  year,  besides
the  sabbath,  namely,  the  first  and  last
days  of  Unleavened  Bread,  the  Feast  of
Pentecost,  the  Day  of  Atonement,  the  Feast
of  Trumpets,  the  first  and  last  days  of  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles.

Ver.  3. — ^The  seventh  day  is  the  sabbath  of
rest.  This  is  a  very  strong  expression,  liter-
ally, (he  sabhath  of  sabbatism,  which  doubles
the  force  of  the  single  word.  Ye  shall  do  no
work  therein.  The  sabbath  and  the  Day  of
Atonement  were  the  only  days  in  which  no
work  might  be  done,  whereas  on  the  other
festivals  it  was  only  no  servile  work  that
might  be  done.  It  is  not  to  be  obeerred
solely  where  the  tabernacle  is  pitched  or
the  temple  is  built,  but  in  every  town  and
village  of  Canaan — ^In  all  your  dwellings.
In  the  sanctuary  itself  the  peculiar  charao-
teristics  of  the  sabbath  were  a  holy  con-
vocation, the  renewal  of  the  shewbrend,  and
the  burnt  offering  of  two  lambs  with  their
meat  and  drink  offerings  (Numb,  zzviii.
fl,  10);  elsewhere  it  was  observed  only  by
the  holy  convocation  and  rest  from  all
labour.  It  commenced  at  sunset  on  Friday
evening,  and  continued  till  sunset  on
Saturday  evening.  Ip  later  days  the  Iiour
at  which  it  began  was  announced  by  three
blasts  of  the  priests'  trumpets,  immediately
after  which  a  new  course  of  priests  entered
on  their  ministry.

Ver.  4. — This  verse  repeats  the  statement
or  heading  contained  in  ver.  2,  with
reference  to  the  annual  holy  day,  the  sab-
bath having  been  disposed  of  in  ver.  3.

Ver.  5. — In  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first
month  at  even  is  the  Lord's  passover.  The
month  of  Nisan  was  made  the  first  month  of
the  religious  year  in  consequence  of  the  origi-
nal Passover  having  taken  place  in  it  (Exod.
xii.  2).  On  the  occasion  of  the  "first,  or
Egyptian,  Passover,  all  heads  of  a  family,
either  singly  or  two  or  three  heads  of  families
in  conjunction,  provided  themselves  with  a
Iamb  or  a  kid  on  the  10th  day  of  Nisan,
killed  it  in  the  evening  of  the  14th,  and,
taking  a  bunch  of  hysscip,  dipped  it  in  the
blood  and  struck  the  lintel  and  two  side
posts  of  the  doors  of  their  bouses  with  the
blood.  They  then  roasted  the  animal  whole
for  eating,  added  to  it  unleavened  bread,
and  garnished  it  with  bitter  herbs.  They
made  themselves  ready  to  eat  it  by  dressing
themselves  for  a  journey,  "  with  their  loins
girded,  their  shoes  on  their  feet,  and  their
staff  in  their  hands"  (Exod.  xii.  II),  and
thus  they  ate  it  in  haste,  in  a  standing
position.  The  meaning  of  the  ceremony  is
explained  by  what  was  taking  place  at  the
same  tiiw.    On  the  same  night,  after  the


blood  bad  been  sprinkled  upon  the  lintel
and  side  posts,  God  slew  the  firstborn  of  all
who  had  not  exhibited  this  symbol  of  their
having  been  brouglit  into  covenant  with
himself,  and  the  Israelites  set  off  hurriedly
on  their  departure  from  Egypt.  It  was
commanded  that  the  day  should  be  kept
hereafter  in  like  manner  as  a  memorial,  and
that  the  following  seven  days  should  be
kept  as  a  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  (Exod.
xii.  14, 15).  This  command  is  here  concisely
repeated,  as  it  is  again  repeated  in  Dent,
xvi.  I — 8.  One  very  considerable  change
was,  however,  necessarily  made  in  the  method
of  its  observance.  Originally,  each  head  of
a  household  or  combination  of  households
sacrificed  the  lamb  himself,  and  sprinkled
the  blood  upon  the  doorposts  and  linteL
But  after  the  establishment  of  the  Aaronio
priesthood  and  the  withdrawal  of  the
priestly  authority  previously  vested  in  each
head  of  a  house  (chs.  viii.,  ix.),  and  after  the
stringent  prohibition  of  sacrificing  else-
where than  in  the  court  of  the  tabernacle
had  been  issued  (ch.  xvii.),  this  could  not
continue.  Accordingly,  we  find  in  the  Book
of  Deuteronomy  the  direct  injunction,
"Thou  mayest  not  sacrifice  the  Passover
within  any  of  thy  gates,  which  the  Lord  thy
God  giveth  thee;  but  at  the  place  which
the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose  to  place  bii
Name  in,  there  thou  shalt  sacrifice  the  Pass-
over at  even,  at  the  going  down  of  the  sun,
at  the  season  that  thou  earnest  forth  out  of
Egypt"  (xvi.  5,  6).  A  result  from  this  rule
was  that  every  male  Israelite  had  to  present
himself  at  Jerusalem,  and  there  slay  his
lamb  on  the  day  of  the  Passover,  which  in
the  time  of  Nero,  brought  between  two  and
three  million  pilgrims  to  Jerusalem  each
year.  The  crowd  of  pilgrims  took  their
way  to  the  temple,  and  were  admitted  into
the  court  in  tliree  divisions.  There  they
slew  each  man  his  lamb,  while  the  priests
offered  the  blood  on  the  altar,  and  the
Levites  sang  the  Hallel  (Ps.  cxiii. — cxviii.).
Then  they  bore  away  the  lambs,  roasted
them  whole  on  a  spit  of  pomegranate  wood,
taking  care  that  no  bone  should  be  broken,
and  prepared  the  Paschal  supper.  At  the
supper,  as  well  as  at  the  sacrifice,  a  change
of  manner  was  introduced.  "  As  the  guests
gathered  round  the  Paschal  table,  they
came  no  longer,  as  at  the  first  celebration,
with  their  loiT>s  girded,  with  shoes  on  Uieir
feet,  and  a  staff  in  their  hands ;  that  is,  as
travellers  waiting  to  take  their  departure.
On  the  contrary,  they  were  arrayed  in  their
best  festive  garments,  joyous  and  at  rest,
as  became  the  children  of  a  king.  To
express  this  idea,  the  rabbis  also  insisted
that  the  Paschal  supper,  or  at  least  part  of
it,  must  be  eaten  in  that  recumbent  position
with  which  we  are  familiar  from  the  New


CH.  xxm.  i — 6.]


THE  BOOK  OP   LEVITICUS.


Ml


Teatsment.  'For,'  say  they,  'they  use
this  leaning  posture,  as  free  men  do,  in
memorial  of  their  freedom.'  And  again,
'  Because  it  is  the  manner  of  slaves  to  eat
standing,  therefore  now  they  eat  sitting  and
leaning,  in  order  to  show  that  they  have
been  delivered  from  bondage  into  freedom.'
And  finally,  '  No,  not  the  poorest  in  Israel
may  eat  till  he  has  sat  down,  leaning.'  But
though  it  was  deemed  desirable  to  sit  lean-
ing during  the  whole  Paschal  supper,  it
was  only  absolutely  enjoined  while  par-
taking of  the  bread  and  the  wine  "  (Eders-
heim,  'Temple  Service').  The  essentials
of  the  Paschal  feast  were  the  Paschal
lamb,  the  unleavened  bread,  and  the  bitter
herbs  (Exod.  xii.  8).  To  these  were  after-
wards added  a  dish  formed  from  an  animal
sacrificed  on  the  Passover  day,  a  composi-
tion of  dates  and  other  dried  fruits,  and  four
cups  of  red  wine  mixed  with  water,  the
last  of  which  came  to  be  regarded  as  essen-
tial as  that  which  had  been  commanded
in  the  Law.  The  Babbi  Gamaliel  is  re-
ported by  the  Mishna  to  have  said,  "  Who-
ever fails  to  explain  three  things  in  the
Passover  fails  to  fulfil  his  duty.  These
are  the  Paschal  lamb,  the  unleavened  bread,
and  the  bitter  herbs.  The  Paschal  lamb
means  that  God  passed  over  the  houses  of
our  fathers  in  Egypt,  which  were  sprinkled
with  blood ;  the  unleavened  bread,  that  our
fathers  were  hurried  out  of  Egypt;  the  bitter
herbs,  that  the  Egyptians  made  the  lives  of
our  fathers  in  Egypt  bitter "  (Pes.  x.  15).
The  wine  was  regarded  so  necessary  an
adjunct,  that  it  is  ordered  that  every  house-
holder must  provide  himself  with  four  cups,
even  if  he  had  to  sell  or  pawn  his  coat,  or
hire  himself  out  for  a  servant,  or  receive
money  from  the  poor's  box,  in  order  to  do
■o  (Pes.  i.).  The  supper  began  with  drink-
ing the  first  cup  of  wine,  before  which  a
grace,  or  thanksgiving,  of  the  following
character  was  said : — "  Blessed  art  thou,
Jehovah  our  God,  who  hast  created  the
fruit  of  the  vine  1  Blessed  art  thou,  Jehovah
OUT  God,  King  of  the  universe,  who  hast
chosen  us  from  among  all  people,  and  exalted
na  from  among  all  languages,  and  sanctified


ni  with  thy  commandments  I  And  thou  hast
given  us,  in  love,  the  solemn  days  for  joy,
and  the  festivals  and  appointed  seasons  for
gladness,  and  this,  the  day  of  the  Feast  of
Unleavened  Bread,  the  season  of  our  free-
dom, a  holy  convocation,  the  memorial  of  our
departure  from  Egypt.  For  us  hast  thou
chosen;  and  us  h^st  thou  sanctified  firom
among  all  nations,  and  thy  holy  festivals
with  joy  and  with  gladness  hast  thou  caused
us  to  inherit.  Blessed  art  thou,  O  Lord,
who  sanotifiest  Israel  and  the  appointed
seasons  I  Blessed  art  thou.  Lord,  King  of
the  universe,  who  hast  preserved  us  aUve,
and  sustained  us,  and  brought  us  to  this
season "  (Ederaheim,  '  Temple  Service  ').
After  drinking  the  first  cup,  there  followed
•  general  washing  of  hands,  after  which
the  company  ate  some  of  the  bitter  herbs.
Then  the  second  cup  was  filled,  and  in
order  to  carry  out  the  injunction  of  Exod.
xii.  26,  27,  the  youngest  member  of  the
company  inquired,  "What  mean  ye  by
this  service?"  And  the  president  of  the
feast  replied,  "  It  is  the  sacrifice  of  the
Lord's  Passover,  who  passed  over  the  houses
of  the  children  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  when
he  smote  the  Egyptians,  and  delivered  our
houses."  At  the  same  time,  he  explained
the  purport  of  the  unleavened  bread  and
the  bitter  herbs,  and  called  upon  the  com-
pany to  give  thanks  for  what  God  had
wrought  for  them  and  for  their  fathers,  end-
ing with  Ps.  cxiii.,  cxiv.,  sung  by  all  present.
The  second  cup  was  then  drunk,  and  after
a  second  ^Yashing  of  hands,  the  unleavened
bread  was  broken,  and  thanks  again  given,
after  which  the  pieces  of  bread,  the  bitter
herhs,  the  other  sacrificial  dish  (if  any),
and  the  Paschal  lamb  were  partaken  of  in
turn.  The  third  cup  was  then  filled,  thanks
were  again  given,  and  the  cup  was  drunk.
This  cup  had  the  name  of  the  "cup  of
blessing,"  owing  to  the  blessing  said  over  it,
and  it  was  succeeded  after  an  interval
by  the  fourth  cup,  when  Ps.  oxv. — oxviii.
(which,  with  Ps.  cxiii.,  cxiv.,  made  up  the
Hallel)  were  sung,  followed  by  a  prayer  of
thanksgiving.


H0MTLETIC8.

Ver.  6.— The  Paschal  supper  was  ebgerved  by  our  Lord  In  obedience  to  the  oommand
In  Exod.  xii.  14 ;  oh.  xxiil.  5 ;  Deut.  xvi.  I7-8,  in  the  following  manner,  so  far  as  wa
•re  able  to  gather  from  the  narrative  of  the  gospel.

I.  He  sent  Pbteb  and  John  befoeehand  to  pbbpabk  the  Passovbb.  The  first
step  in  the  preparation  of  the  Passover  was  the  purchase  of  the  Paschal  lamb.  We
may  see  the  two  disciples,  after  they  had  been  led  by  the  man  bearing  a  pitcher  of
water  to  the  house  where  the  feast  was  to  be  held,  providing  themselves  with  a  lamb,
unleavened  bread,  the  bitter  herbs,  and  that  other  dish  into  which  the  sop  was  after-
wiide  dipped ;  then  carrying  the  lamb  to  the  temple,  to  be  sacrificed  in  the  court.   This


349  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxin.  1—5,


was  on  the  afternoon  of  Nisan  14.  Admitted  into  the  court  of  the  temple,  iK.  .<ne  or
other  of  the  three  divisions  into  which  the  mass  of  the  pilgrims  and  residents  wem
divided,  they  would  have  slain  the  lamb,  and,  after  the  blood  had  been  thrown  on  the
altar  by  the  priests,  they  would  have  carried  the  body  to  the  house  in  which  the  pre-
parations for  the  Master's  eating  the  Passover  were  being  made.

II.  He  selected  his  Paschal  company.  The  rule  was  that  the  company  should
not  consist  of  less  than  ten  persons.  In  the  present  case  it  amounted  to  thirteen.
Around  him  were  gathered  his  twelve  disciples,  with  whom  "he  desired  with  desire  to
eat  the  Passover  before  he  suffered"  (Luke  xxii.  15).

III.  He  ENTKi.Eu  INTO  Jerusalem  in  okdeb  that  he  might  eat  the  Passoveb
IN  the  place  which  the  Lobd  had  chosen.  (Dent.  xvi.  7.)  "  It  was  probably  u
the  sun  was  beginning  to  decline  in  the  horizon  that  Jesus  and  the  other  ten  disciples
descended  once  more  over  the  Mount  of  Olives  into  the  holy  city.  Before  them  Ie^
Jerusalem  in  her  festive  attire.  All  around  pilgrims  were  hastening  towards  it.  White
tents  dotted  the  sward,  gay  with  the  bright  flowers  of  early  spring,  or  poured  out  from
the  gardens  and  the  darker  foliage  of  the  olive  plantations.  From  the  gorgeous  temple
buildings,  dazzling  in  their  snow-white  marble  and  gold,  on  which  the  slanting  rays  of
the  sun  were  reflected,  rose  the  smoke  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offering.  These  courts  were
now  crowded  with  eager  worshippers,  offering  for  the  last  time,  in  a  real  sense,  their
Paschal  lambs.  The  streets  must  have  been  thronged  with  strangers,  and  the  flat  roo&
covered  with  eager  gazers,  who  either  feasted  their  eyes  with  a  first  sight  of  the  sacred
city  for  which  they  had  so  often  longed,  or  else  once  more  rejoiced  in  view  of  the  well-
remembered  localities.  It  was  the  last  day  view  which  the  Lord  had  of  the  holy  city
till  his  resurrection.  Only  once  more  in  the  approaching  night  of  his  betrayal  was
he  to  look  upon  it  in  the  pale  light  of  the  full  moon.  He  was  going  forward  to
'  accomplish  his  death '  in  Jerusalem ;  to  fulfil  type  and  prophecy,  and  to  offer  himself
op  as  the  true  Passover  Lamb — '  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the
world.'  They  who  followed  him  were  busy  with  many  thoughts.  They  knew  that
terrible  events  awaited  them,  and  they  had  only  a  few  days  before  been  told  that  these
glorioas  temple  buildings,  to  which,  with  a  national  pride  not  unnatural,  they  had
directed  the  attention  of  their  Master,  were  to  become  desolate,  not  one  stone  being
loft  upon  the  other.  Among  them,  revolving  his  dark  plans  and  goaded  on  by  the
great  enemy,  moved  the  betrayer.  And  now  they  were  within  the  city.  Its  temple,
its  royal  bridge,  its  splendid  palaces,  its  busy  marts,  its  streets  filled  with  festive
pilgrims,  were  well  known  to  them  as  they  made  their  way  to  the  house  where  the
guest-chamber  had  been  prepared  for  them"  (Edersheim,  •  Temple  Service ').

IV.  He  ate  the  Passover  meal  in  the  oitstomabt  manner,  yet  with  buoh
alterations  as  made  it  a  new  institution.  For  example :  1.  He  began  with  the
first  cup,  over  which  he  gave  thanks  as  usual,  and  then  gave  it  to  the  company  to
drink.  It  is  of  this  cup  that  we  read  in  St.  Luke,  "  And  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave
thanks,  and  said,  Take  this,  and.divide  it  among  yourselves"  (xxii.  17).  2.  Instead  of
the  first  washing  of  hands,  he  "  began  to  wash  the  disciples'  feet,  and  to  wipe  them
with  the  towel  wherewith  he  was  girded  "  (John  xiii.  5).  3.  The  feast  then  continued
in  its  usual  order.  The  second  cup,  the  unleavened  bread  (part  of  which  was  "the
sop "  given  to  Judas),  the  bitter  herbs,  and  the  eating  of  the  lamb  followed  in  order.
4.  The  Lord  then  took  some  of  the  unleavened  bread,  and  when  he  had  given  thanks
over  it,  or  blessed  it,  he  brake  it,  and  gave  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said,  "  Take,  eat,  this
U  my  body "  (Matt.  xxvi.  26 ;  Luke  xxii.  19 ;  1  Cor.  xi.  24).  5.  He  took  the  third
cup,  called  "  the  cup  of  blessing  "  (cf.  1  Cor.  x.  16),  "  and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  it  tc
them,  saying,  Drink  ye  all  of  it ;  for  this  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,  which
is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins "  (Matt.  xxvi.  27,  28 ;  Mark  xiv.  23,  24 ;
Luke  xxii.  20;  1  Cor.  xi.  25).  6.  The  fourth  cup,  accompanied  by  the  "hymn,"
or  Hallel  (Matt.  xxvi.  30 ;  Mark  xiv.  26),  no  doubt  finished  the  supper  in  the  usual
manner.

V.  The  Paschal  supper  thus  ceased  for  ever,  and  the  Lord's  Supper  was
instituted  in  its  place.  The  blood  of  the  original  lambs  slain  in  Egypt  received  its
efficacy  in  covering  the  people  of  Israel  and  delivering  them  from  the  visitation  of
God's  angel  of  wrath,  by  its  anticipatory  representation  of  the  blood  of  the  true  Lamb
of  God,  which  was  shed  for  the  deliverance  of  God's  redeemed  upon  the  cross.     Th«


CH.  xxra.  1— 5.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  843

time  had  now  come  for  that  blood  to  be  shed,  and  therefore  the  memorial  and  typical
sacrifices  offered  year  by  year  necessarily  ceased,  the  shadow  being  swallowed  up  in  the
substance,  the  type  in  the  antitype.  In  like  manner,  the  feast  on  the  body  of  the  lamb,
which  represented  the  body  of  Christ,  necessarily  ceased  when  there  was  no  longer  a
lamb  to  bo  sacrificed.  The  Paschal  feast,  if  continued  longer,  would  have  been  an
unmeaning  form,  because  its  meaning  had  become  exhausted.

Jfet,  just  as  Christianity  grew  by  God's  will  out  of  Judaism,  so  a  new  memorial  of
Christ  sprang  out  of  the  old  type.  He  took  the  bread  that  was  before  him,  an  accessory
of  the  old  feast,  and  consecrated  it,  together  with  the  third  cup,  to  represent  his  body
and  blood  in  the  future,  for  a  memorial,  just  as  the  body  of  the  lamb  which  was  eaten
and  the  blood  of  the  lamb  that  was  shed  had  typically  and  by  anticiiiatlon  represented
them  in  the  past.  Thus  the  dead  wood  of  the  old  form,  at  the  moment  of  perishing
blossomed  into  new  life.

The  Passover  was  to  be  kept  as  "  a  feast  to  the  Lord  throughout  your  generations ;
ye  shall  keep  it  a  feast  by  an  ordinance  for  ever  "  (Exod.  xii.  14) ;  and  any  one  who
did  not  keep  the  feast  was  to  "  be  cut  off  from  Israel "  (Exod.  xii.  15).  In  like  manner,
the  Lord's  Supper  is  to  continue,  the  bread  is  to  be  eaten  and  the  cup  to  be  drunk,  as
the  means  of  showing  forth  the  Lord's  death  "  till  he  come."  The  one  ordinance  is  of
as  permanent  a  nature  as  the  other,  and  the  neglect  of  it  may  cause  people  to  incur  a
no  less  penalty  in  the  second  case  than  in  the  first.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS,

The  offering  of  rest ;  the  sahlath.  Ch.  xxiii.  1 — 3 ;  cf.  Gen.  ii.  2,  3 ;  Exod.  xvi.  22 ;
XI.  8 — 11 ;  Mark  ii.  23 — 28 ;  Kev.  i.  10.  In  the  sacrificial  worship  we  come  across  what
is  essentially  different  as  an  offering  from  the  sacrifice  of  an  animal  or  of  any  palpable
possession,  and  yet  is  a  real  sacritice  all  the  while — we  mean  that  of  time.  The  sabbath,
as  an  offering  of  rest,  has  consequently  a  very  high  place  among  the  Jews.  As  Ewald
has  remarked,  it  is  the  only  sacrifice  which  finds  a  place  among  the  ten  commandments.
No  wonder  he  regards  it  as  "  the  greatest  and  most  prolific  thought "  in  the  Jewish
religion.     And  here  let  us  notice^

I.  The  high  value  man  usually  sets  on  his  time.  It  is  indeed  said  to  be  money.
Many  will  make  almost  any  other  sacrifice  more  willingly  than  that  of  their  time.
They  will  give  money,  valuables,  almost  anything  you  like  to  ask,  except  their  precious
time.  What  a  fuss  made  about  an  evening  devoted  to  you  by  a  busy  friend,  or  half  an
evening,  or  sometimes  half  an  hour !

Hence,  in  demanding  from  man  a  proportion  of  his  time,  God  asks  for  what  man
esteems  highly  and  is  loth  to  give.  Time  is  regarded  as  so  peculiarly  man's  own,  to
do  what  he  likes  in,  that  it  becomes  no  light  sacrifice,  but  rather  the  crown  of  all
sacrifices,  when  a  considerable  portion  of  time  is  made  over  unto  God.

II.  The  demand  God  makes  is  in  man's  interest,  fok  it  is  for  rest  after
LABOUR.  Six  days  of  work,  and  then,  saith  God,  one  day  ot  rest.  The  body  needs  it.
Seven  days'  unceasing  toil  wcnld  soon  take  the  heart  out  of  all  workers,  and  bring  on
premature  decay.  God  himself  has  set  the  example.  After  the  untold  labours  of  the
creation,  after  the  hard  work — if  we  may  reverently  use  such  terms  of  God — of  the
creative  periods,  he  has  entered  into  the  long  sabbath  of  human  history.  He  is  in
the  midst  of  it  now.  This  is  implied  by  the  words  of  Jesus,  "My  Father  worketh
hitherto,  and  I  work  "  (John  v.  17),  in  their  connection.  And  so  a  restful  Father  in
heaven  calls  upon  his  toiling  children  upon  earth  to  rest,  as  he  has  done,  one  day  out  oi
seven,  and  not  sink  through  unceasing  labour.  So  consonant  is  this  weekly  rest  with
the  laws  of  our  physical  nature,  that  some,  who  do  not  see  clearly  the  scriptural  proof
and  obligation  of  a  holy  day,  believe  that  it  might  safely  be  allowed  to  rest  upon  the
foundation  of  physical  need.  But  the  needs  of  others,  alas  I  constitute  no  sufficient
sanction  with  selfish  men.  God  must  speak  and  make  his  demand,  else  men  will  run
counter  to  their  general  welfare  in  their  self-indulgence.

III.  God's  best  is  to  be  characterized  by  social  worship.  Man  is  not  to  spend
his  seventh  day  in  inactivity.  He  is  not  to  loiter  about  his  tent  or  gossip  at  its  door
all  ite  day.    "There  i.s  to  be  "  an  holy  convucation  "  (ii'.7j3"«'ij3p).     The  day  is  to  be


344  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  [ch.  xxiii.  1— 6.

celebrated  by  social  worship.  The  people  were  expected  to  gather  in  their  thousand!
to  praise  the  Lord.  Were  it  not  for  such  a  regulation  as  the  sabbath,  with  its  publia
serrices,  even  Judaism  could  not  have  survived.

The  same  reason  still  holds  for  a  holy  sabbath.  In  the  interests  of  religion  it  must
be  observed.  What  would  become  of  our  holy  religion  if  a  set  time  for  its  weekly
observance  were  not  generally  kept  ?  Men  need  these  "  trysting  times  "  and  "  trysting
places  "  (as  ^]?in,  in  ver.  2,  might  very  properly  be  translated),  that  religion  may  keep
its  position  among  us.

We  may  imagine  what  our  land  would  be  if  no  Lord's  day  were  kept,  if  no  sabbath
bells  summoned  people  to  public  prayer,  and  no  preachers  got  their  weekly  oppor-
tunities. It  would  soon  be  an  irreligious  land,  carelessness  and  indifference  reigning
throughout  it  in  a  measure  infinitely  greater  than  they  do  even  now.

IV.  The  day  op  best  is  to  be  begaeded  as  the  Loed'&  "  It  is  the  sabbath  of  the
Lord  in  all  your  dwellings."  The  Jew  regarded  the  sabbath  as  "  the  Lord's  day."  It
was  the  day  of  the  week  that  God  regulated,  and  all  whose  hours  he  claimed  as  his.
We  claim  as  much  for  "  the  first  day  of  the  week  "  imder  our  dispensation.  We  ask
men  to  lay  the  day  as  a  hearty  offering  on  God's  altar.  They  are  not  doing  so  while
they  spend  it  as  they  like.  It  is  to  be  a  holy  day,  not  a  holiday;  a  holy  day,
and  therefore  to  a  holy  soul  a  happy  day,  the  day  in  which  we  can  rejoice  and  be  glad.
When  we  can  say  with  John,  "  I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  diiy,"  we  are  sure
to  have  most  precious  visions  of  the  Lord's  beauty  and  glory  (cf.  Rev.  i.  10,  etc.).

It  is  no  contention,  therefore,  about  something  Jewish,  but  simply  about  something
honestly  dedicated  as  a  day  to  God.  Those  who  contend  against  the  strict  observance
of  the  Lord's  day  either  labour  under  a  total  misapprehension  about  the  way  some
people  spend  it,  or  are  really  bent  upon  devoting  the  day  to  their  own  purposes  instead
of  to  God's.  If  we  are  commonly  honest,  we  shall  esteem  it  only  right  to  surrender  at
the  highest  offering  of  our  religious  life  the  seventh  of  our  time  to  him  who  deserves
it  all.

"  Man,  then,"  says  Ewald,  "  shall  release  his  soul  and  body  from  all  their  burdens,
trith  all  the  professions  and  pursuits  of  ordinary  life,  only  in  order  to  gather  himself
together  again  in  God  with  greater  purity  and  fewer  disturbing  elements,  and  renew  in
him  the  might  of  his  own  better  powers.  If,  then,  the  interchange  cf  activity  and
rest  is  already  founded  in  the  nature  of  all  creation,  and  is  the  more  beneficial  and
health-bringing  the  more  regular  its  recurrence,  so  should  it  be  found  here  too ;  yet
not  as  when,  in  the  night  and  in  sleep,  the  body  is  cared  for,  but  as  when,  in  a  joyous
day  of  unfettered  meditation,  the  spiritual  man  always  finds  his  true  rest,  and  thereby
is  indeed  renewed  and  strengthened." — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Tht  sabbath.  This  is  here  classed  amongst  the  "  feasts  of  the  Lord."
The  greater  number  of  these  were  first  observed  after  the  settlement  of  the  Israelites  in
Canaan ;  but  the  Passover  was  an  exception,  which  was  held  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus,
forty  years  earlier.    The  sabbath  also  was  an  exception.     M'e  have  to  consider —

I.  "The  OBLiaATioN  op  the  sabbath.     1.  /*  is  not  altogether  a  Mosaic  institution.

SI)  Its  original  enactment  took  place  at  the  close  of  the  creation  week.  The  words  are
hese  (see  Gen.  ii.  1 — 3).  (2)  It  was,  therefore,  an  Adamic  law,  and  was  obligatory
upon  mankind  at  large  more  than  twenty  centuries  before  the  Israelites  had  an  exist-
ence. (3)  It  was  by  the  Israelites  themselves  recognized  as  a  patriarchal  law.  For,
in  the  wilderness  of  Sin,  probably  three  months  before  they  were  fully  constituted  into
a  nation  by  receiving  their  own  Law  at  Sinai,  the  double  portion  of  manna  which  they
gathered  on  the  sixth  day  had  respect  to  the  sabbath  to  follow  on  the  seventh  (see
Biod.  xvi.  22 — 30).  2.  Jt  was  incorporated  in  the  Sinai  code.  (1)  It  formed  the
fourth  commandment  of  the  Decalogue  (Exod.  xx.  8 — 11).  But  even  here  it  is  intro-
duced with  the  word  "  Bemember,"  as  a  law  already  known  to  exist.  The  reason  for
its  observance  also  is  that  given  at  the  original  institution.  (2)  As  a  Levitical  law,
however,  it  has  an  additional  reason,  viz.  the  deliverance  of  the  children  of  Israel  from
the  cruel  servitude  in  Egypt,  where  they  could  not  enjoy  the  rest  of  the  ancient  insti-
tution (Deut.  T.  15 ;  see  also  Heb.  iv.  8,  margin).  (3)  In  this  relation  also  dtath  was
made  the  penalty  of  its  transgression  (see  Exod.  xxxi.  13 — 16 ;  Numb.  xv.  32—36).
3.  n»  Lwitical  law  of  the  sabbath  is  repealed.    (1)  The  body  is  of  Christ,  who  fulfilled


OH.  ixm.  1— 5.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUa  «4S

the  type  of  the  deliverance  from  the  hondage  of  Egypt  in  emancipating  us  from  th«
bondage  of  sin.  (2)  The  Levitical  penalty  of  death  for  the  transgression  of  the  Law
ii,  of  course,  removed  with  the  obligation  of  the  Law  itself.  4.  But  the  Adamie  law
remains.  (1)  As  Grentiles,  we  were  never  under  the  Levitical  Law.  The  institution  of
the  Levitical  sabbath,  or  the  incorporation  of  the  patriarchal  sabbath  in  the  Mosaic
code,  left  us  still  where  we  were,  under  the  Adamie  law.  (2)  And  as  the  enactment  ol
the  Mosaic  Law,  which  mainly  concerned  the  Hebrew  people  and  their  land,  left  us
where  we  were,  so  do  we  remain  there  after  the  abrogation  of  the  Mosaic  Law.  (3)
But  what  effect  has  that  abrogation  upon  the  Hebrew  ?  It  leaves  him  where  he  was
before  the  publication  of  bis  Law,  viz.  in  common  with  mankind  at  large,  still  under
obligation  to  observe  and  keep  the  sabbath  of  the  Adamie  law.  (4)  This  reasoning  is
equally  good,  whether  we  identify  the  sabbatic  law  as  set  out  in  the  Decalogue  with  the
Adamie  law  on  the  one  hand,  or  with  the  Levitical  on  the  other.

U.  How  IT  SHOITLD  BE  KEPT.  It  should  be  kept :  1.  As  a  day  of  rest  from  business.
(1)  The  idea  of  rest  is  expressed  in  its  name.  It  was  the  most  obvious  idea  in  the
injunction  from  the  beginning.  God  hallowed  it,  or  separated  it  from  the  six  days  of
the  week,  because  on  the  seventh  day  he  rested  from  the  work  of  the  creation,  (2)  The
rest  of  God  does  not  imply  that  he  was  weary  from  his  work,  but  that  he  ceased  from
the  action  of  creating.  This  is  the  import  of  the  word  (n«»i).  The  teaching  is  that
God  so  constituted  his  creation-  that  bis  active  creatures  need  a  hebdomadal  pause  or
rest.  (3)  To  ensure  this  to  them  he  mercifully  constituted  it  into  a  law.  He  foresaw
that  otherwise  it  would  be  refused  under  the  influence  of  cupidity,  avarice,  tyranny,
and  itupidity.  2.  As  a  day  of  holy  convocation.  (1)  Best  being  secured  from  the
toil  of  business,  the  activities  of  the  soul  have  now  to  be  turned  into  another  course.
(Mange  really  constitutes  the  rest  of  an  essentially  active  nature.  So  the  rest  of  God
from  creation  is  his  work  in  providence  and  redemption.  This  our  Lord  taught  us  when
he  said,  "  My  Father  worketh  hitherto,"  or  until  now  (lopi  Hpn)  (John  v.  16,  17 ;  comp.
Ps.  xxxi.  19).  (2)  That  change  which  is  the  greatest  from  the  activities  of  business  is
communion  with  God  in  his  worship  and  service.  This  seems  to  have  constituted  the
blessing  of  the  seventh  day,  for  on  that  day  God  visited  his  children  in  Eden.  Ever
since  it  has  been  the  season  sacred  to  religious  services.  (3)  Men  must  not  be  diverted
from  this  noblest  of  pursuits  by  seeking  their  own  pleasure  on  the  sabbath  day  (Isa.
Iviii.  13).  3.  As  a  day  of  prophetic  anticipation.  (1)  Barnabas  (in  his  Epistolse,
cap.  XV.)  puts  this  subject  thus :  "  Attend,  my  children,  to  what  he  says,  'finished  in  six
days ' — that  is  to  say,  in  six  thousand  years  the  Lord  God  will  consummate  all  things,
for  with  him  the  day  is  a  thousand  years,  as  he  himself  testifies,  saying,  '  Behold,  this
day  shall  be  as  a  thousand  years.'  Therefore,  children,  in  six  days — that  is,  in  six
thousand  years — all  things  shall  be  consummated.  And  he  rested  the  seventh  day,  that
is,  when  his  Son  shall  come  and  make  an  end  of  the  time  of  the  wicked  one,  and  shall
judge  the  ungodly,  and  shall  change  the  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars ;  then  shall  he  rest
gloriously  in  the  seventh  day."  (2)  These  views  seem  to  be  in  harmony  with  the
sacred  calendar  of  prophecy.  And  Paul  in  particular  refers  to  the  "sabbath-keeping
which  remaineth  for  the  people  of  God  "  (Heb.  iv.). — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  3. — Aspects  of  the  sabbath.    We  are  reminded  of —

I.  Its  origin  in  bablibst  human  histokt.  "  The  seventh  day  is  the  sabbath  of
rest"(seeGen.  ii.  2,  3).

II.  The  special  oblioation  kestino  on  Isbabl,  as  a  kedebmed  people,  to  observe
IT.  "The  Lord  thy  God  brought  thee  out  thence  .  .  .  therefore  the  Lord  thy  God
commanded  thee  to  keep  the  sabbath  day  "  (Deut.  v.  15).  We,  also,  as  those  redeemed
at  far  greater  cost,  may  feel  ourselves  on  this  ground  constrained  to  observe  it.

III.  Its  place  in  the  prophetic  testimont.  It  is  deeply  significant  that  the
prophets,  who  were  the  rebukers  of  mere  ritualism  and  the  advocates  of  the  moral  and
spiritual  elements  in  religion,  should  have  given  so  high  a  place  as  they  did  to  the
observance  of  the  sabbath  (see  Isa.  L  10 — 15,  comp.  with  Ivi.  2  and  Iviii.  13,  14).

IV.  iTi  Chbistuh  aspect.  1,  It  commemorates  Ihe  greatest  fact  in  human  history
—the  resurrection  of  our  Lord.  The  crowning  act  of  redemption  is  more  to  us  than  the
crowning  act  of  creation.  2.  Its  obligation  rests  not  on  any  one  positive  precept,  but  on
the  known  will  of  Christ.    8.  It  meets  the  two  great  wants  of  man— his  bodily  and  his


346


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  XXIII.  6 — 44.


spiritual  reqiiirementg.  4.  It  is  to  be  observed:  (1)  in  the  Church,— it  is  to  bo  "an
holy  convocation;"  (2)  in  the  home,— "in  all  your  dwellings."  As  individual  soula
we  shall  seek  to  honour  our  Lord  and  gain  access  of  spiritual  strength  in  the  sanctuary ;
as  parents  we  shall  do  our  best  to  make  the  sabbath  a  holy,  happy,  welcome  day  to  the
children  in  our  homes. — 0.


EXPOSITION,


Ver.  8. — ^The  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread
was  instituted  at  the  same  time  with  the
Feast  of  tte  Passover  (Bxod.  xii.  15—17),
and  from  the  beginning  the  two  festivals
were  practically  but  one  festival,  never
separated,  though  separable  in  idea.  The
Passover,  strictly  so  called,  lasted  but
one  day,  Nisan  14;  the  Feast  of  Un-
leavened Bread  lasted  seven  days,  Nisan
15 — 21.  The  whole  made  a  festival  of  eight
days,  called  indifferently  the  Feast  of  the
Passover,  or  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread.
The  bread  to  be  eaten  throughout  the
festival  was  unleavened,  in  order  to  remind
the  Israelites  of  the  historical  fact  that  on
account  of  the  urgency  of  the  Egyptians,
"  the  people  took  their  dough  before  it  was
leavened,  their  kneadiugtrougha  being
bound  up  in  their  clothes  upon  their
■boulders  "  (Exod.  xii.  34),  and  quitted  the
land  of  their  afSiction  in  baste.  Accordingly,
in  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  it  is  appointed,
"Seven  days  shalt  thou  eat  unleavened
bread  therewith,  even  the  bread  of  afSiction ;
for  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt  in  haste :  that  thou  mayeat  remember
the  day  when  thou  earnest  forth  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt  all  the  days  of  thy  life"
(Deut.  xvi.  3).

Vers.  7,  8. — The  first  and  the  last  day
were  to  be  days  of  holy  convocation,  on  which
no  servile  work  might  be  done.  It  was  on
the  first  day,  Nisan  15,  that  our  Lord  was
crucified.  The  Pharisees  found  nothing  in
the  holiness  of  the  day  to  prevent  their
taking  virtual  part  in  his  seizure  and  con-
demnation and  death.;  but  we  are  told  by
St.  John  that  "  they  themselves  went  not
into  the  judgment  hall,  lest  they  should  be
defiled,  but  that  they  miglit  eat  the  Pass-
over "  (John  xviii.  28).  What  is  meant  in
this  passage  by  "  the  Passover "  is  not  the
Paschal  lamb  which  had  already  been  con-
sumed, but  probably  the  peace  offering,  or
ehagigak,  which  had  to  be  offered  $,nd  eaten
on  the  first  day  of  Unleavened  Bread.  The
public  sacrifices  on  each  of  the  seven  days
of  the  week  were  two  young  bullocks,  one
ran,  and  seven  It  mbs  for  a  burnt  offering.


with  the  accompanying  meat  offerings,  and
one  goat  for  a  sin  offering  (Numb,  xxviii.
19 — 24).  And  these  were  followed  by  peace
offerings  made  at  the  discretion  of  indi-
viduals, "  according  to  the  blessing  of  the
Lord  which  he  had  given  them"  (Deut.
xvi.  17).

Vers.  9 — 14. — A  second  command  is  given
on  the  subject  of  the  Feast  of  Unleavened
Bread  respecting  those  ceremonies  which
were  only  to  be  made  use  of  when  the
Israelites  had  reached  Canaan.  It  has
reference  to  the  second  day  of  Unleavened
Bread,  which  is  called  the  morrow  after
the  sabbath,  the  first  day  of  the  feast  being
meant  by  thesahbath,  on  whatever  day  of
week  it  may  have  occurred.  It  was  on  this
second  day  that  the  presentation  of  the  first
or  wave  sheaf  of  barley  took  place,  according
to  the  command,  Ye  ^all  bring  a  sheaf  of
the  firstfruits  of  your  harvest  unto  the
priest:  and  he  shall  wave  the  sheaf  before
the  Lord,  to  be  accepted  for  you:  on  the
morrow  after  the  sabbath  the  priest  shall
wave  it.  Which  command  wag  fulfilled  in
the  following  manner.  "Already,  on  the
14th  of  Nisan,  the  spot  whence  the  first  sheaf
was  to  be  reaped  had  been  marked  out  by
delegates  from  the  Sanhedrim,  by  tying
together  in  bundles,  while  still  standing,  the
barley  that  was  to  be  cut  down.  Though
for  obvious  reasons  it  was  customary  to
choose  for  the  purpose  the  sheltered  Ashes
valley  across  Kedron,  there  was  no  restric-
tion on  that  point,  provided  the  barley  had
grown  in  an  ordinary  field — of  course  in
Palestine  itself — and  not  in  garden  or
orchard  land,  and  tl  lat  the  soil  liad  not  been
manured  nor  yet  artificially  watered.  When
the  time  for  cutting  the  sheaf  had  arrived,
that  is,  on  the  evening  of  the  15th  of  Nisan
(even  though  it  was  a  sabbath)  just  as
the  sun  went  down,  three  men,  each  with
a  sickle  and  basket,  formally  set  to  work.
But  in  order  clearly  to  bring  out  all  that
was  distinctive  in  the  ceremony,  they  first
asked  of  the  bystanders  three  times  each  of
these  questions  :  '  Has  the  sun  gone  down  ? '
'With  this  sickle?'  'Into  this  basket?'
'  On  this  sabbath  ? '  (or  first  Passover
day);  and  lastly,  ' Shall  I  reap ? '  Having
been  each  time  answered  in  the  affirmative,
they  cut  down  barley  to  the  amount  of  one
ephah,  or  ten  omers,  or  three  seahs,  whioh  ia


OH.  xxm.  6 — 44.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


M7


equal  to  about  three  pecks  and  three  pints
of  our  English  measure.  The  ears  were
brought  into  the  court  of  the  temple"
(Edersheim,  'Temple  Service')-  The  sheaf
composed  of  these  ears  (for  the  Authorized
Version  is  right  in  considering  that  it  is
the  sheaf,  and  not  the  omer  of  flour  made
out  of  the  ears  of  barley,  that  is  meant  by
loy,  though  JosephuB  and  the  Mishna  take
it  the  other  way)  was  on  the  following  day
waved  by  the  priests  before  the  Lord,  in
token  of  its  consecration,  and  through  it,  of
the  consecration  of  the  whole  barley  crop  to
the  Lord.  With  it  was  offered  the  burnt
offering  of  a  lamb,  a  meat  offering  double
the  usual  quantity,  and  a  drink  offering.
This  passage  and  vers.  18  and  37,  are  the
only  places  in  the  Book  of  Leviticus  where
the  drink  offering  is  mentioned.  Until  the
waving  of  the  sheaf,  neither  bread  nor
parched  com,  nor  green  ears,  that  is,  no
grain  in  any  form,  might  be  eaten.  We
may  imagine  how  delicacies  made  of  the
new  flour  would  at  once  appear  in  the
streets  af  soon  as  the  iheaf  had  been
Ttaved.

Vers.  15—21  -The  Feast  of  Pentecost
lasted  but  one  day.  Trom  the  morrow  after
the  sabbath — ^that  is,  from  the  second  day  of
Unleavened  Bread — the  day  that  ye  brought
tile  sheaf  of  the  wave  offering;  seven  sab-
baths, i.e.  weeks,  were  to  be  counted,  making
forty-nine  days,  and  on  the  day  following
the  completion  of  the  seventh  sabbath  (mean-
ing here  the  seventh  week),  the  festival  was
to  be  held,  whence  its  later  name  of  Pente-
cost, or  Fiftieth-day  Feast.  It  would  have
fallen  about  the  beginning  of  June — a
season  of  the  year  which  would  have  made
the  journey  to  Jerusalem  easy.  The  cha-
racteristic offering  of  the  day  was  that  of
two  wave  loaves  of  two  tenth  deals  ...  of
fine  flour  .  .  .  baken  with  leaven.  These
loaves  were  regarded  as  the  firstfruits  unto
the  Lord  of  the  wheat  harvest,  although
the  greater  part  of  the  crop  had  now  been
reaped  and  housed.  They  were  to  be
leavened  and  brought  out  of  your  habita-
tions ;  that  is,  they  were  to  consist  of  such
bread  as  was  ordinarily  used  in  daily  life.
They  were  made  out  of  ears  of  wheat  se-
lected and  cut  like  the  barley  in  the  Feast
of  Unleavened  Bread,  and  then  threshed
and  ground  in  the  temple  court.  Each
loaf  contained  an  omer  of  flour,  amounting
to  about  flve  pints,  and  would  therefore
have  weighed  about  five  pounds.  With
these  were  offered  two  lambs,  which  were
waved  before  the  Lord  by  being  led  back-
wards and  forwards  before  the  tabernacle  or
the  temple,  and  then  the  loaves  were  waved
also,  but  they  were  not  placed  upon  the
altar,  as  they  were  leavened.  The  twentieth
veru,  which  is  somewhat  obscure  in  the


Authorized  Version,  should  be  pnnotnuMl
as  follows.  And  the  priest  shall  wave  them
(the  two  lambs)  with  the  bread  of  the  fiist-
fmits  (the  two  loaves)  for  a  wave  offering
before  the  Lord;  with  the  two  lambs  they
(the  loaves)  shall  be  holy  to  the  Lord  for  the
priest.  The  other  sacrifices  to  be  offered
on  this  day  are  described  in  the  text  as
seven  lambs,  .  .  ,  one  young  bnUook,  and
two  rams  .  .  ,  for  a  burnt  offering  onto
the  Lord,  with  their  meat  offering,  and  their
drink  offerings, .  .  .  and  one  kid  of  the  goats
for  a  sin  offering.  In  the  Book  of  Numbers
(xzviii.  27)  they  are  stated  to  be  "seven
lambs,"  "two  young  bullocks,"  "one ram,"
with  meat  and  drink  offerings,  and  "one
kid  of  the  goats."  Seeing  that  in  Leviticus
one  young  bullock  and  two  ram»  are  com-
manded, and  in  Numbers  "two  young
bullocks  and  one  ram,"  it  is  reasonable  to
suppose  that  a  copyist's  error  has  found
its  way  into  one  or  the  other  text.  The
feast  was  to  be  kept  as  a  day  of  holy  con-
vocation, and  no  servile  work  was  to  be
done  upon  it  The  number  of  sacrifices
offered  by  individuals  who  had  come  to
Jerusalem  caused  the  festivity  to  be  in
practice  continued  for  several  days  subse-
quent to  the  festival  itself.

Ver.  22. — When  ye  reap  the  harvest  of
your  land.  The  legislator  pauses  in  his
enunciation  of  the  festivals  to  add  the  rule
of  charity,  already  laid  down  in  the  nine-
teenth chapter,  as  to  leaving  the  gleanings
unto  the  poor,  and  to  the  stranger.

Vers.  23 — 25. — In  the  seventh  month,  in
the  first  day  of  the  month.  Only  one  of  the
monthly  festivals  is  named  in  this  chapter,
because  it  is  the  only  one  on  which  a  holy
convocation  was  to  be  held.  The  first  day
of  the  seventh  month  we  should  expect  to  be
holier  than  the  first  day  of  any  other  month,
on  account  of  the  peculiar  holiness  of  the
seventh  month,  and  because  it  was  the
beginning  of  the  civil  year.  It  is  to  be  a
sabbath';  that  is,  a  festival  observed  by  rest,
and  a  memorial  of  blowing  of  trumpets.  The
latter  words  should  be  rather  rendered  a
memorial  of  a  joyful  noise.  That  these  joy-
ful sounds  were  made  by  blowing  the  cornet,
we  may  well  believe  from  the  testimony  of
tradition,  but  the  text  of  Holy  Scripture
does  not  state  the  fact,  and  the  use  of  the
word  trumpets  in  place  of  "  cornets  "  leads  to
a  confusion.  Every  new  moon,  and  among
them  that  of  the  seventh  month,  was  ob-
served by  the  blowing  of  trumpets  (Numb.
X.  10),  but  the  trumpets  then  blown  differed
in  their  use  and  shape  from  the  comet.
The  trumpet  was  a  long-shaped,  metal  in-
strumeot,  at  first  used  to  give  the  signal  for
marching,  afterwards  to  serve  as  the  sign  of
the  arrival  of  the  monthly  festival;  the
comet  was  an  animal's  horn,  or,  if  not  a  real


348


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[oh.  xxm.  6 — it.


horn,  an  inBtrument  formed  In  the  shape  of
a  hom,  and  it  was  used  to  express  joyful
emotions,  answering  somewhat  to  our  modem
bell-ringing  in  the  West,  or  firing  unloaded
guns  in  the  East.  Besides  the  blowing  of
trumpets,  special  sacrifices  were  appointed
for  the  first  of  each  month,  "two  young
bullooks,  and  one  ram,  seven  lambs,  with
their  meat  and  drink  offerings,  for  a  burnt
offering,  and  "  one  kid  of  the  goats  "  for  a
sin  offering  (Numb,  xxviii.  H — 15).  On
New  Year's  Day,  which,  from  its  difference
&om  the  other  new  moons,  was  an  annual
a<  well  as  a  monthly  feast,  the  special  offer-
ings were  "  one  young  bullook,  one  ram,  and
seven  lambs,"  with  their  meat  and  drink
offerings  for  a  burnt  offering,  and  "  one  kid
of  the  goats"  for  a  sin  offering;  and  these
were  to  be  in  addition  to  the  offerings  made
on  the  first  day  of  each  month  (Numb.  xxlz.
2 — 6).  It  became  a  eustom  for  the  Levites  to
ehant  at  the  morning  sacrifice  Ps.  IxxxL,
and  at  the  evening  sacrifice  Ps.  xxix.  The
great  joyfulness  of  the  day  is  shown  by  the
account  given  of  its  observance  in  the  Book
of  Nehemiah.  It  wab  on  the  first  day  of
the  seventh  month  that  Ezra  read  the  Book
ot  the  Law  publicly  to  the  people,  and  when
"the  people  wept,  when  they  heard  the
words  of  the  Law,"  Nehemiah  and  Ezra  and
the  Levites  said,  "This  day  is  holy  unto
the  Lord  yonr  God ;  mourn  not,  nor  weep.
...  Go  your  way,  eat  the  fat,  and  drink
the  sweet,  and  send  portions  unto  them  for
whom  nothing  is  prepared :  for  this  day  is
holy  unto  our  Lord :  neither  be  ye  sorry ;
for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength.  So
the  Levites  stilled  all  the  people,  saying.
Hold  your  peace,  for  the  day  is  holy ;  neither
be  ye  grieved.  And  all  the  people  went
their  way  to  eat,  and  to  drink,  and  to  send
portions,  and  to  make  great  mirth,  because
they  had  understood  the  words  that  were
declared  imto  them  "  (Neh.  viii.  9 — 12).

Ver.  26 — 32. — The  ceremonies  to  be  ob-
served on  the  day  of  atonement  have  been
already  described  in  ch.  xvl.,  where  it  found
its  place  as  the  great  purification  of  the
people  and  of  the  sanctuary.  Here  it  is
reintroduced  as  one  of  the  holy  days.  It  is
the  one  Jewish  fast ;  to  be  observed  as  a  day
of  holy  convooation,  a  day  in  which  to  afSict
youi  souls  and  to  offer  an  offering  made  by
Ire  unto  the  Lord,  and  in  which  no  manner
•f  work  was  to  be  done ;  inasmuch  as,  like
the  weekly  sabbath,  it  was  a  sabbath  of  rest
from  the  ninth  day  of  the  mouth  at  even,
from  even  unto  even.  The  time  of  year  at
which  it  was  appointed  showi  that  one
purpose  of  its  institution  was  to  make
■olemn  preparation  f6r  the  joyous  festival
of  Tabernacles,  which  was  to  follow  in  five
days'  time,  when  the  people  ought  to  be  in  a
state  of  reoonoiliation  with  God.


Vers.  33— 36.— The  third  of  the  great
festivals,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles — be-
ginning on  the  15th  of  Tisri,  as  the  Feast
of  Unleavened  Bread  began  on  the  15th  of
Nisan — lasted  seven  days,  and  was  followed
by  an  octave;  on  two  days,  the  first  day
and  its  octave,  there  is  to  be  an  holy  convo-
cation, and  on  these  no  servile  work  is  to
be  done.  The  eighth  day  is  also  a  solemn
assembly.  The  meaning  of  the  word  atzereth,
translated  a,  solemn  assembly,  is  doubtful.
It  occurs  ten  times  in  the  Hebrew  Scrip-
tures, and  appears  to  signify  (1)  the  last
day  of  a  feast  (see  John  vii.  37,  where  men-
tion is  made  of  "the  last  day,  that  great
day  of  the  feast ") ;  (2)  a  solemn  assembly
held  on  the  last  day  of  a  feast ;  whence  it
comes  to  mean  (3)  a  solemn  assembly.  The
Jews  gave  the  name  to  the  Feast  of  Pente-
cost, as  being  the  close  of  the  Feast  of
Unleavened  Bread.  On  each  of  the  seven
days  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was  to  bo
offered  an  offering  made  by  fire  onto  the
Lord.  The  sacrifices  to  be  offered  are  enu-
merated in  Numb.  xxix.  12 — 38.  There
were  to  be  sacrificed  two  rams,  and  four-
teen Iambs,  and  bullocks  diminishing  by
one  a  day  from  thirteen  on  the  first  day  to
seven  on  the  last.  These  formed  the  burnt
sacrifices.  The  sin  offering  on  each  day
was  one  Md  of  the  goats.  On  the  eighth
day  the  burnt  offering  consisted  of  one
bullock,  one  ram,  seven  lambs,  and  the  sin
offering,  as  before,  of  one  kid  of  the  goats.
Thus  there  were  offered  in  all,  in  the  eight
days,  seventy-one  bullocks,  fifteen  rams,
one  hundred  and  five  lambs,  and  eight  kids,
beside  meat  and  drink  offerings.

Vers.  37,  38. — These  verses  form  the  con-
clusion of  the  immediate  subject.  The
feasts  have  been  enumerated  in  which  holy
convocations  are  to  be  held  and  public  sacri-
fices offered ;  these  sacrifices,  it  is  explained,
not  including  those  of  the  sabbath  or  of
individual  offerers.

Vers.  39 — 44. — A  further  instruction  re-
specting the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  ap-
pended. When  ye  have  gathered  in  the
fruit  of  the  land,  not  necessarily  at  the  com-
pletion of  the  ingathering,  but  at  the  time  at
which  the  festival  is  held,  ye  shall  take  you
on  the  first  day  the  boughs  of  goodly  trees.
The  word  in  the  Hebrew,  in  its  literal
acceptation,  means  fruits  of  goodly  trees.
and  hence  in  later  times  a  misunderstand-
ing arose  (see  2  Mace.  x.  6,  7),  which  led  to
the  graceful  praotioe  of  carrying  in  the  left
hand  citrons  (the  fruit  of  goodly  trees),  and
in  the  right  hand  myrtles,  palms,  and
willows.  It  appears,  however,  that  the  word
signifies  in  this  place  rather  products  &an
fruits,  namely,  leaves  and  branches.  Th«
command,  therefore,  would  be^  ye  shall  take
yon  .  .  .  produot*  of  goodly  trees,  branches


OH.  xxiu.  6 — 44.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


349


of  palm  trees,  and  the  boughs  of  thick  trees,
and  willows  of  the  brooks.  Originally,
the  purpose  of  these  boughs  was  to  make
booths,  as  is  shown  by  Neh.  viii.  15,  16,
"  Go  forth  unto  the  mount,  and  fetch  olive
branches,  and  pine  branches,  and  myrtle
branches,  and  palm  branches,  and  branches
of  thick  trees,  to  make  booths,  as  it  is
written.  So  tba  people  went  forth,  and
brought  them,  and  made  themselves  booths."
And  ye  shall  rqoice  before  the  Lord  your
6od  aeven  days.    Acoatdingly  we  find  when


the  feast  was  observed  by  Ezra,  after  the
long  interval  from  the  days  of  Joshua,
"  there  was  very  great  gladness "  (Neh.
viii.  17).  The  reason  of  the  injunction  to
dwell  in  booths  is  that  your  generations
may  know  that  I  made  the  children  of  Israel
to  dwell  in  booths,  when  I  brought  them  out
of  the  land  of  £gypt;  that  is,  on  the  first
night  after  they  liad  been  delivered  from
Egypt,  and  encamped  at  Succoth  (Exnd
xii.  37).


HOMILETIOa.

Vers.  9—21 ;  39 — 43. — The  harvest  festivals  among  ourselves  receive  a  sanction  &om
the  divinely  appointed  harvest  festivals  of  the  Jews,  which  were  three  in  number.

I.  The  Pabsoveb  habvest  festival.  1.  On  Nisan  14,  the  selection  of  the  field
and  the  ears  of  barley  which  were  to  be  cut.  2.  On  I^isan  15,  the  progress  of  three
appointed  delegates  to  the  spot,  as  the  sun  went  down,  with  sickles  and  baskets ;  the
reaping  of  the  barley  that  had  been  marked  to  be  cut,  and  its  conveyance  to  the  court
of  the  temple.  3.  On  Nisan  16,  the  waving  of  one  sheaf  of  the  barley  before  the  Lord,
in  token  that  the  whole  crop,  of  which  it  was  the  firstfruits,  was  offered  to  the  Lord  in
gratitude  for  his  having  given  it  to  man  for  his  food.  Not  until  the  firstfruits  had  been
presented  to  God  might  the  new  year's  barley  be  used.  The  firstfruits  having  been
made  holy,  the  whole  lump  was  holy.

II.  The  Pentecost  harvest  festival.  1.  At  the  beginning  of  the  wheat  harvest,
the  reservation  of  the  field  from  which  the  ears  of  wheat  were  to  be  cut.  2.  On  the
forty-ninth  day  from  Nisan  15,  the  progress,  as  before,  of  three  appointed  delegates  to
the  spot,  with  sickles  and  baskets ;  the  reaping  of  the  wheat  that  had  been  marked  ;  its
conveyance  to  the  court  of  the  temple ;  its  threshing,  winnowing,  and  grinding,  and
the  formation  out  of  it  of  two  loaves  made  with  leaven.  3.  On  the  fiftieth  day  from
Nisan  15,  the  waving  of  the  two  loaves  before  the  Lord,  in  tokeii  that  the  whole  wheat
crop,  like  the  barley  crop  before,  was  sanctified  for  the  use  of  man  by  a  sample  portion
of  it  having  been  given  to  God.  Not  till  after  this  might  the  meat  offering  be  made
of  the  new  flour.  4.  On  the  same  day  and  subsequent  days,  the  private  ofi'i  ring  of  first-
fruits,  which  might  not  be  brought  until  the  national  offering  of  the  firstfruits  of  the
wheat  harvest  had  been  made,  biit  kept  up  the  harvest  joyousness  from  that  time  to
the  end  of  the  year.  From  each  of  the  twenty-four  districts  into  which  Palestine  was
divided  came  a  company.  Each  morning,  while  they  were  on  the  road  to  Jerusalem,
their  leader  summoned  them  with  the  words,  "  Come  ye,  and  let  us  go  up  to  Zion,  and
unto  Jehovah  our  God"  (Jer.  xxxi.  6),  and  they  answered,  "I  was  glad  when  they
said  unto  me,  Let  us  go  into  the  house  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  cxxii.  1).  "  First  went  one
who  played  the  pipe;  then  followed  a  sacrificial  bullock,  destined  for  a  peace  offering,
his  horns  gilt  and  garlanded  with  olive  branches ;  next  came  the  multitude,  some  carry-
ing the  baskets  with  firstfruits,  others  singing  the  psalms  which  many  writers  suppose
to  have  been  specially  destined  for  that  service,  and  hence  to  have  been  called  'The
Songs  of  Ascent,'  in  our  Authorized  Version  'The  Psalms  of  Degrees.'  The  pooriT
brought  their  gifts  In  wicker  baskets,  which  afterwards  belonged  to  the  oSioiating
priests ;  the  richer  theirs  in  baskets  of  silver  or  of  gold,  which  were  given  to  the  temple
treasury.  .  .  .  And  so  they  passed  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land,  every-
where waking  the  echoes  of  praise.  As  they  entered  the  city,  they  sang  Ps.  cxxii.  2,
'  Our  feet  .shall  stand  in  thy  gates,  0  Jerusalem.'  ...  As  they  reached  the  temple
mount,  each  one,  whatever  his  rank  or  condition,  took  one  of  the  baskets  on  his  shoulder,
and  they  ascended  singing  that  appropriate  hymn, '  Praise  ye  the  Lord.  Praise  God
in  his  sanctuary ;  praise  him  in  the  firmament  of  his  power '  (Ps.  cl.).  As  they
entered  the  temple  itself,  the  Levites  intoned  Ps.  xxx., '  I  will  extol  thee,  0  Lord ;
for  thou  hast  lifted  me  up,  and  hast  not  made  my  foes  to  rejoice  over  me ' "  (Bdersheim,
'  Temple  Service ').    The  ceremonies  of  the  actual  presentation  are  detailed  in  Deut.


350  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxin.  «--44,

ixri.,  "  Thou  shalt  go  unto  the  priest  that  shall  be  in  those  days,  and  say  unto  him,  I
profess  this  day  unto  the  Lord  thy  God,  that  I  am  come  unto  the  country  which  the
Lord  sware  unto  our  fathers  for  to  give  us.  And  the  priest  shall  take  the  basket  out
of  thine  hand,  and  set  it  down  before  the  altar  of  the  Lord  thy  God.  And  thou  shalt
speak  and  say  before  the  Lord  thy  God,  A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was  my  father,  and
he  went  down  into  Egypt,  and  sojourned  there  with  a  few,  and  became  there  a  nation,
great,  mighty,  and  populous :  and  the  Egyptians  evil  entreated  us,  and  afflicted  us,  and
laid  upon  us  hard  bondage :  and  when  we  cried  unto  the  Lord  God  of  our  fathers,  the
Lord  heard  our  voice,  and  looked  on  our  affliction,  and  our  labour,  and  our  oppression :
and  the  Lord  brought  us  forth  out  of  Egypt  with  a  mighty  hand,  and  with  an  out-
stretched arm,  and  with  great  terribleness,  and  with  signs,  and  with  wonders :  and  he
hath  brought  us  into  this  place,  and  hath  given  us  this  land,  even  a  land  which  floweth
with  milk  and  honey.  And  now,  behold,  I  have  brought  the  firstfruits  of  the  land,
which  thou,  0  Lord,  hast  given  me.  And  thou  shalt  set  it  before  the  Lord  thy  God,
and  worship  before  the  Lord  thy  God:  and  thou  slialt  rejoice  in  every  good  thing
which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given  unto  thee,  and  unto  thine  house,  thou,  and  the
Levite,  and  the  stranger  that  is  among  you  "  (Deut.  xxvi.  3 — 11).

III.  The  Inqatherinq  harvest  festival.  1.  The  dwelling  in  booths  for  a  week
in  memorial  of  the  encampment  at  Succoth,  when  the  Israelites  for  the  first  time  felt
themselves  to  be  free  men.  2.  The  rejoicing  for  the  final  ingathering  of  the  olives  and
grapes  and  the  other  fruits  of  the  earth.  "  Thou  shalt  keep  the  Feast  of  Ingathering,
which  is  in  the  end  of  the  year,  when  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  labours  out  of  the
field  "  (Bxod.  xxiii.  16).  "  Thou  shalt  observe  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  seven  days,
after  that  thou  hast  gathered  in  thy  corn  and  thy  wine:  and  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  thy
feast,  thou,  and  thy  son,  and  thy  daughter,  and  thy  manservant,  and  thy  maidservant,
and  tlio  Levite,  the  stranger,  and  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  that  are  within  thy
gates  "  (Deut.  xvi.  13,  14).  3.  The  carrying  of  the  cethrog,  or  oitron,  and  of  the  lulav,
or  palm,  together  with  a  myrtle  and  willow  branch.  4.  On  the  last  day  of  the  feast,
the  drawing  water  from  the  pool  of  Siloam  (a  ceremony  of  a  post-Mosaic  date).  "  While
the  morning  sacrifice  was  being  prepared,  a  priest,  accompanied  by  a  joyous  procession,
with  music,  went  down  to  the  pool  of  Siloam,  whence  he  drew  water  into  a  golden
pitcher  capable  of  holding  three  logs  (rather  more  than  two  pints).  .  .  .  The  priest  then
went  up  the  rise  of  the  altar  and  turned  to  the  left,  where  there  were  two  silver  basins
with  narrow  holes — the  eastern  a  little  wider  for  the  wine,  and  the  western  somewhat
narrower  for  the  water.  Into  these  the  wine  of  the  drink  offering  was  poured,  and  at
the  same  time  the  water  from  Siloam "  (Edersheim,  '  Temple  Service ').  Our  Lord
shows  the  true  symbolism  of  this  ceremony  to  be  the  gift  of  the  Spirit.  5.  The  further
post-Mosaic  ceremony  of  lighting  four  golden  candelabra  in  the  court  of  the  women
on  the  night  of  the  first  day  of  the  feast,  the  wicks  in  the  candelabra  having  been
made  of  the  robes  of  the  priests  worn  out  during  the  past  year.  This  ceremony
probably  symbolized  illumination  by  the  Spirit.

IV.  MoBAL  LESSON.  The  duty  of  thankfulness.  It  b  a  rabbinical  saying  '.bat  the
Holy  Spirit  dwells  in  man  only  through  joy.  This  is  an  exaggeration,  but  it  teaches
a  truth  which  is  forgotten  wherever  asceticism  comes  to  be  a  subject  of  admiration.
The  service  of  God  is  a  joyous  service.  "  Thou  shalt  rejoice  before  the  Lord  "  (Deut.
xvi.  11)  is  the  injimction  of  the  Old  Testament;  "Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway;  and
again  I  say,  Eejoice  "  (Phil.  iv.  4),  is  that  of  the  New  Testament.  It  is  right  that  there
should  be  special  occasions  on  which  this  joy  may  be  exhibited  and  encouraged.  Hence
the  reasonablenaw  of  festivals  and  holy  days.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0E3.

The  Pastovtr.  Ch.  xxiii.  4 — 8 ;  cf.  Exod.  xii. ;  also  1  Cor.  t,  7,  8.  In  addition  to
the  weekly  "  offering  of  rest,"  there  were  emphasized  offerings  of  a  similar  character  at
select  seasons  throughout  the  Jewish  year.  These  were  to  bring  to  remembrance
great  national  deliverances,  or  to  celebrate  the  blessings  with  which  Jehovah  crowned
the  year.  The  first  of  these  feasts  was  the  Passover.  It  was  to  celebrate  the  deliver-
ance pieceding  the  Exodus.    It  began  with  •  holy  convocation ;  there  vai  then  a


OH.  xxm.  8— 44.  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  «51

week  of  complete  freedom  from  leaven ;  and  then  a  holy  convocation  completed  the
special  observances.  Burnt  offerings  were  also  presented  of  a  special  character  every
day  of  the  holy  week.     The  following  line  of  thought  is  suggested  by  this  feast.

I.  The  whole  pofulation  in  Egypt  was  exposed  to  a  common  danger.  It  it
evident  from  the  narrative  that  the  destroying  angel  might  justly  have  carried  death
into  every  house,  and  that  it  was  only  the  special  arrangement  which  prevented  his
doing  so.  For  though  a  difference  was  made  between  the  Egyptians  and  the  Israelites,
it  had  its  reason  and  its  root  in  God's  sovereign  grace.  The  Israelites  may  not  have
carried  their  enmity  to  God  with  so  high  a  hand  as  the  Egyptians,  yet  their  pilgrimage
demonstrated  that  the  hostility  was  there.  The  judgment  on  the  firstborn  was  conse-
quently only  a  sample  of  what  all  deserved.

Unless  we  begin  with  the  truth  that  "  there  is  no  difference,"  for  "  all  have  sinned
and  come  short  of  God's  glory,"  we  are  likely  to  underestimate  the  grace  which  maketh
us  afterwards  to  differ.  We  are  not,  properly  speaking,  in  a  state  of  probation,  but  in
a  state  either  of  condemnation  or  of  salvation.  "  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned
already  "  (John  iii.  18)  ;  "  he  that  believeth  is  not  condemned."  When  we  start  with
the  idea  that  we  are  really  culprits  and  condemned  already,  we  are  stirred  up  to  lay
hold  by  faith  of  the  deliverance.  How  we  reach  the  blessed  condition,  "There  is
therefore  now  no  condemnation,"  is  beautifully  symbolized  by  the  Passover.    For —

II.  Gton'S  PLAN   OF    DELIVBBANOE  WAS   THROUGH   THE   SPRINKLING  OP   BLOOD.      Each

Israelite  was  directed  to  take  a  lamb  and  slay  it,  and  sprinkle  on  the  doorpost  and
lintel,  with  a  hyssop  branch,  its  blood.  The  destroying  angel  respected  the  sprinkled
blood,  and  passed  over  the  houses  on  which  it  appeared.  Here  was  God's  plan,  by  the
saciifice  of  the  life  of  an  innocent  substitute  to  secure  the  remission  of  the  sins  of  his
people.

And  need  I  say  that  the  Paschal  lamb  was  one  of  the  most  beautiful  types  of  Jesus  ?
He,  as  our  Passover,  was  "  sacrificed  for  us  "  (1  Cor.  v.  7).  It  is  through  his  blood  we
have  remission.  His  life,  laid  down  in  payment  of  the  penalty,  secures  our  just  release.
The  destroying  angel -pnsses  over  all  who  are  under  the  shelter  of  Christ's  blood.

III.  The  Paschal  lamb  was  to  afford  life  as  well  as  secure  deliverance.
Boasted  with  fire,  with  bitter  herbs  and  unleavened  bread,  it  was  to  be  eaten  by  all  the
delivered  ones.  Within  the  blood-protected  houses  they  stood  and  partook  of  a
wholesome  meal.  It  entered  into  their  physical  constitution,  and  strengthened  them
to  begin  their  journey.

In  the  same  way  does  Jesus  Christ  sustain  all  who  trust  in  him.  He  becomes  our
Life.  He  strengthens  us  for  our  wilderness  journey.  The  Exodus  from  Egypt  becomes
easy  through  his  imputed  strength.  And  so  our  Lord  spoke  not  only  of  eating  his
flesh,  but  even  of  drinking  his  blood  (John  vi.  54),  and  so  receiving  his  eternal  life.
Not  more  surely  does  vital  power  come  to  the  body  through  the  digestion  of  food  than
does  spiritual  power  come  to  the  soul  through  partaking  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  We
vre  not  only  saved  from  wrath  through  him,  but  sustained  by  his  life.

IV.  The  Passover  was  the  date  of  a  new  life.  An  Exodus  began  with  the
■' jst  Passover,  succeeded  by  a  wilderness  journey ;  and  every  succeeding  Passover  pre-
ceded a  week  of  feasting  on  unleavened  bread.  Thus  was  a  new  and  heroic  life  re-
garded as  dating  from  the  Passover.  Hence  the  Lord  changed  the  year  at  its  institution,
and  made  it  the  beginning  of  months  with  his  people.

The  same  is  experienced  by  believers.  Unless  our  salvation  by  Christ's  blood  is  suc-
ceeded by  pure  living  and  the  putting  away  of  "  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness  "
(1  Cor.  V.  8),  we  are  only  deceiving  ourselves  by  supposing  we  are  saved.  Our  salva-
tion is  with  a  view  to  our  pilgrimage  and  purity.  Therefore  we  must  keep  the  Feast  of
Unleavened  Bread  as  well  as  celebrate  the  Passover.  It  will  not  do  to  accept  of  salva-
tion as  an  "  indulgence."  God  makes  no  arrangement  for  impunity  in  sin.  The  death
of  the  Lamb  shows  plainly  that  under  God's  government  no  sin  will  go  unpunished.
To  purity  we  are  consequently  called  as  part  and  parcel  of  a  Divine  salvation. — B.  M,  E.

The  Feast  of  the  Firstfruits.  Ch.  xxiii.  9—14 ;  of.  Prov.  iii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  20.  The
Feast  of  the  Firstfruits  began  on  the  second  day' of  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,  as  the
fifteeath  and  sixteenth  verses  about  Pentecost  imply.  And  curiously  enough,  the  she^  i
ii  the  ffl-stfruits  was  to  be  waved  "on  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath,"  that  is,  on  wh:i'


352  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxiii. «— 44

eorrespondt  to  our  present  "  Lord's  day."  Such  a  coincidence  should  not  be  overlooked,
and  was  manifestly  designed.  If  the  Passover  speaks  of  the  death  of  Jesus,  the  first-
fniiti  are  surely  intended  to  speak  of  hit  resurrection.  The  death  of  the  Paschal  lamb
and  the  presentation  of  the  flrstfruits  occupy  the  same  temporal  relation  as  the  death
of  Jesus  and  his  resurrection.  Hence  we  find  in  this  arrangement  the  following
lessons  :—

L  Thb  FiBSTFBimii  HAiiLOWED  THB  suxsEQUENT  HABVE8T.  They  Were  s  grateful
acknowledgment  of  Qod'g  hand  in  the  harvest,  and  at  the  same  time  the  condition-  of
ita  being  properly  gathered.  As  one  writer  has  very  properly  said,  "  It  removed  the
impediment  which  stood  opposed  to  its  being  gathered,  the  ceremonial  impurity,  if  I
may  so  say,  which  was  attached  to  it  previous  to  the  waving  of  the  sheaf  before  the
Lord,  until  which  time  it  was  unlawful  to  make  use  of  it.  The  prohibition  on  tliis
head  was  express.  '  And  ye  shall  eat  neither  bread,  nor  parched  corn,  nor  green  ears,
until  the  selfsame  day  that  ye  have  brought  an  offering  unto  your  God :  it  shall  be  a
statute  for  ever  throughout  your  generations  in  all  your  dwellings '  (ver.  14).  There
was,  then,  you  perceive,  an  imputed  uncUcmnest  attached  to  the  harvest  before  the
offering  of  the  mrstfruits,  but  which,  when  the  sheaf  was  presented,  was  done  away ;
and  thus  it  ia  written,  'he (the  priest)  shall  wave  the  sheaf  before  the  Lord  to  he  accepted
for  yoti.'"'  Now,  it  is  very  plain  from  this  that  Christ,  the  Firstfruits,  hallows  the
subsequent  human  harvest.  The  great  ingathering  of  souls  depends  on  the  preceding
Firstfruits  fw  consecration  and  acceptance.  Thus  do  we  see  in  symbol  that  he  was
"  raised  for  our  justification  "  (Rom.  iv.  25).

II.  Thb  FiRSTFBmrs  webe  thb  eabnest  of,  the  cohino  habtest.  Here  was  a
sample  of  what  was  coming  and  was  at  hand.  It  was  first  ripe,  but  the  rest  was  on  its
way.  In  the  very  same  way,  the  resurrection  of  the  Saviour  is  the  earnest  and  pledge
of  that  of  his  people.  Hence  Paul  says,  "  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and
become  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that  slept.  For  since  by  man  came  death,  by  man
came  also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall
all  be  made  alive.  But  every  man  in  his  own  order :  Christ  the  Firstfruits ;  afterward
they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming"  (Cor.  xv.  20 — 23).  Hence  we  take  the  risen
Saviour  as  at  once  the  pledge  of  the  resurrection  of  his  people,  and  the  tample  of  what
our  resurrection  is  to  be.  On  the  pledge  implied  by  his  resurrection  we  need  not  dwell.
It  is  clear  from  1  Cor.  xv.  and  from  other  Scriptures  that  his  resurrection  is  the  sure
guarantee  of  ours.

The  other  thought  involved  is  quite  as  precious.  "  Our  citizenship  is  in  heaven ;
from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  who  shall  change  our
body  of  himiiliation,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,  according  to
the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself"  (Phil.  iii.  20,
21),  Just  as  Jesus  in  his  post-resurrection  life  of  forty  days  on  earth  showed  marvellous
superiority  to  the  laws  of  nature  by  which  these  bodies  of  humiliation  are  bound,  just
as  he  was  able  on  ministries  of  mercy  to  pass  with  the  speed  of  thought  from  place  to
place,  to  enter  through  barred  doors,  and  vanish  like  a  vapour  when  he  had  dispensed
Ids  peace, — so  do  we  hope  to  be  possessed  of  an  organ  more  consonant  to  the  aspirations
of  our  spirits,  and  better  adapted  than  our  present  bodies  can  be  to  fulfil  the  purposes  of
God.  The  forty  days  before  the  ascension  of  our  Saviour  afford  the  insight  now  needed
into  the  conditions  of  our  future  life,  when  we  too  are  gathered  as  sheafs  that  are  ripe
into  the  gamer  above.  "  We  know  that,  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him."
-B.  M.  B.

Uke  Pentecost.  Oh.  xxiii.  15 — 21 ;  cf.  Acts  ii. ;  also  Jer.  ii.  3  ;  Eom.  xi.  16  ;  and
las.  L  18.  Having  found  in  the  firstfruits  a  typical  reference  to  the  resurrection  of
Christ,  we  have  no  difficulty  on  the  same  line  in  finding  in  the  harvest  festival  seven
weeks  thereafter  typical  reference  to  the  harvest  of  the  Church  of  God.  Primarily  it
was  eucharistic  in  character,  but  this  does  not  exhaust  its  meaning.  It  was  exactly
fifty  days  after  the  Exodus  that  the  Law  was  given  on  Sinai,  and  so  Pentecost  was
asaoiaated  from  the  outset  with  the  "  revival  of  the  Church  of  God."  What  happened
in  th«  P«ntecost  after  our  Lord's  last  Passover  was  the  baptism  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and
•  NTivad  interest  in  God's  holy  Law.

•  Lowe,  on  '  The  Annual  Feasts  of  the  Jews,'  pp.  27,  28.


OH.  xxm.  6— 44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  853

Now,  on  turning  to  the  directions  about  Pentecost,  we  find  that  "  firstfruits  "  were
again  to  be  presented  to  the  Lord,  but,  unlike  the  earlier  firstfruits  during  the  week  of
unleavened  bread,  these  were  to  be  prepared  with  leaven,  and  they  were  to  be  accom-
panied by  a  sin  ofiering  as  well  as  burnt  ofiierings  and  peace  offerings.  It  is  evident,
therefore,  that  there  is  an  element  in  the  Pentecostal  ritual  which  is  not  to  be  found  in
the  previous  ritual  at  all.
If  Christ  is  typified  by  the  first  of  the  firstfruits  presented  without  leaven,  hit
ople  gathered  out  of  the  nations  may  well  be  typified  by  the  second  firstfruits,  the
accompanying  leaven  indicating  their  sinful  character,  notwithstanding  that  they  are
his,  and  the  sin  offering  most  appropriately  accompanying  tl^eir  typical  dedication.

I.  Let  us  obsebye  that  the  idea  of  the  fibbtfbuits  is  applied  to  thm
Lord's  people  several  tiues  in  ScBiprnBE.  Thus  Jeremiah  calls  Israel  "  holiness
unto  the  Lord,  and  the  firstfruits  of  his  increase  "  (ii.  3).  The  same  thought  re-
appears in  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Bomans,  "  If  the  firstfruits  be  holy,  the  lump  is  also
holy "  (xi.  16).  James  also  speaks  of  the  Lord's  children  in  such  terms  as  these :
"  Of  his  own  will  begat  he  us  with  the  word  of  truth,  that  we  should  be  a  kind  of  first-
fruits  of  his  creatures"  (i.  18).  The  harvest-field  of  God  is  the  world,  and  those
who  are  already  gathered  are  the  firstfruits.  They  are  so  far  the  consecrated  element
in  the  mighty  population,  and  in  spirit  are  laid  upon  God's  altar.

II.  There  seems  a  bignifioance  in  the  two  loaves.  "  Why,"  it  has  been  said,
"  should  the  lump  be  divided  into  two  parts,  and  not  be  presented  whole  ?  In  order,  I
would  venture  to  suggest,  to  set  forth  the  two  component  jiarta  of  the  Christian  Church
— ^the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  hoth  made  one  in  Christ."  >  Out  of  the  harvest-field  of  the
world  the  Lord  requires  two  loaves  to  be  presented,  the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles,  laid  in
their  unity  on  his  altar.  Paul  brings  out  this'  with  ^eat  beauty  in  Eph.  ii.  14 — 18,
where  the  unity  of  Jews  and  Gentiles  in  Jesus  Christ  is  pointed  out.

IIL  After  all,  the  consecbation  of  the  Lord's  people  is  an  impebfeot  tbino.
Christ's  consecration  was  perfect  because  sinless.  Ours  is  imperfect  and  "  mired  with
the  trails  of  sin."  Well  may  the  firstfruits  be  baked  with  haven ;  well  may  a  sin
offering  be  presented  along  with  them.  Our  holiest  acts  could  not  stand  alone,  but
need  to  be  repented  ofl  Atonement  has  to  cover  the  holiest  efforts  of  the  Lord's
people.

Thus  is  all  spiritual  pride  kept  under,  since  at  our  very  best  we  are  "  unprofitable
servants."

IV.  The  Pentecostal  outpouring  after  our  Lord's  ascension  presents  the
SIALITT  of  which  THE  RITUAL  WAS  THE  TYPE.  In  this  glovious  ingathering  there
was :  1.  A  penitential  spirit.  It  was  for  this  Peter  called  (Acts  ii.  38).  2.  A  world-
wide imitation  (Acts  ii.  39).  The  promise  was  to  those  "  that  are  afar  off,  even  as  many
as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call."  3.  A  separation  of  many  from  the  world,  that  they  might
consecrate  themselves  to  God  (Acts  ii.  41).   4.  A  great  unity  of  spirit  (Acts  ii.  44—47).

It  is  this  vivifying  inspiration  we  all  need ;  and  may  God  send  it  soon ! — B.  M.  E.

Z7»e  Feast  of  Trumpett.  Ch.  xxiii.  23 — 25;  ct  Numb.  x.  1 — 10;  Exod.  xix.  19;
Pi.  Ixxxix.  16.  The  first  mention  of  the  trumpet  is  in  Exod.  xix.  13, 19,  in  connection
with  the  giving  of  the  Law.  "  When  the  trumpet  soundeth  long,  they  shall  come  up  to
the  mount "  (Exod.  xix.  13).  It  was  God's  method  of  summoning  the  people  to  covenant
privileges.  It  was  further  used  for  the  calling  of  assemblies,  for  the  beginning  of
journeys,  for  alarms,  and  at  the  new  moons  and  festal  seasons,  when  it  was  blown  <yver
the  mcrificei.  Those  who  knew  the  significance  of  the  sacrifices  could  rejoice  in  the
trumpet-sound  which  proclaimed  them  complete.  No  wonder  it  is  said,  "Blessed  is
the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound  "  (nji"i^ ;  literally, "  sound  of  a  trumpet ") :  "  they
shall  walk,  0  Lord,  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  15).

The  analogy  of  faith,  therefore,  warrants  us  in  taking  the  Feast  of  Trumpets  as
symbolical  of  (Jod's  message  of  mercy  to  man.  The  gospel  preached  is  God's  trumpet,
■ummoning  men  to  the  privileges  and  duties  of  the  Christian  life.    This  suggests —

L  The  good  tidings  are  of  a  finished  saobifige.  It  is  only  when  the  sacrifice
of  Jesus  is  the  foundation  of  the  appeal  that  man  is  arrested,  trumpet-like,  by  the

'  Lowe,  ut  tupra,  p.  50.
LBVITIUIIL  2  A


S64  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxiii.  6—44.


gospel.    The  Lamb  has  been  slain,  the  atonement  complete,  and,  consequently,  pool
tinners  are  summoned  to  joy.

It  would  be  no  such  joyful  message  if  we  were  summoned  to  establish  our  own
righteousness  instead  of  submitting,  as  now,  to  the  righteousness  of  God.  It  is  a  present
salvation,  on  the  ground  of  the  finished  sacrifice  of  Jesus,  which  constitutes  the  fountain
of  the  purest  joy.  No  such  joyful  trumpet-tones  were  ever  heard  by  human  ears  in
other  religions  as  God  gives  when  he  says,  "  I  have  heard  thee  in  a  time  accepted,  and
in  the  day  of  salvation  have  I  succoured  thee :  behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time ;  behold,
now  is  the  day  of  salvation  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  2).

II.  The  gospel  trumpet  summons  itb  to  best.  On  the  Feast  of  Trumpets  "ye  sliall
do  no  servile  work  therein."  It  was  a  summons  to  sabbatic  rest.  And  truly  the  gospel
is  a  call  to  put  off  the  servile  spirit,  the  obedience  which  comes  through  fear,  aud  to
enter  into  God's  rest.  "  We  who  believe  do  enter  into  rest."  Christian  experience  is
sabbath  rest  after  the  worry  of  worldly  experience.  We  lay  down  our  burden,  and  pass
into  Divine  peace.  The  Saturday  evening  of  experience  is  when,  through  grace,  we  put
away  our  worldliness,  our  feverish  anxieties,  our  low  and  selfish  ideals,  and  the  sabbath
morning  experience  is  rest  in  God's  love  and  bounty.

III.  The  oospel  tbubh-bt  summons  us  to  personal  sacrifice.  If  the  servile  work
is  to  be  surrendered  for  sabbath  rest,  we  must  go  forward  to  the  duty  indicated.  "  But
ye  shall  offer  an  offering  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord."  For  this  is  the  gospel  plan —
acceptance  and  rest  on  the  ground  of  a  completed  sacrifice,  and  the  personal  dedication
as  a  living  sacrifice  in  gratitude  for  such  unmerited  favour.  From  the  one  Great
Sacrifice  for  us  we  proceed  gratefully  to  such  personal  sacrifice  as  God's  honour  and  glory
require.  The  love  manifested  in  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  "  constrains  us  to  live  not  unto
ourselves,  but  unto  him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again "  (2  Cor.  v.  14,  15).  Self-
righteousness  is  not  self-sacrifice ;  rather  is  it  proud  bargaining  for  that  which  God  offers
as  a  gift.  But,  when  the  gift  is  accepted,  self  is  in  the  acceptance  crucified,  and  a  life
of  devotion  becomes  self-sacrificing  indeed.

IV.  The  gospel  trumpet  is  to  be  succeeded  by  the  trump  op  the  resurbeotion.
All  who  in  their  graves  of  sin  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  who,  through
hearing,  live  (John  v.  25),  are  destined  to  hear  another  joyful  note  from  the  same
trumpet :  "  For  the  hour  is  coming,  in  the  which  all  that  are  in  the  graves  shall  hear
his  voice,  and  shall  come  forth ;  they  that  have  done  good,  unto  the  resurrection  of
life"  (John  v.  28,  29).  This  is  "the  voice  of  the  archangel  and  the  trump  of  God"
through  which  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  (1  Thess.  iv.  16).  "  We  shall  not  all  sleep,
but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last  trump :
(for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,)  and  the  dead  shall  be  raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall
be  changed  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52).

Such  are  the  summonses  which  God  gives  to  men  to  privilege,  to  peace,  and  at  the  last
tf  everlasting  felicity.     The  preachers  who  give  no  uncertain  sound,  but  proclaim  with  •
trumpet-tongue  the  gospel,  are  the  heralds  who  are  preparing  for  the  day  of  the  Lord,
with  its  everlasting  rest  and  light  and  love ! — B.  M.  B.

The  annual  repentance — the  Day  of  Atonement.  Oh.  zxiii.  26 — 32 ;  of.  ch.  xvi. ,
Heb.  ix.  12.  Into  the  ritual  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  we  need  not  here  enter,  after
what  has  been  said  on  the  subject  under  ch.  xvi.  But  the  reference  here  is  to  the  spirit
of  repentance  which  was  to  characterize  the  people  on  that  day.  It  was,  in  fact,  a  call
to  the  whole  congregation  to  repent  and  be  reconciled  to  Gfod.  As  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment is  in  all  respects  the  climax  of  the  sacrificial  worship,  it  may  be  useful  here  to
notice  the  spirit  which  belonged  to  that  worship  and  the  corresponding  spirit  in  man
which  it  demanded.

I.  The  BPntiT  of  Judaism  is  that  of  exclusion  from  the  Divihe  presbnok.  Ever
since  man's  fall  until  the  vail  was  rent  at  the  death  of  Jesus,  man  was  deservedly  kept
at  a  distance  from  God.  Sin  is  a  separating  power;  as  long  as  it  is  harboured  it
prevents  near  access  to  him.  And  even  when,  in  the  Exodus,  God  delivered  a  chosen
people  to  bring  them  to  himself  (Exod.  xix.  4),  they  were  only  permitted  to  come  up  to
certain  barriers  round  about  the  holy  mount.  When,  moreover,  the  Lord  transferred
his  dwelling-place  from  the  top  of  Sinai  to  the  tent  or  tabernacle  provided  by  his  pilgrim
people,  he  insisted  on  having  a  private  apartment,  railed  off  from  vulgar  gaze,  and  only


CH.  xxm.  6— 44.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITI0U8.  358

allowed  one  representative  man,  the  high  priest,  to  draw  nigh  unto  him  once  a  year.
He  certainly  sent  this  honoured  individual  forth  with  his  blessing,  to  encourage  the
people  waiting  without.  But  the  whole  arrangement  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  was  on
the  principle  of  excluding  the  people  until  such  times  as  they  might  profitably  have
closer  access.  "  God  sent  his  people,"  says  an  able  writer,  "  his 'blessing,  to  show  them
that  he  had  not  forgotten  them.  But  he  would  not  see  them.  Even  the  high  priest
saw  but  a  very  little  of  him  at  this  annual  solemn  time.  The  cloud  of  fragrant  incense
tilled  the  most  holy  place,  and  barred  the  view."'

11.  Thebe  is  NOTHiNa  so  HUMiLiATnro  AS  THIS  DENIAL  OF  ACCESS.  On  the  Day  of
Atonement  the  people  came  to  the  tabernacle,  and  saw  their  select  representative  enjoy
the  privilege  of  drawing  nigh  to  God  all  alone.  Not  a  man  of  them  dare  venture  beyond
the  vail.  Nadab  and  Abihu,  who  seem  to  have  done  so,  intoxicated  by  their  elevation
to  the  priesthood  and  perhaps  also  by  wine,  perished  liefore  the  Lord.  The  Israelites
felt  at  the  tabernacle  that  they  were  an  excluded  people.  This  would  lead  to  self-
examination,  and  to  repentance  for  the  sin  which  excluded  them.  Doubtless  the  ritual
of  the  great  Day  of  Atonement  would  have  a  soothing  effect  upon  their  spirits.  The
blessing  would  fall  upon  their  souls  like  balm.  At  the  same  time,  they  could  not  but
feel  that  access  to  God  was  for  them  through  a  mediator,  and  that  they  were  kept  at  a
very  humiliating  distance.

HI.  OuB  Great  High  Priest  has  given  us  the  kealitt  op  access  in  that  he  has
BBCOUE  OUB  PoRERUNNBB.  This  is  the  beautiful  idea  suggested  by  the  apostle  in  the
Hebrews  (vi.  20),  Christ  has  not  entered  the  holiest  to  enjoy  a  privilege  in  solitude.
He  has  entered  it  as  our  Forerunner,  to  announce  our  approach.  This  applies,  not  only
to  the  everlasting  felicity  of  heaven,  but  also  to  present  devotional  access  to  God.
Through  him  we  are  permitted  to  draw  nigh.  The  vail  is  rent ;  therefore  we  draw  near
with  holy  boldness.  We  are  no  longer  an  excluded  people,  but  in  the  enjoyment  of
close  communion.  When  the  vail  was  rent  at  the  death  of  Jesus,  the  ordinary  priests
were  thereby  raised  to  the  privilege  of  the  high  priest.  All  had  alike  access  to  God.
Hence  we  are  to  live  up  to  our  privilege  as  believers ;  for  we  are  priests  unto  God,  and
access  is  our  right  through  the  rending  of  the  vail  of  our  Redeemer's  flesh.

Thus  do  we  see  the  secret  of  penitence  on  the  Day  of  Atonement,  and  how  it  is  the
preliminary  arranged  by  the  All-wise  to  communion  with  himself  close  and  eternal.—
B.M.E.

The  pilgrim  spirit  as  illustrated  in  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Ch.  xxiii.  3'3 — 43 ;  of.
Ps.  xxxix.  12 ;  Heb.  xi.  13  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  11.  The  seventh  month  was  a  very  celebrated
one  in  the  Jewish  year.  It  was  the  sabbatic  month,  so  to  speak,  when  religious  services
of  the  most  important  character  took  place.  The  Feast  of  Trumpets  introduced  the
month,  and  joyful  were  the  anticipations  of  blessing.  Then  on  the  tenth  day,  came  the
great  ritual  of  atonement,  with  its  penitential  sadness.  Then  came,  on  the  fifteenth  day,
the  beginning  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  In  the  rainless  harvest-time  the  people  were
eipected,  even  after  their  settlement  in  Canaan,  to  spend  a  week  in  booths  or  tents,
and  with  boughs  of  goodly  trees,  with  palm  branches,  and  with  willows  of  the  brook  to
rejoice  before  God.    Now  this  feast  was —

L  A   CELEBBATION   OF   THE    PILGBIMAQE    OF   THE    WILDERNESS.      It    WaS   "  that   yOUT

generations  may  know  that  I  made  the  children  of  Israel  to  dwell  in  booths,  when  I
brought  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt "  (ver.  43).  It  is  most  important  to  keep  a  great
deliverance  in  mind.  Hence  the  people  were  enjoined  once  a  year  to  become  pilgrims
attain,  as  their  fathers  had  been.  We  should  never  forget  how  the  Lord  has  led  his
people  in  every  age  out  of  bondage  into  pilgrimage  and  freedom  as  the  avenue  to  rest.

XL  It  was  a  celebration  op  the  Divine  provision  in  the  wilderness.  For  it  was
a  harvest  festival,  and  the  fruits  of  the  earth  had  been  gathered  in  before  the  feast
began.  Before  them  lay,  so  to  speak,  the  bounties  of  God's  providence,  just  as  the
manna  lay  morning  by  morning  before  their  fathers.  God  was  praised,  therefore,  for
crowning  the  yewr  with  his  goodness,  as  their  fathers  praised  him  for  crowning  with  his
goodness  each  day.    It  was  consequently  a  eucharistio  seryice  in  the  highest  degree.

nL  It  was  a  oblebration  op  the  stranseb  and  piLGEiM  spibit  which   God

"  Tait'B  'Thoughts  for  the  Thoughtful,'  p.  160.


•66  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxm.  6— 44

F0STEE8  IN  ALL  HIS  PEOPLE.  The  voluntary  leaving  of  their  homes  for  a  season  to  live
in  a  "  tented  state  "  was  a  beautiful  embodiment  of  the  stranger  and  pilgrim  spirit  to
which  we  are  called.  God  in  the  wilderness  dwelt  as  the  Great  Pilgrim  in  a  tent  with
his  pilgrim  people ;  and  year  by  year  he  enjoined  his  people  in  their  generations  to  be-
come Uterally  "  strangeis  with  him  "  (Ps.  xxxix.  12),  as  their  fathers  had  been.  And
the  same  danger  threatens  us,  to  feel  at  home  in  this  world  and  to  give  up  the  pilgrim-
age. Hence  the  apostle's  warning  is  ever  needful :  "  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you
as  strangers  and  pilgrims,  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,  which  war  against  the  soul "  (1  Pet.
ii.  11).  If  the  world  does  not  seem  strange  to  us,  it  is  because  we  are  not  living  as  near
as  we  ought  to  God.  The  more  access  we  have  to  him,  the  greater  will  be  our  moral
distance  from  the  world.

IV.  The  joy  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was  enhanced  by  the  home-cmjino
WHICH  LAY  BEYOND  IT.  The  "  tented  state  "  is  not  intended  to  be  permanent.  Its
value  lies  in  its  temporary  nature.  Canaan  lay  in  sunlight  beyond  the  wilderness,  and
the  thought  of  "  home  "  there  encouraged  them  in  their  pilgrimage.  The  week's  camp-
ing out  after  Canaan  had  been  reached  made  them  enjoy  their  home  life  all  the  more.
In  the  same  way,  while  we  confess  like  the  patriarchs  to  be  "  strangers  and  pilgrims
upon  the  earth,"  we  are  seeking,  and  rejoicing  in  the  prospect  of  yet  reaching,  a  better
country,  with  a  city  of  God  and  permanent  abodes  (Heb.  xi.  13 — 16).  The  pilgrimage
is  joyful  because  it  is  destined  to  end  in  the  everlasting  home.  Perpetual  pilgrimage
no  man  could  desire,  for  this  would  be  perpetual  exile  from  legitimate  home  joys.  A
long  pilgrimage  can  be  welcomed  if  it  lead  towards  everlasting  joy  in  the  Father's  house.

And  is  there  not  an  element  of  triumph  associated  with  such  a  celebration  as  this
Feast  of  Tabernacles  ?  It  indicates  victory  over  worldly  feeling  through  faith  in  God.
No  wonder,  then,  that  palm  branches  and  goodly  boughs  were  waved  by  joyous  ones
before  the  Lord.  It  is  into  victorious  joy  he  summons  all  his  people  as  the  earnest  of
the  everlasting  joy  with  which  he  is  yet  to  crown  them. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  4 — 14. — The  Passover.  Under  this  general  title  we  include  the  Feast  of  Un-
leavened Bread,  and  the  offering  of  the  firstfruits  which  was  connected  with  it.  The
history  of  the  institution  is  given  in  Exod.  xii.  That  the  Passover  was  a  type  of  Christ
is  evident  (see  1  Cor.  v.  6 — 8).

I.  The  LAMB  TYPIFIED  HIS  PEBBON.  (John  i.  36.)  1.  It  was  taken  from  the  flock
(Exod.  xii.  9).  (1)  As  it  had  been  one  with  the  flock,  so  was  Jesus  one  with  us.  His
humanity  was  no  phantom,  but  a  reality.  (2)  What  an  honour  is  conferred  upon  us,
that  the  God  of  glory  should  stoop  to  assume  our  nature,  to  become  "  bone  of  our  bone  " !
Let  us  not  dishonour  ourselves  by  sinning  against  such  grace.  2.  It  was  a  male  of  the
first  year.  (1)  This  was  ordered  because  the  male  is  the  stronger  animal,  and  was
viewed  as  an  emblem  of  excellence.  Christ  amongst  men  is  the  most  excellent ;  "the
fairest  amongst  ten  thousand."  (2)  Hence  he  is  distinguished  as  "  The  Son  of  David,"
as  "  The  Se^  of  Abraham,"  as  "The  Son  of  man."  David  had  many  sons,  but  in  com-
parison with  him  they  were  nowhere;  so  he  is  the  Son  of  David,  the  one  glorious
descendant  who  throws  all  others  into  the  shade.  So  with  the  seed  of  Abraham.  So
with  the  sons  of  Adam.  In  the  whole  race  there  is  no  one  to  compare  with  him.  3.  It
was  without  blemish.  (1)  The  blemishes  that  would  disqualify  a  Paschal  lamb  were
physical,  and  so,  abstractedly  considered,  of  little  account.  But  these  blemishes  were
typical  of  moral  evils,  and  in  this  view  were  very  important.  (2)  But  Christ  was,  in
the  moral  sense,  absolutely  blemishless.  He  was  unique.  Singular,  however,  not  in
eccentricity  but  in  transcendent  goodness.  As  under  the  microscope  the  works  of  God
are  seen  to  differ  essentially  from  those  of  men,  appearing  more  variously  and  wonder-
fully beautiful  as  they  are  more  nearly  examined  under  higher  powers,  so  the  more
utiuutely  Christ  is  considered  the  more  woitderful  and  beautiful  is  he  seen  to  be.  >

XL  Its  saobifiob  fobeshadowed  ms  passion.  1.  The  lamb  suffered  vicarimisly.  •(I)
When  taken  from  the  flock  the  rest  of  the  flock  was  spared.  So  was  Jesus  chcsen  that
by  his  suffering  his  nation  and  his  race  might  not  perish  (see  John  xL  49 — 53),  (2)  The
blood  of  the  lamb  was  sprinkled  on  the  doorposts  of  the  houses  to  avert  the  wrath  of
the  destroying  angeL  The  firstborn  in  every  house  was  sacrificed  where  no  vicarious
blood  appeared.  So  are  we  saved  from  wrath  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus
Ohrist  through  faith.    (3)  Those  saved  £rom  destruction  through  the  blood  of  the  lamb


OH.  xxm.  6— 44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  861


were  immediately  led  out  of  Egypt,  and  set  on  their  way  to  Canaan.  So  those  justified
through  the  blood  of  Christ  are  delivered  also  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  and  set
on  their  way  to  heaven.  2.  Memarkable  circumstances  claim  attention,  (l)  The  lamb
was  to  be  "  of  the  first  year,"  i.e.  in  its  prime.  So  was  Christ  in  the  prime  of  his  man-
hood when  he  was  offered.  (2)  It  was  to  be  offered  "in  the  place  which  the  Lord  should
choose"  (Deut.  xvi.  5 — 7).  That  place  was  Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xxi.  7 ;  Ps.  cxxxii.  13,
14).  There  also  "  our  Passover  was  sacrificed  for  us."  (3)  "  In  the  fourteenth  day  of
the  first  month  at  even  is  the  Lord's  Passover"  (ver.  5).  Some  think  that  our  Lord,  in
accordance  with  the  usage  of  the  Karaites,  or  Scriptiarii,  killed  and  ate  the  Passover
a  day  earlier  than  the  Pharisees,  and  that  he  expired  on  the  cross  at  the  time  when  the
Traditionarii  were  employed  in  killing  their  Paschal  lambs  (see  Ikenii, '  Dissert.  Theolog.,'
torn.  ii.  ohs.  ix.,  x.,  xi.).  Be  this  as  it  may,  the  word  in  the  text  translated  "  at  even  "
is  literally  between  the  evenings ;  that  is,  between  the  chronological  and  ecclesiastical,
which  would  be  at  the  "  ninth  hour,"  or  three  p.m.  This  was  the  very  hour  at  which
Jesus  expired  (Luke  xxiii.  44 — 46).  (4)  It  was  ordered  that  no  bone  of  the  Paschal
lamb  should  be  broken.  And  whereas  the  legs  of  the  malefactors  were  broken,  the
soldiers,  seeing  that  Jesus  was  dead  already,  brake  not  his  legs  (see  John  xix.  31 — 36).
Such  things  could  not  have  been  ordered  by  chance.

III.  The  feast  coeebsponded  to  the  Christian  Eucharist.  1.  The  latter  wot
accommodated  to  the  former.  (1)  This  is  evident  from  the  history  of  the  institution.
For  the  cup  of  the  Eucharist  Christ  used  that  cup  of  the  Passover,  which  was  called  by
the  Jews  the  "  cup  of  blessing,"  and  which  description  Paul  applies  to  the  Christian  cup
(1  Cor.  X.  16).  For  the  bread  of  the  Supper  he  used  that  of  the  Passover  (Luke  xxii.
15 — 20).  (2)  So  when  Paul  speaks  of  Christ  as  "  our  Passover  sacrificed  for  us,"  he
adds,  "  let  us  keep  the  feast,"  meaning;  allusively,  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,  and
really  that  which  replaces  it  in  the  Church.    2.  Both  are  retrospective  and  anticipative.

(1)  The  Hebrews  commemorated  the  type,  viz.  the  deliverance  from  the  destroying
angel  and  from  Egypt.  The  Christians  commemorate  the  antitype,  viz.  the  deliverance
of  souls  from  the  anger  of  God  and  from  the  tyranny  of  sin.  (2)  The  Hebrews  antici-
pated their  entrance  into  Canaan.  The  Christians  anticipate  the  joys  of  heaven;  the
new  wine  of  the  kingdom.  3.  Both  are  tokens  of  Church  communion.  (1)  The  Passover
was  not  the  rite  initiatory  into  the  Church  of  Israel.  Circumcision  was  that  rite.  To
this,  baptism,  under  the  gospel,  corresponds,  and  is  therefore  called  the  circumcision  of
Chi  istianity  (Col.  ii.  11,  12).  (2)  But  it  was  the  rite  continuative  of  such  communion.
Exclusion  from  the  Passover  was  excommunication  under  the  Law.  So  is  the  Eucharist
the  sign  amongst  Christians  of  a  continued  Church  communion.

"  On  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath,"  viz.  of  the  Paschal  weel;,  the  sheaf  of  the  first-
fruits  was  waved  before  the  Lord  (vers.  10, 11).  This  was  a  type  of  Christ  in  his  resur-
rection as  the  Firstfruits  of  the  great  harvest  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  20 — 23).  But  when  Christ
died,  the  sabbath  of  the  Paschal  week  happened  upon  the  day  in  which  he  lay  in  the
tomb  (comp.  John  xix.  31 ;  Luke  vi.  1).  Thus  the  morrow  after  this  sabbath  was
precisely  that  first  day  of  the  week  on  which  our  Lord  arose  (Mark  xvi.  9).  How
strengthening  to  faith  are  all  these  correspondences ! — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  15 — 22. — The  Feast  of  Harvest.  This  was  the  second  of  the  three  great  festivals
upon  which  all  the  males  of  Israel  were  required  to  assemble  at  Jerusalem  (see  Exod.
xxiii.  14 — 17 ;  Deut.  xvi.  16).     Let  us  consider —

I.  The  duties  then  enjoined  upon  the  worshippers.  1.  They  were  to  meet  in  holy
convocation.  (1)  This  was  intended  to  keep  alive  their  interest  in  the  service  of  God.
Were  sabbaths  and  public  services  of  religion  to  cease,  men  would  soon  forget  God

(2)  All  Israel  looked  each  other  in  the  face.  Beligion  is  eminently  social.  And  as
these  convocations  were  types  of  heavenly  things,  this  suggested  the  recognitions  and
greetings  of  the  future  (see  Heb.  xii.  22, 23).  (3)  On  this  day  servile  work  was  to  cease.
The  teaching  here  is  that  when  we  congregate  in  heaven  we  shall  be  emancipate  1  from
the  curse  of  toil  (comp.  Gen.  iii.  17 ;  Rev.  xxii.  3).  2.  They  were  to  present  two  wave
loaves.  (1)  These  were  composed  of  two  tenth-deals  of  fine  fiour.  They  were  to
sacctify  the  wheat-harvest  as  the  sheaf  of  the  firstfruits  sanctified  the  barley  harvest.
Hence  these  also  are  called  "  firstfruits "  (vers.  17,  20 ;  Exod.  xxxiv.  22).  (2)  They
were  to  be  baken  with  leaven.    As  the  unleavened  bread  of  the  Passover  was  a  msnuorial


358  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxm.  6— 4*.


of  the  haste  with  which  they  departed  from  Egypt,  this  was  to  express  thankfulness  to
God  for  the  hlessings  of  ordinary  food,  together  with  their  rest  in  Canaan.  (3)  One
loaf  was  to  he  eaten  hy  the  worshipper,  while  the  other  was  God's.  That  more  com-
pletely given  to  God  was  divided.  One  portion  was  humt  on  the  altar,  while  the
priests  took  the  remainder  (Numh.  xviii.  9—11).  This  explains  the  injunction  that
they  should  he  waved  along  with  the  peace  ofTerings.  We  learn  here  that  our  ordinary
bread  should  he  religiously  eaten  (see  1  Cor.  x.  31).  (4)  These  wave  loaves  constituted
one  of  three  meat  offerings  of  the  whole  congregation.  The  first  was  the  sheaf,  or  omer,
of  the  flrstfruits  of  the  barley  harvest  (vers.  9—14).  This  was  the  second.  And  the
thiro  was  the  twelve  loaves  of  the  shewbread  (Bxod.  xxv.  30 ;  oh.  xxiv.  5 — 9).  Could
there  be  here  a  prophetic  anticipation  of  the  order  of  the  resurrection,  viz.  "  Christ  the
Firstfruits  j  afterwards  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  coming ; "  and,  finally,  the  "  rest  of
the  dead,"  destined  to  live  again  at  the  end  of  the  millennial  reign,  when  death  shall
be  abohshed  ?  (oomp.  1  Cor.  xv.  23 — 26 ;  Bev.  xx.).  (5)  Beside  the  firstfruits,  which
were  strictly  national,  each  person  had  to  bring  his  own  firstfruits  to  the  temple  (see
Deut.  xxvi.  1 — 10).  God  would  have  us  ever  to  remember  that  religion  is  personal  as
well  as  public.  3.  They  were  to  offer  sacrifices.  (1)  The  burnt  offerings  appointed
were  seven  lambs  of  the  first  year  without  blemish,  one  young  bullock,  and  two  rams,
or,  as  elsewhere  expressed,  two  young  bullocks  and  one  ram  (comp.  ver.  18 ;  Numb,
xxvili.  27).  As  burnt  offerings  were  intended  to  expiate  sins  against  affirmative
precepts,  the  godly  worshipper  would  pray  during  the  burning,  as  David  prayed
(Ps.  xix.  13).  The  meat  and  drink  offerings  proper  to  burnt  offerings  accompanied  (ver.
18).  'J'hese  were  distinct  from  the  two  tenth-deals  waved  to  sanctify  the  harvest.
(2)  A  kid  of  the  goats  was  appointed  for  a  sin  offering  (ver.  19).  As  sin  offerings
were  to  expiate  sins  committed  in  ignorance,  the  thoughts  of  the  worshipper  were
carried  forward  to  the  Great  Sin  Sacrifice  of  Calvary.  (3)  Two  lambs  of  the  first  year
were  appointed  for  the  peace  offering.  These  were  distinguished  from  those  usually
offered  as  "  holy  to  the  Lord  for  the  priest."  They  were  to  be  eaten  by  him  before  the
Lord.  For  the  meat  offering  which  oidinarily  accompanied  the  peace  offerings,  in  this
case  the  two  loaves  of  the  firstfruits  were  substituted  {vers.  19,  20).

II.  The  notes  or  time,  with  their  beasons.  1.  They  counted  from  the  putting  in  of
the  sickle.  (1)  This,  however,  was  not  left  to  private  option.  That  would  have  worked
endless  confusion ;  for  it  was  a  public,  national,  act.  The  Lord  is  a  God  of  order  (1  Cor.
xiv.  40).  It  would  have  tended  to  will-worship.  The  evils  of  this  are  seen  in  the
Romish  Church.  We  cannot  too  literally  abide  by  the  letter  of  Divine  precept.  (2)
It  was  limited  to  the  second  day  of  the  Passover  week  (vers.  15, 16).  From  this  reckoning
the  Jews  call  this  Feast  of  Harvest  (D'»Dn  dv)  the  fiftieth  day.  For  the  same
reason,  it  is  in  the  New  Testament  called  the  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  1;  xx.  16;  1  Cor.
xvi.  8).  2.  They  commemorated  the  giving  of  the  Law.  (1 )  The  observance  of  the
Passover  was  on  the  fourteenth  of  the  first  month  (Exod.  xii.  18),  leaving  seventeen
days  of  that  month  to  run.  To  these  add  thirty  days  of  the  second  month,  and  we
have  forty-seven  days.  But  the  Law  was  given  on  the  third  day  after  Moses  came  into
the  wilderness  of  Sinai,  which  was  in  the  beginning  of  the  third  month  (Exod.  xix.
1, 10, 11).  These  three  days  added  bring  the  number  up  to  fifty.  (2)  Well  might  the
Israelites  have  a  festival  of  thanksgiving  for  the  giving  of  the  Law ;  for  thereby  they
were  honoured  and  blessed  as  no  other  nation  had  ever  been  (Deut.  iv.  8).  3.  They
anticipated  the  publication  of  the  gospel.  (1)  The  gospel  is  the  Law  of  God,  published
from  Zion,  in  contradistinction  to  that  published  from  Sinai  (see  Isa.  ii.  3).  That  pub-
lication took  place  "  when  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully  come."  (2)  The  fifty  days
were  counted  from  the  second  day  of  the  Passover  week,  on  which  the  firstfruits  of  the
barley  harvest  were  presented  (vers.  15, 16).  That  "  firstfruits  "  were  a  type  of  Christ
in  his  resurrection.  After  that  event  he  was  seen  of  his  disciples  during  forty  days.
The  Pentecost  followed  exactly  ten  days  after  the  Ascension  (see  Luke  xxiv.  49 ;  Acti
ii.  1).  (3)  Note,  further,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  given  on  the  first  day  of  the  week.
The  Paschal  lamb  was  eaten  on  Thursday.  The  Friday  on  which  our  Lord  was
crucified  was  the  first  day  of  the  Passover  week.  On  the  Saturday  the  firstfruits  were
offered  up.  Consequently,  the  Pentecost,  which  was  the  fiftieth  day  after,  would  fall
upon  the  Sunday.  Thenceforth  this  became  "  the  Lord's  day,"  or  the  Christian  »abbath
(see  Lightfoot  on  Acts  ii.).


OK.  xxui.  6— 44]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  369

Where  gratitude  in  there  will  be  goodness.    Hence  the  injunction  to  care  for  the
poor  and  the  stranger  (ver.  22).    This  spirit-  of  the  Law  is  also  the  genius  of  the
1.— J.  A.  M.


Vers.  23—44. — The  hebdomad.  Seven  In  Scripture  is  %  very  remarkable  number.
In  the  text  it  is  repeated  in  so  many  forms  that  it  forces  itself  upon  our  attention.

I.  Hbbdouads  ABE  coNSPicuons  IS  THE  CHBONOLOQT  OF  THS  Law.  1.  They  o^pptar
in  the  week  cf  daya.  (1)  The  foundation  of  this  is  the  Creation  week.  The  patriarchal
sabbath  became  incorporated  into  the  Mosaic  Law.  There  were  other  weeks  of  days
and  sabbaths.  In  the  text  there  are  three  of  these,  with  a  sabbath  on  the  first  and
another  on  the  eighth  day.  (2)  Could  there  be  in  these  an  anticipation  of  the  change  of
the  sabbath  from  the  seventh  day  to  the  first  or  eighth  under  the  Christian  dispensation  ?
The  sabbaths  of  the  seventh  and  eighth  days  may  point  to  the  rest  of  the  millennium
in  the  first  instance,  and  to  that  of  the  new  heavens  and  earth  in  the  second.  In
observing  the  Lord's  day,  it  would  be  highly  edifying  to  have  these  anticipations  in
mind.  2.  They  appear  again  in  the  week  of  months.  (1)  The  entire  cycle  of  the  feasts
of  the  Lord  was  comprised  in  such  a  week.  It  commenced  on  the  14th  day  of  Abib,
with  the  Passover,  instituted  in  commemoration  of  the  Exodus.  Then  followed,  in
their  appointed  seasons,  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread;  that  of  the  Pirstfruits;  the
Feast  of  Harvest,  which  is  also  called  the  Feast  of  Weeks  (Exod.  xxxiv.  22 ;  Dent.
xvL  10,  16 ;  2  Chron.  viiL  13).  The  series  ended  with  the  festivals  of  the  seventh
month.  (2)  During  the  five  months  remaining  there  was  no  annual  feast.  The  daily
sacrifices  and  those  of  the  sabbaths  and  moons  were  of  course  continued.  (3)  The  moon
was  a  symbol  of  the  Church,  and  its  changes  represented  the  mutations  through  which
it  passes  in  this  world,  but  when  it  has  fulfilled  its  great  week  of  changes  it  will  be  per-
fected for  ever  in  heaven.  3.  They  appear  again  in  the  week  of  years.  (1)  The  Law
had  its  septenary  division  of  years,  with  a  continually  repeated  seventh  year  of  rest  for
the  land  (chs.  xxv.  3 — 7 ;  xxvi.  34,  35 ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21).  (U)  Founded  upon  this
also  was  a  greater  period  of  a  week  of  weeks  of  years,  with  its  year  of  jubilee  (oh.  xxv.
8 — 17).  The  lessons  of  the  sabbatic  and  jubilee  years  will  come  under  consideration  in
their  proper  places.

II.  Hebdomads  are  oosspicnous  m  the  chronoloot  of  prophecy.  1.  The  days
of  the  week  are  taken  as  prophetic.  (1)  David,  and  Peter  from  him,  notes  that  one  day
i<!  with  the  Lord  as  a  thousand  years  (Ps.  xc.  4 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  8).  Paul  also  mentions
the  sabbath-keeping  of  the  future  "  which  remaineth  to  the  people  of  God  "  (Heb.  iv.  9).
And  John  describes  that  rest  as  extending  over  a  thousand  years  (Rev.  xx.  4).  (2)  To
this  agrees  the  tradition  in  the  house  of  Ellas,  a  teacher  who  lived  about  two  hundred
years  before  our  Lord,  antl  which  is  thought  to  have  been  derived  from  Elijah  the
Tishbite.  It  purports  that  this  world  is  to  endure  in  its  imperfect  state  six  thon-
sand  years:  two  thousand  before  the  Law;  two  thousand  under  the  Law;  two
thousand  under  Messiah;  and  then  a  thousand  years  in  a  state  of  renovation  (see
Mede,  536,776,  894;  also  Bishop  Newton's  'Disser.,'  voL  iii.  335).  (3)  The  same
view  is  no  less  definitely  put  forth  by  Barnabas.  He  makes  each  day  of  the  Creation
week  represent  a  thousand  years  of  the  subsequent  history  of  the  world,  and  the
sabbath  he  makes  to  stand  for  the  reign  of  peace,  or  millennium  of  John.  2.  Dispen-
sations are  measured  by  weeks  of  tiTnes.  (1)  The  "  times  of  the  Gentiles"  are  accepted
to  be  the  same  as  the  "  seven  times,"  during  which  Israel  was  destined  to  be  trodden
down  of  them.  Upon  the  year-day  principle  these  are  the  double  of  the  "  time,  time,
and  dividing  of  a  time  "  of  Daniel  and  John,  during  which  the  little  horn  was  to  wear
out  the  saints,  and  represent  2520  years.  The  larger  period  commences  with  the
literal  Babylon,  and  the  smaller  with  the  mystical.  (2)  But  how  can  the  Patriarchal,
Levitical,  and  Christian  dispensations  be  hmited  to  six  thousand  years,  if  each  is  to
extend  over  2520?  They  do  so  by  overlapping  each  other.  Thus  the  patriarchal
extends  "  from  Adam  to  Moses "  (Rom.  v.  13,  14),  which  space  comprises  "  seven
times."  The  Jewish  then  reckons  from  Shem  the  patriarch,  selected  as  the  depositary
•of  the  covenant,  to  Jesus.  The  interval  from  Shem  to  Jesus  measures  "  seven  times."
The  dispensation  of  the  Gentiles,  already  described  as  the  "  times  of  the  Gentiles,"
forms  the  third.  It  began  with  the  rise  of  the  ancient  Babylonish  power,  And  will  end
with  the  overthrow  of  the  mystical  Babylon.


360  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxm.  6—4*.


in.  Hebdomads  abe  hot  without  fockdation  m  natueb.  1.  TTiey  are  not  very
obviously  marked  in  the  heavens.  (1)  The  day  is  measured  by  the  revolution  of  the  earth
upon  its  axis.  The  month  is  measured  by  the  revolution  of  the  moon  in  her  orbit.  The
year  is  determined  by  the  revolution  of  the  earth  about  the  sun.  (2)  But  where  are
we  to  find  the  measure  of  the  week  ?  The  quarters  of  the  moon  do  not  measure  it,  for
the  month  is  more  than  four  times  seven  days.  2.  Tet  they  have  a  foundation  in
nature.  (I)  It  is  now  well  known  that  changes  in  animals  are  regulated  by  weeks.
Dr.  Laycock,  summing  up  what  he  had  advanced  on  this  subject  in  a  series  of  remark-
able papers,  says,  "  The  facts  I  have  briefly  glanced  at  are  general  facts,  and  cannot
happen  day  after  day  in  so  many  millions  of  animals  of  every  kind  from  larva  or  ovum
of  a  minute  insect  up  to  man  at  definite  periods,  from  a  mere  chance  or  coincidence ;
and  although  temperature,  food,  domestication,  and  other  modifying  circumstances
may  and  do  interrupt  the  regularity  with  which  the  varioiis  processes  I  have  alluded  to
are  conducted,  yet  upon  the  whole  it  is,  I  think,  impossible  to  come  to  any  less  general
conclusion  than  this.  Tliat  in  animals  changes  occur  every  three  and  a  half,  seven,
fourteen,  twenty-one,  or  twenty-eight  days,  or  at  some  definite  number  of  weeks  "  (see
Lancet,  1842 — 43).  (2)  The  words  recorded  by  Moses  (Gren.  i.  14)  guide  us  to  the  con-
sideration of  the  revolution  of  the  epacts,  or  differences  in  solar  and  lunar  measures  of
time.  And  it  is  most  admirable  that  the  epacts  of  the  times  of  prophetic  chronology
as  measured  by  true  solar  and  lunar  years  come  out  in  toeeks  (see  Guinness's  '  Approach-
ing End  of  the  Age ').

From  this  interesting  subject  we  learn ;  1.  That  prophecy  is  from  Ood.  2,  That
the  God  of  nature  is  the  God  of  providence.  3.  That  religion  should  be  interwoven
with  secular  concerns. — J.  A.  M.

Vets.  23 — 25. — The  Feast  of  Trumpets.  "  The  Old  Testament,"  says  Augustine,
"  when  rightly  understood,  is  one  grand  prophecy  of  the  New."  The  New  Testament
is  the  key  to  the  Old.

I.  The  moon  was  a  symbol  or  the  Chubch.  1.  Its  lustre  sets  forth  her  leauty.
(1)  Even  in  our  Northern  climate  the  moon  is  a  beautiful  object ;  but  in  Oriental  skies
she  is  remarkably  so.     Solomon  compares  the  beauty  of  the  bride  to  that  of  the  moon

SSong  vi  10).  (2)  She  shines  in  a  light  borrowed  from  the  sun.  So  is  the  lustre  of
fesus  the  loveliness  of  his  Church  (see  Isa.  xxz.  26 ;  comp.  Matt.  v.  14  with  John
viii.  12 ;  Rev.  xii.  1 ;  xxi.  23).  (3)  As  the  moon  enlightens  the  darkness  in  the
absence  of  the  sun,  so  is  the  Church  the  light  of  the  world  in  the  absence  of  her  Lord
(see  Matt.  v.  14 ;  John  i.  4 ;  ix.  5  ;  Phil.  ii.  15).  All  men  should  be  attracted  to  the
communion  of  the  Church  by  the  charms  of  her  beauty.  Professors  should  beware  how
they  may  hinder  this  issue  by  their  inconsistencies.  2.  Its  changes  set  forth  her  vicissitudes.

(1)  The  renewals  of  the  moon  will  represent  the  dispensations  through  which  she
passes.  Thus  the  patriarchal,  which  is  divided  into  two  ages,  viz.  that  before  the  Flood,
and  that  which  followed.  The  Mosaic,  which  also  is  divided  into  two  ages,  viz.  that  of  the
tabernacle  and  that  of  the  temple,  the  latter  being  more  eminently  the  age  of  prophecy.
The  Christian  dispensation  likewise  is  distributed  into  two  ages,  viz.  the  present  mili-
tant and  suffering  age,  and  the  triumphant  age  of  the  millennium  to  come.  Perhaps
the  seventh  moon  may  then  anticipate  the  celestial  state  to  follow  (see  Isa.  Ix.  19,  20).

(2)  The  phases  through  which  each  moon  passes  will  represent  corresponding  minor
changes  in  the  Church.  She  too  has  her  waxings  and  wanings.  Sometimes  she  is
brightened  by  revivals  of  purity  and  zeal,  which  are  followed  by  seasons  of  apostacy  and
dsgeneration.  Sometimes  she  rejoices  in  seasons  of  peace  and  prosperity ;  then  suffers
persecutions  and  reverses.

XL  The  seventh  was  mstinguibhed  amono  the  moons.  1.  It  was  a  high  sabbath.
(1)  The  new  moons  were  all  observed  as  sabbaths.  No  servile  work  was  done  in  any
of  them  (see  Amos  viii.  5).  They  were  memorials  of  the  believers'  rest  from  ser-
vility to  Satan.  (2)  But  this  moon  was  the  beginning  of  the  civil  year,  and  is  believed
to  be  the  time  of  thi  Creation,  when  vegetable  nature  was  in  perfection.  It  grate-
fully commemorated  the  old  Creation.  It  joyfully  anticipated  the  new.  2.  It  was  a
My  convocation.  (1)  The  people  assembled  for  worship.  This  is  God's  order.  Those
who  neglect  public  worship  under  the  pretext  of  "  worshipping  the  God  of  nature  in  the
fields^"  follow  their  own  order.    (2)  :bi  company,  they  heard  tiie  Word  of  God  Cses


«.  xxm.  6— 44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  8«1

2  Eingg  iv.  23 ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  23  ;  Bzek.  xlvi.  1 ;  Amos  vlii.  6).  (3)  They  feasted  together  upon
the  sacrifices  (Numb,  xxviii.  11 — 15).  Thus  they  anticipated  the  spiritual  festivities  of
the  gospel,  and  the  glorious  festivities  of  heaven.  (4)  They  rejoiced  in  the  light  of  the
moon  (Ps.  Izxxi.  3  ;  Izxziz.  15,  16).  If  the  Psalmist  rejoiced  in  the  anticipation  of  the
light  of  the  gospel  moon,  how  much  more  should  we  rejoice  under  that  light  ?  3.  It
wcw  a  memorial  of  blowing  of  trumpets.  (1)  The  trumpets  were  blown  upon  every  moon,
but  on  the  seventh  so  signally  that  it  thence  became  distinguished  as  the  Feast  of
Trumpets.  The  trumpeting  began  at  sunrise  and  continued  till  sundown.  This  moou^
not  only  ushered  in  the  new  month,  as  the  others  did,  but  also  the  new  (civil)  year.
(2)  The  trumpets  were  sounded  over  the  sacrifices.  These  were  in  greater  number.
There  were  not  only  the  daily  sacrifices,  which  were  never  superseded,  and  the  ordinary
sacrifices  of  the  moons,  but  burnt  ofierings,  meat  and  drink  offerings,  and  a  sin  offering,
proper  to  this  feast  (Numb.  xxix.  2 — 6).  The  sounding  of  the  trumpets  oyer  these
indicated  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  be  the  preaching  of  the  cross  of  Christ  (see  Isa.
xxvii.  13).  (3)  The  trumpeting  was  in  memorial.  If  it  referred  to  the  giving  of  the
Law,  we  are  reminded  of  the  trumpet  that  ttien  sounded  from  Sinai ;  and  the  gospel  law
was  sounded  out  from  Sion.  If  the  memorial  referred  to  the  Creation,  then  we  are
reminded  that  the  Psalmist  calls  the  word  by  which  God  ma^lo  the  world,  "  the  voice  of
his  thunder  "  (Ps.  civ.  7).  We  are  also  reminded  of  the  singing  of  the  morning  stars  and
shouting  of  the  sons  of  God  (Job  xxxviii.  6,  7).  The  shouting  and  thundering  at  the
Creation  and  at  the  giving  of  the  Law  and  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  are  but  the
echoes  of  the  voices  and  trumpeting  of  the  Judgment  of  the  great  day.  "  He  that  hath
ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear."  When  the  last  trumpet  is  sounded,  it  will  be,  as  on  the  Feast
of  Trumpets,  at  the  finishing  of  the  gathering  of  all  the  fruits  of  the  earth. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  26 — 32. — TKe  Feast  of  Expiation.  This  great  occasion,  the  ceremonies  of  which
are  more  particularly  described  in  ch.  xvi.,  was  to  be —

L   A  HOLY  CONVOCATION,  IN  WHICH  THE  PEOPLE  WEBB  TO  AFPLIOT  THEIR  SOnLS.        Learn

hence  :  1.  Thn  t  sin  must  he  mourned.  (1)  It  should  be  mourned  in  secret.  There  are
matters  which  it  may  be  proper  to  confess  to  Gud  alone.  The  confession  of  these  to  others
would  serve  no  useful  purpose.  It  might  even  be  productive  of  harm.  (2)  It  should  be
publicly  mourned.  Where  there  are  national  sins  they  should  be  openly  confessed.
Sins  against  society  should  be  publicly  owned.  The  general  public  confession  of  sin  is
useful  in  calling  individual  sin  to  remembrance.  (3)  Contrition  for  sin  is  indispensable.
To  neglect  it  is  to  incur  excision  (ver.  29).  2.  The  mourning  must  he  thoi-ough.  (1)  No
secular  work  must  be  done  on  this  day  in  which  men  were  to  afflict  their  souls.  Not  only
were  they  on  this  day  to  rest  fmm  "  servile  work,"  as  on  the  other  annual  feasts  j  the
rest  must  be  as  strict  as  upon  the  weekly  sabbaths.  If  we  would  have  salvation,  we
maist  be  in  earnest.  We  must  not  suffer  the  claims  of  the  world  to  divert  us  from  this
great  business.  (2)  The  soul  must  be  a£3icted  with  fasting.  The  animal  soul  is  here
referred  to  (see  ch.  xvi.  31 ;  Numb.  xxix.  7 ;  Isa.  Iviii.  5,  6).  The  spirit  of  a  religious
fast  is  abstinence  from  all  kinds  of  sin.  3.  The  soul  is  to  be  afflicted  because  of  the
atmement.  (1)  They  were  to  bring  an  "  offering  by  fire  unto  the  Lord  "  on  this  day.
The  sin  and  trespass  offering  had  respect  to  particular  sins,  but  the  burnt  offering  was
for  sin  in  the  abstract.  The  sacrifices  of  this  day  were  of  the  greatest  importance,  and
eminently  tyidfied  the  Great  Atonement  of  the  gospel.  (2)  Penitence  is  never  perfect
till  we  get  a  view  of  Calvary.  Because  he  is  merciiul  we  fear  God  with  a  gracious  fear.
With  such  a  fear  is  holiness  perfected  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).

II.  This  holt  convocation  was  on  the  tenth  day  or  the  seventh  month.
1.  Uiis  was  to  suggest  the  riches  of  redemption.  (1)  For  the  mystery  of  the  number
ten  is  wealth.  So  the  Hebrew  word  for  ten  {-my)  is  also  the  word  for  riches.  (2)  Hence
because  of  his  riches  of  merit  and  wealth  of  blessings,  viz.  as  the  Depository  of  all
the  promises,  Christ  is  called  a  Tenth  (see  Isa.  vi.  13).  (3)  When  Isaiah  calls  Christ
the  Tenth,  he  describes  the  Tenth  as  of  the  nature  of  bread.  Bread  is  the  "  staff  of
life,"  and  Christ  is  the  "  Tree  of  life  " — the  Bread  of  immortality.  Hence  all  the  holy
bread,  as  prefigurin';  Christ,  was  composed  of  tenth-deaia  of  flour.  So  the  meat,  or
broad,  offering ;  so  the  firstfruits ;  so  the  shewbread ;  even  the  manna  was  gathered  in
omers,  or  tenths  (gee  Exod.  xvi.  36 ;  see  also  Mai.  iiL  10).  2,  The  association  of  th*
tenth  dag  with  the  seventh  month  also  is  suggestive.    (1)  It  suggest!  the  perfection  of


3«2  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxui.  6—44

riches  to  be  associated  with  the  mysteries  of  the  day.  This  we  find  only  in  connection
with  the  great  atonement  of  Christ.  Other  wealth  is  poverty  compared  with  the
"  riches  of  Christ."  (2)  Note  elsewhere  the  association  of  seven  and  ten  in  weeks  of
-decades.  Thus  the  term  of  human  life  is  a  week  of  decades,  at  the  close  of  which  the
rich  rewards  of  a  faithful  life  are  reaped  (Ps.  xc.  10).  But  "the  wicked  do  not  live
out  half  their  days."  They  come  short  of  the  "  durable  riches."  The  week  of  decades
was  the  term  of  the  Babylonish  captivity  (Jer.  zxiv.  11 ;  xxix.  10).  And  towards  the
close  of  that  period  the  week  of  weeks  of  decades  was  revealed  to  Daniel  as  destined  to
mark  the  crisis  of  the  great  atonement  (see  Dan.  ix.  24).  (3)  Dr.  Lightfoot  computes
that  the  Feast  of  Exi>iatipn  was  the  anniversary  of  that  on  which  Moses  came  the  last
time  down  from  the  mount,  bringing  with  him  the  unbroken  tables  and  the  assurance
■of  God's  reconciliation  to  Israel,  the  very  glory  of  the  gospel  beaming  in  his  face.
Moses  in  this  was  a  similar  type  to  the  high  priest  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  (see
*?  Cor.  iii.  12 — 18).-  (4)  It  is  still  more  remarkable  that  Jesus,  on  the  anniversary  of
these  events,  actually  entered  the  cloud  of  the  Shechinah,  and  passed  within  the  vail
'nto  the  heaven  of  heavens  (see  reasoning  to  this  conclusion  in  the  appendix  of
Ouinness's  '  Approaching  End  of  the  Age ').  These  coincidences  are  not  accidental.
They  are  "  the  Lord's  doing,  and  marvellous  in  our  eyes."  Such  things  as  these,  and  in
^uch  the  Holy  Scriptures  abound,  prove  them  to  ba  from  God,  and  should  encourage  our
faith  and  obedience. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  33 — 44. — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  This  was  the  last  of  the  great  annual
■festivals  of  the  Hebrews.     It  was  a  season  of  great  joyfulness.     Let  us  notice —

I.  The  reasons  op  its  APPoruTMBNT.  1.  It  was  to  assure  them  of  Ood's  return  to
dwell  with  them.  (1)  This  reason  is  not  given  in  the  text,  but  may  be  gathered  from
"the  history.  The  commission  to  build  the  tabernacle  of  witness,  which  had  been
suspended  in  consequence  of  their  rebellion,  was  renewed  to  Moses  in  the  mount.
When  he  brought  them  these  good  tidings,  he  directed  them  to  construct  booths,  for
they  were  to  abide  in  their  present  encampment  until  the  work  should  be  accomplished.
•(2)  In  due  time  the  Shechinah  possessed  the  tabernacle.  This  glorious  event  fore-
shadowed the  sublime  mystery  of  the  incarnation  (comp.  John  i.  14).  How  wonderful
is  that  grace  of  the  gospel  according  to  which  believers  become  the  shrines  of  Deity !
(1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  vi.  19 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16).  2.  It  was  to  remind  their  children  that  their
fathers  camped  in  the  desert.  (1)  The  condition  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  described
the  Christian  in  his  journey  through  the  world  in  quest  of  the  heavenly  Canaan.

(2)  The  dwelling  in  booths  exhibited  the  changeful  and  unsettled  nature  of  earthly
things  (see  Heb.  xL  9).    This  fact  is  obvious;  yet  we  need  to  be  reminded  of  it.

(3)  The  Hebrews  dwelling  happily  in  Canaan  were  not  to  forget  the  humble  state
of  their  fathers.  Prosperity  leads  us  to  forget  the  day  of  humility;  therefore  this
Divine  institution  recurring  annually  to  counteract  that  tendency.  In  the  review  of
the  barbarity  of  our  ancestors,  we  may  feel  more  grateful  to  God  for  the  blessings
-of  civilization.  3.  It  was  to  he  a  yearly  national  harvest  thanksgiving.  (1)  This  is
bere  specified  in  the  note  of  time,  viz.  "  when  ye  have  gathered  in  the  fruit  of  the

.  land  "  (ver.  39).  The  vintage  as  well  as  the  harvest  was  then  gathered  in  (see  Exod.
xxxiv.  22 ;  Deut.  xvi.  13).  The  goodness  with  which  God  crowns  the  year  should
ever  be  celebrated  by  us  with  grateful  hearts.  (2)  In  Exodus  the  Feast  of
Tabernacles  is  called  the  Feast  of  Ingathering  (xxiii.  16  ;  xxxiv.  22).  Thus  viewed,  it
was  an  anticipation  of  the  Eesurreotion.  The  general  resurrection  is  that  final  in-
gathering at  the  end  of  the  world's  great  year,  of  which  the  resurrection  of  Christ  was
the  firstfruit  (1  Cor.  xv.  20).  (3)  This  thanksgiving  was  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  the
seventh  month,  five  days  after  the  Day  of  Atonement,  on  which  the  people  had  afflicted
their  souls.  The  joys  of  salvation  follow  upon  the  sorrows  of  repentance.  The  joys  ot
the  Eesurreotion  rise  out  of  the  horrors  of  Calvary.

II.  The  mode  of  its  cblebeatiow.  1.  It  began  and  ended  toith  a  holy  convocation.
(1)  The  first  day,  perhaps  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  seventh  month,  the  eve  of  the  feast,
was  kept  as  a  sabbath  from  servile  work.  God  should  be  served  in  our  everyday
employments;  yet  must  there  be  cessation  from  those  employments  for  his  more
«speoial  service.  Great  importance  is  attached  to  social  worship  in  Holy  Scripture,
■f  2)  The  eighth  day  also  was  a  sabbath.    This  was  distinguished  as  "  that  great  day  of  the


«H.  xxm.  6— 44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  863


feast "  (see  John  vii.  37).  Upon  it  the  full  round  of  sacrifices  n'ere  offered  (ver.  37).
On  this  day  also  the  people  of  God  returned  to  their  houses,  and  so  celehrated  their
entrance  into  Canaan  after  the  toils  of  the  wilderness,  and  anticipated  the  rest  of
heaven.  The  freedom  from  servile  work  on  this  day  showed  that  at  the  last  day  all  toil
will  terminate  in  the  glorious  rest  of  eternity.  (3)  This  was  the  day  on  which  "  Jesus
stood  and  cried,  saying,  If  any  man  thirst,"  etc.  (John  vii  37,  38).  The  occasion
appears  to  have  been  that  of  the  priest's  pouring  out  as  a  libation  water  which  he  had
drawn  from  the  pool  of  Siloam  in  a  golden  flagon.  This  ceremony  was  not  prescribed
in  the  Law.  Jesus  calls  off  attention  from  human  ceremonies  to  himself.  2.  On  the
fifteenth  day  they  gathered  the  boughs  for  their  booths  (ver.  40).  (1)  This  employ-
ment had  its  obvious  economic  use.  They  needed  the  shelter  which  their  tabernacles
afforded.  (2)  But  there  was  a  religious  import  in  what  they  did ;  and  the  trees  were
emblematical.  The  thick  shady  trees,  such  as  the  oak  or  beech,  afforded  shelter  and
protection,  and  suggested  the  protection  and  shelter  of  the  covenant  of  God.  The  "  palm  "
was  an  emblem  of  victory  (Rev.  vii.  9).  The  "  willows  of  the  brook  "  represented  the
thriving  condition  of  the  happy  (Isa.  xliv.  4).  The  olive  was  a  symbol  of  peace  (see
Neh.  viii.  15).  When  Jesus  proved  himself  to  be  "  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life  "  by  his
miracle  upon  Lazarus,  the  people  acknowledged  it  by  the  boughs  of  trees  (John  xiL  13).
3.  Sacrifices  vjere  offered  which  were  reducid  in  number  each  succeeding  day.  (1)  (For
the  account  of  the  sacrifices,  see  Numb.  xxix.  12—38.)  (2)  Could  the  reduction  in  the
number  be  Intended  to  foreshow  that  the  typical  sacrifices  were  destined  to  vanish  away  ?

Jacob  seems  to  have  anticipated  this  feast  on  his  entering  into  Canaan  (see  Gen.
xxxiii.  17).  Anticipations  of  the  Law,  as  well  as  of  the  gospel,  are  often  seen  in  the
history  of  the  patriarchs.

After  the  plague  upon  the  enemies  of  Jerusalem  in  the  last  days  of  the  Gentiles,  the
remnant  will  turn  to  the  Lord,  and  keep  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (see  Zech.  xiv.  16).
The  gospel  teaches  us  now  to  go  out  to  Christ  without  the  camp.— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  influence  of  sacred  recollections.  The  great  festival  of  the  Passover
derived  all  its  meaning  from  one  memorable  historic  scene.  It  annually  recalled  one
event  of  surpassing  interest,  and,  by  bo  doing,  it  impressed  all  susceptible  souls  with  those
leading  truths  to  which  God  called  Israel  to  bear  its  living  testimony.     We  look  at —

I.   THB   special    SCENB    which    this   rEABT    COMMEMOKATBD,   AND    THE    rUFLtTENCE

IT  WAS  PITTED  TO  EXERT.  What  a  night  in  Hebrew  history  that  night  of  the  Lord's
Passover  1  What  false  confidence  in  every  Egyptian,  what  agitated  hearts  and
trembling  hopes  in  every  Hebrew,  homel  With  what  solemn  awe,  and  yet  with  what
thrilling  expectation,  did  their  forefathers  in  the  land  of  bondage  partake  of  that  strange
meal  I  With  what  eager  carefulness  did  they  see  that  the  saving  blood-stream  marked
the  lintels  of  the  door  which  would  shut  in  their  dear  ones !  And  what  a  morning  on
the  morrow !  What  joyous  congratulations  in  each  Hebrew  home  when  they  all  met,
in  life  and  health,  on  that  memorable  march  I  And  what  terrible  consternation,  what
wild  cries  of  anguish  and  remorse  in  those  Egyptian  houses  where  the  angel  of  death
had  not  passed  by,  but  had  struck  his  fearful  stroke  I  It  was  the  hour  of  Jehovah's
most  signal  interposition  ;  it  was  the  hour  of  national  redemption.  They  might  well
remember  it  "  in  all  their  dwellings  through  all  their  generations."  This  festival
recalled  the  scene  and  also  the  deliverance  to  which  it  immediately  led.  And
the  influence  on  the  minds  of  all  who  observed  it,  both  parents  and  children,  was,
or  surely  should  have  been :  1.  To  strengthen  their  attachment  to  one  another.
There  was  danger,  with  the  distribution  into  tribes,  and  with  the  Jordan  cutting  off
two  tribes  and  a  half  from  the  rest,  that  their  national  unity  might  be  lost,  and
thus  the  distinctiveness  for  which  they  were  called  into  being  disappear.  These
common,  sacred  memories  would  help  to  bind  them  together  and  to  keep  them  one.
2.  To  preserve  their  allegiance  to  their  Divine  Deliverer.  These  sacred  recollections
must  excite  (1)  a  sense  of  deepest  obligation ;  (2)  a  corresponding  feeling  of  profound
gratitude  for  such  signal  mercy;  (3)  a  consequent  renewal  of  their  consecration  of
themselves  _to  Jehovah's  service ;  and  especially  (4)  a  determination  to  live  that  life
of  purity  and  separateness  from  heathen  iniquity  of  which  the  "  unleavened  bread  "  spoke
daily  to  their  minds.
Tt.  National  mebcies  which  we  have  EEnBivBD  fbom  God  and  the  iNrnjENos


3«4  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITIOTjS.  [ch.  xxm.  6— 44.

THESE  SHOULD  EXERT  ON  ITS.  We  are  apt  to  celebrate  the  greatness  of  our  country
with  too  little  reference  in  our  minds  to  the  special  favours  we  have  received  from
Gbd.  The  separation,  through  geological  processes,  of  our  land  from  the  continent ;
the  store  of  treasure  laid  up  for  our  use  beneath  the  surface ;  the  mingling  of  races
resulting  in  our  strong  English  character;  the  upraising  of  mighty  and  godly  men
(Alfred,  WicklifFe,  Tindale,  Wesley,  etc.),  who  have  wrought  great  things  for  us ;  the
effectual  and  lasting  deliverance  of  our  land  from  the  bonds  and  corruptions  of  Borne ;
the  security  of  religious  freedom ;  the  rise  and  growth  of  the  missionary  and,  subse-
quently, the  evangelistic  spirit,  etc.  These  things  and  such  things  as  these  are  national
mercies,  which  we  should  frequently  recall,  and,  remembering  them,  we  should  (1)
guard  against  national  boastfulness,  as  if  our  "  right  hand  "  had  done  everything ;  (2)
cultivate  a  sense  of  national  obligation,  with  its  accompaniment  of  reverent  gratitude ;
and  especially  (3)  realize  that  we  are  what  we  are  in  order  that  we  may  boiir  witness
to  God's  truth,  and  extend  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ.

III.   SpEOIAIi  INDIYIDnAL    HEBCIES    WE    HATE  BECEIVED    AND    THS    INFLUENOK   WE

SHOULD  OAIN  PROM  THEIR  RBMEMBBANCB.  Every  human  life,  when  it  has  reached
maturity,  contains  instances  of  special  as  well  as  ordinary  loving-kindness  from  the
hand  of  God.  These  may  be  (1)  recovery  from  dangerous  illness ;  or  (2)  extrication
from  financial  embarrassment ;  or  (3)  preservation  of  some  precious  life ;  or  (4)
deliverance  from  forming  a  foolish  and  fatal  friendship,  or  from  the  perils  attending
compulsory  association  with  the  wicked ;  or  (5)  sense,  suddenly  or  gradually  imparted,
of  the  supremacy  of  sacred  things  resulting  in  the  acceptance  of  Christ  as  Lord  and
Saviour;  or  (6)  revival  from  spiritual  sloth  and  backsliding.  The  remembrance  of
these  calls  for  (1)  humility,  (2)  gratitude,  (3)  consecration. — C.

Vers.  9 — 14. — Provision  and  piety.    We  have  here —

I.  The  DrvDSK  fobethouoht.  Jehovah  (1)  anticipated  the  religious  wants  of  his
people,  and  made  due  provision  for  them.  "  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  .  .  .  and
shall  reap  the  harvest  thereof,  then  ye  shall  bring,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  God  has  anticipated
our  spiritual  necessities  with  every  provision  in  the  gospel ;  there  will  never  arise  any
necessity  for  which  there  is  not,  in  Christ  Jesus  and  his  salvation,  an  adequate  supply.
(2)  Anticipated  their  bodily  necessities.  He  was  preparing  for  them  corn  and  wine
and  oil  in  the  land  whither  they  went.  So  God  is,  through  all  the  months  between
seed-sowing  and  harvest,  "  preparing  us  corn,"  providing  for  our  nourishment,  and  also
§at  otir  enjoyment.  His  hand  of  power  is  ever  working  (John  v.  17)  in  anticipation  of
our  wants  and  wishes.

n.  HuHAN  FiETT  IN  RESPONSE.  The  gooduess  of  God,  shown  to  us  through  all
generations,  demands  intelligent  and  devout  response.  We  are  reminded  by  tha
beautiful  act  of  symbolism  here  enjoined — the  presentation  of  the  first  sheaf  of  the
harvest  unto  the  Lord  (vers.  10, 11) — that  our  responsive  piety  should  show  itself  in :
1.  Conscious  dependence  on  God,  the  Source  of  all  life  and  strength ;  the  waving
of  the  firstfruits  was  a  clear  acknowledgment  that  the  whole  came  from  him  and
belonged  to  him.  2.  Gratitude  to  God,  the  bountiful  Benefactor.  Undoubtedly  this
was  to  be  a  principal  element  in  the  institution ;  their  hearts  were  to  be  filled  with
thankfulness  for  the  harvest  then  about  to  be  gathered  in.  There  is  not  less  gratitude
due  to  our  gracious  God  for  giving  us  food  as  the  result,  in  part,  of  our  own  labour,
skill,  intelligence,  and  patience ;  there  is,  in  truth,  immeasurably  more,  for  it  is  the
kindest  way  of  doing  the  kindest  thing ;  it  is  a  way  in  which  he  has  regard  not  only
to  our  physical  requirements,  but  also  to  our  moral  and  spiritual  well-being.  3.  Fellow-
ship with  God.  The  meat  and  drink  offerings  (ver.  13)  spoke  of  the  fellowship  of  the
worshipper  with  Jehovah  himself.  We  are,  as  reconciled  children,  to  have  communion
with  the  God  whom  we  love,  to  rejoice  in  his  presence,  to  sit  down  at  his  table.
4.  Consecration  to  God.  (1)  The  burnt  offering  (ver.  12)  pointed  to  the  dedication  of
themselves  to  the  Lord  ;  and  (2)  the  strict  injunction  of  ver.  14  intimated  that  they
were  to  bring  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  the  first  produce  of  the  fertile  land  he  had
given  them.  This  is  the  culmination  of  true  piety,  the  (1)  presentation  of  ourselves  to
him  as  to  the  One  whose  we  are  (Rom.  xii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20),  and  (2)  bringing  the
first  and  the  best  we  have  to  his  holy  service  (Prov,  iii.  9) ;  laying  ourselves  and  out
substance  on  the  altar  of  our  Lord. — C.


OT.  xxm.  6— 44.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  36d

Vers.  15 — 22. — Piety  in  prosperity.  We  often  speak  of  our  duty  in  the  d»y  of
adversity,  of  tlie  spirit  which  true  piety  will  then  manifest.  It  is  of  equal  consequence
that  we  should  consider  what  is  its  rightful  attitude  in  the  hour  of  prosperity.  When
the  harvest  is  gathered,  the  nation  is  rich ;  when  the  fruits  of  the  field  are  in  the  garner,
the  husbandman  is  safe  for  another  year.  The  time  of  harvest  may,  therefore,  stand
for  the  position  of  prosperity.  And  these  verses  may  suggest  to  us  that  when  it  is  well
with  us  in  our  outward  circumstances  there  should  be —

I.  Gbateful  AOKNOWLBDGMKiin;  OF  THE  HAND  OF  GoD.  At  the  Feast  of  Pentecost
two  loaves,  leavened,  of  the  finest  flour,  the  firstfruits  of  the  wheat  harvest,  were  waved
by  the  priest  "  for  a  wave  offering  unto  the  Lord."  The  successful  agriculturist  is  apt
to  say  to  himself,  if  not  to  others,  "  This  is  the  harvest  I  have  grown ; "  is  disposed  to
congratulate  himself  on  the  excellency  of  his  own  farming.  By  this  act  of  waving  the
presentation  loaves,  the  Hebrew  husbandman  said,  "  I  have  ploughed,  and  sown,  and
weeded,  and  reaped,  and  ground,  and  baked,  but  thou.  Lord,  hast  given  the  increase ;
thine  was  the  sun  that  shone,  thine  the  rains  that  fell,  thine  the  airs  that  blew,  thine
the  wondrous  power  that  made  the  elements  of  nature  work  out  the  germination  and
growth  and  ripening  of  the  corn :  unto  thy  Name  be  the  honour  and  the  praise."
Whatever  may  be  the  sphere  of  our  activity,  the  character  of  our  success,  this  is  to  be
"  the  spirit  of  our  mind ; "  we  are  to  be  ready  to  make  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the
hand  of  God  in  all  satisfying  results.

XL  Humility.  "  Ye  shall  sacrifice  one  kid  of  the  goats  for  a  sin  offering  "  (ver.  19).
The  people  of  God  were,  on  all  occasions,  even  the  most  joyful,  to  own  their  unworthi-
ness,  and  to  seek  the  forgiving  favour  of  God.  The  sin  offering  must  find  a  place  even
at  the  Pentecostal  feast.  When  we  are  most  "  glad  in  the  Lord,"  we  do  well  to  make
mention  of  our  frailty,  our  folly,  our  imperfection,  and  to  ask  that,  for  our  Saviour's
sake,  it  may  be  forgiven,  and  we  ourselves  be  accepted  of  God.

III.  Sacbbd  jot.  With  the  burnt  offering  there  was  to  be  the  accompanying  "  meat
offering,  and  their  drink  offerings  "  (ver.  18).  And  with  the  sin  offering  there  were  to
be  offered,  "  two  lambs  of  the  first  year  for  a  sacrifice  of  peace  offerings "  (ver.  19).
Here  was  a  very  distinct  note  of  sacred  joy.  When  there  is  harmony  without,  there
must  be  songs  in  the  soul,  but  these  should  not  be  without  strains  of  sacred  music  which
will  be  acceptable  in  the  ear  of  God.  Let  the  voice  of  joy  be  heard  in  our  halls,  but
let  us  be  glad  "  before  the  Lord,"  remembering  the  goodness  and  realizing  the  presence
of  him  whose  we  are  and  whom  we  serve.

IV.  Consecration.  "  They  shall  be  for  a  burnt  offering  unto  the  Lord  "  (ver.  18).
There  is  no  time  more  appropriate  than  the  hour  of  increase  ami  prosperity  to  renew
our  vows  unto  our  God,  and  rededicate  our  whole  lives  to  his  service.

V.  Chabitt.  (Ver.  22.)  We  must  remember  "  the  poor  and  the  stranger."  That
is  an  evil  and  miserable  prosperity,  unsightly  in  the  esteem  of  man  and  hateful  in  the
sight  of  God,  which  seeks  to  wrap  itself  up  in  silken  folds  of  selfish  enjoyment ;  that  is
an  honourable  and  admirable  prosperity,  blessed  of  God  and  man,  which  has  a  kindly
heart  and  an  open  hand  for  those  who  are  beaten  in  the  battle,  for  those  who  are  left
behind  in  the  race  of  life. — 0.

Vers.  23,  24. — The  summons  of  God.  The  trumpet  utters  a  sound  that  summons
attention  from  every  ear.  It  is  distinct  from  every  other  note ;  it  is  clear,  startling,
strong.  When  God  bade  his  prophets  declare  his  mind  to  the  people  he  desired  them
to  "  blow  a  trumpet  in  Zion."  The  feast  which  was  distinguished  by  the  blowing  of
trumpets  may  have  been  intended  to  remind  Israel,  or  may  remind  us  of —

I.  Thbie  kesponsibilitibs  under  the  Law.  When  the  sacred  music  was  heard  at
this  festival,  the  Jews  could  hardly  fail  to  think  of  that  august  occasion,  when  "  there
were  thunders  and  lightnings,  and  a  thick  cloud  upon  the  mount,  and  the  voice  of  the
trumpet  exceeding  loud,"  etc.  (Exod.  xix,  16).  They  would  thus  realize  that  they
were  children  of  the  Law,  that  they  existed  as  a  nation  for  the  very  purpose  of  receiving,
preserving,  and  revealing  the  Law  of  the  Lord,  that  they  had  entered  into  sacred  cove-
nant with  Jehovah,  that  they  had  a  great  mission  to  fulfiL  The  trumpet  was  the  voice
of  the  Lord,  saying  to  them,  "  Bealize  what  you  are."

II.  The  privileges  which  were  immediately  before  them.  This  was  "New
Tear's  Day  "  to  them :  the  year  was  before  them ;  it  would  be  a  year  during  which  God


«6«  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxm.  6— 44.

would  be  speaking  to  them  and  they  to  him.  Daily  sacrifices  would  be  laid  on  hii
•Itar.  Special  rites  would  demand  peculiar  devotion ;  one  of  these — the  most  sacred  of
»11 — ^was  close  at  hand ;  privilege  and  opportunity  were  awaiting  them,  would  meet
them  with  the  advancing  seasons  of  the  new  year  on  which  they  had  entered ;  the
trumpet  of  the  Lord  said,  "  Listen  and  obey,  for  God  is  with  you."  The  Feast  of
Trumpets  reminds  usof—

III.  The  more  okacioub  kba  to  which  wb  belono.  There  was  no  such  overwhelm-
ing scene  at  the  inauguration  of  the  gospel  as  that  at  the  giving  of  the  Law.  No  "  voice
of  the  trumpet  sounding  long,  and  waxing  louder  and  louder,"  no  "  thunders  and  light-
nings." The  kingdom  of  God  "came  not  with  observation;"  "he  did  not  strive  nor
cry,  nor  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets."  Yet  he  "  spake  as  never  man
spake  "  before,  and  as  man  will  never  speak  again,  and  at  the  beginning  of  every  year
we  may,  without  any  trumpets  sounding,  hear  a  voice  from  heaven  saying  to  us,
"  This  is  my  beloved  Son  ;  hear  y«  him."  God  summons  us  to  learn  of  him,  and  know
from  him  (1)  how  to  be  related  to  himself,  (2)  the  spirit  in  which  we  should  act  to  our
fellows,  and  (3)  the  way  to  rule  our  own  spirit  and  regulate  our  own  life.  We  may  also
be  reminded  of —

IV.  The  last  day  of  this  dispensation.  The  day  draws  on  when  the  "trump  of
God  "  shall  sound,  summoning  the  dead  to  life,  calling  the  living  and  the  dead  to  judg-
ment and  award  (see  1  Cor.  xv.  52;  1  Thess.  iv.  16).  At  any  hour  of  our  life,  but
especially  on  any  anniversary,  when  we  are  reminded  of  the  passage  of  our  probationary
life  and  the  oncoming  of  the  day  of  his  appearing,  we  may  well  hear  the  summons  of
God  to  prepare  for  that  great  day.

"  Groat  Ood,  what  do  I  see  and  hear  ?

*  •  *  «  •

The  trumpet  sounds,  the  graves  restore
The  dead  which  they  contained  before.
Prepare,  my  soul,  to  meet  him."

a

Vers.  33 — 43. — Joy  hefore  the  Lord.  The  idea  that,  under  the  ancient  Law,  Israel
was  a  peculiarly  severe  and  gloomy  nation,  is  essentially  false.  Gravity  rather  than
light-heartedness  may  indeed  have  characterized  them :  they  may  have  had  much
"  seriousness  of  soul ; "  but  they  were  familiar  with  joy,  and  sometimes  gave  themselves
up  to  great  and  continued  gladness  of  heart.  It  was  radiant  sunshine  in  Israel  during
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  The  whole  engagements  of  the  sacred  festival  suggest
to  us —

I.  That  sobbow  is  often  followed  bt  jot,  and  that  sacked  sobbow  is  the
souBOE  of  pdbbst  JOT.  It  is  significant  that  this  Feast  of  I'abernacles  came  only  five
days  after  the  Day  of  Atonement,  the  day  on  which  they  were  commanded  to  "  afflict
their  souls"  (see  vers.  27,  34).  How  often  does  a  very  small  interval  divide  joy  and
sorrow !  so  checkered  are  the  scenes  of  our  mortal  life,  that  no  man  in  brightest  circum-
stances can  ensure  to  himself  five  days'  prosperity,  and  tiiat  no  man  under  the  darkest  cloud
need  despair  of  seeing  the  sun  break  speedily  and  shine  serenely  on  his  path.  And
when  sorrow  is  hallowed  by  reflection,  submission,  prayer,  there  is  laid  the  foundation
of  purest  joy.  The  happiness  which  is  bom  of  submission  to  the  will  of  God  is  some-
thing which  "  satisfies  and  sanctifies  the  mind."    It  is  a  joy  that  lasts.

n.  That  pbosperitt  does  well  sometimes  to  tubn  a  backward  look  on  the
ADVBBSITT  IT  HAS  LEFT  BEHIND.  (Vcrs.  40,  42,  43.)  It  was  Well  for  Israel,  dwellin<'
in  strong  and  comfortable  houses,  to  spend  one  week  in  the  year  in  the  "  booths,"  which
took  them  back  in  thought  to  the  tents  of  the  wilderness.  When  God  gives  either  to
a  man  or  to  a  nation  to  rise  out  of  obscurity  and  hardship  into  prominence  and  comfort,
to  pass  from  spiritual  destitution  to  a  state  of  abounding  privilege  and  opportunity,'
nothing  is  more  desirable  than  that  he  (or  it)  should  occasionally  revert  to  the  old  day's
of  toil  or  want,  and  have  his  (its)  heart  filled  with  thankfulness  to  him  who  plants  our
fget  upon  the  rock,  who  lifts  us  up  to  the  high  place  of  prosperity  and  power.

ni.  That  happiness  is  safe  onlt  when  it  ib  sanctified.  The  Hebrew  nation
was  to  "  rejoice  before  the  Lord  seven  days  "  (ver.  40).  The  heart  of  the  people  was  to
be  filled  with  overflowmg  gladness,  but  it  was  to  be  pouwd  out  "  before  the  Lord ; "  so  it


OH.  xxm.  6— 44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  867

wu  safe  and  salutary.  Happiness,  success,  attaining  the  height  of  our  hopes,— tiiii  i»
very  apt  to  run  into  (1)  uDrestrained  mirth,  or  (2)  proud  .complacency  of  spirit,  or  (3)
unchristian  selfishness.  So  it  becomes  a  curse  to  him  who  should  be  blessed.  Let  us
take  care  to  "  rejoice  before  the  Lord,"  to  turn  joy  into  gratitude,  to  go  with  our  gladness
into  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord,  to  consecrate  our  substance  to  bis  service,  to  consult
his  will  in  the  way  in  which  we  shall  use  our  power  or  our  opportunity ;  then  will  our
increase  and  elevation,  of  whatever  kind  it  be,  prove  a  blessing,  and  not  a  bane  to  our-
selves and  to  our  neighbours.

IV.  That  baethly  joy  is  the  joy  of  happy  PiLORiHAaE.  Our  earthly  house  is
but  a  tabernacle  (2  Cor.  y.  1) ;  it  is  to  bs  soon  taken  down  and  to  give  place  to  a  "  house
in  the  heavens."  We  are,  as  the  Hebrew  nation,  dwelling  in  booths.  This  is  but  a
transitory  condition ;  we  must  not  think  and  act  as  if  it  were  our  "  continuing  city."
Such  joy  as  pilgrims  have,  who  are  ever  looking  forward  to  a  blessedness  to  come,  we
may  permit  ourselves.  But  alas  I  for  him  who  "  has  his  reward  "  here,  and  looks  for
none  hereafter,  whose  only  heritage  is  in  the  "  world  that  passeth  away."  Well  is  it  for
him  whose  holy  happiness  is  a  preparation  for,  and  an  anticipation  of,  the  blessedness
which  is  beyond,  which  abides  and  abounds  for  ever. — 0.

Vers.  1 — 4.4. — The  festivals.  Vers.  1 — 3,  the  stxibhath.  The  three  features  of  it  are;
the  convocation  ;  the  rest  from  all  work ;  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  in  their  dwellings.

I.  The  PUBLIC  WORSHIP  of  God  is  the  main  reason  for  the  sabbath.  "  Holy  convoca-
tion." Necessity  that  one  day  should  be  appointed.  Importance  of  preserving  that
day  of  worship  from  distraction  and  distiubance.  Influence  of  public  worship  on  the
general  interests  of  religion,  and  therefore  on  the  individual,  community,  and  the  world
at  large.

II.  Best.  "  Ye  shall  do  no  work."  The  physical  necessity  of  an  interval  of  rest.
The  moral  importance  of  giving  opportunity  to  the  higher  powers  of  the  nation  for  free
development.  The  reaction  of  the  sabbath  on  the  working  capacity,  both  by  physical
recuperation  and  moral  strength.  The  difference  between  God's  Law  and  the  "  gospel
of  work"  preached  by  many.  The  secularist  empties  life  of  its  dignity  and  glory, and
at  last  sacrifices  it  to  the  Moloech  of  this  world's  necessities  and  pleasures.

III.  The  sabbath  of  God  is  a  sabbath  m  ons  DWELLXNas.  Keligion  sanctifies  home
life  and  family  affection.  Best  in  the  house  of  God  is  rest  in  the  house  of  man.  The
law  of  religion  shields  all  life  from  injury,  and  cherishes  the  glad  and  happy  in  the
midst  of  the  laborious  and  troublesome.  We  should  take  care  that  the  sabbath  at
home  is  both  rest  and  worship,  that  it  is  not  spent  in  idleness  or  even  self-gratification,
but,  being  given  to  God,  becomes  the  more  really  our  own — ^not  by  slavish  regulation
of  the  hours,  but  by  the  spirit  of  worship  pervading  all  our  surroundings  and  employ-
ments.   The  sanctuary  and  the  home  open  into  one  another. — B.

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  Passover  and  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread.  This  may  be
regarded  as  the  opening  festival  of  the  year,  and  the  closing  one  was  the  Feast  of
Tabernacles ;  typically  representing  the  life  of  God's  people  passing  from  redemption
to  restitution.  The  Jewish  sacred  year  may  be  taken  to  represent  the  progress  cf
Divine  grace.  The  foundation  of  all  is  the  Passover — redemption,  the  death  of  Christ
the  Paschal  Lamb.     The  main  ideas  are —

I.  All  true  life  resting  on  the  true  beginning  of  peace  and  rest  in  the  offering  up  of
the  Lamb  of  God  for  the  sins  of  the  world.

II.  All  true  holiness,  bread  without  leaven,  pure  fruits  of  man's  labour,  offered  to
God,  springs  out  of  faith.  Morality  is  an  outcome  of  religion.  Reconciliation  with
God  is  the  beginning  of  the  consecrated  life.

III.  The  Passover,  a  national  celebration,  set  forth  the  true  strength  of  the  national
life,  as  the  life  of  God  in  the  nation.  The  world  can  be  renovated  only  as  it  is  regarded
as  a  world  redeemed.  Christianity  is  the  only  religion  adapted  to  be  a  universal  message
to  mankind.    Hence  its  catholicity., — B.

Vers.  9 — 14. — The  first  sheaf  a  wave  offering  of  the  harvest.  Festival  of  firstfruits.
May  be  viewed  (1)  naturally ;  (2)  typiadly.

I.  The  consecration  of  human  life  and  its  results  to  God.  1,  As  an  expression  ol
thankfulness  and  praise,    2.  As  an  act  of  faith  and  hope.


m»  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxm.  6—44.

II.  Ttpioal  view  of  the  firstfruit*.  1.  Caxrist  the  Firatfruita.  In  the  Besurrectlon
(1  Cor.  XT.  20).  Of  humanity  as  renewed  and  restored  to  perfection.  2.  The  true
aoctrine  of  election,  the  flrstfruits  the  pledge  of  the  harvest.  Israel  separated  from  the
world  for  the  hope  of  the  world.  3.  Individually.  Our  present  life  consecrated  is  a
pledge  of  future  glory.  We  shall  reap  hereafter  the  full  harvest  of  redemption.  Pro-
fession and  dedication.  The  wave  offering, " before  the  Lord"  and  before  bJa  people,  in
the  sanctuary ;  as  a  sacrifice ;  in  the  covenant. — R.

Vers.  16 — 22. — Day  of  Pentecost  (cf.  Acts  ii.).

I.  Ths  blending  togethbe  of  the  natural  and  BPiBiTiTAii  LIVXB.  Th»  harrert  of
the  earthly  labour,  the  harvest  of  grace.

II.  Intimate  connection  between  the  two  festivals  of  Fasboveb  and  Pbntb-
cosT.  The  seven  weeks',  that  is,  week  of  weeks',  interval,  pointing  to  sacred  bond
between  them.  The  fruits  of  righteousness  are  by  Jesus  Christ.  Pentecostal  grace  flows
from  redemption  as  a  fountain,  as  summer  from  spring,  as  harvest  from  seed-time.

in.  Historical  fulfilment  of  the  idea  of  Pentecost  in  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,
the  ingathering  of  the  firstfiuits  of  the  Christian  Church,  the  beginning  of  the  new  life
and  new  joy  of  the  world.  Christ  arising  and  bringing  forth  fruit.  Mingling  together
of  the  wave  loaves  and  the  bloody  sacrifices,  typical  of  the  union  of  the  work  of  Christ
and  the  work  of  the  Spirit.  The  sabbath  in  the  harvest,  the  rest  in  the  work,  the  true
reward  of  life  in  the  enjoyment  of  God.  The  mission  of  Christianity  to  the  poor  and
the  stranger.  Universal  joy.  All  the  field  brings  forth  blessed  results  for  all  the
world. — E.

Vers.  23 — 25. — The  Feast  of  7^-wnpeti,  "A  sabbath,  a  memorial,  a  holy  convoca-
tion." Probably  recalling  the  giving  of  the  Law  from  Mount  SinaL  Therefore  typical
of  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel,  which  is  the  new  law  of  love.

I.  The  people  of  God  unite  together  to  spread  the  sound  of  the  gospel  in  the  world.

II.  They  rejoice  in  it.     It  is  a  festival — a  work  which  is  sabbatical.

III.  It  is  immediately  connected  with  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  and  the  pro-
clamation will  be  no  uncertain  sound,  but  a  distinct  announcement  of  the  sav!ng  truth
«et  forth  in  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ. — E.

Vers.  2&^32. — The  great  Bay  of  Atonement  (see  on  ch.  xvL  29 — 34), — B.

Vers.  33 — 44. — Hie  Feast  of  Tdbemadei  (cf.  Neh.  viiL  17 ;  Zech.  xiv.  16).

I.  PeAISE  fob  accomplished  BEDBMPTION  and  the  bounteous  gifts  of  VBOyiDSSiJS.

Beminiscences  of  the  wilderness  life.  Fact  that  Israel  neglected  the  feast  from  Joshua
to  Nehemiah,  even  in  the  time  of  great  national  prosperity  in  Solomon's  reign,  very
instructive,  pointing  to  ingratitude  and  unbelief.  The  religious  life  and  the  natural
life  blended.  The  joy  of  praise  binding  families  together,  and  so  nations  and  the
world.

II.  The  symbolical  meaning  of  the  feast — the  globt  of  Isbael  and  the  ultimatk
EESTiTua'ioN  OF  ALL  THINGS.  The  prophecy  of  Zechariah  (xiv.  16)  not  to  be  taken
literally,  otherwise  its  significance  is  narrowed ;  but  as  a  spiritual  anticipation  of  the
enlargement  of  the  true  Church  tmtil  it  shall  embrace  the  world.  The  gospel  invites
men  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord.

III.  The  feast  on  earth — a  foretaste  op  the  higheb  lifk  of  heaven.  Dwelling  in
booths — temporary,  frail,  withering,  yet  by  their  nature,  as  pleasant  places  of  shadow,
pointing  to  the  rest  that  remains  for  the  people  of  God.  The  wilderness  life  leads  on
to  the  Ufe  of  Canaan ;  the  earthly  festival  to  the  heavenly ;  the  frail  tabernacle  to  the
"  city  of  habitations,"  "  having  foundations,"  etc. — E.

Ver.  4.— Religious  festivals.  This  chapter  has  been  termed,  from  its  contents,  the
Calendar  of  Feasts.  Underneath  much  that  has  been  abolished  by  the  gospel,  we  can
trace  principles  and  truths  of  permanent  application,  invested  with  interest  for  the
Christian  as  well  as  the  Jewish  Church.  Surface  views  are  of  little  worth ;  if  not  mis-
leading, they  are  at  best  transitory  in  nature.

I.  True  religion  has  its  festivals.   The  word  rendered  "  feasts  "  in  the  text  i


OH.  xxiii.  1— 44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  369

"  fixed  times ; "  but  in  ver.  6  "  feast "  is  the  translation  of  a  word  that  signifies  rejoicing,
whose  expression  is  dancing  or  processions.  By  their  devotion  to  Jehovah,  the  Israelites
were  not  to  be  continually  shadowed  in  gloom,  nor  deprived  of  the  legitimate  mirth  that
attached  even  to  heathen  celebrations.  Only  they  were  to  be  the  "feasts  of  the  Lord,"
in  his  honour — not  to  the  deification  of  Baalim  or  Ashtaroth.  "  Eejoice  in  the  Lord  "
is  our  privilege  as  Christians,  and  to  realize  every  privilege  is  also  a  duty.  It  is  time
that  the  popular  idea  were  corrected  which  dissociates  a  profession  of  religion  from  all
that  savours  of  high  enjoyment.

II.  The  charaoteeistio  of  a  festival  is  thb  OATHBRiNa  TooETHEB  or  Q-od's
PEOPLB.  "  Convocation "  gives  the  force  of  the  original — it  is  "  a  place  of  calling."
Solitary  joy  does  not  constitute  a  feast  of  Jehovah.  Just  as  some  are  prone  to  neglect
private  meditation,  so  do  others  slight  the  public  communion  of  saints.  The  chief
promise  of  the  Lord's  presence  is  granted  to  those  "  assembling "  in  his  name.  We
ought  to  make  an  effort  to  attend  all  the  festivals  of  the  Church ;  we  are  called  to  them,
and  are  guilty  of  disobedience  if,  without  reasonable  excuse,  we  do  not  respond.
Numbers  exert  an  exhilarating  influence  upon  the  mind ;  a  large  meeting  is  generally
inspiriting  to  all  concerned.  The  gatherings,  sometimes  held  apart  from  the  tabernacle
in  accordance  with  the  injunctions  of  this  chapter,  developed  into  the  worship  of  the
synagogue,  the  model  of  our  services  upon  the  Lord's  day.

III.  Holiness  is  the  purpose,  and  should  be  the  ruling)  feature,  op  thebi
OATHBRINQS.  They  are  termed  "holy"  convocations,  and  are  thus  distinguished  from
the  wild  orgies  of  heathendom.  Neither  Roundhead  austereness  nor  Cavalier  licentious-
ness is  here  designed.  Especially  should  we  aim  in  our  modern  religious  meetings  at
edification;  not  indulging  to  excess  in  humour  and  levity,  but  preserving  decorum
whilst  ri^ng  to  intelligent,  godly  enthusiasm.  By  such  a  time  of  sacred  gladness  we
shall  prove  the  truth  of  the  utterance,  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  The
apostle  intimates  (1  Cor.  xi.  10)  that  our  behaviour  in  Church  assemblies  should  be
governed  by  a  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  the  angels  are  spectators.  Let  our  august
visitors  be  treated  with  respect.  So  shall  these  meetings  prove  preparations  for  above,
for  the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the  Firstborn,  and  the  innumerable  hosts  of
angels.

IV.  The  festival  involves  abbtinenck  from  servile  work.  (See  ver.  7.)  The
usual  occupations  are  renounced,  and  rest,  not  of  indolence,  but  of  spiritual  activity,  is
enjoyed.  The  good  that  thereby  results  to  the  physical  and  spiritual  frame  can  hardly
be  overestimated.  Energy  and  time  are  not  wasted,  but  improved.  It  is  well  that  a
man  should  not -be  always  trammelled  by  the  claims  of  business,  but  discern  that  there
are  other  obligations  it  is  incumbent  on  him  to  discharge.  The  chain  that  never  leaves
the  neck  will  eat  itself  into  the  flesh,  and  liberty  become  impossible.  If  the  head  be
continually  bent  towards  the  earth,  it  will  become  a  matter  of  utmost  difBculty  to  raise
it  to  behold  the  heavens.  To  work  at  our  worldly  calling,  to  minister  to  the  wants  of
the  body,  is  not  the  only  or  the  noblest  task  we  are  expected  to  perform ;  the  soul  has
its  rights  and  needs,  and  Jehovah  his  prerogatives.

v.  Festival  oatheringb  are  of  regular  recurrence.  "  Which  ye  shall  proclaim
in  their  seasons."  What  is  irregularly  attended  to  is  liable  to  be  overlooked ;  what  is
anticipated  can  be  prepared  for.  The  weekly  observance  of  a  day  of  holy  convocation
prevents  every  pretext  of  forgetfulness  and  insufScient  notice,  and  reminds  us,  in
addition,  of  the  flight  of  time.  The  methodical  man  parcels  out  his  days;  and  a  regard
for  order  is  evident  in  all  the  precepts  of  Scripture. — S.  B.  A.

Vers.  10, 11. — The  beginning  of  harvest.  Advantage  was  taken  of  the  long  lojoum
in  the  wilderness  to  promulgate  and  instruct  the  people  in  the  Law,  that  they  might  be
ready  to  execute  its  commandments  as  soon  as  full  opportunity  was  afforded  by  a
residesc?  in  a  settled  country.  To  dwell  upon  such  future  observances  could  not  but
strengthen  the  faith  of  the  people  in  God's  intention  to  bring  fhem  eventually  into  th«
promised  land.  Of  all  the  anticipations  connected  with  that  land,  the  most  pleasing
was  the  prospect  of  seeing  the  golden  grain  standing  in  the  fields  inviting  the  reaper's
sickle.

I.  The  recognition  op  God  ab  the  Giver  op  all  good  GiPTfi.  1.  Here  he  is
recognized  at  the  Ood  of  providence,  whose  kind  hand  enriches  man  with  the  fruits  of

LEVITICUS.  2  B


S70  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS,  [oh.  xxin.  1—44

earth,  causing  the  seed  to  germinate,  and  perfecting  and  ripening  it  with  sun,  air,  »nd
rain.  Israel  thus  rehuked  the  folly  of  surrounding  nations,  who  deified  the  earth  as  a
personal  goddess  ;  and  the  conceptions  of  the  modern  materialist  who  refusis  to  see  in
nature  any  trace  of  an  overruling  Deity,  and  of  the  pantheist  who  identifies  God  with
ois  works,  may  he  similarly  reproved.  And  if  the  blessings  received  from  Providence  are
to  be  acknowledged,  surely  the  same  argument  wil'  apply  to  all  the  many  favours,
temporal  and  spiritual,  that  stream  upon  us  as  the  children  of  God.  In  fact,  what
have  we  of  intellectual,  physical,  or  propertied  endowment  that  did  not  proceed  from
him  ?  2.  Recognized  hy  the  congregation  as  a  whole.  Family,  corporate,  national
religion  is  distinct  in  a  sense  from  individual  worship,  and  God  may  honour  the  one
as  such  apart  from  the  particular  merits  of  the  other.  The  entire  body  ought,  however,
to  resemble  the  coiriponent  units ;  otherwise  there  is  felt  to  be  an  incongruity  that
mocks  the  Being  whom  we  intend  to  magnify.  The  Americans  have  shown  that,  apart
from  what  is  called  State  religion,  there  may  be  hearty  national  recognition  of  God.
3.  The  general  does  not  exclude  the  personal  aeknowledgment  of  God's  yoodness.  In
ch.  iL  14  are  found  regulations  respecting  the  presentation  of  free-will  individual  firstfruit
ofiFerings.  The  service  of  the  sanctuary  should  stimulate  and  not  serve  as  a  substitute
for  private  prayer  and  praise.  Let  the  congregational  dedication  be  seconded  by  a
personal  self-surrender  to  the  glory  of  God.

n.  The  method  of  acknowledgment.  1.  An  offering  Irought  to  the  Lord,  vii.
a  sheaf  of  barley,  which  is  "  waved "  by  the  priest,  the  symbolical  act  indicative  of
surrender  of  property  to  God.  By  returning  a  portion  of  what  was  originally  bestowed,
God's  proprietorship  and  man's  stewardship  are  signified  in  fitting  manner.  Bach
Church  and  family  should  pay  its  tithe  to  the  Lord,  separating  some  of  its  members  to
religious  work.  2.  Such  an  offering  may  provide  for  the  support  of  God's  appointed
servants.  This  sheaf  was  not  consumed  upon  the  altar,  but  was  for  the  benefit  of  the
priests.  Those  who  by  reason  of  exclusive  devotion  to  the  altar  cannot  find  leisure  to
BOW  and  reap,  must  be  remembered  by  the  people  in  whose  behalf  they  labour.  To
assist  the  servants  of  Christ  is  to  render  help  to  the  Master  himself.  Let  the  wealthy
in  the  receipt  of  their  dividends  think  upon  the  men  who  are  their  representatives  in
Christian  effort.  The  division  of  labour  must  not  allow  one  field  of  industry  to  be
entirely  isolated  from  the  rest.  3.  Other  offerings  natwraUy  accompany  the  particular
presentation.  The  one  food  reminds  of  other  blessings,  and  so,  besides  the  firstfruit
sheaf,  there-are  brought  a  burnt  oflFering,  a  meat  offering,  and  a  drink  offering,  consti-
tuting a  festal  sacrifice.  One  gift  prepares  the  way  for  another,  opens  the  door  so  that
a  presentation  of  a  different  kind  may  fullow.  He  who  sets  apart  a  portion  of  time  for
Gcd  is  not  likely  to  stop  there,  but  will  contribute  money  and  influence  likewise.

HI.  The  pkiokitt  op  God's  claim  to  honotjb.  1.  It  precedes  our  ovm  enjoyment.
No  bread,  nor  parched  corn,  nor  green  ears  must  be  tasted  till  Jehovah  has  been  duly
acknowledged  as  the  bountiful  Giver.  The  rent  must  be  paid  ere  we  can  settle  down
to  comfortable  possession  of  the  house.  Men  think  they  can  without  impropriety
reverse  this  order,  attending  first  to  their  own  needs  and  pleasures,  and  then  to  God's
requirements.  In  two  ways  they  err — they  dishonour  their  Maker,  and  they  fail  to
hallow  the  enjoyment  of  their  daily  food  and  privileges  by  the  happy  consciousness
that  a  portion  has  been  previously  dedicated  to  God.  To  acknowledge  our  indebted-
ness is  to  send  us  back  rejoicing  to  our  dwellings.  2.  It  is  not  right  to  wait  until  the
whole  amount  of  llessing  has  been  reaped.  At  the  very  beginning  of  harvest  this
ceremony  occurs,  consecrating  the  harvest  toil,  ensuring  the  favour  of  God  upon  the
remainder.  Men  who  delay  an  offering  until  they  know  the  exact  amount  of  their
savings,  are  likely  to  find  the  total  less  than  they  hoped.  It  is  wejl  to  give  in  faith,
seeing  quite  sufBcient  reason  already  to  evoke  a  testimony  of  gratitude.  "  Honour  the
Lord  with  thy  substance,  and  with  the  firstfruits  of  all  thine  increase :  so  shall  thy
barns  be  filled  with  plenty,  and  thy  presses  shall  burst  out  with  new  wine."  For  the
first  convert  in  a  place  that  seems  teeming  with  promise  of  fruitfulness,  we  would  at
once  give  thanks.  Ere  the  multitudes  of  happy  dead  can  be  raised  and  gathered  into
the  heavenly  gamer,  Jesus  Christ  is  risen  and  become  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that
deep.  His  appearance  before  God  as  the  Perfect  Offering  guarantee  an  ample  blmmd
harvest, — 3.  fi,  A.


OT.  xxni.  1—44.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  S71

Vers.  40 — 43. — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  There  were  three  great  festivals  for  the
Israelites,  the  dates  for  which  were  plainly  marked,  and  at  which  times  it  behoved  the
males  of  the  cation  as  far  as  possible  to  be  present  at  the  sanctuary.  It  is  the  last  of
these  we  are  about  to  consider.  The  regulations  for  its  observance  were  enunciated  in
fullest  detail.  Were  not  the  people  thus  reminded  that  they  assisted  in  the  celebration
of  the  ceremonies  of  a  royal  court?  The  Christian  Church  has  its  festivals,  prominent
among  which  are  its  gatherings  on  the  Lord's  day,  and  the  observance  of  the  Lord's
Supper.  Much  of  what  can  be  said  with  reference  to  the  Israelitish  feasts  is  appUcable
also  to  the  latter.

I.  This  was  the  most  joyous  of  the  festivals.  "Ye  shall  rejoice  before  the
Lord  your  God."  1.  See  Ood's  delight  in  the  happiness  of  his  people.  He  loves  to
witness  their  rejoicing.  Religion  was  never  intended  to  be  synonymous  with  gloom  or
moroseness.  2.  This  teas  the  crouming  festival  of  the  year,  and  therefore  ought  to  be
its  climax  of  joy.  For  the  child  of  God  better  days  are  ever  in  store ;  he  need  never
pine  for  the  past  to  return  ;  each  festival  shall  surpass  the  preceding.  Jesus  keeps  the
best  wine  till  the  last ;  not  so  with  the  world's  pleasures.  3.  It  took  place  five  days
after  the  solemn  Day  of  Atonement,  when  the  national  sin  was  purged,  and  Israel's
communion  with  its  God  re-established.  To  confess  sin  and  obtain  pardon  is  the
fitting  preparation  for  gladness  of  heart.  No  man  who  has  not  experienced  the  feeling
of  relief  from  the  burden  of  guilt  and  the  emotion  caused  by  restoration  to  his  heavenly
Father's  favour,  knows  the  meaning  of  real  joy.  Compared  with  this  the  delights  of
aense  and  intellect  are  flavourless.  4.  Joy  reaches  its  highest  expression  in  the  presence
ef  Qod.  " Eejoice  before  the  Lord"  even  the  holy  righteous  God  who  searches  the
heart  and  tries  the  reins.  We  may  without  pride  know  that  we  have  done  what  was
right,  and  that  the  Being  of  beings  approves  our  conduct  and  graces  the  festival  with
the  light  of  his  countenance.  There  is  none  of  the  secret  misgiving  that  attends  sinful
banquets,  where  the  laugh  is  hollow  and  the  gaiety  forced,  from  a  conviction  that
consci^ce  is  being  silenced  and  moral  law  violated.  Cf.  the  rejoicing  of  the  people,
and  the  terror  of  Adonijah  and  his  guests  (1  Kings  i.  40,  49).  David  danced  for  glee
before  the  Lord  when  the  sacred  ark  was  brought  into  the  city  of  David.  "  Rejoice,  0
daughter  of  Zion,  for  thy  king  cometh  unto  thee."  We  would  fain  have  the  children
glad  when  it  is  said,  "  Let  us  go  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord."

IL  This  was  a  festival  of  gratitude  fob  eecent  blessings.  1.  Another
name  for  it  was  the  Ftast  of  Ingathering.  AU  the  produce  of  the  ground  had  been
garnered,  the  Lord  had  blessed  them  in  all  their  increase — corn,  oil,  and  wine ;  daily  food
and  luxuries  abounded ;  the  booths  were  constructed  of  fruit  trees  and  leafy  palms.
God's  bounteous  bestowment  was  acknowledged.  Spiritual  and  temporal  mercies  had
enriched  the  people  and  evoked  manifestations  of  thanksgiving.  So  visibly  dependent
is  man  upon  God  for  the  germinating  and  maturing  of  the  grain  and  fruit,  that  a  harvest
thanksgiving  seems  peculiarly  appropriate,  and  again  at  the  storing  of  the  harvest,  when
the  work  for  the  year  is  practically  ended,  a  festival  is  of  evident  fitness.  The  com-
passions of  the  Lord, "  new  every  morning,"  furnish  ample  matter  for  devout  meditatioD
and  praise.  2.  Thisfeatwe  of  the  festival  was  a  reason  why  all  should  share  in  it,  not
only  the  wealthy,  high-born  Israelites,  but  the  strangers,  the  fatherless,  the  widow,  and
the  poor  (Deut.  xvi.  14).  God  allows  his  sun  to  shine  and  rain  to  descend  upon  all,
and  he  expects  those  who  receive  his  lavish  gifts  to  invite  others  to  participate  in  th«
enjoyment  thereof.  Anticipating  our  Lord's  directions  to  summon  to  a  feast  the  pool
and  maimed  and  blind,  the  Israelites  were  accustomed  to  "  send  portions  to  them  for
whom  nothing  is  prepared."  Selfish  exclusion  was  thus  prevented,  and  universal
rejoicing  made  possible.  3.  An  offering  to  Qod  from  each  was  essential.  "  They  shall
not  appear  before  the  Lord  empty ;  every  man  shall  give  as  he  is  able  "  (Deut.  xvi.  17).
Speech  and  sentiment  without  deeds  are  rijjhtly  deemed  insincere.  It  is  true_of  all
converts  from  heathendom  that  when  they  give  of  their  substance  to  God  we  may  infer
tiiat  they  have  first  given  him  their  hearts.  The  priests  and  Levites  were  in  part
supported  by  these  national  free-will  presentations.  If  we  esteem  the  Master,  we  sliall
treat  his  servants  well  for  his  sake.

in.  This  was  a  commbmobatioh  of  fokmbb  blessings.  During  seven  days  the
Israelites  dwelt  in  booths  made  of  green  boughs  to  remind  them  of  the  days  when  they
■ojouined  in  the  wilderness  (ver.  43).    1.  Previous  experience  may  weU  be  rememhered.


372


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XXIV.  1 — 9.


If  it  pass  into  oblivion,  its  lessons  have  not  been  graven  on  the  mind,  and  our  state  has
not  proved  the  discipline  it  was  designed  to  be.  Stand,  0  believer,  upon  the  mount  o<
present  station,  and  survey  the  path  with  all  its  windings  by  which  you  have  ascended
to  this  lofty  summit.  Such  a  review  will  be  profitable  in  the  extreme,  it  will  produce
deepened  humility  and  thankfulness.  Keil  says,  "the  recollection  of  privation  and
want  can  never  be  an  occasion  of  joy."  Surely  he  forgets  the  Latin  line,  "  hseo  olim
meminisse  juvabit."  Contrast  ever  heightens  joy,  a  danger  successfully  surmounted  ii
one  oi  the  most  pleasing  of  memories.  2.  Z7i«  exhibition  of  Ood's  protecting  grace  and
i«ve  demands  particular  recollection.  Not  the  might  and  resources  of  the  Israelites,  but
the  watchful,  provident  care  of  Jehovah,  had  led  them  safely  through  the  desert.  He
had  been  to  them  "  a  booth  for  a  shadow  in  the  daytime  from  the  heat,  and  for  a  place
of  refuge,  and  for  a  covert  from  storm  and  from  rain  "  (Isa.  ir.  6).  The  honour  of  God
was  concerned  in  having  a  permanent  memorial  of  Israel's  stay  in  the  wilderness,  and
this  institution  was  adapted  to  preserve  the  continued  confidence  of  the  people  in  him
and  consequent  freedom  from  boastful  self-assertion.  In  many  ways,  "  the  joy  of  the
Lord  is  our  strength."  3.  The  deliverances  wrought  for  our  forefathers  in  olden  days
$hould  excite  gratitude  to  Ood  in  our  breasts.  Can  we  recall  unmoved  the  triumphs  of
the  early  Christiains,  or  the  heroism  which  God's  Spirit  enabled  martyred  Protestants  to
evince  ?    The  wonders  of  our  age  become  the  heirlooms  of  the  ages  that  follow.

Conclusion.  The  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  commemorated  in  the  Lord's  Supper  was
the  Passover  of  the  Church ;  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  at  Pentecost  marked  the  era  of
the  Church's  Feast  of  Weeks ;  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  yet  waits  its  due  counterpart,
when  the  elect  shall  be  gathered  into  the  kingdom  from  every  land,  to  celebrate  the
cessation  of  earthly  toil,  to  exult  in  the  complete  removal  of  sinful  stain,  and  to  enter
upon  the  undimmed,  undying  gladness  of  the  eternal  sabbath.  Not  one  of  God's  people
shall  be  missing  through  illness  or  distance  of  abode,  and  a  retrospect  of  the  pilgrimage
of  earth  shall  enhance  the  bliss  of  heaven. — S.  It.  A.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXIV.
A.  oonneotiou  between  eh.  xxllL  and  oh.
xxiv.  1—9  is  found  by  Keil  in  the  fact  that
the  oil  for  the  holy  lamps  and  the  shewbread
were  offerings   of  the  people,  a  sacrificial
gift  with  which  Israel  was  to  serve  the  Lord
continually.    "  The  offering  of  oil,  therefore!
for  the  preparation  of  the  candlestick,  and
that  of  fine  flour  for  making  the  loaves  to  be
placed  before  Jehovah,  formed  part  of  the
service  in  which  Israel  sanctified  its  life  and
labour  to  the  Lord  its  God,  not  only  at  the
appointed  festal  periods,  but  every  day ;  and
the  law  is  very  appropriately  appended  to
the  sanetifioation  of  the  sabbaths  and  feast
days  prescribed  in  ch.  xxlii "    But   it    is
better  to  consider  the  whole  chapter  paren-
thetical between  chs.  xxiii.  and  xxv.,  -thB
first  part  having  been  suggested  by  the  list
of  days  on  which  holy  convocations  were  to
be  held,  because  it  it  connected  with  the
temple  or  tabernacle  service ;  the  second  part
(the    blasphemer's   death)    being  inserted
became  it  chronologically  happened  shortly


after  the  law  as  to  holy  oouTocstioni  and
festivals  had  been  pronounced.

Vers.  1 — i. — The  ordinance  on  the  lamps
contained  in  the  first  three  verses  is  repeated
from  Exod.  xxvii.  20.  The  oil  to  be  used
for  the  lamps  was  to  be  pure  oil  olive,  that
is,  oil  made  of  picked  berries,  without  any
intermixture  of  dust  or  twigs ;  and  it  was  to
be  beaten  instead  of  "  pressed,"  because  when
the  berries  were  crushed  in  the  olive-press,
small  portions  of  them  became  mixed  with
and  discoloured  the  oil,  which  was,  therefore,
less  pure  than  when  the  fruit  was  simply
beaten  and  then  left  to  drain.  The  lamps
were  to  bum  continually ;  that  is,  from  even-
ing to  morning  every  night.  ■Without  the
vail  of  the  testimony,  in  the  tabernacle  of  the
congregation ;  that  is,  in  the  holy  place,  as
distmct  from  the  holy  of  holies.  Aaron,
eitUtr  personally  or  by  his  sons  (see  Exod.
xxvii.  21),  was  to  dress  the  lamps  every
niorning,  and  light  them  every  evening
(Exod.  iix.  7).  The  lamps  were  upon  the
seven-branched  candlestick,  ^\  hich  is  called
the  pure  candlestick,  because  made  of  gold
The  light  of  the  seven-branched  candlestick
gmbolized  the  enlightening  power  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  which  should  illumine  God's
Church  (Zech.  iv.  2—6;  Rev.  1,  12,  20)
Vers.  5— 9.— The  shewbread,  or  bread  of


OH.  iXIV.  1 9.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


«73


the  face,  that  ii,  of  the  presence,  was  to  be
made  of  fine  flour,  that  ia,  of  wheat,  and  to
oonsut  of  twelve  oakes  or  loaves,  to  represent
the  twelve  tribes  of  Lnael,  each  loaf  contain-
ing upward  of  six  pounds  of  flour.  The
loaves  were  placed  upon  the  pure  table
before  the  Lord ;  that  is,  on  the  golden  table
of  shewbread  within  the  sanctuary — which
stood  not  far  from  the  vail  which  partitioned
off  the  holy  of  holies— toward  the  north,  as
the  candlestick  was  toward  the  south.  The
loaves  were  set,  not,  probably,  in  two  rows,  six
on  a  row,  as  they  could  have  hardly  stood  in
that  position  on  so  small  a  table  as  the  table
of  shewbread  (which  was  only  three  feet  by
one  foot  and  a  half),  but  in  pilee,  »ix  in  a
pHe.  Upon  them,  or  more  probably  between
the  two  piles,  were  placed  two  vials  or  cups
filled  .with  frankincense  (Josephus,  '  Ant.,'
iii.  7, 6).  The  shewbread  was  renewed  every
sabbath  day,  with  much  ceremony.  "  Four
priests,"  says  the  Mishna,  "  enter,  two  of
them  carrying  the  piles  of  bread,  and  two  of
them  the  cups  of  incense.  Four  priests  had
gone  in  before  them,  two  to  take  off  the  two
old  piles  of  shrewbread,  and  two  to  take  oif  the
cups  of  incense.  Those  who  brought  in  the
new  stood  at  the  north  side  facing  south-
wards; those  who  took  away  the  old,  at  the
south  side,  facing  northwards  One  party
lifted  off  and  the  other  put  on,  the  hands  of
one  being  over  against  the  hands  of  the  other,
•■  it  is  written.   Thou  shalt  set  upon  th«


table  bread  of  the  Passover  always  before
me  "  ('  Men.,'  xi.  7).  The  loaves  that  were
removed  were  delivered  to  the  priests  for
their  consumption  within  the  tabernacle,
the  whole  quantity  amounting  to  seventy-
five  pounds  of  bread  per  week.  It  was  this
bread  which,  in  the  pressure  of  necessity,
Ahimelech  gave  to  David  and  his  men  (1  Sam.
xxi.  4—6).  At  the  same  time  that  the  old
loaves  were  changed,  the  frankincense  was
burned  on  the  golden  altar  of  incense  for  a
memorial,  even  an  offering  made  by  fire  unto
the  lord.  There  is  nothing  in  Scripture  to
prove  whether  the  loaves  were  leavened  or
unleavened.  As  being  the  meat  offering  of
the  tabernacle,  we  should  expect  them  to  be
unleavened,  like  the  meat  offeiing  of  the
court,  but  there  was  a  reason  why  the  meat
offering  of  the  court  should  be  unleavened,
which  did  not  operate  in  the  case  of  the
shewbread.  A  part  of  the  ordinary  meat
offering  had  to  be  burnt  on  the  altar  of  burnt
sacrifice ;  therefore  it  could  hot  be  leavened,
because  no  leaven  might  be  burned  on  the
altar ;  but  the  shewbread  was  not  burnt  on
any  altar,  and  consequently  it  need  not  for
that  reason  be  unleavened.  The  two  Pen-
tecostal loaves,  which  were  offered  to  the
Lord  by  waving  instead  of  burning,  were
leavened.  The  probabilities  derived  from
Scripture  appear  to  be  equally  strong  on
either  side.  Josephus  states  that  they  were
unleavened  (<  Ant.,'  iii.  6,  6 ;  10, 7).


HOMILETICS.

Vers,  1 — 9. — ^The  lamps  of  the  seven-branched  candlestick  burnt  throughoat  the
whole  night  in  the  tabernacle ;  and  the  shewbread  was  constantly  set  forth  upon  the
golden  table.  They  may  be  taken  to  symbolize  :  1.  The  constant  illumination  vouch-
safed by  God  to  his  Church  through  the  indwelling  of  tlie  Holy  Spirit.  2.  The
spiritual  food  constantly  supplied  by  him  in  his  Church  to  those  who  come  in  faith  to
have  their  wants  supplied.

I.  I.  Illumination  by  the  Spirit  was  pkomised  by  Cheist.  "  The  Comforter,  which
is  the  Holy  Ghost,  whom  the  Father  will  send  in  my  name,  he  shall  teach  you  all
things,  and  bring  all  things  to  your  remembrance,  whatsoever  I  have  said  unto  you  "
(John  xiv.  26).  "  It  is  expedient  for  you  that  I  go  away :  for  if  I  go  not  away,  the
Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  him  unto  you.  .  .  .
When  he,  the  Spirit  of  truth,  is  come,  he  will  guide  you  into  all  truth  "  (John  xvi.
7—13).

II.  Thk  fulfilment  of  the  pkomtse  commenobd  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.
"  Therefore  being  by  the  right  hand  of  God  exalted,  and  having  received  of  the
Father  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  hath  shed  forth  this,  which  ye  now  see  and
hear"  (Acts  ii.  33).

III.  The  illumination  is  permanent  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  per-
manent MINISTRY.  "When  he  ascended  up  on  high, he  led  captivity  captive,  and  gave
gifts  unto  men.  .  .  .  And  he  gave  some,  apostles;  and  some,  prophets;  and  some,
evangelists  ;  and  some,  pastors  and  teachers  ;  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the
work  of  the  ministry,  for  the  edifying  of  the  Body  of  Christ"  (Eph.  iv.  8^12).

IV.  Christ  abides  by  his  Spirit  in  the  midst  op  the  seven  golden  candlesticks.
"  I  saw  seven  golden  candlesticks ;  and  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks  one  lika


374  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxiv.  1— a

unto  the  Son  of  man  "  (Rev.  i.  12,  13).  "  These  things  saith  he  that  holdeth  the  seven
stars  in  his  right  hand,  who  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  golden  candlesticks "
(Rev.  ii.  1).

▼.  Ant  branch  of  the  candlestick  whose  liqht  is  extinguished  "will  bb
BEMOVBD.  "  Remember  therefore  from  whence  thou  art  I'allen,  and  repent,  and  do  the
first  works ;  or  else  I  will  come  unto  thee  quickly,  and  will  remove  thy  candlestick  out
of  his  place,  except  thou  repent "  (Rev,  ii.  5).

2.  L  Chbibt  is  the  bpibitual  food  of  his  Church.  "  Then  Jesus  said  unto  them,.
Verily,  verily,  1  say  unto  you,  Moses  gave  you  not  that  bread  from  heaven  ;  but  my
Father  giveth  you  the  true  Bread  from  heaven.  For  the  bread  of  God  is  he  which
Cometh  down  from  heaven,  and  giveth  life  unto  the  world.  Then  said  they  unto  him.
Lord,  evermore  give  us  this  bread.  And  Jesus  said  unto  them,  I  am  the  Bread  of  Life  t
he  that  cometh  to  me  shall  never  hunger ;  and  he  that  believeth  on  me  shall  never
thirst.  .  .  .  The  Jews  then  murmured  at  him,  because  he  said,  I  am  the  Bread  which
came  down  from  heaven.  .  .  .  Jesus  therefore  answered  and  said  unto  them,  Murmur
not  among  yourselves.  ...  I  am  the  living  Bread  which  came  down  from  heaven :  if
any  man  eat  of  this  bread,  he  shall  live  for  ever :  and  the  bread  that  I  will  give  is
my  flesii,  which  I  will  give  for  the  hfe  of  the  world  "  (John  vi.  32 — 51).

IL  Christ's  sacrifice  upon  the  cross  supplies  the  food  on  which  bt  faith  wb
ABE  to  feed.  "  We  have  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat  which  serve  the
tabernacle  "  (Heb.  xiii.  10).

IIL  One  means  of  our  thus  feeding  upon  him  is  the  sacrament  of  the  Lobd's
Supper.  "  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread,  and  blessed  it,  and  brake  it,  and
gave  it  to  the  disciples,  and  said.  Take,  eat ;  this  is  my  body.  And  he  took  the  cup,
and  gave  thanks,  and  gave  it  to  them,  saying,  Drink  ye  all  of  it ;  for  this  is  my  blood
of  the  new  testament,  which  is  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sim  "  (Matt.
xxvi.  26—28).-

IV.  Hb  supplies  the  needs  of  those  that  thirst  as  well  as  cf  those  thai
HUNGER.  "  I  will  give  unto  him  that  is  athirst  of  the  fountain  of  the  water  of  Jife
freely"  (Rev.  xxi.  6).  "Let  him  that  is  athirst  come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  him.
take  the  water  of  life  freely  "  (Rev.  xxii.  17).

V.  He  feeds  HIS  people  not  onlt  by  sacraments  but  by  the  Word  of  Goiy
PREACHED  BY  HIS  MiNiSTBBS.  "  Man  shall  not  Hve  by  bread  alune,  but  by  every  word
that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God"  (Matt.  iv.  4).  "  Take  heed  therefore  unto
yourselves  "  (the  Kphesian  elders),  "  and  to  all  the  flock,  over  the  which  the  Holy  Ghost,
hath  made  you  overseers,  to  feed  the  Church  of  God  "  (Acts  xx.  28).  "  He  gave  some,,
pastors  and  teachers  "(Eph.iv.  11).  "  He  saith  unto  him.  Feed  my  lambs.  .  .  .  He  saith
unto  him,  Feed  my  sheep.  .  .  .  Jesus  saith  unto  him.  Feed  my  sheep  "  (John  xxi.  15
— 17).  "  The  elders  which  are  among  you  1  exhort,  ...  Feed  the  flock  of  Ck)d  which
is  among  you "  (1  Pet.  v.  1,  2),


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Everlasting  light.  Ch.  xxiv.  1 — i ;  cf.  Rev.  L  12 — 20 ;  also  Ps.  xliii.  3.  The  holy-
place,  like  the  most  holy,  had  no  windows,  and  consequently  required  illumination..
This  was  secured  by  the  golden  candlestick,  with  its  seven  lamps.  These  were  to>
be  always  emitting  some  light.  If  all  the  seven  lamps  were  not  lit  during  the  daytime,
one  or  two  of  them  were.  The  idea  carried  out  was  that  there  should  be  in  God's
sanctuary  everlasting  light.

That  the  candlestick  was  taken  as  the  symbol  of  God's  truth  is  evident  from  Ps.  xliii.
3,  "  Oh  send  out  thy  light,  even  thy  truth  :  let  them  lead  me  ;  let  them  bring  me  untr  thy
holy  hill,  and  to  thy  tabernacles."  In  fact,  God's  essential  nature  as  light  was  exhibited
by  the  Shechinah  in  the  holy  of  holies ;  then  in  the  golden  candlestick,  we  have  the-
light  mediated  in  the  holy  place  in  such  a  way  as  would  suffice  for  the  illumiuatic  n  of
the  ordinary  priests  at  their-  sacred  ministries.  God's  arrangement,  therefore,  for  tho'
dissemination  of  tru":h  in  this  dark  world  of  ours  is  what  the  golden  candlestick  ig-
inteuded  to  convey.     Rev.  i.  12 — 20  throws  clear  light  on  the  symbol.     The  Churches-


CH.  XXIV.  1—9.]  THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  378

established  in  the  world  by  God  are  the  lamps  (\vxvttti)  which  he  intends  to  shine  lUl
the  dawn  of  the  eternal  day.

I.  Notice  the  unity  of  all  true  Churches.  For  the  seven  lamps  were  united  in  the
one  candlestick,  just  as  all  true  Churches  are  one  in  Christ.  There  is  no  incorporation
necessarily  implied,  but  this  is  also  to  be  encouraged  by  every  legitimate  means.  If
anity  in  Christ  he  a  real  thing,  it  will  show  itself  in  some  way  or  another  before  men.

II.  The  oil  fob  the  light  was  to  be  beaten.  The  olives  were  to  be  placed  in  a
mortar  and  beaten,  and  then  the  oil  which  flowed  off  without  further  pressure,  the
purest  possible,  was  to  be  used  for  the  light.  God's  truth  is  communicated  to  men  in
such  a  form  that  they  must  diligently  co-operate  with  God  before  the  benefit  is  obtained.
No  careless  handling  of  truth  will  suffice.  We  must  beat  the  olives  well  before  we  get
the  needful  oil.  Ministers  must  be  diligent  in  their  preparations.  Christians  of  all
classes  must  "  search  the  Scriptures,"  if  the  requisite  oil  for  the  light  is  to  be  obtained.
God  might  rain  down  oil  from  heaven,  and  save  us  a  heap  of  trouble,  but  he  would
rather  put  it  into  the  olive  berries,  and  ask  us  to  pound  it  out  from  these.  Similarly,  he
has  put  in  his  Word  "  things  hard  to  be  understood,"  as  well  as  things  that  are  simple,
to  the  end  that  we  should  diligently  study  it  and  get  the  sacred  oil.

III.  The  wick  had  to  be  carefully  trimmed,  and  when  needful  snuffed.  It
was  the  high  priest's  special  duty,  in  which,  however,  the  other  priests  assisted.  And
is  this  not  to  indicate  the  work  undertaken  by  Jesus  Christ,  who  as  High  Priest  walked
among  the  golden  lamps?  (Kev.  i.  12).  A  beautiful  parallel  passage  is  presented  in
Matt.  xii.  20,  where  it  is  said,  "smoking  flax  [i.e.  'a  wick' — \lvoy]  shall  he  not  quench,
till  he  send  forth  judgment  imto  victory."  There  may  be  pain  in  the  process  often  by
which  our  High  Priest  gets  his  wicks  trimmed  and  luminous,  but  there  is  also  mercy
and  tenderness  ineffable.  How  often  does  he  hold  his  hands  around  the  expiring  wick,
and  blow  it  gently  into  a  flame  again  1  Blessed  are  his  dealings,  when  as  the  result  his
people,  and  especially  his  ministers,  are  made  to  shine  as  "  lights  in  the  world."  Re-
garding the  snuffers  in  this  connection,  we  may  quote  an  old  and  quaint  writer.  "  The
Lord,"  says  Weemse,  "commanded  to  make  snuffers  of  pure  gold  for  the  snuffing  of  the
lamps,  and  snuff-dishes  to  receive  the  snuff;  he  would  have  the  snuff  taken  from  the
light,  to  signify  that  ho  would  have  the  Word  kept  in  sincerity  and  purity ;  and  he
would  have  the  snuffers  of  gold,  to  teach  them  to  be  blameless  and  holy,  who  aie
censurers  aud  correctors  of  others ;  and  hu  would  have  the  snuff-dishes  of  gold,  to  teach
them  that  the  covering  of  the  offences  of  their  brethren  was  a  most  excellent  thing."

IV.  The  lamps  were  lit  from  the  altar.  That  is  to  say,  it  was  Diaine  fire  which
made  the  oil  luminous.  God  is  light,  from  him  cometh  all  real  illumination.  So  it  is
only  when  the  Saviour  baptizes  men  with  fire,  it  is  only  when  the  Holy  Ghost  lights  up  the
sacred  page,  it  is  only  when  the  Spirit  co-operates  with  the  Word,  thut  the  truth  appears
in  its  brightness  unto  men.  An  earnest  ministry  is  that  which  gives  itself  to  prayer
and  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word,  prayer  calling  down  the  Divine  fire  which  makes  the
entrance  of  the  Word  give  light.  Then  may  the  lamps  be  expected  to  burn  brightly  and
to  light  up  the  night  of  the  world  till  the  day  dawns. — K.  M.  B.^

The  weekly  off'.ring.  Ch.  xxiv.  5 — 9 ;  cf.  1  Cor.  xvi.  2 ;  1  Tim.  v.  17, 18.  Along
with  the  everlasting  light  from  the  golden  candlestick,  there  was  to  be  in  the  holy  place
a  presentation  of  bread,  which  was  made  on  the  sabbath  and  lay  before  the  Lord  on  the
prescribed  table  all  the  week,  becoming  the  property  and  support  of  the  priests  when
they  brought  the  fresh  loaves  on  the  succeeding  sabbath.  The  loaves  were  to  be  twelve
in  number,  to  porrespond  to  the  tribes  of  Israel ;  they  were  arranged  in  two  piles,  upon
the  top  of  which  there  was  placed  a  little  incense,  which  was  duly  fired  and  thus
ascended  to  heaven.  The  incense  sanctified  the  offering.  Now  this  "bread  of  the
fere,"  as  it  was  called,  bread  intended  for  the  Divine  presence,  was  the  dedication  on
the  part  of  the  people  of  the  staple  of  life,  first  to  God,  and  secondly  to  the  support  of
his  priests.  As  previously  observed,  it  was  the  perpetual  meat  offering.  Here  it  is
interesting  to  notice  it  as  a  "  weekly  offering"  prescribed  in  the  Old  Testament  economy.
What  Paul  urges  on  the  Corinthians  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2),  "Upon  the  first  day  of  the  week
let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in  store,  as  God  hath  prospered  him,  that  there  be  no
gatherings  when  I  come,"  is  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  shewbread.  The  Lord's  day
ia  to  be  th«  time  for  a  weekly  offering  for  the  support  of  his  cause.


376  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxiv.  1— 9

I.  Wb  abb  SnSELT  TAUGHT  HERB  HOW  SYSTEMATIC  OUR  OFFEBIK«S  SHOULD  BB.    There

should  be  a  regularity  about  them  like  the  return  of  the  holy  day.  It  is  only  when  this
periodicity  characterizes  them  that  the  Lord's  cause  is  likely  to  be  propwly  supported."
A  weekly  offering  is  much  more  likely  to  be  successful  than  a  monthly,  or  quarterly,  or
annual  offering.  Liberality  is  to  be  a  weekly  exercise,  like  the  ordinances  of  our  holy
religion.

II.  OUB  0FPBKIK08  SHOULD  BE  SANCTIFIED  BY  THE  INCENSE  OF  PBAYEB.      Thls  is  Only

to  say  that  liberality  should  be  a  religious  act,  part  of  our  religious  servipe.  Then  are
we  likely  to  be  conscientious  in  discharging  our  obligations,  when  we  carry  our  gifts
into  the  presence  of  God.  As  Jesus  stood  over  against  the  treasury  in  the  temple,  and
saw  the  extraordinary  liberality  connected  with  the  widow's  two  mites,  so  is  he  watch-
ii^  our  offerings  at  his  shrine,  noticing  whether  they  are  generous  and  cheerful  or  given
with  a  grudge,  observing  whether  they  are  perfumed  with  incense  or  rendered  obnoxious
by  worldliness  and  ostentation.  It  will  tend  to  purify  our  liberality  to  envelop  it  in
prayer.

III.  God's  officers  should  be  regarded  as  receiving  theib  support  from  his
TABLE.  That  is  to  say,  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  receiving  their  support  from  God,  not
directly  from  the  people.  It  is  this  element  of  sanctity  in  the  service  of  liberality  which
saves  the  dignity  of  the  Lord's  officers,  and  prevents  them  from  being  beggarly  depend-
ents upon  the  people.  Conscientious  people  lay  their  oflerings  before  God,  and  then
God's  officers  receive  their  portion  as  from  their  Master  in  heaven.  "  And  it  shall  be
Aaron's  and  his  sons' ; "  and  they  shall  eat  it  in  the  holy  place.

IV.  The  weekly  orFEBma  should  be  the  outcome  of  an  everlasting  engage-
ment with  God.  "  Every  sabbath  (the  priest)  shall  set  it  in  order  before  the  Lord
continually,  being  taken  from  the  children  of  Israel  by  an  everlasting  covenant."  That
is,  liberality  is  to  be  no  spasmodic  outburst,  but  a  steady  outcome  of  an  engagement
that  is  perpetual.  God  has  laid  his  people  under  such  obligation  by  his  rich  provision
in  the  gospel,  that  we  feel  we  can  never  adequately  discharge  it.  Hence  week  by  week
our  offerings  are  laid  upon  his  altar,  and  we  recognize  the  arrangement  as  a  lasting  one.

Amid  all  the  changes  of  times  and  of  Churches,  here  have  we  sound  principles  of
Church  finance.  It  is  to  the  religious  spirit  of  the  people  we  must  ultimately  commit
the  interests  of  God's  cause.  When  they  bring  regularly,  prayerfully,  perpetually,  and
at  the  same  time  realize  that  the  Church  officers  are  God's  servants  and  depend  upon
God's  altar,  then  is  there  no  fear  of  any  failure.  God  will  stand  between  his  servants
and  his  people,  and  secure  the  interests  of  both. — R.  M.  B.

Vers.  1 — i. — The  lighting  of  the  sanctuary.  The  face  of  Moses  la  glorious  in  the
light  of  the  gospel.

I.  The  candlestick  was  an  emblem  of  the  Church  of  God.  (See  Eev.  i.  20.)
1.  The  candlestick  in  the  holy  place  was  one.  (1)  So  is  the  Church  of  God  a  unity.
Christ  has  not  two  mystical  bodies  (Col.  i.  38).  He  has  not  two  brides  (Eph.  v.  23).
It  comprehends  the  whole  body  of  the  faithful.  (2)  It  is  unscriptural  as  well  as
invidious  for  any  denomination  to  style  itself  "  The  Church."  Denominations  are  not
even  "  Churches,"  though  often  so  misnamed ;  they  are,  at  best,  but  divisions  of  the
grand  army  of  the  saints.  2.  It  carried  seven  lamps.  (1)  These  are  called  "  candle-
sticks" (Eev.  i.  20).  The  reason  is  that  visible  Christian  corporations,  w!  ich  are  called
"  Churches  "  in  the  plural  (see  Acts  ix.  31 ;  xv.  41 ;  xvi.  5),  are  types  of  the  more  perfect
unity.  (2)  "  Seven"  is  a  definite,  put  for  an  indefinite,  number.  It  is  the  numeral  for
perfection,  and  likewise  stands  for  many  (see  1  Sam.  ii.  5).  So  the  seven  Churches  of
Asia,  to  which  the  candlestick  is  compared,  are  to  be  taken  as  representing  the
multitude  of  the  Churches  of  Christendom.  These  are,  indeed,  countless,  if,  as
Chrysostom  says,  "  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  the  name  of  Jesus
there  is  a  Church."  3.  The  candlestick  was  of  pure  gold.  This  was  to  express  the
preciousness  of  the  saints.  (1)  They  are  precious  to  Gtid.  He  has  redeemed  them  with
the  blood  of  Christ.  He  has  prepared  for  them  a  heaven  of  inconceivable  magnificence
(2)  They  are  precious  to  the  world.  They  are  its  light.  They  are  its  salt.  The
light  in  them,  like  salt,  is  purifying  and  preserving,  as  well  as'illuminating  (Matt.
V.  13—16.)

II.  The  light  in  the  Churches  is  the  Word  of  God.    This  may  be  taken  ia


CH.  xiiv.  1— 9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LJfiVrnCUS.  377

kindred  senses.  1.  God^s  Word  written.  (1)  This  is  no  uncertain  light,  as  that  of
mere  reason  is.  ,(2)  It  is  no  false  light,  as  that  of  tradition  often  is.  For,  however  pure
it  may  have  heen  at  its  source,  it  soon  becomes  corrupted  in  transmission.  2.  The
personal  Word  of  Ond.  (1)  The  presence  of  a  personal  Teacher  in  the  living  Spirit  of
Christ  is  a  priceless  blessing.  (2)  Such  an  Interpreter  is  infinitely  better  than  popes  or
Councils.  (3)  Christians  are  still  the  disciples  of  the  personal  Jesus.  They  should
cultivate  in  prayerfulness  the  simplicity  and  docility  becoming  such  (see  John  vii.  17).

III.  The  oil  that  sustains  the  lioht  is  thb  Holt  Spirit's  qbaoe.  No  wonder
it  must  be  "pure  oil  olive  beaten  for  the  light."  1.  Jesus  had  the  Spirit  without
measure.  (1)  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  was  in  him.  So  was  he  anointed
with  the  oil  of  gladness  immeasurably  above  his  fellows.  (2)  Thus  was  he  constituted
the  Christ,  or  Anointed  One.  2.  Of  his  fulness  we  receive  grace.  (1)  Christians,
therefore,  with  propriety  have  their  name  from  Christ.  Those  who  first  gave  that  name
in  derision  little  knew  its  propriety  (see  2  Cor.  i.  21 ;  1  John  ii.  20,  27),  (2)  This
anointing  is  illuminating.  So  we  learn  in  these  references  from  John.  It  enlightens
the  Christian  himself.    It  enables  him  to  illumine  others.

IV.  The  oil  was  furnished  bt  the  worshippers.  1.  ITiere  it  a  tense  in  which
hdievers  bring  the  Holy  Qhost.  (1)  They  do  this  by  their  faith.  When  the  faith
of  the  people  is  constant,  the  lamps  of  the  Churches  "  bum  continually."  What  an
honour  to  the  faithful !  (2)  Through  unfaithfulness  the  candlestick  (or  lamp)  may  be
removed  (see  Bev.  ii.  5 ;  also  Matt.  xxi.  43).  How  great  is  the  responsibility  of
professors  1  2.  The  Holy  Ghost  is  nevertheless  the  Gift  of  God.  (1)  This  is  true  of  his
type.  Who  but  God  could  put  oil  into  the  olive  ?  (2)  So  of  the  Antitype.  Accordingly,
in  Zech.  iv.  2,  3,  the  oil  is  represented  as  feeding  the  candlestick  immediately  from  the
olive.  The  figure  is  explained  thus,  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (Zech.  iv.  6).

V.  Aaron  among  the  lights  eefbesented  Christ  among  his  Churches.  1.  TTiis
we  have  from  the  nature  of  the  case.  The  high  priest  was,  generally,  a  type  of  Christ.
So  in  this  particular.     2.   We  have  it  also  by  special  revelation  (see  Eev.  i.  13).

VI.  The  candlestick  was  without  the  vail.  1.  ITie  Churches  shine  in  this
world.  (1)  The  sanctuary  was  the  type  of  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  upon  the  earth.
Here  the  candlestick  was  placed.  (2)  Every  Church  member  should  realize  that  he
has  his  light  firom  God  that  he  may  diffuse  it  (Matt.  v.  14 — 16).  2.  The  Shechinah  uns
within  the  vail.  (1)  There  is  no  need  of  a  candle  in  that  bright  Presence  (see  Isa.  Ix.
19,  20 ;  Bev.  xxi.  10,  23  ;  xxii.  5).  (2)  The  seven  Churches  are  there  lost  in  the  one
Church,  which  flames  with  the  glory  of  God.  If  there  are  before  the  throne  "  seven
lamps  of  fire,"  they  are  explained  to  be  the  "  seven  Spirits  of  God,"  or  Holy  Spirit,
whose  light  is  "  sevenfold  "  or  perfect  (Bev.  iv.  5 ;  Isa.  xxx.  26). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  5 — 9. — The  bread  of  the  presence.  As  there  was  light  on  the  candlestick
In  God's  house,  so  was  there  bread  on  his  table.  It  was  called  the  "  shewbread,"
literally, "  bread  of  faces,"  or  of  the  presence,  viz.  of  Jehovah.    Let  us  consider —

I.  Its  description.  1.  It  was  composed  of  fine  flour.  (1)  Christ  is  aompared  to  a
corn  of  wheat,  viz.  before  it  is  ground,  and  while  the  life  is  whole  in  it  (see  Ps.  Ixxii.
16,  where  the  "  handful  of  corn "  may  be  more  literally  construed  a  com  of  wheat ;
and  comp.  John  xii.  24,  where  Jesus  evidently  cites  this  passage  and  applies  it  to
himself).  (2)  So  is  he  compared  to  bread.  This  is  corn  whose  life  is  sacrificed  in  the
treatment  to  which  it  is  subjected.  Jesus  calls  himself  the  Bread  who  gives  his  life
unto  the  world  (John  vi.  33).  (3)  The  very  manner  in  which  corn  loses  its  life  to
become  nourishment,  it  being  bruised  and  burnt,  describes  the  sufferings  of  Christ  !n
body  and  spirit  from  the  hands  of  man  and  of  God.  (4)  Bread  is  the  staple  in  food.
As  without  it  there  is  no  feast,  so  without  Christ  there  is  no  true  joy.  As  with
it  there  is  no  hunger,  so  have  we  in  him  a  satisfying  portion.  2.  It  was  measured  in
tenths.  (1)  Ten  is  the  number  for  riches ;  and  Christ,  as  the  Rich  One,  is  called  a  Tenth
(gee  Isa.  vi.  13).  All  the  holy  bread  was  measured  in  tenth-deals,  to  point  to  the
"  measure  of  the  fulness  of  Christ "  (Kph.  iv.  7,  13).  The  riches  of  eternity  are  ours  in
him  (see  Homily  on  the  Feast  of  Expiation).  (2)  But  why  two  tenth'^eals  to  each
cake?  Perhaps  light  may  be  let  in  upon  this  by  noting  that,  on  the  sixth  day,  two
omen,  or  tenths,  of  manna  were  gathered  to  prepare  for  the  sabbath  (Exod.  xvi.  22).   It


378  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxiv.  1— 9.

was  on  the  sabbath  that  the  bread  of  the  presence  was  replaced.  (3)  This  correspondence
further  identifies  the  typical  import  of  the  presence-bread  with  that  of  the  manna.  Not*
in  addition  that,  as  the  manna  came  from  God  out  of  heaven,  this  bread  is  distinguished
as  that  which  comes  from  the  Divine  presence  ;  and  the  true  Bread  of  Life  came  from
heaven  (John  vi.  33,  38,  4.0,  50,  51,  58).  3.  The  number  of  the  loaves  was  twelve.
(1)  Here  was  a  loaf  for  every  son  of  Israel.  "  There  is  bread  enough  in  our  Father's
house."  (2)  This  number  was  continued  after  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  (2  Chron.
ziii.  11).  This  fact  suggests  that  the  number  is  also  typical  in  relation  to  the  spiritual
Israel ;  a  view  confirmed  by  the  application  of  the  number  twelve  to  the  New  Testament
Church.  Thus  upon  the  head  of  the  sun-clothed  woman  is  a  coronet  of  twelve  stars,
obviously  in  allusion  to  the  twelve  apostles  of  the  Lamb,  who  are  described  as  twelve
angels  at  the  twelve  gates  of  the  mystic.il  city,  and  whose  names  are  inscribed  upon
its  twelve  foundations  (Rev.  xii.  1 ;  xxi.  12,  14,  21).  (3)  Twelve  also  is  the  nnmber
of  the  Lamb  himself.  He  is  the  true  Tree  of  Life,  having  twelve  manner  of  fruits,
corresponding  to  the  twelve  months  in  the  year  (Rev.  xxii.  2).  So  the  one  Bread  of  the
Presence  is  distributed  into  twelve  loaves.  And  "  we  being  many  are  one  bread  "  in  him
(see  1  Cor.  i.  17).  (4)  This  association  of  the  months  with  the  loaves  opens  a  very
interesting  field  of  investigation.  Is  there  not  a  great  year  of  the  world  to  be  measured
by  soli-lunar  time  (see  Gen.  i.  14)  ?  Eing,  in  his  '  Morsels  of  Criticism,'  has  a  dis-
sertation concerning  the  sabbath  and  a  sabbatical  era,  in  which  he  unfolds  from
the  sabbatical  intercalation  of  the  Levitical  system  a  more  perfect  adjustment  of
lunar  to  solar  time  than  the  Gregorian.  Intercalations  on  the  principle  of  the  Jewish
sabbatic  period  will  in  400  years  adjust  the  solar  and  lunar  time  within  one  hour  and
forty  minutes.  In  fifteen  such  periods,  or  6000  years,  the  adjustment  will  leave  only
one  hour  to  be  accounted  for.  But  every  144,000  years,  which  is  the  square  of  12  in
thousands,  and  a  nnmber  very  remarkable  in  the  measures  of  the  New  Jerusalem,
things  are  brought  right  to  a  second  (see  Bev.  vii. ;  xiv.  3,  4;  xxi.  17).

II.  What  was  done  with  it.  1.  It  was  placed  upon  the  table  before  the  Lord.
(1)  It  was  "  before  the  Lord,"  for  the  Shechinah  was  separated  from  it  only  by  the
vail.  The  glory  sometimes  streamed  out  through  the  vail,  as  it  did  through  the  flesh
of  Christ  on  the  mount  of  transfiguration.  (2)  It  was  then  set  in  two  rows  of  six  over
against  each  other.  The  purpose  seems  to  have  been  to  show  how  the  tribes  of  the
spiritual  Israel  will  feast  together  in  the  fellowship  of  heaven.  (3)  It  was  in  a  sense
there  "continually,"  for  it  was  replaced  with  new  every  sabbath.  The  Jews  say,
"  The  hands  of  those  priests  that  put  on  were  mixed  with  those  that  took  o£f,  that  the
table  might  be  never  empty."  2.  A  memorial  of  it  was  burnt.  (1)  It  was  "  an  offering
made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord."  But  how?  Was  it  not  eaten  by  the  priests?  When
the  cakes  were  removed  the  frankincense  was  burnt.  This  was  the  memorial  of  the
whole ;  in  this  the  whole  was  accepted  as  a  burnt  offering  (comp.  oh.  ii.  2).  This  will
explain  the  expression  in  the  words  of  the  angel  to  Cornelius,  "  Thy  prayers  and  thine
iima  are  come  up  for  a  memorial  before  God  "  (Acts  x.  4).  (2)  But  was  this  memorial
burnt  upon  the  table  ?  We  have  no  reason  to  think  so.  It  was  probably  burnt  upon
the  golden  aliar,  which  was  the  altar  of  incense.  Note :  the  communion  table  ought
never  to  be  spoken  of  as  an  altar.  It  was  from  the  table,  not  from  the  altar,  that  the
priests  ate  the  bread  of  the  presence.  (3)  The  spiritual  priesthood  alone  have  a  right
to  partake  of  the  true  Bread  bl  the  Pre.sence,  and  feast  in  fellowship  with  God. — •
J.  A,  M.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Ourselves  as  lights.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  seven- branched
candlestick  in  the  holy  place  was  typical  of  the  Hebrew  Church  as  the  source  of
heavenly  light.    We  therefore  reach  the  subject  of —

L  Light  dfvinelt  kindled.     All  light  must  be  of  God,  who  himself  is  light

51  John  i.  5).  He  has  sought  to  illumine  the  human  world  in  more  ways  than  one.
,.  He  has  given  us  the  light  of  our  spiritual  nature— our  reason,  our  conscience ;  "  the
spirit  of  man  is  the  candle  (lamp)  of  the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xx.  27).  2.  This  should  have
sufficed  to  us,  but  it  did  not ;  and  God  gave  the  revelation  of  himself  in  his  Law
Amid  the  surrounding  darkness  there  was  light  in  Israel.  The  brightly  burning  lamp
in  the  holy  place  represented  the  holy  nation,  the  instructed  people,  with  whom  were
the  oracles  of  God,  into  whose  minds  the  truth  of  heaven  was  shining.     3.  Yet  this  did


CH.  xtiv.  1— 9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  879


not  suffice,  and  Oroi  gave  the  Light  of  the  world,  his  only  begotten  Son.  «  That  was
the  true  light  which,  coming  into  the  world,  enlighteneth  every  one."  4.  And  he  came
that  he  might  leave  in  the  world  the  light  of  the  Christian  Church ;  those  to  whom  and
of  whom  he  could  say,"  Te  are  the  light  of  the  world."  "As  he  was,  so  are  we  iu
this  world,"  sources  of  heavenly  illumination,  of  inward  purity,  of  Divine  wisdom.

H.  Its  teue  ohabaotbkistics.  These  are :  1.  Purity :  they  were  to  bring  "  pure  oil
olive  beaten,"  The  light  which  is  to  shine  in  our  words  and  from  our  character  is  to  be
such  that  there  shall  be  the  least  possible  admixture  of  error  and  corruption.  2.  Ful-
ness :  we  read  of  "  the  lamps  "  (plural),  and  we  know  that  there  were  seven  of*  these
(Bxod.  XXV.  31,  32)— a  complete,  perfect  number.  The  truth  we  are  to  make  manifest
is  not  only  to  be  pure,  but  full.  We  must  declare  the  "  whole  counsel  of  God ; "  the
severe  as  well  as  the  gracious,  the  less  pleasant  as  well  as  the  more  acceptable,  tlie
deeper  as  well  as  the  more  superficial,  the  ethical  as  well  as  the  doctrinal,  aspects  vf
the  truth  of  God.  3.  Constancy :  they  were  "  to  cause  the  lamps  to  burn  continually  "
(ver.  2),  "  from  the  evening  unto  the  morning  before  the  Lord  continually  "  (ver.  3).
Whether  all  day  and  all  night  long,  or  only  (as  seems  more  probable)  through  the  night^
the  lamps  were  to  burn  all  the  appointed  time  without  ceasing  to  shine;  there  was  to
be  no  fitfulness  or  unsteadiness  about  the  light  which  shone  "  before  the  Lord."  So  onr
words  and  our  deeds  are  to  be  continually  reflecting  the  light  of  heavenly  truth.  In
our  work  and  in  our  play,  in  things  sacred  and  in  things  secular,  at  home  and  from
home,  consciously  and  unconsciously,  we  are  to  be  "  bearing  witness  unto  the  truth,"
we  are  to  be  "  shining  as  lights  in  the  world."

III.  Its  maintenance.  "  Aaron  shall  order  it."  "  He  shall  order  the  lamps."  The
Jewish  priest  was  to  take  every  care  that  the  lamps  burnt  brightly  and  continually.
1.  The  Christian  minister  has  to  see  that  he  does  his  part  in  "  ordering  the  lamps."
He  must  preach  such  truth  and  give  such  counsel  as  shall  feed  the  fires  of  the  soul
most  effectively.  2.  Each  Christian  man  must  do  his  part  also.  Every  one  of  us  must
(1)  watch  to  see  when  the  light  is  low ;  (2)  replenish  the  spirit  with  sacred  truth,  that
truth  which  nourishes  and  sustains  the  soul  in  the  life  of  God  ;  (3)  seek  from  heaven
thoie  Divine  influences  which  shall  be  as  oil  to  the  flame  and  make  it

"...  to  his  glory  burn
With  inextinguishable  blaze."

&

Vers.  6 — 9. — The  lesson  of  the  loaves.  In  this  act  of  worship  the  Jews  made  weekly
acknowledgment  of  the  goodness  of  Gud  to  them  and  of  their  dependence  on  him ;
they  presented  to  him  a  suitable  offering  of  those  things  he  had  given  them ;  and  they
silently  pleaded  for  God's  continued  remembrance  of  them  and  their  necessities.  The
lesson  of  these  loaves,  of  this  "  bread  of  presence,"  is  therefore —

I.  That  God's  gifts  to  tjs  abb  such  as  to  demand  ouk  continual  acknowlbdo-
mbnt.  'I'he  Hebrew  priest  was  to  place  before  the  Lord  bread,  the  source  of  strength
(Ps.  civ.  15) ;  wine,  the  source  of  gladness  (Ps.  civ.  15) ;  and  frankincense  (ver.  7),  the
source  of  sweetness.  He  was  to  renew  these  presentations  every  sabbath  day  "con-
tinually "  (ver.  8),  and  the  table  was  never  to  be  without  them.  This  was  a  constant
acknowledgment  by  the  nation,  through  the  act  of  the  priesthood,  of  its  dependence
on  God  for  all  the  good  gifts  received  at  his  hand.  We  also,  in  our  way,  are  to  make
continual  acknowledgment  every  sabbath  day  in  the  sanctuary,  every  day  at  the  family
altar,  and  in  the  chamber  of  devotion,  of  our  absolute  dependence  on  God,  for  (1)  our
strength, — all  things  that  minister  to  our  health  and  vigour  of  body,  mind,  spirit,  being
due  to  his  providing  love ;  for  (2)  our  gladness, — all  those  comforts  and  enjoyments,  all
those  happy  memories  and  inspiring  hopes  which  make  the  music  of  our  life,  which
infuse  joyousness  and  elasticity  into  our  nature,  coming  from  his  bountiful  hand ;  and
for  (3)  the  sweetness  of  our  life, — all  the  tender  affections,  the  delicate  delights  which
belong  to  pure  and  holy  love,  being  the  gift  of  his  kindness  also.

II.  That  with  our  sense  or  what  we  owe  to  God  it  is  suitable  that  we  present
■OME  OFFERING  TO  HIM.  Of  that  which  made  Israel  strong,  the  priest  presented  bread  j
of  that  which  made  it  glad,  wine;  of  that  which  was  sweet,  frankincense.  1.  Our
strength  is  in  mental  power,  knowledge,  gift  of  speech,  bodily  vigour,  wealth ;  of  these


880  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxit.  1—9.


we  should  give  a  goodly  share  to  the  cause  and  kingdom  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Of  our  joy
and  gladness  we  should  give  to  God  our  offering  in  gratitude,  in  thankful  thoughts  and
in  the  voice  of  praise.  3.  Of  the  affection  which  constitutes  the  sweetness  of  our  life
we  are  to  give  a  large  measure  of  love  to  him  wliom  we  have  not  seen,  but  whom  we
know  as  our  Divine  Redeemer  and  unchanging  Friend.

III.  That,  so  doing,  we  mat  expect  responsive  blessings  fbom  him.  Thjs  was  to
be  done  "  for  a  memorial  "  (ver.  7),  i.e.  a  "  bringing  to  remembrance  of  the  worshipper
for  his  good."  Jehovah  was  "  continually  "  reniindeJ  of  the  devoutness  of  his  people
by  the  "bread  of  presence."  He  was  thus  contiaually  appealed  to,  by  that  sileut
prayer,  to  "  remember  them  for  good."  And  as  long  as  that  act  of  worship  in  the  holy
place  truly  represented  the  spirit  of  the  people,  as  long  as  it  was  their  act,  through  the
priests,  of  acknowledgment  and  consecration ;  so  long  was  the  Divine  Sovereij;n  well
pleased  with  his  subjects,  so  long  was  he  ready  to  enrich  and  bless  them.  As  long  as
we,  instead  of  ascribing  to  ourselves  the  strength,  joy,  and  sweetness  of  our  lives,  are
honouring  our  God  and  Saviuur  for  his  goodness  and  grace  therein,  as  long  as  we  are
cheerfully  and  generously  giving  to  him  and  to  his  cause  of  that  which  he  has  oiven  us ;
80  long  may  we  reckon  on  his  gracious  smile  and  look  for  his  abundant  blessing. — C.

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  lights  tn  the  sanctuary.  Pure  oil  furnished  by  the  people.  The
high  priest  responsible  for  the  maintenance  of  the  lamps.  Pure  oil,  pure  lamps,  pure
candlestick,  before  the  Lord  continually.     The  main  lessons  are  these —

I.  Proqkessive,  continual  sanctification  of  God's  people  provided  for  by  his
grace.  1.  By  the  su|iply  of  the  Spirit,  the  pure  oil.  2.  In  and  through  the  lamps;
that  is,  the  individual  and  positive  manifestation  of  the  spiritual  life.  3.  In  connection
with  the  golden  candlestick,  and  in  dependence  on  the  ministry  of  the  high  priest;  that
is,  by  means  of  the  Church  and  its  ordinances,  in  so  far  as  the  manifestation  and  public
maintenance  of  the  light  of  life  are  concerned.  Yet,  as  the  people  themselves  provided
the  pure  oil,  we  are  reminded  that  personal  sanctification  is  not  dependent  solely  on
public  ordinances ;  but  the  Spirit  worketh  as  he  will  (John  iii.  8).

IL  DrviNB  faithfulness  and  long-suffering  in  the  midst  of  the  true  Church.
While  the  night  is  over  them,  the  light  still  burns.  While  outside  the  temple  there  is
gloom,  within  the  sanctuary  there  is  hope  and  promise.

IIL  Ttpicallt,  the  pressed  oil  and  beaten  gold  of  the  candlestick  point  to  the
connection  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit  with  the  saciificial  work  of  Christ.  The  light  ol
sanctification  proceeds  from  the  death  of  Christ,  and  is  maintained  by  the  priesthood
of  Christ.— E.

Vers.  5 — 9. — ITie  shewhread,  or  bread  of  the  Presence.  Corresponding  with  the
number  of  the  tribes,  and  representing  them ;  a  national  offering ;  a  meat  offering,  with
frankincense,  drink  offering,  and  salt.  Taken  from  the  people,  eaten  by  the  priests,
every  sabbath,  for  a  memorial,  by  an  everlasting  covenant;  "furnishing  a  striking
figure  of  Israel's  condition  in  the  view  of  Jehovah,  whatever  might  be  -their  outward
aspect.  The  twelve  tribes  are  ever  before  him.  Their  memorial  can  never  perish.
They  are  ranged  in  Divine  order  in  the  sanctuary,  covered  with  the  fragrant  incense  of
Christ,  and  reflected  from  the  pure  table  whereon  they  rest  beneath  the  bright  beams
of  that  golden  lamp  which  shines,  with  undimmed  lustre,  through  the  darkest  hour  of
the  nation's  moral  night."

I.  The  perfect  unity  and  completeness  of  the  Church  as  before  God.  1.  As  com-
pared with  the  broken,  external,  visible  unity.  2.  As  maintained  by  the  Spirit  and
merit  of  Christ.  3.  As  hereafter  to  be  manifested  when  there  shall  be  no  more  temple,
but  the  glory  of  God  and  of  the  Lamb  are  the  temple  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.

II.  The  SAFETY  and  blessedness  of  God's  peo[ile.  Their  meiiiorial  is  before  him.
1.  Proceeding  from  the  sanctuary,  i.e.  all  blessedness  the  outcome  of  spiritual  blessed-
ness. 2.  Committed  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Head  of  the  true  Israel,  the  Lord
of  the  temple,  in  whom  "  all  the  promises  are  Yea  and  Amen."  3.  Appealing  to  faith.
The  loaves  were  there  to  represent  the  continued  life  of  the  people ;  faith  alone  gaw  ths
reality. — R.

Vcri.  2 — 4. — The  candlestick.    To  many  the  regulations  of  Leviticus  seem  a  crypto-


CH.  XXIV.  1—9,]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  861


graph  to  which  they  have  no  key.  To  others,  an  inscription  of  old  date  with  no
reference  to  present  concerns.  Yet,  dull-eyed  must  we  be  if  we  can  discern  no  lessons
for  ourselves  in  the  construction  of  the  tabernacle  and  its  furniture.  The  Hebrew  can
be  translated  into  modern  English,  the  Law  stated  in  terms  of  the  gospel.  The
tabernacle  was  the  meeting-place  of  God  with  his  people.  It  was  his  house,  where  his
servants  ministered  and  his  guests  were  entertained.  Light  was  needful  therein, — the
great  requisite  of  life,  without  which  men  grow  pale  and  plants  sickly,  work  ceases,  and
festivity  is  impossible.     Let  us  consider  the  candlestick  with  its  light.

I.   As  SETTQfQ  FORTH  THE  CHARACTER  AND  ATTBIBUTES  OF  GOD.     1.    The  characteristic*

of  light.  (1)  Its  beauty.  Naught  excels  it ;  it  is  splendour  itself,  and  invests  other
objects  with  radiance.  "  God  is  light."  What  a  combination  of  hues  constitutes  the
pure  white  ray !  (2)  An  emblem  of  knowledge.  "  Thy  Word  is  a  light  unto  my
path."  "  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony :  if  they  ...  no  light  in  them."  Light  is
the  revealer-^indicates  our  position  and  prospects.  The  wisdom  of  God  is  infinite ;  an
inscrutable  blaze  that  baffles  the  strongest  vision.  He  devises  plans  for  every  emer-
gency. Whilst  men  argue  concerning  the  possibility  of  some  works,  he  calmly  does
them;  yea,  whilst  they  prove  (!)  that  no  God  exists,  he  is  occupied  in  balancing  the
worlds,  directing  the  course  of  the  ages,  hastening  the  day  when  all  shall  perforce  know
him.  (3)  Typical  of  joy.  "  Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the
upright  in  heart."  Illuminations  are  a  worldwide  method  of  rejoicing.  The  notions
some  hold  concerning  Gfld  as  a  hard  Taskmaster,  a  Judge  of  severe  countenance,  a
Father  who  never  smiles,  are  not  Biblical  representations.  We  read  of  "  the  glorious
gospel  of  the  blessed  (happy)  God."  Joy.  is  an  emotion  that  loves  to  communicate
itself  to  others,  and  from  the  throne  of  God  issues  a  stream  of  untainted  happiness  to
enrich  the  lives  of  his  children.  2.  The  burning  lamps  showed  the  constant  wahefid-
nent  of  Qod.  The  people  retired  to  their  couches  for  repose,  darkness  brooded  over  the
camp,  but  the  holy  place  was  unaffected  by  the  shadows  of  the  night.  God  never
slumbers  nor  sleeps.  It  may  not  have  occurred  to  the  Israelites  that  God  heard  praj-er
from  o'er  the  compass  of  the  globe ;  but,  in  order  to  be  the  God  of  the  whole  earth  and
to  listen  to  the  petitions  of  all  its  inhabitants,  it  follows  of  necessity  that  God  has  no
couch  in  his  sanctuary,  for  he  resteth  not.  Whilst  the  day  is  closing  in  the  one
hemisphere  it  is  beginning  to  dawn  in  the  other.  "In  him  is  no  darkness  at  all."
3.  The  candlestick  indicated  perpettud  existence.  "  A  statue  for  ever  in  your  genera  ■
tions."  Aaron  might  pass  away,  hut  the  candlestick  continued  to  give  light  in  the
tabernacle.  Men  die,  God  survives.  As  we  behold  the  same  sun  and  moon  that
gladdened  the  eyes  of  our  forefathers,  so  it  is  the  same  God  that  hears  our  prayers  and
blesses  us  with  the  light  of  his  countenance.

n.   As  8ETTINO  FORTH  THE  RELATIONSHIP  AND  FUNCTIONS  OF  THE  PEOPLE.      1.    Their

privileged  condition  as  favoured  with  a  special  revelation  of  the  heing  and  character  of
Ood.  They  were  the  only  nation  to  possess  such  a  candlestick  made  "after  the  pattern
showed  in  the  mount."  All  the  heathen  constructed  deities  and  images  of  Deitj
according  to  their  own  judgment,  taste,  and  caprice.  The  night  during  which  the  lamp
burned  was  a  fit  emblem  of  the  moral  state  of  the  world  lying  outside  Israel.  The
Israelites  were  blessed  with  the  light  of  the  Law ;  "to  them  were  committed  the  oracles
of  God,"  In  the  symbols  of  the  Law  was  taught  the  way  of  salvation,  to  be  completed
by  a  coming  Mediator.  So  in  Jesus  Christ  we  have  "  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the
glory  of  God."  At  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  when  according  to  custom  largo  golden
lamps  were  lit  at  dark  in  the  temple  court,  our  Lord  termed  himself  "  the  Light  of  the
world."  We  have  the  Spirit  of  God  to  illumine  our  consciences,  to  show  unto  us  the
things  of  Christ.  We  read  in  the  Revelation  of  the  seven  burning  lamps  before
the  throne,  which  are  the  sevenfold  Spirit  of  God.  In  Zechariah's  vision  of  the  candle-
stick he  saw  the  bowls  supplied  with  oil  from  two  olive  trees,  representing  the  continued
grace  furnished  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  keeping  alight  the  knowledge  of  God  in  days  of
the  Church's  decline.  And  we  have  the  Word  of  God,  "  a  light  shining  in  a  dark
place."  Let  not  this  light  condemn  us  as  did  the  sacred  candlestick  removed  to
Belshazzar's  palace,  where  its  rays  revealed  the  fingers  of  a  man's  hand  writing  tht
monarch's  doom.  "  The  word  that  I  have  spoken,  the  -same  shall  judge  him  in  the  last
day."  2.  Their  duty  to  minister  to  the  glory  of  Ood.  The  people  were  permitted,  yea,
expected,  to  bring  the  oil  for  the  lamps,  as  they  had  previously  offered  the  gold  for  thi


S82  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxiv.  1— 9.

candlestick  itself.  They  were  to  keep  the  light  of  God  burning  in  the  world.  It  ii
incumbent  on  Christians  to  support  the  ministry  and  the  operations  of  the  Church,  that
thera  may  be  a  continual  testimony  to  the  existence  and  majesty  of  the  Eternal  Ood
requires  us  to  render  the  best  service  at  our  command.  It  must  be  pure.  The  candle-
stick was  of  gold,  as  were  the  tongs  and  snuff-dishes,  and  the  oil  was  of  finest  quality,
free  from  dust,  not  crushed,  but  beaten.  If  preparing  a  meal  for  one  we  lightly  esteem,
little  trouble  is  taken,  but  where  we  delight  to  honour  our  gnest,  what  anxiety  is  dis-
played in  all  that  concerns  the  banquet!  Our  devotion  must  be  regular.  The  lamps
were  lit  each  evening,  trimmed  and  dressed  every  morning.  That  the  full  light  did
not  shine  during  the  day  is  evident  from  1  Sam.  iii.  3.  Josephus,  however,  says  that
three  of  the  lamps  burnt  all  day  long.  The  lamp  is  said  to  "  ascend,"  it  rises  to  heaven
as  a  tribute  of  adoration  to  God.  We  may  think  of  him  as  viewing  his  world,  and
expecting  light  to  arise  from  different  quarters  where  his  children  dwell  But  how  often
must  disappointment  accrue !  No  morning  perusal  of  his  Word,  no  evening  worship.  A
mother  on  her  birthday  delights  to  turn  over  the  letters  from  her  children,  that  greet
her  upon  her  plate,  but  if  one  familiar  handwriting  be  missed,  what  a  shadow  darkens
her  joy  1  The  chill  that  creeps  over  her  heart  seems  to  nullify  the  gladness  which  the
tokens  of  remembrance  cause.  Let  not  God  have  to  sigh  over  our  neglect.  All  is
<Kcepted  through  the  priesthood.  No  Levite  or  layman  must  enter  the  holy  precincts,
the  priests  represent  and  are  supported  by  the  people.  Jesus  Christ  is  our  means  of
access  to  the  Father ;  through  mm  our  service  is  acceptable.  To  venture  to  draw  nigh
in  our  name  is  presumption ;  it  sets  at  naught  the  solemn  regulations  of  the  Most  High,
and  it  will  receive  the  rebuke  it  merits.  The  Son  of  man  must  walk  in  the  midst  of
our  golden  candlesticks,  or  else  we  know  not  that  they  are  in  accordance  with  the  Divine
mind ;  and  only  thus  can  we  hear  the  exhortations  that  shall  prevent  the  candlestick
from  being  removed  out  of  its  place  because  of  failure  to  discharge  its  proper  functions.
— S.R.A.

Vers.  6 — 9. — 2%e  shewbread.  The  furniture  and  ministry  of  the  tabernacle  are  most
■clearly  understood  in  import,  if  it  be  remembered  that  they  have  a  double  reference.
Like  the  clouds  of  the  sky,  one  aspect  is  towards  heaven,  the  other  towards  earth.  In
the  ordinance  of  the  shewbread,  we  may  see  imaged  truths  relating  to  God,  and  truths
with  more  immediate  reference  to  the  position  and  duties  of  his  people.

L  God  as  the  Pbeserver  of  life.  Food  was  essential  to  the  conception  of  the
tabernacle  as  the  house  of  God.  Unless  he  minister  to  the  needs  of  his  servants,  they
perish  for  lack  of  sustenance.  "  My  Father  giveth  you  the  true  Bread  from  heaven."
The  shewbread  is  literally  the  "  bread  of  my  face,"  or  presence.  Jesus  Christ,  the  Bread
of  Life,  appears  continually  before  the  presence  of  God.  Ood  is  never  unprovided  with
tntertainment  for  his  guests.  He  is  ahle  also  to  supply  the  wants  of  all  his  people.  Twelve
loaves  indicate  that  every  tribe  is  remembered.  As  we  think  of  the  shewbread,  let  it
point  us  to  him  who  pointed  to  the  Bread  upon  the  table  of  the  last  Supper  and  said,
"  This  is  my  body."  He  was  truly  of  the  finest  of  the  wheat,  no  corruption  marred  his
perfection.  He  was  prepared  to  be  the  Bread  of  the  world  by  many  sufferings,  just  as
the  flour  of  the  shewbread  underwent  numerous  poundings  and  bruisings.

IL  The  people  contribdtino  the  bread  op  God.  A  parent  bestows  an  allowance
upon  his  children,  and  is  none  the  less  pleased  when  they  devote  a  portion  of  it  to
purchasing  some  offering  of  regard  to  present  to  him.  So  from  God  do  we  derive  all  we
possess ;  it  is  really  his,  and  yet  he  graciously  accepts  as  our  gift  to  him  what  we  con-
secrate to  his  service.  This  shewbread  represented  the  result  of  toil  in  tilling,  sowing,
and  reaping.  The  Israelites  were  expected  to  offer  of  the  best  of  their  property.  Only
fine  wheaten  flour  is  accepted  to  be  placed  upon  the  table.  Love  should  secure  this
attention  if  naught  else  suffices.  All  the  people  are  bound  to  be  represented  before  Ood.
The  twelve  cakes  testified  that  God  was  reverenced  and  served  by  all  the  tribes.  The
duty  one  of  perpetual  and  unceasing  obligation.  It  recurred  every  week,  and  devolved
on  each  succeeding  generation.  The  continual  observance  of  God's  statutes  is  the  token
of  the  covenant.  The  shewbread  perfumed  with  incense.  The  loaves  were  accepted
indirectly  by  God,  being  consumed  by  his  consecrated  servants,  but  the  incense  was
burned  as  God's  special  memorial.  Prayer  hallows  every  offering,  without  it  our  deeda
and  gifts  lack  the  religious  spirit   that  is  the  real  honouring  of  God.     And  prayer


OH.  XXIV.  10—23.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


383


should  ever  be  in  the  Name  of  Christ,  whose  merits  impart  fragrance  to  our  unworthy
presentations.  We  must  not  rest  satisfied  with  our  former  religious  deeds.  Tiie.offering
of  last  week  needs  to  be  repeated,  else  it  will  grow  stale  and  be  offensive  to  God.  With
•very  day,  in  fact,  should  come  a  rededication.  As  our  physical  frame  is  in  constant
flux,  so  is  it  with  our  thoughts  and  emotions  j  they  are  really  new,  and  must  in  their
turn  be  laid  before  Qod. — IS.  B.  A.


EXPOSITION.


The  reasuu  why  the  narrative  of  the
falasphemer'b  death  (vers.  10 — 23)  is  intro-
duced in  its  present  connection,  is  simply
that  it  took  place  at  the  point  of  time  which
followed  the  promulgation  of  the  last  law.
It  serves,  however,  to  vindicate  by  a  memor-
«ble  example  the  principle  which  is  at  the
foundation  of  every  Mosaic  law.  "I  am
the  Lord"  is  the  often-repeated  sanction,
whether  of  a  moral  law  or  of  a  ceremonial
legulation.  But  this  bastard  Israelite,  one
of  the  mixed  multitude  that  had  followed
fa  the  flight  from  Egypt  (Exod.  xii.  38),
blasphemed  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  If  such
blasphemy  were  to  go  unpunished,  the
obligation  of  law  was  dissolved.  For,  as
Lange  has  said, "  A  community  which  suffers
the  reviling  of  the  principle  of  their  com-
munity without  reaction,  is  morally  fallen
to  pieces."  He  was  brought,  therefore,  to
Moses,  and  so  solemn  was  the  occasion,  that
Moses  reserved  the  case,  for  which  no  pro-
vision had  yet  been  made,  for  the  special
■decision  of  God.  The  specific  judgment
on  the  man  is  that  he  shall  die  by  stoning
at  the  hands  of  the  congregation,  after  the
witnesses  of  his  sin  had  laid  their  hands
upon  his  head ;  and  a  general  law  is  founded
OD  the  special  case.

Ver.  10. — The  Sou  of  an  Israelitish  woman.
This  is  the  only  place  where  the  adjective
Uraelitish  is  found ;  and  the  word  "Israelite"
only  occurs  in  2  Sam.  xvii.  25.  Whose
father  was  an  Egyptian.  The  man  could
not,  therefore,  be  a  mem  er  of  the  congrega-
tion, as,  according  to  the  subsequently  pro-
mulgated law  (Deut.  xxiii.  8),  the  descend
•nt  of  an  Egyptian  could  not  be  admitted
till  the  third  generation.  He  seems  to  have
committed  two  offences  which  led  up  to  his
great  crime.  First,  he  went  out  among  the
children  of  Israel,  that  is,  he  did  not  conKne
himself  to  his  own  part  of  the  encampment,
where  the  mixed  multitude  lived,  but  he
intruded  into  the  part  set  aside  for  pure
Israelites ;  and  next,  having  thus  put  him-
«elf  already  in  the  wrong,  this  son  of  the
Iiraelitish   woman    uid  a   man  of    Israel


strove  together  in  the  camp.  According  to
Jewish  tradition,  the  cause  of  quarrel  \v!is  a
claim  set  up  by  the  Egypto-Isruelite  to
encamp  in  the  Danite  quarters,  on  the
ground  that  his  mother  was  a  Danite — a
claim  which  he  insisted  on  enforcing,  al-
though the  judges  gave  a  decision  against
him.

Ver.  11. — In  the  course  of  the  struggle
the  Israelitish  woman's  son  blasphemed  the
name  of  the  Lord,  and  cursed.  The  word
nakav  is  here  rightly  translated  blasphemeth
(cf.  vera.  14,  16,  23),  but  the  words  of  the
Lord  should  be  omitted,  as  they  are  nut
found  in  the  original,  and  are  not  required.
The  LXX.  have  rendered  ruikav  by  a  word
meaning  pronounced,  and  on  this  misunder-
standing, adopted  by  the  Jews,  has  been
founded  the  Jewish  precept  forbidding  the
'Utterance  of  the  Divine  Name.  Owing  to
that  prohibition,  the  true  pronuticiation  of
the  word  written  and  called"  Jehovah  "  lias
been  lost.  Wherever  the  Name  occurred  in
Scripture,  that  of  Adonai,  meaning  Lord,
was  substituted  for  it  in  public  reading,
the  consouants  only  of  the  original  name,
Y  H  V  H,  being  preserved  in  the  written
text,  and  the  vowels  of  Adonai,  namely
a  0  a,  being  written  underneath  them  in
lieu  of  the  original  vowels.  Fiom  the  con-
sonants Y  H  V  H and  the  vowels aoa  would
be  formed  Yahovah  or  Jahovah,  but  the  luws
of  the  Hebrew  language  required  the  first  a
to  be  changed  into  e,  and  hence  the  name
Jehovah.  It  is  almost  certain  that  the
original  vowels  were  a  and  e,  which  would
form  the  name  Yahveh,  the  Samaritans
having  always  so  pronounced  it,  according
to  the  testimony  of  Theodoret.  It  is  said
that  the  high  priest  continued  to  utter  the
very  name  Yahveh  on  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment long  after  it  had  ceased  to  be  used  in
the  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  and  that  when
he  did  so,  those  who  heard  it  prostrated
themselves,  saying, "  blessed  be  the  Name  1 "
After  a  time,  however,  he  ceased  to  pro-
nounce it  aloud  on  that  day  also,  lest  it
should  be  learnt  and  used  for  magical
purposes.  In  consequence,  perhaps,  of  the
substitution  of  Adonai  for  Yahveh,  the  Sep-
tuagiut  version  always  reads  for  Yahveh.
Kipios :  and  the  English  version  the  Lobd.
In  French  and  other  versions  the  name  u


834


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICQS.


[oh.  XXIV.  10—23.


represented  by  the  Eternal,  and  it  has  been
proposed  to  substitute  the  latter  rendering
for  the  Lord  in  our  own  version.  But  it  is
more  than  doubtful  whether  wo  should
then  come  nearer  to  the  true  sense  of  the
origins]  Yahveh,  although  at  first  sight  it
appears  that  this  would  be  the  case.  For
the  word  Yahveh  is  part  of  the  causative
form  of  the  verb  havah,  or  hayah,  to  be ;  but
tliis  verb  is  not  used  to  express  unchange-
able or  absolute  existence,  but  rather  an
occurrence :  its  causative  form,  therefore,
would  signify  that  which  brings  about
events ;  and  the  substantive  derived  from
that  causative  form  would  signify,  not  one
that  eternally  exists,  but  one  that  provi-
dentially governs.  For  an  induction  of
instances  for  the  further  proof  of  the  above
meaning  of  the  word  Yahveh,  we  refer  the
reader  to  Sir  William  Martin's  essay  '  On
■•■he  Divine  Name'  ('Semitic  Languages,'
pt.  ii.),  from  which  we  transcribe  the  con-
cluding paragraph.  "  This  view  of  the
Divine  Name,  to  which  we  are  led  by  the
evidence  of  the  Hebrew  language  itself,  ii
in  full  conformity  with  the  general  religious
temebing  of  the  Old  Testament,  which  is
practical  and  moral ;  setting  forth  in  form
readily  intelligible,  the  character  of  God  in
his  relations  to  man.  It  does  not  concern
itself  with  those  problems  which  philosophy
has  ever  been  seeking  to  solve.  It  ad-
dresses itself  to  human  needs  and  human
duties,  and  not  to  abstract  inquiries.  Not
that  the  highest  abstract  truths  were  un-
known or  untaught  Lawgiver  and  prophet
and  psalmist  set  before  the  people  the
greatness  and  the  eternity  of  God  in  lan-
guage most  clear  and  impressive.  Yet  the
Name  whereby  he  was  put  before  them  as
the  object  of  their  daily  worship,  was  not
one  which  would  exalt  him  to  the  utmost
above  the  fraU  and  changeful  and  transi-
tory lives  of  his  worshippers,  and  thereby
remove  him  far  away  from  them  into  the
height  of  a  Being  beyond  man's  search  or
oompreliension ;  but  rather  a  Name  which
should  bring  him  nigh  to  them,  as  One
ever  mindful  of  them,  ever  carrying  for-
ward his  great  purpose  for  their  good,  work-
ing for  their  deliverance  in  every  time  of
need ;  as  One  '  whose  providence  ordereth
all  things  in  heaven  and  on  earth.'  If  this
Name  did  convey  to  the  mind  of  a  Hebrew
hearer  the  thought  above  expresserl,  it
follows  that  the  old  rendering  Adonai,
Kvpios,  or  Lord,  is  to  be  prefeiTed  to  that
which  haa  of  late  been  tubstituted  for  it."
&nd  they  brought  the  blasphemer  unto
Uoses.  This  was  in  accordance  with  the
eounsel  of  Jethro,  accepted  by  Moses  (Bxod.
xviii.  13—26):  "Moreover  thou  shalt
provide  out  of  all  the  people  able  men,  such
as  fear  Qod,  men  of  truth,  hating  covetous-


ness ;  and  place  such  over  them,  to  be  rulen
of  thousands,  and  rulers  of  hundreds,  rulen
of  fifties,  and  rulers  of  tens :  and  let  tliem
judge  the  people  at  all  seasons :  and  it  shall
be,  that  every  great  matter  they  shall  bring
unto  thee,  but  every  small  matter  they  shall
judge :  .  .  .  and  they  judged  the  people  at
all  seasons:  the  hard  causes  they  brought
unto  Moses,  but  every  small  matter  they
judged  themselves."

Ver.  12.— And  they  put  him  in  ward.
The  same  course  was  followed  in  the  ease
of  the  man  found  gathering  sticks  upon  the
sabbath  day :  "  And  they  put  him  in  ward,
because  it  was  not  declared  what  should  be
done  to  him  "  (Numb.  xv.  34).  The  same
penalty  was  awarded  in  both  cases.

Vers.  18,  14. — ^Bring  forth  him  that  hath
cursed  witiiont  the  camp; — ^lest  the  camp
should  become  polluted  by  his  death — and  let
all  that  heard  him  lay  their  hands  upon  his
head.  The  ceremony  of  laying  on  of  hands
in  all  cases  set  apart  the  person  or  thing  on
whom  or  on  which  they  were  laid  for  some
special  purpose.  Its  further  signification
was  determined  by  the  particular  circum-
stances of  the  case.  Here  it  probably  re-
turned back  on  the  head  of  the  blasphemer
the  guilt  which  otherwise  would  nave
adhered  to  the  witnesses  from  the  fact  of
their  hearing  his  blasphemy,  and  appearing
to  acquiesce  in  it.

Vers.  15,  16.— In  aocordiince  with  the
judicial  decision  on  the  man  is  framed  the
general  law  against  blasphemy  and  its
penalty.  It  runs  as  follows :  Whosoever
curseth  his  God  shall  bear  his  sin.  And  he
that  hlasphemeth  the  name  of  the  Lord,  he
shall  surely  be  put  to  death,,  and  all  the
oongregatiou  shall  certainly  stone  him.  It
has  been  quodtioned  whether  two  o£fences  or
one  are  here  contemplated,  whether  cursing
his  God  is  one  offence,  bearing  his  ein  being
its  punishment,  and  blaspheming  the  Name
of  the  Lord  another  and  greater  offence,  for
which  the  punishment  is  stoning  ;  or  whether
the  latter  offence  and  punishment  are  a
more  specific  statement  of  the  offence  and
punishment  which  had  only  generally  been
described  before.  Those  who  take  the  first
view  point  out  that  the  present  offender
was  an  Egyptian,  and  urge  that  had  he
cursed  his  God,  that  is,  the  Egyptian  god  or
gods,  he  would  only  have  had  to  bear  his
sin;  but  that  as  he  had  blasphemed  the
Name  of  Israel's  God,  Jehovah,  he  was  to
be  stoned.  The  second  explanation,  how-
ever, is  the  truer  one.  The  Scriptures
recognize  but  one  God,  and  he  is  the  Lord
Jehovah.  Whoever  curses  him  shall  bear
his  sin,  that  is,  shall  be  guilty  in  such  •
way  that  his  sin  must  be  purged  either  by
punishment  or  by  sacrifice,  and  it  is  then
further  declared  that  this  particular  sin  can


OH.  XXIV.  10— i;3.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEViTIOUS.


385


be  purged  only  by  the  death  of  the  offender
at  the  hand  of  the  congregation.

Ver.  17. — In  close  connection  with  the
command  to  slay  the  blasphemer  is  repeated
the  prohibition  of  murder,  and  the  injunc-
tion that  the  murderer  shall  surely  be  put  to
death.  Thus  a  distinction  is  sharply  drawn
between  the  judicial  sentence  carried  out
by  the  congregation,  and  the  unsanctioned
smiting  the  life  of  a  man  by  another,  and
a  warning  is  given  against  any  man  fanati-
cally taking  the  law  into  his  own  hands,
even  in  the  case  of  a  blasphemer.

Vers.  18 — 21. — ^A  summary  of  the  law
wapecting  minor  injuries  is  added  to  that
respecting  murder.  He  that  killeth  a  man,
he  shall  be  put  to  death,  but  he  that  killeth
a  beast  shall  make  it  good;  and  this
lex  talionig  shall  apply  to  all  damage  done
to  another,  breach  for  breach,  eye  for  eye,
tooth  for  tooth  (see  Matt.  t.  38).

Ver.  22. — As  it  had  been  a  stranger  who
had  on  this  occasion  been  the  offender,  the
law,  Te  shall  have  one  manner  of  law,  as
well  for  the  stranger,  as  for  one  of  your  own
country,  with  the  sanction,  I  am  the  Lord
your  God,  is  emphatically  repeated  (see  ch.
lix.  34).


Ver.  23.— The  penalty  is  inflicted  on  the
offender  solemnly  as  an  act  of  the  Law,  not
of  mob  fury.  So  it  was  by  a  judicial  or  semi-
judicial  prooeeding  that  St.  Stephen  was
stoned :  "  They  brought  hiln  to  the  oonncil,
and  set  up  false  witnesses,  which  said.  This
man  ceaseth  not  to  speak  blasphemous
words  against  this  holy  place,  and  tiie  Iiaw  "
(Acts  vi.  12,  13).  And  in  spite  of  the
violence  exhibited,  there  was  still  some
form  of  law,  according  to  Jewish  practice,
observed  in  his  stoning  (Acts  vii.  58).  In
the  case  of  our  Lord,  on  the  other  hand,
when  they  regarded  him  as  guilty  of
blasphemy  on  his  saying,  "  Before  Abraham
was,  I  am"  (John  viii.  58)  and  "I  and
my  Father  are  one"  (John  x.  30),  the
Jews  "took  up  stones  to  oast  at  him,"  not
waiting  for  a  judicial  condemnation,  but,
as  they  supposed,  taking  the  law  into  their
own  hands.  Had  his  death  been  by  Jewish
hands,  it  would  at  the  last  l;ave  been  by
stoning  under  this  law.  But  the  power  of
life  and  death  had  been  taken  away  from  the
Jews  by  the  Bomans,  "  that  the  saying  of
Jesus  might  be  fulfilled,  which  htj  spake,
signifying  what  death  he  should  die"  (John
iviii.  32).


H0MILETIC3.

Vers.  11 — 16. — The  Name  of  the  Lord  is  a  revelation  of  his  nature.  Names  given  or
taken  by  man  may  be  imposed  from  accidental  circumstances.  A  name  given  by  God
denotes  an  essential  quality  of  the  thing  named.  Hence  if  we  can  arrive  at  the  true
meaning  of  God's  Name,  as  revealed  by  himself,  we  shall  have  a  manifestation  of  him-
self as  he  chose  to  reveal  his  nature  to  man.

I.  After  the  primary  Name  of  Elohim,  where  we  mark  the  plural  form  of  the  noun,
the  Name  by  which  he  revealed  himself  to  the  patriarchs  was  that  of  El  Shaddai,  GK>s
Almighty.  His  omnipotence  was  the  part  of  ms  nature  which  he  specially  manifested
to  them  (Bxod.  vi.  3).

n.  To  Moses  he  revealed  himself  under  the  name  of  Ehtbh,  asheb  Ehteh,  or
I  AM  THAT  I  AM.  The  word  Ehyeh  is  not  used  for  absolute  existence  in  any  place
where  it  is  found  in  the  Scriptures,  but  rather  for  condition  or  relation.  "  The  mean-
ing to  be  given  to  the  words,  if  we  guide  ourselves  by  the  evidence  furnished  by  the
Hebrew  books,  may  be  paraphrased  in  this  way,  'J  thow  myself  from  time  to  time,
even  as  1  thow  myself.  I  stand  from  time  to  time  in  varying  relation  to  men.  This  is
my  Name.  Only  from  my  dealings  with  men  is  my  character  to  be  apprehended  by
men ' "  (Sir  W.  Martin, '  Semitic  Languages ').

III.  He  also  revealed  himself  to  Moses  as  Yahveh,  Neither  Is  this  word  used  for
absolute  existence.    It  means  the  One  who  causes  things  to  happen  as  they  do.

lY.  In  these  thkbb  Names,  then,  we  find  the  revelation  that  God  thought
FBOFEB  THEBEBT  TO  GIVE  TO  HIS  ANCIENT  PEOPLE.  He  Is  the  Almighty  Spiritual
Being,  who  manifests  himself  as  he  wills  to  his  creatures,  and  governs  by  his  providence
the  universe  and  all  the  events  of  human  life.  This  is  the  proclamation  of  his  Name
by  God  himself.  "  And  Yahveh  descended  in  the  cloud,  and  stood  with  Moses  there,
and  proclaimed  the  name  of  Yahveh.  And  Yahveh  passed  by  before  him,  and  pro-
claimed, Yahveh,  Yahveh  Elohim,  merciful  and  gracious,  longsuffering,  and  abimdant
in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgres-
sion and  sin,  and  that  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty ;  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the
lathers  upon  the  children,  and  upon  the  children's  children,  unto  the  third  and  to  tit*

LEVITICUS.  t  a


386  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICQS.  [oh.  xxiv.  10— 23.

fourth  generation  "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  5 — 7).  In  the  Old  Testament,  then,  God  does  not,
uy  bis  Name,  reveal  his  absolute  nature,  but  his  relation  to  man  as  the  Supreme
Moral  Governor  of  the  world,  whose  characteristic  in  that  government  was  omnipotence,
uncontrolled  by  anything  but  his  own  will,  but  guided  by  mercy  and  justice.

V.  In  the  New  Testament,  not  only  God's  relation  to  man,  but  also  his  own
NATURE,  IS  BEVBALED  BY  THE  Name  OF  Fathbr,  Son,  AND  HoLT  Ghost.  These  names
exhibit  to  us,  so  far  as  human  faculties  can  apprehend  them,  the  very  Godhead,  not  merely
as  governing  man,  but  in  its  essential  character.  "  The  revealed  Name  of  God,  given  to  ths
apostles  in  the  tradition  of  holy  baptism,  is  a  revelation  of  truth.  The  entire  Christian
revelation  is  in  the  way  of  a  summary  contained  in  it.  It  is  itself  a  doctrine  -and  the
Bum  of  all  doctrine.  It  was  originally  given  in  order  that  the  world  might  be  taught
it  ('  make  disciples  of  all  nations '),  and  it  contains  all  that  the  world,  in  the  way  of
religion,  needs  to  be  taught.  The  apostles,  indeed,  by  Divine  inspiration,  developed  it
into  its  essential  and  necessary  details,  summed  into  the  Apostles'  Creed ;  but  in  itself,
that  is,  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  all  was  shortly  comprised.  In  like  manner,  it
is  a  creed  and  the  sum  of  all  creeds ;  for  while  we  read  that  it  was  often  used  as  a  creed
in  early  times,  the  structure  of  the  subsequent  authoritative  creeds  of  the  Church  has
been  so  framed  upon  it,  and  their  contents  so  confined  to  it,  that  what  we  chiefly  learn
in  all  the  articles  of  our  belief,  whether  contained  in  the  Apostles',  the  Nicene,  or  the
Athanasian  formula,  is  first,  to  believe  in  God  the  Father,  who  hath  made  all  the  world ;
secondly,  in  God  the  Son,  who  hath  redeemed  all  mankind ;  and  thirdly,  in  God  the
Holy  Ghost,  who  sanctifieth  all  the  elect  people  of  God.  .  .  .  All  the  great  elements
and  outlines  of  inspired  teaching,  as  they  are  gathered  into  the  Apostles'  Creed,  and  all
the  minute  expressions  and  articulations  of  truth  as  given  to  the  Church  in  writing  by
the  apostles,  are  to  be  regarded  with  deep,  true,  and  habitual  reverence  for  the  sake
of  the  Name  of  God  "  (Moberly, '  The  Law  of  the  Love  of  God ').

VI.  The  Name  Jesus  Chbist  indicates  the  work  and  the  relation  to  ourselves
OF  HIM  WHO  BEiNO  MAN  WAS  ALSO  GoD.  1.  Christ  is  the  Anointed  One.  "God  anointed
Jesus  .  . .  with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  power  "  (Acts  x.  38).  "  The  Word  was  made
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us,  .  .  .  full  of  grace  and  truth  "  (John  i.  14) ;  "  for  God  giveth
not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  him  "  (John  iii.  34) ;  "  for  it  pleased  the  Father  that  io
him  should  all  fulness  dwell "  (Col.  L  19).  2.  Jesus  is  the  Saviour.  "  Thou  shalt  call
his  name  Jesus :  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins  "  (Matt.  i.  21).  "  Neither
is  there  salvation  in  any  other :  for  there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  amon"
men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved  "  (Acts  iv.  12) ;  "  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  "  (Acts  v.
31) ;  "  a  Saviour,  Jesus  "  (Acts  xiii.  23).  "  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he
was  bruised  for  our  iniquities :  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him ;  and  with
his  stiipes  we  are  healed.  .  .  .  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  .  .  .
For  the  transgression  of  my  people  was  he  stricken  "  (Isa.  liii.  5 — 8).  The  Name  Jesus
Christ,  therefore,  indicates  that  he  who  bore  it  was  the  promised  Messiah  (Dan.  ix.  26  •
John  i.  41),  filled  to  the  full  with  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  Savionr  of  those
that  put  their  trust  in  him.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0E3.

The  erlTM  of  IJasphemy.    Ch.  xxiv.  10 — 16 ;  cf.  2  Chron.  xxvi.  16 23 ;  Dan.  r.

1 — 4,  30.  The  sanctity  of  the  Name  of  God  is  distinctly  declared  in  the  third  com-
mandment. There  the  Lord  declared  that  he  would  not  hold  the  blasphemer  "  guiltless."
But  it  was  not  till  the  incident  now  before  us  that  God  showed  his  sense  of  the  enormity
of  the  crime.  He  here  puts  it  into  the  category  of  capital  crimes,  and  decrees  the
death  of  every  blasphemer,  whether  he  be  a  stranger  or  one  bom  io  the  land.

Now,  when  we  inquire,  we  find  that  he  calls  it  "  this  glorious  and  fearful  name.  The
Lord  thy  God  "  (Deut.  xxviii.  58).  So  glorious  is  it  that  inanimate  things,  when  his
Name  is  put  upon  them,  cannot  be  desecrated  with  impunity.  Thus  his  tabernacle
could  not  be  treated  even  by  a  king  according  to  his  capricious  pleasure,  but  Uzziah,
for  presuming  to  burn  incense  within  it,  is  doomed  to  leprosy  and  exile  all  his  life
(2  Chron.  xxvi.  16 — 23).  Belshazzar  too  paid  the  penalty  of  his  life  for  deseoratina
the  vessels  belonging  to  the  tabernacle  (Dan.  v.  1 — 4,  30).


OE.  XXIV.  10— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  88"

The  case  before  us  was  one  of  pure  blasphemy.  This  reckless  youth,  the  son  of  an
Egyptian  father,  had  blasphemed  "  the  Name,"  and  for  this  he  was  stoned  to  death  after
those  who  heard  the  blasphemy  had  laid  their  hands  on  his  head.

I.  Let  us  start  with  the  fundamental  truth  that  the  Name  op  God  is  the
■BVELATION  OF  HIS  CHARACTER  IN  WORD.  Hence  to  take  up  the  Name  of  God  lightly  is
to  treat  his  character  lightly,  It  is,  in  fact,  to  despise  the  Person,  and  is  nothing  less
than  treason-  against  the  Supreme  King.  The  individual  who  blasphemes  "  the  Name  "
would  take  up  arms  against  the  Person,  and  so  must  be  treated  as  a  rebel.  When,
therefore,  we  bear  in  mind  that  God  makes  known  his  Name  that  men  may  trust  in
luiQ  (cf.  Ps.  ix.  10),  the  blaspheming  of  his  holy  Name  is  really  the  rejection  of  his
appeal  for  trust,  the  rejection  of  his  merciful  manifestation,  and  deserves  the  penalty
attached  to  it.

II.  Man's  attitude  towards  God's  Name  determineb  his  character.  In  other
words,  the  Name  of  God  is  the  touchstone  of  human  character.  The  person  who  curseth
the  holy  Name,  as  this  reckless  youth  did,  is  thereby  judged.  He  has  voluntarily  set
himself  against  the  Almighty,  he  has  become  a  rebel  not  in  heart  only  but  openly,  and
if  the  Most  High  is  to  exercise  his  authority,  the  blasphemer  should  die.  It  is,  more-
over, a  mistake  to  imagine,  because  sentence  is  not  now  executed  so  speedily  against
blasphemers,  that  their  awful  sin  has  become  less  heinous  in  the  lapse  of  ages.  The
shortsighted  individual  who  defies  the  Almighty  will  find  eventually  how  hard  are  the
bosses  of  his  buckler.

III.  The  penalty  attached  to  blasphemy  is  to  be  aoquibsoed  in  by  the  people
OF  the  Lord.  The  whole  congregation  in  .this  case  is  called  upon  to  repudiate  the
awful  crime.  Those  who  heard  it  are  required  to  lay  their  hands  on  the  blasphemer's
head,  to  indicate  that  the  guilt  must  be  his  own.  They  will  not  share  it,  and  then  the
whole  congregation  are  to  be  the  executioners  of  the  Divine  decree.  Now  we  are  bound
to  entertain  a  similar  and  holy  abhorrence  of  such  a  crime.  We  are  most  assuredly
sinking  in  character  if,  through  association  with  careless  men,  we  come  to  regard  blas-
phemy when  indulged  in  as  a  light  thing.  The  truth  is,  if  we  are  making  spiritual
progress,  we  shall  be  advancing  in  the  fear  of  his  Name;  Greater  awe,  not  greater
familiarity,  will  characterize  us,  until  at  length  we  shall  see  it  to  be  just  and  right,  if
treason  towards  mere  potentates  on  earth  is  regarded  as  a  capital  offence,  much  more
ought  treason  against  "  the  blessed  and  only  Potentate  "  to  be  visited  with  death.

IV.  Let  us  in  consequence  all  bow  at  the  Name  of  Jesus.  To  him  hath  the
Father  given  a  Name  that  is  above  every  name,  that  at  it  every  knee  should  bow  (Phil.  ii.
9, 10).  Submitting  reverently  to  him,  we  shall  find  in  his  Name  that  marvellous
significance  which  was  heralded  before  his  birth  (Matt.  i.  21).  As  our  Saviour  from
sin,  he  will  show  us  how  reasonable  is  the  exhortation,  "  Let  every  one  that  nameth
the  Name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).  Baptized  in  his  Name,  as  well
•s  in  the  Name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  shall  look  to  him  for  the  fulfil-
ment of  the  covenant  promise  therein  implied.'  Under  the  shadow  of  the  Name  and
in  the  light  of  the  face  of  God  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  be  enabled  to  pass  on
reverently  and  peacefully  towards  our  everlasting  rest. — E.  M.  E.

Public  Justice  secured  by  the  law  of  retaliation.  Ch.  xxiv.  17—22 ;  cf.  Matt.  v.
38 — 48 ;  Kom.  xii.  19 — 21.  There  is  here  presented  to  us,  as  a  law  upon  which  Israel
was  to  act,  the  principle  of  retaliation.  And  yet  we  have  seen  in  the  moralities  of
ch,  xix.  17, 18,  an  express  denunciation  of  revenge.  How  are  we  to  reconcile  this  re-
taliation commanded  with  the  revenge  which  is  forbidden?  Evidently  the  retaliation
is  to  be  deliberate,  in  cool  blood,  without  the  fever-heat  of  vengeance.  _

Now,  when  we  bear  in  mind  the  early  age  to  which  this  law  of  retaliation  was  given,
•n  age  when  the  institution  of  public  justice  was  rudimentary  in  character,  then  we
can  understand  how  very  important  a  check  it  was  on  the  lawlessness  to  which  men
are  naturally  tempted.  Of  course,  when  public  justice  has  developed  itself  into  a  wide
and  vigilant  system,  the  necessity  for  each  man  taking  the  law  into  his_  own  hand  ceases.
Then  it  becomes  a  crime  against  law  to  usurp  its  functions ;  it  only  increases  lawless-
to  attempt  for  one's  self  what  the  organized  state  willingly  undertakes  f<»  you.

'  Cf.  Tait's  'Thoughts  for  the  Thoughtful,'  pp.  186—195.


388  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [01. -sxiv.  10— 2*

But  in  rude  ages  it  is  eminently  desirable  that  savage  spirits  should  contemplate  as  »
dead  certainty  getting  as  much  as  they  give.'    Let  us  notice  ene  or  two  points.

I.  The  law  op  retaliation,  admikistbeed  in  a  judicial  spirit,  was  in  th«
INTERESTS  OF  JUSTICE  AND  OEDEE,  Its  principle  is  a  sound  one.  The  criminal  is  to
get  exactly  what  he  gave.  It  is  only  in  this  way  that  the  nature  of  a  crime  can  be
driven  home  to  a  rude  and  tyrannical  nature.  If  he  has  been  cruel  to  a  neighbour,  let
him  taste  the  effect  himself  of  the  same  amount  of  cruelty.  A  man  who  victimizes  his
neighbours  will  cease  doing  so  if  he  finds  that  he  is  to  be  victimized  in  exactly  the  same
fashion  by  public  law.  In  fact,  he  comes  to  consider  his  own  case  as  bound  up  most
intimately  with  his  neighbours',  and,  instead  of  indulging  in  cruelty,  he  by  his  better
conduct  ensures  his  personal  peace.

And  a  distinct  corollary  of  this  law  of  retaliation  is  the  penalty  of  murder  (vers.  17^
21).  If  a  man  deliberately  puts  his  brother  out  of  life,  it  is  an  injury  which  admits  of
no  repair,  and  so  death  becomes  its  just  penalty.

II.  The  law  op  eetaliation  is  in  one  respect  a  pebpaeation  fob  the  goldei*
RULE.  For  the  golden  rule  runs  parallel  to  it.  It  is,  so  to  speak,  its  glorious  issue.
"  Therefore  all  things  whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  evea
so  to  them :  for  this  is  the  Law  and  the  prophetg  "  (Matt.  vii.  12).  Yes,  this  very  law
of  retaliation  suggests  to  every  thoughtful  mind  whether  it  would  not  be  better  to  try
the  opposite  plan,  and  do  to  others,  not  what  we  should  be  afraid  they  would  do  to  ub»
but  what  we  would  like  them  to  do  to  us.  In  other  words,  let  us  wisely  win  the  good
services  of  others,  if  we  are  to  receive  what  we  give,  by  doing  all  to  them  and  for  them
that  we  would  welcome  ourselves.

And  indeed,  the  reason  why  the  golden  rule  does  not  prevail  as  widely  as  it  might,
is  because  immediate  justice  is  not  now  executed  as  in  the  case  of  a  law  of  retaliation
it  is.  The  return  of  kindness  is  often  impeded  by  ingratitude,  and  men  may  do  good
to  others  for  a  long  lifetime  without  receiving  much  thanks.  But  such  an  arrangement
gives  a  field  for  faith  and  courage,  such  as  a  government  of  instantaneous  justice  could
not  secure.  In  truth,  we  should  become  mere  mercenaries  if  the  golden  rule  involved
instantaneous  returns.  Now,  however,  we  must  rely  on  the  wide  range  of  providence,
and  believe  that  in  the  end  it  will  prove  wisest  and  best  to  have  treated  our  neighbour
as  we  would  like  to  be  treated  ourselves.

IIL  In  cultivating  the  spirit  of  love  towards  even  our  enemies,  we  abk
BUT  following  THE  FOOTSTEPS  OF  OUR  FATHER  IN  HEAVEN.    For  while  re-cnforcing
th"  courage  of  his  people  in  rude  ages  by  commanding  retaliation,  he  was  himself  at
the  same  time  making  his  sun  to  shine  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sending  raia
upon  the  just  and  on  the  unjust  (Matt.  v.  45).     He  was  not  dealing  with  men  after
their  sins,  nor  rewarding  them  according  to  their  iniquities  (Ps.  ciii.  10).     Not  only  ia
Nature,  with  its  dignified  refusal  to  be  a  respecter  of  persons,  but  also  in  his  sacrificial
worship,  was  God  dealing  with  his  enemies  so  as  to  make  them  his  friends.     He  wa»
pursuing  even  then  the  policy  of  overcoming  evil  by  good  (Rom.  xii.  21).     Such  laws
as  retaliation,  resting  on  inexorable  justice,  did  something  to  check  sin;  but  only  love
and  goodness  can  overcome  it.    Hence  the  spirit  of  the  old  dispensation,  while  hostile
to  sin,  as  the  outcome  of  a  holy  God  must  be,  had  an  undertone  of  love  and  mercy,
God,  in  fact,  was  practising  all  the  time  his  own  golden  rule.    He  was  doing  by  men
what  he  wanted  men  to  do  by  him.     In  some  cases  this  succeeded,  for  this  is  the
substance  of  the  Divine  appeal  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,  as  it  was  the  undertone  of  the
preliminary  law ;  it  some  cases  in  failed  through  the  waywardness  of  men.     Still,  the
golden  rule  is  the  spirit  of  the  Divine  administration,  and  will  be  till  the  present  dis-
pensation is  finisUed.     Then  must  the  great  Governor  deal  with  the  impenitent  in  the
way  of  strictest  justice,  since  they  will  not  yield  to  his  dying  love.     The  rhythm  of
the  ages  will  be  maintained ;  if  the  wrath  of  man  is  not  turned  to  praise  by  the  exercise
of  love,  it  must  be  restrained  by  the  exercise  of  the  cool  and  deliberate  infliction  of
deserved  wrath. — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  10 — 23. — Shelomith's  son.  Here  a  narrative  is  introduced  into  the  midst  of  »
code  of  laws ;  but  this  is  done  as  a  preamble  to  enactments  of  whose  publication  the
case  was  the  occasion.     We  notice —

'  Of.  Canon  Mozley's  '  Euling  Ideas  in  Early  Ages,'  pp.  180—221.


4M.  ixiv.  10— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OP   LEVITICUS.  889

I.  The  crime  of  this  son  of  Shblomith.  1.  It  was  hlaspheming  the  God  bf  Israel.
(1)  We  are  not  distinctly  informed  as  to  the  particular  form  of  this  blasi^hemy.  We
•re,  however,  told  that  this  man,  whose  name  is  not  given,  was  "  the  son  of  an
Israelitish  woman,"  that  his  father  was  an  Egyptian,  and  that  in  striving  with  a  man
of  Israel  he  blasphemed  the  sacred  Name.  It  may  hence  be  concluded  that  he  angrily
reflected  upon  the  Divine  equity  in  favouring  the  seed  of  Jacob.  Anger  is  certainly
implied  in  the  words,  "  blasphemed  the  Name,  and  cursed."  (2)  Here  was  the  very
spirit  of  Satan,  whose  rebellion  against  God  was  probably  excited  by  the  honour  he  had
put  upon  man.  "  Is  thine  eye  evil  because  I  am  good  ?  "  (3)  Is  not  that  hatred  to  God
which  is  in  the  carnal  mind  of  the  very  essence  of  this  bliisphemy?  Though  the
manifestations  be  restrained,  the  venom  is  still  there.  Let  us  beware  how  we  entertain
tard  thoughts  of  God.  2.  Strife  was  its  occasion.  (1)  How  little  do  men  dream,
-when  they  enter  into  strife,  where  they  may  be  carried  by  their  passions  (see  Prov.  xvii.
1-!)!  The  moral,  therefore,  is  that  it  should  be  carefully  avoided.  (2)  But  how  is  this
ito  be  done?  We  must  "give  none  offence."  We  must  be  willing  to  suffer  wrong.
The  spirit  (or  temper)  of  Christ  is  gained  through  the  indwelling  of  his  (Divine)  Spirit.
3.  Race  was  the  origin  of  the  strife.  (1)  It  appears  to  have  been  a  contention  between
«  pure  Israelite  and  a  mongrel.  The  father  of  Shelomith's  son  was  probably  one  of  the
mixed  multitude  that  came  up  with  the  Hebrews  from  Egypt.  (2)  Traced  back
«noth«r  step,  we  find  the  origin  in  the  marriage  of  Shelomith.  Mixed  marriages  have
«rer  been  prolific  in  mischief.  Of  these  sprang  the  monsters,  viz.  not  so  much  in
stature  as  in  iniquity,  who  provoked  the  Deluge.  (3)  Even  Dibri,  the  father  of
Shelomith,  was,  remotely,  responsible  for  the  blasphemy  of  her  son,  by  consenting
io  her  marriage  with  an  alien.  How  careful  we  should  be  never  to  commit  a  wrong,
ADce  no  man  can  tell  how  prolific  it  may  be  in  mischief  I  The  day  of  judgment  will
-declare  it.

IT  The  impbaohmbnt  op  the  blasphemeb.  1.  Mis  witnesses  arrested  him.  (1)  They
were  bound  to  do  so.  Had  they  allowed  him  to  escape  they  would  have  been  accom-
^ices  in  his  crime  (see  ch.  xix.  17,  margin).  They  might  have  brought  down  the
wrath  of  God  upon  the  nation.  Witness  how  Achan  troubled  Israel  (Josh.  vii.  1),  and
how  David  also  brought  down  a  plague  upon  his  people  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  15 — 17).  (2)
Happy  is  the  nation  whose  sons  are  jealous  for  the  honour  of  God  (see  Ps.  Ixix.  9).
Happy  is  the  nation  whose  sons  are  guardians  of  its  morality.  This  is  public  spirit  in
perfection.  2.  They  kept  him  in  ward  for  the  judgment  of  God.  (1)  They  brought
bis  case  before  Moses  (ver.  11).  This  was  in  accordance  with  Divine  direction  (see
Exod.  xviii.  22).  They  might  have  wreaked  a  summary  vengeance,  but  they  chose  the
more  excellent  way.  "  Judgment  is  of  God  "  (Deut.  i.  17) ;  therefore  judgment  should
Im  deliberate.  (2)  Moses  accordingly  appealed  to  God.  Every  cause  must  come
altimately  before  him.     This  should  never  be  forgotten.

IIL  The  judoment  of  the  Lord.  1.  This  had  respect  to  th»  particular  offender.
(1)  He  was  to  be  carried  without  the  camp,  as  an  outcast  from  society  and  a  peison
excommunicated  from  the  Church.  (2)  There  he  was  to  die  for  his  sin.  The  witnesses
put  their  hands  on  his  head.  This  was  to  clear  themselves  of  all  complicity  in  his  guilt.
His  blood  then  ostensibly  was  upon  his  own  head.  (3)  Stoning  him  was  to  be  the
mode  of  his  punishment.  The  witnesses  cast  the  first  stone,  and  the  congregation,  by
their  representatives,  followed,  until  he  perished.  Thus,  as  Henry  says,  in  allusion  to
Ps.  Ixiv.  8,  The  tongue  of  the  blasphemer  fell  heavily  (see  Deut.  xvii.  7  ;  John  viii.  7).
2.  It  had  also  respect  to  the  community.  (1)  This  judgment  was  now  made  a  law  in
Israel,  as  well  for  the  stranger  as  for  him  that  is  born  in  the  land.  (2)  It  was  alss
eaacted  that  murder  must  be  visited  with  death  (vers.  17,  20).  This  was  the  incoi-
poration  in  the  Levitical  code  of  the  Noachian  precept  recorded  in  Gen.  ix.  6.  (3)  The
ra-inciple  of  compensation  and  retaliation  was  asserted  (vers.  19, 20).  In  things  judicial
this  principle  still  holds,  though  in  matters  of  private  wrong  the  gospel  direction  is
diat  evil  be  suffered  rather  than  revenged  (see  Matt.  v.  38,  39 ;  vii.  1,  2),— J.  A.  M.

Vers.  10 16,  23. — A  suggestive  episode.    We  have  an  affecting  illustration  in  these

wrses  of  the  truth  that  "  The  Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,  but  for  the  lawless
•nd  disobedient,  ...  for  unholy  and  profane"  (1  Tun.  i.  9).  The  announcernent  of
the  Law  is  broken  by  the  account  of  this  transgression,  and  the  transgression  itself  gives


390  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxiv.  10—25.

occadon  for  the  enactment  of  other  statutes  (rers.  15—22).  The  stoiy  and  the  statutes
suggest —

L  What  LASTma  evil  hat  accrue  fbok  an  imHOLT  alliance.  Had  th*
I^aelitish  woman  not  married  an  Egyptian  (ver.  10),  it  is  morally  certain  that  sh*
would  not  hare  heen  called  upon  to  part  with  her  son  imder  these  tragic  and  terrible
circumstances.  She  consulted  her  own  fancy  rather  than  the  known  will  of  Jehovah,
and,  long  years  afterwards,  she  bore  her  penalty  in  maternal  griefl  There  is  nothing
fraught  with  more  grave  and  enduring  evils  than  an  unwise,  unholy  alliance.

II.  How  LIKELY  ONE  POLLY  18  TO  END  IN  ANOTHER.  TWs  son  of  the  Israelitisb
woman  strove  with  a  man  of  Israel  in  the  camp,  and  their  strife  led  to  blasphemy  and
cursing  on  the  part  of  one  of  them.  Strife  led  to  profanity.  Similarly,  carelessness  often
ends  in  fraud,  fraud  in  falsehood,  indelicacy  in  impurity,  occasional  excess  in  habitual
intemperance,  anger  in  murder,  etc.

III.  How  SERIOUS  A  SIN  MAY  RESIDE  IN  A  FEW  WKONG  WORDS.  (Ver.  16.)  Probablj
the  words  in  which  Shelomith's  son  blasphemed  were  few  in  number.  Words  are  but
breath,  impressions  made  on  the  air,  we  may  say.  Yet,  simple  though  they  be,  they
may  (1)  reveal  a  most  foul  and  guilty  state  of  soul,  (2)  work  terrible  mischief  to  other
souls,  (3)  be  heard  with  deep  abhorrence  by  God  and  the  good.

IV.  How  WISE  A  COUKSE  IS  THE  PATIENT  ADMINISTRATION  OP  LAW.      Had  the  CfOWd

that  gathered  at  the  strife  between  these  two  men  inflicted  condign  punishment  on  the
transgressor,  the  event  would  have  been  regarded  as  an  ordinary  disturbance,  and  no
moral  effect  would  have  been  produced.  Possibly  the  guilty  man  would  have  been
pitied  as  a  victim  of  the  violence  of  a  mob.  But  by  the  patient  course  pursued
(vers.  11 — 15,  23)  it  was  clearly  seen  by  all  that  the  man  died  because  he  had  com-
mitted a  grievous  sin,  and  that  whosoever  followed  him  in  his  guilt  must  expect  to
suffer  the  same  penalty  he  endured.  Thus  that  which  might  have  seemed  nothing
better  than  fatal  exasperation  was  made  to  wear  the  true  aspect  of  righteous  vindication
of  law.  It  is  always  best  to  be  patient  in  the  infliction  of  punishment.  Here  as  every-
where, but  here  especially,  calmness  is  strength,  passion  is  weakness.  By  restraining
ourselves  from  hasty  action  we  may  restrain  many  others  from  the  commission  of  sin.

V.  How  SAD  A  SERVICE  SOME  MEN  ARE  COMPELLED  TO  RENDER  THEIR  RACE.     Some  mCB

serve  their  fellows  involuntarily.  They  become  beacons  to  warn  all  who  approach  from
the  danger  they  are  running.  Shelomith's  son,  by  this  evil  deed  of  his,  caused  the  enact-
ment of  ver.  16 ;  and  this  weighty  law,  together  with  the  impressive  circumstance  out
of  which  it  grew,  undoubtedly  produced  a  very  deep  and  permanent  impression  on
Israel.  It  materially  contributed  to  the  very  striking  result  that  no  nation  has  been
more  reverent  in  its  tone  and  spirit  than  the  Jews.  It  is  a  sad  reflection  that  a  man
should  serve  his  race  by  suffering  death  as  the  penalty  of  his  sin.  We  may  be  com-
pelled, by  overruling  Omniscience,  so  to  serve  others.  How  much  rather  would  the
heavenly  Father  apcept  our  willing  service,  and  make  use  of  our  devout  endeavour  to
bless  our  kind ! — C.

Vers.  17 — 22. — The  holy  Law  of  Ood.  These  enactments,  occasioned  by  the  sin  «rf
the  son  of  Shelomith,  contain  certain  principles  on  which  God  founded  his  Law,  and
which  he  would  have  us  introduce  into  our  dealings  and  regulations  now.    These  ar»—

I.  The  sacredness  op  human  life.  "  He  that  killeth  any  man  shall  surely  be  put
to  death"  (ver.  17).  This  is  significantly  repeated  (ver.  21)  We  can  hardly  be  said
to  have  learnt  this  lesson  yet,  after  eighteen  centuries  of  Christian  legislation.  Her&
however,  is  a  statute  which  unmistakably  and  emphatically  asserts  it.

n.  Equity.    There  is  to  be  careful  discrimination  in  awarding  penalty  (vers.  18 20),

A  man  must  suffer  according  to  the  injury  he  has  done.  Nothing  is  more  destructiv*
of  the  main  purpose  of  law  than  undistinguishing,  and  therefore  unrighteous,  retribu-
tion, whether  at  the  national  tribunal,  or  in  the  school,  or  in  the  home ;  nothing  moi*
salutary  than  the  calm,  regulated  equity  which  estimates  degrees  of  guilt,  and
determines  the  fair  penalty  therefrom.

IIL  Considbratbness.  Law  is  obliged  to  regard  the  general  good,  the  welfare  of
the  community  at  large,  the  result  of  action  and  of  permission  in  the  end  and  upon  the
whole.  It  therefore  often  bears  severely  on  individual  men.  But  it  must  not  be
inconsiderate.  Where  it  cap  right  one  man  that  has  heen  wronged  it  must  do  so.  "  He
that  killeth  a  beast,  he  shall  restore  it "  (ver.  Zl\


OH.  XXIV.  10— 23,]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  391

rV.  Impabtiality.    (Ver.  22.)

V.  Instbuotivbness.  Law  should  not  only  decide  individual  cases,  and  bring  down
appropriate  penalty  on  individual  transgressors ;  it  should  also,  by  its  embodiment  of
Divine  principles,  be  a  most  effective  teacher  of  truth,  a  constant  instructor  in  righteous-
ness. The  law  of  the  land  should  be  daily  leading  the  nation  to  true  conceptions  of
what  is  upright,  moral,  estimable.  These  few  statutes  contain  that  vital  principle,
the  supreme  value  of  human  (as  compared  with  animal)  nature.  If  a  man  killed  his
fellow-man,  he  must  die  j  if  he  killed  a  beast,  he  must  restore  it  (vers.  17,  18,  21).
There  are  too  many  who  (1)  treat  themselves  or  (2)  treat  others  as  if  there  were
nothing  more  in  human  nature  than  in  the  "  beasts  that  perish."  Sow  much  is  a  man
better  than  a  sheep?  He  is  better  by  the  immeasurable  height  of  his  intelligent,
responsible,  spiritual,  immortal  nature.  Let  us  estimate  our  own  worth,  and  recognize
the  precipusness,  before  God,  of  the  meanest  soul  that  walks  by  our  side  along  the  path
of  human  life.     We  may  add  that  we  see  here—

VI.  Boom  fob  fubthee  eevelation.  Righteous  law,  applicable  to  all,  vindicated
by  just  administrators,  without  a  trace  of  personal  resentment,  says, "  an  eye  for  an  eye,
a  tooth  for  a  tooth."  But  beside  this  righteous  law,  consistent  with  it  while  high
above  it,  is  the  spirit  of  individual,  generous  forgiveness.  Where  duty  to  society  does
not  demand  it,  let  the  spirit  of  retaliation,  so  natural  to  unrenewed  humanity,  give
place  to  the  spirit  of  magnanimity, — the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  Great  Teacher
(Matt.  v.  38 — 41),  the  Divine  Exemplar  (Luke  xxiii.  34). — 0.

Vers.  10 — 12. — A  hlasphemer  punished.  An  incident  is  here  inserted  that  explainr
part  of  the  Law  by  pointing  to  its  origin.  It  is  a  practical  illustration  that  tlirows
lurid  light  upon  the  possibility  and  consequences  of  transgression.

I.  The  sin.  It  is  described  as  blasphemy.  1.  A  sin  of  the  tongue.  Not  the  light
matter  some  deem  it.  The  tongue  can  cut  like  a  sword.  We  need  to  take  heed  to  our
ways,  lest  we  sin  with  the  tongue.  The  prayer  befits  us,  "  Set  a  watch,  0  Lord,  before
my  mouth."  A  word  quickly  spoken  may  have  lasting  results.  What  a  power  for
good  or  evil  is  placed  within  our  reach  1  2.  Its  criminal  character.  The  Name  of
God  is  to  be  had  in  reverence.  This  man  sinned  against  the  third  commandment.  If
it  be  treason  to  speak  ill  of  the  ruler,  how  much  more  to  utter  with  contempt  the  Name
of  the  King  of  kings  I  Lost  to  all  sense  of  propriety  must  he  be  who  can  curse  God,
Par  from  this,  his  Name  should  not  even  be  jestingly  or  frivolously  mentioned,  nor
should  he  be  called  to  witness  in  our  casual  remarks.

II.  Its  causes.  1.  The  immediate  cause  was  strife.  This  rouses  angry  passions  and
leads  to  worse  sin.  The  beginning  of  strife  is  as  the  letting  out  of  water ;  none  can
foretell  how  far  it  will  spread.  Little,  perhaps,  did  this  man  suspect  that  ibo  quarrel
would  end  in  his  speedy  death.  Let  the  rivulet  of  contention  be  checked,  ere  it
develop  into  a  torrent !  Men  heated  by  a  dispute  will  give  utterance  to  sentiments  of
which  in  calmer  moments  they  would  be  ashamed.  2.  The  remote  cause  was  tnarruige
with  an  unbeliever.  This  man's  mother  had  espoused  an  Egyptian,  and  the  son  would
appear  to  have  followed  the  religion  of  his  father,  for,  wishing  to  taunt  an  Israelite,  he
reviled  the  Name  of  Israel's  God.  Imprudent  alliances  are  a  source  of  continual
grief  and  disappointment.  The  mother  had  the  pain  of  beholding  her  son  put  to
death  with  every  mark  of  ignominy.  The  advice  of  the  Apostle  Paul  with  respect  to
marrying  an  ungodly  person  is  based  on  religious  principle,  and  its  worth  is  confirmed
by  the  dictates  of  common  sense  and  the  facts  of  experience.  It  is  not  desirable  that
there  should  be  a  difference  of  opinion  on  matters  of  religion  between  the  husband  and
the  wife.  The  loss  of  the  children  is  great  when  they  are  not  trained  in  ways  of  piety
by  the  hearty  co-operation  of  their  parents.

III.  The  punishment.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  people  should  have  been  so
astounded  at  such  wickedness  that  they  requested  Jehovah  to  instruct  them  concerning
the  penalty  adequate  to  the  offence.  'The  punishment  made  known  and  inflicted  was
severe,  revealing  God's  estimate  of  the  enormity  of  the  sin ;  swift,  lest  the  conscience  of
the  people  now  aroused  should  have  time  to  slumber,  and  le«t  hope  of  a  reprieve  should
in  after-days  lead  to  licence  of  language.  It  was  inflicted  hy  the  whole  congregation,  to
rid  themselves  of  any  guilt  of  tacit  participation  in  the  crime ;  the  nation  must  avenge
the  insult  perpetrated  upon  its  covenant  Head.    The  penalty  was  not  averted  by  ea>


392


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  XXV.  1—56.


tenvating  pleas  of  race  or  passion.  It  gave  occasion  for  the  enactment  of  the  law  of
retribution.  The  lex  talionis  lias  a  rude  justice  about  it  which  appeals  to  the  sentiment
of  uncivilized  nations.  King  Bezek  acknowledged  its  force  (Judg.  i.  7).  This  retribu-
tion was  allowed  at  first  because  of  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts,  but  being  permitted
to  run  side  by  side  with  the  law  of  love  to  one's  neighbour  and  the  stranger,  the  way
was  prepared  for  the  Christian  rule  by  which  the  waters  of  the  former  current  are  merged
in  the  strength  and  beauty  of  the  stream  of  love.  Even  under  this  dispensation,
however,  the  law  of  love  has  its  equitable  as  well  as  forgiving  aspects. — S.  R.  A.

Vers.  10 — 23. — 77ie  law  of  death.  Blasphemy,  murder,  wilful  injury,  whether  by
Israelite  or  stranger,  judged  and  punished  on  the  principle  of  compensation  without
mercy  (cf.  Isa.  xii. ;  Eom.  xi.).

I.  Here  is  the  evil  of  a  fallen  nature  and  an  apostate  people  set  forth  (see  Bom.  i.,iL).
"All  have  sinned."    Israel  itself  is  defiled.

n.  The  contrast  suggested  between  the  law  of  death  and  the  law  of  life  (cf.  Sermon
on  the  Mount  and  Bom.  vii.,  viii.).  The  true  glory  to  the  Name  of  Jehovah  is  not  the
death  of  the  blasphemer,  but  the  life  of  God's  people.  What  the  Law  could  not  do,  i.e.
restore  the  injured,  heal  the  wound,  give  back  the  life,  is  done  by  the  grace  of  the
gospel.

III.  Historical  illustrations  of  the  insufficiency  of  the  Law  in  the  hands  of  a  fallen
race.  Jesus  accused  of  blasphemy.  Stephen  stoned.  Paul  treated  as  violator  of  the
Law.  Through  the  Jews  and  their  defection  the  Name  of  Jehovah  blasphemed  in  tha
world.    The  lex  talionis  no  real  protection  either  of  the  individual  or  society. — R.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTBE  XXV.

The  inbject  of  the  sacred  seasons  is  taken
up  again  in  this  chapter,  after  the  paren-
thetical insertion  of  ch.  xxiv.  There  remain
the  septennial  festive  season  and  that  of  the
half-century — the  sabbatical  year  and  the
jubilee.

The  sabbatical  year  was  instituted  not
for  any  supposed  physical  benefit  accruing
from  it  to  the  land,  but,  first,  as  serving  for
a  link  between  the  sabbath  and  the  jtibilee
by  means  of  the  sacred  number  seven  -  the
sabbatical  year  being  the  seventh  year,  and
the  jubilee  being  the  year  following  the
Reven-timea-seventh  year;  and  secondly,
and  chiefly,  as  enforcing  the  lesson  of  the
weekly  sabbath  in  a  manner  that  could  not
be  overlooked,  and  symbolically  teaching
the  universal  application  of  the  sabbatical
law,  even  where  physical  needs  were  not
concerned,  and  in  that  way  suggesting  the
expectation  of  a  nst  to  be  hereafter  attained
by  all  God's  creatures.  The  sabbatical  year
began  with  the  commencement  of  the  civil
year,  the  1st  of  Tisri,  just  before  the  autumn
■owingB,  which  were  intermitted  for  one
year.  The  ground  was  not  tilled  during
this  year  (ver.  4).  There  was  a  release  of
debt!  (Deut.  xv.  1 — 11),  and  there  was  to  be


public  leading  of  God'g  Law  .-„««.  xrxi
10 — 13).  During  the  previous  six  years  the
husbandmen  had  been  well  aware  of  the
coming  sabbatical  year,  and  would  have  laid
by  in  store  accordingly,  so  as  to  support
themselves  and  their  families  during  tliat
year.  The  release  of  debta  inculcated
mercy.  The  command  that  the  Law  should
be  publicly  read  showed  that  the  intention
of  the  institution  was  not  that  the  year
should  be  spent  in  idleness,  but  that  the
time  saved  from  ordinary  labour  was  to  be
given  to  devotional  pursuits.  The  law  of
the  sabbatical  year  was  so  hard  of  ob-
servance by  an  agricultural  people,  that  it
was  seldom  or  never  acted  upon  until  the
Captivity  (see  2  Chron.  xxxvi  21).  But
after  that  time  it  seems  to  have  been  re-
ligiously kept  (see  Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xi.  8,
6;  xiv.  10,  6;  xiv.  16,  2;  xv.  1,  2;  1  Maoo
vi.  49;  Gal.  iv.  10;  Tacit., '  Hist.,'  v.  2,  4).

The  jubilee  was  a  joyous  year  appointed
to  be  observed  every  fifty  years.  The  cycle
of  the  sabbatical  year  and  the  jubilee  touched
without  coalescing.  The  forty-ninth  year
was  necessarily  a  sabbatical  year,  and  the
following  year  was  the  jubilee.  It  has  ap-
peared to  some  BO  difficult  to  believe  that
two  years  in  which  it  was  not  allowable  to
engage  in  agricultural  work  should  oniBa


OH.  XXV.  1 — 55.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


393


together,  that  they  have  aaeumed  that  the
Babbatioal  year  itself,  that  is,  the  forty-
ninth  year,  was  the  year  of  the  jubilee.
But  this  was  clearly  not  the  case.  Twice  in
the  century  the  land  was  to  lie  fallow  for
two  years  running — from  September  to  the
second  September  following — special  pre-
porationa  having,  of  course,  been  made  by
laying  up  a  store  of  grain  from  the
abundant  harvest  promised  in  the  previous
year  (ver.  21),  and  foreign  crops  being,  no
doubt,  imported  to  take  the  place  of  the
usual  home  crops.  In  matter  of  fact,  how-
ever, these  two  blank  years  seldom,  if  ever,
occurred  together ;  for  as  the  sabbatical  year
was  not  observed  before  the  Captivity,  while
there  are  indications  of  the  existence  of  the
jubilee  (1  Kings  xxi.  3 ;  Isa.  Izi.  1 — 3),  so
probably  the  jubilee  ceased  to  be  bbserred
after  the  Captivity,  when  the  sabbatical  year
was  carefully  kept.  Supposing  that  they
did  come  together,  the  aecond  year  in  which
labour  was  prohibited  would  end  just  in
time  for  the  seed  to  be  sown  for  the  next
summer's  harvest.

The  jubilee  affected  both  land  and  men.
Land  could  only  be  sold  for  fifty  years,  its
Talu3  immediately  after  a  jubilee  had  passed
being  that  of  fifty  harvests,  or  rather,  de-
ducting the  sabbatical  years  and  the  fiftieth
year,  of  forty-two  harvests.  If  it  were  sold,
it  might  be  bought  back  by  the  original
owner  or  any  of  his  relations,  counting  the
number  of  harvests  remaining  before  the  next
jubilee,  and  buying  out  the  previous  pur-
chaser with  the  sum  of  money  thus  estimated;
No  more  effective  plan  could  be  well  de-
vised for  preserving  the  various  properties
in  the  families  to  which  they  weie  at  first
assigned.

The  other  point  chiefly  affected  by  the
law  of  the  jubilee  was  slavery.  In  case  a
brother  Israelite  became  poor,  it  was  the
duty  of  his  richer  brethren  to  help  him,  and
to  lend  him  money  without  interest,  to  set
him  up  in  the  world  again.  But  if  this  did
not  succeed,  the  poor  man  might  sell  him-
self as  a  slave,  either  to  an  Israelite  or  to
a  foreigner  living  in  the  land.  In  the
former  case  it  had  been  already  enacted
that  his  slavery  was  not  to  last  beyond  six
years  (Exod.  xxi.  2).  To  this  enactment  it
was  now  added  that  he  must  be  also  set
firee  whenever  the  year  of  jubilee  occurred.


If  he  became  the  slave  of  a  non-Israelite,  ha
must  be  set  free,  not  as  before  on  the  seventh
year  of  his  slavery,  but  still  at  the  jubilee.
He  had  also  preserved  for  him  the  right  of
being  redeemed  by  any  kinsman,  the  price
paid  for  him  being  the  wages  which  would
be  paid  up  to  the  next  jubilee.  In  either
case,  he  was  to  be  treated  without  rigour,
and  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Israelite  magis-
trate to  see  that  no  undue  harshness  was
used  by  the  foreign  master.  The  principle
is,  as  before,  that  as  the  land  is  God's  land,
not  man's,  so  the  Israelites  were  the  slaves
of  Cod,  not  of  man,  and  that  if  the  position
in  which  Cod  placed  them  was  allowed  to
be  interfered  with  for  a  time,  it  was  to  be
recovered  every  seventh,  or  at  furthest  every
fiftieth,  year.  The  possession  of  slaves  was
not  iorbidden — ^the  world  was  not  yet  ready
for  such  a  prohibition.  The  Hebrews  might
purchase  and  own  slaves  of  alien  blood,  but
between  Hebrew  and  Hebrew  the  institution
ofmaster  and  slave  was  practically  abolished,
and  superseded  (in  most  respects)  by  the
relationship  of  master  and  servant.

Ver.  1. — And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Uossi
in  mount  Sinai.  The  purpose  of  the  words,
in  Mount  Sinai,  is  not  to  distinguish  the
place  in  which  the  sabbatical  law  and  the
law  of  the  jubilee  were  given  from  that  in
which  the  preceding  laws  were  delivered.
The  words  mean  only,  "  in  the  Sinai  dis-
trict ; "  and  they  are  employed  because
the^e  laws  form  the  conclusion  of  the  series
of  laws  given  while  the  people  were  en-
camped under  Mount  Sinai.  The  law  on
vows  is,  it  is  true,  added  to  them,  but  it  is
by  way  of  appendix.

Vers.  2 — 7. — The  sabbath  of  the  seventh
year  could  only  be  observed  when  ye
come  into  the  land  which  I  give  yoo.  Tiie
habit  of  making  uo  distinction  in  the
seventh  year  during  the  whole  of  the  life  in
the  wilderness  may  have  led  to  the  neglect
of  the  law  after  the  settlement  in  Canaan.
Another  excuse  for  the  neglect  may  have
been  a  ditiioulty  which  would  have  pre-
sented itself  of  fixing  the  date  from  which  to
count  up  to  the  seventh  year,  as  different
parts  of  the  laud  were  conquered  at  difl'er-
eut  times.  According  to  the  law,  from  New
Year's  Day  of  the  seventh  year  (the  1st  of
Tisri,  which  occurred  about  the  middle  of
September)  to  the  following  New  Year's
Day,  there  was  to  be  neither  sowing  nor
pruning,  reaping  or  gathering.  The  ex-
pression. Neither  Shalt  thou  gather  the
grapes  of  thy  vine  undressed,  would  be  mora
literally  rendered,  the  grapes  of  thy  Nazarita


394


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[cH.  XXV,  1 — 55.


vine,  the  yine  with  its  unpmned  tendrils,
being  likened  to  the  Nazarite  with  hie  un-
shorn loBks.  As  to  sowing  Bnd  reaping,
an  exception  was  made  with  respect  to
the  barley  sown  and  reaped  for  the  Passover
sheaf,  and  the  wheat  sown  and  reaped  for
the  Pentecost  loaves.  The  spontaneous
fruits  of  the  earth,  and  they  were  very  large
in  the  rich  fields  of  the  valleys  and  plains,
were  to  be  the  property  of  all  alike,  whether
the  owners  of  the  land  or  not,  "  that  the
poor  of  thy  people  might  eat"  (Exod.
zxiii.  11).  And  what  was  left  by  man  was
to  be  food  for  the  cattle  and  beasts  of  the
field.  The  cessation  of  agricultural  labonrb
must  have  served,  and  may  have  been  in-
tended to  serve,  as  an  encouragement  to  mer-
cantile pursuits,  as  well  as  to  the  study  of
the  Divine  Law  (Deut.  xxxi.  10 — 13).  The
Feast  of  Tabernacles  of  the  seventh  year
was  specially  appointed  by  Moses  as  »  day
for  reading  the  Law  to  the  assembled  people
(Deut.  xxxi.  10— *.3).  And  the  Mishna
appoints  the  foUoviing  passages  of  Deute-
ronomy to  be  read  on  that  day : —  Deut.  i.
1—6 ;  vL  4—8 ;  xi.  13—22 ;  xiv.  22 ;  xv.  23 ;
ivii.  14;  xxvi.  12 — 19;  xxvii.,  xxviii.
('  Mish.  Sotah.,'  vii.  8).  The  other  ordi-
nance connected  with  the  sabbatical  year,
the  release  of  debts  to  the  poor  (Deut.  xv.
1 — 6),  was,  like  the  fifth  commandment,
made  of  none  effect  by  rabbinical  traditions
— notably  by  nne  which  required  a  debtor,
when  his  creditor  said,  "  I  remit,"  to  insist
that  nevertheless  he  should  accept  pay-
ment. The  moral  purpose  of  the  sabbath  of
the  seventh  year  is  well  drawn  out  by  Keil : —
"  In  the  sabbatical  year  the  land  which  the
Lord  had  given  his  people  was  to  observe
a  period  of  holy  rest  and  refreshment  to  its
Lord  and  God,  just  as  the  congregation  did
on  the  sabbath  day ;  and  the  hand  of  man
was  to  be  withheld  from  the  fields  and  fruit
gardens  from  working  them  that  they  might
yield  their  produce  for  his  use.  The  earth  was
to  be  sacred  from  the  hand  of  man,  exhaust-
ing its  power  for  earthly  purposes  as  his  own
property,  and  to  enjoy  the  holy  rest  with
which  God  had  blessed  the  earth  and  all  its
productions  after  the  Creation.  From  this,
Israel,  as  the  nation  of  God,  was  to  learn,  on
the  one  hand,  thiit  although  the  earth  was
created  for  man,  it  was  not  merely  created
for  him  to  ilraw  out  its  power  for  his  own
use,  but  also  to  be  holy  to  the  Lord  and  par-
ticipate in  the  blessed  rest;  and  on  the
«.  ther  hand,  that  the  great  purpose  for  which
thfl  congregation  of  the  Lord  existed  did  not
consist  in  the  uninterrupted  tilling  of  the
earth,  connected  with  bitter  labour  in  the
sweat  of  the  brow  (Gen.  iii.  17, 19),  but  in
the  peaceful  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  the
earth,  which  the  Lord  their  God  had  given
them  and  would  give  them  still,  without  the


labour  of  their  hands,  if  they  strove  to  keep
his  covenant  and  satisfy  themselves  with
his  grace."

Vers.  8,  9. — ^The  word  jubile  (as  it  is
always  spelt  in  the  Authorized  Version)  is
taken  from  the  Hebrew  word  yovel,  and  it
came  to  mean  a  year  of  liberty  (£izek.  xlvL
17;  Josephus,  'Ant.,'  iii.  12,  8),  because
it  freed  men  and  lands  from  the  obligations
to  which  they  would  otherwise  have  been
liable;  but  originally  it  signified  no  more
than  a  cornet-blast,  and  thence  the  year  of
the  cornet-blast.  The  way  to  find  the
jubilee  year  was  to  number  seven  sabbaths
of  years,  that  is,  seven  weeks  of  years  (oh.
xxii.  15),  seven  times  seven  years;  and  the
space  of  the  seven  sabbaths  of  years  shall  be
unto  thee  forty  and  nine  years :  then  by  a
blast  of  the  comet  (the  word  is  inexactly
rendered  trumpet)  on  the  tenth  day  of  the
seventh  month,  in  the  day  of  atonement,  the
approach  of  the  jubilee  iu  the  following  year
was  announced.

Ver.  10. — This  verse  contains  a  short
statement  of  the  two  purposes  of  the  jubilee :
(1)  to  proclaim  liberty  throughout  all  the
land  unto  all  the  inhabitants  thereof;  (2)  ye
shall  return  every  man  unto  his  possession.

Vers.  11, 12. — So  far  as  the  tillage  of  the
land  went,  the  jubilee  year  was  to  have  the
same  effect  as  a  sabbatical  year.

Vers.  13 — 17. — The  Israelites  were  only
tenants  of  God.  They  might  regard  them-
selves as  owners  for  fifty  years,  but  at  the
end  of  every  fifty  years  the  land  was  to
come  back  to  him  to  whom  the  Lord  had
assigned  it,  or  to  his  representative.  It
might  be  bought  and  sold  on  that  under-
standing, the  value  of  the  purchase  being
found  by  reckoning  the  price  of  the  har-
vests u^  to  the  next  jubilee  day;  but  in
this  period  only  "  the  years  of  the  fruits  "
were  to  be  counted,  that  is,  the  sabbatical
years,  in  which  there  would  be  no  harvests,
were  to  be  deducted.  Ye  shall  not  therefore
oppress(or  overreach)  one  another  by  demand-
ing more  for  the  land  than  would  be  its  just
value  under  the  limitation  of  the  jubilee
law.

Vers.l8— 22.— "Notonlytheyearof jubilee,
but  the  sabbatical  year  also,  commenced
in  the  autumn,  when  the  farmers  first  began
to  sow  for  the  coming  year;  so  that  the
sowing  was  suspended  from  the  autumn  of
the  sixth  year  till  the  autumn  of  the  seventh,
and  even  till  the  autumn  of  the  eighth  when-
ever the  jubilee  year  came  round,  in  which
case  both  sowing  and  reaping  were  omitted
for  two  years  in  succession,  and  consequently
the  produce  of  the  sixth  year,  which  was
harvested  in  the  seventh  month  of  that  year,
must  have  sufSced  for  three  years,  not
merely  till  the  sowing  in  the  autumn  of  the
eighth  or  fiftieth  year,  but  till  the  harvest


OH.  XXV.  ]  —55.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS


395


of  the  ninth  or  fifty-first  year,  as  the  Tal-
mud and  rabbins  of  every  age  have  under-
stood the  law  "  (Keil).  The  question.  What
shall  we  eati  would  present  itself  with
double  force  when  the  sabbatical  and  the
jubilee  years  came  together.  It  and  the
answer  to  it  therefore  properly  follow  on
the  institution  of  the  jubilee,  instead  of
precediag  it,  as  Ewald,  Knobel,  and  others
demand  that  it  should  do.

Vers.  2.S,  24. — ^For  the  land  is  mine;  for  ye
are  strangers  and  sojourners  vith  me.  Many
incidental  advantages,  if  some  difSoulties,
arose  from  the  jubilee  law  (which  will  be
the  more  appreciated  if  we  compare  the  evils
resulting  from  slavery  and  the  accumulation
of  land  in  a  few  hands,  found  in  the  history
of  Eome  or  any  other  ancient  nation) ;  but
its  essential  features,  so  far  as  the  land  was
concerned,  was  its  inculcation  of  the  lesson
of  the  proprietorship  of  the  Lord.  Palestine
was  God's  land :  he  divided  it  once  for  all
in  the  time  of  Joshua  among  his  people,
and  every  fifty  years  he  required  that  re-
course should  be  had  to  that  original  divi-
sion, in  order  that  in  each  generation  the
people  might  feel  themselves  to  be  his
tenants,  not  independent  owners,  possetsorea,
not  domini.

Vers.  25—28. — The  right  of  redemption
of  land  sold  continued  always  alive,  and
might  be  exercised  by  the  original  owner  or
his  kinsman.  If  not  exercised,  the  owner
returned  into  his  possession  at  any  rate  in
the  jubilee  year.  If  a  man  had  to  sell  his
land,  he  was  bound  to  otter  it  to  his  nearest
kinsman  first  (see  Jer.  xxzii.  7,  8).

Vers.  29 — 31. — Houses  in  walled  cities
are  not  subject  to  the  law. of  restoration  at
the  jubilee,  as  that  law  applies  only  to
lands  and  to  men :  but  houses  in  the  country
are  subject  to  the  law,  as  they  are  regarded
only  as  appurtenances  of  the  land.  Houses
in  cities,  being  occupied  by  artisans  and
built  by  hnman  industry,  not  originally
assigned  in  the  territorial  division,  are  not
considered  in  so  strict  a  sense  the  property
of  the  Lord  as  the  soil  is,  and  may  be  parted
with  more  readily.  Yet  the  owners,  if
obliged  to  part  with  them,  are  allowed  »
year's  grace,  dviring  which  they  are  to  have
the  right  of  buying  them  back.  The  ex-
pression, within  a  fall  year,  would  be  more
literally  rendered  during  a  fixed  time,  that
fixed  time  having  just  before  been  declared
to  be  a  year.

Vers.  82 — 34. — The  houses  of  the  Levites
are,  by  an  exception,  subject  to  the  law  of
jubilee.  They  constituted  the  share  of  the
national  property  which  was  assigned  to
the  tribe  of  Levi,  and  so  far  stood  in  the
same  relation  to  them  as  the  land  did  to
the  other  tribes.  They  therefore  returned
to  the  original  possessor  or  his  represen-


tative In  the  year  of  jubilee,  and  might
at  any   earlier  time  be   redeemed.     The
words.  Notwithstanding  the   cities   of  the
levites,  should  rather  be  rendered.  But  in
re8j)eot  to  the  citie$  of  the  Leviteg.    There  is
a  difiSculty  also  as  to  the  translation  of  the
clause,  And  if  a  man  purchase  of  the  Levites,
for  the  word  rendered  purchaie  means  else-
where redeem;   but   here    the  Authorized
Version  would   seem  to  be  correct.     The
sense  that  it  gives  is  that  if  any  one  bought
a  house  of  the  Levites,  he  had  to  render
it  back  in   the   y«ar   of  jubilee,  just  as
though  it  had  been  land.     On  the  other
hand,  the  land  belonging  to  the  Levites,  in
the  suburbs  of  the  Levitioal  cities,  which
was  used  for  the  pasturage  of  the  flocks  of
the  Levites,  could  not  be  sold  except  to  a
Levite,  and  therefore  no  question  between
the  Levites  and  members  of  the  other  tribes
could  arise  regarding  it.    The  phrase,  the
house  that  was  sold,  and  the  city  of  his  pos-
session, must  be  understood,  by  a  hendiadys,
to  mean,  the  house  that  wai  soli  in  the  etty  o}
his  possession  (see  Geaenius, '  Lex.,'  t.v.  h  l.b.).
Vers.  35— 38.— Slavery.    It  is  presumed
that  no  Hebrew  will  become  a  slave  except
on  the  pressure  of  poverty,  and  this  poverty
his  brethren  are  con^manded  to  relieve ;  but
foreseeing  that  either  want  of  charity  on  the
part  of  the  rich  or  unthrift  on  the  part  of
the  poor  would  certainly  bring  about  slavery,
the  legislator  makes  regulations  so  as  to
soften  its  character  as  far  as  possible.    The
literal  translation  of  ver.  35  is  as  follows :  If
thy  brother  becomes  poor,  and  his  hand  faileth
by  thee,  thou  shalt  lay  hold  of  him;   a
stranger  or  a  sojourner  that  he  may  live
with  thee.     The  translation  of  the  latter
clause  adopted  by  the  Authorized  Version,
yea,  though  he  be  a  stranger,  or  a  sojoumerf
that  he  may  live  with  thee,  makes  the  duty
of  giving  charitable  support  and  loans  of
money  to  apply  to  the  case  of  the  stranger
and  sojourner  as  well  as  of  the  ^raelite.
The  other  and  more  probable  rendering  con-
fines its  application  to  native  Israelites.   If
thy  brother  becomes  poor,  and  his  handfaileth,
thou  shalt  support  him  as  u  stranger  or  a
sojourner,  that  is,  treat  him  with  the  for-
bearance shown  to  resident  foreigners,  to
whose  state  he  had  reduced  himself  by  the
loss  of  his  land.    The  command  in  ver.  36,
Take  thou  no  usury  of  him,  or  increase,  does
'  not  bear  upon  the  general  question  of  taking
interest  for  money  when  lent  to  wealthy
men  or  companies  for  business  purposes.
It  simply  forbids  the  taking  of  interest  or
increase  of  a  brother  Israelite  who   had
become  poor.    The  history  of  Bome  shows
how  much  cruelty  and  revolution  such  an
injunction  may  have  prevented.  The  words,
or  increase,  added  to  usury,  forbid  the  exac-
tion of  any  greater  quantity  of  food  oi


396


THE   BOOK   OF   LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XXV.  1 — 56.


clothing  (a  method  of  evading  the  law
against  usury)  than  that  which  had  been
lent.  The  injunction  was  transgressed  in
tlie  time  of  Nehemiah,  when  "he  rehuked
the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and  said  unto
them.  Ye  exact  usury,  every  one  of  his
brother.  .  .  .  Then  held  they  their  peace,
and  found  nothing  to  answer"  (Seh.  T.
7,8).

Vers.  39 — 42. — We  see  the  way  In  which
a  poor  Israelite  might  become  a  slave  in  the
case  of  the  sons  of  the  widow  whose  oil  was
multiplied  by  Elisha.  •  "  Thy  servant  my
husband  is  dead;  (and  thou  knowest  that
thy  servant  did  fear  the  Lord:)  and  the
creditor  is  come  to  take  unto  him  my  two
sons  to  be  bondmen  "  (2  Kings  iv.  1).  And
in  the  time  of  Nehemiah,  "  Some  also  there
were  that  said,  We  have  mortgaged  our
lands,  vineyards,  and  houses,  that  we  might
buy  corn,  because  of  the  dearth.  .  .  .  And,
lo,  we  bring  into  bondage  our  sons  and  cor
daughters  to  be  servants,  and  some  of  our
daughters  are  brought  unto  bondage  al-
ready :  neither  is  it  in  our  power  to  redeem
them;  for  other  men  have  our  lands  and
vineyards"  (Neh.  v.  3 — 5).  But  the  fact
that  an  Israelite  could  not  be  kept  in
slavery  for  more  tlian  six  years  (Exod.  xxi.  2),
and  that  the  period  of  his  service  had  to
be  stiU  shorter  if  the  jubilee  fell  before  the
seventh  year,  and  the  further  fact  that  at
the  time  of  the  jubilee  he  would  not  only
be  free,  but  recover  any  ancestral  property
that  he  had  forfeited,  so  that  he  might
become  once  more  on  an  equality  with  his
mastei,    would   have    made   hia   position


totally  different  from  the  hopeless,  helplesi
state  of  tlie  Greek  or  Roman  slave,  even  with-
out the  positive  command  that  he  was  to
be  treated,  not  as  a  bondservant:  but  aa
an  hired  servant,  and  as  a  sojonmer.  All
alike,  master  and  bondsman,  were  the  slaves
of  God,  and  therefore  not  only  were  they,
so  far,  on  an  equality  one  with  another,  but
the  master  would  be  encroaching  on  the
right  of  God  if  he  claimed  God's  slaves  for
his  own  inalienably.

Ver.  43. — Xhou  shalt  not  rule  over  him  with
rigour;  but  shalt  fear  thy  Ood,  is  paralleled
by  the  New  Testament  injunction,  "  And,
ye  masters,  do  the  same  things  unto  them,
forbearing  threatening :  knowing  that  your
Master  also  is  in  heaven;  neither  is  there
respect  of  persons  with  him  "  (Eph.  vi.  9).

Vers.  44 — 46. — Slavery  is  not  forbidden
in  respect  to  non-Israelites.  The  world
was  not  yet  ready  for  it,  as  it  was  not  ready
in  the  days  of  St.  PauL

Vers.  47 — 55. — Rules  are  laid  down  for
the  case  of  an  Israelite  who  has  sold  him-
self for  a  slave  to  a  non-Israelite.  In  this
case  he  is  not  set  free  at  the  end  of  six
years,  as  he  would  be  if  his  master  were  a
countryman,  but  in  other  respects  bis  treat-
ment is  to  be  like  that  of  the  man  with
an  Israelite  master.  He  may  be  redeemed
by  the  value  of  his  work  down  to  the  jubilee
being  paid  by  himself  or  his  kinsman ;  he
is  to  be  set  free  when  the  jubilee  comes  at
any  rate ;  he  is  to  be  treated  kindly  while
continuing  in  his  master's  service,  and  hi*
countrymen  are  to  see  that  no  oTer-seveiity
is  used.


HOMILETIOS

Vers.  8 — 34. — The  jubilee,  being  a  year  of  deliverance  and  joy,  came  to  be  a  type  o
the  Messianic  dispensation,  and  of  the  final  deliverance  and  state  of  happiness  which
is  still  to  come.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me ;  because  the  Lord  hath
anointed  me  to  preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek ;  he  hath  sent  me  to  bind  up  the
brokenhearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to
them  that  are  bound ;  to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  "  (Isa.  Ixi.  1, 2).  We
have  our  Lord's  authority  for. saying  that  these  words  bear  spiritual  reference  to  his
ministry  on  earth  (Luke  iv.  21).  They  are  partially  fulfilled  in  his  kingdom  here,  and
will  be  fully  accomplished  at  "the  restitution  of  all  things"  (Acts  iii.  21)  in  his
kingdom  hereafter,  when  his  people  shall  "  rest  from  their  labours "  and  be  delivered
from  the  burden  of  their  debts  and  emancipated  for  ever  from  slavery.

Vers.  35 — 55.— The  power  of  slavery  was  undermined,  not  at  once  destroyed,  hy  the
Bible.  I.  In  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  accepted  as  a  fact,  not  denounced  or  approved,
but  recognized  and  gradually  ameliorated.  1.  Hebrew  slaves  are  not  to  be  treated  with
rigour  (vers.  43,  53),  but  as  hired  servants.  How  diflferent  from  the  state  of  slaves  in
the  workshops  of  Greece  and  Rome  1  2,  In  the  case  of  Hebrew  slaves,  the  duration  of
slavery  was  not  to  De  perpetual.  At  the  end  of  six  years  every  slave  was  to  be  restored
to  liberty,  and  at  the  end  of  fifty  years  at  the  utmost  he  was  to  be  replaced  in  a  socia
position  which  might  equal  his  master's  (vers.  28, 54).


OH.  XXV,  I— 55.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LKVITICDS.


397


n.  In  the  New  Testament.  It  is  still  accepted  as  a  fact.  But :  1.  A  principle  ii
laid  down,  which,  like  leaven  leavening  the  whole  lump,  could  not  but  cause  its
destruction      ;  Ye  masters  .  .     your  Master  also  "  (or,  as  it  would  be  b.tter  translated,

your  and  their  Master  ")  «« is  in  heaven ;  neither  is  there  respect  of  persons  with  him  "
(Eph.  VI.  9).  "Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord :  and  ye  say  well ;  for  so  I  am.  If  I  then
your  Lord  and  Master,  have  washed  your  feet ;  ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet!
For  I  have  given  you  an  example,  that  ye  should  do  as  I  have  done  to  you  "  (John  xiii
13—15;.  Art  thou  called  being  a  servant  (slave)?  care  not  for  it:  but  if  thou
mayest  be  made  free,  use  it  rather.  For  he  that  is  called  in  the  Lord,  being  a  servant
(slave),  is  the  Lords  freeman:  likewise  also  he  that  U  caUed,  being  free,  is  Christ's
8ervant(slaver  (ICor  vii  21  22).  "  There  is  neither  .  .  .  bond  nor  free :  but  Christ  is
all,  and  in  all  (Col.  in.  11).  2.  An  example  is  given.  St.  Paul  thus  speaks  of  Onesimus.
the  runaway  slave,  now  converted  to  Christianity  :  "  I  beseech  thee  for  my  son  Onesimus
whom  I  have  begotten  in  my  bonds :  .  .  .  thou  therefore  receive  him,  that  is,  mine  own
bowels.  ...  For  perhaps  he  therefore  departed  for  a  season,  that  thou  shouldest  receive
him  for  ever;  not  now  as  a  servant  (slave),  but  above  a  servant  (slave),  a  brother
beloved,  specially  to  me,  but  how  much  more  unto  thee,  both  in  the  flesh,  and  in  the

Lord?    If  thou  count  me  therefore  a  partner,  receive  him  as  myself"  (Philem.  10 17).

Contrast  the  feeling  entertained  coutemporaneously  towards  slaves  in  the  Roman
Empire.  "Their  growing  power  was  sometimes  restrained  by  legalized  murder;  they
were  sold  without  remorse ;  they  were  tortured  and  beaten  and  crucified  without  pity.
Even  Cicero  apologizes  to  Atticus  for  being  affected  by  the  death  of  his  slave  "  (Words-
worth, '  Church  History,'  ch.  xxiii.).

IIL  Tbachino  in  the  second  century.  "  We  ought,"  says  Clement  of  Alexandria,
« to  treat  our  slaves  as  ourselves.  They  are  men  as  we  are ;  and  there  is  the  same  God
of  bond  and  free ;  and  we  ought  not  to  punish  our  brethren  when  they  sin,  but  to
reprove  them.  Whatever  we  do  to  the  lowest  and  meanest  of  Christ's  brethren,  we  do
to  him  "  ('  Pasdag.,'  p.  307,  as  quoted  by  Wordsworth).

IV.  Slow  but  certain  extinction  of  slavery.  There  was  a  long  battle  to  be
fought  between  the  selfish  and  the  Christian  instinct ;  but  slavery  could  not  coexist  with
Christianity,  and  wherever  Christianity  now  stretches,  slavery,  though  it  may  still
linger  her*  and  there,  ia  condenmed  by  public  sentiment  and  doomed  to  extinction.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

17te  faUow  year.  Ch.  xxv.  1 — 7 ;  cf.  Deut.  xxxi.  10 — 13.  We  have  here  •  ceremonial
appendix  to  the  fourth  commandment.  The  land  must  have  its  sabbath  as  well  as
man,  and  so  every  seventh  year  was  to  be  fallow  year  for  the  ground.  The  necessity  of
giving  land  rest  is  recognized  still  in  agriculture.  Continual  cropping  impoverishes
a  soil,  and  reduces  it  eventually  to  barrenness.  This  was  one  of  the  grave  charges
made  by  political  economists  against  the  slavery  of  North  America,  that,  in  con-
sequence of  the  inefBciency  of  slave  labour,  the  land  was  subjected  to  a  monotonous
process  of  cropping,  and  in  consequence  killed.  The  finest  virgin  soil  was  being  reduced
to  wilderness,  for  the  land  was  allowed  neither  variety  nor  rest.'  This  arrangement  in
Israel,  therefore,  was  economically  most  wise.  But  "  the  sabbath  of  the  fields  "  bad  a
wider  basis  than  this  mere  natural  one.  It  was  attended  by  most  important  religious
results.

I.  The  fallow  yeab  proolaiued  that  the  land  belonged  to  the  Lord.  For  ii
the  fourth  commandment  really  implies  that  the  people,  called  from  their  own  work
to  do  God's  work  on  God's  day,  belong  to  him,  and  so  are  under  obligation  to  obey  this
call,  in  the  very  same  way  the  claim  that  the  land  should  rest  proclaims  that  the  land
is  his.  What  was  thus  claimed  in  Canaan  is  only  part  of  a  still  wider  claim ;  for  "  the
earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof;  the  world,  and  they  that  dwell  therein.
For  he  hath  founded  it  upon  the  seas,  and  established  it  upon  the  floods "  (Ps.  xxiv.
1,  2).    The  demand  for  "a  sabbath  of  rest  unto  the  land"  is  for  "»  sabbath  for  th«

•  Cf.  Caimes'  •  Slave  Power,'  p.  56,  oto.


398  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [on.  xxv.  1—65.


Lord."  He  thus  stamps  the  land  as  his,  and  had  we  the  clear  vision,  we  might  see  the
"  sign  manual "  of  the  Lord  upon  all  the  world.

n.  The  fallow  teab  changed  aqbioultubal  into  fabtobal  life.  The  people  of
necessity  gave  greater  attention  to  the  rearing  and  the  tending  of  cattle.  It  is  evident
from  ver.  7  that  the  care  of  the  cattle  and  of  the  beasts  of  the  field  was  specially  con-
templated by  the  arrangement.  National  life  would  become  in  consequence  more
idyllic,  A  wholesome  change  would  thus  be  introduced  every  seventh  year,  and  the
people  would  morally  be  improved.  The  population  would  become  more  and  more
humane,  and  the  whole  country  profit  thereby.

Now,  in  pastoral  countries  there  is  of  necessity  more  time  for  pensive  meditation
and  thought.  Pastoral  life  is  in  the  interests  of  reflection.  It  is  a  providential  aid
thereto.  Hence  we  see  in  the  sabbatic  year  the  condition  supplied  for  greater  thought-
fulness  and  reflection.  If  we  compare  the  blank  intellectual  condition  of  agricultural
labourers,  ground  down  by  ceaseless  toil,  with  the  thoughtful,  poetic  mood  often  met
with  among  shepherds,  we  can  have  no  difiSculty  in  recognizing  the  great  moral  import-
ance of  a  pastoral  year.

III.  The  fallow  teab  wab  a  fine  exeboise  fob  the  national  faith.  For  men
would  naturally  ask,  "  What  shall  we  eat  the  seventh  year?"  (ver.  20).  And  to  this
the  Lord  made  answer,  "  Then  I  will  command  my  blessing  upon  you  in  the  sixth
year,  and  it  shall  bring  forth  fruit  for  three  years  "  (ver.  21).  For  a  nation  to  prepare
for  this  fallow  year  required  great  faith  in  God.  The  sixth  year  was  a  year  of  "  great
expectations ; "  they  looked  to  God  to  provide  for  the  coming  year  of  rest,  and  thus
were  drawn  up  to  an  exercise  of  faith  and  hope  of  the  most  profitable  description.  Amid
our  multiplied  methods  of  livelihood  we  are  in  danger  of  losing  sight  of  the  Divine
liand  altogether,  and  of  living  a  low  life  of  sight.  And  yet,  by  periodic  returns  of  hard
times  and  difBculties,  the  Lord  is  still  calling  on  txs  for  faith  in  him,  to  enable  us  to
serve  him.  He  still  desires  us  to  exercise  this  faith  in  him,  that  none  of  us  shall  ever
suffer  real  loss  in  seeking  to  serve  him.  "  So  those  who  abstain  from  their  labours  upon
the  sabbath,"  says  an  old  writer  in  this  connection,  "  it  shall  never  impoverish  them,
for  the  blessing  of  God  upon  the  week-days  shall  supply  all  their  wants, ;  so  the  Lord
promised,  when  they  shall  go  up  to  Jerusalem  to  serve  him  at  their  feasts,  that  he
would  keep  their  land  from  the  incursion  of  their  enemies  (Exod.  xxxiv.  24).  We
see  also  (Josh.  t.  1,  2),  when  they  were  circumcised,  the  Lord  struck  such  a  fear
and  terror  into  the  hearts  of  the  Canaanites,  that  they  durst  not  touch  them,  as
Simeon  and  Levi  killed  the  Sheohemites  when  they  were  newly  circumcised.  Never
man  yet  got  hurt  in  the  service  of  God;  he  shall  still  find  the  Lord'i;  protecting
hand  and  blessing  in  his  service."

IV.  The  fallow  teab  bkought  into  peominencb  the  obeat  tbuth  about  the
BBOTHERHOOD  OF  HAN.  Although  the  land  was  to  lie  fallow,  it  gave  much  in  the  way
of  spontaneous  growth.  This  became  public  and  common  property,  so  that  servant,
and  maid,  and  hired  servant,  and  stranger,  as  well  as  the  rightful  owner,  "had  all
things  common."  In  fact,  there  was,  to  adopt  the  modern  phraseology,  a  "  commune  "
established  in  Canaan  so  far  as  the  produce  of  the  sabbatic  year  was  concerned.  Was
this  not  a  recognition  of  the  brotherhood  of  man,  and  of  the  obligation  to  make  some
provision  for'  poorer  brethren  ?  It  was  thus  the  year  of  charity,  when  all  alike  sat  at
the  table  of  the  Divine  bounty,  and  realized  thereat  their  common  relation.

It  was  a  similar  outcome  of  the  religious  spirit  which  occurred  at  Pentecost.  Then
"  the  multitude  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul :  neither  said
any  of  them  that  ought  of  the  things  which  he  possessed  was  his  own ;  but  they  had
all  things  common"  (Acts  iv.  32).  And  although  the  Christian  commune  did  not
work  well,  but  broke  down  speedily,  it  showed  the  true  tendency  of  inspired  men.
The  obligation  under  which  they  live  to  do  their  best  for  all  about  them,  especially  for
those  of  the  household  of  faith,  is  cheerfully  and  gladly  recognized.  And  possibly,  in
the  perfect  world  and  sabbath  of  the  spirit,  this  community  of  goods  will  be  found
workable,  the  selfish  elements  which  now  cause  friction  having  entirely  disappeared.

V.  The  fallow  teab  affobded  special  facilities  fob  fbomoting  national
■suoation.  It  is  evident  from  Deut.  xxxi.  10 — 13  that  the  sabbatic  year  was  to  be  a
season  of  special  study  of  the  Law.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  with  which  it  began  was
to  be  devoted  to  the  public  reading  of  it.     Not  only  the  adults,  male  and  female,  but


OH.  XXV.  1—55.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  899


also  the  children,  were  to  be  instructed  in  it.  So  that  the  national  desire  might  very
properly  find  its  expression  in  the  wofds  of  the  Psalm  (oxix.  19),  which  celebrates  the
Divine  Law,  "  I  am  a  stranger  in  the  earth :  hide  not  thy  commandments  from  me."
A  pilgrim  people  in  extemporized  tents  applied  themselves  in  the  sabbatic  year  to  the
study  of  God's  commandments.

Thus  national  education  was  promoted,  and  this  education  was  of  such  a  character
that  "  the  revival  of  religion  "  must  have  resulted  if  the  sabbatic  years  had  been  faith-
fully kept.  It  would  seem  from  such  a  passage  as  Jer.  xxxiv.  14,  however,  that  Israel
was  not  careful  about  the  sabbatic  year,  and  the  result  was  judgment  without  mercy
(Jer.  xxxiv.  17 — 22).  The  institution  was  most  valuable,  morally  and  spiritually,  but
it  was  disregarded  by  an  apostatizing  people,  who  came  in  consequence  into  an  inheri-
tance of  judgment  rather  than  of  blessing. — E.  M.  B.

The  Juhilee.  Ch.  xxv.  8—55;  cf.  Isa.  Ixi.  1— 13j  Luke  iv.  18, 19.  We  have  here
a  further  appendix  to  the  fourth  commandment.  After  seven  sabbatic  years  there
came  another  year,  called  the  jubilee,  which  was  also  sabbatic,  and  during  which  there
was  to  be  a  universal  restitution.  The  trumpet  was  to  be  blown  on  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment, and  the  captives  were  then  to  be  released,  the  unfortunate  ones  who  had  been
compelled  to  part  with  their  inheritance  had  it  restored  to  them,  and  there  was  a
general  restoration  of  heart  and  of  hope  throughout  the  land.  It  was  the  year  of
liberty,  of  comfort,  of  restoration ;  in  one  word,  it  was  every  half-century  a  bloodiest
revohition,  giving  to  the  entire  nation  the  opportunity  of  a  new  departure.

I.  The  jubilee  was  pre-eminently  the  Lord's,  and  as  such  was  a  hallowed
TEAB.  The  fallow  year  was  a  year  of  rest  unto  the  land,  the  jubilee  was  a  year  of
liberty  and  release  unto  the  people,  and,  as  the  year  which  was  reached  after  a  series
of  seven  sabbatic  years,  it  was  hallowed  as  no  other  year  was  hallowed,  to  the  service  of
the  Lord.  His  will  ruled  all  the  year,  just  as  his  will  is  pre-eminently  regarded  on  the
siibbath  days.  Now,  the  principle  embodied  in  the  jubilee  was  this :  "  All  members  o^
the  community  are  the  direct  servants  of  Jehuvah,  not  the  servants  of  men,  and  thej
must  therefore  have  an  unfettered  body  and  unencumbered  estate,  in  order  to  live
worthy  of  their  vocation." '  Hence  God  gave  his  people  in  the  jubilee  who  had  become
"  servants  of  men  "  through  the  pressure  of  the  time.s,  release  from  their  bonrlage ;  he
gave  those  of  them  who  had  disposed  of  their  estates,  which  they  could  only  dispose  of
until  the  jubilee,  a  new  gift  of  their  inheritance;  he  gave  every  exile  from  his  home
and  family  through  the  exigencies  of  the  times,  right  to  return  to  his  family  and  begin
life  amid  the  old  associations  and  without  encumbrance.  This  was  surely  to  show  that
his  service  is  perfect  freedom,  and  that  when  his  will  is  done  on  earth  as  it  ought  to
be,  men  shall  have  such  social  privileges  and  such  adequate  temporal  provision  as  will
make  life  an  antepast  of  heaven  1

The  only  exception  to  the  law  of  restoration  was  the  case  of  a  house  in  a  walled
town,  which,  if  not  redeemed  within  a  year,  might  become  the  inalienable  inheritance
of  the  buyer.  It  was  only  by  some  little  possibility  of  this  kind  that  the  stranger
could  have  any  footing  in  the  holy  land  at  all.  The  growth  of  cities,  and  of  the  civili-
sation which  cities  bring,  was  thus  provided  for.  If  every  house  as  well  as  field
reverted  to  its  former  owners,  every  jubileePwould  have  witnessed  an  emigration  of  all
but  the  descendants  of  the  old  proprietors,  and  business  would  have  been  brought  to
an  utter  standstill.  We  see  in  this  exception  the  possibility  of  a  foreign  and  advan-
tageous element  amid  the  native  population.

II.  There  was  a  blavbbt  which  terminated,  and  a  slavery  which  did  not
TERMINATE,  IN  THE  YEAR  OP  THE  JUBILEE.  The  slavery  which  did  terminate  was
that  into  which  a  Jewish  debtor  had  entered,  in  order  to  give  his  service  in  lieu  of  the
debt.  In  fact,  slavery  was  the  form  that  the  bankruptcy  laws  took  in  Palestine.  It
would  be  well  if  some  such  system  were  engrafted  on  our  own  jurisprudence.  A  man
who  has  got  unfortunately  into  difficulties  might  thus  honourably  redeem  his  position
and  his  character,  instead  of  compromising  both  by  availing  himself  of  present  legal
facilities.

On  the  other  hand,  foreigners  or  natives  of  Canaan  might  become  perpetual  alavea  t«

*  Ewald's  'Antiquities  of  Israel,'  pp.  378,  379.


400  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxv.  1—55.

the  Jews.  In  bo  doing,  they  shared  in  Jewish  privileges,  and  had  the  advantage  of
Jewish  training.  This  was  compensation  for  the  loss  of  their  freedom.  Besides,  their
considerate  treatment  was  carefully  secured  by  the  Law  of  God.  It  was  right,  there-
fore, that  it  should  thus  be  unmistakably  exhibited  that  other  nations  were  only  "  hewers
of  wood  and  drawers  of  water"  to  the  Lord's  own  people.  This  was  what  slavery
among  the  Jews  embodied.

IIL  Thk  jubileb  was  the  type  of  gospel  times.  Our  Lord  appropriated  the
prophecy  delivered  by  Isaiah,  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  me ;  because  the
Lord  hath  anointed  me  to  preach  good  tidings  unto  the  meek ;  he  hath  sent  me  to  bind
up  the  brokenhearted,  to  proclaim  liberty  to  the  captives,  and  the  opening  of  the  prison
to  them  that  are  bound ;  to  proclaim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord "  (Isa.  Ixi.  1,  2 ;
cf.  Luke  iv.  18, 19).  We  are  living  consequently  amid  the  glorious  privileges  of  the
Lord's  acceptable  year.  The  gospel,  as  preached  to  men,  is  the  trumpet  blown  at  the
beginning  of  the  jubilee.  It  is  blown  over  the  completed  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ.
It  proclaims,  therefore—

1.  The  pardon  of  sin.  Sin  constitutes  the  great  debt,  and  as  sin-burdened  hearts
feel,  the  pardon  of  sin  is  the  great  release.     What  a  liberty  forgiveness  brings !

2.  TTie  gospel  proclaims  freedom  from  the  power  of  sin.  For  if  God  gave  us  liberty
to  sin  with  impunity,  it  would  be  no  real  blessing.  He  gives  us  through  Christ  and
his  Spirit  freedom  from  the  dominion  of  sin.  He  takes  away  the  love  of  sin,  which
is  the  real  liberty.

3.  The  gospel  proclaims  the  sanctity  of  famMy  life.  Just  as  in  the  jubilee  broken
family  circles  were  restored  again,  and  social  enjoyments  regained,  so  the  gospel  exalts
the  family  as  the  unit,  and  sets  its  highest  sanctions  roimd  the  home.

4.  The  gospel  has  wrought  steadily  towards  the  liberties  of  men.  For  while  there
was  no  "servile  war"  proclaimed  in  the  apostolic  time,  but  seeds  of  liberty  were  left
to  fructify  in  the  bosom  of  the  race,  we  know  they  have  sprung  into  vigorous  being,
and  that  it  is  pre-eminently  to  the  force  of  gospel  truth  and  principle  the  battle  i4
freedom  and  its  victory  are  due.

5.  And  the  gospel  is  the  charter  of  all  wise  reform.  It  might  be  shown  that  true
progress  and  the  bloodless  revolutions  of  such  countries  as  England  and  America  are
due  to  the  force  of  gospel  principles  making  their  hallowed  way  among  men.  It  is
only  so  far  as  the  will  of  God  is  regarded  in  the  politics  and  policy  of  nations  that  true
progress  and  needful  revolutions  shall  be  secured.

IV.  The  jxtbilee  is  also  the  type  of  the  everlasting  best.  "  There  remaineth,"
we  are  told,  "  a  sahbatism  to  the  people  of  God  "  (Heb.  iv.  9).  This  jubilee  of  Creation
is  to  be  ushered  in  by  the  trump  of  God  (1  Thess.  iv.  16).  And  regarding  the  heavenly
state,  we  may  in  this  connection  remark —

1.-  That  heaven  will  he  an  everlasting  sahbath.  If  the  jubilee  was  a  sabbath  extend-
ing over  a  year,  heaven  is  to  be  a  sabbath  extending  over  an  eternity.  All  time,  if
such  an  element  is  recognized^  in  eternity,  will  prove  consecrated  there.

2.  All  wrongs  shall  then  te  righted.  All  the  burdens  and  injustices  and  sorrows
which  we  endure  here  will  give  place  in  the  jubilee  of  heaven  to  the  utmost  justice  and
the  most  scrapulous  reward.

3.  The  Divine  family  shall  he  complete^  The  scattered  children  of  (Jod  shall  be
restored  to  their  rightful  place  in  the  great  family  circle,  and  the  home-feeling  shall  be
the  heritage  of  all.

4.  And  everlasting  progress  shaU  eharacferize  the  everlasting  rest.  For  if  progress
towards  perfection  is  life's  most  real  joy,  we  can  see  how  heaven  itself  can  afford  a  field
for  it.  God's  infinite  nature  and  boundless  operations  will  not  be  comprehended  in  a
flash  of  intuition;  but  insight  will  be,  let  us  thankfully  believe,  the  steady  growth  of
ages. — B.  M.  £.

Vers.  1—7,  18— 22.— The  sahhatie  year.  At  the  close  of  the  original  week  the
sabbath  of  the  seventh  day  was  given  ;  that  of  the  seventh  year,  on  the  entrance  of  the
Hebrews  into  Canaan.  The  former  was  a  memorial  of  creation  ;  the  latter,  of  redemp-
tion. These  are  intimately  related.  There  are  correspondences  between  the  old
creation  and  the  new — the  material  and  the  spiritual.  The  grand  effect  of  redemption
will  be  the  constitution  of  a  new  creation,  in  which  the  mundane  system  will
participate.


OH.  XXV.  1—55.1  THE  BOOK  OP  LBVITIOUa  401

I.  The  skvknth  teak  was  a  "sabbath  op  tbs  land."  Then;  1.  2%e  toil  re
mained  untiUed.  (1)  In  other  years  it  was  customary  to  sow  the  grain  after  the  Feast
of  Ingathering,  and  the  vines  were  pruned  in  the  spring.  While  we  are  in  this  world
the  greater  portion  of  our  time  should  be  occupied  in  its  concerns.  This  is  God's  order.
Th«  thing  in  hand  should  be  done  with  might.  (2^  In  this  year  no  seed  was  sown,  and
there  was  no  dressjng  of  vines.  The  affairs  of  this  world  must  not  engross  aU  our  time
and  care  (3)  The  sentiment  of  religion  must  be  with  us  in  our  earthly  business.
Religion  must  limit  the  time  it  clainv — the  intensity  with  which  it  is  pursued.  Thus  :
'I.  The  people  were  taught  to  trust  God.  (1)  They  lived  upon  the  natural  productive-
ness of  the  soil.  But  not  without  the  blessing  of  God  upon  it.  Natural  productiveness
without  the  blessing  of  God  is  a  poor  dependence.  (2)  With  that  blessing,  such  was
the  bounty  of  the  sixth  year  that  it  carried  the  nation  on  to  the  harvest  of  the  eighth
(see  vers.  21,  22).  Thus  miraculously  was  the  fruit  of  three  years  brought  forth  in  one.
This  was  in  perpetuity  the  miracle  of  the  manna  (Exod.  xvi.  22 ;  see  also  Matt  iv.  4).
(3)  What  reply  to  this  institution  can  those  give  who  would  convict  Moses  as  an
impostor?  (see  Exod.  xxiii.  10, 11).  No  sensible  man  would  have  made  such  a  law  as
this;  unless  he  acted  under  Divine  direction;  for  the  sixth  year  would  have  refuted  his
pretensions.  Thus  also :  3.  The  people  were  taught  to  hope  in  Ood.  (1)  Every  re-
currence of  the  sabbatic  year  reminded  them  of  the  period  before  sin  entered,  in  which
the  earth  of  its  natural  strength  brought  forth  plenty.  (2)  In  it  too  they  anticipated
the  period  when,  through  the  redemption  of  the  gospel,  the  curse  shall  be  lifted  from
the  earth,  and  men  shall  be  released  from  the  burden  of  labour  (see  Gen,  iii.  17 ;  iv.  11,
12 ;  V.  29-;  also  Isa.  Ixv.  17—25  ;  Rom.  viii.  18—23 ;  Rev.  xxii.  3).

II.  Then  the  feuit  of  the  Lord's  land  was  fbbe.  1.  The  land  is  the  LorcPt.
(1)  In  this  law  he  asserted  his  right  as  Landlord  to  impose  conditions  upon  his  people
when  he  gave  them  possession  of  Canaan.  All  God's  gifts  carry  conditions.  This
should  ever  be  remembered.  (2)  God's  laws  will  regulate  the  new  heavens  and  earth.
They  will  not  then  be  contravened.  Happy  will  that  state  be.  By  loyalty  to  the
laws  of  God  we  should  now  anticipate  that  state  as  much  as  in  us  lies.  2.  This  year
the  tenant  shared  his  benefits  with  all  comers.  (1)  What  fruit  came  spontaneously  was
free  to  the  poor — free  to  the  stranger — free  to  the  cattle — free  even  to  the  wild  animal.
What  a  lesson  of  generosity  1  of  public  spirit!  of  kindness  to  animals  I  Consider
here  also  the  Divine  philosophy  of  rights  in  property.  (2)  Note  that  the  resolution  of
the  primitive  Christian  Church  to  have  all  things  in  common  was  not  without  precedent
(see  Acts  ii.  44).  Also  that  in  the  light  of  this  precedent  we  may  discern  their
purpose ;  and  learn  that  when  the  Spirit  sliall  be  poured  out  upon  all  flesh,  of  which
the  baptism  of  the  Pentecost  was  but  an  instalment,  the  consummation  will  be  happy.
(3)  But  how  different  are  the  theories  of  our  socialists!  Satan  is  an  adept  at  setting  up
counterfeits.  The  idle  vagabond  has  no  objection  to  be  the  subject  of  love  from  others,
if  he  can  thereby  live  on  their  property.  He  would  eat  without  working,  in  contra-
vention of  the  apostolic  rule  (see  1  Thess.  iv.  11, 12  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  10).  He  has  no  con-
ception of  those  spiritual  blessings  in  connection  with  which  alone  communism  is  a
liappy  possibility.  (4)  The  feeding  together  of  the  cattle  and  wild  animals  points  to
the  vmiversalUy  of  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  (see  Isa.  xi.  6 — 9 ;  IvL  7 — 9  ;  Hos.  ii.
18 ;  Acts  X.  11, 12).  The  feeding  together  of  the  stranger  and  poor  Hebrew  on  the
holding  of  the  rich  sets  forth  the  spirittiality  of  the  gospel.  These  things  will  be
blessedly  realized  in  the  sabbaths,  viz.  of  the  millennium,  and  of  the  heavenly  world.
3.  There  was  a  release  from  debts  (see  Deut.  xv.  1,  2).  (1)  The  gospel  truly  is  "  the
Lord's  release."     (2)  This  release  will  be  perfected  in  the  heavenly  state.

in.  The  lbisube  of  this  year  was  KBLiaiousLT  spent.  1.  The  J  ^iw  VMU  publicly
read  (see  Deut.  xxxi.  10,  11).  (1)  Our  leisure  should  be  largely  given  to  the  stud-''  ot
the  Word  of  God.  (2)  Leisure  should  be  made  for  this  important  duty.  2.  If  not
religiously  used,  leisure  is  fruitful  in  mischief.  (1)  The  want  of  a  worthy  aim  is  in
itself  a  great  mischief.  The  faculties  suffer.  (2)  The  want  of  a  worthy  aim  implies
the  pursuit  of  that  which  demoralizes.  We  are  constitutionally  active.  We  cannot
sleep  away  existence.  (3)  The  curse  of  labour  is  a  blessing  in  disguise.  All  God's
curses  crop  up  as  blessings  somewhere.  This  must  be  so,  for  he  is  essentially  and
everlastingly  Good.  Men  who  retire  from  business  should  give  their  leisure  to  Church
work.— J.  A.  M.

LE-vinctrs.  2  d


402  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxv.  1— 56i

Vers.  8 — 17. — .The  Jubilee.  The  sabbath  of  the  seventh  day  is  commemoratiye  of  th*
rest  of  Ood  after  the  work  of  creation,  and  anticipative  of  the  rest  in  heaven  for  hig
people  after  the  world's  great  week  of  toil  and  sorrow  (see  Heb.  iii.,  iv.).  The  more
to  impress  these  things  upon  as,  to  keep  alive  our  gratitude,  and  to  stimulate  our  faith
and  hope,  he  also  instituted  the  sabbaths  of  the  Levitical  system.  Conspicuous
ftm^ngst  these  are  the  grand  sabbaths  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  viz.  that  of  the
seventh  year  and  that  of  the  week  of  years.  This  last  comes  now  luder  review ;  and
we  notice —

I.  The  tiste  of  the  jubilee.  1.  In  its  astronomical  aspect.  (1)  It  was  regulated
by  the  sun.  It  was  reckoned  from  the  entrance  of  the  children  of  Israel  into  Canaan^
and  recurred  at  the  time  of  the  autumnal  harvest.  (2)  It  was  also  regulated  by  the  moon
It  was  counted  from  the  tenth  day  of  the  first  month,  that  being  the  month  in  which
Israel  crossed  the  Jordan.  (3)  It  was  itself  an  important  factor  in  reconciling  solar
and  lunar  time.  Forty-nine  years  is  a  soli-lunar  cycle.  The  interval  from  the  tenth
day  of  the  first  month  of  the  year  to  the  tenth  of  the  seventh  month  of  the  forty-ninth
year  is  exactly  six  hundred  lunations.  The  sabbaths  are  all  worked  in,  as  elements
of  intercalation,  and  the  intercalations  of  the  Levitical  system  are  very  superior  to  those
of  the  Gregorian  (see  '  Dissertation  Concerning  the  Sabbath ;  and  a  Sabbatical  Era,'  in
the  third  volume  of  King's  'Morsels  of  Criticism').  Who  but  God  could  have
instituted  a  system  so  scientifically  perfect  ?  (see  Gen.  i.  14).    2.  In  its  theological  aspect,

(1)  The  jubilee  dated  from  the  great  Day  of  Atonement.  Some  compute  that  the  very
year  in  which  Christ  suffered  was  the  year  of  jubilee,  and  the  last  of  the  Levitical
series.  (2)  Its  provisions  were  typical  of  gospel  mysteries.  As  the  jubilee  ended  the
yoke  and  burden  of  the  slave,  so  the  bringing  in  of  the  gospel  released  us  from  the  yoke
and  burden  even  of  the  ceremonial  Law  itself.  (3)  When  the  gospel  is  received  by
faith,  it  introduces  us  into  a  spiritual  rest  from  the  burden  and  yoke  of  sin.  (4)  The
rest  of  the  soul  in  Christ  is  an  earnest  of  the  rest  in  heaven.  This  last  also  springs
from  the  great  atonement  of  Calvary.

II.  The  pboclamation  of  the  jubilee.  1.  This  foreshadowed  the  preaching  of  tha
gospel.  (1)  It  was  by  sound  of  trumpet.  Some  suppose  that  the  jubilee  had  its  name
(•jav)  from  a  particular  sound  of  the  trumpet.  The  word  johel  (^3<)  is  used  for  a
trumpet  in  Exod.  xix.  13.    The  gospel  should  have  a  certain  sound  (see  1  Cor.  xiv.  8).

(2)  The  trumpet  was  sounded  over  the  sacrifices.  This  foreshowed  the  connection
between  the  great  atonement  of  Christ  and  the  blessings  of  salvation.  The  preaching
of  the  gospel  is  the  preaching  of  the  cross.  "  The  great  liberty  or  redemption  from
thraldom,  published  under  the  gospel,  could  not  take  place  till  the  great  atonement —
the  sacrifice  of  the  Lord  Jesus — had  been  offered  up  "  (Clarke).  (3)  The  trumpet  was
sounded  throughout  the  land  (ver.  9).  (a)  If  the  land  of  Canaan  be  taken  as  a
specimen  of  the  world  at  large,  then  was  this  a  prophecy  of  the  proclamation  of  the
gospel  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  (Matt,  xxviii.  19 ;  Mark  xvi.  16  ;  Col.  i.  23).  (6)  But
if  the  land  be  taken  in  a  restricted  sense  as  applicable  to  the  people  of  the  Law  in
contradistinction  to  the  heathen,  then  the  teaching  is  that  those  only  who  renounce
sin  by  repentance  are  concerned  in  the  blessings  of  the  gospeL  2.  The  trumpet  also
suggests  the  judgment.  (1)  The  Johel,  or  trumpet,  sounded  at  the  giving  of  the  Law
(Exod.  xix.  13).  It  called  attention  to  the  Law  as  the  standard  by  which  we  shall
be  judged.  The  trumpet  will  sound  at  the  last  day,  (o)  to  awaken  the  dead
(1  Cor.  XV.  52) ;  (6)  to  summon  all  men  to  the  tribunal.  (2)  The  jubilee  trumpet
was  the  trumpet  of  a  seventh  period.  There  was  the  trumpet  of  the  seventh  day;
again,  of  the  seventh  year;  and  now  again,  of  the  sabbath  of  a  week  of  sabbatic
periods.  To  these  correspond  the  seventh  of  the  seven  great  trumpets  of  the  Apocalypse,
which  proclaims  the  judgment.  (3)  While  to  the  wicked  the  trumpet  of  the  judgment-
is  a  fearful  alarm,  to  the  good  it  is  a  joyful  sound.  If  we  sing  of  judgment  we  must
also  sing  of  mercy  (Ps.  ci.  1).     The  seventh  trumpet  heralds  in  the  reign  of  peace.

III.  The  blessings  of  the  jubilee.  1.  It  proclaimed  a  release.  (1)  As  to  the
person.  The  slave  was  released  from  the  hand  of  his  brother ;  from  the  hand
of  the  stranger.  Whom  the  Son  maketh  free  is  free  indeed.  (2)  As  to  the  land.
Every  man  returned  to  his  possession.  Adam  Clarke  derives  the  word  Jubilee  (^av)  from
hdbil  (^'ain),  to  cause  to  bring  b«ck,  because  estates,  etc.,  which  had  been  alienated,
were  then  brought  back  to  their  primitive  owners.    No  true  believer  can  be  deprived  ot


OH.  XXV.  1—55.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  403

his  share  in  the  land  of  promise  (see  Eph.  i.  14 ;  Heb.  xi.  9 — 14).  2.  It  was  a  season  oj
joy.  (1)  The  poor  then  rejoiced  in  plenty.  In  the  sabbatic  year  the  fruit  of  the
Lord's  land  was  free.  In  the  year  of  jubilee  every  man  returned  to  his  possession.
(2)  The  generous  rejoiced  in  the  prosperity  of  the  poor.  No  doubt  there  wore  churls.
Such  persons  are  never  to  be  envied ;  least  of  all  in  a  season  of  rejoicing.  Heaven
would  be  hell  to  the  churl.  (3)  The  spectacle  of  blessedness  periodically  witnessed  in
sabbatic  years  and  jubilees  encouraged  generous  habits  of  thought,  feeling,  and  action,
Happy  is  the  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  23 — 34. — Eedemption.  This  subject  is  intimately  connected  with  that  of  the
jubilee ;  and  the  redemption  of  the  Law  prefigured  that  of  the  gospel,  which  also  stands
intimately  related  to  the  glorious  jubilee  of  the  great  future.  In  this  light  we  have  to
consider —

I.  The  nature  of  the  bedemption.  This  we  may  view:  1.  In  respect  to  the
possession.  (1)  Canaan  may  be  taken  as  a  specimen  of  the  earth  at  large.  The
Hebrew  word  for  that  land  (ps)  is  the  term  also  for  the  whole  world.  In  the  largest
sense  the  earth  was  given  to  mankind  for  an  inheritance  (Gen.  i.  26 — 29 ;  Ps.  viii.  5 — 9 ;
cxv.  16).  If  the  Israelites  were  ever  reminded  that  they  had  their  possession  of
Canaan  from  God  (ver.  23),  we  must  never  forget  that  we  have  nothing  that  we
receive  not  (John  iii.  27 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  7 ;  Jas.  i.  17).  (2)  The  Hebrews  held  their
possession  upon  the  tenure  of  faith  and  obedience  (Deut  i.  34 — 36 ;  xxx.  15 — 20 ;  Heb.
iii.  18,  19).  Such  also  is  the  tenure  upon  which  the  earth  at  large  is  held.  And  as
the  expulsion  of  Adam  from  Eden  vividly  brought  home  to  him  his  forfeiture  of  right  to
the  earth,  so  did  the  forfeiture  of  Canaan  keep  alive  in  the  Israelite  the  remembrance
of  the  consequences  of  the  FaU.  (3)  The  land  of  Canaan  was  not  only  a  specimen
of  the  earth  at  large,  but  also  of  a  type  of  the  new  earth  of  the  future.  Eden  also  was
a  "like  figure."  Like  the  garden,  Canaan  was  "the  glory  of  all  lands"  (Deut.
viii.  7 — 10 ;  Ezek.  xx.  6,  15).  So  in  the  institution  of  the  law  of  redemption  we  have
bodied  forth  the  means  by  which  we  shall  recover  our  interest  in  the  earth  (see  Luke
xxi.  28;  Rom.  viii.  23  ;  Eph.  i.  14 ;  iv.  30).  (4)  While  Satan  is  the  god  of  this  world,
the  true  heir  may  be  kept  out  of  his  inheritance,  but  his  title  cannot  be  ultimately
defeated.  This  was  one  of  the  important  lessons  of  the  jubilee,  and  of  the  law  of
redemption  (vers.  23,  24,  28;  see  also  Eph.  i.  4;  Heb.  xi.  9 — 14).  (5)  As  the
possessions  of  the  Levites  were  inalienable  (ver.  34),  so  the  "  kingdom  of  priests  "  shall
for  ever  enjoy  their  possessions  in  the  renovated  earth  (1  Pet.  ii.  5 ;  Eev.  i.  6).  We
may  view  this  subject :  2.  In  respect  to  the  person.  (1)  By  sin  we  have  not  only
forfeited  our  right  to  Eden,  to  Canaan,  to  the  old  earth,  to  the  new  earth,  but  we  have
also  become  enslaved.  The  habit  of  evil  is  a  chain  of  iron.  The  terror  of  death  is
formidable  bondage.  The  tyranny  of  Satan  is  merciless.  Bad  enouc;h  to  have  our
liberties  sold  to  a  fellow-man;  but  to  be  sold  over  to  this  "stranger"  from  the
infernal  world  is  intolerable.  (2)  But  there  is  redemption  for  the  Hebrew  slave.  He
may  redeem  himself  if  he  have  the  means.  His  next  of  kin  has  the  right  of  redemptior
(vers.  25, 26).  He  may  be  redeemed  by  his  brother  Hebrew  (see  Keh.  v.  8).  So  to  the
truly  penitent,  who  like  the  Hebrews  are  the  people  of  the  Law,  there  is  the  redemption
of  the  gospel.  (3)  But  the  Law  has  no  provision  for  the  redemption  of  the  stranger  who
cannot  purchase  freedom  for  himself.  Yet  might  he  be  the  subject  of  mercy.  Tho
gospel  reaches  those  whom  the  Law  discourages.  The  pagan  slave  migbt  become
a  Jewish  proselyte,  and  be  released  in  accordance  with  the  Law.  So  those  who  are
furthest  off  may  in  true  repentance  be  brought  nigh  to  God.  (4)  But  the  mercy  of  the
gospel  has  its  limits.  It  may  be  forfeited  by  obstinacy.  It  may  also  be  forfeited  by  neglect.
A  year  only  is  allowed  in  which  to  redeem  a  house  in  a  city  (ver.  30).  The  house  is  a
common  figure  for  the  people;  and  the  interpretation  of  the  year  of  recovery  may  be
seen  in  Isa.  Ixi.  2 ;  Ixiii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  2.  If  taken  in  time,  the  whole  city  of  God  may
be  redeemed ;  but  the  period  of  probation  missed,  the  case  is  hopeless.     Consider—

IL  The  qualifications    of   the    ebdbbmek.     1.  A  slave  might  redeem  himself.
(1)  That  is,  if  it  be  in  the  power  of  his  hand.    Under  favourable  conditions  of  earning  and
saving,  this  might  become  possible.     (2)  But  when  the  slave  is  the  sinner  and  he  is
bondage  to  the  justice  of  God,  this  is  impossible.     Our  deeds  are  sin.     And  th     wag
of  siu  is  death.     2.  Tlie  near  kinsman  i$  the  legal  redeemer.    (1)  This  kmsman   was  a


404  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxv.  1—55.


type  of  ChriBt.  Bishop  Patrick  quotes  a  rabbi,  who  says,  "  This  Eedeemer  is  the
Messiah,  the  Son  of  David."  Job  speaks  of  Messiah  as  his  Redeemer  (xix.  25).  So  is
he  elsewhere  termed  in  Scripture  (see  Isa.  lix.  20 ;  Bom.  xi.  26).  (2)  To  be  qualified
to  redeem,  Jesus  became  our  Kinsman  by  taking  up  our  nature.  As  any  Hebrew  brothel
might  become  a  redeemer,  so  Jesus,  in  our  flesh,  became  "  the  brother  of  every  man,"
that  he  might  redeem.  Job  speaks  of  seeing  his  Eedeemer  in  his  flesh,  or  incarnate — for
this  I  take  to  be  the  sense.  (3)  Every  near  kinsman  may  not  have  it  in  his  power  to
become  a  Qoel  or  Redeemer.  No  mere  human  being  can  give  to  God  a  ransom  for  his
brother  (Ps.  xlix.  7).  But  Christ  is  a  competent  Redeemer,  having  in  his  Godhead  all
resources.  (4)  We  can  imitate  Christ  as  redeemers  of  our  brethren  only  by  endeavour-
ing instrumnntally  to  recover  them  from  the  snares  of  Satan.  (5)  What  a  blessing  is
liberty !    "  Whom  the  Son  maketh  free  is  free  indeed." — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  35 — 55. — Justice  and  mercy.  The  equity  of  the  Mosaic  laws  has  striking
illustrations  in  the  words  now  under  review.     We  see  it —

I.  In  THE  KINDNESS  ENJOINED  TOWAEDS THE  POOB.  1.  TlieimenessUies are  tohe  relieved.
(1)  Though  they  be  strangers.  The  stranger  "with"  the  Hebrew,  and  so,  subject  to
his  law,  is  recognized  as  a  brother  (see  vers.  35,  36).  (2)  Usury  is  not  to  be  taken
from  the  poor.  "  That  thy  brother  may  live."  Rights  of  property  must  not  override
those  of  existence  (Matt.  vi.  25).  "  That  thy  brother  may  live  with  thee."  The  hands
of  the  poor  are  as  necessary  to  the  rich  as  is  the  wealth  of  the  rich  to  the  poor.  2.  The
reasons  for  mercy  are  edifying.  (1)  "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God."  I  stand  in  covenant
relationship  to  you.  I  have  a  right  to  require  this  of  thee.  (2)  I  "  brought  thee  out
of  the  land  of  Egypt."  The  remembrance  of  thy  miseries  in  Egypt  should  influence
thee  to  consider  those  of  the  poor  stranger  by  thee.  (3)  I  "gave  you  the  land  of
Canaan."  Gratitude  to  me  should  move  thee.  I  can  yet  more  gloriously  reward  thy
mercy  in  giving  thee  inheritance  in  the  heavenly  Canaan.

II.  In  the  kindness  enjoined  towaeds  the  slave.  1.  The  Hebrew  must  show  it.
(1)  Not  to  his  brother  only,  but  also  towards  the  stranger.  (2)  Yet  there  is  a  difference.
The  Hebrew  slave  goes  out  in  the  jubilee ;  but  the  power  of  a  Hebrew  master  over  the
stranger  is  not  then  removed.  This  law  prefigured  the  dominion  which  the  righteous
will  have  over  the  wicked  in  the  morning,  viz.  of  the  resurrection  (see  Ps.  xlix.  14).
(3)  The  stranger,  by  becoming  a  proselyte,  might  claim  the  privilege  of  the  Hebrew.  So
may  the  wicked,  by  repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  become  a  Chris-
tian, and  enjoy  the  privileges  of  the  righteous.  2.  The  stranger  must  show  it.  (1)  The
stranger  is  presumed  to  be  not  so  merciful  as  the  Hebrew.  Privileges  of  grace  should
make  men  generous.  (2)  The  cruelty  of  the  wicked  must  be  restrained  by  the  laws  ot
the  good.

III.  In  the  detbkmination  op  the  eansom  price.  In  this  determination :  1.  The
rate  of  wages  is  an  element.  The  principles  of  hired  service  should  be  remembered  by
masters  in  the  treatment  of  slaves.  2.  ITiis  rate  was  then  multiplied  into  the  years
prospective  to  the  jubilee.  (1)  This  determination  of  the  rate  was  in  favour  of  the  slave ;
for  if  the  law  had  not  settled  it,  then  it  must  be  settled  by  agreement,  in  which  case
the  master  would  be  in  a  position  to  drive  a  hard  bargain  to  the  prejudice  of  the  slave.
Law  should,  for  the  same  reason,  control  the  claims  of  landlords  where  they  preju-
dice the  rights  of  their  tenantry.  (2)  In  this  law  there  is  equity  also  with  respect  to
the  master.  Any  difference  in  the  value  to  him  of  a  slave  over  that  of  a  hired  servant
is  compensated  in  the  risk  of  life,  in  which,  after  the  redemption,  he  has  now  no
pecuniary  concern.

IV.  In  the  diffeeence  op  the  law  eelatino  to  a  country  HonsE  as  compaeeb
WITH  a  house  in  a  walled  gitt.  1.  The  country  hovse  returned  to  the  owner  of  the
land.  (1)  This  house  is  presumed  to  be  simply  a  residence.  The  inconvenience  of
removal  of  residence  is  not  formidable.  (2)  To  a  Christian  the  removal  of  residence
from  this  world  should  not  be  formidable.  2.  The  house  in  the  walled  city  did  not  so
return.  (1)  Such  a  house  may  be  presumed  to  be  a  place  of  business.  In  this  case
establishment  in  a  locality  is  often  of  great  importance.  Landlords  should  consider
the  interests  of  their  tenants  as  well  as  their  own.  (2)  But  within  the  first  twelv*
months  after  the  sale  of  a  house  in  a  walled  city,  the  owner  had  a  power  of  redemption.
This  was  before  the  business  could  be  said  to  be  established.    It  gave  the  seller  an


OH.MV.  1— 65.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  405

opportunity  to  repent  of  a  bargain  which  may  have  been  forced  upon  him  by  the
pressure  of  a  temporary  necessity.  (3)  What  a  mercy  that  the  sinner  has  space  for
repentance  1 — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Divine  discipline.  This  was  certainly  one  of  the  most  striking  insti-
tutions which  God  gave  to  Israel.  It  was,  in  a  high  degree,  disciplinary.  Rightly
taken,  it  would  engrave  sacred  truth  on  their  minds  more  deeply  and  effectually  than
either  word  or  rite.    It  was  calculated —

I.  To  TEACH  THEM  THE   TRUTH   AS  TO   THE   DiVINE   OWNERSHIP.        God    claimed    tO

be  the  One  Proprietor  of  the  land.  He  had  given  it  to  the  nation  by  his  direct  guidance,
and  by  his  interposing  power.  To  him  it  belonged,  and  those  who  occupied  were  to
feel  that  they  held  everything  at  his  good  pleasure.  What  could  more  effectually  and
impressively  teach  this  than  the  right  which  God  reserved,  to  require  them  to  do  what
he  thought  was  best  with  the  soil — to  cultivate  it  or  to  leave  it  untilled  ?  How  difficult
we  find  it  to  realize  as  we  should  that  we  hold  everything  as  tenants  at  the  Divine
will ;  that  we  must  be  ready  at  his  word  to  lay  down  that  which  we  most  regard  as
"  our  own ; "  that  we  are  but  "  strangers  and  sojourners  with  God  "  (ver.  23)  1

II.  To  INCULCATE     MODERATION     IN     THE     USB     OF    THAT    WHICH    THEY     POSSESSED.

Making  haste  to  be  rich,  men  too  often  exhaust  themselves  and  the  objects  on  which
they  work.  How  often  is  land  impoverished  by  the  incessant  demand  the  agriculturist
makes  upon  it!  God  demanded  that  the  rich  land  he  gave  Israel  should  not  he
rendered  infertile  by  their  drawing  immoderately  on  its  virtue.  He  would  have  ns  use
prudently,  as  those  who  look  forward,  the  things  which  he  puts  in  our  power.  The
lesson  particularly  applies,  in  our  time,  to  the  use  we  make  of  our  physical  and  mental
powers ;  we  should  give  these  full  measure  of  rest,  a  restorative  sabbath,  that  they
may  serve  us  the  better  and  the  longer.

III.  To  ENCOURAGE   A   SENSE   OP  BKOTHERHOOE    AND     KINDNESS    OP    HBABT.       (Vcrg.

6,  7.)  Of  that  which  was  spontaneously  produced  all  might  freely  partake.  The  land
was  for  the  nation,  and  not  merely  for  those  whose  names  were  enrolled  as  proprietors.
The  husbandman  was  to  be  trained  to  see  his  neighbours,  whatever  their  condition  or
relation  to  himself,  gathering  the  fruits  of  his  land.  This  sabbatic  institution  said
practically  to  him,  and  says  to  us,  "  God  has  given  the  earth  and  all  it  bears  to  the  many
and  not  to  the  few,  to  all  classes  of  the  people :  cause  all  to  rejoice  in  the  abundance
of  his  gifts."

IV.  To   TEST    THBIB    MORAL   AND   RELIQIOHS    DISPOSITION.        1.   It    WOUld    tCSt    their

obedience.  They  would  be  under  some  temptation  to  make  the  ordinary  usp  of  their
opportunity,  and  to  secure  a  harvest  by  tillage.  This  word  of  the  Lord  tried  them ;
the  obedient  regarded,  the  disobedient  disregarded,  his  will.  2.  It  would  also  test  their
industrial  virtues.  Perhaps  there  was  move  room  left  for  daily  activity  than  some  have
imagined.  "  Each  day  would  still  present  certain  calls  for  labour  in  the  management
of  household  affairs,  the  superintendence  or  care  of  the  cattle,  the  husbanding  of  the
provisions  laid  up  from  preceding  years,  »nd  the  execution,  perhaps,  of  improvements
and  repairs."  Nevertheless,  there  must  have  been  some  temptation  to  abuse  the  long
holiday.  A  wise  man  has  said  that  nothing  is  so  certain  a  criterion  of  character  as  the
way  in  which  men  spend  their  leisure  hours.  The  idle  are  tempted  to  vacancy  or  folly;
the  wise  find  an  opportunity  for  (1)  real  recreation,  for  (2)  self-improvement,  for
(3)  service  of  others,  for  (4)  the  worship  of  God  (see  Deut.  xxxi.  9— 13).— 0.

Vers.  8—55.— Tear  of  jubilee ;  I.  A  nation's  joy.  On  every  fiftieth  year  of  national
life,  as  the  sun  went  down  on  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  when  the  sms  of  the  nation
had  been  forgiven,  and  peace  with  God  was  once  more  assured,  the  sound  of  many
trumpets  ushered  in  the  blessed  year  of  jubilee.  Then  (1)  the  forfeited  patrimony
was  restored  to  its  rightful  heir  (vers.  10,  13,  28,  41);  then  (2)  the  bondsmen  were
free  once  more  (vers.  10,  41—54) ;  then  (3)  members  of  the  same  family,  long  sepa-
rated, were  reunited  (vers.  10, 41);  then  (4)  the  ties  which  bound  man  to  man  through-
out all  classes  and  conditions  of  the  nation  were  to  be  recognized  and  honoured  (vera
12—14  17  35.  36) ;  then  (5)  the  relation  in  which  Israel  stood  to  Jehovah  was  to  b«
distinctly  and  peculiariy  realized  (vers.  17,  18,  23,  38,  55)  ;  and  then  (6)  in  holy  joy
the  favoured  nation  was  to  be  glad  in  the  prosperity  which  came  from  God  (ver.  19>


4<»'  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxv.  1— 55.


No  nation  now  can  expect  to  enjoy  such  an  institution  as  this ;  we  must  learn  to
dispense  with  such  miraculous  arrangements  as  that  which  made  the  year  of  jubilee
a  possible  thing  to  Israel  (vers.  20—22).  It  is  our  national  wisdom  to  bring  about,  by
(1)  wise  and  equal  laws,  and  by  (2)  virtuous  and  godly  lives,  the  happy  estate  in
which  the  people  of  Grod  found  themselves  when  the  trumpets  of  jubilee  announced
that  a  new  era  of  liberty,  sufficiency,  piety,  prosperity,  had  begun.

A  nation  may  truly  rejoice,  and  may  feel  that  its  jubilee  is  approaching,  when  it  ii
attaining  to:  1.  Freedom  from  degrading  poverty ;  the  community  not  being  constituted
of  a  few  wealthy  men  and  a  multitude  of  paupers,  but  being  composed  of  those  who
earn  an  honourable  livelihood  by  self-respectful  industry,  there  being  general,  wide-
spread prosperity.  2.  The  possession  of  liberty — individual  and  national,  civil  and
religious ;  every  cruel,  degrading,  injurious  bond  being  broken,  and  all  men  being  free
to  exercise  their  God-given  faculties  without  hindrance  or  restraint.  3.  Domestic  well-
being  ;  purity,  love,  order  in  the  household.  4.  Piety ;  the  recognition  of  indebtedness
to  God,  and  a  full  and  deep  understanding  that  we  are,  above  all  things,  his  servants.
5.  Charity;  a  kind  and  generous  regard  to  those  who  are  "waxen  poor  and  fallen
into  decay ; "  a  ready  hand  to  help  the  needy,  and  give  them  a  new  start  in  the  race  of
life.  Let  a  nation  only  be  advancing  in  these  elements  of  goodness  and  prosperity,
and  it  may  rejoice  greatly  in  its  inheritance,  for  then  "  God,  even  our  own  God,  will
bless  it;"  and  though  no  trumpet  sound  the  note  of  jubilee,  then  shall  its  "light  break
forth  as  the  morning  .  .  .  and  its  righteousness  shall  go  before  it ;  and  the  glory  of  the
Lord  shall  be  its  rereward  "  (Isa.  Iviii.  8). — C.

Vers.  8 — 55. —  Year  of  Jubilee :  11.  79ie  world's  redemption.  The  whole  Christian  era
is  one  long  year  of  jubilee.  It  is  "the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord"  (Luke  iv.  19).
That  "  acceptable  year,"  the  fiftieth  year  in  the  Jewish  calendar,  was  a  year  of  (1)
emancipation  (ver.  10) ;  (2)  readjustment  of  social  relations  (vers.  10,  39 — 41,  43,  54) ;
(8)  national  regeneration  (vers.  10,  13).  The  land  rested  a  second  year,  and  recovered
any  virtue  it  may  have  lost,  and  the  old  patrimonies  reverted  to  the  heirs  of  the  original
owners ;  (4)  rest  from  cultivation  (ver.  11) ;  (5)  abounding  joy.

These,  in  a  deeper,  a  spiritual  sense,  are  the  characteristics  of  the  Christian  era:

1.  It  is  a  time  of  spiritual  emancipation.  Sin  is  the  slavery  of  the  soul ;  "  men  are
"holden  with  the  cords  of  their  sins"  (Prov.  v.  22).  They  are  in  the  bondage  of
selfishness,  or  of  worldliness,  or  of  one  or  other  (or  n  ore  than  one)  of  the  vices,  or  ot
the  fear  of  man,  or  of  a  foolish  and  frivolous  procrastination.  To  accept  Jesus  Christ
as  Saviour  of  the  soul  and  Lord  of  the  life  is  to  be  released  from  these  spiritual  fetters.

2.  Social  readjustment.  Christianity,  indeed,  effects  no  immediate  revolution  in  the
forms  of  social  life.  It  does  not  say  to  the  slave,  "  Escape  from  thy  master "  (1  Cor.
vii.  20) ;  it  does  not  give  directions  as  to  the  way  in  which  human  relations  are  to  be
organized.  But  it  infuses  a  new  spirit  into  the  minds  of  men ;  it  introduces  those  prin-
ciples of  righteousness  and  those  feelings  of  considerateness  which  silently,  but  most
effectually,  "make  all  things  new."  It  drops  the  seed  of  "charity"  in  the  soil  of
human  nature,  and  behold  a  goodly  tree  springs  therefrom,  the  leaves  of  which  are  for
the  healing  of  the  social  sores  of  all  the  nations.  3.  Individual  and  national  regenent-
Hon.  The  soul  that  receives  Jesus  Christ  as  its  Lord,  and  the  nation  that  surrenders
itself  to  his  holy  and  beneficent  rule,  make  an  entirely  new  departure  in  their  course.
So  great  and  radical  is  the  change  which  is  thereby  effected,  that  the  Truth  himself
speaks  of  it  as  a  "  regeneration  *  (John  iii.).  In  Christ  we  are  bom  again,  or  bom  from
above.  We  enter  on  a  new  life,  the  life  of  faith,  love,  humility,  zeal,  holy  service,
godliness,  anticipation  of  future  blessedness.  4.  Rest  of  soul.  The  rest  of  body
enjoyed  in  the  year  of  jubilee  has  its  analogue  in  the  rest  of  soul  which  we  enjoy  in  the
acceptable  year  of  the  Lord — rest  from  (1)  a  burdensome  sense  of  condemnation;
(2)  self-reprcach,  remorse ;  (3)  spiritual  struggle  and  disquietude ;  (4)  anxious,  torturing
fears.  5.  Joy  in  Qod.  In  this  "  acceptable  time  "  we  have  not  only  peace,  but  we  also
"joy  in  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  (Eom.  v.  11).  We  are  bidden  to  "  rejoice
in  the  Lord  alway "  (Phil.  iv.  4) ;  and  though  there  may  be  found  in  the  sorrows  of
others  as  well  as  in  our  own  and  in  the  difficulties  and  depressions  that  attend  us  here  too
much  ol  cloud  and  shadow  to  feel  that  it  is  always  jubilee-time  with  us  in  our  home-
ward journey,  yet  the  felt  presence  of  our  Saviour,  his  unchanging  friendship,  the


OH.  XXV.  1—55.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  407

blessedness  of  doing  his  work,  honouring  his  Name,  and  even  hearing  his  holy  will,  the
view  of  the  heavenly  land, — ^these  will  "  put  a  new  song  into  our  mouth,"  a  real
gladness  into  our  heart,  the  brightness  and  music  of  the  "  acceptable  year  "  into  our
Christian  life. — 0.

Vers.  8—55. — Yva/r  of  jubilee :  III.  The  Messed  kingdom.  It  may  be  thought  that,
while  it  is  indeed  true  that  the  year  of  jubilee  has  a  true  counterpart  in  that  .dispensa-
tion of  spiritual  emancipation,  social  readjustment,  regeneration,  rest,  joy,  in  which  we
stand ;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  so  much  of  detraction  in  the  sins  and  sorrows  of
the  present  time  as  to  make  the  one  but  a  very  imperfect  picture  of  the  other.  There
is  truth  in  this  thought:  it  is  only  in  a  qualified  sense  that  we  can  speak  of  the
Christian  era  as  a  time  of  jubilee.  Its  perfect  realization  is  yet  to  come ;  its  true  and
glorious  fulfilment  awaits  us,  when  the  blessed  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  God  shall  have
come  in  all  its  fulness  and  the  latter-day  glory  shall  appear;  then  there  shall  be —

1.  Emancipation  from  all  bondage.  Every  fetter  shall  be  struck  from  the  soul,  as
well  as  from  the  body,  and  we  ourselves  shall  be  free  in  all  "  the  glorious  liberty  of  the
children  of  God."

2.  Restitution.  We  shall  recover  the  heritage  forfeited  by  sin ;  the  estate  which
our  Father  intended  to  bestow  originally  on  all  his  human  children  will  then  revert  to
us,  and  we  shall  "  return  every  man  unto  his  possession  "  (ver.  13).  We  shall  know  by
blessed  experience  what  God  designed  for  holy  manhood.

3.  Regeneration.  So  great  and  blessed  will  be  the  change,  the  new  conditions
under  which  we  shall  live,  that  we  shall  feel  that  a  "  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  "
have  been  created.     God  will  have  made  "  all  things  new  "  to  us.

4.  Reunion.  We  shall  "  retiun  every  man  unto  his  family  "  (ver.  10).  Parents
and  children,  brothers  and  sisters,  pastor  and  people,  long-separated  friends,  will  gather
■gain  in  the  same  home,  and  "join  inseparable  hands"  of  holy,  heavenly  reunion.

5.  Reign  of  love.  If  liiere  be  gradation,  inferiority,  rule,  and  service  there,  all
"rigour"  will  be  unknown  (ver.  46).  Our  "brother  will  live  with  us"  (vers.  35,  36)
in  love ;  all  rule  will  be  beneficent ;  all  service  sweet  and  cheerful.

6.  Perfect  service  of  the  Supreme.  "  Unto  me  the  children  of  Israel  are  servants ;
they  are  my  servants  '  (ver.  55).  There  is  no  fairer  promise  in  the  Word  of  God
concerning  the  future  than  this — "  his  servants  shall  serve  him  "  (Rev.  xxii.  3).  Then
shall  we  attain  to  the  ideal  of  our  humanity  when,  escaping  from  ourselves,  we  shall,
in  thought  and  feeling,  in  word  and  deed,  consciously  and  unconsciously,  he  serving
God  in  stainless,  uninterrupted  ministry.     Then  God  will  be  "  all  in  all."

7.  Rest  and  joy.  The  toil  and  care  of  earth  will  be  left  behind,  will  be  lost  in  the
endless  sabbath,  and  we  shall  "enter  into  rest."  Only  those  happy  activities  will
await  us  in  which  we  shall  engage  with  untiring  energy  and  unfading  joy. — C.

Vers.  1 — 7. — 2%e  sabbatical  year.  Rest  of  the  land,  as  the  physical  source  of  blessings,
as  the  consecrated  portion  of  God's  people.

I.  The  natural  basis  or  religion.  Creation.  Providence.  Moral  government.
"  Man  is  one  world,  and  hath  another  to  attend  him  "  (George  Herbert).  The  ascent  oi
the  higher  nature  from  the  lower.  The  subordination  of  the  material  and  temporary
to  the  immaterial  and  eternal.  Care  of  all  life  involved  in  the  covenant  of  God  with
his  people.  The  life  of  the  vegetable  world,  the  life  of  the  animal  world,  viewed  in
their  relation  to  higher  purposes  of  God.  Art  is  perfected  only  in  the  atmosphere  of
religion.  Science,  both  theoretic  and  applied,  requires  to  be  pervaded  with  religioas
spirit,  or  becomes  atheistic,  worldly,  and  corrupt.

II.  The  blessing  of  God  on  his  people.  "A  sabbath  for  the  Lord,"  that  he
may  rejoice  with  his  children.  1.  Material  blessings  promised  :  "  All  these  things  shall
be  added  unto  you ;  "  "  he  careth  for  you ; "  "  godliness  hath  the  promise  of  the  world
which  now  is."  2.  Rest  in  the  Lord,  over  ail  the  land,  in  all  states  and  conditions,
eventually  in  all  men.  The  resting  land  typical  of  the  Divine  promise  of  a  restored
earth  and  regained  paradise.  The  weekly  sabbath  enlarged.  Time  expanding  to
eternity.     Special  opportunities  granted  for  the  larger  spiritual  culture.— R.

Vers.  8—34. — 2%«  year  of  jubilee.    Accumulation  of  sabbaths  and  sabbatical  years  ;


lOe  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxv.  1—55.

clitnax  of  rest.  Proclaimed  on  Day  of  Atonement.  Outcome  of  the  original  covenant,
Specially  goul-stirring  and  delightful,  "  waked  up  the  nation  from  the  ■'ery  cenue  oi
itB  moral  heing."  "  AH  estates  and  conditions  of  the  people  were  perniKted  to  feel  the
hallowed  and  refreshing  influence  of  this  most  noble  institution.  The  exile  returned ;
the  captive  was  emancipated ;  the  debtor  set  free ;  each  family  opened  its  bosom  to
receive  once  more  its  long-lost  members  :  each  inheritance  received  back  its  exiled
owner.  The  sound  of  the  trumpet  was  the  welcome  and  soul-thrilling  signal  for  the
captive  to  escape ;  for  the  slave  to  cast  aside  the  chains  of  his  bondage ;  for  the  man-
slayer  to  return  to  his  home ;  for  the  ruined  and  poverty-stricken  to  rise  to  the  pos-
session of  that  which  had  been  forfeited.  Ko  sooner  had  the  trumpet's  thrice-welcome
sound  fallen  upon  the  ear  than  the  mighty  tide  of  blessing  rose  majestically,  and  sent
its  refreshing  undulations  into  the  most  remote  corners  of  Jehovah's  highly  favoured
land."     Regard  it  (1)  socially,  (2)  morally,  (3)  spiritually.

I.  SooiAULT.  An  example  of  wise  and  beneficent  legislation.  As:  1.  Security
against  accumulation  of  property  in  the  hands  of  the  few,  to  the  oppression  of  the  many.
2.  Belief  to  inevitable  reverses  of  fortune.  3.  Maintenance  of  family  life  and  bonds  of
natural  affection.  4.  Destruction  of  slavery.  5.  Promotion  of  equality  of  condition
and  opportunity.  6.  Preservation  of  hopefulness  and  cheerfulness  in  society.  7.  Avoid-
ance of  litigation  and  social  strife.

II.  MoKAiLT.  An  abiding  support  of  the  higher  moral  sentiments.  1.  Benevolence
and  compassion.  2.  Patriotism.  8.  Personal  liberty.  4.  Moderation.  5.  Brother-
hood.   6.  Industry.

III.  Spiritually.  A  type  of  realized  salvation  by  Divine  grace,  1.  Proclaimed  on
Day  of  Atonement ;  fruit  of  reconciliation  with  God.  2.  Universality  of  the  offered
deliverance,  independent  of  human  merits.  3.  Promise  of  restored  human  condition —
the  ''meek  inheriting  the  earth."  4.  The  jubilee  of  heaven — "glorious  liberty  of  the
chilaren  of  God  "  (Rom.  viii.  21 ;  of.  Isa.  Ixvi.  12—23 ;  Luke  iv.  16 — 22  ;  Eev.  xi.  15 ;
iJT.  6,  7 ;  xxi.). — E.

Vers.  35 — 55. — ITie  law  of  personal  servitude.  I.  Gbnebal  principle,  love  of  our
n-iighhomr.  Servitude  admitted  in  that  early  stage  of  the  world,  but  limited  and
modified,  and  its  extinction  provided  for  in  that  principle  of  love  and  compassion  which
was  seized  and  exalted  by  the  gospel.  God's  method  to  subdue  and  extinguish  effects
of  man's  fall  by  the  vital  force  of  higher  motive.  Distinction  between  strangers  and
fellow-Israelite  preserved  the  covenant,  therefore  the  religion  which  taught  love  and
saved  the  stranger.

II.  Lesson  of  unselfishness  asd  unworldliness.  All  servants  ot  the  Lord.
All  property  his.  The  imderlying  facts  of  redemption, "  bought  with  a  price,  there-
fore glorify  God,"  etc. — E.

Vers.  19 — 21. — The  sabbatical  year.  All  the  Divine  institutions  are  marked  by
practical  wisdom,  and  doubtless  subserved  many  purposes  which  are  not  distinctly
mentioned  in  the  Law.  To  celebrate  a  year  of  abstinence  from  agricultural  labour  must
have  benefited  the  ground  itself,  as  well  as  tended  to  produce  a  spirit  of  brotherhood
amongst  all  classes  of  the  people.  For  in  that  year  the  natural  uncultivated  produce
of  the  soil  wag  free  to  be  partaken  of  by  the  poorest.  But  we  shall  concern  ourselves
chiefly  with  the  reasons  given  in  the  Law  for  the  observance  of  the  sabbatical  year.

I.  The  PBOPBiETOKSHip  OF  the  land  is  claimed  by  Gad.  "The  land  is  mine"
(ver.  23).  As  proprietors  occasionally  shut  up  a  path  for  a  day  in  order  to  prevent  its
being  claimed  as  public  property,  so  God  refuses  every  seventh  year  to  let  the  Israelites
do  what  they  please  with  the  land,  in  order  to  remind  them  of  the  fact  that  he  is  the
real  owner  whose  grace  bestowed  the  tenancy  on  them.  Men  are  but  stewards.  God's
dominion  is  universal  over  their  persons  and  possessions.  Nothing  that  man  ig  or  has
can  be  exempted  from  the  need  of  consecration.  The  conditions  of  tenancy  must  bt
complied  with.  If  the  people  were  unwilling  to  observe  the  terms,  let  them  quit  their
holding,  and  start  somewhere  for  themselves.  But  where  shall  we  procure  aught  by
our  own  exertions  apart  from  the  favour  of  the  Almighty  ?  Our  very  existence  is  due
to  him.    Useless,  then,  is  it  to  quarrel  with  the  lease  of  our  premises.

II.  Mam  is  taught  that  es  has  other  duties  than  that  of  pbotidino  fob  eu


OH.  xxT.  1— 55.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  409


FEYSIOAL  WAHTS.  Work  is  the  fundamental  necessity,  the  burden  laid  upon  us  by  the
declaration,  "  In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  thou  shalt  eat  bread."  Mere  idleness  is  dis-
graceful. Yet  by  this  command  of  the  text  God  asserts  that  rest  is  a  duty  as  well  as
toil.  The  one  does  indeed  fit  us  for  the  other.  Eecreation  is  by  no  means  sinful,  and
that  is  a  narrow,  false  view  which  deems  it  so.  God's  rest  after  the  work  of  creation  has
for  ever  hallowed  legitimate  relaxation.  Best  from  servile  labottr  may  be  properly
employed  in  holy  service.  It  was  during  this  sabbatical  year  that  the  Law  was  to  lie
read  in  the  hearing  of  the  entire  people.  Man  does  not  find  his  noblest  end  in  the
industrial  pursuit  of  his  daily  occupation.  He  is  not  always  to  be  surveying  the  same
,  span  of  earth.  He  may  lift  up  his  head,  and  rejoice  in  upward  thoughts  and  wider
''  prospects.  This  world  is  not  man's  final  home.  So  we  may  without  violence  interpret
the  statement,  "  Ye  are  strangers  and  sojourners  with  me."  It  refers  primarily  to  the
placing  of  Israel  in  a  land  which  did  not  belong  to  them,  but  it  conveys  a  deeper  lesson,
one  of  pertinent  application  to  modem  circumstances.  Many  fancy  that  if  they  dili-
gently attend  to  their  business  and  pay  their  way,  they  do  all  that  can  be  demanded  of
them.    Such  low-thoughted  action  is  here  rebuked.

HI.  Timid  fobbthoitghx  inquibes  as  to  the  feasibilitv  op  compliance  with
THE  ENACTMENT.  "  What  shall  WO  Cat  the  seventh  year  ?  "  Man  is  expected  to  use
his  reason,  and  to  anticipate  the  future.  Ushered  into  the  world  the  most  helpless  of
animals,  he  is  enabled  to  surround  himself  with  ample  might  and  resources.  One
harvest  suffices  to  fill  his  granaries  till  they  are  replenished  by  the  stores  of  another
year.  Is  he  to  run  in  the  teeth  of  prudence,  and  to  neglect  the  usual  tillage  operations  ?
The  requirement  of  the  Law  is  superior  to  such  scruples.  It  may  seem  unreasonable
conduct,  unbelief  may  suggest  terrible  eventualities,  but  if  the  will  of  God  has  been
clearly  expressed,  the  devout  Israelite  dares  not  falter.  There  are  many  Divine  precepts
which  appear  to  impose  trying  obligations  upon  the  faith  of  Ood's  people.  Some  have
feared  to  risk  the  loss  involved  in  renouncing  Sunday  trading.  Some  have  refused  to
sacrifice  any  portion  of  their  time  or  profits  to  engage  in  religious  work.  The  livehhood
of  themselves  and  families  has  been  the  one  prominent  object.  Too  often  the  necessary
provision  is  rated  too  high,  and  luxuries  are  included  among  the  essentials.  There  are
others  to  whom  the  question  suggests  itself,  "  How  can  I  compete  with  my  rivals  if
I  adhere  to  moral  laws  and  discountenance  all  practices  savouring  of  dishonesty  ?
To  make  a  profesuon  of  Christianity  may  entail  the  loss  of  position  and  worldly
esteem."

IV.   God    promises     that     NOTHIKG    shall    be    lost    through    OBEDIENCB    TO    HIS

iTATUTES.  "  I  will  command  my  blessing  upon  you."  The  sixth  year  shall  bring  forth
fruit  for  three  years.  Of  course,  this  supposes  a  supernatural  association  of  conduct  and
prosperity  which  is  not  to  be  looked  for  in  the  ordinary  course  of  providence.  Yet  the
promise  of  blessing  upon  the  faithful  is  for  every  generation.  There  is  a  full  recompence
guaranteed  for  all  tribulation  endured  in  the  service  of  righteousness.  Nor  are  the
instances  fc  v  in  number  where  men  have  in  modem  times  experienced  the  trath  of  the
assertion  that  God  withholds  no  good  thing  from  them  that  walk  uprightly,  that
the  righteous  are  not  forsaken,  nor  have  their  poor  been  obliged  to  beg  for  bread.
Eecently  a  Greek  newspaper  owned  that  since  it  had  discontinued  its  Sunday  issue,  its
profits  had  increased  rather  than  diminished.  This,  at  least,  is  certain,  that  he  makes  a
good  investment  who  takes  shares  in  God's  companies  formed  for  righteous  purposes.
Such  shall  realize  the  double  assurance  of  "  safety  "  and  "  abundance  "  (ver.  19).  Note
our  Lord's  reply  to  Peter  asking,  "  What  shall  we  have  then  ?  "  Moses  esteemed  "  the
reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in  Egypt."  Let  the  promises  of
Qod's  Word  scatter  all  doubt  and  hesitation !  Hiscounsel  may  appear  strange  as  it  did
to  King  Zedekiah  (Jer.  xxxviii.  20),  but  the  result  shall  verify  his  wisdom.  "  What
shall  it  profit  a  man,  il'  he  gain  the  whole  world  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  In  keeping
his  commandments  there  is  great  reward.  It  is  good  for  this  life,  and  even  better  for
the  life  to  come. — S.  B.  A.

Ver.  42. — Servants  of  God.  The  Law  contains  other  than  ceremonial  regulations
Many  of  its  precepts  are  moral  in  the  highest  degree,  and  breathe  the  spirit  of  purest
Christianity.  Indeed,  the  Christian  Church,  with  the  relationship  of  its  members,  its
benefits,  and  obligations,  is  clearly  outlined  in  the  nation  of  Israel ;  rather,  howeveti     J


410  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxv.  1— 55.

to  say,  in  its  consticution  than  in  actual  observance  of  its  conditions.    Little  alteration
is  needed  to  suit  the  injunctions  of  this  passage  to  modern  circumstances.

I.  God's  sbevants  abb  so  by  vibtdb  op  what  he  has  done  fob  them.  "  They  are
my  servants  which  I  brought  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  Redemption  from  the
iron  furnace  of  affliction  was  the  ground  on  which  Jehovah  continually  claimed  the
Israelites  as  his  own  peculiar  property.  "  I  have  broken  the  bonds  of  your  yoke."  So
Ood  gave  his  Son  as  the  price  of  man's  ransom  from  sin,  and  Christ  is  said  to  have
purchased  the  ('hurch  of  Grod  with  his  own  blood.  Paul  delighted  to  call  himself  a
"  bondservant "  of  Christ  in  the  superscription  of  his  Epistles.  To  the  goodness  of  God
the  Israelites  owed  their  preservation  and  their  installation  in  a  goodly  land.  Oratitude
constrains  to  faithful  service.  We  have  but  to  review  the  past  to  notice  numberless
golden  bands  that  attach  us  to  the  Redeemer.  The  matchless  character  of  our  Grod
furnishes  sufficient  reason  for  executing  his  commands,  but  this  character  is  best
evidenced  by  a  survey  of  the  deeds  of  sovereign  love  that  have  made  us  what  we  are
and  placed  us  where  we  are.

II.  God's  seevice  peecludbs  otje  beino  in  bondage.  We  cannot  serve  two  masters,
and  if  we  belong  to  God,  others  cannot  claim  absolute  lordship  over  us.  "  They  shall
not  be  sold  as  bondmen,"  for  this  would  signify  that  God's  ownership  is  disputed.  Only
the  foreigner  can  be  treated  as  a  slave  without  insulting  Jehovah.  Slavery  is  thus  really
ixndtmned,  though  permitted  with  restrictions.  The  Law  must  not  be  too  far  in
advance  of  the  morality  of  those  who  are  to  keep  it,  lest  it  overshoot  the  mark  and  prove
powerless  to  guide  and  instruct.  What  was  granted  in  earliest  ages  may  be  altogether
unpardonable  in  days  of  modern  illumination  and  progress.  We  shall  be  judged
according  to  the  light  we  have  to  direct  our  steps.  The  truth  shines  dearly  forth  that
la  serve  Ood  is  truest  freedom.  It  accords  with  the  noblest  dictates  of  our  nature ;  reason
ind  conscience  glorify  such  obedience.  Like  the  railway  train,  we  fulfil  our  highest
functions,  not  by  deserting  but  by  running  upon  the  lines  laid  down  for  our  advance.  See
the  warnings  addressed  to  Christians  by  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  viii.  34),  Paul  (Rom.  vi.
16),  and  Peter  (2  Pet.  ii.  19).  When  we  are  actuated  by  the  suggestions  of  the  tempter,
we  rebel  against  God's  authority  and  proclaim  ourselves  unworthy  servants.  And  tc
seek  to  ensnare  others  or  to  induce  them  to  act  contrary  to  Divine  instructions,  is  even
worse  than  to  have  been  brought  into  bondage  ourselves.  God  will  not  brook  these
in&actions  of  his  majesty.

III.  The  sbevants  of  God  abe  bound  to  avoid  all  habsh  tbbatmbnt  of  one
anothbb.  Unjust  dealing  is  reprobated.  Bad  in  any  case,  it  is  peculiarly  ofl'ensive  here.
The  people  of  God  are  not  to  forget  that  they  are  brethren  in  the  employment  of  the  one
master.  "If  that  evil  servant  shall  say  in  his  heart.  My  Lord  delayeth  his  coming, and
shall  begin  to  smite  his  fellow-servants,  the  lord  of  that  servant  shall  come  in  a  day  when
he  looketh  not  for  him,"  is  the  New  Testament  version  of  the  commandj  "Thou  shalt
not  rule  over  him  with  rigour ;  but  shalt  fear  thy  God  "  (ver.  43).  Christian  brother-
hood is  not  intended  to  upset  the  constitution  of  a  society  in  a  fruitless  endeavour  after
social  equalization.  Distinction  of  rank  and  class  is  recognized  by  the  Apostle  Paul,
and  proper  regard  roust  be  paid  to  those  in  authority.  The  servant  is  not  to  despise  his
master  because  the  latter  is  a  brother  in  Christ ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  masters  are  to
forbear  threatening,  "  knowing  that  both  their  Master  and  yours  is  in  heaven  "  (Eph.
vi.  9).  It  cannot  be  pleasing  to  Christ  to  see  an  unfair  advantage  taken  of  a  brother
Christian's  hour  of  weakness.  Such  conduct  virtually  dishonours  the  Master  whom  we
profess  to  serve,  it  offends  "  one  of  these  little  ones."  And  inrther,  felloia-servants  should
relieve  each  other's  wants  (see  ver.  35,  and  margin,  "  strengthen  ").  There  is  a  "  bond  "
of  union  between  them,  and  love  and  regard  for  the  Master  must  lead  them  to  see  that
in  giving  to  the  poor  they  are  lending  unto  the  Lord.  "  One  is  your  Master  "  (Instructor),
"  and  all  ye  are  brethren."  To  collect  for  the  Church  poor  at  the  observance  of  the
Lord's  Supper  is  a  happy  recognition  of  this  truth.  Many  are  the  vicissitudes  of  life
that  befal  the  most  honest  and  industrious.  Changes  of  fortune  merit  our  sympathy,
and  the  cloud  is  beautified  with  rainbow  hues  when  the  sun  of  brotherly  love  shines
athwart  its  darkness.  Another's  fate  may  at  any  time  become  our  own.  How  it  wiU
mitigate  our  grief  to  know  that  in  our  season  of  elevation  and  prosperity  we  were
not  unmindful  of  the  woes  of  others  1  "  Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor :  -the
Lord  will  deliver  him  in  the  time  of  trouble."  "  As  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  do  good
unto  all  men,  especially  unto  them  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith." S.  R.  A.


OH.  XXVI.  1 — 46.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


411


PAET  V.
CONCLUDING  EXHOETATION.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXVI.


The  fliBt  two  yeises  of  this  chapter  con-
tain A  prohibition  of  idolatry,  and  a
command  to  observe  the  sabbath  and  to
reverence  God's  sanctuary;  that  is,  they
repeat  in  summary  the  substance  of  the
Israelites,  religious  duty,  negative  and
positive,  as  comprised  in  the  first  table  of
the  Decalogue.  They  form,  therefore,  a  pro-
logue to  the  remainder  of  the  chapter,  which
■olemnly  announces :  1.  The  blessings
which  should  result  from  obedience  (vers.
I — 13),  8.  The  curses  which  should  follow
disobedience  (vers.  14 — 39).  3.  The  gracious
treatment  which  would  ensue  on  repentance
(vers.  40—45).

Hitherto  the  Book  of  Leviticus  has  con-
■isted  of  ceremonial  and  moral  injunctions,
with  two  historical  passages  interposed.  In
the  present  chapter  it  rises  in  its  subject
and  its  diction  &om  legal  precepts  and  a
legal  style  to  prediction  and  the  style  which
became  a  prophet.  We  may  trace  in  Joel
(ii.  22—27)  an  intimate  acquaintance  on  the
part  of  the  earliest  prophet  of  Judah  with
this  chapter.  The  first  promise  there,  as
here,  is  that  of  rain,  and  as  here  it  is  to  be
"  in  due  teaton,"  so  there  it  is  "  the  former  and
the  latter  rain,"  that  is,  the  regular  autumn
and  spring  rains.  "  The  land  shall  yield  her
increase,  and  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  yield
their  fruit,"  appears  in  the  prophet  as,  "the
pastuies  of  the  wilderness  do  spring,  for  the
tree  beareth  her  fruit,  the  fig  tree  and  the
nnedo  yield  their  strength."  The  following
clause,  "  your  threshing  shall  reach  unto  the
vintage,  and  the  vintage  shall  reach  unto  the
Bowing  time,"  as,  "  the  floors  shall  be  full  of
wlieat,  and  the  fats  shall  overflow  with  wine
•nd  oil ; "  the  next  clause,  "  ye  shall  eat  your
bread  to  ffte  full,  and  dwell  in  your  land
tafely,"  as,  "  1  wiU  send  you  corn,  and  wine.


and  oil,  and  ye  shall  be  satisfied  therewith,"
and  "  ye  shall  eat  in  plenty,  and  be  satisfied ; "
the  clause,  "  I  will  give  peace  in  the  land,
and  ye  ehaU  lie  down,  and  none  shall  make  you
afraid,"  as  "  I  will  no  more  make  you  a  re-
proach among  the  heathen,"  and  "  my  people
shall  never  be  ashamed ; "  and  the  clause,
"  I  will  rid  evil  creatures  [not  beosfa]  out  of  the
iMnd,  neither  shall  the  simrd  go  through  your
land,"  as,  "  I  will  remove  far  off  from  you  the
northern,"  and  "I  will  restore  to  you  the
years  that  the  locust  hath  eaten,  the  canker-
worm,  and  the  caterpiller,  and  the  palmer-
worm,  my  great  army  which  I  sent  among
you."

The  blessings  and  the  curses  rise  one
above  the  other  in  regular  gradation  :  on  the
one  side,  rain,  abundance,  peace,  deliverance,
victory,  increase  in  numbers,  oommunion
with  God ;  on  the  other  side,  (1)  horror,
wasting,  and  the  burning  fever,  hostile
spoiling  of  the  fields,  defeat,  and  causeless
flight ;  (2)  the  heaven  iron,  and  the  earth
brass,  failure  of  crops  and  fruits  in  spite  of
labour  spent  upon  them ;  (3)  wild  beasts  for
the  destruction  of  cattle,  children,  and  men,
desolation  of  the  highways;  (4)  the  sword,
pestilence,  and  famine ;  (5)  cannibalism,
overthrow  of  their  heathen  idols  and  of  God's
own  bouse  and  worship,  destruction  of  their
cities,  utter  desolation  of  their  lands,  and
their  captivity  among  the  heathen.  And
even  yet  the  full  measure  of  their  misery  is
not  accomplished,  for  while  the  land  enjoys
her  sabbaths,  the  captives,  if  unrepentant,
are  to  fall  from  one  misery  to  another,  till
they  pine  away  and  are  consumed.  Each
of  these  grades  is  described  as  being
symbolically  seven  times  worse,  that  is,
incomparably  worse,  than  that  which  has
gone  before.  Because  these  plagues  would
come,  and  in  fact  did  come,  upon  them  as
the  immediate  result  of  physical  or  moral


412


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XXVL  1— 4&


oanses  that  could  be  traced,  they  are  none
the  less  the  effect  of  God's  wrath  upon  his
apostate  people-
Confession  of  sin,  recognition  of  God's
providence  in  all  that  had  happened  to  them,
bumilitf,  and  acquiescence  in  their  punish-
ment, would  restore  them  to  their  forfeited
coyenant  relation  (vers.  40 — 45).  Then  God
would  "  not  abhor  them  to  deitroy  them  utterly,"
hut  would  '^remember  the  covenant  of  (heir
ftUhere."  Thus  it  was  that  God  brought  them
back  after  theBabylonish  Captivity;  and  thus
it  is  that,  upon  their  repentance,  he  replacesin
a  state  of  salvation  Churches  and  individuals
that  have  fallen  away  from  him.  In  this
way  puuishmenta  become  a  blessing,  and
men  are  able  to  "  accept  of  them,"  or  rejoice
in  them,  as  the  word  miglit  be  rendered.

Ver.  1. — ^Ye  shall  make  you  no  idols  nor
graven  image,  neither  rear  you  up  a  stand-
ing image,  neither  shall  ye  set  up  any  image
of  stone  in  your  land,  to  bow  down  unto  it.
The  word  idoU  (dilim)  means  the  "  nothings"
which  the  heathen  substituted  for  the  Lord
God.  The  graven  image  (here  meaning  a
carved  wooden  image),  the  standing  image
(meaning  a  sacred  pillar),  and  the  image  of
itone  (that  is,  a  sculptured  stone  idol),  are
the  three  forms  of  images  under  which
adoration  was  paid,  whether  to  the  true  God
or  to  a  false  deity.  The  expression,  to  bow
dovm  unto  (or  towards)  it,  forbids  worship-
ping before  an  image  as  well  as  worshipping
an  injage.

Yer.  2. — ^Te  shall  keep  my  sabbaths,
and  reverence  my  sanctuary :  I  am  the  Lord.
These  words  are  repeated  textnally  from
ch.  six.  30.

Yer.  3. — If  ye  walk  in  my  statutes.  The
free  will  of  man  is  recognized  equally  with
God's  controlling  power.

Yers.  4 — 6.— These  verses  appear  to  have
been  in  the  mind,  not  of  Joel  only,  as  already
pointed  out,  but  of  Ezekiel  (xxxiv.  20
— 31).  In  Leviticus  we  find,  Then  I  will
give  you  rain  in  due  season;  in  Ezekiel,
"  And  I  will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down
in  his  season ;  there  shall  be  showers  of  bless-
ing." In  Leviticus,  And  the  land  shall  yield
her  increase,  and  the  trees  of  the  field  shall
yield  their  fruit ;  in  Ezekiel,  "  And  the  tree
of  the  field  shall  yield  her  fruit,  and  the
earth  her  increase."  In  Leviticus,  Te  shall
dwell  in  your  land  safely ;  in  Ezekiel,  "  They
(hall  dwell  safely  in  the  wilderness,  and  sleep
in  the  woods."  In  Leviticus,  And  I  wiU
five  peace  in  the  land,  and  ye  shall  lie  do^m,
and  none  shall  make  yon  a&aid:  and  I  will
rid  evil  beasts  out  of  tiie  land,  neither  shall
the  sword  go  through  yoniland;  in  Ezekiel,


«  And  I  will  make  with  them  •  covenant  of
peace,  and  will  cause  the  evil  beasts  to  cease
out  of  the  land.  .  .  .  And  they  shall  no  mor»
be  a  prey  to  the  heathen,  neither  shall  the
beast  of  the  land  devour  them ;  but  they  shall
dwell  safely,  and  none  shall  make  them
afraid."  The  promise.  Tour  threshing  shall
reach  unto  the  vintage,  and  the  vintage  shall
reach  unto  the  sowing  time,  is  similar  to  that
in  the  prophet  Amos,  "Behold,  the  days
come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  the  plowman
shall  overtake  the  reaper,  and  the  treader  of
grapes  him  that  soweth  seed  "  (ix.  13).

Yer.  8. — And  five  of  you  shall  chase  an
hundred.  Cf.  Josh,  xxiii.  10,  "  One  man  of
yon  shall  chase  a  thousand."  For  examples,
see  Judg.  iii.  31 ;  xv.  15 ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  6—16 ;
2  8am.  xxiii.  8.

Yer.  10.— Ye  shall  eat  old  store,  and  bring
forth  the  old  because  of  the  new.  The
provisions  of  the  past  year  would  be  so
abundant  that  they  would  have  to  be  re-
moved to  make  place  for  the  new  stores.

Yer.  11. — And  I  will  set  my  tabernacle
among  you.  This  was  fulfilled,  spiritually,
as  shown  to  St.  John  in  his  vision  of  the
new  Jerusalem :  "  I  heard  a  great  voice  out
of  heaven  saying,  Behold,  the  tabernacle  of
God  is  with  men,  and  he  will  dwell  with
them,  and  they  shall  be  his  people,  and
God  himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  ba
their  God"  (Eev.  xxi.  3).  And  my  sou]
shall  not  abhor  you.  The  result  of  God's
abhorrence  being  his  rejection  of  those
whom  he  abhors  (see  ch.  xx.  23),

Yer.  12. — And  I  will  walk  among  yon»
and  will  be  your  Ood,  and  ye  shall  be  my
people.  These  words  are  quoted  by  St.  Paid
as  a  ground  of  the  holiness  required  of
God's  people  (2  Cor.  vi.  16).

Yer.  13. — And  I  have  broken  the  bands  of
yonr  yoke.  This  expression,  used  also  in
the  parallel  passage  of  Ezekiel  above  re-
ferred to  (xxxiv.  27),  and  Jer.  xxvii.  3
receives  an  illustration  from  the  ancient
method  of  harnessing  oxen,  still  kept  up
in  the  East  and  South.  lie  band  means
the  straight  piece  of  wood  laid  across  the
necks  of  the  oxen,  by  which  their  heads
are  fastened  together  to  keep  them  level
with  each  other,  and  by  which  they  are
attached  to  the  pole  of  the  waggon.  The
single  collars  worn  by  horses  in  more
northern  countries  have  not  the  same
oppressive  effect.

Vers.  14 — 17. — Punishment  in  its  first  de-
gree. Terror,  consumption, — that  is,  wasting
— and  the  burning  ague,  that  shall  consume
the  eyes,  and  cause  sorrow  of  heart : — a  pro-
verbial expression  for  great  distress  (se»
1  Sam.  ii.  3.S)— and  ye  shall  sow  your  seed
in  vain,  for  your  enemies  shall  eat  it  (sea
Jer.  V.  17,  and  Micah  vi.  15,  "  Thou  shalt
sow,  bat  thou  shalt  not  reap;  then  abalt


OH.  XXTI.  1 — M.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


41S


tiead  the  olives,  bnt  thou  shalt  not  anoint
thee  with  oil")  .  .  .  and  ye  shall  be  slain
before  your  enemies  (as  took  place  often
in  their  after  history,  see  Judg.  ii.  14 ;  iii.
M ;  IT.  2) ;  they  that  hate  yon  shall  reign —
that  is,  rule — over  yon;  and  ye  shall  flee
when  none  pnrsneth  yon.

Vers.  18 — 20. — ^Punishment  in  its  second
degree.  I  will  make  yonr  heaven  as  iron,
and  yonr  earth  as  brass;  the  result  of
no  rain  in  a  land  scorched  by  the  fiery
Eastern  sun.  Tonr  land  shall  not  yield  her
increase,  neither  shall  the  trees  of  the  land
yield  their  fruits.  Cf.  1  Kings  viii.  35 ;  Hag.
i.  10, 11.

Vers.  21,  22. — Punishment  in  its  third
degree.  I  will  also  send  wild  beasts  among
yon,  which  shall  rob  yon  of  yonr  children,
and  destroy  your  cattle,  and  make  you  few  in
number.  So  in  the  case  of  the  Assyrians
transported  to  Palestine, "  At  the  beginning
of  their  dwelling  there,  they  feared  not  the
Lord :  therefore  the  Lord  sent  lions  among
them,  which  slew  some  of  them"  (2  Kings
xvii.  25) — and  your  high  ways  shall  be  deso-
late. Of.  Judg.  V.  6,  "  In  the  days  of  Shamgar
tlie  son  of  Anath,  in  the  days  of  Jael,
the  higiiways  were  unoccupied,  and  the
travellers  walked  through  byways."

Vers.  23 — 26. — Punishment  in  its  fourth
degree.  I  wUl  bring  a  sword  upon  yon,
that  shall  avenge  the  quarrel  of  my  oove-
oant :  .  .  .  I  will  send  the  pestilence  among
yon;  and  ye  shall  be  delivered  into  the  hand
of  the  enemy^that  is,  ye  shall  go  into
captivity  .  .  .  and  ye  shall  eat,  and  not
be  satisfied.  Cf.  Ezek.  v.  12,  "  A  third
part  of  thee  shall  die  with  pestilence,  and
with  famine  shall  they  be  consumed  in  the
midst  of  thee :  and  a  third  part  shall  fall  by
the  sword  round  about  thee;  and  I  will
scatter  a  third  part  into  all  the  winds,  and

1  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  them."  The
famine  that  is  to  come  upon  them  is  de-
scribed as  making  ten  women  bake  bread
in  one  oven, — whereas  in  ordinary  times  one
oven  was  only  sufficient  for  one  woman's
baking- and  they  shall  deliver  you  yonr
bread  again  by  weight ;  th»t  is,  the  quantity
baked  will  have  to  be  weighed  out  in  rations,
before  any  one  is  allowed  to  take  it.     See

2  Kings  vi.  25 ;  Isa.  iii.  1 ;  Jer.  xiv.  18_;  and
as  illustrative  of  the  last  point,  Ezek.  iv.  16,
■'  Behold,  I  will  break  the  staff  of  bread  in
Jerusalem:  and  they  shall  eat  bread  by
weight,  and  with  care ;  and  they  shall  drink
water  by  measure,  and  with  astonishment."

Vers.  27— 33.— Punishment  in  the  fifth
degree.  Ye  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  your  sons,
and  the  flesh  of  yonr  daughters  shall  ye  eat.
We  find  that  this  threat  was  fulfilled  in
Samaria  (2  Kings  vi.  28),  and  in  Jerusalem
at  the  time  both  of  the  earlier  siege  by  the
Chaldieans,  and  of  the  later  siege  by  the


Homans  (see  Lam.  ii.  20 ;  iv.  10;  Josephui,
'  Bell.  Jud.,'  V.  9,  3 ;  and  the  terrible  case  of
Mary  daughter  of  Eleazar,  Josephus,  '  Bell.
Jud.'  vi.  3, 1).  And  I  will  destroy  yonr  high
places.  By  high  placet  is  meant  the  tops  of
hills  or  eminences  chosen  for  worship,  whether
of  Jehovah  (see  Judg.  vi.  26;  1  Kings  iii.
2;  2  Kings  xii.  3;  1  Cliron.  xxi.  26),  or  of
false  gods.  The  high  places  intended  here
are  the  spots  where  the  "  sun-images  "  were
erected  (see  2  Chron.  xiv.  5 ;  Isa.  xvii.  8 ;
Ezek.  vi.  1) — and  out  down  your  images,  and
oast  your  carcases  upon  the  carcases  of  your
idols— that  is,  they  should  roll  in  the  dust
together.  And  I  will  make  yonr  cities  waste
— as  Samaria  and  Jerusalem — and  bring
your  sanctuaries  unto  desolation, — by  the
lanctiMries,  which  are  to  be  desolated,  is
meant  all  the  consecrated  things :  the  holy
of  holies,  the  holy  place,  the  court,  the  ark,
the  altat  of  incense,  the  altar  of  burnt  sacri-
fice—  and  I  will  not  smell  the  savonr  of
your  sweet  odours  -  so  in  Jer.  vi.  20,  "  To
what  purpose  cometh  there  to  me  incense
from  Sheba,  and  the  sweet  cane  from  a  far
country?  your  burnt  otferings  are  not  accept-
able, nor  your  sacrifices  sweet"  (cf.  Isa.  i.
11 — 15).  And  I  will  bring  the  land  into
desolation  (cf.  Jer.  ix.  11) :  and  your  enemies
which  dwell  therein  shall  be  astonished  at
it  (cf.  Ezek.  v.  15).  And  I  will  scatter  yon
among  the  heathen,  and  will  draw  out  a
sword  after  yon.  See  Jer.  ix.  16,  "  I  will
scatter  them  also  among  the  heathen,  whom
neither  they  nor  their  fathers  have  known :
and  I  will  send  a  sword  after  them,  till  1
have  consumed  .them."

Vers.  34,  35. — The  land  had  not  parti-
cipated in  the  sins  of  its  inhabitants.  The
latter  had  thought  that,  by  the  neglect  of
the  sabbatical  jears,  they  had  enriched
themselves  by  the  ficuits  of  those  years
which  would  otherwise  have  been  wasted.
The  result  was  that  they  lost  the  land  alto-
gether for  a  period  equal  to  that  during
which  it  ought  to  have  kept  sabbath,  and
the  land  "as  long  as  she  lay  desolate
kept  sabbath,  to  fulfil  threescore  and  ten
years"  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21).  From  the
entrance  into  the  holy  land  until  the
Babylonish  Captivity  there  elapsed  eight
hundred  and  sixty-three  years,  in  which
time  there  ought  to  have  been  kept  one
hundred  and  twenty-three  sabbatical  years.
As  only  seventy  are  made  up  by  the  dura-
tion of  the  Captivity,  it  may  be  concluded
that  fifty-three  sabbatical  years  were  ob-
served by  the  Israelites;  bat  this  conclusion
is  very  doubtful.  It  is  more  likely  that
seventy,  being  a  multiple  of  the  sacred
number  seven,  was  regarded  as  sufficient  to
purge  all  previous  neglects,  whatever  they
might  have  been.

Vers.    36—38.  —  Tlie  final  puniahment


iU


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XXVI.  1 — 46.


TTpon  them  that  are  left,  that  is,  the  bdt-
viving  captives  and  exiles,  I  will  send  a
faintness  into  their  hearts, — so  Ezek.  xxi.  7,
"  And  every  heart  ehall  melt,  and  all  hands
shall  be  feeble,  and  every  spirit  shall  faint,
and  all  knees  shall  be  weak  as  water " —
.  .  .  and  the  sound  of  a  shaken  (or  driven)  leaf
shall  chase  them ;  ■  ■  ■  and  they  shall  fall,
.  .  .  and  ye  shall  perish  among  ike  heathen,
and  the  land  of  yoor  enemies  shall  eat  yon
up.  And  they  that  are  left  of  yon  shall  pine
away  in  their  ini^nity  in  yonr  enemies'  lands.
This  is  the  concluding  threat.  It  is  con-
ditional in  its  nature,  and  the  condition
having  been  fulfilled,  we  may  say  with  re-
verence that  it  has  been  accomplished.
Those  of  the  ten  tribes  who  did  not  find
their  way  to  Babylon,  and  so  became  ab-
sorbed in  the  body  which  returned  to  Jeru-
salem, have  been  eaten  up  by  the  land  of
their  enemiet,  and  have  pined  away  in  their
enemies'  lands.  Neither  they  nor  their
descendants  are  to  be  found  in  any  part  of
Ihe  globe,  however  much  in ves ligation  may
employ  itself  in  searching  for  them.  Tiiey
have  been  absorbed  by  the  populations
among  which  they  were  scattered.

Vers.  40 — 45. — God's  pardon   will,  even
yet,  as  always,  follow  npon  confession  of  sin


and  genuine  repentance.  They  must  re-
cognize not  only  that  they  have  sinned,  but
that  their  sufferings  liave  been  a  punish-
ment for  those  sins  at  God's  hand.  This
will  work  in  them  humble  acquiescence  in
God's  doings,  and  tben  he  will  remember
his  covenant  with  J'aoob,  and  also  his  cove-
nant with  Isaao,  and  also  his  covenant
with  Abraham,  and  for  the  sake  of  the
covenant  of  their  ancestors,  he  will  not  cast
them  away,  neither  will  he  abhor  them,  to
destroy  them  utterly,  and  to  break  his  cove-
nant with  them.  Whether  Jewish  repent-
ance has  been  or  ever  will  be  so  full  ae
to  obtain  this  blessing,  cannot  be  decided
now.  Perhaps  it  may  be  the  case  that  all
the  blessings  promised  by  Moses  and  by
future  prophets  to  repentant  and  restored
Israel  are  to  find  their  accomplishment  in
the  spiritual  Israel,  the  children  of  Abraham
who  is  "  the  father  of  all  them  that  believe  "
(Kom.  iv.  11),  seeing  that  "God  is  able  of
stones  to  raise  up  children  imto  Abraham  "
(Matt.  iii.  9)

Ver.  46. — This  is  the  closing  paragraph
of  the  Book  of  Leviticus ;  to  which  another
chapter  has  been  added,  in  the  form  of  an
appendix,  on  the  subject  of  vows.


HOMILBTICS.

Vers.  3 — 46. — Promises  and  threaienings.  In  this  chapter  the  prophet  looks  forwara,
and  declares  how  God  would  deal  with  his  people ;  which  should  be  accoiding  to  the
way  in  which  they  should  act.  In  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  14 — 21,  the  chronicler  looks  back,
and  shows  how  God  bad  dealt  with  them ;  which  had  been  according  to  the  way  in
which  they  had  acted.

The  promises  and  the  threatenings  are  to  the  nation,  not  to  individuals ;  and  the
prophetical  assurance  is  that  national  obedience  to  Qod  shall  bring  about  national
happiness  and  prosperity,  and  that  disobedience  shall  cause  the  ruin  of  the  nation.  In
spite  of  the  rough,  wild  times  of  the  Judges,  and  of  the  apostacy  of  Saul,  the  heart  of  tlie
nation  was  on  the  whole  loyal  to  Jehovah  till  the  end  of  the  days  of  Solomon.  And  till
that  time  there  was  an  upward  growth  in  the  flourishing  estate  of  the  people — their
wtalth,  their  power,  their  prosperity,  their  happiness.  In  the  latter  days  of  Solomon,
outwardly  glorious  as  they  were,  decay  and  corruption  began.  King  and  people  wei  e
alike  affected  by  the  splendid  despotism  which  one  wielded  and  under  which  the  other
flourished  in  material  prosperity.  In  that  prosperity  they  forgot  the  source  of  it.  The
king  himself  pushed  his  tolerance  for  foreign  habits  into  idolatry,  "  His  wives  turned
away  his  heart  after  other  gods :  and  his  heart  was  not  perfect  with  the  Lord  his  God,
as  was  the  heart  of  David  his  father.  .  .  .  And  the  Lord  was  angry  with  Solomon,
tecause  his  heart  was  turned  from  the  Lord  God  of  Israel "  (1  Kings  xi.  4 — 9).  Like
prince,  like  people ;  a  general  relaxation  of  moral  fibre  and  religious  zeal  ensued  through-
out the  kingdom.  Its  culminating  point  had  been  reached,  and  now  there  followed  the
rapid  descent  and  fall  which  resulted  from  disobedience.  The  first  step  to  ruin  was
the  great  schism,  from  the  effects  of  which  neither  the  northern  nor  the  southern  king-
dom ever  recovered.  Then  followed  the  various  apostacies  and  punishments.  In  the
southern  kingdom, "  Behoboam  forsook  the  Law  of  the  Lord,  and  all  Israel  with  him.  And
it  came  to  pass,  that  in  the  fifth  year  of  King  Rehoboam,  Shishak  King  of  Egypt  came
up  against  Jerusalem,  because  they  had  transgressed  against  the  Lord  "  (2  Chron.  xii.
1,  2).    Jeh<irani  "  walked  in  the  way  of  the  kingi  of  Israel,  like  as  did  the  house  o(


SH.  XXVI.  1—46.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  41o

Ahab  (for  he  had  the  daughter  of  Ahab  to  wife) :  and  he  wrought  that  which  was  evil
in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord.  ...  In  his  days  the  Edomites  revolted.  .  .  .  Moreover  the
Lord  stirred  up  against  Jehoram  the  spirit  of  the  Philistines,  and  of  the  Arabians,
that  were  near  the  Ethiopians:  and  they  came  up  into  Judah,  and  brake  into  it"
(2  Chron.  xxi.  6 — 17).  In  the  latter  days  of  Joash,  "they  left  the  house  of  the  Lord
Qod  of  their  fathers,  aud  served  groves  and  idols :  and  wrath  came  upon  Judah  and
Jerusalem  for  this  their  trespass.  .  .  .  And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  year,
that  the  host  of  Syria  came  up  .  .  .  with  a  small  company  of  men,  and  the  Lord
delivered  a  very  great  host  into  their  hand,  because  they  had  forsaken  the  Lord  God  of
their  fathers  "  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  18 — 24).  In  the  reign  of  Amaziah,  Jerusalem  was
taken  by  Joash  King  of  Israel,  because  "  Amaziah  sought  after  the  gods  of  Edom  "
(2  Chron.  xxv.  14 — 24).  Ahaz  "  made  molten  images  for  Baalim.  .  .  .  Wherefore  the
Lord  his  God  delivered  him  into  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Syria  .  .  .  and  into  the  hand
of  the  King  of  Israel "  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  2 — 5).  At  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of
Manasseh,  "the  Lord  spake  to  Manasseh,  and  to  his  people:  but  they  would  not
hearken.  Wherefore  the  Lord  brought  upon  them  the  captains  of  the  host  of  the  King
of  Assyria  "  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  10, 11).  And  at  last,  these  partial  chastisements  having
failed  to  bring  about  reformation,  came  the  Babylonish  Captivity.  "  The  Lord  God  of
their  fathers  sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  rising  up  betimes,  and  sending ;  because
he  had  compassion  on  his  people,  and  on  his  dwelling  place :  but  they  mocked  the
messengers  of  God,  and  despised  his  words,  and  misused  his  prophets,  until  the  wrath
3t  the  Lord  arose  against  his  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy.  Therefore  he  brought
upon  them  the  King  of  the  Chaldees,  who  slew  their  young  men  with  the  sword  in  the
house  of  their  sanctuary,  and  had  no  compassion  upon  young  man  or  maiden,  old  man,
or  him  that  stooped  for  age :  he  gave  them  all  into  his  hand.  .  .  .  And  them  that  hai
escaped  from  the  sword  carried  he  away  to  Babylon  "  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  15 — 20).

The  transgressions  of  the  northern  kingdom  were  even  greater  than  those  of  the
southern  kingdom,  and  their  final  punishment,  therefore,  fell  upon  them  earlier.  "  For
so  it  was,  that  the  children  of  Israel  had  sinned  against  the  Lord  their  God,  .  .  .  and
.valked  in  the  statutes  of  the  heathen,  ...  for  they  served  idols,  whereof  the  Lord  had
said  unto  them,  Ye  shall  not  do  this  thing.  .  .  .  And  they  rejected  his  statutes,  and  his
covenant  that  he  made  with  their  fathers.  .  .  .  Therefore  the  Lord  was  very  angry,
.  .  .  and  removed  them  out  of  his  sight "  (2  Kings  xvii.  7 — 18).  This  occurred  in  the
reign  of  Hoshea,  and  in  the  case  of  the  ten  tribes  we  find  no  symptoms  of  repentance
under  suffering.  The  two  tribes  produced  a  Daniel ;  and  his  prayer  ."or  the  for^veness
of  his  people  (Dan.  ix.  3 — 19)  illustrates  the  feelings  of  the  better  of  his  fellow-
captives  ;  and  therefore,  according  to  the  promise  of  ch.  xxvi.  40 — 42,  Qod  remembered
his  covenant  with  Jacob,  and  Isaac,  and  Abraham,  and  raised  up  Zerubbabel,  Ezra,  and
Nehemiah  to  effect  the  restoration;  while  the  ten  tribes  pined  away  in  the  land  of
their  captivity.     Thus  Moses'  prediction  was  fulfilled.

iSod  deals  with  other  nations  as  with  Israel ;  but  we  have  not  the  inspired  record  of
his  dealings.  While  Greece  cultivated  intellectual  wisdom,  she  flourished ;"  when  she
turned  to  sophistry,  she  perished.  While  Kome  spread  order  and  law  throughout
the  globe,  she  grew  in  strength ;  when  she  submitted  to  the  sway  of  arbitrary  despots,
she  fell.  What  is  England's  mission  in  the  world  ?  To  disseminate  at  once  true  religion
and  true  liberty.  As  long  as  she  does  this,  she  will  receive  God's  blessing.  As  soon  as
she  fails  to  fulfil  the  purpose  of  her  existence  as  a  nation,  she  wiU  be  withdrawn  from
the  scene,  and  another  instrument  raised  up  in  her  stead.


HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Temporal  rewards  and  pwiishments.  Ch.  xxvi. ;  of.  Eccles.  ylH.  11 ;  Isa.  xIviiL  18 ;
Matt.  V.  44, 45 ;  and  1  Tim.  iv.  8.  There  is  in  this  chapter  a  distinct  assertion  of  mora)
government  exercised  over  Israel.  If  they  obeyed  God's  Law,  he  would  grant  thew
great  temporal  blessing ;  if  they  disobeyed,  he  would  send  them  sore  chastisement;  bul
if  after  disobedience  they  became  penitent,  he  would  remember  their  fathers  and  hi»
covenant  with  them,  and  receive  their  penitent  seed  into  favour  again.    The  wholi


416  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxvi.  1— 48.

question,  consequently,  of  the  "  method  of  the  Divine  government "  is  hereby  nused.
And  here  let  ub  remark —

I.  God's  judoments,  whether  bewabds  ob  pditishmbnts,  wbbb  exboutbd  with
BECOMING  LEibUEB  AND  DELIBBEATION.  It  is  along  the  lines  of  natural  law,  as  dis-
tinguished from  miracle,  that  he  proposes  to  execute  his  decisions.  If  the  people  prove
obedient,  then  they  are  to  have  (1)  bountiful  harvests;  (2)  national  triumph  and  con-
sequent peace ;  (3)  riddance  of  the  beasts  of  the  field,  so  far  as  they  would  injure  their
crops;  (4)  great  increase  of  the  population;  and  (5)  the  enjoyment  of  religious
ordinances.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  people  prove  disobedient,  they  are  to  have
(1)  sickness;  (2)  scarcity;  (3)  defeat;  (4)  devastation  by  wild  beasts;  (5)  famine  in  its
most  fearful  forms ;  and  (6)  a  sabbatic  desolation  in  the  Lord's  land.

^low,  it  is  to  the  leisurely  and  deliberate  element  in  the  rewards  and  the  punishments
that  we  direct  attention.  If  God  chose  to  execute  his  sentences  speedily,  if  obedience
got  its  reward  immediately,  if  disobedience  got  its  punishment  without  one  moment's
delay, — then  men  would  have  no  room  for  question,  and  no  room  for  moral  education
and  decision.  Such  a  childish  regulation  would  doubtless  prevent  a  large  jamount  of
evil  in  the  world,  but  it  would  keep  men  children  always.  It  is  a  pitiable  stage  of
education  when  the  child  insists  on  seeing  its  reward  before  it  obeys,  and  requires  the
immediate  "  slap "  to  prevent  disobedience.  If  men  are  to  be  trained  morally,  they
must  be  asked  to  take  upon  credit  God's  promises  and  threatenings,  and  decide  in  the
interval  before  he  is  pleased  to  act.

This  leaves  room  for  a  large  amount  of  evil.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work
is  not  executed  speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to
do  evil "  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  Men  may  say,  because  God  does  not  show  quickly  hii
hand,  that  he  may  possibly  not  show  it  at  all.  Hence  they  sin  and  say,  "  The  Lord
shall  not  see,  neither  shall  the  God  of  Jacob  regard  it "  (Ps.  xciv.  7).  The  Lord's
delay  is  interpreted  as  Divine  indifference.  This  is  one  of  the  evils  due  to  man's  sinful
heart  exercising  its  freedom  under  a  truly  paternal  government.  Instead  of  God's
goodness  in  the  delay  leading  men  to  repentance,  it  is  allowed  to  foster  a  hope  that  he
will  resign  the  reins  of  government  altogether  and  sit  indifferently  by,  while  men  do  as
they  please.  An  instance  of  this  tendency  to  misinterpretation  is  afforded  by  Professor
Tyndall,  in  his  '  Fragments  of  Science,'  where  he  has  the  audacity  to  deduce  from
Matt.  V.  45,  "  He  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth
rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust,"  as  the  doctrine  of  the  Master  himself,  that  "  the
distribution  of  natural  phenomena  is  not  affected  by  moral  or  religious  causes ; " '
whereas  the  context  shows  that  the  whole  arrangement  is  prompted  by  love  towards
his  enemies,  that  they  may  be  induced  to  become  his  Mends.  Men  get  easily  warped
in  their  interpretations,  and  miss  the  point,  or  want  to  miss  it.

( )n  the  other  hand,  God's  delay  in  making  good  his  promises  and  threatenings  affords
an  opportunity  for  humiliation  and  faith.  When  men  believe  he  will  be  as  good  and
as  severe  as  he  says,  then  they  humble  themselves  under  his  mighty  hand,  and  suppli-
cate his  fdrgiveness.  When  also,  as  his  forgiven  ones,  they  try  to  the  best  of  their
ability  to  obey  him,  then  the  delay  of  the  promised  blessing  enables  them  to  cultivate
the  "  patience  of  hope,"  and  thus  to  complete  their  character.  If,  therefore,  there  are
drawbacks  through  man's  sin  on  the  one  side,  there  are  vast  advantages  to  himian
character  on  the  other  attending  this  arrangement.

II.  God's  judgments,  even  when  execoted,  have  not  the  aib  of  finaliti
ABOUT  THEM.  Notwithstanding  the  special  pleading  of  Warburton  and  his  followers
about  the  temporal  character  of  the  Divine  judgments  among  the  Jews,  and  their
consequent  ignorance  about  a  future  life,'  it  is  evident  on  the  face  of  the  judgments
that  they  are  not  final.  Little  children  perishing  and  eaten  in  the  sieges  (ver.  29)
could  not  be  regarded  surely  as  a  final  judgment.  Children  suffering  for  their  parents'
sins  could  not  be  regarded  as  a  final  judgment.  In  truth,  God's  judgments  among  the
Jews,  like  his  judgments  still,  were  imperfect,  and  designedly  so.  "For  observe,"
says  the  Rev.  Charles  Wolfe,  "  if  we  found  every  man  in  this  life  received  just  what
he  deserved,  and  every  evil  work  always  brought  swift  punishment  along  with  it,  what
should  we  naturally  conclude?    There  is  no  future  punishment  in  store.   I  see  nothing

'  Page  36  of  3rd  edit.  »  '  Divine  Legation  of  Moies,'  bk.  v


ea.  XXVI.  1— i6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  417


wtnting ;  every  man  has  already  received  the  due  reward  of  his  works ;  everything  is
already  complete,  and,  therefore,  there  is  nothing  to  he  done  in  the  next  world.  Or
if,  on  the  other  hand,  there  were  no  punishment  visited  upon  sin  at  all  in  this  world,
we  might  he  inclined  to  say.  Tush,  God  hath  forgotten ;  he  never  interferes  amongst
us ;  we  have  no  proof  of  his  hatred  of  sin,  or  of  his  determination  to  punish  it ;  he  is
gone  away  far  from  us,  and  has  left  us  to  follow  our  own  wills  and  imaginations.  So
that  if  sentences  were  either  perfectly  executed  on  earth,  or  not  executed  at  aU,  we
might  have  some  reason  for  saying  that  there  was  a  chance  of  none  in  a  future  world.
But  now  it  is  imperfectly  executed ;  just  so  much  done  as  to  say,  '  You  are  watched ;
my  eye  is  upon  you;  I  neither  slumher  nor  sleep;  and  my  vengeance  slumbereth  not.'
And  yet,  at  the  same  time,  there  is  so  little  done,  that  a  man  has  to  look  into  eternity
for  the  accomplishment."  *

III.  God's  promise  to  the  penitent  implies  that  thev  abb  not  paedonec
SIMPLY  ON  the  geound  OF  THEIR  PBNITENOB.  The  Lord  contemplates  the  Jewish
defection  as  practically  certain.  At  the  same  time,  he  holds  out  the  hope  of  the
penitent  people  being  restored  to  favour  (vers.  40 — 16).  But  it  is  surely  significant
,  that  penitence  is  expressly  shown  not  to  be  the  ground  of  acceptance.  Doubtless  it  is
the  condition ;  but  were  it  the  sole  ground  of  acceptance,  as  it  is  confidently  asserted
to  he,'  it  is  not  easy  to  see  why  in  such  a  case  as  that  now  before  us  God  would  speak
about  remembering  their  fathers,  and  throwing  the  radiance,  so  to  speak,  of  their
obedience  round  about  their  children  (vers.  42,  45).  It  is  evident  the  penitents,  even
after  they  have  been  punished,  cannot  stand  alone.  And  in  truth,  when  the  whole
matter  of  acceptance  is  analyzed,  it  is  seen  to  rest  upon  a  covenant  of  sacrifice.  The
sacrifices  of  the  covenant,  as  we  have  already  seen,  point  unmistakably  to  a  suffering
Substitute,  the  glory  of  whose  merits  must  encircle  all  accepted  ones.  In  a  word,  we
are  led  straight  to  Jesus,  the  Lamb  of  God,  by  whose  blood  we  are  redeemed  and
received  into  covenant  relations.  "  Accepted  in  the  Beloved,"  we  are  careful  to  "  abstain
from  the  very  appearance  of  evil,"  and  in  the  exercise  of  new  obedience  we  find  a
triumphant  power  bestowed.  When  we  hearken  to  his  commandments  our  peace  flows
like  a  river,  and  our  righteousness  becomes  resistless  like  the  waves  of  the  sea  (Isa.
xlviii.  18).  We  find  that  "  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise  of
the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  8). — R.  M,  E.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  blessedness  of  the  righteous.    In  the  words  before  us  we  have —

I.  The  qualities  or  the  rightbotts  described.  These  are :  1.  That  they  worship
the  true  Ood.  (1)  They  make  no  idols.  Graven  images.  Pillars  to  memorialize
advantages  supposed  to  be  derived  from  false  gods.  Witness  the  votive  offerings  ot
the  papists.  They  might  not  superstitiously  worship  such  stones  of  memorial  as  Jacob
set  up  to  memorialize  the  blessings  of  Jehovah  (see  Gen.  xxviii.  18 ;  and  comp.  2  Kings
iviii.  4).  The  images  of  stone  or  "  stones  of  picture  "  (see  margin)  would  probably  be
statues.  Note :  men  make  their  idols.  (2)  They  respect  Jehovah.  He  is  the  Maker
of  all  things.    He  is  himself  uncreate.    Bfe  is  the  Covenant  Friend  of  the  righteous.

2.  That  they  worship  him  truly.  (1)  By  keeping  his  sabbaths.  Memorials  of  his
works  of  creation  and  redemption.  Pledges  of  the  rest  of  heaven.  (2)  These  are :
weekly — monthly — ^yearly — septennial — in  the  jubilee.  (3)  By  reverencing  his  sanc-
tuary.   The  place  of  his  presence,  of  his  altar,  of  the  congregation  of  his  people.

3.  They  serve  him  dbedirntly,  (1)  Walking  in  his  statutes.  This  implies  the  study
of  his  Word.    (2)  To  keep  his  commandments  also  Implies  prayer  for  Divine  grace.

II.  Thbie  blessedness  assured.  They  have  the  promise  of:  1.  Plenty.^  (1)  The
elements  were  to  be  propitious  to  them.  Seasonable  rains.  These  are  very  important.
They  are  here  mentioned  as  representing  all  benign  elemental  influences — light,  heat,
electricity, — all  which  are  essential.  (2)  The  result  then  is  abundance  (ver.  5).  Before
they  could  have  reaped  and  threshed  out  their  com,  the  vintage  should  be  ready,  and
before  they  could  have  pressed  out  their  wine,  it  would  be  time  again  to  sow.  (3)  This
was  to  prefigure  the  abundance  of  grace  which  should  mark  the  times  of  the  gospel  (see
Amos  ix.  18).  2.  Security.  (1)  From  the  hostility  of  the  elements.  No  plague
should  invade  them.    (2)  Prom  the  hostility  of  men.     No  warrior  should  invade  them.

•  Wolfe's  '  Remains,'  6th  edit.,  pp.  325,  326.  '  Cf.  Hutton's  '  Essays,'  vol.  i.  p.  872.

LEVITICUS.  2  B


418  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xs.vi.  I— 4a


No  robber  should  trouble  them.  (3)  Prom  the  hostiliJy  of  animals.  Where  population
IB  reduced  by  wars  and  famines,  beasts  of  prey  prowl.  (4)  How  the  faithfulness  of
Gk)d  has  been  verified  in  the  history  of  his  people!  3.  Victory.  (I)  God  puts  the
dread  of  them  into  their  enemies.  They  fly  before  them.  Witness  the  flight  of  the
Syrians  in  the  days  of  Elisha  (2  Kings  vii.).  C*^)  He  puts  courage  into  their  hearts.
Witness  the  exploits  of  Gideon,  of  Samson,  of  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer  (1  Sam.
xiv.  6,  12).  4.  Multiplication.  (1)  This  is  a  blessing  of  the  covenant.  It  is  a  real
strength  to  a  nation.  It  is  a  real  strength  to  a  Church,  (f?)  But  outside  the  covenant
mere  numbers  may  prove  a  formidable  evil.  5.  Bivinj  favour.  (1)  "I  will  have
respect  unto  you."  Contrast  with  this  Heb.  x.  38.  (2)  The  token  of  the  favour  of
God  is  his  presence,  (a)  His  tabernacle  was  amongst  them  in  the  wilderness.  What
miracles  of  mercy  were  shown  to  them  then!  (6)  How  glorious  were  the  days  of
Solomon  when  the  Shechinah  entered  the  temple !  (c)  His  tabernacle  was  set  among
his  people  in  the  presence  of  Jesus  (John  i.  14).  But  they  did  not  know  the  blessed-
ness of  their  day.  (d)  How  blessed  is  the  mystical  incarnation  of  Christ  in  the
believer !  (John  vi.  56 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16 — 18 ;  vii.  1).  (e)  The  glory  of  the  tabernacle  will
culminate  in  the  new  heavens  and  earth  (see  Eev.  xxi.  3).

All  this  blessedness  was  pledged  in  the  emancipation  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt
(ver.  13).     More  fully  in  the  redemption  of  the  gospel  typified  thereby. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  14 — 89. — Prophetic  maledictions.  The  promises  of  God  are  prophecies  of  good  ;
so  are  his  threatening  prophecies  of  evil.  Prophecy,  therefore,  gives  no  countenance  to
fatalism,  since  it  is  made  to  depend  upon  conditions.  God  may,  therefore,  repent  him
of  evils  threatened,  viz.  when  sinners  repent  of  the  sin  that  provoked  him.  So  long
as  the  Hebrews  were  faithful  to  their  God,  they  found  him  faithful  in  mercy ;  when  they
rebelled,  they  found  him  no  less  faithful  in  judgment.  What  a  commentary  upon  the
verses  before  us  is  the  history  of  the  Israelites  I     Let  us  review —

I.  The  judoments  denounced  against  them  in  theih  land.  For  their  rebellion :
1.  They  were  to  be  visited  with  plagues.  (1)  The  plague  of  <en-or.  This  is  the  natural
plague  of  a  guilty  conscience.  The  apprehension  of  formidable  judgments.  (2)  Of
consumption.  This  term  expresses  aE  chronic  diseases.  (3)  Of  burning  ague.  This
.describes  those  diseases  which  are  more  acute.  (4)  All  these  plagues  are  to  "  consume
the  eyes,  and  cause  sorrow  of  heart."  2.  They  were  to  suffer  from  invasion.  (1)  The
sword  of  the  enemy  was  to  consume  them.  How  fearfully  they  suffered  under  the
judges,  under  the  kings,  and  afterwards !  (2)  The  exactions  of  the  tyrant  were  to
distress  them.  When  the  invaders  mastered  them,  how  grievously  were  they  oppressed !
3.  They  were  to  encounter  the  anger  of  their  God.  (1)  The  plague  and  the  sword  of  the
enemy  could  not  otherwise  have  visited  them.  (2)  But  in  the  source  itself  there  is  the
most  formidable  terror.  "  I  will  set  my  face  against  you."  4.  Their  obstinacy  was  to
bring  upon  them  aggravated  evils.  (1)  The  land  was  to  become  unfruitful.  For  the
heaven  was  to  be  like  iron,  which  might  reflect  the  glare  of  heat,  but  could  distil  no  rain
or  dew.  (2)  Wild  beasts  were  to  come  among  them.  When  the  people  become
diminished  by  war  and  pestilence  and  famine,  wild  animals  multiply  and  become  for-
midable (see  Numb.  xxi.  6 ;  2  Kings  xvii.  25 ;  ii.  24 ;  Ezek.  v.  17).  (3)  It  is  a  fearful
thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God.     Bather  let  us  seek  his  mercy,

II.  Those  denouscbd  against  them  in  the  lands  of  their  captivity.  1.  They
were  to  be  scattered  amongst  the  heathen  (ver.  33).  (1)  Thus  ten  of  the  tribes  were
carried  away  by  the  Assyrians.  (2)  The  two  remaining  tribes  were  afterwards  removed
by  the  Babylonians.  (3)  Some  of  these  returned  under  Ezia  and  Nehemiah,  and
werB  ultimately  carried  away  by  the  Eomans.  2.  The  sword  was  to  follow  them  thsre.
(1)  The  sword  of  war.     (2)  The  sword  of  persecution.     So  they  suffered  from  pagans,

from  papists,  from  Mohammedans.     3.   They  were  to  suffer  astonishment  (vers.  36 39).

(1)  Faintness  of  heart,  suspicion  of  danger  where  it  existed  not,  susceptibility  to  panic.
(Z)  Pining  in  terror.  (3)  Perishing  through  the  rapacity  of  their  enemies.  4.  Their
sufferings  were  to  be  protracted.  (1)  The  land  was  to  enjoy  her  sabbaths.  Houbigant
observes  how  literally  this  was  fulfilled  in  the  seventy  years  of  the  Babylonish  Captivity.
"  From  Saul  to  the  Babylonish  Captivity  are  numbered  about  four  hundred  and  ninety
years,  during  which  period  there  were  seventy  sabbaths  of  years ;  for  seven,  multiplied
by  seventy,  make  four  hundred  and  ninety.     Now,  the  Babylonidi  Captivity  lasted


419


CH.  XXTI,  1— 46.]  THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.

serenty  years,  and  during  that  time  the  land  of  Israel  rested.  Therefore  the  land  rested
Inst  as  many  years  in  the  Babylonish  Captivity  as  it  should  have  rested  sabbaths  if  the
Jews  had  observed  the  law  relative  to  the  sabbaths  of  the  land."  (2)  The  longer  term
of  "seven  times"  thrice  repeated  (vers.  21,  24,  28)  is  also  notable.  These  are  the
"times  of  the  Gentiles,"  during  which  Jerusalem  is  to  be  trodden  down  of  them
(Luke  xxi.  24).  5.  Meanwhile  their  land  was  to  lie  desolate  (vers.  31—35).  (1)  Such
has  been  its  history,  under  the  Romans,  under  the  Saracens,  under  the  Crusaders
under  the  Turks.  (2)  Who  but  God  could  have  foreseen  all  this?  How  unreasonable
is  unbelief! — J.  A,  M.

Vers.  40— 46.— flops /or  Israel.  The  curses  of  this  chapter  have  proved  prophetic.
So,  may  we  infer,  will  the  blessings  prove.  We  may  therefore  hope  to  see  the  con-
version of  the  Hebrews  to  Christ,  their  restoration  to  their  ancient  inheritance,  and  the
sun  of  prosperity  shining  brightly  upon  them.

L  Thbt  will  confess  their  sin.  1.  Their  personal  iniquity.  (1)  They  will
have  many  things  to  confess,  as  all  sinners  have.  They  will  "  humble  their  unoircum-
cised  heart"  (see  Jer.  ix.  26;  Bom.  ii.  29).  (2)  In  particular  they  will  confess  their
capital  sin  in  rejecting  Christ.  This  crime  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  fathers.  2.  The
iniquity  of  their  fathers.  (1)  This  was  the  same  as  their  own.  They  will  acknowledge
themselves,  not  in  pride,  but  in  penitence,  to  be  the  children  of  their  fathers.  (2)
Instead  of  attempting  to  extenuate  their  sin  because  of  the  example  of  their  fathers,
they  will  repent  for  the  sin  of  their  fathers  as  well  as  for  their  own.  This  is  in  accord-
ance with  the  principle  of  the  visitation  of  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  upon  the
children.  3.  The  justice  of  Qod  in  their  punishment.  (1)  They  acknowledge  that  they
walked  contrary  to  God  (see  Ezra  ix. ;  Neh.  i.  4 ;  ix.  1,  2,  29 ;  Dan.  ix.  3,  4).  (2)  That
he  has  therefore  walked  contrary  to  them.     Afflictions  do  not  spring  out  of  the  dust.

II.  Then  God  will  remember  his  covenant.  Therefore :  1.  Ee  will  not  destroy
them  utterly.  (1)  His  providence  will  be  over  them.  What  else  could  have  preserved
them  now  for  nineteen  centuries  amidst  untoward  circumstances?  They  are,  notwith-
standing their  sufferings,  as  numerous  to-day  as  they  were  in  the  zenith  of  their
prosperity  in  the  days  of  Solomon.  (2)  The  remnant  of  them  shall  be  saved.  (3)
How  tender  is  the  compassion  of  God !  (Hos.  xi.  8,  9).  2.  He  will  reinstate  them,  in
their  land.  (1)  He  will  remember  his  land.  For  in  the  covenant  they  are  promised
the  land  "  for  ever."  (2)  Remembering  the  land  also  implies  that  it  will  recover  its
ancient  fhiitfulness  (see  promises,  vers.  4,  5,  10).  (3)  In  that  condition  it  will  be  the
appropriate  type  and  pledge  of  the  heavenly  country  (see  Isa.  Ixii.  4).  3.  He  will  make
them,  a  blessing  in  the  earth.  (1)  They  will  grow  into  a  multitude.  (2)  They  will
rejoice  in  spiritual  blessings.  (3)  The  miracles  of  the  Exodus  from  Egypt  will  be
repeated.  (4)  The  heathen  will  be  startled  into  thoughtfulness  (ver.  4n).  (5)  The
heathen  will  once  more  learn  the  way  of  salvation  from  the  lips  of  Hebrews.  4.  In  all
this  they  are  beloved  for  the  fathers'  sahes.  (1)  This  is  distinctly  stated  (ver.  42 ;  comp.
Rom.  xi.  28).  (2)  The  patriarchs  of  the  covenant  are  referred  to  in  the  order  of
ascent,  viz.  Jacob,  Isaac,  Abraham.  Note:  when  the  Jews  in  humility  confess  them-
selves the  children  of  their  more  recent  sinful  fathers,  God  will  acknowledge  them  as
the  children  of  their  earlier  faithful  ancestors.  (3)  It  is  an  encouragement  to  faith  that
the  memory  of  Divine  mercy  is  far-reaching — everlasting. — J.  A.  M.

Ver.  1. — Idolatry :  our  danger  and  our  security.  Knowing,  as  we  do,  how  wide-
spread was  the  idolatry  of  the  age  and  how  terribly  tempted  were  the  children  of  Israel
to  fall  under  its  fascination,  we  do  not  wonder  either  at  the  repetition  or  the  fulness  of
this  commandment.  God  made  it  quite  clear  to  his  people,  and  impressed  the  truth
on  their  minds  with  strong  emphasis,  that  they  must  not  permit  any  visible  image  tc
come  between  themselves  and  him.  He  would  sanction  "  no  idol,  nor  graven  image,
nor  pillar,  nor  figured  stone  "  (marginal  reading).  Respecting  idolatry  we  may  do  well
to  consider —

I.  Its  natural  history.  Men  do  not  descend  at  once  into  the  blind  and  blank
idolatry  with  which  we  are  familiar.  1.  The  first  step  downwards  is  when  men  take
some  object  or  construct  some  image  which  shall  remind  them  of  Deity,  or  stand  foi
Ckid,  or  be  a  sign  and  token  of  his  presence,  so  that  when  they  see  that  they  shall  thinh


*20  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxvi.  1— 4&

^  him.  This  was  the  case  with  the  "golden  calf"  which  Aaron  made.  The  people
presented  their  offerings  to  it  in  connection  with  a  "  feast  to  the  Lord  "  (Exod.  zxxii.  5).
It  is  too  great  a  mental  labour  to  realize  God's  presence  by  pure  thought  and  medita-
tion ;  men  crave  a  visible  object  which  shall  remind  them  of  the  Supreme.  2.  Th»
next  step— deep  into  the  thick  darkness — is  to  identify  the  Deity  with  the  object  which
is  the  chosen  sign  of  his  presence ;  and  the  constant,  inevitable  accompaniment  of  this
act  is  to  multiply  the  number  of  divinities ;  for,  as  the  visible  images  are  many,  the-
gods  become  many  also  to  the  popular  imagination.  However  antecedently  unlikely  it
may  seem  to  ns  that  men  would  commit  such  great  folly  as  this,  universal  history
compels  us  to  believe  that  they  have  done  so.  Beginning  with  the  demand  for  "  a
sign,"  men  have  "  bowed  down  unto  "  and  worshipped  the  image,  the  pillar,  the  figured
stone.  3.  Then  follows  mental,  moral,  spiritual  degradation.  The  worshippers  of  idols
have  attributed  to  their,  gods  their  own  infirmities  and  sins,  and  then  their  worship  has
reacted  on  their  own  character,  and  they  have  sunk  to  the  lowest  depths  of  abjectness
of  mind,  vileness  of  spirit,  grossness  of  Ufe.

II.  Its  essential  elements.  We  must  not'  identify  Idolatry  with  those  more
shameless  forms  of  it  which  historians  and  travellers  have  made  known  to  us.  These
are  its  last  and  worst  developments.  But  the  idolatrous  element  is  found  where  there
is  (1)  a  false  association  of  God  with  an  object  with  which  he  has  nothing  to  do,  as  (in
the  case  referred  to)  where  the  Israelites  associated  Jehovah  in  their  thoughts  with  an
image  with  which  he  had  no  connection  whatever ;  or  (2)  a  false  trust  in  an  object  with
which  God  is  more  or  less  connected.  That  was  an  idolatrous  act  on  the  part  of  the
Israelites  when  they  made  sure  of  victory  because  the  ark  of  God  was  in  the  camp
(1  Sam.  Iv.  3 — 11).  God  had  connected  himself  with  the  ark  in  an  especial  manner ;
but  the  Jews  were  trusting  in  it  rather  than  in  him,  and  they  leant  on  a  broken  reed.

III.  Its  appeal  to  ourselves.  Our  danger  is  not  from  the  grosser  forms  of  idolatry,
nor  is  it  in  the  former  of  the  two  essential  elements  of  it ;  it  is  in  the  latter  of  these.
We  are  liable  to  trust  idolatrously  in  that  with  which  God  is  connected,  but  which  has
no  virtue  at  all  in  itself.  We  are  invited,  and  sometimes  find  ourselves  tempted:
1.  To  imagine  that  a  priest  can  bless  us,  independently  of  the  truth  which  he  teaches
or  the  spiritual  help  which  he  renders  us.  2.  To  suppose  that  we  are  nearer  to  God  in
sacred  places,  irrespective  of  the  consideration  whether  we  realize  his  presence  and  draw
nigh  to  his  Spirit.  3.  To  seek  sanctity,  or  even  salvation,  in  sacraments  apart  from  the
reverent  thought  and  consecrated  feeling  which  they  should  suggest  or  excite.  This  is
an  idolatrous  delusion.

IV.  The  path  or  satett.  This  is:  1.  The  avoidance  of  temptation.  We  must
shun  those  Churches  and  services  which  would  seduce  us  from  spiritual  purity.  2.  The
acceptance  of  the  One  Divine  Mediator  we  have  in  Christ  our  Saviour.  There  is  "  one
man  we  can  adore  without  idolatry — the  man  Christ  Jesus."  3.  The  use  of  our  faculties
for  the  worship  of  the  Invisible.  We  can  worship  him  who  is  a  Spirit  "  in  spirit  and  in
truth."  We  can  realize  the  presence  of  tho  infinite  God ;  we  can  love  him  whom  we
have  not  seen  (1  Pet.  i.  8) ;  we  can  walk  the  whole  path  of  life  conscious  of  a  Divine
Companion  whose  hand  we  cannot  grasp,  but  who  "  leads  us  all  our  journey  through."
By  a  living  faith,  "  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ "
(1  John  i.  3).— C.

Vers.  3 — 13. — Incentives  to  obedience.  Beligion  has  the  first  claim  upon  us  as  tho
supreme  obligation  of  the  soul.  We  are  bound  to  worship  and  honour  God  because  we
owe  far  more  to  him  than  to  all  other  beings  in  the  universe.  The  first  and  all-
sufficient  reason  why  we  should  "  worfhip  and  bow  down"  before  him,  is  in  the  fact
that  "  he  is  our  God " — that  One  from  whom  we  come,  in  whom  we  live,  from  whom
Cometh  down  every  good  gift.  But  God  condescends  to  urge  us  to  obedience  by  pre-
senting incentives  to  our  minds.  He  wishes  us  to  consider  that  he  has  made  it
infinitely  remunerative  for  us  to  do  so ;  that,  by  so  doing,  we  become  recipients  of  the
largest  blessings  he  can  confer  and  we  can  receive.  There  is  so  much  of  contrast  as
well  as  comparison  between  the  blessings  of  the  old  and  the  new  dispensations,  that  we
must  divide  our  subject  into  two  parts.

I.  The  djoentives  which  God  held  out  to  his  ancient  people.  These  wer»
importanay  spiritual,  Jmt  prominently  temporal.    If  they  did  but "  walk  in  his  statutes.


OT.  XXVI.  1—46.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  421

•nd  keep  his  commandments,  and  do  them"  (ver.  3),  they  might  reckon  on  (1)  fertility
in  the  field  (vers.  4,  5, 10) ;  (2)  sense  of  security  from  without  and  disturbance  from
within  (safety  and  peace,  vers.  5,  6) ;  (3)  victory  in  war  (vers.  7, 8) ;  (4)  national  growth
(ver.  9) ;  (5)  God's  presence  with  them  (vers.  11, 12) ;  (6)  his  pleasure  in  them  (ver.  11) ;
•nd  (7)  his  guarantee  of  their  liherty  and  self-respect  (ver.  18).

n.  Thb  frohises  which  he  has  hade  to  us.  These  are  partly  temporal,  hut
principally  spiritual.  They  include :  1.  SufSciency  of  worldly  substance.  God  does
not  now  say,  "  Serve  me,  and  you  shall  be  strong,  wealthy,  long-lived,"  but  he  does
say,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  .  .  .  and  all  these  things  "  (food,  clothing,  etc.)
"shall  be  added  unto  you"  (Matt.  vi.  33).  "Godliness  has  promise  of  the  life  that
now  is  "  (]  Tim.  iv.  8).  Those  who  are  his  children  in  Christ  Jesus  may  reckon  uion
all  needful  support  from  his  bountiful  hand.  2.  Consciousness  of  spiritual  integrity.
As  God  made  his  people  to  be  delivered  from  the  yoke  and  to  "  go  upright "  (ver.  13),
go  he  makes  those  who  have  returned  to  him,  and  who  have  escaped  from  the  yoke  of
sin,  to  "  walk  in  uprightness  of  heart."  Instead  of  shrinking  in  fear,  bowing  down
with  a  depressing  sense  of  wrong-doing,  we  have  a  happy  consciousness  of  integrity  of
soul.  We  say  with  the  psalmist,  "  As  for  me,"  etc.  (Ps.  xli.  12).  3.  Sense  of  recon-
ciUation  with  God.  God  promises  peace  and  a  sense  of  safety  (vers.  5,  6)  to  those  who
seek  his  favour  in  Christ  Jesus.  Being  justified  by  faith  in  him,  we  have  peace  with
Gtod ;  and  we  know  that,  whatever  may  be  our  circumstances,  we  are  secure  behind  the
shield  of  his  almighty  love.  4.  Victory  in  the  battle  of  life.  If  it  be  not  wholly  true
that  "our  life  is  but  a  battle  and  a  march,"  yet  it  is  true  that  there  is  so  much  of
spiritual  struggle  in  it,  from  its  beginning  to  its  close,  that  we  all  understand  only  too
well  what  is  meant  by  "  the  battle  of  life."     There  are  many  foes  with  which  to  wrestle

gllph.  vi.  12),  and  we  need  the  invigorating;  power  which  only  the  Spirit  of  the  Strong
ne  can  impart.  If  we  are  his,  he  will  help  us  in  the  strife.  "  Our  enemies  will  fall
before  us"  (ver.  7;  see  2  Cor.  ii.  14  and  Bom.  viii.  37).  5.  His  presence  with  us  and
his  pleasure  in  us.  "  God  will  set  his  tabernacle  among  us ; "  he  "  will  walk  among  us  "
(vers.  11,  12).  He  will  be  "  with  us  always,"  and  his  sustaining  presence  will  uphold
us  in  the  darkest  hour,  in  the  most  trying  scene.  "His  soul  will  not  abhor  us"
(ver.  11);  he  will  take  Divine  pleasure  in  us;  we  shall  be  his  children,  his  guests,
his  friends,  his  heirs.  6.  An  everlasting  heritage  in  him.  He  will  be  our  God
(ver.  12).  The  sacred  page  does  not  speak  of  any  duration ;  but  that  which  is  adum-
brated in  the  Old  Testament  is  revealed  in  the  New.  Jesus  Christ  has  brought  life  and
immortality  out  into  the  light,  and  we  know  that  "  him  that  overcometh  will  the  Son
of  man  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple  of  his  God,  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out,"  etc.
(Rev.  iii  12),  and  that  "  to  him  that  overcometh  will  he  grant  to  sit  with  him  on  his
throne,"  etc.  (Rev.  iii.  21).  The  present  and  the  future,  the  best  of  the  one  and  the
whole  of  the  other,  are  the  heritage  of  those  who  "  know  the  will  of  God  and  do  it."
Surely  it  is  the  choice  of  the  wise  to  "  make  haste  and  delay  not  to  keep  his  com-
mandments."~0.

Vers.  23,  24. — Our  God  and  ourselves.  The  text  suggests  the  question.  How  far
does  God's  treatment  of  us  depend  on  our  attitude  towards  him  ?  And  the  answer  must
be  somewhat  complex,

L  In  large  measure,  God's  treatment  of  us  is  quite  irrespective  op  our  conduct
TOWARD  HIM.  He  has  done  much  for  us  from  the  promptings  of  his  own  generous  and
beneficent  nature.  As  the  sun  gives  light  because  it  is  light,  regardless  of  the  objects
on  which  it  shines,  so  our  God,  who  is  a  Sun  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11),  is  sending  forth  beams  of
truth,  love,  beauty,  happiness,  because  in  him  is  all  fulness,  and  from  that  abundance
tLere  must  flow  blessing  and  bounty  on  every  hand  (see  Ps.  ciii.  10,  11 ;  Matt.  v.  45).

IL  In  large  measure,  God's  treatment  of  us  depends  on  our  attitude  toward
HIM.  1.  Eight  feeling  on  our  part  is  reciprocated  with  kind  feeling  on  his.  If  we  love
him,  he  will  love  us  and  come  to  us  (John  xiv.  23).  2.  Rebellions  conduct  on  our  part
brings  down  adverse  action  on  his  part.  If  we  "  will  walk  contrary  to  him,  he  will  walk
contrary  to  us,  and  punish  us  for  our  sins."  The  greater  part  of  this  chapter  (vers.  14
— 39)  is  a  terrible  admonition  that,  if  we  provoke  God  by  our  wilful  disobedience,  we  must
•xpect  to  find  his  hand  against  us  in  all  the  paths  of  life,  our  growing  iniquity  nieetiug
with  his  multiplying  wrath  and  darkening  retribution.    3.  Repentant  action  ob  oW


tS2  THE   BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxvi.  1—46

E»rt  is  met  by  returning  favour  on  his  (Jer.  iii.  22 ;  Joel  ii.  12 — 14 ;  Isa.  xliv.  22 ;  Iv.  7)t
et  the  prodigal  son  arise  to  return,  and,  "  while  yet  a  great  way  off,"  the  heavenly
Father  will  run  to  meet  and  to  welcome  him  (Luke  xv.).

HL  God's  goodkess  to  us  will  seem  to  us  to  vakt  accobding  to  the  BEOTrniDS
OF  CUB  SOULS  toward  HIM.  As  men  seem  to  us  to  be  just  or  unjust,  kind  or  unkind,
according  to  the  position  we  occupy  toward  them,  so  also  does  the  Father  of  spirits.  "  All
the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  "  (and  are  seen  to  be)  "  mercy  and  truth  unto  such  as  keep  his
covenant  and  his  testimonies"  (Fs.  xxv.  10).  But  the  ways  of  the  Lord  will  seem
"  contrary  "  to  the  rebellious;  With  the  merciful  man  God  shows  himself  merciful  j
with  the  froward  he  shows  himself  froward  (Ps.  xviii.  26).  The  guilty  will  exclaim
against  the  inequality  of  God's  dealings  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  17).  He  will  seem  unjust
because  they  are  unholy,  because  their  spirit  is  false  and  wrong  (Matt.  xx.  15).  Those
who  fear  God  and  love  his  Son  their  Saviour,  join  in  the  psalm  of  the  Church  on  earth,
"  The  Lord  is  righteous  in  all  his  ways,  .  .  .  bis  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works  "
(Ps.  cxlv.) ;  they  anticipate  the  strain  of  the  Church  in  heaven,  "  Just  and  true  ar»
thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints  "  (Rev.  xv.  3). — 0.

Vers.  14 — 39. — Divine  retribution.  The  Divine  Legislator  of  Israel  knew  well  that
he  must  contemplate  disobedience  as  well  as  obedience  to  his  laws.  When  he  had
intimated  the  fulness  of  the  reward  he  would  bestow  on  the  faithful,  he  was  compelled
to  pass  on  to  "  But  if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me,  and  will  not  do,"  etc.  It  is  sad  to
think  that  it  did  not  need  Divine  prescience  to  foretell  this  issue.  Human  disobedience
is  too  constantly  occurring  a  factor  in  human  history  to  rec)uire  that :  it  may  always  be
safely  assumed.     We  have  now  to  deal  with  God's  treatment  of  it ;  and  we  see —

I.  That  God  puinsHBB  rr  with  various  evils.  (Vers.  14 — 18.)  God  always  says
to  us,  "  If  ye  will  not  do  my  commandments,  -I  will  set  my  face  against  you."  To  the
Israelites  he  threatened  specifically:  (1)  bodily  sickness;  (2)  unprofitable  labour;  (3)
defeat  in  battle ;  (4)  subjection  to  a  hated  rule ;  (5)  ignominious  terror  and  flight.  If  we
sin  we  must  expect  to  suffer  in  mind,  body,  or  estate.  Guilt  and  misery  are  necessarily
conjoined.  Sin  deserves  to  suffer :  there  needs  no  further  explanation  uf  aufff ring  than
that  God's  holy  and  righteous  Law  has  been  transgressed.  Yet,  while  the  Divine  Law-
giver visits  sin  with  retribution  because  it  is  right  that  it  should  receive  this  mark  of  his
holy  disapproval,  it  is  also  true —

IL  That  God's  punishment  is  meant  to  be  remedial.  "  If  ye  will  not  yet  for  all
this  hearken  unto  me"  (ver.  18).  Then  it  is  clear  that  these  providential  visitations
would  be  meant  to  lead  to  a  better  spirit,  to  a  disposition  to  hearken  and  to  obey.  God,
when  he  punishes,  not  only  does  an  act  of  righteous  retribution,  which  his  position  as
Supreme  Judge  demands  of  him,  but  he  also  does  that  which  he  desires  shall  lead  to
penitence  and  restoration.  He  smites  us  in  one  memVier  that  he  may  heal  us  altogether.
He  takes  away  a  little  that  he  may  give  very  largely.  He  sends  passing  pain  that  he
may  give  enduring  joy.  God's  retributions  are  his  "  corrections,"  his  paternal  chastise-
ments, his  strong  but  kind  admoiiitioiis.  By  them  he  lays  his  hand  upon  us  and  says
to  us,  in  tones  we  cannot  fail  to  understand, "  Kepent  and  return,  and  be  restored."  But
we  learn  from  these  verses —

III.  That  man  too  often  refuses  to  heed  the  Divine  correction.  "If  ye
will  not  yet  for  all  this  hearken"  (ver.  18);  "if  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  me"
(ver.  21) ;  "  if  ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  me  by  these  things  "  (ver.  23).  Often  men
do  listen  and  learn  and  obey  when  God  comes  to  them  in  sickness  or  in  sorrow  ;  but
only  too  often  they  do  not.  They  continue  in  or  revert  to  their  evil  course,  they  fall
again  into  crime,  into  vice,  into  unconcern,  into  indecision.

IV.  That  God  lays  a  heavier  hand  on  persistent  and  obdurate  impenitbncs.
He  gave  to  his  people  fair  and  full  warning  of  what  they  were  to  expect  at  his  hand
They  knew  that  obduracy  on  their  part  would  entail  gathering  and  growing  evils,
leading  on  and  down  to  uttermost  destruction.  There  would  come  the  enmity  of  the
elements,  with  consequent  disaster  in  the  field  (vers.  19,  20)  ;  desolation  and  bereave-
ment (ver.  22) ;  pestilence  and  famine  (vers.  25, 26) ;  revolting  and  unnatural  cruelties
wrought  among  themselves  (vers.  28, 29) ;  exile  and  dispersion  (ver.  33) ;  terror  of  soul
(vers.  36,  37) ;  national  destruction  and  impending  extinction  (vers.  38,  39).  These
solemn  and  fearful  threateuings  are,  no  doubt,  directed  .against  Israel,  the  specially


•H.  XXVI.  1—46.]  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  423

instructed  people.  As  God  "  exalted  that  land  unto  heaven  "  in  privilege  and  oppor-
tunity, so  he  "  brought  it  down  to  hell "  in  condemnation  and  doom.  But  when  we
remember  with  what  retribution  God  visited  the  sins  of  the  antediluvian  world,  of  the
cities  of  the  plain,  the  Canaanites,  the  great  cities  of  Babylon  and  Nineveh,  and  when
we  recall  the  sufferings  and  humiliations  he  has  brought  down  on  lands  and  cities  in
more  modern  times,  we  may  conclude  that  those  nations  which  will  not  learn  when
God  speaks  to  them  in  wrath  and  in  "  his  high  displeasure "  may  look  forward  to  a
time  of  gathering  disaster  and  final  ruin.

'  God's  retributive  dealings  with  nations  have  their  counterpart  in  his  action  toward
individual  lives.  Men  who  sin  and  suffer,  and  who  will  not  learn  by  the  things  they
suffer,  may  take  to  heart  the  truth  that  God's  manifested  wrath  will  reach  them  here  or
will  overtake  them  hereafter ;  they  may  well  wish  that  it  may  arrive  soon  rather  than
late,  for  as  time  passes  and  as  sin  indurates  aud  blinds  the  soul,  there  is  the  less  likeli-
hood that  the  sacred  lesson  will  be  learnt  before  death  shuts  the  book  of  opportunity,
ftnd  eternity  opens  that  other  book  of  judgment  and  award. — C.

Vers.  40 — 45. — Sorrow  unto  salvation.  The  chastisements  of  God,  like  the  gospel  of
Jesus  Christ,  are  either  a  savour  of  life  unto  life  or  of  death  unto  death  ;  they  either
make  or  mar ;  they  may  sanctify  and  save  or  they  may  leave  the  soul  more  bound  in
the  bonds  of  sin  than  ever.  It  is  only  godly  sorrow — sorrow  regarded  in  a  true  light
and  treated  in  the  way  that  God  intended — ^that  works  repentance  unto  salvation;
otherwise  it  works  death  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).  The  right  use  of  affliction  is  indicated  in  the
text ;  there  must  be—

I,  A  SENSE  or  ILL  DESERT.  The  uncircumcised  heart  must  be  humbled  (ver.  41).
God  seeks  by  his  chastisements  to  break  our  pride,  our  haughtiness  of  heart,  our  sinful
self-complacency.  ■  Until  this  is  done  nothing  is  done.  When  the  soul  is  at  ease  in  its
iniquity,  it  is  in  a  very  "  far  country,"  a  long  way  from  God,  truth,  salvation.  When
trouble  touches  and  pierces  our  complacency,  filling  the  soul  with  a  sense  of  its
rebelliousness,  as  soon  as  the  heart  says,  "  I  have  sinned,"  a  large  part  of  the  work  of
the  correcting  hand  is  wrought.     Then  necessarily  and  readily  follows —

n.  The  LANonAGE  or  confession.  Directly  the  heart  feels  the  lip  speaks.  Too
often  men  use  the  language  of  penitence  when  the  feeling  is  entirely  absent.  But  he
that  searcheth  the  hearts  makes  due  distinction  between  the  words  which  are  true  and
those  which  are  false.  There  is  nothing  gained  with  God  by  adopting  the  language
which  we  ought  to  be  disposed  to  use,  but  which  does  not  express  our  actual  con-
dition; everything  unreal  is  offensive  in  his  sight.  But  there  is  much  gained  by  the
limple,  natural,  heartfelt  utterance  of  penitential  feeling.  "  If  they  shall  confess  their
iniquity,"  etc.  (vers.  40 — 42).  "  With  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation  "
(Bom.  X.  10).    The  spirit  thus  taught  of  God  through  his  servant,  sorrow,  has  now —

III.  The  subject  will.  It  "  accepts  of  the  punishment  of  its  iniquity  "  (ver.  41).
It  says,  "  Surely  it  is  meet  to  be  said  unto  God,  I  have  borne  chastisement,  I  will  not
offend  any  more :  that  which  I  see  not  teach  thou  me,"  etc.  (Job  xxxiv.  31,  32).  It  is
"in  subjection  unto  the  Father  of  spirits"  (Heb.  xii.  9).  It  submits  to  His  guidance
and  surrenders  itself  to  his  will.    And  then  comes —

IV.  DiviNB  BEBTOEATION.  God  " remembers  his  covenant"  (vers.  42,  45).  As  he
remembered  the  covenant  he  made  with  the  ancestors  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and
"  did  not  abhor  them  "  (ver.  44),  but  withdrew  his  anger  from  them,  so  he  remembers  his
promise  with  us,  sealed  with  a  Saviour's  blood,  to  pardon  our  sins  and  to  restore  our
souls  to  his  Divine  favour.    Yet  there  are —

V.  LiNGEBiNQ  CONSEQUENCES  OF  SIN.  With  penitent  Israel,  toward  whom  God  was
extending  his  mercy,  "  the  land  also  was  to  be  left  of  them,  and  was  to  enjoy  her
sabbaths,  while  she  lay  desolate  without  them  "  (ver.  43).  With  us,  when  penitent
•nd  restored,  when  taken  back  into  the  family  and  kingdom  of  God,  there  are  lingering
consequences  of  sin  which  even  Divine  mercy  does  not,  cannot  remove — consequences
in :  (1)  miserable  memories  which  will  visit  the  mind  ;  (2)  enfeebled  faculty  that
must  work  in  a  lesser  sphere  with  smaller  influence ;  (3)  diminished  reputation  among
men ;  (4)  abiding  results  in  those  who  have  been  injured,  and  who  are  beyond  the
reach  of  our  restoration,  etc.  While  facing  this  solemn  fact— a  fact  which  makes  sin
seem  to  us  the  stem,  sad,  hurtful  thing  it  is — we  may  nevertheless  find  a  glad  relief  in
rtcalling —


4t4  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxvi.  1— 4&

VI.  The  blessed  hope  of  the  holt.  There  is  a  country  where  the  penal  con-
MQuences  of  sin  will  be  so  removed  from  sight  and  sense  that  to  our  consciousness
ttiey  will  exist  no  mora.  Sin  and  sorrow  shall  never  cross  the  stream  that  "divides
that  heavenly  land  from  ours ; "  they  must  always  remain  on  this  side  of  it.  What
will  remain  to  us  there  ia  a  remembrance  that  will  enhance  our  joy — a  recollection
of  sin  that  has  been  forgiven,  and  of  sorrow  that  has  been  endured,  both  the  one  and
the  other  magnifying  the  mercy  of  our  crowned  and  exalted  King. — 0.

Vers.  3 — 8. — Obedience  and  prosperity.  The  connection  between  godly  conduct  and
material  good  may  not  seem  to  us  so  close  or  so  clearly  discernible  as  that  which  is
promised  in  these  verses.  Still,  the  heart  of  the  promise  remains,  and  instances  have
never  been  wanting  to  prove  that  "  godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  promise
of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  The  prophecy  of  Amos
(ii.  13) — evidently  founded  on  this  passage  of  the  Law — refers  to  gospel  times,  and
reminds  us  that  the  declarations  of  the  text  are  capable  of  a  spiritual  application  which
invests  them  with  deeper  meaning  and  grander  results.

L  The  peopkiett  of  obedience.  1.  Man  is  unfit  to  guide  his  own  way.  "  It  is
not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps."  Ho  is  a  creature  swayed  by  passion,
short-sighted,  fallible  in  judgment.  Nor  can  the  united  wisdom  of  the  multitude  secure
the  framing  of  a  code  free  from  prejudice  and  error.  We  may  consult  the  instructions
of  Scripture  as  our  unfailing  chart ;  we  may  listen  to  its  precepts  as  the  helmsman  does
to  the  commands  of  the  captain,  assured  that  from  his  loftier  position  he  can  better
determine  the  course  the  vessel  ought  to  take.  2.  2%e  Almighty  possesses  irresistible
claims  upon  our  obedience.  He  is  our  Creator  and  Governor,  Father  and  Benefactor.
He  has  bestowed  upon  us  all  our  earthly  and  our  spiritual  benefits,  and  in  particular
spared  not  his  only  Son  for  our  sakes.  Supremely  wise  and  holy,  we  cannot  without
manifest  incongruity  refuse  to  follow  his  counsel  and  rule  of  life.  We  are  rebels  if  we
neglect  his  injunctions.  To  pick  and  choose  which  we  will  conform  to  is  to  assume
presumptuous  functions.  3.  The  statutes  are  such  as  to  commend  themselves  upon
matwrest  reflection.  Any  precept  plainly  contrary  to  reason  or  morality  no  will  has
power  to  enforce.  But  the  hexaplar  verdict  of  the  psalmist  will  be  pronounced  by  all
who  study  the  laws  of  God,  "  The  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right,"  etc.  (Ps.  xix.  7 — 9).
The  teachings  of  Jesus  Chiist  are  a  master-piece  of  skill,  goodness,  and  purity.  If
universally  adhered  to,  the  world  would  become  an  Eden.

II.  The  reward  of  obedience.  1.  Blessings  are  promised  to  the  obedient.  Plenty.
The  ground  shall  be  fertile,  the  fruit  gathered  in  harvest  shall  more  than  snflBce  to
carry  the  husbandman  on  to  the  next  ingathering.  The  gospel  does  at  any  rate  teach
Christian  stoicism,  making  a  man  contented  with  his  lot,  and  he  who  has  sufficient  for
his  wants  cannot  complain.  But  in  the  spiritual  region  we  may  have  a  never-ceasing
flow  of  gifts.  For  God  is  bountiful,  and  loves  to  grant  richest  graces  unto  his  people.
If  only  we  are  prepared  to  receive,  the  floodgates  of  his  bounty  will  be  opened.  Peace.
They  shall  dwell  at  home  in  safety,  none  causing  terror.  Strife  amongst  God's  own
people  shall  be  unknown,  the  inestimable  blessing  of  tranquillity  shall  diffuse  its  sweet-
ness over  the  land.  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on
thee."  Calm  of  conscience  is  the  peculiar  privilege  of  the  believer  in  Christ.  Bodily
suffering  cannot  destroy  this  peace.  The  testimony  of  a  well-known  minister  on  his
death-bed  recently  was,  "  Within  I  have  deep  peace,  though  around  is  constant  search-
ing pain."  Victory,  if  foes  attempt  to  molest.  The  Christian  life  is  a  warfare,  and
this  is  quite  consistent  with  the  enjoyment  of  peace.  It  is  an  external  sphere  of  conflict,
the  enemy  is  determined  and  active,  "  but  thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  obedient  soldiers  are  likeliest  to  come  off
conquerors  when  the  general  is  skilled  in  strategy.  And  as  Havelock's  men,  by  their
observance  of  moral  rules,  were  ever  prepared  for  duty,  so  are  those  who  conform  to  the
precepts  of  Christ  certain  of  success  in  the  struggle  against  sin.  The  association  is
much  more  intimate  between  obedience  and  spiritual  triumph  than  that  which  is  hero
promised  in  the  Law,  2.  These  blessings  are  eminently  desirable.  It  speaks  a  wise  and
gracious  God  to  have  made  it  so  greatly  men's  interest  to  keep  his  laws.  In  any  case
we  are  bound  to  do  what  seems  right,  yet,  if  this  conduct  were  not  coincident  with
advantage,  life  would  be  a  melancholy  scene.     Peace,  plenty,  and  victory  are  just  what


OH.  XXTI.  1—46.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  425

the  heart  desiderates  and  men  strive  to  attain.  God  will  not  offer  what  men  contemn.
It  IS  true  that  the  degraded  may  at  first  fail  to  appreciate  the  joys  of  prosperity  and
tranquillity,  yet  education  is  possihle,  and  even  brief  reasoning  must  convince  of  the
value  of  these  inducements.  3.  The  list  is  comprehensive.  There  is  material  prosperity
and  moral  good,  and  in  the  following  verses  religious  satiaractlon  is  promised — God
doling  iu  the  midst  of  his  people,  Nothing  that  can  add  to  man's  real  happiness  ia
absent  from  the  catalogue  of  pleasures  to  be  participated  in  by  the  obedient.

III.  General  bbfleotions.  1.  There  is  nothing  wrong  in  cUloiving  ourselves  to  be
influenced  by  the  promise  of  rewards.  Man  is  compelled  to  anticipate ;  prudence  is  a
virtue.  All  depends  upon  the  character  of  the  rewards.  If  they  minister  to  base,
ignoble  lusts,  then  to  be  moved  thereby  is  indicative  of  an  evil  state  of  nnnd.  But  if
the  blessings  are  legitimate  and  elevating,  in  accordance  with  principles  implanted  by
our  Maker,  then  the  hope  of  obtaining  them  is  a  strong  incitement  to  be  cherished
rather  than  checked.  To  impel  men  to  a  holy  life  by  preaching  the  bliss  and  glory  of
heaven  is  surely  allowable  and  to  be  commended.  2.  The  worth  of  these  rewards  will
be  enhanced  by  a  consideration  of  the  misery  of  their  opposites — ^want,  turmoil,  and  defeat.
Such  is  the  lot  of  those  who  follow  their  own  devices,  blindly  hurrying  to  ruin.  The
prodigal  imagined  that  he  must  see  the  world  and  leave  his  father's  home  in  order  to
be  happy,  but  he  soon  discovered  his  dire  mistake.  3.  History  proves  Ood^a  faithfvl-
nets  to  his  word.  As  long  as  the  Israelites  kept  the  Law,  their  condition  was  one  of
security,  development,  and  honour.  Every  age  has  testified  to  the  fulfilment  of  Divine
declarations,  forcing  from  the  sceptical  an  acknowledgment  of  "  a  power  that  makes
for  righteousness."  Seeking  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,  all  other
things  have  been  added.  On  the  other  baud,  it  has  been  found  hard  to  kick  against  the
pricks.  What  Carlyle  terms  the  "  eternities  "  war  against  the  evil-doer.  As  predic-
tions have  been  fulfilled  in  the  past,  so  we  are  confident  that  all  the  promises  of  God
■hall  ultimately  be  realized  in  the  experience  of  his  faithful  servants. — S.  R.  A.

Ver.  II, Ood  dwelling  amongst  men.    All  possible  methods  were  employed  to

attach  the  Israelites  to  the  Law.  Solemnity  of  its  promulgation,  judgment  executed
on  transgressors,  enticing  promises  and  terrifying  threats.  Chief  among  inducements
to  obedience  was  the  promise  of  the  text.

I.  Setting  up  a  tabernacle  implies.  1.  Settled  residences  in  the  midst  of  the
people.  This  was  more  than  an  occasional  appearance  on  the  mountain-top  or  in  the
wilderness.  A  tent  is,  at  least  for  a  season,  a  fixed  abode.  The  Almighty  would  never
be  far  distant  from  his  lieges  as  he  had  seemed  to  be  in  preceding  years.  2.  Friendly,
familiar  intercourse  with  the  people.  He  condescended  to  their  manner  of  life,  inhabit-
ing a  home  as  they  did,  passing  as  it  were  from  one  to  the  other.  This  is  expressed  in
ver.  12,  "  I  will  walk  among  you."  Naught  of  pollution  was  suffered  for  the  reason
given  in  Deut.  xxiii.  14,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  camp,"  A
special  revelation  of  God  is  intimated,  that  he  would  be  known,  not  as  omnipresent  in
space,  but  as  peculiarly  present,  interchanging  visits  with  his  people.  3.  The  assuranct
of  Divine  blessing.  Guidance,  assistance,  forgiveness,— all  are  herein  included.  Qof
would  be  always  near  to  be  entreated.  At  the  tabernacle  sacrifices  could  be  offered  tr
purge  away  defilement.  "  The  heathen  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  Israel,
when  my  sanctuary  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  them  for  evermore "  (Bzek.  xxxvii.  28),
God's  presence  is  superior  to  any  of  his  works ;  if  we  have  him,  we  have  ail  good  things

guaranteed.

II.  The  people  op  God  mat  well  wonder  that  he  should  delight  in  them  anp
NOT  VIEW  them  with  ABHORRENCE.  To  abide  with  man  would  be  impossible  if  disgus
were  continually  uppermost  in  the  mind  of  God.  1.  Consider  man's  sinfulness.  How
repugnant  to  the  pure  and  holy  One  of  Israel  is  every  thought  of  iniquity,  much  less
its  overt  commission!  How  often  must  he  be  shocked  at  the  sights  and  sounds  that
gratify  sinful  creatures?  Peter,  awakened  to  a  sense  of  his  unworthiness,  cried  out,
"Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord."  2.  Consider  man's  imperfections,
his  ignorance  and  frailty,  his  dulness  of  perception,  his  insensibility  to  refined  and
elevated  tastes  and  emotions.  If  one  nurtured  in  good  society  revolts  at  the  idea  of
close  communion  with  those  inferior  in  the  social  scale,  whose  manner  of  hfe  and  habits
of  thinking  are  so  different,  how  great  must  be  the  disparity  between  heaven  and  earth  1


426  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [ch.  xxvi.  1—46.

what  a  descent  must  God  feel  it  to  be  to  consort  with  creatures  of  such  petty  selfish
aims  and  uncultured  ways !  Only  real  pitying  love,  a  desire  to  benefit  and  raise  these
miserable  objects,  a  vision  of  what  it  was  possible  for  them  to  become  by  such  fellow-
ship with  the  Most  High,  could  have  invested  men  with  sufficient  interest  in  the  eyes
of  God  to  permit  him  to  dwell  amongst  them.  If  the  people  strive  to  fulfil  the  behests
of  the  Law,  much  of  their  degradation  will  vanish,  and  be  succeeded  by  integrity  and
righteousness,  which  shall  gradually  beautify  their  character  and  customs.  "My  sonl
shall  not  abhor  you,"  if  you  honour  my  precepts  by  strict  fidelity.

III.  The  promise  verified.  1.  In  the  local  habitation,  of  God  at  Shiloh  and
Jerusalem.  There  God  placed  his  Name  and  exhibited  his  power  and  favouri  2.  In
his  personal  manifestation  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  In  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the
Godhead  bodily."  "  The  Word  .  .  .  dwelt  among  us."  Then  was  answered  the  ques-
tion, "  Will  God  in  very  deed  dwell  with  man  upon  the  earth  ?  "  Christ  sojourned  like
ourselves  in  a  house  of  clay,  mingling  with  men  and  women  in  their  daily  tasks,  sat
at  the  same  table  with  publicans  and  sinners.  3.  In  the  presence  of  Qog  spiritually  in
the  heart  of  the  individual  believer,  in  the  Church  of  Christ  as  a  whole,  making  it  thu
temple  of  God,  and  in  the  various  assemblies,  small  or  great,  of  the  saints.  "  Where
two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  Name,  there  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them."
The  grandest  fulfilment  will  be  when  the  Lord  God  Almighty  shall  himself  constitute
the  temple  in  which  they  shall  ofier  their  worship  and  service.  "  He  that  sitteth  on
the  throne  shall  dwell  among  (spread  his  tabernacle  over)  them."  No  more  hungering
nor  thirsting,  no  death,  sorrow,  nor  crying,  when  God  shall  thus  absolutely  completely
draw  near  to  his  people. — S.  R.  A.

Vers.  1,  2. — Command  to  maintain  the  public  worship  of  Jehovah.  I,  Ppbity  of
WORSHIP.  No  idols  or  images.  1.  Spirituality  of  religion.  2.  Dependence  of  man
on  renelation.  The  deistic  position  of  natural  religion  untenable.  3.  The  worship  of
God  should  be  the  free  and  grateful  remembrance  of  past  benefits  received,  therefore
the  leading  elements  of  it  should  be  faith  and  praise,  not,  as  in  heathenism  and  corrupt
Christian  systems  such  as  the  Roman  Catholic,  the  slavish  subjection  of  man  to  the
fear  of  Divine  wrath  and  the  mediation  of  priests.

n.  Consecration  both  of  day  and  place.  Sabbath  and  sanctuary.  1.  As  neces-
sary on  account  of  the  weakness  of  our  nature.  We  cannot  keep  the  mind  above  the
world  unless  we  are  separated  at  times  altogether  from  it.  2.  The  rallying  point  of
fellowship.  In  the  communion  of  saints  there  is  special  spiritual  help.  3.  As  main-
taining the  holy  order  of  human  life,  giving  distinction  and  eminence  to  the  highest
things,  predicting  the  future  rest,  revealing  the  dependence  of  the  bodily  life  on  the
life  of  the  soul,  and  of  the  happiness  of  earthly  toil  on  the  blessing  of  God.  4.  The
Christian  sabbath  as  based  on  the  resurrection  of  Christ  has  a  new  form  of  obligation
and  a  larger  sphere  of  holy  suggestion.  It  is  not  so  much  commanded  as  vitally
connected  with  the  whole  strength  of  Christian  motive. — ^B.

Vers.  3 — 39. — Promises  and  threatenings.  Ver.  12,  "  And  I  will  walk  among  vou,
and  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be  my  people."

I.  The  true  law  of  human  life.  1.  Religion  the  upholding  support  of  individual,
social,  national  well-being.  Natural  laws  subservient  to  higher  ends.  Ascending
scale  in  the  universe,  the  physical  the  basis  of  the  psychical,  the  psychical  of  the
moral,  the  moral  of  the  spiritual.  2.  The  covenant  relationship  of  God  and  man  the
only  true  form  in  which  the  ideas  of  religion  can  be  realized  and  maintained.
Personality  of  God,  freedom  of  man.  Interchange  of  confidence.  Living  communion.
Support  of  prayer,  which  should  embrace  all  wants  and  possibilities.  3.  Illustration
of  the  connection  between  providence  and  religion  in  the  history  both  of  individuals
and  nations.  Importance  of  insisting  on  the  truths  contained  in  this  chapter  as  against
seculariem  and  fanaticism  and  mysticism.  Religion  is  objective  as  well  as  subjective.
Tremendous  fact  that,  notwithstanding  both  the  promises  and  threatenings,  Israel  failed
to  keep  the  Law.    Illustration  of  human  fall  and  dependence  on  Divine  grace.

II.  Divine  government.  1.  Righteous.  2.  Merciful.  3.  Revealed  in  connectioa
■with  a  system  of  truth  and  actual  promir^es  appealing  to  faith.  4.  Embracing  thoM
who  know  not  God,  as  wtll  as  his  people. — B.


OH.  xxvii.  1 — 34.J


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


42?


Ver.  21.—^reatenings.  I.  Actually  fulfilled  in  history  of  the  Jews,  espeoially  at
siege  of  Jerusalem,  a.d.  70.

II.  Illustrating  the  moral  nature  of  man  as  connected  with  a  moral  gorernment.

III,  Taken  in  order  of  announcement  after  the  promises,  reminding  us  that  Qod
wiUeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner.  The  brightness  of  the  lore  on  the  background  of
righteousness. — R.


Vers.  40 — 46. — The  graeiout  invitation  to  repentance.  The  covenant  may  be
restored.  Even  in  the  midst  of  the  declarations  of  Divine  sovereignty  and  govern-
ment, long-suffering  mercy  meets  "  the  earliest  and  faintest  breathings  of  a  broken  and
penitent  spirit."

I.  Confirm  by  history  (see  Judges  and  Kings).  The  restoration  from  Babylon.
All  consummated  in  Messiah.

II.  The  free  grace  of  God  is  the  foundation  of  hope ;  "  I  am  the  Lord  their  Qod ; "
" I  will  remember ; "  " for  all  that  I  will  not  cast  them  away ; "  "of  faith,  that  it
might  be  by  grace."

III.  The  forgiveness  of  Qod  dependent  on  the  fulfilment  of  declared  conditions.
"  If  they  shall  confess ; ''  "  if  their  uncircamcised  heart  be  humbled."  1.  Spirituality
of  religion  maintained  from  the  beginning.  2.  The  pmpose  and  end  of  all  Divine
chi^tisements  to  produce  an  acceptable  state  of  heart.  3.  The  true  penitence  was  the
true  circumcision,  in  other  words,  it  was  a  renewal  of  the  covenant,  therefore  included
faith  and  acceptance  of  the  Divine  revelation  and  ordinances.  Repentance  and  faith
are  one  in  the  higher  light  of  the  gospel,  for  they  are  both  "  toward  "  the  covenant  in
Christ  Jesus. — £.


APPENDIX.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXVIL


1'hb  final  chapter,  attached  to  the  book
after  the  conoludiug  exhortation,  is  a  short
treatise  on  persons  (vers.  2 — 8),  animals
(vers.  9—13),  houses  (vera.  14,  15),  lands
(vers.  16—24),  vowed  to  God;  and  on  the
commntation  of  vows.

A  man  might  vow  to  the  service  of  God
whatever  he  had  a  right  over,  that  is,  him-
self, his  wife,  his  children,  his  slaves,  his
beasts,  his  houses,  his  fields.  In  case
persons  were  vowed,  the  rule  was  that  they
should  be  redeemed  at  »  certain  price,
though  occasionally  the  redemption  was
not  made.  Vowing  a  person  to  God  thus,
was,  as  a  rule,  no  more  than  vowing  so
much  money  to  the  use  of  the  sanctuary  as
was  fixed  as  the  price  of  the  redemption  of
the  person  vowed.  Yet  there  is  a  great
difference  between  the  two  acts  of  vowing
a  person  and  vowing  the  correlative  sum
rf  money.  A  man  in  great  danger  or
distress  might  devote  himself  (Gen.  xxviii.
20)  or  another  (Judg.  xi.  30;  1  Sam.  i.  U)


to  God,  when  he  never  would  have  vowed
money.  Such  vows  were  redeemable,  and,
as  a  rule,  were  redeemed,  though  there
were  some  exceptions,  as  in  the  case  of
Samuel.

If  beasts  were  vowed  to  the  Lord  (vers.
9 — ]  8),  they  could  not  be  redeemed  if  they
were  such  as  could  be  sacrificed  to  him ;  if
they  were  not  such  as  could  be  sacrificed,
they  were  to  be  valued  by  the  priest,  and
either  retained  as  a  possession  of  the  sanc-
tuary, or,  if  the  owner  preferred  it,  redeemed
by  him  at  the  price  fixed  and  one-fifth
additional.

If  houses  were  vowed  to  the  Lord  (vers.
14,  15),  they  became  the  property  of  the
sanctuary,  unless  they  were  redeemed  at  the
valuation  set  upon  them  by  the  priest,  with
one-filth  additional.

If  hereditary  lauds  were  vowed  to  the
Lord  (vers.  16 — 21),  ihey  became  the  pos-
session of  the  sanctuary  at  the  year  of
jubilee,  unless  they  had  been  previously
redeemed;  redemption,  however,  was  in
this  case  the  ordinary  rule,  and  we  do  not


128


THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.


[CH.  XXVII.  1 — 34


hear  of  any  aooumnlation  of  landed  property
in  the  hands  of  the  prieets  from  this  source.
In  the  case  of  a  field  which  was  not  an
hereditary  possession,  but  a  purchase,  being
vowed  to  the  Lord  (vers.  22—24),  the  com-
mutation sum  was  paid  down  "  in  that  day,"
that  is,  on  the  spot  in  a  lump  sum,  the  land
going  back  at  the  jubilee  to  the  original
owners  from  whom  the  temporary  possession
had  been  bought  by  the  man  who  made  the
vow.

A  section  is  added  forbidding  the  first-
bom  of  animals,  things  devoted,  and  tithes
to  be  vowed,  because  they  were  already
the  Lord's  ;  allowing  the  redemption  of  the
firstborn  of  uncleaa  animals,  and  of  the
tithes  of  corn  and  fruits,  but  prohibiting
redemption  in  the  case  of  sacrificial  animals,
ct  things  devoted,  and  of  the  tithes  of
animals.

Yer.  2. — When  u  man  shall  make  a
singular  vow, — literally,  when  a  man  ehall
separate  a  vow,  that  is,  make  a  special  vow
(see  Numb.  vi.  2)— the  persons  shall  be  for
the  Lord  by  thy  estimation ;  that  is,  when  a
man  has  vowed  himself  or  another  person
to  the  Lord,  the  priest  shall  declare  the
amount  at  which  the  person  vowed  is  to  be
redeemed.

Vers.  3 — 7. — The  sum  at  which  a  man
between  twenty  and  sixty  years  of  age  was
to  be  redeemed  was  fifty  shekels,  equal  to
£6  9«.  id.;  a  woman,  thirty  shekels,  or
£3  178.  6i. ;  a  youth  between  five  and
twenty  years  of  age,  twenty  shekels,  or
£2  lis.  Sd.;  a  maiden  between  the  same
ages,  tea  shekels,  or  £1  5s.  IQd.;  a  boy
between  one  month  and  five  years,  five
shekels,  or  128.  11(2. ;  a  girl  between  the
same  ages,  three  shekels,  or  7«.  9d. ;  a  man
above  sixty  years,  fifteen  shekels,  or
£1  188.  9(i. ;  a  woman  of  the  same  age,  ten
shekels,  or  £1  58.  Wd.

Ver.  8. — A  discretion  is  left  with  the
priest  to  lower  these  valuations  in  case  the
man  who  has  made  tlie  vow  is  very  poor.
According  to  his  ability  that  vowed  shall
the  priest  value  him.

Vers.  9,  10. — In  caae  a  clean  animal  is
vowed  to  the  Lord,  it  is  not  to  be  exchanged
for  another  on  the  plea  of  not  being  good
enough  or  being  too  good  for  sacrifice.  If
any  such  attempt  is  made,  both  animals  are
to  be  given  up  and  sacrificed,  or,  if  blemished,
added  to  the  herd  of  the  sanctuary.

Vers.  11 — 13. — An  unclean  animal,  which
might  not  be  saciificed,  if  vowed,  was  to  be
valued  at  a  price  fixed  by  the  priest.  If  its
original  owner  took  it  back  again,  he  was
to  pay  this  price  and  one-fifth  more  than


the  sum  named ;  if  he  did  not,  it  beoame  the
property  of  the  sanctuary.  The  words,  the
priest  shall  value  it,  whether  it  be  good  or
bad,  should  rather  be  rendered,  the  prie$t
shall  estimate  it  between  good  and  bad,  thai
is,  at  a  moderate  price,  as  though  it  wera
neither  very  good  nor  very  bad.  And  so
in  the  next  verse.

Vers.  14, 15. — The  rule  as  to  the  redemp-
tion of  houses  is  the  same  as  that  regarding
the  redemption  of  unclean  animals.  The
ordinary  practice  was  to  redeem.

Vers.  16 — 21. — In  case  a  man  shall  Banotify
onto  the  Lord  some  part  of  a  field  of  bis
possession,  that  is,  of  his  hereditary  lands,
the  redemption  price  is  fixed  by  the  quantity
of  seed  required  for  sowing  it.  If  it  requires
a  homer,  or  five  bushels  and  a  half,  of  barley
seed  to  crop  it,  the  redemption  price  is  fifty
shekels,  or  £6  9s.  2d.,  plus  one-fifth,  that  is,
£7  158.,  supposing  that  the  vow  had  been
made  in  the  year  succeeding  the  jubilee;
but  if  the  vow  was  made  at  any  time  after
the  jnbile,  the  value  of  the  previous  harvests
was  deducted  from  this  sum.  The  amount
does  not  seem  to  have  been  paid  in  a  lump
sum,  but  by  annual  instalments  of  one
shekel  and  one-fifth  of  a  shekel,  equal  to
3s.  l^d.,  each  year.  In  case  he  had  sold  his
interest  in  the  field  up  to  the  approacldng
jubilee  before  making  his  vow,  then  no  re-
demption was  allowed;  lie  paid  nothing,
but  the  field  passed  from  him  to  the  sanc-
tuary at  the  jubilee.

Vers.  22 — 24. — The  case  of  a  man  who
shall  sanctify  unto  the  Lord  a  field  which  he
hath  bought,  which  is  not  of  the  fields  of  his
possession,  or  inheritance,  is  necessarily
different,  because  he  was  not  the  owner  of
the  land,  but  only  the  possessor  of  it  until
the  next  jubilee.  For  this  reason  he  had
to  pay  the  redemption  price  immediately  in
that  day,  the  land,  of  course,  reverting  to
the  original  owner  at  the  jubilee.

Ver.  25. — The  estimation  is  to  be  made
according  to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary,
that  is,  the  shekel  at  its  full  value  before
worn  by  use  in  traffic  (see  Exod.  xxx.  13 ;
Numb.  iii.  47;  xviii.  16).

Vers.  26— 33.— The  law  of  vows  and  their
commutation  is  furtlier  declared  in  four
subjects:  (1)  the  firstborn  of  animals;
(2)  things  already  devoted;  (3)  tithes  of
the  produce  of  the  land ;  (4)  tithes  of  the
produce  of  the  cattle.

Vers.  26— 28.— The  firstborn  of  animals
were  already  the  Lord's,  and  they  could
not,  therefore,  be  vowed  to  him  afresh ;  the
sacrificial  animals  were  to  be  offered  in
sacrifice  (Exod.  xiii.  15);  the  ass  was  to  be
redeemed  by  a  sheep  or  be  put  to  death
(Exod.  xiii.  13 ;  xxxiv.  20) ;  other  unclean
animals  are  to  be  either  redeemed  at  th«
fixed  price,  plus  one-fifth,  or,  if  not  t»


CH.  xxvn.  1 — 34.]


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


429


deemed,  lold  for  the  benefit  of  the  (ano-
tnary.

Vers.  28, 29. — Whatever  is  already  eherem
(a  word  here  first  used  as  a  term  well  undar-
itood),  that  is,  devoted  to  God,  whether
devoted  for  the  purpose  of  destruction  or  of
entire  surrender  to  him,  may  be  neither
redeemed  nor  sold.  Wljether  it  be  of  man,
like  the  Canaanites  at  Hormah  (Numb.  zxi.
2),  or  of  beast,  as  the  sheep  and  oxen  of  the
Amalekites  (1  Sam.  xv.  21),  or  of  the  field,
as  referred  to  in  ver.  21,  or  of  other  inani-
mate objects,  as  the  cities  of  Hormah
CNumb.  xzi.  2),  it  is  either  to  be  put  to
death  or  given  np  without  reserve  or  com-
mntation  to  God's  ministers.  In  the  case
of  men  they  must  be  put  to  death.  "  This
provision  would  have  applied  only  to  the
devoting  of  those  who  were  already  mani-
festly under  the  ban  of  Jehovah — those
guilty  of  such  outrageous  and  flagrant
violation  of  the  fundamental  law  of  the
covenant  that  they  manifestly  came  under
the  penalty  of  deau.  Such  persons,  instead
of  being  tried  and  condemned,  might  be  at
once  devoted  and  put  to  death  "  (Gardiner).
"  To  this  it  may  be  added  that  the  devotion
by  ban  (cherem)  of  any  object  or  person
was  not  to  be  done  by  private  persons,  at
their  own  will,  but  was  performed  by  the
civil  magistrates,  iinder  known  conditions
and  laws;  e.g.  the  cities  of  idolaters,  such
as  Jericho,  were  so  devoted,  and  the  inhabi-
tants, by  the  command  of  God  himself,  who
made  his  people  to  be  the  executioners
cf  his  judgments  against  inveterate  idola-


try (see   Dent.  xiii.    18;    Josh.  yi.    V)"

(Wordsworth).

Vers.  30— 32.— Tithes,  like  the  eherem,
are  introduced  as  thinfja  well  known.
Abraham  gave  tithes  to  Melchizedek  (Gen.
xiv.  20;  Heb.  vii.  4).  Jacob  vowed  the
tenth  to  the  Lord  (Gen.  zxviii.  22),  whence
we  see  that  the  practice  of  tlie  payment  of
tithes  was  not  of  Mosaic  institution,  but
immemoriaL  The  duty  was,  however,  com-
manded afresh  for  the  Israelites.  "  I  have
given  the  children  of  Levi  all  the  tenth  in
Israel  for  an  inheritance,  for  their  service
which  they  serve,  even  the  service  of  the
tabernacle"  (Numb,  xviii.  21),  and  of  this
tithe  they  were  to  pay  a  tenth  to  the  priests
(Numb,  xviii.  26).  Being  already  the
Lord's,  the  tithe  of  the  cora  and  fruits  could
not  be  vowed  to  the.  Lord,  but  it  could  be
redeemed,  or  commuted,  by  the  owner
paying  one-fifth  more  tlian  the  price  at
which  it  was  valued.

Vers.  82,  33.— The  tithe  of  the  cattle
could  neither  be  vowed  nor  redeemed.  As
the  young  oxen  and  sheep  passed  under  the
rod  by  which  they  were  counted  by  the
herdsman,  the  tenth  animal  was  touched
(the  rod,  according  to  tradition,  having  been
dipped  in  red  paint),  and  handed  over  to  the
Levites.  There  was  to  be  no  change  made
in  the  animals,  nor  was  commutation  allowed.

Ver.  34. — The  final  verse  of  the  previous
chapter  is  repeated  after  the  further  legis
lation  on  vows  and  on  their  commutation  has
been  added,  to  show  that  it  too  makes  part
of  the  Sinaitio  code.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 34, — Vows  are  not  instituted  by  the  Mosaic  legislation  ;  they  were  already
in  existence  as  a  habit  of  the  Hebrew  people,  and  they  are  only  regulated  by  Moses
The  principle  on  the  subject  of  vows  is  that  no  one  was  bound  to  make  a  vow,  but  that
when  a  vow  was  made,  it  must  be  observed  by  the  payment  of  the  thing  vowed  or  its
recognized  commutation.  Thus  Deut.  xxiii.  21,  "  When  thou  shalt  vow  a  vow  unto
the  Lord  thy  God,  thou  shalt  not  slack  to  pay  it :  for  the  Lord  thy  God  will  surely
require  it  of  thee ;  and  it  would  be  sin  in  thee.  But  if  thou  shalt  forbear  to  vow,  it
shall  be  no  sin  in  thee."  And  Numb.  xxx.  2,  "  If  a  man  vow  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  or
swear  an  oath  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  bond ;  he  shall  not  break  his  word,  he  shall  do
according  to  all  that  prooeedeth  out  of  his  mouth."  And  Bcoles.  v.  5,  "Better  is  it  that
thou  shouldest  not  vow,  than  that  thou  shouldest  vow  and  not  pay."

L  Old  Testament  vows  were  pkomisbs  to  God  to  give  up  to  him  something  or

TALUB  ON  CONDITION  OF   DBLIVEBANOE   IN   DISTBESS  OB  HELP  IN   ATTAINING   SOMETHWG

DBSIBBD.  Examples :  1.  Jacob's  vow :  "  And  Jacob  vowed  a  vow,  saying,  If  God  will
be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I  go,  and  will  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and
raiment  to  put  on,  so  that  I  come  again  to  my  father's  house  in  peace ;  then  shall  the
Lord  be  my  God :  and  this  stone,  which  I  have  set  for  a  pillar,  shall  be  God's  house
and  of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me  I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto  thee  "  (Gen.  xxviii.
20—22),  2.  Jephthah's  vow :  "  And  Jephthah  vowed  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,
If  thou  shalt  without  fail  deliver  the  children  of  Ammon  into  mine  hands,  then  it  shall
be,  that  whatsoever  cometh  forth  of  the  doors  of  my  house  to  meet  me,  when  I  return
in  peace  from  the  children  of  Ammon,  shall  surely  be  the  Lord's,  and  (or)  I  will  ofier  it  up


480  THE  BOOK  OP  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxvn.  1—34.


for  a  burnt  offering"  (Judg.  xi.  30,  31).  What  Jephthah  appeared  to  contemplate  aa
likely  to  meet  him  was  either  a  non-sacrificial  animal,  which  would  then  be  handed
over  to  the  sanctuary  (ch.  xxvii.  11 — 13),  or  a  sacrificial  animal,  which  would  be  offered
up.  His  daughter  came  under  the  first  head  (ch.  xxvii.  9,  10).  "  3.  Hannah's  vow :
"  And  she  vowed  a  vow,  and  said,  0  Lord  of  hosts,  if  thou  wilt  indeed  look  on  the
affliction  of  thine  handmaid,  and  remember  me,  and  not  forget  thine  handmaid,  but  wilt
give  unto  thine  handmaid  a  man  child,  then  I  will  give  him  unto  the  Lord  all  the  days ,
of  his  life,  and  there  shall  no  razor  come  upon  his  head"  (1  Sam.  i.  11).  4.  Absalom's
pretended  vow :  "  For  thy  servant  vowed  a  vow  while  I  abode  at  Geshur  in  Syria,
saying,  If  the  Lord  shall  bring  me  again  indeed  to  Jerusalem,  then  I  will  serve  the
Lord  (offer  sacrifices  in  Hebron)  "  (2  Sam.  xv.  8).

II.  Christian  vows  aee  peomiseb  made  to  God,  dxffbbino  fkom  the  Jewish  vow

BY  BEINS  INDEPENDENT  OF  ANT  DELIVERANCE  OK   BENEFIT  TO  BE  BBCEIVED  IN  RETURN.

Examples :  1.  The  baptismal  vow,  ratified  and  confirmed  in  Confirmation :  "  Wilt  thou
then  obediently  keep  God's  holy  will  and  commandments,  and  walk  in  the  same  all  the
days  of  thy  life  ?  I  will."  "  Do  you  here,  in  the  presence  of  God,  and  of  this  congrega-
tion, renew  the  solemn  promise  and  vow  that  was  made  in  your  name  at  your  baptism ;
ratifying  and  confirming  the  same  in  your  own  person  ?  I  do  "  (Baptism  and  Confir-
mation Services).  2.  The  marriage  vow  :  "  Wilt  thou  have  this  woman  to  thy  wedded
wife,  to  live  together  after  G«d's  ordinance  in  the  holy  estate  of  matrimony?"  "  Wilt
thou  have  this  man  to  thy  wedded  husband,  to  live  together  after  God's  ordinance  in
the  holy  estate  of  matrimony  ? "  "I  will "  (Form  of  Solemnization  of  Matrimony).
3.  The  ordination  vow-:  "Will  you  then  give  your  faithful  diligence  always  so  to
minister  the  doctrine  and  sacraments,  and  the  discipline  of  Christ,  as  the  Lord  hath
commanded,  and  as  this  Churcb  and  realm  hath  received  the  same,  according  to  the
commandments  of  God ? "  "I  will  so  do,  by  the  help  of  the  Lord "  (The  Ordering  of
Priests).

III.  The    CONDITIONS    under   which   vows    AND   OATHS    ABE    NOT,   OR    CEASE    TO  BE,

OBLIGATORY.  Jeremiah  writes  (iv.  2),  "  And  thou  shalt  swear.  The  Lord  liveth,  in
truth,  in  judgment,  and  in  righteousness."  Isaiah  speaks  of  those  "  which  swear  by  the
Name  of  the  Lord,  and  make  mention  of  the  God  of  Israel,  but  not  in  tnith,  nor  in
righteousness "  (Isa.  xlviii.  1).  Accordingly,  any  oath  or  vow  is  void  which  was  an
nnrighteous  oath  or  vow  when  taken ;  and  the  sin  of  breaking  it,  though  a  sin,  is  less
than  that  of  keeping  it.  Therefore  Herod  ought  not  to  have  kept  his  oath  to  the
daughter  of  Herodias  (Matt.  xiv.  9) ;  and  the  observance  of  their  oath  by  the  forty  con-
spirators who  had  bound  themselves  to  kill  Paul,  would  have  been  a  sin  on  their  part
(Acts  xxiii.  12 — 21).  Further,  a  vow,  as  distinct  from  an  oath  or  contract,  ceases  to
be  obligatory  if  the  person  concerned  comes  to  regard  it  as  unrighteous  and  wrong  for
him  to  fulfil  with  his  changed  mind  or  under  changed  circumstances.  Thus,  the  vow
taken  at  ordination  to  administer  the  sacraments  in  the  form  received  by  a  special
Church,  is  not  binding  if  a  man  ceases  on  conscientious  grounds  to  be  a  member  of
that  Church,  and  the  vow  of  celibacy  taken  by  Luther  and  others,  who  have  become
reformers,  no  longer  binds  them  when  they  have  come  to  the  conviction  that  the  vow
was  unrighteous,  and  when  they  have  rejected  the  discipline  of  their  Church.  The
marriage  vow,  however,  stands  upon  a  different  basis,  because  marriage  is  a  contract,
containing  not  only  a  vow  to  God,  but  also  a  promise  to  man,  by  the  non-fulfilment  of
which  wrong  would  be  done.'

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

On  keeping  vow$,    Ch.  xxvii. ;  cf.  Eccles.  v.  4,  5  j  Gten.  xxviii.  20 — ^22 ;  xxxv.  1 ^7.

We  have  in  this  apparent  appendix  to  the  book  an  interesting  chapter  about  keeping
TOWS.  Eeligious  enthusiasm  may  very  properly  express  itself  in  the  dedication  either
of  one's  self,  or  a  relative  in  whose  destiny  we  have  a  voice,  or  a  Oeast,  or  a  house,  or
finally  a  field.    Such  a  sense  of  special  obligation  may  be  laid  upon  us  that  we  feel

1  The  best  treatise  on  this  difficult  subject  is  Bishop  Sanderson's  '  Seven  Lectures  Oon-
oeming  the  Obligation  of  Promissory  Oaths,'  delivered  in  Latin,  at  Oxford,  and  translated
by  the  command  of  Charles  I.


aa.  xxvn.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  431


oonstrained  to  dedicate  either  a  person,  an  animal,  or  a  piece  of  property  unto  God.
But  it  may  be  highly  inconvenient  for  the  priests  to  accept  of  the  dedicated  article  at
the  tabernacle.  It  may  be  much  more  convenient  to  receive,  in  lieu  thereof,  its  money
equivalent,  and  so  a  scale  of  charges  is  here  given,  according  to  which  the  vow's  value  is
to  be  estimated.

I.  Wb  MTJST  dedicate  in  this  special  WAT  ONLY  WHAT  LIES  BETOND  THE  LOBD's

osuAii  DUES.  The  tithes,  the  firstlings,  and  the  Nazarites  may  be  regarded  as  the  Lord's
ordinary  dues.  We  have  no  right  to  "  make  a  fuss  "  about  what  is  lawfully  his  own.
The  margin  beyond  the  tithe  is  broad  enough  from  which  to  make  our  special  vowi<
without  encroaching  upon  the  tithe.  Let  the  nine-tenths  or  the  four-fifths,  according
as  we  regard  a  single  or  a  double  tithe  the  Jewish  proportion  in  systematic  giving,  be
the  source  from  which  we  shall  draw  our  special  vows.

II.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  give  ODB  increasing  gratitude  such  special  OUTLETS.

For  after  all,  the  Lord  has  given  us  everything,  and  may  demand  all  if  he  pleases.
When  he  is  so  "  modest  in  his  demands  " — ^if  we  may  be  allowed  such  an  expression
regarding  his  claim  upon  the  tithes — it  is  surely  becoming  in  us  from  time  to  time  to
give  our  hearts  free  play,  and  have  persons  or  things  specially  set  apart  for  him.

III.  But  wb  must  not  be  bash  or  inconsideratb  in  cub  vows.  Jephthah,  for
example,  was  most  rash  in  his  vow.  So  was  Saul  in  the  war  with  the  Philistines,  when
he  almost  insisted  on  Jonathan  dying  because,  in  eating  a  little  honey  in  the  wood,  he
had  in  ignorance  transgressed  the  vow  of  the  inconsiderate  king.  We  have  no  right  to
make  "  rash  promises ''  to  any  one,  much  less  to  God.

IV.  When  we  have  eegistered  a  special  vow  wb  hubt  keep  it  scrupulously.
There  is  a  temptation  to  make  liberal  vows  on  condition  of  receiving  certain  blessings
from  God,  and  then  to  forget  them  when  the  blessing  is  received.  Let  us  take  in
illustration  the  case  of  Jacob.  When  he  was  posting  in  hot  haste  towards  Fadan-aram
for  fear  of  the  injured  Esau,  he  spent  a  remarkable  night  at  Bethel.  God  there  gave
him  a  reassuring  vision.  Sin,  he  saw,  had  not  separated  him  altogether  from  heaven,
but  even  a  deceiver  like  himself  might  return  penitently  to  God  and  rise  on  the  rounds
of  a  ladder  of  light  into  fellowship  and  peace.  In  this  ecstasy  he  registers  in  the  calm
morning  light  a  vow :  "  If  God  will  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  this  way  that  I
go,  and  will  give  me  bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on,  so  that  I  come  again  to  my
father's  house  in  peace ;  then  shall  the  Lord  be  my  God :  and  this  stone,  which  I  have
set  for  a  pillar,  shall  be  God's  house :  and  of  all  that  thou  shalt  give  me  I  will  surely
give  the  tenth  unto  thee  "  (Gen.  xxviii.  20 — 22).  Did  Jacob  keep  his  vow  ?  Surely
the  moment  he  returns  to  Canaan  he  will  make  for  Bethel,  and  set  up  his  altar,  and
discharge  his  vow  ?  Nothing  of  the  kind.  He  forgot  all  about  it,  and  went  to  Succoth,
and  then  to  Shechem,  and  it  was  not  till  Dinah  had  been  defiled,  and  members  of  his
family  were  becoming  idolaters,  and  God  commanded  him  to  go  to  Bethel  and  perform
it,  that  the  wily  old  patriarch  was  brought  to  a  sense  of  his  duty  (Gen.  xxiv.  1—7).

Let  us,  then,  enter  upon  our  vows  calmly,  deliberately,  without  any  unseemly  haste.
Then,  whatever  it  may  cost,  no  matter  how  great  the  sacrifice,  let  us  undertake  it,  and
our  whole  religious  life  will  rise  to  the  occasion.  The  future  life,  into  which  we  hope
to  enter,  will  be  so  completely  dedicated  to  God's  glory,  that  the  distinction  we  must
ueeds  now  make  between  ordinary  and  special  vows  shall  be  lost  completely,  for  the
enthusiasm  which  leads  to  such  special  vows  now  shall  make  them  the  ordinary  rule
for  ever.- B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 25.^-Bitigular  wwi.  The  loving  heart  will  ask  not  only  what  must,  but
what  may,  be  done ;  and  the  sacrifices  offered  in  the  flames  of  love  are  acceptable  to
God  (2  Chron.  vL  8).  These  are  the  principles  which  underlie  the  laws  concerning
singular  vows.

I.  The  singulabitt  lies  in  the  eleuent  of  bepaeation.  1.  Hence  the  subject  of
'the  vow  is  styled  a  Nazarite.  (1)  From  in,  to  separate,  to  consecrate  (see  Numb.  vLj
Judg.  xiii.  5  ;  1  Sam.  i.  11,  28).  (2)  Probably  the  prayer  of  Jabez  was  of  the  nature
of  a  singular  vow  (1  Chron.  it.  10).  Paul  seems  to  have  taken  upon  himself  such
a  vow  (see  Acts  xviii.  18).  2.  Jesm  was  a  Nazarite  in  spirit.  (1)  He  was  not  •
Nazarite  in  the  letter  (Matt.  xi.  19).  What  a  rebuke  is  here  to  the  uncharitableness  of
certain  extreme  advocates  of  total  abstinence  I    (2)  Yet  in  spirit  was  Jesus  the  Grand


432  THE  BOOK  OF  LBVlTICUa  [oh.  xxrn.  1— 34.

Antitype  of  all  t1in=e  anciently  separated  to  God.  Hence  his  dwelling  at  Kazareth  wai
iu  the  urder  of  providence,  and  in  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  viz.  that  he  should  be  called
•  Kazarene  (Matt.  ii.  23).  3.  So  are  true  Christians.  (1)  The  disciples  of  Jesus,  who
were  first  called  "  Christians  "  at  Antioch,  were  also  distinguished  as  "  Nazarenes  "  (see
Acts  xi.  26 ;  xxir.  5).  They  do  not  appear  to  have  refused  either  title.  (2)  Professors
should  strive  to  prove  themselves  worthy  of  both.  All  Chnstians,  in  their  baptism
and  in  their  voluntary  acceptance  of  Christ,  are  bound  by  sacred  vows.  (3)  The  true
merit  of  our  modern  abstainers  from  intoxicants  who  are  so  for  the  glory  of  Qod,  is  that
of  the  Nazarite.

II.  Thinos  hat  be  consecrated  ab  well  as  persons.  1.  A  least  might  he  the
subject  of  a  singular  vow.  (1)  The  Law  prescribes  that  should  it  be  such  as  might  be
offered  in  sacrifice  to  God,  it  must  not  be  exchanged  (vers.  9, 10).  The  reason  appears
to  be  that  in  this  case  it  must  be  looked  upon  as  a  type  of  Christ,  and  for  him  there
can  be  no  substitute.  (2)  But  if  unsuitable  for  sacrifice,  then  it  becomes  the  priests'.
In  this  case  it  became  the  subject  of  estimation,  and  from  the  value  put  upon  it  by  the
priest  there  is  no  appeal.  This  assumes  that  his  valuation  is  just ;  and  this  certainly
is  true  of  his  Great  Antitype,  who  will  be  our  Judge.  2.  A  house  may  be  the  subject  of
a  singular  vow.  (1)  By  means  of  dedicated  things  the  sanctuary  came  to  be  the
depository  of  great  treasure  (1  Kings  xv.  15).  (2)  The  riches  of  the  gospel  are
principally  spiritual.  The  houses  which  enrich  the  Church  are  saintly  families.  3.  A
field  might  be  the  subject  of  a  singular  vow.  (1)  The  estimation  of  the  land  is  by  the
quantity  of  seed  sown  in  it,  fifty  shekels  to  the  homer  (ver.  16).  But  the  estimation
was  modified  with  respect  to  the  law  of  the  jubilee.  The  values  of  all  earthly  things
are  influenced  by  their  relation  to  things  heavenly.  (2)  If  the  owner  rrould  redeem
that  he  vowed  to  God,  he  must  add  a  fifth  to  the  estimated  value.  This  was  a  general
rule ;  and  was  instituted  to  discourage  fickleness  in  relation  to  the  service  of  Qod.^
J.  A.M.

Vers.  26—34. — Devoted  things.  The  earlier  part  of  this  chapter  is  mainly  concerned
with  things  sanctified  to  God  by  vows.

I.  Devoted  things  DiprBB  from  things  sanctified.  1.  In  that  they  may  not  be
redeemed.  (1)  Things  sanctified  might  be  redeemed.  The  laws  of  estimation  proceeded
upon  the  recognition  of  this  principle.  (2)  But  it  is  otherwise  with  things  devoted
(see  vers.  6,  21,  28).  They  are  in  the  category  of  things  "  most  holy,"  which  only
may  be  touched  by  the  priests.  (3)  Hence  firstlings  must  not  be  sanctified  (ver.  26).
The  reason  is  that  they  are  already  the  property  of  God.  They  can  neither  be  given  to
him  nor  redeemed  from  him.  They  were  types  of  Christ,  who  is  therefore  called  the
"Pirstfruits  of  every  creature" — ^the  Antitype  of  all  the  firstfruits.  2.  Persons  when
devoted  were  doomed  to  die.  (1)  Such  was  the  fate  of  the  enemies  of  the  Lord.  The
Canaanites  as  unfit  to  live  were  so  devoted  (see  Exod.  xxii.  19 ;  Deut.  xxv.  19 ;  Josh,
▼i.  17;  1  Sam.  XV.  3;  1  Bangs  xi.  42).  (2)  Here  is  no  reference  to  human  sacrifices,
as  some  have  imagined.  It  is  a  question  of  justice  and  judgment  upon  the  wicked.
(3)  But  by  a  rash  vow  the  innocent  may  suffer.  Thus  through  the  adjuration  of  Saul
Jonathan's  life  was  imperilled  (1  Sam.  xiv.).  Jephthah's  vow  compromised  the  life
of  his  daughter  (Judg.  xi.  30,  31,  39).  The  reading  in  the  margin  (ver.  31)  is  prefer-
able. Jephthah  could  not  make  a  burnt  offering  of  anything  unsuited  to  that  purpose,
and  whatever  else  came  forth  he  vowed  not  to  sanctify  but  to  devote.  (4)  The  severity
of  God  upon  those  devoted  for  their  wickedness  should  admonish  sinners  of  the  formi^
ableness  of  liis  anger  in  the  great  day  of  his  wrath.

II.  The  law  concerning  tithes.  1.  These  are  now  formally  required.  (1)  They
were  originally  vowed  to  God  (see  Gen.  xiv.  19;  xiviii.  22).  (2)  The  acts  of  the
patriarchs  bound  their  posterity.  Hence  Levi  paid  tithes  to  Melchizedek,  being  yet  in
the  loins  of  Abraham  (Heb.  vii.  9, 10).  (3)  Therefore  God  now  claims  them  (vers.  30,
32).  (4)  The  spirit  of  this  law  is  still  binding  upon  the  spiritual  seed  of  Abraham
(see  1  Cor.  ix.  11 ;  Gal.  vi.  6).  2.  Things  marked  as  tithes  must  not  he  exchanged.
(1)  The  expression,  "  passeth  under  the  rod,"  is  thus  explained  by  the  rabbins :  "  When
a  man  was  to  give  the  tithe  of  his  sheep  or  calves  to  God,  he  was  to  shut  up  the  whole
flock  in  one  fold,  in  which  there  was  one  narrow  door  capable  of  letting  out  one  at
a  time.    The  owner  stood  by  the  door  with  a  rod  in  his  hand,  the  end  of  which  wm


CH.  xxra.  1—34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  438

dipped  in  Termilion  or  red  ochre.  The  mothers  of  those  Iambs  or  calves  stood
without,  and  as  the  young  ones  passed  out,  when  the  tenth  came  he  touched  it  with
the  colour,  and  this  was  received  as  the  legitimate  tithe."  (2)  Here  note  the  vicarious
principle.  When  the  tenth  was  taken,  nine  went  free.  Christ  is  our  Tenth  (see  Isa.  vi.
13).  (3)  The  tenth  must  not  be  exchanged  for  better  or  worse.  Providence  is
presumed  to  have  guided  the  rod.  While  Christ  becomes  the  Substitute  for  mankind,
ao  one  can  take  his  place. — J.  A.  M,

Vers.  1 — 33. — Spontaneous  devotion.  The  relations  between  God  and  his  ancient
people  were  not  so  rigid  as  they  are  sometimes  supposed  to  have  been.  It  was  not  all
enactment  on  the  one  hand,  and  obedience  or  disobedience  on  the  other.  We  find
illustration  here —

I.  That  the  Law  of  Qoo  leaves  ample  boom  fob  the  plat  of  sfomtaneo0s
DBYOTION.  Under  the  inspiring  influence  of  some  signal  mercies,  individual  or  national,
the  Israelite  might  devote  to  God  either  (1)  a  person  (ver.  2),  or  (2)  an  animal  (ver.  9),
or  (3)  a  house  (ver.  14),  or  (4)  a  piece  of  land  (ver.  16).  This  was  to  be  a  singular
vow  (ver.  2),  the  dedication  of  something  over  and  above  that  which  was,  by  law,  already
appropriated  to  the  service  of  Jehovah  (see  vers.  26, 30).  It  was  and  is  the  wiU  of  our  God
that  special  favours  received  at  his  hand,  or  special  influences  wrought  by  his  Spirit  in
our  heart,  should  be  marked  by  optional  and  exceptional  services  on  our  part.  We  may,
when  thus  animated  by  gratitude  for  his  kindness,  or  penetrated  with  a  sense  of  his  good-
ness and  grace,  freely  and  spontaneously  bring  to  the  altar  of  our  Lord  (1)  our  posses-
sions, (2)  our  lime  and  labour,  (3)  our  children  (whom  we  may  surrender  to  his  service
in  distant  and  dangerous  scenes),  (4)  any  precious  thing  which  we  are  not  bound  to  give,
but  which  we  voluntarily  and  joyfully  lay  at  his  feet.

II.  That  the  fobm  of  oub  devotion  mat  change  so  long  as  the  spibit  of  it
IS  eetained.  The  Israelite  who  vowed  a  "person  "  redeemed  the  vow  by  presenting
money  according  to  a  nicely  graduated  scale  (vers.  3 — 8) ;  or  he  might  redeem  a  beast
by  paying  money  equal  to  its  estimated  value,  together  with  one-fifth  part  added
thereto  (ver.  13) ;  so  with  a  piece  of  land  (ver.  19).  In  a  similar  way,  we  may  resolve
and  may  undertake  to  give  ourselves  or  our  possessions  to  some  particular  sacred  cause,
and  there  may  arise  conditions  which  render  it  undesirable  or  even  impossible  for  us  to
complete  our  work.  In  such  case  our  Lord  does  not  hold  us  to  a  mere  literal  fulfilment ;
what  he  looks  for,  and  should  certainly  receive  at  our  hands,  is  some  equivalent  in
which  we  at  leaet  as  freely  express  our  gratitude  and  devotion.  The  essential  thing  is
to  preserve  the  spirit  of  our  piety,  and  also  to  maintain  a  good  measure  of  its  most
suitable  expressiott,  whatever  that,  at  any  time,  may  be.

III.  That  we  mat  go  so  fab  in  the  wat  of  dedication  that  rr  is  not  peb-
MiBSiBLB  TO  betibe.  The  Jew  under  the  Law  might,  as  we  have  seen,  redeem  certain
things  at  a  certain  point ;  but  there  was  a  point  at  which  everything  was  irredeemable.
No  "  devoted  thing  "  could  be  redeemed  (vers.  28,  29).  A  beast  "  devoted  to  the  Lord  "
must  be  offered  up ;  an  enemy  once  "  devoted  "  must  be  put  to  death.  When  this
point  is  reached  in  Christian  consecration  must  be  left  to  each  Christian  conscience.
But  we  may  contend  that  withdrawal  is  seldom,  if  ever,  allowable  when  (1)  there  has
been  a  solemn  and  formal  dedication  of  person  or  substance  in  the  presence  of  Christ
and  his  people ;  (2)  an  overt  action  has  been  taken  which  commits  other  people,  and
when  our  retirement  would  involve  theirs  also ;  (3)  such  withdrawal  would  bring  dis-
honour on  the  sacred  Name  we  bear.  Under  such  conditions  as  these  we  must  proceed
at  all  risks  and  costs,  and  having  vowed,  we  must  "pay  unto  the  Lord  our  God"
fPs.  Ixvi.  11).— C.

Vers,  8 — 7. — TOe  distinctions  which  remain.  A  pious  Hebrew  might,  under  a  sense
of  gratitude,  or  in  an  hour  of  spiritual  elevation,  dedicate  something  dear  to  himself
unto  Jehovah.  It  might  be  a  person,  or  an  anima^  or  a  field.  If  the  first  of  these,  he  or
she  was  to  be  redeemed,  and  a  table  was  drawn  according  to  which  the  redemption  was  to
be  made.  In  this  scale,  we  find  the  extremes  of  life,  age  and  infancy,  valued  at  the  least
sum,  youth  at  more,  and  prime  at  the  most ;  we  find  also  woman  placed  lower  in  the  list
than  man.    These  distinctions  in  the  estimated  value  of  human  life  may  remind  us—

L  That  dj  the  gospel  of  Chbist  thebb  abb  no  distinotions  in  bbbpbot  of
liEViTions.  2  y


tSi  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  [oh.  xxvn.  1—34.

AOE,  BEX,  OE  CLASS.  Age  is  not  less  welcome  because  it  is  old,  nor  youth  because  it
is  young,  nor  poverty  because  it  is  poor,  nor  wealth  because  it  is  rich,  to  the  Saviour
of  souls.  Woman  stands  on  the  same  ground  with  man,  and  her  love  and  service  count
for  as  much  in  the  Lord's  esteem  as  his.  '"  In  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  Jew  nor
Greek,  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free,  there  is  neither  male  nor  female  "  (Gral.  iiL  28).
There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.

II.  That  in  the  value  of  Chbistian  bbrvicb  bomb  distinctions  must  beuain.
The  kind  of  service  we  render  our  Lord  differs  at  different  periods  of  our  life.  Obviously
that  of  the  little  child  is  distinct  from  that  of  the  man  in  the  maturity  of  his  strength.
The  scale  of  redemption  under  the  Law,  as  given  in  this  passage,  suggests :  1.  That
age,  though  of  declining  value,  has  its  tribute  to  bring  (ver.  7) ;  it  can  bring  its  purity,
its  calmness,  its  caution,  its  contentedness,  its  patient  waiting :  "  planted  in  the  house  of
the  Lord, ...  we  shall  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age  "  (Ps.  xciL  13, 14).  2,  That  prime
has  the  largest  offering  to  lay  on  the  altar  of  the  Lord  (ver.  3).  Manhood  brings  its
strength,  its  maturity,  its  experience,  its  learning,  its  vigour.  3.  That  youth  is  of
great  account  in  the  estimate  of  God  (ver.  5) ;  it  can  bring  to  the  service  of  Christ  its
eagerness,  its  ardour,  its  faith,  its  devotedness.  4.  That  childhood  has  its  figure  also
in  the  Divine  reckoning  (ver.  6) ;  it  can  bring  its  innocence,  its  trustfulness,  its  docility,
its  winsomeness,  its  obedience.  We  are  thus  reminded  that,  while  there  is  no  stage  in
our  life  when  we  are  not  heartily  welcome  to  our  Saviour,  there  is  at  each  period  some
special  work  we  can  do,  some  peculiar  service  we  can  render  him,  and  we  may  add  that
every  offering  of  every  kind  is  acceptable  to  him  if  it  be  presented  in  humility  and  with
a  willing  mind. — 0.

Yer.  84. — The  Law  and  the  gospel.  1.  It  may  be  rightly  said  that  true  religion  is
essentially  the  same  everywhere  and  at  all  times.  Whithersoever  and  whensoever  we
look,  we  shall  find  the  same  cardinal  elements — the  fear  of  God,  the  love  of  God,  respect
for  our  own  spiritual  nature,  regard  for  the  rights  and  claims  of  others,  abstinence  from
that  which  is  immoral,  kindness  and  helpfulness,  etc  2.  It  may  also  be  truly  said
tliat  in  the  Law  there  was  much  more  than  many  have  supposed  of  those  elements
which  are  prominent  in  the  gospel :  more  of  spiritual  freedom,  of  joy  in  God,  of  happy
and  sacred  fellowship  than  we  are  apt  to  associate  with  "  Mount  Sinai,"  and  "  the  com-
mandments which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses."  When,  therefore,  we  draw  a  distinc-
tion between  the  Law  and  the  gospel,  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  is  not  without
important  qualifications;  that  the  Law  had,  in  most  cases,  an  aspect  which  was
essentially  Christian ;  and  that,  similarly,  the  gospel  in  most  cases  has  aa  aspect  which
is  legal.     With  this  in  mind,  we  may  draw  the  contrast —

I.  That  the  Law  was  pbefabatory  and  pbophetio  ;  the  gospel  is  final  and  in
fulfilment  of  that  which  had  been  anticipated.  This,  especially,  in  regard  to  sacrifice
and  offering.

n.  That  the  Law  was  pkecbptivb  ;  the  gospel  is  suggestive.  The  one  supplied
a  multitude  of  rules  for  the  regulation  of  worship  and  of  daily  life,  the  other  has  few
"  commandments."  Its  positive  precepts  are  small  in  number,  but  it  lays  down  those
principles  and  implants  that  spirit  by  which  the  right  and  the  wrong  course  are  sug-
gested, to  be  pursued  or  shunned  by  the  obedient  heart.

III.  That  the  Law  was  peohibitive  ;  the  gospel  is  inspiring.  Not  wholly,  but
strikingly,  in  each  case.  The  Law  continually  said  imperatively,  "  Thou  shalt  not ; "
the  gospel  says  encouragingly,  "  Wilt  not  thou  ? "  The  Law  interdicted  very  many
things,  and  an  Israelite  was  obedient  very  much  according  to  his  conscientious  avoid-
ance of  that  which  was  forbidden.  The  gospel  incites  to  feelings,  words,  actions  of
goodness,  wisdom,  grace,  helpfulness ;  and  a  Christian  man  is  obedient  and  acceptable
in  proportion  as  he  opens  his  heart  to  heavenly  inspiration,  and  .is  stirred  to  be  and  do
that  which  is  noble  and  Christ-like.

IV.  That  the  Law  uade  its  appeal  to  human  feab  ;  the  gospel  to  human  love.
Jehovah  was,  indeed,  presented  often  to  the  Hebrew  as  his  Redeemer  from  bondage ;  but,
upon  the  whole,  he  was  so  revealed  as,  above  everything,  to  strike  the  soul  with  pro*
foundest  reverence  and  awe.  The  Jew  never  ceased  to  hear  the  thunderings  and  set
the  lightnings  of  Sinai.  The  motto  of  the  devout  Israelite  was  thi» — "  I  fear  God."  In
the  gospel  God  is  manifested  in  Jesus  Christ,  our  Saviour,  our  Friend,  our  sympathizing


cii.  xxvn.  1-V34.]  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  43«

High  Priest ;  and,  while  not  without  deepest  reverence,  we  feel  that  "  the  love  of  God
in  Christ  Jesus  "  is  the  spring  and  the  strength  of  our  devotion ;  it  is  the  key  to  which
the  sacred  music  of  our  ufe  is  set.

V.  That  the  Law  had  respect  to  earthly  life  ;  the  gospel  to  the  farthest  future.
The  Law  said, "  Do  this,  and  thou  shalt  lire  long  in  the  land ; "  "  do  this,  and  the  rains
shall  fall  and  the  vines  shall  bear  and  the  bams  be  full ; "  but  the  gospel  says,  "  Do
this — repent,  believe,  follow  Christ ;  and  while  there  shall  be  sufficiency  of  present  food
for  present  need,  there  shall  be  abounding  grace  in  the  heart,  fruitfulness  in  the  life,
peace  in  death,  and  a  long  eternity  of  sinless  service  and  unclouded  joy  in  the  presence
of  the  King,  in  the  home  of  God. — C.

Ters.  1 — 34. — Vows  and  dues.  I.  We  find  here  a  representation  of  the  union  of
righteousness  and  grace  in  the  kingdom  of  G«d.  The  sacredness  of  vows  and  dues ;
but  the  estimation,  by  the  priest,  according  to  the  ability  of  him  that  made  the  vow.
The  Law  makes  its  claim,  but  God  provides  against  its  rigour.

II.  Comparison  of  the  Law  of  God  as  given  to  his  ancient  people  with  the  imperfect
and  cruel  laws  of  merely  human  origin.  Especially  as  to  human  sacrifices.  The  only
human  life  which  could  be  vowed  to  God  was  that  which  was  already  doomed  by  right
of  war  or  otherwise.  The  animal  sacrifices,  being  strictly  prescribed,  excluded  himian
sacrifice.  The  true  religion  is  the  only  protection  of  human  life.  Those  who  profess
enthusiasm  of  humanity,  instead  of  and  as  a  substitute  for  faith  in  Christ,  have  no
security  to  offer  that  their  inadequate  theory  of  human  obligation  will  extirpate  cruelty
and  promote  the  happiness  of  the  world.

III.  The  commutation  of  vows  and  dues  pointed  to  the  pitifulness  of  Jehovah,  who,
while  upholding  the  inviolability  of  his  Law,  would  yet  provide  for  the  weakness  of
man.  "fie  knoweth  our  frame,"  etc.  These  glimpses  of  love  in  the  midst  of  the
thunders  of  Sinai  were  the  promises  of  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  nature  in  which  love
should  predominate — a  new  covenant,  which  should  take  up  into  itself  all  that  was
tndiu'ing  and  Divine  in  the  old.  Underneath  all  the  regulations  of  Leviticus  lies  the
01  iginal  promise  of  redemption,  and  through  all  the  vail  of  the  Mosaic  economy  shines
the  Shechinah  glory  of  God  manifest  in  the  flesh — the  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King;,  who
came,  not  to  destroy  the  Law,  but  to  fulfil  it,  and  in  whom  all  the  promises  of  God  are
Yea  and  Amen. — S,


HOMILETICAL  INDEX.


THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.


CHAPTEB  L

PAOB

The  Sooriflcial  System       .h          f  i

The  Burnt  Offering...        m*           m*  5

Mediation  •••  .••  ...  ««,  6
Entire  Consecration,  h  Dluatrated  in

the  Burnt  Offiaring         ...            ...  6

The  Weakness  of  Man  and  the  Oraoe

of  God               ...           .„           ...  8

The  Greatness  of  God        m*           m«  9

Onr  Seasonable  Service     m.           •••  10

Sacrificatuie         ...           ...           .,•  12

The  Burnt  Sacriflee  of  the  Herd  ...  13
The  Burnt  Offering  of  the  Flook  and

of  the  Fowls      ...           ...           ...  14

God  in  Special  Manifestation  ...  IS
The  True  End  of  Saoiifloe— Entire

Oonseoration  to  God        ...           „.  16

Principles  of  Spiritual  Sacrifice        ...  17

God's  Pleasure  in  Man       ...           ,m  18

The  Law  of  Burnt  Offerings            ...  19

"  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel "  20

The  Burnt  Sacrifice            21

"And  he  shall  put  liis  hand  upon  the

head,"  etc.         ...            ...           ...  21

The  Killing,  Flaying,  and  Consuming

of  the  Victim    ...           ...           ...  22

The  Offering  from  the  Flocks           ...  22

The  Offering  of  Fowls        ...           .m  23

CHAPTEB  XL

The  Meat  Offeiing             m           .»  25

Salt        26

Consecrated  Life-work,  as  brought  out

ia  the  Meat  Offering      ...           ...  S7

liEVITIOUS.


FAGa
28
29
30
31
82
33
34
85

36
37
88
89
39


Honouring  God  with  our  Firstfrnits...
Mediate  and  Immediate  Presentation
The  Salt  of  the  Covenant  ...  ...

The  Offering  of  Daily  Life  ...

The  MincTuth,  a  Type  of  Christ        ...
The  Feast  upon  the  Minehah  ...

Notable  Things    ...  ...

The  Minehah  of  the  Firstfrnits         ...

Our  Becognition  of  the  Hand  of  God

in  the  Blessings  of  Life  ...  ...

Purity  in  Worship  ...  ...

Priest  and  People :  Beciprocal  Services

The  Meat  Offering

The  Various  Kinds  of  Meat  Offerings

CHAPTEB  m.
The  Peace  Offering  ...         41, 46, 49

Fellowship  with    God  and   Man   as

Illustrated  in  the  Peace  Offering ...
A  General  View  of  Offerings  ...

Jehovah's  Portion  ...  ...

The  Peace  Offering  of  the  Flock
The  Foundation  of  Fellowship  with

God    ...  ...  ...  ...

The  Guarding  of  Sacred  Feeling      ...
"  The  fat  that  covereth  the  inwards  "
"  And  Aaron's  sons  shall  bum  it,"  etc.
Varieties  in  the  Offerings— Unity  in

the  Sacrifice      ...  ...  •«•


42
44
45
47

48
48
51
51


sa


CHAPTEB  IV.


The  Sin  Offering 55,  67

Atonement  for  the  Penitent,  as  Illus-
trated in  the  Sin  Offering  ...      65
2  a


INDEX.


PAGE

Unintentional  TranegreBBion            ,.,  67
Atonement    for    Involuntary    Trans-
gression            ...            ...           •••  58

Bites  Essential  to  an  Atonement     ...  58

The  Sin  Offering  for  the  Priest        ...  59
The  Sin  Offering  Viewed  as  Typical  of

the  Sacrifice  of  Calvary  ...  ...  60

Sin  Offering  for  the  C!ongregation    ...  61
Sin  Offering  of  the  Buler  and  of  any

of  the  People    ...  ...  ...  63

The  Mind  of  God  respecting  the  Bin

of  Man  ...  ...  ...  61

Gradations  in  Onilt  ...  ...  65

Collective   Guilt   Unconsciously   In-
curred ...  ...  ...  66

Full  Acceptance  with  God...  ...  66

Access  for  All :  Comparison  and  Con-
trast  ...  ...  ...  ...  67

The  High  Priest's  Burnt  Offering   ...  70
The    Whole    Congregation    Sinners

through  Ignorance  ...  ...  70

A  Buler  can  Sin  throngh  Ignorance,

and  Bequires  Atonement  ...  71

The  Sin  9  of  the  Common  People      m.  71

OHAPTEB  V.

Confession  3f  the  Sin  Committed     ...  73

Guilt  Bemoved     ...  ».  ...  74

The  Trespass  Offering        ...        75,  80,  85

Fidelity  in  Bearing  Witness  ...  76

Shunning  the  Impure        ...  ...  77

Bedeeming  Promises  „.  ...  77

Pardon  Possible  to  All       ...  ...  78

Cases  of  Concealment  of  Knowledge

and  Ceremonial  Uncleanness         ...  79
Bestitution  as  Inculcated  in  the  Tres-
pass Offering    ...           ...           ...  80

Trespass  Amended  n<  ..•  82

Trespass  in  Sacrilege         ...  ...  82

Bestitution  to  God  ...  ...  83

Unconscious  Sin  ...  m«  m.  84

OHAPTEB  Vt

Swearing  Falsely...  ...  m.  86

Bepentanoe,  Confession,  Satisfaction,

Absolution        ...  ...  ...  86

Dishonesty  Atoned  for       m.  m.  86

Bestitution  ...  ...  ...  87

Human  Ownership  and  Dishonesty ...  88

Bin  a  Ctenn  as  well  as  a  Fmit         m.  89

Trespasses  done  Wittingly  .,.  89

The  Priests' Bitiial  ^  ...  91


THEUB  PAOl

Quench  not  the  Spirit        •••            ...  91

The  Ever-burning  Fire      ...            ...  93

The  Holiness  of  the  Sin  Offering     .m  93

The  Law  of  the  Burnt  Offering        .»  94

The  Law  of  the  Meat  Offering         ^  95

The  Law  of  the  Sin  Offering            „.  96

Three  Principles  of  Piety  ...           ...  97

"Fellowship  with  the  Father"        ...  98

Communicated  Sanctity     ...            ...  98

Ministerial  Function  and  Obligation  99
Instructions  on  the  Offerings  for  the

Priests              ...           ...           ...  99

Meat  Offering       ...            ...            ...  100

Special   Begnlationa  as  to  the  Sin

Offering            ,„          ...           ^  100

CHAPTBB  VIL

That  which  is  itself  Unclean  Makes

whatever  it  Touches  Unclean  also  102
Ministerial  Support            ...            103,  113

Fidelity  to  Precept  Enforced           m.  104

The  Threefold  Participation            ...  105

The  Law  of  the  Trespass  Offering   ...  106

The  Peace  Offering  of  Thanksgiving  107

The  Sanctity  of  the  Service  of  God  ...  108

The  Service  of  the  Oblation  ...  109
Emphatic  Truths;  or  Things  God  Lays

Stress  upon        ...            ...            ...  110

The  Kingdom  of  God:  Lessons  from

the  Heave  Offering         ...           ...  110

Four  Thoughts  on  Sacred^  Service    ...  Ill

Divine  and  Human  Severity            ...  112

Three  Features  of  Acceptable  Service  112
The    Peace    Offerings    and    Thank

Offerings           ...           ...           ...  113

Instructions  for  the  People  on  the  Fat

and  on  the  Blood            ...            ...  114

The    Wave  Breast   and   the    Heave

Shoulder           ...           ...           ».  114

OHAPTEB  VIIL

Priesthood            ...           m.           ...  118

Priestly  Consecration         ».           ...  120

The  Installation  of  Aaron  ...           ...  122

The  High  Priesthood  of  Christ        ...  123

The  Triple  Offering           124

The  Baptism  of  Aaron  and  his  Bona  125

The  Holy  Garments  of  Aaron           ...  126

Levitical  Anointings          ...            ...  128

The  Vesting  of  the  Priests  and  the

Offerings  for  them          ...            ...  129

The  Bam  of  Consecration  ..,            m.  180


INDEX.


PAOK

A  Time  for  Pablicity          ...           ...  131

The  Human  and  Divine  Priesthood —

Contrast           ...            ...            ...  132

The  Human  and  Divine  Priesthood —

Comparison       ...           ...           ...  132

Spiritual  Apparel               ...           ...  133

Equipment  for  Special  Work             ...  134

The  Burden  of  the  Lord     ...            ...  135

Public  Inauguration  of  Divine  Service  135
"And  Moses  brought  Aaron  and  his

sons,"  eto.         ...           ...            ...  136

Aaron's  Dress       ...           ...           ...  136

Anointing            ...           ...           ...  136

The  Sacrifices  of  Consecration          m.  137

CHAPTER  IX.

Miracnloiu  Confirmation  of  the  New

Polity 139

A  Sign  Expected  and  Beceived       •..  140

The  Glory  of  the  Lord       ...           ...  141

The  Eighth  Day  ...            142

Aaron's  First  Priestly  Services         ...  143

Appearing  together  before  God       ...  144

Sacrifice  for  Sin   ...           ...           ...  145

The  Priest  at  the  Altar      ...           ...  146

Holy  Invocation  ...           ...           ...  147

The  Manifested  Presence  ...           ...  148

God's  Glory  Manifested  in  the  Bleased-

neu  of  Hia  People          »•           ...  148

CHAPTER  X.

The  Sinfulness  of  Man  Mars  the  Full

Effect  of  the  Good  Purposes  of  God  150

Fire        ...           ...            ...            ...  151

Increase  of  Privilege  Involves  Increaje

of  Danger         ...            ...           ...  151

Counterfeit  Fire  ...            ...           ...  152

Submission  in  Bereavement              ...  153

Disobedience  Swiftly  Punished        ...  154

A  Bereaved  Parent             ...            ...  155

Bestrictions  and  Infirmities    of   Be-

ligious  Service  ...           ...           ...  156

Nadab  and  Abihu                ...            ...  156

Sin  and  Penalty  in  Sacred  Things   ...  157

Strange  Fire         158, 160

Self-Eestraint  and  Utterance            ...  159

That  Priests  are  Teachers  ...            ...  162

Abstinence  Enjoined          ...           ...  162

Sobriety  in  the  Priesthood...            ...  163

The  Bating  of  the  Holy  Things       ...  164

Moses  and  Aaron :  an  Allegory       ...  165

Wine  and  Worship             ...           ...  166


THEira

rAei

Instruction  as  well  as  Sacrifice         m.

166

The  Spirit  of  Obedience

167

That  which  is  Left  to  us

168

Ministers  to  be  Examples  of  Purity ...

168

CHAPTEB  XL

Meats  Distinguished  into  Clean  and

Unclean  172, 176, 182, 183,  184

"  Ye  shall  be  holy ;  for  I  am  holy  "  173

The  Beligious  Use  of  Nature           ...  174

The  Waters  and  their  Inhabitant*    ...  177

Flying  Creatures  ...            ...           ...  178

Unlcean  Creeping  -and  Dead  Things  180

The  Abominable  Thing     ...            ...  181

Health  a  Duty  as  well  as  a  Blessing  182

The  Significance  of  Death ...            ...  184

Sacred  Separation               ...            ...  185

High  Reasons  for  Holiness                ...  185

Holiness  and  its  Bequirements         ...  186

Holiness                ...           „.           ...  187

CHAPTEB  XIL

The  Purification  of  the  Church        ...  190

Born  in  Sin          ...           ...           ...  191

The  Statutes  on  Maternity               ...  193
Woman  under  the  Law  and  under  the

Gospel               ...           ...           ...  194

Ceremonial  Purifications    ...           w.  195

CHAPTEB  Xm.

Leprosy  regarded  as  the  Type  of  Sin  198
The  Extrusion  of  the  Leper  &om  the
Camp  is  a  Type  of  Excommunica-
tion irom  the  Cliristian  Chiuch    ...  199
The  Diagnosis  of  Sin  as  Illustrated  in
the  Leprosy      ...           ...           ...  200

Leprosy ...            ...            ...            ...  202

The  Priest's  Adjudication  ...           ...  203

A  Picture  of  Sin  ...            ...            ...  204

The  Chosen  Type  of  Sin—

(1)  Its  Individual  Aspect               ...  206

(2)  Its  Social  Aspect       „,           ...  207
Conviction  of  Sin ...           ...           ...  208

Affections  of  the  Mind        ...            ...  208

The  Right  and  Duty  of  Excommuni-
cation                ...            ...            ...  209

Purity  of  Garments            ...           ...  211

Impure  Surroundinga         ...           m.  212

CHAPTER  XIV.
The  Cleansing  of  the  Leper  Bepiesenti


the  Absolution  of  the  Sinner


216


iNDEX.


THEn  'AG"

The  CleaoBing  of  Sin  as  Illustrated  in

the  Cleansing  of  the  Leper           ...  218

Bestoration  Suggestions     ...            ...  219

Beadmission         ...            ...            .••  220

Final  Bites  of  Beadmission              •..  221

Divine  Considerateness       ...            ••.  222

Thorough  Purification        ...            m.  223
The  Cleansing  of  the  Leper —

(1)  Ceremonies  outside  the  Camp ...  221

(2)  Ceremony  in  the  Tabernacle   ...  225
Uncleanness  in  Houses       ...            ...  228

Cleansing  the  Corrupt  House           ...  230

Iieproiy  in  a  House            ...           ••.  230

CHAPTEE  XV.

The  Figure  of  the  "  woman  which  waa
diseased    with    an  issue  of  blood

twelve  years"   ...           ...           ...  232-

Secret  Sins           .m            •••            ...  233

TJncIeanness         m>            •••            •••  231

Personal  Purity    ...  ,m  ...'^235

CHAPTER  XVL

Union  and  Communion  with  God     ...  241
The  Annual  Beiteration  of  the  Puri-
fication made  on  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment   ...           ...           ...           ...  216

The  Great  Day  of  Atonement          ...  216

A  Sabbath  of  Best              ...            ...  218

The  Climax  of  Sacrificial  Worship   ...  218
The  High  Priest  on  the  Day  of  Atone-

meut  ...           ...           ...           ...  250

The  Sacrifices  on  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment  ...            ...            ...            ...  251

The  Day  of  Atonement      ...  252,  251

A  Solemn  Ceremony           ...            ...  253

The  Peril  of  Privilege       .m           ...  256
Type  and  Antitype—

(1)  The  Priest                256

(2)  The  Offering              257

The  Great  Anniversary — Sacred  Sea-
sons    ...           ...           ...           ...  258

The  Imperfect  Bitual   and  the  All-

sufSoient  Sacrifice           ...           .,.  259

CHAPTEB  XVIL

Sacrifice  is  not  in  Itself  Enough      „.  262

The  Bating  of  Blood  Prohibited      ...  261

Grace  before  Meat              ...           ...  264

Statutes  concerning  Blood ...           ...  265

One  Place  of  Sacrifice        ...            ...  266

Features  of  Christian  Service           ...  267


Atoning  Death     ...           ...  m.  268

Sanctity  of  Animal  Life     ...  ...  268

The  Sanctity  of  the  Atoning  Blood  ...  269

CHAPTEE  XVm.

The  Bestraints  thrown  about  Marriage

by  God's  Law   ...           ...  ...  276

Unworldliness      ...           ...  ...  278

Abominable  Doings            ...  ...  280

Two  Aspects  of  Sin            ...  „.  281

Life  in  Obedience              ...  ...  281

Impurity — its  Extent  and  Source  ...  282

The  Penalty  of  Sin            ...  ...  283

Obedience  Enjoined            ...  „.  284

Abominations  Denounced  ...  ^a  285


CHAPTEE  XTX.


•••    290
...    291


Morality  has  a  Basis  of  its  Own

The  Laws  of  Submission    ...

The  Laws  of  Piety,  and  of  Faith       ...  293

The  Law  of  Kindness         ...  ...  294

Stealing  is  Forbidden  by  the  Law  of

Grod  and  Man    ...  ...  ...  294

"Ye  shall  not  swear   by  my  Name

falsely"  295

Mingled  Seed       ...  ...  ...  297

Eespect  for  Old  Age  ...  ...  298

Moral  Conunandments  have  a  Double

Sanction  ...  ...  ...  298

Beligion  and  Superstition  ...  ...  298

"Honour  to  whom  honour"  ...  298

Considerateness    ...  ...  ...  299

Integrity  ...  ...  ...  300

Love — its  Boot  and  Fruit  ...  ...  301

Aids  to  Purity      ...  ...  ...  302

The  Bange  of  Sin  and  the  Rule  of  God  302

Three  Helps  to  Spiritual  Progress    ...  303

Social  Morality     ...  ...  ...  303

Purity  in  Worship  ...  ...  305

Kindliness  ...  ...  ...  306

Jnstioe ...  307

Fidelity  to  God    ...  ...  ...  307

The  Fear  of  God 309

"Ye  shall  be  holy,"  etc.     ...  ...  309

The  Holy  Law  in  the  Holy  Life      ...  310

CHAPTEB  XX.
The  Difference  between  the  Beligiout

and  the  Secular  Law      ...  ,..  812

The  Pursuit  of  Knowledge  by  Bight

Means  ...  .„  ...  313

"  Ye  shall  be  holy  unto  me "  '...  S13


INDEX.


rAOB

Human  Sacrifloea ...  m«  —m  814

Sin  at  its  Worst    ...  m»  m>  815

Cradnlity  and  Faith  ...  ...  816

Sanctity  —  Demand,       Inducement,

FrondM  ...  ...  ...  317

The  UnfoTglTen   ...  ...  ...  317

QoA'b  Displeasuie  Trith  Onnelvei    ...  318

Three  Aspects  of  Human  Life  ...  319

Sin  unto  Death 820

Foniahments  Assigned  to   Pretnmp-

toong  Sim        ...  .»  „,  821

CHAPTEB  XXL

The  Marriage  of  the  Clergy  «.  823

Priestly  Qnalificationa        ...  ...  323

Law  of  Holiness  for  the  Pirleats        ...  325

Distinctions  and  Degrees  in  Obligation  325

Unblemished  Service       ...  ...  326

The  Ferfeotion  of  the  Prierthood     m.  827

CHAPTEB  XXIL

The   Perfection    Demanded   in  the

Sacrificial  Victims          ...  ...  830

Holiness  of  Priests  and  Saoriflcei  ...  330

Priestly  Disqualifications  ...  ...  331

The  Service  of  Abstention  ...  332

The  Guilt  of  Profanation    ...  ...  332

Characteristics  of  Acceptable  Service  883

The  Culture  of  Kindness   ...  ...  334

The  Eating  of  the  Holy  Things  m.  334

Laws  of  the  Oblations         ...  m.  835

CHAPTEB  XXm.

The  Paschal  Supper  Observed  bjr  our
Lord ...  ...  ...  ...    841

The  Offering  of  Best:    The  Sabbath    843

The  Sabbath         344

Aspects  of  the  Sabbath      m.  m.    345

The  Harvest  Festivals        m.  ...    349

The  Passover        ...  ...  850,  356

The  Feast  of  the  First&uita  ...    351

The  Pentecost      ...  ...  ...    352

The  Feast  of  Trumpets       ...   853,360,368
The  Annual  Bepeutance — the  Day  of
Atonement        ...  ...  ...    854

The  Pilgrim  Spirit  as  Dlustrated  in
the  Feast  of  Tabernacles...  ...    855

The  Feast  of  Harvest         ...  m.    357

The  Hebdomad 359

The  Feast  of  Expiation      ...  ...    361

The  Feast  of  Tabemaclea  ...   862,368,371
The  Influence  of  Sacred  Becollections    363


TBim  riGs

Provision  and  Piety           ...  m.    364

Piety  in  Prosperity             .m  —    365

The  Summons  of  Ood         m.  m.    365

Joy  before  the  Lord            m.  ...    366

The  Festivals       ...           ...  ...    367

The  Passover  and  Feast  of  Unleavened

Bread ..,            ...            ...  ...    367

The  First  Sheaf  a  Wave  Offering  of  the

Harvest             ...           ...  ...    3C7

The  Day  of  Pentecost         ...  ...    868

Beligious  Festivals             ...  ...    368

Tlie  Beginning  of  Harvest ...  „.    369

CHAPTEB  XXIV.

Everlasting  Light              ...  ».    874

The  Weekly  Offering         375

The  Lighting  of  the  Sanctuary  ...    376

The  Bread  of  the  Presence...  877,  380

Ourselves  as  Lights            ...  m.    378

The  Lesson  of  the  Loaves  ...  ...    379

The  Lights  in  the  Sanctuary  ...    380

The  Candlestick  ...           ...  ...    380

The  Shewbread    ...           ...  ...    382

The  Crime  of  Blasphemy    ...  ...    386

Public  Justice  Secured  by  the  Law  of

Betaliation        ...            ...  ...     387

Shelomith's  Son    ...            m.  ...    388

A  Suggestive  Episode         ...  ...    389

The  Holy  Law  of  God        ...  ...    390

A  Blasphemer  Punished    ...  ...    391

The  Law  of  Death              .«  m.    892

CHAPTEB  XXV.

The  Power  of  Slavery         ...  ,„    396

The  Fallow  Year...            ...  ...    397

The  Jubilee          ...           ...  399, 402

The  Sabbatic  Tear  ...    400,  407, 408

Bedemptiou           ...            ...  ...    403

Justice  and  Hercy              ...  ...    404

Divine  Discipline...           ...  ...    405

Year  of  Jubilee —

(1)  A  Nation's  Joy         ...  405, 407

(2)  The  World's  Bedemption  ...    406

(3)  The  Blessed  Kingdom  „.  407
The  Law  of  Personal  Servitude  m.  408
Servants  of  God    ...           ...  „,    409

CHAPTEB  XXVL

Promises  and  Threatenings  h.    414
Temporal  Bewards  and  Punislunents    415

The  Blessedness  of  the  Bightaooa  ...    417

Prophetic  Maledictions      »•  .m    418


vl


INDEX.


rAOK

Hope  for  Israel     ...           m.  ••.  419

Idolatry :  Oar  Danger  and  our  Seoority  419

Inoentives  to  Obedience     ...  ...  420

Our  Ood  and  Ourselves      m.  ».  421

Divine  Betribution             ...  ...  422

'iorrow  unto  Salvation        .m  —.  423

Obedience  and  Prosperity  ...  m.  424

God  Dwelling  amongst  Men  ...  425

Command   to    Maintain   the  Pablio

Worship  of  Jehovah        ...  ...  426

Promises  and  Threatenings  „,  426

Tbieatenings       •«           im  an  427


The  Oracious  Invitation  to  Bepent-

ance    ...           ...           ...  ...  427

CHAPTER  XXVn.

Vows      ...           M»           ...  M.  429

Keeping  Vows      ...            m  ...  430

Singular  Vows     ...           m.  „,  431

Devoted  Things    ...           ...  ...  432

Spontaneous  Devotion        ...  m*  483

The  Distinctions  which  Bemain  m.  433

The  Law  and  the  Gospel    .»  m.  434

Vows  and  Dues    m>           ■••  cm  483
