


















sO











ie ae of s
\

SAAR R RS RU are a 1S DOPE he "
baa Sa Sa Yee Sa a va val Ya SY Na a Wn a Vad YO hg Ou Sg a a WN Reoeuueut
HWS Va eg Wa Vd Tu Ya fa Sg Sa SP Oa SU Na YO Va Ud Oa Wa a Ua Ga Wa a Oa Wa a Wa Wa a Oa Ga a Oa ta Og
MSG OMG Une OO OL SE TE SEO OU Ta OE UG Wa OU OU Wd Ud aU Yu YEU Oe Wa UY Sa Ug Wau Sa Og Va Wu Na Oy Ya Wa Og Ga a Gata Uae
Page HL NU EON TU THON SA OH Od Ua 8d OU Od OR YUH Ts WO WO a Nu Ua Ou gO Oa Uatg Oy OU a a a Qa ta Cy bg a Oa
SUV SSE Be TG SAN 08 YT NUS OY OY Wd Ok Yd Nd Ws Og WY Ws Wa Ws ig Ws Ws Wd Cd Yh sn iy Yn Ua Vg AS

Onn SESH IS TE TUNES SG 80 TOC TENE YTU SRG NA Sal d Wa OA OU Od Gu OU aU Yu Oa Wu Ya a ea Un ga Oa Wa Wa Wg Va Wa a Sa Nd a Ga jbata
MME ABS OSS AE NEE CATS OTSEGO CA ETOAC TA A OCMC CRO EO
Sou SA FENG NSO NIE HA UHINA OA OU OU OU OH NE CO Su CHU Yu GO Ou WO USO UUW Wa za Or GC Ou Wa Oa WL Wa a a Ua a aa a Cg aah gd
Soe OG LAE YON VEL ONE dO TOMY SALOU DO OW WO UL Od Os Oa WY Oa Med kr aus a Yc Oa a Sd a Og a Py stat,
Ke z SSAA RR BOR oko yak ak. WAAR UT EU Nts A OCAR ASEAN SEES 4 i ut +
we SSS IESATNRSCAL SH INC MUTUSNCUCCUESUUNUSC UNCC HEEL OTIC UR UU Ud OUT TO aT CUE TT HT ET a
SRE ean NOG ne TN TOL OT OU SSE TCT SOG SUE YO OSC Ws Ur TL Ws cs is a Us Yr a Wn a WW eteuounnd ‘Nay
DRAUSS Ma MLLTG  LTO NONLIN SO Tek Sd OO Od LO OW TL Wa la Nt ale Wa iy Wa eg Wa on)
PATON TU IE OSES NSN OE TEL SAGO OYE LY NOY TO Ys SH sO Ou Wd Ol Wu Wa ay sO
a. COS SNARE RRR A
SRG NAN SRA RRA RANA AREA RR ARR EAR ARR RRA RRA ARR RR OLR RA BALE RA EA

ae ae eee ETN NNN ESSER ADR ORD ACROA RRC RCATR DAD ARPUCA AAA bogey hk hk be

Seb eR TNE TE LOE YE OU SC SS SSE OO TLE OO WO Wd OO WE iO YW Ws Wd hs Cir Wa a Ur a a WW a wy ite

DSCNS NE ET ETN ACNE SETS MTU OOO OU SONU OO WW Oa Ui UY Wu WO a Graal Ou a Ua
LAS AMAR AS EASA ERA ARAN RRR ARR RAR eR AR RR AR kk

Vahey REEVE Oe ut Et
SAAS ,








MURR A RE RRe Ree RRR Ree ee eee
MRSA RARER RR RAR Ae Ree
UVa Gu ide auin
RR RRR RRR ARERR RRA RRR A
AORTA te Sa ROOTLETS URN OCCU ECU UCT ILENE TNR TL CUNT
SEA AL LAE SLAM RANA RARER LALA ALAR ARERR ARR AA RAR RRR A RAR AR LOR AR AAA AR AA A OL,
Oa DA ea CPO SLNC a MSSOLLML MC NONC LS MOO MCE WE OUI SALW OO Ud UW a WY UO NOW Od WN uN Og
SOSA SARA RA RRS ARAAN LAR RAL ARAN SEAR ALARRANECLRR RRA RURAL ERLE AeA OR RR ARAL BR OAD OD
ee CATS ALS SUNS ASSESS BONE SO i ie
\ 3 ;
‘ Toa Sao UH OH OU Oe OH OU LOU Oa Sa OH TAT Te We OY Ca OH a OO Ga Ca a a Oa











CMEC NG ETE SUTTER OO OH YLT ST OP OD a DS
AY. EXCEL US SLL SL SU OG Od ed UL  O
ECOSTORE


CORSA SH NEHA O98 OU OTT NL er ON
DA OHO OMEN Ok UO OS WLW WS
EEE Se NTS SO NU OL OG YE ST OE NO aN wee





Wea
; eS
AN TNL ULES OSLO ON SOLE WO i Or SW Wl a
KOSS 88 ALG 88 8 OG Od 8 SHO WH OND NG

RRC O COC CUCU ECR OT RCA SOIC TE ICEL SUCH STE
DG ee ESE SOO ES

SCUCUReCOCUCuG
EWEN SE NENG SES
CSE OE TOT OO OC UO OO WW
KORG 00 EOE TEE OG OO OLY NO iss








AKANE
SABO SERBS RRNA RRA OKLA SAA DLA OAL DRL AA AS a hth Shen.


ENON SG Od SO YL SS SL


On DRA ATa NON NAONC NUMAN SOND Ho ME OREO OL WO Os NOs WO ae is Oa iG


























1001 1320600






A OR ONE ROE Se SHE TO SOT Ws
SSSA IC ACKUAAATAATA AK TASA SAG TUNS AMOK SKA

NSIS SNR ERRNO ORGAN AA A TAA AAS SSS ASRS
SENSO AANA AOA OCA AKASAKA A ATM a wea A A SUSY
NISRA AARON AAA ARPA AA AAAIAUANIOATAAATCANUS A. AMAA NA tEAM RSC KMA












Se SOAR ROMACUR CARON OAC OOO ACK AR ACATK AAA AS ASL SSAA TAK ADL
ASAIN RSAC AACA AMARA OA KUALA KATA SALSA ASA USA AAO A
NOSSAISIACAAACEIRIRA ROAM ACA IIATA AERO ATARASATAACATA KIS TA SADA SA SA ATA SA NOOK:
SEN SN


So AY
SOAS Hu NY OS OOO
NA AA ATR AAA SAN
CRASS AY

ON ONY



















} j SS ” ‘ MANA eS A a 9 Cs NL WW SEZ Ys






Gp)


The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711











THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOKS OF KINGS


THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC
COMMENTARY
ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In T: wena OTe Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


2 ae wa


pe A HOMILETIC
COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOKS OF


KINGS


BY THE


REV. GEORGE BARLOW





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States


PREFACE





No pains have been spared to make this volume a thoroughly usable and
suggestive Homiletic Commentary on the two Books of Kings. Every avail-
able work bearing on the subject has been consulted and made to contribute
its choicest passages, either in exposition or illustration. What every explorer
in this field must have discovered before, the homiletical material on the Books
of Kings is exceedingly scanty, and there are many paths the writer has been
compelled to traverse alone, and for the first time, so far as any known literary
record bears evidence. ‘The remark of the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, in his valu-
able little work on Commenting and Commentaries, has been often painfully
realized: “We have next to nothing on the Books of Kings.”

The student will readily detect the plan on which the work has been carried
out. Each chapter is prefaced by “Critical and Explanatory Notes,” which
elucidate any word or sentence in the original text thought to be of use and
value to the exegete. These “Notes” are from the practised pen of the
Rey. W. H. Jellie, the author of the scholarly and elaborate Commentary on
JEREMIAH in this series. The paragraph on which the main homily is con-
structed consists of as many verses as contain a complete subject. For the
“Germ Notes,” this paragraph is again minutely scrutinized, and every verse,
or part of a verse, that suggests matter for homiletic treatment, is. utilized,
together with any outline, or pithy and illustrative comment, from other sources.

The practical aim has been to bring together, within the smallest compass as
much homiletical material on the subject of the paragraph as will be suggestive
to the thoughtful sermonizer in working out his own original composition.

Of the seven hundred and forty-three outlines, brief or more extended, contained
in this Commentary, one hundred and eighty-seven are from the pens of other
writers. In every case where the author’s name is not appended the outline is
original.

Among the principal works consulted in the progress of this Commentary
are:—Lange’s Commentary on the Books of Kings (written by Dr. E. Harwood
and W. G. Sumner, B.A.) ; Keil’s Commentary on Kings; Whedon’s Commentary
(by Milton S. Terry, A.M.) ; Dr. R. Jamieson’s Critical and Experimental Com-
mentary; The Speaker's Commentary; Trapp’s Commentary; Pool’s Annotations;
Dr. Kitto’s “Daily Bible Illustrations”; Maurice’s “Prophets and Kings”; Bishop
Hall’s “Contemplations”; Stanley’s “Jewish Church”; and Geikie’s “Hours with
the Bible.”

In the prosecution of this work, the constant effort has been to seize and develop
the moral teaching interwoven with the details of the history, to show how the
fluctuations of national prosperity and disaster were conditioned on the fidelity or
treachery of Gods convenant people, and to apply the lessons derived from the
Divine treatment of the Israelites to the national life of to-day. Thus viewed,


the history becomes not a mere desiccant record of facts, but pulses with life
and meaning.


GEO. BARLOW
Hexham, April, 1885


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON THE


FIRST BOOK OF KINGS.


Sutroduction.


Tux two books of Kings originally constituted one continuous work, the
division into two portions being made in the printed edition of the Hebrew
work by Bomberg, in 1518. They are essentially historical in their character,
though the history throughout has an evident moral drift. The work was
composed, probably by Jeremiah, during the second half of the Captivity.
The object of the writer appears to be to place before the exiled and sorrowing
Jews a faithful picture of their history from the period when the kingdom
reached the highest pitch of national glory under Solomon, to its declension and
fall. The history is written not so much from a civil, as from a religious point
of view. The Jews are regarded not as an ordinary nation, but as the people of
God with whom He has entered into covenant. The historian refers to civil
events only so far as they illustrate the moral condition of the nation, and the
Divine dealings with it. He traces the various steps in the moral probation of
the captive race, and exhibits their conduct under such probation in its true
light. In the full career of Solomon’s prosperity and magnificence, the author
sees and notes the fatal taint of evil, the inclination towards idolatry, which is
to gather strength, and increase, and finally to bring about the complete rejec-
tion of both Israel and Judah. The sun of Solomon sets amid clouds, and
henceforth the narrative is marked by a pervading spirit of deep melancholy,
which is not wholly cast off even when the most pious monarchs are ite subject,
and the most glorious deliverances have to be spoken about.* In the darker
characteristics of the later history God has presented to mankind another
illustration of the deep depravity of human nature, and its invariable tendencies,
not heavenward and upward, but earthward and downward; not te a tran-
scendental perfection, but further and further still from God and hope an@ peace.
For we see that till Christianity came, human corruption made even per-
manent nutional prosperity impossible. A perfect kingdom cannot come till
there is a perfect nature; and a perfect nature can only be a thing of the future
when the crowned and conquering Messiah shall establish over this scene of
strife and confusion His universal kingdom of righteousness and peace. The
Jews at the period of the Captivity were probably exercised by anxious doubts
relative to the accomplishment of the Divine promises.t{ The history of human
nature is the same in all ages and among all nations; and there are instructive
lessons to be learnt by a comparison of modern with ancient times. The design
of this Commentary is not to furnish historicalinformation, whieh may be readily
gained from so many sources; but to aid in tracing the dealings of God with man
in varied conditions, in searching out the moral truths that lie underneath alike
the great and trivial events of national and individual lite, in interpreting the
suggestive teachings of the Old Dispensation in the light of the New, and in
applying the lessons derived from the manifold aspects of the Divine movements
in history in their practical bearing on moral conduct.


a enemies mages








® Rawlinson’s Introduction.
T Garbeti’s Divine Plan.
B 4


CHAP, 1. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





CHAPTER 1.


SCENES IN THE CLOSING CAREER OF A GREAT KING.


CrrricaL anD Expianatory NotEes.—The opening word, “now,” is and, the cop. J}
indicating the unbroken connexion of this book with a prior record. Originally the books of
“ Kings” were a continuation of those of “Samuel,” and constituted one whole narrative,
styled respectively the First, Second, Third, and Fourth Books of Kings; and the four books
bear a common heading in the LXX. and Vulgate.—Verse 1. David was old—In his seventieth
year (compare chapter ii. 11 with 2 Samuel v. 4, 5). Verse 2. Get heat—An established
medical fact that the aged and sickly may thus derive vital warmth from the young and
healthy. Josephus calls these “servants” who advised this course physicians (Ant. vii.
14, 33). Verse 3. Shunemite—Shunem, five miles south of Tabor, on the table-land of
Esdraelon. Verse 5. Adonijah, son of Haggith—No record of origin or rank of Haggith,
therefore probably without any family distinction. Adonijah was David’s fourth son, and
the eldest now alive. Exalted himself—NiW3s777 (cf. Proverbs xxx. 32); took advantage


of his father’s feebleness to claim the throne. But God was king in Israel, and he retained
the unchallengeable right of selecting the occupant of the throne (Deuteronomy xvii. 14).
Verse 6. He also was a very goodly man—This would give him acceptance with the nation
(1 Samuel ix. 2‘. Verse 7. Conferred with Joab, commander-in-chief of the army, through
whom Adonijah hoped to win military support, and Abiathar, the High-priest, through
whom he sought sacerdotal sanction and help; and he gained it, TINUVY “to help one


so that men immediately follow him” (Keil). Verse 9. Slew sheep and oxen, &c.—This
usurpation of the throne inaugurated by a sacrificial feast. En-rogel, the well or source of
the Rogel; south-east of Jerasalem in BaciAing wapa8elow (Josephus). Verse 12. Save thine
own life, &c.; for had the scheme of Adonijah succeeded, all rivals to the throne would have
been slain. Verse 13. Assuredly Solomon, be.— The particle 9°) scarcely allows of so forcible


arendering; saying, Z’Aat Solomon shall reign. Verse 14. Confirm thy words: Nyy"
NTR mnydp_-I will make full thy words—a phrase used for the fulfilment of divine utter
df ED IEAE.


ances (chapters ii. 27, viii. 15, 24). Verse 16. Bowed and did obeisance—The latter word

denoting the prostrate attitude customary in the East before kings. Verse 21. Shall be

counted offenders—Counted is not in the Hebrew, though implied in the connexion; they

will be D'NQM—i.e., guilty of a capital crime, treated as traitors deserving death.
welt


Verse 25. God save King Adonijah: i.e, Let the king live; literally, Live the king ! the
usual Israelitish acclamation (chapter v. 84-39; 1 Samuel x. 24, Se Verse $1. Let my
lord, King David, live for ever—A form of blessing, used by the Hebrews only on specially
solemn occasions, but was a common form amongst the Persians (Daniel iii. 9, v. 10, vi. 22;
Nehemiah ii. 3). Verse 88. Take the servants of your lord: viz., the royal body-guard
(verse 38). Ride upon mine own mule—The cummand that he “ride” was especially
significant, for no one, under pain of death, might mount the king’s mule; to ride thereon
was an actual declaration that he was king. A she-mule, TIO, because more docile ana


enduring than the male. Gihon—A pool or fountain on the west side of Jerusalem; favourable
as a scene for a vast assemblage, and removed sufficiently from En-rogel to avoid a collision
with Adonijah’s adherents. Verse 34. Anoint him—Done only in the case of a new dynasty or
disputed succession. Verse 35. Sit on my throne—David would resign it to Solomon.
Over Israel and over Judah—The kingdoms were not yet separate, but the union of the
names was designed to arrest the growing disposition to separation which the envy of Ephraim
was fostering. Verse 89. An horn of oil out of the tabernacle: the priestly consecrated
oil, prepared according to divine directions (Exodus xxx. 22-25); the king was thus
emphatically “the anointed of the Lord.” Verse 40. People came up after him—i.e., to
Zion, the citadel. Werse 47, King bowed himself upon his bed—His infirmities allowed
him to do no more (compare Genesis xlvii. 81). Verse 50. Caught hold on the horns of
the altar: an act by which he appealed to God and man that his life, forfeited by his
attempted usurpation of the throne, might be spared. Originally the place was appointed as
an asylum for accidental homicides (Exodus xxi. 12 sg.), but later on other transgressors
sought and found refuge there, befriended from the penalty of their crimes. Verse 58. Go to
thine house: be content with privacy, remain in seclusion, aspire not again; in so doing he
was to show himself a worthy man, vir probus. Such an act of clemency by Solomon towards
his rival was a noble inauguration of his kingly rule, and must have both vourably affected
the nation and conciliated the followers of Adonijah,
2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. I.
Ser I a ec re
HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-4.
Tue Wixrer or Live.
I. Overtakes men in the highest rank. ‘Now King David was old


and stricken in years.” Even the monarch is not exempt from the paralysing
influence of life’s winter. David had just escaped from the terrible plague
which had smitten fatally 70,000 of his subjects, only to waste away more
gradually under the remorseless ravages of time, from which there is no escape
but in death. If men escape one peril it is only to meet another. The holiest
soul dwells not in an impregaable fort. The aged king had projected a great
work—the building of the temple—and made vast preparations for it. He was
not permitted to finish it. As the frosts of winter arrest the growth and deve-
lopment of the most magnificent tree, so the progress of life’s bleak winter
interrupts the work of the most gifted.


II. Chills the vital sources of the naturally robust. ‘And they covered
him with clothes, and he gat no heat.” Asayouth, David was noted for beauty
and physical strength—‘‘ was ruddy and of a fair countenance.” He scarcely
knew the limit of his power. He hesitated not to attack and slay a lion and a
bear—was the victor of Goliath—the terror of the Philistines—the hero of a
hundred fights. But, as the shadows of the grave creep into the midst of the
gayest scenes of our mortal life, so, in the mid-career of those exploits which
raised him into fame, there were admonitory blasts of the coming of that winter
which must ere long freeze the vital energies at their source. Exposure,
hardship, suffermg and sorrow, wore down a constitution naturally robust; and
now, in his 70th year—a period when many are still vigorous—David was
greatly enfeebled. He was also suffering from a wasting disease to which
frequent allusion is made in the Psalms. Coverings and garments can only
preserve and accumulate the heat actually existing in the body, but cannot
supply that which is gone. An affecting picture of the pitiable weakness of a
once powerful and victorions monarch! Let not the mighty man glory in his
might.


III. Is but temporarily alleviated by the best considered human
devices. The cherishing of Abishag was—1. Advised by the court physicians.
An expedient not unusual in similar cases, when internal cordials failed, and
with the limited skill of the faculty in the use of warmth-creating potions.
2. Was innocent. Suggested for no other than purely medical reasons. In those
days, when polygamy was not forbidden by the Jewish law, and when perverted
views as to the relation of the sexes were so prevalent, Abishag was recognized
as David’s wife. She ministered to him also as a nurse. Sophocles lauded old
age as a deliverance from the tyranny of the passions, as an escape from some
furious and savage master. 3. Suspended only for a brief season the inevitable
progress of decay. Medical skill is no more efficacious for the monarch than for
the humblest subject. David died within the year. A moment comes im the
winter of life when the warm pulse is stilled, and the once stalwart frame is
locked in the icy embrace of death.


HOMILETIO8 OF VERSES 5-10.
Tue Revoir or Aponwan.


I. Was the outcome of a spirit of arrogance and vanity (verse 5).
Solomon had been designated by both Jehovah and David as successor to
the throne, and this had been publicly declared. But Adonijah, presuming
upon his seniority, and puffed up with pride, insolently strove to prevent
by foree the accomplishment of what he knew to be the Divine arrangement.

8


CHAP. L HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—








-¢Vain men, whilst, like proud and yet brittle clay, they will be knocking their
sides against the solid and eternal decree of God, break themselves in pieces.”
—Trapp. Like his brother Absalom, his prototype in rebellion, Adonijah
assumed all the external show of royalty—had a great retinue of chariots and
horsemen, both for state and protection, to wait upon and fight for him. The
glitter of outward display always attracts the multitude. There is no limit to
the pride and extravagance of a rebel. Absalom-like, ambition rideth without
reins.


II. Aggravated as committed against an indulgent and aged parent
(verse 6). Adonijah took advantage of his father’s growing infirmities
to gratify his sinful ambition. Had never known the wholesome discipline
of parental restraint. ‘‘The indulgence of parents at last pays them home in
crosses.” Reminds us of Prince Heury, in Shakespeare’s Henry IV., part ii.,
scene 5. It added not a little to the grief of the dying king that the trumpet
of rebellion should be sounded in his ears by the son whom he had loved ‘‘ not
wisely, but too well.”


III. Succeeded in corrupting men of the highest reputation (verse 7).
Joab, as commander-in-chief, had formerly done David noble service in
most difficult and troublous times. He had incurred the displeasure of the
king by his unwarrantable murder of Abner and Amasa; and, probably,
he disliked the character of Solomon as a man of peace. For the history
of Joab see 2 Samuel ii. 18-82; iii. 22-31; x. 7-14, &c. The
defection of Abiathar, the high priest, was more surprising. He was son
of that Ahimelech who suffered death in David’s cause, and the only one of his
sons who escaped the massacre by Doeg. David seems to have felt towards him
a special tenderness. Hitherto they had been the firmest friends. Abiathar
was with David through all his wanderings when he fled from Saul—served him
as priest in Hebron—accompanied him out of Jerusalem when Absalom
rebelled—was one of his chicf counsellors. The addition of these two
representatives of the church and camp mightily strengthened the cause of
Adonijah, and was significant of the charm of his personal presence, and bland,
insinuating address. ‘Outward happiness and friendship are not known till
our last act. In the impotency of either our revenge or recompense it will
easily appear who loved us for ourselves, who for their own ends.”


IV. Stimulated and bribed by excessive festivity (verse 9). Esau
sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, and he is not the only one
whose appetite has proved stronger than his conscience. Sensual feasting
is often the precursor of thoughtless, perilous conduct. The judgment is
unhinged, the heart inflamed with a fictitious bravery. Many commit
themselves to measures which in calmer moments thoy regret. Such as serve
their own belly, and will be in the interest of those that will feast them, what
side soever they are of, are an easy prey to seducers (Rom. xvi. 11).—Watt.
Henry. If the oxen were offered in sacrifice, as some think, it only added to
the audacity and impiety of the proceeding. Such a mockery of worship is
hateful to God, and can end only in disaster to the promoters. The triumph of
the wicked is short (Job xx. 5)


V. Powerless to vitiate the integrity of the faithful (verses 8, 10).
Zadok pertormed the offices of chief priest at the tabernacle of witness at Gibeon,
while Abiathar was the real high priest, and officiated at the sanctuary con-
taining the ark of the covenant in Zion. Benaiah was chief of David’s body-
guard (2 Sam. viii. 18; xx. 23). Nathan, the prophet, might be counted
among Solomon’s staunch friends, Had given the infant prince the name of

4


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, &





Jedidiah, ‘‘ darling of Jehovah,” and was probably entrusted with his education.
As representative of the Divine aspect of the arrangement, and privy to all
Dayid’s plans, he fully approved the order of succession which the king
was known to intend. Shimei and Rei are supposed to be David’s two brothers
Shimma and Raddai. The mighty men were the company of 600 originally
formed during David’s early wanderings (1 Sam. xxv. 13; xxvii. 2), and after-
wards maintained as the most essential element of his standing army (2 Sam.
xxiii. 8-39; 1 Chron. xi. 9-47).—Speaker’s Comm. Neither these worthies
nor Solomon were invited tothe feast. It would only have added insult to the
wrong. High integrity of character lifts man above many solicitations to evil.
Tacitus observed that the statues of Brutus and Cassius were the more glorious
and illustrious because they were not brought out with other images in a solemn
procession at the funeral of Germanicus. Cato said he would rather men
should question why he had no statue or monument erected to him, than why
he had. By not inviting Solomon, Adonijah betrayed his plans, and himself
gave the occasion for their frustration. The policy of the wicked is short-sighted,
and often helps the cause it seeks to hinder (Psalm lxix. 23; Romans xi. 9).


Lxssons:—1. Pride ts a fruitful source of rebellion. 2. Rebels do not suffi-
ciently estimate the power of the principles they oppose. 8. Rebellion ts recklesa
in its movements. 4. Rebellion conceived in arrogance +8 doomed to @ humiliating
defeat.


REMONSTRANCE WITH EVIL DOERS—Verse 6.


We are taught here that much of the evil that Adonijah did had its
root in his early bad training. David, though a good man and a great king,
sadly erred in his treatment of his children. What asad glimpse do we get
here of his domestic life! What is written is for our admonition. Learn—


I. That remonstrance with evil doers is an imperative duty.
““Why hast thou done so?” Thus should he have spoken. ‘‘ His father.”
None able to speak with such authority and tenderness. So others, according
to their place and relationships. Hear God's call to arms: ‘‘ Who will rise up
for me against the evil doers ?”


II. That remonstrance with evil doers is a very difficult duty.
« Displeased.”? Pride hurt; carnal security disturbed; conscience roused to
give pain; danger of speaking harshly ; of speaking the truth in wrath more
than in love. Still must do what isright. Better offend men than God; better
speak, than by silence imperil souls. Besides, if you act in time you may gain
your brother.


III, That remonstrance with evil doers is a much neglected duty.
Here a father, and that father David, is charged with failure. Who, then, is
safe? The very fact that the duty is so difficult and delicate makes many
shrink from it. They will not give pain. They fear the consequences of
rebuke and discipline. But though the neglect of this duty is so common, this
does not make the guilt the less. It is a sin against God, and a crime against
your brother. Take heed; be warned by many fearful examples. Innocence
is better than repentance. Better far to ‘‘displease” your children now by
kind and righteous correction, than to let them go on in sin without check, and,
in view of their sad fate and terrible upbraidings, to cry, ‘‘ Deliver me from
blood guiltiness, O Lord!’ Besides, how much higher a place will the father
hold who rules as a king, like Abraham (Gen. xviii. 19), than the man whe
weakly abuses his trust like Eli (1 Sam. iit. 18).—Homslsst. ye


CHAP, I





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





GERM NOTES ON THE VEESES.


Verses 1-4. Weakness and in-
firmity in old age are—1. The uni-
versal lot to which we must all con-
sider ourselves appointed (Psalm xc.
10). 2. Should loosen the bands
which hold us to the temporal and
perishable, and ripen us for eternity
(2 Cor. iv. 16-18). Old and sick
people should, and it is expected of
them as a work well pleasing to God,
that they bear this with a willing
heart, with patience, self-denial, and
sacrificing love.—Lange.


Verse 5. Adonijah’s attempt to
gain the crown. 1. The ground
upon which it rests. 1. Upon self-
assertion, pride, lust of power; but
God resisteth the proud, and a haughty
spirit goeth before a fall. 2. Upon
outward qualities, age, and beaatiful
person; but 1 Sam. xvi. 7; Psalm
exlvii. 10,11. 2. The means which
he employed. 1. He seeks to impose
upon the people by chariots and horse-
men; but Psalm xx. 8. 2. He con-
spires with false and faithless men, but
they forsake him in the hour of danger
(verse 49; Psalmci. 6,7). 8. He pre-
pares, for appearance sake, a religious
festival ; but Prov. xv. 8.


The effort after high things
(Rom. xii. 16). Now many a person
thinks: [ will become a great person-
age, a man of authority and influence,
and then scruples at nothing to attain
his goal. But that which is written
in 1 Cor. vii. 20-24 applies to the indi-
vidual as well as to entire classes.—
Lange.


Verse 6. The inevitable retribu-
tion of parental indulgence. In
its effect—1. Upon churacter, engender-
ing—1. Vanity, conscious of personal
beauty, fond of display. 2. Pride
“exalted himself.” 38. Reckless-


ness. (a). Disrespect of a parent’s
love. (6). Indifference to a parent’s
sufferings. 2 Upon conduct. Seen—


1. In deliberate opposition to the

Divine intentions. 2. Defiance of

parental authority. 8, Usurpation of
&


parental rights. 4. Dissension in the
household. 5. Abuse of property.


I. His father made a fondling of
Adonijah. II. He, in return, made a
fool of his father—U. Henry.

The father who allows his son to go
on in his pride and in worldly or sin-
ful conduct, and shuts his eyes, not to
trouble him, must expect that his son
will trouble him and embitter the
evening of his life. The fond parent
is generally punished in the ingrati-
tude and opposition of those very child-
ren whom he has most indulged, for
they cannot be influenced by any sense
of obligation or duty who have been
accustomed to be gratified in every
wish of their hearts (Prov. xxix. 17).


Verse. 7. The instability of human
friendship. 1. Begins in misunder-
standings, and is fostered by imaginary
wrongs. 2. Characterized by ingrati-
tude to our greatest benefactors. 3.
Culminates in bitter hostility and
revenge. 4. Disastrous in proportion
to the intimacy formerly enjoyed.


— Wickedness sometimes unites
strange elements. 1. Knows where
to select its accomplices—among the
ambitious, the disaffected, the waver-
ing. 2. Combines its votaries in sym-
pathy, aim, mode of operation, and
vengeance, against a common foe.
3. Formidable and dangerous when
espoused by men of high repute.

— High personages always find
people for the execution of their sinful
plans, who, from subserviency or
desire of reward, from ambition or
revenge, will act as counsellors and
agents; but they have their reward,
and for the most part end with terror
(Prov. xix. 21).

Verse 8. The true value of human
friendship tested in trouble. An in-
corruptible fidelity—1. Sinks selfish
considerations in promoting the com-
mon weal. 2. Soothes the alarm and
anxieties of the principal sufferer.
3. Is vigilant and active in counter-
acting the plots of evil workers. 4. Is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





a powerful incentive and support in
doing the right.

With those who are meditating
treason and destruction we should
never make common cause (Prov.
xxiv. 21, 22).


Verse 9. Sensual indulgence. 1.
Unfits the mind to estimate the rela-
tive value of things. 2. A fruitful
source of social and moral corruption.
8. Encourages promiscuous association
with questionable characters. 4. Af-
fords a coveted opportunity to artful





— He who gives the crowd wherewith
to eat and to drink, who prepares for
them festivities and pleasures, makes
himself popular and beloved for the
moment ; but all who allow themselves
to be gained in such way, to-day shout
Hosanna! and to-morrow, Crucify !—
Lange.


Verse 1(. A good character. 1.
Places a man beyond the suspicion of
treachery. 2. Is honoured, while it
is feared and envied, by the base.
3. Saves man from many temptations


to evil.


conspirators. 5. Instigates te all
kinds of violence.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 11-14.
Tue Counsen oF THE Wise ann Goon.


I. Is prompted by an unselfish concern to carry out the Divine
will 1. The Divine will ts the first and highest constderation with a true
prophet. Nathan well knew it was the Divine purpose that Solomon should
reign. Doubtless it was he who revealed to David the promise of Jehovah to
this effect (1 Chron. xxii. 8, 9). Without blindly and imactively resting on
the issue of the Divine decree, he saw the wisdom and importance of using all
lawful means to disconcert the wicked attempt to frustrate it. He was not
influenced by a priestly officiousness and love of political intrigue, but by the
supreme and jealous anxiety to fulfil the will of God. ‘‘ When crowns were
disposed of by immediate direction from Heaven, no marvel that prophets were
so much interested and employed in that matter; but now that common
Providence rules the affairs of the kingdom of men (Dan. iv. 32) the sub-
ordinate agency must be left tocommon persons. Let not prophets intermeddle
in them, but keep to the affairs of the kingdom of God among men.” Nathan
was indifferent to the personal risk he run had his counsel been rejected and
Adonijah allowed to become king. In all things, spiritual and temporal, the
will of God is the highest reason. It is the safest motive to action. 2. The
conduct of Nathan was in harmony with a genuine friendship. The faithfulness
of the prophet in reproving David’s sin not only produced repentance, but
established a bond of friendship which lasted for the remainder of the monarch’s
life. The training of Solomon was entrusted to Nathan, and the amiable
qualities and superior abilities of the youthful prince won the prophet’s love.
The services of a true friend may be more freely and cheerfully rendered when
they accord with the Divine intentions. It is no act of friendliness to tender
advice which involves in its observance the displeasure of God. Advice should
be given with gentleness and wisdom: it should fall as the dew, not overwhelm
as the torrent.


II. Highly valuable in great emergencies. A grave crisis had come
in the history of the kingdom. It needed the utmost caution and promptitude
in dealing with it. Important interests were threatened. 1. 4 crown was at
stake (ver. 11). Adonijah had usurped the position to which his brother was
formally designated. There was danger the sceptre should not pass into the
hands of Solomon. The crown of life, more lustrous far than the costliest
earthly diadem, is reserved for the faithful. That no man take ee crowa,


GitaP, i. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





we must give heed to Divine counsel. 2. Life was at stake (ver. 12). It
was the sanguinary custom among the ancient monarchies of the East, in the
event of a forcible seizure of the throne, to murder the dethroned ruler, or the
opposing pretenders to the crown, and all their nearest relatives (Judg. ix. 5;
1 Kings xv. 29; 2 Kingsx. 6, 13; 2b. xi.1). If Adonijah succeeded, Bathsheba,
Solomon, and, probably, Nathan, must perish. We are in danger of eternal
death. It is the privileged function of God’s messengers, while warning
against threatened death, to offer life. Happy are they who are wise to receive
instruction! To keep sound wisdom und discretion is life to the soul and grace
to the neck (Prov. ili. 21, 22). 3. Zhe wish of the dying king was dis-
regarded. That Adonijah knew the intention of David was evident by his
refusing to summon Solomon, and by conducting the conspiracy so secretly that
the aged king was ignorant of it. Filial duty dictates a reverential regard to
the last wishes of a dying parent. Rebellion outrages all family relationships,
and ignores the dearest parental wishes. 4. Zhe future prestige of the empire was
imperilled. Adonijah was unfit to govern. Had he reached the throne, his
career must have been one of disaster. There would have been no Solomon-era;
and the peace, the commercial affluence, the luxurious display, the intellectual
glory, and theocratic splendour that characterised the brilliant reign of the wise
and gifted king, would have been, if not unknown, indefinitely postponed. A
prophet and a woman—both contemptuously overlooked by the proud con-
spirators—were the instruments of defeating an ill-starred enterprise. The
timely and vigorous action of a single mind has often decided the destiny of a
nation.


III. Suggests the most forcible reasons for right action (verse 18).
1. The king 18 informed that his own arrangement concerning the regal succession ts
violently disturbed. ‘Why, then, doth Adonijah reign?” It was a terrible
blow to David to be told that his son—a son so fondly loved and excessively
indulged—was engaged in a rebellious attempt to defeat his father’s declared
intention. It would affect David the more that his informant was Bathsheba, a
woman he tenderly loved, and mother of the son who would be most injured if
the usurper triumphed. Nothing will sooner rouse a man into action than the
forcible and wilful interference with his own long-cherished and thoughtfully-
formed plans. 2. The king 1s reminded of his oath. ‘‘Didst not thou swear ?”
It is not known when David made the promise on oath to Bathsheba that her
son should be king. It was evidently after the revelation made to him by
Jehovah, recorded in 2 Sam. vii. The reference to his oath, uttered with the
utmost solemnity and awe, would be irresistible. The God-fearing king would
be incited to adopt prompt and active measures for ensuring the accomplishment
of his purpose. The man who fears God must ever be most solicitous to fulfil
the promise made by his solemn invocation of the Divine Name.


IV. Is supplemented and confirmed by active, personal endeavours
(verse 14). Many are ready to tender advice when it does not involve
personal effort and inconvenience. Advice thus cheaply given is generally
estimated at the same value. The true friend, not content with simply giving
the wisest counsel, is prepared to substantiate his words with earnest, diligent,
and self-sacrificing personal endeavours. The advice of such a friend is beyond
all price. It should be gratefully obeyed.


Lessons:—1. The minister of God should be able to give sound counsel.
2. The best counsel ts that which ts most in harmony with the will of God.
8. The counsel of the wise and good should be carefully pondered. 4. Good
Gore thy promptly acted upon, is followed with beneficial results,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EINGS.


OHAP. i.





GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 11. The watchfulness of the
faithful minister—1. Enables him
to discern the dangers which threaten
the interests of God’s kingdom. 2. To
discover the secret plots of evil workers.
8. To afford seasonable and important
counsel in grave emergencies. 4. To
lend all the force of his personal efforts
in defeating the designs of the wicked.
5. To brave all the perils of fidelity.


Nathan, the type of a true pro-
phet. Seen—1. In his watchfulness
and fidelity (Ezekiel xxxiii.7). He
is not silent when it was his duty to
open his mouth (Isaiah lvi. 10). 2. In
his wisdom and gentleness (Matt. x. 16).
8. In his earnestness and courage
(Matt. x. 28). How grand is this
Nathan! How reproving to all who
sleep when they should be wakeful,
who are dumb when they should
counsel, who flatter when they should
warn! Itisasolemn duty not to con-
ceal what can prove an injury and
evil to an individual or to a community,
but to expose it at the right time and
in the right place, so that the injury
may be averted.— Lange.


Verse 12. The great burden of the


Gospel message. The mission of the
Gospel is—1. To counsel the igno-
rant. 2. To warn the indifferent.
8. To offer life to the spiritually dead.
4. To reveal the endless duration and
consummate felicity of the life enjoyed
by the believer. 5. To set forth the
character and redeeming work of the
great Life-Giver.

— What Nathar here says to Bath-
sheba, Christ and His Apostles, in an
infinitely higher sense, say to us all,
especially every father and every
mother. How many take kindly the
good advice of a wise man, for them-
selves and for their children, in their
earthly and outward affairs, but who
wish to hear nothing of the best advice
aa shall bring blessedness to their
souls!


Verse 14. The purity of the counsel
is confirmed by the accompanying re-
sult. There are some seeming contra-
dictions in Scripture; and though they
seem to be as the accusers of Christ,
never a one speaking like the other,
yet, if we understand, we shall find
them speaking like Nathan and Bath-
sheba, both speaking the same things.


—Trapp.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 15-21.
Tue Perscasive Purapine or an Anxious Moran.


I, Is profoundly deferential, Bathsheba hesitates not to venture at
once into the inner chamber of the aged and dying king. Her maternal


instincts and concern for her son’s future render her courageous.


Her presence


pleaded eloquently, but her speech, tremulous with the conflicting emotions of.


the wife and mother, was overwhelming.
She paid every respect due to avid as her prince
If we would find favour with superiors, we must show them
We should cherish a dutiful regard towards those from whom
Nothing is ever lost by sincere politeness.
lt propitiates the most morose, and often wins a


unto the king” (verse 16).
and husband.
becoming respect.
we expect kindness.
a refined and gentle spirit.


favourable reception in the most difficult suit.
unmannerly brusqueness fails. It is irresistible in a true woman.


‘« Bathsheba bowed and did obeisance


It evidences


It succeeds where an
Life is not


so short but there is always time enough for courtesy.


II. Urges the religious obligation of an oath. Verse 17, ‘Thou


swarest by the Lord thy God.”


romised word ; but an oath is inviolable.


A conscientious man is morally bound by his


We are engaged if we have promised ;


if we have sworn, we are bound. Neither heaven nor earth has any gyves for
9


%


OHAP. I. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





that man whocan recklessly shake off the fetters of an oath. Such a man has
no regard for that God whose awful name he dare invoke to a falsehood. He
who cares not for God will not care for man. Itis a powerful leverage to move
a man to right action when we can remind him of his solemnly pledged word
An oath should be religiously remembered and conscientiously fulfilled. It ia
a duty we owe to both God and man. Even the highest in authority should be
faithfully reminded of this duty, and warned as to the consequences of a careless
repudiation of trust. A faithful friend in a palace is rare.


III. Graphically depicts the distraction of rebellion (verses 18, 19).
1. The throne ts seized by an ungrateful son. ‘‘ Adonijah reigneth.” Without
waiting forthe death of his father, or seeking his sanction, and even without
his knowledge, the presumptuous son assumes all the authority and external
display of royalty. Had his right to the succession been ever so good, such
conduct was undutiful and treasonable. An unprincipled ambition corrupts
natural affection: it acknowledges obedience to none but its ownimperious will.
2. Excessive festivity prevails. Indulgence is often provocative of vain bvasting,
extravagant designs, and riotous conduct. It leads to cruelty and disaster.
3. The members of the royal family and the true friends of the aged king are seduced
foe their allegiance. There was disorder in the household. The children of

avid repaid his paternal kindness with unfaithfulness and wild rebellion. The
ingratitude of children, for whom so much has been sacrificed and endured, is
one of the sharpest pangs of a disappointed parent’s heart. Polygamy, in how-
ever limited a degree, is a prolific source of domestic trouble. Any violation of
the moral order carries with it its own Nemesis. The infidelity of Abiathar
and Joab—men with whom he had repeatedly trusted his life—was a severe blow
to David. Little does the renegade friend think of the anguish caused by his
treachery. Confidence in human nature isshattered. 4. The king-designate ts
ignored. ‘ But Solomon thy servant ”’—not thy sovereign, as Adonijah affects
to be—‘‘hath he not called.” He is evidently regarded as a rival, and every
attempt is made to prevent his gaining the throne. It is not an oversight, but
a contempt of the act of settlement, which had been made sufficiently public,
that Solomon is neglected. All the fondly cherished plans of David are
threatened with a rude and ignominious overthrow. The scene of confusion
created by the rebels, thus graphically presented, was calculated to deeply
affect the dying monarch—as the husband, the father, and the king.


IV. Earnestly advocates the pressing claims of the nation (verse 20).
The rebellion had not gone so far es that of Absalom’s in stealing away the
hearts of the people. There was a grave pause in the kingdom. The people
hesitated what to do, until the royal intention was publicly proclaimed. David
was too firmly seated in the affections of his subjects to allow them to act
without the knowledge of his declared will. This ominous silence of the national
voice was Nathan’s opportunity and Adonijah’s doom. In troublous times the
nation looks to the king. In him is vested supreme authority. He is the guide
and defender of the empire. The interests of all are in his keeping; and his
power should ever be exercised on the side of justice, equity, and peace. A
divine sentence is in the lips of the king. ‘‘ That thou shouldest tell them who
shall sit on the throne.” This some princes love not to do—Queen Elizabeth,
for instance. A false Jesuit wrote that she wished she might, after her death,
hang awhile in the air, to see what scuffling there would be for her kingdom.
Men should use whatever power or influence they possess, not in compassing
their own selfish ends, but in advancing the kingdom of the Messiah.


V. Is full of genuine pathos. 1. .4 mournful contingency ts referred to
(verse An “‘ When my Lord shall sleep with his fathers.” Here the heart of
A


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. i,
the wife speaks out. It was evident David’s end was near; and Bathsheba
could not contemplate that event without deep emotion. Death is compared to
asleep. Beautiful simile! Such a view robs death of its terror, and soothes
the sorrow of the bereaved. Death is but the gentle sinking of the tired and
spent body into the lap of rest. Silently it reposes among the hallowed dust
of bye-gone generations, until the last great trumpet shall wake it into newness
of life. 2. A tender allusion is made to threatened personal peril. ‘I and my
son Solomon shall be counted offenders.” Here the heart of the mother speaks
out. It is suggested by some commentators that, probably, Adonijah had
spoken slightingly of Bathsheba as an adultress, and of Solumon as illegitimate,
and, therefore, not fit to be king. The reputation of mother and son was in
danger, and must be protected. Not only so: if Adonijah succeeded, they
would both be reckoned traitors and public enemies, and their lives sacrificed.
Adonijah would not have dealt so mercifully with Solomon as Solomon did with
him. He who usurps a throne will stop at no cruelty to secure himself in it.
If anything will rouse the soul into earnest concern, it is the peril to which
those dear to it are exposed.


Lessons:—1. The mother exerts a powerful influence on the destiny of the
famtly. 2. It 1s an unspeakable advantage for a youthful prince to have a wise
and capable mother. 3. The eloquence of a mother’s heart is irresistible.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 15-21. Bathsheba before the Verse 18. ‘‘Thou knowest it not.


king. She reminds him of his duty—
1. Towards God, before whom he had
sworn. What one has vowed before
God, according to God’s will, one must
hold to under all circumstances; of
this one must remind kings and princes.
2. Towards the people, whose well-
being and whose woe were in his keep-
ing. The great responsibility of him
towards whom all eyes are directed.
8. Towards the wife and son, whose
happiness and life were at stake. Woe
to the father through whose guilt wife
and children, after his death, fall into
contempt and wretchedness.— Lange.


Verse 16. “‘ What wouldest thou ?”
A question the King of Heaven is ever
asking—1. The perplexed enquirer.
2. The penitent suppliant. 3. The
complaining sufferer. 4. The solitary
mourner. 5. The ambitious self-
seeker.


The isolation of the aged and infirm
—1. Presents a melancholy contrast to
the joyous excitement of an active
life. 2. Renders them oblivious of the
most important events of the outside
world. 3. Ignorant of the calamities
that threaten their dearest interests.
4. Familiarizes their minds with suffer-
ing and approaching death. 5. Calls
for the kindly attention and sympathy
of loving hearts.


Verse 20. The grave responsibili-
ties of the monarch, 1. All eyes are
turned to him in times of national dis-
tress. 2. He is expected to promptly
and effectually crush rebellion. 3. The
best interests of his subjects should
be his chief concern. 4. He should
make the wisest arrangements for the
future peace and stability of the king-
dom. 5. He is accountable to God,
from whom he derives his authority.


HOMILETICS OF WERSES 22-81.
Tae Exposrunation oy a Farraro. Movisrer.


Bathsheba retires, and Nathan is announced. No time should be lost m
dealing with evil. Delay is all in favour of the enemy. Wickedness hardens


in its effrontery the longer it is unchecked. Observe :—


12


OHAP, L HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





I. That the faithful minister is painfully conscious of wrong done to
others. His character supposes familiarity with the highest and purest moral
truths. His communion with God gives tone and balance to his personal
experience of those truths. His training renders him highly susceptible to
every variation from the right. His office, as a divinely-appointed watchman,
implies his constant alertness in detecting the presence and operation of evil.
As the magnet trembles under the influence of some atmospheric disturbance, so
the heart of the faithful minister is sensitively alive to the violence of the
wicked. The havoc wrought by sin is the source of bitterest sorrow to the
good. He feels the injury done to others more than the injury done to himself.

II. That the faithful minister is sincerely solicitous to rectify the wrong.
Without delay, Nathan set all the forces within his reach in motion to counter-
act the wicked designs of the rebels. When we are conscious of a flagrant
wrong, fidelity requires that we protest against it, and use all lawful and wise
endeavours to put it away. Man never feels so weak as when he comes into
active opposition with the colossal powers of evil. But for Divine encouragement,
he would give up the contest in despair. When his best efforts are powerless to
conquer the obstinacy of the wicked, like the tender-hearted prophet, he
exclaims, ‘‘My soul shall weep in secret places for you” (Jer. xiii. 17),
What an unfathomable depth of disappointment and regret is sounded in the
heartrending wail of the ever-pitying Jehovah—‘O! that thou hadst
hearkened to my commandments!’’ Even the Deity, after exhausting, in vain,
all legitimate attempts to win man back to the right, has nothing left but tears !
Christ weeping over Jerusalem.


III. That the faithful minister knows how to influence the highest
authority in favour of the right. While the impression made by the passionate
pleading of Bathsheba was fresh in the mind of the king, Nathan appeared,
and, with the utmost respect, but in a form that implied a slight reproof,
expostulated with him. The wood that a single wedge will not rive is readily
split asunder by a double one. The prophet rehearsed, for the most part, the
arguments used by the mother; but, as befitting his character, he used them
in such a way as was calculated to powerfully move the heart of the king.
1. He expostulated with David as a man of consistency. ‘‘ Hast thou said
Adonijah shall reign?” (ver. 24). This was contrary to what the king-had said
before. He had solemnly declared that Solomon should be king; and this was
publicly known. This appeal to his consistency would rouse the personal
interest of the king. The slightest suspicion of inconsistency alarms the
conscientious soul. It is sometimes needful to stir up and encourage to duty
those who mean well, but are enfeebled by infirmity. 2. He expostulated with
Dawid as a considerate and popular prince. Rebellion had broken out, and had
reached its highest point of aggravation. The revellers were shouting, “God
save king Adonijah!” Beloved as David was by the nation, the rebels had
despised his authority, challenged his power, abused his kindness, insulted his
friends, and ignored his son (verses 25, 26). All this would tend to fire the
indignation of the king. 38. He expostulated with David as a man of candour
(verse 27). Could it be that the king had changed his mind as to the succession,
and kept his truest friend and wisest adviser in ignorance? The man who
represented the Divine aspect of the arrangement was surely the first who had
aright to know. Had the king been practising secresy and deception? This
was unlike David. Few men can bear their candour called in question. The
fuse ignited the train. The king was thoroughly roused. Feeble and dying as
he was, something of the vigour of his best days re-animated his soul. As the
saint, the husband, the father, the prince, he was prepared to enforce his
promised word. The mightiest. appeal at the Mercy Seat is that which is based
upon the Divine Word.

12


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. L





IV. That the expostulation of a faithful minister was in this instance
srowned with success. 1. Zhe king resolved to take immediate action to maintain
the right. ‘‘Kven so will I certainly do this day” (verse 30). Good men
will do their duty,.if it is faithfully and judiciously pressed upon them.
David’s love towards his usurping son gave place to indignation. He now
anderstands the serious state of affairs, and the necessity for prompt measures
being taken. The clearness and vigour with which the dying king gave
instructions indicate that, notwithstanding the feeble state of his body, his
intellectual powers were unimpaired. Age ripens knowledge into wisdom.

Plato wrote at eighty years of age, Isocrates at ninety-five, and some of the
ablest men who have reached a good old age have grieved that they must die
when they began to be wise. Without immediately revealing his purpose to
the prophet, David summons Bathsheba into his presence (verse 28). He still
retained the power of the king, and of acting independently. The woman who
would be so grievously wronged must be assured that justice should be done.
2. The king renews his oath with increased solemnity (verses 29, 30). He not
only repeats his former oath, but, with deepest emotion, ratifies it with another.
An oath is so sacred that its obligation cannot be broken; and so solemn that
the impression ought never to be forgotten. David acknowledges the goodness
of God in bringing him safely through the difficulties and hardships of life. As
God had been true to him, so would he remain true to the end. Dying saints
should bear witness of the faithfulness of God towards them. What a lesson was
this to his son and successor to trust in God in every time of distress that might
come upon him! Bathsheba gratefully acknowledges the decision of the king
—‘‘Let my lord, king David, live for ever” (verse 31). Would that it had
pleased God that this change had never been necessary, and that thou mightest
have lived and reigned perpetually! We should ever desire the prolonging of
useful lives, however much it may appear against our own advantage. David
acted in this instance, not merely in compliance with the supplication of a wife,
or from a dislike to Adonijah, but from a religious motive. He was firmly
persuaded that Solomon was appointed by Jehovah to be his successor; and that
through him, as well his own house as the house of Jehovah should be built
up. This had been promised, and David witnessed its fulfilment (2 Sam. vil.
11-13; comp. Heb. xi. 32, 33).


J.ussons :—1. That the faithful minister should not tolerate the wrong. 2. That
the faithful minister will adopt the wisest and most influential method in persuading
men to the right. 3. That when the expostulations of the faithful minister are
regarded, blessed results follow. 4. That the minister must be faithful tn
expostulation, wrrespective of results,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


xiii. 2). With questions which lead
to a knowledge of self, he who has
the care of souls often accomplishes


Verses 22, 23. To have a Nathan by
one’s side, who refers at the right time
and in the right way to the will of


God, is the choicest blessing for a
prince. ‘‘He who fears God lays
hold of such a friend ” (Eccles. vi. 16).
The ministers of God and the preachers
of His word should not, indeed, mingle
in worldly business and political affairs ;
but their calling always requires them
to testify against uproar and sedition,
for he who resisteth the powers re-
sisteth the ordinance of God (Rom.


more, than by direct reproaches and
disciplinary speeches.


Verses 28-30. David’s decision.
1. His oath is an evidence of his firm
faith in the divine promise. 2. His
command is a living proof of the truth
of the Word (Isaiah xl. 31, and
Psalm xcii. 15). Happy for the king
who, under all circumstances, observes

13


»


CLAP, 1


what he has promised. Fidelity in
high places meets with fidelity from
those below.— Lange.


Verse 29. Jehovah the Detverer
of His people. 1. That the people of
God are not exempt from the calamittes
of life. They may be prostrated by
disease, perplexed with commercial
reverses, disappointed by false friends,
distressed with domestic affliction, over-
whelmed with bereavement, puzzled
with the inexplicable mysteries of the
Divine procedure. 2. That out of
every calamity Jehovah graciously de-
livers His people. This He does either—
1. By removing the cause of the





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





and finally to conquer. 8. That the
constancy of Jehovah in delivering His
people should ever be gratefully acknow-
ledged. 1. Faithis confirmed. 2. Cha-
racter moulded by the discipline of
trouble. 3. Sympathy and fidelity
towards others encouraged. 4. Praise
should be continually offered.


Verse 30. ‘ Even so will I certainly
do this day.”” Promptitude in Chris-
tian service—1l. Is impelled by a
profound conviction of the superlative
righteousness of the work to be done.
2. Necessary to counteract the strata-
gems of the wicked. 8. Demanded
by the pressing needs of humanity.


calamity ; or, 2, by abating its force;


4. Accomplishes the most satisfactory
or, 3, by imparting strength to endure,


results.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 32-40.
Tre Coronation or Soromon.


1. Was undertaken with the full approbation and by the express direo-
tions of the reigning monarch. 1. Zhe king voluntarily abdicated in favour
of hts son Solomon. ‘‘ He shall be king in my stead; and I have appointed him
to be ruler over Israel and Judah” (verse 35). No sooner is David roused
to comprehend the gravity of the occasion than he proceeds to make the most
complete arrangements for carrying out his own intentions and the Divine will.
He surrenders into the hand of the youthful Solomon the kingdom which, for
the most part, had been conquered and consolidated by his own military and
administrative genius. He had subdued Ephraim, which took the name of
Israel, and united it with Judah. Considerable jealousy existed between these
two portions of the empire, which ultimately forced on a separation. The old dis-
union reappeared in the revolt of Absalom, and was again revived by the
attempt of Adonijah. It was therefore with a view of strengthening Solomon’s
authority over the whole kingdom that David expressly declared that his son
should be ruler over Israel and Judah. The abdication of a monarch in favour of
a son is not always a wise proceeding. King Henry II. of England lived
to regret that he had so acted. Prince Henry, inflated with his new dignity,
and instigated to filial disobedience by his mother, rebelled against the king ;
and in 1183, in the midst of his wicked designs, was seized with a fatal illness,
and died. But Solomon had learned better things from his father (Prov. iv. 4),
from his mother (Prov. xxxi.), and from his tutor, Nathan. 2. The king was
explicit in his directions (verses 82-35). He summoned into his presence Zadok,
Nathan, and Benaiah, the chief representatives of the church and the army,
and commanded them to take with them the royal bedy-guard, to set Solomon
on his own mule, an honour never conferred but as a mark of the highest
distinction ; to conduct him in state down to Gihon, there to anoint him with
the sacred oil, to sound the trumpet and proclaim him king in the public street ;
to bring him back to the court in magnificence and triumph, with all the
necessary and imposing ceremonies of coronation. The minuteness with which
these orders were given indicates the clearness and vigour of David’s mind, and
the fervour of his soul in doing what he believed to be the right. Zeal for God


shoald pes be controlled by particularity, method, and purpose. 3. Zhe action


:


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. I
en ee ee


of the king met with signal approval (verses 36, 87). Benaiah, on behalf of the
rest, applauds the act, and adds his devout Amen. He also utters a prayer
that Jehovah may be with Solomon, and exalt his throne above that of
his father. The best of men desire their children to be wiser and better than
themselves; as they themselves desire to be wiser and better. To be wise and
good is to be truly great. Benaiah neither flattered not reflected upon David ;
but, convinced that the king’s arrangements were in conformity with
the Divine will, he wished that the blessing of heaven might rest upon
the newly-formed government. God heard the prayer, and confirmed Solomon’s
reign, characterized by a lengthened period of civil and religious felicity,
representing the triumphant church in heaven, as David’s reign had been
a figure of the church militant on earth.


II. Was celebrated with becoming solemnities. 1. There was all the
outward display of regal magnificence. Among the Persians it was a capital
offence to ride on a king’s horse, to sit on his throne, or to handle his sceptre
without the royal permission: on the other hand, to be authorised to mount
the royal palfrey was accounted by them the highest dignity. Solomon was
placed on the king’s own mule, as a token that he was invested with the regal
office ; and, attended by the principal officers of the church, the state, and the
army, with all the external pomp of a royal procession, was conducted down to
Gibon, a small brook on the west side of Jerusalem which emptied itself into
the Kedron. The Rabbins assert that all the Hebrew kings were anointed
beside a fountain or river as a symbol of the perpetuity of their kingdom. It
was a spot where a large assemblage could be gathered, and from which an
imposing entrance into the city, which had no open public square, could be
made. External display is an important means of impressing the people with
the majesty of the throne. That was a striking spectacle in the city of Brussels
in 1555, when Charles V. abdicated in favour of his son Philip IT. (vide Mutley’s
Rise of the Dutch Republic, vol. i., chap. 1). What a sight for the universe
was that when the triumphant Messiah ascended on high, and was invested
with the kingly authority! 2. Zhere was the solemn anointing. An oil flask
of horn, containing the anointing oil, which was used only for the anointing of
priests and kings, was taken out of the tabernacle, where it was always care-
fully laid up; and Zadok and Nathan anointed the youthful king, one of
them pouring out the oil, andthe other anointing his head, drawing a circle
round about it with oil, according to the maxim that the Hebrew kings were
anointed in the form of a crown, to denote their delegation to the royal dignity.
The pouring of the oil upon the head symbolized the communication of the
Spirit of Jehovah (1 Sam. xvi. 13), and that the king should be endued
with all regal virtues, and reign in submission to and for the furtherance of the
will of God. The horn of oil was emblematic of power and plenty. The
Messiah was anointed to his mediatorial office, not with oil, but with the
immeasurable fulness of the Spirit (Psalm xlv. 7). 38. There was the public
proclamation. Zadok blew his sacred ram’s-horn, that gave a far-sounding note
and was specially employed for giving signals, and on other solemn occasions ;
and, as was the custom on the inauguration of kings, the trumpeters of the
guard followed with a loud blast, which announced to the assembled crowd the
completion of the impressive ceremony. A shout then went up amid the
acclamations of the multitude, ‘‘God save king Solomon!” Thus, with all
the honours befitting the occasion, and in the most public manner, the youthful
prince, at the age of fifteen according to some, of twenty according to others,
was raised to the throne of his father David. The kingly character of the
Messiah was openly proclaimed to the universe (Psalm xxiv. 7-10).


II. Was the occasion of great national rejoicing (verse 40). abe people


omar. LL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
LLL LIED,


escorted their newly-crowned king to the city, and expressed their exuberant
joy, after the manner of the Orientals, with the wild music of flutes, with
vehement dancing, and with loud enthusiastic plaudits, so that the earth rang
again. The excessive jubilation of the whole people showed that they did not
side with Adonijah, but accepted the decision ot David as authoritative and
binding. They saw in the elevation of Solomon a victory over the daring
usurper. The coronation of a monarch is a fitting time for national joy ; the
more so when the character of the king wins the confidence of the people.
There is everything in the kingly character of the Messiah to call forth the
joyous acclaim of all angelic powers, of all peoples, of all ages.


Lessons:—1. A wise king will make the best arrangements for the future stability
and peace of his kingdom. 2. The accession of a good prince should be celebrated
with all due honours. 3. All thrones are at the divine disposal. He disconcerts
the most cleverly-conceived cabal, and works through the confusion his own
peaceful ends.


Tus Accession or Sonomon Typrican oF tHe Kinery Cranacrer or Crrtst.


I, Like Solomon, Christ was appointed to the regal office by His Father.
Years before the actual event the voice of prophecy declared: ‘I have set my
king upon my hill of Zion ” (Psa. ii. 6). Gabriel announced to the Virgin: ‘ The
Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David, and he shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end”
(Luke i. 32, 33). The highest expectations were cherished as to the perma-
nent results of Solomon’s brilliant reign; but it was reserved for the true, the
later Son of David to fulfil the prophetic yearnings which had gathered round
the birth of the earlier. All the weight and magnificence of the Father’s
authority belonged to the Messiah absolutely (Matt. xxviii. 18).


II. Like Solomon, Christ was established in His throne, notwithstanding
the violent opposition of His enemies. The greatest dignitaries of both the
Jewish and heathen worlds plotted against the Messiah, and strove to prevent
theestablishment of his kingdom. ‘‘The kings of the earth set themselves, and the
rulers took counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed,” &e.
(Psa. ii. 2, 8). There had been a similar confederacy among the Ammonites,
Syrians, &c., against David, but it was completely crushed. And terrible was
the vengeance that fell on the enemies of God’s anointed One. The Romans
were the instruments of the Divine wrath against the Jews, and, in course of
time, punishment fell upon the Romans; the imperial city was captured by the
Goths, and the conquered people subjected to the most barbarous cruelties. All
oppesition to Christ, the Father looks upon as opposition to Himself, and it can
end only in unutterable disaster and defeat.


III. Like Solomon, Christ was solemnly anointed. His name, Christos,
implies it. But the Messiah was not anointed to the regal office with oil.
Indeed, the consecrated oil, specially compounded and specially appropriated to
the anointing of kings and priests, was lost hundred of years before the birth of
Christ, and the custom of anointing in that manner had long ceased. The only
anointing of the Messiah of which we read is, the anointing of the Spirit. Peter
testifies “‘ how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with
power” (Acts x. 88). And this anointing took place, partly at His conception
(Luke i, 35), by which He was prepared for His mission, and more fully at His
baptism (Matt. iii. 16), when He formally entered upon the performance of all
the ee belonging to His Messiahship. His baptism in the river Jordan


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. &


a ae a erp ee ey


still retained the analogy suggested by the old Jewish custom of anointi i
alo; ting kin

near @ stream, to signify the perpetuity of the kingdom. The aHOHOHT OE the

Holy Ghost was poured on Him with an immeasureable fulness (John iii. 34),


IV. Like Solomon, Christ made His triumphal entry into the Holy City
amid the joyous plaudits of the people. Get was the; oy and loud ah tito
hosannas of the people when Jesus rode in glorious but homely pomp into his
own loved J erusalem—“‘ Blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name
of the Lord” (John xii. 13). But grander and louder was the shout of victory
that shook the heavens when the triumphant Messiah ascended to His court on
high, and took possession of His mediatorial throne (Psa. xlvii. 5-8;
xxiv. 7-10). :


Lessons :—1. Jesus reigns—His people may therefore rejoice. 2. Jesus reigns—


His people will therefore triumph over ever J
, f 'y foe. 8. Jesus reigns—the present and
future interests of His people are therefore secure. ‘ “ti


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 41-49,
Tue Dzrrat or Resetzion.


I. That rebels are more intent on selfish indulgence than the public
good. ‘As they had made an end of eating” (verse 41). Adonijah and his
supporters had given themselves up to festivity; and the entertainment must
have been greatly prolonged, as all the arrangements for crowning and
proclaiming Solomon had been initiated and completed while his opponents
were gluttonising. Rebellion originates in a feeling of intense selfishness, and
when it grasps power it uses its advantage in a free, unchecked indulgence of
those appetites which the force of constitutional order had restrained. How
often has the conqueror of a tyrant become in turn a greater tyrant himself!
He consults not the weal of the community, but the greed of his own passions.
They who oppose the Lord Jesus Christ are such as serve their own bellies
(Rom. xvi. 18; Phil. iii. 19). Excessive indulgence lulis the soul into a fatai
security. The antediluvians, intent only on selfish indulgence, were deaf to all
warnings, till the roaring waters roused them into concern; and then their
frantic efforts were powerless to rescue from the suffocating waves. The
dwellers in Sodom gave rein to the lowest tendencies of their nature, until the
reeking stench of their abominations became intolerable, and was purged away
with the fire from heayen. So shall it be at the end of the world (Luke


Xvil. 26-30).


II. That rebels are often surprised in the midst of fancied security,
‘‘ Wherefore is this noise?’’ (verse 41). The blare of the sane trumpet that
proclaimed the coronation of Solomon startled the revellers, and revealed to the
leaders of the revolt the critical position of their enterprise. What was an
inspiriting note of triumph to one party was the dread signal of confusion and
defeat to the other. ‘‘ When sin spreads the table of riotous feasting, the end of
that mirth will be heaviness. Ever after the meal is ended comes the reckoning.
No doubt, at this feast, there was many a health drunk to Adonijah, many a
confident boast of their prospering design, many a scorn of the despised faction
of Solomon ; and now for their last dish is served up astonishment and fearful
expectation of a just revenge.”—ZHall. The wicked are often overtaken when
they are least on their guard. It requires a sleepless vigilance to detect the
swift and silent approach of justice, and superhuman forethought to ward off its
inevitable vengeance; and these are qualities the wicked do not possess. ‘The


rebel is like a man who struggles to secure possession of an ocean rock be :use
é 17


GHAP, L HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





of the fabulous treasure it is reputed te contain; and while he is gloating over
his newly-found wealth, heedless of danger, he becomes suddenly aware that
he is surrounded by the steadily rising sea, which, despite his shrieks of horror,
enfolds him in its pitiless embrace, and sings a low, wild, mournful dirge as it
entombs him in its liquid depths.


III. That rebels are compelled to listen to unwelcome tidings (verses
42-48). Jonathan, the son of Abiathar the priest, had probably been left behind
to act as a spy upon the movements of the leading men in the city. He had
seen much and heard more from reliable sources. His industry and acuteness in
gathering information were amazing; and when, with breathless haste, he broke
in upon the thoughtless banquetters, very different was his interpretation of the
tumult which interrupted their revelry, from what Adonijah anticipated. Joab,
an old campaigner, understood its significance, and trembled; but Adonijah,
blinded by vanity and presumption, flattered himself that all events would be
in his favour. That man is often least timorous who is in the most dangerous
condition. The order in which Jonathan related his tidings was calculated to
make a deep impression on his listeners, and to increase the consternation which
they caused. David had formally nominated Solomon as his successor: therefore,
the hopes of Adonijah were wrecked, and his attempt branded with rebellion
and ingratitude. Zadok, Nathan, and Benaiah had been authorised to set Solomon
on the royal mule: therefore, these men enjoyed the confidence of the aged king,
and would occupy a foremost place in the court of the youthful monarch; and
the leading men who supported the revolt of Adonijah had every reason to fear
for the consequences of their perfidy. Solomon had been solemnly anointed:
therefore, the king was in earnest, and everything had been done to secure the
Divine approval. Zhe youthful king had been brought to Jerusalem, and placed
on the throne of hss father: therefore, his triumph was complete. The utmost
publicity had been given to the whole transaction: it was accomplished with
becoming pomp and dignity: it was welcomed by the principal officers of state:
it was applauded by the people with an extravagance of joy: it was approved
and confirmed by the highest authority, the dying king bowing reverently
upon his bed, and pouring out his soul in gratitude to God. This intelligence
filled the rebels with dismay, and convinced them of the true character and
utter hopelessness of their enterprise. Awful are the tidings that will soon
break upon the ear of the sinner: in the midst of his boasting and merriment
the message will come that will fill his soul with a nameless terror: ‘Thou
fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee.”


IV. That rebels are doomed ere long to an inglorious defeat (verse 49).
The followers of Adonijah were stricken with fear, their faces paled, their hearta
grew chill, their courage failed them, their sport was spoiled, and, their eyes
being opened, they saw the wicked daring of their conduct. They were now
liable to be punished as rebels. They took to flight, and thus sought to escape
the consequence of their rash attempt. ‘They were afraid, and rose up and
went every man his way.” Such is the fate of all unrighteous rebellion against
God or man. Rebellion has in it no element of permanency. It clutches at a
temporary advantage, while it outrages and tramples on eternal principles. It
must sooner or later suffer defeat—defeat the most humiliating and disastrous.
It is a bubble, inflated with pride and glittering with the many-coloured tints
of vanity, but melting away before the gossamer thread stretched across its
pathway. It isacloud-wreath—light, gay, pretentious, aspiring ; but vanishing
into space before it reaches the summit of the mountain from the spongy flank
ef which it sprang. :

Lussons :—1. Lebels are intensely selfish. 2. Rebels are ever in the greatest peril,


&. it ne meroy when rebels are convinced of thew folly before recovery ts hopeless
8


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. L.


—— sn
GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 41-49. The frustration of
the schemes of Adonijah. 1. The
intelligence he obtains. 2.The effect
produced by this intelligence. To an
evil conscience (Joab) the trumpets
which announce victory and joy are
judgment trumpets which sound forth—
Thou art weighed, and found wanting.
The same message in which David ex-
presses himself, Blessed be, &c. (v. 48),
works terror and alarm in Adonijah
and his party. So still ever sounds
the ‘‘ good message,’”’ that the true
Prince of Peace (Christ) has won the
victory, and is seated at the right hand
of God, which to some is for thanks-
giving and praise, so that they support
themselves upon it; but to others it
is a stone of stumbling, so that they
fall and are confounded (Isa. vill. 14;
Luke ii. 34).—Lange.


Verse 42. A truthful messenger—
1. Is at great pains to ascertain the
truth. 2. Has a good reputation to
maintain. ‘Thou art a valiant man.”
8. Is unmoved by flattery. ‘‘ Come
in; thou bringest good tidings.”
4. Swerves not from the truth because
it is unpleasant. 5. Is earnest and
faithful in giving prominence to the
main features of his message. 6. Is
often the means of arresting mischief
before it has gone too far.


Verse 48. The joy of aged and
dying saints in leaving their de-
scendants prosperous, peaceful, and
pious. David blessed God that He
bad given him a worthy successor.
He had great satisfaction in Solomon’s
character as one eminently wise and
good, in whom the Israelites would
heartily acquiesce and rejoice, and
under whose government the kingdom
would be peaceful, prosperous, and
happy. Amidst all the languor of
nature, David’s heart rejoiced in this
happy settlement, and he ascribes the
praise to that God from whom pro-
motion cometh. Observe—

I. Thar the prospect of leaving
their families in prosperous and
peacota! circumstances and in the


service of God is a matter of great
joy to aged and dying saints. 1. 7
$3 a pleasure to an aged and dying saint
to leave hisfamily in prosperous circum-
stances. It is the character of a good
man that he is not a lover of this
world, nor anxiously solicitous about
future events. Nevertheless, he con-
siders himself as obliged by the laws
of nature, reason, and the gospel, to
provide for those of his own house;
not only to furnish them with the
necessaries of life while he liveth, but
lay up for them such a share of its
good things as he can, consistent with
their present support and comfort,
and the other demands which his
great Lord hath upon him. He is
particularly pleased and thankful
that what he leaves is the fruit
of his honest industry; that he
has no ill-gotten money among his
substance, to bring a curse uponit;
and that his family will be likely to
have the blessing of God with what
he leaves them. 2. J¢ #8 @ greater
pleasure to leave his descendants in unity
and love. David had seen and felt
much of the fatal mischiefs of discord
in his own family; but he hoped that
the settlement of £0 wise and benevo-
lent a prince as Solomon on the throne
would establish and secure its peace.
Contentions and quarrels, between
whomsoever they happen, are griev-
ous to all the sons of peace, dishonour-
able to religion, and injurious to its
power; but between those of the
same stock and family they are most
shameful and pernicious. The cele-
brated Phillip de Mornay (Lord
Plessis) said, with an air of cheerful-
ness, just before his death: ‘‘] am
arrived at the height of comfort, since
I die with the assurance of leaving
peace among my children.” 3. Jt ts hes
greatest yoy to leave his descendants in
the way of holiness, and zealous for the
support of religion. Next to the good
hope of his own salvation, there is
nothing can give the heart of a pious
parent higher delight than such a
prospect as this. He can adopt the
dying words of Josepb to his brethren
19


GHAP.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





and posterity: “(I die; but God will
surely visit you, and bring you to the
land which He hath promised”
(Gen. 1. 24).


II. The reasons why such a pros-
a gives so much joy to aged and
ying saints. 1. This joy arises in
part from their natural love to their
descendants. God hath implanted in
all creatures a strong affection to
their offspring, in order that they
may preserve and sustain them till
they are capable of providing for
themselves. This natural instinct or
affection is, in good men, sanctified
by religion. Thus their children
become dear to them by a stronger
and more engaging tie than that of
nature, even their common relation
to God as their Father and Friend,
and to Jesus as their Redeemer
and Saviour. 2. Zhe concern aged
saints feel for the honour of God and
for the continuance and spread of
religion increases this joy. It is the
joy of the good man to thinx that
though he is dying, religion is not
dying with him: that that will sur-
vive, and continue in the town and
neighbourhoood to which he is related,
and, especially, in his own family,
The more the dying eaint loves God
and His ways, the more he rejoices
there are those rising up in his stead
who will have the same loves and
care, and be the support of religion
when he is laid in the dust. 3. Dut
the principal ground of joy of the aged
and dying saint ts the prospect of
meeting his pious descendants again in
the heavenly world. The separation
from loved ones is but short; and it
is with unspeakable joy the dying
saint looks around on his pious, duti-
ful children when he thinks that he
shall soon meet them again in the
presence of Christ, with their graces
infinitely improved and all their im-
perfections done away.


Inferences. 1. Jt should be the
earnest desire and diligent careofall


parents that they may have this joy.
The pious Dr. Annesty, when one of
his friends hinted to him that his
charity was too great considering the
number of his children, answered:
“You quite mistake the matter: I
am laying up portions for my child-
ren.” 2. Aged saints who have this
joy ought to be very thankful. <A
strong obligation is laid upon them
to employ their remaining time and
strength in endeavouring to promote
higher degrees of piety, zeal, and
usefulness in those who shall come
after them. 8. It ts the duty of young
persons to fulfil ther parents’ joy. It
is mentioned, as an amiable part of the
character of the judicious Hooker, that
he used to say: ‘If I had no other
reason and motive for being religious,
I would strive earnestly to be so for
the sake of my aged mother, that I
may requite her care of me, and cause
the widow’s heart to sing for joy.”—
Orton. ;


Verse 49. The inconstancy of

wicked accomplices. 1. That the
wicked vow undying friendship to each
other when the lower instincts of their
nature are gratified. When Adonijah
prepared a feast he had troops of
friends. 2. Zhat the first tidings of
calamity fill the wicked with fear.
The sinner is essentially a coward.
Having no righteous principle to
sustain him, he is powerless in
the day of adversity. 3. That the
wicked, on the slightest alarm, seek
safety in ignoble flight. When the
message of misfortune was brought
to Adonijah, all his professed adher-
ents, even the astute Joab, forsook
him (Eccles. vi. 10-12).
—‘‘And went every man his way.”
Individual responsibility—1. Car-
not be merged im the actions of the
crowd. 2. Is vividly impressed upon
the conscience in the hour of misfor-
tune. 3. Recognises the desert of
punishment for wrong-doing. 4.
Anxiously strives to escape impending
vengeance.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS, OHAP. L
rr rrr


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 50-53
Royat Cremency.


1, Here we have royal clemency earnestly and humbly sought (verses
60, 51). The reckless adventurer is liable to great and sudden changes: he may
be a monarch in the morning, and a beggar before night. He who issues
commands and pardons to others may himself have to sue for mercy.
Adonijah confesses his crime, acknowledges the kingship of Solomon, declares
his subjection, and seeks forgiveness. The fear of death, the sense of sin, and
the alarming consequences it involves, the yearning of the soul to be reconciled
to the Being whom we have offended, lend unutterable pathos and fervency to
our prayers. The deepest want of the soul, and that which is expressed in its
most thrilling cry, is mercy. The sincere penitent seeks not in vain (Isaiah lv
6, 7). Forgiveness is a blessing worthy of the most diligent search.


II. Here we have royal clemency moved by the distress of the van-
quished. Adonijah, who a few hours ago was the proudest and gayest
in Judah, elevated to the pinnacle of confident success (verses 5, 42), was now
a crushed and disappointed man. He fears the vengeance of his successful
brother, flies to the altar for safety, and becomes a trembling suppliant for
mercy. It may be, Adonijah had before slighted the religious services of the
altar; but, as with many others, in the time of distress it is the first place to
which he runs. Whatever drives the sinner to the mercy-seat is an unspeakable
blessing. Solomon hears of Adonijah’s penitence and terror; he remembers he
is his brother; that this was perhaps his first offence; that he will be more
servicesble as a peaceful subject than asa restless agitator of rebellion; and
the heart of the young prince is moved to clemency. ‘The victor can afford to
be generous, and the most fitting exercise of newly-acquired power is to show
mercy. So God hears the ery of distress—the sad monotone of woe, ever
surging up from the throbbing sea of human experience. He beholds, too, the
voiceless anguish under which thousands writhe; and His great: heart melts
with pity, and His arm is outstretched to save.


III. Here we have the conditions on which royal clemency is exercised
(verse 52). Indiscriminate lenity is fatal to good government. The continuance
of mercy is conditioned on the moral conduct of the pardoned. Adonijah
is put on his good behaviour. If he show himself a worthy man [Hebrew, a
son of valour], controlling himself and quietly submitting to the reigning
power, he shall remain secure and unmolested; but if he hatches a new treason,
or otherwise misconducts himself, his lifeis imperilled. Let not the veteran in
wickedness delude himself with the belief that he will go unpunished, or that in
the boundlessness of the Divine goodness his sins will be overlooked. The
Righteousness that provides an outflow of the richest mercy is also inflexibly
rigorous in inflicting deserved vengeance (Icclesiastes xii. 14; Romans i. 18;
2 Corinthians v. 10). The moral character we form on earth will be the basis
of our condition and destiny in the future world: and that character will be
inevitably developed, or blasted, according to the degree in which we gain or
forfeit the clemency and approbation of God.


IV. Here we have royal clemency generously declared. “So king
Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar; and Solomon said
unto him, Go to thine house” (verse 53). His crime is pardoned, his life
is spared, and he is reinstated in his position and inheritance. Considering the
custom of Eastern monarchies, the marvel is that Adonijah was so opps


OHAP. I, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


i


dealt with. In some Oriental countries, not only are pretenders almost always
punished with death, but it has often been the custom for each king, upon his
accession, to put to death all his brothers as mere possible pretenders. In
Turkey this custom continued into the present century. Pardon brings no
comfort to the stricken penitent unless it is distinctly declared and consciously
realized. God delighteth in mercy and in assuring the trembling but believing
soul of the joy-creating fact of forgiveness. To forgive is the most difficult and
the most God-like; it is here that the flood-tide of generosity registers
its highest summit.


V. Here we have royal clemency gratefully acknowledged. ‘‘ And he
came and bowed himself to king Solomon” (verse 53). Subdued more by the
generous spirit of his victorious brother than by the failure of his own boasted
enterprize, Adonijah renders thankful homage at once to the clemency and the
dignity of the king. Man forgets the gracious power that delivers him from
misery far more quickly than the pungency of the misery itself when endured.
Of the ten lepers cleansed, only one returned to give thanks to the Great
Healer. To be grateful is the least that man can do, and it is a grace of which
he shows the least. Life should be one glad expression of thankfulness and
humble obedience.


Lxssons:—1. Power loses none of tts dignity or efficiency by showing mercy. 2.
To be forgiven inoreases the obligation to live uprightly. 3. The pardon earnestly
sought should be humbly and gratefully acknowledged.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 50. The altar, the refugefor 4. The position of man in the future
the guilty. 1. Itistheplaceofsacri- is decided by the character and results
fice and atonement. 2. It is the of his present life. 5. To abuse reli-
symbol of reconciliation. 8. Itisthe gious privileges entails unutterable
scene of divine manifestations. 4. It disaster.
is suggestive of worship. 5. It isthe
sanctuary of the distressed in all ages, Verse 58. ‘Go to thine house.”

The uncertainty of earthly great-

Verse 52. Destiny decided by moral ness. 1. It is possible to be one day
character. 1. Man is a free moral in affluence, the next a pauper. 2.
agent. 2. He is therefore responsible True greatness is permanent only when
for his beliefs, words, and actions. it rests ona moral basis. 3. It is a
8. Every provision has been made to bitter experience to descend from a
aid man in the right conduct of life. proud popularity to obscurity.


CHAPTER II.
THE BEGINNING OF A BRILLIANT REIGN.


CriricaL awp ExpLanatory Notes.—Verse 8. Keep the charge of Jehovah—i.e., pre-
serve the Theocracy, maintain the piety and dignity becoming the Hebrew monarch, who rules
by Divine right, and is entrusted with the representation and vindication of the Divine laws.


Keep his statutes, Fiprt— the prescriptions of the law. Commandments, NigID, the
expressions of the Divine will. Judgments—D ODD objective sentencesand ordinances, the
violation of which involves punishment. Testimonios—y Ty solemn declarations of God's
will a sin (Keil), That thou mayst prosper—Not so much “have good fortune *


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS, CHAP, i,








(Gesenius, De Wette), but be skilful, carry yourself wisely, as he surely will do who acts
harmoniously with the Divine *‘ statutes, commandments,” &c., verse 4. The Vatican Sept.
omits “concerning me,” and ‘‘with all their soul.” Not fail thee a man: assures “not
completely unbroken succession, but only the opposite of » break for ever ” (Hengstenberg) ;
dit. ‘there shall not be cut off from thee a man on the throne ;” ée., thy posterity shall held
the throne in perpetuity: the royal house of David became imperishable in “ great David’s
greater Son.” Verse 5. Shed the blood of war in peace; i.¢., murderously slew the inof-
fensive ; shed, in peace, blood which should only flow in war. Put the blood of war on his
girdle and in his shoes—The “ girdle ” was the military band, and to which his sword was
attached, worn by a warrior, suggestive, therefore, of his rank; while his ‘‘shoes” suggest his
marching equipment; and these insignia of his office and dignity he soiled with murder!
(comp. Lange). Verse 6. Do according to thy wisdom— At fitting time, and in fitting manner,
mark his crimes with abhorrence, and requite his guilty deeds. Werse7. Eat at thy table,
for so they came to me,” #.¢., they did me kindness in entertaining me. Verse 8. Bahurim—
A village beyond Olivet, five and a quarter miles distant from Jerusalem. A grievous curse—


Not merely cursed me, but AY IDI mp @ grievous, violent curse (as in Micah ii 10, “sore
an yee tr:


destruction ”) ; heinous, dreadful, Such punishment of Shimei was not vindictiveness on David's
part, but a vindication of the Divine justice against a ribaldimpiety. Verse 10. Buried in
the city of David—A tomb probably prepared by the king before he died, and afterwards
marked with great veneration, even in the time of Christ. Verse 13. Comest thou peace-
ably 2—After recent events, there was reason to suspect his design. Verse 15. The
kinedom is turned about—He prudently thus evades the charge on Bathsheba of having
herself been uccessory to this issue. Verse 16. Deny me not; Jit. turn not away my
face. Werse 18. Well, I will speak for thee—She saw not the cunning of Adonijah, and
might have thought this gratification would appease his disappointment, Verse 22. Ask for
him the kingdom also—Solomon saw his crafty aim. The wives and concubines of a
deceased king became the property of his suecessor to the throne (2 Sam. xii. 8) ; hence the

ossession of Abishag would have given to Adonijah an additional apparent right to the
besion: it was treason, therefore, for him, a subject, to claim a member of the royal harem
as his wife; and Solomon recognised it as one step towards the seizure of the crown, or ag
a scheme by which Adonijah sought to found a rival dynasty. Hence the summary justice
(verse 25), and hence, too, the religious oath (verse 23), for the royal line of David might not
be imperilled by intrigue. Verse 26. Not at this time put thee to death —It did not containa
threat that what was now deferred would be executed at a later date; the sentence would depend
on Abiathar’sfutureconduct. Verse 30, Nay, but I will aie here—A defiance of the king’s
message, thinking that Solomon dared not order bis execution there. But Joab had placed
himself outside the protection of the altar (Exod. xxi. 14; Deut. xix. 11-18). Verse 37.
Thy blood shall be upon thine own head—The legal form of the sentence of death (Lev. x.
9, 11, 12, etc.). Verse 38. Dwelt in Jerusalem many days; 02") DY). Verse 42, The word
that I have heard is good. Pointed sometimes thus,—* The word is good; I have heard.”
Verse 46. So the king commanded—that he died—This was not merciless rigour. Shimei had
committed perjury, had acted deceitfully and independently—not petitioning Solomon for
leave ; and having added to high treason (verse 44) this crime of violating his oath, though om
keeping it his life hung, retribution was imperative. Kingdom was established Tt ip


or by the hand, i.¢., in the possession of Solomon, or by his administration.


———9—~
HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-4,
OsEDIENCE THE Paroway or Biessrne.


I. That the supreme standard of obedience is the Divine will (verse 8)
Will expresses itself in significant actions, or in positive commanis. ‘The
statutes are the prescriptions of the law, so far as itsobedience 1s connected with
definite rules and usages: the commandments, as the expression of the Divine
will, which is to be fulfilled: the judgments, as the objective sentences and
ordinances, the violation of which draws punishment after it: the testimonies,
as solemn declarations of the will of God against sin. All these statutes,
commandments, judgments, and testimonies are found in the law of Moses, te


bey which David binds his son.— es, According to Patrick, the ‘ eames i


CHAP, Ti. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.











are explained as the positive ordinances of the law, ¢.g., the command not to
sow two seeds of different kinds together: the ‘‘ commandments” as the moral
precepts, not to steal, &c.: the “judgments” as the laws belonging to civil
government: and the ‘‘ testimonies ” as the laws directing the commemoration
of certain events (compare Psalm xix. 7-8): the Written Word is the latest
declaration of the Divine will, and the supreme rule by which obedience must be
regulated.


II. That obedience consists in the strict conformity of the whole life to
the Divine will. This implies—1. Anowledge. There is to bea personal
acquaintance with the will of God “ as it is written in the law of Moses” (verse 3),
and in the books of Revelation and of nature. The Divine Word has been the
subject of pious instruction from sire to son, through succeeding generations. As
in the case of David, it has often constituted the last solemn charge of a dying
father. It has been illustrated in the lives of the good, and enforced by the
impressive teachings of many a wondrous providence. There has been line upon
line and precept upon precept. Every opportunity has been afforded for
becoming acquainted with the Divine will, so that ignorance thereof is
inexcusable and blameworthy. 2. Circumspection. ‘‘ And keep the charge of
the Lord thy God” (verse 3). Jn general, this means to take care of God, His
person, His will, His rights. A trust of tremendous significance is committed to
us: the honour of Jehovah is in our hands. It is only by an exact obedience
that we can discharge the duties of our sacred trust: and to do this involves
incessant thought, anxious care, and sleepless vigilance. There is reference to
the charge given to all kings in Deuteronomy xvii. 18-20. The monarch is
amenable to the same moral law as his meanest subject. If obedience is
careless and defective in the higher social circles, a similar spirit will soon
infect the lower, and the moral integrity of the nation be seriously damaged.
‘‘ The least deviation in the greatest and highest orb is both most sensible and
most dangerous.” Keep the charge—as the sentinel the post of danger, as the
physician in the critical stage of disease, as the stern and faithful guardian of
untold treasure.


III. That obedience should be resolute and manly. ‘“ Be thou strong,
therefore, and shew thyself a man” (verse 2). Solomon’s youth elearly
constituted one of the chief difficulties of his position. His exact age at his
accession is uncertain. Eupolemus made him twelve. According to Josephus
he was fourteen, but this may be no more than a deduction from David's
words, ‘‘Solomon, my son, is young and tender” (1 Chron. xxii. 5), and from
Solomon’s own declaration (1 Kings iii. 7), ‘‘ I am but a little child.”? Moderns
generally have supposed that he was about twenty, which is probably an over
rather than an under estimate. For a youth of nineteen or twenty, known to
be of apacific disposition (1 Chron. xxii. 9), to have rule over the warlike and
turbulent Hebrew nation, with a strong party opposed to him, and brothers of full
age ready to lead it, was evidently a most difficult task. Hence he is exhorted,
though in years a boy, to show himself in spirit aman.—Speaker’s Comm. It is
not always easy to obey. It demands a firm, bold, intrepid spirit to dare to do
the right, when by doing so it bears painfully upon those we love. Obedience
to the highest law sacrifices all lower considerations, at whatever cost of personal
feeling. The obedient man is the true man—the bravest and the best. They
who would be faithful to God have need of courage.


IV. That obedience is the pathway of blessing. 1. It insures the fulfilment
of Divine promises. ‘That the Lord may continue his word which he spake”
(verse 4). The promises of God are conditional, “‘ which is as an oar in a boat,
or stern a a ship, and turneth the promise another way.” The original promise


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS. OHAP. If.








to David that Messiah should come out of his loins was apparently absolute
and unconditional (2 Sam. vii. 11-17); but the promise as to his children
occupying the throne of Israel was conditioned on their obedience (Psalm
exxxil. 12). David reminds Solomon of this in order to impress upon hima
powerful motive to continued fidelity. We never lose the blessedness of the
promise till we first neglect the precept. 2. Zt confers blessing on every under-
taking. ‘‘That thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever
thou turnest thyself’ (verse 3). To infringe law in any department brings
ecr‘usion and suffering ; obedience is not only the way of safety, but of success.
The man whose ways please God shall not lack any manner of thing that is
good. Abraham, when at the call of Jehovah he stepped into the region of the
untried and unknown, little dreamt of the wealth of blessing that was destined
to rest upon him and his posterity as the reward of his faith and obedience.
There is no peace so calm and abiding as that which flows from conscious
rectitude. ‘‘ That happiness is built on sand or ice which is raised upon any
other foundation besides virtue.” Il-gotten prosperity is transient and full of
bitterness. 3. It leads tothe highesthonour. ‘‘ There shall not fail thee aman on
the throne of Israel” (verse 4). This promise, confirmed by the Lord himself to
Solomon on his prayer at the consecration of the temple (viii. 25), which was
repeated by the prophet Jeremiah (xxxili. 17) at the time of the greatest
humiliation of the royal house of David, for the strengthening and consolation
of the faithful, found its full realization in Christ, the greatest descendant of
David, whose dominion will endure as long as the sun and moon stand
(Psalm lxxii.) Fidelity in a lowersphere is an excellent preparation for the
honours and duties of a higher. The career of the obedient is like ariver, small
and unnoticed in its beginning, but gathering volume, momentum, and majesty
in its expanding flow. Obedience is, to quote the language of Carlyle, “an
everlasting lode-star, that beams the brighter in the heavens, the darker here
on earth grows the night around.”


Lrssons:—1. Obedience ts the earliest and most dificult lesson to learn. 2. It
ss often richest in blessing when tt 1s most dificult te practise. 3. We are called to
sts exercise by the most solemn considerations.


Davm’s Dyrxe CxHazer tro Sotomon.


The scene before us is solemnly impressive. The youth that had slain a
giant is now, after a most eventful life, about to fall before a mightier arm
than that of Goliath; the friend that had wept over his beloved Jonathan,
is now going the way of all the earth ; the monarch who had exclaimed over the
remains of a child, still lovely in death, ‘‘ I shall go to him, but he cannot return
to me,” is now at the end of his last stagc, and about to mingle his ashes with
the departed. We will draw near, and hear his last words of parental tender-
ness and dying counsel to his royal son and successor. ‘‘ Be thou strong, and
show thyself a man.” If the king of Israel needed strength, and was required
to show himself a man in the government of his kingdom, no less necessary,
nay—onerous as the duties and cares of a sovereign might be—far greater, is the
courage which the vigorous maintenance of our moral and religious principles
demands.


I. It behoves us to be strong, and quit ourselves as men, as it respects
the truth and doctrines of the Gospel. If on any question manliness of character
is demanded, it is on this. 1f the Scriptures are a revelation of God’s will to
man, receive them as such, and obey them accordingly. How many are thera
who, manly, perhaps, in many things besides, are here most oo timid,


OHAP. I, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ee


hesitating, or double-minded. It is not acting as a man to own the Bible to be
true, and at the same time treat it as if it were a fiction, a fable, a falsehood.
Sustained by the clearest evidence, and published to the world by the highest
authority, the Word of God is worthy of all confidence. It is no doubtful
question whether the Lord Jesus was sent by the Father to be the Saviour of
the world, nor what is the substance of His doctrine and teaching. Whatever
He has expounded, it is for us, with a single, simple heart, to follow; to take
the truth as He left it; to grasp it firmly as our life, and hold it with the same
tenacity as a sinking man would hold the hand that was stretched forth to save
him from the gurgling vortex. If we truly believe that we possess the
treasure of a true revelation from God, then it is manly to espouse, to defend,
to diffuse it for its own inestimable value, for the honour of Him from whom
it comes, for the purity, peace, and safety of our own souls, and for its power
to regenerate and bless the world.


II. To carry out the admonition is to shrink from no duty and no sacrifice
which it may require. It is not the way of the world, even where the
Christian religion is professed, to render obedience to the Divine commands. A
kind of respectful treatment of the Word of God—nothing bold, nothing
decided—is all that it will render; and the love and fear of the world will
prompt us to dono more. A still stronger persuasion of the jlesh speaks from
within. It is sloth, it is selfishness, it is the predominance of some master
passion, that governs the irreligious mind, and places men in rebellion against
the will of God and the dearest interests of the soul. And then the Avil Spirit,
the great tempter, the subtle adversary of man, will suggest all discontented
and rebellious thoughts. Thus beset, multitudes, instead of quitting them-
selves like men and resisting the devil, readily yield. Does he show himself
aman who yields to every temptation to neglect the house of God on the
Sabbath, and to follow the allurements of pleasure? Does that youth show a
manliness of mind who consents to the enticements of sinners, and surrenders
himself to companionship with those whose house is the way to hell? Does
that misguided and miserable creature show himself a man who, for the sake
of indulging the lowest and worse than brutal propensities of his nature, will
beggar his wife, starve his children, cover himself with rags, and make his
home the scene of poverty, strife, and every hateful and disgusting passion ?
Ought we not to carry with us as Christians the same resolute and decided
temper, the same open and obvious manliness in all matters that refer to
eternity, as we do to those which are limited to time? In a word, to serve
God is to show the same spirit towards Him which every one of us, who has
the heart of a man, would show in defence of the health, the welfare, the
happiness, and the life of the members of his own family.


III. To carry out the admonition, we must be bold and persevering in
the work of God, till He shall relieve us from all further service. It is
manly to begin well, but it is most unmanly to forsake or negligently execute
a task once begun. There is a mighty class of inducements to instability in
religion, such as are not brought to operate upon the mind in any other sphere
of action. Here, as everywhere, success and satisfaction are the recompense,
not of half deeds, but of manly, hearty energy, industry, and perseverance.
Who is sufficient for these things? No one of himself; but He who gives us
the command will not fail us if we rely upon Him for its fulfilment. When He
bids us be strong, He is ready to give us power to obey. Heaven is the prize,
-every effort shall have its reward. We are surrounded by a cloud of witnesses
who have finished their manly course, and reached the crown. They invite ua
onward. Let us not fear the troubles that beset the way, but be strong in the
Lord and in the power of His might. Arise, for the work is great, the time is
short, ne the prize is eternal—Z. W. Hamilton, DD.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP. I.


a


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 2. “TI go the way of all the
earth.” Deatha journey. 1. Silent
and mysterious in its commencement.
2. Interminable in itspathway. 3. A
journey on which all must enter.
4. Demands diligent and serious pre-
paration. 5. Is a period of sad faree
wells and solemn counsels.

David lives to see a wise son warm
in his seat; and now he that yielded
to succession yields to nature. Many
good counsels had David given his heir ;
now he sums them up in his end.
Dying words are wont to be weightiest;
the soul when it is entering into glory
breathes nothing but divine: “I go
the way of all the earth.” How well
is that princely heart content to sub-
scribe to the conditions of human
mortality, as one that knew sovereignty
doth not reach to the affairs of nature!
Though a king, he neither expects nor
desires an immunity from dissolution,
making no account to go in any other
than the common tract to the universal
home of mankind, the house of age.
Whither should earth, but to earth ?
And why should we grudge to do that
which all do ?—Bishop Hall.

‘‘Be thou strong, therefore, and
shew thyself a man.” Be firm, and
be aman! 1. What is requisite to be
one? 2. How shall one become one?
3. Of what use? (Heb. xiii. 9;
1 Cor. xv. 5-8 ; xvi. 13.)—Lange.

Even when David’s spirit was going
out, he puts spirit into his son; age


puts life into youth, and the dying
animates the vigorous. He had well
found that strength was necessary to
government, that he had need to be no
less than a man that should rule over
men. A weak man may obey, none
pate strong can govern.—Bishop
all.


Verse 8. The last and best will of
a father to hisson. 1. Trust in God’s
protection of yourself and all whom
God has confided to your care. 2. Walk
in His ways; let Him lead and guide
you; He will do it well (Prov. xxiii.
26; Psalm xxxv. 5). 8. Keep His
ways and ordinances (Eccles. xii. 13;
Psalm i. 1-6; Tob. iv.6). God-fearing
parents are more anxious about their
children keeping close to God and His
word than about leaving them tempo-
ral goods.—Lange.

Graceless courage were but the
whetstone of tyranny. The best
legacy that David bequeaths to his
heir is the care of piety. Himself had
felt the sweetness of a good conscience,
and now he commands it to his suc-
cessor. If there be anything that, in
our desires of the prosperous condition
of our children, takes place of good-
ness, our hearts arenotupright. Here
was the father of a king, charging the
king’s son to keep the statutes of the
King of kings; as one that knew
greatness could neither exempt from
obedience, nor privilege sin.—Hall.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 5-9.
Tre Terrie Perriacrry or REvEneR.


It is unfair to judge Old Testament characters according to the standard of
New Testament morality. Viewed in the light of the religious ideas of the
nineteenth century, the temper and conduct of David on his death-bed are
irreconcileable with the spirit and genius of Christianity. But the religious
era of David was initial and imperfect in its development; and it is no marvel
if we detect serious blemishes alongside what is best in its experimental life,
Besides, it should not be overlooked that in the instance before us David spoke
not as a private individual, but as a theocratic king, uttering the decrees of the
righteous vengeance of Heaven against gross wrong-doing. We may regard the
whole passage as illustrative of the terrible pertinacity of revenge,


I, That a spirit of revenge is difficult to suppress. 1. Jt ee obtrude


*


@@a?P. 1. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








itself amid the solemnities of the dying howr. When the soul is about to quit its
frail, worn tenement, and is pluming its wings to svar into the invisible and
eternal, it is desirable that its latest thoughts on earth should savour of amity,
peace, and concord, and that its words should be free from bitterness and
enmity. But such is the subtle, pertinacious character of revenge, that it clings
to the soul for years, and disturbs the repose of the dying pillow. It is the dark,
grim shadow of man’s better self, ever present, consciously or unconsciously,
and which sometimes never vanishes but into the deeper shadow of the grave.
2. It mars a character otherwise noble and generous. There was much in the
character of David of moral beauty, of noble impulse, and lofty aspiration. In
the complexity of its elements, passion, tenderness, generosity, fiereeness—the
soldier, the shepherd, the poet, the statesman, the priest, the prophet, the king,
the romantic friend, the chivalrous leader, the devoted father—there is no
character of the Old Testament at all to be compared to it. Jacob comes
nearest in the variety of elements included within #. But ‘‘ David’s character
stands at a higher point of the sacred history, and represents the Jewish people
just at the moment of their transition from the lofty virtues of the older system
to the fuller civilization and cultivation of the later. In this manner he
becomes naturally, if one may so say, the likeness or portrait of the last and
grandest development of the nation and of the monarchy in the person and
period of the Messiah.” Pity it is that a character of qualities so fine and
varied should be blurred by the dark, unsightly blot of revenge! making every
allowance for David as representing in his last utterances the intentions of
avenging Heaven. Revenge threatens the destruction of every virtue.


II. That a spirit of revenge retains a vivid recollection of past injuries.
1. The particular occasions of past injuries are retentwely remembered (verses
5, 8.) Joab’s chief offence against David, besides his murder of Abner and
Amasa, was, no doubt, his killing Absalom (2 Sam. xviii. 14), despite the
king’s orders to the contrary. Another serious crime was his support of the
treasonable attempt of Adonijah. But, besides these, he seems to have offended
David by a number of little acts. He was a constant thorn in his side. He
treated him with secant respect, taking important steps without his orders
(2 Sam. iii. 26), remonstrating with him roughly and rudely (7d. verses 24, 25),
almost betraying his secreta (7b. xi. verses 19-21), and where he disliked the
orders given him, disobeying them (1 Chron. xxi. 6). David allowed his
ascendancy, but he chafed against it, finding “this son of Zeruiah” in
particular, ‘‘too hard” for him (2 Sam. iii. 39). Shimei’s cursing was all
the more grievous because David was in distress at the time (2 Sam. xvi.); and
the Jews say the insult was all the greater because Shimei upbraided him with
his descent from Ruth, the Moabitess. The hatred and virulence of the curse
indicated that the Benjamites resented the loss of royalty in their tribe, even
in the palmiest days of David’s monarchy. Revenge notes every minute detail
of the injury inflicted, broods over it in secret, and watches for the moment of
retaliation; its memory is infallible, its hatred intense, its patience stern and
unwearying, and its sting venomous and crucl. 2. Zhe character of past
injuries modifies the character of the revenge they provoke. The injuries in
this case were of the gravest kind—cursing and murder. Sometimes the
revenge is more terrible than the offence. In other instances the acts are so
fiagrant and sinful that to cherish and execute revenge simply amounts to the
infliction of the righteous punishment of outraged justice. Magistrates are
the avengers of the blood of those of whom they have charge. There are
some sins which it would be a greater sin to allow to go unnoticed and
unrequited. The murderer and blasphemer were punishable with death
(Lev. xxiv. 14; Exod. xxii. 27; 2 Sam. xvi. 9; #6. xix. 22). 8. Great
Jorbearance may be shown before revenge 4s gratified (verse 8). Shimei had

28


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, Ii.








seen and confessed his sin, and obtained a reprieve, at least during David’s
lifetime (2 Sam. xix. 16-23). But his offence was of such a character, and
his turbulent, malicious temper so well known, that Solomon was warned not
to let slip the opportunity which any new offence offered of inflicting the
punishment he deserved. The spirit of revenge may be for a while restrained
by the prevalence of a more generous feeling, from motives of policy, or in
order to choose the best time for its gratification; but, sooner or later, the
stroke will fall. For a justification of David’s conduct in committing to
judgment a man whom he had forgiven, see He:l on verses 8 and 9, with foot
note.


III. That a spirit of revenge is terribly pertinacious in its demands
(verses 6-9). 1. J¢ surrenders tts victims to the extreme spenalties of
justice. ‘Hold him not guiltless,”—do not treat him as an innocent man; but
punish him as in thy wisdom may seem best. Not at once; but when the next
delinquency is committed, hesitate not to punish with the utmost severity.
“So that deferring payment is no breach of bond: there will come a time
wherein the Lord will have a full blow at the impenitent person, be the
pretences of impunity what they will.”—TZrapp. The hoary head of both must
be brought to the grave with blood, else David’s head could not be brought to
his grave in peace. Due punishment of malefactors is the debt of authority :
if that holy king has run into arrearages, yet, as one that hates and fears to
break the bank, he gives orders to his paymaster, it shall be defrayed, if not by
him, yet for him.— Bishop Hall. Revenge may slumber for years; but whenit
is once roused, terrible is the havoc which it works. It burns with irresistible
fierceness. It exacts the uttermost farthing of the penalty. 2. The aged are
allowed no exemption from sts severest punishments. Grey hairs, if found in the
way of righteousness, are a crown of glory (Prov. xvi. 31), adorned with which
man may go the way of all flesh in peace and comfort; but an old sinner,
whom even grey hairs have not brought to repentance, goes down to the grave
without solace or peace. Age in itself is no protection from justice. The
longer man continues in sin, the more fearful will be his punishment (Isa. lxv. 20).
A life of wasted opportunities, abused privileges, and unrepented sins will
bring an old age of suffering and dishonour.


IV. That a spirit of revenge is often relieved by the exhibition of an
opposite spirit of kindness and liberality. ‘ But shew kindness unto the sons
ot Barzillai” (verse 7). A gooddeed will not go unrewarded. Even successions
of generations fare better for one good parent (Prov. xxvii. 10). The children
of Barzillai inherit the fruits of their father’s timely hospitality (2 Sam. xvii.
27-29). Generous natures are never ungrateful. Agesilaus, king of Sparta,
was always very grateful for any courtesies he received, and used to say that it
was not only an unjust thing not to be thankful, but if a man did not return
greater kindness than he received. The honour of eating at the royal table is a
custom thoroughly oriental, and has prevailed in all ages. How much more
bountiful is the Father of Mercies in the remuneration of our poor, unworthy
services! The heart that is susceptible of the bitterest revenge is often most
lavish in affection and generosity.

Lessons:—1. Revenge ts strangely out of place om a death-bed. 2. The
predominance of the Christian spirst destroys revenge. 3. To forgwe an injury
8 more noble than to retaliate.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 8, %.


Tre Suors or Gopty Men.


A man of God retains to the last the bias of nature with which his Maker
endowed him at the first. Christianity does not reduce men to one oe level ;


*


6naF. 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





it rather brings out in greater relief those parts of our character which are in
harmony with its principles, while tending to tone down others with which it
has no affinity. If the good man in the present age is so misunderstood, and
his actions so unmercifully criticised, what little chance is there of the cha-
racters of men in past times being rightly appreciated and justly dealt with ?
The Almighty is ever the same; but the peoples of every age, in every land,
differ from their sires. Where once the stalwart Roman stood, there now the
effeminate Italian basks in languid ease. The bandit lurks where erst the
philosophic Greek discoursed. All this God recollects, if we forget, and
assuredly will judge men as well from that outside them, as from that within
their hearts. There are three ways in which David may have been influenced
in giving this dying injunction to his son :—


1, As the agent, unconscious or otherwise, of Divine justice. We cannot
conceive this measure as being the consummation of a Divine purpose, it had
apparently so much about it of human plan. The Almighty’s power, when
exerted in support of justice, has always been certain and direct in its action,
without any reference to contingencies. With God it is all justice or all
mercy: no half measures. How different from man’s punishment is this! The
very manner of Shimei’s death is the greatest argument against it having been
ordained by God (verse 36-46). Even David and his son were ashamed of it;
and shall God be credited with what they despised? For the honour of his
father’s name, as well as his own, Solomon disguised his real object by laying a
trap for Shimei, puerile in its meanness, and yet sufficient to attain the end
desired. David’s conduct in giving this dying injunction to his son may have
been influenced—


II. By a conscientious desire to administer human justice according to
the will of God. David, we are told, was a man of God, one after His own
heart. Intimately acquainted with the Divine nature-—keenly alive to heaven’s
requirements, and inspired most devoutly with the desire to imitate his Maker's
character—he is prominently put forth as, in many respects, the model of a
godly man. How, then, with such clear perceptions of the Divine attributes,
can we conceive of him as acting in this matter conscientiously and with cool
judgment, in the full belief of the harmony of his decree with Almighty
rectitude? To do so isto dishonour the unswerving uprightness of God’s justice,
or to depreciate David’s experiences and knowledge of the Divine character.
We would rather be left to our final alternative in—


III. Regarding his injunction as prompted by revenge. As a man he
forgave Shimei at the time of his crime, which then should have been effaced
from his memory. Heavenly justice, if not satisfied, would have taken its own
way of vindicating itself, without further action on David’s part. With David,
as a man of God and Israel’s lawgiver, we must utterly disconnect this act, and
attribute it entirely to a flaw in his character, which, at the last, re-
asserted its natural power in antagonism to Divine grace. Feud and retalia-
tion have ever been the preceders of law, order, and Christianity ; and
even now, among some nations, one of the most sacred principles a man acknow-
ledges is to avenge a loved one’s death, or his own personal wrong, till the
third and fourth generations. Undoubtedly, in David’s time, this custom of
revenge and retaliation was rife among the Eastern nations, along with many
other practices at variance with progress and religion. Men were brought
up to them, accepted them as their moral clothing, and acted up conscientiously
to their injunctions. So it was with David. Though a man of God, in whom
He delighted, yet the customs of his time, the habits of thought of those about


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
rr


OHAP. I,


him, with the silent effect of their example, had—unknown, maybe, to him—#o
impregnated his being as to germinate into ungodly actions at any sudden
temptation or crisis, with sufficient power to sweep away for a time the tuition
and principles of his heavenly life. In David’s case, what mighty lessons this
should teach! Here was a patriarch indeed, at the last moments of his existence
succumbing to the seducing wiles and powerful instincts of his grosser nature
Men may well dread death, for then is the last great struggle between earth and
heaven—nay, hell and heaven. It is Satan’s last chance, and he puts forth his
mighty energies in one last grand endeavour, in which the deadliest hate and
fear, and every terrible passion, is at work, striving to counteract the power
of his Almighty antagcnist. But the Almighty knows him, and He knows us.
Like David, we may be vengeful on our death-bed—our spirits may become
dim, and weak, and faint; yet He knows our hearts that we are in Him, and
He in us, and pardons the wanderings of our falterixg footsteps as we totter
to His threshold, until, as we gain the door and faintly knock, it opens
wide, disclosing a scene of light, and joy, and bliss, with the inspiriting words
sounding gladly in our ears—‘‘ Be of good courage, I will never leave thee or
forsake thee !”—Homilist,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 5-9. Perhaps the dying
monarch is solely anxious for the
security of his young successor’s king-
dom. Perhaps he allows old animosities
to revive, and is willing to avenge
himself indirectly and by deputy,
though he had been withheld by cer-
tain scruples from taking vengeance in
his own person. We must not expect
gospel morality from the saints of the
Old Testament. They were only the
best men of their several ages and
nations. The maxim of them of old
time, whether Jews or Gentiles, was
“Love your friends and hate your
enemies’? (Matt. v. 43), and David,
perhaps, was not, in this respect, in
advance of his age. It would have
been more magnanimous had he, either
now or previously, freely forgiven
these great offenders (Joab and Shimei)
their offences against himself; but it
would have been a magnanimity un-
exampled in the previous history of
the world, and which we have no right
to look for in one who was the warrior
king of a nation just emerging from
barbarism. If David was actuated by a
sense of his own wrongs in the injunc-
tions which he gave with respect to
Joab and Shimei, we cannot justify
the morality of his conduct; but it
ought not to occasion us any surprise
or difficulty. At any rate, it is aatis-


factory to see that, if David did allow
himself to accept the unchristian half
of the maxim above quoted, and to
indulge malevolent feelings against his
enemies, at least he accepted equally
the other half, and entertained warm
feelings of affection towards his friends.
His hatred pursues only the individuals
who have done him wrong. His grati-
tude and love pass on from the doer
of a kindness to the doer’s children
after their father’s death.—Speaker’s
Comm.


Verse 7. A noble heart does not for-
get what was done for him in times of
trouble especially, and thinks of it
even in the hour of death. The world
is ungrateful. A blessing rests on
deeds of faithfulness, and self-sacri-
ficing, disinterested love; and it de-
scends to children and children’s
children.— Lange.


A spirit of kindness—1. Has a
lively appreciation of help rendered in
time of need. 2. Is prompt to acknow-
ledge its obligations. 3. Delights in
showing greater kindness than it
received. 4. Is an important, prac-
tical feature of the Christian spirit.


Verses 8, 9. A curse rests on those
who curse the “ powers’’ which aro
81


A


@HAP. i,





God’s ministers, instead of praying for
them, and they are made, sooner or
later, to feel the curse (1 Peter ii. 17, 6).
The Lord prayed for those who cursed
Him ; but when they did not repent
and become converted, Divine judg-
ment came down on them. No doubt





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





a wicked man often goes a long time
unpunished for his deeds ; but Divine
justice does not fail to overtake him
finally, ere he is aware. It required
wisdom to punish: a premature, ill-
judged chastisement does more harm
than good.—Lange.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 10-12.
Tue Nicut or aw Op Dynasty, anp THE Mornine or THe New.


The reign of David began in the midst of storm and conflict. His was along
and eventful life, teeming with romance, ever menaced with danger, and ever
escaping it, and yet continually advancing to a higher pitch of greatness and
power. The trumpet of rebellion had roused him from his dying couch. As
one accustomed to such scenes, and well knowing how to act, he crushed the
incipient attempt before it had gathered strength enough to injure hs throne.
It was his last struggle. From that period an era of peace was inaugurated
that lasted for years. Atthe beginning of this season of tranquillity the dynasty
of the Warrior-King closes, and is followed by the rule of the Man of Peace.
This change of government suggests a few reflections.


I. That death is no respecter of person or rank. ‘So David slept with
his fathers’? (verse 10). The unpitying destroyer ravages alike the cottage
and the palace. Even David, who had borne a charmed life in the fiercest
battles, is at length overtaken by the enemy whose power he had seemed to
defy. All the resources of a kingdom are utterly incompetent to arrest the.
inevitable and desolating stroke of Death. No amount of wealth can bribe him
to betray his ghastly mission ; no skill, however subtle, can baffle his designs;
no pleadings, however pathetic, can move him to pity; no rank, however
exalted, can escape his fatal visit. Silently, steadily, irresistibly, unweariedly
he prosecutes his work. Like the gigantic vampire bat of Java, whose perfumed
wings fan its victims into a profound sleep while it sucks the life-blood, so
Death often throws a stupor over the worn-out body while knawing away its
vitality : the senses are numbed, the breath rifled, the pulse stilled, and all is
over—the prince and the beggar are reduced to the same level. One event
happeneth to all.


II. That the greatness of the son is often built on the wise provisions of
the sire. ‘‘ Then sat Solomon on the throne of David his father” (verse 12).
The exertions of David had made the kingdom of Israel what it was. By his
conquests he greatly enlarged its territory and increased its wealth. As the
crowning work of his life he set his heart upon building s temple for Jehovah ;
but this he was not permitted to do, though he had made extensive preparations
for the undertaking. When, therefore, Solomon came to the throne, he found
a kingdom thickly populated, and growing in wealth, prestige, and influence,
A substantial basis was thus laid down on which the empire was raised to the
height of affluence, splendour, and renown it afterwards attained. Whatever
reputation Solomon might have won by his wisdom, he would never have been
known to posterity as a mighty prince had he not inherited the substantial
fortunes of his victorious father. The son of a great man and heir to vast
Dossessions occupies no enviable position. He accepts a solemn responsibility —
ne has the prospect of a brilliant career. If he fails, his humiliation is most
abject. He needs Divine help. The best guarantee of success is to possess
heavenly wisdom.

32


HOMILELIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. ii.
— ———enmemen a a a


_ II. That the progress of a nation advances notwithstanding the loss of
its greatest men. ‘‘ And his kingdom was established greatly” (verse 12),
There is an immense power in an individual life; it impresses itself upon the
nation; it moulds its policy and guides its destiny, and becomes interwoven
with the texture of its character; it seems indispensable to its existence. Yet
it is humbling to discover how little one is missed and how soon forgotten.
Great men die; but the nations they helped to create survive and flourish. How
often are we made to feel :—


The individual is less and less,
The world is more and more.


Individuals perish—principles never: men depart, but humanity remains. The
work of one generation is a preparation for the work of another; and thus,
under the controlling hand of God, nations accomplish their respective destinies :


« There is a Power
Unseen, that rules the illimitable world—
That guides its motions, from the brightest star
To the least dust of this sin-tainted world ;
While man, who madly deems himself the lord
Of all, is nought but weakness and dependence,”’— Thomson.


Lxssors:—1. All earthly governments are subject to change. 2. It ts matter for
gratitude to the nation when the end of one good reign is the beginning of another.
3. Amid the rise and fall of dynasties the Divine purpose concerning the race steadily
advances.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


now taken, after so many tumults, of


Verses 10, 11. The death and
burial of David. 1. His death was a
rest from a long and toilsome life—as
a storm having spent its force sinks
gently into a peaceful and prolonged
slumber. Rest is sweet after bearing
the burden and heat of the day for
forty years. 2. He was buried among
the monuments of his energy and
greatness. His own city was his tomb.
Kings who build palaces should not
forget their tombs; a small space must
shortly contain all their greatness.
David’s grave is a pledge that the
memory of the just is blessed (Prov. x.
7; Acts ii. 29).

And now, when David hath set all
things in a desired order and forward-
ness, he shuts up with a zealous bless-
ing of his son Solomon and his people,
and sleeps with his fathers. O, blessed
soul, how quiet a possession hast thou


a better crown! Thou that hast pre-
pared all things for the house of thy
God, how happily art thou now wel-
comed to that house of His, not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens !—
Hall,


David, a type of Christ. 1. Ap-
pointed by God to his high office, and
consecrated to it with the holy oil.
2. Was long opposed by violent ene-
mies. 3. Was sustained in his heaviest
trials by a large measure of Divine con-
solation. 4. Was supreme governor
of his people. 5. Ruledin righteous-
ness. 6. Pardoned enemies and
punished the obstinately rebellious.
7. Was confirmed in the kingdom by
covenant (Pealm lxxxix. 3, 4, 28, 29).
— Robinson.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 13-25.
THe Doom or «a TREASONABLE SprRrr.


1, That a treasonable spirit is slow to learn s lesson from past mis


fortunes.


One would have thought that after the lamentable and disgraceful


failure of his recent enterprise Adonijah would not have had the hardihood
5)


33


%


oHaP. ti. HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.





to risk another defeat. His conduct at this time reveals his character as a
restless, intriguing, ambitious man. There are some men who will not be
taught. The advice of the wise is contemptuously thrown away: the most
calamitous events and their obvious lessons are speedily forgotten. The love of
plotting and scheming amounts in some men toa passion; they are often blinded
by their own cunning, and caught in the snares they had laid for the feet of
others. Envy and ambition are turbulent elements, difficult to allay, and often
hurrying their victims to certain ruin.


II. That a treasonable spirit has no scruple asto the method adopted in
gaining itsend. 1. [¢ will flatter a mother’s vanity. ‘Treason is a tortuous
policy, and seeks to use others as tools to accomplish its designs. Instead of
going direct to the king, Adonijah strove to influence the mother in his favour.
He spoke of her son in a way to gratify the mother’s heart, and to disguise the
insincerity that lay beneath his words. Flattery is one of the most polished
and effective weapons of the schemer. 2. J¢ ts regardless of veracity. ‘‘ Thou
knowest that all Israel set their faces on me.’”’ This was a great exaggeration.
He had really no very large following (see chapter i. 39, 40, 45, 49). It
was well known the Lord had chosen Solomon. Accuracy as to matters of fact
never troubles the conscience of some people. The liar is never at a loss for
arguments, nor very particular as to their character. Says the proverb—“ It is
an easy thing to find a staff to beat adog with.” 3. Zt can affect a mock saintliness
‘For it was his from the Lord.’? From such lips, this sounds very much like
cant! The aim was evidently to deceive Bathsheba as to the real intention of
securing her advocacy. Of all methods to attain sinister ends, the réle of
the religious hypocrite is the most detestable. There are some natures over
whom it exerts a potent charm.


III. That a treasonable spirit is prompted by base motives (verse 17).
The beauty of Abishag had made its impression on Adonijah. Blinded by
sensual passion and the lust of power, he disregarded the incestuous proposal to
marry his father’s widow. Such an union was directly contrary to positive
law (Lev. xviii. 8). The darkest designs are the offspring of the lowest
motives, and an ambitious zeal for place and the public weal often covers the
desire for a wider scope in the personal indulgence of sensual instincts
(Psalm xxxvii. 12).


IV. A treasonable spirit knows no bounds to its ambition. Nothing short
of kingship could satisfy Adonijah. His possession of Abishag was intended
as a meansto that end. Her eminent beauty and near relation to David would
give her a powerful interest at court. Inthe oriental mind a monarch was s0
sacred, such a divinity hedged him in, that whatever was brought near to him
was thenceforth separate from common use. This sacred and separate character
attached especially to the royal harem. The inmates either remained widows
for the rest of their lives, or became the wives of the deceased king’s successor.
When a monarch was murdered or dethroned, or succeeded by one whose title
was doubtful, the latter alternative was almost always adopted. The Pseudo-
Smerdis married all the wives of Cambyses (Herod. iii. 68); and Darius married
all the wives of the Pseudo-Smerdis (#5. ch. 88). So David, when he succeeded
Saul, had all the wives of Saul (2 Sam. xii. 8); and Absalom, when he seized
the crown, by the advice of Ahitophel, went in unto his father’s concubines
(ib. xvi. 22). These are examples of what seems to have been a universal
practice; and the result was such a close connection in public opinion between
the title of the crown and the possession of the deceased monarch’s wives, that
to have granted Adonijah’s request would have been the strongest encourage-
ment ue pretensions.— Speaker's Comm. Woman is often courted for the sake


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP, IT.





of the place and power to which she can introduce her suitor: the serpent
addressed the woman first in order to gain the man. The ambition of a treason-
able spirit is as avaricious and insatiable as it is reckless in the agencies it
employs.


V. That a treasonable spirit is unexpectedly detected and exposed (verses
22, 23). Solomon at once saw through the design of Adonijah. He appears,
too, to have discovered some indications of another attempt at rebellion, in
which Abiathar and Joab were implicated (verse 22). He showed Sathsheba
how she had been deceived by the flattery of Adonijah; and we can conceive
with what alarm she would start back from the dark pitfall into which she was
about unwittingly to plunge herself and son! A course of villany may go on
for a long time in uninterrupted prosperity ; but detection is sure to come, and
the exposure will be humiliating and complete. Be sure your sin will find you
out. In these days of literary enterprise, the columns of a thousand journals
will exhibit your disgrace to the world in unmistakeable characters. If the
mask could be torn from the face of society, what a horrid index would be pre-
sented to the festering mass of deceit, envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitable-
ness which is ever heaving and spreading there! A day is coming when the
secrets of all hearts shall be revealed, and all wrongs redressed. But who can
fathom the depth of that Divine patience that bears with the enormities of the
wicked, and calmly waits for the hour of retribution? Better to find out and
deplore our own sins before they are exposed and punished by omniscient and
omnipotent justice.


VI. That a treasonable spirit meets with summary and unfaltering
vengeance (verses 24, 25). Adonijah had before been pardoned, and his life
spared, on condition that he acted worthily (i. 52). That condition was violated ;
and now, without admitting any intercession for his life, he is solemnly doomed
to death, and the sentence forthwith executed. The perils of the state sometimes
demand the prompt and rigorous punishment of offenders. Sin entails a life of
disappointment and misery, and a death of shame and infamy. The cunning of
the wicked often overreaches itself, and the plot which is intended to gain a
fortune terminates in a dishonoured grave. Many a head has been lost in the
attempt to seize acrown. ‘The ruin of the enemies of Christ’s kingdom is as
sure as the unshakeable stability of that kingdom.


Lzssons:—1. A treasonable spirit demoralizes man’s whole nature. 2. The
cleverest plotter is no match for the simple wisdom of uprightness. 8. Persistency
in sin intensifies the severity of the punishment.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


them, but generally harden and em-
bolden them. If they do not succeed
by open force, they choose deceitful
ways, notwithstanding all the promises


Verses 13-25. Adonijah’s attempt
to gain the throne. 1, Wherein this
attempt consisted (verses 13-18).
2. How it ended (verses 19-25).


Adonijah and his faction show the
truth of what is often found—namely,
that revolutionary men are not dis-
couraged by the failure of their plans,
and even disgraceful defeat, but
always brood over the means of
attaining their ambitious views and
gratifying their thirst for power.
Pardon and forbearance do not change


they may have given; and they feign
submission until they think their
opportunity has arrived. Every one
to whom God has confided the govern-
ment should hear the words of David
to Solomon: ‘‘Be strong, therefore,
and show thyself a man;’’ for weak-
ness is, in this respect, sin against
God and man. As to Adonijah, the
38


i)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,





whole East knew but one punishment
for such plans as he cherished—viz.,
death. Had his enterprise succeeded,
he would doubtless have destroyed
Solomon and his principal adherents,
in accordance with the usual practice
hitherto. Solomon, on the contrary,
did not follow this custom, but showed
forgiveness and generosity; in fact,
he avoided all persecution of Adoni-
jah’s partisans. Only when Adonijah,
contrary to his word, and notwith-
standing his humble homage, again
appeared as pretender to the throne,
and sought to reach his end by deceit
and hypocrisy, did he order the affixed
punishment.—Lange.


Verse 18. “‘I will speak for thee
unto the king.” The Christian
minister an ambassador. 1. He
is divinely called and qualified. 2.
He has influence with the court of
heaven. 38. He pleads the cause of
the needy. 4. He seeks to reconcile
the rebellious to God. 5. He is
appealed to for counsel by the dis-
tressed and penitent.


Verse 20. Bathsheba makes a peti-
tion against herself, and knows it
not; her safety and life depend upon
Solomon’s reign, yet she unwittingly
moves for the advancement of Adoni-
jah. In unfit supplications we are
most heard when we are repelled.


Thus doth our God many times answer
our prayers with merciful denials,
and most blesseth us im crossing our
desires.— Bishop Hall.


Verse 22. ‘‘ Ask for him the king-
dom also.” For that is it he gapes
after, and seeks to strengthen his
cracked title by marrying the late
king’s concubine, who was likely
grown very gracious with the great
ones, and as potent at court as was
once here Dame Alice Pierce, King
Edward III.’s concubine, who did
whatsoever she pleased.—Trapp.


Verse 24. ‘‘ Adonijah shall be put
to death this day.” This day, before
to-morrow, lest delay should breed
danger. Who knoweth what a great-
bellied day may bring forth? We
are used to say—A day breaketh no
square; but that is not always true.
Oh, that we would be as quick in
slaying our arch rebels—those pre-
dominant sins that threaten our
precious souls !—TZrapp.


Verse 25. ‘And he fell upon him
that he died.” This was another
piece of the punishment of David’s
two great sins, the small and short
pleasure whereof behold what a train
and tail of calamities 1t draweth aftez
it !—Trapp.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 26, 27.
Tur Rereimmction oF A Faitatess FRienpsHiP.


Formerly, Abiathar had been a firm and attached friend of David, had
ai.cuded him in all his wanderings when he fled from Saul, and was esteemed
by the king with a special tenderness. It may be Abiathar had grown jealous
of Zadok, and feared being supplanted by him; or, it’ may be, he was drawn
into rebellion by the masterly strategy and astute opposition of the wilful and
discontented Joab. He thus became, equally with Joab, involved in the guilt
of treason, though a difference is made in the final judgment passed upon the
two. The subject suggested by the whole passage is the retribution of @ faith-
less friendship.


I. That a faithless friendship may merit the severest punishment. ‘For
thou art worthy of death’’ (verse 26). Treachery on the part of one we have
trusted is an act of basest cruelty; aud in proportion to the intimacy enjoyed
will be the mischief wrought. Itis an exquisitely painful experience when, for
the ome time, our confidence in human nature is broken. Such an experience

6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. II,








has driven many into general infidelity and reckless course of iniquity. We
begin to discover the truth of the proverb—‘‘ Confidence in an unfaithful man
in time of trouble is like a broken tooth and a foot out of joint” (Prov.
xxv. 19). Few men can be trusted to do all we expect, still less to do all we
require. Faithless conduct is ungrateful. All the kindnesses of a long, fond
friendship are forgotten and despised. ‘‘He who calls a man ungrateful,” says
Swift, ‘sums up all the evil a man can be guilty of.” Such conduct entails
unspeakable suffering. To the pang of disappointment is added a series of
disasters. No one sin is alone; it is the cause of many others: it is like the
letting out of waters. Such conduct will meet with severe punishment. The
unfaithful friend often suffers more than his victim. Conscience will speak,
and its every tone is full of torture. The most callous will be goaded into agony
by the stings of a retributive remorse.


II. That the severity of retribution is often moderated by the recollection
of acts of fidelity in the past. 1. Respect is had to the religious office and conduct
of God's ministers. ‘ Because thou barest the ark of the Lord God’? (verse 26).
Whatever we do for God in sincerity and truth will not be forgotten when
trouble overtakes us. The virtuous part of a life that may afterwards sink in
the moral scale is looked back upon with admiration and regret. Justice draws
near with reluctance, and sorrows while it smites. 2. Hespect ¢s had to the
exhibition of a genuine fellow-sympathy in times of suffering. ‘And because thou
hast been afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted” (verse 26). Abiathar
had been with David in his exile and distress, caused both by the persecution
of Saul and the rebellion of Absalom, and shared all the hardships of those
trying times. Friendship is cemented and strengthened by suffering. Our
love to any one may be measured by the extent we are prepared to suffer
for him. The father and brethren of Abiathar were slain for David’s sake.
Those who show kindness to God’s people will have it recompensed to them
sooner or later. It is a sad reflection that a friendship that has borne the test
of suffering may, nevertheless, prove untrue.


III. That the retribution of a faithless friendship consigns its victim toe
a condition of shame and obscurity. 1. Jt tnvolves a dismissal from the royal
presence. ‘‘Get thee to Anathoth, &c.” (verse 26). This would be a heavy
blow to Abiathar, whose life had hitherto been spent at court, and occupied
with the highest affairs of state. He must now exchange the excitement
and display of the city for the obscurity of Anathoth. And yet he must have
dreaded a heavier punishment when he remembered the fate of Adonijah, and
the fate that threatened Joab. His life was mercifully spared, though he was
excluded from that which had before been the sunshine and joy of his life—the
favour of the king. Cain felt his curse all the more bitterly because he was
driven from the presence of the Lord; and the lot of the finally impenitent
will be all the more unendurable because they are for ever shut out from the
presence of the Great King. 2. It involves a degradation from the most honour-
able office. ‘So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest unto the Lord”
(verse 27). He had disqualified himself for the holy duties of his office by his
opposition to that which he knew was the will of God. ‘‘ The priesthood of
Abiathar, as it aggravated his crime, so it shall preserve his life. Such honour
have good princes given to the ministers of the sanctuary that their very coat
has been defence enough against the sword of justice: how much more should
it be of proof against the contempt of base persons!’’ Saul cruelly slew the
father of Abiathar, and eighty-five priests with their families, for a supposed
crime: Solomon spares Abiathar himself, though guilty of a real crime. Mark
the judgment of history in those two cases: the government of Saul waa


disgraced and ruined; the throne of Solomon was established. As pee are ts
3


*


owar.'t.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





God’s ministers, they will find Him to them. When circumstances permit,
mildness and forgiveness should go hand-in-hand with justice. The highest
ecclesiastical office does not lift a man above the power of the law to punish
for wrong-doing.


IV. That the retribution of a faithless friendship may be the uncon-
scious fulfilment of a long-threatened judgment against a sinful generation.
‘“‘That he might fulfil the word of the Lord, which He spake cuncerning the
house of Eli in Shiloh” (verse 27). Eighty years had rolled away since the
words of doom were spoken against the house cf Eli, and it seemed very
unlikely that they would ever be fulfilled (1 Sam. ii. 31-36). But time has
no power to wipe out the Divine record, or to enfeeble the justice of the Divine
hand. The deposition of Abiathar involved the rejection of the house of
Ithamar (1 Chron. xxiv. 3), to which Eli belonged, and the re-establishment of
the high-priesthood in the line of Eleazar, to which Zadok belonged (Num.
xxv.18; 1 Chron. xxiv.5,6). The wickedness of a generation cannot be purged
away, though its punishment may be arrested by the virtues of individuals.
“Tf God pays slowly, He pays sure. Delay of most certain punishment is
neither any hindrance to His justice, nor any comfort to our miseries.’
Solomon had no immediate intention of punishing the descendants of Eli, and,
perhaps, never thought of the prophecy. Man is often the unconscious
instrument of carrying out the Divine purposes. Faithlessness will not go
unpunished for want of agencies to punish. All the forces of the universe are


at the service of the Supreme Judge.
loyalty, is doubly criminal.


Rebellion in a priest, who should teach


Lessons :—1. 4 treacherous friend may work serious mischief. 2. Js punished


with reluctance.


GERM NOTES


Verses 26, 27. Solomon allowed
Abiathar to go unpunished at first,
which scarcely any other Eastern
prince would have done. But when
the repeated attempt of Adonijah to
seize the kingdom was discovered,
Abiathar could no longer be passed
over. Yet, instead of inflicting death
upon him, he deprived him of his
influential office, and let him live at
liberty on his estate, on account of
his former good behaviour. Here was
no severity, but gratitude, kindness,
and generosity. Ecclesiastical office
can be no protection from just punish-
ment of crime (see Luke xii. 47;
1 Cor. ix. 27). Former fidelity can-
not efface later treachery. It is most
lamentable that a man who was faith-
ful in times of trouble should end his
career as a sinner (1 Cor. x. 12).—


Lange.
Verse 26. “Thou art worthy of


death.” The voice of law to the
sinner. 1. He has forfeited life by
transgression. 2. It is the function


of law to convince him of that fact.
38


ON


3. Yet cannot escape the inevitable retribution of his treachery.


THE VERSES.


8. Law offers no gleam of hope as ty
any escape from death. 4. Christ alone
redeems from the curse of the law.

‘¢ Because thou hast been afflicted.’
But for this he had now been a
dead man. So God by the rod pre-
venteth the sword; and therefore will
not condemn his saints for their sins,
because they have suffered (1 Cor.
xi. 31), and in His account have
suffered double (Isa. xl. 1).— Zrapp.


Verse 27. Solomon might lawfully
take from Abiathar all the revenues
of his place, as well as the liberty ot
officiating in it; but the sacerdotal
office, which he received from God,
and to which he was anointed, he
could not alienate. He was still
styled the priest (ch. iv. 4). There
is a great difference between depriving
aman of the dignity and of the exer-
cise of his function in such a deter-
minate place, and taking from him
an authority which was given him by
God, and the profits and emoluments
which were the gifts of the crown or
the nation.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. B.
NERS


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 28-34,
Tue Rerersution or Buoop.


Life isa Divine gift, bequeathed as a sacred trust to humanity, to be jealously
guarded and carefully cultured. It is susceptible of the loftiest rapture,
or the iaost abject misery. To violate the body, which is the curiously-
wrought casket of the life-principle, and to rob it of its priceless jewel, is a
sacrilege and a crime. Only He who gave life has an absolute right to
resume i. Murder is an unpardonable outrage on humanity ; it is the ghastly
policy of the cruel tyrant, the final resource of the baffled coward. It isa gross
Insult to the great Giver of all life, and an offence against the Divine law which
cannct go unpunished. The murderer forfeits his own life, and exposes himself
to a righteous retribution which sooner or later will fall upon him with over-
whelming power. The blood of the innocent victim clamours with unceasing
voice for vengeance, and clamours not invain. Terrible will be the wrath-vials
poured upon the head of the blood-shedder, and which he is utterly powerless to
avert.


I. The retribution of blood, though delayed, is inevitable. Years had
passed away since Joab had recklessly shed the blood of Abner and Amasa; but
the crime was not forgotten, nor could it go for ever unrequited. Mere lapse
of time has no power to change the nature of things; it weakens nothing;
it strengthens nothing. Before Him who is the same yesterday, to-day, and
for ever, the sin a generation old is as new as at the time of its committal,
even as the holy aspiration that may be rising from the soul at this moment
‘will be had in remembrance a thousand years hence asit is at this instant of time.
Nor can the good deeds of one part of our life atone for the heinous crimes
committed at another period. Joab deserved well of his king and country. He
was brave and victorious in war; he did much towards the building and beauti-
fying of Jerusalem; he clung faithfully to David in his distresses; and devoted
himself to promote the best weal of Israel. But his noblest virtues were unable
to ward off the punishment due to his oldsins. ‘It isnot in the power of all our
deserts to buy off one sin, either with God or man; where life is so deeply for-
feited, it admits of no redemption.” Often when least expected the stroke of
vengeance falls. The long, deep, silent pause in the tempest is most to be
dreaded: the storm-king is but gathering strength for a more terrific onset.


II. The retribution of blood is perpetually dreaded. ‘‘ Then tidings came.

. And Joab fled unto the tabernacle of the Lord, and caught hold on the
horns of the altar”? (verse 28). The conscience spoke, and the sou] was
filled with fear. ‘‘ The wicked flee when no man pursueth.” No man pursued
Adam amid the bowers of Paradise, yet he fled. ‘‘I heard thy voice in
the garden, and was afraid.” Noman pursued Cain when the world was in the
morning of youth, yet he fled. No man pursued Joab as yet, though the sword
of vengeance was busy with those around him, and yethe fled. There was that
within him which told him he could not always escape. Oh, what a hell of
mis*ry is often carried in the breast of the sinner! His conscience creates the
imags of his righteous avenger who is ever threatening and ever pursuing him.
It is a mere phantom, but none the less real, none the less near, none the lesa
alarming on that account. He cannot escape it; he cannot destroy it. Neither
oceans nor continents can separate him from it; it is not at his heels, it is in his
heart; it has become a part of himself. He hears the visionary pursuer in
every sound. The whispering wind, the rustling leaf, the creak of a swinging
branch, the chirp of an insect, seem to betray to his disturbed imagination the
immediate presence of the avenger.

“Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind ;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer,” Shakespeare. fo


GHAP. 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


sie ail








III. The retribution of blood respects not the protection of the most
sacred asylums, ‘Behold, heis bythe altar. . . Go fall upon him” (verse
29). It had become the custom for malefactors to flee to the altar for safety,
though there was no law on the subject, except for accidental homicides. But
for the murderer the altar offered no protection (Exod. xxi. 14). There is no
citadel, however massive ; no cavern, however gloomy; no seclusion, however
remote; no spot on earth, however sacred, that can screen the trembling
victim from the remorseless avenger of blood. There are some sins too great
for any human sanctuary to shelter. But there is a refuge to which the worst
{ransgressor may run, and be assured of safety, pardon, and hope. Christ is that
refuge. The victims offered and the blocd shed on the altar of the tabernacle,
and which sanctified it asa place of refuge, typified the atonement made for the
sins of the whole world by the shedding of the blood of Christ, the Paschas
Lamb. None, however guilty, but may, by believing in Christ, obtaim
salvation. Unspeakably happy are they who have taken sanctuary in Him.


‘‘ Betake thee to thy Christ, then, and repose
Thyself in all extremities, on those
His everlasting arms,
Wherewith he girds the heavens, and upholds
The pillars of the earth.”— Quarles.


IV. The retribution of blood isin harmony with the Divine law. ‘ And
the Lord shall return his blood upon his own head” (verse 32). We are set
in the midst of a system of laws which, in their ever active operation, press
upon us at all points. While we act in harmony with them they minister to
our well-being ; but when we violate them they are inexorable in their revenge.
1. Retribution ts in harmony with the law of causation. We are to-day the re-
sult of our conduct yesterday, and the cause of our conduct to-morrow; and
thus our present actions must ever be the seeds of future recompense. 2. Jt
ts in harmony with the law of conscience. It is the province of conscience to
approve or condemn. No action of our life is ever lost. Memory reproduces
every detail of the past; and conscience smiles or frowns according to its actual
character. 38. Jt is in harmony with the law of righteousness. Divine justice
binds itself to punish the wicked and reward the good. ‘‘ Be not deceived; God
is not mocked; whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”


“Heaven is most just, and of our pleasant vices
Makes instruments to scourge us.”


V. The retribution of blood sometimes reaches, in its effects, beyond its
immediate victim. ‘Their blood shall therefore return upon the head of Joab
and upon the head of his seed for ever” (verse 33). Itis asentiment frequently
set forth in the Old Testament that innocent blood cries to God for vengeance,
and that if suffered to go unpunished it brings down a curse and judgment
upon the land. This idea seemed present to the mind of David, and influenced
his conduct; hence, at the time of Abner’s murder, he publicly implored that
the judgment of this innocent blood might be averted from his house and king-
dom, and that it might rest upon Joab and upon his house (2 Sam. iii. 28, 29).
The murderer hands down the stigma of his guilt to his posterity. The history
makes no further mention of the descendants of Joab; they sink into inglorious
oblivion. What becomes of the children of our great criminals? If it were
possible to trace the career of sin in its darkest exploits, what a terrible record
would be made !


VI. The retribution of blood is essential to the maintenance of good
government. ‘But upon David, and upen his eeed, and upon his house, and
40


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. II.
LL LLC A TTC repre


upon his throne, shall there be peace for ever from the Lord” (verse 33).
Either from motives of friendship, or fearing the consequences because of
Joab’s popularity with the army, David had hesitated to punish the murderer
as he deserved; but knowing the power of this man to disturb the peace of the
kingdom—an instance of which had just been exhibited in his siding with the
treasonable attempt of Adonijah—the dying monarch charged his son to execute
upon him the judgment of heaven on the first occasion that justified him in so
acting. All government is at an end where crime is allowed to go unpunished;
authority 1s insulted and defied, and anarchy and terror prevail. ‘It isa foolish
niceness,” says Bishop Hall, “‘to put more shame in the doing of justice than
in the violating of it. In one act Solomon approved himself both a good
magistrate and a good son, fulfilling at once the will of a father and the charge
of God.” A negligent magistrate will bear the woe of the sin that he is not
careful to avenge. Favour to the offender is cruelty to the favourer. The
throne is only secure when it sends forth justice irrespective of persons
(Prov. xxv. 5).


VII. The retribution of blood is inexorable and complete.—‘‘So Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him and slew him” (verse 34).
The voice of blood can be silenced only by adequate retribution (Gen. ix. 6).
Retribution overtook Joab on the very scene of the most treacherous of his
murders ; for the tabernacle, at whose altar he perished, was then at Gibeon,
and it was at the “great stone which is in Gibeon” that Joab slew Amasa
(2 Sam. xx. 8-10). The sword of justice may be for a while mercifully
suspended; but when it falls, terrible indeed is the havoc it occasions. The
sins of an impenitent life return in vengeance upon thesinner. ‘‘ Society is like
the echoing hills. It gives back to the speaker his words; groan for groan,
song for song. With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again.” Though human laws cannot be satisfied with anything less than blood
for blood, yet if the greatest sinner, even a murderer, fly to the horns of the
Divine altar, he shall never be dragged thence.


VIII. The retribution of blood does not extend further than to answer the
purpose of God. ‘‘ And he was buried in his own house in the wilderness ”’
(verse 4). Vengeance did not extend to the dead body of Joab. It is not for
man to lay the iniquity upon the bones, whatever God may do. It isa fiendish
cruelty that offers the least indignity to a lifeless corpse. Joab was buried in
his own family sepulchre attached to his country seat, and in a manner befitting
a great warrior, a peer of Israel, and a near relative of the king. ‘‘ Death puts
an end to all quarrels: Solomon stays the penalty when Heaven is satisfied :
the revenge that survives death, and will not be shut up in the coffin, is bar-
barous and unbeseeming true Israelites.”” The funeral of Joab would suggest to the
spectators many solemn reflections on fallen greatness, and the inability of high
social status and deeds of valour to screen the wrongdoer from severe retribution.

Learn—1. Zhe preciousness of human life. 2. That no misery ts 8o great as
that of the murderer. 8. That Christ can pardon the greatest sinner.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 28-34, The terrible end of
Joab. 1. He dies conscious of his
guilt, without peace and pardon.
2. Even in the very jaws of death he
is defiant, rough, and proud. 8. He
does not leave the world like a hero,
but like a criminal. How differently
David dies! (verse 2).—Lange.


Of all expositors, Pellican only justi-
fies Joab to have been a most faithful
servant to David, and seemeth to tax
it as a point of ingratitude in David
towards him to appoint him to be
slain; by his example warning all
courtiers of their uncertain condition.


But Joab certainly now received
at


OHAP. I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





according to his deserts for his blood-
shed and faction, which must not go
unpunished.—Vayer.


Verse 28. ‘‘For Joab turned after
Adonijah.” And that was his bane.
If men do not cast away all their trans-
gressions—that ‘‘all’’ is a little word,
but of large extent—they perish un-
doubtedly. Many here, like Benhadad,
recover of one disease and die of
another.— Zrapp.

“‘ Joab fled, and caught hold on the
horns of the altar.” An evil con-
science can put to flight a hero who
never yielded to the enemy in a single
bloody field. Fond Joab, hadst thou
formerly sought for counsel from the
tabernacle, thou hadst not now needed
to seek it for refuge; if thy devotions
had not been wanting to that altar,
thou hadst not needed it as a shelter.
It is the fashion of our foolish pre-
sumption to look for protection where
we have not cared to yield obedience.
Even a Joab clings fast to God’s altar
in his extremity, which, in his pros-
perity, he regarded not. The worst
men would be glad to make use of
God’s ordinances for their advantage.
Miserable Joab! what help canst thou
expect from that sacred pile? Those
horns, that were sprinkled with the
blood of beasts, abhor to be touched
by the blood of men. That altar was
for the expiation of sin by blood, not
for the protection of the sin of blood.
If Adonijah fled thither and escaped,
it is murder that pursues thee more
than conspiracy. God hath no sane-
tuary for a wilful homicide.— Bishop
Hall.


Verse 30. “Nay; but I will die


here.” The sullen stubbornness of
crime. 1. It gloomily accepts the
inevitable. 2. 1t expects no mercy.


3. Is indifferent about desecrating the
most sacred place. 4. Secks, in dying,
to throw the utmost odium on those
who inflict the punishment.


Verse 31. ‘ That thou mayest take
away the innocent blood.” David had
never formally pardoned Joab; and,
indeed, it may be questioued whether

42


by the law there was any power of
pardoning a murderer (see Numbers
xxxy. 16-34; Deut. xix. 33). The
utmost that the king could do was to
neglect to enforce the law. Even in
doing this he incurred adanger. Un-
punished murder was a pollution to
the land (Numbers xxxy. 383), and
might bring a judgment upon it like
the famine which had been sent a few
years before this on account of Sau’
and of his bloody house, ‘‘ because he
slew the Gibeonites”” (2 Sam. xxi. 1).
Or the judgment might fall upon the
negligent monarch, or his house, as
punishment fell upon Eli and his house,
fur not chastising the wickedness of
his sons (1 Sam. iii. 13).—Speaker’s
Comm.


Verse 32. ‘‘ Who fell upon two men
more righteous and better than he ?—
who had done Joab no wrong, nor
meant him any, and, had they lived,
might probably have done David better
service. If the blood shed be not
only innocent but excellent, the life
more valuable than common lives, the
crime is the more heinous. Joab is
put to death for the murder of Abner
and Amasa, rather than for his treason-
able adherence to Adonijah,


Verse 34. ‘So Benaiah went up and
slew him.” Joab must have been old
and infirm at this time; and now he
bleeds for Abner, he bleeds for Amasa,
and he bleeds for Uriah. The two
former he murdered; of the blood of
the latter he was not innocent. Yet
he had done the state much service,
and they knew it; but he was a
murderer, and vengeance would not
suffer him to live—Dr. A. Clarke.


Verse 35. The reward of a tried
fidelity. 1. Zhat there are crises when
Jidelity is severely tried. 1. In times
of national distress and rebellion.
2. In times of personal affliction and
helplessness. 3. In times of secret
temptation and outrageousthreatening.
2. That the maintenance of fidelity in
tumes of trial has a good influence on the
unstable. 1. Rebellion is more easily
suppressed. 2. The authority of go-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP, ii,


———


vernment is more firmly established.
8. It is an education to fit for nobler
and more important service. 3. That
jidelity severely tried is sure to meet
with reward. 1. It secures the satis-
faction of an approving conscience for


and generosity of the highest autho-
rities. 3. It conducts to positions of
high honour and responsibility. <A
faithful man makes himself indis-
pensable. 4. It exalts the character
of the office disgraced by the unfaith-
fulness of others.


duty done. 2. It wins the confidence


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 86-46.
THe Rerrisvrion or A Cours.


Itis a striking testimony to the power of Christianity, that those who have
been trained under its influence find much that is painful to their feelings in
transactions which would, even in modern times, appear perfectly reasonable,
just, and even laudable, among Eastern nations. The greatest oriental magnates
were animated by the spirit cf the age in which they lived; and we might as
well complain that they travelled from Dan to Beersheba on the slow-footed
ass, rather than by the rapid rail, as that they were not in all things
actuated by the spint of a later revelation and a later time. The series of
stern retributions recorded in this chapter must be viewed and interpreted in the
light of the times in which they took place. Many have complained that in the
case of Shimei an unwonted measure of severity is shown. There is much
force in the remarks made by Dr. Kitto :—‘ Upon the whole, it seems to us that
in this incident, as in many other austere circumstances of Scripture history,
the apparent difficulty disappears, or becomes greatly attenuated, when all the
circumstances are closely weighed, and when we contemplate the subject not
exclusively from our own point of view, but from that of contemporaries, and
in connection with influences—religious, political, and social—very different
from our own, but which some degree of careful study may enable us to realize.
The more this is done, the more ‘digestible’ many of the hardest things of
‘Scripture history will appear. One thing is certain, that there is not a word or
hint in the Sacred Book to show that the conduct of Duvid and Solomon to Joab,
Shimei, Adonijah, or Abiathar, was regarded as other than perfectly right and
just, if not laudable, by the people of the age and country in which David and
Solomon lived. Indeed, we may be sure that Solomon was too sagacious to dis-
figure the commencement of his reign by acts abhorrent to the public opinion
of his time. And if he had that sanction—as we are sure he had—we feel that,
in matters not affecting any principle of God’s ancient law, we have no right to
stigmatise his conduct as unjust or barbarous, although, with our keener sense
—with our Christian and occidental perceptions—of human obligations, we turn
with relief from the grim severities of this blood-stained page.” In reviewing
the conduct and fate of Shimei observe :—


I. That a curse is the offspring of a spirit of bitter rancour and hostility.
Shimei was of the house of Saul, and strongly resented the loss of royalty to
the Benjamites, and all prospect of preferment to himself. He unjustly charged
David with being the cause of the ruin of the Sauline dynasty, and conceived a
violent hatred towards him. While David was in prosperity and power,
Shimei dared not assail him; but when, in a day of adversity, David and his
followers had in their flight come to Bahurim, Shimei came out from his house,
situated on an elevated ridge near the roadside, and poured on the humbled and
distressed monarch a torrent of outrageous curses (2 Sam. xvi. 5-13), The
greatest swearer is the greatest coward. There are men with hearts so full of
hatred, malice, and all uncharitableness, that their lips constantly burn with
freshly uttered blasphemies ; their stomachs are so foul that they must needa

; 43


GHAP. II. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





spit up the loathsome venom with which they are overcharged, and they care
noton whom itshall fall. If there is no special object of their spite before
them, they will curse allround, and end by cursing themselves. To curse is the
most contemptible method of revenge; it is an evidence of utter impotency,
and a horrid revelation of a most fiendish nature, Just as Shimei cast dust
(ib. v. 18) which would be harmless to those he abused, and would doubtless be
blown again into his own eyes, so the curses of the vile blasphemer often return
in fearful retribution upon himself. Shimei was a dangerous, bad man, equal to
any intrigue, and finding his recreation in plotting wickedness. With some
monarchs such a man would not be suffered to be at large. There are some
men who are not fit to be trusted out of sight, and the sweurer is often of thut
class.


II. That the retribution of a curse is sometimes mercifully delayed.
1. The delay affords space for repentance and reformation. The evildoer mis-
apprehends the slowness of the Divine punishment, as though it were an evidence
of weakness. God hesitates, that man may relent and find forgiveness. But,
oh! the blindness of the human heart—* Because sentence against an evil work
is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in
them to do evil” (Eccles. viii.11). The lullin the tempest enables the skilful
mariner to repair damages, and prepare for the worst; so the stillness of God
should suggest to the sinner the importance of a prompt and penitent search
after salvation. 2. The delay is conditional (verses 36, 37). Shimei was to be
prisoner at large in Jerusalem, and not to pass a certain boundary outside the
city, formed by a circle drawn from the brook Kidron. To infringe that condi-
tion, on any pretence whatever, would render him worthy of death. ‘‘ Besides
the old grudge, no doubt Solomon saw cause to suspect the fidelity of Shimei,
as @ man who was ever known to be hollow to the house of David. The
obscurity of acountry life would easily afford him more safe opportunities of secret
mischief; many eyes shall watch him in the city ; he cannot look out unseen, he
cannot whisper unheard. Upon no other terms shall he enjoy his life, which
the least straying shall forfeit."—Bp. Hall. All our blessings are conditional.
As a limit was fixed for the restless Shimei, so is it necessary that we should
set a limit to our affections, desires, and ambitions. 3. The mercy of delayed
retribution should be gratefully acknowledged (verse 38). Shimei recognized the
justice and clemency of the conditions imposed on him, and solemnly pledged
himself to observe them. He looked for death, and lo! life was continued.
The sinner has reason to praise God for every moment his punishment is delayed.
He best shows his gratitude for the gracious respite by striving to be obedient.
St. Bernard, one of the holiest of the church’s saints, was in the habit of con-
stantly warning himself by the grave enquiry—“ Bernard, for what purpose art
thou here?” The thoughtful penitent may profit by frequently putting to
himself the question—‘“‘ For what purpose art thou spared ?””


III. That the retribution of a curse is hastened by some fresh act of dis-
obedience. 1. Man is tempted to disobedience by the love of temporal gain
(verses 39, 40). Avarice is the root of all evil. The loss of two servants led
Shimei to disobedience, even to forget his oath and risk his life. ‘‘ Covetousness
and presumption of impunity,” says Bishop Hall, “ are the destruction of many a
soul, Shimei seeks his servants, and loses himself! How many are there who
cry out of this folly, and yet imitate it! These earthly things either are our
servants, or should be. How commonly do we see men run out of the bounds
set them by God’s law, to hunt after them till their souls incur a fearful judg-
ment!” 2. Disobedience is ungrateful. Shimei had acknowledged the kind
forbearance shown him, and engaged himself by an oath to observe the condi-
tion. a ignored his obligation, and forgot the kindness he had received. For-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS, GHAP, ft,
————— eee


getfulness is a reckless destroyer of gratitude, and a prolific cause of disobedi-
ence. Men sin because they ‘‘forget”” the commandments of the Lord. It ia
the depth of ingratitude to rebel against our best benefactor, to slight his com-
mands, to depreciate his goodness, and frustrate his purpose. 8. Disobedience is
dangerous. This Shimei discovered to his cost. Let the skater disregard the
warning, ‘‘ Beware!” and it is no marvel if he is suddenly immersed under the
treacherous ice. A. certain rebel chieftain—a principal leader in one of the
most sanguinary risings of the Irish against the government—died from a
grievous malady contracted by his wearing poisoned boots, which, it is said,
were sent him in a present. The disobedient walk in poisoned boots, and to
continue the practice is sure to prove fatal (Ezek. xviii. 20)!


IV. That the retribution of a curse falls at last with awful severity.
1. The grounds of retribution are rehearsed (verses 42-45). Stress is laid upon
Shimei’s violation of his own oath, and of the king’s commands. He is also
reminded of his former crimes: there was no need to call witnesses in proof—
his own heart was privy to it all (verse 44). The heart is privy to much more
wickedness than ever appeared without. The punishment for any one sin’
brings up unpleasant recollections of all the sinful past. The retribution of the
wicked will be justified in the light of Divine justice, and in the reflected light
of his own sinful history. 2. The retribution is complete. ‘‘So Benaiah fell
upon him that he died” (verse 46). Vengeance against rebels may sleep; it
cannot die. Shimei’s fate plainly proves the truth of the word (Job xxxiv. 11;
Psa. cxli. 10; Prov. v. 22). Divine justice at length overtakes those whose
crimes have long been unpunished, and when they least expect it. Those
also who have cursed the anointed of the Lord, the eternal King of God’s
realm, and who have shot their poisoned shafts at Him, shall hereafter say to
the mountains, Fall on us! and to the hills, Cover us! (Luke xxiii. 30). How
weak and forgetful of his word would the king have seemed to all the people if
he had let Shimei now go free, particularly with the notions then entertained
about a king! (Prov. xvi. 12-15; xx. 2, 26).—Lange.


V. The retribution of a curse tends to strengthen the authority of govern-
ment, ‘And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon” (verse 46).
All malcontents and rebels were now removed or subdued: his own subjects
were affectionately bound to him, and the surrounding nations either dreaded
him, or did not think proper to make him theirenemy. The union of mildness
and firmness, generosity and official justice, in the conduct of the young
sovereign in the treatment of his foes, must have deeply impressed the people,
have increased his authority, and established his rule. It is a comforting
thought to the believer, that the kingdom of Messiah is firmly established,
notwithstanding the rage and tumult of His adversaries. In Him the throne of
David is established for ever (verse 45; see also 2 Sam. vii. 13, 16; Psalm
lxxxix. 4, 36, &c.) The time is approaching when all the enemies of Christ
shall perish, and His righteous government be universally acknowledged and


obeyed.


Lessons:—1. .A swearer is always something worse. 2. A foul mouth ts ite
own condemnation. 3. The impenitent blasphemer will be rigorously punished.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 36. “‘ Build thee an house in and is therefore confined and kept
Jerusalem.” Shimei was no further within compass. So should our
to be trusted than he might be seen, devcitful hearts be dealt with. Set

45


- *


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP, Ii.


a jealous eye upon them, or else they
will give you the slip, as David’s did
(Psalm xxxix. 1, 2). He said he
would look to his ways and bridle his
tongue; but presently after he shows
how he broke his word (verse 3).


Verses 86, 37. The power of evil
circumscribed. 1. Though evil is a
power, it is not the greatest power.
2. Evil is checked and limited by the
superior power of law. 3. Law
enforces its authority by adequate

enalties. 4. When the limits of
aw are transgressed, its penalties are
inflicted. 5. The extreme penalty of
violated law is death.


Verse 39. The temptations of
avarice. 1. Are irresistible to the
depraved. 2. Lead to the transgres-
sion of hitherto observed restrictions.
8. Allure the victim to inevitable
destruction.


‘And they told Shimei ”—either
for good or for evil will; so shall
a@ man sooner or later hear of his
faults, either by his friends or his
foes; and malice, though an ill judge,
may be a good informer.—Zrapp.


Verse 40. ‘“‘And Shimei went to
Gath. Sin, the way of death. The
walker therein is—1. Passion-blinded.
2. Devil-driven. 3. Judgment-
stricken.


— ‘And it was told Solomon.”
Kings have long ears, and more eyes
than their own.


Verse 42, 48. The precept here
was a mutual adjuration. Shimei
swore not to go; Solomon swore his
death if he went. The one oath must
be revenged; the other must be kept.
If Shimei were false in offending,
Solomon will be just in punishing.—
Bishop Halt,


Oaths should bind to good abearance
(behaviour); but some can play with
them as apes do with nuts, or mon-
keys with their collars, which they


ahi


slip on and off again at pleasure.—
Trapp. Perjury is a crime for which
the avenging God will visit.


Verses 41-46. This proceeding
appears very harsh to the subjective
modern view of history. Shimei has
surely, it is thought, committed no
great offence, if he has brought back
his slaves, which he probably bought
and paid for with hard cash, and thus
helped himself to his own lawful
property. Perhaps he thought also
that his journey to Gath was no
transgression of the royal command,
because he did not require to cross the
Kidron. On such grounds expositors
have endeavoured to excuse Shimei,
and, at the same time, to prove Solo-
mon’s rigour. But Shimei cannot be
exculpated. The subtle evasion is
refused by the plain words of the text,
which forbid him to go any whither
out of Jerusalem (verses 36, 42); and
the reference to the cash which his
slaves may have cost him is no less
an empty argument. If Shimei
wished to remain true to his oath,
he should have informed the king of
the flight of his slaves, petitioned
him for leave to bring them back, and
awaited his directions; but he ought
not to have lightly broken his oath.
In his perjury lay his guilt, and he
had no excuse, as Solomon showed
him; to which was added his high
treason against David. Inthe punish-
ment of his crime Solomon thus only
vindicated the Divine right, and
might therefore have regarded it as a
retribution suspended over Shimei for
his transgression, for which God will
bless him by the fulfilment of the
promise made to David of the per-
petual duration of his throne.—Aevl.

A sure, though late judgment
attends those that dare lift up either
their hand or tongue against the sacred
persons of God’s vicegerents. How
much less will the God of heaven
suffer unavenged the insolencies and
blasphemies against His own Divine
Majesty! It is a fearful word, He
should not be just if he should hold
these guiltless.— Bishop Hall,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. Iil,


EEE EE eee
CHAPTER III.


THE RULE OF WISDOM.


Ontrican ann Expianatory Nores.—Verse 1. Pharaoh, king of Egypt—Probably Vaphres,
but Winer suggests Psusennes. An alliance with so mighty a royal house shows that the
Hebrew kingdom enjoyed high renown, and commanded influence among the nations. From
the Egyptian monuments a supposed portrait of this princess has been obtained. The
“Song of Solomon” is supposed to have her as ithe immediate theme. Brought her into
the city of David—Not admitted into the stronghold of Zion, where the ark was; probably
he found for her a temporary home in his mother’s residence (Song iii. 4, viii. 2) while his
own palace was building. ‘This marriage is never censured in Scripture, so that it is natural
to conclude she became a proselyte to the Hebrew religion. ‘I'o this, Psalm xlv. 10-11 may
refer, a Psalm which is thought, in addition to the Canticles, to have been composed by Solomon
in her honour, Verse 2. Only the people sacrificed in high places— This is not recorded as
& wrong act, but as rendered necessary until the Temple could accommodate them. Verse 4.
The king went to Gibeon to worship there: for the tabernacle was now there (2 Chron. i. 3),
called the great high place, because of that fact. High places, SVD, ic, hills, and

Tr


mountain heights; were chosen by all ancient nations for worship and sacrifice. Danger rose out
of this temporarily permitted practice (Deut. xii. 13-14); but in Solomon’s conduct now there
was nothing wrong. After the Temple was completed, the “ high places ”’ should have been
abandoned; but the habit had become formed, and hence the snare. A thousand burnt
offerings—As an act of national consecration and homage to Jehovah; its motive being,
“Solomon loved the Lord’’ (verse 3). Verse 5. In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon—


Probably during this sacrificial festival. Verse 7. A little child: ep. “Wa a weak boy ;


but it is an error to suppose him only twelve years of age (as say the Rabbins, and after them
Keil); for David called him a “man” (chapter ii. 9) before this incident, and after forty years’
reign he is called })} “old” (chapter xi. 4); hence he must have been at least twenty


years of age. But he felt himself a mere “child” in matters of royal responsibility and
national government. Verse $. An understanding heart yov a ‘Ca heart hearkening


to the voice of God” (Keil); “obedient heart” leneen cor docile (Vulgate) ; literally, @
hearing heart, not self-confident, but eager to learn. Verse 11. To discern Judgment—
Lit., to hear judgment; and Lange observes “aright sentence depends upon the hearing,
4.¢., the trial of the parties ; and for this, understanding and judgment are most requisite for
the judge ” (comp. 2 Sam. xiv. 17). Verse 13. Not asked ; both riches and honour: Nas


honour is here promised as answering to “ the life of thine enemies” (verse 11), and may
therefore be regarded as a promise of military honour, victory over enemies, or the glory to be
won by the bloodless triumphs of his far-famed wisdom. Verse 15. Behold, it was a dream—
‘yet not a mere creation of the fancy, but a real incident, ‘‘a divine vision in a dream
(Theodoreti). The sequel proved it to have been more thana dream. Verse 16. Harlots—
The Rabbins derive J)}3$ from }\¥, to feed, nourish; and the Targumist translates the
word here, and in Josh. ii. 1, by })72)D, pundekon, hostesses, tavern-keepers. Verse 20.
Laid her dead child in my bosom—lIn order to escape the suspicion and charge of having
killed her own child. Verse 26. Her bowels yearned upon her son: DVT a Hebrew
hrase for the seat of feeling, hence here “the tender mother love”’ (Keil) ; ‘‘for her motherly
Keart burned for her son”? (Luther). Verse 27. Saw that the wisdom of God was in him


Not that there was anything supernatural in Solomon’s method of settling this dispute, but
that it proved this youthful king had penetrating discernment and acquaintance with the


workings of the human heart.


——


HOMILETICS OF VERSES \-%.
Tar Paranoxes or a Derective Prery.


We obtain a glimpse in these verses of the state of religion in the nation at this
eriod. ‘The enemies of Solomon had been despatched, the throne was estab-


ished in the popular affection, and the government of the youthful king had
47


CHAP. 2% HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





already won the respect of surrounding nations. The only thing that indicated
the kingdom was not so thoroughly established in all respects as it might be,
was the unsettled condition of public worship. ‘‘ Only the people sacrificed in
high places.’”’? The practices of the heathen still clung to the worshippers of the
one living and true God. The growth of the religious life of a people is slow:
it is a long time before all traces of a previous period of imperfection and debase-
ment disappear. The best guarantee of permanency in all earthly governments
is a strong, healthy, propagative piety; and in the process of development
towards a more perfect knowledge and experience many contradictions will
appear.


I. That piety may include a devout love of God, and yet be defective.
‘(And Solomon loved the Lord.’ So far good. It does not say he loved the
Lord with all his heart. The command in this respect was most explicit, and
frequently repeated (Deut. xiii. 3, xxx. 6; Matt. xxii. 37; Mark xu. 30, 33,
Luke x. 27). The religion of some is purely intellectual ; they conceive noble
ideas of God; they construct an ideal paradise, and adorn and fill it with bright
poetic fancies; they scorn to betray the least feeling—this would be altogether
too gross and sensual; they live in an ever-revolving circle of refined mental
intoxication. The religion of others is all emotional; they have tears for every-
body and everything; they are a power in society, and they know it, for we
are all most easily moved through our sympathies. But excess of feeling is
penicious—it over-rides the judgment, and is apt to degenerate into weakness
end folly. The victim of emotion goads himself in vain efforts to produce
certain sensational effects which will not admit of repetition according to order,
and at last sinks into a condition of helplessness, and is constantly employed in
a morbid dissection of his own miserable and over-wrought feelings. The
religion of others consists in a blind and dogged devotion to some one moral
precept; it is obtruded into everything; it is the oracle to interpret every
problem, the key to fit the complicated wards of human opinion and unlock
every mystery; it is with them the infallible touchstone by which to test the
religion of everybody else. Such people have no conception of the harmony and
continuity of universal truth. It is possible to love God with a devout and
reverential affection, and yet be defective in the realization and practical
presentment of the religious life.


II, That piety may influence the practical outgoings of the individual life,
and yet be defective. ‘‘ Walking in the statutes of David his father.” These
“statutes” referred, not only to the directions which had been specially
enjoined on Solomon by his father David (1 Kings ii. 2-4; 1 Chr. xxviii. 8, 9),
but also to the Divine commandments which David loved, and (notwithstanding
some grievous falls) ordinarily practised. They who love God will strive to
regulate their every-day life according to the Divine precepts, and in imitation
of the holiest examples. The best of human examples is imperfect; and the
most devoted and conscientious Christian worker is paintully conscious of
constantly coming far short of his own ideal of duty. There are contradictions
in the individual Christian life difficult to reconcile—the most saintly have to
mourn over innumerable defects.


III. That piety may be demonstrative in acts of worship, and yet be
defective, ‘‘ te sacrificed and burnt incense in high places” (verse 3). The
heathen were accustomed to perform their religious rites on the summit of lofty
mountains, under the idea that they were thus nearer Deity and heaven.
Abraham built his altars on mountains (Gen. xii. 8; xxii. 2), and worshipped in a
grove (Gen. xxi. 33)—whence the custom among the Jews was derived, and for
which they were not reprehensible till the law obliged them to worship in one

48


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. iz.





place (Deut. xii. 5,6). The law did not forbid “high places” directly, but only
by implication. It requireti the utter destruction of all the high places which had
been polluted by idolatrous rites (Deut. xii. 2). The injunction to offer sacri-
fices nowhere but at the door of the tabernacle (Lev. xvii. 3-5) was an indirect
prohibition of high-places, or, at least, of the use which the Israelites made of
them; but there was some real reason to question whether this was a command
intended to come into force until the place was chosen where the Lord would
cause His name to dwell (Deut. xii. 11, 14). The result was that high places
were used for the worship of Jehovah from the time of the Judges downwards
(Judg. vi. 25; xiii. 16; 1 Sam. vii. 10, xiii. 9, xiv. 35, xvi. 5; 1 Chron.
xxi. 26), with an entire unconsciousness of guilt on the part of those who used
them. And God so far ‘‘ winked” at this ignorance that He accepted the
worship thus offered Him, as appears from the vision vouchsafed to Solomon on
this occasion. There were two reasons for the prohibition of high places :—1st,
the danger of the old idolatry creeping back if the old localities were retained
for worship; and, 2nd, the danger to the unity of the nation if there should be
more than one legitimate religious centre. The existence of worship at high
places did, in fact, facilitate the division of the kingdom.—Speaker’s Commentary.
The worship of God is not confined to any one particular spot—the devotion of
the worshipper, and the manifestations of Divine blessing, consecrate the locality.
We may worship God with all the proprieties of external ceremonial, and with
all the ardour of a devout spirit; and yet the religion of the life be defective.
Few men carry into all the departments of practical duty the holy and exalted
feeling realized in their best moments at the Mercy Seat.


IV. That piety may be liberal in sacrifices, and yet be defective. “A
thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar.” A sacrifice of a
thousand victims was an act of royal magnificence suited to the greatness of
Solomon. So Xerxes offered a thousand oxen at Troy (Herod. vii. 43). We
are not to suppose that Solomon offered sacrifice with his own hand; such a
task was beyond the power of a single person todo. He simply presented the
victims. Scores of priests officiated on such occasions, and the sacred festival
lasted many days. Where God sows plentifully, he expects to reap accordingly ;
and those who truly love Him and His worship will not grudge the expenses
of their religion. The liberality of the wealthy is the easiest part of Christian
duty, and few give to God’s cause in proportion to their means. Giving is, to
some natures, the severest test of a genuine piety, and one of its best evidences.
There may be a princely generosity in giving, while there is a niggardliness in
doing. The most opulent sacrifices cannot atone for active, loving, faithful
service.


V. That piety may be associated with great worldly affluence, and yet be
defective. ‘‘And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh, king of Egypt.” It
was an evidence of the importance into which the kingdom of Israel had risen
that Solomon should succeed in forming an alliance with Egypt, the most
ancient and splendid of the Eastern monarchies. It was the first intercourse
between these nations since the time of the Exodus. Its immediate effect was
probably favourable to Solomon, by increasing his fame and comparative
importance among the nations, and adding to his dominions (chap. ix. 16).
Riches flowed in upon him, kings courted his favour and were proud to form
alliances with his house. There is no reason why piety should not flourish in
the king’s palace as well as in the humble cottage: there are many among the
great and wealthy who fear God and work righteousness. It is not an easy
matter to settle which are the most difficult to bear—the dangers of the rich,
or the temptations and miseries of the starving poor. It is possible to be
surrounded with temporal abundance, while the heart is restless and ay epian te

e


OHAP. Iii, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGB.


ee


Solomon nad all that his soul could desire, and the result was detrimental rather
than helpful to his piety. His marriage with the Egyptian princess, though
not formally condemned, opened the way to other alliances that were disastrous.
According to the letter of the law, only marriage with the Canaanitish tribes was
forbidden to the Jews (Ex. xxxiv. 16); and inter-marriage with nations outside
of Canaan was not only not prohibited, but tolerated in the examples, never
rebuked, of Joseph’s marriage with the daughter of an Egyptian priest (Gen.
xli. 45); of Moses’ marriage with a daughter of Midian (Ex. ii. 21); and that
of Boaz and Ruth. But though the law did not forbid these marriages, they
were not in harmony with its spirit; and it was by foreign marriages that
Solomon was at length seduced from the worship of Jehovah. Piety is safest
when it is humblest; and only as the believer retains his humble, child-like
trust in God, amid increasing temporal prosperity, will he escape the perils that
threaten.


Lxssons:—1. There is danger in resting satisfied with the mere externalism of
religion. 2. There may be much that is morally good tn individual character, and
yet a serious deficiency in piety. 3. True piety demands the full surrender to God
of will, affection, and life.


Tuts passage may be also homiletically treated as follows :—
Prery Livtrep sy Opportuntrr.


I, That piety is limited by individual experience. 1. Jt is limited by the
individual experience of the love of God. ‘‘ Solomon loved the Lord ’” (verse 3).
He was first loved by Him, and was thus called Jedidiah, the darling of Jehovah.
Our love to God is but the reflex of His love to us (1 John iv. 19). Our piety
receives its character and attains its limits by the nature and degree of our love
to God: as our love is, so is our piety. Loveis the source and power of the reli-
gious life, and the stream can never rise higher than the fountain. 2. Jt is
limited by the examples of those we are taught to imitate. Solomon walked in the
statutes of David his father, and strove to copy his example. A good manis a
pattern for all to imitate; and all men are more potently influenced by a living
example of piety, than by the most elaborate code of precepts, however
eloquently explained or cogently enforced. It was a high commendation to
the Thessalonian converts that they became imitators of the highest patterns of
Christian excellence (1 Thess. i. 6). All human models are imperfect, and
the characters shaped and influenced by them must partake of their imperfections.
The example of Christ is the absolute, all-perfect standard, the great infallible
pattern after which the noblest life must ever be moulded. 8. Jt ts limited by
individual capacity. The dew falls in quantity sufficient to water the whole
earth, but there is an endless variety in the capacities of the flower-cups held out
to receive the refreshing draught ; some are so small that one crystal drop each
would fill their tiny fragile goblets. So the blessing of heaven descends upon
mankind in superabundant measure, but there is a vast diversity in the capacity
of the individual recipient. The grandest created nature is bounded by its
finiteness. If man were not tinite he could not grow.


II. That piety is limited by the opportunities for its cultivation. ‘Only
the people sacrificed in high places, because there was no house built unto the
name of the Lord” (verse 2). The frequent public worship of God is founded in
a necessity and tendency of human nature. Man will worship, and if he is not
constantly directed to the great Object of all true and acceptable worship,
and spiritually assisted in the exercise, he is apt to regard the vast. fabric of
created things as God ; and nature, with her grand, silent motions, becomes the
object of his pantheistic idolatry. The multiplicity and accessibleness of Christian

50


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, Ils.





ordinancesin the present day lead many to undervalue their importance. Buta
compulsory and prolonged absence from the house of God, and the conscious
depreciation in spirituality, rectify the delusion, and compel the sufferer ta
estimate more highly than ever the public means of grace.


II. That piety is limited by the associations and conditions of national
life. ‘‘ And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh ’’ (verse 1). The alliance with
Egypt, and growing importance and wealth of the nation, would have a powerful
influence in developing and forming the character of the nation at that time.
National life is the outcome and representation of many conflicting and contra-
dictory causes, some apparent, some hidden; but all active. Climate, natural
scenery, employments, modes of living, intercourse with each other and with other
peoples, all act and react in giving form, colour, tone, and spirit to the national
character. The ruggedness and strength of the free mountaineers are strangely
contrasted with the refinement, softness, and supineness of the inhabitants
of the sultry plains; and the causes of the difference are evident. And so the
associations and conditions of national life affect and limit the piety of a people.
There will be more vigour and enterprise in the religion of a nation struggling
for independence and extended commerce, than in a nation reposing in content-
ment, and revelling in luxuries and riches. Success in either individuals or
communities is often a fatal advantage, and the period of greatest prosperity
registers the beginning of decline.


Lussons:—1. That the opportunities for cultivating personal piety are abundant.
2. That tt is an imperative duty to strive after a higher standard of piety. 3. That
the actual use made of opportunities will be the measure of personal pisty enjoyed.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES8.


‘Yerses 1-4. National reformation.
1. Meets with rebellious opposition.
2. Is gradual in accomplishment. 3.
Must be wisely conducted. 4. Is
facilitated by promoting amicable rela-
tions with other nations. 5. Aims at
strengthening the internal government.
6. Is permanent in its results onl
when it grows out of a genuine reli-
gious life.


Verse 1. Marriage. 1. Animport-
ant crisis in individual life. 2. Not to
be entered into without seriousthought.
3. May make or mar the happiness of
two lives. 4. Is honourable in all.
5. Broadens our sympathies for the
race. 6. Has the divine sanction.

— Although marriage with persons of
unlike faith be allowed, and is in itself
no sin (1 Cor. vii. 14), it is, neverthe-
less, better that one avoid it, because
the unbeliever perverts the believer
more frequently than the believer con-
verts the unbeliever. Solomon’s mar-
riage with a daughter of Pharaoh was,
strictly speaking, a political alliance,


but it has also a significance in the
history of redemption. The great and
mighty king of the lend which for
Israel had been ‘‘the house of bond-
age,” in which it had eaten ‘the
bread of affliction” (Ex. xx. 2;
Deut. xvi. 3), gives now to the king
of this once despised and oppressed
people his daughter in marriage, and
must, in the providence of God, con-
tribute to the strengthening of the
Israelitish throne, and to the increase
of the power and glory of the Israel-
itish kingdom. God has the hearts of
all men in his hands, and can bring it
to pass that they who have been in-
imical to us, and have despised us, shal!
hold us in great honour (Prov. xvi. 7 ;
on. xxxi. 24).—Lange.
— This seems to have been Solomon’s
first act of foreign policy, and was,
perhaps, designed to counteract the
influence of Hadad, the Edomite, who
had fled to Egypt during David’s reign,
and was now securely housed in the
royal family (see chap. xi. 14-22).
Everything in the history e Hadad


OGaP, (i.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





naturally conspired to make him a
settled enemy of the kingdom of Israel ;
and, perhaps, at a later period, he had
a hand with Jeroboam in planning the
revolt of the ten tribes of Israel.
Solomon doubtless expected to
strengthen his kingdom by this
affinity with Egypt, and to prevent
invasion frem that quarter.— Whedon.


— “Until he had made an end of
building the house of the Lord.”” This
Solomon would finish before he would
set up the queen’s palace—such was
his zeal while young; but he suffered
sad decays afterwards. I read of a
holy man who oft prayed that he might
keep up his young zeal with his old
discretion.—Zrapp.


Verse 2. “*Only the people sacri-
ficed in high places.” The particle
“only”? has reference to the last
sentence of chap. ii. 46. This is not
mentioned as a circumstance of blame
either in the people or in the king;
for had they not sacrificed and
burnt incense on high places, they
could not have sacrificed or burnt
incense at all. And it appears by
the sequel that the sacrifice at Gibeon
was acceptable.— Bishop Horsley.
Possibly Solomon thought it better
to allow an error in a circumstance
than to occasion a neglect of the sub-
stance of God’s worship, which he
apprehended would follow upon a
severe prohibition of that practice,
because the people’s hearts were gene-
rally and constantly set upon these
high places, as appears from all the
following history; and they were not
willing to submit to so much trouble
and charge as the bringing of all their
sacrifices to one place would cause ; nor
would they yield to it until the temple
was built, which he knew would
easily incline and oblige them to it.
And that being speedily to be done,
he might think it more advisable rather
to delay the execution of that law of
God for an approaching season, wherein
he doubted not they would be sweetly
and freely drawn to it, than at present
to drive them to it by force, although
these and all other prudential con-

od


siderations should have given place te
the will and wisdom of God.—Pool.


Verse 3. ‘‘ Walking in the statutes
of David his father’’—the customs,
usages, and laws of religious conduct
practised by David. But it does not
appear that David ever sacrificed o7
burnt incense in high places. The


_ contrary is implied in this verse; and


it is more than intimated that though
this worship was tolerated because not
offered to false gods, and because there
was no house yet built to Jehovah,
still both Solomon and his people were
censurable for allowing it such great ex-
tent and prominence, and thereby paving
the way for future idolatry in Israel.
It would have been safer and better to
have sacrificed only before the ark of
the covenant, as Solomon did after his
return from Gibeon (verse 15), or else
only at Gibeon, where the tabernacle
was (1 Chron. xvi. 39).— Whedon.


Verses 2-4. Solomon’s sacrificial
festivity. 1. When he celebrated it—
at the beginning of his reign, to return
thanks for the past assistance of God,
and to implore its continuance. 2.
Where he kept it—upon the high place
at Gibeon, because no temple was built
as yet, the place of prayer in the Old
and in the New Testameat. Though
God dwell not in temples built by
human hands, yet it is needful for
each congregation to have a house
where, with one mouth, it praises the
name of the Lord. Where this need
is not felt, there is a defect in faith
and love for the Lord.—Lange.


Verse 8. He loved the Lord. This
is the best and greatest thing that can
be said of a man. So every one that
loves the world has not in him the love
of the Father; this is only where
God is loved above all things, His word
observed, and His commandments ful-
filled with joy and delight (1 John ii.
5, 15; v. 3). Happy is he who, to
the question of the Lord, ‘‘ Lovest thou
me?” can return the answer of Peter
(John xxi. 17). Because Solomon
loved the Lord, he honoured also
his father, and walked in his ways.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP. IID.





The want of filial piety in our day
comes from want of love to the Lord.
—Lange.


Verse 4. Gibeon was well worthy
to be the chief, yea, the only high
place. There was the hallowed altar
of God; there was the tabernacle,
though, asthen, severed from the ark;
thither did young Solomon go up,


and as desiring to begin his reigu
with God, there he offers no less than
a thousand sacrifices.—Bishop Hall.


If we should begin our daily work
with the sacrifice of our prayer, how
much more our life’s calling, and every
weighty undertaking upon which our
own and the well-being of other men
depend!— Lange.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 5-15:
A Deram oF Wispom anp its Reatrry.


A pzzrop of special devotion is often succeeded by the brightest visions of God,
and by rich endowments of supernatural grace. In ancient times a common
mode of Divine revelation to man was by a dream (see Num. xii. 6; Matt. i. 20;
Matt. ii. 13, 19, &c.) In such cases the soul was raised to a state of Divine
ecstacy and illumination, and held conscious intercourse with God and heavenly
intelligences ; but when the soul woke to its natural condition of consciousness,
the person knew it was a dream, though the reality of the Divine communi-
cation remained. So God appeared to Solomon in a dream; and the youthful
king saw more with his eyes shut than ever they could see open—even Him
who is Invisible! ‘‘Solomon worships God by day : God appears to him by night.
Well may we look to enjoy God when we have served Him; the night cannot
but be happy, whose day hath been holy.” The experience of Solomon during
the night spent within the sacred city of Gibeon had a mighty influence upon
his future conduct and destiny.


I, That wisdom is a Divine gift (verses 5,12). 1. Theordinary endowments
of wisdom are from God (Sas.i.17). The gifts of genius may exist apart from the
personal enjoyment of Divine grace. Tremendous is the responsibility of men who
are endowed with superior talents, and great will be the punishment for their
abuse. Bezaleel was “ filled with the Spirit of God in wisdom, understanding,
and knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship”; but this does not imply
that he possessed the highest gifts of grace. It is said of Othniel that ¢* the
Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he judged Isracl” (Judg. ii. 10); the
power conferred being not necessarily connected with his piety, but referred to
his superior tact in governing the people. Many of the sons of genius have
not been children of the Spirit. Scotland’s most honoured bard was the slave
of one of the lowest appetites, and fell a victim to its sinful indulgence. The
highest poetic genius in England in modern times was obliged to banish himself,
because of his vices, from the society of the honourable and virtuous. Gifts are
often found where the graces are not. We must not undervalue gifts, for they
come from God; but we must beware of being satisfied with them. 2. Zhe
unique wisdom of Solomon was from God. ‘Lo, I have given thee ”
(verse 12). It is the good pleasure of God to give wisdom to them that
seek for it. ‘If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God that
giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him”
(Jas. i. 5). Solomon’s wisdom was, to a certain extent, a supernatural gift, a
signal dispensation of Divine favour, which must not be classed with natural
acquirements, which are ordinarily obtained by dint of mental application alone.
But while this much appears upon the face of the history, we must not suppose
that ail his knowledge was so special and superiiatural an endowment as that he


received it without any effort on his part. He doubtless studied and ae like


CHAP. ITI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


eS


other men for his acquirements; but he was divinely and supernaturally
assisted in a manner and to an extent which no other man ever enjoyed. We
shall see further in chap. iv. 29-34 that-Solomon’s wisdom comprehended
natural science, political sagacity, and a deep insight into spiritual truth.—
Whedon. As an acute philosopher, and a wise, judicious king, Solomon stood
alone—‘‘ There was not like unto thee before thee, neither after thee shall any
arise like unto thee.” Trapp observes, ‘He was not only wiser than
Trismegist, Orpheus, Homer, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Lycurgus, Ptolemy ;
but also Abraham, Moses, David, yea, even Adam himself after the fall. He
was the wisest mere man, take him for everything, as ever was; insomuch as he
had all manner of knowledge, natural and supernatural, infused into him.”
Solomon saw around him the materials out of which a great and prosperous
kingdom could be made, if he only had discretion to use them; and his prayer
indicated that this and all other special endowments were in the gift of God.


II. That wisdom is to be diligently sought in prayer. 1. Prayer for wis-
dom gratefully recognizes the Divine mercy tn the blessings already enjoyed. ‘‘ Thou
hast showed unto thy servant David great mercy”’ (verses 6, 7). A good child
will remember his father’s excellencies, to imitate them, and draw a veil over his
sins. Solomon refers to the goodness of God, not only to his father David, but
also to himself as successor to the throne. Gratitude for past mercies is an
excellent preparation for the reception of new benefactions. The search after
the highest good should ever be pursued with a grateful remembrance of the
good already possessed. God’s favours are doubly sweet when transmitted to
us through the hands of those who have gone before us. The way to get the
entail perpetuated is to bless God that it has hitherto been preserved. 2. Prayer
for wisdom humbly recognises personal tncompetency. ‘‘I am but a little
child” (verse 7). Solomon, with graceful modesty and humility, feels and
acknowledges his youth and inexperience. His exact age at this time is not
known; he was probably not more than twenty years of age. Youth, which,
as a rule, places freedom in lawlessness, needs before all things to ask God
daily for an obedient heart. Those who are employed in public stations ought
to be very sensible of the weight and importance of their work and their own
insufficiency for it; and then they are qualified for divine conduct and instruc-
tion. Absalom, who was a fool, wished himself a judge; Solomon, who was
a wise man, trembles at the undertaking, and suspects uis own fitness for it.
“‘T know not how to go out or come in’’—to sway this massy sceptre, to rule
this great people. An allusion to captains or shepherds, or, as some think, to
a little child, who learneth of his mother to go out and come into the house.—
Trapp. It is an idiomatic expression denoting the whole officiai conduct of a
ruler before his people (compare Numb. xxvii. 17). The wisest men are most
sensible of their own ignorance. 3. Prayer for wisdom has special reference to
the object for which st ts to be practically exercised. ‘‘Give thy servant an
understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good
and bad’’ (verse 9). A monarch’s sagacity in the administration of justice was
calculated to make the most marked impression upon the popular mind, and
likely to be most generally talked about throughout the land. This quality
also came more home to the personal concerns of his subjects than any other,
and was for that reason alone the more carefully regarded. The administration
of justice was, in all ancient monarchies, as it is now in the East, a most
important part of the royal duties and functions; and there is no quality more
highly prized than that keen discernment in the royal judge which detects the
clue of real evidence amidst conflicting testimony, or that ready tact which
devises a test of truth where the evidence affords no clue to any grounds of
decision.—itto. The true wisdom for which we have to ask God does not
consist in manifold and grea’) knowledge, but in that which enables us to


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. @uaP. tit:


discern between good and bad, right and wrong, sin and duty, truth and
falsehood, so as not to be misled in judging either of other’s actions or of our
own (Job xxviii. 28; James iii. 17; Eph. v.17). This discernment is a fruit
of our spiritual renewal (Rom. xii. 2).


III. That wisdom often includes inferior blessings (verse 13). The
way to temporal blessings is to be indifferent to them. Solomon has wisdom
because he asks for it, and wealth because he does not. God superadds riches
and honour, and promises long life to enjoy them. A similar principle in the
Divine government is enunciated by Christ—‘ Se®k ye first the kingdom of God
and his righteousness ; and all these things shall be added unto you” (Matt.
vi. 33). The greater blessing includes all lesser ones. ‘So doth God love
a good choice, that He recompenses it with over giving. Had Solomon made
wealth his boon, he had failed both of riches and wisdom; now he asks the
best, and speeds of all. They are in a fair way of happiness who can pray
well.” —Bishop Hall. Riches and honour are then truly blessings when God
bestows the wisdom and grace to improve them aright (Eccles. vii. 11).


IV. That the gift of wisdom is conditioned on personal obedience (verse
14). All the Divine promises are largely conditional. This wise king, whose reign
began so auspiciously, failed to meet the conditions of long-continued prosperity.
“‘No character in the sacred writings disappoints us more than the character of
Solomon.” As the condition was not observed (1 Kings xi. 1-8), the right to
the promise of lengthened days was forfeited, and it was not fulfilled. Solomon
can scarcely have been more than fifty-nine or sixty at his death. Length of
days is the blessing in the right hand of Wisdom—typical of eternal life; but
in her left hand are riches and honour (Prov. iii. 16).


V. That the gift of wisdom should be devoutly and joyously acknow-
ledged (verse 15). 1. In diligent attention to religious duties. ‘‘He came
to Jerusalem, and stood before the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and
offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings.” Solomon deter-
mined to inaugurate his reign by a grand religious ceremonial at each of the
two holy places which at this time divided between them the reverence of the
Jews. Having completed the religious services at Gibeon, where was the
Tabernacle of the congregation, and where he had received the Divine blessing,
he proceeds now to Jerusalem, and sacrifices before the Ark of the Covenant,
which was in Mount Zion (2 Sam. vi. 12). This proceeding symbolized that
coming hour when, under the greater than Solomon, all separation of tabernacle
and ark would be for ever past, and the true worshippers would advance from a
cultus that made locality a test, to findtheir great altar in the inner temple of the
Spirit, and to worship the Father in spirit and in truth (John iv. 21-24). We
should give God praise for all his gifts, and for the promise of gifts not yet
realized. 2. In promoting the happiness of others. ‘‘ And made a feast to all
his servants.”” A great feast naturally followed on a large sacrifice of peace-
offerings. In these the sacrificer always partook of the flesh of the victim, and
he was commanded to call in to the feast the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless,
and the widow (Deut. xiv. 29). We best employ the gifts of God by using
them to increase the joy of those around us.


Lessons:—1. Zhe highest blessings are secured only by tmportunate prayer.
2. To possess true wisdom 18 to possess all the essentials of happiness.


Tue Dexam or Sotomon.


Solomon was a great man—great in everything he did. When he sinned,


great in sin; when he worshipped, great in worship. Good and evil peeey
5


O@AP. Il. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


pr


met and battled in this man’s life. He had a majestic intellect, an intellect
whose every thought contained the wealth of a proverb; but he had great
animal propensities too.. The sea of passion within him was deep and warm,
heaved in resistless waves, and its surges often swamped his reason and his
conscience.

The passage before us is the record of a dream which this great man had one
night at Gibeon, a place celebrated in the Old Testament, but not mentioned in
the New, and whose geographical position cannot be determined with any
certainty now. There are two things very noteworthy in this dream.


1. The blending of the human and divine. There is much that you can trace
to Solomon’s own mind in the nocturnal vision recorded here. J¢ seemed to be
according to the measure of his capacity. He was a large-minded man, and the
dream is on a large scale. There is nothing mean or small about it. Pharaoh’s
dream was very inferior to this. He was a narrow, material-minded man, and
he dreamed of oxen and of corn. The dream of the Midianitish soldier was a
still more contemptible thing. A poor, uncultivated, small-minded soldier
dreamed that which was in accordance with his capacity, about a barley cake.
Solomon’s great soul took within the ample range of its imagination the whole
Jewish nation, the Eternal Ruler of the universe, the righteous providence of
Heaven, and the everlasting principles of moral obligation. A small mind can

‘never have large conceptions, either awake or asleep. The dimensions of a
man’s ideas will always be measured by hiscapacity. Flower-pots cannot grow
the cedars of Labanon—they require depth of soil and sweep of area. It
seemed to be also according to the moral state of his mind. The previous day he
had been engaged in religious services. His whole nature seemed on fire with
devotion. In the fourth verse we are told that at Gibeon he sacrificed no less
than a thousand burnt offerings. A thousand cattle he offered in sacrifice to God
in one act of devotion. If the amount of bis sacrifice measured the extent of
his religious ardour, his religious feelings on this occasion must have reached
the highest point of elevation. It was natural, therefore, on the night of that
day the religious element should be predominant. The dream is thoroughly
religious. As the religious sentiment had flooded his nature in the day, it
worked his imagination in the night. It is generally thus. Our dreams grow
out of the waking thoughts that have most impressed us. Imagination in the
stillness of the night, when deep sleep falleth upon us, brings these thoughts
together, constructs them into a fabric often grotesque, strange, and thrilling.
It seemed to be, moreover, according to the strongest desire of his heart. He had
just been appointed king of Israel; he was inexperienced—not more, perhaps,
than twenty years of age. The responsibility of governing a great country
pressed heavily on his young heart, and filled him with solicitude. He felt
that to take the place of his father David, and direct the destinies of Israel, he
required that wisdom which God alone could bestow. This he earnestly
desires. Our mental faculties are the servants of our desires; desires are the
spirit in the wheels of the mental machine.

So far, we see the human in this dream; but the divine is manifestly here,
too. The coherency, truthfulness, and sublimity of the religious thoughts, and
the propriety of the spirit and language of the prayer that was offered, and the
fulfilment of the Divine answer given in the actual history of Solomon, all show
that there was a presiding Divinity in the dream. The other thing noteworthy
in this dream is—


2. The suggested conditions of successful prayer. The prayer of hisdream was,
as we have said, answered in his actual history. He did receive a wisdom for
ruling, and abundance of riches, and a splendour of dominion that have never
been rivalled by any monarch on the earth. Now, what are the conditions of
successful prayer which the dream suggests?

56


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, It,





I. That effective prayer must be divinely authorized, At the beginning
of the dream Solomon received an authority to pray: “And God said, Ask
what I shall give thee.” Such an authority is evidently a necessary con-
dition. Unless the Eternal gave us a warrant to address Him, our appeals
would be impious and fruitless. Hell prays, prays earnestly and continuously,
but it prays without Divine authority, and the supplications rebound with the
force of a crushing despair. An all-important question arises here: Have we,
the men of this age, a Divine authority for praying? If not, our appeals to
Heaven are worse than idle breath. What saith the oracle? Hear its
declarations on the point (Deut. iv. 29-40; 2 Chron. vii. 18-14 ; Jer. xxxiii. 3;
Isa. xv. 24 ; Matt. vii. 7-11). Here, then, is sufficient authority. God says
as traly to us now as he said to Solomon in hisdream, ‘‘.4sk what I shall
give you.” 1. This authority to call upon God in prayer agrees with our religious
tnstincts. Prayer in some form or other isthe natural cry of the soul. The child
in distress does not more naturally look to his fond parent for help, than the
human soul in sore trouble and danger looks to the heavens for aid.
‘The heathen mariners in that little vessel that was bearing Jonah to Tarshish,
when the tempest lashed the sea into fury, and threatened their destruction,
“ cried every man unto his God.” Even men who in theory deny the existence
of a God, urged by this instinct, will cry to Him in danger. There are many
striking instances of thisonrecord. Take one or two. Volney, the celebrated
infidel, was once in astormatsea. Whilst the vessel was reeling and plunging
with the fury of the elements, there was no man on board more frantic with
terror, and more earnest in prayer to that God whose existence he impiously
denied, than this Volney. ‘‘Oh, my God, my God!” said he, “what shall I
do?” One of his companions on board, struck with the inconsistency of this
man’s appeal to heaven, said, “What! have you a God now?” To which he
replied, ‘‘Oh, yes! oh, yes!” Voltaire, the brilliant Frenchman and the
celebrated infidel, cried out, when the king of terrors confronted him, ‘‘ Oh,
Christ! oh, Jesus Christ!’? Tom Paine, that bold, clever sceptic, who wrote
the ‘‘Age of Reason,” cried out in his last hours, ‘‘O Lord, help me! God,
help me! Jesus Christ, help me! O Lord, help me!” &. Yes, the instinct in
the soul tocall upon God when excited by imminent danger triumphs over the
strongest logic and grandest theories of infidelity. It is to me no feeble
collateral argument for the divinity of the Bible, that God does that which the
soul in her most solemn mood craves for—authorizes prayer. 2. This
authority to call upon God in prayer 13 encouraging to our hope as sinners.
Oh! what should we, who are here involved in guilt, depravity, affliction,
death, do were those heavens sealed above us, and there was no God
to hear our prayer? Our condition would indeed be hopeless. But when
we hear Him say to us, ‘‘ Call upon me in the day of trouble, and 1 will deliver
thee; ” and again, ‘‘ Ask what I shall give thee,” we feel that we may obtain His
help to raise us to virtue, dignity, and immortal bliss. It is this truth that
makes the thought of Him even tolerable to us. The thought that He created
the universe, that He sustains all existence, that He is the righteous Governor
of all worlds, would overwhelm us with terror unless we believed that He
answered prayers. That He hears prayer is a truth that gives to every aspect
of His character an attraction to us as sinners.


II. That effective prayer must be earnestly spiritual. By this we
mean that spiritual interest must reign supreme, that spiritual motives must
be predominant. It was so now with Solomon in his prayer. What a sense he
had of the Invisible God! The grandeur of kingdoms and the splendour of
material worlds seem to have had no place in his spirit now. The Great God is the
one grand object, in all the reality of His being, before him. He recognized


Him as the Author of all the distinguishing virtues which his es David
5


OMAP. i. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





possessed. ‘Thou hast showed,” &. He speaks to God asa present, personal,
conscious existence, seeing him, knowing and feeling what he said in prayer.
What a sense he had of the importance of spiritual goodness in reference to his
royal father in prayer! The idea of his temporal glory was lost in the thought
of his spiritual excellence. ‘‘ He walked before thee in truth, and in righteous-
ness, and in uprightness of heart with thee.’”? What a sense he had of the
Diwine goodness He ascribed all that his father hadto God. ‘‘Thou hast kept
for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne.”
Much as he loved his father, he traced all his father’s greatness to the goodness
of God. What a sense he had of his own insignificance! ‘‘I am but a little
child; I know not how to go out or come in.” Humility is essential to true
prayer. No one can feel himself in the presence of the Infinite without being
overwhelmed with a sense of his own insignificance. Egotistie thoughts can no
more live in the breath of prayer, than flakes of snowin a summer sun. What
a sense he had of his own responsibility / ‘‘ Thy servant is in the midst of thy
people, which thou hast chosen; a great people, that cannot be numbered
nor counted for multitude.” Alli this shows how earnestly spiritual his prayer
was; and this earnest spirituality is an essential condition of effective prayer.
When we pray, materialism must vanish from our minds asa cloud, and spiritual
realities must rise in all their commanding importance. He that prays must
feel that he has to do with one who is the original fountain of all kinds of good.
He that prays must have the deepest humility, must feel as Abraham felt when
wrestling for Sodom, that he is but dust and ashes. He that prays must deeply
realize his responsibility, both to man and his Maker. ll this spiritual
earnestness is an essential condition of effective prayer.


III. That effective prayer must be thoroughly unselfish. ‘What he
prayed for was, ‘* an understanding heart;”’ and he prayed for that, not that it
might serve his own interest, but in order, as he says, ‘‘ to judge thy people, that
I may discern between good and bad.” And this speech, we are told, ‘“ pleased
the Lord that Solomon had asked this thing,” &c. Mark, God answered his
prayer ; infact, gave to him more than he sought, because he sought not the good
for his own ends, but in order to enable him to serve others. What! it may be
said, are we to forget self in prayer? Are we not to pray for spiritual and
temporal good for ourselves? By all means. But seek the good for yourself,
not mainly for the sake of yourself, but in order that thereby you may be qualified
to serve your generation and yourGod. With this spirit Moses prayed, ‘Oh!
this people have sinned a great sin, and have made them gods of gold. Yet now,
if thou wilt, forgive their sin; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book.”
In this spirit Paul prayed, ‘‘ My heart’s desire and prayer to God for Israel is,
that they might be saved.” In this spirit Jesus prayed, ‘‘ Now is my soul
troubled; and what shall I say, Father save me from this hour? but for this
cause came I unto this hour.” Such are the conditions of effective prayer
suggested in this dream. There are, of course, other conditions that are not
here suggested, such as faith in the mediation of Jesus Christ, for all true
prayer must be offered up in his name.

In conclusion, do you ask why prayer is not answered now asin olden times ?
We read of wondrous things it did in ancient times, in the generations of old.
Abraham prays, and the storm of fire and brimstone is borne up for a time
on the breath of his intercession. Moses prays, and now we see the earth
opening her mouth, and swallowing up religious impostors, and now the sea
dividing and making a highway for the chosen race. The disciples pray in the
upper room at Jerusalem, and the day of Pentecost comes showering blessings on
the ages. In fact, the Old and New Testaments are full of the triumphs of
prayer—prayer creating the rain and the drought; prayer clearing the
pete and dividing the seas; prayer scattering armies, and awakening the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHaP. rit.





dead to life; prayer destroying the power of the burning fiery furnace, and
sealing up the mouths of lions; prayer opening prison doors, and healing all


manner of diseases.
examples of ite power.—Homilist.


Nor have we been left in later times without striking


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 5. Sleep is like a state of death
to the soul, wherein the senses are
locked up, and the understanding and
will deprived of the free exercise of
their functions. And yet this is no
impediment to God in communicating
His willto mankind; for He has power
not only to awaken our intellectual
faculties, but to advance them above
their ordinary measure of perception,
even while the body is asleep (Job
Xxxili. 14). God can approach the
soul in many different ways when the
body is ina state of rest and inactivity,
can move and actuate it as He pleases ;
and when He is inclined to make a
discovery of anything, can set such a
lively representation of it before the
understanding as shall prevent a man’s
doubting the reality of the vision (see
Calmet). In the particular phase of
sleep known in Scripture as ‘‘ dream”
or ‘‘ vision,” it may be that the mind
was sometimes in possession of all its
powers, and that only the body slum-
bered. That which engages us most
when we are awake will even in sleep
still be our employment.

God well knew what Solomon needed,
but He bade himask. 1. Toshow how
negligent men are in praying for what
is spiritual. 2. That He would only
bestow His gifts in the ordinance of
prayer. 3. That great personages
might have an example of what they
should ask of God above all others.

‘“‘Ask what I shall give thee.”
1. A test-word, for as man wishes and
prays, so does he show of whose spirit
he is the child (Psalm exxxix. 23).
2. A word of warning, for we not only
may, but we should also ask for all
which we have most at heart (Psalm
xXxxvil. 4).—-Lange.


Verses 5-15. The prayer of Solo-
mon, 1. Its contents (verses 6-9).
2. Its answer (verses 10-14). A
dream like Solomon’s does not happen


when the day just past has been spent
in revel and riot, in gross or in refined
sin.— Lange.


Verse 9. Solomon’s choice of wis-
dom. And now occurred one of those
prophetic dreams which had already
been the means of Divine communica-
tion in the time of Samuel. Thrice in
Solomon’s life (at the three epochs of
his rise, of his climax, of his fall) is
such a warning recorded. This was
the first. It was the choice offered to
the youthful king on the threshold of
life—the choice so often imagined in
fiction, and actually presented in real
life. ‘‘Ask what I shall give thee.”
The answer is the ideal answer of such
@ prince, burdened with the respon-
sibility of his position. He remem-
bered the high antecedents of his pre-
decessor; he remembered his own
youth and weakness; he remembered
the vastness of his charge; he made
the demand for the gift which he, of
all the heroes of the ancient church,
was the first to claim; he showed his
wisdom by asking for wisdom; he
became wise because he had set his
heart upon it. This was to him the
special aspect through which the Divine
spirit was to be approached and grasped,
and made to bear on the wants of men ;
not the highest, not the chore of
David, not the choice of Isaiah, but
still the choice of Solomon.—Stanley.

As it appears eventually that Solo-
mon did some foolish and some mis-
taken things, it becomes a matter of
interest to know wherein lay that
wisdom with which he was super-
naturally endowed. God giveth to
him that hath. It was the previous
possession of wisdom which qualified
him for more. His wisdom is evinced
by nothing more than his choice of
wisdom beyond all other blessings,
when the fruition of his wishes was
offered te him in the vision at Gibeon.

59


»


GHAP, IIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ee


The terms of his request indicate the
nature of the wisdom he required.
That Divine wisdom in spiritual things,
that heart religion which the Jews
sometimes denoted by this name, is not
intended. With that he was not pre-
eminently gifted; not more gifted,
certainly, than his father David, hardly
so much gifted. The wisdom which
he craved was that of which he had
already enough to be able to appre-
ciate the value of its increase—prac-
tical wisdom, sagacity, clearness of
judgment and intellect in the adminis-
tration of justice and in the conduct
of public affairs, with an aptitude for
the acquisition and use of the higher
branches of philosophical knowledge,
natural and moral, which constituted
the learning of his age. In the latter
he excelled the most famous men of
his time.— Kitto.


The ‘terms translated ‘‘ wise” and
“ understanding,” both denote practical
wisdom (see Gen. xli. 33-39; Deut.
iv. 6; Prov. i. 2, &c.).


Verses 11-14. The granting of Solo-
mon’s prayer teaches and assures us—
1. That God grants more than they
request, over and above praying and
understanding, to those who call upon
Him with earnestness and for spiritual
gifts (Eph. iii. 20; Matth. vi. 83).
2. That God gives to him upon whom
He confers an office—that is, to one
who does not rush into an office or
calling, but is called thereto by God—
the necessary understanding if he
humbly seek it. Where there is wis-
dom there comes, -indeed, also gold end
silver (Prov. ili. 16), but not the re-
verse.— Langé.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 16-28.
Tur Jupement oF SoLomon.


The gifts of God are not permitted to remain long unused. He who bestows
them finds ample opportunity for theiremployment. A case is speedily brought
before Solomon which brings into exercise the faculty of wisdom with which
he was supernaturally endowed; and his startling decision made a profound
impression on the people, and added greatly to his reputation. The pattern-
instance, as recorded in these verses, is, in all its features, thoroughly Oriental.
Examples are recorded in ancient history of similar judicial penetration.—(See
Kitto, Dr. A. Clarke, Lange). But the sagacity displayed by Solomon in the
instance before us was most wonderful, and evinced to all that, though young
in years, he was fully competent to fulfil the duties of the lofty position to
which he was raised.


I. The judgment of Solomon was exercised on a case of peculiar difficulty.
1. Lt was too dificult for ordinary tribunals to settle. The case had, doubtless,
been brought before a court where it was customary to hear and decide upon
ordinary disputes and offences; but this was altogether beyond the capacity
of the judge to settle. The final appeal must, therefore, be made to the king,
and his judgment be irrevocable. There are questions sometimes brought
before our law courts so involved and contradictory that the penetration of the
ablest judge fuils to detect the real transgressor, and the power of justice is for
the time paralyzed. But the great Omniscient cannot be deceived ; and the day
is coming when He will reveal the secrets of all hearts, and redress the wrongs
of the universe. 2. Zhe disputants were of questionable character. ‘‘There came
two women that were harlots’’—persons of abandoned character. The word iv
also rendered victuallers, or hostesses. Perhaps they were both, though they
could not be common harlots, for such would hardly have ventured into the
presence of the king. One sin injures the whole character, and there are some
#.ns which cast suspicion on the veracity of the transgressor, however solemn
hig Eppceraton, The value of testimony hinges on rectitnde of personal


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, ITz,
EE I LT TE TT AEE ETN Ce,


character. The greatest difficulties of our law judges arise from the unreliable
nature of the evidence they have to sift. 3. The testimonies were evenly balanced
- (verse 22, 23). The stout affirmation of the one mother was met by the flat
denial of the other. Their testimonies were of equal credit—#.¢., of none at all.
As there was no evidence, it seemed impossible to arrive at any decision, and
the whole court seemed held in suspense, and unable to tell which to believe.
But Solomon was equal to the occasion, and had made up his mind how to solve
the difficulty.


II, The judgment of Solomon was successful by an appeal ¢» materns:
affection. 1. Zhis appeal was sudden, Every opportunity had been giver to
each women to state her case. The king had patiently listened, and shown
every disposition to administer equal justice. There was nothing more to say
but what would be a repetition of what had been already said. A painful pause
had come in the progress of the trial, when, as if moved by a sudden inspiration,
the king speaks. The actions which have had the most important bearing on the
destinies of individuals have often been the result of a spontaneous impulse.
When truth is quickly apprehended it is wisest to act promptly. 2. This
appeal was apparently severe. ‘‘ And theking said, bring me a sword” (verse 24)
Doubtless some of the wiser hearers smiled upon each other, and thought in them-
selves, What! will the young king cut these knotty causesin pieces? Will he
divide justice with edged tools? Will he smite at hazard before conviction ?
There was a law concerning the dividing of a living ox and a dead one (Exod.
xxi. 35); but that did not reach his case. The heart of kings is unsearchable
ake xxy. 8). That sword which had served for execution, shall now serve

or trial. ‘‘ Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to
the other.’’? Oh! divine oracle of justice, commanding that which it would not
have done, that it might find out that which could not be discovered? Neither
God nor his deputies may be so taken at their words, as if they always intended
their commands for action, and not sometimes for probation.— Ap. Hall. 3. This
appeal revealed a deep practical insight into human nature.~ The mother’s heart
was touched, and, without the aid of argument and cross-examination, the great
discovery was made. The yearning affection of the true mother for the child
whose life was thus threatened stood out in prominent contrast to the cold,
callous attitude of heradversary. The case is strikingly put by Bishop Hall :—
This sword hath already pierced the breast of the true mother, and divided her
heart with fear and grief at so killing a sentence: there needs no other rack to
discover nature, and now she thinks—woe is me, that came for justice, and am
answered with cruelty! ‘ Divide ye the living child!” Alas! what hath
that poor infant offended, that it survives, and is sued for? How muc*
less miserable had I been that my child had been smothered in my «leey;
than mangled before mine eyes! If a dead carcase could have satisfied me,
I need not to have complained! What a woeful condition am I faller
into, who am accused to be the death of my supposed child already, and
now shall be the death of my own! If there were no loss of my child,
yet how can I endure this torment of my own bowels? And while she
thinks thus, she sues to that suspected mercy of her just judge—
‘Oh, my Lord, give her the living child, and slay him not!” as thinking, if he
live, he shall but change a mother; if he die, his mother loseth a son: while
he lives, it shall be my comfort that I have a son, though I may not call him
so; dying, he perisheth to both. Contrarily, her envious competitor, as holding
herself well satisfied that her neighbour should be as childless as herself, can
say, “‘ Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.’” Well might Solomon
and every hearer conclude, that either she was no mother, or a monster, that
eould be content with the murder of her child; and that, if she could have been
the true mother, and yet have desired the blood of her infant, she Babes as


*%


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. KINGS.





worthy to have been stripped of her child for so foul unnaturalness, as the other
had been worthy to enjoy him for her honest compassion. Not more justly
than wisely, therefore, doth Solomon trace the true mother by the footsteps of
ove and pity ; and adjudgeth the child to those bowels that had yearned at his
danger.


III. The judgment of Solomon won the respect and confidence of the
people (verse 28). The justice of the sentence made a deep impression upon
the whole people. They saw that he judged impartially ; that they could not
impose on him; and they were afraid to do those things which might brin,
them before his judgment seat. They acknowledged the Divine source of his
marvellous endowment. ‘They saw that the wisdom of God was in him to de
judgment.”” What was done to the other woman we are not told; justice cer
tainly required that she should be punished for her lies and fraud. Wisdom
strengtheneth the wise: itis better than weapons of war (Eccles. vii. 19; ix. 18),
Good men reverence, and bad men stand in awe of, the wise.


Lzssons :—1. Zo do justice 1s one of the most important duties of the sovereign.
2. Divine help is needed and should be sought tn order wisely to discriminate between
right and wrong. 3. The Divine justice is unerring, and all its decisions irrevocable,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 16-28. Sin infallibly ex- Solomon’s wise judgment. 1. The


posed, 1. Notwithstanding the secrecy
of its indulgence. 2. Notwithstand-
ing the subticty and ability of its
defenders, 3. Notwithstanding the
deceptive contradictions of its evidence.

Every part of the incident is cha-
racteristic. The two mothers, degraded
as was their condition, came, as the
Eastern stories so constantly tell of
the humblest classes, to demand justice
from the king. He patiently listens ;
the people stand by, wondering what
the child-like sovereign will determine.
The mother of the living child tells
her tale with all the plaintiveness and
particularity of truth, and describes
how, as she “looked at him again and
again, behold it was not my son which
I did bear.”’ The king determines, by
throwing himself upon the instincts of
nature, to cut asunder the sophistry of
argument. The living child was to be
divided, and the one half given to one,
the other half to the other. The true
mother betrays her affection: O, my
Lord, give her the living babe (the word
is peculiar), and in no wise slay it.’
The king repeats, word for word, the
cry of the mother, as if questioning its
meaning. ‘Give her the living bade,
and in no wise slay it? then bursts
forth into his own conviction: She is
the mother.” — Stanley.

62


question in dispute (verses 16-22).
2. The decision (verses 23-28).—
Lisco.


Verses 17-22. Such sin brings to-
gether, but it unites only for a short
time, for it produces discord, wrangling,
and controversy. Abiding peace dwells
only in the house where the God of
peace binds hearts together. He who
takes from the heart of a mother her
child, or estranges or deprives her,
will not escape the righteous tribunal
of the judge to whom the mother calls
and appeals. Litigation is generally
associated with envy, falsehood, an
unrighteousness; hence the Lord says,
“Be ready,” &c. (Matth. v. 25; Luke
xil. 58).—Lange.


Verse 19. The perils of infant life
1. Arising from the ignorance and in-
experience of those on whom it ig
dependent. 2. From its own fragile
and defenceless condition. $8. From
the consequences of others’ sins. 4.
Are avoided only by the mercy and
protecting care of heaven.


Verses 25-27. Even in morality it is
thus also; truth as it is one, so it loves
entireness; falsehood, division. Satan,
that hath no right to the heart, would


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





be content with a piece of it; God, that
made it all, will have either the whole
ornone. The erroneous church strives
with the true for the living child of
saving doctrine; each claims it for her
own; heresy, conscious of her own
injustice, would be content to go
away with a leg or an arm of sound
principles, ashoping to make up the rest
with her own mixtures; truth cannot
abide to part with a joint, and will
rather endure to lose all by violence
than a piece through willing con-
nivancy.— Bishop Hail.

Verse 26. If an immoral woman be
merciful for the son of her body, and
cannot forget her little child, how
much more should every Christian
mother be ready to offer, when neces-
sary, the heaviest sacrifice to deliver
her child from moral ruin. If in the
hearts of sinners the love of father and
mother be so strong, how strong must
the fatherly love of God be (Isaiah
xlix.15)! Envy hardens all human feel-
ing, and makes one hard and heartless.


OHAP, IV.


Verses 27, 28. When a child, appa-
rently given over to death, is restored
to its parents by Divine providence, so
much the more must their chief solici-
tude be to educate and bring it up in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord.
Not power and force; not great pomp,
and pride, and tyranny; but wisdom
and righteousness give to the govern-
ment authority, and call forth genuine
fear and the voluntary obedience of the
people. If it were given to a Solomon
to bring to disgrace lying and misrepre-
sentation by judicial wisdom and know-
ledge of the human heart, and to deliver
a righteous judgment, how much less
shall liars and hypocrites stand up
under the tribunal of Him who could
say, ‘‘A greater than Solomon is here!”
who, without needing witnesses and
judicial examination, will bring to
light what is hidden in darkness (1 Cor.
iv. 5), and before whose judgment seat
we must all appear (2 Cor. v. 10) ?—
Lange.








CHAPTER IV.
THE GOLDEN AGE OF THE HEBREW EMPIBE.


Crrrican AND Expranatory Norzs.—The list of officers in Solomon’s kingdom (verses
2-19) seems to have been inserted without belonging to the narrative; for verse 1 connects
itself naturally with verse 20, and the record moves on consecutively. The list supplies
internal evidence that it belongs to the later period of Solomon’s reign, and not to this early
portion of his career; for it includes two officers who had daughters of Solomon for their
wives (verses 11 and 15). Probably it is a record of the most distinguished officers of the
kingdom during the whole reign. Appropriately inserted here, as showing how well ordered
and flourishing the kingdom was: managed by civil officers of different degrees of dignity in
the realm. Verse 1. King over all Israel, inclusive of Judah. Verse 2. Azariah, the priest,
Wi5s3. Not a sacerdotal office, but secular ; wD describes a secular office in 2 Sam. viii.


18; xx. 26; and }7¥2 is used of “ Zabud ” (verse 5, called * principal officer”); and of these


highest state dignitaries Azariah was chief. The word thus denotes an officer answering to

rime minister, or chief of the privy counsellors, the first in the state next the king. Verse 3.
Reaibck = Geccetaries of state. Recorder—Historiographer or chronicler (the same officer
was under David, 2 Sam. viii. 16) : in all oriental kingdoms, ancient and modern, this officer
is of first rank, Verse 4. Benaiah, over the host, formerly captain of the guard, now
succeeded Joab as commander of the forces, Zadok and Abiathar were the priests : the
former alone discharged the functions of the sacerdotal office, the latter was banished (ii. 26),
and retained office only in nomine. Verse 5. Over the officers: +.¢., the prefects, or provincial


governors (verse 7). Principal officers—fiJo) probably means a privy counsellor, And
friend of the king: i.e., his confidential friend or favourite. This attachment of Solomon te


i ideri i dered
he sons of Nathan is natural and honourable, considerin; what service N athan had ren
Lia phan: i., ii, 22 ag). Verse 6. Over the household—Steward or chamberlain es palaca,


~*~


GuAP. Iv, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





master of the household, The tribute: D/d/7, the levy, or labourers (comp. v. 18-14)


overseer of the hirelings who were employed to maintain the splendour of Solomon’s court.
Verses 17-19. Twelve officers—Governors of territories allotted to their oversight, entrusted
with securing the royal revenues. The division of the land into twelve sections was not
according to the boundaries of the tribes, but the fertility of the land. The returns from
these districts were made, not in cash, but in the produce of the soil. Each district sert
supplies for a month, and the twelve in succession completed the year. Verse 20. As the
sand which is by the sea—This shows the promise to Abraham (Gen. xxii. 17; xxxii. 13)
fulfilled. Eating, drinking,’ and making merry suggests the contentment and socia}
prospenty of the people. Verse 21. From the river unto the land—The word “ unto” is
supplied; but instead of “J3y unto, } might be understood, over, thus: “From the river


(Euphrates), over the land of the Philistines,” &c. ‘‘ Brought presents,” means tribute. Al
the petty kingdoms from the Euphrates to the Mediterranean acknowledged the Hebrew
monarchy. Verse 22. Solomon’s provision for one day: #.e., for the king’s table, the court,
principal officers, foreign visitors, &c, “The quantity of fine flour used is estimated at
240 bushels; that of meal or common flour at 480. The number of cattle required for
consumption, besides poultry and several kinds of game, which were got in abundance on the
mountains, did not exceed in proportion what is needed in other courts of the Hast’ (Dr.
Jamieson). ‘Ten fattened oxen, twenty from the pastures, and one hundred sheep,” &.
ee 23). Verse 24. From. Tiphsah; t.¢., Thapsacus, a large town on the west bank of the

uphrates. Even to Azzah. i.¢., Gaza, on the extreme south-west, about ten miles from the
Mediterranean. Verse 25, Under vine and fig tree—A beautiful metaphor for security and
comfort. Verse 26. And 12,000 horsemen—Not horsemen, riders; but DW saddle-


0 rq,
horses, as in contrast with harness-horses. These chariot and saddle horses Solomon kept
partly in Jerusalem, and partly in other towns (x. 26; 2 Chronicles i. 14; ix. 25), Verse 28.
Dromedaries—The fleet one-humped camel. Verse 29. Wisdom and understanding
exceeding much—High powers of mind, and sharpness of perception. Largeness of heart—
95 3m, amplitude of soul, capacity for receiving and communicating knowledge; for
the “heart” with the Hebrews stood for capacities of the soul. Verse 80. Children of the
East Country—Arabians, Chaldeans, and Persians (Genesis xxv. 6). Opposite these in the
West was Egypt, whose fame for wisdom was throughout the ancient world (Isaiah xix. 11;
Acts vii. 22). Verse 81. Ethan, the Ezrahite—Of tae Levitical family of Merari (1 Chron.
vi. 44); president of the music in David's tabernacle (1 Chronicles xv. 17 19), and composer
of Psalm Ixxxix. Heman—A chief of the tabernacle musicians, and the king’s seer
(1 Chronicles xxv. 5), a sonef Joel. Chalcol and Darda, sons of Machol—Unknown. ‘The
Rabbinical book Seder Olam says, ‘‘ These were prophets that prophesied in Egypt,” but all


is uncertain, Verse 82. Proverbs—5y}r) denotes epigrammatic sentences, pithy and
a

witty sayings holding moral sentiments and wise observations on human life and character,

Songs—Of these we possess only Psalms Ixxii., cxxxii. probably exxvii., and the Canticles.

How few of these lavish creations of his capacious mind survive the destructive work of Time}

The Koran praises him as conversant with the languages of men and demons, birds and anis,


with all of whom he had intercourse. The whole of the occult learning in the East ig still
associated with his name,


ee


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-28.
Promment Fraturrs or Narronat Prospenrrry.


Tux author of the Books of Kings, true to the religious intention of the history,
gives but a scanty description of the external magnificence of the Israclitish
kingdom in its palmiest days. But the list of names, and brief allusions
contained in this chapter, present glimpses of the glory and affluence of that
period. ‘The general tone of the records of Solomon’s reign is that of jubilant
delight, as though it were, indeed, a golden day following on the iron and
brazen age of the warlike David and his half-civilized predecessors. The heart
of the poets of the age overflows with the beautiful words of loyal delight
(Psa. xlv.). The royal justice and benevolence are like the welcome showers in
i The poor, for once, are cared for. The very tops of the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. ' «GHAR. IV.





bare mountains sem to wave with corn, as on the fertile slopes of Lebanon”
(Psa. Ixxii. 2, 5, 6, 7, 13, 16). We have in the brief descriptions of this
paragraph a portrayal of the prominent features of national prosperity, as
illustrated more or less in the history of all nations.


I, The unity and submission of the whole nation to the reigning monarch.
‘So king Solomon was king over all Israel. And reigned over all kingdoms
from the river unto the land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt;
they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life” (verses 1,
21). Solomon was the only Hebrew monarch who ever governed for his whole
lifetime so vast a territory. David for seven years ruled but a single tribe; and
at the beginning of the reign of Solomon’s successor the kingdom was rent
asunder by the revolt of the ten tribes, as the result of one churlish breath.
The subject kingdoms, doubtless, preserved their separate organization and
nationality, as when independent, but were ever ready both to contribute to the
annual revenues of Solomon, and also to furnish, when occasion offered, their
quota of men for any public service. The organization of a great empire into
provinces, ruled by governors holding office at the pleasure of the crown, was a
discovery of Darius Hystaspis. The time is hastening when all nations will be
united in one grand confederation under the sceptre of Messiah (sa. lxxii. ;
Isaiah lx. 5-11).


II. The splendour and order of the court (verses 1-19, 26-28). The
period of the Judges was the time of public crudeness in which there was an
absence of order and of organic unity of the kingdom. The age of David was that
of continuous wars and battles, in which, indeed, victory over all enemies at last
came, and with it, at the same time, the beginning of a well-ordered condition,
but not complete peace for the kingdom. This first came with Solomon’s reign
(1 Chron. xxii. 8, 9). The reign of Solomon is the result of all preceding con-
flicts and Divine teachings. It is the kingdom of Israel in its highest maturity.
—Lange. The catalogue of names probably contains those of the most dis-
tinguished officers which during the whole reign of Solomon, or at least during
its most flourishing period, helped to add lustre and dignity to his administration.
The officers of the court were generally the same as those of David’s time. The
great officers are now, for the first time, called by one general name—prinves—
a title which before had been almost confined to Joab; these officers of the first
rank deriving their station from Solomon, and probably holding it during
pleasure. The union of priestly and secular functions still continued. The
prophets cease to figure among the dignitaries, as though the prophetical office
had been overborne by the royal dignity. The chief-priesthood was concen-
trated in Zadok alone, though Abiathar, notwithstanding his deposition
(ch. ii. 27), continued to hold his priestly dignity and character, so that when
he no longer executed the duties of his office his name remained on the official
list. The three military bodies seem to have remained unchanged. The
commander of the host is the priestly warrior Benaiah. The guard appear only
as household troops, employed on state pageants. A number of inferior officers
was appointed, under a principal officer, the greater part of whom had to
éontrol the taskwork exacted from the Canaanite population, and the remainder,
consisting of twelve chiefs, had to be'responsible for provisioaing the royal
household. The court was a scene of magnificence and gaiety, thronged with
richly-apparelled attendants, and sparkling with evidences of boundless wealth.
In the midst of this gorgeous array stood the stately figure of the king—fair im
countenance, and resplendent in beauty—his robes scented with the perfumes
of India, the crown on his head and the sceptre in his hand, and the guards
and councillors surrounding his brilliant throne: or, a8 was often the case, the
king, at early dawn, is driving out of Jerusalem in one of his numerous
ohariots, drawn by horses of unparalleled swiftness and beauty, himself clothed

; ¥


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





in white, followed by a train of mounted archers, all splendid youths of magni-
ficent stature, dressed in purple, their long black hair flowing behind them,
powdered with gold-dust, which glittered in the sun as they galloped along
after their royal master.—(Josephus, Stanley passim.) A wealthier grandeur
than that of the greatest earthly empire rests upon the throne of the Great
Redeemer: His officers are the most gifted, and most numerous; His
government is orderly and beneficent.


III. The vast increase of population (verse 20). ‘As the sand which is
by the sea in multitude,” a proverbial and hyperbolical expression, commonly
used in all languages. Thus was fulfilled the promise made to Abraham
(Gen. xiii. 16; xxii. 17; see also ch. iii. 8; and compare Psalm exxyvii.,
which is traditionally ascribed to Solomon, and which celebrates the populous-
ness and security of Israel in his day). A healthy and increasing population
is an important evidence of national prosperity, an honour to the prince, and a
terror to his enemies (Prov. xiv. 28). The people of God—His spiritual Israel—
are innumerable (Rey. vii. 9).


What a countless company
Stand before yon dazzling throne!


IV. The ample supply of provisions (verses 22, 23, 27, 28). The daily
provision for Solomon’s table was sufficient to serve, at two pounds of bread
each, besides meat, no less than 29,160 men. Thenius computes the number
daily fed at the palace of the Israclitish king to be 14,000. It is said that
one hundred oxen were daily slaughtered for the kings of Persia, and that
15,000 persons have been daily fed at the court. And Tavernier relates that
as many as five hundred sheep and lambs were daily consumed at the court of
the Sultan, besides a number of fowls, and an immense quantity of butter and
rice. No nation can boast of prosperity when its people are starved and famine
prevails. When we consider how closely population follows on the heels of
production, how great is the goodness of God in ensuring a constant supply of
food tor man and beast! He who is greater than Solomon feeds a more numerous
household, not only with the bread that perisheth, but with that which endureth
to everlasting life.


V. The universal prevalence of peace. ‘He had peace on all sides round
about him” (verse 24). Wherein also he became a lively type of Christ, the
Prince of Peace (Isa. ix. 6), who as he was brought from heaven with that
song of peace (Luke ii. 14), so he returned up again with that farewell of peace
(Jno. xiv. 27), leaving to the world the doctrine of peace, the gospel of peace
(Eph. ii. 17); which worketh that peace which passeth understanding
(Phil. iv. 7).—Zrapp.


VI. The conscious security and happiness of the people (verses 20, 25).
They were cheerful in their enjoyment of abounding plenty—eating, drinking,
and making merry—evidences these of a happy, peaceful, and prosperous
administration, Every man dwelt safely ‘“‘under his vine,” that clustered
round his court; ‘and under his fig tree,” which grew in his garden. They
were no longer obliged to dwell in fortified cites for fear of their enemies ; they
spread themselves over all the country, which they everywhere cultivated ;
and had always the privilege of eating the fruits of their own labours. In
this was typified the spiritual peace and joy and holy security of all the faith-
ful subjects of Messiah’s kingdom. “It must be regarded as an unspeakable
blessing of God, when, under the protection of a wise and righteous government
cocoa the nation, even the least, can remain in the undisturbed possession


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP, IV.





of his property, and can enjoy the fruits of his industry in the bosom of his


family.”


Lessons :—1. National prosperity ts the gift of God. 2. Is fraught with many


dangers.
people.


3. 1s permanent only when used for the highest religious welfare of the


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Chap. iv. The kingdom of Solomon
a type of the Messiah’s. 1. In its
greatness and extent. 2. In its pros-
perity and peace. 3. In his wisdom
and knowledge. Fortunate is the
government where all goes orderly.
Their eyes shall look around after the
faithful in the land, and pious subjects
are loved and esteemed; but false
people and liars, and those of a per-
verse heart, who have proud ways and
haughtiness, and who calumniate
others secretly and maliciously, it will
not endure nor have about it; but
will clear away and destroy after the
example of David (Psalm cx.). A
well-ordered state constitution is the
condition of the growth and pros-
perity of every kingdom; but all
ordinances and institutions avail
nothing when requisite and proper
persons are wanting for their adminis-
tration and execution. To select such,
and to entrust them with different
administrative offices, is the first and
most difficult task of aruler. Happy
the prince to whom God grants the
grace to find the right persons, who
can counsel him and deserve his con-
fidence (Eccles. x. 2-5). Asa court,
where it is beset with flatterers, back-
biters, carousers, &c., generally goes
Jown, so also it prospers, on the
other hand, when pious servants are
there.


Verses 4, 5. Compare 1 Chron. xxii.
7-10. David, the man of action;
Solomon, the man of rest. The man
of active life usually has more con-
spicuous virtues and more conspicuous
faults than the man of rest. David
proposed to build the house—the man
of action was the founder; Solomon
carried the plans of his father into
execution. David was the founder ;
Solomon the builder.


“ergo 20. Not the multitude of a


people causes a scarcity in the land,
but the wickedness and avarice of
men. Food and drink and amusement
are a gift of God (Eccles. iii. 13),
when used in the fear of God (Eccles.
xi. 9) and with thanksgiving (1 Cor.
x. 31; Col. iii, 17); but they become
sin when, in the gift, the Giver is
forgotten, the belly made a god of,
and serves the lust of the flesh.


Verse 21. The kingdom of Christ is
still far greater. He rules from one
end of the sea to the other, from the
rising of the sun unto the going down
thereof (Zach. ix. 10). All kings
shall call upon Him: all the heathen
shall serve Him (Psalm lxxii. 8-10).


Verse 22. As by Divine providence
and ordering there are always diffe-
rent conditions, high and low, rich
and poor, so their manner of life can-
not be the same, but must be conform-
able to the rank and position which
have been assigned to every one by God.
The household of a prince who stands
at the heud of a great and distinguished
people ought not, indeed, to give to
the people the bad example of extrava-
gant show, luxury, and riot; but it
must, in abundance and splendour,
surpass every private establishment,
and ought not to appear needy and
impoverished.


Verse 24, 25. The blessings of
peace. 1. Wherein they consist.
2. To what they oblige. Peace
nourishes, disturbance consumes.
Only in peace, not in war, does a
natien attain to well-being; therefore
should we offer prayer and supplication
for kings and all in authority, &.
(1 Tim. ii. 2). Happy the land where
goodness and truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed
each other (Psalm lxxxy. 10).—


Lange.
Kd 67


Omar. fv. HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





HOMILETICS OF VERSES 20-#4.
THe Uniovz Wispom or Sotomor.


I. It was vast in its range and profound in its insight (verse 29). The
terms of this verse indicate that Solomon was gifted as a man of profound
thought, of deep understanding, with vast powers of judgment, and a broad and
diversified experience. Largeness of heart is intended to convey the idea of
great intellectual capacity. In Scripture the heart is often used for the
intellect. The expression, as the sand that ts on the sea shore, was proverbial in
reference to numerical multitude (Gen. xxii. 17; xxxii. 12; xli. 49; Josh. xi.
4; Judg. vil. 12; 1 Sam. xiii. 5; 2 Sam. xvii. 11; 1 Kings iv. 20; Psalm
Ixxviii. 27). It is used here to denote the amplitude and multiplicity of the
knowledge and wisdom of Israel’s greatest king. It was said of a certain great
man that he was a very gulph of learning; of another, that he was a closet
or market of all sciences and learning; of another, that he was skilful in every-
thing; and of a fourth, that he might be said to know all that was know-
able. All these eulogies might be fitly applied to Solomon. His wisdom
was not only vast in extent, but, like the sea-sand, minute and accurate in
detail. As the sand upon the sea-shore, observes Lord Bacon, incloses a great
body of water, so Solomon’s mind contained an ocean of knowledge. Intellectual
endowments are better than wealth (Prov. iii. 13, 14), better than long life
(+b. iii. 2), better than the uncertain prizes of worldly honour (¢. iii. 16).
But there is a wisdom deeper, vaster, and more satisfying than that of Solomon’s,
and which can be learned only at the feet of Him who is greater than Solo-
mon, and ‘‘in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.” The
mere child of faith is wiser than the most profoundly intellectual unbeliever.
The wisdom of Solomon gave no peace to his restless mind, did not prolong his
days, and did not prevent his falling into grievous sins. But the wisdom
that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, &c. (Jas. iii. 17). The life
of man is short; but the glory that blooms upon it—the outburst and glitter
of intellectual genius—is shorter still, But they that be wise—wise in the truest
and highest sense—are invested with an undying and celestial radiance—“ they
shine as the brightness of the firmament and as the stars for ever and ever.”


II. It surpassed the wisdom of the best known philosophers (verses 30, 31).
The East is the cradle of the sciences, and in Solomon’s day was the only part of
the world famous for wisdom. The children of the East country would embrace
the Chaldeans and Arabians, both of whom were distinguished for scientific
research, and as the authors of sage and sententious utterances, which became
proverbial. The wisdom of Egypt held a high position in the ancient world, and
was varied and extensive in its character. It included magic, geometry,
medicine, astronomy, architecture, and a dreamy mystic philosophy, of which
metempsychosis was the main principle. The Egyptians despised the Greeks as
only children in knowledge: and, indeed, the Greak learning only commenced
four hundred years after the era of Solomon. It is not certain whether the
philosphers mentioned in verse 31 were contemporaries of Solomon, or men of ¢
more ancient time, whose fame for wisdom was still celebrated. When compared
with the best known philosophers of his own and all former time, Solomon ie
declared to be supreme inwisdom. The knowledge which is divinely bestowed
1s superior to that which is acquired as the result of human labour: grace is
more potent than art. To possess a wealth of wisdom involves a solemn
responsibility. Woe be to that man who prostitutes God-given talent to base
and ignoble purposes! The abuse of wisdom will only meke the transgressor
more exquisitely alive to the misery he draws upon imselt) True wisdom exalts
the possessor, and bleases the race,

68


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. IV.





III. It enriched the practical and poetic literature of the ages (verse 32).
Of these three thousand proverbs a very valuable though a comparatively small
portion remains in the book of Proverbs, and, perhaps, also in Ecclesiastes.
The remark that he spake these proverbs may imply that they were not all
written, or actually recorded, and so far from being preserved only by oral
tradition, they either became gradually lost, or their authorship became
uncertain. Being the son of the greatest of human lyrists, the sweet psalmist
of Israel, Solomon naturally inherited the gift of poetry and song. Of
the thousand and five songs, there now remain, probably, the Ixxii. and exxvii.
Psalms, and the Canticles, though the authorship of the latter is a controverted
question. But though most of the proverbs and songs of Solomon are lost to us,
their silent influences, flowing through unscen channels, may have greatly
affected both the ancient and modern literature of the East, and may still be
studied in the apocryphal books of Ecclesiasticus and the Wisdom of Solomon.—
Whedon. The man who adds one really good book to the already wealthy
literature of the world is a benefactor to mankind. When preferment was
offered to Thomas Aquinas, he was wont to sigh and say, ‘‘I would rather
have Chrysostom’s Comment on Matthew.’ A pure and healthy literature is a
mighty force in shaping individual and public opinion, in consolidating moral
character, in defining and directing the career of a nation, in exposing time-
honoured fallacies, and in promoting the highest ends of truth and righteousness.
On the other hand, who can estimate the pernicious influence of a single bad
book? It is lamentable to observe how the loftiest genius is employed in
teaching downright immorality, and shattering the faith of man in the supreme
good. ‘Truth is sacrificed for effect, and purity for a temporary bubble reputa-
tion. The monetary gain of a vile book soon vanishes, but the mischief remains
long after the cunning hand of the writer has turned to dust. Many would
have sacrificed all they possessed to be able to undo the evil their own
pens produced.


IV. It embraced a minute acquaintance with the principal subjects of
natural history (verse 38). This is the first idea of a complete system of
natural history as far as it includes the animal and vegetable kingdoms; and
Solomon was probably the first natural philosopher in the world. His know-
ledge ranged from the most gigantic trees to the humblest plant; from
mammoths to insects. The writings of Solomon bear evidence of his keen
appreciation of the beauties of nature, and of the habit of minute observation
and sage reflection. His extended commerce with other nations afforded him
ample opportunity for becoming acquainted with rare and varied specimens of
plants and animals. His discourse would consist not simply in scientific
description and analysis, but in tracing evidences of Divine skill and power.
Unlike some inflated scientists of the present day, his profound knowledge of
the my teries of nature did not obscure, but brighten and expand, his
eoncc;.lions of the Divine. Irenaeus observes that Solomon expounded psycho-
logically the wisdom of God which is manifest in creation. And Josephus
states, “‘ He spake a parable upon every sort of tree, from the hyssop to the
cedar; and in like manner, also, about beasts and all sorts of living creatures,
whether upon the earth, in the seas, or in the air; for he was not unacquainted
with any of their natures, nor omitted inquiries about them, but described them
all like a philosopher, end demonstrated his exquisite knowledge of their several
properties.” 1t is the function of science to interpret nature ; and the record
of its triumphs in recent years reads like the pages of a thrilling romance.
But alongside the growth and expansion of science there has grown up an
unhealthy and dangerous scepticism. This has been more especially evident
when one branch of the great family of the sciences has been the exclusive


object of study, for then the flow of thought becomes narrowed in pasar,


GEAP. Iv. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








the range of vision limited, and the harmony of truth, which lies not so much
in one thing as it pervades all, is seriously disturbed. The sublime object of
all true science is to interpret and illustrate the highest truth, and aid the
anxious inquirer in its attainment. There is something overpoweringly
affecting in contemplating a gifted human soul, bafiled in its unaided search
after truth, and drifting, ever drifting, like a lonely raft on a shoreless sea.
The invariable result of the kind of scepticism which certain doctrines of
modern science has helped to create is to plunge the mind into greater doubts
than those from which it professes to liberate; but it is the office of a genuine
philosophy—a Christianized science—to bring the light that dispels the gloom
and guides the distraught inquirer into hallowed rest and peace.


V. It acquired a universal reputation. ‘‘ His fame was in all nations
round about” (verses 31, 34). Solomon wasthe Aristotle of the Jewish nation ;
but his fame excelled that of the Grecian sage, and is to-day familiar with
thousands to whom the name of Aristotle is unknown. Solomon not only con-
tinued to be the type and model of all wisdom to his own people, but in the
East is so regarded to the present day. The Koran praises him as knowing the
languages of men and demons, of birds and ants, with all of which, it is said, he
held intercourse. The Turks still possess a work of seventy folio volumes which
is called the Book of Solomon. The occult wisdom of the East is still connected
with his name. His court was a centre round which gathered the great and
learned of all nations, who were attracted either by curiosity, or with a desire
to add to their stores of wisdom (verse 34). It is not always the good fortune
of the wise to attain a wide-spread popularity. The highly talented often pine
in obscurity (Eccles. ix. 13-16). Messiah is the embodiment of a wisdom
infinitely surpassing that of Solomon (Prov. viii. 22, 23; Col.ii. 3). His repu-
tation is the most exalted, and is imperishable (Phil. ii.9; Ps. lxxii. 17); they
who would be wise unto salvation must come to Him (1 Cor.i.30). The perpe-
tuity and blessedness of true wisdom are best ensured by imparting it to others.


Lrssons.—1. We are again reminded that superior wisdom is the gift of God
(verse 29). 2. Uncommon abilities increase the responsibility to use them with
uncommon diligence for the glory of the Donor. 3. The wisdom of the few should
be diffused for the instruction of the many. 4. He who ts wise unto salvation, and
wise to win souls, acquires an undying reputation.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 29-84. The wisdom of Solo- 7. As attracting all ranks to resort to
mon. 1. Its Divine origin (verse 29). him (Psalm xlv. 12; lx. 6). —
2. Its vastness (verse 29). 38. Its Robinson.
superlative excellency (verses 30, 31).
4. Its marvellous productiveness
(verse 32). 5. Its practical utility


Verse 29. Not every one receives
from God an equal measure of spiritual


(verse 33). 6. Its irresistible attrac-
tiveness (verse 34).


— Solomon a type of Christ. 1.
As the child of promise. 2. As con-
secrated to the regal office. 3. Though
ready to spare, as finally destroying
every obstinate rebel against his go-
vernment. 4. In the tranquillity and
equity of his reign. 5. As the builder
of the Temple of the Lord. 6. As
tc of extraordinary wisdom.

i)


endowment, but every one is obliged
with the gift he has received to dis-
pose of it faithfully, and not allow it
to be fallow (Luke xii. 48; Matt.
xxv. 14-29). In the possession of high
spiritual endowment, and of much
knowledge, man is in danger of over-
estimating himself, of becoming
proud and haughty ; hence the highly
gifted Solomon himself says, ‘Trust
in the Lord,” &. (Prov. iii. 5, 6),
-~—Lange.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: RINGS,
ee oe ETS NE








Verses 30, 31. The responsibility
of intellectual greatness. 1. Intel-
lectual greatness should be distin-
guished by eminent goodness. 2. Is
exposed to many subtle temptations.
8. Is powerful in exerting a beneficent
or malevolent influence upon the age.
Fey Is all the more lamentable in its


Verse 30. Heathen wisdom, great
as it may be in earthly things, under-
stands nothing of divine, heavenly
things, and is therefore far below the
wisdom whose beginning is the fear of
the personal, living God, who has re-
vealed Himself in His Word. This
wisdom alone yields true, good, and
abiding fruit (James iii. 15-17).—
Lange.


Verse 31. With the accession of
Solomon a new world of thought was
opened to the Israelites. The curtain
which divided them from the surround-
ing nations was suddenly rent asunder.
The wonders of Egypt, the commerce
of Tyre, the romance of Arabia—nay,
it is even possible, the Homeric age of
Greece—became visible. Of this, the
first and most obvious result was the
growth ofarchitecture. But the gene-
ral effects on the whole mind of the
people must have been greater still.
A new direction seems to have been
given to Israelite thought. Prophets
and psalmists retire into the back-
ground, and their place is taken by the
new power called by the name of
“‘ Wisdom.” Its two conspicuous ex-
amples are the wisdom of Egypt and
the wisdom of the Children of the
East—that is, of the Idumzan Arabs.
Four renowned sages appear as its
exponents: Ethan the Ezrahite, and
Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the
sons of Mahol. It would almost seem
asif a kind of college had been founded
for this special purpose—a house of
wisdom on seven pillars. A class of
men sprang up, distinct both from
priest and prophet, under the name of
“the wise.”? Their teaching, their
manner of life, was unlike that of
either of those two powerful orders.
The thing and the name had been


GHAP. IV.


almost unknown before. Ina restricted
sense, the word had been used of the
Danite architects of the Tabernacle,
and in a somewhat larger sense of two
or three remarkable persons in David's
reign. But from this time forward
the word occurs in the sacred writings
at least three hundred times. What
it was will best be perceived by seeing
it in its greatest representative. A
change must have come over the
nation, any way, through the new
world which he opened. But it was
fixed and magnified by finding such a
mind to receive it. His wisdom ex-
celled the wisdom of any one of his
time. From his early years its germs
had been recognized.—Stanley.


Verses 32, 33. A pure literature,
1. Embalms the best thoughts of the
wise and good of all times and all
lands. 2. Is of unspeakable value in
the formation of moral character. 3.
Deals with every phase of scientific
truth. 4. Should be widely dissemi-
nated.—The glory which is obtained
in the world through bad books is
shame and disgrace before Him who
demands account of every idle word.


Verse 32. It is, we might say, an
accident that the Proverbs of Solo-
mon are not called the ‘‘ Parables,”
and that the teachings of the New
Testament are called the ‘‘ Parables,”
and notthe ‘‘ Proverbs,”’ of the Gospels.
The illustrations from natural objects,
the selection of the homelier instead of
the grander of these, are not derived
from the prophets or from the psalm-
ists, but from the wise naturalist,
‘‘who spake of trees, and beasts, and
fowls, and creeping things, and fishes,
of the singing birds, of the budding
fig tree, of the fragrant vine.” The
teaching of Solomon is the sanctifica-
tion of common sense in the Old Testa-
ment, and to that sanctification the
final seal is set by the adoption of the
same style and thought in the New
Testament by Him who, with His
apostles, taught in ‘‘ Solomon’s porch,”
and expressly compared His wisdom
to the wisdom which gathered the
nations round Solomon of Saeed

1


GmaP, ¥.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a


Verse 33. Far better would it befit
lords and princes to find their enjoy-
ment in study rather than to seek
satisfaction in dramas, plays, and in
immoderate drinking. A man may be
able to speak of all possible things,
and at the same time be without wis-
dom, for this does not consist in varied
knowledge and wide-spread acquire-
ments, but in recognition of the truth
which purifies the heart and sanctifies
the will. Observation and investiga-
tion of nature is only of the right kind
and fraught with blessing when it leads
to the confessions of Psalms civ. 24;
xcii. 6, 7.—Starke.

— Solomon was, at least in one great
branch, the founder, the only repre-
sentative, not merely of Hebrew wis-
dom, but of Hcbrew science. As
Alexander’s conquests had supplied
the materials for the first natural his-
tory of Greece, so Solomon’s commerce
did the like for the first natural history
of Israel. He spake of trees from the
highest to the lowest, ‘‘from the
spreading cedar of Lebanon to the
slender caper-plant that springs out
of the crevice of the wall.’”? He spake
also of beasts, and of fowls, and of
creeping things, and of fishes. We
must look at him as the first great
naturalist of the world, in the midst
of the strange animals—the apes, the

eacocks—which he had collected from
india 3; im the garden, among the


copious springs of Etham, or in the
bed of the deep ravine beneath the


‘wall of his newly erected temple,


where, doubtless, was to be seen the
transplanted cedar, superseding the
humble sycamore of Palestine; the
paradise of rare plants, gathered from
far and near; ‘pomegranates with
pleasant fruits, camphire with spike-
nard, spikenard and saffron, calermus
and cinnamon, with all trees of frank-
incense, myrrh and aloes, with all the
chief spices.’’— Stanley.


Verse 34. The fascination of learn-
ing, 1. Appeals to the inquisitive
instinct of man. 2. Stimulates its
votary to still higher achievements.
8. Creates and strengthens a com-
munity of sympathy among minds of
varying capacity. 4. Elevates the
successful competitor to a pinnacle of
enduring fame.


— To Solomon came from all nations
people to hearken to his wisdom ; but
to Him who is greater than Solomon
the wise men of to-day will not listen
(1 Cor. i. 19-21). How many travel
over land and sea to seek gold and
silver, but stir neither hand nor foot
to find the wisdom and knowledge of
the truth which lie close at hand, and
are better than gold and silver (Prov.
vill. 11; xxiv. 14; Job xxviii. 18) !—
Lange.





CHAPTER Y.
NEGOTIATIONS WITH THE TYRIAN KING.


CriricAL AND Exrtanatory Norres.—Verse 1. Hiram, king of Tyre, called Hirom
cee 7 and 19), Hwram (2 Chron. ii. 8), and by Josephus E%pwuos, the same who had sent

avid timbers for his palace (2 Sam. v. 11; 1 Chron. xiv. 1}. This embassy to Solomon was
a declaration that he desired to maintain equally friendly relations with David’s successor
Solomon took the incident as an opportunity to aegociate for “cedar trees out of Lebanon”
(verse 6) with which to build the temple. Verse 83. Wars which were about him on every
side—David was not prevented from erecting God’s temple because wars allowed him no leisure
(see 2 Sam. vii. 1, “ Lord had given him rest,” &c.); he was free from military claims to de
this work, but not free from military stains; his had been a career of war, and Jehovah’s
temple must be reared by one who should prefigure the ‘‘ Prince of Peace ” (¢f. 1 Chron. xxviii,
8). Note: Solomon assumes that Hiram knew David's intention to build the temple (ef.
1 Chron. xxii. 1-4). Verse 4. Neither adversary nor evil occurrent—}) Y37d means an un-

= Sets


happy event, ¢.g., plague, rebellion, famine. David had such ‘evil occurrent” in Abgalom’s
rebellion, and in the plague following his numbering the people. Werse 6. Cedar trees out of
Lebanon—Only from the forests of Lebanon could Solomon have procured such timber for the
temple. These forests belonged to the Phanicians, who carried on extensive trade mm both cedars


72


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OwAY. ¥.





and cypresses. The best cedars grew on the north-west of the mountain range. The Sidonians
were at this time expert shipbuilders and good navigators; it would, therefore, be an easy part
of their contract to ‘convey by sea” their merchandize (verse 9). Rodinson says the famous
cedar forests lie two days’ journey north of Beirut, near the highest mountain peak, distant
from Jebul Sunnin six or eight hours north. Verse 7. Hiram said, Blessed be the LORD—
The Septuagint here reads @eds, not Képios ; yet this recognition of JenovaH might indicate in
Hiram nothing more than a polytheistic acceptance of the God of Israel as one of many deities.
In the parallel passage (2 Chron. ii, 12) Hiram calls hm 5xqup > TIT Jehovah, God
oy Py a er ry


aie ;

of Israel, and adds, “ that made heaven and earth.” Yet this may only imply his assent to the

religious views of the Israelites. . Verse 8. Cedar and fir—w}")) more probably denotes the
3


cypress, not “fir,” although the pine, larch, and cypress are all found at this day in the Lebanon ;
and by Jerosh may be intended either tree. Werse 9. Convey them by sea in floats—lit.,
I will make them into floats on the sea. Thus they could be brouzht down the river, proe
bably the Dog River, to the sea coast, and by sea to Joppa (2 Chron. ii, 16). Verse 11.
Wheat for food, and pure oil—Pheenicia was poor in agricultural produce, but rich in umbra-
geous growth. The land of Israel was poor in trees, rich in corn and oil. This exchange
was, therefore, mutually advantageous. The “pute oil,” MID Wow beaten, é. é., finest oil,


was obtained from olives not fully ripe, and pounded in mortars ; had a white colour, as well as
a better flavour; and yielded a purer and clearer light than the ordinary olive oil obtained
through the press.— Keil Verse 12. The Lord gave Solomon wisdom, &c., means that, guider
by “ wisdom profitable to direct,” Solomon entered into a friendly alliance and commercial

eaty with Hiram, Verse 13. Raised a levy—/it., caused to go up (see note on iv. 6),
om to take out “30,000 men.” These were Israelites, in distinction from Canaanitish bond-


servants (ch. ix. 20; 2 Chron. viii. 7-9), and prisoners taken by David in war, numbering
153,600; and these levied Israelites are employed on lighter terms than the bondslaves, serving
in detachments of 10,000 for one month, and then resting for two months at home, while the
other two detachments take their turn. Verse 14. Adoniram was over the levy (ef. note on
iv. 6). Verse 15. Threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens, &.—70,000 carriers sad


80,000 cutters of wood; or, more probably, of stone— un being more strictly used of a cutter


of stone (2 Kings xii. 12), although used of both in this instance (Gesenius). This total of
150,000 were “strangers in the land of Israel’? (2 Chron. ii. 17), not Israelites. Verse 16.
Officers over the work, 3,300—'These were over the bondmen; other 550 captains were over
the 30,000 Israelites (ch. ix. 23). Verse 18. The stone squarers nv>1371)—The Giblim


(Joshua xiii. 5), 4. ¢., inhabitants of 933—These Giblites (see Ezek. xxvii. 9) were epecally
skilful in shipbuilding. Thenius suggests that the slightly changed werd pam ba


then reads, “they wreathed the stones, put a border round them,”’ i. é., “And
Soin opailders and Hiram’s trailors did hew them and bevel them.” Such grooved or bevelled
stones. twenty or thirty feet long by six feet, are now visible to Palestine explorers as the
basement stones of the ancient temple, and are probably the original stones used “to lay the
foundation of the house” (verse 17).—W. H. J.


——¢———
HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-18
PrePaRaTIonNS Yor 4 Gueat Worx,


the preparations for a great work are facilitated where a
Panerenendaiy exists. 1. Zhe friendship of a worthy Sather is often
continued to his posterity. ‘‘ For Hiram was ever a lover of David” (verse 1).
The friendships formed by a good man are a precious legacy to his children.
He may have many and bitter enemies; but the faithful few will love him to
the end of his days, and after his death will honour his memory even in his
offspring. A son will sometimes receive signal advantages in life, for his
father’s sake. David rejoiced to show kindness to Mephibosheth, the crippled
son of his friend Jonathan (2 Sam. ix. 8, 13). ‘A fast friend is a rare bird.
Most friends now-a-days are like Joab’s dagger, as soon in and as soon tie
The love of foster-brothers in Ireland far surpasseth—-saith one, but I believe


him not—all the loves of allmen. They only love truly that love one san out


GHaP. Vv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
aD


ofa pure heart fervently (1 Pet.i.22). This love lasteth."—TZrapp. 2.4 genuine
friendship is strengthened and perpetuated by mutual acts of courtesy and service
(verse 3-11). Solomon responds with great cordiality to the congratulatory
embassage of Hiram, and, at the same time, suggests the way in which the
Tyrian king can help in his great work of building a house for the Lord.
Hiram cheerfully falls in with the arrangement, and the terms of contract are
speedily and satisfactorily settled. A friendship where the giving is all on one
side, and the receiving ail on the other, will soon come to an irreparable breach.
The quid pro quo may not always be the same in kind; but a true courtesy will
ever be ready to acknowledge the preponderance of obligation.





II. That in the preparation for a great work the choicest materials
should be obtained (verses 6, 10, 17, compared with 2 Chron. ii. 7, 8).
Cedar, gold, and costly stones—the choicest timber, the choicest metal, and the
choicest stone—were to be used in the building of the temple. Many wonderful
properties are ascribed to the cedar, such as resisting putrefaction, destroying
noxious insects, remaining sound for a thousand years, yielding an oil famous for
preserving books and writings, &c. The wood is extremely hard, which caused
the ancients to believe it incapable of decay. In whatever work we do for
God, the best material should be used. Nothing is too good for Him. Some
men will spend enormous sums on jewelry, on house furnishing, or on
architectural decoration, and yet be content to see the ugliest and shabbiest
material used in the service of God. David spared neither time, nor pains, nor
expense in gathering together the costliest materials for the projected building,
though he well knew he would not be permitted to take part in its erection.
Let us not grudge to do the preparatory work by which posterity will princi-
pally benefit. He who does something to enrich the future of humanity has
not lived in vain.


III. That in the preparation for a great work the best talent should be
sought. ‘There is not among us any that can skill to hew timber like unto
the Sidonians ”’ (verse 6 compared with verse 18). Sidon was a part of the
territories of Hiram, and its inhabitants appear to have been the most expert
workmen. Much skill is needed in the felling and treatment of timber.
According to Vitruvius, a contemporary of Julius Cesar, and author of a
celebrated treatise on architecture, timber must be cut in the autumn or in
the winter, when it is free from a moisture which is apt to make it rot, and it
should be cut in such @ manner as to allow the sap to distil away. It should
never be exposed to a hot sun, high winds, or rain, nor drawn through the
dew; and it should be in like manner guarded for three years before being used
in building. Probably these and other similar precautions gave the Sidonians
their fame for skill in felling timber. They were also celebrated as builders
and as dextrous in the working of all kinds of metals. Strado ascribes to them
great knowledge in philosophy, astronomy, geometry, arithmetic, navigation
and in all the fine arts. Sidon had glass works, linen, and other manufactures,
that furnished very ingenious and far-sought commodities. Homer represents
the most precious and valuable of the great metal wine bowls, in which the
Greeks of the heroic age delighted, as imported from Sidon (Odyss. iv. 614-618 ;
xv. 425), and made by Sidonian workmen (Iliad. xxiii. 743, 744). He AP
ascribes to Sidonian women the production of the beautifully embroidered robes
which were worn by Asiatic ladies of the first rank (0b. vi. 259-295). Both
Herodotus and Homer attest the general nautical skill of the Phoenicians: and
the former assigns the palm to Sidon. Talent is the gift of Heaven, and its
best efforts and most masterly productions should be consecrated to the noblest
ends. The work of God affords scope fer the exercise of the most accomplished
and fertile genius.

74


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAP. ¥.
aera SL aya TaN SS SS SSO cmeemeeesmieciemees nearer ee


TV. That in the preparations for a great work respect should be h

the condition and wants of the workers. (Compare roe 6, 9 reen
The labourers were well officered, and the toil and drudgery mitigated by a
methodised system of relays (verse 14). Without some such system so vast a
number of workers would relapse into a confused, tyrannical mob, and inflict
on each other much oppression and suffering. Organisation lightens labour
while it consolidates it. The wants of the workers were supplied. In
addition to the provisions sent to the royal court of Tyre (verses 9 11)
Solomon furnished to the servants of Hiram 20,000 cors (about 223,600
bushels) of beaten wheat, 20,000 cors of barley, 20,000 baths of wine, ard
20,000 baths of oil (2 Chron. ii. 10). The land of Israel was rich in grain and
oil, while in this respect Phoenicia was poor, the steep mountain ranges of
Lebanon affording very little space for arable land. Honest labour should be
honestly recompensed. In all work for God the utmost diligence and fidelity
are demanded; but He will take care the humblest labourer shall not go
unrewarded. ‘‘No house, even though it be the church and temple of God.
should be built to the hurt and oppression of one’s fellow-creatures,”’ Every
country has its staple commodity, by exchange of which intercourse is main-
tained with its neighbours. It is the happiness of a nation when, with the corn
of Canaan, it possesses also the shipping of T'yre.


V. That in the preparations for a great work help may be obtained
from all available sources (verses 6, 8-10, 12, 18). The world may be
used as the servant of the church. The unbeliever is often called upon
to contribute to a work the spiritual significance and end of which he does
not apprehend. The Tyrians, though Gentiles, were employed about the
work of the Temple, and thus prefigured the vocation of the Gentiles and their
future helping to build up the spiritual temple. Pellican, in allegorising this
fact, observes that the Sidonians and the proselytes among the Jews were the
workmen, but the rulers of the work were Israelites; thus showing forth that
the spiritual temple should be built by disciples among the Gentiles, but the
Apostles, who were Israelites, should be the chief workmen and governors
therein. Solomon ‘‘knew that the Tyrians’ skill was not given them for
nothing. Not Jews only, but Gentiles, must have their hand in building the
temple of God: only Jews meddled with the Tabernacle, but the temple is not
built without the aid of Gentiles; they, together with us, make up the church
of God (Eph. ii. 18, 14). Even pagans have their arts from heaven: how
justly may we improve their graces to the service of the God of heaven! If
there be a Tyrian who can work more curiously in gold, in silver, in brass, in
iron, in purple and blue silk, than an Israelite, why should he not be employed
about the temple? Their heathenism is their own, their skill is their Maker’s.
Many a one works for the church of God that yet hath no part in it.—Bp. Hall.
The varied talent and material riches of all nations should be made serviceable
to the interests of Christ’s kingdom, not for ostentation, for that would be ‘‘ to
make a calf of the treasure gotten out of Egypt.”

Lessons:—1. A great work necessitates corresponding forethought. 2. A great
work is made up of numberless little efforts. 3. Labour ts dignified by the greatness
of the end st seeks to accomplish. 4. The work of one generation ts completed by


another,
GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. * For Hiram was ever a 3%. Makes known the character and
lover of David.” ‘The influence of a worship of the true God. 4. Secures
good man. 1. Operates irrespective valuable friendships for his posterity.
of distance. 2. Attaches to himself Verse 1-5. Solomon’s purpose to


men of widely different creeds. build a house to the ai , 1. The


GaAP, VY;


HOMILRTIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





motive. Verses 3-5. Notambition, the
love of glory, the love of pomp; but
the divine will and the charge of his
father. Inevery weighty undertaking
ene must examine and be assured that
it do not proceed from selfish motives,
but is the good, acceptable, and perfect
will of God (Rom. xii. 2). 2. Zhe
time—rest and peace (verse 4). A
time of peace is the time for building
in general, but especially for building
houses of God, which are a memorial
of thanksgiving for the blessings of
peace and prosperity. 3. Zhe request
for assistance (verse 6). In important
undertakings which are agreeable to
the will of God and propose his honour,
we may and should not hesitate to
trust in Him who directs men’s hearts,
to ask others for aid and assistance.—
Lange.


Verse 4. National peace. 1. A
blessing from God to be gratefully
acknowledged. 2. The most favour-
able period for carrying out great
undertakings. 3. Gives greater weight
and influence in negotiating with other
nations. 4. Is conducive to the free
and healthy development of the best
qualities of the people. 5. Is an
emblematic representation of the uni-
versal peace to be.


— “So that there is neither adver-
sary.” The Vulgate hath it, Non est
Satan. We use to say, seldom lieth
the Devil dead in a ditch. He is the
¢roublous one, and delighteth tc
hinder anything that is good; but at
this time God had chained him up,
and Solomon had nothing to hinder
him. ‘The Lord is with you whilst
ye are with Him,” saith one prophet
(2 Chron. xv. 2). ‘And the Lord
will be with the good,” saith another
42 Chron. xix. 11)—TZrapp. Satan
doth all he can to hinder temple-work
(1 Thess. ii. 18; Zech. iii. 1); but
when he is bound (Rev. xx. 2) we
should be busy.


Verse 5. A dutiful son. 1. Che-
rishes the memory ; 2. Maintains the
reputation; and $8. Executes the
wishes of his deceased parent.


me 66 i purpose to build a house unto
6


the name of the Lord my God.” There
is no building of the ancient world
which has excited so much attention
since the time of its destruction, as
the temple which Solomon built at
Jerusalem, and its successor as rebuilt
by Herod. Its spoils were considered
worthy of forming the principal illus-
tration of one of the most beautiful of
Roman triumphal arches; and Justi-
nian’s highest architectural ambition
was, that he might surpass it.
Throughout the middle ages it in-
fluenced to a considerable degree the
forms of Christian churches, and its
peculiarities were the watchwords and
rallying points of all associations of
builders. Since the revival of learn-
ing in the sixteenth century, its ar-
rangements have employed the pens of
many learned antiquarians, and archi-
tects of several countries have taxed
their science in trying to reproduce its
forms. But it is not only to Christians
that the temple of Solomon is so inte-
resting; the whole Mohammedan
world look to it as the foundation of
all architectural knowledge, and the
Jews still recall its glories, and sigh
over their loss with a constant tenacity
unmatched by that of any other people
to any other building of the ancient
world.—Smith’s Dictionary.

— If it cannot come into the mind
of every one to build a house of wood
and stone unto the Lord, neverthcless,
every one to whom God has given wife
and children is in a condition to vow
and to build a house unto the Lord ovt
of living stones. I and my house will
serve the Lord (Josh. xxiv. 15).
Israel knew not how to plan great
buildings, especially works of art, but
they did know how to serve the living
God. Better to live without art than
without God in the world.—Lange.


Verse 6. The cedars of Lebanon
are the most celebrated of all the trees
of Scripture, the monarchs of the
vegetable kingdom. The prophets
refer tothem as emblems of greatness,
majesty, and splendour. Ezekiel
(chap. xxxi.) presents us with a most
graphic description of their grandeur
and beauty when he makes them


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GRAP, V.


rr re eee


representatives of the Assyrian power
and glory. The wood was used for
beams, pillars, boards, masts of ships,
and carved images. Not only did
David and Solomon import it for their
building purposes, but the king of
Assyria and Persia, and, perhaps, of
other nations, did the same. The
modern cedar of Lebanon is usually
from fifty to eighty feet high, and often
covers with its branches, when stand-
ing alone, a space the diameter of
which is greater than the height of
the tree. It is an evergreen, and its
leaves are produced in tufts. Its
branches, disposed in layers, spread
out horizontally, and form, as they
approach the top, a thick pyramidal
head. The profane writers represent
the cedar wood as specially noted for
its durability, and the cedar roof of
the great temple of Diana at Ephesus
is said to have lasted four hundred
years.


Ver. 7-12 (See also 2 Chron.
ii. 11-16). Hiram and Solomon.
1. Gratification. Hiram ‘‘ rejoiced
greatly ’’ when he heard the words of
King Solomon. This arose partly
from the love he bore to his father
David; we are alwaye attracted to
them who are loved by those whom we
love. ‘‘ For David’s sake”—the prin-
ciple of substitution is every where to be
seen in human life. An illustration
in support of the doctrine of justifica-
tion by faith. The gratification of
Hiram sprang also from a recognition
of Solomon’s wisdom: gratification in
ancther’s good. 2. Consideration (verse
8). The demand of Solomon was no
small on, and deserved consideration.
It involved, in all probability, a great
sacrifice on the part of the Tynans.
It is true that in the eleventh verse
we are told that “‘ Solomon gave,” &c.,
yet that was for his household, or
servants who were engaged in work
for Solomon’s own benefit. How
would this great sacrifice affect
Hiram’s subjects? Would they be
willing to give to the people of another
nation so much of their property, and
especially for the erection of a temple
for the worship of (to them) a strange


deity ? All these things Hiram must
have taken into consideration. Most
of the mischief of life is the result of
a want of thought and consideration.
“ Evil is wrought by want of thought,
as well as want of heart.” 2. Satisfac-
tion. ‘* All his desire’? (verse 10).
There was not one thing which Solo-
mon asked, which Hiram did not
grant. It is not right to ask or expect
unreasonable things. It is right to
grant reasonable requests, even if they
should occasion sacrifice ; unreasonable
requests should not be granted, even
if it should be more easy to do so than
torefuse. 4. Recognition. ‘‘Endued
with understanding” (2 Chron. ii. 13).
Knowledge, genius, skill, are of
heavenly birth, and to despise them is
to be guilty of asin. 5. Combination.
Solomon and Hiram were not inde-
pendent of each other. No one can serve
God properly in isolation: ‘‘ Two are
better far than one,” &c. Query,
Have Christians a right to remain
detached from the church of Christ ?
6. Distribution. (See 2 Chron. ii. 16.)
Each did the part allotted to him; the
result was success.—F. Wagstaff.


Ver. 7. It proves a noble heart
when a man, free from envy and
jealousy, sincerely praises and thanks
God for the gifts and blessings which
He grauts to others. When God
wishes well to a nation He bestows
upon it godly rulers; but when He
wills to chastise it He removes them.
Hiram praises God that He bestows
upon another people a wise monarch :
how much more should that people
itself thank God, since He bestowed
upon it a wise and pious king?

Verse 7-10. . The heathen king
Hiram. 1. His rejoicing over Solo-
mon and his undertaking. 2. His
praise of the God of Israel. 3. His
willingness to help. How far stands
this heathen above so many who call
themselves Christians !—Lange.

Verse 12. Kingly wisdom. 1. Is
a divine gift. 2. Is honourably em-
ployed in cultivating peaceful rela-
tions with neighbouring kingdoms,
3. Encourages a prosperous commerce,
4. Promotes the best caus iL


CHL, VL.





of the people. 5. Conserves and
extends the religious life of the
church.


— The league between Solomon
and Hiram, 1. Its object—a good
God-pleasing work begun in the ser-
vice of God. Like kings and nations,
even so individual men should unite
only for such purposes. 2. Its condi-
tions—each gave to the other accord-
ing to his desire; neither sought to
overreach the other; the compact was
based upon honesty and fairness, not
upon cunning and selfishness. Only
upon such compacts does the blessing
of God rest, for unjust possessions do
not prosper.— Lange.


Verse 18-18. The workmen at
the temple building. 1. Jsraelites.
Solomon acted not like Pharaoh (Exod.
ii. 23). He laid no insupportable
burdens upon his people, but permits
variety in the work, and Israel itself
undertakes it without murmurs or
complaints.
Israelites stand above so many Chris-
tian communities, who constantly
object or murmur when they are
about to undertake any labour for
their temple, or must needs bring a
sacrifice of mercy or time! 2. Hea-
then (Psa. xxii. 29). Jew and hea-
then together must build the temple
of God, according to divine decree—a
prophetic anticipation of fact as set


How high do those.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


el


forth Eph. ii. 14, 19-22; iii. 4-6.
The great preparations of Solomon
must naturally remind us of the far
greater preparations and arrangements
which God has made for the building
of the spiritual temple of the New
Testament. How many thousand
faithful labourers, how many wise
and good men, has he placed in every
known part of the world: how has he
furnished them with wisdom and
many other gifts of the Spirit, so that
the great work of the glorious build-
ing may be completed !—Lange.


Verse 17. ‘And they brought
costly stones to lay the foundation.’
Now is the foundation laid, and tne
walls rising of that glorious fabric
which all nations admired, and all
times have celebrated. Even those
stones which were laid in the base of
the building were not ragged and
rude, but hewn and costly: tte part
that lies covered with earth trom the
eyes of all beholders is no {ess pre-
sious than those that are miore con-
spicuous. God is not all for the eye:
He pleaseth Himself with the hidden
value of the living stones of His
spiritual temple. How many noble
graces of His servants have been
buried by obscurity! not discerned so
much as by their own eyes! which
yet as He gave, so He crowneth.
Hvpocrites 1egard nothing but show ;
God nothing but truth—By. Hail.


~——_ — —___


CHAPTER VI.


THE BUILDING OF SOLOMON’S TKMPFLE.


OnrricaL 4ND ExpLanaTory Nores.—Verse 1. Began to build the house of the Lord—
The chronological year is carefully noted, and no criticism supplies reason for changing the
figures here given. The Sept. reads 440 instead of 480, but is supported by no ancient MS.
The site was Mount Moriah (2 Chron. iii. 1). “The uneven rock of Moriah had to be
levelled, and the inequalities filled by immense substructions of great stones, costly stones, and
hewed stones” (ch. v. 17).—Stanley. Verse 2. Cubits—The ancient standard lengtk of a cubit
was one foot six inches English measure. The structure is separated into three mat» architec
tural divisions; “the house” (verse 2), “the porch” (verse 3), and “ the chambers round
about” (verse 5). The house J).D;7 was constructed of massive stone walls (verses 6, 7),


and included two compartments; the front is called (verse 5) “the temple of the honse*
337 >**T and the “oracle” (verse 5) in the rear, Yat Verse 4. Windows—Of
their re situation, and shape or sise no information is given, none therefore possessed


ab. is
Ba ee me ene
ih


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. VI.








With narrow lights—Probably lattices. Verse 5. Chambers round about—On three sides of
the ‘‘house ” there were chambers in three stories. Verse 11. And the word of the Lord came
to Solomon—i. ¢., during the erection of the sacred structure, in order to encourage the king in
his work, and remind him of the solemn conditions under which he reared a temple for Jehovah.
The word “if thou wilt” (verse 12) would warn the king and people against assuming that
God would be satisfied with a magnificeut building. He required spiritual consecration:
wit! out that in them He would never “dwell among’’ them (verse 13) in His manifested glory
over the mercy seat. Verse 15. The cedar was used for the inner walls and ceiling, the
cypress (‘‘fir’’) for the floor, Verse 16. The whole interna] space of the ‘‘ house’’ was
divided by a cedar wall from the floor to the ceiling, this partition consisting of folding doors,
drawn to and f.o by golden chains (verse 21); these two, apartments were respectively the
front, measuring forty cubits square, “ the holy place,” 935)), and the rear, measuring twenty


cubits square, “the most holy place,” “D"} Verse 18. Knops and open flowers—Bitter
gourds and opened buds. Verse 21. He made a partition by the chains of gold—i.e., he made
the partition to go upen golden cnains; or worked the partition by golden chains. Verse 22.
The whole house he overlaid with gold—i.e., the entire interior of the holy place, and the
altar, and the holy of holies. Verse 23. Two cherubim of olive tree—These D°3)95
were of a form which can only be conjectured by us. In Ezek. xli. and Rev. iv. further
descriptive indications are given ; but the cherub is represented variously, with one, two, and
then four various faces ; and with two, four, or six wings; probably colossal figurative images
of manifold and majestic life. “Standing on the highest step of created life, and uniting in
themselves the most perfect created life, they are the most perfect revelation of God and the
Divine life.”—Bahr. Olive wood was employed in their construction, as being most solid and
durable. Their outspread wings spanned the entire breadth of the temple from side to side,
meeting and touching in the centre of the holy “oracle” (verse 27). Verse 29. Carved all
the walls... within and without—lit., from within to without, Ws) D 2551
ie, from the inner oracle, the holy of holies, to the outer compartment, the holy place.
Verse 34. The two leaves of the one door were folding—lIt seems from this that the door
consisted of two wings, or halves, and these were made like leaves of the wild olive tree,
either longitudinally like leaves bound together, or the two leaves were the upper and lower
halves of each door wing. Verse 37. In the fourth year, &c.—The time occupied
in erecting the temple was from the second month of the fourth year to theeighth month of the
eleventh year of Solomon’s reign; #.¢., about seven years and a half; a short period for so
magnificent an edifice ; but the large number of workmen employed, and the vast preliminary
preparation of stones and timber which were used, explain the comparative speed with which
this temple of Jehovah’s glory was reared and finished.— W.. H. J.


——


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-38.


Tur TempPie or SOLOMON AN EmBLEM OF THE CHURCH oF GoD.


I. The Church of God, like the Temple of Solomon, rests on a solid
foundation. In forming the sub-basement of the gorgeous temple on Mount
Moriah huge stones were quarried, carefully chiselled and squared, and laid
deep in the earth with the utmost precision (chapter v. 17). Josephus
says: ‘The king laid the foundation of the temple very deep in the ground,
and the materials were strong stones, and such as would resist the force of time.
These were to unite themselves with the earth, and become a basis and sure
foundation to sustain with ease those vast superstructures and precious orna-
ments whose own weight was to be not less than the weight of those other high
and heavy buildings which the king designed to be very ornamental and
magnificent.” So the chureh of God is securely settled on a foundation of
truths that know no decay, and which shall survive the wreck and ruin of the
most solid structures of earth. In vain tempests rage, or earthquakes rumble,
or enemies assail—this foundation is immovable: the truth of God is unalterably


the same.


II. The Church of God, like the Temple of Solomon, is composed of a great
variety of materials, The stone, the woed, the gold, the brass, ect ar


OwAP, VI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








the textile fabrics used in the construction and beautifying of the material
temple point out the great diversity of moral character which now constitutes
the temple of God (Luke xiii. 29). The stars that glitter in the firmament vary
in magnitude, in motion, and in embellishments; but their light is one, and
they together form the same grand temple of the skies. Diversity in unity is
the leading characteristic in all the works of God.


III. The Church of God, like the Temple of Solomon, is gradual and silent
in its erection (verse 7.) When Bishop Heber read to a friend his poem on
Palestine, he was reminded that in describing the Temple of Solomon he had
made no reference to the silence in which the building proceeded. The poet
turned aside, and in a few minutes struck off the beautifully expressive line :—


“ Like some tall palm the noiseless fabric sprang.”


‘‘In order to reconcile the spirit of the new architecture as nearly as possible
with the letter of the old law (Deut. xxvii. 5, 6), the stones were hewn in the
quarries and placed with reverent silence one upon another without sound of
axe or hammer, and the temple rose as if by the gradual growth of nature.’
The work was not done in haste. Years had been spent in thoughtful and
substantial preparations; and more than seven years were occupied in the actual
building (verses 1, 37-38). Some of the greatest movements are for a time veiled
in obscurity until the right moment comes, when the obscurity vanishes, and the
vastness and splendour of the work elicit the wonder and admiration of the age.
We are familiar with this process in the natural world and in the progress of
individual history. The fruits of the earth do not reach maturity at a bound.
Slewly and in secret the bud is rounded, then comes the delicately-tinted
blossom, and afterwards the glossy, mellow fruit. The same may be said of the
growth of human character. It reaches the higher grade of mental and moral
excellence by slow and silent stages, and advances in the same ratio with the
fidelity and energy with which the man carries out the great plan of his life-
career. The plan and scope of our individual life is often obscure to us; but
as we endeavour to work out that part that is clear, the whole gradually becomes
more distinctly defined. And so in rearing the temple of God, the worb
proceeds deliberately and noiselessly. Such a method is an education anc
discipline to the church. The grandest truths of God are not comprehendec ’
suddenly by the weakness of man: inquiry is provoked and faith in the divine
wisdom and power encouraged.


IV. The Church of God, like the Temple of Solomon, is the scene of hal-
lowed worship. 1. There the truth of God ts deposited. ‘‘ The oracle he prepared
in the house within, to set there the ark of the covenant of the Lord ” (verse 19).
The ark contained the two tables of stone, inscribed with the ten commandments
which testified to the nature of the covenant existing between Jehovah and hia
people. Over the ark stretched the wings of the cherubim (verses 23-27). Thiz
was the very throne of Jehovah, who was said to ‘‘ dwell between the cherubim.’?
It was also called the Mercy Seat or Propitiatory, because Jehovah there
revealed himself, especially on the great day of atonement, as ‘“‘ God pardonin 8
iniquity, transgression, and sin.” Nor was it without the profoundest allusion
to the coming dispensation of the gospel tl at God's tnrone of Mercy covered and
hid the tables of the daw. The attitude uf the cherubim was significant of the
desire of angelic intelligences to learn th» gospel mysteries that were hidden in
the law. The more complete revelatior of the divine will is committed to the
custody of the Christian church, and it .s her functior to disseminate the know-
ledge of that will. Acquaintance wi:h divine truth is essential to intelligent
and aeceptabie Worsalp. 2. There waise is offered. The devout Israclite T6<
oiced e praise God in His sanctuary. Praise is the essence of all true worship,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAP. Vi.





Should he offered continually (Psalm xxxiv. 1). Should be intelligent and
fervid (1 Cor. xiv.15). Is oftenthe precursor of special blessing (compare 2 Chron.
v. 18, 14; Neh. viii. 6, 9, 12, 17, 25, 26; Acts xvi. 25, 26). Should always follow
the reception of blessing (Acts ii. 46, 47). The prophetic description of the
heavenly temple designates its walls ‘‘salvation,” and its gates “praise.” 3. There
the divine glory 1s manifested. The Temple of Solomon was the scene of revela-
tions of overpowering splendour (2 Chron. v. 14). The glory of Jehovah shone
forth from between the cherubim (Ps. lxxx. 1). The sanctuary has ever been
the place where the soul has beheld its brightest visions (Ps. lxiii. 2). The
church is the repository of heavenly mysteries and the academy where they are
explained. Here many a dark mind has been illumined, many a burdened soul
relieved, many a strange providence interpreted, many a tangled question
settled. The manifestation ef Jehovah to the soul fills it with solid satisfaction
and radiant joy.


V. The Church of God, like the Temple of Solomon, is the dwelling place
of Jehovah (verse 11-13). The presence of Jehovah is the charm, the life, and
the glory of the church. ‘‘ Methinks,” says Bishop Hall, ‘‘I see four temples
in this one. It is but one in matter, as the God that dwells in it is but one ;
three, yet more in resemblance, according to the division of them in whom it
pleases God to inhabit ; for wherever God dwells, there is His temple. O God!
Thou vouchsafest to dwell in the believing heart. The heaven of heavens is
not able to contain thee, and yet thou disdainest not to dwell in the strait
lodgings of our renewed souls. So, then, because God’s children are many,
and those many divided in respect of themselves, though united in their head,
therefore this temple, which is but one in collection, as God is one, is manifold
in the distribution, as the’saints are many; each man bearing about with hima
little shrine of this Infinite Majesty. This temple of stone, though most rich
and costly, yet what is it to the living temple of the Holy Ghost, which is our
body? What is the temple of this body of ours to the temple of Christ’s body,
which is His church? And what is the temple of God’s church en earth te
that which triumpheth gloriously in heaven?”


VI. The Church of God, like the Temple of Solomon, is permanent in its
reputation. Notwithstanding the chequered history of the Temple—the glory
of its prime, the humiliation of its decay; its disasters, its transformations, its
demolition—it retains to this day a conspicuous place in the veneration of the
wandering and scattered Israclites, and in the esteem and marvel of the re-
ligious world. Its memory will never perish : the material type has vanished ;
the spiritual antitype endures. So the church of God, alternating with the
ebb and flow of reverses and triumphs, is ever advancing more distinctly into
view, is gaining on the admiration and affection of the race, and is winning for
herself immortal renown.


Tue Borpine or tHE Heavewty Tempte (Verse 7).


The house built in this mysterious silence was the first temple at Jerusalem.
Of all earthly objects this, to the ancient Jew, was the most sacred and dear.
If he loved his God, it was the scene of his sweetest joys. If he loved Him
not, he Icved His temple. The men who wrote the Scriptures partook of this
fecling. Would they raise the believer in Jesus to his highest honour ?
‘« Know ye not,” says one, ‘that ye are the temple of God?” Would they
describe the church in her brightest glory? The beauty of Zion is made an
emblem of her; the church is represented as ‘‘an holy temple,” designed and
builded for its Creator’s praise. The subject before us is a view of the


aedeemed church as a temple now building by God in an eternal eae
@


GHAP, VI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


scm





I. The materials of which it is composed. And what are they? They
came to it from a very far country. Heaven itself could not supply them. In
themselves, they are worthless; but the means which have been employed to
remove them thither have made them costly, precious. They are an
innumerable multitude of sinners, brought from the fallen world on which we
are standing—wmaterials strange indeed to be employed in such a place, but
better calculated than any other to manifest the wisdom and the power of God.
They are well de:evibed as “stones made ready.” A stone, in its original
state, isrough and unshapen, incapable of separating itself from its native rock,
and, even if separated, unfit for the workman’s use. It may serve for the
wall of a mean and humble structure; but the builders of a temple will not
touch it. Now, this is precisely our natural state. It was once the state of all
the redeemed. But a blessed change at lengthtransformed them. These stones
were “made ready ”’ for a glorious building ; these senseless, mean, sinful beings
were prepared for heaven; and the work was God’s. He selected them, chose
them out from among their fellow-sinners, and then formed them a people for
himself. The exterior of the earthly temple at Jerusalem was of polished
marble; it glittered, we are told, with a snowy whiteness; and nothing was
seen within but cedar and gold; but as for this heavenly house, he calls its
walls ‘‘salvation,”’ and its gates ‘‘ praise.’? Here stands revealed that truth which
every view that we can take of heaven confirms, ‘‘ Ye must be born again.”
The stones were made ready, not in this house, but ‘ before they were brought
thither.” No axes or hammer were found there to prepare them. Nor are
any means of grace to be found beyond the skies. There no preacher warns,
no afflictions soften, no patient Saviour entreats, no spirit strives.


II. The foundation of this heavenly building. And how wonderfully
adapted is this to the materials of which it is composed! The sinners who
are now rejoicing in glory had another world once given them. It was a good,
a fair, and happy world: but they lost it; at least they lost its happiness, and
covered it with misery and death. They have now another kingdom bestowed
upon them; but will they not lose this also? The fallen angels once possessed
it; but though they ‘‘excel in strength,” they kept it not. How, then, shall
worms of the dust be safe in so high a station? The same omnipotent Being
who redeemed their souls from destruction, and formed them for heaven,
has covenanted, pledged Himself, to keep them secure for ever. Hence, if we
speak of them as a building, the Holy Spirit testifies of Him as the foundation
on which it stands. He is its chief “corner stone,” its ‘sure foundation ;”
the support, the security, the immovable resting place, of the whole fabric.
He sustains this relation now to the church on earth, and He is as ready in His
love, as able in ‘‘the greatness of His strength,” to bear the weight of the far
happier and wider church above. The convulsions that shake the worlds from
their places will not throw down a pillar, nor even loosen a stone, of this
mighty structure; the events of eternity will not move it. There is under-
neath it a living, an everlasting Rock, on which it is not only built, but to
which it is united. It is in it, become a part of it; so that it can no more
be tora from it than that Rock itself can be shivered and destroyed. “In
Jesus Christ,” says St. Paul, ‘all the building groweth.” ‘In Him ye also
are builded together.”


III, The manner in which this temple is built. 1. Like almost every
work of its great author, it is accomplished gradually. The first stone of it was
laid when righteous Abel found himself in glory; and since that period, another
and another has been added, according to the good pleasure ‘‘of Him whe
worketh all things after the council of His own will.” Sometimes it has risen
slowly i et other times it has advanced with wonderful rapidity; but at all


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; KINGS. GHsP. Vi,
ERS ete ett cetose tastiest eesti ere eneouenisoosinstacnininjocaaasmneoninioeng
times ‘‘ the God of all grace’”’ has been employed on it, so that the building has
increased in height and glory through all generations. In the present day the
Lord is hastening His work. He is “‘adding to His church daily such as shall
be saved ;” and after He has made them ready, He takes them from this His
earthly habitation, and fixes them, one after another, in their places, in His
fairer temple above.

2. This temple is building also constantly, steadily, surely—without
interruption or hindrance. Earthly structures do not proceed thus. Unfore-
seen difficulties embarrass, and unavoidable delays retard. Sometimes the
design of the builder is changed; at other times he is baffled in carrying it into
effect. It is not so, however, when God builds. His purposes never change;
they can never be frustrated. ‘‘ Before the mountains were brought forth,” He
formed the stupendous plan of His heavenly house. It was the work, the
masterpiece, of His infinite skill; and it contains ‘treasures of wisdom and
knowledge,”’ which angels cannot explore, nor eternity unfold. The directions
given for the Jewish temple were minute; but in this most glorious edifice
nothing was overlooked. It was ‘ordered in all things, and sure.”” We know
but little of the magnificence of this plan, but were it possible that it could be
yet more vast, we know that there is ability in Christ to perform it all. His
people, though more numerous than the stars of heaven, shall all “‘ be willing in
the day of His power ;” and as for His enemies, they can no more impede His
designs, than a host of worms could delay the rolling of the glorious sun.

8. Thus goes the building on, gradually, constantly; but yet, all this time,
silently. Turn again to the Jewish temple. ‘There was neither hammer, nor
axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the house while it was building” (verse 7).
This silence has something in it deeply mysterious. It could not have happened
from mere chance. It was undoubtedly enjoined by God, and intended to
convey some important truth. The question is, What is that truth? And
this is not easily answered. (1.) It intimates, the unnoticed and secret manner
tn which God carries on His purposes of grace in a tumultuous world. Whatis the
history of the world? A history of commotions. Its great men have seldom
moved, but confused noise and garments rolled in blood have marked their
footsteps. They have struggled till whole kingdoms have resounded with
their deeds, and this poor distracted earth has resembled ‘‘the troubled sea
when it cannot rest.” But God, in the midst of them, unperceived and
almost unthought of, is bringing His own purposes to pass; is making “‘ the
wrath of man to praise Him,’’ and the wickedness of man to do His will.
He presides in the storm. The waves thereof toss themselves, but He turns
every billow that swells to the furtherance of His own glory. (2.) The
silence in this temple may remind us of the secret operations of God in the souls
of men. Sometimes He turns their thought to Himself by the wind, the earth-
quake, or the fire, by means which are visible and striking; but it is generally
in ‘‘the still small voice” that He manifests Himself as the God of their salva-
tion. The seed is sown in their hearts, they know not when; ‘‘it groweth up
they know not how;”’ it brings forth fruit of which they themselves are often
unconscious. They are ripened for heaven in a way which they underst.ind not,
and then they die, and go there by a road which none can discover. ‘ihey lie
down in the grave, and allissilence. And what a peaceful world do they enter!
(8.) The stillness among the Jewish builders might be designed to remind us of
the peace of heaven. All there is unbroken calmness. Changes and afflictions
have ceased. The souls they so often assailed and wrought on, need them no
more. Ne ionger earthly, they are now heavenly and faultless, All is purity,
and perfection, and brightness. The workisdone; the instruments thereof are
cast aside; and not a sound is heard but the voice of overflowing blessedness,
and the songs of adoration, and the shout of praise. Now what may we lear
trom this part of our subject? Weare taught not to despair of the ord of God


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. Vi.





even én the darkest scenes. Look where we will, the state of the world is indeed
deplorable. But amid all its clamour and strifes, the work of God is going
gradually, surely, silently on. We hear the voice that is lifted up in the
streets, the conqueror’s shout, the wrangler’s curse, and the worldling’s song,
but we hear not the prayer of the broken heart, we see not the bended knee,
we mark not the spirit that in this cottager’s hut, or in that poor man’s dwel-
ling, bursts joyfully from its prison of clay, and is carried home by the angels
of God. We may learn here, too, the character of true religion. Nothing is more
common in some parts of our land than an ostentatious, noisy display of affected
piety. Beware of a love of display. Beware of a bold, forward, unmeaning
tongue, It will please, it will deceive, none but the simple; it will disgust all
the wise. Let your tempers, let your lives, speak with a louder voice than
your words. True religion is a silent, humble, retiring thing. It is as modest
as it is bold. It will come into public notice, rather than leave misery
unrelieved, ignorance unaided, or any duty undone; it will brave the opposition
and cruelty of a whole world, rather than sin; and then it will retire inte its
closet, and be seen only by its God.


IV. The great end for which this heavenly temple is raised. And this,
perhaps, is too often overlooked. The temple of Solomon was not built for
this single purpose, that it might be ‘‘a house of prayer for all nations.” It
was designed to be the habitation of God, the seat of His presence, and a
monument of His name. And this heavenly temple is erected for the same
purpose; not so much for the sake of the living and shining stones that
compose it, as for the honour of its great builder; not so much for the salvation
of the poor outcasts of the earth, as for the glory of the power, wisdom, and
grace of the great God of heaven. Brethren, will this blessedness be ours?
The edifice of which you have been hearing is not a creation of fancy, the
baseless fabric of a dream. It is as true that there are pardoned sinners joyful
in heaven, as that there are dying, suffering sinners within these walls. It
becomes a question, then, and a very solemn one, Shall we ever see this glorious
temple? Shall we ever form a part of it? To answer this question we must
ask another: Are our souls emblems of this great building? Are we now
‘the temples of the Holy Ghost ?”——“‘ habitations of God through the Spirit ?”
With such a weight of glory before us, shall we repine at the strokes which are
making us ready for its honours and happiness? What if the blows fall heavy
and fast? The sound of the axes and hammers will the sooner cease; if not,
the more honourable will be our place in the building, the more shall we show
forth in heaven the glory of the Lord.—C. Brapiey.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 28-28.


Tue Cuerver Emstematic or THE Hicuesr Forums or Liven.


Tue doctrine of the Cuzrusm™ has elicited a great variety of views a:
the ablest expositors. By some the symbol Las ben = to signify hee
the four covenants; or all the creatures; or the four cardinal virtues—justice
wisdom, fortitude, and temperance; or the four faculties in the soul—rational.
irascible, concupiscible, and conscience; or the four chief passions—joy grief,
hope, and fear; or the four great monarchies; or the four elements; or the
four evaigelists. Others have contended that the cherubic figures were
intended to symbolize the Divine Persons in the Sacred Trinity—the figure of
the lion being associated with the human form to indicate the promised incar-
natien ; or that they were glowing emblems of the character and modes of
8


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP., VE





operation of the Third Person of the Trinity ; or that the cherubim were no
other than holy angels, and the figures of them inthe Temple were symbolical
representations of their nature and ministry. Dr. Kitto argues in favour of the
opinion that the cherubim represent the whole multitude of the redeemed from
among men, not of any section of the church, nor of any class of its members,
but of the great body of believers in the Atonement throughout all ages, coun-
tries, and nations. ‘In the immediate application of this symbol,’’ he writes,
‘it may be said that, when the High Priest entered the Most Holy Place of
the Tabernacle, which he never did without the blood of atonement in his hands.
and looked upon the Ark of the Covenant with its cherubic appendages, with
the Shekinah enthroned between, he beheld, in fact, but a miniature model of
what he saw on a large scale without, when standing amidst the many
thousands of Israel abiding in their tents. Here were the cherubic symbole
resolved into their constituent multitudes; and over the host rested in calm
majesty the pillar of cloud, the visible external token of the Divine presence
permanently residing among the tribes. And even this was, as our further
light indicates, but a type of that which the Israelites could not see, and would
not like to have seen, of multitudes redeemed to God, out of all nations, by
the blood of atonement, forming the Church of God among whom He should
dwell.” For homiletical purposes, the more practical views entertained on this
subject may be combined by regarding the Cherubim as emblematio of the Highest
Forms of Life.


I. The cherubim were emblematic of life in general. A conspicuous and
extraordinary feature of the cherubim was their wings (v. 24, 27, compared
with Isa. vi. 2; Ezek. i. 23-25). Wings are suggestive of motion, and motion
of life. As the eye of the devout worshipper rested on the figures of the
cherubim carved on the cedar walls of the temple and on the folding doors of
the oracle (v. 29-35), he would be reminded that life in its lowest forms had
its origin from that Being before whose awful presence he bowed. The world
teems with evidences of life. The swarming insects, the merry, fluttering
birds, the gleaming, trembling waters with their countless inhabitants, display
to the observer that earth, air, and sea, are pregnant with vitality. Life at all
times and in any aspect is full of mystery; it eludes the keenest search and
puzzles the ablest analyst. The ancients recognized the Divine origin of life in
their story of Prometheus, who climbed the heavens by the assistance of Minerva,
and stole fire from the chariot of the sun, which he brought down in a hollow
stick or ferule to animate his man of clay. The genius of man may construct
mechanical marvels, but it cannot inspire life. All life depends for its origin
and perpetuity on the will of God. This seems the first and most elementary
truth suggested by the cherubic symbol, and its surrounding decorations of palm
tree and open flowers (v. 29).


II. The cherubim were emblematic of manifold forms of life. The
cherubim were composite images significant of all forms of creature life, and
symbols of the living presence of Jehovah in all departments of the animal
world, Their form is described in the opening vision of Ezekiel i. 5-11.
Each cherub had four faces and four wings, and every part of their appearance
seems to have been symbolical of some aspect or manifestation of Divine energy
and power in creature life. A Jewish proverb says, concerning the cherubim :
‘‘ Four are the highest things in the world: the lion amongst the wild beasts,
the bull amongst cattle, the eagle amongst birds, the man is over all, but God
is supreme.” God, on the other hand, is common to these four, and the life
uniting them, which they have not of themselves, but from Him who is the
source of all life—the Creator, and hence stands and is enthroned above them
all. The distribution and limitation of life are among the ee cics and


CHAY, VI, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
nn


wonders of creation. The character of each individual plant or animal is
decided and shaped by the measure of life-force it contains. This accounts for
the endless variety to be found in nature. But life, in whatever form or degree
manifested—whether is ‘he crawling worm or the majestic lion, in the slimy
frog or the stately bull, mm the humble sparrow or the soaring eagle, in the
sluggish octopus or in divinely-imaged man—has but one source in God. ‘This
idea of the cherubic figures, as representative of multiform life, was evident. 7
embodied in the mythologies of the ancients, though travestied by many a1
extravagance. We observe it in the Egyptian Sphinx, or Serapis, compounded
of the human and the quadruped; in the Persian Mithra, sun and bull; and
in the Roman Diana, horse, dog, end may


III. The cherubim were emblematic 0} the higher forms of spiritual life.
“These cherubim,” observes Bahr, ‘as beings standing on the highest step of
created life, and uniting in themselves the most perfect created life, are the
most perfect relation of God and the Divine life.” This life is enjoyed in a
very lofty degree by the angels, who are frequently represented in Scripture by
cherubic symbols; but the higher possibilities of the spiritual life are reserved
for those who accept, by faith, the blessings of the atonement, shadowed forth
by the teachings of that mercy-seat on which the cherubim bent their medi-
tative gaze. The first mention of the cherubim in Gen. iii. 24 is suggestive.
Man had fallen; transgression had brought its penalty: he was already subject
to the fear of death. Still, between him and this issue stood the tree of life;
he might still eat and live for ever. God saw his wretchedness, and in mercy
interposed; for what would life be but one protracted curse beneo** the frown
of the angry and unpropitiated Deity? A voice is hearc. sut r is from the
Shekinah; communion may be held, but it must be from between the
cherubim; a more spiritual economy is already inaugurated; man’s attention
is to be turned from the paradise of earth to the paradise of heaven ; sacrifices
already foreshadow the mediatorial atonement, and the first development of the
Spirit’s operations is seen in restraining man from impending evil, and con-
ducting him to a holier and more spiritual life. The cherubic symbols were
but figures borrowed from nature to represent great spiritual qualities, and
they were eminently adapted to do so. What better type could be found of
intelligence, wisdom, sympathy, and every generous and tender emotion, than
the face of man; of strength, courage, and magnanimity of spirit than the body
of the lion; of patient endurance, unwearied service, and meek submission to
the yoke, than the face of the ox; and of an active, fervent, soaring spirit, than
the wings of an eagle?


IV. The cherubim were emblematic of the operations of the Third
Person in the Trinity as the source of the highest kind of life. Some writers
have contended that the vision of cherubic splendour recorded in Ezekiel i.
symbolizes the offices and work of the Holy Spirit; that not more fully are the
glowing pages of Isaiah occupied with a delineation of Christ’s birth, life,
sufferings, death, and the glories which should follow, than is the sublime and
majestic scroll of Ezekiel, full from end to end of the illustration of that mighty
agency, t= “Loly Ghost, whether viewed under the emblems of fire, air, or water.
Th s.gament is ingeniously set forth in a lecture on the cherubic symbol,
delivered before the Young Men’s Christian Association in London, by
Dr. J. B. Melson, in summarizing which he observes, ‘‘ We have seen thig
symbol restraining our first parents in paradise; witnessing to the acceptance of
the sacrifice of Abel; assuring Abraham of his inheritance in Mamre; connected
with the commissioning of Moses, in which we have a type of that commission
which every faithful minister of God mw :st receive; guiding, defending, and
oes the children of Israel in ‘kei: wenderings; and showing forth the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. Chab, 2,





a


very method in which the Spirit still guides, defends, and comforts God’s
Israel in our day. We have entered Solomon’s temple, and seen it beautifying
the place of the Divine residence with its infoldings and its unfoldings until the
priests could uo longer minister by reason of the glory. We have seen the
same symbol mysteriously connected with the revelation of God’s will to Ezekiel,
Daniel, and Isaiah, and with the glowing representations of regenerating,
quickening, and sanctifying energy with which the pages of the prophet of
Chebar abound. Daniel saw the glory in its cherubic chariot ascending into
heaven, the shepherds beheld it returning again to earth. This glory conducts
the wise men to Bethlehem, and clothes the top of Tabor with its fleecy light;
it receives the conqueror as he rises triumphant, enriched with the spoils of
death and of hell. The glory carries him up into heaven from the heights of
Olivet, and descends in flame upon the heads of the disciples at Jerusalem,
filling the room where they were sitting.” In this view, the work of the Holy
Spirit is brought more vividly and constantly before the mind than a cursory
student of Scripture would observe ; it localises and embodies the spiritual and
unseen ; it helps to differentiate the subtlest influences; it strengthens faith, and
stimulates the soul to seek after a more intensely spiritual life.


Lessons.—1. It 1s the tendency of all life to assume some visible form
2. Great spiritual truths are strikingly represented by well-known material symbola.
le he spiritual life of the believer is @ grander reality than tts most imposing

ema.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1 and88. Why was the time
ter building the Temple so exactly
specified? 1. Because tt was a most
important event to Israel. It points to
the finul aim of the leading out of
Egypt, the land of bondage. The
time of the wandering, of unrest,
and of battle, is over; Israel is in
possession of the whole of the pro-
mised land; the time of the king-
dom of peace is come. The temple is
a memorial of the truth and mercy of
God, who ever fulfils his promises,
albeit after many long years (Ex. iii.
17), supplies all wants, and governs
things excellently. The word of the
Lord is sure. After long wandering,
after many a cross, many 4 tribulation
and trouble, comes the promised time
of peace; the Lord helps His people,
even as He preserves every single being
unto His heavenly kingdom (2 Tim. iv.
18). 2. Because it is a world-historical
event. The temple of Solomon is the first
and ouly one in the whole ancient world
which was erected to the one, true,
and living God. Darkness covered the
earth, and gross darkness the people
(Is. ix. 2). Heathendom had here and


there greater temples, but they were
the abodes of darkness: this temple is
the abode of light and life; from it
light breaks forth over all nations
(Is. ii. 8; Jer. iti, 7; Mic: iv. 2).
What avails the greatest, most glorious
temple, if darkness instead of light
proceeds from it, and, amid all the
prayers and praises, the knowledge of
the living God is wanting?


Verse 2. The exceeding glory and
pomp of the temple. 1. Zhe sdea to
which st bore witness. No house, no
palace in Israel compared, for splen-
dour and glory, with the house of God.
Everything in the shape of costly
material and treasure which the age
permitted, all toil and art were lavished
upon it. To the Most High were
given the noblest and dearest of men’s
possessions. How many princes, how
many nations, how many cities build
gorgeous palaces, and adorn with gold
and all treasures the buildings de-
signed to minister to the pride of the
eyes, the lust of the flesh, and to a
haughty manner of life; but yet have
no money, n0 sacrifice, for eee

8


GHAP. VI.





which either are entirely wanting, or
are poor and miserable in appearance !
2. The purpose which tt served. Its
magnificence has no empty, dead show,
to dazzle and intoxicate the senses;
everything was full of meaning, and
referred to higher, Divine things; it
was not meant to render sensual man
still more sensual, but to draw him
nearer to the supersensuous, and thus
to elevate him. Empty parade is un-
seemly for any house of God; rather
must everything which wealth and art
can accomplish serve to raise the heart
and mind to God, so that each one
shall say, This is none other but the
house of God, and this is the gate of
heaven (Gen. xxviii. 17).—Lange.

— The same rule that skilful carvers
observe in cutting out the perfect
statue of a man, that the height be
thrice the breadth, and the breadth
one-third of the height, was likewise
duly observed in the fabric of the tem-
ple, whose length was double to the
height and treble to the breadth, as
being sixty cubits long, thirty high,
and twenty broad. How exquisite a
symmetry hast thou ordained, O God,
betwixt the faithful heart and thy
church on earth, with that in heaven!
How accurate in each of these, in all
their powers and parts, compared with
others! So hath God ordered the be-
lieving soul that it hath neither too
much shortness of grace, nor too much
height of conceit, nor too much breadth
of passion; so hath He ordered His
visible church, that there is a neces-
sary inequality without any dispropor-
tion, a height of government, a length
of extent, a breadth of jurisdiction,
duly answerable to each other: so
hath He ordered His triumphant
church above, that it hath a length
of eternity, answered with a height of
deal and a breadth of incompre-

ensible glory.—By. Hall.


Verses 8, 16, 17. As the temple
hath three distinctions of rooms—the
porch, the holy place, and the holy of
holies, so is each of them answered
spiritually. In the porch we find the
regenerate soul entering into the
blessed society of the church; in

88


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





the holy place the communion of the
true visible church on earth selected
from the world; in the holy of holies,
whereinto the high priest entered
once a year, the glorious heaven into
which our true High Priest, Christ
Jesus, entered once for all to make an
atonement betwixt God and man.—
Bp. Hall.


Verse 5. All round there was an
additional construction of three stories,
the foundation of which leant upon
the outer wall of the house, which, on
this account, grew narrower every
sturey, so that the rafters of the circuit
leant upon it without being let into
the wall. Thus was.the temple, like the
heart, concealed, its walls with their
graceful proportions, as they rose to-
wards heaven, becoming lighter and
finer ; upon them, however, rested the
euter building which belonged to
them, as the whole being rests upon
the heart filled with faith.


Verse 7 The greatest works
often proceed in deepest silence.
1. Examples in the motion of the
celestial bodies, the force of gravition,
the flow of the tides, the growth of
vegetation. 2. Noise and demonstra
tiveness are no evidence of real pro-
gress. 8. The most impressive feature
in all Divine operations is their silence.
4. The voiceless testimony of the
church before the world is often irre-
sistibly effective.

— The temple is framed in Lebanon,
and set upon Zion. Neither hammer
nor axe was heard in that holy struc-
ture. There was nothing but noise in
Lebanon; nothing in Zion but silence
and peace. Whatever tumults are
abroad, it is fit there should be all
quietness and sweet concord in the
church. O God, that the axes of
schism, or the hammers of furious con-
tentions, should be heard within thy
sanctuary! Thine house is not built
with blows, with blows it is beaten
down. O knit the hearts of thy ser-
vants together in the unity of the
spirit and the bond of peace, that we
mind and speak the same things, that
thou who art the God of peace mayest


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. Wi.


agg


take pleasure to dwell under the
quiet. roof of our hearts!—Bp. Hall.

— The building of the Temple em-
blematic of the building up of Chris-
tian character. The erection of the
Temple was a type of the building up
of Cliristian character—an emblem of
the manner in which the Spirit of God
builds up the minds of men in holi-
ness. If we attempt to dismiss en-
tirely from our thoughts all things
that are material, we shall not find it
easy, nor, perhaps, possible, to realise
the ileas for which they stand. For
instance, take the case of sacrifice:
turn away your mind entirely from
any material, visible sacrifice, and can
you tell what a sacrifice is—a sacrifice
of God? Then, again, dismiss from
your mind the material image of a
temple, and could a Jew, can you,
fully grasp the thought of God dwell-
ing in man—a mind in a mind, intel-
lect in intellect, reason in reason, will
in will?


I. The erection of the Temple was
God’s work. It was built by His
express direction, and He connected
Himself with it in a manner not com-
mon to any place on earth. Men were
sometimes inspired to speak and some-
times to act; and under the guidance
of this inspiration the Temple was
erected, and God Himself condescended
to preside over it in a special manner.
Thus it was the erection of God Him-
self, and was intended as a book in
which the Jews might read high and
Divine principles.

Now leave the Temple, and look at
the Christian, and there learn that
God is at the foundation of Christian
character—that the erection, the pro-
gress, the completion of the Christian
character, and its consummation in
heaven, is an idea and work of God.
The Temple answered political and
civil ends; but it also shadowed forth
some great spiritual truth; and what
was that truth? That the great God
means to make living souls His dwell-
ing place, intends to live with men, and
that there is such a thing as the union
of the Spirit of God with the Spirit of
man And hence the soul of man is


called in the New Testament “a living
temple.”


II. The Temple, as an emblem of
the Christian, was the place of
mercy, the place of law, the place of
worship. 1. The Temple was a place
of mercy. There was erected a throne
of mercy ; there mercy was, as it were,
localized. God’s design was, to yive
man a clear conception of mercy.
Mercy was in the heavens, mercy was
in the seasons, mercy breathed in all
things around the Jewish people; but
they did not recognise it, they did not
realize it. In the Temple there was
a bright emblem of mercy—mercy in
a state of incarnation. But it is only
a Christian that has a clear idea of
mercy as a living principle. Men
in general do not feel their need of
mercy at all. The Christian knows
his need of it, and knows the reality
of mercy as an attribute of God. As
soon as the need of mercy becomes a
living idea in the heart, it exerts a
softening influence, it produces humi-
lity. It is possible to ¢alk of mercy,
and be proud, hatefully proud; but as
soon as the need of mercy becomes a
genuine operative principle, it makes
the soul deeply, sweetly humble. It
produces peace—peace between man’s
intellect and truth, between man’s
will and holiness, peace bet ween man’s
desires and God’s government. It is
with the Christian as with the Temple.
The glory of the Temple was within.
It was externally glorious, but its true
glory was the Shekinah, the indwell-
ing of the Spirit of God. 2. The
Temple was a place of law. The law
was deposited in the ark, and it re-
mained there until the wars with
Titus. But leaving the history of the
written law, turn to the indwelling of
law in the heart of the Christian.
Look at the significant words of in-
spiration—“ This is the covenant I
will make with thee, saiih the Lord,
I will put my laws in their minds, and
write them in their hearts.” 3. Zhe
Temple was a place for worship.
Worship is internal. In the Temple
there was communion with the Divine
presence; there was the say of the

8


GHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Shekinah, there was the sacrifice
offered, there the incense ascended.
Have you seen or realized the Being
you worship? God has made all
things, as it were, double. There are
dualities everywhere. We know that
if the eye sees, it has external objects
suited to its operation; if the ear
hears, it has sounds to meet its capa-
city. Now, if we were simply mat-
ter, this would be all; but we are
spirit, and there is something to
answer to spirit. It is God! And
by the Temple was taught the glorious
truth that the Divine Spirit and human
souls come together. The great work
of Christ is to carry, in a living man-
ner, the presence of God down into the
human heart; to transfuse God’s mind
into the mind of man. It is repelling,
it is resisting this, that will ruin men.
This, then, is the main idea sug-
gested, that the consecration of man as
a temple is the work of God.


III. The erection of the Temple
was a noiseless work. ‘There was
neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool
of iron heard in the house while it was
in building.” Oh! the severity, the
stillness, the quietness, of the growing
up of this extraordinary edifice! The
kingdom of God cometh not with ob-
servation. ‘‘A bruised reed will
He not break; He shall not lift up
nor cry, nor cause His voice to be
heard in the street.”” The building
up of the human soul as a temple is a
quiet, noiseless work. There is very
little religion where there is much
bustle, very little religion where there
is much ostentation. We shall not
suffer by giving a little more time to
deep, quiet, severe thinking, to secret
communion with the unseen; to the
inner unostentatious work of heart
worship. This fellowship with our-
selves and the indwelling Spirit of
God is the essence of true religion,
and the true idea of a spiritual temple.
—Caleb Morris.


Verses 11-13, The soul as the
home of God. 1. Is garnished with
moral and spiritual virtues. 2. Isde-
signed as a permanent dwelling (verse
13). 3. Is clustered with the memo-

90


ries of happy fellowships. 4. Is re-
tained by continued obedience: dis-
obedience involves desertion.


Verses 18, 22. ‘There was no
stone seen; the whole house he over-
laid with gold.” The strength and
beauty of moral character. 1. Moral
character must be firmly based on ¢
foundation of imperishable truth. 2. A
strong, vigorous character is often hid
under the veil of the brightest and
tenderest graces. 8. Religion in its
higher development is essentially
aesthetical. 4. The church of God
combines and exhibits every moral]
excellence. ‘‘Strength and beauty
are in His sanctuary.”


Verse 20. The construction of the
Most Holy Placein the form of a perfect
cube had, doubtless, its typical signifi-
cance. It was an appropriate symbol of
perfection. The solid cube, in what-
ever way it is set, is always upright, a
perfect square on every side, and all
sides and angles corresponding per-
fectly to each other. So this form of
the inner sanctuary indicated that the
Holy One of Israel dwelleth in per-
fection.


Verse 88. ‘Solomon began,” says
Wordsworth, ‘to build the temple in
the flower-month, and finished the
building in the fruit month. Such is
the life of the church, and of every
believer who is a temple of the Spirit.
It begins in flowers, but must end in
fruit. The harvest is the end of the
world.”

— The temple of Solomon was not
distinguished, like the temples of
Thebes, for gigantic vastness, for it
was not a very large structure, but
rather for its harmonious proportions,
its beauty and completeness of work-
manship, and the excessive costliness
of its materials. And the church,
the spiritual house of the living God,
is to be specially distinguished for the
excellency and completeness of tho
elect and precious stones which are
required to build it; for these are
not the many that goin the broad way
to destruction, but the comparatively
few that find the way of life (Matt,
vii. 18, 14).— Whedon.


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY : KINGS. OBAP. VZB.





CHAPTER VIL.


THE SPLENDOUR OF SOLOMON'S BUILDINGS.


CriricaL AND Expianatory Nores.—Verse 1. Solomon was building his own house
thirteen years—Because no previous building preparations had been made for the palace
as for the temple, and there was less urgency about the king’s house than that God’s Holy
Place should be prepared wherein He and His people might meet; and Solomon was more
zealous in his work for Jehovah than for himself. Verse 2. He built also, &c. Lange,
Michaelis, and others regard this “ house of the forest of Lebanon” as the first of the various
edifices composing the palace, not a separate summer residence on Lebanon. Probably his own
house, this house of the forest of Lebanon, and the house for Pharoah’s daughter, were
sectional structures, unitedly forming one grand royal abode. Called the “ house of the forest
of Lebanon” on account of rows of cedar trees built together in its construction. It seems to
have been an armoury (1 Kings x. 16, 17; Isaiah xxii. 8). Its form was apparently an open
court, surrounded by colonnade and galleries; ‘the inner surface was used, no doubt, for
assemblies of warriors, the body guard,” &c. (Lange). Verse 6. A porch of pillars—This
was the second division of the palatial edifice, and formed the Court of Judgment; in the
rear of the porch of pillars, which was an extended colonnade, was located this ‘‘ porch of
judgment” (verse 7), where the ‘‘throne” stood. Verse 8. Solomon made also a

ouse for Pharaoh’s daughter ”—This, according to Eastern custom, would be not a building
distinct from the king’s house, but a rear part of it, although a structure complete in itself.
Jamieson arranges this complex edifice thus: the building itself was oblong, consisting of
two square courts, flanking a large oblong hall which formed the centre, and was properly the
house of the forest of Lebanon, bemg the part where were the cedar pillars of this hall, In
front was the porch of judgment. On the one side this large hall was the king’s house; on
the other, the royal apartments for Pharaoh’s daughter. Verse 18, Fetched Hiram out of
Tyre—He seems to have been eminent among the artists in metals for which Tyre and
Pheenicia were then renowned. ‘This man (of like name with the king) is designated in
2 Chronicles ii. 18, by the title of honour JX —4.c., master, teacher, father (Keil). His
genius was a natural gift of God (verse 14). Note the difference between this phrase
concerning Hiram, “ filled with wisdom,” &c., and the statement as to the supernatural endow-
ments of Bezaleel (Exod. xxxi. 8), “ filled with the Spirit of God, in wisdom,” &c. Verse 15.
Pillars of brass eighteen cubits high—These columns were 32 feet long, without
the capitals, and 7 feet in diameter; the metal was about 34 inches thicl Jer. lii. 21), and the
total weight of each pillar must have been about 18 tons. The capitals were over 8 feet


high (verse 16), making a total height of 41 feet. Verse 21. Jachin and Boaz—}')
means established (2 Chron. xvii, 5) ; while wa is a compound of y power, strength,


and $3; in him—és., in God; ergo, strong in Him (Isa, xlv. 24). Verse 23. Molten
sea” 5A}; colossal brazen basin 174 feet in diameter, over 8 feet im depth, capable of
Tr


i Nearly 20,000 gallons of water. Verse 25. Stood upon twelve oxen—of
eae 81Z€ a acy alles to the Assyrian bulls; for the total combined weight
of the vessel and water would be some 100 tons. Verse 40. Lavers, for carrying away
water; shovels, for removing ashes; basins for receiving the blood of sacrifices,


Verse 45. Bright brass — DDD, polished after the casting; brilliant, therefore.
So


i he plain of Jordan . . . between Succoth and Zarthan—Here the
Nees ihe os Brel mart.  Succoth,” close by the mouth of the Jabbok ; ‘“ Zarthan ”’
or Zaretan), whose site is uncertain, except that it was proximate to the Jordan, was near by
Sa The distance from Jerusalem was considerable; but all the noxious smoke and
vapours of the foundry would thereby be avoided; although the clay and sand found there
doubtless determined the choice of the spot. Verse 47. Solomon left all the vessels—The
word unweighed is wisely inverted in the translation, for mm. means he let them be; the


eat that their weight was not computed, Verse 48. And Solomon made,
Sees Hien ae equally “ skilful to work in gold.” (2 Chron, ii. 14), it is most probable
that the king entrusted this work also tohim. Verse 61. The things pele ri his fairer
had dedicated—From 1 Chron. xxii. 14-16, xxix 2 sg., we find that David’s store of go me
silver, &c., was vast, including the valuable trophies of his victories (of. 2 Sam. viii. 7, Hin j
1 Chron. xviii. 7, 10, 11), and his own private treasures (1 Chron, xxviii. wold). So dpe an
was the supply of precious metal that, although yy quantity used for the temple was


store in reserve.—W. H. J.
jmmense, there was a large in § 91


OaaP. VIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


| SS Sh ES





HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-13.
fer Erarcat Siennncance or tHE Patace or Sotomo.


The group of buildings described in these verses constituted one and the same
royal palace. It included several edifices within itself. The principal one
was the great hall of state, encased in cedar, and so called “‘ the House of the
Forest of Lebanon ’’(verse 2). In front of it was reared a pillared portico
(verse 6). Between this portico and that part of the palace which was set apart
for the royal residence was a cedar porch of exquisite proportions and surpassing
beauty, called the Porch of Judgment (verse 7). Adjoining these erections,
separated by an inner court, was the residence of the king; and beyond this,
and connected with it, was the house of his Egyptian consort, built after the
gorgeous pattern of the porch of cedar (verse 8). This magnificent pile of
buildings was surrounded with a spacious court, decorated with a colonnade
of stones and cedar (verse 12). The palace of Solomon was thirteen years in
building: the Temple of the Lord was erected in seven. We should ever
manifest more zeal and eagerness in prosecuting the work of God than in
making provision for our material comfort. The results of Christian work
remain when the most imposing fabrics of human pride and luxury have
crumbled into ruin. The palace of Solomon suggests the following reflections.


I. That religion is not inimical to, but promotive of, the highest art.
The iconoclasm that would destroy every vestige of a work of art, because of
its possible abuse in matters religious, is the fruit of the reckless barbarism of a
barbarousage. In all great reforms, whether in the Church or in the State, it is
difficult to prevent excesses: there are always some wild extremists who com-
mit enormities that bring discredit upon the best of causes. Religion has often
suffered in reputation by the rude vandalism of a few; and the Church of God
has been held up to scorn as the enemy of the arts and sciences. And yet it is
evident to the thoughtful that religion has ever been the foster-mother of true
genius: she inspires the noblest and purest conceptions, and supplies the most
exalted themes for the pen, the pencil, or the chisel. In all ages, whatever
has been grandest in architecture, most exquisite in painting, most chaste
in statuary, and most celebrated in song, may be traced to the influence of the
religious spirit. It is only religion that saves the arts and sciences from
becoming the ministrants of the most revolting vices.


II. That it is the duty of the king to defend and maintain the best
interests of his people. In the royal palace were deposited the weapons of
war, the targets and shields of beaten gold (ch. x. 16,17). Thus was set
forth the mission of the king against his enemies—his protecting war-strength,
In the Porch of Pillars, sometimes called the Tower of David—apparently
hung over the walls outside, as was the custom in many warlike cities, were a
thousand golden shields, which gave the whole palace the name of the Armoury
“‘With a splendour that outshone any like fortress, the tower with these
golden targets glittered far off in the sunshine like the tall neck, as it was
thought, of a beautiful bride, decked out after the manner of the East, with
strings of golden coins. Five hundred of them were made by Solomon’s orders
for the royal guard; but the most interesting were the older five hundred which
David had carried off in his Syrian wars from the guard of Hadadezer, ag
trophies of arms and ornaments, in which the Syrians specially excelled. It
was these which, being regarded as spoils won in a sacred cause, gave, in all
probability, occasion to the expression ‘the shtelde of the earth belong unte


HOMISETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. Vil
Se rr ee ee


God.’” When the Israelites first desired a king, one important purpose was
that he might go out before them and fight their battles (1 Sam. viii. 20): and
they would be reminded of this every time they gazed upon the glittering
shields of the royal armoury. A good monarch makes the best welfare of his
people his constant study; and he is ever ready to protect them from the
assaults and ravages of the foe. William the Silent, of Holland, devoted all
his treasures and talents with such self-denying bravery in defending and
delivering his oppressed countrymen, that ‘‘as long as he lived, he was the
pening star of a brave nation; and when he died, the little children cried in the
streets,


III, That the administration of justice is an essential part of good
government, The most attractive portion of the palace of Solomon was the
Porch of Judgment, in the interior of which the throne was erected. It repre-
sented the royal elevation and majesty, and signified the vocation of the king
in judging and ruling his subjects. ‘This porch,” writes Stanley, ‘‘was the
gem and centre of the whole empire, and was so much thought of that a similar
likeness to it was erected in another part of the royal precinct for the queen.
Within the porch itself was to be seen the king in state. On a throne of ivory
brought from Africa or India, the throne of many an Arabian legend, the kings
of Judah were solemnly seated on the day of their accession. From its lofty
seat, and under that high gateway, Solomon and his successors after him de-
livered their solemn judgments. That porch, or gate of justice, still kept
alive the likeness of the old patriarchal custom of sitting in judgment at the
gate; exactly as the gate of justice still recalls it to us at Granada, and the Sub-
lime Porte—the Lofty Gate at Constantinople. He sat on the back of a golden
bull, its head turned over its shoulder, probably the ox or bull of Ephraim;
under his feet, on each side of the steps, were six golden lions, probably the
lions of Judah. This was the seat of judgment. This was the throne of the
house of David.” Where justice is perverted, the nation suffers ; government ia
impossible, and the people become the victims of a sateless avarice, or a cruel
tyranny. ‘‘ The king by judgment establisheth the land ;”’ but when “ the law
is slacked and judgment doth never go forth,” disorder and anarchy ensue.


IV. That magnificence in architecture is a substantial evidence of
national prosperity and culture. Temporal aggrandisement was an important
element in the blessing that Jehovah had promised the Jews on condition of their
obedience. In consequence of their own sins, they had tasted the bitterness of
the warning, but not till now did they attain the full glory of the promise. To
preclude the possibility of the objection being raised that the motive of
reward had not been tried in God’s dealings with His people, they are favoured
for a brief period with the material splendour and religious progress of the
era of Solomon. Their public buildings, in temple, palace, and fortresses ; their
enriching and extended commerce; their splendid apparel and sumptuous
banquets, were unmistakable indications of the wealth, luxury, and refine-
ment of thetimes. ‘‘ Kings and princes cannot, on account of their high position,
choose to live in ordinary houses, or yet in poor hovels; it is simply folly to
reproach them when they build castles for themselves. The building of palaces
becomes sinful and blameable only when they are built for the gratification of
ostentation and insolence, or at the expense of a poor and oppressed people.”


Y. That regal and national aggrandisement is fraught with many
dangers. 1. Zhere 6s the danger of unguarded pride. Few could bear the
popularity which Solomon reached, or resist the temptations to which he was
exposed. All that the world most highly prizes were at his disposal-—wealth,
power, beauty, knowledge. Ho is not the first whose brain has been turned by

93


GHAP, VII. HOUILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





a plethora of wordly abundance. ‘Great riches,’’ says Lo d Bacon, “have sold
more men than ever they have bought out.” 2. There is the danger of an
enfeebling indulgence. At the bottom of every sparkling cup of pleasure is the
bitter dreg—satiety. To revel in the voluptuousness and sin which unlimited
wealth may furnish, destroys the very capacity forenjoyment. The pleasure is
still pursued long after it has ceased to be a pleasure ; and the unsatisfied votary
has to moan

O! pleasures past, what are ye now,

But thorns about my bleeding brow ;

Spectres that hover o’er my brain,

And agpravate and mock my pain!


8. There is the danger of a disastrous and trreparable decay. It is sad to observe
amid the gayest bloom of national or individual life the withering leaves of
approaching and inevitable decline. At the brightest noonday of Solomon’s
glory the coming shadow of his fall was already discernible. Worldly
prosperity is ‘‘like a river that beareth up things light, and drowneth things
weighty and solid.” Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.


Lessons :—1. The most imposing scene of earthly greatness 1s but temporary tn
tts duration. 2. The greater the treasures of a nation, the greater ts the responst-
bility of the ruler. 3. Thereligious life of @ nation +s the most precious possession,
and in tts results the most enduring.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 18—61.


Retteron anp Arr.


Solomon determined to offer the best to God—the best in material, the best
in form. He desired to have real works of art, and he so little despised art as
the handmaid of religion, that he even sent for a heathen and foreign artist.
In his wisdom, he regarded the command, ‘‘ Thou shalt not make to thyself any
graven image,” not as the prohibition of every species of religious sculpture. As
Hiram’s mother was an Israelite, we may well surmise that he was not unac-
quainted with the God whom his mother worshipped, and, therefore, would be
better able than all other Tyrian artists to enter into the right spirit and meaning
of the works which Solomon entrusted to him. The elaborate decoration of the
Temple, and the exquisite finish of its furniture as detailed in these verses,
suggest several reflections as to the relation of Religion and Art.


I. Art imbibes its best inspirations from religion. Hiram ‘was filled
with wisdom and understanding, and cunning to work all works in brass”
(verse 14). The genius of art is a divine endowment. The skill of Hiram is
referred to nearly in the same terms as that of Bezaleel (Exod. xxxi. 3); but
in the case of the latter it was a supernatural inspiration for a special purpose,
while in the case of Hiram it was a natural gift of God. Like all true genius,
it possessed the soul of the artificer with an irrepressible passion for his particular
work. He was filled with wisdom and ingenuity to work. It is a dangerous,
and often fatal infatuation, when a man dreams he is a genius, and does nothing
more but dream. The greatest genius is he who has the greatest capacity for
hard work, and who finds his greatest pleasure in it. The artist ia ever an
enthusiast. When Macready acted Romeo for the first time—being then only
sixteen years of age—his success was so great that a host of friends crowded
round him at the close, and shook his hand with fervent congratulations, A
lady asked him, ‘‘ Well, sir, how do you feel now?” and he, with a boyish

94


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, Vii.
a ee


ingenuousness, answered—“ I feel as if I should like to act it all over again !”
Hey sos more pure and lofty should be the enthusiasm of the Christian


II. Art fulfils its loftiest mission when it is consecrated to religious uses,
All this wealth of metal and of talent was employed in building and embel-
lishing the Temple of Jehovah. It is a sad and pitiful sight to see the leaders
of art and science lending their great powers in antagonism to religion, And
yet it is reassuring to know that the greatest minds, and those who have had
the greatest influence in moulding the best thoughts of the world, have ever
been among the most devout. Copernicus, whose system of the universe over-
threw the delusion of many thousand years, was no enemy of religion. His
tomb bears the following characteristic inscription :—


“T crave not the grace which Paul received,
Nor the favours with which Thou didst indulge Peter;
That alone which Thou bestowedst upon the thief on the cross,
That alone du I entreat.”


Kepler, Newton, and many others who were giants in the realm of science,
were humble and zealous Christians. Genius gains its most entrancing visions,
glitters with its brightest radiance, wins its most resplendent victories, and
scatters its choicest blessings, when it devotes its best powers to expound and
adorn religion.


III. Religion combines what is beautiful in art with all that is vigorous
and substantial in principle. The Temple was firmly founded, massive and
durable in structure, graceful and brilliant in ornamentation. The great
Creator has so exquisitely proportioned His external dwelling-place that there
is everything about it to delight the eye and gratify and clevate the taste. He
has stamped upon it all the glory of form, irradiated it with all the brilliance
and softness of colour, and finely attuned it to all the rapture and harmony
of sound. The masterpiece of the most gifted artist is but a dim, imperfect
reflection of the native, peerless beauty of the universe. Jehovah is said to
“clothe Himself with light as with a garment;’? and what are all His created
works but a garment, jewelled with stars, embroidered with constellations, and
heavy with the riches of all worlds? The Being whose self-created Temple is
so full of grandeur and beauty is worthy of the most gorgeous sanctuary that
the hand of man can fashion. The ocean loses none of its power because it is
silvered with fretted foam, or sparkling with the golden sheen of reflected sun-
beams. The mountain is not less majestic because it is belted with the feathery-
branched pines, garlanded with slender wild flowers, and clothed with a purple
robe of blooming heather. Nor does the religious hero lose anything in strength
and stature because he wears ‘‘ the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which
is in the sight of God of great price.”


IV. Art becomes dangerous and misleading when it usurps the place of
religion. The principle laid down and developed by Neander is the true one—
that the design of the Christian religion, which is to promote holiness of life,
should be kept constantly in view ; and whatever is beautiful in art should ever
be subordinated to this design. When the beautiful becomes, or tends to become,
supreme in worship and in Christian art, then it becomes unlawful. Whenever
this principle is infringed, an intense desire to reform is apt to develop itsclf
into a reckless, iconoclastic spirit. The men who denuded and dismantled the
churches in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries regarded ornaments as
snares to the conscience, and as the foster-nurses of superstition. Religion
admits of no rival: she must be supreme, and all the meretricious Cy of art


OHAP, VIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





must be subservient to her sway, and minister to her high and beneficent
purpose. Art is one of the noblest and best gifts which God has bestowed on
man; therefore, above all, it should be applied to the glorification of God, and
not merely to the sanctification and pleasure of the world. To scorn and reject
art in the service of religion is to reject Him who has given it. The aesthetics
of the Christian life must not be permitted to mar or displace its spiritual
power.


Lussons:—1. The best talent should be employed for God. 2. A genuine
Christian life is adorned with the beauty of many virtues. 3. Art without religion
te sdolatry and stn.


HOMILETIOS OF VERSE 22
Liy Work.


While, for convenience sake, this is called Solomon’s Temple, itis much more
David’s; but in the highest sense it is God’s—-God’s thought, which He put
into the soul of David, and fed by His holy aspirations and musings. And
about this divinely-suggested Temple, with all its several items of grandeur
and device, there is nothing more distinctly characteristic than the idea whick
gleams forth from this description of the pillars built by Hiram—‘ Upon the
top of the pillars was lily work;’’ an illustration, moreover, of that work, also
David’s, into which he threw his thought, not only about the material Temple,
but about all Divine realities—‘‘ Strength and beauty are in His sanctuary.”
The pillars, how massively grand, towering, and sublime, yet fretted over and
crowned with gracefulness! Even ‘lily work’? of choicest artifice.


I, As we look at these pillars, we cannot fail to remember that the man who
butlt them threw his soul into them. And his soul was inspired to do the best his
hands could. How immensely it would relieve the drudgery of manual occu-
pation if our workers were to feel that their true work was an inspiration—
that the thought of it, and the power to do it, were alike from God, and that
they were doing it for God? ‘Would not this make them, also, do their daily
duty as indeed for God? In that Temple all was to be good and sound. Men
felt it was all for God, and so they put their souls into it. The one thought
seemed to be, How shall we most fitly express our sense of the Divine worth ?
And to an age largely impressed by material signs and symbols this was a
testimony of some value. It was looked upon as a Divine gift to have a faculty
for skilful workmanship. In these days it is to be feared that our loose
thought about what constitutes the soul of religion has led to some disparage-
ment of these so-called natural gifts. It needs to be told with much plainness
to the so-called Christian people of this day, that they are not honouring God
if, however dovout and prayerful, they neglect their proper every-day work.
To serve God is not simply to be rapt by religious emotions. He who makes a
boot, or drives a nail, or executes a design skilfully, may do it religiously,
And we might say to the workers, It is to be feared that we of the pulpit some-
times needlessly disparage your toil, and make it harder than needs be, because
we do not sufficiently allow that a true glory rests about all honest, well-
wrought toil. The true sanctification of labour will never be attained until we
allow that a good work may be as truly wrought by painstaking and skill in
the commonest engagements. We must do our best, because we are doing it
for our Lord. Christ takes note of all conscientious, painstaking endeavour
and whatever is well done, conscientiously done, is done for Him. Believing
that in the simple work-a-day matters of conscientiousness and painstaking
about our daily calling it is within our power to please or grieve Him, let us
give Him our best.

9a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. GOHAP. Vii.








_





ee


II. Following closely upon this is a thought about the soundness and honesty
of service in God's Spiritual Temple. All work that is worth doing at all is
worth doing well. If a man has to give, let him give cheerfully, for God
loveth a cheerful giver. If he has ta teach, let him give himself in the teaching ;
if he has to rule a househc2é, let him do so with diligence. Let his service be
not by constraint put willingly. A cup of cold water is not unacceptable, but
meat may sometimes be more serviceable, therefore more acceptable. A prayer
for the troubled is good, but a suffering patience is better. This high, grand
principle would effectually rectify at least some of the wrongness of the Christian
church. Well doing is in doing one’s best. A really spiritual endeavour is an
endeavour in which the spirit of a man shows itself, as in a good painting a
man’s soul peers through the canvas. Whether, therefore, in one’s own soul-
culture, or in the culture of spiritual life in others, we should not present 4
maimed sacrifice, when we ought to and can offer an unblemished one. Let
all our works be done in truth. Let them bear the inspection of the eye of
Heaven. However laborious, let them be finished; if pillars, let the top be
chased with ‘lily-work.”


III. But passing away from these general thoughts suggested by the scene of
these varied works in the Temple, let us come to another. If upon the top of
Hiram’s pillars was “‘lily-work,” so majesty, crowned with gracefulness, will be
found in all the Divinest thoughts. Religion is one of these Divine thoughts.
Revelation is to provoke religious life; and in religious life there is strength
as well as beauty, beauty as well as strength. ‘‘ Upon the top of its pillaz» is
lily-work.” In ‘Theophilus Trinal” the words are applied to the frame of
Nature, thus:--‘‘ How mighty and massive is Nature’s frame! Strong are the
world’s pillars! Yet what profusion of things graceful, even sportively graceful,
does the earth contain! Beautiful is tae ‘lily-work.’” This great Temple—
the world is like that old Temple—the wonder of Solomon’s heart and time.
“‘ Upon the top of the piliars is lily-work.”’ In all God’s works will be found
a perfect harmoniousness; so there is as trulyin the sphere of the spiritual
within man the same blending of the strong with the beautiful. The massive-
ness of the religious principle which it takes time to establish and to build up
is adorned with many a grace, and crowned with many a flower-picture.


IV. The pillars must be before the florid ornamentation. That which is
essentially Divine must have elements of strength and stability. The force
which is to control a man’s inner and outer being must—being a Divine force
—be an overcoming one. There is muscle and sinew and bone in all healthily
embodied life. It must be able to resist aud assert itself. Moral cowardice,
e.g., cannot co-exist with a healthy spiritual life; hence the repeated exhorta-
tions in Scripture to ‘be strong,” to ‘‘be very courageous.” The muscular
school of Christianity, as it is called, has done some good if it has only helped
to explode the notion that religion is an effeminate thing; but it has not always
chosen the best modes of exemplifying its principles. ;

Strong are the pillars of God’s spiritual temple, deeply laid the foundations,
in force of principle, in power of life. Pity the man who is wanting in there,
whose religion is sentiment and nothing more. Presently some blast will tear
up the roots of such a life, and lay the lifeless trunk bare to the scorn of all
beholders. But beauty is also in God’s sanctuary, and “‘ upon the top of the
pillars was lily work ”’—one of its simplest illustrations. Nature1n this respect
furnishes us a series of types. Her vegetation which clothes those rugged peaks,
climbing ever where it can to adorn and beautify, tells of some thought of God,
to be applied to spiritual ideas. To the devout, all such contemplation of the
works of God will result in an ever-deepening conviction that while God loves
the strong, He also loves the graceful. Similarly, out of the settled, rock-like
principles of religious faith spring many @ beautiful plant of grace. oe

u


GHAP, Vil, HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
ee


Attention to the minor moralities, the tender, graceful offices of Christian
gentleness, is no unimportant phase of the sweetness of goodness. It is our joy
when we can trace all things of worth to the Saviour; and, having taken the
text from which to teach of the strength and beauty which God loves, we would
turn with profound respect and gratitude to the Saviour of men as the source
of all that is enduringly grand and vitally beautiful. Consider Christ—how
settled and stable are the grand principles upon which His religion is founded !
What strength you have in the elementary principles of the Christian religion !
Yet what beauty! As in His life, so also in the life thatis nurtured by faith in
Him, you will find force and fragrance—whatever can give sustenance to the
more heroic virtues; whatever can give nurture to the gentler graces. The
pictures representing the Saviour mostly err in the direction of effeminacy. So
also Renan’s word-picture of Him is an exaggeration in this direction. And
we are all apt, knowing how much of sweetness was in his nature, to forget the
ruggeder virtues which dwelt within His manly breast. But we have only to
come to the cross to get these effeminate notions corrected. He could “even
dare to die,”—of such stalwart sort was His inner soul, and yet even from that
cross could turn a look of pitying love toward the weeping woman by it, and say
to John, ‘‘ Behold thy mother.”

And as in the human life and story of Christ, so also in the manifestations of
Christ ever since; what brave endurance, what meek patience, have been seen !
Strength, manly and courageous; beauty, touching, pathetic, graceful. Think
of those pillars in Solomon’s Temple—beautiful in their grandeur: they repre-
sent a true religious life—massive, towering, sublime; yet crowned with the
graceful, wrought upon the top in ‘‘lily work.” You are firm and true to
principle: do not think you need be rude and ungainly. Let the “ beauty of
holiness’? beam forth from you. Let not the sacredness of your life ever be
forbidding—shine forth! Though possessed of the enduring vitalities of the
hidden life, be also clothed in the comely garment of the Christian graces.

Istly. You, especially, who are seeking for something abiding—who yearn to
be in your true place, a place not to be changed—you must overcome. ‘‘ Him
that overcometh will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God.” Have you
overcome self-will, passion, worldly expediency? There is earnest work
before you before this hope of heaven can be your enjoyment. In the strength
of God and of his dear Son you will find the victory.

2ndly. You who love the beautiful—where are you looking for it? You ind
much baseness, lowness in yourself—in society. Look for it in Christ, and in
that which springs from the acceptance of His service and yoke. ‘Come unto
Me,” all ye sons and daughters of pleasure, wearied with much seeking and
never finding. ‘‘Come unto Me,” all searchers after true consolation and joy:
“I will give you rest.”—C. W. P.


Tur Symsorico Tzacutne or tHe TEMPLe.


WueEn the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews states that “the Law had a
shadow of good things to come,”’ he does not undertake to show that the several
institutions and ceremonics of that legal period have their exact counterparts
in every particular, in the institutions of Christian times. Shadows are very
indefinite and insubstantial things, erratic and uncertain in their movements, so
that it is only with great difficulty and much patient observation that we can
succeed in defining the substance they so dimly forecast. The symbolic
tharacter of the Levitical ritual has been often exaggerated. Old Testament
persons and places, sacred seasons and sacred things, down even to the very
snuffers and tongs of the sanctuary, have been strained into meanings the most
Jaa and have afforded seope for the play of the most fanciful imagination,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. Vit,





But while the typical and figurative teaching of the Bible is liable to be abused,
it has ever been, and still is, a valuable and impressive medium of conveying
the knowledge of the most important truths, especially if one of the fundamental
rales of allegorical interpretation be observed—that which necessitates the
rejection of everything inconsistent with the particular truth it is intended to
unfold and illustrate. The Temple of Solomon, so far as it was a reproduction
(on an enlarged scale) of the Tabernacle, was, like that more ancient structure,
the pattern, example, and shadow of heavenly things. But Solomon introduced
a number of additions to the ancient pattern shown to Moses in the Mount.
The side-chambers, the colossal cherubim, the molten sea on twelve oxen in
place of the more simple laver of the tabernacle court, the ten smaller lavers
and their bases, the ten tables and the ten golden candlesticks—all seem to have
been the product and expression of theocratic ideas that had been maturing in
the Israelitish mind for more than four hundred years, though many of them
were probably demanded by the more extensive and elaborate service of
Solomon’s time. The symbolic meaning of various parts of the Temple are
worthy of consideration.


I. The Temple, as the dwelling place of Jehovah, localised the mani-
festation of His presence and power. Though Solomon was well aware
“the heaven and heaven of heavens” could not contain the God of Israel, yet
he built the Temple with the declared purpose of providing a house for Jehovah
to dwell in—a settled place for His abode (viii. 3). He could, therefore, have
entertained no such thought as that by dwelling in the Temple God ceased to
be omnipresent; but the Temple was specifically the place where Jehovah
recorded His name, and therefore the visible sign and pledge of His covenant
with Israel. It was the abode of His holiness, the place where He was to be
consulted and understood by His people—the place of vision and of glorious
manifestation and blessing.


II. The Temple was symbolic of Heaven, While the Temple was
specifically the dwelling place of Jehovah, it also typified heaven itself, which
the Apostle designates ‘“‘ the true Tabernacle ” (Heb. vili. 2; ix. 24). Accord-
ingly, in Solomon’s prayer at the dedication, we find a continued contrast
between “this house,” oz ‘this place,’”’ and “heaven, Thy dwelling place,” or
simply “heaven” (chap. viii. 30-49). And so the pious Israelite might ever
see in the holy and beautiful house where Jehovah recorded His name a type
and symbol of heaven itself. It was the Temple of His holiness (Psalm v. 7;


lxxix. 1; oxxxviii. 2).


III. The Temple indicated the close relationship existing between Gou
and man. This divine human relationship was symbolised in the two main
apartments of the Temple. Why, in the Temple as in the Tabernacle, have
two holy rooms, rather than three or more? Why, except to express the two-
fold relation that essentially exists between the worshipper and God? ‘he
holy of holies, with its profound symbols of “‘ Mercy covering wrath,” showed
God’s relation to His people; how, and on what terms, the Almighty and Holy
One would dwell with man. The holy place, where the consecrated priests
ministered, with its incense, altar, and tables and candlesticks, expressed the
relation of the true worshipper to God. ‘The devout worshippers, who offe,
before God the incense of continual prayer, are at once the salt of the earth
and the light of the world. And this is the one great truth embodied in the
several symbols of the holy place. Thus, in the two main apartments, were
exhibited “‘the two great branches into which the tree of Divine knowledge
always of necessity runs—namely, the things to be believed concerning God,


end the things to be done by His believing people.” “4


GHAP. VII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—


IV. The Temple symbolised the gradual revelation of the Divine
Holiness. When we come to observe the details of the structure we notice,
first of all, the graduated sanctity of the three holy places. First, the court,
where nothing unclean might enter; then the holy place, where only the
consecrated priests might go to perform holy services; and, beyond this, vailed
in thick darkness, the holy of holies, where only the high priest entered (and
he but once a year) on the great day of atonement. Here was symbolised, not
only the absolute holiness of Him who ‘‘ dwelt in the thick darkness,” but also
the gradual and progressive revelations of His name and Nature, which have
been made known to men. Whilst the Temple and the priesthood remained,
the Holy Ghost signified that the way into the holiest of all was not yet mads
manifest (Heb. ix. 8); but since Christ has rent the vail and entered heaven
itself for us, we all may, with boldness and full assurance of faith, enter into
the holiest, and have everlasting fellowship and communion with God
(Heb. ix. 24; x. 19-22).

V. The square form of all the apartments and courts of the Temple is
not without significance. The oracle was a perfect square, the navea double
square, the porch half a square, &c. Nowhere do we find the form of the
triangle, the pentagon, or the circle; but everything about the sanctuary seems,
like the heavenly Jerusalem, to be quadrangular, as if to correspond with the
four corners of heaven, the upper dwelling place of God (Jer. xlix. 36;
Matt. xxiv. 31).

VI. The Temple also had a symbolism of members. Especially noticeable
is the predominance of the numbers ten and three. The Jength and breadth of
all the apartments and the courts is a common multiple of ten—the number of
the commandments written on the Tables of Testimony within the Ark. Ten is
the number of the candlesticks and tables, the bases and the lavers; ten cubits
was the height of the cherubim and the extent of their outstretched wings ; ten
cubits was the breadth of the molten sea. Then we note the three holy
apartments, each with its type of expiation—the altar of burnt offerings, the
altar of incense, and the mercy seat; the last within the most holy place, which
bore the form of a perfect cube, the length and the breadth and the height of
it being equal. Each apartment also had three principal kinds of articles of
furniture. In the oracle were the cherubim, the ark, and the tables of the
Law; in the nave were the candlesticks, the tables, and the altar of incense ;
and in the court were the brazen sea, the lavers, and the altar of burnt offerings.
There were also the three stories of side-chambers. In this symbolism “of
numbers we may discern a mystic representation both of the variety and unity
of all Divine revelation. ‘‘ What happens thrice is the genuine once; what is
divided into three is a true unity. The one dwelling, by its division into three
parts, is designated as one complete whole; and the three kinds of articles of
use which are in the three parts, or in one of them, again form a complete
whole, and belong under it to the one or the other relation. While the number
ti gives the impress of finishing and completing to multiplicity, the number

three) is the signature of perfect unity, and thus also of the Divine Beine.”

VII. The decorations of the Temple symbolised the Divine source of
all forms of life. The cherubim, lions, oxen, palms, flowers, and lily work
were representative of all created life, and signified that, while Jehovah
condescended to make the Temple His special dwelling place, His presence fills
the universe with life. He upholds all things by the Word of His power.
Angels and men, cattle and creeping things and fowl, and all inanimate creation
have their being from Him whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain, And
thus was added to the various lessons of Jehovah’s absolute holiness and infinite |
i abel ee ie mad eateee this ornamental expression of His
universal providence (see Bahr on * The Symbolism of the i inde
Whedon's Comm., and Lange). d apna ge

100





HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
prthocannaten a etna ai sella Le alte ee SEE sy


OmAP. Vii.





GEEM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1-51. In matter: all was here
of the best. The wood was precious,
sweet, lasting; the stones beautiful,
costly, insensible of age; the gold pure
and glittering. So are the graces of
God’s children excellent in their na-
ture, dear in their acceptation, eternal
in their use: so are the ordinances of
God in His church holy, comfortable,
irrefragable: so is the perfection of
His glorified saints incomparable, un-
conceivable. In situation: the outer
parts were here more common; the
inner more holy and peculiarly re-
served. One court of the temple is
open to the unclean, to the uncireum-
cised: within that another, open only
to the Israelites, and, of them, to the
clean : within that yet another, proper
only to the priests and Levites, where
was the brazen altar for sacrifice, and
the brazen sea for washing. The eyes
of the laity might follow their obla-
tions in hither; their feet might not.
Yet more, in the covered rooms of the
Temple there is, whither the priests
only may enter, not the Levites; there
is, whither the high priest only may
enter, not his brethren. It is thus in
every renewed man, the individual
temple of God: the outer parts are
allowed common to God and the
world; the inwardest and secretest,
which is the heart, is reserved only
for the God that made it. It is thus
in the church visible: the false and
foul-hearted hypocrite hath access to
the holy ordinances of God, and treads
in His courts: only the true Christian
hath entire and private conversation
with the Holy One of Israel, he only
is admitted into the Holy of Holies,
and enters within the glorious vail of
heaven.— By. Hail.


Verse 1-12. They who are great
may appear 80; it is as fit that a king
should dwell in a palace, as a peasant
in a cottage. They who are occupied
in building should take care not to
lose, in the stone and mortar, their
solicitude to secure a better ‘‘ house,
not made with hands, eternal in the


heavens.”


— The building of the house for the
king followed immediately upon the
building of the temple: they belong
together. Altar and throne stand and
fall together, even as we have the two
commandments: Fear God: Honour
the king (1 Pet. ii. 17; Prov. xxiv. 2).
In the kingdom where religion is
cherished and highly honoured, there
royalty is most secure: a God-fearing
people is the best, nay, the only sup-
port of the throne.— Lange.


Verse 13. As the tabernacle was
built with the wealth of Egypt, so the
temple with the wit of Tyre: God
will serve himself by the common gifts
of men.


Verse 18, 14. A wise prince, in the
furtherance of his enterprise, which
aims at the honour of God and the
good of the nation, looks around for
the best instruments, and in order to
obtain them seeks them wherever he
can find them (Prov. xxvi. 10). He
who has learned anything thoroughly,
and brought it to perfection in its
especial province, must be sought out
and held in esteem, whatscever be his
position or country.


Verse 15-22. The pillars of Hiram
emblematic of the church of God.
1. As to tts stability. The names given
to the pillars are suggestive. Jachin:
He will establish, referring to the tact
that Jehovah’s dwelling place, hitherto
movable and moving, was now firmly
fixed in the midst of His people.
Boaz: Jn him is strength, indicating
the strength and power that would be
put forth by God in the defence and
establishment of His people. The
church is stable—1. Because it is
founded in truth; 2. Built up in
truth; and 8. Sustained and encom-
passed by the God of truth. IL. As
to its beauty. The pillars were sur-
mounted with ornamental capitals,
shaped like a full-blown lily-cup, with
fine checkered network thrown over
the whole, and delicate chain work
hanging in festoons outside, ie deco-

10.


OHAP. Viz,





rated with circling rows of pome-
granate. The church is adorned—
1, with the graces of the Holy Spirit ;
2, with the beauty of holiness ; 3, with
the reflected glory of its risen and
glorified head (2 Cor iii.18). III. Ae
to its eventful history. These famous
pillars were broken in pieces by the
Babylonians when they destroyed
Jerusalem (2 Kings xxv. 13; Jer. lii.
17). But the material remained and
retained its value. So the church has
often been persecuted, pierced, and
broken by the violence of its foes, and
often brought disaster on itself by its
unfaithfulness to God; but it has not
been utterly destroyed. It retains its
vigour, and is ever increasing in value
and preciousness.


Verse 18. The pomegranate was one
of the commonest ornaments in
Assyria. It was used on quivers, on
spear-shafts and mace-heads, in pat-
terns on doorways and pavements. It
is doubtful whether a symbolical mean-
ing attached to it, or whether it was
merely selected as a beautiful natural
form.—fawlinson.


Verse 22. The Hebrew named the
lily simply ‘‘ the white”; it is, there-
fore, a natural symbol of purity.
The priests, as ‘‘ the holy ones” (Ex.
ill. 27), were dressed in white (Num.
xvi. 7); and the high priest, the holiest
of the holy, wore on the great day of
atonement white garments instead of
his usual many coloured ones; and these
white robes were cailed ‘holy gar-
ments (Lev. xvi. 4, 32). Inasmuch
as holiness was the characteristic and
fundamental idea of the Israelitish
religion, ‘‘the white” (¢.e., the lily)
seems to have been their religious
flower, as the lotus was the well-
known sacred flower of the Indian and
Egyptian religions. Besides this, the
lily is nowhere more indigenous than in
Palestine (Matt. vi. 28); and it may
therefore be named the flower of the
Promised Land, as the palm was its
tree. If the capitals of the pillars
were thus always and everywhere de-
corated with carvings of flowers, no
more characteristic and suitable one

102


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





could be chosen for the capitals before
the holy temple than the lily.—Lange.

— ‘And upon the pillars was lily-
work.” To show the beauty and
sweetness of Christ and His people,
those especially that are more eminent,
the glory of the churches; such as
were James, Cephas, and John, who
‘‘ seemed to be pillars” (Gal. ii. 9).


Verse 23. As a large laver for the
priests to wash in (2 Chron. iv. 6).
The Hebrews used to call the gather-
ing together of much water a sea. It
signifieth both the exceeding filthiness
of sin, requiring a sea for the cleansing
of it, and the infinite virtue of Christ’s
blood.—Zrapp.


Verse 37. ‘* All of them had one
casting.” To teach the uniformity
about things of God. It is a sweet
thing when with one mind and one
mouth God is glorified as ‘‘the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ”? (Rom. xv.
6), and men’s prayers come before
Him ‘‘as the sound of many waters.”


Verse 40-51. What signification
have the holy vessels of the temple for
the church of the Lord, which is the
true temple of God? 1. The pillars,
Jachin and Boaz, in the porch, are, as
it were, the superscription over the
temple, and declare its strong founda-
tion and its permanence. The Lord
declares both to His people church:
upon this rock will I build my church,
and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it (Matt. xvi. 18). Great,
noble promise! II. The brazen sea
and the vases in the porch are there,
that the priests may purify themselves
and the sacrifices which they bring
there. The church of the Lord is that
holy priesthood which offers spiritual
sacrifices (1 Pet. ii. 5). Those who
wish to perform such service the pro-
phet summons: Wash ye (Isa. i. 16);
and the apostle: I beseech you, &c.
(Rom. xii. 1). IIL. The altar, the
candlesticks, and the table stand in
the building itself, which is a type of
heaven, and show that for them who
offer themselves pure and holy sacri-
fices, a divine light and life are pre.


HOMMETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. Viti,


ene


pared before the throne of God, and no
other sacrifice is rendered except the
incense of prayer, of praise, and wor-
ship of God (Ps. xvi. 11; Rev. v.
“B-14).—Lange.

— If, from the walls, we look into
the furniture: what is the altar,
whereon our sacrifices of prayer and
praises are offered to the Almighty,
but a contrite heart? What is the
golden candlestick, but the illumined
understanding, wherein the light of
the knowledge of God and His divine
will shineth for ever? What the
tables of shew-bread, but the sanctified


memory, which keepeth the bread of
life continually? Yea, if we shall
presume so far as to enter into the
very closest of God’s oracle, even
there, O God! do we find our un-
worthy hearts so honoured by thee,
that they are made thy very ark,
wherein thy royal law and thy pot of
thy heavenly manna are kept for ever;
and from whose propitiatory, shaded
with the wings of thy glorious angels,
thou givest the gracious testimonials
of thy good Spirit, witnessing with
ours that we are the children of the
living God.— Bp. Hall.





CHAPTER VIII.
THE DEDICATION OF THE TEMPLE.


CerrroaL axp Expianatory Notrs.—In the Vatican Sept. this chapter commences: And
it came to pass when Solomon had made an end of building the house of the Lord, and his
own house, after twenty years, then Solomon, &c.; but no other authority sustains the
addition. Eleven months elapsed between the completion of the Temple and its dedication ,
it being finished in the eighth month (chap. vi. 38), and opened in the seventh month of the
following year (viii. 2). ‘This delay was solely for the arrival of the Feast of Tabernacles, in
the Jubilee Year, which happened the year ensuing. The commemoration of the nation
having dwelt in booths in the wilderness (Feast of ‘'abernacles) was a fitting occasion for
the consecration of the first permanent House of Jehovah; and their being assembled in large
numbers gave a public dignity to the august event. Verse 1. Then Solomon assembled—
The representatives of the nation were, by roys] edict, summoned to their place in the pro-
cession which should attend the removal of the Ark into the Temple. The order would be: the
king, elders of the people, priests bearing the Ark, Levites carrying the vessels. Progress must
have been very deliberate, for along the line priests were stationed with sacrifices, and the pro.
cession paused while they were at intervals offered. Verse 4. The Tabernacle of the congre.
gation —This “T}7\1D Orin was the tent in which the Ark rested at Gibeon (ef. 1 Chron.


v
xvi. 8, 9; xxi. 29; 2 Chron. i. 3), the original Mosaic tabernacle, in distinction from David’s
tabernacle for the Ark (cf. 2 Sam. vi. 17; 1 Chron. xv, 1). Verse 5. Before the Ark,
sacrificing—The procession having reached the temple, the ark was laid down in the outer
court, and a great sacriice offered ; then it was borne by the priests inte the Oracle, and placed
nder the wings of the cherubim. ote: There were cherubim fixed upon the ark originally
(Exod. xxxvii. 7-9); these, therefore, remained, and the colossal One of Solomon


extended their wings over all. Verse 9. Nothing in the ark, etc.—In Heb. ix. 4 “ the
golden pot with manna and Aaron’s rod” are mentioned in addition ; but these were never in
the ark, only “laid before the Lord” (Hxod. xvi. 33; Numb. xvii. 10). Verse 10, 11.
Cloud filled the house, . . . glory of the Lord filled the house —This “cloud” was not
wholly dense darkness (as some suggest), but possibly dark clouds surrounding a resplendent
glory ; for when Aaron entered the holiest of the tabernacle the smoke of incense rolled itself
around him, enveloping him as in a cloud, thus softening the overmastering splendour of the
mi TBD (Lev. xvi. 13). The 335 of the O.T. answers to the 8éfa of the N.T.
ae ;


Verse 12. Dwell in the thick darkness—A deeply solemn gloom which impressed beholders
with a mysterious awe. As on Sinai (Exod. xx. 21 2912), so here 22nye correspond-


ing to the Greek dppvds. Verse 14. King turned his face sbout—with his back upon the
people; he and they had been watching the movements of the glory cloud; now he faced the
awed concourse. Verses 15-21 contain Solomon’s address to the people, who listen standing,
in which the king gratefully records that he undertook and completed the temple in obedience
tc Jehovah's word. Verses 22-53. The Royal Prayer of Dedication —“ Solomon stood before the
@itar” on a brazen platform erected for the occasion (2 Chron vi. 13) im front 7 fg altar of


@HAP, VHIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


eed Thy ee rah eo I ens


burnt offering ; there, too, he knelt (verse 54), and with uplifted hands (verse 22) presented this
sublime prayer before Jehovah. Verse 28. Prayer, supplication, and ery - nG aPs


TID, TID are respectively prayer im general (whether praise, petition, or thanks),


entreaty or supplication (petition for grace and help), and praise (prayer as the joyful ex pression -
of raise Set ear ore Verse 31. If any man trespass— Solomon here passes from
general prayer, and begins to specify distinct cases. Seven particular cases are given In which
God’s merciful interposition would be needed : concerning the observation of the oath (31. 32),
captives (83, 84), drought (35, 36), land plagues (37-40), strangers (41-43), Israelites wheu
absent from Zion (44, 45), captives (46-50). Verses 61-53. A concluding argument by which
Solomon urges his prayer. Verses 54-61. Solomon counsels and blesses the congregation—
He arose from the altar, . . . and he stood and blessed, §¢. Verse 61. Let your heart be perfect
with the LORD, M7 Dy odut ; wuprightly with Jehovah (Luther); submissive
Se utd e Ly ie
oe Wette) ; in friendship with God (Gesenius); undividedly given to the Lord (Keil and Lange).
erses 62-64. The sacrificial act of consecration—These were the first offerings laid upon the
sacred altar. The priests’ court was not sufficiently extensive for such numerous sacrifices ;
therefore the king did “hallow the middle of the court” temporarily for sacrificial purposes. The
immense number of sacrifices offered supplied for the prolonged “ feast” which succeeded, lasting
fourteen days, and to which assembled great multitudes, from the entering in of Hamath unto
the river of Egypt. Verse 65. Hamath is the Grecian Epiphaneia, the principal city of Upper
Syria, on the Orontes, the Northern frontier of Palestine (Numb. xiii. 21; xxxiv. 8). The
river of Egypt is here, not the Nile, but the el Arish—the Southern boundary of the land of
Israel (Numb. xxxiv. 5; Josh. xv. 4, 47).—W. H. J.


a
HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-9.


Tur CuvrcH tae Sacrep Depostrory oF THE Drvmve Word.


As the Tabernacle in the wilderness was solemnly consecrated to the worship
of Jehovah (Ex. xl.; Num. viii.), so now must the grander house which is to
supersede and supplant the tattered relics of the old system be dedicated with
becoming solemnities to the same lofty purpose. And as Moses, the inspired
servant of Jehovah, faithful in all his house (Num. xii. 7), was the chosen one
to consecrate the tabernacle, so Solomon, the Divinely chosen King in Zion
(1 Chron. xxviii. 6), in whose person the Hebrew monarchy at this time reached
the highest summit of its glory, was the only proper person to consecrate the
Temple. No priest could perform this holy service as properly as he. No
other person in the realm had concentrated in himself at that time such sanctity,
exaltation, and power. He was the type of that greater Solomon who is now
silently building His spiritual Temple, and will Himself presently, at the time
appointed, fill and hallow it with a cloud of glory that shall never pass away.
The first step in the august ceremony was the removal of the ark from the
tabernacle of David on Mount Zion to the Most Holy Place in the new Temple
on Mount Moriah. And here the thought is suggested—that as the ark con-
tained the tables of the Law, so the church is the sacred depository of the
Divine Word.


I. The Divine Word is the irresistible rallying cry of a whole nation
iverses 1,2). ‘Ihe fiery cross of the Scottish Highlanders, or the gory morse!s
of the slaughtered oxen distributed throughout the coasts of Israel by the warlike -
Saul, were not more potent in mustering the militant hosts of the nation, than
was the mention of the ark of God in gathering the Hebrew people to one common
centre. The leading men of the nation at once obeyed the summons (verse 1).
The elders included, more particularly, the chosen representatives of the nation ;
the heads of the tribes were the leading and most influential individuals; and the
chiefs, or princes, of the fathers, were the most distinguished and saintly old men

104


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, VIII,
sca Sas ES EET emencmmemmamesoememcesmeaeteeeneeeeneemee ya


of the nation, whose presence and approbation were indispensable at so important

an event as the dedication of the Temple. “N othing can be nobler than to see

a whole nation, from the highest to the lowest, gathered in unity round its

holiest possession.” It is the Word of God that makes the most profound

ee on the national heart, and that shapes and determines the national
estiny.


II. The Divine Word is the infallible directory in all true worship.
1. It recognises the office of sacred persons (verses 3, 4). The priests and the
Levites are mentioned indiscriminately. The parallel passage in the Chronicles
says that ‘‘the Levites took up the ark ;’’ but there is no contradiction in this,
for all priests were Levites, though all Levites were not priests. Priests bore
the ark across the Jordan and around Jericho (Joshua iii. 6; vi. 6). These
persons were specially set apart to this sacred work, according to the require-
ments of the law (Num. iv. 15; Deut. xxxi. 9). Inattention to the divinely-
prescribed order was followed by fatal results (compare 2 Sam. vi. 1-7;
1 Chron. xv. 12, 13). To be bearers of the Word of God, to set up the mercy
seat in the sanctuary, and to point perishing sinners to the sprinkled blood, is
the office and the glory of God’s ministers. Office has nothing sacred in itself,
apart from the iaithful performance of the duties it involves, and the irreproach-
able moral character of the person appointed to it. Priestly assumption is the
most unwarrantable, and, in the sight of God, the most abhorrent. 2. It limite
the significance of sacred things (verse 4). It would appear that on this great
inauguration day two imposing processions were formed: the one coming from
the height of Gibeon, bearing aloft the sacred tent and the holy vessels of the
old pastoral worship, now to be disused for ever—the ancient brazen altar, the
candlestick, the table of shew-bread, and also the brazen serpent. This proces-
sion was joined on Mount Zion by a still more imposing and stately one, bearing
the ark of acacia-wood, covered with its two small winged figures—the one
relic that was to unite the old and new together. Much has been made of
these sacred vessels, until they have been raised into objects of idolatry.
Starting with a certain modicum of truth, the enthusiastic lover of types and
figures has wandered into regions unheard of and untrod before, and discovered
hidden meanings and mysterious premonitions which the obvious use and common-
sense teaching of the symbols utterly failed to convey. By a careful comparison
of the Word of God we are taught the true significance and appropriate use of
these sacred things, and of all external aids in the acceptable worship of God.
8. It authorizes the exercise of sacred acts (verse 5). The removal of the ark
was celebrated by sacrifices of ‘‘ sheep and oxen that could not be numbered for
multitude.” The road, according to Josephus, was flooded with streams of
blood. The air was darkened and scented with the clouds of incense; the
songs and dances were unintermitted. No worship can be acceptable to God
apart from sacrifice. The Divine Word is most explicit on this point (compare
Lev. i. 2; iti. 2, 7; Gen. viii. 20; xxii. 7; Ex. xviii. 12; xl. 29; Num.
xxviii. 10, 14; 1 Kings iii. 4; Ps. li. 16, 19; Isa. xl. 16; Heb. x. 6-8, &c.).
The vilest sinner can now approach God through the ever-eflicacious sacrifice of
His Son. Every act of genuine worship involves sacrifice. Our whole self,
and the best of everything we have, should be freely sacrificed to Him whe
gave Himself for us.


III. The Divine Word finds its permanent home in the holiest place of the
Church. 1. There it is securely guarded (verses 6, 7). The ancient lid of the
ark formed by the two small cherubim of beaten gold was removed, and a new
one, without them, was substituted to fit its new abode. Ona rough unhewn
projection of the rock the ark was thrust in and placed lengthways, under the


shadow of the outspread wings of the two gigantic cherubim pach were


GAP, VIII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
EEE


waiting, like two watchful and stalwart guardians, to receive and evermore
protect the precious treasure. ‘‘The Word of the Lord is under Divine protec-
tion ; the angels are its guardians and watchers; it can neither be destroyed by
human power, nor is it aided or protected by men.” The holiest church is
the most faithful custodian of the Word, and the holiest heart is its safest and
most beauteous shrine. 2. There tt is intended to remain (verse 8). When the
ark moved within the veil to be seen no more, the retiring priests, as a sign
that it had at length reached “the place of its rest,” and was not to be carried
about any more, drew forth from it the staves or handles on which they had
borne it to and fro; and, although the staves themselves remained within the
veil, the ends could just be seen protruding through the door, ir token that its long
wanderings were over; or, a8 Keil puts it, their ends could be observed from
the sanctuary by the elevations on the vail, which might be seen from the
sanctuary itself, but not without. - They remained long afterwards, even to the
later days of the monarchy, and formed a lane to guide the steps of the Chief
Priest as he entered in the darkness. The Word of God has found its permanent
home in His church, and the history of the two are inseparably bound together.
Not long ago there was discovered among the hardened lava of Pompeii the form
of a human body, with all the features singularly perfect and strikingly beautiful,
and the expression as of one who was sleeping a pleasant and placid sleep.
The burning flood, which carried death in its impetuous flow, and the cold
entombment of eighteen hundred years, had not availed to destroy the imperish-
able lineaments. So the church may be exposed to the fiery persecution of her
cruellest enemies, or buried under the cold neglect of her professed friends; but
cast in the mould of the undying and unchanging Word of God, she retains
her indestructible image, with every line and feature of perfection distinctly
marked, and, when ages have rolled away, will stand forth to an astonished
world in all her peerless beauty and greatness. 38. There it ts the most highly
prized treasure. ‘‘ There was nothing in the ark save the two tables of stone’
(verse 9). When the old lid of the ark was taken off before it disappeared
within the vail, and before the new covering was fixed on, the interior of the
ark was seen by Israclitish eyes for the first time for more than four centuries,
perhaps for the last time for ever. The pot of manna, the rod of Aaron, and
the golden censer, which were said to be laid up within it, or beside it, were
gone—lost, it may be, in the Philistine captivity. Nothing remained but the
two granite blocks from Mount Sinai, graven with the ten commandments.
But these were of unspeakable value and unmistakable significance. ‘‘The
ark of the covenant was the root and kernel of the whole sanctuary: it con-
tained the moral law, at once *ie original document and pledge of the covenant,
through which, and in consequence of which, Jehovah was to dwell in the
midst of His people. We have, in the New Covenant, not only the Law, but
the Gospel, which is everlasting. Where His Word is, there the Lord dwells
and is enthroned ; it is the soul of every House of God, and, indeed, gives it
its consecration.”


Lxssons:—1. The Word of God should be fervently loved. 2. Diligently studied
8. Jealously guarded. 4. Fatthfully obeyed.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. Solomon decked and gar- Solomon. And as that woman who


nished his temple before he prayed in

it; so, saith one, before thou prayest

prepare thy heart, which is the true

temple of Him who is greater than
106


sought her groat swept the whole
house, so when thou seekest anything
of God, sweep the whole house of thy
heart: sweep it by repentance, wash


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





the pavement of it with tears, beautify
it with holiness, perfume it with
prayers, deck it with humility, hang
it with sincerity.—TZrapp.

— There seems to be a contrast here
between the more popular proceedings
of David, who, when he brought up
the ark to Mount Zion, ‘‘ gathered to-
gether all the chosen men of Israel,
thirty thousand,” and the statelier,
more aristocratic system of his son,
who, born in the purple, conducts him-
self in a loftier way, merely summon-
ing the chief men as representatives of
the nation. The rest of the people
‘assembled themselves” (verse 2),
and were mere spectators of the
ceremony.


Verse 1-4. Religion the mightiest
force in the nation. 1. /¢ is the
source and safeguard of regal authority.
The ruler who ignores the religious
principle has no guarantee fora sound
and permanent government. Stronger
than the sword, or the schemes of
statecraft, or the popular cry of the
hour, is the deep-rooted religious life
of the people. 2. l¢ commands the
homage and allegiance of all ranks and
conditions. All that is venerable in
age, ripe in wisdom and counsel, bril-
liant in genius, vigorous and daring in
manhood, or blooming and hopeful in
youth, respond at once to its irresistible
call (verse 1, 2). 3. Jt commemorates
and consecrates great national blessings
(verse 2). ‘‘ The feast in the month
Ethanim’”’ wasthe Feast of Tabernacles.
Ethanim is defined as ‘‘the month of
flowing streams,’’ and corresponded
with our October; it also signifies
ripeness or strength. Solomon finished
the Temple in the eighth month, but
waited till the seventh month of the
next year for the dedication, that it
might be coincident with the Feast of
Tabernacles. This feast was designed
for a thanksgiving and rejoicing over
the fruits of the harvest (Ex. xxiii. 16;
Deut. xvi. 13); and also for a com-
memoration of the time when Israel
dwelt in booths in the desert (Lev.
xxiii. 43), It was therefore fitting to
associate the dedication of the temple
with this important feast, for the ark


OHAP. VIiL


that had dwelt in a tabernacle and
been carried to and fro for five hun-
dred years was now to enter into its
place of rest (compare 1 Chron. xxviii.
2; 2 Chron. vi. 41). And so the holy
house, begun in the month of flowers
and finished in the month of garnered
fruits, was appropriately consecrated
in the month of thanksgiving. 4. /¢
venerates the most sacred objects (verse 4),
The ark, the tabernacle, and the holy
vessels had been associated with the
most eventful eras in the history of
the Israelites, in defeat and victory, in
distress and joy. Sacred relics, while
unworthy of idolatry in themselves,
are often reminders of privileges and
blessing in the past which the grateful
soul would not willingly forget.


Verse 4. The tabernacle of the con-
gregation, made by Moses, hitherto
transportative and for many years
severed from the ark, was now to be
re-united and settled in the temple;
as the saints, here tossed up and down,
shall one day be in heaven, that habi-
tation of God’s holiness. Thougk
neither the tabernacle, nor its holy
vessels, were applied to any use in the
temple, their sacred character made it
fitting that they should be deposited
within its precincts. Most probably
they were placed in the treasury.


Verse 5. Sacrifice the essence of
acceptable worship. 1. Was insti-
tuted in the earliest times. 2. Has
been practised in some form by all na-
tions in all ages. 3. Was most per-
fectly exemplified in the sufferings
and death of the Son of God. 4. Is
illustrated in generous gifts for reli-
gious purposes. 5. Demands the whole
life and service of the individual
believer.


Verses 6-8. The ark an emblem of
the human heart. 1. As vivifying
and adorning the most splendid crea-
tion of human genius. 2. As the
hiding place for the Divine Word
(Psa. cxix. 11). 3. As having affinity
with angelical life. 4. Asit exercises
itself in showing mercy. 5. As it is
the shrine of Divinest manifestations,

107


OHAY. VIII.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Verse 9. ‘‘There was nothing in
the ark save the two tables of stone.”
The imperishable nature of the
Divine Word. 1. It is superior to its
most magnificent surroundings. 2. It


are lost. 8. It survives the wreck
and ruin of the mightiest empires.
4. It isnot in the power of men or
devils to destroy it. 5. It will endure
when earth and sea and stars have
vanished.


remains when other precious things


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 10-18.


Tur Croup or THE Lozp.


I. Was the visible symbol of the Divine Presence in the midst of His
people. The word shechinah, though not used in the Bible, is frequently
employed by writers on sacred subjects to designate this remarkable appearance,
the creation of His power ‘‘ whose strength is in the clouds,’”’ and of whom it
is said that ‘‘clouds and darkness are round about Him, while righteousness
and judgment are the habitation of His throne.” From various references to
it in the Scriptures we gather that the Shechinah was an intensely brilliant
light, enclosed in a pillar-shaped cloud; that, during the day, this cloud would
be so dense as almost entirely to conceal the light, but that at night it would
become so attenuated and transparent as to leave the light alone visible. It
might be, also, that the approbation or anger of Jehovah would be indicated at
certain times by the changing aspects of unusual brightness or darkness. The
recorded appearances of the God of Israel in the form of a cloud may have
suggested to many heathen writers the manifestations of their own deities in a
similar form. Thus, we read of Jupiter enthroned on Mount Gargarus “ veiled
in a fragrant cloud”: of Minerva entering the Grecian army ‘‘ clad in a purple
cloud”: and that, when Apollo attended a celebrated warrior, ‘‘a veil of
clouds involved his radiant head.” The first mention made of this remarkable
spectacle—as if thrust out of space by some unseen hand— was on the memorable
night of the exodus of the Israelites from their long vexatious bondage in
Egypt. And it must surely have created a profound feeling of wonder and awe
among that vast host of two millions and a half, as the mysterious glory-cloud
floated down into their midst, and, proceeding to the front, majestically and
silently assumed the leadership in their perilous journey. When the Tabernacle
was reared and furnished to foster the spirit of worship, and to assist the growth
and enlargement of the religious life, the cloud of the Lord covered and filled
it with inexpressible glory. As Jehovah, in the old covenant, chose a visible
dwelling among His people in token of their election, so also He verified His
presence in this Temple of Solomon in a way cognizant to the senses—that is,
through the cioup, which is the medium and sign of His manifestation, not
only here, but all through the Old Testament. (Compare Ex. xvi. 10; xx. 21;
xxiv. 15, 16; xxxiv. 5; xl. 84; Lev. xvi. 2; Num. xi. 25; xii. 5; Isa. vi.
8,4; Ezek. i. 4, 28; x. 8, 4; Ps. xviii. 10-12.)


II. Indicated that the glory of the Divine character is beyond the
vomprehension of the human mind. The cloud concealed and veiled the
majesty of Jehovah as well as revealed it. ‘The Lord said that He would
dwell in the thick darkness” (verse 12). Cloud and darkness are synonymous
words. The throne within the Temple, on which the Divine presence was
concentrated, stood in the back part of the most Holy Place, which was perfectly
dark. ‘The cloud is, then, on the one hand, the heaven-descended sign of the
presence of the self-manifesting God; on the other hand, it declares that Goi
in His being, spiritually and ethically, is so far above and different from ull
other beings, that man, in his sinful and mortal nature, eannot comprehend “or
endure the sight of Him.” The glory of Jehovah that is unseen infinitely
surpasses that which is visible (1 Cor. xiii. 12; Job. xxxviii ; Ex. ii. 20, 32),

10R


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: Elves. GHA. Vili.





III. Is the true consecration of every Christian sanctuary, Every Chris-
tian sanctuary is erected in the name and for the glory of Jehovah, and is
intended for His dwelling place, His permanent home (verse 13), But the true
consecration of the building is the manifested presence of God to the hearts of
the worshippers. The Shechinah of the old dispensation was ever closely
associated with the Tabernacle. It was not a spectacle simply to excite and
gratify the amazement of the people, but was intended to assist them in the
worship of the one living and true God (Ex. xl. 38). A sanctuary is to be
consecrated, not with holy water and the mummery of Pagan rites and cere-
monies, but with prayer and thanksgiving, with the Word and blessing of God.
W Pa Jehovah manifests His glory, there is the cousecrated Temple for His
worship.


IV. Is sometimes manifested in overwhelming majesty and glory (verses
10, 11, compared with 2 Chron. v. 18, 14). The darkness was so insup-
portable, and the heavenly glory so overpowering, that the priests staggered
under the awful manifestation, and were not able to minister. It is worthy of
note, too, that the power of God came down while the worshippers were in the
act of praising (7). verse 13). When we rise to the highest pitch of sincerity
and fervour in the worship of the Most High, it is then we receive the most
memorable benedictions. ‘The existence of the church to-day is a triumphant
evidence of the continuance of the Divine presence and the special manifestations
of the Divine glory. And, though we have not the pillar of fire glittering over
the church as in days of yore, the power of God is realized in the person and
government of the Holy Ghost, whose glory has been displayed in different
periods of the church’s history in a way every whit as wonderful and imposing,
and with more extensive results than in the days when the mysterious outward
sign attended the Israelites ‘‘ throughout all their journeys.” The miraculous
effusion of the Spirit on the Day of Pentecost, und the remarkable revivals
which have occurred since that day, are signal examples and distinctive pledges
of the plenitude and omnipotency of spiritual grace with which the church may
expect to be visited in the present day. ‘‘odis still in the midst of His people.
When the world is convinced of sin, of »ghteousness, and of judgmeut; when
believers are earnest in prayer and 4iligent in seeking the salvation of souls;
when the careless and giddy are arrested in their whirl of gaiety, and become
serious with thoughts of eternity; when the callous are melted, the obstinate
persuaded, the doubting re-assured, and the despairing cheered; when the soul
is humbled under a sense of personal unworthiness, and overwhelmed with views
of the glory, the condescension, and the love of God; when the false confidences
of the heart are shivered, an’ we are enabled to rely only on Jesus; when love
giows with intense heat, and, under its fervid, constraining influence, we are
led to consecrate ourselves afresh to God and to His great service—then have
we unmistakable evidences of the presence and mighty operations of the Divine
Spirit, that the cloud of the Lord is filling His Temple and descending isto the
midst of His worshipping people, in all the glory of His transcendent charms,
in all the generous encompassing fulness of His outpoured blessing. Nothing
short of the felt, spiritual presence of God—God realized in the heart by the
energy of the Spirit—can be an effectual safe-guard against sin. The Jews saw
the glory-cloud, the symbol of God’s presence and guidance and power ; it was
‘Cin sight of all the House of Israel throughout all their journeys; ” it filled the
Temple specially and solemnly dedicated to His worship; yet they sinned—sinned
grievously and repeatedly. An awful commentary on the insufficiency of the
most imposing outward symbolism to regenerate and sanctify corrupted human
nature! It is the revelation of Christ to the heart by the Spirit that can alone
accomplish the sin-destroying work. 1

Lussons:—1. Zhe Zemple is the place of glorious revelations. 2. It ss im the
highest moods of worship that the greatest blessings are read. ef


GHAP, VITL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


er


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 10. By a cloud did God often
both represent His glory, and cover it :
signifying thereby that it was both
invisible and unapproachable.


— The cloud—the visible symbol
of the Divine presence, the Shechinah
of the Targums—which had been pro-
mised before the ark was begun (Ex.
xxix. 42), and had filled the Taber-
nacle as soon as it was completed (Ex.
xl. 34), and which had probably been
seen from time to time during the
long interva} when we have no ex-
press mention of it from a little before
the death of Moses (Deut. xxxi. 15),
to the present occasion, now once more
appeared in full magnificence, and
took, as it were, possession of the
building which Solomon was dedica-
ting. The presence of God in the
Temple henceforth was thus assured
to the Jews, and His approval of all
Solomon had done was signified.—
Speaker's Comm.


Verses 10-18. It is impossible that
mortal, sinful man should see or com-
prehend the Holy and Infinite One.
I can experience His merciful pre-
sence; but presumption and folly it is
to wish to sound the depths of His
Being. The eye of faith beholds in
darkness the glory of the Lord; in
the night of the cross, the light of the
world; through the dim veil of the
flesh, the only begotten Son of God,
full of mercy and grace.—Lange.


— The glory of the Lord appeared
in a cloud, a dark cloud, to signify—
1. The darkness of that dispensation
in comparison with the light of the
Gospel, by which, with open face, we
behold, as in a glass, the glory of the
Lord. 2. The darkness of our present
state in comparison with the vision


of God which will be the happiness
of heaven, where the divine glory is
unveiled. Now wecan only say what
He is not, but then we shall see Him
as He is.


Verse 11. The holy angels clap
their wings upon their faces, as it
were a double scarf—cr as a man doth
his hands before his eyes, when he
beholdeth an exceeding great light—
before the brightness of God’s pre-
sence, that would else put out their
eyes. Pellican saith, by the priests
being driven out by this cloud appear-
ing was showed that the time should
come when this priesthood should
minister no more by carnal rites in this
place.—Zrapp.


— Not veneration for the Divine
majesty alone forbids delay in the
presence of the Divine glory; not
merely a holy dread thrills through
the priests, so that they draw back;
but the glory of the Lord, like a con-
suming fire, is that before which un-
holy man cannot exist, to which he
cannot approach without being des-
troyed. Hence the High Priest was
obliged to prepare his entrance into
the holiest by first enveloping with
the smoke of burning incense the sym-
bol of the sin-covering power of prayer
—the cloud which embodied the glory
of the Lord.— Keil.


Verse 12. Perceiving both priests
and people struck with horror and
wonder at this darkness, Solomon
reminds them that this was no sign of
God’s dislike or disfavour, as some of
them might possibly imagine; but a
token of His approbation and grace
oat special presence among tLem.—

ool,


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 14—32},


Tuer Joy or an AccomPiisHep Purrosn.


The human mind abhors incompleteness.
upon his easel an unfinished painting of Titania,


410


When Charles Leslie died, he left
from the Midsummer Night's


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. VIEL
rece


Dream, that was to be another pictorial realization of Shakespearian creations
with which the fame of Leslie is inseparably connected. But the busy brain
ceased to work, the pencil dropped from the facile fingers, and the deserted
fragment retains but a dim promise of the artistic genius which the completed
picture would have revealed. It is impossible to gaze upon an incomplete
work like that without feeling disappointment and regret. The crumbling
ruins of a structure that was once complete is more satisfying to the mind than
an unfinished building abandoned to decay without having served any useful
purpose. How great, then, is the joy of seeing accomplished a purpose which
has cost so much anxiety and thought, and which has been in progress for
years! Such a joy was realized by Solomon at this time, when he witnessed
a greatest work of his life completed, and that it was accepted of God.
serve—


_I. The joy of an accomplished purpose is expressed in devout thanks-
giving (verses 14,15). The heart of the king was full of joyous gratitude, and
under its influence he blessed the people, and blessed the Lord God of Israel.
Sharing in the gladness and solemnity of the occasion, the whole congregation
stood up, as if eager to receive the benediction. The first moments of a
realized good, long hoped and worked for, are full of unutterable emotion.
The ecstacy is sometimes fraught with peril. In his last days the Venerable
Bede was engaged in a translation of the New Testament on which he had set
his heart. He dictated to one of his disciples the last verse in the Gospel of
John. ‘It is finished, master,” said the scribe. ‘‘It is finished,’ replied the
dying saint. ‘‘ Lift up my head, let me sit in my cell, in the place where I
have so often prayed. And now, glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost.” And, with these words, as if the rapture of having accomplished
a patiently prosecuted purpose was too much for him, his spirit fled. It
is said, on one occasion when Sir Isaac Newton was engaged in some calcula-
tions to prove the extent of his elaborated theory of terrestrial gravitation, that,
as he drew to the close and foresaw the absolute certainty of the theory they
would inevitably prove, he became so agitated that he was obliged to desire a
friend to finish them. A genuine joy overflows in thanksgiving.


II. The joy of an accomplished purpose is intensified by a review of the
varied steps by which it is consummated (verses 15-21). These verses contain
an appropriate narration of the most interesting facts connected with the
planning and building of the temple, and without such narration the services of
the dedication would have been incomplete. 1. This purpose was divinely
suggested. ‘‘The Lord God of Israel spake with His mouth unto David my
father’’ (verse 15). Our best thoughts and holiest inspirations come from God :
and the most successful work in connection with His Church is that which is
done on the lines projected by His Word. Moses was directed to build
the Tabernacle according to the pattern showed him in the Mount (Heb. viii. 5).
2. Its accomplishment was greatly needed. For years the ark was migratory, and
Jehovah had no settled place for His worship. Undera theocratic government
it was important there should be some spot specially set apart in which the
Lord could record His name. Jehovah first chose the person who should rule
His people, and then put it into his heart to build a house for His worship
(verse 17). If any other city than Jerusalem had been divinely chosen for
the Temple, then this would be regarded as a usurpation. But it is expressly
stated that God “chose no city to build an house” (verse 16); ther. tore, there
was the more urgent need for the building of this. 3. /¢ was cherished by one
who was not permitted to carry it out (verses 17-19). It was the life-purpose
of David to build a temple for Jehovah, and he made extensive preparations


accordingly. It would have been an unspeakable joy to him oe Pe been


eHaP, VIIL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
ee erent


permitted to build and consecrate the temple; and the occasion would
have called into exercise the highest genius of his poetic nature. But
this honour was denied him; partly, because the ancient nomadic
form of worship was not yet to be abandoned; and because the wars of
David unfitted him to be the founder of a seat of peaceful worship (2 Sam. vi.
6, 11; 1 Chron. xxii. 8). But a solemn assurance was given that his
dynasty should last for ever to continue the work: and the glory of building
and consecrating the most celebrated temple of antiquity fell to the lot of
Solomon (2 Sam. vii. 13; 1 Chron. xxii. 9). Jehovah approved and accepted
the good intentions of David, though he did not permit him to put them into
execution. This Divine approval was implied by God’s acceptance of the
design, with only the difference that it should be executed by the son instead
of the father, and also by the various promises by which He rewarded the
pious wish of His servant (2 Sam. vii. 10-16). 4. It was brought to its final
accomplishment by Divine assistance. ‘‘ The Lord hath performed His word that
He spake” (verse 20), ‘‘ Hath with His hand fulfilled it” (verse 15). Solomon
was the instrument; but Jehovah, as in all truly great enterprises, was the
moving power. The son was but completing the plan which had been pre-
conceived and arranged by his father. It is instructive to observe how the
unfinished works of a previous age are continued and completed by succeeding
generations. M. Lesseps, in constructing the Suez Canal, has only completed
the work commenced by Pharoah-Necho; while the Mount Cenis engineers, in
tunnelling a way though the Alps, have finished the work of Hannibal. The
Pacific Railroad, and the new line of steamers from Hong Kong to San Francisco,
have accomplished the grand vision of Columbus of a direct trade between
Europe and Asia by the Western, instead of the Eastern route. Russia, by her
present efforts to make Sarmacand a great centre of traffic, is filling in the
grand outline bequeathed to her by Tamerlane; while, by choosing the Oxus
as the great commercial highway of Central Asia, she is merely treading in the
footsteps of Alexander the Great. Every age has its own special mission; and
it should strive to maintain and extend the civil and religious blessings handed
down to it by our suffering and heroic forefathers. The Divine side of the work
remains unchangeably the same. God never yet ‘suffered His faithfulness to
fail, nor altered the thing that went out of His mouth” (Ps. lxxxix. 33).
Witness the constant and concurrent experience of saints in all ages—not one
instance to the contrary.


IIT. The joy of an accomplished purpose is based on the assurance of its
harmony with the Divine covenant (verse 21). The tables of stone laid up
in the ark were enduring witnesses of the covenant into which Jehovah had
entered with His people. The erection and consecration of the Temple was
another evidence of the faithfulness of God to His part of the covenant; and
this thought would augment the joy of Solomon on the occasion. There can
be no solid satisfaction in doing anything that we know is notin harmony with
the Divine will: ‘‘ Whatever good we do, we must look upon it as the per-
formance of God’s promise to us, rather than the performance of our promise to
Him. The more we do for God, the more we are indebted to Him; for our
sufficiency is of Him, and not of ourselves.”” We have more need to be
concerned about our own fidelity than that of God.


Lxssons:—1. Wo purpose can prosper that ts not concewed in a humble and
grateful spirit, 2. It vs an unspeakable privilege, and a great responsibility, to be
allowed to take any part in the work of God. 3. The joy of an accomplished good
outweighs the suffering and totl encountered in tts achievement.


412


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS.
a


GHAP. VXI





GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 16.—The choice of God is no
blind preference of one and prejudice
against another, but aims at the salva-
ion of both. As from amongst all
nations He chose Israel for its salva-
tion, so out of all the tribes of Israel
He chose the city of David for the
blessing of the whole kingdom.—
Lange.


Verse 17. How many individuals,
as well as whole congregations, have
the means and the power wherewith to
build a church, to repair a ruinous
one, or to enlarge one which has be-
come too small; but nothing can be
further from their mind.


Verse 18. Unrealized ideals no:
useless. 1. The character of an in-
dividual life is influenced and shaped
by the ideal after which it continually
aspires. 2. The ideal of a holy and
useful life should be constructed in
harmony with the requirements of the
Divine will. 3. If the ideal of life is
not realized, the effort after its attain-
ment will confer a reflex benefit on the
sincere aspirant. 4. Ideals of goodness,
though unrealized, call forth the
Divine commendation. 5. Unrealized
ideals in the present life become the
bases of still loftier ideals in the
future.

— He who purposes to doa good
work, but is hindered therein not by
his own fault, but by Divine decree, has
yet “well done.” God regards his
intentions as the deed itself.

—On maintaining a high ideal.
1. By a high ideal is meant, not some-
thing vast and vague and unattainable,
but what each, by God’s help, in the
full development of his own nature,
may attain. To aim at less would be
to be sluggish, undutiful, unfaithful.
To aim at more would be to enter the
mist, and become unreal. Speaking
generally, it will be found that what-
ever can be intelligently and conscien-
tiously aimed at, can be attained. In
the very ideas we entertain, and in the
endeavours we make, God gives us the
assurance that what we thus think of

1


and strive after may be attained. It
was the notion of Plato that each in-
dividual human creature is an offspring
or product of aneternal form or idea in
the Divine mind. Something of this
kind must be supposed in reason:
something of this kind is indeed taught
by the Christian revelation. God thus,
as we may say, keeps the secret of
every life, its true image and propor-
tions, and opens that secret to each as
he comes to Him. He has a picture
in his own mind of which each may
be, through His grace, a living reflex.
O beautiful, inspiring thought! touch-
ing us with fear, and yet raising us to
rapture—that each of us can find
himself truly, only in his God, and that
the discovery is certain to be eternal
advancement and salvation. 2. To
maintain the ideal high, we must be
continually striving to enlarge it. Our
moral conception of our own proper
nature must either grow larger and
more luminous, or fade down into
narrowness and darkness. Nothing on
earth, mental or material, can continue
in one stay. Thereisa sense in which
our best thoughts and noblest purposes
are passing away and dying; and our
only safety lies in raising still better
thoughts and still nobler purposes from
the ashes of those that have died.
Swift and subtle and sure is the pass-
ing away of our most etherial thought,
our most glowing emotion. Swiit and
sure also is the reproduction and ex-
pansion of them, so that while there is
dying and coming into life perpetually,
there shall yet be to our consciousness
only an unbroken continuity, and a
going on of our life from strength
to strength.” 38. In seeking to main-
tain and still enhance this spuitual and
great idea of our own life, we shall be
much assisted by an assured belief that
it is the very thing which God wishes
and will help us to realize and be. If
God will not help us in this by the
breath of His own infinite sympathy,
by the uplitting of the light of His
countenance upon us, our life is in-
deed a dark and hopeless thing. It
never can expand inte summer breadth
143


GHAP, VIII.





and beauty. How it pleases a father,
or a strong elder brother, to take the
hand of some youthful climber and
help him up the rocks and along the
giddy and perilous ridge towards some
sunny and safe elevations of the moun-
tains! Will it please the Heavenly
Father less to help those who, already
called and quickened by His grace,
are aiming, as they can, after entire
conformity to the very image of their
Father? 4. If we would maintain a
high sentiment and a pure idea about
our own life, we must learn to believe
in the actual goodness of others as well
as in the possible growth of our own.
To use technical but perfectly appro-
priate language, we must learn to
believe that God has a people in the
world. Look for goodness, and it will
shine out upon you, unless you your-
self are evil. Look for the love and
tenderness of Christ, which yet are
found in so many human hearts, and
you will soon be refreshed by the
breathing of that love and tenderness
as though He Himself were near. 5.
The contemplation of goodness in
others will be found, in the case of
most young persons, to operate power-
fully in the same direction—towards
raising and keeping the standard and
tone of life pure and high. Nothing
touches life so deeply and sensibly as


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





life. Nothing moves it to finer issues.
Is it not certain that, looking, we shall
become like? being changed by the
subtle, benignant laws of grace into
the same image we thus see and admire
—<‘‘from glory to glory, as by the Spirit _
of the Lord.” 6. Above all, we must
maintain a constant, vital connection
—a connection by faith, love, admira-
tion—with Jesus Christ. None among
us, old or young, can maintain a high
ideal of our life without Him. We
need Him—for our reverence and for
our admiration, and for our enthusiasm
and for our love! and for our frailties,
oh! how much! and for our great un-
worthiness. A human life is simple,
pure, and high, when it is a ‘‘ growing
up into Him in all things who is the
head.”—A. Raleigh (condensed from
the Sunday Magazine for 1873).


Verse 20. The fairest prerogative
of him whom God has placed upon a
throne is, that he has power to work
for the glory of God’s name, and to
watch over the extension of the Divyne
Kingdom amongst His people. Every
son who succeeds to the inheritance of
his father should feel obliged, first of
all, to take up the good work whose
completion was denied to his father,
and perfect it with love and zeal.—
Lange.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 22—58,


A Mover Depicatory Prayer.


Tus is a prayer of unusual length, of great compass and prthos in its
petitions; and is ‘‘remarkable as combining the conception of the Infinity of
the Divine Presence with the hope that the Divine Mercies will be drawn down
on the nation by the concentration of the national devotions, and even of the
devotions of foreign nations towards this fixed locality.” It consists of three
parts—-1. Adoration for the fulfilment of the promise to David (verses 23, 24).
2. Prayer for its continued fulfilment, and for blessings upon the concentration
of worship at the Temple (verses 25-30). 8. Supplication for specific blessings
(31-53) ; eg., in cases of trespass, when smitten before enemies, in times of
drought, famine, or plague, for the devout stranger, for success in battle, and for
deliverance from captivity. These prayers for specific blessings are seven, thus
corresponding in number with the seven petitions of the Lord’s prayer. We
may regard the whole prayer as illustrative of and embodying the three principal
tdcas which governed the religious life of the Jewish people—the ideas of God
of sin, ry of a coming deliverance. Just as the Grecians represented the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. Vit.








philosophic and artistic culture, and the Romans the legislative capacity, of the
human race, so the Israelites represented the religious principle—the greatest
force of all, and that which was destined to interpenetrate all other forces, and
use them for the advancement and salvation of the race, An examination of
the scope and matter of this prayer will show how the three leading ideas
referred to were ingrained in the national consciousness of Israel. The whole
prayer is an excellent model that may be appropriately followed in the dedicatory
services of every sanctuary solemnly set apart for Divine worship.


I. This prayer is illustrative of the Israelitish idea of Jehovah. The
whole world was overrun with polytheism, and the idea of one God was
in danger of being utterly extinguished. Abraham, the founder of the Jewish
nation, was rescued, by the special call of heaven, from the darkness and
bewilderment of heathenism, and became the great apostle of monotheism. With
his descendants was deposited the precious truth, which, though at first a
strictly national possession, was ultimately to enrich and exalt mankind. The
Israelites cherished the loftiest ideas of Jehovah—1. As a Being of Incom-
parable Majesty: ‘‘There is no God like Thee” (verse 23). Jehovah is not
compared here with other gods; but, on the contrary, is described as the only
true God (compare Deut. iv. 39; Josh. ii. 11; 2 Sam. vii. 22; xxii. 32).
God is recognized as the living and personal God, who is the source and power
of all things, and in comparison with whom all is emptiness and vanity.
2. As a Being of Infinite condescension: ‘‘ But will God indeed dwell on the
earth ?” (verse 27). The omnipresence and infinitude of Jehovah are acknow-
ledged. This is at once a refutation of the anthropomorphic notions of God
such as heathenism made in its temples, and which it might seek to associate
with His dwelling, no longer a movable tent, but in a permanent building; and
also a refutation of the pantheistic notion of Deity, which the highest philosophy
of heathendom, by identifying God and the world, imagined. ‘‘The Israelitish
idea of God knows nothing of a contradiction between the supernal, infinite, and
absolute being of God, and His entering into creaturely, finite, and limited being.
Just because He is infinite and unsearchable, He can communicate with the
finite; and because He is everywhere, He can be peculiarly present in one
place, centring His presence and displaying His absolute sublimity.” 3. dea
Being of unutterable purity. From Him proceeds the law which discovers sin
in us and holiness in Him, and which law is the rule to regulate our earthly
life. The whole Levitical economy, in its elaborate particularity, was 80 con-
structed as specially to detect and unveil sin in man, and to foster the most
exalted conceptions of Divine purity. 4. As a Being of boundless mercy : ‘‘ Who
keepest covenant and mercy ;” “‘ And when thou hearest, forgive ” (verses 23,
30). He is the gracious and merciful God to whom the poor and afflicted may
look for help, and all the world for blessing. In the new covenant we no
longer call upon God as the God of Israel, but as the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. He has revealed Himself to us through Christ, and through Christ
alone do we find in Him the true God, the God of grace and mercy (Eph. i. 3;
John xvii. 3). We have glimpses now of the depth and vastness of God’s
mercy which the most pious Israelite never saw. 5. As a Being of unchange-
able faithfulness (verses 24,25). Through the ages of the past, notwithstanding
the failures and sins of His chosen people, Jehovah continued steadfast to His
part of the covenant. The course of Jewish history is studded with wondrous
and convincing evidences of the unswerving fidelity of God; and the sacred
writers are never wearied in rehearsing the mighty acts which were done in
defence and preservation of His people, and in the accomplishment of His
promised Word. The believer of to-day has the same invulnerable fidelity te


fall back upon: “ Faithful is He who hath promised, who also cee it.


CHAP, VITZ. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
ere Ee J


Il. This prayer is illustrative of the Israelitish idea of sin. Israel is the .
nation conscious of sin, conscious as no other nation ever was or could be. The
best of men in the pre-Christian age were conscious there was something radically
wrong, but they had no just conception of the nature of the wrong, and were
utterly powerless to devisea remedy. Convinced that things could not go on as
they were, they looked for the destruction of the world, and despaired of mankind.
The piety and religions of the ancient world resolved themselves into stoical
scepticism on the one hand, and superstitious despair on the other. There was
no nation in whom the consciousness of sin was deeper, more genuine, or more
powerful than in Israel. The law was a constant remembrancer and a constant
convicter of sin. Sacrifice was the central point of all the rites and ceremonies
of the law. The sacred fire was to be burning incessantly upon the altar;
sacrifices were to be offered day by day; and the climax of all sacrifice was that
offered on the great day of atonement, on which the high priest, as the repre-
sentative of the nation, laid upon the sacrificial anima] the sins of the whole
people, bore the blood of atonement into the place of God’s typical presence, and
sprinkled with it the mercy seat, that the people might be absolved from sin, and
reconciled to God. Not only is universal sinfulness expressly asserted—‘‘ There ie
no man that sinneth not;” or, rather, That may not sin (verse 46)—but the living
consciousness of sin isinterwoven with every thought. Thisisthe more charac-
teristic, as it was not a penitential ceremony at which the prayer was offered, but
a joyful thanksgiving festival, and it was offered by a king who was the wisest
of his time, and had reached the summit of power and prosperity. Itis evident.
then, how deeply rooted was this consciousness of sin in Israel, and how insepar-
ably it was blent with their religious ideas. (Consult Luthardt’s Pundamental
Truths, Lecture viii., end Lange’s Com.) The deeper our sense of sin, the more
awful does the holiness of God appear, and the more eagerly do we welcome and
prize His mercy.


Til. This prayer is illustrative of the Israelitish idea of future deliverance
and glory. Israel was the nation of hope. Ancient prophecies of a Redeeme
and of a glorious redemption, in which the whole world was to share (verse 60}
existed among this people, and ever kept their view directed to the future
These prophecies assumed a form ever increasingly definite, while their fulfil
ment was confided to an ever narrowing circle—to the seed of Abraham, thc
tribe of Judah, the house of David. And now Israel, in the reigns of David and
Solomon, has reached the climax of its history and the maturity of its national
development and glory; and this era is a type of the victorious conflicts and
universal peace of the future, when a greater than Solomon shall reign over a
vanquished and ransomed world. It is remarkable that while Solomon is
offering this prayer, at the very flood-tide of national prosperity and triumph,
as if gifted by prophetic insight, he foresees the defeat and captivities of Israel
in the future, and earnestly supplicates for their restoration, that the Divine pur-
pose in advancing the good of mankind and His own glory might not be frus-
tated (verse 46-53—compare with verse 43-59, 60). ‘The common talk of
vulgar rationalism, about: Jehovah being only a God of the Jews and of their
land, appears in all its emptiness and folly when contrasted with the official
acknowledgment of Israel’s world-wide mission, and which acknowledgment was
made on a most solemn occasion.” The continual approach of a great deliverance
and of an era of happy, peaceful, and glorious government, is the great theme of
all the Hebrew prophets. Diversely as the records may read, penned as they
were under such different circumstances, all the varying features of the prophetic
utterances combine to form one great, bright picture of future blessings. The
history of Israel to the present is a witness to the veracity of the prophecies
and to the wondrous facts of Christianity. The prince who, on one occasion
asked a chaplain to furnish him with the evidence of the truth of Christianity,

6


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP .VHI.


Se ere een eee OS en ee
but to do ao briefly, for he had no time to spare, received as an answer th®


words—‘“‘ The Jews, your majesty!”


Lessons:—1. Prayer is a humble admission of personal dependence and helpless-


ness. 2. Must be offered to the only living and true God.


3. Should be compre-


hensive sn tte topics. +4. Should be urgent and persevering in supplication.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES,


Verse 22. Solomon stands before
the altar, bows the knee, stretches out
his hands; the people stand around,
the worshippers turn their faces to-
wards the sanctuary (verses 38, 44,
48, 54). In prayer the ancients used
to spread out the palms of their hands,
as it were to receive a blessing from
God (Exodus ix. 29; Psalms xliv. 20;
exliii. 6), Outward forms for the
worship and service of God are not to
be rejected when they are the natural
unbidden outflow of inward feeling.
They are worthless when they are
regarded a8 meritorious, and man puts
his trust in them (Luke xviii. 11).
They are sinful and blameworthy if
they are performed merely for appear-
ance’s sake, or to deceive men (Matt.
vi. 5, 16). The Lord knows the
hearts of all men; one cannot serve
the living God with dead works. The
Lord Himself and His Apostles prayed
upon their knees (Luke xxii. 41;
Eph. iii. 14). No one is so exalted
that he ought not to bow his knee and
elasp his hand.


Verses 23-58. The prayer of
Solomon. 1. A witness to his faith.
He confesses the living, holy, and one
God before all the people. 2. To his
love. He bears his people upon his
heart, and makes intercession for them.
8. To his hope. He hopes that all
nations will come to a knowledge of
the true God. From Solomon we may
learn how we ought to pray—in true
reverence and humiliation before God,
with earnestness and zeal, with un-
doubting confidence that we shall be
heard. What an elevating spectacle—
a king upon his knees praying aloud
in the presence of his whole people,
and in their behalf! Although the
highest of them all, he is not ashamed


to declare himself a servant of God,
and to fall down upon his knees; al-
though the wisest of them all, he
prays, a8 a testimony that a wisdom


‘which can no longer pray is folly;


although the mightiest of all, he con-
fesses that nothing is done by his
power alone, but that the Lord is the
King Eternal; therefore it is that he
does not merely rule over his subjects,
but as an upright king supplicates
and prays for them likewise.—Lange.


Verse 27. Reflecting upon God’s
performance of His promise concerning
the building of the Temple, Solomon
breaks forth into admiration. Is it
possible that the great and high and
lofty God should stoop so low as to
take up His dwelling here amongst
men! OQ, astonishing condescension !
The heaven—all this vast space of
the visible world:—And heaven of
heavens—the third and highest and
therefore the largest heaven, called
the heaven of heavens here (as also
Deut. x. 14; Psalm cxlviii. 4), for
its eminency and comprehensiveness—
cannot contain Thee, for Thy essence
reacheth far beyond them, being
omnipresent. How much less this
house that I have builded! This house,
therefore, was not built as if it were
proportionable to Thy greatness, or
could contain Thee, but only that
therein we might serve and glorify
Thee.—Pcol.

By the sentence that the heaven
of heavens—.e., the heaven in its most
extended compass; the ilimitable
space above the visible heaven or
firmament which lies immediately
over the earth—cannot contain God,
Solomon strikes down all rationalistic
assertions, that the Israelites imagined
Jehovah to be only a finite national

117


GHAP. VIII.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


en LE


god. The infinite and supra-mundane
exaltation of God cannot be more
clearly and strongly expressed than it
is in these words. That, however,
Solomon was addicted to no abstract
idealism is sufficiently apparent from
this, that he unites this consciousness
of the infinite exaltation of God with
the firm belief of His real presence in
the temple. The true God is not
merely infinitely exalted above the
world, has not only His throne in
heaven (verses 34, 86, 39; Psalm ii.
4; xi. 4; ciii. 19; Isaiah lxvi. 1;
Amos ix. 6), He is also present on the
earth (Deut. iv. 39), has chosen the
temple for the dwelling place of His
name in Israel, from which He hears
the prayers of His people.—Keil.

— Although the heaven of heavens
cannot contain the Unmeasurable and
Infinite One, and no building, how
great and noble soever, can suffice for
Him, yet, in His mercy, He will make
His dwelling place (Jno. xiv. 23) in
the heart of that man who loves Him
and keeps His word, and it will truly
become a temple of God (1 Cor. iii 16).
He will dwell with those who are of a
humble spirit (Isaiah lvii. 15; Psalm
cxili. 5, 6).


Verses 27-30. The greatness and
condescension of God. I. God ts too
great to be confined by anything that has
dimits. 1. He is greater than all
created things: ‘‘ Behold, the heaven
and the heaven of heavens cannot con-
tain thee’’ (verse 27). Solomon won-
ders that God should appoint a temple
to be erected to Him upon the earth,
when He is not contained in the vast
circuit of the heavens; His essence is
not straitened in the limits of any
created work. He who was before
the world, and place, and all things,
was to Himself a world, a place, and
everything: He is really out of the
world in Himself, as He was in Him-
self before the creation of the world.
As because God was before the founda-
tion of the world we conclude His
eternity, so because He is without the
bounds of the world we conclude His
immensity. He is above and outside
of all His creatures, and governs all

118


the possibilities of their existence
2. Heis presenteverywhere. Every-
thing is filled by God; but that which
is filled is different from that by
which it is filled. The Omnipresent
God is the inmost fundamental Being
of everything that exists: He is the
life of all that lives, the Spirit of all
spirits. And as He is all in all, so is
allin Him. Asthe bird in the air, as
the fish in the sea, so do all creatures
live and move and have their being in
God. The world of time and space,
of nature and history, is contained in
Him. But although creation is con-
tained in God, God is not contained in
His creation. Although the Omni-
present One is essentially present in
every leaf and every grain of wheat,
He dwells and moves freely in Him-
self, in virtue of His eternity. The
fundamental error of Pantheism is the
notion that God is Omnipresent of
necessity. God is present in one way
in nature, in another way in history ;
in one way in the church, in another
way in the world: He is not, in the
same sense, present alike in the hearts
of His saints, and in those of the un-
godly; in heaven and in hell (J/far-
tensen). II. God condescends to make
His church His dwelling place. 1. Here
His presence is especially realized:
“The place of which thou hast said,
My name shall be there” (verse 29).
The choice of Jerusalem as the place
seems to have been made by special
revelation to David (Ps. lxxviii. 68;
exxxii. 18, comp. with 1 Chron.
xxii. 1). The Name Jehovah is
synonymous with the nature and per-
fections of Jehovah; and it is here in-
timated that He would be present in
His temple to show forth His power
and glory by enlightening, quickening,
pardoning, sanctifying, and saving the
devout and sincere worshipper. As
the prayerful Jew directed his gaze
towards the Temple of Jerusalem, so
the believer must address his prayers
to God through Jesus Christ, who is
the Head of the spiritual church
(Dan. vii. 10, with Heb. x. 19, 20;
Col. i. 18). 2. Here His word is de-
posited. The church is commissioned
to hold inviolate the sacred trust, and


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY +» KINGS.


OHAP. Viti.


a SASSER cn


to disseminate the Word in all its purity


and power. The hoarded riches of
ancient cities were paltry compared
with the inexhaustible wealth of re-
velations which are treasured up in
the church of God—treasured up not
to lie unused and unproductive, but to
enrich the world. 3. Here His mercy
isdispensed. The ark of the covenant,
with its mercy seat, was in the Temple
—a symbol of hope and a pledge of
deliverance to the transgressor. III.
God +s graciously pleased to hear and
answer the prayer of the humble sup-
pliant (verses 28, 380). 1. Prayer may
be offered anywhere. The exclusive-
ness of the Jewish religion was a pre-
paration for, and made possible, a
religion that was to be adapted to
universal man. In the old dispensa-
tion prayer was offered in or towards
Jerusalem (verse 30): in the present
dispensation the command is that
“Men pray everywhere, lifting up
holy hands without wrath and doubt-
ing’ (1 Tim. ii. 8). Both tabernacle
and temple were types of Christ—God
manifest in the flesh; and He was and
is the Mediator between God and man.
The human nature of Christ is the
temple in which dwell all the fulness
of the Godhead bodily; therefore all
prayer, to be acceptable and entitled
to a hearing, must be offered to God
through Him. There is no restriction
as to locality. From the crowded
sanctuary or the quiet home-circle,
from the dingy prison or the pathless
seas, the worshipper may direct his
prayers to the Great Helper of the help-
less. 2. Prayer, to be successful, must
be fervent. Solomon speaks of the
“cory” and the ‘‘supplication”
(verses 28, 30). The more vividly
the soul realizes its need and its peril,
the more pathetic and passionate will
be its cry for help. Spite of the
hollow sneer of modern scientists,
prayer has an indefinable something
about it that moves the heart of God,
and brings Him consciously nearer to
the praying soul. The most coveted
rizes in religious experienc? have
bean won by wrestling prayer.
Lessons:—1. Zhe greatness of God
ts manifested in His merciful condescen-


ston. 2, He ts worthy of ceaseless adora-
tion. 3. The most abject sinner who
turns to Him will not be rejected.


Verse 29. The eye of God looks
upon every house where His name is
honoured, where all with one mind
raise heart and hand to Him, and call
upon His name (Psa. exxi. 4). To
every church the saying is applicable—
My Name shall be there. The object
of every church is to be a dwelling-
place of divine revelation, #.¢., of the
revealed Word of God, in which, upon
the strength of that Word, worship,
praise, and prayer shall be offered to
the name of the Lord.


Verse 30. The houses of God,
above all else, must be houses of
prayer (Isa. lvi. 7): they are dese-
erated if devoted to merely worldly
purposes of any kind whatsoever, in-
stead of being used for prayer and
supplication. The hearing of prayer
does not, indeed, depend upon the
place where it is offered (Jno. iv. 20),
but prayer should have an appointed
place, where we can present ourselves,
even as God wills that, together with


one voice, we humbly exalt His name


(Rom. xv. 6; Psa. xxxiv.4). Where
two or three are gathered together in
His name, He is in their midst; how
much more will He be where a whole
congregation is assembled to call upon
Him. — Lange.


Verses 31-50. The seven petitions
of the prayer teach us—1l. In all
necessity of body and soul to turn to
the Lord, who alone can help, and call
upon Him with earnestness and zeal
(Psalm 1.15; xci. 14,15). 2. In
all our straits to recognize the whole-
some discipline of an holy and just
God, who will show us the good way
in which we must walk (Psalm xciv.
12; Heb. xii. 5). 3. To confess our
sins, and to implore forgiveness in
order that we may be heard (Psalm
xxxii. 1, 5, 7). 4. Not only for our-
selves, but also for others, in their
time of need, should we pray and
gupplicate, even as the king docs here
gor all individual men, and for his
entire people.— Lange. +


OMAP, VITZ,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Verses 31, 82. The solemn appeal
of the accused. 1. That cases will
arise where tt 18 dificult to convict
the wrong-doer of his crime. Sin is
subtle in its movements and deceptive
initsappearance. It often wears the
garb of the saint, while it is enacting
the enormities of the most vicious.
How often is the truth concealed by
the most miserable equivocation. A
sudden lie may be sometimes only
manslaughter upon truth; but, by a
carefully constructed equivocation,
truth always is, with malice afore-
thought, deliberately murdered. It
is difficult to detect the real culprit,
amid the mystifications he has himself
originated, as it is to seize the cuttle-
fish by groping in the inky waters it
has itself discoloured. 2. Zhat the
final refuge of baffled justice ts to allow
the accused an appeal to the judgment
of God. 1. This appeal has been
often abused. In the ruder stages of
humzn development, very painful
methods were resorted to as tests of
innucence. Fire and sword were
freely used for this purpose. In the
dark ages a fire was kindled within
the church, not far from the great
altar; a bar of iron was heated, and,
after an elaborate ritual of prayers
and abjurations, the accused was re-
quired to carry the red-hot iron nine
yards from the flame. The moment he
laid it down, he was borne by the
priests into the vestry: there his
hands were wrapped in linen cloths,
sealed down with the signet of the
church; and, according to the condi-
tion in which the hands were found
on the third day, was he declared
innocent or guilty. A belief was
common among the northern nations
that the corpse of a murdered person
would bleed on the touch or at the
approach of the real murderer; and
this test was often applied with great
and imposing ceremonies. In Borneo,
we are told, when two dyaks have to
decide which is in the right, they
have two equal lumps of salt given
them to drop into water, and he whose
lump Cissolves first is deemed to be
in the wrong. Or, they put two
live shell-fish on a plate—-one for each

120


litigant—and squeezing lime-juice
over them, the verdict is given ac
cording to which man’s mollusc stirs
first. The Siamese, again, have a
curious way of deciding the truth
between two parties in the absence of
witnesses: their method is to ascer-
tain which of the two can stay longest
under water. Such are specimens of
the varied plans which reveal the
craft, the audacity, and the folly of
mankind. 2. This appeal must be
solemn and sincere(verse31). Though
the method may be abused, we may
and must call upon God to help the
innocent man to his rights, and, even
in this world, to reward the evil man
according to his deserts. It is allow-
able for a pious man to entreat God to
administer his just cause; yet, must
he not wish evil to his neighbour in
mere human vindictiveness (Psa. cix.
1). The oath is a prayer, a solemn
invocation of God in testimony of the
truth: the false oath is not merely a
lie, but an insolent mockery of God,
and God will not be mocked (Gal. vi.
7; Ex. xx. 7). Bear in mind, when
thou swearest, that thou art standing
before the altar, ¢.¢., before the judg-
ment-ceat of the Holy and Just God,
who can condemn body and soul to
hell. Where the oath is no longer
held sacred, there the nation and the
state go to ruin.—/Starke). 3. That
the Judgment of God is infallible in the
punishment of the guilty and the vindi-
cation of the innocent (verse 82). The
sinner cannot triumph for ever; and
the cries of the injured for justice are
notin vain. The retribution of the
wicked is often swift, and is always
terrible: God ‘‘ brings his way upon
his head.” This He hath done on
those who have taken false oaths of
execration, as may beinstanced in the
three false accusers of Narcissus, the
bishop of Jerusalem; in the case of
Earl Godwin; and in the case of one
Anne Averies, who, forswearing her-
self in a shop in Woud Street, London,
in 1575, praying God she might sink
where she stood, if she had not paid
for the wares she took, fell down
speechless and instantly expired. Ve-
rily, there is a God thet ruleth in the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. VIM.


sca REeeneeeeeene


earth, and every act of man shall
receive its due recompense according
to its character.


Lessons :—1. The innocent need not
fear the strictest scrutiny. 2. Sin is
certain to be discovered and punished.
3. The appeal to Divine Justice is not
tn vain.


— Personal injuries. I. Should
not be lightly inferred. Here an oath
was taken of the man who had in-
flicted the injury. This oath was
to be taken before God’s altar.


II. Should be committed into the
hand of God. The Judge of all the
earth will do right. Prayer to God
when we smart under injury will—


1. Prevent a vindictive spirit. 2.
Lead us to desire the triumph of
righteousness.


Verse 33, 84. The terrible scourge
of war. 1. That the defence of a
nation depends upon the bravery of its
people. 2. That sin saps the founda-
tion of natural courage. 3. That war
is sometimes an instrument of punish-
ment for national offences. 4. That
war is ever attended with terrible
suffering. 5. That defeat often drives
a nation to seek help and deliverance
in prayer. 6. That God hears the
ery of the humble and penitent
captives, and brings them out of their
distresses.


—I. The commission of sin producing
national calamities. Israel smitten
before the enemy, ‘‘ because they
sinned.” This result may be brought
about by the operation of natural
laws—not necessary to suppose any
miraculous intervention. Sin weakens
—sin destroys.

II. Zhe means that should be em-
ployed in times of calamity.

1. Reformation—‘‘Turn again to


thee.” 2. Confession of sin—‘‘ Con-
fess thy name.”’ 3. Prayer to God—
* And pray.”


— A victorious enemy is the whip
and scourge with which the Lord
chastises a nation, eo that if may


awake out of sleep, confess its sins,
turn unto Him, and learn anew its
forgotten prayers and supplications.
To those who are taken captive in war,
and, far from fatherland, must dwell
beneath a foreign yoke, applies the
Word of the Lord (Luke xiii. 2),
Therefore, they who are prospering
in their native country must pray for
them, believing in the words of Psalm
exlvi. 7.


Verses 35, 86. The abuse of pros-
perity and its Nemesis. I. Prospe-
rity is a blessing from God. He
controls the food-producing elements
—opens or stops ‘‘the bottles of the
sky,” fills the earth with fruitfulness,
or binds it up with the iron bands of
sterility. II. Prosperity is encom-
passed with many perils. Of a reck-
less and thankless indulgence—of a
proud self-sufliciency—of an impious
forgetfulness of God. III. The abuse
of prosperity is followed with inevit-
able punishment. Hard, harassing,
and unremunerative labour—general
searcity—life-long disease, personal
and social sufferings. IV. The teach-
ings of adversity tend to correct the
errors of prosperity. The proud and
thoughtless are humbled—man is
taught his absolute dependence on
God—a spirit of genuine devotion is
encouraged—a wise and generous use
of prosperity is inculcated.

—Introducesa question ebout which
there has been much angry discussion
Can human prayer modify or influence
the operation of natural law? If so, to
what extent, and under what con-
ditions? Probably a thorough and
satisfactory solution of the problem
will never be obtained. No necessary
conflict between prayer and natural
law.

I. The possibility of a great calamity
arising from natural causes. ‘Heaven
shut up.” ‘No rain.”

II. The connection of this calamity
with human sinfulness. ‘‘ Because they
have sinned against Thee.”

III. The Scriptural method of ter-
minating this calamity.

1. Confession of sin. 2, Abandon-
ment of sin. 3. Prayer of God.

lz}


@mAr. VOL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


LL


— Inasmuch as fruitful seasons,
instead of leading to repentance, as
being proofs of God’s goodness, 80
often tend to create pride, haughtiness,
and lightmindedness, therefore the
Lord sometimes shuts up His heavens.
But then we should murmur not
against Him, but against our own
sins (Sam. iii. 39), aad confess that
all human care and toil for obtaining
food out of the earth is in vain if He
give not rain out of heaven and fruitful
seasons. Fine weather is not brought
about by the means of processions, but
by true repentance and _ heartfelt
prayer (Lev. xxvi. 8, 4%. When
God humbles us, He thus directs to
the good way (Psalm cxix. 67; Deut.
ii. 3; v. 8).—WStarke.


Verse 86. The good way. 1. Is
Divinely revealed. 2. Is maintained
by Divine instruction. 3. Is lost by
disobedience. 4. Is found in the
pathway of suffering and trial. 5.
Leads to everlasting blessedness.


Verse 37-40. National calamities
and their lessons. I. That national
calamities are varied in their character
(verse 37). 1. Famine, a scarcity,
or total want of bread, necessarily
springing from the preceding cause,
want of rain. 2. Pestilence, any
general and _ contagious disease.
8. Blasting, anything by which the
crops are injured, so that the eur is
never matured, but, instead of whole-
some grain, there is a black offensive
dust. 4. Mildew, anything that vi-
tiates or corrodes the texture of the
stalk, destroys the flowers and blos-
soms, or causes the young shaped
fruits to fall off their stems. 5.
Loéust, a well-known curse in the
East, a species of grasshopper that
multiplies by millions, and covers the
face of the earth for many miles
square, destroying every green thing,
leaving neither herb nor grass upon the
earth, nor leaf nor bark upon the trees.
6. Caterpillars, the locust in its young
or nympha state. The former refers
to ocusts brought by winds from
other countries, and settling on the
land; the latter, to the young locusts

122


bred in the land. 7. An enemy,
having attacked their defenced cities,
the keys and barriers of the land.
8. Any other kind of plague, that
which affects the surface of the body
—blotch, blain, leprosy, ophthalmia,
&c. 9. Sickness, whatever impaired
the strength, or affected the intestines,
disturbing or destroying their natural
functions. II. That national calams-
ties are aggravated by indwidual
offences. 1. Sin is the fruitful source
of all calamities, and is itself the
greatest of all. 2. That a personal
consciousness of sin is the discovery of
man’s greatest moral plague (verse 38).
III. That national calamities should
lead to national humiliation and prayer.
IV. That the removal of national
calamities should intensify and augment
national piety (verse 40).

— Divine judgments and means of
discipline are very various in their
kind, their degree, and their duration.
God in His wisdom and justice metes
out to a whole people, as to each in-
dividual man, such measure of suffer-
ing as is needed for its salvation, for
He knows the hearts of all the chil-
dren of men, and He tries no man
beyond His power of endurance. He
hearkens to him who calls upon Him
in distress (2 Sam. xxii. 7; Psalm
xxxiv. 18; Isaiah xxvi. 16). Dis-
tress teaches us how to pray, but often
only so long as itis present with us.
God looks upon our hearts, and knows
whether our prayer is @ mere passing
emotion, or whether we have truly
turned to Him. How entirely diffe-
rent would our prayers often sound if
we reflected that we were addressing
Him who knows our heart, with its
most secret and mysterious thoughts,
expectations, and wishes. The effect
of an auswer to our prayers must be
that we fear the Lord, and walk in His
ways, not only in the time of need and
trouble, but at all times as long as we
live. It is a priceless thing that the
heart remains constant.—Lange.


Verse 38. The moral plague of
humanity. “Shall know every man
the plague of hisown heart.” I. The
moral plague of humanity is sin. IL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. VITi.


a


Is inward and individual. III. Is
terrible when it intensifies itself into
the form of a conscious and deserved
judgment of God. IV. Is an un-
speakable blessing when it induces man
to escape from its ruinous consequences
by a timely repentance. V. Can be
removed only by a believing applica-
tion of the Divine Remedy.

— ‘The plague of his own heart.”
His own iniquity (Psalm xviii. 23):
the cause of his calamity, as he well
understandeth when sin and wrath
meet in his soul and make a wound in
it: the cure whereof he seeketh of
God by prayer, which hath a pacify-
ing property, and fetcheth out the
stain and sting of sin.—TZrapp.


Verse 39. The divine knowledge
of man. 1. Is infallible. 2. Uni-
versal. 3. Minute. 4. Is specially
concerned with his moral condition.
5. Enables God to reveal man’s true
state to himself. 6. Should foster in
man a spirit of vigilance, circumspec-
tion, and awe.


Verse 40. The fear of God is again
connected with forgiveness in Psalm
exxx. 4, asif he should not fear, unless
we could hope. So Milton makes
Satan say, ‘‘ Then farewell Hope ; and
with Hope, farewell Fear.” And
Aristotle speaks of fear as inseparably
connected with hope (Rhet. ii. 5).—
Speaker’s Comm.


Verses 41-43. The unifying power
of prayer. I. All men are alike in


their moral needs. II. The exercise
of prayer is an invisible but all-active
power that unites the entire race—irre-
spective of rank, of nationality, of
creed, or outward circumstances. III.
Prayer is a divinely-appointed means
of bringing all men to a true know-
ledge of God. IV. Prayer recognises
the fact of a universal brotherhood.


Verse 41. Nothing is more remark-
able in the Mosaic law than its libe-
' rality with regard to strangers. Not
only were the Israelites forbidden to
vex or oppress a stranger (Ex. xxii.
21), not only were they required to


relieve the stranger who was poor or
in distress (Lev. xxv. 35), not onl
had they a general command to “love
the stranger” (Deut. x.19); but, even
in religious matters, where anciently
almost all nations were exclusive, they
were exclusive, they were bound to
admit strangers to nearly equal pri-
vileges. Such persons might make
offerings at the tabernacle under ex-
actly the same conditions as the native
Israelites (Num. xv. 14-16); and they
might be present at the solemn reading
of the law, which took place once in
seven years (Deut. xxxi. 12). It is
quite in the spirit of these enactments
that Solomon, having first prayed God
on behalf of his fellow-countrymen,
should next go on to intercede for the
strangers, and to ask for their prayers
the same acceptance which he had
previously begged for the prayers of
faithful lsraelites.—Speaker’s Com.


Verses 41-43. Even Solomon bore
witness that the house he had built
could not encompass Him whom the
heavens cannot contain, so likewise he
testified that the covenant made by
God with Israel did not exclude all
other nations from salvation, but rather
aimed at leading all men to a know-
ledge of the truth. If a Solomon
prayed for the attainment of this
object, how much more does it become
us to pray for the conversion of the
heathen, and do our utmost that the
people who sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, may come to Him, a
light set by God before all nations to
lighten the heathen (Luke ii. 31),
He who desires to know nothing of
missions to the heathen, fails to know
the God who wills that help should be
given to all men, and that all should
come to the knowledge of Himself
(1 fim. ii. 4). Solomon hoped that
the heathen, when they heard the
great deeds which the Lord did in
Israel, would turn to that God; how
much stronger becomes this hope
when the infinitely greater scheme of
salvation in Christ Jesus is declared te
them!—The acknowledgment of the
name of God necessarily causes the
fear of God. If an individual, or an

123


CHAP, WII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





entire nation, be wanting in the latter,
they will, alas! lack a true knowledge
of God, let them boast as they will of
enlightenment and enlightened reli-
gious ideas.—Lange.


Verse 43. Here is one of the Old
Testament intimations of the univer-
sality of the true religion and true
worship of God. Though the national
consciousness of Israel was that of
separateness from all other nations,
yet at times the Spirit lifted it above
that exclusiveness, and thrilled it with
a momentary grasping after universal
brotherhood.—Zerry.


Verse 44. This refers to wars
undertaken by Divine appointment—
“‘'Whithersoever thou shalt send
them”: for in no other wars could
they expect the blessing and concur-
rence of the Lord; in none other
could the God of truth and justice
maintain their cause. There were
such wars under the Mosaic dispensa-
tion; there are none such under the
Christian dispensation: nor can there
be any, for the Son of Man is come,
not to destroy men’s lives, but to save
them. Except mere defensive war, all
others are diabolic; and if there were
no provocations, would there be any
attacks, and, consequently, any need of
defensive wars ?—A. Clarke,


Verses 44, 45. Prayer a prepara-
tion for conflict, 1. Every man is
called to wage unceasing warfare
against evil. 2. Man can conquer evil
only by Divine aid. 8. He who prays
the most will fight the best. 4. Prayer
will win the conflict when all external
tactics fail. 5. God will prosper and
maintain the cause He has made His
own.

— A people who undertake war
should, »bove all, be sure that it is
under the guidance of God. That
alone is a just war which is undeitaken
with God’s help and in the cause of
God, of truth, and of justice. A host
going forth to battle should remember
this:—Nothing can be done in our
own strength; we are soon quite ruined
(Psa. xxxiii. 16), and thereupon we

124


should pray and entreat the Lord, from
whom alone proceeds victory (Prov
xxi. 81; Ps. exlvii. 10).—That soldier
can never answer it to God that strikes
not more as ajusticerthan as an enemy.
Soldiers must fight and pray, and pray
and fight.


Verses 46-50. Captivity and free-
dom. I. Captivity is a bitter experi-
ence to the ardent lover of liberty.
It is the badge of defeat—the loss of
home and country—exposes to ex-
asperating taunts and pitiless cruelties.
II. Captivity to sin, and on account of
sin, is most degrading, and fraught
with unutterable distress. III. The
first step towards freedom begins in
repentance and prayer (verse 47). IV.
Freedom from sin involves restoration
to the Divine favour and inheritance.

— Righteousness exalteth a nation,
but sin is a reproach to any people
(Prov. xiv. 34). Thus the people
Israel is a living example for all times
as a warning and as an admonition
(1 Cor. x. 2.) The Lord has patience
with each person. as also with whole
peoples and governments, for He knows
‘there is no man that is not sinful.”
But when the riches of His goodness,
patience, and long-suffering are de-
spised, and a nation given over to
hardness of heart and impenitence
(Rom. ii. 4), He casts it away from
before His face, and wipes it out as a
man wipeth a dish (2 Kings xxi. 18),
so that it ceases to be a people and a
kingdom. The world’s history is the
world’s final doom. The wrath of God
towards all ungodly conduct of men is
not a mere biblical form of speech, but
a fearful truth, which he who hearkens
not will learn by expcrience.—The
saying: ‘‘ There is no man that sin-
neth not’’—that may not sin—must not
be misused to apologize for sin as a
natural weakness; it should rather
warn and exhort us that we must not
give the reins to that will which lieth
even at the door, but rule over it
(Gen. i. 4, 7); for he who committeth
sin is the slave of sin (Jno. viii. 34).
The statement is not made with re-
ference to the possibilities of gracious
attainment in the Christian life, but


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. Vili.





to the ordinary facts of humen history.
The meaning is, there is no man and
no nation that can claim to be beyond
the possibility ofsinning. Israel must
not assume that because they are the
chosen people that may not, by run-
ning into sin, draw down the Divine
anger in bitter judgments upon them.
But here is surely no such universal
proposition as to involve, as some as-
sume, that even the New Testament
saint, whose life is hid with Christ in
God, sees never in this life the hour in
which he doves not sin. The confes-
sion, ‘‘ We have sinned” (verse 47)
must come from the depths of the
heart, and must be in connection with
the conversion of the whole soul to
the Lord; for he alone can obtain for-
giveness of all his sins in whose spirit
there is no guile (Ps. xxxii. 2). But
how often in days of fasting and
humiliation is this confession made
only with the lips! How, then, can
a man hope for mercy and forgiveness
through the hearing of prayer? The
Lord, who guides the hearts of men as
water-courses, can bestow upon our
enemies a forgiving and merciful heart,
even as Israel experienced. For this,
and not for the destruction of our ene-
mies, we ought to pray.—Lange and
Whedon.


Verse 50. Solomon probably means,
not merely such compassion as Evil-
Merodach showed towards Jehoiachin
in alleviating his sufferings and ame-
liorating his condition (2 Kings xxv.
27-30; Jer. lii. 31-34), but such as
Cyrus and Artaxerxes showed in allow-
ing the captive Jews to return to their
own land (Ezra i. 3; viii. 15; Neh.
ii. 6, compared with Ps. cxlvi. 46).


Verse 51. ‘The midst of the fur-
nace of iron.” The disciplinary
aspect of affliction. I. Is very pain-
ful toendure. II. Tests the faith and
patience of the sufferer. III. Purifies
and ennobles the whole man. IV. Mag-
nifies the grace and power of God in
sustaining and delivering. V. Prepares
for a loftier mission and more extended
usefulness.


Verses 51-53. Arguments in plead-
ing with God. Based on—I. Intimacy
of relationship: ‘‘ They be thy people.”
1. Specially chosen: ‘‘ For thou didst
separate them from among all the
people of the earth.” 2. Specially
prized: ‘‘ Thine inheritance.” II.
The fact of great suffering: ‘* The
midst of the furnace of iron.” III.
The memory of past deliverances :
‘« Which thou broughtest forth out of
Egypt.” IV. The record of Divine
pledges and promises: ‘‘ As thou
spakest by the hand of Moses.”


— In the midst of our cries and
prayers we should remember how
dearly the Lord has purchased us for
His own by the blood of His Son
(Rom. viii. 32; 1 Cor. vi. 20; Rev. v.
9). The grace of God in Christ is the
foundation of our assurance that the
Lord will deliver us from all tribula-
tion and sorrow, and will lead us to
His heavenly kingdom. For this do
we close our prayer with the words—
For the sake of thine eternal love.
God does not leave His people in the
furnace of misery, but always guides
them forth from it (Job. iii. 22). Our
prayers from beginning to end must
be grounded on the Divine promises
(2 Sam. vii. 25).—Starke.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 54-61.


Toe Exevatine anp Satisryine Powzr or Trur Devortom.


L. It fills the soul with grateful emotion (verses 54, 55). As Solomon
rose from his knees, after his earnest and prolonged pleading with God, his
Leart was eo full of Divine and heavenly influence that it overflowed in earnest


and emphatic expressions of gratitu


songregation with a loud voice.” And so it is.


de and joy—‘‘ He stood and blessed all the


They that wait upon the
135


GHAP, VIIZ, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Lord shall renew their strength—shall gain an increase of moral vigour and
sympathy. The suppliant may enter the presence-chamber of the Invisible and
Eternal God with trembling and fear; but he retires braced up in courage, and
clothed with supernatural power, prepared for conflict and hopeful of victory :
he comes, stricken down with a gloomy sense of personal unworthiness and
defilement, and retires modestly elated with}|a sense of pardon, transfigured
with the radiance of a moral transformation, the very countenance glistening
with the chrism of a heavenly benediction. There is no emotion so tender, so
profound, so full of nameless pathos and tranquillising joy like that which flows
into the heart in its quiet moments of communion with God; or which, like
sunshine after storm, visits the soul after it has passed through a season of
earnest and successful wrestling with God. The man whose life is spent in
devotion, though bound to earth by the dearest human ties, holds high fellow-
ship with the world above. In him earth and heaven are united—both are
understood by him in their true significance, and held in proper balance and
esteem. He is like a tall, gigantic mountain whose broad base 1s fixed in the
rocks far down beneath our feet, but whose top, springing into the lofty
expanse above, reposes under the pure covering of radiant snow and sunlight.
He is lifted above the pleasures of this world, and finds consolation and strengtk
in the darkest day of adversity. The apostle was ‘‘in prison more frequent,”
but in his dungeon he found the presence of Jesus, and could pray and sing
praises unto God. ‘‘I thought of Jesus,” said the holy John Rutherford, when
imprisoned for the Gospel’s sake, ‘‘ until every stone in the walls of my cell
shone like a ruby.”


II. It presents the most exalted and satisfying views of the faithfulness
of God (verse 56). 1. As to a specific Divine promise. ‘‘The Lord hath given
rest unto His people Israel, according to all that He promised.” Solomon
blessed God, not for wealth, grandeur, power, or victory, all of which had been
80 conspicuously bestowed on Israel, but for rest. Without this blessing all
the others would be unavailing. Many weary years wheeled round, and many
sharp trials were endured before the promised rest was given; but it came at
last. And it will come to us. Oh! how often does the veteran wilderness-
traveller, wearied with toil, and battered with conflict, turn his dim, weather.
worn eyes towards the shadowy outlines of the Canaan he approaches, and
sigh for the rest that remains for the people of God! 2. As to every Divine
promise. ‘There hath not failed one word of all His good promise” (Deut.
xil. 10; Josh. xxi. 45; xxiii. 14). How marked is the contrast between man,
the promise-breaker, and God, the promise-keeper! Every Divine promise is
based on His unchangeable faithfulness, and backed by His Omnipotence.
Not only the nature of God, but every act of His providential and redemptive
government, is a guarantee of His incorruptible and unfailing fidelity. What-
ever is opposed to the Divine will must inevitably fall: whatever God hag
promised will be inevitably fulfilled. The united and fiercest opposition of
earth and hell cannot hinder the final and complete accomplishment of the
Divine Word.


Nil. It realizes the nearness of God in the ordinary walk of life
(verses 57, 58). 1. The nearness of God with His people is a fact of past expe-
rience. ‘‘ As He was with our fathers.”” He was with Abraham when he was
called by His mysterious voice to leave the idolatrous associations of his early
life, and migrate to an unknown country and become the father of a countless
heritage. He was with Jacob when he fled from the fury of an incensed
brother. He appeared to him at Bethel, assured the distracted traveller of
future guidance and prosperity, and renewed to him the promise which had
been noel to Abraham, He was with Israel in Egypt, preserved them amid

1:


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. VIII.








the threatenings and cruelties of their relentless taskmasters, delivered them
from their oppressors, defended them amid the perils and trials of the wilder-
ness, and guided them in safety to the promised rest. God is with His church
to-day ; and in this fact is the assurance of her final victory and everlasting
blessedness. 2. The nearness of God is matter of personal consciousness. ‘‘ That
He may incline our hearts unto Him.’ The heart is the sphere in which God
manifests His presence—-mind revealing itself to mind, will to will, heart to
heart. When the soul is full of love to God, it the more readily recognizes His
presence in every event of life. ‘If we have loving, waiting, Christ-desiring
spirits, everything in this world—the common meal, the events of every day,
the most veritable trifles of our earthly relationships—will all have hooks and
barbs, as it were, which will draw aiter them thoughts of Him. There is
nothing so small but that to it there may be attached some filament which will
bring after it the whole majesty and grace of Christ and His love.” Man is
never so sweetly conscious of the nearness of God as when he is bowed at His
footstool in humble and sincere devotion. He only forsakes those who have
forsaken Him (Ps. ix.11). 3. The nearness of God ts the great inspiration to a
life of obedience. ‘‘To walk in all His ways, and to keep His commandments
and His statutes and His judgments.” The temptations to turn aside from
rectitude are many and powerful, but for Divine aid we should be powerless to
resist. When, says one, the believer is as nigh to God as a creature can be,
the sound of the devil’s feet is heard behind him; but, blessed be God! He is
near to His people as the devil can be, and if the devil touch Job’s flesh and
Job’s bone too, God is in Job’s heart, and that is nigher. The end of Divine
blessing is to bring the heart near to Him, and to give grace to walk in His
way with uprightness and perseverance.


IV. It teaches how temporal blessings are to be subordinated and made
contributory to the more glorious end of spreading the knowledge of the
only true God (verses 59, 60). Jehovah blessed Israel with a marvellous history,
with deliverances, successes, and affluence which reached their climax of
grandeur and power in the age of Solomon, but He did it all for His name’s sake ;
and to fit the nation forits great mission in making known His salvation to all
people (verse 60). Every temporal blessing has its moral significance, and
increases the responsibility of the recipient. Wealth, intellectual genius, spiritual
influence, that is not used for God will only intensify the sorrows and sufferings
of the unfaithful possessor. Like most garments, like most carpets, everything
has a right side and a wrong side. You can take any joy, and by turning it
round find troubles on the other side; or you may take the greatest trouble,
and by turning it round find joys onthe other side. The gloomiest mountain
never casts a shadow on both sides at once, nor does the greatest of life’s calamities.
By aiming at the glory of God in all things, sorrows will be turned into joy,
reverses into success.


V. It stimulates the soul after a higher standard of moral perfection
(verse 61). The best and greatest wish which a king can form for his people,
a father for his children, a pastor for his flock, is—May your heart be righteous—
#.¢., whole and undivided before the Lord our God. He who elects to side with
Him must do so wholly and entirely : all ‘halting between two opinions | 18 an
abomination to him: the lukewarm he will spue out of his mouth. Be thou on
the Lord’s side, and he will be with thee (Lange). The great end of prayer 1s
to encourage a holier life; and itisa mighty agency 10 promoting that end.
We must find happiness in our every-day life and in the performance of our
ordinary duties, or we shall miss it altogether. ‘The greatest happiness is the
outgrowth of the highest moral perfection, and the spring of both is found in g
spirit of profound devotion. “is


Guar, Vii.





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
Pia ak I Ee et an Ene


Lussons:—1. Zhe soul touches the lowest depth of humiliation and reaches ets
most exalted blessedness in communion with God. 2. The brightest visions of God's
character and the most practical lessons for the conduct of life are obtained in the
best moods of devotion. 8. Prayer ts one of the most potent agencies tn promoting


a holier life.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 54-61. Solomon’s final
address to the people contains—l. A
psalm of praise (verse 56). 2. A wish
for a blessing (verses 57-60), 3. A
warning (verse 61).


Verse 56. ‘‘The Lord hath given


rest unto His people.’”? Compared
with 1 Chronicles xxiii.25,. The rest
of the people of God. I. In the


mysterious polity of the people of
Israel, spiritual and temporal blessings
were s0 closely allied that the same
language might naturally be employed
to signify either. When with the
conviction of special divine super-
intendence was combined the pure and
lofty moral nature of the Divine
Governor, as revealed in the law issued
by Moses, it is inconceivable but that
the higher class of Israelitish minds,
the holy and meditative class, must
often have felt that the mass of
ordinances which surrounded them
were truly meant as types of some
more profound spiritual realities; and
that their whole national history was
intended to image forth a moral his-
tory, wider in its purpose and extent,
and more adequate to the power and
dignity of a God whom they well
knew to be the God of the whole earth
as well as of the territory of Israel,
yea, even a God whom ‘‘the heaven
of heavens could not contain.” In
the fourth chapter of the Epistle to the
‘Hebrews it is shown that the rest
which the Israelites enjoyed in the
land of promise, no less than the rest
of the Sabbath-day, was symbolical of
the repose of the persevering Christian.
II. It is not unwarrantable to con-
jecture that when the patriot cried—
“The Lord hath given rest unto His
people Israel,” he was not more the
patriot of Israel than of mankind ; or
at least, that the Spirit of God spoke
128


through his lips with a higher purpose,
to be explained and developed by the
events of subsequent ages. The God
of Israel, in permitting His ark to
be deposited in a permanent abode,
seemed to guarantee the eternal glory
of the city of David. And it seemed
at length that the Lord was about to
give His people the proof of His
peculiar favour, which they might
naturally have expected, by actually
exalting them to the highest temporal
position among the nations of the
earth, and making the divine glory on
the mercy seat the centre from which
the deputed authority of God was to
radiate to the circumference of the
world. It was the destiny of Israel,
after a brief period of prosperity, to
separate into rival dynasties, to run
through a course of much iniquity, to
despise constant, reiterated warnings,
and at length to merge into utter ruin,
undestroyed, indeed, but preserved
only as a monument of God’s abiding
vengeance. But mark the unsearch-
able depths of the purposes of Provi-
dence! These national misfortunes
brought in universal blessedness.
Israel fell to prepare the salvation of
mankind ; and the rest which the Lord
denied His people was denied only
that an everlasting rest might be
secured to His spiritual people for
ever! III. This rest which the Lord
God of Israel bestows on His spiritual
Israel is no unattainable blessing even
on this side of the grave. It is the
mark of a poor spirit to be satisfied
with small things. With the temporal
dispensations of God, whatever they
be, a Christian is bound to be content ;
but for the man whois not a Christian,
that discontent should be hs portion
is the prayer of mercy itself! Such
discontent is the voice of the Spirit of
God, for whom his nature was origin:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





ally formed, calling upon him to
perceive and acknowledge that he has
no abiding city here, and that in
seeking after the things that belong
to his peace, he must turn to the
Prince of Peace. What some dreamer
imagined as to the structure of the
earth we live on, is a truth as regards
our own internal nature. We are,
indeed, a fragment struck from the
great source of light and heat, from
the sun of eternal righteousness; and
if the force that wilfully separates us
from our origin would but cease to
operate, we should return to our
native birth-place, even the bosom of
our Father; we should fly to the
centre of all good, and there abide in
blessedness for ever. To effect this
union is the great object of our
religion: Christ the Mediator is the
link that binds us to the centre of
everlasting happiness. IV. 1. Rest
and peace must fall upon a Christian
spirit, first from its devotion to Christ
Himself, and its devoted imitation of
His pure and perfect example. The
life of a Christian is the imitation of
Christ. And, among all the imitable
attributes of Christ, none is more
beautiful than His perfect peace.
Blessed Lord! Thou dost indeed give
us this peace when Thou givest Thyself
asour example! To be thy disciples
and copyists is to be at peace with
everything butsin. 2. Thisinfluence
of the character of Christ becoming the
great examplar of their actions is not
the only cause which works peace and
rest in the hearts of his followers.
The very singleness of the object of
His hope has a power to elevate the
Christian above the petty concerns of
daily life. The true peace of mind is
that which resolves all into a single
principle. God is one: let our affec-
tions but partake of the unity of that
object, and we shall have reached the
pathway of real and imperishable rest.
8. The same question might be argued
from the very nature of the Christian
affections, affections whose very exer-
cise is peace and happiness. In the
very exercise of faith and hope and
love, there are the materials of peace,
even apart from the subject of these
Ez


CHAP. VII.








feelings. The mere position of a
mind believing, trusting, and loving is
one of real happiness and rest. 4. In
such a state as ours, unless the
eternal world in some manner becomes
the guarantee of this, we are the
slaves of every accident, without any
hope for the future, any consolation
for misfortune, any substantial or
permanent motive for conduct, any
reward for endurance, any guide for
life. The earthly and the heavenly
elements must combine, or we are
powerless. To have the great object
of our thoughts placed beyond the
chances of human life is to place our-
selves beyond them! Our hope
“‘entereth into that within the veil.”
The Christian lays hold of a chain
which is bound to the throne of God;
he links himself to the eternal cer-
tainties of nature; the immutable
attributes of the God of the universe
are pledged for his security. As the
certainty of the end is greater than
that of the means, and as the dead
world that surrounds us exists, doubt-
less, with a main view to the Christian
people of God—the less perfect being
ever subordinate to the more perfect—
80 we may say that the finest laws of
nature and man, the very foundations
of the world that now is, are Jess firm
and durable than the purpose of God
to make His faithful people happy!
(Condensed from Archer Butler.)

‘¢‘ There hath not failed one word of
all His good promise.” The Divine
purpose fulfilled. 1. God hath
formed a purpose of mercy toward
mankind. 2. The fulfilment of this
purpose of mercy is committed to the
Lord Jesus—accomplished by His own
atonement for sin, and by the com-
munication of the Holy Spirit. 3.
The Divine purpose of mercy, under
the administration of the Lord Jesus,
shall be perfectly and triumphantly
accomplished.

Verse 57. The presence of God.
1. Necessary. 2. Promised. 3. Actu-
ally experienced. 4. Continued on
obedience. 5. The source of all help
and happiness.

Verse 58. All keeping of the com-

129


~x


GHAP. VIII.





mandments, all mere morality, without
submission of the heart to God, is worth-
less; a mere shell without the kernel.


Verses 59, 60. The words which
cise out of the depths of the heart to
God reach Him and abide with Him.
He forgets them not (Rev. viii. 3,4).
That the Lord is God, and none other,
seems nowhere more conspicuous than
in the choosing and leading of the
people Israel, in which He has revealed
Himself in His might and glory, in His
holiness and justice, His faithfulness
and mercy (Psalm exlv. 3-12). No
better proof of the existence of a one
living God than the history of Israel.—
Lange.


Verse 61 (compared with Exod.
xv. 11). Holiness the supreme end
of life. 1. We need the revelation of
God’s holiness in order to sustain usin
the presence of the tremendous forces
of the external universe, and in the
presence of what sometimes seems to
be the chaotic confusion of this world’s
affairs. To me itis not the benevolence
of God which seems to be supremely
necessary for the solace and the peace
of the heart, but His justice. I want
to know that the law of righteousness,
to which my conscience does homage,
will sooner or later be openly and com-
pletely vindicated; that even now we
are not under the government of mere
chance or of brute force, but of a living
holiness; that there is not only ajudg-
ment seat before which, in some re-
mote and uncertain day, all men will
have to give an account of the deeds
done in the body, but that now a
righteous God rules the world, and
suffers no irreparable injustice to be
inflicted on any man; that however
intolerable the actual condition of hu-
man affairs may seem to me, He who
has power to prevent every accident,
every mistake, every folly, every
crime; He who could strike the liar
dumb before he utters the slander
which will break the heart of the
innocent; He who could unmask before
itis consummated the villainy which
will ruin the peace and honour of a fair
and virtuoushome; Ho who could strike

130


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





down with mortal disease the recklesa
statesman who hurries a nation into an
unnecessary and iniquitous war; I
want to know that He the Almighty
and Omniscient Ruler of all men is not
careless of what happens on earth, that
He hasno selfish purpose to accomplish,
that He is not wilful, that He is not
capricious, but absolutely and perfectly
just ; that He has a hatred and scorn
a8 much more intense than mine for
every sin as His nature is greater than
myown. Knowing this—and I know
it—-I can look back upon the
sorrowful ages of human history, I
can look round upon the wild con-
fusions of my own time, I can look
forward to the dark and stormy future
which, apart from Him, promises no
sure relief from the vast and terrible
evils which seem to be the inheritance
of our race, and my heart is at rest.
From the vision of God’s holiness I
receive a peace which the world cannot
give, and which the world cannot take
away. 2. Nor is it only peace of
heart which God’s holiness inspires.
The Divine holiness is a strong support
to all our endeavours to attain moral
and spiritual perfection. Whatever
mystery may rest upon the Divine
government, and however unable we
may be to interpret the issues that
are to come out of the movements of
that providence over which God pre-
sides, we can be in no doubt concerning
God’s ultimate purpose in relation to
ourselves. Apart from any spiritual
relation, we have an absolute certainty
that wherever there is the capacity
for holiness, holiness must be the great
end of existence. We are capable of
a perfection which transcends, though
it includes moral virtue, and this pers
fection is holiness. Since we are
capable of it, it is, and it must be, the
supreme end for which we ought to
live. We miss the glory which is
within our reach if we do not attain
to it. God’s holiness makes it certain
that He regards our holiness as the
very crown of our nature, apart from
which the idea which He desires to
have illustrated in every man is un-
fulfilled. 8. God has no ultimate use
for a man who is not holy, and such a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. Viti.


eee


man does not become what he was
meant to be. Being holy Himself, it
must be, and it is, His great concern
that we should attain to moral and
spiritual perfection. God’s supreme
concern in relation to you and me is,
not that we should be happy to-day or
to-morrow, and all our life through:
His supreme concern is that we should
regard sin with intenseand unutterable
abhorrence, and that we should regard
goodness with a deep and passionate
affection. And God will not shrink
from inflicting any pain, however
skarp, or any suffering, however pro-
tracted, upon any of us, that may be
necessary in order to fulfil His great
design. LV. This was His supreme
purpose in sending the Lord Jesus
Christ into the world. Christ came
to save us from our sins, not merely
to release us from the penalty of our
sins, much less to assure us that we
may remain sinful and yet not miss
the glory and the blessedness for


which God made us. The grace that
Christ reveals does not for a moment
suggest that God regards our sin with
that pity and compassion with which
it is the tendency of our modern
religious lives to regard all sin; but
that He abhors sin so much, that He
Himself stooped to the most terrible
sufferings, to shame and to death, in
order to deliver us from sin. The
holiness of God lies at the very root of
the redemptive work of the Lord
Jesus Christ. It is just because God
is so holy that He set His heart upon
redeeming us from the power of sin.
Until we know that God is glorious in
holiness, as well as infinite in mercy,
and find in His very holiness that on
which we shall build our trust, and
that out of which our joy shall spring,
we know very little of the fulness of
life, and the depth of peace, and the
perfection of blessedness possible to us
through Jesus Christ our Lord.—(Con-
densed from 2. W. Dalein C. W. P).


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 62—66.


Sacerrick THE Txust oF GRATITUDE.


The Temple, the dwelling-place of Jehovah, the pride of the Jews, the
marvel of the ages, was now completed ; and its solemn dedication was attended
with overwhelming manifestations of the divine presence and glory. Its actual
consecration is now crowned with an act of sacrifice on a scale of unexampled
magnitude and grandeur. Monarch and people cheerfully unite in offering the
vast holocaust. As the whole empire shared in the religious benefits of the
occasion, so it was fitting it should share in its religious duties. Observe—


; a grateful heart prompts to acts of sacrifice. Bowed undera
Mase the Bivine ean and beneficence, the people burst forth ik
praising Jehovah, ‘For He is good; for His mercy endureth for ever
(2 Chron. vii. 3). It is when the heart is touched and melted with gratitude
that it is most prolific in generous sacrifices, in holy resolves, and in initiating
noble enterprises. The origin of many a stately building, of many a princely
charitable endowment, and of many a sacrifice which, though small as the
widow’s two mites, has, like hers, been the most acceptable to heaven, may be
traced to the tender impulse of a holy and grateful heart. While Jacob was
impressed with the goodness of a manifested God, he vowed a vow and set apa
pillar (Gen. xxviii. 16-22). When Isaiah felt the cleansing touch of the
Seraphim, and saw the ineffable glory of Jehovah, the difficulties of his ee
vanished, and his grateful and enraptured spirit eagerly cried, ‘‘ Here am ; "1
send me !”? (Isa. vi. 1-8.) In a similar way, many 4 brave and successf
missionary pioneer has offered his all upon the altar. The heart that is in-
capable of gratitude is incapable of anything truly great.


II, That sacrifice should be proportioned to the magnitude and character


of the benefits conferred (verse 62-64). 1. Jé should be equal to Ae eerste


OfAP, VIII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





The opening of the temple was the greatest event in the history of the
Israclitish nation. It was the fulfilment of a promise of many years’ standing;
the crowning act of a graduated series of laborious preparations. The liberality
with which the people offered their gifts, the enthusiasm with which they
laboured in its erection, and the readiness with which they gathered to cele-
brate its dedication, indicate the supreme importance in which it stood in the
national estimation. And now the sacrifices they are called to offer must bear
some adequate proportion to the greatness of the occasion. Alas! how few
gifts to the church of God, now-a-days, are worthy of the name of sacrifice?
Men—Christian men so-called—will spend hundreds of pounds in a pleasure
trip, a fancy ball, a luxurious banquet, or a bit of jewellery, and yet insult the
church of Christ by grudgingly offering a paltry piece of silver! There is
neither poetical nor any other kind of justice in conduct like this. It is
shockingly below the occasion. Allsense of honour, of obligation, of gratitude,
is utterly quenched. 2. Jt should be proportioned to ability. God had bestowed
on Solomon great commercial prosperity, great wealth, great intellectual
powers, great religious privileges, and he strives on this occasion to offer a be-
coming return to the Great Giver of all good. The Lord estimates the sacri-
fices of the rich, not by what is given, but by what is left. It was a frequent
saying of Gonsalvo de Cordova, the great Spanish captain, ‘‘ Never stint your
hand: there is no mode of enjoying one’s property like giving it away.” It
is expected by every law of right and justice that the wealthy should offer to
God’s cause in accordance with their means ; that the intellectually gifted should
devote their best powers to promote His glory; and that those who are specially
endowed with spiritual influence should use it diligently for the good of humanity.
God does not expect impossibilities. ‘‘ If there be first a willing mind, it is ac-
cepted according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not”
(2 Cor. viii. 12).


III, That sacrifice is a privilege to be enjoyed (verse 65). It was here
accompanied with great festivities. The feast of the dedication of the altar
lasted for a week, over which period, probably, the offering of the enormous
mass of sacrificial victims was extended. This, again, was succeeded by the
Feast of the Tabernacles (2 Chron. vii. 8, 9), now celebrated with more than the
usual festivities. The mere feasting occasioned by the vast number of victims
wassufficient to mark the grandeurof the festival. Whatever we do for God should
be done cheerfully and willingly, with all the relish of an enjoyable feast : not as
if performing some irksome and unpleasant task, but as if enjoying a distinguished
privilege. It is a triumph of Divine grace in man, and an evidence of a high
state of personal sanctity, when it becomes a joy to make sacrifices. It is then
that man most closely imitates the example of the great Sacrificial Victim who
said, ‘‘ Lo I come to do thy will, O God!” and who for the joy that was set
before Him endured the cross, despising the shame.


IV. That sacrifice is often followed by the most joyous results (verse 66).
The vast host of Israelites who had joined in the celebration was filled with
joy and thankfulness. When the people were dismissed they blessed the king,
and went away to their tents, glad and merry of heart, lightening the journey
home with songs of joy, ‘‘ for all the goodness that the Lord had done for David
His servant, and for Israel His people.” Great sacrifices are often succeeded
by great blessings. What we sow in tears, wereap in joy. The sacrifices of a
few may contribute to the happiness of the many. The one sacrifice of the Son
of God has filled earth and heaven with gladness.


Lessons:—1. We owe to God more than we can ever repay. 2. The most ac-
eeptable sacrifice to God is a grateful and obedient life. 3. We find our greatest
happiness in our greatest sacrifices:

132


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. VIM.


SSE a IR PSE I SE ee
GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 62-66. The Temple Dedica-
tion. 1. A thanksgiving feast (verses
62, €3). 2. A covenant feast (verse
65). 3. A feast of great gladness.

— For great benefits men should
offer great thanksgivings, and indeed
should prove their gratitude by pro-
moting the true service of God, and
by benevolence to the poor and needy.
—Lange.


Verse 62. A sublime spectacle.
1. A nation before the Lord conse-
erating a temple to His worship.
2. King and people mutually acknow-
ledging sin. 3. King and people
uniting in highest acts of devotion.
4. King and people rejoicing together.


Verse 63. Sacrifices. 1. Were
offered ever simce the fall. 2. Were
@ perpetual memorial of Jehovah’s
covenant with His people. 3. An
acknowledgment of Divine mercies.
4. Necessary as an expiation for
human sin.


Verse 64. The Burnt Offering was
so called because the victim was
wholly consumed by fire upon the
altar, and so, as it were, sent up to
God on the wings of fire. ‘his idea
which is expressed in the accoun
of Noah’s sacrifice, and which con-
stantly recurs both in the Scriptures
and in profane authors, is implied in
the Hebrew word, which signifies
to ascend. The sacrifice was a memo-
rial of God’s covenant, and signified
that the offerer belonged wholly to
God, and that he dedicated himself
soul and body to Him, and placed his
life at His disposal. And every such
sacrifice was a type of the perfect
offering made by Christ, on behalf of
the human race, of His human nature
and will to the will of the Father.
The Ifeat Offering always accom-
panied the burnt offering, for which
it might be substituted by the poor,
As the burnt offering signified the
gonsecration of fife to God, both that
of the offerer himself and of his living
property, so in the meat offering the
produce of the land was presented


before Jehovah, as being His gift.
The Peace Offering was not an atoning
sacrifice to make peace with God, but
a joyful celebration of peace made
through the covenant. In this part
of the Mosaic ritual, more than in
any other, we see Jehovah present in
His house, inviting the worshipper to
feast with Him. Peace offerings
were presented either as a thanks-
giving, or in fulfilment of a vow, or
as a free-will offering of love and joy.


Verse 66. When a man has ren-
dered unto God what is of God, he
can go forth to his daily labour with
joy and gladness. To praise and thank
God makes the heart glad and willing
to work. A good king is the joy of
his subjects. When we return to
our eternal home, our joy shall never
end; and our King Jesus will be the
theme of everlasting praise.

— As the King concluded, the
cloud which had rested over the Holy
of Holies grew brighter and more
dazzling; fire broke out and consumed
all the sacrifices (2 Chron. vii. 1);
the priests stood without, awestruck
by the insupportable splendour; the
whole people fell on their faces, and
worshipped and praised the Lord,
‘‘for He is good, for His mercy is
for ever.” Which was the greater,
the external magnificence or the
moral sublimity of this scene? Was
it the Temple, situated on its com-
manding eminence, with all its courts,
the dazzling splendour of its mate-
rials, the innumerable multitudes,
the priests in their gorgeous attire,
the king, with all the insignia of
royalty on his throne of burnished
brass, the music, the radiant cloud
filling the Temple, the sudden’ fire
flashing upon the altar, the whole
nation upon their knees? Was it not
rather the religious grandeur of the
hymns and of the prayer; the exalted
and rational views of the Divine
Nature; the union of a whole people
in the adoration of one Great, Incom-
prehensible, Almighty, Everlasting
Creator ?—Dean Milman.

— ‘For all the goodness that the

133


OHAP. IX. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Lord had done for David his servant.” 8. Demands continued obedience on
The heritage of the good. 1. Is the part of its possessor. 4. Is an
transmitted to succeeding generations. unspeakable boon to any nation. 6.
2. Bears constant testimony to the Should be earnestly coveted and
Divine faithfulness (comp. verse 15). faithfully preserved,





CHAPTER IX.
SEVERAL IMPERIAL TRANSACTIONS,


CrirrcaL AND Expianatory Norrs.—Chapter divides itself into two sections: verses 1-9,
@od’s answer, of promise and warning, to Solomon’s prayer; verses 10-27, transactions
between Solomon and Hiram, with a record of Solomon’s levy of labourers, his officers and
servants, his navy and foreign trade. Verse 1. It came to pass, &c.—i. ¢., “‘at the end of
twenty years” (verse 10), for verse 1 begins a narrative which verse 2 interrupts; verses 2-9


being a parenthesis. Solomon’s desire, PWIJ—(1 Chron. vii. 11), “ All that came into Salo-
Al


mon’s heart.” Thenius suggests ‘“ pleasure buildings” as in distinction from public works,
But verse 19 explains his “desire” as having reference to ‘‘ Jerusalem, Lebanon, and all the
land of his dominion ”—probably aqueducts, &c. Verse 2. That the Lord appeared, &c.—
Rather, ‘‘ for the Lord appeared,” as interposing this section, which continues till verse 10
resumes the narrative. The second time as, &c.—In Gibeon, during the night after his sacri-
fices (chap iii. 5); in this instance, during the night following the dedication prayer and sacri-
ficial offerings ; and again ‘‘inadream.” Verse 3. Sept. inserts, after “ Supplication that thou
hast made before me,” ‘I have done to thee according to all thy prayer.” Verse 6. If ye
shall at all turn.—A. V. implies only the slightest dereliction, ‘‘at all turns’ whereas
yawn 1\w is an intensive Hebraism, implying entirety, absolute apostasr, ‘Which I


have set before you: or, Moses set before you; so Sept. Notice also that the threatening
(verse 7) is a quotation from Moses (Deut. xxviii. 87). Verse 8. This house is high—Omit


italicised words at and which; ts high=future tense, shail be high Woy, not exalted in renown
2


(as Von Meyer, De Wette, Bahr), but shall stand high, a eonspicuous exam; j
illustration of destruction, res (the Peshito Matte Batteher), “ thie. rien Tine
heap.” Sept. =6 olos viras ora: d upmads. Vulg., e¢ domus hee ertt in exemplum. Verse 10,
At the end of twenty years—Seven and a-half years spent in erecting temple, twelve and ae
half upon his own house. This verse takes up again the suspended narrative (verse 1, supra)
After Solomon, with the aid of Hiram, had completed his work, the king gave Hiram twent ;
cities, &c. Verse 11, Cities in the land of Galilee—Adjacent to Tyre (J. osephus), until ‘sols
unconquered, and occupied by the Canaanites. Verses 12 and 13. They pleased him not.

he called them Cabul—Gesenius regards Cabul as a name of contempt; Keil considers she
word to be a contraction from zal 7) as @ vacuity, a desolate region. Verses 15-19,


Solomon fortified the border cities especially open to attacks fro i | i
ing projects for the public health ay aiyantage: The levy serie se mai ee
Comp. notes on chap. v.13. Werse 23 shows whom the Jevy included. Verse 22. Men of
war DO” TAy =oflicials of the wardepartment. Rulers of his chariots O'W))Uj—Rather, royal
adjutants—the royal bod ard, Verses 24 and 25 are inserte iinee
nection with the eee Fit by referring back to the events Chie ialnieee ae
the beginning of his reign (chap, iii, 1-4), they mark the completion of his building mreiecle
and hence the fulfilment of “all his desire.” Verse 26, Navy of ships—The Sept. Chala.”
aud Arab. have the singular ship, both here and verse 27; yet °N meansa fleet. Esion-gebm,
°?


port at the eastern head of the Red Sea. lioth, Elim, where a rove of terebi i
stands at the head of the gulf. Verse 28. Gold, four hundred and twenty ene


vill. 18 states 450, a mere change of the eipher 9 (5
£2,604,000.—W. H. J. pher 3 (50) into 3 (20): caleulated to value


——t=—
484


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAE, Ik.
ee


HOMILETICS OF VERSES}, 3.
Tae Parvizees anp Responsisinity oF Divine Mantrestation to May.


At two important eras in the career of Solomon, Jehovah appeared to him
The first appearance was at Gibeon, at the outset of his kingly career, when th
Lord gave him not only what he asked for, but also riches, dignity, and fame
the second occurred some years after, when Solomon had completed all his grea.
works, and stood at the highest pinnacle of his external and imperial grandeur
Each appearance had its own peculiar significance and worth. The one afforded
the opportunity and power to advance on a pathway of unexampled greatness
and authority ; the other was fraught with warning as to the danger of apostasy
and decline, and that at atime when he had reached the very summit of success.
Favoured, indeed, is the man whose life is divinely guided in its beginning,
prospered in its progress, and cautioned and guarded in its mid-career. To fall,
after being thus divinely fenced, is a saddening proof of the fickleness of human
promises, of base ingratitude, of gross criminality. Every revelation of God to
man is a distinguished privilege and a grave responsibility.


I. That Divine manifestation to man is an act of gracious condescen-
sion. In all ages man has eagerly longed for revelations of the Divine.
Heathen authors speak of the appearance of gods on the earth, and of the
exaltation of heroic men to the dignity of deity ; the former in the incarnations
of the Eastern world, the latter in the apotheoses of the Western. Though
these are but poetic fancies, they indicate the strong aspirations of the human
heart after God. Sin has broken the union that once existed between God and
man, and created a moral gulf which man is wholly unable to cross But the
infinite mercy of God has followed man in all his wanderings, met uim more
than half way, and bridged the otherwise impassable chasm. The yearnings of
humanity have been satisfied by Divine manifestations. The revelations of
Jehovah in Israel were preliminary and prophetic of the great revelation in
which He was Himself to appear in the person of His Son, and thus restore
the harmony between God and man that had been disturbed by sin. Sin was
the reason for the incarnation: the needs of humanity were met by the gracious
condescension of God.


II, That Divine manifestation to man often occurs at a critical junc-
ture in his individual history. Solomon was now at the height of his fame
—in the full tide of prosperity. Temptations unlike any he had had before
assailed him, and he was, perhaps, less prepared to resist them. There was no
one around him who had the courage or the ability to warn him of his dangers.
At this crisis, Jehovah appeared to him a second time, and, while encouraging
him in the pathway of integrity, cautioned him as to the consequences of dis-
obedience. How deep and untiring is the interest God takes in His children.
His manifestations are the most timely, and His words fraught with profound
significance. The extremity of the individual life has been the opportunity for
Divine interference; the crisis has been successfully passed, and the destiny
changed. The Divine manifestations are unmistakable. A poor Arabian of
the Desert was one day asked how he came to be assured that there was a God.
“‘In the same way,” said he, “‘that I am able to tell by the print impressed
on the sand whether it was a man or a beast that had passed this way.” The
manifestation of the God-Man was at a critical period in the world’s history ;
and who shall estimate the influence of that manifestation on the destinies of


the human race J
135


*


+


GHAP. Tx, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KING.





III. That Divine manifestation to man involves a solemn responsibility.
1. Because it is made to one who can apprehend and appreciate its significance. It
is not a display to insensate and unthinking matter. However gorgeous might
be the revelation in its external aspect, there is nothing in star, or flower, or
tree to catch and respond to its meaning; they robe themselves in the glory,
while all unconscious of the truth it unfolds. But the revelation to man is to
one gifted with intelligence and formed in the Divine image. ‘‘ If we think of
God, we think of Him after our image; and we do not think incorrectly. And
as God has ever thought of and willed Himself, so has He ever lovingly willed
man, in order to impart Himself to him.” Thus having affinity with the
Divine nature, man is competent to understand the meaning and appreciate the
value of Divine manifestations. 2. Because it ts made to one who ts capable of
carrying out the Divine behests. Man has capacity for accomplishing great things.
Vast, indeed, is his power for good or for evil. Marvellous are the productions
of human genius. Solomon had just exemplified what one man could do, when
divinely aided, in building up an empire which was the wonder of succeeding
ages. Man is exalted to the highest dignity when he becomes a medium for
carrying out Divine ideas and purposes. 3. Because tt ts made to one who may abuse
the blessings 1t confers. The will of man is free, and that which may be the
instrument of the greatest good may become a power for propagating terrible
mischief. The noble may become ignoble, the refined base, the honoured con-
temptible. Few great men exercise the questionable caution of a certain
celebrated musical composer who spent the last forty years of his life in almost
complete idleness, saying, ‘‘ An additional success would add nothing to my
fame; a failure would injure it. I have no need of the one, and I do not choose
to expose myself to the other.” Mayhap, it would have been well for some lives
if they had terminated when, to all appearance, they had reached the highest
point of moral goodness, rather than be prolonged to present such pitiful


examples of degeneracy and sin.


Lessons :—1. God honours man by His manifestations.
manifestation ts that which ts made to the heart.
1s a prelude and motive to loftier enterprise and totl.


2. The most blessed
3. Every manifestation of God
4. Zo disregard Divine


manifestation ¢s to incur unutterable calamity.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1-2. The second appear-
ance of Jehovah to Solomon.—l1.
The point of time at which it occurred:
after the completion of the great
works of the kingdom. 2. The ob-
ject of the appearance: promise and
warning.

— The appearance with which
Solomon was favoured after the com-
pletion of his many grand edifices, as
the text clearly and positively says,
is expressly placed in relation to and
contrasted with that which he had in
the beginning of his reign at Gibeon
(ch. iii. 5). He had succeeded in all
that he had undertaken. Not only
did he himself stand at the summ't of
fortune, but his people had never

136


before reached such @ great and
prosperous state, being blessed with
peace and quiet without, and with
prosperity and comfort within. Then
came the second appearance, which
contained, with the remembrance of
the prayer answered at the dedication
of the Temple and the promise of
blessing in the future, a threatening
and warning very wholesome, and
even necessary now, for Solomon
himself, who, though hitherto loyal
and faithful to the Lord, was open to
the temptation to fall away, as the
after-history shows. It was also
needed by that ever-restless, fickle
people which, in the enjoyment of
the greatest happiness, were in dan-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





ger of forgetting their Lord and God,
and of relapsing into the idolatrous
worship which was more agreeable to
the flesh.— Lange.

— This was a great engagement
upon Solomon to cleave close to that
God who had appeared unto him
twice (ch. xi. 9). See an analogical
appearance to all that love Him (Jno.
xiv. 21); and be instructed, lest
God’s soul depart from us (Jer. vi. 8),
for our evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the living God (Heb.


CHAP. Ix.





— The danger of transitions in
life——1i. Every period in life has its
special dangers. 2. The greatest
danger is present when in a state of
transition from one period into an-
other. 3. In every such transition
special help and wisdom should be
sought. 4. It is an unspeakable
boon to be conscious at such times of
the Divine presence and guidance,
5. To ignore the lessons of such
periods is to invite disaster and
ruin.


ili. 12).—Zrapp.
HOMILETICS OF VERSES 3-9.
Renieion THE Gtory oF « Nation.


I. That the religion of a nation does not consist in anything external.
1. Not in the grandeur of its temples. Architecture and artistic decoration are
not essential to true piety. The most exquisite creations of the trowel and
mallet can never rival the glorious edifice which has been already reared by the
master hand of Deity. Nature is one vast cathedral, with its roof fretted with
clouds and gemmed with stars; its aisles are the long-extended valleys; its
pillars the lofty, massive hills; its altar the spot where the worshipper
reverently bends his knee; and its music the manifold voices that rise from
bird, or forest, or sea. Some of the costliest temples built by the art and
adorned by the genius of man are consecrated to the worship of other than the
only true God. 2. Not in the elaborateness of its ritual. The rites and cere-
monies of the Israelitish religion in the days of Solomon were minute and
exacting. Their worship was a rich, imposing pageant, calculated to impress
both the worshipper and the spectator; and their history shows with what
scrupulosity they observed the forms of their ritual when the spirit which
gave those forms life and meaning was altogether quenched. It is the
tendency of man to rest in the outward; and the devoutest worshipper has


often to complain—


But I of means have made my boast,
Of means an idol made;

The spirit in the letter lost,
The substance in the shade.


8. Religion consists in the sincere worship of an ever-present God. The true glory
of Moriah’s Temple was the hallowing presence of Jehovah. ‘‘I have hallowed
this house which thou hast built, to put my name there for ever; and mine eyes
and mine heart shall be there perpetually” (verse 3). When we fail to recog-
nize the true God, when we forget His eye is upon us, when we are no longer
conscious of His personal and all-compassionate love, religion ceases to be a power,
ceases to be a reality. We may take our place in the temple, we may engage
mechanically in its services, but there is no longer any true, acceptable worship


(Matt. xv. 8, 9).


II. That the religion of a nation depends for its permanence on obedience
to God (verses 4, 5). 1. Obedience is regulated by clearly defined injunctions.
“‘To do according to all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my statutes


and my judgments.” Obedience must be intelligent, be governed eS ia


OHAP. Ix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





appreciation of the Divine commands. We are surrounded by law. We can-
not properly fulfil the great purpose of life without some acquaintance with the
laws and forces in operation around us. The mariner needs it in order to pilot
his vessel aright, the scientist to guide him in research, the physician to
ameliorate human suffering. There should not be less study given to the laws
of God for the government of our moral actions than is given to the laws of
nature. 2. Obedience must be genuine and complete. ‘In integrity of heart and
in uprightness.’”? We must be sincere. When we remember with what
energy and publicity we have sometimes served sin, we should be animated
with the more courage and earnestness in serving God. ‘‘ He doeth not God’s
will but his own, who doeth no more than himself will. Everything must be
done as well as anything, else we do nothing.” 3. Obedience ts illustrated by
noble examples. ‘If thou wilt walk before me as David thy father walked.”
God expects no impossibility. What one man has done, anothermay do. David
had great imperfections; but he had also great virtues. The seed of the godly
cannot expect to enjoy the entail of the blessing unless they tread in the steps
of those who have gone before, and keep up the piety of their ancestors. Solo-
mon’s subsequent fall lends to these repeated warnings a special interest.
4, Obedience ensures perpetuity of blessing. ‘‘ Then I will establish the throne of
thy kingdom upon Israel for ever” (verse 5). Obedience and blessing run
together. If we are faithful to our part of the covenant, God will never fail
on His part. All the promises of God are conditional ; and failure in fulfilment
of the promise is no proof of changeableness in God, but of infidelity in man.
While the condition is observed, the promise is inviolably kept.


III. That the decay of the religion of a nation is inevitably followed by
national ruin (verses 6-9). 1. Zhe ruin of tts national greatness. ‘‘ Then will
I cut off Israel out of the land I have given them.” In the very land where
the Jews were most highly exalted did they witness the most abject degradation
When the people forsook God, and turned to idols, the Temple of Solomon—
the world-wide evidence of national prosperity and blessing—was destroyed,
Israel ceased to be an independent kingdom, and the people were banished ; and
when, after the second temple was built, they rejected David’s greater Son—their
promised, true, and eternal king in whom all nations of the earth were to be
blessed—this temple was destroyed never to be rebuilt, and the people were
scattered through the whole world, ceasing for ever to be an independent king-
dom and nation. Irreligion will ruin a nation more completely than an invad-
ing army could do. The external evidences of national greatness are the last to
go: the first fatal weakness begins within, and may progress for a time silently
and unnoticed. 2. Zheruin of tts religious prestige. ‘‘ And this house which I
have hallowed for my name will I cast out of my sight.’? The temple was the
symbol and external evidence of the intense religiousness of the people. Never
was there before a nation so favoured with religious privileges: it was its
solemn mission to preserve and promulgate the idea of the Only True God,
which idea had become lost amid the mists of heathenism. When Israel lost
its religion it lost everything—temple, character, influence. The same is true
of every nation that abandons God. 3. The ruin ts held up as aterrible warning
to all ages. ‘‘ And Israel shall be a proverb and a bye-word among all people ;
and this house which is high (Heb. shall be high), every one that passeth by it
shall be astonished, and shall hiss” (verses 7, 8). Not a scornful hiss, but a
hissing of terror (Jer. xix. 8; xlix.17). The temple and the nation shall be
as conspicuous in their desolation as in their glory. No people in the world
ever became such a proverb—everywhere despised, reviled, and persecuted.
By its story it illustrates to all nations the unchanging truth uttered by the
prophet Azariah to King Asa, ‘If ye forsake Him, He will forsake you”
(2 Chron. xv. 2).

138


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








CHAP. TX





Lessons :—1. Religion ts at once the strength and the adornment of « people.
2. The chief concern of the monarch should be for the religious welfare of his people.
3. Zhe nation that abandons God will be abandoned by Him.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSEA,.


Verse 8. ‘To put my name there
for ever.” God’s gifts are without
repentance. When He puts His
name in the temple, He does it, in
intention, for ever. He will not arbi-
trarily withdraw it after so many
years or so many centuries. Once
placed there, it will remain there for
ever, so far as God is concerned. But
the people may, by unfaithfulness,
drive it away.

— ‘Mine eyes and mine heart shall
be there perpetually.” Solomon’s
prayer had been that God’s eyes might
be directed towards the temple con-
tinually. The answer given is—Not
mine eyes only, but mine eyes and
mine heart. To every house where
the name of God is truly honoured
applies the Divine saying, ‘‘ Mine eyes
and my heart shall dwell there for
ever.”

— The Divine solicitude for the
Church. 1. Heinvestigates its moral
condition. 2. He sympathises with
its struggles. 3. He rejoices in ita
triumphs. 4. Hiscareis unremitting.


Verse 4. “If Zhow wilt walk
before me” (compared with verse 6).
The power of individualism. 1.
The national is vastly influenced by
the personal. 2. A monarch may
foster or blast the religious interests
of his people. 8. The greater the
authority placed in the hands of one
men, the greater is his responsibility
for its use or abuse. 4. How mo-
mentous are the opportunities pre-
sented within the compass of a single
life |


Verses 6-9. Because men endure
aninterrupted prosperity with much


greater difficulty than they do crosses
and afilictions, therefore, when they
are at the summit of their wishes and
their hearts’ desire, it is most neces-
sary that the grave importance of God
and of eternity should be held up
before them, so that they may not fall
into security, and forget to work out
their own salvation with fear and
trembling (Matt. xvi. 26; 1 Cor.
x. 12). The more abundantly God
displays His mercy and love towards
an individual or towards a nation, so
much the more fearful will be the
righteous sentence, if the riches of
His mercy are despised. In happy
and prosperous days forget not that
the Lord tells us, “‘ Watch and pray,
lest ye enter into temptation.” How
many men, how many families, how
many nations, blessed in every respect,
have come to a fearful and shameful
end! Askest thou—Wherefore is
this? The only reply is— Because
they have forsaken the Lord their
God; for what a man sows that shall
he also reap. Let him who will not
recognize a Divine justice, turn to the
twice-destroyed temple of Jerusalem,
and to the world-scattered people who
have become a byeword amongst all
nations.—Lange.


Verse 7. If our growth in grace
does not correspond with our privi-
leges, our boast of the temple and the
best form of worship will but delude
and destroy us.


Verse 9. Apostasy is hateful even
among the heathen. Solyman, the
Grand Signior, rejected the revolt of
his Christian subjects to Turkism, and
doubled their taxations.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 10—14.


QuzstTiowaBLE GENEROSITY.


L. It is questionable generosity when a gift is tardily rendered. “ And
it came to pass at the end of twenty years—that then King Solomon gave


139


>


GAP, Ix, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


 —


Hiram twenty cities”—one city for every year of building. The charm of
generosity is its promptness. That is well done that is done quickly. To give
slowly is to give grudgingly. ‘ihe Arabians are said to be remarkably lavish in
their generosity. Gibbon relates that a dispute had arisen who, among the
citizens of Mecca, was entitled to the prize of generosity, and a successive
application was made to the three who were deemed most worthy of the trial.
Abdallah, the son of Abbas, had undertaken a distant journey, and his foot was
in the stirrup when he heard the voice of a suppliant, ‘‘O son of the uncle of
the Apostle of God, I am a traveller, and in cistress!” He instantly dis-
mounted to present the pilgrim with his camel, her rich caparison, and a purse
of four thousand pieces of gold, excepting only the sword, either for its intrinsic
value, or as the gift of an honoured kinsman. The servant of Kais informed
the second suppliant that his master was asleep; but he immediately added,
“Here is a purse of seven thousand pieces of gold—it is all we have in the
house—and here is an order that will entitle you to acamel anda slave.” The
master, as soon as he awoke, praised and enfranchised his faithful steward, with
a gentle reproof that by respecting his slumbers he had stinted his bounty.
The third of these heroes, the blind Arabah, at the hour of prayer, was sup-
porting his steps on the shoulders of two slaves—‘‘ Alas!” he replied, ‘‘ My
coffers are empty ; but these you may sell: if you refuse, I renounce them.”
At these words, pushing away the youthful slaves, he groped along the wall
with his staff. There is a generosity that is questionable in its excess; when
it surpasses the limits of discretion. A true generosity is regulated by justice.


II. It is questionable generosity where the right of disposal is doubtful.
According to the law, Solomon had no right to give away these cities, or any
part of the inheritance of Israel (Lev. xxv. 23). But this was not the first nor
last instance in which this great king stepped aside from the law of Moses.
Already, contrary to the express commands of the law, he had multiplied horses
and chariots. In the case before us the appearance of transgression is some-
what modified when we remember that these cities, when given to Hiram, were
not peopled by Israelites, but by heathens. Solomon may have regarded it as
a prudent policy to hand over the government of these heathen cities, which
were evidently of no great worth, to his friendly neighbour who had rendered
him so much service in building the Lord’s house. It is worse than a ques-
tionable generosity, it is a positive injustice, for a man to give away in charity
what ought to be paid in discharge of his just debts. It is easy for a man to be
lavish wita money that is not his own, but which in all fairness belongs to his
creditors. It is the impulse of benevolence blinding the sense of justice.


III. It is questionable generosity where the gift creates disappointment
rather than pleasure. ‘‘ And Hiram came out of Tyre to see the cities which
Solomon had given him ; and they pleased him not” (verse 12). It is not
always that a generous spirit meets with the appreciation and gratitude it
merits; but it strives so to administer its gifts as to meet the wants and pro-
mote the happiness of the recipient. There is a way of bestowing benefits
in which the giver makes himself appear as the obliged party. On the other
hand, a gift may be so inadequate in comparison with the resources of the
donor and the merits of the recipient as to produce chagrin and displeasure.
Hiram might naturally have coveted some of Solomon’s coast towns—perhaps
had cast his eyes on the noble bay of Acco or Ptolemais—and was therefore dis-
satisfied with the gift of a comparatively useless inland region. It would be


well for us to have as light an esteem of all things temporal as Hiram had of
these twenty cities !


IV. An act of questionable generosity need not interfere with a long:
tried friendship. ‘And Hiram sent to the king six score talents of gold”
140


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. Ix,
eee
(verse 14). Apparently to show that, although disappointed, a was not
offended. The sum sent was very large—above a million and a quarter of our
money, according to Mr. Poole’s estimate of the weight of the Hebrew gold
talent, or about £720,000 according to the estimate preferred by Mr. 8. Clarke
At any rate, it was more than equal to a sixth part of Solomon’s recular
revenue (chap. x. 14). The cities despised by Hiram were restored to
Solomon, who rebuilt and colonized them with Israclities (2 Chron. viii. 2)
No doubt Solomon compensated Hiram in some other way. Their friendship
was not sacrificed by what might have been thought an act of parsimoniousness
on the one hand, or an act of ungrateful contemptuousness on the other. In
the dearest friendships, anomalies will occur which are difficult to reconcile.
The conduct of a friend may seem questionable and blameworthy. Then is the
time to exercise patience and forbearance, to put the best construction on the
most unfavourable appearances, and wait calmly the issue of events. Many a
valuable friendship has been wrecked by a single injudicious act; and a wound


inflicted which has rankled in the heart for years. It is a bitter experience
when the soul realizes for the first time the heartless infidelity of a long


trusted friend!


1s all the counsel that we two have shared,

The sisters’ vows, the hours that we have spent
When we have chid the hasty-footed time

For parting us—O! is all forgot ?

All school-days’ friendship, childhood innocence ?
— And will you rend our ancient love asunder
To join with men in scorning your poor friend ?


Lxssons:—1. [¢ requires great wisdom to be truly generous.


Midsummer Night's Dream.


2. Generosity ta


often abused, both in the donor and én the recipient. 3. A genuine friendship ts too


ealuable to be forfeited by trifles.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 10. The demeanor of Solo-
mon and Hiram towards each other.
1. Friends and neighbours should be
of one mind, and mutually ready to
help each other. II. Let not him
who has kindly aided thee with his
substance be long awaiting the proofs
of thy gratitude, and render to him
more rather than less, even if he need
it not. III. Regard not so much the
gift which thou receivest, as the dis-
position of the giver, remembering
always, it is more blessed to give than
to receive.


Verse 10. A generous spirit. 1.
Is careful in estimating. 2. Liberal
in providing. 3. Prompt in giving.
4. Is one of the noblest fruits of
Christianity.

Verse 13. These twenty cities were
mere villages, of course, and it isa
genuine Eastern trick to dignify a
small present with a pompous name,


And so the remonstrance of Hiram
with Solomon is very natural: ‘‘ What
cities are these which thou hast given
me, my brother?” and then he
fastens upon the gift a name of con-
tempt—Cabul, vile or displeasing—a
mode of expressing and of perpetu-
ating dissatisfaction eminently Orien-
tal.— Zhe Land and the Book.

— From the heathen Hiram, many
Christians may learn, even where
real cause for dissatisfaction and just
claims exist, to state the dispropor-
tion between gifts and recompenses
with friendly words and ina kindly
manner.


Verse 14. Friends who through
long years have aided each other
must not be estranged, even when one
thinks himself injured by the other,
but must strive to come to a thorough
understanding and agreement.—
Lange.

141


GHAP, IX, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





HOMILETICS OF VERSES 15—28.


Tue Iuprrative Exicencigs oF Reeat Macniricence.


Solomon had the wisdom to conceive how his little inland kingdom eould be
raised into greatness and importance; and it excites our admiration to observe
the skilful combinations by which he accomplished his aims. His relations with
Egypt, Arabia, and Tyre, by which he seemed to open up the resources of the
East and the West, tended to the rapid aggrandisement of his empire. One
luxury demanded another; and the increase of riches seemed to beget the
desire for more. In these verses we have some indications of the manifold


exigencies of regal magnificence.


I, There is the demand for architectural display (verses 15,17-19). The
character of a nation is known by its public buildings. The great nations of
antiquity have been famous for the grandeur of their erections. No other
Israelitish king ever built so much as Solomon. The sacred narrative would
not have given such prominence to his buildings but for their relation to the
Theocratic kingdom. They were designed to further the greatness, power, and
splendour of the Theocracy of which the Temple—the House of Jehovah—was
the ostensible centre. After first building the Temple, his chef-d’euvre,
Solomon erected his own royal palace, fortified Jerusalem, and built cities and
fortresses in different parts of his dominions. And yet where are these vast
structures to-day ? They have succumbed to the violence of dynastic changes,
and the relentless ravages of time. From the gorgeous temple of Moriah to the
massive and elaborate edifices of Tadmor in the Wilderness, whose ruins now
lie ‘‘ lonely and forsaken, like bleached bones on a long-neglected battle-field,”
the same fate has overtaken them. It is not possible to conceive higher ideas
of Solomon’s magnificence than these ruins present, nor more humiliating ideas
of the vanity and weakness of all human splendour.


II. There is the employment of forced labour (verses 15, 20, 21). The
greater portion of the levies of men employed by Solomon in his public works
were drawn from the subjugated nations; but still the Israelites were not
exempt. This was, perhaps, the first time the Israelites were called upon to
perform forced labour. It had been prophesied, when they desired a king,
that, if they insisted on having one, he would ‘take their men-servants and
their maid-servants, and their goodliest young men, and put them to work”
(1 Sam. viii. 16); and David had bound to forced service ‘* the strangers that
were in the land of Israel” (1 Chron. xxii. 2); but hitherto the Israelites had
escaped. Solomon now, in connection with his proposed work of building the
Temple, with the honour of God as an excuse, laid this burden upon them.
As to the system adopted, see chap. v. 13,14. This, though a light form of task
work, was felt by the Israclites to be a great oppression: But the great works
of an imperious prince must proceed, and he who will not voluntarily help must be
compelled. Every form of human slavery is degrading. Most of the great
buildings of antiquity are the work of slaves. Will the works of freemen be
more enduring ?


ITI. There is the maintenance of a costly court (verses 22, 23). The court
of Solomon was on a scale of magnificence never attempted in Israel before or
since his day. The great officers are now for the first time called by one
general name—Princes. The union of priestly and secular funotions still
continued. The Palace was next in point of splendour to the Temple, and
the Porch of the Palace was the gem and centre of the whole empire. The

142


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, IX.


a


royal banquets were of the most superb kind. All the plate and drinking vessels
were of gold. There was a constant succession of guests. The train of
servants was such as had never been seen before. There were some who
sat in the king’s presence, others who always stuod, others who were
his cup-bearers, others musicians. His stables were on the most splendid
scale. In the midst of this gorgeous array was the sovereign himself,
The king is fair, with superhuman beauty; his sword is on his thigh ; he
rides in his chariot, or on his war-horse; his archers are behind him, his
guards are round him; his robes are so scented with the perfumes of India or
Arabia that they seem to be nothing buta mass of myrrh, aloes, and cassia. The
queen, probably from Egypt, the chief of all his vast establishment of wives and
concubines, themselves the daughters of kings, was by his side, glittering in
the gold of Ophir—-one blaze of glory, as she sat by him in the interior of the
palace ; her attendants, gorgeously arrayed, are behind her; she has left her
father and her father’s house; her reward is to be in the greatness of her
descendants. Such is the splendour of Solomon’s court, which, even down to
the outward texture of their royal robes, lived in the traditions of Israel
(Stanley in loco). The dignity of royalty should be maintained in accordance
with the wealth and resources of the nation.


IV. There is the call for elaborate defence. 1. A standing army must be
maintained (verses 22, 23). The three military bodies remain as in the days of
David. ‘the commander of the host is the priestly warrior, Benaiah, whe
succeeded the murdered Joab. The six hundred heroes of David’s early life
only once pass across the scene. Sixty of them attended Solomon’s litter, to
guard him from banditti on his way to Lebanon. The guard appear only as
household troops, employed on state occasions. 2. Strong fortifications must be
erected (verses 15, 19). Jerusalem, the capital, is surrounded by massive walls
and strengthened with a huge tower. Garrison cities are built in various parts
of the country to keep the insurrectionary inhabitants in check, and to protect
the nation against invaders. As a people grows in riches and in power, every
necessary preparation is made at least to defend its possessions. The wealth
of a nation tempts the cupidity of greedy and ambitious marauders.


V. There is the burden of an oppressive taxation (verse 15, comp. with
ehap. xii. 1-4). The vast levies of men raised by Solomon to build the Temple,
the palace, and the fortifications of Jerusalem and other cities, must have
severely taxed the people, and this grievous yoke perhaps grew heavier with
Solomon’s advance of years. The people who once clamoured for a king, that
they might be like the nations around them, now began to realize the truth of
Samuel’s prediction as to the cost of maintaining a king and court (1 Sam. viii.
11-18). This taxation was so heavy that it appears to have been the principal
cause of the revolt of the ten tribes on the death of Solomon. ‘‘ The govern-
ment of the wise king was rapidly becoming as odious to the Israelites as that
of the race of Tarquin, in spite of all their splendid works, to the patricians of
Rome. Mutterings of the coming storm were already heard, both abroad and
at home.” No government can long flourish that rests on the tyranny and
oppression of the people. An excessive taxation drains the fountain of a
nation’s productive power.


VI. There is the necessity for extended commerce (verses 26-28). The
exhaustion of the ample means left by his father, and the inadequacy of the
ordinary sources of revenue to cover his vast expenses in sacred and regal
building, as well as to sustain the great expense of his magnificent court
and numerous household, led Solomon to turn his attention to commerce. His


sagacity taught him that the Phoenicians, with whom he gee teoome


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





acquainted, had risen to extraordinary prosperity and great wealth solely asthe
result of commerce. He therefore joined Hiram in building and equipping a
fleet of ships which sailed from the Red Sea, and brought in the rich produc-
tions from the far East. Necessity is the mother of invention for nations as


for individuals.
pressing necessity of the hour.
fresh necessities :
prosperity.


Lessons :—1. Loyalty has its undoubted rights and privileges.
of royalty is to promote the best welfare of the people.


suppresses commerce beggars ttself.


commerce begets commerce.


The grandest commercial ventures have sprung out of the
The increase of commerce is the increase of


It is the life of national


2. The glory
3. Zhe government that


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 15-19. National architec-
ture. 1. Isan evidence of the wealth
and genius of a nation. 2. Has a
powerful influence in the culture of
the national taste and character. 3.
May remain when the true greatness
of a nation has passed away.


Verses 15-23. The plans and ar-
rangements of Solomon for the benefit
and protection of the land. 1. He
built the house of the Lord, forth from
which would come all salvation for
Israel; then he built the store-houses
for times of need and famine, and as
protection against the enemies of the
kingdom. A wise prince cares alike for
the religious and spiritual, and for the
material and temporal well-being of
his people, and in times of peace does
his utmost to provide against every
danger which may assail the land,
either from without or within. For
this a nation can never be grateful
enough, and should uphoid him with
readiness and might, instead of mur-
muring and complaining, as is often
the case. 2, Solomon’s plan was, in
his undertaking, to spare his nation
all servile labour as far as possible.
Therefore for all compulsory service he
employed the conquered enemy, who,
as such, were slaves. A wise prince
will never impose burdensome taxes or
heavy labour upon his people, and
reigns much more willingly over free-
men than over slaves; but a good and
loyal people does not make freedom a
pretext for villainy, and ever follows
the king’s call for arms when the de-

144


fence of ‘‘ Fatherland ” is concerned.
For Israel can no more say with truth,
“The Lord is my rock, wy fortress,
and my deliverer” (Psa. xviii. 3), if
all the nation does not aid in its de-
fences and fortifications. In the
kingdom of the true and eternal Prince
of Peace bondage will cease, and all
men shall obtain the freedom of the
children of God.—Zange.


Verse 16. Though in the East
husbands generally pay fortheir wives,
yet dower is given in some cases.
Sargon gave Cilicia as a dowry with
his daughter when he married her to
Ambris, king of Tubal. Antiochus
Soter gave his claims on Macedonia as
a dowry to his stepdaughter Phila,
when she married Antigonus Gonatas.
Cole-Syria and Palestine were pro-
mised as dowry to Ptolemy Epiphanes
when he married Cleopatra, sister of
Antiochus the Great. The Persian
kings seem generally to have given
satrapial or other high offices as
dowries to the husbands of their
daughters.— Rawlinson.


Verses 20, 21. Thecurseof slavery.
1. It s8 personally degrading. It robs
man of his self-respect, poisons his
sense of rectitude and honour, demora-
lizes his sensibilities, imbrutes his
entire nature, and brands him with
unutterableinfamy. 2. Jé ts degrading
to the oppressor. It is an insult to hia
own manhood, it lowers his estimate
of humanity, it blunts his sympathies
for the race, and leads him to the


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. Le,





shameless commission of other wrongs.
The hideous character of oppressors is
depicted in a few words by Words-


worth—
The good old rule
Sufficeth them, the simple plan,
That they should take who have the power,
And they should keep who can.


8. It 1s an element of weakness and decay
in the nation. The nations of antiquity
in which slavery was maintained have
come to ruin. It blights the fairest
country, spoils its chivalry, and saps
its strongest foundations.


Verse 25. The public worship of
God. 1. Is the duty of all—king and
subjects. 2. Cannot be neglected
without mischievous results (chap. iii.
2-4). 38. Should be observed with
regularity and solemnity. 4. Is the
secret of national prosperity and great-
ness. 5. Is fraught with blessing to
the individual worshipper.

— A kingmustmake religion therule
of government, and not to balance the
scale; for he that casteth in religion
only to make the scales even, his own
weight is contained in those characters
—Nene, mene, tekel, wpharsin; he is
found too light ; his kingdom shall be
taken from him.—Bacon.


Verse 26. A wise government seeks
not only to preserve existing prospe-
rity, but also to discover new sources
thereof. Many there are who travel
over land and sea to seek gold and to
become rich, and forget that the Lord
hath said, ‘‘I counsel thee to buy of
me gold tried in the fire, that thou
mayest be rich” (Rev. ui. 18). Ex-
peditions into far countries must
serve not only to obtain gold and
treasure, but also to carry thither the
treasure which neither moth nor rust
doth corrupt, and where thieves do not
break through nor steal (Matt. vi. 19).
Commerce may become a rich blessing
for a nation, but a greedy thirst for
gold often leads to extreme luxury
and neglect of God, as is many times
exemplified in the history of Israel.—
Lange.


Verses 26-28. Commerce. 1. Taxes
the ingenuity ofa people. 2. Stima-
L


lates travel and discovery. 8. Is the
source of a nation’s wealth. 4. Pro-
motes international amity and brother-
hood.

Verse 28. The controversy con-
cerning the locality of Ophir will
probably never be settled. It has
been placed in Arabia, in India, in the
Burmese Peninsula, at Ceylon, on the
East coast of Africa, in Armenia, in
Phrygia, in Iberia, and in South Ame-
rica, where it has been identified with
Peru! Among these various opinions
three predominate, all moderns,
except a very few, being in favour
either of Arabia, India, or Eastern
Africa. Africa has comparatively few
advocates, but M. Quartremere and
Dean Milman are among them. India
is preferred by Lassen, Thenius,
Ewald, and Berthau. Arabia’s claims
are supported by the greatest number,
among whom are Winer, Keil, Kalisch,
and Mr. Twistleton. The grand argu-
ment in favour of Arabia is derived
frem the occurrence of Ophir in the
manifestly Arabian list of names in
Genesis x. 25-29. To the objection
that Arabia could not produce either
gold or almug trees, it is replied—l.
It has not yet been proved that she
could not produce them; and 2. At
any rate she might have furnished
them te the Jews from an emporium.
—Speaker’s Comm. We do not con-
tend that Ophir was a place on the
Indian coast. Nay, more, we do not
insist that it was any particular place.
It seems to us that Heeren is quite
right in his remark that Ophir, like
the name of all other distant places or
regions of antiquity—as Thule, Tar-
tessus, and others—denotes no parti-
cular spot, but only a certain region or
part of the world, such as the Kast or
West Indies in modern geography.
Hence Ophir was a general name for
all the countries lying on the African,
Arabian, or Indian seas, so far as at
that time known.—Xvtto.

— Even the gold of Ophir perishes
in the using; but the treasures of
grace never wax old nor decay. He
that is possessed of these hath that fine
gold which constitutes the true riches
(Rev. iii. 18).

145


GHAP, X. LLOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





CHAPTER X.


THE QUEEN OF SHEBA AND SOLOMON.


OririoaL AND EXPLANATORY Norzs.—Verse 1. Queen of Sheba—The Arabs and Abys-
ginians both claim this queen, and surround this historic visit with rival legends (comp.
Stanley’s Jewish Church, pp. 259-262). The former name her Balkis; the latter, Maqueda.
But the country here denoted is NAW in Arabia Felix, Saba, the eapitel of the Sabean


kingdom of Yemen, and not NAD (with which Josephus confounds it) —i.e., Merod in African


Ethiopia, yiz., Abyssinia. Fame of Solomon concerning the name of the Lerd—Words
mi ans difficult of interprotation: De Wette, to Jehovah’s honour; Ewaid, through the
ANT heat


glory of Jehovah; Weil, by Jehovah so glorifying Himself in him; Gesenius, by Jehovah’s
favour; Keil, in regard to the name of the Lord. Hard questions—Riddles or enigmas.
Verse 2. Spices, very much gold, and precious stones—Saba, or MapidSa, in Arabia Felix,
was abundant in these valuables, and its inhabitants were celebrated among Hebrews and
Greeks for extensive trade in these products. Verse 4. House—i. ¢., his own palace, for
things mentioned in verse 5 belonged to the palace. Verse 5. His ascent by which he went
up, &c.— All the versions (Sept., Chald., Syr., and Vulg.) read burnt offerings which he
offered up in, &c.; but Keil, Winer, Ewald, and others, retain the reading in A. V. Pro-
bably it was an arched viaduct leading from the palace to the temple (2 Kings xvi. 18), the
remains of which have recently been discovered. Verse 10. An hundred and twenty talents
of gold=£720,000: and spices—DIUI, from DOW, probably balsam. Verse 11. Almug


trees—2 Chron. ix. 10, 11, has “ algum wood,” most probably red sandal wood. Verse 13.
Pillars—TD/5. This word occurs here only, and its meaning is doubtful, though its root,
Teme


“SVD, means to support, make sure. Keil and Ewald think Jbalustrades; Jarchi and
oi 2


Lange, tessellated pavements. Verses 14, 15. Solomon’s revenue—666 talents=£3,996,000.

Verse 15. Beside .. . of the merchantmen, and... . merchants — the words

rendered “merchantmen,’” D°VS\71 WIN have been conjectured to mean “fines of the sub-
. T= oo.


ject” (provinces); but, literally, they signify “men of the travellers,’ 4. ¢., travelling traders
dealing in the larger merchandise ; then the word “ merchants” 9°)3"\—will mean “ pedlers”


dealing in inferior wares. Yet DAT is used in Numb. xiv. 6 of the men Moses sent to


view and report upon the land; hence some eritics would here render the word by ‘“ ambas-
sadors” instead of “merchantmen.” All the kings of Arabia—I YN 99579, not “ of Arabia,”
Apicy Hi


the points will not allow of that rendering ; ayy isa mixed multitude; and these “ kings”


were kings over mixed races—the bordering tribes, Bedonins. These “tributary kings and

governors of the country” would bring from their respective provinces, periodically, presents

of the produce of their territories (see note on chap. iv. 7-19). Verse 16. Targets—

“STN is a large square shield, rounded down upon its length, covering the whole body”
a


(Lange). Verse 18. The best gold—Qold of Uphaz. The “ throne of ivory” is not to be
understood as of solid massive ivory, but inlaid. Verse 22. A navy of Tharshish—Tartessus
in Spain, the ancient Phenician emporium, where silve1 was 80 freely obtained ; but the better
interpretation of the word is Tharshish navy, a common phrase, equivalent to a strongly built
fleet. “Silver” could have been gained from Spain, but not the gold, apes, peacocks, or
ivory; these were obtainable in Africa. Verse 28. Horses brought out of Egypt, and linen
yarn—A decided error here in the translation: Mp cannot be “linen yarn,” it means a
ig ae


‘troop ;’? hence the verse reads, “As for the export of the horses which Solomon got from
Egypt, a troop of royal merchants used to fetch a troop (of horses) at a price.” The chapter
thus indicates the vast wealth, splendour, and luxury of Solomon’s court.—W. H. J.


148


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. X.
oe —— EEE eee


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-18
Tue Love or Wispom.


I. Exceeds the love of wealth and station. Here was a woman occupying
\se most illustrious position, the queen of a country so highly favoured that it
was called “The Happy Land,” and possessing unlimited resources, as the
splendour of her retinue and the richness of her presents indicated, smitten
wrth a love of that which was to her more precious than crown or sceptre.
There are wants in man which neither riches nor honours can satisfy. The
deep questionings and eager longings of the heart can be met only by the
solutions of a higher wisdom. ‘It is a good thing to doubt, better to be re-
solved. The mind that never doubts, shall learn nothing: the mind that ever
doutits, shall never profit by learning. Our doubts only serve to stir us up to
seek truth : our resolutions settle us in the truth we have found. There were ~
no pleasure in resolutions, if we had not been formerly troubled with doubts.
There were nothing but discomfort and disquictness in doubts, if it were not
for the hope of resolution. It is not safe to suffer doubts to dwell too long
upon the heart; there may be good use of them as passengers, dangerous as
inmates. Happy are we if we can find a Solomon to remove them.””—Bp. Hall.
Many sacrifice wealth, comfort, position, and even health itself, in a life-long
pursuit after truth.


II. Inspires the soul with courage and enterprize in its search. Undis-
mayed by distance or the difficulties of travel, this rich and powerful queen
journeyed from the remotest South to Jerusalem, not for the purpose of mer-
chandise or political alliance, but purely in search of wisdom. ‘‘ We know
merchants who venture to either Indies for wealth; others we know daily to
cross the seas for wanton curiosity. Some few philosophers we have known to
have gone far for learning; and amongst princes it is no unusual thing to send
their ambassadors to far distant kingdoms for transaction of business, either of
state or commerce. But that a royal lady should in person undertake and
overcome so tedious a journey, only to observe and inquire into the mysteries
of nature, art, and religion, is a thing unparalleled. Why do we think any
labour great, or any way long, to hear a greater than Solomon? How justly
shall the Queen of the South rise up in judgment and condemn us who may
hear wisdom crying in our streets, and neglect her!” Man will venture
everything for that which he loves. Love is the soul and strength of bravery.
The love of wisdom is ennobling.


III. Gives an aptitude in acquiring its rarest treasures (verses 1-3). The
queen came as an enquirer, to prove Solomon with hard questions. Great art
is required in asking questions; and it is only a passionate love for the science
in which we are specially interested that guides the mind to the most important
points on which light is needed. In most things “love sees not with the eye,
but with the mind;” and its divinings are subtle and wonderfully verified.
‘‘The spirit of this asking of questions and solving of dark riddles is of the very
nature of the Socratic wisdom itself. ‘To ask questions rightly,’ said Lord
Bacon, ‘is the half of knowledge.’ ‘Life without cross-examination is no life
at all,’ said Socrates. And of this stimulating process, of this eager enquiry,
of this cross-examining of our thoughts, bringing new meanings out of old
words, Solomon is the first example. When we enquire, when we question,
when we are restless in our search after truth, when we seek it from unexpected
quarters, we are but following in the steps of the Wise King of Judah and


the Wise Queen of Sheba.”’—-Stanley. The enquiries of the royal aaaece were


*y


CHAP, X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





fally and satisfactorily answered (verse 3). Happy are they whose doubts are
resolved, and whose hearts are set at rest.


IV. Reverently acknowledges its Divine origin (verses 4-9). And if this
great personage admire the wisdom, the buildings, the domestic order of
Solomon, and chiefly his stately ascent into the House of the Lord, how should
our souls be taken up with wonder at thee, O thou true Son of David, and Prince of
Everlasting Peace, who receivedst the Spirit not by measure, who has built this
glorious house not made with hands, even the heaven of heavens, whose infinite
Providence hath sweetly disposed of all the family of thy creatures, both in
heaven and earth; and who didst ascend on high and leddest captivity captive,
and gavest gifts to men.—Zishop Hall. True wisdom is from above, and bears
the indelible impress of its heavenly origin (James iii. 17). A generous spirit
will acknowledge and admire the genius which he finds in another: a devout
spirit will trace all gifts to their Divine source, and adore the affluence and
wisdom of the Giver.


Lessons:—1. Wisdom ts worthy of diligent self-denying search. 2. A saving
knowledge of Christ, who is the wisdom of God, +8 the highest and only satisfying
wesdom.


>


This passage may be also homiletically treated as follows :—
Ture Queen or Suepa, a Type or tHe HeatHen Seekine aFrER Trvru.


It was no uncommon thing in ancient times for men to travel far in search of
wisdom. They would traverse seas, and deserts, and mountains to visit the
spots famous for learning, and to converse with men celebrated in philosophy.
The increased facilities with which the most distant countries are now reached,
and the vast number of people who now travel with such variety of objects, de
not admit of the career of a seeker of knowledge being so noticeable as of yore.
And yet the search for increased light is not less earnest, and it is certainly more
general. The cry of the dying Goethe is the cry of millions to-day, ‘ Light.
more light!’’? The Queen of Sheba is a type of the intense desire with which
thousands outside the circle of Christian teaching are seeking after truth.


I. There is the admission of conscious need. The Queen of Sheba possessed
everything that could minister to her temporal enjoyment. She had wealth,
prosperity, rank, power; but these did not satisfy the cravings of her soul.
There was a sense of something still needed in order to attain happiness. That
something was the wisdom described and extolled in Prov. iii. 18-18. The sense
of need is the spur which goads the soul onward in its weary, painful search
for rest. The sinner never seeks forgiveness till he is first conscious of his sin;
he never flees for safety till he is roused to a sense of danger. Our fitness to
receive the blessings of the gospel is the humble confession of our need. God
delights to fill the empty, to feed the hungry, to cheer the disconsolate.


Il, There is the eagerness with which the intelligence of clearer light
is welcomed. The Sheban Queen “ heard of the fame of Solomon concerning
the name of the Lord” (verse 1). God hath no use of the dark lanterns of
secret and reserved perfections: we ourselves do not light up candles to put
them under bushels. The great lights, whether of heaven or earth, are not
intended to obscurity ; but as to give light unto others, so to be seen themselves.
Dan and Beersheba were too strait bounds for the fame of Solomon, which now
bad flown over lands and seas, and raised the world to an admiration of hig
more Soe ae wisdom. Even so, O thou Everlasting King of Peace! Thy


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. xX.
ee eS lA eel ji prnsuasspandnisScbseiossnemmansmanssnenpncsesss ecncie= n= Spay cme


name is great among the Gentiles. There is no speech nor language where the
report of Thee is not heard. Fame, as it is alwaysa blab, so ofttimes a liar.
The wise princess found cause to distrust so uncertain an informer, whose
reports are either doubtful or fabulous, and, like winds or streams, increase in
passing. This great queen would not suffer herself to be led by ears, but comes
in person to examine the truth. How much more unsafe is it, in the most im-
portant businesses of our souls, to trust the opinions and reports of others!
Those eyes and ears are ill bestowed that do not serve to choose and judge
for their owners.—Bp. Hall. The anxious enquirer hails with joy the faintest
glimmer of light which will conduct him out of the dark labyrinth in which he
has been so long wandering; as the inhabitant of the Polar Regions, shut up in
darkness for the greater part of the year, rejoices to descry the first rosy rays
of dawn kindling on the snow-clad mountain tops, which announce to him the
approach of the summer, during which the sun never sets.


III. There is the willingness to seek truth wherever it may be found.
“And she came to Jerusalem,” &c. (verse 2). She spared neither expense nor
trouble ; the toils and dangers of travel did not intimidate, the scorn and con-
tempt of the world did not trouble. The soul-hunger for the word of life, the
desire to know something about the name of Jehovah, enabled her to overcome
all difficulties, and brave all perils. ‘How superior is this heathen woman to
many Christians who hunger and thirst after all possible things, but never after
a knowledge of truth and wisdom.” The sincere seeker after truth will press
through fire and water, will sunder the dearest ties of relationship, will sacri-
fice the most brilliant prospects in life, to attain the goal where light and rest
and peace are to be found (¢g., the history of Sakya-Muni, founder of
Buddhism).


IV. There is the joyous acknowledgment of the truth (verses 4-9).
1. This acknowledgment was the result of overwhelming conviction. ‘* When the
queen had seen all Solomon’s wisdom, &c., there was no more spirit in her”
(verses 4, 5). She saw, examined, and judged for herself; the evidence was
ample, and the conviction irresistible. The reality of Solomon’s ability and
greatness exceeded all she had heard. The profession of truth that is not based
on clear and profound conviction will not be permanent. The true order is
laid down by the apostle: ‘‘ We believe, and therefore speak’ (2 Cor. iv. 18).
2. This acknowledgment was freely and generously rendered (verses 6-8). An un-
prejudiced mind will readily and cheerfully admit the force of truth. It is
weak, it is dishonest, not to act up to the deepest convictions of the soul. The
martyrs and confessors bore nobly their testimony in the presence of cruelty
and death. 8. This acknowledgment recognized the Divine source of truth (verse
9). Perhaps the heathen queen was turned from her dumb idols, henceforth to
worship the living and true God. This was a general belief among Jewish
writers. (God is the fountain of all truth; and He should be praised continu-
ally for the abundant revelations with ‘hich He has favoured the race.


V. There is the practical manifestation of a grateful heart (verse 10).
The queen brought presents of gold, of precious stones, and fragrant spices. The
test of our gratitude to God is seenin what we givetohim. Few give according
to their ability, none in proportion to the blessings received. ‘‘ How should we
bring unto Thee, O Thou King of Heaven, the purest gold of Thine own
graces, the sweet odour of our obedience. Was not this withal a type of that
homage which should be done unto Thee, O Saviour, by the heads of the nations?
The kings of Tarshish and the isles bring presents; the kings of Sheba and
Seba bring gifts; yea, all kings shall worship Thee, all nations shall serve
Thee (Isa. lx.). They cannot enrich themselves, but by giving ais Thee.


GHAP, x.





EOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


True wisdom cannot be bought with gold, but too much gold cannot be spent
in its attainment and propagation. It cannot be too dearly bought, not too far


fetched.


Lessons:—I1. Great ts the responsibility of that nation which possesses the light


of Divine Truth. 2. A sincere seeker after Truth shall not seek in vain.


3. The


eagerness with which the heathen embraces the Truth +s @ rebuke to the cold
indifference of more highly favoured nattons.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-13. The Queen of Sheba
comes to Solomon. 1. She comes in
order to hear the wisdom of Solomon.
2. She finds more than she expected.
8. She worships and praises the Lord
for what she has seen and heard.
4. She returns home in peace, with
rich gifts. Solomon receiving the
Queen of Sheba a type of Christ
(Matt. xxii. 42). 1. He did not
reject her who sought Him, but
raised her up (Jno. vi. 37). 2. He
solved her questions, and showed
her His glory (Jno i. 9,14; xxii. 46;
vi. 68). 3. He accepted her gifts, and
gave her much more in return, even
all that she desired and requested
(Jno. x. 11, 28; xvi. 24; iv. 18).


Verses 1-8. The dissolving of doubts
(compared with Dan. v. 16). Doubts
and quesiions are the common lot and
heritage of humanity. They vary in
their subjects and times, but we have
them always on hand. We live just
now ina specially doubting age, where
almost every matter of feeling is
openly doubted, or, it may be, openly
denied. Science puts everything in
question, and literature distils the
questions, making an atmosphere of
them. We doubt both creation and
Creator. We doubt free agency and
responsibility, immortality and salva-
tion, the utility of prayer and worship,
and even of repentance for sin. And
these sweeping, desolating doubts run
through all grades of minds, all modes
and spheres of life, as it were tele-
graphically, present as powers of the
air to unchristen the newborn thoughts
of religion as fast as they arrive. The
cultivated and mature have the doubts
ingrown they know not how, and

159


the younger minds encounter their
subtle visitations when they do not
seek them. And the more active-
minded they are, and the more thoughts
they have on the subject of religion,
the more likely they are (unless
anchored by true faith in God) to he
drifted away from all the most solid
and serious convictions even before
they are aware of it.

Note the three principal sources
and causes whence our doubts arise,
and from which they get force to make
their assault. They never come of
truth or high discovery, but always of
the want of it.

1. All the truths of religion are in-
herently dubitable. They are only what
are called probable, never necessary
truths like the truths of geometry or
of numbers. In these we have the
premises in our very minds themselves.
In all other matters we have the pre-
mises to find. Now this field of pro-
bable truth is the whole field of re-
ligion, and of course it is competent
for doubt to cover it in every part and
item.

2. We begin life as unknowing crea-
tures that have everything to learn. We
grope, and groping is doubt ; we handle,
we question, we guess, we experiment,
beginning in darkness and stumbling
on towards intelligence. We are in
a doom of activity, and cannot stop
thinking—thinking of everything—
knocking against the walls on every
side; trying thus to master the pro-
blems, and about as often getting mas-
tered by them. Yeast works in bread
scarcely more blindly.

3. léts a fact that our faculty ts ¢t-
self in disorder. A broken or bent
telescope will not see anything rightly,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. X.


en ee ee


A filthy window will not bring in even
the day as itis. So a mind wrenched
from its true lines of action, or straight
perception, discoloured and smirched
by evil, will not see truly, but will
put a blurred, misshapen look on
everything. To show not how doubts
may be stopped, for that is impossible,
but only how they may be dissolved,
or cleared away, observe :—


I. Doubters never can dissolve or
extirpate their doubts by inquiry,
search, investigation, or any kind of
speculative endeavour. They must never
go after the truth to merely find it,
but to practise it, and live by it. It
is not enough to rally their inventive-
ness, doing nothing to polarize their
aim. They imagine, it may be, that
they are going first to settle their ques-
tions, and then, at their leisure, to
act. As if they were going to get the
perfect system, and complete know-
ledge of truth, before they move an
inch in doing what they know! No,
there is no fit search after truth which
does not, first of all, begin to live the
truth it knows.


II. There ts a way for dissolving any
and all doubts—a way that opens at a
very small gate, but widens wonderfully
after you pass. “Every human soul, at
a certain first point of its religious out-
fit, has a key given it, which is to be
the open sesame of all right discovery.
Using this key as it may be used, any
lock is opened, any doubt dissolved.
Thus every man acknowledges the dis-
tinction of right and wrong, feels the
reality of that distinction, knows it
by immediate consciousness even as he
knows himself. Here is the key that
opens everything. The true way of
dissolving doubts is to begin at the
beginning, and do the first thing first.
Say nothing of investigation, till you
have made sure of being grounded
everlastingly, and with a completely
whole intent, in the principle of right
doing as a principle. And here it is
that all unreligious men are at fault,
and often without knowing, or even
suspecting it, They do right things
enough in the out-door, market sense
of the term, and count that being right.


But let them ask the question, “ Have
T ever consented to be, and am I really
now, in the right, as in principle and
supreme law ; to live for it, to make
any sacrifice it will cost me, to believe
everything it will bring me to see, to
be a confessor of Christ as soon as it
appears to be enjoined upon me, to go
on a mission to the world’s end if due
conviction sends me, to change my oc-
cupation for good conscience’ sake, to
repair whatever wrong I have done to
another, to be humbled, if I should,
before my worst enemy, to do complete
justice to God, and, if I could, to all
worlds—in a word, to be in wholly
right intent, and have no mind but this
for ever?” Ah! how soon do they
discover possibly, in this manner, that
they are right only so far as they can
be, and not be at all right as in princi-
ple—right as doing some right things,
nothing more. As certainly as the
new right mind begins, it will be as
if the whole heaven were bursting out
in day. This is what Christ calls the
single eye, and the whole body is in-
evitably full of light. This is the
menstruum by which all doubts may be
dissolved. How surely and how fast
they fly away, even as fogs are burned
away by the sun!


Lessons :—1. Be never afraid of
doubt. 2. Be afraid of all sophistries
and tricks and strifes of disingenuous
argument. 3. Hawe tt asa fixed prin-
ciple that getting into any scornful way is
fatal. 4. Nover settle upon anything
as true because it is safer to hold it than
not. 5. Have tt as a law never to put
force on the mind, or try to make tt be-
lieve, because it spotls the mind’s inte-
grity ; and when that 13 gone, what power
of advance tn the truth ts left? 6.
Never bein a hurry to belreve, never try
to conquer doubts against time.—Con-
densed from Bushnell.


Verse 4. Words must be followed
by works: the beholding with her
own eyes, and her very own experi-
ence, must be added to the rumours
she has heard. Nathaniel, when he
heard of Jesus the Messiah, spoke
doubtiagly at first—Can iy good


%


come outof Nazareth? But when he
came and saw, he joyfully exclaimed,
‘¢Thou art the Son of God, Thou art
the King of Israel” (Jno. i. 45-49).
Asin order to form a just conception
of visible things we must see them
with our own eyes, so also with
invisible and Divine things: rightly to
recognize them as such, we must feel
and taste their strength in our own
heart, and not merely hear of them
from others (1 Peter ii. 3; Psalms
xxxiv. 9).


Verse 5. Great palaces, brilliant
arrangements, &c., are objects worthy
of real admiration if they are not evi-
dently mere works to gratify the lust of
the eye and the pride of life, but rather
proofs of wisdom, of spiritual elevation,
and of love of art. The scene here des-
cribedreceivesvery aptillustrationfrom
the Assyrian banquet scenes, where we
have numerous guests sitting, dressed
handsomely in fringed robes, with
armlets upon their arms, and bracelets
round their wrists, attendants stand-
ing behind them, and magnificent
drinking cups, evidently of a costly
metal, in the hands of the guests,
which are filled from a great wine-
bowl at one end of the chamber.—
Ancient Monarchies.


Verse 8. Not because of their fine
clothes, of their high position, of their
splendid possessions, did the queen
regard the people and the servants of
Solomon as blessed and happy; but
because they could always listen to
his wisdom. How much the more are
those to be esteemed blessed who, sit-
ting at His feet who Himself contains
all the treasures of wisdom and of
knowledge, can hear the word of ever-
lasting life from His mouth (Luke
x. 23).—Lange.


Verse 9. Christ the Head and
King of the church. When the
Queen of Sheba came from the South
to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and
saw his buildings, provisions, ministers,
and servants, she acknowledged and
praised Jehovah, as the Author of
Solomon’s advancement. She observes

152


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.


that it was an evidence of God’s spe-;
cial regard to him that he was set on
the throne af Israel, God’s peculiar

eople; and she further observes that
it was a token of God’s great and
everlasting love to Israel that 80 wise
and pious a prince was set over them.
With much more justice may these
werds be applied to our Lord Jesus
Christ, whom God hath ‘set as King
on His holy hill Zion;” and we may
say, with humble and devout praise,
‘¢ Blessed be the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which delight-
eth in Him to make Him Head and
King of the church. Because the
Lord loved mankind, and was desirous
to save them for ever, therefore He
made His Son King, to do judgment
and justice.” Let us see how the
words are applicable to Christ, and
what reason we have to bless God
for so wise aud gracious an appoint-
ment.

I. The designation or appointment
of Christ to be Head and King of the
church was an evident instance of
God’s delight in Him. Thus a great
honour was conferred upon the Son of
God. It isan honour to be any way
employed for God. In this view the
work of Christian ministers is honour-
able, and it becomes them to ‘‘magnify
their office.” It is an honour to the
angels to be the ‘‘ ministers of God,
aud do his pleasure.” But signal
honour was conferred upon Christ, in
being invested with so great authority,
exalted to so extensive a dominion,
and having all things put under His
feet. This was an evidence that He
loved righteousness and hated iniquity
that God thus exalted Him. For no-
thing but such a disposition can give
one rational being a real excellency
and superiority above another. A ve
great trust was reposed in the Son of
God; and that shows God’s approba-
tion of lim and delight in Him, no
less than recovering God’s fallen, sin-
ful creatures to their duty and allegi-
ance, promoting the glory of the great
Lord of all, and making so considerable
a part of the intelligent creation holy
end happy. The Father loved His
Son, and hath given all things inte


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





His hands. Again, by this appoint-
ment the glory and joy of the Redeemer
were advanced. Every soul brought
into subjection to Him adds to His
revenue of praise and honour. He
sees of the travail of his soul, and is
satisfied. This was the ‘‘the joy set
before Him.”? What superior honour
can God confer on any being, than to
render him an instrument of com-
municating great, extensive, and last-
ing happiness to many others? This is
making such a being, in an eminent
degree, like Himself. Christ hath a
large sphere of service for the glory of
God and the salvation of souls. There
is joy in heaven whenever it prospers ;
and whenever the whole redeemed are
presented faultless before the presence
of the Divine glory, it will be to the
exceeding joy of Christ Himself, and
the highest evidence of God’s delight
in Him.

II. The appointment of Christ to
be King of the church is a remark-
able instance of God’s love to man.
Because He loved the world, He made
Jesus Christ King to do justice and
judgment. It was an evidence of
God’s love to man that He appointed
prophets and teachers to instruct and
reclaim an ignorant, idolatrous, sinful
world. But in proportion to the ex-
cellency of the persons commissioned
to this work, will the Divine love and
grace be apparent. It isa merciful
scheme to rescue the world from ignor-
ance, superstition, and vice, to erect
a spiritual kingdom in it, to destroy
the works of the devil, and to deliver
men from the worst slavery. But to
manifest His Son for this purpose was
an aetonishing instance of mercy. The
perfections of His nature, and especi-
ally His moral excellencies, qualify
Him for this work. His example illus-
trates and recommends His precepts,
and He is able to bestow every bless-
ing which we can want; to deliver us
from everything that would hinder or
lessen our happiness, and confer and
continue everything that will promote
and secure it. How pertinent and
useful are such reflections as these in
this connection! Did the Queen of
Sheba bless the God of Isracl for ap-


OHAP. X.


pointing Solomon to be king over it?
And shall not I ardently praise Him
for exalting a Son to be a Prince and
a Saviour? I would consider from
what a slavery He redeems us; from
ignorance, error, anda thousand irregu-
larlustsand passions. He redeemsus to
God, brings us into astate of likeness
to Him and friendship with Him. He
has made effectual provision that we
shall not again be enslaved if we will
stand fast in our liberty. I would
further consider how wisely and gra-
ciously He governs us. His laws are
all plain, reasonable, wholesome, ex-
cellent, enforced by the most powerful
sanctions; and gracious allowances
are made for our weakness and imper-
fection. I would consider also to
what astate of glory and happiness
he will raise all his faithful subjects.
He will bring them to His heavenly
courts, fix them beyond the reach of
enemies, sorrows, and dangers, in a
state of perfect holiness and never-
ending joy. How affectionately and
gratefully should my soul magnify the
Lord for this unspeakable gift!
Reflections.—When the queen of
Sheba had complimented Solomon on
his wisdom, prosperity, and the
happiness of his servants, and praised
God for making him king, she ‘‘ gave
him much gold, spices, and precious
stones.” This was a token of her
high veneration for him, and grati-
tude for the favours she had received
from him. Thus, when we have been
commemorating the goodness of God
in exalting His Son to be the Ruler
and Saviour of His people, it becomes
us to offer our presents to Him. He
requireth not, he needeth not gold,
and silver, and precious stones. He
requireth that we yield ourselves to
Him; that we give Him our hearts,
and testify our allegiance and subjec-
tion, not by this service only, but
the obedience of our whole lives;
that we submit to His government,
and study to promote the interests
of His kingdom. This is what we
can give, what we ought to give,
what alone he will accept.—J. Orton.


Verses 10-18. The interchange of
153


“ye


emsPp. xX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





gifts between the queen and Solo-
mon. 1. The queen is not content
with words of praise and thanks;
she testifies her gratitude by means of
great and royal gifts. Of what avail
are mere verbal thanks and praise, if
the life be devoid of lovely deeds and
of cheerful gifts, for the acknowledg-
ment of God’s kingdom? 2. Solomon
needed not the gifts; he had more
than she could give him (verses 11,
12); he gave her all that heart could
desire. What are all our gifts in
comparison with those which we
receive from the Lord—those which
are immeasurably beyond what we
ask and seek (Eph. iii. 20), and where
it is more blessed to give than to receive
(Acts xx. 35) !—Lange.


Verses 1-18. The anxious en-
quirer. I. Perplexed. II. Aroused.
III. Seeking. IV. Convinced. V.
Satisfied.


Verse 18. With a treasure incom-
parable in value to gold and jewels,
the queen joyfully went her way,
like the eunuch of Ethiopia. How
many are there who return from far
journeys into distant lands, rich in
gold and substance, but poor in faith
and knowledge of the truth! They
have lost more than they have won:
the queen gained more than she
lost.

— The generation of the present
day in comparison with the queen
of Sheba, I. Its satiety and indiffer-
ence. II. Its unbelief and its guilt
(Matt. xii. 42).—Lange.

— The exalted mission of a true
philosophy. 1. Is to become ac-
quainted with the highest truth. 2.
To freely communicate truth to others.
3. To promote the happiness of nations
by the active dissemination of truth.
4. To insist upon the imperative
claims of truth.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 14—29.
Tur Froop-Tmr or Nationat ProgsPertry.


I. Seen in the super-abundance of wealth (verses 14-17; 21-23). Gold
was so plentiful that silver was ‘‘ nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon ; he
exceeded all the kings of the earth forriches.”? He was the ideal of an Eastern
monarch, all the attributes of greatness were united in him—riches, dignity,
ability, fame, splendour. The Old Testament kingdom reached its culminating
point in David’s Son; all the promises of temporal prosperity were fulfilled in
it. Such is the nature of worldly wealth, the more abundant it is, the less valu-
able it is. Great fears are expressed that recent discoveries in the diamond fields
of South Africa will depreciate the value of the precious stone. Oh! how ought
the possession of mental and spiritual riches to lessen our love for the perishable
things of earth! If we are citizens of the New Jerusalem, the very streeta
will be pure gold, and the walls the richest jewels; so much will our eternal
blessedness exceed all earthly joy and felicity.


II. Seen in the external grandeur of the throne (verses 18-20). In the
ruder stages of national life the king would dispense justice and promulgate
law by the side of some favourite stream, under the shadow of a well-known
tree, on an elevated mound of earth, at the entrance of the city, or by the side
of a spear thrust into the ground; but as the monarch and people increased in
wealth, these simple, primitive methods gave place to more ceremonious and
ornate displays of regal greatness. Solomon’s throne was made of ivory inlaid
with the best gold. It was erected in the Porch of Judgment, leading out of
the Porch of Pillars (chap. vii. 7). Here Solomon sat to receive his officers of
state, eee ambassadors and princes on important occasions, and especially


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS. OHAP. X.


eT


to hear and decide the cases that were submitted tohisjudgment. The dazzli
splendour of the throne was well calculated to inspire rave and miuts caikine
evidence of the wealth and luxury of the time.


III. Seen in the consummate wisdom of the ruler (verse 23-25). The
wisdom of Solomon was eminently practical. It suppressed the malcontents
and ensured the peace ofthe kingdom. It organised a complicated and flourish-
ing system of commerce. It raised the nation to affluence and fame, so that
“‘ king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom.”
This was in accordance with the Divine promise (ch. iii. 18). In the depressed
condition at that time both of Egypt and Assyria, it would seem to have been
literally true that Solomon’s kingdom was, for wealth and splendour, the first
in all the world. Grandees from afar flocked to the court of the Israelitish
king to listen to the profound wisdom that fell from his lips, and to learn the
secret of his brilliantrule. In an age when so much depended on the character
and policy of the sovereign, to be gifted with almost superhuman wisdom was a
sure way of securing increased prosperity and power. Happy is the nation
that, with an expanding and profitable commerce, possesses a wise and con-
siderate king.


IV. Seen in the prevalence of expensive luxuries (verses 21,22; 26-29).
The drinking cups were of gold: there was no silver in them. And yet a
draught of water is as sweet and refreshing from the moss-covered cistern among
the hills as from the most richly-chased goblet of gold. The fleets of Sclomon
supplied Jerusalem with the rarities and dainties of foreign lands— gold, silver,
ivory, apes, and peacocks. Wordsworth sees a sort of irony and sarcasm in the
mention of apes and peacocks as “‘ the climax of the produce of the commerce of
Solomon. Apes and peacocks to Solomon, the wise king at Jerusalem! To
gratify curiosity, to amuse the people, and, perhaps, to while away the time
of the strange women to whom Solomon clave in love, instead of cleaving to the
Lord.’”? He indulged in the costly extravagance of chariots and horses, with
which he established a new species of military force, strongly discouraged by
the law of Moses, and from which all previous rulers of this people had abstained.
The country was mountainous, and wholly unsuited for cavalry. It was also
a time of peace; and all the great victories of his father and other conquerors
had been won in reliance upon the strength of the Lord’s arm, without using
any such force, and in opposition to the enemy who employed it (Psa. xx, 7).
Besides, such a number of chariots and horses was out of all proportion to se
small a country; and perhaps no act of royal indulgence was more unpopular
among the people. This was doubtless a strong element in the spirit of discon
tent which afterwards shattered the empire. Prosperity has its accompanying
perils, and not the least of these is the tendency to indulge in costly and
emasculating luxuries.


V. Marks the beginning of national decline. As the flood-tide of the
ocean begins to ebb soon after it has registered its highest water-mark, and ag
the earth sinks towards the darkness and cold of winter the moment after it has
risen to its highest point in the summer solstice, so the period in which a
nation bursts forth into its grandest display of material splendour presents
indications of inevitable decay. Wealth, fame, and the most massive works of
man are perishable, while wisdom, righteousness, and moral goodness bloom


with immortal beauty.


Lessons :—1 There ts the wisdom of gold, and the gold of wisdom. 2. National
prosperity is ever attended with serious porils. 8. The religious character of @


nation survives the decay of sts external glory. “A


GaAP, X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








Tus Ivory Turonze a Symeon or Reeat GovernMEnr.


One of the most attractive objects in the Palace of Solomon was the great
ivory throne. It was a massive and imposing structure, and exceeded in splen-
dour anything of the kind in any other kingdom. It was in the form of an
ancient round-topped, two-armed chair, with the figure of a lion on either side,
probably of cast metal gilt; and fixed on an elevated platform, the ascent to
which consisted of six steps, each step being adorned with the life-sized figure
of a lion, facing another at the opposite end of thestep. The chair of state, and
the steps up to it, were covered with ivory and gold. Representations of thrones
are frequent in the Egyptian and Assyrian sculptures. They have no steps up
to them, but frequently stand upon square bases. The back appears to be flat
at the top, not rounded. Assyrian thrones have ‘‘stays” or arms on either
side, and they stand generally on lions’ feet. Ivory waa a material used in
them; but they were chiefly of wood and metal. We read in after years of the
Parthian kings, whose throne was of gold, encompassed with four golden pillars
adorned with precious stones; and of the Persian kings who sat in judgment
under a golden vine and other trees of gold, the bunches of grapes and other
fruits being formed of different kinds of precious stones. We may regard the
throne of Solomon as a symbol of regal government.


I. That regal government should be righteous in its principles. 1. In
order to maintain the dignity of the throne. Ivory and gold were emblems of
purity, and point out the incorruption that should belong to kings, whose duty
it is to administer justice with the utmost strictness and purity. The dignity
of the judge consists, not in the richness of his robe or in the splendour of his
surroundings, but in the justness and integrity of his decisions. Where partiality
and injustice predominate, the dignity is transferred to the innocent prisoner,
who is unrighteously accused and condemned. 2. Jn order to enforce the autho-
rity of thelaw. Avselfish, corrupt, time-serving government has endless difficulty,
and has to resort to the most brutal methods in enforcing its authority. Its
laws are an insult, and their maintainance an intolerable cruelty. The throne
is secure in itself, and in the willing obedience of the people, only as it is based
in righteousness. That king is truly glorious who makes his subjects affluent
and happy under his wise and righteous administration. Solomon on his ivory
throne is typical of Him who is greater than Solomon, seated on the great white
throne of Judgment, pronouncing sentence on the eternal state of men and angels
(Rev. xx. 2). Justice and judgment are the habitation of the Divine throne
(Ps. lxxxix. 14).


II. That regal government should be imposing in its administration.
1. Jn outward ceremony. The glittering throne, the stately figure of the king,
the numerous attendants, and the solemnity of the order of proceeding could not
fail to impress the spectators with the awful majesty and power of law. The
magistrate is to be a terror to evil-doers (Rom. xiii. 8). All legitimate external
means should be adopted that will tend to beget a wholesome reverence of law,
not simply to create a slavish dread. It is said that Attila, king of the Huns,
had a custom of fiercely rolling his small, deep-set eyes, asif he wished to enjoy
the terror he inspired. Law has nothing terrifying in it tothe innocent. 2. Jn
moral significance. ‘he lions which supported and adorned the throne not only
signified its stability, but also the vigilance with which the prince watched over
the interests of the kingdom, and the courage and power with which he defended
his people. The arms of Assyrian thrones are occasionally supported by figures
of animals. The throne of Rameses II., at Medinet Abou, has a sphinx at the
side, and ss lion below the sphinx. As the lion is the natural king of beasts, se

I


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS.
———— eee


Rar. BR


|


the figure of the lion is naturally adopted by any imaginative race as an emblem
of sovereignty. The object of all true government should be, not simply to in-


dulge in outward display, but to teach, in every possible way,
The throne should be


truth, righteousness, and virtue.


the lessons of
more conspicuous for


moral excellencies than forivory and gold.


III. That regal government should be beneficent in its aims. The twelve


lions represented the twelve tribes of Israel united under one sovereign.


The


ruler should aim at uniting the p»ople under his care into a law-abiding, in-


dustrious, and virtuous nation.


Government is instituted, not to gratify the


ambition and lust of the few, but to promote the best welfare of the many. No


government can be permanent that does not aim at this.


Thrones may fall,


dynasties pass away, but righteousness abides for ever.


: Lessons :—1. Justice is the weapon and defence of all true government. 2. Great
6s the responsibility and glorious the reward of the righteous ruler. 3. The throne
of Jesus +8 impregnable, and wll survive all the thrones of earth.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 14-29. The glory of Solo-
mon. I. Wherein it lay. Power,
dominion, pomp, splendour, glory, and
honour, everything that men wish or
desire in this world, all these we see
before us in the life of this one man.
But the glory of man is as the grass of
the field, which fades and withers;
truly, the lilies of the field exceed it in
glory, and Solomon himself confessed,
“All is vanity” (Eccles i. 2; ii. 11;
Ps. xlix. 17, 18).

Il. Its segnificance for us. That we
should seek after that other and im-
penahal’ glory, prepared for us by

im who is greater than Solomon (Jno.
xvii. 24). Scarcely one of many thou-
sands can attain to the glory of Solo-
mon, but to the glory of God we are
all called (1 Thess. ii.12). Ifour life
pe hidden with Christ in God, then, &c.
(Col. iii. 3, 4). Therefore shall we re-
joice in the hope of tuture glory, and
not only so, but in tribulations also
(Rom. v. 2, 3; 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18).

Power and dominion. I. The re-
eponsibility involved thereon. Towhom
much is given, of him shall much be
required (Luke xii. 48), Singular
endowments bring with them singular
requirements. Authority is power
given for the use and benefit of inferiors ;
wealth is bestowed upon the rich that
they may relieve necessity according
to their means.


II. The perils connected with ¢¢.
Pride and haughtiness, forgetfulness
of God, and unbelief (Ps. lxii. 11; lii.
9; 1 Tim. vi. 9; Matt. xvi. 26).
Therefore envy not the rich and power-
ful, for they are exposed to many
temptations (1 Tim. vi. 6). Devout
Christians may have and hold gold
and silver, lands and possessions, catile,
in short everything, and with a good
conscience, if only they do not misuse
them by idle pomp or for the oppression
of their fellow-creatures, for they are
gifts and favours of God, which He
lends them (Hagga. iii. 8; Ps. 1. 10).
The throne of Solomon, stately and
magnificent as it was, is Jong since
crumbled to dust; but His throne
before whose judgment seat we must
all appear, endures to all eternity.
The man to whom God has given great
wealth and high position in the world
may indeed dwell in splendour; but
every man sins whose expenses exceed
his income, or are greater than his
position requires. Golden vessels are
not necessaries of life, nor do they
conduce to greater happiness or content.
than do earthen and wooden ones.
It is the duty and right of a prince te
bring an armed force to the defence of
the country against her enemies; but
prince and people must ever remember
what the mighty Solomon himself
says: ‘‘ The horse is rae i ae


OnaP, x.





the day of battle: but safety is of the
Lord”? (Prov. xxi. 31; Psa. xxxiii.
16-19; Isaiah xxxi. 1).—Lange.


Verse 20. One lion at each end of
each of the six steps by which the
king ascended the throne. They were
symbolic figures, and in that position
might teach that resolute and deter-
mined courage and firmness should
characterize all the actions of the king.


Verse 22. It is said by some
authorities that these Hebrew words
for ivory, apes, and peacocks, are
identical with the Tamil names by
which they are known in Ceylon at
the present day. It has long since
been decided, says Cuvier, that India
was the cradle of the peacock. It is
in the countries of Southern Asia, and
the vast archipelago of the Eastern
Ocean, that this birl appears to have
fixed its dwelling, and to live in a state
of freedom. All travellers who have
visited these countries make mention
of these birds.

— Like unto these ships thus laden
are the books of some sectaries, where-
in, as in the Jewish Talmud, sunt mala
mista bonis, sunt bona mista malis. In
some parts of their writings are whole-
some and good passages ; as in a wood
or forest full of briers and brambles
there may be some violets and prim-
roses; and as here, with apes and
peacocks, were gold, silver, and ivory.


—Trapp.


Verse 23. Wealth and wisdom com-
pared and contrasted. I. Compared.
1. Both are the gifts of God. 2.
Both involve much care and toil. 3.
Both are scources of great power. 4.
Both are liable to great abuse. II.
Contrasted. 1. Wealth and wisdom
not necessarily possessed by the same
person. 2. Wealth may adorn the
body ; wisdom adorns the mind.
8. Wealth may buy influence, wisdom
commands it. 4. Wealth is material
and perishable, wisdom is immortal.

— When King Demetrius had sacked
and razed the city of Megaera to the
very foundation, he demanded of
Stilpo, the philosopher, what losses he

158


HOMILETIO COMMENTALY: KINGS.





had sustained. ‘‘None at all,” said
Stilpo, ‘‘for war can make no spoil of
virtue.”? And it is said of Bias, that
his motto was, omnia mea mecum porto—
I carry all my goods with me; vis.,
his goodness.

— Perfect freedom hath four parts:
wisdom, the principle of doing things
aright ; justice, the principle of doing
things equally in public and private ;
fortitude, the principle of not flying
danger, but meeting it; and temper.
ance, the principle of subduing desires
and living moderately.——Plato.


Verses 23, 24. Every other quality
besides is subordinate and inferior to
wisdom, in the same sense as the mason
who lays the bricks and stones in a
building is inferior to the architect
who drew the plan and superintends
the work. The former executes only
what the latter contrives and directs.
Now, it is the prerogative of wisdom
to preside over every inferior principle,
to regulate the exercise of every
power, and limit the indulgence of
every appetite, as shall best conduce
to one great end. It being the pro-
vince of wisdom to preside, it sits as
umpire on every difficulty, and se
gives the final direction and control to
all the powers of our nature. Hence
it is entitled to be considered as the
top and summit of perfection. It
belongs to wisdom to determine when
to act, and when to cease; when to
reveal, and when to conceal a matter;
when to speak, and when to keep
silence; when to give, and when to
receive; in short, to regulate the
measure of all things, as well as to
determine the end, and provide the
means of obtaining the end pursued in
every deliberate course of action.
Every particular faculty, or skill,
besides, needs to derive direction from
this: they are all quite incapable of
directing themselves.

The art of navigation, for instance,
will teach us to steer a ship across the
ocean, but it will never teach us on
what occasions it is proper to take a
voyage. The art of war will instruct
us how to marshal an army, or to
fight a battleto the greatest advantage,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : KINGS.





but you must learn from a higher
school when it is fitting, just, and
roper to wage war, or to make peace.
he art of the husbandman is to sow
and bring to maturity the precious
fruits of the earth; it belongs to
another skill to regulate their con-
sumption by a regard to our health,
fortune, and other circumstances. In
short, there is no faculty we can
exert, no species of skill we can apply,
but requires a superintending hand,
but looks up, as it were, to some
higher principle, as a maid to her
mistress for directions; and this uni-
versal superintendent is wisdom.—
Robert Hall.


Verse 24. A notable type of Christ,
so generally frequented and yet still
so cheerfully resorted to in His ordi-
nances by His people, flying thereto
as so many “‘ clouds, and as doves to
their windows’? (Isaiah lx. 8).—
chee a .

— There is no true wisdom that does
not rest calmly on a basis of truthful-
ness of heart, and is not guarded and
nurtured by righteousness and purity
of life, Man is one—one and indis-
soluble. The intellect and the con-
science are but two names for diverse
parts of the one human being—or,
rather, they are but two names for
diverse workings of the one immortal
soul. And though it be possible that
a man may be enriched with all earthly
knowledge, whilst his heart is the
dwelling-place of all corruption, und
that, on the other hand, s man may be
pure and upright in heart, whilst his
head is very poorly furnished, and his
understanding very weak, yet these
exceptional cases do not touch the
great central truth: ‘‘ The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and
the knowledge ofthe Holy is under-
standing.’’ Here, then, isthe outline
of the fair form that rises before you—
a wisdom satisfying and entire for all
the understanding, and nota dry, hard,
abstract wisdom either, but one which
is all glowing with light and purity,
and is guidance for the will, and
cleansing for the conscience, and
strength for the practical life: wisdom


GHAYP, X,





which is morality and righteousness;
morality and righteousness which ia
the highest wisdom. Go out into the
world, I pray you, and strip everything
that appeals to you of its disguises, and
you will find it true that, where Christ
isnot, there—let it wooeversosweetly,
and sing ever so melodiously—there is
only a siren that tempts you down
beneath the sunny surface of pleasure
to the black depths below, where she
lives on dead mens’ bones! There is
your choice. On the one side there
calls you the god-descended, beautiful,
and serene Wisdom, with diadem on
her brow, and blessing in her hands,
and peace upon her lips—a Wisdom
behind which Christ stands with face
fairer, yet lips fuller still of grace, a
heart gentler than the woman-wisdom
that Solomon knew of, and hands full
of better blessing than any that dawned
upon him; and, on the other side, a
loud-voiced, clamorous, painted, deceiv-
ing harlot, who calls you to herself to
stifle you with her poisonous breath.
—A. Maclaren.


Verses 24, 25. The charms of
philosophy. I. Are found in the very
nature of the scvence. 1. It promises
somuch. 2. It gratifies the pride of
intellect. 3. It affords ample scope
for speculation. II. Allure stnquirers
From the most distant places. ‘‘ All the
earth sought to Solomon to hear his
wisdom.” 1. The love of knowledge
braves all difficulties. 2. Influences
all classes. 3. Is shown by dissemi-
nating knowledge, as by seeking it.
III. Zvoke the most costly offerings.
‘And they brought every man his
present.” 1. Wisdom is better than
gold. 2. Talent deserves suitable
acknowledgment. 38. The learner
should be grateful. 4. More money
is wasted in useless luxuries than is
spent in seeking knowledge. IV. Jn-
spire unremitting devotion in tts votaries.
“Year by year.” 1. It demands
constant attention. 2. Its unsolved
problems sustain the interest of the
student. 3. It has charms to many
as a purely intellectual exercise.

— We are raised by science to an
understanding of the infinite wisdom

169


OHAP, X.





and goodness which the Creator has
displayed in all His works. Not a
step can we take in any direction with-
out perceiving the most extraordinary
traces of design ; and the skill every-
where conspicuous is calculated in so
vast a proportion of instances to pro-
mote the happiness of living creatures,
and especially of ourselves, that we
feel no hesitation in concluding that,
if we knew the whole scheme of
Providence, every part would appear
in harmony with a plan of absolute
benevolence. Independently, how-
ever, of this most consoling inference,
the delight is inexpressible of being
able to follow the works of the great
Author of nature, and to trace the un-
bounded power and exquisite skill
which are exhibited by the most
minute as well as the mightiest parts
of His system.—Brougham.


Verse 25. We have here expressed
in words what the Egyptian and
Assyrian monarchs recorded by means
of elaborate sculptures on slabs and
obelisks—the frequent coming to the
court of tribute-bearers from the sub-
ject kings, who brought not only the
fixed rate of bullion whereto each of
them was liable, but a tribute in kind
besides, consisting of the most pre-
cious products of their respective
countries. Among these vessels, pro-
bably of silver and gold, garments
and horses are very conspicuous on
the monuments.—Speaker’s Comm.


Verse 26. The true defence of a
nation. 1. Not in chariots and
horses—weapons of war. 2. But in
the devotion and valour of the people.
8. In the overshadowing presence of
God. 4. In the prevalence of
righteousness.


Verses 26-29. Trading. 1. An
honourable calling. 2. Is a source of
wealth to individuals and nations. 3.
Encourages industry and enterprize.
4. Expands the knowledge of human
nature. 5. Offers many temptations
to roguery. 6. Is legitimate only
when it is honest.

— How to be a Christian in

160


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





trade (compared with Matt. xxv. 16).
I. The fair possibility of being a
Christian in trade. 1. There is the
very certain fact that there have
been good Christians in trade; and if
that be so, then it follows, by a very
short argument, that what has been
can be—that is, can be again and
often. 2. All apprehensions of a
specially harmful exposure in trade
are mistaken. What it calls profits
are just as truly earmings as any of the
fruits of hand-labour. 3. Little
room is there, under anything pro-
perly called trade, for what many
seem to regard as the necessary skill,
in raising colour by glosses of false
recommendation, or by small lies
sprinkled in for the due stimulation of
the customer. That is not an accom-
plishment belonging to the genuine
operation of trade, but only to the low-
lived, inbred habit of the man. II.
How to bea Christian tn trade. 1.
No man of course expects to be a
Christian in trade without being a
religious man in it. And just here,
alas! is the difficulty most commonly
encountered—the difficulty of continu-
ing to be a Christian without begin-
ning to be one; the difficulty of being
kept safe in religion, or religious
character, by a business carried on
without such character, and wholly
outside of religion. 2. It is another
important consideration that you are
permitted, if at all, to go into this
occupation by a really Divine call.
God has a place for every man, in
what is to be his particular employ-
ment, as He has a place for every rock,
and tree, and river, and star. 8. Be-
ing thus installed in trade, as by the
call of God, how surely may you have
God’s help in the prosecution of it.
How surely, that is, if you ask it, and
train your ways of practice so that
you can fitly receive it. All right
employments are callings in which
God puts His servants for their good,
and what will He more surely do than
help them to findtheir good! 4. The
merchant in his calling of trade is put
in a relation to God so inherently
religious, if he will undertake it in
that manner, that he is justified in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,





passing his vow not to be in trade, or
even for a day to stay in it, if he
cannot have the enjoyment of God in
it. 5. There are even special advan-
tages in trade as regards the develop-
ment of a Christian life, which do not
occur as largely in any other employ-
ment. The transactions are many,
crowding thick upon the shelves and
counters all the day. The temptations,
of course, are just as much more nume-
rous as the transactions; and it must
not be forgotten that the more tempted
@ man is, the more opportunities are
given him to grow. Scarcely could
he grow at all if none at all were put
in his way. 6. There is also a con-
siderable Christian advantage in the
relation that subsists between the
merchant and his customer. To bea
customer signifies more or less of
favour and confidence. The cus-
tomer, in being such, commits himself
in a large degree to the honour of the
merchant, and then the merchant in
turn accepts him naturally asa man
who comes in expression of trust, and
is fairly entitled to generosity. 7.
Trade also furnishes occasions of bene-
ficence to the poor, which are all the
better to both parties, that they make
no parade of charity, but may pass
for a buying and selling between
them It is trade on the one side,
and trade on the other; only that on
one side it is so near to the confines
of beneficence that it consciously
passes over. A more gentle, genial,
and genuine influence on the man
could hardly be devised. 8. It is yet
another and very great moral advan-
tage of trade, that it is just the
calling in which a Christian man will
best learn the uses of money. Hence
it is going to be discovered, that the
great problem we have now on hand,
viz., the Christianizing of the money
power of the world, depends for its
principal hope on the trading class in
society. Talent has been Christianized
already on a large scale. The political
power of states and kingdoms has been
long assumed to be, and now at last


OHAP. X





really is, as far as it becomes their
accepted office to maintain personal
security and liberty. Architecture,
arts, constitutions, schools, and learn-
ing have been largely Christianized.
But the money power, which is one of
the most operative and grandest
of all, is only beginning to be;
though with promising tokens of a
finally complete reduction to Christ
and the uses of His kingdom. Trade
expanding into commerce, and com-
merce rising into communion, are to
be the outline of the story. When
the merchant seeking goodly pearls—-
all the merchant race—find the pre-
cious one they seek, and sell their all
to buy it, they will make it theirs. —
Bushneit.

— Luxury and extravagance.
1. Always go together. 2. Depre-
ciate the true value of things. 3.
Flourish on the oppression and distress
of others. 4. Excite popular discon-
tent. 5. End in disgrace and ruin.


Verse 27. This strong hyperbole
marks in the most striking way the
great wealth and prosperity of the
capital during Solomon’s reign. The
lavish expenditure which impoverished
the provinces, and produced, or helped
to produce, the general discontent
that led to the outbreak under Jero-
boam, enriched the metropolis, which
must have profited greatly by the resi-
dence of the court, the constant
influx of opulent strangers, and the
periodical visits of all Israelites, not
hindered by some urgent reason, at
the great festivals.—Speaker’s Comm.


Verse 28. It is thought that the
first people who used horses in war
were the Egyptians; and it is well
known that the nations who knew
the use of this creature in battle
had greatly the advantage of those
who did not. God had absolutely
prohibited horses to be imported or
used; but, in many things, Solomon
paid little attention to the Divine
command,


*&


GitaP. x1, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





CHAPTER XI.


THE DECLINE OF THE HEBREW EMPIRE.


Crrrrcat AND Expianatory Norrs.—Verse 1. But King Solomon loved many strange
women—lIf importations of foreign luxuries and indulgences into his court (see previous
chapter) were occasions of peril to Solomon, tending to corrupt his heart from simple fidelity
to Jehovah, far more so this creation of a foreign harem. Among the ancient Hebrews poly-
gamy was permitted; and the number of a man’s wives was a standard of his wealth and
dignity. Solomon emulated this dangerous and degrading custom ; and, being unrivalled in the
lavishment of wealth, he seems to have resolved upon excelling in this department of Oriental
indulgence, thereby to assert his state magnificence. Together with the daughter of
‘Pharaoh —It is not implied that his marriage with Pharaoh’s daughter was wrong,
but his adding others. Contrary to the law of the Lord (Deut. xvii. 17) he took,
“together with the daughter of Pharaoh, many strange wives.” Verse 3. Seven hundred
wives, princesses—So great a number from noblest princely houses of foreign nations suggests
the splendour of his court. It was a vanity, and fraught with greatest snares. Verse 4.
Solomon's old age—He was probably not over fifty. Verse 5. Went after Ashtoreth—Lange
thinks he did not himself become an idolater, but allowed every form of idolatry his wives
desired; yet, though he offered no sacrifice on the altars he reared, to rear them was equiva-
lent to sacrificing, equally offensive to Jehovah. -Ashtoreth, Astarte, the highest feminine deity
of the Sidonians ; Milcom, Molech; Chemosh (verse 7), the war and fire-god of the Moabites.
Verse 11. Forasmuch as this is done of thee; or, is purposed of thee, Verse 15. When
David was in Edom; or, was (at war) with. The Sept. and Peshito read, had smitten.
Hadad was @ royal child, rescued from Joab’s extirminating slaughter (2 Samuel viii. 13) in
Edom, carried into Egypt, and fostered by the Egyptian king. On learning of the death of
David and Joab, he quitted Egypt, returned to his own land, and sought to restore the ruined
kingdom of his fathers. Foiled in his efforts, he joined himself to Rezon, another of Solomon’s
adversaries (verses 23-25). Verse 22. Let me go in any wise—The Sept. and Codex Vat.
insert here, ‘‘ And Hadad returned to his own land; this is the mischief which Hadad did; and
he abhorred Israel, and reigned over Edom.” Verse 23. Another adversary, Rezon—Comp.
2 Sam. vill. 3, eg. Verse 25. Beside the mischief that Hadad did T7777 TWN TYII-NN?

Sass vile


—A peculiar phrase, not easy to render; yet A. V. gives the sense fairly; or thus, But as for
this mischief that Hadad did; or, And, indeed, along with the evil that Hadad did (so Ber-
theau). Verse 26. Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite, é.e., an Ephraimite. Hadad
and Rezon were “adversaries” to Solomon; but Jeroboam was an internal enemy, a subject
and servant who developed into a rebel, and a more dangerous enemy. Being a young man
of industry and talent, Solomon entrusted him with the honourable position of superintendent
of the engineering works in progress around Jerusalem. He evidently used this eminence to
sow sedition, for “ this was the cause,” &c., verse 27. Lange suggests that the Ephraimites
had an old and irrepressible jealousy of Judah, and very reluctantly submitted to labour in the
king’s citadel. Compulsory labour increased this dislike to hatred, so that Jeroboam found it
easy to fan the flame of insurrection among them. Verse 29. Ahijah the Shilonite—shiloh
was in the tribe of Ephraim; hence Ahijah and Jeroboam were of the same tribe—probably,
of the same spirit also, Verse 40. Solomon sought, therefore, &c,—Jeroboam’s inflated pride
and restless ambition led him to conspiracies even before Solomon’s death, as verse 26 affirms,
Unto Shishak, king of Egypt, who harboured this seditious rebel, thus showing his own
mined ee peony of Solomon. Shishak was of a different dynasty from Solomon’s father.
-la Wo ° e


HOMILETIC8 OF VERSES 1—8.
Tae Fatt or Sotomon, anp rvs Lzssows.


Everything about Solomon was on a scale of unparalleled greatness. He was
great in his descent—the offspring of the renowned David. He was great as a
sovereign, raising the kingdom of the Hebrews, which was inaugurated by Saul,
and enlarged and consolidated by David, to the highest pitch of imperial great-


ness suyese nal magnificence it ever attained. He was great in intellectual


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. XE,





endowment—‘‘ He was wiser than all men, and his fame was in all nations
round about.” He was great in Divine benedictions—“ For the Lord magnified
Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed on him such royal
majesty as had not been on any king before him” (1 Chron. xxix. 25). And
his greatness was not less conspicuous in his sad and terrible fall. The whole
career of Solomon is a succession of surprises and mysteries. As soon as he took
up the reins of government he gave evidence of the greatness of his powers.
The nation felt itself in the grasp of a master, and became pliant and obedient in
his hand. And yet, with all the outward show of his consummate abilities and
gigantic enterprizes, we have but few details of his personal life. His works
impress and delight us: his personality is vague, and only mystifies us. As
you have seen on occasions of public rejoicing, among other illuminations, some
gigantic figure lit up and sparkling in brilliant outline, while the interspaces of
the figure are dark, vacant, and unintelligible: so was it with Solomon. His
imposing and majestic figure occupied a large space in the history of the Jewish
Kingdom and in the history of the world, and shed the lustre of its imperial glory
over all nations and through all succeeding ages; but the minute personal
features of that stately form fade away into the darkness—are, in fact, for the
most part invisible. The splendour of Solomon’s reign was like a glare of sun-
shine resting on the fertile plains, teeming with life and efflorescent with beauty.
While the light remains, the scene is gay, brilliant, captivating; but, all unseen
and unsuspected, the poisonous miasma is loading the air, and by-and-by will
spread sorrow and disaster in its course. Consider—


I. The causes which contributed to the downfall of the great Hebrew
monarch, 1. Zhe intoxication of intellectual pride. We have seen how he was
gifted with a keen and comprehensive intellect, and was addicted from his
earliest youth to the most profound studies. His proverbs were the condensa-
tion of the choicest maxims of moral and political science, and have enriched
the literature of the world; his songs bear evidence of a lofty, poetic genius;
and his discourses and treatises on natural history embraced the most important
and most minute facts of the science. It is appalling to think of the powerful
ascendency these high qualities must have given him over the minds of others.
No wonder the nations crowded around such a prodigy of wisdom (chap. iv.
80-34); and who could inhale the incense of adulation that daily filled his
court without being intoxicated with vain thoughts? It cannot, therefore,
surprise us that, puffed up with the flattery of courtiers and the applauses of
the multitude, Solomon began to think too highly of himself, and to say: ‘‘ By
the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom, for Iam prudent ”
(Isa. x. 13). His wisdom having thus become his idol, he persuades himself
that it will enable him to solve all mysteries, and to rectify all disorders, and
thus to render him the master both of his own destiny and of the destinies of
the people—nay, of the whole world. We can imagine how such a notion
would captivate a generous, great, and aspiring mind. He sees in the state of
society, and in the condition of individual men, evils which he would fain
remove, and wrongs which he would fain redress. Many are suffering from
disease, many are pining in poverty, many groaning beneath the iron yoke of
injustice and oppression. Good men are often treated with neglect, or covered
with obloquy, while wicked men are as often high in place and power. Why
is all this? What is the source and explanation of these painful anomalies?
Cannot I, who have searched out so many deep things, fathom this secret too?
Shall it not be the privilege and the prerogative of Solomon the Wise to
inaugurate a new and better condition of things ?”"—2R. Buchanan. He thus
sought to arrogate to himself a power which no created intelligence is privileged
to possess. His condition of mind is the explanation of many sad and paintul
backslidings that followed. 3. The system of polygamy, which he eee


*%


CHAP. XL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a St


to an unprecedented extent, left its debasing curse on Solomon and on his
family for generations (verses 1-3). The harem of an Eastern monarch is even
at the present day looked upon as a sort of state necessity, and the king’s rank
and greatness are estimated according to its extent. He multiplies his wives
according to his wealth and power, though many of them he never sees at all.
Darius Codomannus is said to have taken three hundred and sixty concubines
in his camp when he marched against Alexander. So Solomon, wishing to
surpass all other kings in the fame of greatness, filled his harem with a thousand
women. This was an enormity. In the simplest view, the sexes being nearly
equal, it deprived a thousand men of wives that one man might have 999 more
than he required. Such a system brought with it the inevitable evils of the
oriental seraglio. Licentiousness taints the intellect, loosens the bonds of
morality, and debases the whole man. 8. The estrangement of heart from
Jehovah (verses 4-6). Solomon did not openly or wholly apostatise. He con-
tinued his attendance on the worship of Jehovah, and punctually made his
offerings three times a year in the temple. But his heart was not perfect with
God. Many causes had concurred to weaken the religious earnestness of his
younger days—as the corrupting influence of wealth and luxury, the canker of
sensualism, an increasing worldliness, leading him to adopt more and more a
worldly policy, and, perhaps, a growing latitudinarianism arising from contact
with all the manifold forms of human opinion (see Speaker's Comm.). A most
significant sign of religious decay was the almost total absence of prophets
during Solomon’s brilliant career. The history of the prophets is the most
remarkable and fascinating of any history in the Scriptures. They enter on
their career as if thrust forth by some unseen hand: they utter their message
as if impelled by some mysterious and irresistible force. Receiving their com-
mission from neither king nor people, they are perfectly independent of both.
No amount of violence or suffering could silence their faithful utterances, or
retard the accomplishment of their mission. And when their work was done,
and their testimony fearlessly borne, like flaming comets, they vanished into the
space from which they seemed at first to emerge. The ‘‘ conspicuous absence ”
of these faithful messengers indicated the mournful state of piety amid the
external splendours of the empire. 4. The publie sanction and practice of
idolatry (verses 7, 8). Heathen temples were built on the southern heights of
Olivet in the very sight of the Holy Temple; and from the abominable rites
that were practised there, a name of infamy was given to the whole mountain.
It was called—and still bears the name of—the Mount of Offence. This flagrant
idolatry roused the displeasure of Jehovah; and the consequent disruption of
the kingdom was plainly foretold (verses 9-13). ‘ He thus became the author
of a syncretism which sought to blend together the worship of Jehovah and the
worship of idols—a syncretism which possessed fatal attractions for the Jewish
nation. Finally, he appears himself to have frequented the idol-temples, and
to have taken part in those fearfulimpuritics which constituted the worst horror
of the idolatrous systems, thus practically apostatising, though theoretically
he never ceased to hold that Jehovah was the true God.” 5. The despotio
character of his government. Commerce, to promote the prosperity of a nation,
must be national and not regal. Butthe commerce of Israel, in Solomon’s days,
was in all respects a monopoly of the crown. The excessive demands upon the
people for sustaining the ever-growing magnificence of the empire became un-
bearable, and a spirit of discontent spread throughout the nation which
ultimately broke out into open and successful rebellion. The structure of the
empire was shattered by the weight of its own opulence and greatness.


II. The ultimate fate of Solomon. It was a much contested point among
the Fathers of the early Church as to whether Solomon was among the saved


or the oa and both opinions were pretty equally sustained by eminent names
4 ,


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OMAP. Xi.








in theology. The question was so frequently debated, and seemed so evenly
balanced, that in a series of frescoes on the walls of a celebrated church on the
Continent, Solomon is represented at the General Resurrection as looking doubt-
fully to the right and to the left, as if uncertain in which side he would find
his destined lot. We incline to the merciful view, and fee! supported by two
considerations :—(1). Six hundred years after Solomon hud been resting in the
grave, and when posterity could pronounce a calm and dispassionate verdict,
Nehemiah gave a summary of the character of the great Hebrew king, in
which he recognized him as ‘‘the beloved of his God” (Neh. xiii. 26, com-
pared with 2 Sam. vii. 14). (2). Add to this the gencrally-admitted fact that
the book of Ecclesiastes contains the utterances of Solomon at the close of his
earthly career ; and, in the concluding words of that book, do we not detect a
wandering, sinning spirit coming to a halt, and an assured resting-place, as he
exclaims :—‘“ Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God and
keep His commandments!’


III. The lessons suggested by Solomon’s life. 1. That worldly greatness
has tts peculiar perils. Solomon began well. He loved God, and strove to walk
in all the ways of David his father; but as he advanced in wealth, and his
mind expanded into the vast fields of intellectual research, the simplicity of
his trust in God was destroyed, his spiritual fervour was chilled, and religious
decline began, His exalted regal position and high mental endowments raised
him into a lofty region, in which few but himself could enter; and there were
none round about him who had the fidelity or the courage to warn him of his
danger, even if they themselves perceived that danger. He became the victim
of his own imperious self-sufficiency—the weight of his own aggrandisement
crushed him to the dust! Wealth, prosperity, promotion, will ever lift men
into the midst of a thousand threatening dangers; and the higher the pinnacle
to which they are elevated, the more imminent their peril, and the more
awfully calamitous their fall. 2. That tn the greatest characters there ts a mingling
of good andevit. As Bacon is, in English history, ‘‘ the wisest, greatest, meanest
of mankind,” so is Solomon in Jewish and in sacred history. Every part of his
splendour had its dark side. ‘The web of our life,” says Shakespeare, ‘ is
of mingled yarn—bad and good together.” It is important to recognize this
fact in forming a just estimate of human character. Solomon is “the chief
example in Sacred History of what meets us often in common history—the
union of genius and crime. The record of his career sanctions our use of the
intellectual power even of the weakest or the wickedest of mankind. As
Solomon’s fall is not overlooked in consideration of his power and glory, so
neither because he fell does he cease to be called the wisest of men, nor is his
wisdom shut out from the Sacred Volume.”—Stanley. 3. That worldly pros-
perity 48 powerless to satisfy the deepest needs of the soul. All the great gifts of
the world were possessed by Solomon in an unexampled degree. His riches
were fabulous, and came from afar—the inexhaustible mines of the Eactern
and Western worlds replenished his treasury with an unfailing supply. He
wielded the most absolute authority. Whatever pleasure could delight the eye
or gratify the taste was at his command. He was a philosopher, a poet, an
accomplished scientist, and penetrated to the depths of all human wisdom—
even to exhaustion and satiety. And yet there was nothing in all these to
make him happy. Turning from all his former delights with unutterable sur-
feiting and loathing, he raises the sad, melancholy lamentation—“ Vanity of
vanities! Allis vanity!” All that worldly good can do for us is—to show
us its own emptiness: it raises our hopes with delusive promises, and dashes
them to atoms with bitter disappointments. The flowers which it sprinkles
around our path barely hide the charnel house in which our bones will soon
have to rot! 4. That the success of the work of God does not depend evn Scenes


%


CHAP, XI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





display. Solomon appears upon the scene like a mighty magician who, with
one stroke of his wand, calls into existence an enchanting spectacle of royal
splendour—the towering palace, the shining throne, the courtly attendants in
gorgeous apparel, the military with glittering weapons and prancing chargers,
the exuberant riches of a prosperous commerce, and all the external evidences
of a great and powerful nation—himse/f the most conspicuous figure in the gay
and animated throng; and, before the eye has got well accustomed to the
dazzling pageant, both magician and his marvellous creation gradually melt
away into the surrounding mysteries. But, all the time, the ulterior purpose
of God in raising up the Jewish nation, and through it endowing the world with
unspeakable blessing, marched grandly and silently on its way. Through the
changing fortunes of succeeding dynasties—through the decline and final
extinction of the kingdom—through the disasters, sufferings, and desolations of
the long captivities, unto the coming of the Son of God, the gracious purpose
slowly ripened, and gave promise of a glorious fruitage. The moral impress on
the world of the Saviour’s advent was made utterly independent and in defiance
of external pomp. And still the work of God goes on, often silently, often in
obscurity and suffering, but always triumphantly }


Hiew Interzectvua, Enpowments Prermovs.


I. Because they are liable to be corrupted by the seductions of sensuality
(verses 1-3). Mental power is no safeguard against the grossest sins. Superior
knowledge did not protect Adam from the blandishments of Eve. ‘‘ If one woman
undid all mankind, what marvel is it if many women undid one. To them did
Solomon join in love, who can marvel if they disjoined his heart from God? Satan
hath found this bait to take so well, that he never changed it since he crept into
Paradise. How many have we known whose heads have been broken with their


own rib?”


II, Because they may breed an undue consciousness of personal superiority,
It is a lovely sight to see wisdom combined with humility, a giant intellect in
union with a childlike simplicity of character. It is a thrilling but dangerous
moment when the mind becomes conscious of its true power; the danger is in-
creased when it discovers its superiority to others. The dim-sighted wanderer,
stumbling with uncertain foothold on the sides of precipitous crags, is not in
greater peril. A moment like that came to Mahomet, and thenceforth the noble
method of moral suasion gave place to the shorter and more imperious argument
of the sword. A moment like that came to Napoleon Bonaparte, and his career
thenceforword was a lurid, bloody tragedy.


ITI. Because they are intolerant ofadvice and admonition. Noone single
mind possesses all the truth on any subject. Different shades of the same
truth alter the complexion of the whole, and may influence personal action in
an opposite direction. It is therefore an unspeakable advantage to be surrounded
by those from whom we can take council. The wise man will learn something
even from an enemy. ‘To be impatient of advice and indifferent to warning is
to be exposed to danger and disaster. It is like rushing into conflict without
sword and shield; or fording the turbulent torrent, whilst despising the use of
boat or raft. It is one of the misfortunes of the intellectual genius that so
many regard him as above the necessity of help from others. Few have the
courage to offer him advice; fewer still the fidelity to warn.


IV. Because they are apt to encourage a proud self-sufficiency. Intellectual
greatness propounds to itself the sublimest tasks. It “soars into the heavens,
penetrates the earth, penetrates itself, questions the past, anticipates the future,

166


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. Har. Xi,





and seeks to find in every region of the universe types and interpreters of its own
deep mysteries and glorious inspirations” (Eccles. i. 18). No wonder, with
such themes revolving in the mind, it should be in danger of losing its balance;
and that it should proudly arrogate to itself the credit of all success and discovery.
Pride of intellectis the most dangerous form of all pride. ‘It isa vice,” says the
judicious Hooker, ‘‘ which cleaveth so fast unto the hearts of men, that if we
were to strip ourselves of all faults, one by one, we should undoubtedly find it
the very last and hardest to put off. In the world many things are the cause
of much evil; but pride of all.”


Deep is the sea and deep is hell; but pride mineth deeper:

It is coiled as a poisonous worm about the foundations of the soul.

If thou expose it in thy motives and track it in thy springs of thought,

Complacent in its own detection, it will seem indignant virtue.

Smoothly it will gratulate thy skill, O subtle anatomist of self !

And spurns its very being, while it nestleth the deeper in thy bosom.
Tupper.


V. Because they may disparage the deepest religious sentiments (verses
4-6). The colossal intellectualism of Solomon did not protect the purity and
genuineness of the religion of his youth. His “heart was turned away, it waa
not perfect with the Lord his God.” Not that he ceased to believe in Jehovah
as the only true God: he could not so far insult and stultify his intellectual
consciousness. But his religious fervour was abated, and his dearest religious
convictions dishonoured. The sensual over-shadowed the intellectual; and the
intellectual, thus eclipsed, depreciated the religious. And there is a school of
thinkers to-day who, in their haste to reconcile difficulties, advance the theory
of one theology for the intel!ect, and another for the feelings. Their theory is,
there are two modes of apprehending and presenting truth; the one by the
logical consciousness that it may be understood; the other by the intuitional
consciousness that it may be felt. These two modes may often conflict, so that
what is true in the one may be false in the other, reminding one of the old
dictum, ‘‘ What is true in religion is false in philosophy.” The danger of this
theory is evident in its enabling a man to profess his faith in doctrines which
he does not believe. If asked, Do you believe that Christ satisfied the justice
of God ?—he can say Yes, for it is true to his feelings: and he can say, No, be-
cause it is false to his intellect. In all true religious experience the head and
the heart are in harmony.


VI. Because they render failure the more ignominious and unbearable. The
degradation of Nebuchadnezzar was all the more conspicuous because of the lofti-
ness of his yauntings. The humiliation and suffering of the stately dames of
Jersualem were all the more noticeable in contrast with their mincing gait,
their stretched-out necks, and tinkling ornaments. So the fall of Solomon was
the more calamitous because of his rare and vast endowments and high exalta-
tion. The locomotive which slips from the metals when at full speed works
all the greater devastation and ruin because of the ponderous power which
pulses in its capacious breast. The nature which is capable of the highest
ecstasy is susceptible of the deeper woe and misery.


Lxssons:—1. Intellectual gifts involve corresponding responsibility. 2. It ts
better to be wise than to be clever. 3. Tobe truly good 18 to be truly great.


Soromon’s ResToRation.


(Compared with Neh. xiii. 26).


The deep interest of biography consists in this—that it is in some measure the


description to us of our own inner history. You cannot unveil paca of


®%


Guar, Xi. BOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ee


another heart without at the same time finding something to correspond with,
and perchance explain, the mysteries of your own. It is for this reason that
Solomon’s life is full of painful interest. Far removed as he is, in some
respects, above our sympathies, in others he peculiarly commands them. He
was a monarch, and none of us know the sensations which belong to Rule. He
was proclaimed by God to be among the wisest of mankind, and few of us can
even conceive the atmosphere in which such a gifted spirit moves, original,
enquiring, comprehending, one to whom Nature has made her secret open. He
lived in the infancy of the world’s society, and we live in its refined and civi-
lized manhood. And yet, when we have turned away, wearied, from all those
subjects in which the mind of Solomon expatiated, and try to look inwards at
the man, straightway we find ourselves at home. Just as in our own trifling,
petty history, so we find in him, life with the same unabated, mysterious
interest; the dust and confusion of a battle, sublime longings and low weak-
nesses, perplexity, struggle; and then the grave closing over all this, and
leaving us to marvel in obscurity and silence over the strange destinies of man.
The career of Solomon is a problem which has perplexed many, and is by
no means an easy one to solve. He belongs to the peculiar class of those who
begin well, and then have the brightness of their lives obscured at last. His
morning sun rose beautifully, it sank in the evening, clouded, and dark with
earthly exhalations, too dark to prophesy with certainty how it should rise on
the morrow. Solomon’s life was not what religious existence ought to be.
The Life of God in the soul of man ought to be a thing of perpetual develop-
ment; it ought to be more bright, and its pulsations more vigorous every year.
Such certainly, at least to all appearance, Solomon’s was not. It was excel-
lence, at all events, marred with inconsistency.


{. The wanderings of an erring spirit. ‘‘ Did not Solomon, king of Israel,
sin by these things?” 1. This is the first point to dwell on—the wanderings
of a frail and erring human spirit from the right way. 1. That which lay at
the bottom of all Solomon’s transgressions was his éntimate partnership with
foreigners. ‘* Did not Solomon sin by these things?” That is, if we look to
the context, marriage with foreign wives. Exclusiveness was the principle on
which Judaism was built. The Israelites were not to mix with the nations,
they were not to marry with them: they were not to join with them in
religious fellowship or commercial partnership. And it was this principle
which Solomon transgressed. He married a princess of Egypt. He connected
himself with wives from idolatrous countries—Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites,
Sidonians, Hittites. And then Nehemiah’s argument, built on the eternal truth
that friendship with the world is enmity with God, is this—‘“‘ Did not Solomon
sin by these things?’ That Jewish law shadowed out an everlasting truth.
God’s people are an exclusive nation; God’s Church is for ever separated from
the world. When a religious person begins to feel an inclination for intimate
communion with the world, and begins to break down that barrier which is the
line of safety, the first step is made of a series of long, dark wanderings from
God. The world changes its complexion in every age. Solomon’s world was the
nations of idolatry lying round Israel. Our world is not that. The sons of our
world are not idolaters, they are not profligate, they are, it may be, among the
most fascinating of mankind. Their society is more pleasing, more lively, more
diversified in information than religious society. No marvel if a young ana
ardent heart feels the spell of the fascination. No wonder if it feels a relief in
turning away from the dulness and the monotony of home life tu the sparkling
brilliancy of the world’s society. No marvel if Solomon felt the superior
charms of the accomplished Egyptian and the wealthy Syrian. His Jewish
countrymen and countrywomen were but homely in comparison. It is almost
aaa almost intelligible—a temptation which we feel ourselves every day.

68


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, XI;
ae a ee


The brilliant, dazzling, accomplished world—what Christian with a mind
polished like Solomon’s does not own its charms? And yet now, pause. Isit
in wise Egypt that our highest blessedness lies? Is it in busy, restless Sidon ?
Is it in luxurious Moab? No. The Christian must leave the world alone.
His blessedness lies in quiet work with the Israel of God. His home is in
that deep, unrufiled tranquillity which belongs to those who are trving to know
Christ. And when a Christian will not learn this; when he will not
understand that in calmness, and home, and work, and love, his soul must find
its peace; when he will try keener and more exciting pleasures; when he says,
I must taste what life is while I am young, its feverishness, its strange,
delirious, maddening intoxication, he has just taken Solomon’s first step,
and he must take the whole of Solomon’s after and most bitter experience
along with it.

2. The second step of Solomon’s wandering was the unrestrained pursutt
of pleasure. And aman like Solomon cannot do anything by halves. What
he did, he did thoroughly. No man ever more heartily and systemati-
cally gave himself up to the pursuit. If he once made up his mind that
pleasure was his aim, then for pleasure he lived. There are some men who are
prudent in their epicureanism. They put gaiety aside when they begin to get
palled with it, and then return to it moderately again. Men like Solomon
cannot do that. No earnest man can. No! if blessedness lies in pleasure, he
will drink the cup to the dregs. We have none of the cool, cautious sipping
of enjoyment here. We have none of the fecble, languid attempts to
enjoy the world which make men venture ankle-deep into dissipation,
and only long for courage to go a little further. It is the earnestness of an im-
passioned man, a man who has quitted God, and thrown himself, heart and soul,
upon everything that he tries, and says he will try it fairly, and to the full.
There is a moral to be learnt from the wildest worldliness. When we look on
the madness of life, and are marvelling at the terrible career of dissipation, let
there be no contempt felt. Itis an immortal spirit marring itself. It is an in-
finite soul, which nothing short of the Infinite can satisfy, plunging down to
ruin and disappointment. Men of pleasure! whose hearts are as capable of an
eternal blessedness as a Christian’s, that is the terrible meaning and moral of your
dissipation. God in Christ is youronly Eden, and out of Christ you can have nothing
but the restlessness of Cain; you are blindly pursuing your destiny. That
unquenched impetuosity within you might have led you up to God. You have
chosen instead that your heart shall try to satisfy itself upon husks. 38. There
was another form of Solomon’s worldliness. It was not worldliness in pleasure,
but worldiness tn occupation. He had entered deeply in commercial speculations,
He had alternate fears and hopes about the return of his merchant ships on
their perilous three-years’ voyage to India and to Spain. He had his mind
occupied with plans for building. The architecture of the temple, his own palace,
the forts and towns of his now magnificent empire—all this filled for a time his
soul. He had begun a system of national debt and ruinous taxation. He had
become a slaveholder and a despot, who was compelled to keep his people down
by urmed force. Much of this was not wrong; but all of it was dangerous.
It is a strange thing how business dulls the sharpness of the spiritual affections.
It is strange how the harass of perpetual occupation shuts God out. It is
strange how much mingling with the world, politics, and those things which
belong to advancing civilization, things which are very often in the way of our
duty, deaden the sense of right and wrong. Let Christians be on their guard
by double prayerfulness when duty makes them men of business, or calls them
to posts of worldly activity. 4. It was the climax of Solomon’s transgression
that he suffered the establishment of idolatry in his dominions. There are writers
who have said that in this matter Solomon was in advance of his age—enlightened


beyond the narrowness of Judaism, and that thispermission of raed was the
9





GzAP. EE: HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





earliest exhibition of that spirit which in modern times we call religious tolera-
tion. But Solomon went far beyond toleration. The truth seems to be,
Solomon was getting indifferent about religion. He had got into light and
worldly society, and the libertinism of his associations was beginning to make
its impressions upon him. He was beginning to ask, ‘‘Is not one religion as
good as another, so long as each man believes his own in earnest?”? He began
to feel there is a great deal to besaid for these ditferent religions. After all, there is
nothing certain; and why forbid men the quiet enjoyment of their own opinion ?
And so he became what men call liberal, and he took idolatry under his patronage.
There are few signs in a soul’s state more alarming than that of religious in-
difference—that is, the spirit of thinking all religions equally true; the real
meaning of which is, that all religions are equally false.


II. Consider God’s loving guidance of Solomon in all his apostacy. ‘There
was no king like unto him who was beloved of his God.” 1. In the darkest,
wildest wanderings, a man to whom God has shown his love in Christ ¢s conscious
still of the better way. In the very gloom of his remorse, there is an instinctive
turning back to God. According to Scripture phraseology, Solomon had a great
heart; and therefore it was that, for such an one, the discipline which was to
lead him back to God must needs be terrible. ‘If he commit iniquity, I will
chasten him with the rod of men.” That was God’s covenant, and with tre-
mendous fidelity was it kept. You look to the life of Solomon, and there are
no outward reverses there to speak of. His reign was the type of the reign of the
power of peace. No war, no national disaster, interrupted the even flow of the cur-
rent of hisdays. No loss of a child like David’s, pouring cold desolation into his
soul ; no pestilences or fumines. Prosperity and riches, and the internal deve-
lopment of the nation’s life—that was the reign of Solomon. And yet, with all
this, was Solomon happy? Has God no arrows winged in heaven for the heart,
except those which come in the shape of outward calamity? Is there no way
that God has of making the heart grey and old before its time, without sending
bereavement, or loss, or sickness? Has the Eternal Justice no mode of withering
and drying up the inner springs of happiness, while all is green, and wild,
and fresh outwardly? Look to the history of Solomon for the answer.
2. One way in which his aberration from God treasured up for him chastise-
ment was by that weariness of existence which breathes through the whole
book of Ecclesiastes. That book bears internal evidence of having been
written after repentance and victory. It is the experience of a career of
pleasure, and the tone which vibrates through the whole is disgust with the
world, and mankind, and life and self. I hold that book to beinspired. It is
not written as a wise and calm Christian would write, but as a heart would
write which was fevered with disappointment, jaded with passionate attempts
in the pursuit of blessedness, and forced to God as the last resource. That
saddest book in all the Bible stands before you as the beacon and the warning
from a God who loves you, and would spare you bitterness if He could.
Follow inclination now, put no restraint on feeling, say that there is time
enough to be religious by-and-by, forget that now is the time to take Christ’:
yoke upon you, and learn gradually and peacefully that serene control of heait
which must be learnt at last by a painful wrench—forget all that, and sav
that you trust in God’s love and mercy to bring all right, and then that book
of Ecclesiastes is your history. The penalty that you pay for a youth of
pleasure is—if you have anything good in you—an old age of weariness and
remorseful dissatiefaction. 8. Another part of Solomon’s chastisement was
doubt. Once more turn to the book of Ecclesiastes: ‘‘ All things come alike ta
all; there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good and tc
the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacri-
ficeth Be In this observe the querulous complaint of a man who has ceased

170


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, Xi.


aa ee ee SE eee ee eee


to feel that God is the Ruler of this world. A blind chance, or a dark desti
seems to rule all earthly things. And that is the penalty of arian
narrow path for sin’s wider and more flowery one. ‘You lose your way, you
get perplexed, doubt takes possession of your soul. And there is no suffering
more severe than doubt. There is a loss of aim, and you know not what you
have to live for; life has lost its meaning and its infinite significance. There
is a hollowness at the heart of your existence; there is a feeling of weakness
and a discontented loss of self-respect. God has hidden his face from you
because you have been trying to do without Him, or to serve Him with a
divided heart. 4. Lastly, we have to remark that the love of God brought
Solomon through all this to spiritual manhood. ‘‘ Let us hear the conclusion of
the whole matter: Fear God and keep His commandments; for this is the
whole duty of man.” In this we have the evidence of his victory. Doubt, and
imprisonment, and worldliness have passed away, and clear activity, belief,
freedom, have taken their place. It was a terrible discipline, but God had
made that discipline successful. Solomon struggled manfully to the end.
The details of his life were dark, but the life itself was earnest; and after
many a fall, repentance, with unconquerable purpose, began afresh. And so
he struggled on, often baffled, often down, but never finally subdued; and
still with tears and indomitable trust returning to the conflict again. And so,
when we come to the end of his last earthly work, we find the sour smoke,
which had so long been smouldering in his heart, and choking his existence,
changed into bright, clear flame. He has found the secret out at last, and it
has filled his whole soul with blessedness. God is man’s happiness. ‘‘ Fear
God, and keep His commandments; for this is the whole duty of man,”


Lessons.—1. There 1s a way—let us not shrink from saying tt—in which sin
may he made to minister to holiness. ‘‘To whomsoever much is forgiven, the
same loveth much.” ‘There was an everlasting truth in what our Messiah said
to the moral Pharisees: ‘‘The publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom
of God before you.” Now, these are Christ’s words, and we will not fear to
boldly state the same truth. Past sin may be made the stepping-stone to
heaven. Let a man abuse that if he will by saying: ‘‘ Then it is best to sin.”
A man may make the doctrine absurd, even shocking, by that inference, but
it is true for all that. God can take even your sin, and make it work to your
soul’s sanctification. He can let you down into such an abyss of self-loathing
and disgust, such life weariness, and doubt, and misery, and disappointment,
that if He ever raises you again by the invigorating experience of the love of
Christ, you will rise stronger from your very fall. But forget not this : if ever
a great sinner becomes a great saint, it will be through agonies which none
but those who have sinned know. 2. I speak to those among you who know
something about what the world is worth, who have tasted its fruits, and found
them like the Dead Sea apples—hollowness and ashes. By those foretastes of
coming misery which God has already given you, those lonely feelings of utter
wretchedness and disappointment when you have returned home palled and
satiated from the gaudy entertainment, and the truth has pressed itself icy cold
upon your heart, “Vanity of vanities”—is this worth living for? By all
that be warned. Be true to your convictions; be honest with yourselves; be
manly in working out your doubts, as Solomon was. Greatness, goodness,
blessedness lie not in the life that you are leading now, they lie in quite a diffe-
rent path; they lie in a life hid with Christ in God. 3. Learn from this subject
the covenant love of God. There is such a thing as love which rebellion cannot
weary, which ingratitude cannot cool. It is the love of God to those whom He
has redeemed in Christ. ‘Did not Solomon, king of Israel, sin? and yet there
was no king like him who was beloved of his God.” Let that be to us a truth


not to teach carelessness, but thankfulness.—Condensed from F. W. ee
V1


~


CHAP. Ki.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


TY


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-8. We come now to that
strange, dark period in Solomon’s
career, 80 strangely dark, and, in con-
trast with his earlier piety and glory,
so deeply sad, that even the author of
Chronicles passes it over in silence, and
some modern critics pronounce it in-
credible and psychologically impossible.
We find Jewish pride on the one hand,
and German rationalism on the other,
uniting to deny or else explain away
the literal truth of the history. But
there the record stands, and will
stand, in unpleasant but simple naked
truth, whose obvious meaning none
can doubt, holding up to the world a
most impressive lesson of human
frailty, and showing the terrible danger
to spiritual life of the vain pomp and
glory of the world (1 Cor.x.12). In
the earlier part of his reign Solomon
was rich towards God; but later he
multiplied to himself gold and silver,
horses and chariots, wives and concu-
bines. In seeking to surpass the
magnificence and glory of the kings of
the nations, he fell even lower than
they all; for better are they who
never knew the way of truth, than he
who, having been blessed with
superior light from God, turns away
and runs headlong into a foul idolatry.
Solomon’s fall was no sudden apostasy,
and doubtless many a deep and wear-
ing heart-struggle did he pass through
ere the lust of the flesh, the lust of
the eye, and the pride of life, finally
gained over him the mastery. We
infer from the warnings against trans-
gression contained in the Divine com-
munication of chap ix. 6, that already
the Lord saw in him tendencies that
threatened danger; and we suppose
that these tendencies grew stronger
and stronger until they resulted in the
dark and fatal apostasy which this
chapter unfolds tous. (Compare Neh.
xiii, 26).— Whedon.

Here we see plainly how a godly
man may gradually fall into sin. He
first allows himself too much liberty.
He ventures into danger, and then
perish “a ; ern: He who scorns


danger, who by marriage and by a
wilful intrusion upon certain positions
exposes himself to it, or who ever
ventures in his daily course too much
into the world, under the pretext of
liberty ; he who indulges in the lust
of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, and
the pride of life, instead of enjoying
with gratitude and moderation the
gifts of God, such an one becomes the
slave of sin, and falls under the wrath
of God. The heart is first inclined,
then wanders upon evil paths, and at
last does openly what ie displeasing to
the Lord. At first we permit in others,
through complaisance, sin, which we
could and should have checked, and
thus we actually assist ourselves to
sin. Still we preserve our appearance
of wisdom and godliness, and will not
have it supposed that we have entirely
deserted the Lord. But he whose
heart is not wholly with the Lord his
God follows Him not at all; he who
follows Him not wholly, follows Him
not at all.

— The example given by the
Bible in the case of Solomon. I.
What st teaches. 1. That for the sin-
ful human heart, a constant outward
prosperity isallied to spiritual dangers |
(Matt. xvi. 26). Thus it is that trial
and sorrow are often blessings for time
and eternity (Heb. xii. 6-12). 2. That
the most abundant knowledge, the
highest education and wisdom, are no
protection against moral and religious
shortcomings. Wine and women
make foolish the wise man. Says the
proverb, no wise man commits a little
folly. II. How tt warns us. 1. To
watch. If a Solomon can fall, a
Solomon brought up in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord, and walk-
ing in the ways of God, in old age, a
Solomon the wisest man of his time,
how necessary is it for us all to watch!
Without watching, the greatest wisdom
may become foolishness, and the
highest spiritual condition may end in
the wrath and judgments of God. 2,
To pray. In the great prosperity and
delight of this life, Solomon forgot


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; KINGS.





prayer, which he had so well practised
in earlier years (chap. iii. and viii).
His wives did not elevate his heart,
they debased it. Prayer alone holds
watch, and is therefore most necessary
in prosperity and success.—Lange.

— The vanity and insecurity of
\uman greatness. 1. Exemplified
tm all ages. 2. Should moderate hu-
nan ambition. 3. Should beget a
coustant self-vigilance. 4. Should
lead man to aim at accomplishing the
highest moral good. 5. Should foster
complete reliance on God.

— Itis sad to turn from the con-
templation of the greatness of Solo-
mon’s wisdom to the mournful reality
of his end. But the thought of God
flooding the soul of man must always
be transcendently more grand than the
life lived by man. So it was with
Solomon, and so it must ever be. As
perhaps chief among the causes which
led to his downfall may be mentioned
polygamy. Like David, he had his
“burst of great heart,’ but, like
David also, he had his ‘slips in
sensual mire.””? A loose morality led
to looseness in religion. The com-
mandments of Jehovah, broken in re-
gard to moral conduct, were also
broken in regard to religious faith.
Under the name of liberty, licence be-
came the rule. The sweet grace of
toleration, so invaluable a possession
in itself, was profaned; and tolerant
men, a8 they have often been before
and since, were made half ashamed of
a creed thatcould lead to such practices
as Solomon encouraged. There arose
two parties among his subjects—the
one favouring his easy, tolerant sym-
pathy of all religious beliefs, and only,
probably, too willing to taste some of
their sensuous fruits; the other keeping
strong by the laws of their early
religion, and resolutely opposed to in-
novations which they saw, under their
very eyes, leading to such disastrous
and ruinous consequences. The mur-
murs of discontent grew loud and
frequent. The old tribal jealousies,
which had been stilled for a time,
showed that their fires were only
smouldering. There were other agen-
cies at work which helped to fan the


OMAP. 4L,


flames of discontent. The burdena
laid upon the Israelites and the taxes
exacted from them were by no means
light. We have seen how many of
them were taken from their homes and
pressed into service at the building of
the temple. The obligations of the
king were so great that he had to ap-
point officers over special districts to
levy money for his use. It was often
exacted in the spirit of the insolence
of office. Manliness and independence
could not long brook such treatment.
—The absence of the prophetical order
at the court of Solomon is very striking,
and is, no doubt, a marked cause of
his downfall. It might appear that
in the person of Solomon the offices of
king aud prophet were fitly joined
together; and so, for a time, they
might have been, had Solomon only
kept a perfect ideal before him. This
he could not do; and neither the
monarchy nor the prophetic office
were at this time ripe for such a union.
Only a perfect religion could produce
a perfect prophet; and the monarchy
was far from being in the position of
producing a perfect king. As it was,
the time soon arrived for the repre-
sentatives of the old order to raise their
voice on high. Thus arose Ahijah,
Shemaiah, and Iddo, stung into speech
by the conviction that the monarchy
in Israel, by its narrow aims, was de-
generating into an ascendency and
violence which endangered the theo-
cracy itself, and withit the sacred and
inviolable basis of Israel’s whole exis-
tence.—(The Quiver for 1875).

Verses 1, 2. This “but” is a
danger-signal to warn us against—
1. Disobedience of the Divine com-
mards. 2. Evilcompanionships. We
are reminded of St. Paul’s solemn
admonition: ‘‘ Be not deceived : evil
communications corrupt good manners”
(1 Cor. xv. 83). Solomon’s intercourse
with these idolatrous nations led te his
adopting their corrupt worship and
customs. Every true Christian must
be a nonconformist: ‘‘Be not con-
formed to this world” (Rom. xii. 2).
The service of God admits of no com-
promise. We cannot serve God and


Mammon.
178


*%


GmAP, Zi.


ee


The friendship of the world is
enmity against God. A distinct line
of division must be drawn and main-
tained between the Church and the
world. They are at deadly feud
against each other: there can be no
truce between them. ‘There are
your foes,”’ said a general, as he led
on his men to the attack ; ‘‘ kill them,
or they'll kill you.” We must not
allow our hearts to be turned away
from Christ to worldliness, like Demas.
The world is not to be converted by
unholy alliances with the enemies of
God, but is to be conquered by His
Word and Spirit.


Verse 1-8. The wise fool. We
have seen many strange sights in our
time—many horrible sights, but none
so strange, none so horrible, as that of
@ wise man making himself a fool.
Solomon did that, and he was a wise
man, even the wisest of men. If the
deep sagacity of Solomon, if his keen
discernment, if his strong reason, if
his profound knowledge of human
life and character, if even his inti-
mate acquaintance with the law and
counsels of the Lord, did not preserve
his name from that stamp of foolish-
ness which we find impressed upon
so many of the great names and great
acts of men, who is there that can
hope to stand? Not one, as of him-
self, but there is without us and
above us a power that can exalt even
the lowly to high things, and can
sustain them in all true wisdom so
long as they rest upon it; instead of
that, the light which shines upon their
path and glorifies their way, shines
out of themselves and not into them.
Solomon was wise; Solomon was
foolish. Strange contrast and contra-
diction of terms! Yet it does not
astonish. It may astonish angels,
but not us. We are used to this kind
of experience. We see men who are
foolish without being wise; but we
see not one who is wise without being
also foolish. Foolishness, which every
man certainly has in his nature;
wisdom, if he has it, is a gift bestowed
on him—bestowed as freely upon him
as it bib upon Solomon. The wisdom

74


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





does not suppress or drive out the
foolishness, but is a weapon, it may
be a staff, or it may bea glittering
sword given into his hands to fight
against it, to keep it under; a weapon
to be used with daily and ever-
watchful vigilance, and not to rest
idly in the scabbard. This was king
Solomon’s fault. Having been victor
in many a deadly fray, until victory
became easy and habitual, he forgot
that the enemy of his greatness and
peace still lived—was not mortally
wounded—did not even sleep. He
suffered his weapon to rest until its
keen edge was corroded, until it clung
in rust to the scabbard, and could not
be drawn forth.— Xitto.

— It was the charge of God to the
kings of Israel that they should not
multiply wives. Solomon had gone
beyond the stakes of the law, and
now is ready to lose himself amongst
a thousand bedfellows. Whoso lays
the reins on the neck of his carnal
appetite, can promise where he will
rest. O Solomon! where was thy
wisdom, while thine affections run
away with thee into so wild a volup-
tuousness? What boots it thee to
discourse of all things, while thou
misknowest thyself? The perfections
of speculation do not argue the inward
power of self-government; the eye
may be clear, while the hand is
palsied. It is not so much to be
heeded how the soul is informed, as
how it is disciplined: the light of
knowledge doth well, but the due order
of the affections doth better. Never
any mere man, since the first, knew
so much as Solomon; many that have
known less have had more command of
themselves. A competent estate well
husbanded is better than a vast patri-
mony neglected. There can be no
safety to that soul where is not a
strait curb upon our desires. If our
lusts be not held under as slaves, they
will rule as tyrants. Had Solomon
done this, delicacy and lawless great-
ness had not led him into these bogs
of intemperance.—Bp. Hall.


Verses 3, 4. These wives and con«
eubines were introduced to add to the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OMAP, XI.





splendour and gaiety of the court.
The love of display is destructive of
Christian simplicity. It has ruined
many by asilly desire to vie with their
wealthy neighbours. 1. It has weaned
mens’ hearts from Christ and His
people. 2. Ruined many families.
8. Swollen the list of commercial
failures. 4. Drawn away its victims
into wicked associations and pursuits.
Fashion is the modern Moloch, whose
worshippers are legion. How true is
it that:


“Gold glitters most where virtue shines no
more

As stars from absent suns have leave to
shine.”


David, with all his faults, never tole-
rated idolatry during his reign ; hence
he is called ‘“‘ The man after God’s own
heart.”


Verses 1-4. Denial of the existence
of marriage 2s a divine ordinance is
the source of the greatest and weigh-
tiest evils. Solomon sinned in this
wise—that, contrary to the law, he not
only took to himself many wives, but
foreign—t.e., heathen—wives. Not
without danger is it that a man takes
a wife who is not of his own reli-
gion (1 Cor. vii. 19). Lust of the
eyes and the pride of life drowse the
soul, and cripple the will, gradually
and imperceptibly influence the heart,
so that’ it loses all scuse of holy and
earnest things, and all pleasure therein,
and becomes stupid and indifferent to
everything divine and noble. A
prince who allows himself to be ad-
yised and led by women in the affairs
of his government, instead of guiding
himself by the unchangeable law of
God, destroys the prosperity of him-
self and his kingdom. Confidential
intercourse and intimacy with those
who know nothing of the living God
and of His word, but rather resist
Him—those who well know how to
flatter—this is a most perilous posi-
tion for a God-fearing heart (Eccles.
vii, 27).—Lange.


Verse 1. Wasted love.—1. Love is
wasted when it is placed on an un-


worthy object. 2. When it is not
properly concentrated—a multiplicity
of interests weaken its power, as the
many-pointed rock breaks up the force
of the wave. 8. When it is sinful in
ita tendency. 4. When it weans the
heart from God. 5. Is supremely
ridiculous and offensive in old age.


Verse 8. Woman was first given
to man for acomforter, and not for a
counsellor, much less for a controller
and director; and, therefore, in the
first sentence against men this cause
is expressed—‘‘ Because thou obeyedst
the voice of thy wife.”


Verse 4. What sight on earth more
sad than the disgraceful fall of an old
man whose youth had been devout
and promising and his manhood noble?
Well did Solon, the Athenian, insist
that no man should be counted blessed
until he had nobly ended a happy,
noble life.

— Solomon was the less to be ex-
cused because his soul had had so long
communion with God and experience
of His goodness; as also because his
body was declining, so that his lust
was the more monstrous, like as it is
to behold green apples on a tree in
winter. Augustine inveighed agdinst
those, and worthily, who consecrate
the flower of their youth to the devil,
and reserve for God the dregs of their
old age. Solomon offended on the
contrary part. Let every man look to
what Lord he dedicateth both his
youth and his age; for it sometimes
falleth out that Satan preyeth upon
those when old, whom he could not
prevail with when young; and it is
not for nothing that the heathen sages
say that old age is to be feared as that
which cometh not alone, but is itself
a disease, and bringeth with it not a °
few diseases both of body and mind.—
Trapp.

— Even as in youth exuberance of
life and strength opens the door to
temptation, so likewise does the weak-
ness of old age; but an old grey-
haired sinner is much more abominable
in the sight of the Lord than a youth.
The sole condition under yaa amid

5


%


O@AP, ZL.





his natural weakness, an old man can
retain his spiritual strength and guard
his honour, is this—that his heart is
purely fixed on God. This condition
failing, let a man’s whole life be in-
fluenced by the opinions of others—
influenced by such opinions without
sharing them, yet still without com-
bating them, then complete wanton-
ness will take possession of his old age.
—Lange.

— the ways of youth are steep and
slippery, wherein as it is easy to fall,
so it is commonly relieved with pity ;
but the wanton inordinations of age
are not more unseasonable than odious.
Yet, behold, Solomon’s younger years
were studious and innocent: his over-
hasted age was licentious and mis-
governed. If any age can secure us
from the danger of a spiritual fall, it
is ourlast; and if any man’s old age
might secure him, it was Solomon’s,
the beloved of God, the oracle, the
miracle of wisdom. The blossoms of
so hopeful a Spring should have
yielded a goodly and pleasant fruit in
the Autumn of age. Yet, behold
even Solomon’s old age vicious. There
is no time wherein we can be safe
while we carry this body of sin about
us. Youth is impetuous, mid-age is
stubborn, old age weak, all dangerous.
Say not now—“ The fury of my
youthful flash is over, I shall hence-
forth find my heart calm and impreg-
nable,” while thou seest old Solomon
doating upon his concubines, yea,
upon their idolatry.— Bp. Hall.

— The fall of an old tree, or of
some noble old ruin, is beheld with
some regret, but it occasions no rend-
ing of heart. It was their doom.
Age ripened them but for their fall;
and we wondered more that they stood
so long, than that they fell so soon.
But man is expected to ripen in moral
and religious strength—to harden into
rock-like fixedness as his age increases.
He whom we have looked up to so
long, he whose words were wise as
oracles, and from whose lips we had so
long gathered wisdom, he who had
borne noble testimonies for the truth,
he who had laboured for the glory of
God, who had withstood many storms

176


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


of human passion and many tempta«
tions of human glory, and in whose
capacious mind are garnered up the
fruits of a life’s knowledge and ex-
perience—for such a man to fall from
his high place, fills the most firm of
heart with dread, and makes the
moral universe tremble. It is alto-
gether terrible. It is a calamity to
mankind; itis more than that: it is
a shame, a wrong, and a dishonour.
The righteous hide their heads; and
the perverse exult :—hell laughs.—
Kitto.

— Old age. 1. Is encumbered
with many frailties. 2. Has its
peculiar temptations. 8. Is not
exempt from the possibility of great
crimes. 4. Is often a pitiable contrast
to the promise and opportunity of
youth. 5. Should be rich in valuable
experiences. 6. Is less excusable in
yielding to the force of evil passions.

— ‘His heart was not perfect with
theLord.’”” The heart the central
force of the religious life. 1. The
reason may be convinced when the heart
is untouched. 2. The truth that moves
us most is that which we feel. 3.
The highest feeling is the highest
reason. 4. If the heart is wrong to-
wards God, allis wrong. 5. He who
is unfaithful towards God, is not to be
trusted by his fellow-men. 6. The
outer evidence of a perfect heart is a
loving, obedient life.


Verses 5-8, Although Solomon did
not himself practise idolatry, he per-
mitted and encouraged it in others;
but the receiver is as bad as the thief,
That is the curse resting upon sin, that
the very means by which men seek to
raise themselves in the world’s estima-
tion become the very means for their
destruction. By perverted compliance
and long toleration Solomon brought
ruin and destruction upon himself and
his people for centuries to come. All
indulgence which is grounded upon
indifference to truth, or founded upon
lukewarmness, is not virtue, but a
heavy sin before God, how much so-
ever it may resemble freedom and
enlightenment. In a _ well-ordered
church and state establishment, neither


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





bigotry nor superstition should have
equal rights with faith and truth.
Where the gate is open to them, or
where they are patronized instead of
being resisted, then both people and
kingdom are going to meet their ruin.
—Lange.

— The evil results of an un-
holy alliance. 1. Idolatry was
allowed. 2. it became the fashion.
3. It divided the king’s heart. 4. He
patronized it. 5. State provision was
made for it. We learn from this his-
tory—1. Jehovah is ajealous God, and
will tolerate norivals. 2. The Divine
commands are imperial, and must take
precedence of allhuman laws. 3. The
impossibility of harmonizing Christi-
anity and heathenism. In ancient
times this led to the worship of Baalim
and other idols-deities, with their cruel
orgies and barbarous rites. A later
result has been the birth of Popery,
which inculcates image cultus in de-
fiance of the Divine commands, turns
the simple spiritual worship of God
into an elaborate heathenish ritual,
proclaims the Pope infallible, and
exalts the Virgin Mary to a higher
dignity than the Saviour Himself.
Religion demands decision, and admits
of no compromise.


Verses 7, 8. He that built a Temple
to the living God, for himself and
Israel, in Zion, built a Temple to
Chemosh in the Mount of Scandal, for
his mistresses of Moab, in the very face
of God’s house. No hill about Jeru-
salem was free from a chapel of devils.
Each of his dames had their puppets,
their altars, their incense Because
Solomon feeds them in their super-
stition, he draws the sin home to him-
self, and is branded for what he should


CHAP. XI.





have forbidden. Even our very per-
mission appropriates crimes to us.
We need no more guiltiness of any sin
than our willing toleration. Who can
but yearn and fear to see the woful
wreck of so rich and goodly a vessel ?
O Solomon! wert thou not he whose
younger years God honoured with a
message and style of love; to whom
God twice appeared, and in a gracious
vision renewed the covenant of his
favour; whom he singled out from all
the generation of men to be the founder
of that glorious temple which was no
less clearly the type of heaven, than
thou wert of Christ, the Son of the ever
living God? Wert not thou that deep
sea of wisdom, which God ordained to
send forth rivers and fountains of all
divine and human knowledge to all
nations? Wert not thou one of those
select secretaries, whose hand it pleased
the Almighty to employ in three pieces
of the Divine monuments of Sacred
Scriptures? Which of us dares ever
hope to aspire unto thy graces? Which
of us can promise to secure ourselves
from thy ruins? We fall, 0 God, we
fall to the lowest hell, if thou prevent us
not, if thou sustain us not !—Byp. Hall.


— So fallen! so lost! the light withdrawn
Which once he wore |

The glory from his gray hairs gone
For evermore!

Of all we loved and honoured, nought
Save power remains ;

A fallen angel’s pride of thought,
Still strong in chains,

All else is gone; from these great eyes
The soul has fled :

When faith is lost, and honour dies,
The man is dead.

Then pay the reverence of old days
To his dead fame ;

Walk backward with averted gaze,
And hide the shame.— Whittier,


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 9-18.


Tux Divive AnezrR axp Homan DisosepIence.


I. That the Divine anger is a fact. ‘And the Lord was angry with Solo-
mon.” It is the fashion with many to expatiate on the Divine benevolence while
they ignore the Divine anger. But the fact of that anger is one of the plainest
and most awful revelations of the Bible (Isa. xiii. 13; Juno. iii. 836 ; Rom. i. 18).


Divine anger is no sudden burst of passion, no low and To ata of
n


%e


CHAP. BE, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





revenge, a8 human anger often is, and with which too many are prone te
associate their idea of the Divine anger. It is rather the deep, eternal
antagonism of holiness to sin, of truth to error, of right to wrong. However
much God may love the human soul as such, if that soul cleaves unto sin, it
must of necessity place itself along with the sin in enmity towards God, and so
be exposed to the Divine anger. It requires a sound judgment and a heart of
tenderest love to speak with profit on the subject of the Divine anger.


II. That the Divine anger is excited by human disobedience. “‘ Because
his heart was turned from the Lord” (verse 9). 1. Disobedience 1s aggravated
when committed against definite commands. ‘‘ And had commanded him concerning
this thing” (verse 10; comp. vi. 12; ix. 6). When law is violated ignorantly it
is still a sin, but is not so aggravated as when committed with the full knowledge
of the prohibition. Princes who have dominion over others are apt to forget
the Divine dominion over them, and while they exact obedience from their own
subjects, to neglect on their part to render obedience to the Great Ruler of all.
The mariner who disregards the lights and landmarks which define the path of
safety is the more reprehensible when he wrecks his : vessel among the
treacherous shoals. 2. Disobedience ts aggravated when committed notwithstanding
repeated Divine manifestations. The Lord ‘‘appeared unto him twice” (verse 9 ;
comp. ili. 5; ix. 1, 2). Good turns aggravate unkindnesses. It is a great
privilege to receive the law through the lips of God’s ministers, but a greater
still to hear it from the lips of God Himself. Solomon was singularly favoured
with Divine blessings. His recalcitrance excited the greater displeasure, and
merited the greater punishment. The Lord does not trifle with men in the
declarations of His word, and He will not eventually allow men to trifle with
Hin.


Tit. That the Divine anger will manifest itself in some form of punish-
ment (verse 11). The threat to divide the kingdom was carried out: the subse-
quent repentance and restoration of Solomon did not prevent it. There are some
things in which repentance comes too late. Repentance does not arrest the
course of physical law. It must have been a bitter experience to Solomon to
know that the magnificent empire it had been his life-work to build up must
ere long be rent asunder and crumble into ruins. ‘‘ Solomon had let go the
sincere service of God by sharing himself betwixt Him and his idols; his
servant therefore shall share the kingdon with his son, and bear away the better
half from him.” The Divine anger is not a theological scare-crow set up to
frighten timid souls, but a terrible reality, as the evil-doer will by-and-by
discover to his dismay. Homer has given expression to a similar idea :—


Fast by the threshold of Jove’s court are placed
Two casks, one stored with evil, one with good.

To whom He gives unmixed
The bitter cup, He makes that man a curse,
His name becomes a byword of reproach,
His strength 1s hunger-bitten, and he walks
The blessed earth unblest, go where he may.


IV. That the Divine anger is ever tempered with mercy. 1. Mercy in
delaying punishment. “ Notwithstanding in thy day I will not do it” (verse
12). Compare a similar mitigation of punishment promised to Josiah (2 Kings
xxii. 20). Delay affords space forrepentance. If the opportunity it presents is
despised, the punishment will be the heavier, and the sufferer be without excuse.
2. Mercy in moderating the severity of punishment. ‘* Howbeit I will not rend
away all the kingdom, but will give one tribe to thy son” (verse 18). Two
tribes ore really retained. The tribe of Benjamin seems to have been


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OBAP. Xt.





absorbed into the tribe of Judah, to which David belonged (xii. 21). This
second mitigation of the sentence reveals the tender compassion of God, and His
unwillingness to punish. Solomon did not at once turn from God: his defec-
tion was gradual; and Jehovah did not at once wrest the kingdom from him.
This additional proof of the Divine mercy must have greatly affected Solomon;
and there is room to hope that it led him to repent and retrace his wanderings.
Kindness succeeds where a stern severity fails. 3. Mercy shown on account of
ulterior Divine purposes. ‘‘ For David my servant’s sake, and for Jerusalem’s
sake which I have chosen” (verse 13). The line of the Messiah must be
preserved. The prevailing lion must come out of the tribe of Judah: not only
the tribe must be preserved, but the regal line and the regal right. All this
must be done for the true David's sake; and this was undoubtedly, observes
Dr. A. Clarke, what God had in view by thus miraculously preserving the
tribe of Judah and the royal line in the midst of so general a defection. As
David was a type of the Messiah, so was Jerusalem a type of the true church:
therefore the o/d Jerusalem must be preserved in the hands of the tribe of
Judah, till the true David should establish the new Jerusalem in the same land
and in the same city. And what a series of providences did it require to do all
these things! The prosperous career of Solomon was only part of a great
scheme for the benefit of the entire race; and the failure of even so great a man
as Solomon must not be allowed to frustrate the Divine intention.


Lessons :—1. Man cannot sin with impunity. 2. The Divine anger te righteous,
8. The manifestation of the Divine anger 1 terrible. 4. God has more delight in
showing mercy than in punishing. 5. He who most delights in morcy most
resembles God. ,


GERM NOT&S ON THE VERSES.


Verse 9. Had not this man’s delin-
quency been strongly marked by the
Divine disapprobation, it would have
had a fatal effect upon the morals of
mankind. Vice is vice, no matter who
commits it. And God is as much dis-
pleased with sin in Solomon as He
can be with itin the most profligate,
uneducated wretch. And, akhough
God sees the same sin in precisely
the same degree of moral turpi-
tude as to the act itself, yet there
may be circumstances which greatly
aggravate the offence, and subject the
offender to greater punishment. Bolo-
mon was wise; he knew better: his
understanding showed him the vanity
as well as the wickedness of idolatry.
God had appeared unto him twice.
The promises of God had been fulfilled
to him in a most remarkable manner.
Ali these were aggravations of Solo-
mon’scrimes, as totheir demerit; forthe
same crime has, in every case, the same
degree of moral turpitude in the sight
of God ; but circumstances may 80 ag-
gravate as to require the offender to


be more grievously punished: so the
punishment may be legally increased
where the crime is the same. Solo-
mon deserved more punishment for his
worship of Ashtoreth than any of the
Sidonians did, though they performed
precisely the same acts. The Sidonians
had never known the true God: Solo-
mon had been fully acquainted with
Him.—A. Clarke.


Verses 9-11. The sin of idolatry.
1. Is a tendency of fallen humanity.
2. Is aninsult toGod. 3. Isa viola-
tion of the most specific prohibitions.
4. Is the cause of national disgrace
and ruin.


Verses 9-13. The punishments that
fell upon Solomon show us—I. The
holiness and righteousness of God
(Ps. exly. 17; Jer. xvii. 10; Luke xii.
47). II. His faithfulness and mercy
(verses 12, 13). He knows how to
punish so that His gracious promises
remain firm (2 Tim. ii. 13; Rom. iii.
3). God makes known singe His


%


SBAP. XI.


judgments through His Word, so that
we may have time to repent and to
turn unto Him (Ezek. xxxiii. 2). If
judgment fell specially on Solomon,
notwithstanding the fact that the Lord
appeared unto him twice in a dream,
and he was honoured with distin-
guished grace, what judgment must
we expect, to whom He has ap-
peared tenderly in Christ Jesus (1 Cor.
1, 30; Heb. ii. 3; x.29). God knows
how, in the proper time, to belittle
him who abandons and forsakes the
Lord and His cause in order to become
great and distinguished in the eyes of
the world (Dan. iv. 34).—Lange.


Verses 12, 13. In the midst of the
horror of this spectacle, able to affright
all the sons of men, behold some
glimpse of comfort. Was it of Solo-
mon that David his father pro-
phesied —-‘‘ Though he fall he shall
not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth him with His hand”? If
sensible grace, yet final mercy, was
not taken from that beloved of God.
In the hardest of this winter, the sap
was gone down to the root, though it
showed not in the branches. Even
while Solomon removed, that word
stood fast: ‘‘He shall be my son, and
I will be his father.”” He that fore-
saw his sin, threatened and limited
his correction (Psa. Ixxxix. 31-33).
Behold, the favour of God doth not de-


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—_—_—_"


Solomon shall suffer his faithfulness
to fail towards his God, God will not
requite him with the failing of his
faithfulness to Solomon: if Solomon
break his covenant with God, God
willnot break His covenant with the
father of Solomon, with the son of
David, He shall smart; he shall not
perish. O gracious word of the God
of all mercies, able to give strength to
the languishing, comfort to the des-
pairing, to the dying, life! Whatso-
ever we are, thou wilt be still thy-
self, O Holy one of Israel, true to thy
covenant. The sins of thy chosen can
neither frustrate thy counsel, nor:
outstrip thy mercies.— Bp. Hall


Verse 13. One tribe remains to
him—that is, of the Divine grace only
a single part of the sovereignty over
all Israel is left to him. This view
is confirmed by the observation that
even the standing distribution in the
Old Testament of Israel into twelve
tribes has its most proper ground, not
in the fact that Jacob had exactly


' twelve sons, as after the recognition


of Ephraim and Manasseh as separate
tribes, the people properly formed
thirteen tribes; but is to be sought
in the import which this number had
acquired in the remotest antiquity by
the observation of the twelve months
of the year, and the twelve signa of
the zodiac.— Kes.


pend upon Solomon’s obedience. If


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 14-40.
Tue Agents oF Divine Rereivrion.


I. Are secretly preparing when least suspected. Hadad and Rezon on
the frontier, and Jeroboam under the shadow of the throne, were plotting
mischief for the empire. In a time of unexampled peace and security, the
seeds of rebellion were being sown. Things are not always what they
seem. The loveliest flower may hide within its cup the deadliest poison.
The mountain draped with richest verdure, and musical with forest songs,
may simmer with internal fires which shall burst their prison, and spread
devastation and woe in their burning pathway. The most promising pro-
ductions of earth may be blasted in a single night. But the agents of
destruction are not always in haste: they can afford to wait. Not at once
does Divine retribution overtake the offender; but after much long-suffering
and pany opportunities for repentance.

1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, XY,





II. Often accomplish their mission by gratifying personal revenge
and ambition (verses 14-17, 25, 26). The Edomite prince, who escaped
when a child, the desolating slaughter of David (2 Sam. viii.), dreamed of
recovering the lost throne of his father. He dreamed of vengeance for the
blood of his countrymen; and ‘‘ dreams grow realities to earnest men.’? Rezon
was influenced in all his plottings against Israel by a spirit of bitter and
ungovernable hatred (verse 25), and lost no opportunity of inflicting injury on
Solomon. Jeroboam, endowed with unquestioned ability, and evidently
conscious of it, was eagerly ambitious of place and power. While these men
pursued their several selfish ends, Jehovah used them as agents for the
punishing of wrong-doing. History is full of examples of this Divine pro-
cedure. The Lord can make the wrath of men His servant, and to minister
to His praise (Psalm Ixxvi. 10). His hand is on all the springs of being.
All the forces of the universe are His obedient instruments in scattering blessings,
or in accomplishing the sterner missions of justice.


III. Embitter the close of a career which had a brilliant and promising
beginning. How few can foresee the contrast which the end of life will present
with its opening! How sad, how heart-rending would be the picture if we
could see, as God sees, the horrid process by which the innocence of youth
gives place to the hardened effrontery and guilt of old age! ‘‘ Nothing
but love and peace sounded in the name of Solomon; nothing else was found
in his reign while he held in good terms with his God; but when once he
fell foul with his Maker, all things began to be troubled. There are whips laid
up against the time of Solomon’s foreseen offence which are now brought forth
for his correction. God would have us make account that our peace ends with
our innocence. The same sin that sets debate betwixt God and us, arms the
creatures against us. It were a pity we should be at any quiet, while we are
fallen out with the God of peace.”’? Solomon’s reign of peace closes amid the
threatenings of war, the firmness of his government is supplanted by the
tremors of rebellion, his enormous supplies are failing him, his greatness
is dwarfed to littleness, his wisdom is transformed into folly. Many a bitter
pang smote the monarch’s heart as he beheld the wreck and failure of his life,
The grave holds many a human heart that has been wounded and broken by
disappointed hopes, baffled endeavours, or dethroned pride.


IV. Are limited and restrained by the Divine will (verses 34, 39). The
Power which has directed the migrations and limited the wars of nations, fixed
the boundaries'of the ocean, and adjusted the force of gravitation, also interferes
in moderating and defining the degree of punishment for sin. ‘I will for this
afflict the seed of David ; but not for ever’? (verse 39). Here breaks in another
ray of promise to the House of David, whose sons, though chastened and smitten
with the rod of men (2 Sam. vii. 14), were to be the human line of fathers to
that Great Son who shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of whose
kingdom there shall be no end. The very anger of God is more construc-
tive than destructive. The worst enemies can do the church no damage
beyond what the will of God permits.


V. Cannot be defeated in their’ purpose by human malice (verse 40).
‘Solomon thought therefore to kill Jeroboam.’’? Murder has ever been the
ghastly policy of the tyrant, the idolized weapon of the coward, the sport of
the brutal, the sanguinary carnival of mons.ers. Solomon's relations to
Jeroboam were strikingly similar to those of Saul to David. Solomon,
like Saul, drew down upon himself by disobedience the anger of heaven ;
and to him, asto Saul, the words of the Lord announced judgments that


darkened all his future. Like Saul, he knew and sought to Sr a rival.
8


%


GuHAP. XI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





The beginning of his reign, like that of Saul’s, was popular and auspicious, but
its end was sad and dark. The rage of man is impotent to frustrate the ultimate


designs of God.


Lxssows:—1. The proenercns have always many enemies. 2. The fall of a


great man involves many in his ruin.


ontasl dismal retributtons.


8. The instruments by which a man climbs
to greatness will, when abused, be hes most inveterate adversartes.


4. Gtlded sins


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 14. The certainty of punish-
ment for sin. 1. Is here directly at-
tributed to Jehovah. 2. May be
effected by human agencies. 38. Isa
warning to evildoers. 4. Vindicates
the righteousness of the Divine law.

— God is said to have stirred up
Solomon’s adversaries, not by infusing
this malice into them, but as using it
to punish his wickedness by them,
even as 8 workman worketh by tools
that another made, and by crooked
tools oft maketh straight and smooth
work.—Zrapp.


Verses 14-40. Solomon’s enemies.
1. They are roused against him by
God, so that he may know and con-
fess what heart-suffering it brings to
forsake the fear of the Lord his God
(Jer. ii. 19). So marvellously does
God bring it about, that he who will
not fear Him must needs fear his fel-
low-men. Once the man of rest and
the prince of peace, now he is pressed
sore by enemies from the north, from
the south, and from his midst. They
are the scourges with which the Lord
chastises him. When foes and oppo-
nents rise against thee and cause thee
care and anguish, then think, the
Lord has summoned them on account
of thy sins and unfaithfulness. The
hostility of man is a sermon of repent-
ance from thy God to thee. 2. They
were in God’s hands, and could do not
more than He permits. They re-
belled, but they were powerless to
take from Solomon the throne and
kingdom during his lifetime. The
Lord commands our foes, So far shalt
thou go, and no further.— Cramer.


Verses 14-25. The power of the
183


little to annoy the great. Solomon’s
last years were not suffered to pass
without heavy troubles, which must
have brought down his kingly pride
very low. Enemies, one after another,
appeared, who had in his early years
been kept down by the memory of
David’s victories, and by the show of
substantial strength which his own
government presented. At length,
however, they ventured to try its
texture, and finding it more vulnerable
than even they had suspected, that
there was nothing very terrible to
resolute men in its showy greatness ;
and having found that the king had
really no power to make any effectual
opposition to their assaults, far less to
put them down, they were emboldened
to take further measures, until some
established their independence, while
others offered the passive resistance of
withholding their tributes—so that
his power became shorn at the borders,
and eventually shaken at home, where
the discontinuance of many outer sup-
plies of revenue, and probably the
interruption of his various lines of
trade, no longer in his undisputed
possession, urged him, not to economy
and retrenchment, but to make good
the deficiency by the taxation of his
native subjects.—Xvtto.

— Formerly, all kings did homage
to Solomon, and brought him gifts,
and journeyed from all countries to
see and hear him; his power was as
great as his kingdom. But now his
power and might are abased before
those who hitherto ranked far below
him, whom he had regarded as the
least of his slaves and vassals. Humili-
ation coming through weak and infe-
rior means is much more bitter than


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


the same humiliation through strong
and powerful means. The latter we
can ascribe to man, but in the former
we must recognize the will and power
of God.— Gerhardt.


Verses 14-22. The fate of Hadad is
recounted to us not so much on his own
account as on our own, in order that
we may learn to regard the ways of
God with man, and order our ways by
Him who is ever mercy and wisdom
(Ps. xxv. 10). If God brought back
the heathen Hadad by mysterious ways
to his native land, how much more
will he lead those who keep his cove-
nant and testimony to the true native
land, and to the eternal rest, how dark
and inscrutable soever may be the ways
by which He leads them.—Lange.


Verses 21, 22. The love of father-
land. 1. Is deeply implanted in
humanity. 2. Creates irrepressible
yearnings in the heart of the exile.
8. Becomes intensified under a sense
of oppression and wrong. 4. Fires
the soul with bravery in its defence.
5. Is a faint image of the love we
should feel for the heavenly father-
land—to go to heaven is to go home
again.


Verse 22. The secresy of revenge.
1. The fierceness of revenge is fanned
by the rehearsal of past injuries. 2.
Is cherished in the midst of peace and


plenty. 8. Ishidden from the dearest
friend and benefactor. #&. Is intensi-
fied by its secresy.


O that the slave had forty thousand lives;

One is too poor, too weak for my revenge!

Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow cell!

Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted
throne,


To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy


eight,
For ’tis of aspics’ tongues !—Othello.


Verses 23-25. Though vanquished
and cast down, tyrauny and ambition
donot forget. They think perpetually
of vengeance, and seek to satisfy it,
now by rough means, now by subtle
ones, whenever an opportunity offers,
Therefore warns the apostle so earn-


estly against those secret and mighty
motives in the natural heart of man
(Rom. xii. 19).


Verse 26. Solomon’s servant, but
unthankful and disloyal, such as was
Ahithophel to David, Brutus to Cesar,
Phocas to Mauritius, Frederick III.’s
courtiers and creatures to him, Biron
to Henry IV. of France. That king
had made him of a common soldier a
captain, of a captain a knight, of a
knight Duke of Biron, Marshal of
France, Governor of Burgundy, &c.
Yet all this and more could not keep
him from conspiring the death of his
king, queen, and prince, that the king-
dom might be transferred to others,
and the Huguenots rooted out.


Verses 26-40. The dangerous glit-
ter of a crown. 1. Infatuates the
ambitious. 2. Has allured many to
their ruin. 8. Hides the misery and
care of the unhappy wearer. 4.
Should be guarded and fenced by a
strict moral obedience to the law of
God (verse 38).

— The disruption of the kingdom
was not the work of a day, but the
growth of centuries. To the house of
Joseph—that is, to Ephraim, with its
adjacent tribes of Benjamin and
Manasseh—had belonged, down to the
time of David, all the chief rulers
of Israel: Joshua, the conqueror;
Deborah, the one prophetic, Gideon,
the one regal, spirit of the judges;
Abimelech and Saul, the first kings;
Samuel, the restorer of the state after
the fall of Shiloh. It was natural
that, with such an inheritance of glory,
Ephraim always chafed under any rival
supremacy. Even against the im-
partial sway of its own Joshua, or of
its kindred heroes, Gideon or Jephthah,
its proud spirit was always in revolt,
how much more when the blessing of
Joseph seemed to be altogether
merged in the blessing of the rival
and obscure Judah; when the Lord
‘refused the tabernacle of Joseph, and
chose not the tribe of Ephraim, but
chose the tribe of Judah, Mount Zion
which he had loved (Psalm lxxviii, 67).
All these embers of dissatisfaction,

183


~


JHAP, XL





which had well nigh burst into a
general conflagration in the revolt of
Sheba, were still glov ing; it needed
but a breath to blow it into a flame.
There was one man who, by his office
and character, had long ago been indi-
cated as the natural successor of
Joshna. This was Jeroboam. —
Stanley.

— Hitherto the chief restraint upon
the people had lain in the notion that
the Lord had guaranteed the throne
over all Israel to the house of David,
and the most turbulent spirits had been
kept under restraint by the fear of re-
sisting the purposes of God. The
intimation of the nomination of Jero-
boam under Divine authority fell like
a spark upon fuel. The important
principle involved—freedom from a
restriction which had become intoler-
able—at once raised the agent, in
whose person it had been set forth, to
the height of popularity among the
tribes under the influence of the house
of Joseph; and although he had been
warned that no change was to take
place until after the death of Solomon,
he found himself driven, by the force
of circumstances, if not by the prompt-
ings of his own ambition, into some
immediate demonstrations. The move-
ment was not attended with the result
he expected, and, finding that he had
become a marked man to Solomon, he
deemed it prudent to evade the storm
he had raised by retiring into Egypt,
and there awaiting the progress of
events.—Aitto.


Verses 26-28. God is wont to chas-
tise the rebellion of princes against
His will by means of the rebellion of
their own subjects; as Solomon raised
his hand against Jehovah, so did his
servant Jeroboam against him. De-
struction from above unites with ruin
from below. Whatever Solomon
undertook after his fall was deprived
of God’s blessing. By the building
of Millo he intended still further to
strengthen his dominion over all his
enemies, and to render impregnable his
dwelling-place ; but this very build-
ing was the cause why his throne
began to totter, and why he lost the

184


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





greater part of his kingdom Here
applies Psalm exxvii. 1. It was by
Divine decree that Solomon himself,
without his own will or knowledge,
should raise from the dust to high
places the very man appointed by God
to abase him and to dismember his
kingdom. Conspiracies and rebellions
are chiefly led by those who have to
complain least of injustice or oppres-
sion, but have been pampered and
favoured until ambition incites them
to suppress every feeling of gratitude
(John xiii. 18).—Lange.


Verse 28. The man of industry.
1. Improves the powers he already
possesses. 2. Attracts the notice of the
great. 3. Is intrusted with important
undertakings. 4. Acquires a position
of honour and influence.


Verse 29. Here we meet with an-
other representative of that interesting
order of men—Divine messengers—
who appear so often and so prominently
during the time of the Hebrew
monarchy. Ahijah seems to have
been to Jeroboam very much what
Samuel was to Saul, and Nathan was
to David. He, too, probably, an-
nounced to Solomon the word of the
Lord as recorded in verses 11-13,
Hie two genuine and authentic prophe-
cies, each of great importance to the
kingdom of Israel, are recorded here,
verses 29-39, and chap. xiv. 6-16.
Ahijah’s oracles seem like a voice from
that olden, sacred past—the voice of
the God of Joshua and of Eli—still
proclaiming blessings on tne obedient,
and penal woes on them that forget
His name.— Whedon.


Verse 80. Here we find the first
instance of that mode of delivering a
Divine message which became so com-
mon in later times, and which has been
called ‘‘acted parable.” Generally
the mode was adopted upon express
Divine command (see Jer. xiii. 1-11;
xix. 1-10; xxvii. 2-11; Ezek. iii, 1-3;
iv. 1; v.1). In thisinstance we may
trace a connection between the type
selected and the words of the announce-
ment to Solomon, in verses 11-13—


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS.





“T will surely rend the kingdom from
thee ’—where the kingdom is likened
unto a glorious mantle upon the king’s
shoulders, as in 1 Sam. xy. 28.


Verse 31. All the world must con-
fess, upon beholding the abasement of
the house of David and the elevation
of Jeroboam, that the Most High has
power over the kingdoms of men, and
bestows them on whom He will (Dan.
iv. 29; 1 Sam. ii. 7, 8; Luke i. 52).


Verse 86. Even in the midst of
His just anger the Lord is merciful,
and the inconstancy of man can never
shake His fidelity. The fulfilment of
2 Sam. vii. 14, 15, is seen in Solomon’s
history. The house of David remained
a light for ‘‘ever,” until that Son of
David came who is the Light of the
world, which lighteth all men who
come into the world (Jno. i. 9;
Rom. xy. 12).— Lange.


Verse 39. The severity
tenderness of God. 1. God
punish the evil-doer. 2. God will
punish with awful severity. 3. God
will temper justice with mercy, 4.
The severity of God does not destroy
His tenderness (Rom. xi. 22).

— ‘But not for ever.” For some
kings of Judah—as Asa, Hezekiah,
Josiah—grew very great. But espe-
cially is this to be understood of Christ,
in whom the glory was restored to
David’s house, such as never any
mortal king had.—Zrapp.

— Inno case—not even if Jeroboam
and his seed continued faithful, serving
God as David had served Him—was
the seed of David to be afflicted for
ever. David had been distinctly
promised that God should never fail
his seed, whatever their short-comings
(Psa. Ixxxix. 28-37). The fulfilment
of these promises was seen, partly in
the providence which maintained
David’s family in a royal position till
Zerubbabel, but mainly in the preser-
vation of his seed to the time fixed for
the coming of Christ and the birth of
Christ—the Eternal King—from one
of David’s descendants. — Speaker's
Comm.


and
will


CHAP. XI.





Verse. 40. Fickle humanity. 1.
Solomon at one time promotes Jero-
boam to honour, at another seeks to
murder him. 2. Jeroboam at one
time is the faithful and diligent ser-
vant of Solomon, at another his vexa-
tious and rebellious foe. 3. Unhappy
subject whose sovereign is so fickle,
unhappy sovereign whose subject is so
faithless !

— From the time when they fur-
nished to their nation the great con-
quering leader who settled Israel in
the possession of Palestine (Num. xiii.
8), the tribe of Ephraim, already
encouraged to hope for high things bh
the blessing of Jacob (Gen. xlviii.
17-22; xlix. 22-26), had claimed,
and, in the main, enjoyed, a pre-
eminence above their brethren. But
the transfer of power to the rival
tribe of Judah involved in the eleva-
tion of David, and the loss of prestige
both by Shiloh and Shechem through
the concentration at Jerusalem of both
the temporal and the ecelesiasti-
cal, must have been bitterly felt by
the Ephraimites. When David boasted
that God refused the tabernacle of
Joseph, and chose not the tribe of
Ephraim, but chose the tribe of
Judah, he touched a sore place in the
hearts of his Ephraimite subjects.
They felt themselves the ‘‘strength”
of Israel, while Judah was the “law-
giver” (Ps. lx. 7; cviii. 8). The
military glory of David’s reign, and
the splendour of his son’s in its earlier
portion, had prevented the discontent
of the Ephraimites from gathering to
ahead. Butas Solomon’s lustre faded,
as his oppression became greater and
its object more selfish, and as a pros-
pect of deliverance arose from the
personal qualities of Jeroboam, the
tribe, it is possible, again aspired after
its old position. Jeroboam, active,
energetic, and ambitious, placed him-
self at their head, and, encouraged by
the prophet’s words, commenced a
rebellion (verse 26). The step proved
premature. The power of Solomon
was too firmly fixed to be shaken;
and the hopes of the Ephraimites had
to be deferred till a fitter season.
Speaker's Comm.

ce 185


CHAP, Xf. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








— Rebellion. 1. Iseasilyfomented 4. Isalwaysattended with great risks.
where conscious wrong exists. 2. 5. Is powerless in frustrating Divine
Is the opportunity of the ambitious. arrangements. 6. Is vigilant and im.
3. Is often ill-timed in its movements. patient to accomplish its purpose.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 41—43,
Tre Deatn or Great Mex.


I. Is not alwaysa calamity to a nation. When the powersof a great mind
are devoted to the best interests of the people irrespective of selfish and ulterior
designs, and when the nation is flourishing under the sagacious and virtuous
policy adopted, the death of such a character is an irreparable loss, a lamentable
disaster. But a great man may be a great curse to a nation. He may bea
genius in wickedness, aggrandising and indulging himself by cruel oppression
and shameless fraud. The death of such a man, terrible as it may be to him-
self, is a blessing to the nation he has so wofully wronged. It is well for
humanity that death does come to the great tyrants of society, else life on earth
would become intolerable. The world would be transformed into a Gehenna
of unutterable torture.


II. Is a humbling spectacle when it happens after they have outlived
their reputation. Napoleon Bonaparte lamented that he did not fall at
Waterloo. And it is said of Daniel O’Connell, the great and gifted Irish
patriot, that he ought to have died thirty or forty years before he did, and
while he stood on the highest pinnacle of fame he ever reached, after the
victories he achieved on behalf of Catholic emancipation. So it might be said
of Solomon that had he died immediately after the great event of his reign—
the dedication of the Temple—he would have fallen in the midst of glory un-
tarnished and of greatness unexampled, and bequeathed to history a character
of wondrous moral symmetry and unrivalled reputation. But Solomon lived
too fast, and, though not old, lived toolong. His death, which, had it occurred
years before, would have produced a profound impression and wrung the
nation’s heart with sorrow and wailing, was chronicled without emotion.
‘Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David’? (verse
43). Death in any form is a saddening sight—in bird, or beast, or flower.
Decay is a subtle, mysterious, but all-potent power, which bafiles inquiry and
conquers all opposition. It is heart-breaking to watch the ravages we are so
powerless to arrest. The death of a good man is sad; but it isa still sadder
sight to witness the death of one who once was great and noble, and has sunk
into obscurity and disgrace. Oh, the weakness and vanity of man! How little
is he to be trusted, how deeply to be pitied! How manifold are the changes
through which he passes during the course of one brief life-time!


III. Does not hinder the progress of the Divine purpose concerning the
race, The individual may prove unfaithful, God never. Great as is the power
for evil of one erring spirit, the evil is circumscribed, and will not be allowed to
imperil the good which God has provided for sinning humanity. ‘ Where sin
abounded, grace doth much more abound.” It is humbling to observe how soon
and how easily the greatest men can be dispensed with. The defection of Solomon,
and of the nation he governed, did not prevent Jehovah from carrying out his
merciful intention of redeeming humanity. By methods the most insignificant
and unexpected He can accomplish His gracious designs.


Lessons :—1. Death brings both great and small to one common level. 2. The
most brilliant gifts will not protect man from committing the most ruinous follies.
3. Greatness +8 supremely contemptible when divorced from goodness.

186


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





OHAP. Xi,


- cS


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 40. Sin obscures the soul.
He who turns aside from God departs
from wisdom; and let those who,
instead of bowing and submitting with
resignation to the chastisements of
God, haughtily strive against them,
contemplate the fate of Jeroboam,
who doubtless stirred up the plot
against Solomon, since he afterwards
eagerly abetted the desertion of the
ten tribes. Even as Solomon, when
he sought to slay Jeroboam, must
have felt that in vain he resisted the
Divine decrees, and was powerless to
hinder them, so likewise Jeroboam,
compelled to fly to Egypt, must have
become conscious that in vain he
strove rashly and insolently to antici-
pate the execution of the Divine
decrees. We mast ever make bitter
expiation when we haughtily resist
and oppose the Lord, or when we
strive to hasten His designs, or to
appoint time and place for their ful-
filment. The life of Solomon closes
with the words—* Therefore Solomon
sought to kill Jeroboam.” Instead of
seeking forgiveness from Him who
forgiveth much, and himself granting
forgiveness, he is thinking of murder
and vengeance. How great and noble
the contrast between this and the
figure of Him who in the face of death
upon the cross cried—‘ Father, for-
give them, for they know not what
they do.” Let us strive to become
like unto His image, and that our last
thought in life may be of love and re-
conciliation, and not of revenge and
hatred. Solomon possessed the fairest
and noblest crown that mortal can
wear, yet it was perishable, not endur-
ing beyond death and the grave. The
Lord promises an immortal crown to


those who love and follow Him. Be
faithful unto death, then He will give
thee the crown of life: blessed is he
who endureth unto the end.— Roos.


Verses 40-48. These three truths
are nowhere more powerfully exempli-
fied than in the life of Solomon. 1.
What is a man profited, &. (Matt xvi.
26). 2. Vanity of vanities (Eccles. i.
2). 8. The world passeth away (1
Jno. ii. 17).— Lange.


Verse 43. Solomon died in almost
the flower of his age, and, it appears,
unregretted. His government was no
blessing to Israel, and laid, by its
exactions and oppressions, the founda-
tion of that schism which was so fatal
to the unhappy people of Israel and
Judah, and was the most powerful
procuring cause of the miseries which
have fallen upon the Jewish people
from that time until now.—A. Clarke.

— His son followed him in the


throne. Thus the graves are filling in
with the generations that go off, and
houses are filling in with those that
are growing up. As the grave cries—
Give, give; so land is never lost for
want of an heir.—U. Henry.


— Solomon a type of Christ.
1. As the child of promise. 2. As
the king of Israel, though ready to
spare, yet finally executing and des-
troying every obstinate rebel against
his government. 38. As the Prince of
Peace. 4. As the builder of the
Temple of the Lord. 5. As the em-
bodiment of wisdom. 6. As attract-
ing multitudes towards him, even of
the most distinguished rank.—
Robinson.


Rertecten Rays rrom THE Best Lirrrary Licuts oN THE CHARACTEK AWD
CarzrR o¥ SoLomon.


You have seen a blight in summer. The sky is overcast, and yet there are
no clouds; nothing but a dry and stifling obscuration, as if the mouth of some
pestilent volcano had opened, or as if sulphur mingled with the sunbeams.


‘‘ The beasts groan; the cattle are oppressed.”


From the trees the embryo
187


OUAP, XL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,








fruits and the remaining blossoms fall in an unnoticed shower, and the foliage
curls and crumples. And whilst creation looks disconsolate, in the hedgerows
the heavy moths begin to flutter, and ominous owlets ery from the ruin. Such
a blight came over the Hebrew summer. By every calculation it ought to have
been high noon; but the sun no longer smiled on Israel’s dial. There was a
dark discomfort in the air. The people murmured. The monarch wheeled
along with greater pomp than ever; but the popular prince had soured into the
despot, and the crown sat defiant on his moody brow; and stiff were the
obeisances, heartless the hosannas, which hailed him as he passed. The wava
of Zion mourned; and whilst grass was sprouting in the temple-courts,
mysterious groves and impious shrines were rising everywhere; and whilst lust
defiled the palace, Chemosh and Ashtoreth and other Gentile abominations
defiled the Holy Land. And in the disastrous eclipse beasts of the forest crept
abroad. From his lurking place in Egypt Hadad ventured out, and became a
life-long torment to the God-forsaken monarch. And Rezon pounced on
Damascus, and made Syria his own. And from the pagan palaces of Thebes
and Memphis harsh cries were heard ever and anon, Pharaoh and Jeroboam
taking counsel together, screeching forththeir threatenings and hooting insuits,
at which Solomon could laugh no longer. For amidst all the gloom and misery
& message comes from God: the kingdom is rent; and whilst Solomon’s
successor will only have a fag-end and a fragment, by right Divine ten tribes
are handed over to a rebel and a runaway.
What led to Solomon’s apostasy? And what, again, was the ulterior effect
of that apostasy on himself? As to the origin of his apostasy the Word of (God
is explicit. He did not obey his own maxim. He ceased to rejoice with the
wife of his youth; and loving many strangers, they drew his heart away from
God. Luxury and sinful attachments made him an idolater, and idolatry made
him yet more licentious; until in the lazy enervation and languid day-dreaming
of the Sybarite, he lost the perspicacity of the sage and the prowess of the
sovereign; and when he woke up from the tipsy swoon, and out of the kennel
picked his tarnished diadem, he woke to find his faculties, once so clear and
limpid, all perturbed, his strenuous reason paralysed, and his healthful fancy
poisoned. He woke to find the world grown hollow, and himself grown old.
He woke to see the sun bedarkened in Israel’s sky, and a special gloom encom-
passing himself. He woke to recognize all round a sadder sight than winter—
a blasted summer. Like a deluded Samson starting from his slumber, he
sought to recall that noted wisdom which had signalized his Nazarite days; but
its locks were shorn; and, cross and self-disgusted, wretched and guilty, he
woke up to the discovery which awaits the sated sensualists. He found that
when the beast gets the better of the .aan, the man is abandoned by his God.
Like one who falls asleep amidst the lights and music of an orchestra, and who
awakes amidst empty benches and tattered programmes—like a man who falls
asleep in a flower-garden, and who opens his eyes on a bald and locust-blackened
wilderness—the life, the loveliness was vanished, and all the remaining spirit
of the mighty Solomon yawned forth that verdict of the tired voluptuary—
‘‘ Vanity of vanities! vanity of vanities! allis vanity !”—Dr. James Hamilton.


Less varied and less profound is the insight afforded into the private experi-
ence of the Wise King. The insufficiency of the most perfect human wisdom
to guard the heart, and of the loftiest eminence of power and earthly
magnificence to satisfy its cravings, are almost painfully prominent. From
amid the lustre of his throne, and the depth of an experience that had
fathomed every created element of happiness, issues the plaintive voice atill
repeating its witness of the vanity of all human things. It is a harvizess
to turn from Ecclesiastes to the Song of Solomon, and, in its rich and gorgeous
stat ie read that not in vain had he searched for the secret of human

8


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : KINGS. GHaP, XL


$$$ ey


happiness, but had found it in the heavenly Bridegroom and the unutterable
joys of His espoused Church. There is, however, another point of view in
which this period of imperial splendour stood in very close relation to the
Divine plan. For it constituted a new appeal to the consciences and even to
the interests of Isracl, such as they had not previously experienced. It was
indeed, the fault of their own sin, and of that alone, that they had hitherto,
with the brief exception of the latter days of Joshua, tasted the bitterness of the
warning, and not the glory of the promise. The alternatives presented by
Moses, and again reiterated by Joshua, were two: an extraordinary blessing
upon cbedience, and an extraordinary curse upon disobedience, They had
perversely chosen the second course, and had already experienced the first
blows of the scourge, to culminate hereafter in their dispersion among all
nations. But thus it happened, that of the other alternative they had enjoyed
no experience up to the time of David. It might, therefore, have been open to
object against God’s final dealings with His chosen race, on the ground that
reward had not been adequately tried. The opposition hardened by the
storm would have melted, it might have been thought, amid the sunshine. Had -
they actually known by experience what the blessing was, who can tell what
effect it may have had upon Israel? This possible objection has been foreclosed
by the glory of the times of David and Solomon. During this period God, by
His own gracious acts—not by virtue of any meritorious obedience of theirs—
gave them the enjoyment of the blessing; not wholly, for the sinful luxury and
profusion of Solomon rapidly introduced the elements of evil, but sufficiently
to indicate the nature of what God had in store for them. Both alterna-
tives were tried, and both the frown and the smile equally failed to conquer the
stubbornness of their disobedience. Hence over this brief period of national
magnificence and religious progress the clouds soon gathered again. Here the
fortunes of the Hebrew race culminated at their highest point, and then hasted
to their decline. Not that God wearied in blessing, but that Israel wearied in
obeying. Ifneither the wise king himself, nor the people he ruled, could bear
that time of glory without introducing elements of decay amid such a full flush
of life, what wonder that others have proved unable to do so; and that the
history of every nation under heaven has hitherto been one invariable sto
of growth, prosperity, corruption, decline, and ruin! Christianity has, indeed,
introduced iute nations a new principle of life, and extended the duration of
their strength far beyond all the limits of the ancient world; but whether,
even among them, the purifying salt will permanently correct the festering
elements of moral corruption, is a lesson still te be learned.— Garbett’s Divine
Plan of Revelation.


Soiomon’s character, as drawn in the Scriptures, is surely many-sided. The
simple, unpretending child—the darling of Jehovah—the chosen king—the
seeker after wisdom: choosing her above all other things—the wise and sagacious
judge—the powerful ruler, and glorious sovereign—surpassing, in many ways,
all the kings of the nations round about him; his navies traversing many a sea,
and kings and princes from afar bringing and laying at his feet their gifts: but
in his old agea despot, a polygamist, and an idolater. These last were doubtless
the immediate causes of his own decline, and of the subsequent misfortunes of
the nation. In his reign the Israclitish monarchy reached the highest pitch of
worldly splendour, the memory of which is still preserved in many an oriental
legend and tradition. But that very splendour seemed to pervert the nation’s
heart, and cause the cloud of Jehovah’s glory to depart from His people and
His Holy Habitation. The outer splendour of his court and empire, the magni-
ficence of hia buildings, and his commerce with foreign nations wero, perhaps,
not in themselves wrong. They might have been made the means of
other nations te the knowledge of the One True God; but they ae pone


~~


Gear Ky, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








with danger. Worldly glory has ever had the tendency to take away the heart
from the pure and the good rather than to win it to the worship of God. So it
was with Solomon, and so it ever has been. ‘‘ How hardly shalla rich man
enter the kingdom of God!” The thing is not impossible with God; but the
dangers of wealth and worldly splendour far surpass their probable advantages
to their possessor. And so the Church, whenever she has sought to increase
her strength by a showing of worldly forces, has become shorn of her spiritual
power. Viewed from the theocratic stand-point, Solomon’s reign was a grand
failure. It corresponded largely with the sad failure of Saul, the first king of
Israel. Saui’s misfortunes, however, were largely owing to his incapacity for
government, as well as to moral obliquity. He was unequal to the exigencies
of his age, and the task of successfully moulding into a monarchy the nation
so long ruled by judges exceeded his powers. But with Solomon there was no
lack of ability. His wisdom, sagacity, and power were equal to any possible
emergency. But his grievous sins and neglect of God’s law brought on his
ruin. His greatness and glory weaned his heart from God, and his wives led
him into idolatry. Speculation as to his probable repentance and final salva-
tion is idle and fruitless, and will always be governed by preconceived opinions,
The sacred writers pass it over in utter silence, and give no shadow of intima-
tion that he ever turned from his idolatry. A mighty shadow clouds his latter
days: and there, in Holy Writ, he stands depicted—one part of his life and
character in strangest contrast with the other—the grandest and saddest
personage of sacred history.— Whedon.


The danger came, and, in spite of the warning, the king fell, Before long the
priests and prophets had to grieve over rival temples to Moloch, Chemosh, and
Ashtoreth, forms of ritual, not idolatrous only, but eruel, dark, impure. This
evil came as the penalty of another. ie gave himself to ‘strange women.”
He found himself involved in a fascination that led to the worship of strange
gods. The starting point and the goal are given us. We are left, from what
we know otherwise, to trace the process. Something there was, perhaps, in his
very ‘* largeness of heart,” so far in advance of traditional knowledge of his age,
rising to higher and wider thoughts of God, which predisposed him to it. In
recognising what was true in other forms of faith, he might lose his horror at
what was false. With this there may have mingled political motives. He may
have hoped, by a policy of toleration, to conciliate neighbouring princes, te
attract a larger traffic. But probably also there was another influence less
commonly taken into account. The widespread belief of the East in the magio
arts of Solomon is not, it is believed, without its foundation of truth. Disasters
followed before long as the natural consequence of what was politically a
blunder as well as religiously asin. The strength of the nation rested on ita
unity, and its unity depended on its faith. Whatever attractions the sensuous
ritual which he introduced may have had for the great body of the people, the
priests and Levites must have looked upon the rival worship with entire disfavour.
The zeal of the prophetic order was now kindled into active opposition. The
king in vain tried to check the current that was setting strong against him.
The old tribal jealousies gave signs of renewed vitality. Ephraim was prepared
once more to dispute the supremacy of Judah, needing special control. And
with this weakness within there came attacks from without. The king, pre-
maturely old, must have foreseen the rapid breaking up of the great monarchy
to which he had succeeded. Of the inner changes of mind and heart, which
ran parallel with this history, Scripture is comparatively silent. We may not
enter into the things within the veil, or answer either way the doubting ques-
tion—Is there any hope ?—Smuith’s Bible Dictionary. (See also Smith's Ola
Lostament History, p. 419-424; also Stanley’s Jewtsh Church, sevond series,
p- 256-260.)

190


'


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAP. XI.








It is extremely difficult to give a portraiture of Solomon which can harmonize
at once both the demand for historic truth and the general estimation which
tradition assigns to him. The story is extraordinary. David, the father of the
wise king, founded and consolidated the kingdom. His life was stormy and
chequered. His chsracter was romantic, chivalric, and generous. He showed
himself capable of both self-sacrifice and of revolting criminality and treachery.
He was tender, andhe was brave. His soul rested upon the covenant-keeping
Jehovah, yet he dared to violate all the duties of the Decalogue which concern
man’s dealings with his brother man. Solomon did not inherit the personal
traits of his father. He was not warlike; he was a man of peace. He sought
wisdom, and he sought it from Jehovah. He desired to administer his govern-
ment according to the law and willof God. He had fine talent for observation,
He was a naturalist of rare attainments. He knew much of the earth; he knew
much of men. He was a man of understanding, expressing his thoughts and
observations in proverbs. He was splendid in his tastes. He sought wealth
by commerce and by trade with heathen nations. He made Israel a kingdom
of this world. At the samo time he built the Temple, lavishing upon it untold
sums of money, and aiming to make it, according to Eastern conceptions,
splendid in all respects. Certainly at its dedication he is one of the most im-
ties and majestic figures in all history. But by degrees, enervated by luxury,

y pleasure, by plenty, he lost the strength of his convictions. He became wise
in this world. The law of Jehovah lost its hold upon his conscience. He
began to justify idolatry. By degrees the splendour passed away, and darkness,
and weariness, and hopelessness, and an ignoble old age came on. He forsook
the noble path of his youth, and his glory was lost. The sun of his life rose in
all splendour and shone briiliantly, to go down at last amid the heavy dark-
ness of impending storm and night. The people lost their sense of the exclusive
sovereignty of Jehovah ; their burdens were heavy, and the brief glory of Israel
as a kingdom of this world passed away for ever.—Dr. H#. Harwood in Lange.


It is impossible not to perceive that such a time as this of Solomon (the
dedication of the Temple), though really a great one, is a critical one for any
nation. The idea of building a house which the Lord would fill with His glory
was a recognition of God as eternally ruling over that people and over ail
people. Yet there lay close toit a tendency to make the invisible visible; they
represent the holy presence as belonging to the building, instead of the building
as being hallowed and glorified by the presence. There was no necessity that
this evil should grow out of that good; in a very important sense one is the
testimony against the other; still all experience, and none more decisively
than the experience of the Israelites, prepares us to expect sucha result. And
here I believe is the precious moral of Solomon’s history, that which makes it a
perfectly harmonious history in spite of the incongruities in his own life.
There was the eced of idolatry in him, as there is in every man. That early
prayer for an understanding heart was the prayer against it—the prayer for an
inward eye to look through the semblances of things to their reality ; for a con-
tinual revelation of that which passeth show. The prayer was answered as
fully as any prayerever was. The Divine judgment, the discrimination of good
and bad, came to Soloman: it was not limited in any direction; it could be
exercised on persons as on things; it was shown to be the faculty which a king
requires, because it is that which a man requires, since by it God perceives the
thoughts and intents of the heart. But there comes a moment when the king
or the man ceases to desire that the light should enter into Aim, should separate *
the good and the bad in him. There comes a time when his faculty begins to
be regarded as a craft, when he half suspects that the light by which he sees is
bis own. Then appears the tempter. He may come in the form of an Egyptian


princess, or any other; but he will in some way eppeas to the ad ng will


®


OHAP. XL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


oe


point the road to idolatry. The secret desire of the heart, mightily resisted
once, will be allowed to prevail; it will convert all that once checked it to its
nourishment. The gold and the silver, not of the palace only, but of the temple
—not the glory only of the kingdom, but of the sanctuary—will strengthen
and deepen the falsehoods of the inner man. The glorious power of judging,
which enabled one who knew not how to go out or come in, to look into the
hardest cases, and to resolve them, itself receives the yoke and bows to the
image; its keenness and subtilty only inventing arguments and apologies for
the shame. And the sympathizing king who sent his people away with glad-
ness of heart, sure that God was the king, and that they had a human king,
who felt towards them as he felt, would gradually become a tyrant, laying on
his subjects Egyptian burdens, compelling them to do the work of beasts, proving
that he valued the stones, the iron, and the brass which formed the materials of
God’s house, above the living beings who weze to draw nigh to offer their
supplications in it. So the wise king may prepare his subjects for rebellion,
and his kingdom for division. A lesson surely full of instruction and wisdom
for all kings and all men; for those who think, and for those who act; for those
who study the secrets of the human heart, and for those who investigate the
meaning of nature; for those who despise the arts and wealth of the world, and
for those who worship them; for those who hold strength and glory to be the
Devil’s, and for those who covet them and hunt after them as if they were
Divine; for nations upon which God hath bestowed mechanical knowledge, and
the blessed results of it; for nations which look upon human beings as only the
machines and the producers of a certain amount of physical enjoyments. But
though so full of instruction, it would be utterly uolcianal and oppressive,
seeing that it speaks of retrogression instead of progress, of folly coming forth
from wisdom—death from life—if there were no sequel to the story. But the
wisdom which Solomon prayed for and pursued with so great and earnest a
heart was not a wisdom which could die with him, or which his forgetfulness
of it could kill. ‘‘The Lord possessed me,” says the writer of the Book of
Proverbs, ‘‘in the beginning of His way, before His works of old. I was set
up for everlasting, from the beginning or ever the earth was.” ‘In the
beginning was the Word,” says St. John, ‘and the Word was with God, and
the Word was God. All things were made by Him, and without Him was not
anything made that was made. In Him was life, and the life was the light of
men.” ‘‘ And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld
His glory, as of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.”
This is the King ‘‘ who shall be found as long as the sun and moon endureth,
whom all nations shall call blessed.” This is that Son ‘who shall judge the
people with righteousness and the poor with judgment.” This is He in whom
the prayers of David are ended. Brethren, every one of us may ask that Divine
Word who is near to us and with us, for an understanding heart. Every one
of us who feels that a great work is laid upon him, and that he is in the midst
of a people which God hath chosen, and some of whom at least he must teach
and judge, and that he is but a little child, may crave for a spirit to discern
the good and the bad in himself and in all others. And if we feel, as most of
us perhaps do, that we need above all things else, is that sense of responsibility,
that consciousness of a calling, that feeling of feebleness which were the sourea
of Solomon’s prayer—let us ask for these gifts first. And so we shall under-
stand more and more clearly that we are called to be kings and priests in that
city which He hath set up, and in which He reigns, a city in which there is one
visible temple; for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple of it;
a city into which the kings of the earth shall at last bring their glory and
honour.— F. D. Maurtce.





193


———


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS, GHAR. iE,
reer NI eS
CHAPTER XII.


THE DISRUPTION OF THE KINGDOM.


Carrroat and Exptanatory Notrs.—Verse 1. Rehoboam went to Shechem—lInstead of
remaining in Jerusalem, whither Israel should have come to him, as they did to David
(2 Sam. y. 1), and sworn allegiance to their king. To make him king—They had no right
to “ maka”’ a king, since Jehovah was the Maker of their kings, and had assigned perpetual
sovereignty to David's posterity. By summoning Rehoboam to Shechem, Israel showed
the intention to depart from loyalty to authorized usages; and in the avowal that they deter-
mined to “make” a king, instead of submitting homage to the rightful heir, the spirit of
rebellion is plainly indicated. Verse 2. When J eroboam, the son of Nebat, who was yet in
Egypt, heard—Heard, not “ of it,”—é. ¢., the convocation at Shechem—but of Solomon’s
death. The Vulgate inserts “heard that Solomon was dead.’ This act of Israel in recalling
& rebel against Solomon, and placing him at their head, shows their determination to revolt,
It must be evident that they sent for Jeroboam before they assembled at Shechem, since it
would have required considerable time for them to send, and forhim to return, It wasall pre-
arranged, Accordingly, the Sept. and Vulg. add to verse 2 these words:—He returned
from Egypt and came unto his city, unto the land of Zerira, which is in the hill country of
Ephraim. And they sent and called him.” Verse 4. Thy father made our yoke grievous—
in order to make his cities majestic, and to maintain the splendours of his court. But his
peaceful and prosperous reign gave wealth and civie benefits to his people, which more than


repaid the heavy taxation, The offence was this: Solomon iaid on them a “yoke.” by
is a yoke laid on beasts of burdev, and suggests their indignation at having been compelled
to do what they regarded as servile work (comp. Notes on xi. 27). Verse 7. If thou wilt bea
servant . . they will be thy servants for ever—Conciliate and concede to them for “ this
day,” thus turning aside their discontent, and they will be won to loyalty, Had he for the


time become T1}) of the people, he would have removed from tbe malcontents every pretext
vy
for revolt. But he heeded the ‘* young men ”—DYT)'—who knew his haughty and ambitious


nature, and flattered him by recommending an attitude of despotic tyranny. Verse 15. The
cause was from the LORD—iit., a turn from; it was brought about by the Lord. Verse 16,
Sept, renders the verse thus :—‘* And the whole people as one man sard each one to his neighbour,
and all cried out, We have no part in David, nor any inheritance in the son of Jesse! Every
man to thy tents, O Israel! For this man ts not (fit) to be a ruler nor to be « prince.” Now
see to thine own house, David—Xei/ remarks that in this ery “ the rooted dislike to David’s
royal house is strongly expressed, and we can perceive a more potent cause for the partition
than the alleged oppression of Solomon.” Verse 18. Adoram, who was over the tribute—
A flagrant blunder to send this chief of the socagers (chap. iv. 6) to negotiate with them. It
incensed them the more, and his fate opened the king’s eyes to the furious antagonism of the
tribes of Israel. Verse 20. Made him (Jeroboam) king over all Israel—This exasperated
Rehoboam to prepare war, from which God restrained him. Verse 26. Now shall the king-
dom return to the house of David—Recognizing the immediate peril of Israel's visits to the
temple, he sought to alienate their hearts from Jehovah’s worship. Verse 28, It is too much
for you—A specious plea that it would save them the costs and toils of a long journey. Two
calves of gold—Egyptian figures, Apis and Mnevis. These winged bulls, by their slight re~
semblance to the cherubim, might captivate their imagination and soothe their scruples,
Verse 30. The people went to Dau—“ Bethel was at the southern extremity of the kingdom,
and within sight of Jerusalem; but the people preferred to turn from all associations with the
city of Judah, and went to ‘ Dan,” on the far northern frontier. Verse 80. Priests of the
lowest of the people—Rather, of all classes. For the Levites would not assist in his idolatry,
and, moreover, Jeroboam wished to destroy all the sacred associations of Israel's former life,
Verse 32. Ordained a feast in the eighth month—-Most probably to divert the memorieg of
the tribes from the Feast of Tabernacles, which fell on the 16th day of the seventh month, in
order further to eradicate sacred memories. He had a plausible pretext for this change, in
that the harvest ripened later in the northern districts. Verse 33. He offered upon the
altars—Thus assuming to himself the functions of the high priest. ‘Two reasons may have
led to this act of usur; ation: he had observed that the Egyptian king united in his person
both the royal and sacerdotal offices; and he may have distrusted the prudence of vesting in a
subject, at so critical an hour in Israel’s career, the ees which a high priest possessed over
& people so controllable by religious impulses.—W. Jd.


neccanee: re
198


~*~


Gar. X11. HOMILETIO COUMENTARY : HINGE.


= en rereen nerunennnt 0 teal nape eee





HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-24,
Revorr: Irs Cavez ann ConsEQuEencu.


Tarrx is an intimate and necessary connection between sin and ita
punishment; and we may trace the political and moral causes of the disruption
of the kingdom in the excessive luxury of Solomon and the sins of his latter
days. The rebellion of the ten tribes was an event of supreme importance
in its bearing on the future history of Israel. It was not a temporary division
like those which occasionally took place under the Judges, but was sullenly
permanent, and defied the power of all subsequent monarchs to reconcile. The
breach was healed, like many other long-standing enmities, only by the fall
and extinction of the contending factions. The whole history is another
illustration of the cause and consequence of revolt so frequently repeated in
the development of all national life.


I. That the cause of revolt is manifold, and lies far back in the history
of a nation. 1. In the existence of tribal jealousy and ambition. The super-
cilious and reckless conduct of Rehoboam was not the immediate cause of
rebellion. The loyalty of a people is not destroyed by a single act of im-
periougness, or even wrong, on the part of the sovereign: it is a patient, long-
suffering, forgiving principle; and only after long continued and exaggerated
wrong does it assume an attitude of determined opposition (vide the Netherlands
under Philip II., France and Spain under the Bourbons, England under
Charles 1). The answer of Rehoboam (verses 13, 14) was as a lighted match
falling on a powder magazine whose stores had been accumulating for
years. The supremacy of the tribes of Judah over the powerful tribe of
Ephraim was a cause of perpetual jealousy and heartburning. ‘There was a
difference in the character and pursuits of the tribes; whilst Judah was the
leader and head of the theocracy and the covenant, therefore of higher religious
life (Genesis xlix. 10; Psalm lx. 9; Ixxvill. 67; cxiv. 1, 2), Ephraim
represented the nature-side of the people’s life; and the consciousness of
natural material strength and earthly abundance appears with it (Genesis xlix.
22; Deuteronomy xxxiii. 13; Psalm Ixxviii. 9). So, in the moral world,
there are two antagonistic forces continually warring with each other—the
carnal and the spiritual, the sensuous and the supersensuous, the world-principle
and the lofty moral aims of church life. But the time is coming when the
strife shall end, when ‘‘ Ephraim shall notenvy Judah, and Judah shall not vex
Ephraim” (Isaiah xi. 12). 2. Jn oppressive exactions The monarchy, as it
grew in power and magnificence, imposed still heavier taxations upon the people,
both in labour and in money. The king became a despot; and the people, who
had no means of obtaining redress, groaned under ever accumulating burdens.
But, all the time, the national fecling was ripening for revolt. The pro-
phets and the chief leaders of the people saw, now that Solomon was dead,
that a change must take place in the government; and they were ready to
take part in the movement. The revolution might have been effected
peacefully and without division; but the youthful monarch was blinded by
self-confidence and fiuttery, and was swept away before the storm of national
indignation he was too powerless to arrest. Tyranny is short-lived, and
will, sooner or latter, meet with its deserved punishment. The whips and
scorpions it has twisted for the chastisement of others will be used to flagellate
itself. 8. Jn the idolatry of king and peopie. This was the head and front of
offence. When Jehovah is insulted and forsaken, the way is open for every
folly and enormity, aud retribution will inevitably ensue. Idolatry is the germ

194


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RINGS. GHAP. XIK,
— eee


of many other sins. The king erred a8 much in the licence and sanction he
gave to heathenish religions as in the severity of his imperial exactions. Sin is
a grea’ disintegrating foree—it loosens the loyalty of a people, it shakes
the fouxdations of a throne, it breaks up the cohesion of a nation.


—.____...





II, That revolt is baneful in its results. 1. Z¢ produces disunion. The
work of Saul, David, and Solomon in consolidating the kingdom—a work of
time and infinite pains—was undone in a single day. Rebellion stirs up the
werst passions, animosities are created which are not forgotten in a lifetime, the
nearest relationships are despised, and the tenderest ties unbound. It isa
political earthquake producing social disorder and confusion. The revolt of
man from the authority of heaven has filled the earth with the elements of
moral discord and disunion. 2. J¢ #8 attended with violence and suffering (verse
18). On this occasion an officer of the crown was stoned to death, and the
king himself obliged to fly. It is rare for a national revolution to be bloodless:
thousands have fallen victims to its lawless fury. A people in rebellion is
like a fierce dog unchained. ‘‘ Nothing is more untractable and violent than
an enraged multitude. It was time for Rehoboam to betake himself to
his chariot: he saw those stones were thrown at him in his Adoram. As
the messenger suffers for his master, so the master suffers in his messenger. Had
Rehoboam been in Adoram’s clothes, this death had been his; only flight can
deliver him from those that might have been subjects.” The evil consequences
of rebellion are often felt for a century. The blood of rebellion makes a dark
stain which it is difficult to wash out.


Iii. That revolt may be Divinely overruled for good (verse 24). This
thing was from the Lord. Without violating the exercise of moral freedom,
Jehovah used the disasters of the kingdom in carrying out His great purpose of
Mercy towards the race. A word from the prophet dismissed the armies which
ra met to plunge into a fratricidal war; and both sides obeyed the authori-
tative word of the Lord. To fight against God may aggravate, but can never
redress human miseries. ‘‘ While the disruption of the Hebrew people into
two nations was, in one point of view a chastisement upon sin, we can see from
another point of view that God made this very calamity instrumental to the
maintenance of Jewish isolation, and the preservation of His revealed truth.
The national life was concentrated into an intenser form among the two chosen
tribes than when diffused among the ten. Their circumstances, as brought
inte closer local proximity with the Temple of Jerusalem, and with all its
services and associations, were favourable in the highest degree to the main-
tenance of true religion among them, and the deepening of all the ties of Jewish
life. Within the narrower area the circle of idolatrous temptation was corres-
pondingly narrowed. The very rivalry between the two kindred nations, and
their common possession of the same Scriptures, drove the Jew back more
intensely on his peculiar privileges, and guarded him thus from the contamina-
tion of the idolatrous apostasy established by Jeroboam. As regards the sacred
writings themselves, it quickened the jealousy with which they were preserved,
and has provided two independent lines of evidence instead of one; and lastly,
in conjunction with these varied results, it narrowed the line of Messiah’s
descent, and drew into definite shape the proofs of His personal identity. The
separation retarded, but did not avert, the final catastrophe.”—Garbett. The
history affords another example of how God can make the sins and follies of
men subservient to His higher purposes.


Essons:—1. Jehovah is the Righteous Governor of the nations. 2. A nation
és trong only while it és faithful to Him. 3. It ia He who redresses national
wrongs while He promotes the welfare of the whole race. ve


A)


GAP, KEL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


Tur Rexpme oy tHe Kurepoxu.


Verses 21-25.


Tue thing which the prophet declared to be from the Lord was the separation
ef the tribes of Israel—the revolt of Jeroboam from the house of David—the
establishment of a new kingdom. Yet these events, to all appearance, contra-
dicted the very purpose for which the chosen people existed, and confused their
history. And this conclusion appears to be strengthened by all subsequent
experience of the effects of thisrevolt. Jeroboam, the author of it, is represented
throughout Scripture as the man who made Israel to sin. The history of the
ten tribes is a record of continually deepening degeneracy. From this time,
too, all the brilliancy passes away from the house of David. His grand antici-
pations of what should come to pass in after times, if they had a partial accom-
plishment in the days of his son, seemed to be belied by the history of his son’s
sons. Prophets mourn over a land devoured by strangers, ‘“‘ whose princes were
rebellious and companions of thieves, loving gifts and following after rewards;
who judged not the fatherless, neither did the cause of the widow come before
them.” The noblest specimens of the royal race were men, the main business
of whose reigns was to remove the corruptions of their predecessors. The last
and most zealous of all was unable, by his reforms, to avert the downfall and
captivity of his people. All these evils are evidently connected in the minds of
the prophets with the schism of the tribes. They look upon their division as
containing the principle, and illustrating the effects, of all divisions which
should happen in all nations in times tocome. Their belief that some day
unity would be restored to their land is identified with the hope of peace and
righteousness for the whole earth.


I. We must not suppose that the sentence which affirms that this great
calamity was from the Lord is an isolated one, or that it can be explained into
some general notion that all mens’ doings, good or evil, may be attributed to an
omnipotent ruler, We shall find presently how little that general notion accords
with the language or teaching of Scripture (read chap. xi. 26-39). In this
passage we are distinctly told that a prophet stirred up those thoughts in the.
mind of Jeroboam which led him to rise against Solomon. This prophet is not
represented as a deceiver, who spoke words out of his own heart; he is a true
witness for the Lord God of Israel. He announces an eternal, unchangeable
law. It had been declared that idolatry must produce degradation and division
in the land. The very ground of the unity of the nation had been taken
away—its acknowledgment of a one Lord. What would follow if the semblance
remained when the reality was gone? This would follow: a perpetual growth
of internal corruption—of internal division ; falsehood spreading in the vitals
of the people, with nothing to remind them that it was falsehood, with nothing
to prove that their kingdom had another foundation than that which they were
trying to rest it upon. Such a state of things is inconceivable if we suppose
that human. beings are as much under a Divine order as natural things are.
That order must vindicate itseli—must show what it is: the punishment of the
transgression must be the way of proclaiming the principle which has been
transgressed.


IL, But moral laws, though they are as powerful defenders of themselves aa
natural laws, do not defend themselves in the same way. Human beings,
voluntary creatures, are the instruments of carrying out the one, as the hidden

wers in sea, or earth, or fire, are of fulfilling the other. A personal God
Sealing wit men will employ men as the agents and executors of His purpose,


ran ue,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. x11, \-


a


Jeroboam has risen by his industry in the service of Solomon. i
charges or burdens for the house of Joseph. He is thus eotea a ae the
discontents of the people ; apparently he sympathises withthem. The tyranny
grew out of the idolatry. Though Jeroboam might not perceive the root, he
could perceive the evil fruit, which deserved to be hated for its own sake: he
was, therefore, qualified to execute Ahijah’s prophecy, not merely as a dull
instrument, but as one who had, to a certain extent, a righteous purpose. A
promise is given him, not of immediate, but of ultimate, success. At the same
time, it is clearly declared to him that the Divine purpose has not been altered
by the sin of the Jewish king. The tribe of Judah, the house of David, the
city of Jerusalem, had a sacredness attached to them which would not be ‘ost.
The tribe had been chosen, the kingdom had been established, the Temple had
been built in the capital, as assurances for the past, the present, and the future
which nothing could set aside. That which seemed to destroy the harmony,
even the existence, of the nation, would, in fact, bring out the secret of its
harmony, the ground of its existence, more fully than they had ever been brought


out yet.





III. This part of the narrative will seem mysterious and supernatural, Such
assuredly it is; and it explains to us how supernatural and mysterious every
event or series of events must be which concerns the life of nations and the
sins of rulers and subjects. But we soon find ourselves in the region of ordinary
human life. (Read chap. xii. 3-11). How rapidly the interval of three
thousand years and all the difference between a small Syrian province of the
old world, and a nation of Europe in the nineteenth century, seems to disappear
as we read this story! Have we not, in one sphere or other, among the
patriarchs of a village, or the statesmen of a kingdom, met and conversed with
some of these grave old men, who did not, perhaps, set before themselves the
highest standard of moral excellence, who did not at once pronounce upon the
right or wrong of an action, but whom long experience had taught the might
which lies in gentle words, and the real desire there is in human beings
to obey, if there be but sense and somewhat of sympathy in those who rule ?
Have we not also—and, alas! far more frequently—encountered those young men
flashed with insolence and wine, who talked loudly of putting down the pre.
tensions of inferiors, and of maintaining their own position and dignity, who had
never yet learnt in what superiority or dignity consists, who had never begun
to reverence their fellow-men because they did not reverence themselves; who
thought they could meet the demands of suffering and wronged men by
boasting words and a frantic determination to maintain privileges which they
ought never to have possessed, because they were not privileges based upon any
real relations, upon any law, human or Divine, but merely upon accident or
assumption, which must perish as rapidly as they have grown up. And yet
these, as the story teaches, and as all subsequent history has proved, are the
favourite and triumphant advisers of those whom their own vanity and folly
have doomed, and who want parasites to put into words the doctrines which
they have already received into their cold, empty hearts. ‘‘ My father chastised

ou with rods; I will chastise you with scorpions.” This in all ages has been
the childish bluster of men who have made themselves blind to the future by
refusing to use their eyes in judging of that which is before them, who fancy
that the power will be their own for ever, at the very moment when the hand-
writing on the wall is declaring that it has been taken from them and given


toeanother.
IV. “Wherefore,” the historian goes on, “ the king hearkened not unto the


people. For the cause was from the Lord,” &c. (verses 15-20). Here again we


are on the mysterious and Divine ground; yet there is no sudden or violent
197


%


OHAP, xil. HOMILETIC COMMENTAKY: KINGS.








transition from that common homely earth upon which we were standing a
moment ago. The prophecy of Ahijah, the Shilonite, is not brought to pass by
any strange combination of events. The folly of Rehoboam and his gay
counsellers, their utter incapacity for estimating their own weakness or the
force of indignation and conviction in the minds of other men—these are the
ways by which the Divine counsels are brought forth into act; these are the
messengers of God’s wrath, as much as the volcano. Deep and unfathomable
mystery, worthy to be meditated on by those who are fighting with evil upon
earth, and by those who have won the victory ; the key to all the puzzles of
history, the comfort and consolation amid the overwhelming evils which we see
around us and feel within us; the deliverance at once from the debasing
Pantheism which teaches that sin is only another form of righteousness—wrong
only an aspect of right—and from the Manicheism which would lead us to
think that evil may at last triumph, or hold a divided empire with God. The
wrath of man has praised Him, and will always praise Him. Sin, and death,
and hell, must do Him continual homage now, and will be led as His victims
and grace His triumph when His glory is fully revealed. But neither now or
then will they ever blend with His works, or be shown to have their origin in
Him, or be known as anything but the contradictions of His nature.


Y. Jeroboam then was established on the throne of Israel. The heir of the
house of David tried to crush the revolt, and to recover the tribes; but tried in
vain. The thing was from the Lord. Rehoboam could no more put down the
rebellious servant of Solomon, than Saul could put down David. The decree
which had said that the ten tribes should remain distinct was as Divine a decree
as that which established an everlasting covenant with the man after God’s own
heart. And yet this is the sequel of the story (read verses 26-32). As this
passage receives great light from those which precede it, so also it throws back
alight upon them. We see now more clearly than ever why the separation of
the kingdoms was a thing from the Lord. It asserted the real dignity of
Jerusalem as the place in which it has pleased God so put his Name, not
merely or chiefly as the place in which David or Solomon chanced to reign. It
asserted the real unity of a nation to be not in a king, but in the King. It
showed that the only basis of any political fellowship among the tribes lay in
that name which was revealed to the first father of them. The revolt of
Jeroboam would have done this, if he had continued faithful; his unfaithful-
ness discovered the same principle through another and a sterner discipline.
The miseries to which it led, justified all the groans of the prophets; the
light which broke through those miseries, showing the cause of them and the
deliverance from them, justified all their hopes.


VI. All Christians have felt that the principle of separations and schisms in
different lands and ages must be contained in this schism of the tribes. The
great schism of the Latin and Greek Churches strikes the student of eccle-
siastical records as a most startling contradiction in the history of a body which
was to include all nations and races. Yet surely it was from the Lord. Idola-
trous habits and feelings had been spreading in both divisions of the church.
The sense of union in an invisible Head, though not lost, was fearfully
weakened. A seeming union must have been preserved by the loss of all
witness for real union; the division remains a standing witness against the
possibility of a visible Head ever holding the Catholic body together. The
schism of rival popes in the Western Church during the fifteenth century was
as great a scandal to Christendom as can be conceived. Yet it was surely from
the Lord. It led men to perceive that there was corruption in the head, and in
the members of the ecclesiastical polity ; it led to those disputes respecting the
relative power of popes and councils which showed that neither could heal

198


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, xi.
eee


the wounds of the Church, or preserve its unity. It led to that movement in
the sixteenth century which we all believe to have been from the Lord, and
which was really a declaration of faith in a living God, against a system of
idolatry that was rapidly passing into a system of organized unbelief. In each
of these cases there were chances of reconciliation, such as were offered
to Rehoboam when the people besought him to lessen their burdens. In each
case there were grave counsellors advising reconciliation, and noisy fanatics
preaching uncompromising resistance. In each case the infatuation of princes
and rulers, ecclesiastical and civil, was carrying out a Divine and eternal
principle, even when they were defying it. They could not restore unity by
declamations, by concessions, or by persecution. T'acts spoke louder than the
eth spoke to Rehoboam: “It cannot be. The thing is from the
rd.


Reflections :—Oh, brethren! how intolerable would be these facts and recol-
lections which show every party in Church and State to have been the cause of
shameful scandals, which forbid us to cast stones at others because we are
in the same sin, if we might not recur again and again to the words which
I have quoted so often. But if ‘‘the thing is of the Lord,’ there must be an
end of all those strifes by which He has ordained that our idolatries against Him
and cruelties to our brethren should punish themselves. There must be a day
when all things in heaven and earth, which consist only by Christ, shall be
gathered manifestly together in Him, when it shall be known and confessed that
there is one king, one priest, one sacrifice; that we have been at war with each
other because we have not done homage to that one king, drawn nigh to God
through that one priest, omitted to present that one perfect sacrifice. And those
who are willing before God’s altar to own that their self-seeking and self-will
have been rending asunder their families, the nation, the Church, the world,
may hope that God’s Spirit will work in them henceforth to do all such acts as
shall not retard, but hasten forward, the blessed consummation for which they
look. They may ask to be taught the mystery of daily self-sacrifice—how
to give up their own tastes, opinions, wishes. They may ask that they may
never be tempted to give up one atom of God’s truth, or to dally for one moment
with the falsehoods of themselves or of their brethren ; because truth is the one
ground of universal peace and fellowship, because falsehood and division are ever
increasing aad reproducing each other.—(Condensed from ’. D. Maurice).


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-24. The rebellion and its
lessons. 1. Many a base design lurks
under the most specious appearances.
2. Tke best government will not be
without factious spirits, ready to blow
the coals of sedition among the popu-
lace. 8. The avarice of a kept mis-
tress is insatiable. 4. Most men are
more concerned how to save their
money than their souls. 5. That
government which subsists only by
severity is in a tottering condition:
no throne is sure where a king reigns
not in the heart of his subjects. 6.
They are our best friends who dissuade


us from rash designs; and they are our
greatest enemies who soothe our folly
and flatter our pride. 7- At court,
too commonly, not the profit of the
kingdom, but the pleasing of the king,
is the object most in view. 8. They
who know the great sin of rebellion
will suffer much rather than rise to
vindicate themselves by so dangerous
a measure. 9. When God’s will con-
tradicts our designs, we must patiently
submit. 10. Love to our brethren
should make us put up with many in-
juries, rather than seek a redress which
may be ruinous to both. 11. If we
199


*%


GuAP, Xi:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





fight against God there can be no hope
of success: it is wise, therefore, betimes
to leave off meddling.


Verses 1-20. The departure of
Israel from the House of David.
I. The grievances. Il. The decision.
III. The rebellion.

— The division of the kingdom.
I. A consequence of manifold sins—of
Solomon, Jeruboam, Rehoboam. II.
A Divine dispensation—for their hu-
miliation and chastisement, and for a
direction towards the heavenly eternal
Kingdom.

— The sources and causes of the
rebellion. I. In general estrange-
ment from God, indifferentism, and un-
belief. II. In particular—these sins
on the part of the people (Prov. xiv. 34),
and on the part of the princes (Prov.
xx. 28). Where prince and people
fear God there will be no rebellion;
but where no covenant with God exists,
all human considerations fall in pieces.
— Lange.


Verse 1. It should seem to be in the
course of nature that sons brought up
under the nurture of wise fathers
should be themselves wise. But it is
not always seen, perhaps not often
seen, that wise fathers have wise sons.
How is this? It may be that the
wisdom of the son, the formation of
his character, depends more on the
mother than the father, and that a
wise mother is even more essential than
a wise father to the formation of a
wise son. We may hear of foolish
sons having wise fathers, and of foolish
fathers having wise sons, but rarely of
@ wise son having had a foolish
mother. Several young men, who
were associated in preparing for the
Christian ministry, felt interested in
ascertaining what proportion of their
Lumber had pious mothers. They
were greatly surprised and delighted
in finding that, out of 120 students,
more than 100 had been blessed by a
mother’s prayers, and directed by a
mother’s counsels to the Saviour.—
Kitto.

— Many a poor man hath a houseful
ef children by one wife, whilethis great

200


king has but one son by many housefuls
of wives. How often doth God deny
this heritage of heirs where He gives
the largest heritage of lands, and gives
most of these living possessions where
He gives least of the dead, that His
blessings may be acknowledged free
unto both, entailed upon neither. All
Israel found that Solomon’s wit was
not propagated. Many a fool hath
had a wiser son than this wisest
father. Amongst many sons it is no
news to find some one defective. Solo-
mon hath but one son, and he no mira-
cle of wisdom. God gives purposely
so eminent an instance to teach men
to look up to heaven both for heirs and
graces.— Bp. Hall.

— The first step taken by the new
king was a most judicious one; and
we may probably trace in it the advice
of those wise heads whose counsels he
soon after rejected. IPfanything could
have removed the disaffection of the
Ephraimites and eaused them to sub-
mit a little longer to the ascendency of
Judah, it would have been the honour
done to their capital by its selection to
be the scene of the new monarch’s
coronation. Shechem (now JVadlis)
lay on the flank of Mount Gerizim,
directly opposite to Mount Ebal, in a
yee second to none in all Palestine.

t possessed the bones of Joseph (Josh.
xxiv. 32), and had been the place of
general meeting in the days of Joshua
(0d. vill. 80-35; xxiv. 1-28). Abime-
lech had also reigned there (Judg. ix,
1-23); and though he had destroyed
the place, it had probably soon risen
again, and was once more a chief city,
or perhaps the chief city of Ephraim,
There wasJoseph sold by his brethren—
as if the very soil had been stained
with perfidiousness.


Verses 2, 8. Experience teaches
that those who have once set up an op-
position to legitimate authority will
ever persist in their resolve, even if
their design fail or is pardoned; they
only await another opportunity to
carry out their plans; therefore they
should never be trusted.


Verse 2. Had not Israel been some-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
ca a eR eT


what predisposed to a mutiny, they
had never sent into Egypt for such a
spokesman as Jeroboam, a fugitive, a
traitor to Solomon; long had that
eraity couspirator lurked in a foreign
court. The alliances of princes are
not ever necessary bonds of friendship ;
the brother-in-law of Solomon har-
bours this snake in his bosom, and
gives that heat, which is repaid with
a sting to the posterity of so near an
ally. That Israel would entertain a
rebel was an ill sign; worse yet, that
would countenance him; worst of all,
that they would employ him. No-
thing doth more bewray evil intentions
than the choice of vicious agents.
Those that mean well will not
hazard either the success or credit of
their actions upon offensive instru-
ments; none but the sluttish will
wipe their faces with foul cloths.
Jeroboam’s head had been a fit pre-
sent to have been tendered unto their
new king; and now, instead thereof,
they tender themselves to Jeroboam as
the head of their faction.— By. Hall.


Verses 3, 4. Rebellious people
easily seek and find in public circum-
stances means which they amplify
and exaggerate in order to give an
appearance of justice to their wicked-
ness, and to have some pretext for their
criminal designs. It is a universal
fact that men exclaimed more con-
cerning oppression than concerning
godlessness and other sins; are more
careful for the body than for the soul ;
and, so that they are free in action,
give little heed to the soul’s nurture
(Ex. xvi. 38). A people which pre-
scribes to its lawful sovereign the
conditions of its obedience to him, and
directs him how to govern, assumes
to itself royal authority, and overturns
the appointed order of God, thus
rushing surely on to its own des-
truction.—Langs.


Verse 4. The cry of the oppressed.
1. Will one day make itself heard.
2. Will not fail to rehearse all the
injuries of the past. 8. Is an appeal
for justice and mercy. 4. Is not
uttered in vain in the ears of the


OHAP. Zi,


prudent ruler. 5. Cannot be disre-
garded with impunity.

— The complaint was probably
twofold. The Israelites no doubt
complained in part of the heavy
weight of taxation laid upon them
for the maintenance of the monarch
and his court. But their chief priev-
ance was the forced labour to
Which they had been subjected.
Forced labour has been among the
causes leading to insurrection in man
ages and countries. It alienated the
people of Rome from the last Tarquin ;
it helped to bring about the French
revolution ; and it was for many years
one of the principal grievances of
the Russian serfs. It is a reasonable
conjecture that Jeroboam’s position as
superintendent of the forced labours
of the tribe of Ephraim revealed to
him the large amount of dissatisfac-
tion which Solomon’s system had
produced, and that his contemplated
rebellion in Solomon’s reign was to
have been connected with this stand-
ing grievance.—Sypeaker’s Comm.

— Doubtless the crafty head of
Jeroboam was in this suit which his
mouth uttered in the name of Israel.
Nothing could have been more sub-
tle: it seemed a promise, but it wasa
threat; that which seemed a suppli-
cation was a complaint: humility
was but a vail for discontentment—
one hand held a paper, the other a
sword. If Rehoboam yield, he ble-
mishes his father; if he deny, he
endangers his kingdom. His wilful-
ness shall seem worthily to abandon
his sceptre, if he stick at so un-
reasonable a suit. Surely Israel came
with a purpose to cavil; Jeroboam
had secretly troubled these waters,
that he might fish more gainfully.—’
Bp. Hall.


Verse 5. A prince who, upon his
accession to the throne, requires
time to decide if his rule shall be
mild and merciful, or harsh and
despotic, cannot have assumed his
high responsible post in the fear and
love of God; therefore he must
expect no Divine blessing. Itis well
and good, indeed, in esa


CHAP. XI.





matters, to take time for reflection, but
in time of sudden danger, rapid, firm
decision is equally necessary. One
accustomed to walk in God’s ways
will at such times take no step which
will afterwards cause him bitter
repentance.—Lange.


— The supreme value of a pause
in the midst of a national crisis.
How pregnant with importance were
those three days! 1. Affording oppor-
tunity for the rectifying of wrongs.
2. Deepening the gravity of the
situation to the opposing factions.
3. Suspending the destiny of the
nation on the next step taken. 4.
Requiring the most consummate
wisdom in counsel and action.


— To hesitatein such a crisis is ruin.
Even a prompt refusal had been less
dangerous than delay. But Rehoboam
could not trust his own understanding.
He asked three days for deliberation.
Even consent aiter such delay would
lose the generous aspect of spontaneous
grace, and would have the appearance
to the people of having been extorted
from hisfears. And it rendered refusal
doubly ruinous. Tke indication of
reluctance gave warning of the result
that might be expected, and afforded
time for the disaffected to mature their
plans and preparations for revolt. We
cannot doubt that these three days
were among the busiest of Jeroboam’s
life.—_Xitto.


Verses 6-11. Rehoboam holds a
council. I. Wtth whom? With his
own servants, old and young, but not
with the Lord his God and Hisservants.
In difficult and grave matters we
should not neglect to take counsel with
men, but chiefly should we go to Him
for counsel of whom it may be said:
‘‘ He hasthe way of all ways, and never
fails in counsel (Jas. i. 5; Isaiah
xxx. 1). If Hesit not in the council,
in vain do young andold advise. Had
Rehoboam sought light from above in
those three days, and prayed as once
his father did (Ch. iii. 9), or as
Jeremiah (Jer. xxxii. 19), or entreated
like Jehoshaphat (2 Kings iii, 11), then

202


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





he would not have been like a reed
shaken by the wind, but his heart
would have been strong. IL. Zhe
alvice givenhim. Neither counsel was
Divine, but both mercly human (Matt.
xvi. 23). The old men, out of their
fear and apprehension, advised: re-
nounce for the present thy royal pre-
rogative, and bow before the will of
the people; later thou canst act
differently. This advice ran counter
to his pride and despotism, so he re-
fused the counsel of the old men.
Through flattery and insolence com-
bined, the young men counselled a
course actually inhuman—to abuse his
royal prerogative—to care nothing for
his people and their wishes, but simply
to treat them with violence. This
advice suited him well, because it
corresponded with his rough, harsh,
selfish, and violent character. But
this produced the exact reverse of what
he wished and hoped. When you re-
ceive conflicting counsels from men,
apply to both the test of God’s Word
(Psa. xix. 8; cxix. 104).—Lange.


Verses 6, 7. The sedate caution
of age. 1. The result of manifold
experience. 2. Is valuable in counsel.
3. Sees the best time to make con-
cessions. 4, Merits respectful con-
sideration.


Verse 6. It is the first privilege
and duty of a king to seek to surround
himself with men who, fearing no
man, either high or low, and regardless
of their own profit or advantage, shall
advise him as befits men responsible
before a just and holy God. One such
man alone outweighs whole hosts of
soldiers (Prov. xx. 28).


Verse 7. Theruler that would hold
the affections of his people must first
learn to be their servant. He must
consult their wishes and interests so
as not to seem unmindful of his most
humble subject. But it is easy to see,
as Bahr remarks, that such a proposi-
tion might not be very agreeable to a
rash and imperious young king in
whose veins Ammonite blood flowed.

— A king who refuses toe be a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,


‘servant of God” readily finds him-
self in a situation where he is compelled
to be a servant of the people. The
splendour of majesty is enhanced by
benevolence, goodness, and mercy, but
never by timid yielding and submission
to the popular will.

Verses 8-11. The reckless frivolity


of youth. 1. Is blind to surrounding
dangers. 2.Is defiant of conse-
quences. 3. Is not to be trusted in


grave emergencies. 4. May goad a
nation into rebellion.

— The young heads are consulted.
This very change argues weakness.
Some reason might be pleaded for
passing from the younger council to
the aged ; none for the contrary. Age
brings experience; and it is a shame
if with the ancient be not wisdom.
Youth is commonly rash, heady,
insolent, ungoverned, wedded to will,
led by humour, a rebel to reason, a
subject to passion, fitter to execute
than advise. Green wood is ever
shrinking and warping, whereas the
well-seasoned holds aconstant firmness.
Many a life, many a soul, many a
flourishing state, hath been ruined by
undisciplined monitors. Such were
those of Rehoboam, whose great
stomach tells us that this conditionat-
ing of subjects was no other than an
affront to their new master, and sug-
gests to them how unfit it is for
majesty to brook so saucy a treaty ;
how requisite and princely tocrush this
presumption in the egg. There can
be no good use of an indefinite pro-
fession of rigour and severity. Fear
is an unsafe guardian of any state,
much less of an unsettled: which was
yet worse—not the sins of Israel were
threatened, nor their purses—but their
persons; neither had they desired a
remission of justice, but of exactions ;
and now they hear of nothing but
burdens and scourges and scorpions.—
Bp. Hall.

— Where the counsels of the aged
are rejected, be it in a kingdom or in
s house, and those only of the youth-
ful followed, there men pursue an un-
hallowed path. For to a true wisdom
of life experience is necessary, and this
youth cannot have. Those who grow





CHAP. KI}.


up with us have, unconsciously and
involuntarily, a vast influence over
our modes of thought and views of
life, therefore parents must have a
watchful eye over the intimacies of
their children.


Verses 10, 11. A vaunting speech
is by no means a proof of courage.
The more boastful a man’s speech the
less resolute he will be in peril and
temptation; a truly strong, firm, and
calm man is silent. Time serving and
flattery are most dangerous for a
prince; they wear the garb of fidelity
and devotion, and in reality are the
greatest treachery. Chiefly distrust
those who counsel thee to do what
gratifies thy vanity, thy selfishness,
and thine own desires, and costs thee
no sacrifice. —Lange.


Verse 11. Gesenius understands by
scorpions, whips having leaden balls
at the ends of their lashes with
hooks projecting from them. And the
latter Romans seem certainly to have
called by this name a certain kind of
whip or rod. Others have supposed
the thorny stem of the egg plant,
called from the irritating wounds
which it inflicted ‘‘the scorpion
plant,” to be intended. But it seems
best to regard the expression as a
mere figure of speech.—Speaker’s
Comin.


Verses 12-15. The answer of the
king tothe people. I. lt 1s hard—
not merely a refusal, but imperious,
tyrannical, unbecoming in any
sovereign, but especially one who
ought to be servant of the compassion-
ate and merciful God, with whom is
great truth and loving kindness
(Exod. xxxiv. 6). Authority is the
handmaid of God to thee for good
(Rom. xiii. 4), and not a terror.
Government is not built upon whips
and scourges, but upon justice, love,
and confidence, That rule alone is
thoroughly right where ‘‘ mercy and
truth are met together’ (Psa. lxxxv.
11). How entirely different is David’s
example of sovereignty (Pasa. ci).

IL. .4 rash and inconsiderate counsel,

203


%


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





\
that of the young men throwing oil on
the flames instead of quenching them,
and exciting uproar and revolt instead
of disposing to submission and obedi-
ence. Passion always blinds. When
the heart is perverted the head is like-
wise dulled, and those who are
generally shrewd become unwise and
unreasonable; for it is not the head
which rules the heart, but, on the
contrary, the inclinations and desires
of the heart are stronger than the
thoughts of the head. (Prov. xv. 1;
xxx. 33; Jas. i. 19, 20; Eph. v. 15-
17).—Lange.

— The almost insane fatuity of the
man who could expect any good effect
from «an answer like this to an
aggrieved and exasperated people,
whom the mere fact of Jeroboam’s
presence must, to an ordinary under-
standing, have shown to be ripe for
any ulterior consequences, can scarcely
be explained, but on the interpretation
that the king was subjected to judicial
blindness, that wisdom and common
sense had been withheld from him in
order that the doom which had already
gone forth against the house of David
might be accomplished.— Kivtto.


Verse 14. The voice of the King of
kings comes to us utterly unlike that of
Rehoboam; therefore should we listen
the more submissively and obediently
to it. The Most High is ever at hand
to change the darkest prospects of the
children of men to a happy termination,
and the accomplishment of His all-
holy will, even as Joseph said to his
brethren (Gen. 1. 20). God disposes
not the thoughts of man to folly and
sin, but brings them to judgment by
their very perverseness, and thus
makes it serve to carry out His own
designs.


Verse 15. ‘‘The cause was from the
Lord.” Better, for st was a change
from Jehovah. The meaning is, this
great change or revolution in the
Hebrew state was brought about in
the providence of God as a judgment
on the nation for the sins of Solomon.
He decreed it and foretold it by the
prophet Ahijah (chap. xi. 30-33).

204


But neither Solomon’s sins nor Reho-


boam’s blind folly and rash imprudence
were from the Lord. For them their
human authors were solely responsible.
But He whose Omniscience takes in
all future events as foreseen certain-
ties (not as decreed necessities) may
well, in respect to events affected by
human agency, determine and decree
His own future judgments or mercies
according to what he foresees men will
freely do. So, too, in infinite holiness
Hisdeterminate counseland foreknow]l-
edge even delivers up Jesus of Naza-
reth to death, but this decree influ-
ences not causatively the action of
those wicked hands that crucify and
slay Him (Acts ii. 23).—Whedon.

— The Divine purpose. 1. Does
not interfere with individual freedom
of action. 2. Is accomplished by hu-
man instrumentality. 3. Is often
openly and distinctly declared. 4. Is
steadily prosecuted amid confusion and
disaster. 5. Is ever in harmony with
the best interests of mankind.


Verse 16. As is the question, 80 is
the answer. He who makes an un-
principled speech must not wonder if
hereceivealikereply. Thesame people
who once came to David and said:
**See, we are thy bone and thy flesh,
thou hast led us, thou shalt be our
king” (2 Sam. v. 1, 2), nowsaid: ‘‘ We
have no part in David; what is the
shepherd’s son to us?” This is the
way of the multitude. To-day they
cry, ‘‘ Hosanna, blessed be who cometh
in the name of the Lord! ”? Tomorrow
it is, “‘Crucify him! we will not that
he reign over us!”? To-day, if fore
tune smile, they are fawningand bland:
to-morrow, if misfortune threaten, they
cry, ‘‘ Look to thyself.” Their cry
is: ‘‘ We will be free, and servants of
no man’’—not seeing that they are the
blind tools of one or more leaders, whe
seek to reign over them. With the
house of David, Israel flung aside the
great promise (2 Sam. vii. 10-16;
xxii. 5) which depended on that house.
For us has come that Son of David
whose kingdom shall have no end
(Luke i. $2). Let us hold stedfastly
by Him, and not be led astray by the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OWaP. KIB


SNES


uproar of the world—‘‘ We will have
no part in Him.” He will finally
destroy all enemies under His feet.
Thus went Israel to his tent, but not
as formerly, blest by the king, and
blessing him, rejoicing over the good-
ness of the Lord to David and to His
people Israel (chap. viii. 66). He
who has not a good conscience cannot
return in peace.


Verse 18. The people desired free-
dom; but a tree of liberty watered
with innocent blood can only bear
poison fruit. He who asks nothing of
God can only lead others to folly: he
who cannot stand in the gap can never
protect others. It is a judgment of
God when a monarch, instead of being
able to repose in the bosom of any one
of his subjects, must needs fly before
him to save his life. To yield to
superior force is no disgrace, but
shameful is the flight which is the re-
sult of arrogance and overbearing
pride.


Verses 19, 20. The great majority
fell away, and the small minority re-
mained faithful: the first was ruined
and had no future; from the latter
came forth the One before whom every
knee bowed, and whom every tongue
acknowledged to be the Lord (Matt.
ii. 6; Phil. ii. 11). In the Kingdom
of God there is no question of majori-
ties and minorities, but it is simply,
are we steadfast and faithful unto
death. The pretended deliverers of
the masses well know how to manage
so that they will become rulers of the
people: they allow themselves to be
summoned, and apparently persuaded,
to the very object which was the sole
aim of their efforts.—Lange.


Verse 19. Sinarevolt. 1. Against
God. 2. Has introduced anarchy and
disorder in the moral world. 8. Will
be subdued by the triumph of moral
goodness.


Verse 20. Blessed be God for lawful
government; even a mutinous body
cannot want ahead. If the rebellious
Ieraclities have cast off their true


sovereign, they must choose a false.
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, must be
the man. He had need be skilful and
sit sure that shall back the horse which
hath cast his rider. Israel could not
have anywhere met with more craft
and courage than they found in this
leader. Rehoboam returns to Jerusa-
lem lighter by a crown than he went
forth: Judah and Benjamin still stick
fast to their loyalty. God will ever
reserve a remnant free from thecommon
contagion.— Bp. Hall.


Verses 21-24. The authority of the
Divine Word. 1. Is superior to the
power of the sword and of the throne.
2. Is sufficient to prevent the most
terrible wars. 38. Should be acknow-
ledged by all nations. 4. Will dis-
concert the cleverest plottings of the
wicked.


Verse 21. What Rehoboam had lost
through insolence and weakness,
through wickedness and folly, he now
sought to regain by violence and
battle : instead of humbling himself
before the All-powerful hand of God,
he is haughty, and depends upon hie
own arm of flesh. The natural heart
of man is a froward and timorous thing
(Jer. xvii. 9), without safe resting
place or firm support, now buoyed up,
now cast down, the football of every
storm of fortune. But blessed is the
man whose trust and confidence are in
the Lord. In the renewed heart is no
pride and no fear.


Verses 22-24. The Word of the
Lord to the king and to the host.
I. The command—Ye shall not go up,
nor fight. II. The cause of the com-
mandment—For this thing is from me.
III. The obedience to the command—
They hearkened. Civil wars are the
most unnatural and likewise the
fiercest and bitterest. He who stirs
up strife between brethren commits a
crime which never goes unpunished.

— Shemaiah, a type of the Lord's
servants. 1. He is a man of God,
and as such he brings good tidings of
peace (Isa. lii. 7). 2. He has no
other arms than the sword of the

205


%


Ofa. Ei.





Spirit, which is the Word of God (Eph.
vi. 17). 3. With His word he comes,
strong and fearless, before the king and
his whole host (Acts iv..20; ix. 15).

— With this man of God we have
met for the first time, and though our
knowledge of him is limited to a few
scattered notices, we see in them how
vast a moral power the prophets of
this age wielded over the king and the
nation. They, and the converts of
their ministry, were the salt that pre-
served the nation through many a long
year of idolatrous rebellion. Shemaiah
seems to have been, during Rehoboam’s
reign, pre-eminently the prophet of
Judah. His word on this occasion,
though doubtless much against the
royal will, awed the king into sub-
mission. Again, in the time of Shis-
hak’s invasion, he appeared, and his
ministry was instrumental in averting
the possible consequences of that in-
vasion—the destruction of Jerusalem
(2 Chron. xii. 5-7).— Whedon.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


— We see here with what great
might the God of truth maintains His
word. By the prophet Ahijah He
announced to Jeroboam that he should
rule over ten tribes of Israel: that is
accomplished here. He had promised
to leave one tribe to the house of
David: that is accomplished here. He
promised to Ephraim, or to his father
Joseph, that kings should proceed from
them (Gen. xlix.; Deut. xxxiii.),
and that is fulfilled here, since Jero-
boam becomes king through Ephraim.
Thus nothing remains unfulfilled of
all that God has spoken, promised, or
threatened. Solomon and Rehoboam
strove to prevent the fulfilment of God’s
word in Jeroboam, for which purpose
Solomon planned to kill Jeroboam, and
Rehoboam assembled a great army
against him; but allin vain. There-
fore let all men believe and seek after
the Word of God, and not strive to
resist it (Luke xxi. 33).— Wurt.
Summ.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 25—838.
A Man-manz Retieron,


Tux genius of Jeroboam was equal to every emergency. He was in his element
when fomenting rebellion. He was equally at home as ruler of the newly-
formed state, and adopted prompt and vigorous measures for the establishment
of his kingdom. He soon saw that his authority would be weakened if
provision was not made for the religious instincts of his people. And here
we get a glimpse at the bold, reckless daring of the man’s nature. He quails
not before the demand made upon him, but at once constructs a religion which
was intended to serve his own crafty purposes, rather than to promote
the piety of the people and the glory of God. In the system of worship thug
established we have the icading characteristics of a man-made religion.


{. It is regarded as a necessary element in state-craft (verses 25, 27). 11t
may be that Jeroboam neither wished nor designed to introduce heathenish
idolatry into his kingdom; the revolt by which he had reached the throne was
brought about as the result of, and asa protest against, the abominations of
such idolatry. He was apprehensive that if all his people went up to Jerusalem
to worship, their hearts would be weaned from him and won over to the
government of Rehoboam. He therefore instituted a new system of worship,
not, perhaps, with the intention of countenancing idolatry, although in reality
caring little about the result, but as a modification of the true worship of God
demanded by the changed circumstances of the kingdom. His religious reform
was dictated by a shrewd state-policy, not by the Word of God. There is a
class of politicians who regard religion as an erratic and troublesome supersti-
tion, Mea 8 necessary part of state organization; and who maintain that the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS. OHAP. XII.


eo). a a i n— a


religion of a people is determined by the condition of their national life. Now
this is inverting the order of things, asif a pyramid was intended to rest upon its
apex rather than its base, or a tree to produce fruit by stretching its branches
underground and its roots in the upper air. The fact is, religion is the
mightiest force in a nation, and that which determines the conditions and
development of national life. The government that trifles with the religion
of a people cannot be permanent.


II. It is the suggestion of an unbelieving and wicked heart. The king
took counsel (verse 28), not with God, but with his owu wicked heart (verse 33)
and with those whom he knew would support and carry out his views. Had
Jeroboam believed in God, and been obedient to His commandments, his
kingdom would have been established as David’s (chap, xi. 38). But when
God is ignored, the unbeliever is left to his own devices; and there is no
possible folly and wickedness to which he may not have recourse. The
infamy that Jeroboam heaped upon his name is a terrible example to all who
would set up a religion irrespective of the Divine word and sanction. Whatis
religion without faith, and what scope is there for faith in a religion in which
the originator himself has no faith? Vain, empty, sinful man is in too sore
need of supernatural help and grace to find either comfort or elevation in a
religion that springs only from himself!


ITI. It is essentially idolatrous (verses 28-30). 1. J¢ ¢s thus a violation
of @ specifie Divine commandment (Exodus xx. 4). The breaking of one
commandment leads the way to the breaking of others. It is like the
letting out of waters: the wider the breach, the more impetuous and over-
whelming the deluge. A single fault in the foundation imperils the whole
structure. Whatever is based on wrong-doing is unstable and perishable.
2. Its tendency 18 thus to insult and supplant the One True God (verse 28). These
calves were not set up to be worshipped as idols, any more than were the ark
and cherubim, and other sacred shrines at Jerusatem, but were designed to be
symbols of Jehovah. And yet the inevitable tendency was to lose sight of the
invisible in the visible, as the subsequent history of Israel so painfully proved.
What an enormity is it to liken the glory of the invisible God to an ox that
eateth grass! Man creates his own idols, and falls down and worships them.
Any creature, real or imaginary, which we invest with Divine properties is an
idol; or, it may be the true God falsely conceived. Idolatry is a sin against
which the most faithful warnings have been uttered in all ages, and on account
of which the severest judgments have been inflicted; yet it is that to which
humanity is most prone. 3. Jt 1s thus the occasion of great moral corruption.
“¢ And this thing became a sin” (verse 30). It was not without reason that the
Israelitish king was branded in sacred history as ‘‘ Jeroboam, the son of Nebat,
who made Israel to sin.” That sin consisted in a one-sided construction and use
of the facts of sacred history, and an arrogant assumption to improve the religious
worship of the nation by most dangerous methods that had no proper sanction
from Jehovah or His prophets. He may be regarded as a type of the Roman
hierarchy, which, in its efforts to bind the people to St. Peter’s chair, has verily
set up graven imagesin connection with its worship, and, assuming to represent
the sanctities of a holy antiquity, has, in fact, reproduced the forms of heathen
idolatry. Idolatry is the fruitful source of many other sins.


IV. It is not scrupulous as to the agents it employs (verse 31). Not that
the king selected priests from persons of low birth or infamous character. This
would have brought his system of worship into contempt. The priesthood had
hitherto been hereditary and confined to the tribe of Levi. But it is probable


that the Levites opposed the unauthorised innovations, and refused se give
20


OMAP, XxL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








their sanction to the new religion ; indeed, they left their possessions and came
to Jerusalem, where they found a more congenial sphere for their sacred
functions (2 Chron. xi. 13-17). But, not to be foiled in his purpose,
Jeroboam created a new priestly order, taken indiscriminately from the entire
population, irrespective of rank or tribes. The wily schemer never lacke
instruments to work out his designs.


V. It has all the outward seeming of a genuine institution (verse 32, 83).
- There was the Temple, the feast of dedication, the altar, the sacrifice, the priests.
Nothing is more delusive than religious form and ceremony. There may be the


most elaborate ritual, while the spirit of religion is extinct.


The most gorgeous


tapestry may hide a wall honey-combed with decay.


Lessons :—1. 4 Man-Made Religion is defictent in fundamental truth. 2. In


spiritual life. 8. In authority.


efficacy.


4. In practical morality.


5. In saving


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 25-33. The demoralizing
influence of idolatry on national
life. 1. It leads to a national en-
feeblement, against which the strongest
fortresses afford no protection (verse
25). 2. It distorts the idea of God
(verse 28). 3. It loosens the bonds of
morality (verse 30). 4. It leaves
the people an easy prey in the hands
of a selfish and unscrupulous ruler.
5. It caricatures the solemnities of
worship (verses 31-33). 6. It issues
in national extinction.


Verse 25. Shechem had been
ruined and sowed with salt (Judges
ix. 45), it had been rebuilt (1 Kings
xii. 1), but now made a royal city, as
being im meditullio regnt, in the middle
of the kingdom ; as Constantinople, for
its situation, is said to be a city fatally
founded, to command a great part of
° the world.— Trapp.

— As soon as Jeroboam obtained
the wish of his heart, namely, the
rulership, he asked no longer about the
condition under which it was promised
to him, and with which it was bound
up (chap. xi. 38). How often we for-
get, when God has granted to us the
desire of our hearts, to walk in His
ways. He who obtains rulership by
the path of rebellion, must always be
in fear and anxiety lest he lose it again
in the same way, for the populace
which to-day cries, Hosanna! will on
the morrow shout, Crucify! crucify!

208


An evil conscience makes the most
stout hearted and the strongest timid
and anxious, so that he sees dangers
where there are none, and then, to
insure his own safety, devises wrong
and evil instruments. One false step
always requires another.—Lange.

— Humanly speaking, Jeroboam’s
fear was, it must be confessed, well-
founded. We cannot, therefore, be
surprised that he gave way to the
temptation of helping forward the
plans of Providence by the crooked
devices of a merely human policy.
His measures for counteracting the
tendency to reunion with Judah were
cleverly devised, and proved him
‘‘wise in his generation.” The later
history shows that they were effectual.
Like all measures which involve a
dereliction of principle, they brought
certain evils in their train; and they
drew down a Divine judgment on him-
self which he had not faith enough to
anticipate. But they fully secured
the object at which he aimed. They
prevented all healing of the breach
between the two kingdoms. They
made the separation final. They pro-
duced the result that not only no re-
union took place, but no symptoms of
an inclination to re-unite ever mani-
fested themselves during the whole
period of the double kingdom.—
Speaker’s Comm.


Verses 28-33. The sin of Jeroboam


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS


.


wherewith he caused Israel to sin.
I. He erected images of God against
the supreme commandment of God
(Exod. xx. 4). II. He set aside the
prescribed order of the servants of God,
and made his own priests. III. He
altered the feast, which was a reminder
of the great deeds of God, and made it
@ mere nature-end-harvest feast. That
is the greatest tyranny when the ruler
of a land makes himself the master
also of the faith and conscience of his
subjects.

— In the estimation of the people
of the world this policy of Jeroboam
is held to be proper, because they con-
sider that religion is to be established,
held, and altered as may be useful and
good for the land and the people and the
common interest, and that the regimen
is not for the sake of the religion, but
the religion for the regimen. Conse-
quently Jeroboam acted well and
wisely in the matter. But God says,
on the other hand, all that I command
you, that shall ye observe, ye shall
not add thereto (Deut. xii. 32). For
godliness is not to be regulated by the
common weal, but the common weal
is to be regulated by godliness. Every
government which employs religious
instrumentalities, and interferes with
the faith of the people, not for the
sake of God and the salvation of souls,
but for the attainment of political ends,
shares the guilt of the sin of Jeroboam,
and involves itself in heavy responsi-
bilities. — Cramer.


Verse 28. ‘‘ Whereupon the king
took counsel.” Compared with verse
26—“ And Jeroboam said in his
heart.” The mental toils of the
cunning, 1. A wicked, crooked
policy involves far more anxiety and
labour than a straightforward policy.
2. The sinful. plotter is in a perpetual
fever of fear—he isin antagonism with
both God and man. 3. Many of the
schemes of the cunning are too dia-
bolical to be divulged; they must
be hidden within one solitary breast.
What a horrible picture is presented
by such a mind to the eye of the
Omniscient! 4. A temporary success
intensifies the mental pressure. 6.


GHAP. XII.





The most complicated contrivances of
the cunning end in humiliating defeat.

— He invented a political religion,
instituted feasts in his own times dif-
ferent from those appointed by the
Lord, gave the people certain objects
of devotion, and pretended to think it
would be more inconvenient and op-
pressive to them to have to go up to
Jerusalem to worship. This was not
the last time that religion was made a
state engine to serve politicai purposes.
It is strange that in pointing out his
calves to the people he should use the
same words that Aaron used when he
made the golden calf in the wilder-
ness, when they must have heard what
terrible judgments fell upon their fore-
fathers for this idolatry.

— Oh, the mischief that comes of
wicked infidelity! It was God’s pro-
phet that had rent Jeroboam’s garment
into twelve pieces, and had given ten
of them to him, in token of his sharing
the ten tribes; who, in the same
breath, also told him that the cause
of this distraction was their idolatry.
Yet now will he institute an idolatrous
service for the holding together of
them whom their idolatry had rent
from their true sovereign tohim. He
says not, God hath promised me this
kingdom; God hath conferred it ; God
shall find means to maintain his own
act; I will obey Him, let Him dispose
ofme. The God of Israel is wise and
powerful enough to fetch about his
own designs; but, as if the devices of
men were stronger than God’s provi-
dence and ordination, he will be work-
ing out his own ends by profane
policies. Jeroboam, being born an
Israelite, and bred in the court of a
Solomon, could not but know the ex-
press charge of God against the making
of images, against the erection of any
rival altars to that of Jerusalem; yet
now that he sees both these may avail
much to the advancing of his ambitious
project, he sets up those images, those
altars. Wicked men care not to make
bold with God in cases of their own
commodity. If the laws of their Maker
lie in the way of their profit or promo:
tion, they either spurn them out or
tread upon them at pleasure. Aspiring

rs 209


OHAP, Xi.





minds will know no God but honour.
Tsrael sojourned in Egypt, and brought
home a golden calf; Jeroboam sojourns
there, and brought home two. It is
hard to dwell in Egypt untainted.
Not to savour of the sins of the place
we live in is no less strange than for
wholesome liquor tunned up in a musty
vessel not to smell of the cask. The
best body may be infected in a con-
tagiousair. Let him beware of Egypt
that would be free from idolatry.—
Bo. Hall.

— To the perverted man, what he
shall do for his God is forthwith too
much. In matters of faith and of the
homage due to God, we should not
consider what is convenient and agree-
able to the great mass, but should en-
quire only for what God prescribes in
His Word. He who conciliates the
sensuousness and the untutored ways
of the masses, and flatters their unbe-
lief or their superstition, belongs to
the false prophets who make broad the
way of life. Doctrines and institutions
which depart from the revealed Word
of God are often praised as progress
and seasonable reforms, while in truth
they are steps backward and corrapt-
ing innovations. In Christendom we
pray no longer to wood and stone, and
to golden calves, and think ourselves
thereby raised far above a darkened
heathenism, but, nevertheless, we
often place the creature above the
Creator, and abandon ourselves to it
with all our love, and consideration,
and service. Behold the things and
persons thou lovest with thy whole
heart and strength, these are thy gods.
What use of typical representations in
the worship of God is permitted, and
what is forbidden ?— Calwer.


Verse 80. Idolatry a sin. 1. It is
a violation of the Divine command-
ment (Ex. xx. 4), 2. It ignores the
claims of the Most High. 3. It is
degrading to the votary. 4. Itis per-
nicious in its example to others. 4.
They who think to secure their saf ty
by sin only hasten the ruin they would
avoid.

— Asa great tree in a forest, when
it falls Re down many others with


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


=





it, so also are many others carried
along by the bad example of those
who rule when they fall away from
their religion, or sin otherwise grossly
against God.— Starke.

— Every accessory to sin is filthy,
but the first authors of sin are abomin-
able. How is Jeroboam branded in
every of these sacred leaves. How do
all ages ring of his fact with the accent
of dishonour and indignation. ‘‘ Jero-
boam, the son of Nebat, that made
Israel to sin.’ It was a shame for
Israel that it could be made to sin by
a Jeroboam; but O, cursed name of
Jeroboam, that would draw Israel to
sin! The followers and abettors of
evil are worthy of torment, but no
hell is too deep for the leaders of pub-
lic wickedness. — By. Hall.


Verse 31. We have in the new cove-
nant no Levitical priesthood, indeed,
but a pastoral and preaching office
which the Lord has instituted, so that
thereby the body of Christ may be edi-
fied (Eph. iv. 11). He who despises
this office, and thinks that any one
without distinction and without alaw-
ful calling may exercise it, is a par-
taker in the sin of Jeroboam. ‘“‘ No
one,’ says the Augsburg Confession,
‘¢ shall teach or preach publicly in the
church, or administer the sacrament,
without due calling.”

— It is not the metal that makes
their gods, but the worship—the sacri-
fices. What sacrifices could there be
without priests? No religion could
ever want sacred masters of Divine
ceremonies. (od’s clergy was select
and honourable, branches of the holy
stem of Aaron. Jeroboam rakes up
his priests out of the channel of the
multitude: all tribes, all persons, were
good enough to his spurious devotion.
Leaden priests are well fitted for golden
deities. Religion receives either much
honour or blemish by the quality of
those who serve at her altars. We
are not worthy to profess ourselves
servants of the true God if we do not
hold his service worthy of the best.—
Bp. Hall.


Verses 32, 33. The empty pretences


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. XII,


Cc ll ca ee eee


of Ritualism. 1. Ritualism is not
absolutely essential to spiritual reli-
gion. 2. Its highest function is only
as a means, and that chiefly to the
most rude and ignorant. 38. It may
be altered according to the whim or
wish of an irreligious sovereign. 4.
It is most elaborate and showy where
the worship is most idolatrous. 5. It
is disappointing to the sincere and
spiritual worshipper. 6. All pretences
to religious zeal, contrary to God’s re-
vealed will, are but the devices of
Satan, more fatally to delude men’s
souls.

— We must not conceal from our-
selves that there are many persons
who, at the bottom of their hearts, will
think that Jeroboam acted wisely in
the course he took, and cannot see how
he could have got over the difficulty
in his path but by some such course
as that which he adopted. How could
he otherwise have managed? The
answer is, he need not have managed
at all. He had been appointed king
under the Divine sanction. He held
his crown under the condition of obedi-
ence, and on that condition the con-
tinuance of the crown to his house was
pledged to him. Nothing was wanted
on his part but unreserved faith in
that promise. If Jeroboam had pos-
sessed that faith he would have been
free from any anxiety on the subject,
he would have felt that it was safer
to incur an apparent danger in pur-
suing the career of duty and right
doing, than to seek exemption from it
by unlawful doing and tortuous policy.
The Lord had given him every reason
to trust in the sufficiency of His pro-
tection when He had compelled king
Rehoboam to dismiss the forces with
which he was prepared to fall upon him
in his comparatively helpless condition.
If it be asked how he was to be secured
from the danger which stood so dis-
tinctly before him, we can only an-
swer, ‘‘ We donot know.” Nor had
Jeroboam any need to know. God
knew; and it was his clear course to
do right, trusting all the rest to God.—
Kitto.


Verse 33. The Feast of Tabernacies,


to be observed in the seventh month
(Lev. xxiii. 34), Jeroboam transferred
to the eighth month. A plausible
occasion for this arbitrary deviation
from the law which repeatedly names
the seventh month as the time ap-
pointed of the Lord (Lev. xxiii. 34,
39, 41), might be found in the cireum-
stance that in the northern districts of
his kingdom the grain ripened at least
a month later than in the southern
Judah, as this festival was to be kept
at the ingathering of the fruit of the
land (the grain); the proper ground,
however, lay in the design to make
the separation also in a religious aspect
as complete as possible, although he
adhered to the day of the month on
account of the weak, who might take
offence at the innovations. For that
there were many besides the priests
and Levites who were highly dis-
satisfied with these illegal proceedings
appears from the notice (2 Chron.
xill. 16) that Israelites out of all the
tribes devoted in heart to the Lord
went to Jerusalem to sacrifice there
to the God of their fathers. Still, not
content with all this, with erecting
sanctuaries and places of worship,
instituting priests and changing feasts,
Jeroboam himself offered sacrifice at
the altar at Bethel, in order to prove
himself to be the spiritual head of his
kingdom.— Feil.

— The festivals which an entire
people celebrate in remembrance of the
great deeds of God for them are the
support of their faith and of their life
of fellowship. It is to destroy this
life when, from prejudice and for the
sake of outward worldly consider-
ations, arbitrarily they are altered or
abandoned.


Verse 83. As it is good and praise-
worthy when kings and princes engage
in the service of God along with their
subjects, and set them a good ex-
ample, so alsois it blameworthy when
they do it only to win the people over
to themselves, and to secure their
authority over them.—Lange.

— ‘Which he had devised of his
own heart.”’ The entire system of
Jeroboam receives its condemnation

31


®%


GmaP, XIU,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





in these words. His main fault was,
that he left a ritual and a worship
where all was divinely authorized, for
ceremonies and services which were
wholly of his own devising. Not
being a prophet, he had no authority
to introduce religious innovations.
Not having received any commission
to establish new forms, he had no right
to expect that any religious benefit


would accrue from them. He was
placed in difficult circumstances, but
he met them with the arts of a poli-
tician, not with the single-mindedness
of a saint. His arrangements had a
certain cleverness, but they were not
really wise measures ; instead of secur-
ing and strengthening, they tended to
corrupt, and so to weaken the nation.
—Speaker’s Comm. —





CHAPTER XII.
THE AYSTERIOUS PROPHET OF JUDAH.


Carrroat ap Exrtawarory Nores.—Verse 1. There came a man of God: an unknown
pee Josephus suggests Jadon, confounding him with Iddo (2 Chron. xiii. 22), but he
ived on during Abijah’s reign; whereas this man died immediately. Names fade; ministries
endure. By the word of the Lord—ATA—“ By the word” means not commanded by, but


in the power of the word, obeying its impulsion. Jeroboam stood by the altar (see notes on
xii, 83)—Acting a foremost part in the national apostasy. Verse 2. ‘‘Cried against the
altar,’’ as if ignoring the king; for the profaned altar possessed a vaster solemnity than the
mere agent of its profanation. And the prediction of é¢s ruin would carry with it and include
the doom of the violator of God’s temple—the lesser included in the greater. The “altar”
also symbolically stood for the whole system of idolatry imposed now upon Israel. Josiah by
name—One of the most minutely delineated prophecies of Scripture, and most minutely ful-
filled, after a lapse of 860 years (2 Kings xxii. 1; xxiii 15). Evidence of literal inspiration


of prophets, Possibly the word WN —Josiah—may be (as Keil suggests) descriptive of


the child who should do this work of retribution, and not necessarily his personal name, the
word meaning “whom Jehovah sustains.” Yet Divine Providence arranged that the prophecy
should assert itself even in the name which the predicted person bore. Verse 8. A sign the same
day—A portent and pledge of the coming event. npi means & prodigy rather than a simple


“gion.” Verse 6. Entreat now the face of the Lord thy God—‘ Entreat,” abn, to soften ;
ca


“entreat the face,” soften the rigour of its expression. Verse 7. Come home with me—A
guilesome attempt to get the man under his influence, sinze he had experienced his alarming
power; or to lessen the startling impression which the event of his arm withering had produced
on the people—an event calculated to convey an appearance of Divine rebuke of the king.
If the people became alarmed the king’s control would be gone. Verse 11, An old prophet
in Bethel: who had been faithless amid surrounding faithlessness. His alertness to win the
prophet of Judah to his house arose from @) his interest (professional) in a fellow-prophet’s
mission—this feeling awoke immediately he heard of one of his own class being near. (2) A
sense of shame may have stirred in him that a prophet from a distance should have come to do
what he himself, being near, should have long ago done. (8) He may have desired to rein-
state himself in the king’s confidence, and in public estimation, by uniting himself in this way
with a distinguished and true prophet. There may have been no desire on his part to induce
the prophet of Judah into sinning, but he himself prevaricated in order to succeed in his wish
to gratify his curiosity or calm his self-rebuke by this act of courtesy. Verse 18. An angel
spake unto me by the word of the Lord—Not ‘the Lord spake,” but an “ angel,” or messen-
ger, one of his sons; hiding the real facts, and conveying a false impression. Verse 20. The
word of the Lord came, &c.— Making deceitful lips speak truth. Verse 21. And he cried—
Rather, ‘it cried’”’ ‘The man was but the passive agent; the Word of God used the man’s
organs of utterance. Verse 31. Bury me in the sepulchre wherein, &c.—Deeply impressed
now that he was a true prophet, and that it was an evil and a bitter thing to sin against the
Lord. Possibly he had a superstitious hope that by burial with this true prophet he himself
might be advantaged when the dead should be raised. or that his own bones would be allowed
to rest undisturbed in company with a man of God.— W. H. J.


212


CHAP. xi, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-10.


THE INVINCIBLE COURAGE OF A DIVINELY AUTHORISED MESSENGER


THE audacity of Jeroboam must not go unreproved or unpunished. He had
assumed sacerdotal functions, and stood by the altar to offer sacrifice. He had
introduced dangerous innovations, and involved the whole nation in the guilt
of idolatry. His conduct is to be denounced at the very altar where his offence
culminated in its highest aggravation. It required more than ordinary bravery
to confront so strong-willed and reckelss a king, who seemed impatient of con-
tradiction, and was accustomed to be obeyed. But Jehovah had already provided
an agent, and qualified him for the work. A stern-visaged prophet of Judah,
like a spectral figure emerging out of misty space, appears upon the scene, armed
with supernatural powers before which the proud king was humbled and made
to tremble. The passage illustrates the invincible courage of a divinely authorised
messenger.


I. It aided him in the full and faithful declaration of the Divine message
(verses 1-3). 1. 48 to the promise of a coming avenger. ‘‘ Behold, a child shall
be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name.” The very name of the
avenger is predicted, an unusual instance of particularity in Divine prophecies,
Only three other similar instances are recorded: Israel (Gen. xvii. 19); Solo-
mon (1 Chron. xxii. 9); and Cyrus (Isa. xlv. 1). The All-Prescient Jehovah,
who sees the end from the beginning, may cause events to be foretold minutely
by His prophets, though in the general law of His providence He does not do so.

- He only can be the most capable judge as to how much of the future should be re-
vealed. 2. As to the particular character of the punishment to be imposed. ‘‘ Upon
thee shall he offer the priests of the high places,” &c. (verse 2). This prophecy
was exactly fulfilled (2 Kings xxiii. 15-20). God is too righteous to indulge
in idle threats. They who disregard warning are without excuse when the
punishment falls. 3. As to the visible tokens of the authenticity of the message.
‘“‘ And he gave a sign the same day,” &c. (verse 3). The altar was rent, and
the ashes poured out (verse 5), as an evidence that the prophet was
Jehovah’s ambassador, and spoke with the Divine sanction. Without this sign
the prophecy of an event that did not take place for three hundred and fifty
years would have wanted authority with those who knew nothing about the
strange, mysterious messenger. God gives to His servants all the power neces-
sary to accomplish their difficult and often unwelcome mission; and woe be to
him who has not the courage or fidelity to act in harmony with his commission—
neither to fall short of it, nor to go beyond.


II. It rendered him fearless in the presence of an angry and unscrupulous
monarch (verse 4). Like all usurpers and tyrants, Jeroboam’s remedy for all
difficulties was force. He would have made short work of the man who had
dared to interrupt him in the very act of performing the highest function of his
self-assumed priesthood, and who denounced him and his idolatrous policy in the
presence of his courtiers and supporters. he divinely authorised messenger is
as bold as a lion (Prov. xxviii. 1), and is not to be intimidated by the fear of
consequences. Few prophets suffered more than Jeremiah; yet all the cruelties
of his enemies were impotent in bribing him to silence, or in impairing his
fidelity. A sense of the Divine call to service, however painful and perilous,
fills the soul with an incorruptible bravery.


TI. It was supported by unmistakable evidences of nT Fewer


*%


CHAP. XIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





The king’s hand was withered, and the altar rent asunder (verses 4, 5). He
who had not scrupled to stir up rebellion and to seize a crown, did not scruple
to lay his hand menacingly on God’s servants; but in vain. How unexpected
was the result! God will protect His messengers, who are ever the special
butts of malice: he who touches them, touches the apple of His eye. Before
God strikes, He warns: He willeth not that any should perish, but rather that
they should come to repentance. It does not appear that either Jeroboam or
his followers were moved to repentance by all they witnessed—an other
example of the hardening nature of sin, and the powerlessness of external
miracles to affect and transform man’s epiritual nature. How many beheld the
miracle-working power of Christ, and yet died in unbelief !


IV. It was not inconsistent with an act of mercy (verse 6). Jeroboam
prayed, not for pardon, but for the restoration of his withered limb. An im-
penitent heart ever betrays itself in greater concern for its sufferings than its
sins. They who in prosperity reject the warnings of God’s messengers are
ready enough in distress to have recourse to their prayers. To pray for those
who despitefully use and persecute us is the way to obtain the promised
beatitude (Matt. v. 10, 44). Those who are most severe and faithful in telling
us of our sins are the most eager and genuine in rendering sympathetic help
when we are in trouble. Courage and tender-heartedness go together.


V. It enabled him to resist the strongest temptation to disobedience
(verses 7-10). 1. The temptation appealed to his physical needs. ‘‘Come home
with me and refresh thyself” (verse 7). Weary and faint as he must have been
with his journey, this invitation would cost the prophet some self-denial to
resist. Satan ever tempts most powerfully at the weakest point and at the
weakest moment. But the prophet must have no fellowship or communion
with their works of darkness—not so much as even to eat and drink with them.
He was not to accept the hospitality of any dweller at Bethel, in order to show
in a marked way, which men generally could appreciate, God’s abhorrence of
the system which Jeroboam had ‘‘ devised of his own heart.” 2. The tempta-
tion offered immediate temporal advantage. ‘‘ And I will give thee a reward”
(verse 7), It was customary to honour a prophet with a gift if he performed
any service that was requested at his hands (1 Sam. ix. 7, 8; 1 Kings xiv. 3;
2 Kings v. 5; viii. 9). The prophet was tempted with three things: royal
hospitality, refreshment, and reward. How far these offers influenced the
future action of the prophet can be only imperfectly conjectured. At this point
of his history they had uno power to corrupt his fidelity. Neither ofters nor
threats must be allowed to prevail with us to swerve a single step from the
path of duty. 3. Zhe temptation was resisted by a remembrance of God’s Word.
‘‘For so was it charged me by the Word of the Lord” Were 9). This was
the weapon by which the Siniess One conquered the most furious onslaughts of
the great adversary (Matt. iv. 4, 7, 10). The Word of God is an impregnable
defence, against which the arrows of temptation are shot in vain.


Lessons :—1. Faithful rebukes often produce proud wrath. 2. In the way of
duty the Divinely-authorized messenger need fear no danger. 8. To reject Divine
warnings aggravates transgression and snottes vengeance.


Tae Cary Worsure Dexouncen.


I. The great business of the prophet is evidently to denounce the altar and
the sacrifices in Bethel. Of course, the rationalist teacher exclaims, ‘‘ These
wore the offences of Jeroboam. He was an intruder upon the special privileges of

314 .


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. Xi,
ee


_





the Jerusalem hierarchy ; he had courage to introduce priests taken from the
lowest of the people ; he broke through the formalities of the Levitical law.
Such a man in our days would be called a reformer or asserter of national and
individual independence. Therefore he is denounced by the ecclesiastics who
have compiled the Jewish records.” Yes, if the establishment of visible sensible
worship be a great step in the progress of the human intellect—if the introduc-
tion of a set of priests continually at work to make that worship more visible
more sensual, more gross, to be a mode of fulfilling the aspirations of those who
desire moral and spiritual liberty—if the breaking through the fetters of a law
which restrained all sacerdotal inventions whatsoever, and bore witness con-
tinually that sacrifices were not offered to appease a tyrant, but to remove an
obstacle between a righteous Lord and His unrighteous subjects—if the con-
sequent establishment of a devil-worship be that which wise men of the
nineteenth century after Christ call reformation, Jeroboam deserves all their
patronage, and the man of God who came out of Judah to pronounce a curse
upon his altar, all their wrath,

If. And this is precisely the question, not for this passage of the history only,
but for every subsequent passage of it. The revolting kings of Israel, in whom
modern enlightenment discovers the champions of human progress, were intro-
ducing the most unlimited sacerdotal tyranny, were making that sacerdotal
tyranny an instrument of regal tyranny. The priests of the high places, the
prophets of the grove, were building their own power upon the degradation of
the multitudes whom they drew after them, were using that power to confirm
every unrighteous decree, to remove every real moral restraint from the kings.
The prophets, who, we are told, would never have been praised except in a book
compiled by the supporters of a certain set: of caste interests, were bearing a
protest, at the hazard of their lives, for a righteous order which no caprices of
human superstition or human will could set aside, for a spiritual authority
which not only did not demand the slavery of the conscience, but was incom-
patible with it, for an actual relation between the Most High and His creatures
which not only did not involve their regarding Him as an object of terror or
distrust, but proved such habits of mind to contain the very essence of sin.

III. Men like the one we are now considering are said to speak the Word of
the Lord, or sometimes in the Word of tae Lord. Their function assumes that
the thoughts of man’s heart and the utterances of it are of all things the most
sacred ; that a presence is ‘here which men are seeking in dark groves, on high
places, in sun, or sea, or air; that this Presence is not a phantom, not a creation
of their own, but He who is, He who formed them ; that the best and wisest
man is He who confesses this presence with awe and wonder, who believes that
he is standing before a living Being to whom all within is naked and open, who
desires that that Being should direct him, act upon him, use him for His own
purposes, who knows that those purposes are right purposes, who is sure that
they cannot concern him more than they concern his fellows. To a man thus
taught and trained, idolatry was something absolutely appalling. He had
no measure of its enormity, only he was sure that a people worshipping
calves, seeking God in high places, were flying from a friend and a deliverer,
to enemies and destroyers ; from the living and the true, to death and falsehood.
He knew that it was so. He was certain that he was not uttering himself or
his own fancies, when he said that it was so. God was speaking through his
lips: God was pronouncing sentence upon that which defied him. What
signified who might stand before the altar, who might be burning incense
upon it? He no more could or dared tremble at the worshipper than at the
thing worshipped. Both were creatures of the Eternal God. The one was
setting himself up, the other was set up in contempt of Him: each alike must
come down. ‘The truth must stand fast and fulfil itself. He had only to pro-


claim the truth.
218


~*~


omar, xm. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





IV. But how shall the idolater know it and be convinced of it? The arm,
wo are told, which was stretched out to perform the sacrifice, and then te
seize the prophet, was dried up so that he could not pull it again to him.
‘‘ Here,” you say, ‘is a miracle; sucha one as we expect in all records of thia
kind.” Precisely, such a one as you might expect in a record of this kind, and
as you would not expect and not meet with in a record of another kind written
by the supporters of a body which was interested in superstition, and trying by
all means to sustain the reputation of it. The man of God testifies to Jeroboam
that the juices and springs of life are renewed from an invisible source, that it
is another than the dead thing which he is worshipping who can dry them up
or give them their natural flow—a protest exactly in accordance with that
which Moses bore against the gods of Pharoah, a protest on behalf of regularity
and law, and for a(¢od of regularity and law, with whom are the issues of daily
life and death, against the seeker of charms in natural things, against the
worshipper of capricious deities. The other part of the sign is precisely of the
same kind. The altar is rent and the ashes are poured out from the altar, as a
sure and everlasting testimony that law and order shall not be violated with
impunity by any ruler, under any religious pretext, that his religious acts are
more hateful in the sight of God than all his other acts, and must hasten the
vengeance upon those.


V. The story of the prophet is continued in these words. (Read verses 7-10),
The invisible teacher who had bid him go forth on his journey and carry the
message to the king, had made him understand as clearly, that when he had |
done his errand, he was to go back into Judah. Hehad no doubt that this was
what he ought todo. It was part of his commission. The other part of it
would not be faithfully discharged if this was forgotten. These words and acts
of the prophet were connected with his own life, they belonged to his very self.
His conscience, as well as his powers of thought and reflection, were not crushed
or stifled by the Divine communication, but were awakened by it into activity.
And the conscience so awakened was proof against any solicitations of the king.
(Condensed from J. D. Maurice.)


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-10. The man of God out


of Judah. 1. He comes led by the
Word of God, and goes on his dark,
difficult way in faith, without taking
counsel with flesh and blood. 2. He
stands, strong and bold, before the
king, fears him not, testifies against
his sins, and announces the judgment
of God. 8. He makes entreaty for
him who was about to lay hold on
Him, and heaps coals of fire on his
head. 4. He resists the offers of the
king, and will not be secured by
bribes.

— The testimony against the
service of the false gods. 1. It pro-
ceedeth from a nameless, unknown,
insignificant man, who, without
worldly consequence, has nothing and
knows nothing, except only the

216


power of the Divine Word. That is
the manner of the Lord in His king-
dom. He accomplishes by means of
small, insignificant instruments, what
no king, with all his power, can do.
The altars of heathendom are shat-
tered by means of the testimony of
fishers and tax-gatherers (1 Cor. i.
27-29), even as were the altars of the
false worshippers of God by means of
& poor, world-despised recluse. 2. It
was received at first with scorn,
wrath, and violence; but the wrath
is powerless and avails nothing; the
altar is rent, and the threatening arm
is dried up. Humble entreaties then
teke the place of wrath (Isa. xxvi. 16).
But though the withered arm be
restored, the heart remains withered
es before Physical aid is always


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GAP. XIil,


rr


readily received by men, whilst they
shut their hearts to the testimony
against their sins.—Lange.


Verse 1. But O, the patience and
mercy of our long-suffering God, that
will not strike a very Jeroboam un-
warned! Judgment hovers over the
heads of sinners, ere it light. If
Israel afford not a bold reprover of
Jeroboam, Judah shall. When the
king of Israel is in all the height
both of his state and his superstition,
honouring his solemn day with his
richest devotion, steps forth a pro-
phet of God, and interrupts that
glorious service with a loud inclama-
tion of judgment. Doubtless, the
man wanted not wit to know what
displeasure, what danger must needs
follow so unwelcome a message; yet,
dares he, upon the commission of God,
do this affront to an idolatrous king,
in the midst of all his awful magnifi-
cence. The prophets of God go upon
many @ thankless errand. He is no
messenger for God that either knows
or fear the faces of men.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 2. God announces beforehand
His judgments to sinners, that they
may have time and space for repent-
ance. Woe to them who misemploy
the respite, for the measure of their
sins will be full. In the new cove-
nant we have a far weightier pro-
phecy. Unto us is born a Son, named
Jesus, out of the House of David ;
who will come again and pronounce
judgment upon those who know not
God, and who obey not the gospel
(2 Thess. i. 8, rere ih :

— The prophet dirceted his speech
to the altar out of detestation of
such an abomination: and, as having
no hope to prevail with Jeroboam,
who stood by it, and was more insen-
sible than that altar, or than the
heap of stones which Bede once
preached unto.—7Zrapp.

— It was the altar, not the person
of Jeroboam, which the prophet thus
threatens: yet not the stones are
stricken, but the founder in boththeir
apprehensions; so dear are the devices
of our own brain to us, as if they


were incorporated into ourselves.
There is no opposition of which we
are so sensible as that of religion.
That the royal altar should be thus
polluted by dead men’s bones and the
blood of the priests, was not more
unpleasing than that all this should
be done by a child of the house of
David; for Jeroboam well saw that
the throne and the altar must stand
or fall together; that a Son of David
could not have such power over the
altar, without an utter subversion of
the government, of the succession ;
therefore is he thus galled with this
comminatory prediction.

— Probably a prophecy against
Jeroboam’s own person, instead of
against the insensate altar, would
have touched him less nearly. But
this showed that his policy would
come to nought, and that the power
he was establishing with so much
solicitude would be utterly subverted,
while the house of David would still
subsist in its strength, for only so
could a king of that house be able to
do this upon an altar in this realm.
The king grasped the full meaning of
this message, and it filled him with
rage against the man who had dared
to deliver it then and there.—Kitto.


Verse 3. The miracles which the
Lord our God performs are not only
proofs of his almighty power to amaze
us, but likewise significant signs which
reveal to us His eternal decrees, and
lead us to the recognition of that
heavenly truth which sanctifies our
hearts.


Verse 4. Although faithful teachers
often accomplish nothing and fail most
signally with men of high degree, yet
must they never on this account
abandon their office. Forif thou warn
him thou hast delivered thy soul
(Ezek. iii. 19), and although the
obdurate remain untouched, yet it
shall not remain without fruit (Isa. lv.
10). How did even this warning
work itself out and bear fruit after
three hundred years (2 Kings xxiii.
15). Sinners eminent by wealth and
position will only listen to prophets

217


%


CHAP, XML,


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: KINGS.


er


who are dumb dogs and cannot bark
(Isa. lvi. 10). When a true servant
of the Lord cries out, ‘‘The axe is
already laid at the root'of the tree,”
they arise in wrathand cry out, ‘‘ Seize
him” (2 Tim. iv. 1-5). He who
attacks a servant of God because of
his testimony, never remains un-
punished. In vain doth the enemy
stretch forth his hand against those
who are under God’s protection (Job
vii. 44; Lev. iv. 29; Ps. xxxvii. 17).
Those who will not listen to the word
of truth, God often visits with bodily
pain in order to humble them and
teach them to pray and supplicate.—
Cramer.

— A fearful stroke, had he well
considered it ; but his heart was as hard
as his hand withered. Jeroboam had
as great a miracle wrought before him
herein, as St. Paul had at his conver-
sion; but without the Spirit’s con-
currence, neither miracle, nor ministry,
nor misery, can in the least measure
mollify the heart of an obdurate and
obstinate sinner. Valens, the Arian
emperor, would have signed a sentence
of banishment against Basil, but could
not by reason of a sudden trembling
of his right hand, so that he could not
write one letter of his own name, but
for anger tore the paper in pieces, and
let Basil alone. There is a story of
one of our late innovators, who, turn-
ing with the times and beginning to
bow towards altars, never went up-
right more; and of another who,
hearing perjury condemned by a godly
preacher, and how it never escaped un-
punished, said in a bravery, ‘‘1 have
often forsworn myself, and yet my
right hand is no shorter than my left.”
These words he had scarce uttered,
when such an inflammation arose in
that hand, that he was forced to go to
the chirurgeon and cut it off lest it
should have infected the whole body ;
and so it became shorter than the
other. The Jews tell us, that when
Jeroboam’s hand was dried up, the
false prophets told him that this fell out
by chance, and so kept him from
thinking of God who had smitten him.
Let the saints learn to put their con-
fidence (ead God; for if He deny con-


course and influence, the arm of all
adverse power shrinketh up presently.


—Trapp.


Verses 4, 6. The importance of the
authentication of the man of God bya
miraculous sign appears from the con-
duct of Jeroboam towardshim. With-
out waiting for the confirmation of his
word by the announced miraculous
sign, the king stretches his hand to-
wards him with the words, ‘‘ Lay hold
on him ;” but must now experience in
the hand with which he could set aside
the prophet who was disagreeable to
him, the omnipotence of the Lord who
bas power to protect his servants. The
outstretched hand is withered by a
miracle—that is, stiffened, deprived of
vital juice—so that he cannot draw it
in again. On this follows the miracu-
lous sign announced, and Jeroboam’s
wicked arrogance is broken down by
the double miracle; he is constrained
to entreat the prophet to intercede
for him with the Lord his God, that his
hand may be restored. — est.

— Resolute wickedness is impatient
of reproof, and, instead of yielding to
the voice of God, rebelleth. Just and
discreet reprehension doth not more
reform some sinners than exasperate
others. How easy is it for God to
cool the courage of proud Jeroboam !
The hand which his rage stretches out,
dries up and cannot be pulled back
again; and now stands the king of
Israel, like some antique statue, in a
posture of impotent endeavour, so
disabled to the hurt of the prophet,
that he cannot command that piece of
himself. What are the great
potentates of the world in the power-
ful hand of the Almighty? Tyrants
cannot be so harmful as they are
malicious. It must needs be a great
strait that could drive a proud heart
to beg mercy where he bent hia

ersecution; so doth Jeroboam, hold-
ing it mo scorn to be beholden to an
enemy. Inextremities the worst men
can be content to sue for favour where
ott have spent their malice.— Bp.


Verse 6. He who desires for him.


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. xii.


EN


self the intercession of others must
himself draw near humbly and
penitently to God and implore His
mercy. In this wise can we know if
we are indeed children of God and
guided by His Spirit, if we pray and
supplicate for those who have done
their worst to us, and thus overcome
evil with good (1 Pet. iii. 9).

— The faith of the wicked in the
prayers of the good. 1. Shows that
religion may be respected while it is
personally ignored. 2. That religion
bears external evidence of its own
superiority. 38. That the wicked are
ever ready to share in the benefits of
religion while they reject its claims.
4. That the example of a religious
life has a powerful influence for good.

— The display of miraculous
ee will not avail to change the

eart. 1. It appeals mainly to the
external senses. 2. The judgment
may be convinced while the will re-
mains unchanged; men reject religion,
not for want of evidence, but for want
of will. 3. To refuse divinely attested
truth is to incur the greater guilt.


Verse 7. Although the ungodly
often hold in high esteem these holy
men especially raised up by God, yet
they never follow their instructions
and warnings (Mark vi. 19). What
bootsit that we gratefully acknowledge
the material blessings which meet us,
if we leave unfulfilled the very object
of these blessings, ramely, the turning
of our hearts from sin and the world
to God. Unbelief and impenitence
cannot be outweighed by even the
highest friendship and humanity.
When the world can effect nothing
more by force and threats, it seeks to
gain its ends by plausible love tokens.
—Osiander.


Verses 8, 9. There is no bribe to
which the man of God will yield: to


him, that which God has commanded
him seems, in all times and all places,
in evil as in good days, the fixed and
definite plan of action. The best
weapon and defence against the snares
of our spiritual enemy is the law and
Word of God. It is far from being
unimportant with whom we eat and
drink, #.e., in fellowship and intimate
alliance (1 Cor. v. ii).— Starke.


Verse 9. The reasons for the Divine
commands. 1. Are not always appa-
rent. 2. Are always grounded in
wisdom and righteousness. 3 Dis-
obedience is inexcusable even where
the Divine reasons are not understood.

— He was charged also not to re-
turn by the way that he came; pro-
bably iest the account of what was
done should have reached the ears of
any of the people through whom he
had passed, and he sufferinconveniences
on the account, either by persecution
from the idolaters, or from curious
people delaying him in order to cause
him to give an account of the trans-
actions which took place at Bethel.
This is @ reason why he should not
return by the same way; but what
the reason of this part of the charge, if
not the above, is not easy to see.

— This command seems to have
been given simply to test the obedience
of the prophet by laying him under a
positive as well as a moral obligation.
When he turned back with the old
prophet, and retraversed a road over
which he had already passed, he dis-
obeyed this injunction, as by eating
and drinking he disobeyed the other.—
Speaker’s Comm.


Verse 10. If in a certain position
thou hast done what God commanded,
and left undone what He forbade, then
go on thy way peaceful and content,
how dark and unknown soever it may
seem to thee.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 11—32,


TEMPTATIONS To DIsoBEDIENCE,


I. Assail us at the moment we are most clearly conscious of duty done.
The mysterious prophet of Judah hed, with great effort and at great peril,


219


~»


CHAP. XIIr. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








accomplished his important mission, and, in obedience to the positive directions
he had received, was returning homeward by a different route, when a tempta-
tion came upon him from a most unexpected quarter. Itis ever so. There
is little space afforded for self-gratulation on the achievement of one difficult
task ere we are confronted with another; and woe to him who is off his guard
at that moment. It is not always in the midst of the storm that the mariner
finds his greatest danger, but in the deceitful and uncertain calm when some
sudden and unexpected gust may strike his vessel unprepared. It was only
lately that the Hurydice, a noble British man-of-war, after successfully navi-
gating the world, was approaching the shores of England with every stitch of
canvas spread, when her sails wére smitten with a terrific blast, and in a few
moments she heeled over and sank to the bottom of the sea, with hundreds of
brave seamen whose hearts were beating with joy in the near prospect of
home! (1 Cor. x. 12).


II. Are most dangerous when they come to us with a pretended religious
sanction (verse 18). The prophet of Bethel was old (verse 11), and com-
manded the reverence that belongs to age. He was recognized as a prophet,
and had so much regard for his sacred office as to be absent from the king’s
idolatrous sacrifices, though he allowed his sons to be there (verses 11, 12).
His object might be to curry favour with the king by making the man of God
contradict himself, and thus impair the moral weight and authority of the
message that had been so faithfully delivered, and weaken its impression on
the minds of the people. He gained his end by telling a lie—a lie that was
aggravated by its boldness and profanity (verse 18). The prophet of Judah
was too guileless to suspect the trap that was laid for him, though, being
himself in direct communication with Jehovah, he ought not to have acted
upon a contradiction of the command imparted to himself, or any other au-
thority than that from which he received it. He was beguiled; he turned back,
and his doom was sealed. The most dangerous allurements of evil are pre-
sented when it robes itself in the external garb of goodness. When rack, and
sword, and faggot fail to intimidate, a false show of piety will fatally deceive!
Ah! how much need have we to cry—


, Awake, my soul, when sin is nigh,
And keep it still awake.


III, Cannot be yielded to with impunity. 1. The disobedient are made
conscious of their sin (verses 20-22). The two prophets were startled at their
humble meal by hearing the voice of the Lord uttering unmistakable condem-
nation; and this time the false prophet was made the vehicle of a true mes-
sage from heaven, which he understood, we may well suppose, with real con-
cern, and delivered with reluctance. A conviction of wrong-doing always pre-
cedes punishment: the sinner will be made to understand what it is for which
he suffers. 2. The disobedient are certainly punished (verses 28, 24). The
punishment may be strange, singular, and in a form utterly unexpected; but
it will be certain. Here a lion was made the instrument of vengeance. It is
said that lions like not to attack man unless driven to extremity for prey,
and that an ass is choice food for a lion, while it is well known that a lion
kills to eat. But in this case we see the natural instinct of the brute con-
trolled by a superior power: the man is assailed and slain; his body and that
of the ass remain unmolested. God is not restricted to any one method of
punishing transgression: all the powers of the universe wait on His bidding. 3.
The punishment is evident (verse 25). The scene was patent to every passer-by,
and soon became the common talk of the city. Where the offence was committed,
there its punishment was witnessed. Jehovah will vindicate His righteous


220


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, XUt,
So Sn


government of the universe by the most public and terrible punishment of sin
(2 Cor. v. 10). 4. The punishment of the disobedient ts not unlamented (verses
26-30). The awful transactions in which the prophet of Bethel was thus called
to take a part could not but make a profound impression on his mind, and
might be beneficial in promoting his spiritual reformation. He sorrowed over
the unfortunate fate of his brother-prophet, and interred his body in his own
tomb (verses 29 30). Do not think, O sinner! that your transgressions are
unnoticed, or that you are the only one affected by them: they cannot be
regarded with indifference by a Just and Beneficent God. Andif you will per-
sist in your disobedience, breaking through all restrictions, and spurning all
help—if you will court ruin, and voluntarily surrender youself to the inevitable
consequences of your sins—He who has done all He consistently can to recall
you to obedience resolves you shall not perish unwept and unlamented ; and
as you drop into the abysmal depths of unutterable woe the voice of Infinite
Pity shall exclaim in tones which, though not intended to do so, can only
sharpen the stings of remorse: 0! that thou hadst hearkened to my command-
ments, &c. (Isa. xlviii. 18).


IV. Will not prevent the ultimate fulfilment of the Divine Word (verses
81, 32). ‘The saying which he cried by the Word of the Lord shall surely
come to pass.” ‘Thus did the faithless prophet bear his testimony to the
faithfulness of God. Jehovah is stronger than the Tempter, and will ere long
expose his most plausible deceptions, baffle his wicked designs, and consiga
him to his own place.


Lzssons:—1. False prophets are the most dangerous and fatal enemies of God's
people. 2. They who seek to seduce the soul from its allegiance to God’s Word,
however specious their pretexts, are the emissaries of Satan. 3. We may be tempted
to do evil by counterfeit appearances of piety, when we should not be driven to st by


any fear of suffering.
This passage may also be homiletically treated as follows :—


Am Unrarrurvut Propner.


I. Is content to live in the midst of idolatry and moral corruption
without lifting up a protesting voice (verse 11). The prophet of Bethel
could not be ignorant of the innovations of the idolatrous king; and while it
does not appear that he actually sanctioned them by his presence, he did not
restrain his sons from worshipping at the unholy altar. He lacked the courage
to protest against the wickedness of the king, though he might be often power-
fully moved to do so. He resisted the impulse until it became feebler; and he
sank down a voiceless witness to the insults that were daily offered to his God.
‘‘He seemed to be one of those mixed characters, true to history and human
nature, which perpetually appear among the sacred persons of the Old Testa-
ment; moved by a partial wavering inspiration; aiming after good, yet failing
to attain it; full of genuine tender admiration for the prophet of whose death
he had been the unwilling cause, the mouthpiece of truths which he himself
but faintly understood.” To disobey repeated calls to duty only confirms the
soul in its unfaithfulness, and renders it content with evils against which it was
wont to loudly and faithfully protest. There are times when silence becomes


@ Bin.


II. Will descend to the most deceptive practices to tempt the faithful
from their allegiance (verses 12-19). What the prophet of Judah a showed
|


%


GOHAP, ZIM. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: FINGS.





the old prophet what he should have done. Filled with shame for his negleet,
and wishful to restore himself in his own opinion and in the opinion of others
who had perhaps accused him of unfaithfulness, he sought to have intercourse
with so courageous a witness for God, and to gain prestige by having him under
his own roof. The objects were thoroughly selfish, and to accomplish it he did
not scruple to tell a lie (verse 18). The most abandoned crave for companione
ship in their sins, and will resort to all kinds of methods to bring down others
to their own level. It is impossible to say to what depths of iniquity one
single act of unfaithfulness may lead (Luke xvi. 103.


III. Is compelled to own the solemn reality and authority of the Divine
Word. A message came to the old prophet the source and meaning of which he
could not mistake (verses 20-22). God may often speak through a wicked
prophet. He did so through Balaam, uttering the sublimest oracles of blessing,
though that sooth-sayer would fain have cursed Israel. The Bethel-prophet
was also firmly convinced that the prophecy against the altar would certiinly
come true; and he therefore directed his sors to bury his corpse in the same
grave as that of the Judah-prophet (verses 30-32). ‘‘ The bones of the seducer
and seduced being thus intermingled in the tomb, it so happened, as the former
probably intended, that his bones escaped at the appointed time the defilement
to which they would otherwise have been subjected. The tomb of the prophet
that came out of Judah was then recognised, and for his sake the contents were
spared from dishonour’’ (2 Kings xxiii. 17, 18). The Word of God will
vindicate itself, even in the lips of those who have sometimes ignored its authority.


IV. Involves his victims in fatal disaster (verses 23-26). We are ready to
admit that the old prophet did not intend to bring upon his victim the result that
really happened. He might have a vague impression that his disobedience
would not escape some kind of punishment; but had he foreseen how awful and
immediate that punishment would be, he would not have persisted in his plot.
But that is ever the way with wrong-doing; it goes farther than it intended,
and stands aghast at the ruin it has itself produced.


V. Need not be devoid of brotherly sympathy and respect, nor be beyond the
reach of reformation (verses 28-30). The Bethel-prophet sincerely mourned
over the sad fate of his brother prophet, and, with the most genuine respect,
reverently interred his body in his own grave. ‘he heart that was thus touched
with fraternal pity was perhaps also smitten with grief on account of sin. He
repented his unfaithfulness in the past; and he showed his desire to henceforth
imitate the spirit and example of the dead prophet, by giving particular direc-
tions that his body should be laid in the same grave. As if he said:—If I
can have no more fellowship with my brother ir life, I will at least be united
to him in death; our common grave, to which I shall soon go down in sorrow,
shall be a lasting testimony against the sin of Jeroboam.”


Lessons :—1. Jé #8 @ great honour and a great rasynnsidility to be a prophet
of the Lord. 2. An unfaithful prophet has a great power for evil. 8. The un-
faithfulness of the messenger does not invalidate the Divine authority of the message,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 11-32. The history of these of Judah we see a man of God full of
two prophets offers an important view life and strength, but who yet proved
of the relation of thisclass tothe new unstable in these disturbed times; in
order = uae: in the prophet out the eld Israclite we look upon one


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS.


OHAP, XIII.





in whom the fire is almost quenched,
it only glimmers faintly—a type of the
expiring high and manly strength of
Israel ; he is still upheld by faith in
God’s Word rather than by self-
reliance. They both yet speak and
testify in death. The fall and death
of the man of Judah set forth two
great truths. 1. He who thinketh
he standeth, let him take heed (1 Cor.
x. 12). He had conducted himself
grandly and nobly, and victoriously
withstood a severe temptation, yet
he yielded to a lesser one. The
higher a man stands the deeper is his
fall, and to whom much is given
from him will much be required
(1 Cor. xvi. 18; x. 18). Only those
who are true unto death can obtain the
crown of life. 2. How unsearchable
are His judgments, and His ways past
finding out (Rom. xi. 383). He who
is holy in all His ways, knows how to
establish firmly that which is threat-
ened with destruction and annihila-
tion by human treachery and deceit.
The death and the grave of the man
of God announce, in louder and more
threatening accents than did his lips,
the altar is rent. —Von Gerlach.


Verses 11-19. I do not know any
passage more useful than this for dis-
abusing us of a prejudice which the
mere word prophet is liable to create
in our minds. ‘‘If the man was
inspired,” we say to ourselves, ‘‘in-
spired by God, we must be sure he
would do the right thing, and say the
right thing. It would destroy all our
security if we thought otherwise.”
No, brethren; it would destroy no
security at all which the Bible de-
signs to give us. On the contrary, we
shall lose a great security, we shall
fall into a great danger, if we do not
strictly adhere to the teaching of the
Bible on this subject, but set up certain
canons of our own. The first obvious
lesson which this passage teaches us
is, that a prophet, a true prophet, a
prophet of God, might be grossly
deceived. The second is, that he
must be deceived if he yielded to any
pretences of inspiration on the part of
any man, though that man were called


a prophet, and were a prophet, when
what he said went against a sure wit-
ness and conviction as to his own duty.
The third is, that a prophet, not
habitually a deceiver, might on a
certain occasion wilfully deceive—in
the plain language of Holy Writ,
might lie. All these statements we
accept on the authority of Scripture.
And if we accept them, we ma
derive the very greatest profit from
them. We are often apt to suppose
that a prophet or inspired man is one
who is raised above laws and govern-
ment, who can lay down laws for
himself, whose internal power is itself
the rule for others and for his own
conduct. The Scripture teaches us
quite a different lesson. The charac-
teristic quality of the prophet, when he
is true, is obedience. He is nothing
in himself. He is merely a servant.
In the acknowledgment of his service,
of the power which is upon him,
his strength consists. But it is no
mere impulse to which he yields
himself. He is liable to all the
same chances and foolish impulses as
other people. He is particularly
liable to confound these impulses
with God’s teaching and commands.
He is, therefore, to be more suspicious
of himself, more watchfal against this
confusion, than othermen. If he once
forgets the Invisible Ruler and Law-
giver, no one will commit such fla-
grant errors, such falsehood, such
blasphemy.—JfLaurice.


Verses 11-15. The old prophet,
when he hears of the man of God,
hastens upon his way, and spares
neither care nor pains to see him and
bring him to his house. How much
time, pains, and money are expended
by the children of this world to see
and hear what will gratify their
senses, whilst they stir neither hand
nor foot to acquire that which rs
tains to their peace and salvation


Verse 11. Doubtless he was a
prophet of God, but corrupt, resty,
vicious. Prophecy doth not always

resuppose sanctification : many a one


th had visions from God, who shai!
228


@HAP. XL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KING8.


pe


never enjoy the vision of God. A
little holiness is worth much illumi-
nation.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 14. The danger of delay.
1. Gives an opportunity to be over-
taken by the tempter. 2. The diffi-
culties of our mission seem to multiply.


8. Often involves suffering and
disaster.
Verses 16-19. So in indifferent


ordinary matters, which God has
either ordered or forbidden, we must
observe unerring obedience. What-
ever obtains success and position by
means of deceit cannot be followed by
blessing, but rather by a curse. The
Scripture is not silent concerning the
sins of the man of God; and this, not
that we may excuse our sins by his,
but that we may guard ourselves from
haughtiness and spiritual pride.


Verse 18, There is no temptation
so dangerous as that which comes
shrouded under a vail of holiness, and
pretends authority from God Himself.
Jeroboam threatens, the prophet stands
undaunted: Jeroboam fawns and
promises, the prophet holds constant.
Now comes a grey-headed seer, and
pleads a counter message from God;
the prophet yields and transgresses.
Satan may affright us as a fiend, but
he seduces us as an angel of light.
Who would have looked for a liar
under hoary hairs and a holy mantle ?


—Bp. Hall.
— Falsehood. 1. Is always inex-
cusable. 2. Aggravated when in the


8. Never fails to
4. An evidence of


garb of sanctity.
produce mischief.
moral degradation.

— The door of his heart seems to
have been standing ajar, almost half
opened already, to the invitations of
the old man. Otherwise, surely he
would have said: ‘‘Thou a prophet !
How is it, then, that thou dwellest at
Bethel, the house of Jeroboam’s
corrupt worship? If thou hadst been
indeed a prophet of the Lord, thou
wouldst have denounced that worship,
and I should not have been sent from
Judah to lift up my voice against it.’
— Wordsworth.

224


Verses 20-22. The same sentence
which the old prophet pronounced
upon the man of God he pronounced
upon himself, while he had led and
betrayed him to disobedience. How
often does the judgment which we
utter for others fall upon ourselves,
when we have sinned equally, or in
greater measure (Rom. ii. 1).—Zange.

— O woful prophet! when he
looks on his host, he sees his execu-
tioner; while he is feeding his body,
he hears of his carcase; at the table
he hears of his denied sepulchre; and
all this for eating and drinking where
he was forbidden by God, though
bidden as from God. The violation
of the least charge of God is mortal;
no pretences can warrant the trans-
gression of a Divine command.— Zp.
Hall.

— Punishment. 1. Results from
disobedience. 2. Is not inflicted
without due warning. 8. Is certain.
4. In the hands of God, is never un-


just.


Verse. 21. It has been asked, how
did the prophet from Judah sin? or,
at any rate, how did he sin so griev-
ously as to deserve the punishment
of death? Was he not justified in
believing that God might revoke His
command? Would it not have been
wrong in him to suspect the old
prophet of telling a lie? To such en-
quiries it may be replied: With God
is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning. He cennot revoke a com-
mand until the circumstances under
which the command was given are
materially changed. The circum-
stances here were not changed. Again,
if God gives a command and revokes
it, He will revoke it as plainly and
with as much evidence as He gave it,
Here there was neither the same
plainness, nor as strong evidence,
The evidence to the man of God was
in the one case the mere word of a
man, and of a man who, by his linger-
ing at Bethel, yet not rebuking Jero-
boam, was clearly not a very good
man; while in the other case the evi-
dence had been the direct word of God.
It was not the duty of the man of God
to disbelieve the old prophet; but it


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. xiii,





was his duty not to have suffered him-
self tobe persuaded. He should have
felt that his obedience was being tried,
and should have required, ere he con-
sidered himself released, the same, or
as strong evidence as that on which he
had received the obligation. With
respect to the question whether the
sin was such a heinous one as to deserve
death, we may answer—first, that the
sin, disobedience to certain positive
commands of God, was one which it
was at this time very important to
punish signally, since it was exactly
the sin of Jeroboam and his adherents ;
and secondly, that temporal death is
not among God’s heaviest punishments,
that it comes on men both naturally
and miraculously for light offences,
and that in such cases we may regard
it as sent in lieu of future punishment,
and therefore as in some sort a mercy.
We are not to suppose that the man
of Judah perished eternally because
he perished temporally.—Speaker’s
Comm.


Verses 23-31. A stern punishment,
it will be said, for sucha crime. An
actual punishment, certainly—one
which asserted the fact that a prophet
will not be more, but less, excused for
his transgressions than another man.
What was the magnitude of the punish-
ment, we are no judges. A man who
has been witness of a great national
sin, and has foretold a great national
calamity, who has found out the false-
hood of a friend anda prophet, and
who is conscious of having done wrong
himself, may not think the sentence a
very hard one which calls him out of a
sonfused world; or more hard because
it comes in a form which assures him
that there is an eternal order which
will vindicate itself in spite of his
errors and those of all other men. A
man of God who had learnt to trust
God, could trust Him when He was
slaying him, and see that there was a
deep and awful righteousness and wis-
dom in the way in which the creatures
of God going forth to seek their meat
from Him may, withont the least
departure from the ordinary law of
their kind, be made the instruments of


punishing man’s transgressions. The
prophet who betrayed him, and then
had the heavy punishment of being
forced to proclaim the wrong which he
himself instigated, is surely the greater
object of compassion, especially if, as
the narrative half leads us to suspect,
his conscience was blunted, and he was
able to understand Jeroboam’s sin
without any keen sense of hisown. A
man with a clear apprehension of the
evil doings of rulers, and admiration
for those who protest against them
with a prophetical power of uttering
the truth, yet with no love of truth or
resolute abhorrence of falsehood, is a
very painful but a very instructive
spectacle. Everyone must be conscious
of something akin to sucha state of
mind—some possibility of it, at all
events, in himself. He should think
of that with trembling and with the
prayer—‘‘ See if there be any wicked
wayinme. Lead me in the way ever-
lasting.” There is something very
pathetic in the homage to a truer and
better man, which is expressed in the
words—‘‘ Lay my bones beside his
bones.”? The lion slew him for return-
ing with me to eat bread and drink
water; yet I should have been glad
to die his death; for I feel that he
was right within, and, therefore, that
there is a sacredness in his carcase
which I would wish mine to share!
Maurice.


Verses 23-25. The judgments of
God often fall suddenly and unex-
pectedly, thus proving that though
long delayed, they are sure to come,
even as this, after the lapse of three
hundred years, was the punishment
threatened for the golden calf-
worship.


Verses 23, 24. The last dread jour-
ney. 1. Was entered on with the
oppressive consciousness that it must
lead to death. 2. Was occupied with
tormenting apprehensions as to what
might be the particular form of death.
3. Was suddenly terminated by the
appointed agent of retribution. 4.
How many sad, painful journeys there
are in the course of human life! &

225


vy


OHAP. XIIL


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.





Who can tell the issue of a single
journey?


Verse 23. This old Bethelite that
had taken pains to come and fetch the
man of God into sin, will not now go
back with him to accompany his depar-
ture. Doubtless he was afraid to be
enwrapped in the judgment which
he saw hanged over that obnoxious
head. Thus the mischievous guides
of wickedness leave a man when they
have led him to his bane, as familiar
devils forsake their witches when they
have brought them once into fetters.


Verse 24. The very wild beasts are
led by a providence; their wise and
powerful Creator knows how to
serve himself of them. The lions
guard one prophet, kill another, ac-
cording to the commission received
from their Maker. What sinner can
hope to escape unpunished when every
creature of God is ready to be an
avenger of evil? Where a holy man
buys so dearly such a slight frailty,
what shall become of our heinous and
presumptuous sins? Violent eventsdo
not always argue the anger of God;
even death itself is to His servants a
fatherly castigation.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 25-29. The chastisement with
which God visits our fellow-men for
their sins is both a warning to reflect
upon our sins and deserts, and a call
to work active deeds of love with all
our might, in life and in death.

— The fierce beast stands by the
carcase, as to avow his own act and to
tell who sent him, so to preserve that
body which he had slain. O wonder-
ful work of God! The executioner
is turned guardian ; and as the officer
of the Highest, commands all other
creatures tostand aloof from hischarge,
and command the fearful ass that
brought this burden thither not to stir
thence, but to stand ready pressed to
carry it to the sepulchre; and now,
when he hath sufficiently witnessed
to all passengers that this act was not
done upon his own hunger, but upon
the quarrel of his Maker, he delivers
up his charge to that old prophet who

226


was no less guilty of this blood thas
himself.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 28. These strange circum-
stances at once showed the miraculous
nature of the death, and were of a na-
ture to call men’s attention to the
matter, and cause the whole story to
be bruited abroad. By these means
an incident which Jeroboam would
have wished to be hushed up, became,
no doubt, the common talk of the
whole people.


Verses 30, 81. We often for the first
time, at the grave of a friend, recog-
nise what we possessed in him, and
how we have sinned against him. One
look into the open grave of one dear
to us in life is adapted beyond any-
thing to remind us of our own end. It
is a very natural thing to rest in death
near those who were closely bound to
us in life by ties of blood or strong
affection; but yet stronger should be
the wish to die in the Lord, and enter
into eternal glory. Then, whatever
in the providence of God we may find
our grave, there shall we rest in peace,
for the earth is the Lord’s, and the
fulness thereof (Psa. xxiv. 1).—Lange.


Verse 80. Grief. I. One of the
fruits of sin. II. Is never out of
place at the grave. III. Is intensified
when at the grave of one whose death
we have accelerated. IV. May lead to
a blessed reformation of life.

— Itis hard to find a man absolutely
wicked: some grace will betray itself
in the most forsaken breasts. It is a
cruel courtsey to kill a man, and then
to help him to his grave; to betray a
man with our breath, and then bedew
him with our tears. The prophet had
needed no such friend, if he had not
met with such an enemy.


Verse 82. The infallibility of the
Divine Word. I. Is not atiected by
time or the opposition of men. II,
Is sustained by the testimony of com-
petent witnesses. III. Is a powerful
reason for placing implicit faith in it,
IV. Constitutes it an unerring standard
of judgment. |


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS, CHAP, XIIt.





HOMILETICS OF VERSES 83, 84.
Aw Invereratre Suxnzn.


I. That an inveterate sinner is indifferent alike to enty

* After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil Sat ore Sea
thing exceedingly obstinate and perverse, as well as blinding and infatuating
in idolatry. The gracious overtures of Jehovah through the prophet Ahijah
(chap. Xo, 38), the prediction against the altar and the miraculous and awe-
inspiring events in connection with it, sent as much in mercy as in anger, were
surely sufficient to have affected and alarmed any heart not wholly and in-
corrigibly hardened: and yet they had no effect on Jeroboam! ‘All these
wonderful accidents, as God’s hammers, did but beat upon cold iron.” This
state of mind is not acquired all at once. It is the result of repeated rejections
of God’s grace, of stificd convictions, and a love of sin for its own sake, An
inveterate sinner is an occasion of sorrow to ministers, to angels, to God!


II. That an inveterate sinner adds to his guilt by a stolid persistency in
the same course of iniquity. ‘But made again of the lowest of the people
priests of the high places.” Among the worst of heathens, the priesthood was
filled with respectable men: but Jeroboam made no discrimination. Any
strolling vagrant who offered himself was accepted, irrespective of moral or
intellectual fitness. The king became more and more careless as to the character
and motives of the men he appointed. The spiritual office is put to shame if
borne by men who make a trafic of religion, and are intent only on filling their
own hands. Wicked men grow worse and worse, till they have filled up the
measure of their sins, and so wrath come upon them to the uttermost (Rev. ix.
21; xvi. 9, 11).


III. That an inveterate sinner will not escape the most complete punish-
ment. ‘And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam—even to
destroy it from the face of the earth.” Sin will not always triumph. Its
glaring abominations cry to heaven for vengeance; and that vengeance, though
Jong delayed, will fall with terrible and desolating power. When neither the
severity nor the patient long-suffering of his God brings to repentance a man
who walksin evil ways, he is brought by his own sin under the sentence for the
obdurate, namely, temporal and eternal ruin (2 Tim. iil. 13; John viii. 34).


Lessons :—1. Unrepented sin hardens the heart. 2. The goodness of God will
not leave the most inveterate unwarned. %. Though hand join im hand, the wicked
shall not go unpunished.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


tiplying itself. At last the sense of


Verses 33, 34. Apparently the wit-
being under any authority will vanish


ness which the man of God bore, and


the death which he died, were in vain.
The destruction of an altar, and the
withering of a hand which was cured
again, were lessons soon forgotten.
A law once broken, there must be
continual new transgressions to justify
the first. A superstition once estab-
lished will go on increasing and mul-


almost wholly from the mind of the
rebellious ruler. He will say—using
the words in precisely the opposite
sense to that in which they are used
in the parable—‘‘ May I not do what
I will with mine own?’ As the
necessary retribution for such a state
of mind, he will become more and
237


~


GaP, XIV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





more a slave. The priests whom he
has made will insist on ever higher
prizes for their ignominious work. To
soothe the fears which haunt him
after the fear of a Righteous Being
has been cast aside, he will ask those
whom he has put in the place of his
conscience what acts he must do that
he may seem a religious man to them,
possibly at last to himself.— J/aurtce.

— The means to strengthen or ruin
the civil power is either to éstablish or
destroy the right worship of God. The
way to destroy religion is to embase
the dispensers of it. This isto give the
royal stamp toa piece of lead. Itisa
sad thing when all other employments
shall empty themselves into the min-
istry ; when men shall repair to it not
for preferment, but refuge, like male-
factors flying to the altars only to save
their lives, or like those of Eli’s race
(1 Sam. ii. 86), that should come
crouching and seeking to be put into
the priest’s office that they may eat a
piece of bread.— R. South.


Verse 33. Idolatry. I. An evil
way. II. Delusive. III. Dangerous.
IV. Corrupting. V. Leads to des-
truction.

— He exercised no discretion, but
allowed anyone to become a priest,
without regard to birth, character,
or social position. We may suspect
from this that the office was not
greatly sought, since no civil gover-


nor who cared to set up a priesthood
would wish to degrade it in public
estimation. Jeroboam did impose one
limitation, which would have excluded
the very poorest class. The candidate
for consecration was obliged to make
an offering of one young bullock and
seven rams (2 Chron. xiii. 9).—
Speaker's Comm.

— The authoritative source of
the ministry. I. Is not the will of
the aspirant. II. Not the exigencies
of a false religious system. III. Not
the appointment of the crown. IV.
But the call of God.


Verse 34. This persistence in wrong,
after the warning given him, was
such a sin as to bring a judgment, not
only on Jeroboam himself, but on his
family. Jeroboam’s departure from
the path of right forfeited the crown
(chap. xi. 38), and in that forfeiture
was involved naturally the destruction
of his family, for in the East, when one
dynasty supplants another, the ordi-
nary practice is for the new king to
destroy all the males belonging to the
house of his predecessor.

— Diminution, disquiet, and deso-
lation of families, is the fruit of sin.
He promised himself that the calves
would secure the crown to his family,
but it proved they lost it and sunk his
tamily. Those betray themselves that
think by any sin to support them-
selves.— UU. Hemry.





CHAPTER XIV.


THE REIGNS OF JEROBOAM AND REHOBOAM.


CriTioaL AND ExpLanarory Notrs.—Ve


heir tothe kingdom, His sickness,
boam’s house,


ree 1. Abijah, the son of Jeroboam—Natural
s pc Amn ee necrned to imperil the continuance of Jero-
Mn erse 4. There is Ahijah the prophet -He was appropriately selected, b

Ahijah was the prophet who, in Solomon’s days, 4 Noe ilies et


pledged the kingdom to Jeroboam (chap. xi.


29). And since Ahijah promised him a “ sure house” (xi. 88), though conditional upon his piet
he sent to him to learn how this illness accorded with the Pode he douized the pein


though he forsook the course, of righteousness.
and honey—These were gifts which a humble
with the disguised appearance of the king’s wife.


Verse 3. Take with thee loaves, cracknels,
peasant woman would take, and accorded
The “ten loaves” were more probably a


kind of hearth cake—D"79), wodAupises (Sept.) Orustula (Vulg.). WVerse4. Could not see, for
his chert set—Keil thinks that he suffered from ‘‘ grey cataracts,” resulting from the


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, XIV.
Sa a a er a


decay of the optic nerves through age, asin the case of Eli (1 Sam. iv. 15). Verse 9. Done
evil above all that were before thee—Inasmuch as he had established idolatry as a legalised
“state institution.” Hast cast Me behind thy back—The moat forcible expression possible
signifying deliberate insult and contempt of Jehovah. It only occurs again in Ezek. xxiii, 35,
qg-%. Verse 10, Cut off from Jeroboam him that, &c.—‘‘ An expression no doubt originally
used of dogs” (Lange), and therefore a contemptuous description of ignominious persons,
Only used of those in great disfavour in parallel Scriptures. Keil, however, differs from this
exposition of the phrase, and regards it as a forceful and figurative expres ion of ‘ extermina-
tion of a family to the last man.” Him that is shut up and left—An alliterative phrase—-


ay) WSy —probably meaning those under guardians, not of age. Keib suggests, him whe


is left to himself—unmarried. Thenius renders the whole sentence thus: ‘_4// the male
descendants of the king, even the minors also,” were threatened with destruction, Verse 14,
Cut off the house of Jeroboam that day; but what? even now. “That day,” DV iT;

= v


this, to-day, viz., cut off the house of Jeroboam, this very day, in the death of his son. “But
what? Even now”—NF\Y-Da iD". And what is happening even now? or, but what


r
{say I}? Even now [the-usurper is raised up]. See how truly this was a fact (chap. xv.
27). Verse 15. Made their groves—Their Asherahs; statues of the female deity elsewhere
called Ashtarte. Verse 17. Tirzah—Now Taltise, a scene of eminent beauty (Song Sol. vi. 4),
chosen as a scene of royal residence on this account, situate about three hours’ journey east of
Samaria.

Verses 21-31. From incidents associated with the kingdom of Isrart, the historian now turns
to Jupau. Verse 28. Naamah an Ammonitess—Sept, reads: “Daughter of Ana [Hanun ?]
son of Naas [Nahash], king of the Ammonites. Her heathen extraction is marked as indicating
her natural alienation from the religion of Jehovah. Asqueen-mother, she had great influence
in the Government, Verse 23. Images and groves—On “groves,” vide Note on verse 15,
supra. Here 2%, ‘‘images” or pillars,” from FTY), to be firmly set, or made fast; pros

= ae


bably stone pillars, or monumental idols, representing the male deity, Baal, as the Ashteraha,
wooden idols, represented the female deity. Verse 24. There were also sodomites in the
land— Dw TpIT- These were vicious paramours, detestable persons who practised, as a relie


r


ious rite, a vile self-desecration. They were male prostitutes, and are ranked in Scripture
with harlots (Deut. xxiii. 17). Verse 25, Shishak, king of Egypt—On the Karnak bas-
relief this Sheshonk (as he is named in Egyptian monuments) is represented as dragging
Jewish captives.—W. H. J.


age


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-20.
Diving JupGMents.


Catamities are now fast closing round and accumulating upon the head of
the impenitent Jeroboam. The power he has defied and provoked must make
itself felt; and the righteousness of the Divire mercy, so long and so often
despised, must be vindicated. The crisis of his fate is approaching. Yet
another and last effort is made to save him. As the coming tempest gives
signals of its advance, and reaches the climax of its fury by graduated stages, so
the judgments of heaven do not overtake the wicked without pre-admonition and
ample opportunity for repentance.


I, That Divine judgments are not sent without due warning. 1. This
warning is repeated. ‘‘ At that time”’ (verse 1). The force of this phrase is to
connect the narrative which follows with Jeroboam’s persistence in his evil
courses. The withered hand, the rent altar, the solemn message of the
mysterious prophet of Judah and his melancholy fate, were so many warnings
to the impenitent king. To all these yet another is added; and the event here
related is the first judgment upon Jeroboam for his obduracy, the beginning of
the cutting off of his house from the face of the earth. God never wearics in
His efforts to save the sinner: His voice is ever calling him to repentance. 2.
This warning appeals to the tenderest human feelings (verses 2, las this


%


GHAP, XIV, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





instance it appeals to the instinct of parental love, a love awakened and
intensified by the immediate danger of a sick and dying child. The darling
child is often snatched away as a warning to the family. As a solitary flower
is more lovely because of the barrenness that surrounds it, and as a little light
is heightened in brilliancy by its darkened background, so the simple piety of
a child is all the more suggestive in its warning and teaching when discovered
in the midst of prevalent iniquity. 38. Zhts warning 18 often given by the same
person who has before uttered promises of good (verse 4-6, comp. with xi. 29-39).
Ahijah, who had before spoken words of promise and of hope, was com-
missioned to convey “heavy tidings” of coming judgment. This fact should
have led Jeroboam to reflection, and to pause before he took the next fatal step
to self-abandonment and ruin. The faithful minister must speak of judgment,
as well as of mercy (1 Sam, xv. 26-28).


II. That Divine judgments are explicitly declared. +1. The reasons for the
Divine judgments are gwen (verses 7-9). Jeroboam had been exalted with
honour, power, and greatness, even to the detriment and humbling of the
favourite tribe of Judah ; and he had treated the gracious intentions of Jehovah
with colossal ingratitude and unexampled impiety. Whatever idolatries the
Israelites had been guilty of previously, whether in the earlier or the later’
times, by their worship of Baal and Ashtoreth, of the groves, of the gods of
Syria, Moab, and Ammon (Judg. ii. 18; iii. 7; vi. 25; x. 6; 1 Kings xi. 38), |
yet hitherto none of their rulers had set up the idolatrous worship of ephods, |
teraphim, and the like (Judg. xviii. 17), as a substitute for the true religion, |
or sought to impose an idolatrous system on the nation. Gideon’s ephod
“‘ became a snare contrarily to his intentions (Judg. viii. 27). Solomon’s high
places were private-built for the use of his wives, and not designed to attract
the people. Jcroboam was the first ruler who set himself to turn the Israelites
away from the true worship and establish a poor counterfeit of it, which he
strove to make, and succeeded in making, the religion of the great mass of his
subjects. Of all this, he is plainly reminded when the Divine judgments are
declared against him. 2. The nature of the Divine yudgments ts stated. (1.) It
is personal (verses 10-14). Jeroboam and his house shall be cut off. The
prophet associates no dignity with any portion of Jeroboam’s doomed house.
He sees in it only the vile slave, or the slaughtered victim of Divine judgment,
whether already a prisoner, or still fighting to keep free from the hands of the
foe, or the lone few that may have escaped death during the siege. They
suffer the horrible punishment threatened in the law to the impious transgressor
(Deut. xxviii. 26), and the foulest indignity that a conquered and slaughtered
foe could be exposed to (comp. v. 11, with 1 Sam. xvii. 46). He who trans-
mits sin to his descendants involves them in the punishment connected with its
continued commission. (2). It is national (verses 15, 16). Here is the first
positive announcement of the Assyrian and Babylonian exiles as a punishment
of Israel’s sins. Already, in earlicr times, had a rooting up and scattering of
the people been threatened in cases of disobedience (Deut. xxviii. 63; xxix. 27;
Josh. xxiii. 16); but Ahijah is the first of that long line of prophets that hold
up exile beyond the river Euphrates as a certainly coming woe. The people
that share in a monarch’s sin will inevitably share in its punishment. 3. Zhe
agent of Divine sudgments 1s mentioned (verse 14). This king was Baasha; and
we learn the fulfilment of the prophetic threat from chap. xv. 27-30. The
agents of Divine vengeance are already stationed all down the lines of future
human history.


_ TI, That Divine judgments are inevitable (verses 17-20). Already the

judgment had begun in the death of this innocent and piousson. Jeroboam soon

tollowed, struck down by a dire disease which dragged him down to a miserable
380 sere


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS





OMAP. xiv.





death (2 Chron. xiii. 20). Destruction often overtakes sinners in the midst of
their career. Death pays no more respect to palaces than to the clay-built hut.
No power in earth or hell can avert the righteous punishment of wrong-doing.


_ Lessons:—1. Ruin is not far froma kingdom when righteousness 4s expelled and
iniquity triumphant. 2. We cannot plead the examples of others, however high in
office and power, to screen our sins from the Divine judgments. 8. A genuine
repentance 8 the only protection against threatened judgments.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1-20. Jeroboam in need and
in distress. I. He is only concerned
about the taking away of the need and
the lifting off of the punishment, not
in the renunciation of his sin and the
conversion of the heart, which should
have been the result of his need, as it
is the case now with so many. II.
He seeks consolation and help, not at
the hands of his false priests and spi-
ritual hirelings, whom he himself did
not trust, but from the prophet, about
whom he did not trouble himself after
he had nothing to ask. Thus it is
always. In need and necessity unbe-
lievers and the children of this world
seek for consolation and comfort from
& spiritual preacher, and despise the
finery of the hirelings who care only
for the wool, and not for the sheep.
III. He does not himself apply to the
prophet, because he has an evil con-
science, and he sends his wife ina dis-
guise, for before the world he does not
wish to be viewed as one who cares
much for prophets. This is the folly
of the wise of this world, that they
suppose they can deceive God as they
deceive men. Butthe Lord sees what
is concealed in the darkness, and gives
to every one what he has deserved.—
Lange.

1-16 The sight of the sick boy whom
he cared for brought back, perhaps, the
thought of himself when he had still
youthful freshness and hope, when he
felt the wrongs which Solomon was
inflicting upon the land, and dreamed
that he might be its deliverer. And
with these thoughts would come the re-
collection of the man who had told him
how, if he walked in right ways, God
would make hima sure house. A sad
and profitable reflection if he had


paused to dwell upon it. But the
lying habit of mind which he had con-
tracted by converse with the priests of
the high places only urged him to
consider how he could bribe Ahijah to
tell him something about the child
which be would like to hear. This
fragment of Ahijah’s history marks
out with much clearness the office of a
prophet in Israel. Living under the
brilliant government of Solomon,
where all had the outward face of
prosperity and continuance—living
under the tyranny of Jeroboam, where
all was new and revolutionary—he
had still to say, ‘‘ There is an eternal
order which cannot be violated. Who-
soever defies it will bring ruin upon
himself and upon his house. God is; a
power which sets Him at nought and
substitutes changeable things in His
place, cannot abide. It may be ap-
pointed to punish an evil which has
been working secretly ; it will last its
hour; but it is doomed. The mouth
of the Lord hath spoken it.’”’? The pro-
phets could speak this word knowing it
to be true. And they could speak
another which was more terrible.
They could say, ‘‘Israel must suffer
for Jeroboam’s sins. Not by an arbi-
trary decree, which punishes one for
the crimes of another; but because the
heart of the people has gone along with
the ruler; because a ruler embodies it
himself, and presents in open act the
temper and spirit of those whom he
rules; because if they would be saved
from the consequences of his evil
doings, they must turn to the everlast-
ing King. ‘This is an universal prin-
ciple which comes out with fresh
power in each stage of Jewish history.
—LMaurice.
231


*


GHAP, XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


e


Verses 1-6. Anxious forebodings.
1. Arisefrom a consciousness of wrong-
doing. 2. Aggravated by family
affliction. 3. Cannot be.concealed by
the cleverest disguise. 4. Are only
too surely realised.


Verse 1. When the threatening,
warning word of God bears no fruit,
God at last sends the cross, especially
the cross in the household, to humble
us, to bring us to a knowledge of our
sins, and to lead us to the cross of
Christ. God generally lays hold upon
men in those respects where it is
mostly grievous to them (2 Sam. xii.
14; John iv. 47).—Siarke.


Verses 2, 3. Extremity draws Jero-
boam’s thoughts to the prophet, whom
else he had not cared to remember.
Certainly his heart despised those
base priests of his places; neither
could he trust either to the gods or to
the clergy of his own making; his
conscience rests upon the fidelity of
that man whose doctrine he had
forsaken. How did the idolater
strive against his own heart, while he
inwardly despised those whom he
professed to honour, and inwardly
honoured them whom he professed to
despise. Wicked breasts are false to
themselves, neither trusting to their
own choice, nor making choice of that
which they may dare to trust.
But, O! the gross folly mixed with
the craft of wickedness. Could Jero-
boam think that the prophet could
know the event of his son’s disease,
and did he think he could not know
his wife’s disguise? The one was
present, the other future; this was
but wrapt up ina clout, that event
was wrapt in the counsel of God; yet
this politic head presumes that the
greater shall be revealed, where the
lesser shall be hid. There was never
a wicked man that was not infatuate,
and in nothing more than in those
things wherein he hoped most to tran-
scend the reach of others.—Bp. Hall.


Verse 2. Jeroboam did not wish to
be seen having anything todo with
the prophet by any one. Worldly

232


people are ashamed to make it known
that they believe in anything, even
if it be s superstitious faith. If God
send thee necessity and distress, take
no bye-ways, but go to Him and pour
out thine heart before Him; He hears
all who call upon Him, all who ear-
nestly ery unto Him. Disguise thy-
self, that no one mark who and what
thou art. This is the bad advice
which the world gives for the conduct
of life, and which passes current with
it as the true wisdom thereof. How
social life is vitiated by this sin, by
the endeavour to seem before people
rather than to be—often it is likea
masquerade! It is even more de-
ceived by actions, by mien, and
manner, than by words. The art of
disguise corrupts man in the pro-
foundest ground of his being, and
transforms him into an incarnate lie.
—Lange.

He would not have it known in
Israel that his queen went on such an
errand. It would show that neither
his calves nor his self-made priests
could help him in the time of trouble.
His heart had become so infatuated
and clouded by his false worship as
to imagine that Jehovah’s prophet
might not detect his guile. He dared
not meet the old prophet, but sent his
wife, for a sense of his own sins ad-
monished him that he deserved con-
demnation, and would receive it if he
went in person to Ahijah.— Whedon.


Verses 8, 4. The little bit of faith
which worldly people often exhibit
is but part of their selfishness. The
fore-knowledge of the future in the
affairs of daily life man would gladly
possess, because he will not yield him-
self in faith to the will of God. Hence
flow oftex superstition, fortune-telling,
dream interpretation, astrology, both
among the heathens, as well as among
Christians. The gift of God neither
should nor can be sold or bought for
money. Asarule, unbelief is bound
with superstition. Jeroboam did not
believe when God spoke to him by
word and deed, and yet he believed
that by means of a few loaves and
cakes he could persuade God to reveal


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP, XIV.


eee


the future to him. The history of
religion in modern times confirms and
illustrates this.— Cramer.


Verse 8. Henry well calls attention
te the “notion of fatality’? evinced
in this enquiry of Jeroboam, and also
in that of Ahaziah (2 Kings i. 2),
and that of Benhadad (2 Kings viii.
8). They enquire simply what the
end will be, not what means they
should use for recovery.— Whedon.


Verses. 4-6. The wife of Jeroboam
before the prophet. 1. She means to
deceive the aged blind prophet by a
disguise, but the Lord gives him
sight (Ps. clvi. 8). He gives strength
to the weary, and power to the feeble.
The Lord ever gives sight to his true
servants, so that the world cannot
deceive and blindthem. 2. She hopes,
by her present, to secure the desired
answer; but at the hour, the Lord
gives him the word he shall speak.
It is the spirit of God who speaks
through him (Matt. x. 19). <A true
servant of God proclaims the word of
truth to every one, without respect of
persons, no matter how hard it be for
him. This oftenis his hard but sacred
duty.— Lange.


Verse. 4. Putting off her royal
attire, and putting on more demure
apparel, like as many hypocrites do,
conforming themselves to the company
they come into, and walking in a dis-
guise till God detect them.— Zrapp.


Verse. 6. The visions of Ahijah
were inward; neither was his bodily
sight more dusky than the eyes of his
mind were clear and piercing. It was
not the common light of men whereby
he saw, but divine illumination ;
things absent, things future, were no
less obvious to those spiritual beams,
than present things are to us. re
the quick eyes of that great lady can
discern him, he hath espied her ; and,
so soon as he hears the sound of her
feet, she hears from him the sound of
her name, ‘‘Come in, thou wife of
Jeroboam.” How God laughs in
heaven at the frivolous fetches of crafty


politicians, and when they think them-
selves most sure, shames them with a
detection, with a defeat! What an
idleness it is for foolish hypocrites to
hope they can dance in a net, unseen
of heaven.—Bp. Hall.


Verses 7-16. Woful tidings these
for a mother’s heart ; and scarcely, per-
haps, intelligible to her stunned in-
tellect. Here was the beginning of
judgment upon Jereboam and upon her,
because she was his—judgment in
taking away the only well-conditioned
and worthy son; and judgment stored
up in and for the ill-conditioned ones
who were suffered to remain. God,
when it suits the purpose of His wis-
dom and His justice, can afflict no less
by what He spares than by what He
takes. Yet there was mercy in this
judgment—mercy, strange as it seems
to say, to that amiable youth on whom
the sentence of death was passed. It
is so stated ; and it is more intelligible
than it seems. It was because there
was some good thing found in him that
he should die. Death was to be for
him a reward, a blessing, a deliverance.
He should die peaceably upon his bed;
for him all Israel should mourn; for
him many tears should be shed, andhe
should be brought with honour to his
tomb; morethaza all, he would be taken
from the evil that hung over his house;
and the Lord’s vindicatory justice
would thus be spared the seeming
harshness of bringing ruin upon a
righteous king for his father’s crimes.
Alas! how little do we know the real
objects of the various incidents of life
and death—of mercy, of punishment,
and of trial! In this case, the motives
were disclosed, and we are suffcred to
glance upon some of the great secrets
of death, which form the trying
mysteries of life. With this instance
in view, we can find the parallels of
lives, full of hope and promise, prema-
turely taken, and that in mercy, as we
can judge, to those whodepart. The
Heavenly Husbandman often gathers
for his garner the fruit that early
ripens, without suffering it to hang
needlessly long, beaten by storms, upon
the tree. Ob! how often, as many a

233


GHAP, XIV.





grieved heart can tell, do the Lord’s
best beloved die betimes—taken from
the evil to come—while the unripe,
the evil, the injurious, live long for
mischief to themselves and others.
Roses aad lilies wither far sooner than
thorns and thistles.— itto.


Verses 7-16. Terrible is that ven-
geance which God thunders against
him by his prophet, whose passion-
ate message upbraids him with his
promotions, chargeth him with his sins,
and, lastly, denounceth his judgments.
No mouth was fitter to cast this royalty
in the teeth of Jeroboam than that by
which it was foretold, fore-promised ;
every circumstance of the advance-
ment aggravates the sin. ‘I exalted
thee ;” thou couldst not rise to honour
alone. ‘‘I exalted thee from among
the people; ”’ not from the peers, thy
rank was but common before this rise.
“T exalted thee from among the
people, to be a prince ;’’ subordinate
height was not enough for thee; no
seat would serve thee but a throne;
‘“‘yea, to be a prince of my people
Israel.” No nation was for thee but
my chosen one; none but my royal
inheritance; neither did I raise thee
into a vacant throne; a forlorn and for-


saken principality might. be thankless,
but ‘I rent the kingdom from another
for thy sake.’’ Yea, from what other


but the grandchild of David! Out of
his hand did I wrest the sceptre, to
give it into thine. O, what high
favours doth God sometimes cast away
upon unworthy subjects! How do
His abused bounties double both their
sin and judgment !—Bp. Hail.


Verse 9. Unexampled wickedness,
Seen—1. In the basest ingratitude for
great favours. 2. In the reckless
abuse of great privileges. 38. In the
persistent and defiant commission of
great crimes. 4. In stolid indiffer-
ence to the most awful warnings. 5.
In the utter rejection of God. 6.
Merits unexampled punishment.


Verses 10-15. Not a blessing, but

a eurse rests upon a house which turns

its back upon the Lord and His com-
234


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


mandments. And so, also, a peopla
who forget the faith of their fathers
lose all territory, are given up to ali
convulsions from within and from
without, and go to destruction. Sin
is the destruction of the people (Ileb.
x. 28-30).


Verse 11. Dogs are the chief scaven-
gers of Oriental cities. Troops of dogs,
more than half wild, scour the strects
by night, clearing away all the off:
and carrion they can finl. “he vul-
ture in the country districts, assisted
sometimes by kites and crows, does
the work of the dog in towns.—
Rawlinson.

— To be cast out unburied is no
great matter, natural men slight it.
There is little differerce to lie eaten
of beasts above ground, or of worms
beneath; yet when foretold to a man
as a judgment denounced from God, as
against that king (Jer. xxii. 19), it
hath its own weight, carrying some
stamp of God’s despising him; and
though a man feels it not when it is
done, yet he feels it looking on it
beforehand, especially as threatened
of God; sees himself, as it were,
dragged about and torn.—Leighton.

— The ancient Medes are said to
have thrown the bodies of their dying
relatives to dogs, supposing it dis-
honourable to expire on their beds,
or be deposited in the earth.—Mawor.


Verses 12, 18. The death of a be-
loved child, for whom God has pre-
pared good, is often the only and the
supreme means of turning away the
heart of the parents from sin and the
world, and of winning them to the life
in God to which they are strangers.
For many a child it is a Divine bless-
ing when it is early taken out of this
vain world, and called away from
surroundings in which there is danger
of the corruption both of soul and
body.


Verse 18. Imperfect goodness.
We are taught here—I. That goodness
may be partial and yet true. 1. Abijah’s
goodness was trwe. (1). It was «
“ good thing «# him.” In whatever


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS.


GEAP. £19.





particular acts his piety found mani-
festation, it sprang from his heart.
(2). It was ‘a good thing found in
him.’”? The Hebrew word here used
signifies “ finding without secking.”
In other words, his goodness was evi-
dent, manifest. (3). It was ‘‘a good
thing toward the Lord God of Israel.”
True goodness springs from the love
and fear of God. The goodness of the
text was heart-felt, sincere, fruit-bear-
ing, God-honouring goodness. Yet,
(2) Abijah’s goodness was imperfect.
“* Some good thing.” This is not the
fullest eulogy. Not like the eulogy
of Job, Caleb, Nathaniel, &. All
the surroundings of Abijah were most
unfortunate. The tender opening
flower was surrounded by a Vicious
atmosphere; and no wonder that, in
some respects, it lacked completeness ;
no wonder that some of its leaves bore
the taint of mildew. A _ true dis-
ciple—he was a weak one; a bright
light—he was not the brightest. II.
That real, but imperfect goodness ts
recognized and accepted by God. God
praised and rewarded the piety of the
young prince. God cannot overlook
imperfect goodness. The eye readily
discovers that in which we delight ;
God loves goodness, and wherever it
springs—in unlikely places, in un-
likely hearts—God knowsit. And He
acceptsit. Learn here: 1. A lessonin
judging of others. We must be chari-
table—men may be true, and not
perfect. The jewel may have a flaw,
and yet be a jewel. 2. There is a
solemn lesson in this subject for those
who, in most favourable circumstances,
lack true goodness. Abijah, in most
unfavourable circumstances, was true
and beautifel. And so there are ever
such. With nothing to help them but
the grace of God, they live pure, godly,
noble lives. What shall be said of
those who lack true goodness despite
the fact that they have every help
and encouragement? God is not a
hard master; but He must condemn
such. 3. A lesson of encouragement
for many who feel that with many failings
they yet have the root of the matter in
them. Your flowers are half hidden
in the weeds; but be of good comfort ;


aim at the highest, work for it, hope
for it, and He shall not cast you out.
—W. L. Watkinson.

— Dr. Kane, finding a flower under
the Humbolt glacier, was more affected
by it because it grew beneath the lip
and cold bosom of the ice, than he
would have been by the most gorgeous
garden bloom. So some single strug-
gling grace in the heart of one far
removed from Divine influences may
be dearer to God than a whole cata-
logue of virtues in the life of one more
favoured of heaven.

— And let me tell you, that asitis
a eulogy in any one to be good in a
bad family, so it must proportionably
be a horrid brand upon any one to be
bad in a good family. It was thought
fit to be put upon record, concerning
Abijah, the son of Jeroboam, that
‘“‘there was some good thing found
in him ;” good desires, good inclina-
tions, even in so wicked a family, as
Jeroboam’s was. It is proportionably
a horrid mark upon that person who
continueth ungodly ina godly family ;
that is, a prayless wretch in a praying
family ; whose heart, at least, never
prayeth, hath no desires after God; no
contrition, no sense in the confession
of sin; no love, no gratitude in the
acknowledgment of mercy. For one
to continue ungodly ina godly family,
or to go out ungodly from a godly
family, what a horrid thing will this
be! How much of terror and amaze-
ment will it carry in it at last, when
the case comes to open itself to view,
and to be looked upon and considered
in its proper and native aspect! And
even as it now is, to think with one-
self, ‘‘That such or such children or
fellow-servants in a family where I
may have lived a considerable time,
may have had their hearts melted in
hearing the Word read and applied,
but mine was always hard; they have
had their souls humbled in the ac-
knowledgment of sin, but mine was
unhumbled; they have had desires
enlarged in seeking for merey, but I
had no desire after spiritual good.”
To live so in a good pid and to go
out such from a good family. Oh! the
horror of this ease, and the reflectiong

235


%


ORAP. ZIV.


——_————————————————


it will cause in the close of time; or,
if not so, in an eternity of misery that
will never end !— Howe.

— If we would wish to discover
whether there were any particles of
steel in alarge quantity of rubbish, it
would not be the wisest way to search
for them, and especially in the dark,
but to hold a large and efficacious
magnet over it. And this, if it be
there, is the way to discover true
religion in our souls. The truths
and promises of God are, to a princi-
ple of religion in the mind, that
which the magnet is to the steel; if
there be any in us, the proper exhi-
bition of the Gospel will ordinarily
draw it forth.—A. Fuller.


Verse 16. The fatal consequences
of sin. J. Sin corrupts the indiwidual
the more tt ts committed. ‘‘'The sins
of Jeroboam who did sin.” II. Js
contagious in its nature and tyrannical
intigrule. ‘And made Israel to sin.”
III. Involves a whole nation in degra-
dation and ruin. ‘‘ And He shall give
Israel up.”

— To tempt and lead another into
sin, is worse than to sin thyself. It
shows sin to be of great growth in that
man that doth it knowingly and
willingly. Herbs and flowers do not
shed their seed till ripe; creatures
propagate not till they are of stature
and age! What do those that tempt
others, but diffuse their wicked
opinions and practices, and, as it were,
raise up seed to the devil, thereby to
keep up the name of their infernal
father in the world? This shows sin
to be mighty in them indeed !—
Gurnall.

— Ifthe Lord say, he who offends
one of the least of these (Matt. xviii.
6), what will He say to those who
give offence to an entire people, at the
head of which they stand, through
unbelief and immorality, and beguile
them into an apostasy trom the living
God ?


Verse 17. Doleful were the tidings
the disguised princess had to bear back
to the beautiful town of Tirzah. All
remoter griefs were probably to her

236


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





swallowed up in this—which rung
continually in her ears in all her home-
ward way—‘‘ When thy feet enter
into the city the child shall die.” It
is heavy tidings to a mother that she
must lose her well-beloved son; but it
is a grievous aggravation of her trouble
that she might not see him before she
died. They who were about him
knew not that he was to die to-day,
and therefore could not estimate the
preciousness of his last hours, and the
privilege of being then near him, and
of receiving hisembrace. She knew:
but she might not be near, nor pour
out upon her dying son the fulness of
a mother’s heart. Knowing that her
son lay on his death bed, her first
impulse must have been to fly home to
receive his dying kiss; but her second
to linger by the way, as if to protract
that dear life which must close the
moment she entered the city. Never,
surely, before or since, was a distressed
mother so wofully torn between the
antagonist impulses of her affection!
At last her weary steps reached the
city ; and as she entered the gates her
son died, and she was only in time to
press to her arms the heart still warm,
although it had ceased to beat.—K¢tito.


Verse 18. Sorrow for the dead.
1. May melt the hardest heart. 2.
Is profound and general at the grave
of the good. 38. Doesnot always lead
to the abandonment of sin.

— A nation in mourning. 1. A
pathetic sight. 2. Shows an appre-
ciation of a virtuous life in the midst
of national corruption. 38. Affords an
opportunity for making serious reso-
lutions to live a truer life.

— Yet what a mixture is here of
severity and favour in one act !—favour
to the son, severity to the father:
severity to the father, that he must
lose such a son; favour to the son, that
he shall be taken from such a father.
Jeroboam is wicked, and therefore he
shall not enjoy an Abijah; Abijah
hath some good things, therefore he
shall be removed from the danger of
the depravation of Jeroboam. The
best are fittest for heaven, the earth ia
fittest for the worst; this is the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


See





region of sin and misery, that of
immortality. It is no argument of
disfavour to be taken early from a
well-led life, as not of approbation to
age in sin.— Zp. Hah


Verses 19, 20. The Scripture says,
the memory of the just is blessed, but
she name of the godless will perish
(Prov. x. 7). The first is true of
David, the last of Jeroboam, whose
name is not like an ointment pouring
out diffusing sweet perfume (Eccles. i.
3), but is a savour of death unto death ;
for with his name, for all the future,
this word is connected, ‘¢ Who sinned,
and made Israel to sin.”” Of what use
is it to have worn a worldly crown
two-and-twenty years, to have striven


and fought for it, when the crown of *


life does not succeed it, which they
alone obtain who are faithful unto
death! (Rey. ii. 10).—Lange.


Verse 20. He lay down. “This
shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie
down in sorrow”? (Isa.1.11). He died
not the common death of all men, but
by some remarkable stroke: beside the
loss of five hundred thousand of his
men in one battle with Ahijah king of
Judah (2 Chron. xiii, 17-20).

— The details of Jeroboam’s end
are lost to us. It is overclouded by
unsuccessful wars with Judah, by
wasting illness, and by the violent
convulsion in which his remains, and
those of his children, were torn from
their sepulchres. To observe clearly
wherein his sins consisted, is to ob-
serve the moral of the whole part of
the history. It was not that he had
revolted against the house of Judah,
for this, according to the narrative, had
been put upon him by the direct pro-
vidence and sanction of God. Nor
that he had fallen into idolatry. This
was the sin of Solomon and Rehoboam,
against which his whole life was a per-
petual protest. It was that to secure
certain good ends, he adopted doubt-
ful and dangerous means. The anti-
cipations of the prophets concerning
him had been frustrated. Like the
apostolic Las Casas, in the sad history
of South America, they saw with bitter


OHAP. XIV,





grief the failure of the institution
which they had fostered, and from
which they had hoped so much. It
is this reflection which gives a keen-
ness of regret to the epithet so many
times repeated, ‘The sin of Jero-
boam, the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin.” To keep the first
commandment, he broke the second ; to
preserve the belief in the unity of God,
he broke the unity and tampered with
the spiritual conception of the national
worship. The ancient sanctity of
Dan and Bethel, the time-honoured
Egyptian sanction of the Sacred Calf,
were mighty precedents; the Golden
Image was doubtless intended as a
likeness of the one trueGod. But the
mere fact of setting up such a likeness
broke down the sacred awe which had
hitherto marked the Divine presence,
and accustomed the minds of the
Israclites to the very sin against which
the new form was intended to be a
safeguard. From worshipping God
under a false and unauthorized form,
they gradually learnt to worship other
gods altogether, and the venerable
sanctuaries at Dan and Bethel prepared
the way for the temples of Ashtaroth
and Baal at Samaria and Jezreel ; and
the religion of the kingdom of Israel
at last sank lower even than that
of the kingdom of Judah, against
which it had revolted. ‘Tho sin of
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat,” is the
sin again and again repeated in the
policy, half worldly, half religious,
which has prevailed through large
tracts of ecclesiastical history. Many
are the forms of worship in the Chris-
tian Church which, with high preten-
sions, have been nothing else but ‘so
many various and opposite ways of
breaking the second commandment.”
Many a time has the end been held to
justify the means; and the Divine
character been degraded by the pre-
tence or even the sincere intention of
upholding His cause: for the sake of
secular aggrandisement ; for the sake
of binding together good systems,
which, it was feared, would otherwise
fall to pieces; for the sake of support
ing the fuith of the multitude, from tne
fear lest they should fall azny fe rival
23


we


CHAP. XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. KINGS.


sects, or lest the enemy should come
and take away their place and nation,
false arguments have been used in sup-
port of religious truth, false miracles
promulgated or tolerated, false readings
in the sacred text defended. And so


mined by the very means intended te
preserve it. The whole subsequent
history is a record of the mode by
which, with the best intentions, a
church and nation may be corrupted.—
Stanley.


the faith of mankind has been under-


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 21-31.
Inonatey as 4 Cause or Natronat Decay.


I. That idolatry is a degradation to the holiest place. “Jerusalem, the
city which the Lord did choose out of all the tribes of Israel to put His name
there” (verse 21). The spot was hallowed as the dwelling-place of Jehovah
and by manifold revelations of His glory. It was no slight degradation that
this holy city should be debased by the idolatrous rites of the heathen. Idolatry
pollutes everything it touches. ‘There was no visible church upon earth but
here; and this what a one! O God, how low dost thou sometimes suffer thine
own flock to be driven! what woful wanes and eclipses hast thou ordained for
this heavenly body. But the gloomy times of corruption shall not last always,
the light of truth and peace shall at length break out, and bless the sad hearts
of the righteous.’


II. That idolatry is the originator and patron of the most abominable
vices. 1. Jt corruptsawhole nation. ‘ And Judah did evil above all that their
fathers had done” (verses 22, 23). It is no longer the individual monarch who
is blamed, but the people; the evil practices have become national. One sinner
destroyeth much good ; one false officer may corrupt an entire army; an idola-
trous king is a curse to acountry. The mother of Rehoboam was an Ammon-
itess (verse 21), a bad wife fora king of Israel; and her son soon partook more
of the temper of Ammon, the idolater, than of the spirit of Abraham. 2. J¢
sanctions the most abominable vices (verse 24). What a strange incongruity is
this—Sodom in Jerusalem! idolsinJudah! Surely debauched profession proves
desperate; admit the idols, you cannot doubt of the sodomy. If they have
changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to cor-
ruptible man, and to birds and four-footed beasts and creeping things, it is no
marvel if God gave them up to uncleanness, through the lusts of their own
hearts, to dishonour their own bodies between themselves. They dishonoured
God by one sin, and God left them to dishonour themselves by another. The
most outrageous sins have been committed under the sanction of idolatrous
worship. 8. Jt ts specially offensive to God. ‘They provoked Him to jealousy
with their sins’? (verse 22). This expression is a metaphor which views the
relation of God and His people as the marriage covenant, in which the people
are represented asa faithless wife. No act of infidelity can be so secret as to
elude the eyes of God. ‘‘Judah did evil in the sight of the Lord.” What
emotions must arise in the heart of God as He is a silent and invisible Spectator
of the sins of His people!


ITI. That idolatry destroys the bravery of a nation. 1. Jt 8 powerless
to repel the invasion of an enemy (verse 25). It may be that Jeroboam incited
the Egyptian king to make war against Judah; but it is a revelation of the
condition of weakness into which the kingdom had sunk that Jeroboam saw his
rival would become an easy prey to the Egyptian army. How great a change
was et the vigour and bravery of the days of David, when the surround-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAP. XIV.








ing nations were kept in awe by his victorious sword, and the Jewish kingdom
acquired the position of a first-rate military power! Idolatry emasculates the
manhood of a people, and it becomes demoralized and cowed in the presence of
an enemy which before it had confronted with bravery. 2. Jt reduces a nation
to poverty (verses 26-28). Religion promotes the wealth of a nation and guards
it from spoliation. While Rehoboam and his people walked in the fear of God
(2 Chron. xi. 17), the accumulated riches of Solomon remained undisturbed ; but
when they forsook the Lord (¢b. xii. 1), then Shishak, the instrumont of Divine
retribution, was permitted to invade Jerusalem and carry away its immense
treasures. And now, instead of the golden shields which glittered in the pre-
sence of Solomon on great state occasions, Rehoboam is glad enough to substi-
tute brass—an emblem of the degeneracy of Judah. How soon the mention of
the profusion of gold in the age of Solomon is succeeded by this mention of
brass in its place! Such are the evanescent vanities of this world’s riches!
Idolatry will bring the most prosperous nation to beggary.


IV. That idolatry is a fruitful source of fraternal enmity. ‘‘There was
war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all their days”’ (verse 30). Not merely
a feeling of hostility, but frequent wars. We are not to suppose that the
Word of the Lord by Shemaiah (xii. 24) was any more observed in the later
history of Rehoboam than it was by his sons. Of all quarrels, those between
people of near kindred are the most bitter and disastrous. Where true religion
is ignored, the bond of unity and brotherhood is destroyed. Idolatry encourages
a restless strife after an unholy and tyrannical supremacy, rather than contends
for the honour of God and the supreme authority of His law.


Y. That idolatry hurries its votaries to an untimely and dishonoured
grave (verse 31), Brief as was the reign of Rehoboam, that of his son and
successor was briefer still (chap. xv. 2). Sin shortens human life, robs it of
many pleasures, and surrounds its close with gloom and misery. Even the
pious are impressed with the brevity of life. ‘‘ Alas!” was the touching lament
of Grotius, ‘‘ I have lost my life in doing nothing with great labour!”? What
ean be said of the close of a life wasted in folly and in wicked opposition to
God ?


Lessons :—1. Religion ts the seoret of a nation’s greatness. 2. No nation can


prosper when tt forsakes God. 3. There sno limit to the abominations of a nation
when st gives stself up to idolatry.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verscs 21-80. The deep fall of Verses 21, 22. Wherever God has


Judah. I. Whence it came (Deut.
xxxli.15; Hosea xiii.6; Prov. xxx.9).
II. Whither it led (Rom. i. 25 28).
Amongst individual men, as in en-
tire communities, cities, and nations,
revolt against the living God results
from haughtiness, over-prosperity, and
earnal security, bringing, asinevitable
consequences, poverty, ruin, and mis-
fortune in war. High as stood Judah
under David and Solomon, so deep in
proportion did it sink under Reho-
boam.—Lange.


a house, the Devil always builds a
chapel close at hand. How olten
does it happen that cities and countries,
whence it has been ordained by God
that the light of His knowledge should
shine forth, have become the seat alike
of superstition and of scepticism, and
thus infinitely sink below the level of
those lands which have never heard
His blessed Word.


Verse 22. The enormity of sin.
I. Is not unnoticed by the Omniscient
239


*


. XIV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





One. Itis committed “in the sight
of God.”’ II. Is a trial to the love of
God. ‘They provoked Him to
jealousy with their sins.” III. Is a
flagrant evidence of faithlessness to the
Divine Covenant. IVY. Earns an un-
enviable notoriety. ‘Above all that
their fathers had done.”


— Idolatry and immorality rather
increased than decreased, and the fall
of Judah seems to have been even
deeper than that of Israel. However,
the condition of Judah was not so bad
as the condition of Israel in this re-
spect; asin the latter the breach of
the fundamental law had become the
state religion and institution of the
kingdom, the separate existence of
which depended on the new worship;
whilst in Judah the apostasy was only
permitted, and the lawful worship of
Jehovah had always a firm footing at
the central sanctuary. Many good
elements also still existed in Judah
(2 Chron. xx. 12). Judah always
repented as often as they fell into
idolatry, and they continued to be the
guardian of the law ; whilst Israel, on
the contrary, never completely re-
turned to the right way.—Lange.


Verses 23, 24. Wherever profligacy
and fornication are in the ascendant,
there is true heathendom, how many
soever may be the churches. King
Rehoboam, too, sinned grievously in
this wise he, although not himself
an idol-worshipper, yet failed as a
servant of God, in that he did not
oppose idol worship with all his might,
and even regarded it as having equal
rights with the service of the true
God—even, alas! as we find Christian
sovereigns who permit unbelief and
revolt from the truth to rank upon
a level with faith and confession of
God in Christ.—Lbid.


Verse 23. One great object of the
Mosaic dispensation was to maintain,
in the persons of the Israelites, a
living testimony against the polytheism
which had overspread the nations ;
and whatever might directly or in-
directly tend to the worship of many

240


gods, or to the associating of other
gods of man’s devising with the only
real God, Jehovah, the Creator of
heaven and earth, was carefully
guarded against and discouraged.
When, in process of time, the high
places and groves of primitive wor-
ship became consecrated to divers idols,
the danger was that, in adopting the
use of them, the Israelites should
retain some lingering recollection of
the God to whom they had been set
apart; and this, gathering strength,
would insensibly lead them into idola-
try, and to the association of other gods
with Jehovah.— K¢stto,


Verse 25. Where the carcase ia,
there will the eagles be gathered to-
gether (Matt. xxiv. 28). The chas-
tisements of God are never delayed
where immorality and godlessness
prevail, but they do not always lead,
as with Judah, to the humble con-
fession, ‘The Lord is righteous”
(2 Chron. xii. 6). Sovereigns are
often only the instruments of God in
their undertakings, although they do
not or will not recognize the fact.—
Calwer.

— So long as Rehoboam continued
ina right course, the king of Egypt
was restrained by the Lord from the
measures he contemplated; but no
sooner had the king, with his people,
sinned against Jehovah, than the
hands of this powerful prince were
loosened, and he proceeded to invade
the land with a mighty host. This
was the first time the Egyptians had
appeared in the sacred land with hos-
tile purposes against the Hebrews ; and
it is probable that so formidable a body
of chariots, horsemen, and infan
had never before invaded the country.
The appearance of this new enemy,
whose power and resources they well
knew, must have filled the Judahites
with dread—the rather, as their un-
faithfulness had disentitled them ta
the right of looking to the Lord for his
protection.— A%tto.


Verse 26. The true treasures of the
Temple are the worship of God in
spirit and in truth, prayer, faith, love,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. XV.


and obedience: these no thieves nor
robbers can steal, and without them
all the gold and silver in temples and
churches is vain and empty show.
Golden or copper shields are alike in
value if only we can say: ‘‘ The Lord
is our shield, and the Holy One of
Asrael our King.”


Verses 27, 28. The pride of poverty.
[. Descends to paltry imitations. IT.
Delights in pompous parade. III.
Exaggerates the value of what it
possesses.


— It is better to pray to our
Heavenly Father in our closet, rather
‘han to worship with pomp in church
to be seen by men. Yet now there
are many who ceremoniously frequent
the churches, but neglect to maintain
the fear of God, discipline, and good
morals in their own houses and neigh-
bourhood.


Verses 30, $1. It is not toa man’s
honour when, at his grave, these


Verse 30. Jealousy a fruitful
source of mischief. I. Engenders
hatred among the nearest kindred.
II. Is the cause of the most horrible
wars. III. Is very difficult to allay.


Verse 81. We are not to conclude
that Rehoboam himself served idols;
on the contrary, it is emphatically said,
that in solemn procession, accompanied
by his whole body-guard, he con-
tinually visited the Temple, and thus
showed himself publicly to the
people as a worshipper of Jehovah.
But he forsook the law in so far that
he did not obey its injunctions; he
suffered idolatrous worship in Jerusa-
lem, and did nothing towards extermi-
nating it. This was the evil he was
accused of: he continued Jehovah’s
servant, but he wanted firmness and
decision. Sometimes fiery and arro-
gant, sometimes yielding and weak, he
was unstable, as he had shown himself
in Shechem at the commencement of
his reign. He seems also to have been
under the influence of his idolatrous


words are said: There was life-long
enmity between him and his neigh-
bour.—Lange.


mother (verse 31), and wife (chap.
xv. 13), and of his many wives
(2 Chron. xi. 21).—Lange.


——oooe OO


CHAPTER XY.


THE REIGNS OF ABIJAM, ASA, NADAB, AND BAASHA.


Critica and Expranatory Notes.—Verse 1. Abijam—Original form of his name wae
Abijah (2 Chron. xii. 16), the sacred terminal “jah” being connected therewith. But, pro-
bably on account of his evil reign, his name was altered to Abijam. Verse 2. Maachah,
daughter of Abishalom—z.¢., Michaiah, daughter of Absalom ; more properly, granddaughter
of Absalom, by Uriel and Tamar, who was Absalom’s daughter (vide 2 Chron. xiii. 2). Verse 4.
Give him a lamp in Jerusalem—An Oriental figure of speech. Having a lamp in the house
{ndicates the continuance of the family name. Verse 6. And there was war between Reho-
Yoam and Jeroboam, &c.—+.¢., rancorous rivalry, and consequent frequent border skirmishes.
A mistake to think that “ Rehoboam” is a scribe’s blunde: for Abijam, as given in end of
serse 7. The feudal antagonism is reasserted here, having been already stated in chap. xiv. 20.
The two records respecting Rehoboam (verse 6) and Abijam (verse 7) simply denote that the
hostile feeling between Israel and Judah continued through the reigns of both father and son.


Verse 12, The sodomites—vide Notes on xiv. 24, All the idols—Q'7193, a word for


despicable things. The Rabbins render it mud-gods; Hwald renders it doll-images ; Gesenius,
idol-blocks. Verse 13. An idol in a grove—This is a word of far different meaning from


that in verse 12. nya means horrendum, as from the verb YD, to terrify, horrify. Tt
wes


is conjectured that this was an obscene figure, a phallus-image, a symbol of the productive

powers of nature, specially (according to the Rabbins) revolting to the Hebrews. “Ina grove,”

may read, unto Asherah; but this “ grove” was one of similar scenes of licentions indulgence
z 24)


¥


omaP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
a


ractised in the name of religion. Werse 17. Baasha, king of Israel—Third sovereign of the
bingicrs of Israel, son of Abijab, probably of lowly origin (chap. xvi. 2). Built Ramezh—In
the tribal territory of Benjamin, about six miles (Roman) from and on the highway to Jeru-
salem, thereby cutting off king Asa’s communication with the north. Verse 18. All the
silver, &c., left in the treasures—Shishak had “left” but little (chap. xiv. 26); indeed, he


“took away all.” So that the OY \49/7;, the remainder, means what Asa had placed therein ;
qe


7d eSpedty, as the Sept. gives it, what he found. Verse 20. With all Naphtali—Or, unto the
land of Naphtali. Verse 22. Made a proclamation throughout—or, called together. None


excepted—The Septuagint has misapprehended the adverbial sense of *P2 PR; “none ex-


cepted,” and given it as a proper name—els ‘Evaaiu. Verse 27. Gibbethon, which belonged
to the Philistines—A town given to the Levites (Josh. xix. 44), situate within the tribe of
Dan. Verse 29. Smote all the housa of Jeroboam—Vide Notes on chap. xiv. verses 10 and
14. Customary in Oriental scenes for usurpers to exterminate all rivals to the throne. But
hereby was fulfilled Ahijah’s prophecy. Left not any that breathed—A more inclusive de-
scription than in xiv. 10, for this embraces both male aud female. Verse 31. Now the rest
of the acts, &c.—The historian cares not to write them ; he aimed not to preserve a detailed
record of the reigns and deeds of kings; all he set himself to do was to show the conduct of
kings in reference to Jehovah and His worship, and the condign punishment which overtook
defiance of the theocratic law ; thereby tracing the fact that “sin” (verse 26), in the odious
form of national apostasy, wrought the overthrow of the Israelitish dynasties, until the king-
dom of Iarael itself perished.—W. H. J.


—_——


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-8.
Tur Permanent Influence or a Goop Exampre.


1. That a good example is acquired by a life of obedience to the Divine
commandments. ‘David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord,
and turned not aside from anything that He commanded him all the days of
his life’’ (verse 5). David became the pattern and mudel to all kings of right
conduct towards Jehovah. Great and many as were his defects and failures,
he was never guilty of idolatry, nor did he permit it to exist under his rule.
A good example is not formed by aiming at it as a distinct object, but by
quietly and faithfully doing the duty of the moment, without reference to
ulterior results. The beautiful is unconscious of its own beauty, the sublime
knows not its own sublimity; so the obedient and the good are unconscious
of the impressions made by their upright example. It is always safest and
best to obey God.


2. That a good example may be marred by serious blemishes. ‘Save
only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite” (verse 6). This was David’s great
crying offence, which drew down on him the judgments of God, and is ever men-
tioned to hisshame. But he was guilty of other sins: as the neglect to properly
disciplining his sons, the primal cause of Absalom’s and Adonijah’s ruin; his
falsehoods before Achish (1 Sam. xxvii. 10); and his sin in numbering the
people (2 Sam. xxiv. 10). But all these are, in comparison with his guilt in
adultery with Bathsheba and in the murder of Uriah, as sins of intirmity and
ignorance. Lange points out that ‘the sin of David against Uriah was great
indeed, but, apart from the fact that he repented of it bitterly, it was not one
which broke the fundamental law of the theocracy, the covenant and its chief
commandment, and it did not, therefore, undermine the foundation of the
Israelite nationality.” David is not held up asa perfect example of goodness;
it is only the Sinless One who can be so considered. How often does it happen
that in great natures, great virtues and great vices are unhappily commingled |
Their sins are beacons to warn; their virtues indicate the possibilities of good«
ness to which human nature may rise.

249


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,
FE sp cn


III. That a good example is not always imitated. 1. Because of tis
feebleness of the religious pronople. His heart was not perfect with the Lord
his God, as the heart of David his father” (verse 3), Yet Abijam prepared
precious offerings for the temple service (verse 15), probably to replace vessels
which Shishak had carried off, and in his war with Jeroboam professed himself
a faithful servant of Jehovah (2 Chron. xiii. 10-12). Many boast of their
profession of godliness who are strangers to the power of it, and plead the
truth of their religion who yet are not true to it. He seemed to have zeal
for the worship of Jehovah, but he lacked sincerity: he still sanctioned
idolatry. In order to have the courage to follow a good example, we must
have deep and forceful religious convictions: these are to the soul what the
ballast and the driving power are to the steamship. What is wanted is a
strong, deep, faith-compelling conviction of the awful truth and saving power
of the Divine Word.

2. Because of the demoralizing influence of a bad example. ‘‘He walked in all
the sins of his father which he had done before him” (verse 3). It is easier
to copy a bad example than a good one, especially when bad examples are
abundant and are continually before us, and when good examples are so rare.
Amid the prevalent idolatry of Israel there was only one Abijah in whom was
‘found some good toward the Lord God of Israel.” Iniquity is a common
weed: goodness is an exotic. One evil example has many imitators, and its
pernicious influence is long continued. It aggravates the sin of a degenerate
seed that they fare the better for the picty of their ancestors, and owe their
blessings to it, and yet will not imitate it.


IV. That the influence of a good example is a permanent blessing to a
nation (verse 4, comp. with ch. xi. 86). for David’s sake, Jehovah did not
utterly abandon Jerusalem, but, from time to time, provided a successor to the
throne who should be as a light in the midst of surrounding darkness. Asa,
the immediate successor of Abijam, was such a light. It was a promise made
to David that his house should be made a perpetual light (Psa. xviii. 28 ;
cxxxii. 17); and the history of God’s people records the fulfilment of the
promise, notwithstanding much individual uofaithfulness and sin. The influ-
ence of a good man is immortal.


Lessons:—1l. Every facility ts provided for living a holy life. 2. A pious
ancestry entails great blessing and great responsibility. 8. A good example does
not always restrain from flagrant sins.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-8. The fruit falls not far
from the tree. What the old sing,
the youngchirp. The parental house
is, for the child, the preparatory school
of life; what he there sees and hears
is never forgotten through life. No
example is so weighty and important
as that of the parents. How great,
then, is their responsibility! Abijam
followed not after the example of
David, great and glorious as it was;
but after that of his father Rehoboam,
which he saw immediately before


him.— Lange.


The throne of David oft changeth
the possessors, and more complaineth
of their iniquity than their remove.
Abijam inherits the sins of his father
Rehoboam, no less than his crown; and
so spends his three years as if he had
been no whit of kin to his grandfather’s
virtues. It is no news that grace is
not traduced, while vice is: therefore
is his reign short, because it is wicked.
It was asad case when both the kings
of Judah and Israel, though enemies,

et conspired in sin. Rehoboam, like
his father Solomon, began graciously,
243


>


CHAP. XY.


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.





but fell to idolatry; as he followed
his father, so his son, so his people,
followed him. Oh! what a face of a
church was here when Israel wor-
shipped Jeroboam’s calves, when
Judah built them high places, and
images, and groves on every high hill,
and under every green tree! On both
hands God is forsaken, His temple
neglected, His worship adulterate, and
this not for some short brunt, but
during the succession of two kings:
for, after the first three years, Reho-
boam changed his father’s religion, as
his shields, from gold to brass; the
rest of his seventeen years were led in
impiety. His son Abijam trod in the
same miry steps, and Judah with them
both. If there were any (and doubt-
less there were some) faithful hearts
yet remaining in both kingdomsduring
these heavy times, what 9,corrosive it
must needs have been to them to see
so deplored and miserable a deprava-
tion !—Bp. Halt.


Verse 4. The idolatry of Abijam
deserved the same punishment as that
of Jeroboam (ch. xiv. 10-14), of Baasha
(ch. xvi. 2-4), orof Zimri (7d. verse 19),
the cutting off of his seed and transfer
of the crown to another family. That
these consequences do not follow in
the kingdom of Judah is owing to the
faithfulness of David, which brings a
blessing on his posterity. Certainly,
few things are more remarkable and
more difficult to account for, or more
ground of human reason, than the
stability of the succession in Judah,
and its excessive instability in the
sister kingdom. One family in Judah
holds the throne from first to last,
during a space but little short of four
centuries; while in Israel there are
nine changes of dynasty within two
hundred and fifty years.— Speaker's
Comm.


— The blessing of pious, God-fearing
forefathers often falis to the advantage
of even degenerate children, through
the mercy of God.


Verse 5. No human example, how-
ever glorious it may be, is perfect, for
even the greatest and best are want-
ing in the sight of God, and miserable
sinners. Therefore, we are referred
to the example of Him who alone ie
sinless, and out of whose mouth pro-
ceeds no guile. He alone can say?
“‘He who follows Me walketh not iz
darkness, but has the Light of Life ”
(1 Pet. ii. 21; John viii. 12). The
children of this world often quote and
excuse their sins by citing the example
of good and holy men who have fallen,
but never take pattern after their re-
pentance and humiliation, and refuse
to know anything of the wrong and
smitten heart of a David (Psa. li. 19),
or of the tears of a Peter (Matt. xxvi.
75).—Lange.


Verses 6-8. The enmity, strife,
and war between the sister-kingdoms
was the result of their broken covenant
with the Lord God. Wheresoever, be
it amid a nation, a community, or a
family, the fear of the living God and
the bond of union with Him is des-
troyed, there will ever be strife and
discord ; peace is only to be found where
the God of peace reigns in the heart
(Col. iii. 15). To go out of the world
at enmity is not a blessed death.—Jbsd.


Verse 7. Sharp wars by a just hand
of God upon both those kingdoms for
their idolatry. And for like cause the
dissensions between England and Scot-
land consumed more Christian blood,
wrought more spoil and destruction,
and continued longer than ever quarrel
we read of did between any two people
of the world.— Zrapp.


HIOMILETICS OF VERSES 9-16,


Retiaious Rrrorm.


I. That religious reform is a commendable work, in which even &
monarch may engage. As the evil which had debased the nation originated
from the throne, it was fitting that the remedy should issue from the same potent


244


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP, XV.








source. Asa was the first monarch who made a bold and determined stand
against the prevalent idolatry. The sin of the nation had grown into colossal
proportions, and it required no ordinary courage and strength of will to attack
it. Asa threw all the authority of the crown on the side of reform, and was
himself the zealous leader of the movement. The king can do himself no
greater honour, nor confer upon his people a greater good, than by making the
interests of true religion his chief care. If persons in the highest rank refuse
to use their influence in the removal of acknowledged abuses, the Lord will
raise from obscurity an agent who will faithfully and effectually do the work.
The humble peasant may be raised up to rebuke the careless and unfaithful
monarch.


II. That religious reform is inspired by a desire to do the right. ‘Asa
did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord; his heart was perfect with
the Lord all his days”’ (verse 11, comp. with verse 14). The need of reform
is suggested by the wide divergence observed in the actual state of things from
the inner consciousness of right. The man who studies the law of God, and
conscientiously strives to keep its commandments, cannot fail to have a sense
of what is right; and this sense of right will be tse guide and inspiration of all
his actions. This was the case with Asa, though the standard of perfection by
which we are to measure the perfect ones of the Old Testament history is not
the fulness of spiritual light and religious attainment which is set before us in
the New Testament. It is rather a singleness and earnestness of pious
purpose to obey God and maintain the honour of His nameand worship. ‘‘ All
these were noble and excellent acts,” writes Bishop Hall concerning the reform
of Asa: ‘‘but that which gives true life unto all these is a sound root.
‘ Asa’s heart was perfect with the Lord all his days.’ No less laudable works
than these have proceeded from hypocrisy, which, while they have carried away
applause from men, have lost their thanks with God. All Asa’s gold was but
dross to his pure intentions.”” Holiness—a perfect heart towards God—is the
strongest motive to work, and imparts a courage which no difficulties can
daunt.


III. That religious reform aims at the suppression of the most glaring
forms of public vice. 1. J¢ uproots gross immorality (verse 12). Ina time ot
reformation the most flagrant abominations are the first to fall; the rising tide
of righteous indignation sweeps them away. No prince or people can prosper
while the festering pest-houses of immorality are suffered to exist. 2. Zt
destroys idolatry (verses 12, 13). Asa removed all the idols, demolished their
temples, and devastated their groves; and doubtless many of the idol worship-
pers would take part in this work of destruction. When the mind is once un-
deceived, its anger against the instrument of its deception is sometimes terrific
and unbounded. During the tyranny of the Spanish Inquisition in the Nether-
lands, in the sixteenth century, a spirit of fury suddenly arose in Antwerp and
elsewhere against the images used in the Romish worship: the cathedrals and
churches were dismantled, the images and religious relics broken to shivers,
and yet not a single coin of the church treasures was appropriated; the de-
structive mania was wholly confined to objects of idolatrous worship. Terrible,
indeed, is the vengeance which will, ere long, overtake the idols and their
worshippers (Isa. ii. 18). 3. l¢ purifies the court (verse 13). Maachah was
deposed from being queen-mother because of her idolatry, and the disgusting
image to which she did homage was burnt, and its ashes cast into the river.
‘‘ The idols which his fathers had made ”’ were all destroyed. All respect for
flesh and blood must be subservient to the duty we owe to God. A good king
who would promote religion among nis subjects must begin by discountenancing
all wickedness at court. A pure court is a great safeguard to a pace


OHAP. KV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





IV. That religious reform is not always thorough and complete. ‘ But
the high places were not removed ” (verse 14): such as were set up for the
worship of God; for as for those that were set up in honour of idols, he
removed them. But he should have done both, as did afterwards zealous
Hezekiah and Josiah. It is with the saints as with Jonathan’s signal arrows,
tevo fell short, and but one beyond the mark; so where one shooteth home to
the mark of the high calling in Christ Jesus, many fall short.—Zrapp. Re-
formation often proceeds slowly and under great difficulties. It may leave
untouched institutions that may become a snare and a source of corruption to
future generations. Vested interests in a superstitious system are hard to slay.


V. That religious reform enriches the temple of God (verse 15), The
practical evidence of a genuine reformation is shown in costly free-willing
offerings to God. The true riches of a temple are not the silver and gold and
superb furniture, but the gratitude, praise, and devotion of which these are
but the outward manifestations. The soul is only rich in what it really lays
up in the treasury of God. We must not only cast away the idols of our
iniquity, but cheerfully dedicate ourselves and our substance to the cause and
glory of God.


Lessons :—1. Abuses wsll creep into the best organized religious systems.
2. The work of the reformer ts one of great sacrifice and labour. 3. The monarch
who ts sealous for religious reform deserves the gratitude and support of his people.

GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


a father than hate an idol. No dear-


Verse 11. It is to be regarded as a
merciful providence of God, when a
son who has grown up with evil sur-
youndings and the bad example of a
father and mother, yet holds steadily
to His word and commandments, and
resists firmly all ungodly influences.

— The standard of right. I. Is
the will of God. II. By it every act
of man is unerringly estimated. III.
Is but imperfectly represented by the
best human examples.

— In vain should he have hoped
to restore God to his kingdom, while
these abominations inhabited it. It
is justly the main care of worthy and
religious princes to clear their coasts
of the foullest sins. O, the impartial
zeal of Asa! There were idols that
challenged a prerogative of favour, the
idols that his father had made. All
these he defaces: the name of a father
cannot protect an idol; the duty to
his parent cannot win him to a liking,
to a forbearance of his misdevotion:
yea, so much the more doth the heart
of Asa rise against these puppets for
that they were the sin, the shame of
his father. He doth not more honour

246


ness of person should take off the edge
of our detestation of the sin.—Bp.
Hall.


Verses 12, 18. Against sins of licen-
tiousnese no authority can be powerful
enough, for where this evil has crept
in, there comes a moral corruption
which works destructively upon all
relations of life. Authority being
ordained of God, as the Apostle says,
its duty and task is to oppose with
severity all godless conduct, without
fear or favour of man, and to vindicate
the eternal Divinelaws. Therefore it
is that we have the church prayer for
those in authority.— Lange.


Verse 13. There can be no gueen-
consort where there is more than one
wife ; and in the East, where there is
no more than one, she is not a gueen,
she is simply the Zan-i-shah, the king’s
wife— that is all. There is, however,
in most cases, some one in the harem
who, on one account or other, is recog-
nised as the chief lady. There was
one whose claim to be chief lady, or


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,


CHAP, XV.





queen, was superior to all others, and
that was the morner of the king.
The prevalent usage of the East
assigns the first rank in every house-
hold, not to the wife of the master,
but to his mother, to whom the wife
merely becomes another daughter.
And so the rank of the king’s mother
was the nearest approach to the rank
and dignity of a non-regnant queen.
—Kitto.

— Nature is worthy of forgetful-
ness and contempt in opposition to the
God of nature: upon the same ground
as Asa removed the idols of his father
Abijam, so for idols he removed his
grandmother Maachah. She would
not be removed from her obscene idols ;
she is therefore removed from the
station of her honour. If all the
world had been an idolater, he knew
bow little that precedent could avail
for disobedience. Practice must be
corrected by law, and not the law
yield to practice. Maachah, therefore,
goes down from her seat, her idols
from their grove; she to retiredness,
they to the fire, and from thence to
the water. Woeful deities that could
both burn and drown !— Bp. Hall.


Verses 12-15. True reformation.
1. Is wrought for the divine glory.
2. Is not to be hindered by family
considerations. 3. Should be national
in its progress and results, 4. Should
destroy every vestige of corruption.
5. Is evidenced by practical generosity.


Verse 14. To remove deep-rooted
and long-standing evils suddenly and
completely is impossible, even for a
well-intentioned and powerful ruler;
for in that case he would bring about
resistance to the good rather than
further it.

— Yet, in 2 Chron. xiv. 8, we
read that Asa ‘‘ took away the altars
of the strange gods and the high
places,’’ and in verse 5 that ‘* he took
away out of all the cities of Judah the
high places and the images,” which
would seem at first sight to imply that
he entirely put down the worship.
The author of Chronicles, however,
himself afterwards allows that ‘‘the
high places were not taken away out
of Israel,”” though the heart of Asa
was perfect all his days. The expla-
nation would seem to be, either that
the idolatry was at one time put down,
but crept back afterwards; or that,
while Asa endeavoured to sweep it
wholly away, his subjects would not
be controlled, but found a means of
maintaining it in some places—not,
perhaps, in the cities, but in remote
country districts, where the royal
authority was weaker, and secresy
more practicable.—Speaker’s Comm.


Verse 15. Hence noble and pious
princes should bethink themselves of
using their gold and silver, not only
for worldly objects, but to enrich
churches and schools, necessary to
the accomplishment of godly designs.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 16—34,


Symptoms or Retierovus REAocTION.

I. Seen in a growing distrust of the protecting power of God. The build-
ing of a fortress by his rival Baasha, which would have the effect of interrupt-
ing a free and open intercourse with his capital, filled Asa with fear; and
instead of putting his trust in that God whom he had so zealously served, he
relied on his own crooked and short-sighted policy. He bribed the king of
Syria to break the league existing between his own kingdom and the two rival
Jewish kingdoms, so that Baasha was compelled to abandon the building of
Ramah, and Asa used the stones for the fortifying of his own cities (verses 17-22).
““Q, what great and many infirmities may consist with uprightness! what
alloys of imperfection will there be found in the most refined soul! Asa doth
not only employ the Syrian, but relies on him, relies not on God: a confidence


less sinful eost his grandfather David dear.” Religion is losina, its ice
24


CHAP. XV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





over the soul when man is trusted more than God. A dishonest and wicked
project may succeed, but the success is always embittered sooner or later. It
is a dangerous thing to be too clever.


II. Seen in the misappropriation of consecrated treasure (verse 18). It
is sad to notice that he who so recently dedicated these spoils to the Lord
should make such use of them as is here described. Only on extraordinary
occasions was the king justified in employing the temple treasures; but it was
downright sacrilege for Asa to use them in bribing a foreign and heathen king,
for whose help there was no urgent necessity. ‘‘ What is bestowed in faith
must be regarded as sacred, and under no pretext must it be diverted to worldly
purposes. Nothing but a rude power, knowing neither fear nor awe of God,
could commit such a robbery, and no blessing can ever rest upon it. He who
gives with one hand, and takes back with the other, has his just recompense
therein.” The money power of the world is largely in the hands of the Chris-
tian church, and there is an immense responsibility resting upon the wealthy
members of that church as to the righteous use-of their riches. They are but
stewards, and that only for a brief space, when they will be called to render
an account of their stewardship to God. Indifference to financial responsibilities
is a sure token of religious decay.


III. Seen in the disrespect and cruelty shown towards God’s faithful
messengers (2 Chron. xvi. 7-10). An important incident in the life of Asa,
omitted by the writer of Kings, is supplied by the author of Chronicles.
Hunani, the seer, was sent to rebuke and threaten the king for his sin in for-
saking the Lord and in relying upon the Syrian for aid. To be thus chided and
exposed when his diplomatic policy had seemed to prosper so well, was more
than one so little used to contradiction could bear, and in his rage he thrust the
too faithful prophet into prison, adding to his original fault the grievous sin
of persecuting an inspired messenger of Jehovah. ‘‘ Here we have the melan-
choly spectacle of a prophet of God imprisoned, not by an idolatrous or notori-
ously wicked king, but by one who has hitherto borne a noble character, and
whose heart was substantially right with God. Not so did David receive
Nathan’s more stern rebuke. This descendant of his does that for only attempt-
ing to do which Jeroboam had his arm palsied.”’ There is little power of reli-
gion left when the servants of God are treated with contempt and hardship.


IV. Seen in the way in which God is ignored even in affliction (verse 23,
comp. with 2 Chron. xvi. 12). From the whole narrative of Chronicles we
gather that the character of Asa deteriorated as he grew old, and that while
he maintained the worship of Jehovah consistently from first to last, he failed
to maintain the personal faith and piety which had been so conspicuous in his
early youth. In his great and fatal affliction ‘he sought not to the Lord, but
to the physicians.” Not that he was blamed for adopting the best means within
his reach for his recovery, but he was blamed for relying more upon the skill
of the physicians instead of upon the Lord’s blessing upon the means they em-
ployed. tis in affliction that man realises his helplessness and need, and when,
more than at any other time, he is called upon to depend upon the gracious
interference and help of God. It is a lamentable proof of how sadly and
deeply the religious spirit has declined when God is forgotten at a period of
great extremity, and in the near prospect of death!


Lessons :—=1. A time of high religious tension ts usually followed by a time of
reaction. 2. Religious reaction ts fraught with great danger, and calls for patient
and skilful treatment on the part of the church. 3. In a time of religious reaction
there is always much to disappoint and grieve the hearts of God's people.

248


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. XV.


A


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES,


V rse 16. The enemies who rise up
against us and bring us into straits
must often serve, in the hand of God,
to try and prove whether our faith is
rooted in the deepest soil of the heart,
and our zeal in religious things no
fleshy one, but a high and holy one.


Verse 17. The devices of the
wicked, I. Are maliciously planned
to place hindrances in the way of the
good. II. Are prodigal of labour and
expense in accomplishing the desired
end. III. Will be ignominiously
defeated.


Verses 18-21. The eloquence of
gold. 1. Is often more potent than
words. 2. Isan irresistible argument
to the avaricious. 8. Has made many
a one a traitor to the most solemn
engagements. 4. Will set anarmy in
motion for any purpose. 5. Rarely
fails in winning a victory.


Verse 18. To confront his rival of
Israel, Baasha, this religious king of
Judah fetches in Benhadad, the king
of Syria, into God’s inheritance, upon
too dear a rate, the breach of his
league, the expilation of the temple.
All the wealth wherewith Asa had
endowed the house of the Lord was
little enough to hire an Edomite to
betray his fidelity and to invade Israel.
Leagnes may be made with infidels;
not at such a price, upon such terms.
There can be no warrant for a wilful
subornation of perfidiousness. In
these cases of outward things, the
mercy of God dispenseth with our true
necessities, not with the affected. O
Asa! where was thy piety while thou
robbest God, to corrupt an infidel, for
the slaughter of Israelites? O princes!
where is your piety while ye hire
Turks to the slaughter of Christians,
to the spoil of God’s church ?—Bp.
Hall.


Verse 19. This is the curse resting
upon the strife of brethren : each forms
a league with the common enemy


rather than resolve upon peace with
each other. The least reliable friend
and companion in need is he who can
be bought with gold, and is always at
the disposal of the highest bidder.
He who persuades another to break
faith must be prepared to find that he
will not maintain the word given to
him. In every strait, seek first the
support and aid of thy God, without
whom no man can help thee.


Verse 20. Whoso diggeth a pit
shall fall therein, and he that rolleth
a stone, it will return upon him (Prov.
xXvi. 27). Baasha wished to become
possessed of an additional city, and
thus lost a series of his own cities;
with the same stones with which he
purposed to strengthen Ramah, Asa
built two strong cities.—Lange.


Verse 22. Factious opposition. 1.
Is ever short-sighted and short-lived.
2. Is liable to a sudden collapse. 3.
May have the materials it gathered
used against itself.


Verse 23. As the life, so the death-
bed of Asa wanted not infirmities,
long and prosperous had his reign
been: now, after forty years’ health
and happiness, he that imprisoned the
prophet is imprisoned in his bed.
There is more pain in these fetters
which God put upon Asa, than those
which Asa put upon Hanani. And
now, behold, he that in his war seeks
to Benhadad, not to God, in his sick-
ness seeks not to God, but to phy-
sicians. We cannot easily put upon
God a greater wrong than the alien-
ation of our trust. Earthly means
are for use, not for confidence; we
may, we must, employ them; we may
not rely on them. Well may God
challenge our trust as his peculiarly,
which, if we cast upon any creature,
we deify it. Whence have herbs and
drugs and physicians their being and
efficacy, but from that Divine hand?
No marvel, then, if Asa’s gout struck
to his heart, and his feet carried him

349


GHAP. XV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EINGE.





to his grave, since his heart was mis-
carried, for the cure of his feet, to an
injurious misconfidence in the means,
with neglect of his Maker.— Bp. Hall.

— The teachings of affliction. 1.
Affliction is often sent in mercy. 2.
Suggests topics for serious reflection.
3. Is the more admonitory when asso-
ciated with age. 4. Often leads the
wanderer back to God. 65. Can only


increase the distress of the obstinately
impenitent.


Verse 24. Sickness in old age, pre-
vicus to death, is a Divine chastise-
ment and trial, to wean men from the
world and ripen them for eternity.
How many men would die uncon-
verted if God did not visit them be-
fore death with sickness |


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 25-34,
Tre PunIsHMENT OF THE WICKED BY THE WICKED.


The sacred writer having traced the history of the kings of Judah to the
death of Asa, in the sixty-first year of the divided kingdom, proceeds at this
point with an account of the contemporary kings, the narrative occupying seven
chapters, beginning with Nadab, who ascended the throne in Asa’s second year,
and concluding with Ahab, in whose fourth year Asa died. During the single
reign of Asa, the government of the rival kingdom of Israel was in six different
hands, and the record of that period is stained with conspiracy, crime, and
bloodshed. In this paragraph we have an example of how the wicked are
sometimes punished by the wicked, which suggests a few obvious reflections.


I, That a life of wickedness is fall of danger (verses 25-28). It was so to
Nadab. It made him an incompetent and unreasonable ruler. It multiplied
his miseries. It shortenedhisdays. It alienated the attachment of his subjects
—not one of them cared to avenge his murder, or seemed to be horrified at the
foulness of the crime, though this was the first regicide that was committed in
the history of the kingdom. Sin isa state of unnature; it is a breach of the
order of the universe, and it is impossible to escape its penalties, except by
finding the refuge in Him ‘‘ who bare our sins, and carried our sorrows.”
‘‘The seeds of our own punishment,” says Hesiod, ‘‘ are sown at the same time
we commit sin.”

We rave, we wrestle, with Great Nature's plan,
We thwart the Deity ; and 'tis decreed,
Who thwart His will shall contradict their own.


A life of wickedness is menaced with a thousand perils, and, if persisted in,
will terminate in misery and woe.


II. That the wicked are sometimes used to punish the wicked. Baavsha,
a hitherto obscure military adventurer, a bold, pitiless conspirator, was the
instrument who punished the hapless Nadab, and who carried out the Jang:
threatened vengeance against the house of Jeroboam (verses 29, 30). He would
do this to secure himself on the throne he had so wickedly usurped, without
thinking of Ahijah’s prophecy (chap. xiv. 10-14)—perhaps without knowing
it. He might be influenced by some personal quarrel with Nadab, or to be re-
venged on the house of Jeroboam for some injury received from them, er to rid
the country of the cruel tyranny of an unpopular prince, or to clear tha way for
carrying out his own ambitious and daring schemes. Yet he signally fulfilled
the Divine threatenings with a more savage barbarity than was originally in-
tended. He not only slew every male, but “he left not to Jeroboam any that
breathed”; and thus the dynasty of Jeroboam became utterly and hopelessly
or is a terrible thing to be abandoned to the remorasless cruelty of the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, XV.





wicked. The sack of Rome by the Goths (ide Gibbon, o. xxxi.) is a graphic
example of the merciless and unbridled ferocity with which one wicked nation
may punish another. Well might David pray, ‘‘ Let us now fall into the hands
of the Lord; and let me not fall into the hands of man” (2 Sam. xxiv. 14).


III, That the use of the wicked as instruments of punishment does not
necessarily turn them from their wickedness (verse 34). Baasha continued
in the same evil courses which had brought such frightful sufferings upon his
predecessors, and in inflicting which he had been the unconscious instrument—
another illustration how little influence the most notable punishments of sin
has in deterring the wicked from their sins. ‘‘The entail of iniquity cannot
be cut off but by a thorough conversion of the soul to God; and of this these
bad kings seem to have had no adequate notion. The wicked followed the
steps of the wicked, and became still more wicked. Sin gathers strength by
exercise and age.”” The sinner cannot reform himself; and he vainly strives
to maintain his authority and prestige by the mad, purblind policy of commit-
ting still more outrageous acts of iniquity. What would be the condition of the
world if wickedness had unchecked and unrestricted sway ? What must be the
nameless horrors of that Gehenna where all moral restrictions to evil are removed!


2. A similar punishment


Lessons :—1. The forbearance of God has sts limits.
8. A


to that which the wicked have inflicted om others may overtake themselves.
life of sin leads to misery and death.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 25-84. Nadab, the son of who heareth not My word, of him


Jeroboam, reigned but two years over
Israel. Then Baasha, of the tribe of
Issachar, conspired against him and
slew him. There is nothing in the
records of conspiracies like this which
separates the Bible history from
ordinary history. We have, on a very
small scale, in the annals of a few petty
tribes, just what we have expanded
to its highest power in the history of
the Roman or of the Byzantine
Empires. Nor is the result different.
The new house is like the old. The
rebel and murderer becomes a tyrant.
It will be said, There is a grandeur
about crimes and miseries which affect
a world; but what interest can we
feel in the story of men so diminutive
in influence, so insignificant in
character, as Jeroboam or Baasha?
I answer, The Scripture wishes us to
feel none, except so far as by a small
experiment we may discover a truth
for all ages and nations.— Maurice.


Verses 25-31. The ruin of the
house of Jeroboam proclaims these two
great truths: Sin is the destruction of
a people (Prov. xiv. 34); and: He


will I require it (Deut. xviii. 19).
God does not punish the innocent
children for the sins of their fathers,
but those who, despising the Divine
patience and long-suffering shown to
their fathers, perpetuate, without any
shame, the sins of their fathers (Ex.
xx. 5,6). A given example of evil is
rarely without imitation ; as Jeroboam
rebelled against the house of David, so
did Baasha against the house of
Jeroboam. Desire for rule and envy
beget first dissatisfaction with the
condition in life ordained by God, lead
then to breach of faith, and end at last
with murder and homicide.—Lange.


Verses 27,28. Conspiracy. 1. Is
often provoked by a reckless and
tyrannical government. 2. Is often
the dangerous policy of the wicked
and ambitious. 98. Is often associated
with cruelty and murder.


Verse 27. It is curious to find
Issachar furnishing a king. This
tribe had never made, and could have
no grounds for making, a claim to
pre-eminence. It had furnished one

251


~


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ac TT


undistinguished judge, Tola (Judges
x. 1), who, on obtaining his office,
had at once settled himself in the
territory of Ephraim. Otherwise the
tribe was as little famous as any
that could be named. The “ ass
crouching between two burthens” was
a true symbol of the patient, plod-
ding cultivators of the Esdraeclon
plain, who ‘‘saw that rest was good,
and the land that it was pleasant;
and bowed their shoulder to bear, and
became servants unto tribute (Gen.
xlix. 14,15). It cannot have been in
consequence of any claims or merits
on the part of his tribe that Baasha
became king. He probably owed his
rise simply to his own audacity and
his known valour and skill as a
soldier. He appears not to have been
even a person of good position in his
tribe (chap. xvi. 2).—Speaker’s Comm.


Verses 29, 30. Divine vengeance.
I. Though delayed, is certain. II.
May be unconsciously carried out by
wicked and cruel men. III. Is not
meaningless in its threatenings. IV.
Is manifested on account of inveterate
wickedness.


Verse 29. Conspirators and rebela
profess to overthrow tyranny and to
throw off its yoke; but when they
obtain power and sovereignty they are
themselves the most violent and cruel
tyrants.


Verse 34. Baasha trod in the foot-
steps of Jeroboam just as if Jeroboam
had been good and upright. And yet
Baasha himself was an instrument in
the hand of God to punish Jeroboam
on account of his sins. What folly!
When Jeroboam’s son, Nadab, did as
his father, we can explain it by pater-
nal influence; but that Baasha should
have pursued the same course is a proof
of monstrous blindness. The world
does not allow itself to be interrupted
in its purposes ; vain cenduct after the
way of those who live before is always


‘inherited (1 Peter i. 18).— Calwer.


— Sin morally blinding. I.
Hides from the soul the excessive
turpitude of sin. II. Renders the
soul incapable of learning lessons from
the most terrible punishments of sin.
III. Prevents the soul from seeing the
danger and misery into which it is
surely drifting.


CHAPTER XVI.


THE DYNASTIC TROUBLES OF ISRAEL.


OnirroaL AND Exptanatory Notzs.—Verse 1. Word of the Lord came to Jehu—His
father was a prophet (2 Chron. xvi. 7), This is the only incident on record of Jehu. Verse 2.
Forasmuch as I exalted thes—Not that God sanctioned the method by which Baasha attained
the throne, but Divine Providence allowed the attainment. Verse 3, Behold I will take
away-—" By me kings reign.” Having reproduced the iniquities of Jeroboam, he should ex-
perience the same doom ; the similitude of their fate extending to their ‘‘ posterity.” Verse 9,
His servant Zimri—Josephus states that Zimri took advantage of the absence of the army and
its chief to undertake the siege of Gibbetoon. Doubtless this arrangement for debauching
Elah in Aza’s house was a part of the plot of Zimri. He thought to consolidate his sovereignty
by the massacre, not only of the relatives, but also of “the friends” of the royal house.
Verse 15. Did Zimri reign seven days—A brief possession of a throne won by such crimi-
nal deeds! The Israelites repudiated the villainous usurper, Verse 18. Into the palace of


the king’s house—})IIIN means the highest place in the king’s house; “ the fortress of the


palace, the securest and inmost place ; for the royal palace contained a great number of build-
ings” (Gesenius). Burnt the king’s house over him—The Syriac says, the besiegers fired
the royal house over hishead, Verse 19. For hissins . , and in walking in the way of
Jeroboam—aAs he only reigned ‘‘seven days,” this must refer to his previous career, although
“the sins which he sinned” well describe his aanguinary deeds in seizing the throne. Verse 22.
80 Tibni died, and Omri reigaed—According to Josephus (Antig. viii. 12, 5), Tibni was
slain; which seems the necessary termination of the struggle. The phrase, “ So he died,”
does not ae of the thought of a naturar death, whereby Tibni conveniently left the poal-
2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RINGS. OHAP, XVi.
SS a en


tion unchallenged to Omri; but a forced conclusion of the rivalry by the death of Tibni.
However, dD" does not definitely indicate a violent death. Verse 24. Bought the hill
T


Samaria of Shemer—The “two talents of silver” purchase price equal less than £700.
Thus this hill became the site of the royal residences of the kings of Israel, and Samaria the
capital of the kingdom of Israel, until Israel was dispersed and the kingdom ceased. Stanley
says of this site: In the centre of a wide amphitheatre of mountains, about six miles from
Shechem, rises an oblong hill, with steep yet accessible sides, and a long flat top extending
east and west, and rising 500 or 600 feet above the valley. Knobel says : It was a beautiful
round mountain, covered with splendid trees, commanding a glorious prospect of the fruitful
valley and the heights and villages surrounding it. Layard tells usa tablet was dug from the
ruins of Nineveh relating to Samaria, thereon called Beth-Khumri, the house of Omri.
Verse 30, Ahab, the son of Omri—A name fraught with woe for Israel! Verse 30. Took to
wife Jezebel—Fthbaal, her royal father,murdered his own brother (king Philetos), was a priest
also of Baal. Fit parent of this woman. Verse 82. Reared up an altar for Baal—Fully


handed over his kingdom to the Tyrian idolatry. yan is the Phosnician sun-god; the
“altar,” 7JINID, was a pillar or image (comp. Notes on xiv. 23). Verse 83, And Ahab made
s'2


& grove—The Ashterah (see on xiv.15). Thus Jehovah’s worship ceased by royal encourage-
ment and example, if not by edict, and Jezebel saw the idolatry of her own people established
in Israel. Verse 84. Hiel the Bethelite built Jericho—More than 500 years intervened
between the curse (Josh. vi. 26) and its literal fulfilment. Ahab, having repudiated Jehovah
as an object of personal and national worship, further showed his defiance of God in rearin
this city, whose overthrow was a memorial of Israel’s salvation by Jehovah. Whether Hiel’s
sons perished by violence during the erection of Jericho is unknown; the fact alone is here
preserved that the curse was literally fulfilled —W. H. J.


——


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-14.
Tue Doom or tHe Usvrrrr.


I. Is self-imposed. 1. Opportunity ss afforded to reach a« different destiny
‘““T exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee prince over my people Israel ”
(verse 2). Though the means by which Baasha seized the throne was foully
wrong, yet when he had acquired the highest rank and the mightiest power in
the realm, he had the opportunity of using his influence in favour of religious
reform. He was raised from the lowest rank, and from a tribe hitherto
undistinguished; and the “might”? with which he ruled for twenty-four
years, causing even Asa to call in the aid of the Syrian king, showed that
ne was not deficient in capacity. Had he striven to walk in the command-
ments of God, his sins would have been forgiven, and his dynasty firmly
secured. But the opportunity passed unimproved. A great person is like a
great hill, sometimes giving a beautiful prospect, at other times shrouded in
darkness and shaking with storms. 2. A course of evil is deliberately and
persistently followed. ‘Thou hast walked in the way of Jeroboam” (verse 2),
A man is not wicked all at once. Wickedness has its gradations. Bad
thoughts come first, bad words follow, and bad deeds finish the progress.
Wickedness is infectious. ‘‘Thou hast made my people Israel to sin.” A
bad man is like bad water: both are poisons. The only disturber of men, of
families, cities, kingdoms, worlds, is sin; there is no such troubler, no such
traitor to any state, as the wilfully wicked man; no such enemy to the public
as the enemy of God. Sin which is deliberately chosen and practised, and
enforced on others, will bring its own doom.


II. Is not reached unwarned (verses 1-4,7). This is made clear by a double
reference to the fact that the prophet Jebu was sent to remind Baasha of his
sin, and to pronounce a judgment on him and his house, similar to that which
fell on the house of Jeroboam. Though the destruction of J eroboam had been
foretold, and though Baasha may be rightly regarded as God’s et to


*~


OHaP. KVL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





punish Jeroboam’s sins, yet, as he received no command to execute Go1’s wrath
on the offender, and was instigated solely by ambition and self-interest, his
guilt was just as great as if no prophecy had been uttered. The proud usurper,
blinded by success, and still more by a life of impenitent wickedness, is apt to
be indifferent to the awful doom which is certainly descending on his head.
But, in his mercy, God sends His faithful messengers to warn and prepare; and
he that taketh warning shall deliver his soul (Ezek. xxxiti.4). The warnings
of God are manifold and constant; and dull indeed must be the ear that cannot
hear, and hard indeed the heart that cannot feel. The sinner’s cam not is his
will not, and his will not is his condemnation.


III. Will be terrible and complete (verses 11-13). The doom so long and
so plainly threatened fell at length with fearful and desolating severity. Zimri
exterminated the race of Baasha; and the Jews say when such a matter is de-
termined, they not only destroy the house of the person himself, but the five
neighbouring houses, that the memory of such a person may perish from the
earth. ‘The excesses of our youth are drafts upon our old age, payable
with interest about thirty years after date.” Philo Judaeus says that the
builders of Babel engraved everyone his name upon a brick, with a view of per-
petuating their memory: yet this did not serve their purpose. It is just with
God to bury those names in the dust which are raised by sin. The ativcities
of the usurper will not go unpunished.


IV. Extends to his posterity (verses 9,10). Elah inherited all the low. gross
instincts of his father, without any of his courage and ability. When an
oriental monarch indulges in intoxication he is expected at any rate to do it
secretly. He is further precluded by etiquette from accepting the hospitality
of his subjects. Elah appears to have set at defiance this restraint, and, like
the Egyptian Amasis, to have continually reminded men of his low origin by
conduct unworthy of royalty. It is sometimes the curse of a bad man that his
sins descend to his children, and their punishment too. When a man lays the
foundation of his own ruin, others will be too apt to build upon it. As the winds
of winter chase the withered leaves hither and thither, so are the wicked chased.
They flee at their own shadow, and death opens to them all the errors of a mis-
spent life. When too late they shut their eyes in despair—undone! undone!


Lussons:—1. A possession unlarwfullg acquired ts a fruitful source of evil.


2. God warns before he strikes. 3. To harden the heart tm smiquity ts to bring
ruin on one’s own head.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-14. Of the two kings, Zimri was still worse; ambition led


Elah and Zimri, we learn nothing be-
sides that they held to the sin of
Jeroboam, except how they died.
This was, however, sufficient to cha-
racterise them. We see that Elah
did not even inherit energy and cou-
rage from his father Baasha, but was
a coward and a low-souled glutton,
because when the whole army was
engaged in combat with the Philistines
betore Gibbethon, he not only remained
at home, but drank and caroused.
254


him to unfaithfuiness and treason;
he not only murdered his king and
master, but the king’s whole house.
How little esteemed and respected he
was, appears from the fact that the
whole army, as soon as they heard of
his having ascended the throne, imme-
diately made another king, and
marched against Zimri. Then when
shut in and surrounded, he set fire
to the citadel over his head, and gave
himself to the flames—his act was one


‘


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





of despair rather than of heroism
(verses 17, 18).— Lange.


Verses 1-4. The general law is
repeated with the same stern simpli-
city to one man as to another.
‘“‘Whether you came in by right
means or foul; whether you are a
legitimate heir or a conspirator, God
has made you a prince; your crime is
your own. Your power is His.
Trying to be something in yourself,
you pronounce your own sentence,
When you think to make gods, God
unmakes you.” The principle is again
affirmed, that a regular succession, a
sure house, is 4 blessing to a land:
that a maz who desires to found such
a one, desires a good gift; but that it
is a gift; that as a witness of God’s
permanence and presence it is good;
that succession, apart from Him, is a
mere transmission of curses. The
particular phrase, ‘‘ provoke me to
anger,” is used here as it is every-
where else in the Bible. God is con-
templated as jealous over His people,
feeling like a husband or father to a
rebellious wife or child. It is pre-
sented with all boldness to men who
had the lowest, most grovelling con-
ceptions of the divine nature, not to
flatter them, but to counteract them,
to destroy the fiction that God is in-
different to His creatures or hates
them, which is the foundation of all
idolatry, to prepare the way for the
full revelation of that truth which
interprets His jealousy, and is the
ground of all right faith in man—
“‘ God is Love.” —Maurice.


Verses 2-4. The sins of the common
people which they have learned from
their princes, as well also as those
which these do not restrain when they
can, are charged to them. Those who
are lifted up out of the dust are often
the proudest and most arrogant,
because they think they must thank
only themselves for their exalted
position, and they forget what is
written in 1 Sam. ii. 7. For Baasha,
also, the hour struck when it was
eaid, Behold, oh! most proud, &e.
(Jer. L 31). The throne thay has


OHAP. XVI,


~


been obtained by lying, deceit, false-
hood, and bloodshed, has no stability.
The judgment of God, though delayed
for a time, will not always tarry
(Psa. v. 6,7). Robbers and murderers
are not always in caves and the hidden
recesses of forests; sometimes they are
seated upon thrones: but the Lord
will sweep them away, and their end
will be with horror. Before His
tribunal, no people, no crown is a
protection.— Osiander,


Verse 2. The responsibilities of
rank. I. Afford exceptional oppor-
tunities for doing great good, or great
mischief. II. Arerarely used for the
noblest purposes when unrighteously
acquired. JII. Merit corresponding
punishment when abused.


Verse 6. The little that is told of
Baasha is sufficient to show that he
was an ambitious, rough, and violent
—indeed, even a blood-thirsty—man.
He did not conspire against his lord
and king, and usurp the throne in
order to bring the fundamental law
of Israel into force again, and to make
an end of the sin of Jeroboam, for he
himself adhered firmly to it all his life,
in spite of all the warnings and
threatenings of the prophets. He only
cared for dominion, and for this he
esteemed the sin of Jeroboam as neces-
sary as the latterhad done. In short,
he seems to have been a rough soldier
who cared little or nothing about
religion. He was the first king-
murderer in Israel, and led the way,
as it were, to this crime, which was
afterwards so often imitated.— Lange.


Verses 8-10. King Elah. I. He
riots and carouses whilst his people
are pouring out their blood in war. It
is a sign of great barbarousness and
rudeness amid exterior refinement,
when the great and rich lead a frivolous
and luxurious life, whilst the masses
eat their bread in the sweat of their
prow, and are famishing. A riotous
court-life is the usual precursor of the
storm which shakes or destroys the
throne. II. Death suddenly overtakes
him in drunkenness. To go suddenly

255


=


OHAP, XVi.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


NL


and unprepared from time into eternity
is a heavy fate: but it is still more
fearful to leave the world in drunken-
ness. The nearer chastisement comes
to the ungodly, the more secure are
they. Itis fearful when one can say
nothing more of a man than “‘ He has
despised God and His word, served his
belly, and ended his life with a revel.”
Better to famish and be miserable with
Lazarus, and then be borne by angels
into Abraham’s bosom, than with the
rich man to live in splendour and
revelry, and afterwards to suffer the
pains of Hell.— Wurt. Summ.


Verse 8. The crime of murder.
I. Is heinous in the sight of God and
man. II. Is ever a ready weapon in
the hand of an unscrupulous usurper.
III. Never goes unavenged. IV. Is
a stain of infamy on succeeding gene-
rations.


Verse 9. Drunkenness. 1. Is an
evidence of great moral degradation.
2. Forfeits the respect of others. 3.
Renders a man an easy victim to his
enemies. 4. Is closely associated with
violence and crime. 6. Incapacitates
for the most obvious duties. 6. In-
evitably issues in a miserable death.

— Drunken revels are an abomina-
tion to the Lord, and only occur where
the fear of God is absent. The drun-
kards rank with those who will not
inherit the Kingdom of God (1 Cor.
vi. 9, 10); and the Lord Christ warns
—Take heed to yourselves, &c. (Luke
xxi, 34).


Verse 13. The emptiness of idola-
I. It isa “ vanity ’—‘“‘ vapour,”
“nothingness.” II. As a creation of
man it is inferior to himself. III. It
is unsatisfying to man. IY. It pro-
vokes the anger of God.


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 15-28.
Snv roe Proriric Source or Narionan CaLamrrres,


I. It degrades the throne and vitiates its authority (verses 15-20). It
places the crown at the disposal of ambitious adventurers. At this period in
the history of Israel there isa remarkable resemblance to the events which led
to the accession of the Flavian dynasty at Rome; and the character and career
of the Roman Galba, Otho, Vitellius, and Vespasian bear a curious similarity
to the Israelitish Elah, Zimri, Tibni, and Omri. Whoever could best succeed
in bribing the army was sure to gain the crown; and the monarch for the time
being used his exalted position and power for purposes of personal indulgence
and debauchery. ‘It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness; for
the throne is established by righteousness” (Prov. xvi. 12).


He’s a king,
A true, right king, that dare do aught save wrong §
Fears nothing mortal but to be unjust:
Who is not blown up with flattering puffs
Of spongy sycophants ; who stands unmoved
Despite the jostling of opinion.


But where sin is triumphant, and justice and righteousness are disregarded, no
throne can be stable. The very army which has elevated the monarch may be
the instrument of his fall and ruin. Sin tarnishes the crown, breaks the sceptre
of uuthority, and weakens the whole nation.. The usurper is often the dupe of
his own wickedness. You smile when you see a child trying to grasp its own
shadow; but how many have been grasping shadows all their lives, and will
continue to reach out and grasp as long as breath and eyesight last !


II. It divides the people, and introduces all the horrors of civil war (verses
21, 22). For four years the rival claimants of the crown carried on the fratri-
cidal contest, and in all probability Tibni suffered a violent death. As soon as

256


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS GHAP. xVi.





Zimri—Sardanapalus-like—came to such a suicidal end, it would appear that the
authorities at Tirzah, disliking a military despotism, apd Tibne S king, and
as the army had already elected Omri, the nation was plunged into all the
miseries of civil war, which was terminated by Omri gaining the supremacy.
Bitterly do the seceding tribes reap the fruits of evil sowing; for not only are
they given up to idolatry, but are half swallowed up in anarchy. Both Tibni
and Omri would have done well to refuse these proffered honours, considering
what had befallen the kings that had gone before them. Macro, captain of
the guard, and Laco, knight of the watch, Romans who had been active in
ruining Sejanus, had great honours bestowed upon them by the Senate. But
they refused them ; and Dion attributed the reason of their refusal to the terrors
of an example so fresh in their memories. ‘‘ The nation from whose heart rec-


fiedct gone, in whose soul vice runs riot, has its throne built on moral gun-


III, It encourages the ruling power to perpetrate acts of unexampled
wickedness (verses 25, 26). Omri ‘‘did worse than all that were before him.”
Worse than Jeroboam, Nadab, Baasha, and Elah. He was an idolater in
principle and in practice. He led the people to idolatry by precept and example;
and he went beyond all his predecessors in legalising and enforcing idolatry
upon his subjects by statutes, for we read in Micah vi. 16, of “‘ the statutes of
Omri, the keeping of which made Israel a desolation.” Taking this in con-
nection with the character which the historian ascribes to him, we cannot
doubt, remarks Kitto, that these “‘ statutes of Omri,” which were but too well
maintained by his successors and observed by the subjects of his kingdom, were
measures adopted for more completely isolating the people of Israel from the
services of the House of the Lord at Jerusalem, and for perpetuating, perhaps
increasing, their idolatrous practices. Jeroboam made Israel to sin by temp-
tation, example, and allurement; but Omri did it by compulsion. Thus when
a people forsake God, they go from worse to worse, till destruction comes upon
them to the uttermost.


Lxssons:—1. The frequent end of ambitious projectors és to perish in the flames
they have themselves kindled. 2. Hnvy and revenge, even in death, forsake not the
wicked. 3. Of all inflictions on @ nation, none are more terrible than civil wars.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 15-20. The vanity of an IV. Frequently ends in


{l-gotten success. I. An ill-gotten


revenge.
suicide.


guccess is evanescent in its character
(verse 15). II. Creates numerous
enemies (verse 16). III. Has to con-
tend with violent opposition (verse 17).
IV. Drives to acts of desperation
(verse 18). V. Brings its own inevit-
able punishment (verse 19). VI.
Acquires an unenviable notoriety
(verse 20).


Verse 18. Despair. I. Often the
result of baffled ambition. II. Is
one of the sharpest stings of a guilty
eonscience. III. Is associated with
the bitterest feelings of hatred and

@


— The doom of despair is the end
of a life given over to sin, which has
lost sight of the living God, and can
never again find Him. Frequently
what the world regards as heroism
and contempt of death is simply
cowardice and crime in the sight of
God. The Lord has no pleasure, &o.
(Ezek. xviii. 23). It requires more
courage and bravery to bear the
merited punishment of one’s sins than
to escape from it by suicide.

— Zimri’s desperate act has been
repeated more than once in the world’s
history. That the last king of

BAT


CHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Assyria, the Sardanapalus of the
Greeks, thus destroyed himself, is
almost the only fact which we know
concerning him. Herodotus gives a
similar account of a contemporary of
his, a certain Boges, a Persian general
left by Xerxes to defend Kion when
he retired from Europe after Salamis.
He also relates thet the Xanthians,
when pressed by Harpagus, burnttheir
wives, their children, and their slaves
in the Acropolis, and then threw them-
selves on the Persian swords.


Verses 21, 22. Anarchy. I. The
inevitable consequence of national ir-
religion. II. Is fomented and sus-
tained by incompetent and unscrupulous
rulers. III. Is not suppressed without
much cruelty and sutiering.


Verses 28-28. The power of a
wicked life. I. Is the more dangerous
when associated with material pros-
perity (verse 24). Il. Transforms a
king into a tyrant (verses 25, 26).
III. Is the less excusable in a man of
valour and capacity (verse 27). IV. Is


transmitted to succeeding generations
(verse 28).


Verses 24-26. Omri built Samaria,
making it the strong centre of the
kingdom; but he walked in all the
sins of Jeroboam, and did worse than
all who went before him. It is not
said in what respect he was worse, but
it certainly implies that he maintained
the anti-theocratic institutions of Jero-
boam with great zeal and decision. It
appears that he stood well as captain
of the army, for it was in the camp
that he was elected to the throne.
Yet, however valiant he may have
been as a warrior, in the chief thing—
namely, in his relation to Jehovah and
the theocratic fundamental law—he
stood worse than any of his predecessors,
and was furthest from being what was
especially required of a theocratic king,
that is, a servant of Jehovah. A man
may be skilful and useful to himself
and others in all material and worldly
things, whilst in spiritual and divine
things he works only mischief and de-
struction. What, without religion, is
so-called civilization ?— Lunge.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 29-84.
Tur Resection or Gop tar AcmE oF WICKEDNESS,


Tue beginning of Ahab’s reign commences a new epoch in the history of
Israel; new, not so much in the flagrant forms of wickedness that manifest
themselves, as in the relative importance of the kingdom of Israel during the
reigns of Ahab, Ahaziah, and Jehoram. With the exception of Jeroboam, the
reigns of Ahab’s predecessors are very briefly noticed, occupying but parts of
two chapters; but the incidents of the three following reigns, embracing a
period of about thirty-five years, extend from this passage to the tenth chapter
of 2 Kings. During this period the kingdom of Judah receives comparatively
little notice, and then only as an ally of the Northern kingdom, which stands
out predominantly as the mightiest ruling power inthe land. During the same
period appeared those greatest, sternest, most mysterious of prophets, Elijah
and Elisha, whose lives and acts, with strange romantic blendings, present on
the one hand the fierce vindictiveness of the theocratic spirit towards sin, and,
on the other, the tender and shrinking humanity which shows them up as men
of like passions with ourselves. By means of Jezebel, the Sidonian princess,
Phenician idolatry is introduced and sanctioned in the kingdom, and Baal’s
prophets are multiplied by hundreds. A fierce persecution arises against the
worshippers of Jehovah—iaithfulness to the Lord God of Israel being by the
court regarded as disaffection to the government and its measures. Wars,
attended with varying fortunes, are carried on with several hostile kingdoms,
while within the land the few pious weep in desolate sadness, and hidg

258


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP, XVI,
a a


themselves in caves and dens of the earth. Israel seemed to reach the
summit of its wickedness during the reign of Ahab. Observe





I, That a wicked son may exceed the iniquity of a wi

“And Ahab, the son of Omri, did evil in the eet of the bee
that were before him” (verse 30). The name of Ahab has attained an evil
eminence in the world’s history. Like Antiochus Epiphanes, and Nero, he
had a love of art, and he was not destitute of generous impulses; but he
stands forth an example of the lengths of wickedness to which a weak selfish-
ness may be driven by the influence of a stronger will. The great sin of Ahab
—that by which he differed from all his predecessors, and exceeded them in
wickedness—was his introduction of the worship of Baal, consequent upon
his marriage with Jezebel, a name even more infamous than his own; and
his formal establishment of this gross and palpable idolatry as the religion of
the state. He was but carrying out to its inevitable results the vile policy
of his father. It is an unspeakable curse to be under the training of a
wicked father; and it is no wonder if a son thus trained should outvie his
father in vice and profanity.


II. That a wicked wife may exert a still more baneful influence over a
wicked husband (verse 31). ‘‘The marriage of Ahab with this princess,”
writes Stanley, ‘‘ was one of those turning points in the history of families
where a new influence runs like poison through all its branches, and transforms
it into another being. Jezebel was a woman in whom, with the reckless and
licentious habits of an Oriental queen, were united the fiercest and sternest
qualities inherent in the old Semitic race. Her husband, in whom generous and
gentle feelings were not wanting, was yet of a weak and yielding character,
which soon made him a tool in her hands. Even after his death, through
the reigas of his sons, her presiding spirit was the evil genius of the dynasty.”
This is the first recorded instance of an Israelitish king choosing his chief wife
from among the cursed Canaanitish race, and both king and people had good
reason for bitterly repenting the choice. The character of Jezebel, as por-
trayed in the following chapters, is an embodiment of all that is most awful
and terrible in the Clytemnestra of the Greek tragedians, and in the Lady
Macbeth of Shakespeare. Woe tothe man who is under the thumb of a clever,
designing, enterprising, but radically wicked wife!


III. That the public sanction and practice of idolatry amounts to a total
rejection of God (verse 22). Hitherto the Israelites had not cast off their alle-
giance to Jehovah, nor ceased to worship Him, though their worship was
damaged by the presence of unworthy emblems, and degraded by maimed rites
and an unlawful priesthood. But inthe dark times of Ahab and Jezebel, while
they did not in so many specific terms formally renounce Jehovah, they did
what was practically the same by setting up other gods besides Him, and holding
Him of no more account than them. Baal-worship became the fashionable and
court religion; and the mass of the people, prepared by the idolatrous experi-
ences of previous reigns, would readily adopt it. Baal was the chief male
divinity among the Phenicians, as Ashtoreth was their female divinity. Jehovah
can tolerate no rival; and a divided worship cannot be acceptableto Him. If
idolatry is preferred, then Jehovah is rejected; and the result is misery and ©


death.


IV. That the rejection of God is the very acme of wickedness (verse 33),
*¢ Ahab did more to provoke the Lord God of Israel to anger than all the kings
of Israel that were before him.’”’ We can be guilty of no greater sin than to


reject God and the salvation He has provided through His son. ‘ This is the
259


~


CHAP. XVI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





sondemnation,”’ &c. (Jno. iii. 19 compared with verse 36). It is not the enor
mity or number of our sins which causes our condemnation; but the unbelieving
rejection of the Divine Redeemer. When we give up God, we give up every-
thing—all help, all hope, all happiness, and, like a rudderless and sailless vessel,
drift towards the gloomy rocks of destruction.


V. That in a time of abounding wickedness the most presumptuous acts
are attempted (verse 34). The attempt to rebuild Jericho is adduced as &
proof of the generalimpiety of Ahab’stime. The curse of God against the man
who should rebuild that city (Josh. vi. 26) had hitherto been believed and re-
spected, and several hundred years had passed with no one so impious as to
despise that curse. The place had been inhabited, but no one had ventured ta
fortify it and set up the gates. But now faith in the old religion had so
decayed that Joshua’s malediction, terrible as it was, no longer exercised a
deterrent power. Hiel, a Bethelite—a native of that city which had so long
been the scene of Israclitish calf-worship, and, perhaps, a despiser of Jehovah
and His laws—undoubtedly aman of wealth and station, perhaps instigated by
Ahab, undertook to restore the long ruined fortress, in spite of Joshua’s menace.
But he suffered for his temerity. In exact accordance with the words of
Joshua’s curse, he lost his firstborn son when he began to lay anew the foun-
dations of the walls, and his youngest when he completed his work by setting
up the gates, and, it is supposed, all his other children between. Of all sins,
presumptuous sins are most offensive to God, and never fail to meet with their
due meed of punishment. But when man abandons God, there is no degree of
wickedness of which he is not capable. THiel paid dearly for his presump-
tion. He sought for a name, but he left it for a curse (Isa. lxv. 15). The
man who defies the Almighty must bear the consequences.


Lussons :—1. Jt is a life-long plague for any man to be united to a wicked and
abandoned woman. 2. If the idolater spares no expense or labour in serving his
abominations, with what generosity and zeal ought the Christian to serve his God.
8. Idolatry has degrees of wickedness—the highest is reached when God is rejected.


Awas AND Baar.


I. The worship of the calves which Jeroboam set up in Bethel and in Dan is
carefully distinguished in Scripture from the worship of Baal which was intro-
duced by Ahab into Samaria. Jeroboam wished to separate the ten tribes from
those which followed the house of David, by giving them sacrifices and priests
of their own. From the words which he is said to have used—‘“‘ These are thy
gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt’”’—it is probable
that he affected to restore the idolatry which Aaron had sanctioned in the
wilderness. He or his priests would suggest the thought to the people, or
their own hearts would suggest it to them, that what the high priest approved
could not be very wrong, that Moses had no right to break the calf in pieces,
that the people in Jerusalem who followed the law of Moses were really
departing from a good old example, that they were returning to a national ser-
vice. The step from this ultra local worship to a foreign Phoenician worship
seems a very long one, yet it was natural and easy. We cannot tell exactly
what the calf signified to the Egyptian, still less what it signified to the Hebrew
slave in the desert, or to the revolted tribes. Itmay have been merely adopted as
a traditional symbol, no special force being attached toit. Buta people trained
in the law of Moses must have associated some recollection of an unseen Being
even with the most worthless image. How strong such associations may be in
any ane how long they may continue, we have happily no means of deter-

6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, XVL








mining. We only know that the conscience of the idolater becomes at once
stupefied and sensitive; more and more incapable of appreciating moral distinc-
tions; more and more alive to terrors. The thought of a righteous being is
sppalling; from an object of trust he passes into an object of horror. How to
appease Him is the question. The old forms may aot be the right. Other
nations which seem happier and more prosperous, have other gods and sacrifices.
It might be well to try them. The most powerful neighbour must be most
worthy of imitation.


II. A king like Ahab meets the demand of a people in this state. The
Scripture which speaks of the cities which he built, and his ivory house, and his
might, and the wars which he warred, leaves the impression upon us that he
was intellectually superior to his predecessors, of a higher ambition, less narrow
in his notions. He had not the dread which Jeroboam felt of intercourse with
Jerusalem, he cultivated the friendship of Jehoshaphat. At the same time he
took to wife Jezebel, the daughter of Ethbaal, king of the Sidonians, and with
her he naturalized a worship certainly more imposing and august than that
which had been practised by the kings that were before him. There may, or
may not, have been animal forms connected with the service of this God of
Ekron. The name would seem only to impart a comprehensive notion of lord-
ship, a notion which might express itself in a number of different symbols,
which certainly would not be as limited to the one of the calf, or be likely to
adopt that as its favourite. Baal would become Baalim, the general lord or
ruler would soon be multiplied and divided into a number of lords and rulers ;
but there would be attached to them all a much grander feeling of dominion
than could ever have entered into the mind of one who was bowing to the like-
ness of a calf which eateth hay.


III. Ahab would therefore seem to himself, as well as to a great many of
his people, an improver and expander of the popular faith. J oreign priests
with much more knowledge, probably, than those lowest of the people whom
Jeroboam had consecrated, would come into the land. A number of the native
priests would be quite ready to adopt the worships which the king and queen
favoured. Though they might have some new rites to learn, though they
might not like the strangers, or might be despised by them, yet they would not
be conscious of any great change in themselves or their devotions. In their
groves, on their hill altars, they had been seeking to propitiate some unknown
fearful divinity. For that divinity they had now found aname. The Egyptian
idol might suggest thoughts sometimes of the dark power, sometimes of
Him who had made s covenant with their fathers; the Phoenician taught them
to understand the distinction, to feel and know that they were invoking another
than the Lord God whose presence Solomon had prayed might fill His temple.


IV. You see, then, why Ahab is said to have provoked the Lord God of
Israel more than all that were before him. The Baal worship was essentially
the worship of mere power. I donot say that abstractedly or originally it
was the worship of an evi? power ; but it was the worship of power; therefore,
of that which man sees without him in nature, not of that which he feels within
speaking to himsclf. When we think that the things themselves exercise
the power, and do not receive it from One in whom dwells eternal justice and
rectitude, forms which denote the most violent and inexplicable outbursts of
fury, the fire and the tempest, are speedily thought to represent the nature of
the Baal or Baalim of the lord or lords of the universe. At all events, these
are what man must address himself to. Some joyous feasts may be celebrated
with wild and reckless licence to the gentler and humaner powers which
manifest themselves in the propitious breeze, the quiet evening, oe a that


a |


oHAP. XVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


Cn et


ripens the autumn fruits; but the most serious services, the sacrifices which
those very enjoyments have made necessary, the libations of blood, must be
presented to some malevolent nature which would destroy unless it were soothed.
Thus the worship of power becomes literally the worship of evil. By a regular
and awful process, Baal or Baal-zebud became in the minds of his devout
servants what his name imported to Jews of later time—the Prince of the


Devils. — Maurice.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 29-34. The king Ahab. I.
His union with Jezebel—a marriage con-
tracted not in obedience to God’s holy
will, but merely upon worldly grounds
and political considerations, and was,
therefore, the source of great mischief
to himself and to his people. II. Zhe
uplifting of idolatry over the religion of
the country. The calf-worship was
merged in the Baal-worship. The
greatest tyranny is the tyranny over
conscience, which pretends to rule also
over belief. The worst rule is that
which, instead of demanding recogni-
tion of the truth, substitutes lies and
errors, and exercises its power in aid
of unbelief and of superstition. III.
The rebuilding of Jericho. By means
of ‘faith’? the walls of Jericho fell
(Heb. xi. 30). IJdolatry will build
them up again; but the curse rests
upon them. He who builds up what
the Lord has destroyed, falls under
His judgment. Julian, who rebuilt
the heathen temple, and the Jews, who
rebuilt the temple of Jerusalem, were
confounded and brought to shame.—
Lange.


Verse 30. And whatmanner of man
was he—this Ahab, son of Omri—who
gave his royal countenance and
sanction to all these doings? Excuse
is sometimes made for him as not an
essentially wicked, but only a weak
man, overborne by the powerful will of
aresolute woman. But ‘all wicked-
ness is weakness,” and itis also true,
that all weakness is wickedness, and
most of all in a king. He to whose
care the welfare of a nation has been
entrusted, has no right to be weak.
The weakness ascribed to Ahab seems
to us merely indolence of character, a
love of ease, an indisposition to exer-
tion, unless when thoroughly roused

262


by some awakening stimulus. He was
such a man as would rather allow what
he feels to be wrong, for the sake of &
quiet life, than take the trouble of
asserting what he knows to be right.
To shake off, to battle against this sloth
of temper, which made him the tool of
others, and rendered him impotent for
all good, was his duty as a man, and
tenfold more his duty asa king; and
to neglect that duty was wickedness,
wasruin. And it ended, as all such
neglect does, in bringing down upon
him tenfold the trouble and disturbance
of ease which he had striven to avoid.
‘‘ Anything for an easy life,’’ seems to
have been Ahab’sruleof conduct. But
a king has no right to an easy life.
It is hard work to be a king. Espe-
cially is it hard work in an Eastern
country, where, on the person of the
sovereign, are devolved many duties of
decision, of judgment, and of action
which, in Western countries, he assigns
to his advisers and ministers.— Aitto.

— The progress of wickedness,
I. Rapid. II. Encouraged by notori-
ous examples. III. Begets an emula-
tion to outstrip all predecessors. IV.
Sinks a nation into moral degradation
and ruin.

— Moral corruption the cause
of decay. J. Zhat the judgments of
God upon the wicked are not arbitrary,
but are regulated by law. Nothing
whimsical or arbitrary may be ascribed
to Him who is the same yesterday,
to-day, and for ever, and who sees the
end from the beginning. The idea
that God is variable in His doings haa,
like all false things, created a reaction
which threatens to be serious. The
changing notions of theology have
stirred the thoughts of men outside
the theological circle, and led to the
earnest study of these positive sciences


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. XVI.





which reveal the order and regularity
of all God’s works. From this source
has sprung a doctrine of God which
represents Him as so fixed and change-
less that it is painful from its very
immutability. Even from this teach-
ing of the Positivists we may learn
that which may help our faith and
clear our conceptions of God. In the
physical world, God rules by law—
law fixed and changeless—since the
perfection of His wisdom forbids the
necessity of change. May we not
learn thence, that in the moral and
spiritual world the same order will be
observed, the same plan of government
carried on? Thisthought is strength-
ened when we remember that the two
worlds are ultimately one; the physi-
cal is only the type of the spiritual.
The one plan of government pervades
the whole. Effects follow causes in
the sphere that belongs to the soul, as
punctually as in the world of matter.
If you break loose from the Divine
plan of spiritual life, or refuse to be
loyal tothe spiritual laws of the king-
dom, it is at your peril. II. The
sllustrations of this law which the history
of the world presents. History, when
written and read rightly, corroborates
the declarations ef the Word of God.
Think of the time when the young
world was filled with wickedness: the
eternal laws of right and goodness
were trampled under foot; God was
forgotten, and human nature exasper-
ated by its own rebellion. The
punishment did not tarry long after
the sin. So was it in like manner
with the cities of the plain. So was
it with the Jews. The cup of their
iniquity was full. Through the ages
their rebellion had been great. They
obtained times for repentance without
number, but always fell back to their
old sin. With the Jews all life of the
highest kind was gone ; every inspira-
tion to nobleness was eatenup. Only
the carcase of a dead people was left,
and where that is, ‘‘ there will the
eagles be gathered together.” What
is to be said of all those empires,
kingdoms, and people which made such
progress for a season, and whose glory
filled the habitable globe? Where


are Assyria, Greece, Rome, Carthage ?
In proportion as the conscience of a
people is true to its own ideas of right
and wrong will the energy of the
people increase and their existence be
prolonged; when it is otherwise,
decay and deuth are certain. Let ua
not tempt God as did the Jews. O!
do not continue in sin; do not play
with the poison, lest it eat out the
life, deaden your sensibility to God
and right, leave you with your virtue
utterly ruined, your God offended,
your destiny lost.—J. Coyle.


Verse 31. Jezebel was just the
woman to manage such a man; and
she soon found how to manage Ahab
as sho pleased, and to become, in fact,
through him, the regnant sovereign of
Israel, while on him devolved the public
responsibility of her acts. It was not
by imperious temper, though she was
imperious, nor by palpable domi-
neering, that she managed this.
No. She made herself necessary to
him—necessary to his ease, his com-
fort, his pleasures. She worked for
him, she planned for him, she de-
cided for him. Shesaved him a world
of trouble. She taughthim to consider
the strength of her will necessary to
supply the weakness of his own—
necessary to save him the labour of
exertion and thought. Prompt in de-
cision, ready in resource, quick in
invention, ruthless in action—she saw
her way at once to the point at which
she aimed, and would cut with a sharp
stroke through knotty matters which
the king shrunk from the labour of
untying. She was thus often enabled
to secure for her husband the object of
his desires which he himself hesitated
to pursue, or despaired to obtain;
and in accepting it from her hands, he
cared not too nicely to enquire whether
it were not stained with blood, or
whether it heaped not upon his head
coals of fire which would one day
consurae him.—K7vtto.

— A native of Zidon and the
daughter of its king, from the very
first hour Jezebel set foot in Israel
she became its poison and curse; and,
indeed, among all who have disgraced

263


%~


GAP, XVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





the name of woman, she must ever
hold a loftily inglorious rank. We
place her on the same platform with
Lucretia Borgia, who shrank from no
crime; with Mary, the daughter of
Henry VIII., who sent Cramner,
Latimer, Hooper, and Ridley to the
stake ; with Catherine de Medici, the
real author of Black Bartholomew,
when, in one single night, 70,000
Huguenots perished ; with Lady Mac-
beth, the original of whom, it is be-
lieved by many, our national drama-
tist found in Jezebel. There is some-
thing in the very sound of that name
that makes one scared and cold. What
mother would call her daughter
Jezebel? What epithet of more utter
scorn, of more withering contempt,
could be applied to any woman, the
worst and most wicked? Even in her
own day the character of Jezebel be-
came a national byeword and proverb,
and to the end of time her memory
will rot as rotted her body when,
trampled by horse and licked by dogs,
they buried what remained, unwept,
in a dishonoured gravee—H. 7,
Howat.

— Anunholy alliance. I. Would
never be entered into if the soul were
not first demoralized. II. Yields the
ascendency to the strongest will. III.
Is a terrible weapon of mischief
where a bad woman is the ruling
genius.

— Mixed marriages eminently
inexpedient and dangerous.
Whether Scripture speaks or is silent,
the facts of life cannot be denied.
They abundantly testify that a want
of mutual religious convictions be-
tween husband and wife injuriously
affects their sacred relationship.
True marriage rests on common ad-
miration and sympathy, it is the union
of hearts in the bonds of holiest love.
If, however, religion, which concerns
the deepest emotions and noblest
thoughts, is excluded, the union of the
two natures is disastrously incomplete,
the real foundation of married life be-
comes fearfully insecure. A husband
may love his wife because of her beau-
tiful face or figure, her gentle manners,
her “peda gifts, her housewifely


skill; but that love is meagre, partial,
unsatisfactory ; the richest chords of
the soul remain untouched. If he be
a devout man, serving Christ, that
which he esteems the best thing in
life she does not possess. The same
is true on the other side. A Christian
woman may feel that her husband is a
noble man, but if he be not religious,
he is not everything to her; she is
perpetually craving sympathy which
he cannot give. There is no union
of soul. Then the hindrances and
sorrows that spring from this spiritual
isolation are incalculable. Man and
wite do not understand each other,
they look at numberless experiences
from opposite standpoints, words of
strife often follow, motivesareimputed,
sometimes sneers at saintliness are
given on the one side and denuncia-
tions of godlessness on the other, which
leave wounds behind them not soon
healed. it is no secret, but a well-
known fact, that multitudes of family
quarrels arise because of this want of
spiritual union, and the highest aspira-
tions of the godly soul are perpetually
thwarted by it. Then how perplexing
is the education ofthe children. The
parents are not at one, and while the
example of one would lead them to an
early consecration, the conduct of the
other nullifies the intended result. If
children, with their keen eyes and
sure instincts, see one parent indiffer-
ent to religion, they will naturally
conclude that they may neglect it too.
To marry an unbelieving husband or
wife may involve the future destiny of
the offspring! If the children of such
a union grow up in the fear of God it
will be in spite of the bad example of
one parent at home.— W. Braden.


Verse 82, 88. A false worship.
I. Is expensive. II. Is strengthened
by organization. III. Becomes more
pernicious the longer it is tolerated.
IV. Gradually supplants and then per-
secutes the true worship. V. Is
specially offensive to God.


Verse 84. The audacity of un-
belief. I. An inevitable result when
idolatry is in the ascendant, IL, Not


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. XV








intimidated by the most awful impre- to others, I. A warning against the

cation. III. Meets with the punish- commission of sin. II. A warning

ment it defies. against associations with sinners. III.
— The victims of sina warning A warning against tempting others.





CHAPTER XVII


THE FIRST APPEARANCE OF ELIJAH THE TISHBITE.


CRITICAL AND ExpLanatory Nores.—Verse 1. Elijah the Tishbite—This is the first
mention of him in Scripture; an abrupt introduction, which seems to imply that already he
was known as a prophet; or the startling development of national apostasy under Ahab may
have called out Elijah into sudden protestation. Tishbite—Not an Israelite, therefore, but a
Gentile, whose employment in the prophetic ministry was itself a rebuke to the nation. Was
there none in all Israel to speak for Jehovah? The name “ Elijah,” TON, signifies, My God


is Jehovah. Israel was rejecting Hm for idols, bat this Gentile had rejected édols for Hm.
“Tishbite,” from Tisbe, a place east of Jordan. Tobit i. 2 refers to @fcBe as being ‘‘at the
right hand of the city properly called Naphtali, in Galilee above Aser.” Said unto Ahab—
1t is suggested that this penal prediction proved the closing application of an unrecorded speech,
All reasoning being ineffective, the prophet leaves the king with this prophetic sentence. Yet
Elijah’s manner was to accost the guilty with few, yet significant words, and then depart.
Verse 3. Hide thyself by the brook Cherith—He should “hide,” in order to escape alike the
king’s violence and importunities ; also to allow his words to vindicate themselves as true, and
give men time to learn their need of him and hisGod. Cherith—Site unknown. Various con-
jectures have attempted to locate it, but all is uncertain. Its obscure site indicates its great


security as @ hiding place. Verse 4. I have commanded the ravens—O'1 VY, which some,


on account of these birds being legally “ unclean,” and notably voracious, have interpreted
Arabians. The word is so used in Ex. xxvii. 27; 2 Chron. xxi. 16; Neh. iv. 17. Gthers
regard the word a8 pointing to the inhabitants of Orbo, near by the supposed brook. Michaelis,
objecting to the supernatural altogether, suggests that Elijah was merely told to feed himsel*
from the raven’s nest, by plundering them of the game they seized! Verse 9. Zarephath,
which belongeth to Zidon— Sarepta, situate between Tyre and Sidon, in the native land of
Jezebel. Yetihis “widow” knew JEHOVAH (verse 12), and appealed to His High Name in
verification of her words. Verse 13. Fear not; go and do, &.—A severe test of faith, for
there was nothing between her and death except the promise of verse 14. Nevertheless, with
nought save a promise to agsure her, she made her solitary cake, and saw it eaten by Elijah.
Yet starvation was not the issue, but salvation. Verse 17. Fellsick. . . no breath left
in him—This phrase does not absolutely imply death (comp. Dan. x. 17; also 1 Kings x. 17),
Josephus renders the incident thus—as «al rhy Wuxhy ddeivar mal Sdtas vexpdy. We may con-
cede that the boy was in a state of fatal exhaustion, sinking away into death, and not abso-
lutely dead. But whichever was the case, his recovery was as really supernatural and miracu-
lous. Verse 18. What haveI to do with thee t—The bitter upbraiding of incoherent grief,
My sin to remembrance—No particular sin, but the current error that affliction was a
punishment (comp. John ix. 3). In the first passion and dismay of sorrow we strangely mis-
read God’s design. Verse 19. Carried him into a loft—The upper chamber; alone there
with God, to plead for Divine interpretation and removal of this unexpected calamity. Verse
21. Stretched himself upon the child three times—“ Stretched himself,” &c., thereby em-
ploying rational means for warming, and thus revivifying the body ; but not relying on natural
methods for his restoration, but on God’s intervention, using means of themselves ineffectual
for the miraculous result. ‘* Three times,” “because the calling upon the name of Jehovah in
the old covenant was a threefold act (Psa. ly. 18; Dan. vi. 10); thrice in the high priestly
benediction was the name of Jehovah laid upon Israel] (Numb. vi. 22) ; thrice did the seraphim
before the throne of Jehovah cry out holy (Isa. vi. 8).”—Lange. And Jesus himeelf ‘left
them and went away and prayed the third time, saying the same words” (Matt. xxvi. 44),
Verse 24. Now by this I know—“ Because thou hast seen thou hast believed ;” yet she had
already shown faith when proof was not visible. This was a most gracious seal to her faith,
which had thus been doubly end sorely tried.—W. H. J. oss


¥


GuaP, XVIL HOMILBTIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ee SRR








HOMILETIOS OF VERSE 1L.
Tae True Proruer anp His Sienrricant Messsen.


Tsrazt had gone from bad to worse, and the cup of her iniquity was fast
filling to the brim. Religion was little more than a name. Jehovah was no
longer worshipped as a living person, but was only thought of as a far distant
and butdimly comprehended being. Faith darkenedintoa grim unbelief, and virtue
wallowed in the filth of a royalty-sanctioned sensuality, or hid itself in solitude
with fear and trembling. The nation had revolted from the beneficent sway of
Jehovah, and rushed with reckless haste into the embrace of a she-fiend, who
held it as with a grip of iron, while she tantalized it with her voluptuous wiles,
and goaded it to despair with her heartless cruelties. Surely the spell of the
vile enchantress could not last forever. The end must be at hand: the iniquity
of the land cried to heaven for vengeance. A sense of approaching doom took
possession of many minds; and it seemed as if a strange, mysterious stillness,
like that which sometimes precedes the terrific tempest, settled on the nation—
a stillness broken only now and then by the murmur of the idolatrous wor-
shippers in the groves, or the loud, coarse laughter of the licentious priests as they
feasted at Jezebel’s table. Suddenly—like a meteor newly kindled in the
heavens, or like a thunderbolt hurled from the clouds by the hand of the
Almighty—Elijah bursts upon the scene. The revellers tremble and the king
grows pale, as the bold and fearless prophet denounces their wickedness, and
warns them of the sufferings which their sins would inevitably bring. Thus the
darkest night of Israel’s spiritual declension was broken by the appearance of
that bright luminary Elijah, the greatest of all the prophets since Moses, and
the type of that great preacher of repentance who was the forerunner of Christ.


I. That the true prophet is often called to his work out of comparative
obscurity. ‘‘ Elijah, the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead.” It
seemed very unlikely that areformer would spring from the midst of the rough,
uncouth inhabitants of Gilead. It was a wild, rocky, mountainous region, a
country of chase, and the favourite haunt of robbers—something like what some
parts of Palestine are rendered by the Bedouins of the present day ; or, in rela-
tion to the rival kingdoms on the west side of the Jordan, very much what the
Highlands were to the Lowlands of Scotland in the days of chieftain feud and
foray (videl/acaulay’s England). And yet it was just the place where the very
qualities that were so essential in a prophet who would successfully contend
with an Ahab and a Jezebel would be likely to be nurtured—the capacity of
endurance, the fleet action, the intrepid boldness, the sternness of reproof
amounting almost to fierceness. How true is it that God is not limited to
locality in the choice of His servants! There was an Abraham in Ur of the
Chaldees, a Moses in the land of Midian, a Nicodemus in the Sanhedrim, a
Joseph of Arimathea among the aristocracy of Jerusalem, a Cornelius in the
Roman camp; there were saints in Cesar’s household, and in half-heathen
Gilead there was found an Elijah.


II. That the true prophet bears unmistakable testimony as to the character
of the only True God. ‘‘ As the Lord God of Israel liveth.”” Jehovah is the
swing God. This truth was uttered by the fearless prophet with an abruptness,
a solemnity, and a ringing vehemency that must have startled the guilty Ahab,
and have reminded him that the dumb, dead idols to which he was yielding
homage were incomparable with the All-powerful and Ever-living Jehovah
whom he and his people had so wickedly forsaken. Elijah means God-Jehovah,
so that even in his name the great reformer carries a rebuke to the Baal-serving
king. The great need of Israel at this time was a revival among them of just
ideas ote God. Notwithstanding the special privileges they had enjoyed

6


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. @HAP. XVII.








in becoming acquainted with the True God, they were now in danger of losing
all faith in Him, and of sinking down into a worse state of heathenism than
that of the idolatrous nations by which they were surrounded. All true reform
must begin by restoring to the mind clear and exalted conceptions of the
character of God. This Elijah did, not so much by eloquence of speech, as by
picturesqueness and significance of action. He was the prophet of action—the
great hero—prophet of the kingdom of the ten tribes: ‘the grandest and most
romantic character that Israel ever produced.” His whole career was one of
intense activity, during which he wrote, as if in fiery hieroglyphics, the awful
character of the God he so diligently served. His mission was to proclaim the
living God in opposition to Ahab’s dead, senseless idols.


III. That the true prophet receives his commission from the Highest
Authority. ‘Before whom I stand.’? How honourable, how sublime, how
awful the position of him who stands to minister in the presence of God as His
servant and ambassador! He receives his commission direct from the throne,
he speeds on his errand with ready obedience, he is oppressed with the respon-
sibility of his office, he utters his message as if standing in the presence of God.
Elijah was ‘‘ the loftiest, sternest spirit of the True Faith raised up face to face
with the proudest and fiercest spirit of the old Asiatic paganism, against
Jezebel rose up Elijah the Tishbite.’” Whenever the powers of darkness
appear incarnate in some such ruling personage as Jezebel, with her hosts of
Baal and Asherah prophets, then God provides an incarnation of his Divine
Spirit and power, with suitable signs and wonders to confuse and confound the
ministers of Satan. Such an incarnation was Elijah. The power that may be
exerted by an individual life is something appalling, especially when it derives
its inspiration direct from heaven. Lord Rochester fied from Fenelon, crying,
“Tf 1 stay here any longer, I shall become a Christian in spite of myself.”
Te greatest power over humanity to-day is spiritual power.


IV. That the true prophet is commissioned to announce the judgments of
God against prevalent iniquity. ‘There shall not be dew nor rain these
years but according to my word.” 1. Jehovah has absolute control over all the
elements of nature. The worshippers of Baalim invested their deities with the
lordship over the processes of nature; and the time had come when they must
be undeceived. The prophet demonstrates that the dew and rain-clouds are not
of Baal’s giving, but are wholly in the hands of God, who can bestow or with-
hold their blessings according to His will. 2. Jehovah can make the elements of
nature the instruments of a nation’s punishment which have been the means of tts
sin. Israel had ignored God in nature and ascribed all power to Baal: nature
is now to wield the rod which is to punish them for their apostasy and sin. It
is to be shown how utterly fictitious is the control of their deities over the dew
and the rain, and how terrible is the judgment which Jehovah can impose by
drying up the moisture of earth and sky. Drought was a punishment
threatened against idolatry (Deut. xi. 16, 17); and in this particular instance
the obstinacy of Ahab continued it for three years and a half. To Eastern and
Southern nations the withholding of rain is the withholding of pleasure, of
sustenance, of life itself. It is only in abject distress and suffering that man
can see the falseness and vanity of the idols in which he has so blindly
trusted.


Lzssons:—1. Jn the worst times God can raise up faithful men to do the most
dificult and most weeded work. 2. They who dare to be bold for God may safely
trust to him for protection. 8. We learm how great may be the power of an
sndiosduad life. ares


~’


GAP, XVI HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Toe Lire anp Lessons oF tHE Great Hesrew RerozMer.


No story so bewitches us as the story of Elijah’s life. His meteoric appear-
ances, his lonely life spent hermit-like for the most part in caves and deserts,
his fearlessness in the presence of Ahab and hostile priests, his sublime trans-
lation, his appearing 900 years after with our Lord; these and other circum-
stances invest his memory with a romantic interest such as belongs to no other
prophet. He is a prophet, and some of the events in his life can only occur in
a prophet’s ; but heis also a man, a man struggling against weaknesses like our
own. His life will touch ours in many parts. Consider


I. The abruptness of his appearance on the arena of action. Where does
the wild, stern-looking being come from ? Who knows anything of his parents?
What is his trade? But we wait in vain for an answer. This throws such a
weirdness over him. There was design in sending the prophet with such abrupt-
ness into the presence of the king. Ahab had become hardened in sin. For a
long time the prophets had been silent; Jehovah dumb. No stern protest had
been lifted up; and, his conscience drugged, the man a mere puppet of his im-
perious queen and her fawning priests, Ahab can be aroused only by shattering
peals of thunder, or a bursting volcano. Into his palace rushes the wild solemn
man of the desert, and at the drowsy idolatrous king flings his stern threat.
Thus God has to act still, To many a man the tenderest utterances of the
Gospel have become as opiating drugs. A fire-brand, a thunderbolt, only will
wake him up. Fingers of forked lightning must write fiery words of doom
on hischamber walls. Ahab needed an Elijah.


II. The words suggested some idea of his previous training. Gilead must
have had much to do with the character of the man. When he stood amid the
crags of Mount Sinai unappalled by the bursts of thunder that shook the foun-
dation of the hills, and shrunk not when the sheets of flame lit up the ravines,
it was because he had been accustomed to similar impressive scenes in his own
rugged land. It was a fitting cradle for such aspirit. The Highlands of Scot-
land have produced a race of men stern, hardy, daring; quite a contrast to the
Lowlanders. The wide prairies of America tend to produce a race of Indians
swift of foot, passionate in the chase, stealthy, and spurning settled abodes.
Jehovah has found His Elijah in the right country. Very little is said about
his personal aspects, but we shall always recognise him when he appears—the
tawny, shaggy-haired man; around his shoulder the loose cape or mantle of
sheep-skin, fastened at his breast with a leathern girdle. The appearance
of the hitherto unknown prophet suggests—


III. How God had been steadily preparing an instrument for His work.
His eye rested upon the nation’s sin, and away in the solitude of Gilead
He was shaping the man who would be as a sweeping tornado in the land,
who would be the Regenerator of His people, the mighty Reformer in Israel.
The world’s history illustrates the principle. Israel needs to be led out of
Egypt. In the very palace of the Pharaohs is young Moses being prepared as
the future leader of Israel. God looks with holy anger upon the corruption
of the Church of Rome, but in secret He is fitting the brave, heroic miner’s
son to shatter the huge fabric of superstition. To turn this principle round,
and look on the other side, it conveys encouragement to God’s people. Teo
them, when in trouble, an Elijah of deliverance shall appear. A soldier
whipped for a trifle, leaped from his ship into the heavy sea. A large alba-
tross swooped like magic down at the man. In his death struggle, he seized
the pneu bird, and was thus kept afloat until aid arrived. Over


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. XViz,





whelmed in the water, there may be an albatross overhead to help the
Christian. God may be preparing in secret an Elijah, not to speak words of
fire as to Ahab, but to be a deliverer. This mention of Thisbe and Gilead
suggests—


IV. From what obscurity the Lord brought the mighty prophet. No
rabbi or learned doctor does God produce as the great instrument to effect His
purpose, but a ‘‘ Lay Preacher from the Highlands of Gilead.” One likes
to think how God employs the lowly, and works out his plans through the
obscure. He is constantly rebuking us for thinking a place must be so
many miles square, a man must have such an amount of brain, or wealth,
before he can work. A rock in mid ocean may prove a cage large enough ta eon-
tain the prond eagle of France. A small smithy in Micklefield can produce a
Sammy Hick, whose name shall be known and influence felt to the extremities
of the land. Bethlehem is large enough for the Redeemer of a world to be
born in. A fisherman’s craft is respectable enough to produce a Peter. ven
an insignificant obliterated Thisbe can send forth an Elijah !—( The Lay Preacher
for 1874).


GERM NOTES ON VERSE 1.


— A strange speech, certainly, to be
reported of a man of whom as yet we
have heard nothing. What had been
passing in his mind up to that day,
what he had to do with Ahab, how he
game to think that dew or rain would
obey his commands, we are not told.
We are to judge of these things as we
can. Our only help for judging of
them lies in the words themselves.
And there is the secret—‘‘ As the Lord
God of Israel liveth before whom I
stand.” Here we have the key to the
education and faith of Elijah, as well
as to his relation with the king of
Israel. ‘‘I have learnt that there is
a Lord God of Israel, and that He
lives, and that I am in His presence.
I am sure that He is my Guide, and
Teacher, and Judge; I am sure that
He is the Guide, and Teacher, and
Judge of this land and of its king.
Ana this, Ahab, is just what thou dost
not believe, just what thou, by thine
acts, art denying. Thou believest in
a Lord, or in many lords, far off from
thee, exercising no government over
thy actions, enforcing no duties upon
thee towards thy subjects; a lord
seated somewhere in the clouds, or on
the summit of some hill; a cloud-com-
peller, a giver of dew or rain when
your offerings please him, or when of
mere sovereignty he chooses to do it.
And I tell you that it is not this lord


or these lords who send rain and dew ;
but that it is the God of you and of
your fathers, the God who has ordained
the course of seasons, who has appointed
summer and winter, seed-time and har-
vest ; who has appointed you to till the
land upon which His rain descends and
His sun shines; who claims first of all
your trust and your obedience, since
though you stand, as I stand, before
Him, it is not your eyes that will tell
you of Him; you must believe in Him
if you would know Him. And as a
sign and witness that it is even so, I
declare to you, that the rain and the
dew shall not come except at the word
of me, a poor, insignificant, unknown
man, by whom it pleases God to declare
what He is, and what the being whom
He has formed in His image is meant
to be.’”? Herein consists the force of
this audacious sentence. It at once
proclaims that relation between the un-
seen God and the spirit of man which
Jezebel’s priests by their services, and
Ahab by his tyrannical acts, were alike
setting at nought.—Maurice.

— Men in general have never been
willing to recognize, and are still un-
willing to recogvize the fact, that need
and misery upon earth stand in the
closest relation to their conduct towards
God ; that through their need they may
be c led back to Him whom they have
fors: ten, and feel what itis when God

989


*


Guar. xvi,


ee EE UE an SISE SRR EEERNREAnERnEnneenenneneeneenainn


withdraws His hand, when they are
left to themselves, when the Almighty
withholds His gifts and blessings, and
sends His punishments and plagues.
The God of Israel is the living God,
because He has spoken to Israel and
has, through His Word, revealed Him-
self to them (Psa. cxlvii. 19, 20).
God has spoken unto us by His son,
the image of His being, and has re-
vealed Himself in Him much more
gloriously to us; therefore Christendom
knows no other living God than the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who
can venture to say that he stands before
God? He who, like Elijah, has firm
faith, is unconditionally obedient to the
Word of God, and fearlessly and
courageously pursues the path God has
prescribed for him.—J/enken.

— National apostasy and na-
tional chastisement. Far away
among the craggy glens of Gilead the
prophet has become acquainted with
the wickedness of the court and the
people. Ah! there was one faithful
heart who mourned over a nation’s sin,
and took it, where we ought to take
our country’s sins, into the presence of
God. I. National chastisement follow-
ing upon national apostasy. Does this
surprise us? If an individual commit
an infamous crime and escape punish-
ment here, there awaits him a stern
avenger among the shadows of the
world to come. But there cannot be
a wholesale retribution dealt out to a
nation or tribe in that future state.
Prosperity attends upon a virtuous
nation, or fell-ruin overwhelms a de-
generate one jere. No kingdom ever
perished through its high-toned mora-
lity. 1. This punishment tas not ar-
bitrary and prejudiced. The law pro-
nounced it ages before this threat, if
the people forsook God (Lev. xxvi. 19;
Deut. xi. 16). No calamity came from
spite or caprice. Jehovah knows
nothing of the despicable venom of
some human hearts when He deals in
severity with men. 2. The punish-
ment threatened was adapted to the
special character of the nation’s sin.
Baal was worshipped as the source of
fruitful harvest. Now there is te be
a test of strength between God and

270


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.





His rival Baal. If drought and
barrenness succeed the prephet’s words,
that will be a tangible proof of the
impotence of their favourite idol. This
is God’s method still. The punish-
ment sent often suits with terrible
appropriateness the sin committed.
Il. These words reveal the source of
the prophet’s holy boldness. ‘‘ As the
Lord God of Israel liveth before whom
I stand.”” He hasa deep conviction
that he is the servant of Jehovah. He
is powerfully conscious of the continual
presence of the Divine Being. Every
Christian should have a conviction of
being summoned to his particular work
inthechurch. Here was the prophet’s
incentive to faithfulness. Moving about
in the presence of the Holy One would
havea salutary effect upon him. To
one conscious of standing, living before
the Holy God, as if he were always in
the Holy of Holies, irreverence, un-
faithfulness, would be exceptionally
aggravated. Let the thought of
“standing before God,’”’ in the home,
behind the counter, and inthe exchange,
be an incentive to faithfulness.

Lessons :—1. The influence of a man
in position. Ahab’s idolatry had led
the nation astray. 2. Learn to identify
yourself with the nation’s conditions,
and make tt a subject for prayer.—The
Lay Preacher.

— The unusual efflux of miraculous
energy at this time is suitable to the
unusual energy and—may we not say,
evoked by it?—God mercifully adapting
His gifts to men’s needs. It is not
here as in legendary histories. There
the supernatural diminishes as the
writer descends the stream of time
and comes nearer to his own day,
Here miracles are abundant or scanty
without any reference to time; but ip
very evident proportion to the spirit-
ual necessities of the people.—
Speaker's Comm.

— Suddenly Elijah appears before
us in the narrative as he appeared in
his lifetime before Ahab and the
children of Israel. Suddenly he
appears, like Méelchizedec, and
suddenly he disappears, ‘‘ without
father, without mother, without
descent, having neither beginning of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. XVIL


i re


days, nor end of life.” Not unnatur-
ally did the ancient rabbis believe
him to be the fiery Phineas returned
to earth, or an angel hovering on the
outskirts of the world. Not unnatur-
ally bave the Mussulman traditions
confounded him with the mysterious
being, the Immortal one, the Eternal
Wanderer, who appears ever and anon
to set right the wrongs of earth and
repeat the experience of ages past.
Not unnaturally did the mediaeval
alchemists and magicians strive to
trace up their dark arts to Elijah the
Tishbite, the Father of Alchemy.
The other prophets— Moses, Samuel,
Elisha, Isaiah—were constantly before
the eyes of their countrymen. But
Elijah they saw only by partial and
momentary glimpses.— Stanley.

— Peculiar and hopeless as the
exigency in Israel appeared, the Lord
found a man fit for it—a man fitted
beyond all others, by the force of his
character, his grasp of faith, and his
fearless spirit, to ‘‘stem the torrent
of a faithless age.” This man was
Elijah the Tishbite. He was one of
the most extraordinary characters
mentioned in the Bible. Great evils
require great remedies; extraordinary
diseases, extraordinary physicians ; gi-
gantic corruptions, gigantic reformers.
And such was Elijah, who in his gifts
and qualities assumes a figure scarcely
human from its gigantic proportions,


and towers aloft like one of the sons
of Anak among common men. He
was such stuff as the heathen made
their gods of; and had he appeared
in a heathen country he would have
come down to us as scarcely less than
a god, side by side, perhaps, with
Hercules, instead of being only some-
thing more than a prophet. There
are two sorts of prophets—prophets of
deeds, prophets of words. Of the
latter the greatest is doubtless Isaiah ;
of the former, there has not been
among men born of women any greater
than Elijah.—Zitto.

— Israel had never such a king as
Ahab for impiety ; never so miraculous
a prophet as Elijah. He comesin like
a tempest, who went out in a whirl-
wind. I do not so much wonder at
the boldness of Elijah as at his power.
Yea, who so sees his power, can no
whit wonder at his boldness: how
could he but be bold to the face of a
man, who was thus powerful with
God? While he knows himself a pro-
phet, heremembers to bea man. He
doth not therefore arrogate his power
as his own, but published it as his
master’s. This restraint must be ‘‘ ac-
cording to his word,” and that word
was from a higher mouth than his.
Man only can denounce what God will
execute, which, when it is once re-
vealed, can no more fail than the
Almighty Himself.—Bp. Hall,


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 2-7.
Tux Txacuines or SoritvupE


Euan had become the most popular man in Israel. His strange, abrupt
entrance upon the scene, and the terrible import of his message, tended to fasten
all eyes upon him, and to raise him into a position of personal importance. But
it was a popularity not to be envied. It was full of peril. It raised up a
number of enemies. It was perhapsatemptation to the prophet himself. God
called him away into retirement, and amid the rocky solitudes of Cherith, with
its solitary brook, he was to learn lessons of humility, of patience, and of faith,


. Solitude affords protection from threatened peril. ‘‘ Hide thyself by
tna ae Cherith ” coe 3). The enraged and deluded Ahab clamoured for
the life of the loyal prophet, and the fawning parasites of Jezebel would fain
have torn him in pieces. They ransacked every imaginable hiding-place in the
kingdom, but in vain. They are well hid whom God doth hide, Moses fled te
Midian from the fury of the Egyptians, and was safely lodged ils forty


)


OAP, XVII. HOMILETIO OOMMENTALY: KINGS,





years. David found shelter from the malice of Saul among the fastnesses of
Engedi; John the Evangelist, from persecution, in the Isle of Patmos; Luther,
from his enemies, in the lonely castle of Wartburg, in the Forest of Thuringia ;
Tyndale, the first translator of the English Bible, was a fugitive in hiding at
Marburg, Worms, Antwerp, and Cologne; John Knox, the Scottish Elijah, was
several years a prisoner in the French galleys; and the great prophet of Gilead
is sent to Cherith for safety and for culture. The faithful worker for God is
scathless till his work is done.


II. Solitude is relieved by special manifestations of Divine care. ‘ And
the ravens brought him bread and flesh,” &c. (verse 6). These words record
an undoubted miracle, and there are fewer difficulties in believing the miracla
than in trying to explain the transaction on natural grounds. The miracle is
all the more impressive that ravens, the most voracious of birds, are the un-
failing purveyors of the prophet. Since the raven is a carrion bird, and a
devourer of all manner of dead flesh, some have wondered how Elijah could
eat without scruple all that was brought to him; but they absurdly assume
that ravens miraculously sent by Divine command would bring what was
common or unclean. ‘‘ When men disobey,” says Wordsworth, ‘‘ God reproves
them by the obedience of the inferior creatures. The old world disbelieved
God’s warnings by Noah, and would not go into the ark, and so perished in the
flood; but the inferior. animals went in and were fed there. Balaam was re-
buked for his disobedience by the ass on which he rode. The disobedient pro-
phet (chap. xiii. 26) was slain by the lion which God sent from the forest, and
which spared the ass and the carcase of the prophet. The disobedience of
Ahab and Israel was rebuked by the obedience of the ravenous birds in bring-
ing food to Elijah. Jonah fled from God, and God sent the whale to bring him
back to prophesy against Nineveh. The lions spared Daniel when his colleagues
would have slainhim. Christ was with the wild beasts in peace (Mark i. 13)
when He was about to be rejected by mankind.” Jehovah has all nature under
His control, and it is an easy thing for Him to make it minister to the neces-
sities of His tried and faithful servants. He who provides meat for the fowls
of the air will make the fowls of the air provide meat for man, rather than his
dependence on God shall be disappointed.


III. Solitude often severely tests the genuineness of our faith (verse 7).
A period of enforced inactivity is most difficult to endure, especially to an ardent
nature. Why am I doomed to this gloomy solitude? what good purpose can it
serve? Time,opportunities, strength to labour, are all passing away unimproved,
Ought I not to break away from this tedious imprisonment, and rush at once
into the eonflict that on every hand demands the stalwart arm and the enter-
prizing soul? Is there no testimony to bear, no work to be done, no warfare
to wage? Such are the questions sometimes asked by the solitary recluse.
The restrain’ tries our faith, while on the other hand faith generates strength
to bear the strain. Nor isatime of retirement without its suffering. ‘It came
to pass that the brook dried up.” The lessening flow of the life-giving stream
and its final exsiccation was an additional trial of faith and source of suffering.
It is in extremity that our faith becomes more daring, and yields the most
solid comfort. ‘* Good bye, dear Lucy,” said adrowning youth to his betrothed,
after they had both held on to the last possible point of endurance to a piece of
the floating wreckage of afoundered steamer; ‘ we shall soon meet in heaven!”


IV. Solitude is an opportunity for mental and moral discipline. It was
to Elijah a time of deep and pensive musing. He thought of God, on whose
bounty he was so absolutely dependent. He thought of Israel, its delusions,
its oe suiferings, ite needs. He thought of himself and the work te

373


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAP. XVii





oe


which he was called. He strove to rectify defects, and sought to brace himself
up for the conflict before him. He discovered the true source of his strength,
and was enabled more completely to consecrate his whole being to the service
of God. Most public men have their Cheriths of retirement and preparation.
When the disciples of our Lord returned from their first mission, and reported
all they had done and taught, He said unto them, “Come ye yourselves apart
into a desert place, and rest awhile” (Mark vi. 30, 31). In this way tempta-
tions to pride and self-sufficiency are conquered, and lessons of humility and





self-abasement are learnt.


“The sufficiency of my merit,” said Augustine,


‘is to know that my merit is not sufficient.”


“The bird that soars on highest wing
Builds on the ground her lowly nest;
And she that doth most sweetly sing,
Sings in the shade when all things rest,
Nearest the throne itself must be
The footstool of humility.”— Herbert.


Lxssows:—.. The withdrawal of @ public instructor ts a calamity to a nation.


2. Solitude is fraught with trial and sorrow.


diligently improved.


&. Seasons of solitude should be


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 2-7. Characteristics of a
child-like faith. 1. It accepts the
Word of God without questioning
(verse 2). 2. It flinches not in the
presence of the severest demands
(verse 3). 38. It is not staggered by
apparent improbabilities (verse 4).
4, It is prompt in obedience (verse 5).
5. Enjoys the fulfilment of the Divine
promise (verse 6). 6. Fails not when
most severely tried (verse 7).

— ElijahatCherith. 1. Men must
he prepared to accept the consequences of
their obedience to God. We do not
always see such consequences, and
when they come upon us they very
often find us unprepared to meet them.
Obedience to God often exposes men to
hatred, scorn, ridicule, opposition, in-
eonvenience, loss of trade, loss of
‘iberty, and even life itself. But when
we choose God’s service we choose
these consequences, and when they
some they should not deter us from
sur duty. 2. Zhat God makes pro-
vision for the exigencies into which obeds-
ence to the Divine commands may bring
Hits servants. He imposes no task, but
He provides strength for its accom-
plishment. Whatever may be the
consequences of their obedience, He
will not leave His servants to meet

2


them alone. He goes before His peo-
ple, providing for their necessities—
strength in weakness and temptation,
light in darkness, comfort in sorrow,
consolation in bereavement, hope in
death. 3. This provision is frequently
not made known to the obedient untst
their need 18 pressing. It is after we
have entered upon our chosen path of
duty, and the difficulties begin to ap-
pear, that God reveals the provision
He has made to enable us to meet
them. It is when the darkness
gathers arourd us that the light of
heaven appears. When the drought
comes upon the land, God will not for-
sake His people; but His voice shall
be heard directing them to Cherith,
where their need shall be amply pro-
vided for.—TZhe Study and Pulpit.


Verse 8. Obscurity. 1. Repugnant
to some men. 2. Sometimes the ap-
pointment of God. 3. Necessary for
self-discipline. 4. A means of safety.

— Even that God sends him to hide
his head who could as easily have pro-
tected asnourished him. He that wil-
fully stands still to catch dangers
tempteth God instead of trusting Him.

— ‘Get thee hence, and hide thy-
self,” A hard word for a heroic mag

373


%


GuAP, XVil,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS&.





like Elijah, who had threatened the
king and the whole people, and must
now flee and expose himself to scorn
and contempt. Going away often re-
quires more self-denial than remaining.
Every man who has done anything
great in the kingdom of God has passed
a long time in retirement and solitude.
But to every faithful Christian also
the command has come, hide thyself,
go into the stillness and solitude.
The hidden man of the heart, with
soft, still spirit, does not thrive in
the perpetual tumult and babbling
noise of the world. There is no man
who has not felt the need of some
time and place to collect his thoughts,
and to be alone with his God; they
who avoid such are not fit for the
kingdom of God.—Lange.


Verse 5. He went in faith along the
hard, dark path into the wilderness,
as a genuine son of Abraham, the
father of all the faithful, who knew
that without faith it is impossible to
please God, and that man can offer to
God no higher and nobler homage than
to believe in His promises. Who so
chooses the dear God, and always hopes
in Him, him will He sustain wonder-


fully in all need and affliction (Psa
iv. 4; exlvii. 5). Go whithersoever
thou wilt, means shall not fail thee,
thy deed is pure blessing, thy course
pure light.— Menken.


Verse 6. Divine Providence. 1.
Cares for the most solitary. 2. Has
absolute control over all supplies. 3.
Never disappoints the believer. 4.
May sometimes make use of ravens—
t.6., abandoned and godless men—to
help the children of God.


Verse 7. Faith tried. 1. By the
gradual failure of that on which life
depends. 2. By the suffering caused
by privation. 3. By the uncertainty
of the future. 4. Is ever rewarded
by timely relief.

— The prophet feels the smart of
this drought which he had denounced.
It is no unusual thing with God to
suffer his own children to be inwrapped
in the common calamities of offenders.
He makes difference in the use and
issue of their stripes, not in the inflic-
tion. The corn is cut down with the
weeds, but to a better purpose.— By.
Hall.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 8-16.
Rescuz ox Extremity.


I. That a time of extremity reveals the Divine source of our daily com.
forts. The water of the brook on which Elijah had depended for daily refresh.
ment gradually diminished, and at length altogether disappeared, and the pro-
phet was again reminded of his absolute dependence on God for hourly susten-
ance. The greatest blessings are apt to be regarded with indifference because
of the constancy of their supply. The daily return of the sunlight, the equal
diffusion of the air we breathe, the regular beat of the life-pulse, the abundant
yield of the soil on which we tread, are bestowed with such uniformity and faith-
fulness, that there is danger we should forget the great source of them all.
When we are deprived for a time of the most ordinary blessings of life, then
do we become vividly conscious of their former presence and of their unspeakable
value. Every new day should be vocal with new thanksgivings and praises for
the new mercies which it brings.


II. That a time of extremity induces a spirit of ready obedience. ‘So
he arose and went to Zarephath”’ (verse 10). Elijah might be tempted to
question: Why may not the same Divine power which sends the ravens with
food keep the Cherith in perpetual flow? And if I must remove, why not go
back ween rather than into Phoenicia, the idolatrous home of Jezebel, whose

4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. xyit.


eee


enormities I am commissioned to punish? But the instinct of obedi
stronger than all such questionings; and that instinct was Ai tis the
difficulties in which he found himself. To remain was to perish, and to obey
opened the only prospect of relief and sustenance. “Servants rise when the
bell rings,” says the proverb ; and Elijah at once set out on his long and adven-
turous journey. He was like Israel! in the wilderness. “At the commandment
of the Lord they rested in their tents, and at the commandment of the Lord they
journeyed.” So God often leads his people out by a way that they know not.
and the reluctance to follow the Divine leading is overcome by the utter per-
plexity of the circumstances into which they are sometimes brought, and their
inability to discover a better way than the one indicated. It is the triumph ot
self-surrender to God when the believer can say—


Nor will I hear, nor will I
Of any other will but Thine”


ITI, That a time of extremity encourages faith in God amid the most
unfavourable appearances (verses 10-12). The prophet was to be dependent
ona woman, and she a Gentile, when there were many women in Israel any of
whom would have counted it a coveted honour tv minister to the wants of the
persecuted champion of Jehovah ; a widow woman, and a widow woman in such
abject poverty that she and her emaciated son were reduced to the last point of
starvation (verse 12). It seemed very unlikely that a woman in whose home
famine had wrought such havoc should be the future hostess of the tamishing
prophet. But Elijah, undaunted by the ghastly and unpromising appearance
of things, had faith in God; he who quailed not in the presence of Ahab and
Jezebel, yielded not in the presence of improbabilities which were even more
difficult to confront. True faith triumphs over the most forbidding circum-
stances; above all external things it sees God and His all-conquering promise.
Abraham “‘ staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, being fully
persuaded that what He had promised He was able also to perform”’ (Rom. iv.
20, 21). Faith eats its way through all Alps of opposition.


IV. That a time of extremity affords opportunity for the most signal
display of Divine power (verses 12-16). 1. Lt reveals how God kas His hidden
ones tn the most unlikely places. This Gentile woman was not ignorant of
Jehovah, and she at once recognized Elijah as His prophet. ‘‘ As the Lord thy
God liveth”? (verse 12). She was probably a believer (Luke iv. 26), however
imperfect might be her faith, and the narrative shows she was capable of the
most disinterested kindness, and of the most implicit confidence in the word of
God (verses 14, 15). ‘‘ Phenicia was the last place in the world to have found
a worshipper of the Lord, the living God. It was also the last place in the
world to have found an Elijah, And yet both are here—the one a lily among
thorns, the other, in the quaint but fine thought of Lightfoot, the first apostle
to the Gentiles.” The rarest virtues are sometimes found in the most unex-
pected places. During the last journey of Livingstone, the veteran African
traveller, he was compelled, in consequence of a tribal war, to change his route,
and pass through a country where no rain had fallen, and the grass, mostly
burnt off, left a surface covered with black ashes, from which the heat radiated
az froma furnace. Yet, out of this hard, hot surface, the flowers would persist
in coming. So amid the moral wastes of heathendom, where the soil is hard
and black, and spparently unfertile, and where our missionaries have toiled so
long with such earnestness and devotion, the delicate flowers of Christian
virtues have pushed their way, displaying their modest beauty, and scattering
their hallowing fragrance —foretokens of the coming period when the wilderness
and the solitary place shall be glad, and the desert rejoice and een as the

316


*


OHAP. XVI, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








—


rose”? (Isa. xxxv.1) 2. Jt reveals the boundless resources of Jehovah in supply-
ing the needs of His people (verse 16). With God nothing is impossible, and
rather than His people should perish He will work amiracle. Thesame power
that multiplied the loaves and fishes to the multitude on the shores of Galiiee
could, with equal ease, replenish the meal barrel and oil cruse in the home of
the Sareptan widow. ‘‘So that,’? writes Maurice, ‘‘the person from whom
Elijah was to receive sustenance, and whom, as areturn for that favour, he was
to teach trust in the Lord God of Israel that her barrel of meal should not waste,
neither her cruse of oil fail, was a woman of that very country from which
Jezebel had come—the very country from which the Baal worship had been
imported. The Lord God of the nation, then, was one in whom the weak and
poor of all nations might confide, one from whom they might ask their daily
bread, and on whom they might cast their heaviest cares.’’ God will be no debtor
to them who trust Him in extremity, or who show kindness to His servants.


Lxssons:—1. God is not indifferent to the wants and sufferings of His people.
2. A time of temporal strastness ts often one of richest spiritual blessing. 3. We
cannot grieve God more than by distrusting Hvn.


GERM NOTES ON THE VEERSES.


Verses 8-16. The barrel of meal


and the cruse of oil. Learn from
this incident: I. The uncertainty of
earthly comforts. When Elijah went
to Cherith he would never dream of
that brook becoming exhausted. He
would settle down there till the
drought passed away. But, when least
expecting it, the word of the Lord
came: ‘‘Arise, get thee to Zarephath.”
Cherith, with all its pleasant associa-
tions, had to be leit. What a picture
of human life! How many are there
of whose worldly comforts it may be
said: ‘* After a while the brook dried
up.” One man is settled in life, with
circumstances all that could be desired,
and he contemplates the future with
pleasure ; but unexpectedly something
arises—bank failure or commercial
crisis—which tells him that the brook
is dried up, and he has to leave his
Cherith. Another looks with pride
and hope upon a child—his pleasure
and joy flow from that child—but,
unnoticed, disease settles upon it and
takes it away. So with earthly com-
forts. They are uncertain, and do
not warrant the eagerness with which


they are sought, or the value with
which they are invested. II. Zhe
certainty of God’s care. God made


provision for Elijah at Zarephath be-

fore He commanded him to leave

Cherith. Decay and change may
276


characterise all our earthly comforts,
but they do not characterise God; He
remains the same, and His care can
never fail. Many changes are per-
mitted to our circumstances, to lead
us to more implicit confidence in the
unchangeable God. ILI. Godly gene-
rosity shall not lose its reward. This
woman had a truly generous spirit,
which was bounded only by her means.
She listened readily to Elijah’s request,
and showed a spirit willing to accede
to it; and her generosity secured her
abundance. God blessed her house for
entertaining His servant, as He blessed
the house of Obed Edom for sheltering
the ark.— Zhe Study and Pulpit.


Verses 10-13. Now here was a de-
mand upon the faith of this woman—
from a foreigp man and a foreign God—
as large as any exacted from the great
prophet himself. See how it stands;
First, she was to make up her pro.
visions for Elijah, trusting that, as he
had said, more would then come mira-
culously to supply her own wants.
What atrial! What would the bird
in the hand worth two in the bush
principle say to this? Who could
have it in his heart to blame her had
she declined to run what was, under
the circumstances, so hard a riskf
Who would condemn her if she had
discrecited this stranger? How could


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGA.


GHAP. XVII.





she know but that, after he had eaten
up her precious bread, he might laugh
inherface? Besides, was not his very
anxiety to be served first of all very
suspicious? Looked it not as if he
were determined, at all hazards, to
secure a meal for himself; and could
we call it unreasonable had she asked
for the proof first—which could be
given as well before as after—that it
should be as he had said? But nothing
of this occurred. She went and did
as Elijah had told her, and found the
result as he had promised. This was
faith of the true sort, heroic faith, the
faith that asks no questions.— Kitto.


Verse 10. ‘‘So he arose and went
to Zarephath.” Compared with verse
15: Obedience toGod. I. Should be
prompt and unquestioning. II. In-
volves sacrifice and suffering. III. Is
always rewarded with blessing.


Verse 12. Happy was it for this
widow that she did not shut her hand
to the man of God, that she was no
niggard of her last handful; never
Jorn or oil did so increase in growing
as here in consuming. This barrel,
this cruse of hers, had no bottom; the
barrel of meal wasted not, the cruse
of oilfailed not. Behold, not getting,
not saving, is the way to abundance,
but giving. The mercy of God crowns
our beneficence with the blessing of
store. Who can fear want by a merci-
fal liberality, when he sees the Sarep-
tan had famished if she had not given,
and by givingabounded? With what
thankful devotion must this woman
every day needs look upon her barrel
and cruse, wherein she saw the mercy
of God renewed to her continually ?
Doubtless her soul was no less fed by
faith than her body by this super-
natural provision.— By. Hall.


Verse 18. Fear not! Ah! how
often has a child of God bemoaned—
Now allislost! Ihave nothing more,
and know nothing more. The opera-
tions of the Spirit of God have ceased
for me; the meal and oil are gone!
And yet, where there is nothing more
amid the night and the darkness,
the morning brings something upon
which one can live and find nourish-
ment for the soul, although the time
be miserable.—Lange.


Verse 15. It was one of those sud-
den recognitions of unknown kindred
souls, one of those cross-purposes of
Providence, which come in with a
peculiar charm to chequer the common-
place course of ecclesiastical history.
The Phosnician mother knew not what
great destinies lay in the hand of that
gaunt figure at the city gate, worn
with travel, and famine, and drought.
She obeyed only the natural instinct
of humanity; but she saved in him
the deliverer of herself and her son.
It may be that this incident is the
basis of the sacred blessing of the Pro-
phet of prophets on those who, even
by a cup of cold water, receiving a
prophet in the name of a prophet,
shall receive a prophet’s reward.—
Stanley.


Verse 16. The same God who spoke
by means of Elijah—The meal in the
barrel shall not be wasted, and the oil
in the cruse shall not fail—has also
promised, as long as the earth lasts,
seed-time and harvest, frost and heat,
summer and winter, day and night,
shall not cease (Gen. villi. 22). We
are astonished at the little miracle in
the cabin at Sarepta, but we pass over
with indifference, and without atten-
tion, the large miracle.—Lange.


HOMILETIO8’ OF VERSES 11-24.


Toe Marvertovus Powzx or aw Iwreerm Farr.


I. We see here how an intrepid faith may be sorely tried. 1. By suddom


and unexpected bereavement (verse 17).


The youth who had escaped from the


merciless fangs of famine, and who, for some time, was sustained by a miracu-


277


%


O#AP, XVII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





lous supply of God, is smitten down with a mysterious disease, and, as it would
appear, with appalling suddenness, expires. It is sad to lose our health, sad ta
lose our fortune, but it is sadder still to lose the loved ones of our hearth and
home.


"Tis hard to lay our darling

Deep in the cold, damp earth ;

His empty crib to see, his silent nursery,
Once gladsome with his mirth.


The thought of death gives a tinge of melancholy to every event of life, and
reveals the frailty and transitoriness of all earthly things. The Roman Emperor
who had commanded a world, exclaimed, when he came to die, ‘‘ I was every-
thing, and have found that everything is nothing.” And yet, if it were some-
thing, in one moment death robs us of it all. No wonder that while complaining
of life we turn away from death. ‘‘ Welive hating life, yet full of fear to die.”’
And when death comes, slowly or suddenly, it tests the faith of the staunchest
believer. 2. By the spectacle of a bewildering sorrow (verse 18). Only a mother
knows a mother’s grief. How ready we are, says Bishop Hall, to mistake the
grounds of our afflictions, and to cast them upon false causes. The passionate
mother cannot find whe h:r to impute the death of her son but to the presence of
Elijah, to whom she couies distracted with perplexity, not without an unkind
challenge of him from whom she had received both that life she had lost and that
she had: ‘‘ What have Ito do with thee, O thou man of God?”’ Asif herson
could not have died if Elijah had not been her guest, whereas her son had died but
forhim. Why should she think that the prophet had saved him from the famine
to kill him with sickness? He who had appeased God towards her is suspected
to have incensed him. This wrongful misconstruction was enough to move any
patience. Elijah was of a hot and fiery temperament, and a strain was put
upon his self-control. But his faith in God, and the sympathy roused within
him for the afflicted widow, not only taught him forbearance, but made him the
more anxious to do what he could to alleviate her anguish.


II. We see here how an intrepid faith is sustained and strengthened by
earnest and importunate prayer (verses 19-21). This incident brings out for
the first time in his history one of the most marked and powerful features of
Elijah’s character as a man of prayer. He was personally deeply moved by the
distress which this bereavement had brought into the widow’s home; and his
prayer is an urgent appeal to God, as a just and merciful and righteous Being.
He pleaded for the restoration of life to the dead boy—a bold and hitherto un-
heard of request from the lips of mortal man! ‘‘ We can imagine the Tishbite
pacing up and down his little chamber in importunate, impassioned prayer ;
but yet with no doubt as to the result of his intercession. It was a mighty
demand, indeed, fora mortal to make a request that had no previous parallel in
praying lips. It was nothing short of this: that unassailable death be stormed
in his own strongholds; that the iron crown be plucked from the head of the
king of terrors. When Elijah does manifest faith, it is always of the noblest
type.” The higher exercises of faith are possible only to earnest, resolute, and
incessant prayer.


III. We see here how an intrepid faith is honoured by a signal display of
Divine power (verses 22, 23). This is the first recorded instance of a
resurrection from the dead. Many suppose that this youth afterwards became
the servant of Elijah (xviii. 48; xix. 3): andan old Jewish tradition identifies
him with the prophet Jonah. ‘‘ It was a proud thought for Greece that on one
and the same day she gained the battle of Platsa on the land, and the battle of
een the sea. And what would be the grateful joy of this widow woman


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. XVIL





that by one and the same agency, in the retirement of her home, and in a
period of the severest national distress, in place of two victims there had been
two victories—a victory over famine, a victory also over death.” Nothing is
impossible to believing prayer. If Elijah by his fervent supplications cc xld
bring about supernatural results, why should we fail in securing blessings with n
the ordinary sphere of nature, by the agency of prayer?


IV. We see here how an intrepid faith is the means of strengthening
and confirming the weak (verse 24). This Sareptan widow believed in God
before, but she is a stronger and more decided believer now. The miraculous
replenishing of her store convinced her of the mercy and love of God, and the
raising of her son from the dead gave her a still deeper insight into the Divine
Majesty and power, and invested the mission of the prophet with a still more
awiul authority. The design of miracles is not for display, or to excite wonder,
but for the confirmation of truth. The strongest faith sometimes gives way
and needs heavenly support. Had this widow’s son continued dead, her belief
had been buried in his grave: notwithstanding her meal and oil, her soul had
languished. The condescension of God provides new helps for our infirmities,
and meets us on our own ground, that he may work out our faith and salvation.
The onus of unbelief is thrown wholly on man. God takes care there shall be
no lack of evidence for the encouragement and building up of faith.


Lessons:—1. Bereavement and sorrow intensify our sympathy with humanity.
2. The soul in tts deepest suffering finds rest and consolation alone im God.
8. Faith in God achieves the grandest moral victories.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES


Verse 17-24. Raising the tanity of exercising His power in


widow's son. 1. Wo home exempt
from the trials and sufferings of this life.
This widow would doubtless be looked
upon with envy by her neighbours.
They would think that in the midst of
the distress suffered by them she was
free and protected by an unseen hand
from wretchedness and woe. Buta
deeper sorrow than they imagined
was soon her portion. In looking
upon some homes, we are apt to think
they are strangers to the ordinary
trials and sorrows of life. But there
is no home that can exclude these.
However well provided temporarily,
however diligent and devoted in the
path of Christian duty the inmates may
be, still there comes to them, more or
less, trial and suffering of one kind or
another—afiliction, disappointment,
bereavement. To know this should
prepare us to meet trials when they
come. 2. Zhe devpest sorrow may be
the instrument of our highest good.
Nothing could have been a greater
affliction to this woman than the death
of her son; but it gave God the oppor-


raising him from thedead. By means
of this she was enlightened, and her
faith in God confirmed. She was on
the borderland of true faith before;
now she enters into its fulness. ‘‘ Now,
by this, I know, &c.” Many have
been similarly blessed by trial and
sorrow ; they have obtained clearer and
loftier views of God and stronger faith
in Him. ‘hey have been raised up
into a higher region of life and affec-
tion (Heb. xii. 11). 3. An dllustration
of the power of prayer. How differ-
ently would this woman regard prayer
to Jehovah to what she had done
before! She would see that it was the
way of access to God and of prevailing
with Him; and lead her to imitate
that earnest and confident prayer of
Elijah which brought her son back
from the regions of the dead. We
have many rich and valuable illastra-
tions of the power of prayer in Holy
Writ and in our own history, which
should lead us to a more earnest and
persevering use of it.— Zhe Study and


Lulpis.
? 379


*


GHAP. XVII.





Verse 18. The voice of conscience.
1, Is heard in the midst of calamity.
2. Is an unfailing remembrancer of
sin, 8. May mislead as to the reasons
for which calamity is permitted to
overtake us. 4. Should be listened to
with a view of moral improvement.


Verses 19-21. Behold this great
man in his chamber, alone with the
corpse of that fair child. See how
vehemently he strides up and down,
gradually working himself up to the
height of the great demand which
gleams before his thought, a demand
which had not crossed the mind of
man since the beginning of the world,
only because no man before had had
the same degree of faith—the faith to
deem it possible that the dead might
be restored to life at man’s urgent
prayer. It is done. His purpose is
taken. The child may live. Noth-
ing is too hard for the Lord. It is as
easy for Him to give back life as to
take it; and He will do this if asked
with adequate faith. Elijah knew that
men too often expect to move the
mountains by such faith as suffices not
to shake the mole-hills; and that
because, from the insufficiency of the
means, the hoped-for results do not
follow, the power of faith is disparaged.
But he felt the true mountain-moving
faith heaving strong within him, and
he gave it unrestrained vent. He
threw himself upon the corpse, as if,
in the vehement energy of his will, to
force his own life into it; und he cried
with mighty and resistless urgency to
God to send back to this cold frame
the breath he had taken away. Faith
conquered. It was adequate, and
therefore irresistible.-— Kitto.


Verse 22. Even if the Lord do no
miracle, there are still a thousand ways
and means by which He sends comfort
and strength, or help and salvation, in
answer to the believing prayer of His
faithful servants. Each granting of
prayer is indeed a miracle, and never
1s one humble, believing prayer uttered
in vain—no, not even when it is re-
fused.— Menken.

— The illimitable power of God.

280


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


=


1. Has absolute control over life and
death. 2. Can accomplish whatever
does not imply a contradiction: it is
never uselessly employed. 3. Is ex-
erted in answer to believing prayer.
4. Confirms the faith of the wavering.


Verse 23. He who testified that
man did not live from hour to hour
by bread alone, but by every word that
proceedeth out of the mouth of God,
testified also to a stranger from the
commonwealth of Israel that God can
give back that life which He has
taken away. The poor woman of
Zidon learnt the amazing lesson that
the power which she had looked upon
as emphatically the destroyer, is
warring with death, and can win a
victory over it, not for some great and
holy person, but for her whose sins
had been brought to remembrance by
the presence of the prophet and the
death of her child. —AMaurtce.


Verse 24. Real knowledge of the
truth. I. There is a kind of know-
ledge of soriptural things which leaves a
man perfectly satisfied with himself.
This widow seems to have been ac-
quainted with the God of Israel, in
the way of providence, and seems to
have known Elijah to be a prophet by
his dress; and her obedience appears
to have been of that kind which
springs from the intellectual know-
ledge that a man has, that God is al-
mighty; that, being perfect, He is
therefore faithful; and that what
He says must come to pass; but
it does not seem to have been that
which springs from a heart know-
ledge of Him as a just God and
a Saviour, who ‘pardoneth ini-
quity,” and which knowledge be-
gets an appropriation of God as ‘my
God” to the heart—for, you observe,
she says, ‘“‘As the Lord thy God
liveth.” She does not say, ‘“‘ As the
Lord my God liveth!’ This lesson
of knowing God as our God she has
yet to learn. And this she was to
learn in the school of affliction—a
furnace in which many of God’s
children are chosen and made to know
Him. There are many persons in the


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: KINGS,


GHAP, XVI.





same state as the widow of Zarephath
before the prophet came to her. Like
her, they have heard of God; they
have heard that there is a God; they
do not deny the truth and power of
God; they believe that the Word of
God is true; they do not hesitate to
render a sort of outside obedience to
His commands. We find them con-
tinually speaking calmly of death,
just as this woman did; but all the
peace which apparently accompanies
this calm statement about death is
false. It arises from ignorance of sin.
When this is brought vividly and
clearly to remembrance, then their
peace flies away, because there is no
real acquaintance with Christ. They
know the inconvenience of sin, they
know the disgrace of it; but as to the
real nature of sin, they areignorant of
it, pecause no man ever can abide
under a knowledge of the nature of
sin without fleeing to Jesus for the re-
medy that God has provided in Him.


Il. This kind of knowledge +s shown
not to be a real acquaintance with truth,
by impatience under affliction. ‘ What
have I to do with thee, O thou man of
God? Art thou come unto me to call
my sin to remembrance, and to slay my
son?”? By some this is understood to
express her deep sense of the vast
difference between herself and the
prophet, and the feeling she enter-
tained in ccusequence; as when Peter,
astonished at the marvellous draught
of fishes, exclaimed, ‘‘ Depart from
me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.”
But it seems as if the words are ex-
pressive of a feeling of impatience of
the sorrow which had come upon her,
in consequence, a8 she thought, of the
presence of the prophet: as if she had
said, ‘‘If this be the consequence of
thy visit, would I had never seen thee.”
She forgets God’s goodness, and thinks
only of her trial. Are there not many
who go on for years partaking of God’s
bounty, who are favoured above thou-
sands around them, but who have no
knowledge of the state of their own
hearts, and who, when the Lord afilicts
them, are irritated, and think them-
selves hardly dealt by ; or when, by the


preaching of the Word of God, He
graciously opens their eyes to the
condition of their hearts, are impatient
at those doctrines, those statements,
which God frequently makes use of to
affirm His purpose of love? This
widow saw in Elijah not the servant
of the Lord, so much as one who
brought her sins to remembrance, and
slew her son; and this she could not
bear. Trials which mellow and ripen
the saint, irritate and enrage the grace-
less sinner; and __heart-searching
preaching leads men to speak evil of
the way of truth. This woman could
not have talked so calmly of dying
if she had known what her sins were;
but when she was stripped of self-con-
fidence, of all those false hopes which
were dear to her as her son—and when
God calls upon men now-a-days to re-
linquish their all to Him, in His love
He will tuke them off from everv false
confidence, till they are left like the
childless widow, with their sins staring
them in the face, and all their creature-
comforts gone, stripped and made bare
by God’s Holy Spirit, then they are
alive to the Scripture truth that they
are in themselves ‘wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked.”


Til. 2# ts generally under a deep
sense of sin, or through deep waters,
that God leads to real acquaintance with
the truth. ‘‘And he said unto her,
Give me thy son: and he took him out
of her bosom.”? The dead son she can
part with readily; she is brought so
low, she is willing to do anything for
aremedy. Shesees matters cannot be
worse, and therefore she is willing to
listen to any remedy which may make
them better. And that is just the
point which a man is brought to who
receives the Lord Jesus with thankful-
ness. Hesees things cannot be worse ;
he sees a truth which the world is very
slow to believe, that there is no such
thing as exaggerating the evil of sin.
And when the Lord says to the con-
victed sinner, ‘‘ Give me thine heart,”
that heart which is dead to every hope
but that which the Gospel gives, it is
immediately yielded up. As God gave

281


~


CMAP, XVII


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


back life to the widow’s son, s0 in re-
generation does God give back that
principle of eternal life which was for-
feited in Adam; God breathes into
man’s nostrils the breath of life, and
man becomes a living soul again, in
contradistinction to what he is natu-
rally, in Scripture language, ‘ dead in
trespasses and sins.” Thus was the
widow taught what she did not know,
perhaps, in heart before, and by means
which were utterly at variance with
her best affections; and thus also our
proud hearts are humbled, and made
to know that those doctrines and
statements of the Word of God which
they long scoffed at are truth.


Lxssons.—1. There is such a thing
as being acquainted with the Word,
and obeying it in a certain outward
sense, and being calm in the prospect of


death, and yet not knowing that Word
experimentally to be truth.

2. Until we are brought to know the
evil of sin, we shall be ignorant of the
spiritual meaning of the Word of God,
and in that degree resist the truth.

3. Until we yield ourselves wholly
to God, we shall never know the
truth savingly, or find peace really.—-:
The Pulpit.

— We pass through much grief and
humiliation before, with joyful as-
surance, we can say to Him who is
greater than Elijah, Now know I that
thou art Christ, the Son of the Living
God. Only by means of individual
experience does each man come to the
blessed confession that the Word of
the Lord is truth. He only is a ser-
vant of God in whose mouth the Word
of the Lord is truth, not mere appear-
ance and sham.—Lange.





CHAPTER XVIII.


ELIJAH’S CONTEST WITH AHAB AND BAAL.


Ortr1caL AND Expianatory Notrs.—Verse 1. After many days . . in the third
year—In Luke iv. 25, James v. 17, the drought is said to have lastea *for the space of
three years and six months.” In the natural order of things, rains fell regularly in March and
October—“ the early and latter rains.” Their ce:sation might be dated either from the March
when the last rain fell, or from the October when the rain first failed to fall. The later reckon-
ing would make the period six months less than the former, yet both computations would be
equally correct. Verse 2, There was a sore famine in Samaria—“ Entirely without refer-
ence to the Old Testament, Menandros (Josephus, Antiq. viii. 13.2) makes mention of a severe
drought lasting for a year under the Syrian king Ithobal, a contemporary of Ahab” (Hwaid).
Verse 4. Obadiah took an hundred prophets—+. ¢., scholars in the schools of the prophets.
This indicates that they must have been numerous, even though Jezebel had sought to extir-
minate them, with all that connected Jehovah’s name and worship with the land. Hid them
in a cave—Most probably in the clefts of Mount Carmel (Winer). Verse 7. Art thou that
my lord Elijah j—Luther translates the words, fJ} FISINI1, “Art thou not my lord Elijah #”

Tr


-
The Sept. renders them, ef od ef airds xtpié pov ’HAla. But Obadiah was in no doubt; “he
knew him.” It is rather a question of wonder (Keil). ‘Art thou here?” Verse 12. The
Spirit of the Lord shall carry thee whither I know not—Hither by a supernatural bodily
transition (Acts viii. 39), or by an inward impulse from God (Matt.iv.1). Cannot find thee—
The effectual secresy of Elijah for so long a time, though search had everywhere been made
for him (verse 10), convinced Obadiah that Elijah could hide from discovery, Verse 16. As


the Lord of hosts liveth—“The FINAN with FF elevates the solemnity of the oath”
Tv; Tr :


(Keil). Verse 17. Art thou he that troubleth Israel?—“\D}), to bring into trouble. The
werds may be rendered, Art thou there, O troubler of Israel? They mean, Do I at last meet
thee, thou bringer of trouble upon Israel? Verse 18. Thou hast followed Baslim— The
Baalim ; not alluding to the numerous images and statues of Baal, but the various personifie
cations of that god—Baal-Berith, Baal-Zebul (Winer). Verse 19. Prophets of Baal, &c.—
Soothsayers and oracle priests. Groves—Asherah. Baal and Astarte were the male and
female divinities. Jezebel was the patroness of the propbots of this female divinity. Verse 21,
282


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OGHAP. XVIR.
ee ed


How long halt ye, &c.—From the root FVD, to divide, dissever. In Psalm exix. 118, the
; v


same word is rendered by “ vain thoughts,” i.¢., double-minded, ambiguous. The Vwig. trans-
lates hore, Usguequo claudicatis in duas partes ? To go tromone toanother. Notwithstand-
ing all Ahab and Jezebel had done to exterminate Jehovah-worship, there was vacillation
between Jehovah and Baal—not decision against Jehovah, only indecision. Verse 24. The
God that answereth by fire—A specially favourable test, for Baal was the fire-god, the sun.
Verse 25. For ye aremany—An ironical taunt. You are the more numerous religious party
fn Israel, and, as being in the ascendant, you have the right of first choice! Yet, O how
near the moment of their reverse from this ascendancy! Verse 26. Leaped upon the altar—
The pantomimic heathenish dance. Verse 27. Cry aloud; for heis a god—A scathing satire,
& most mocking taunt. Talking, or meditating ; pursuing, gone astray. Verse 28. Cut them-


selves after their manner—}J7J)"] means more than a mere puncturing or scratching.


2 N
The superstition existed that the blood of priests was specially virtuous in constraining the
deity to action; and now they were in extremis. Verse 32. Two measures of seed—The
Measurement is not very definite, and cannot be conjectured with any accuracy, but it must
have been both deep and wide. Verse 38. The fire of the Lord fell—M11'—WN does not
Tv: cs
mean lightning (comp. Lev. ix. 24). Verse 40. Slew them there—For they were deadly
criminals, perilous to the theocracy, and had incurred the penalty of death (Deut. xvii
2-4; xiii. 13). Verse 41. Sound of abundance of rain—The cause of the curse of drought
being now removed, the blessing came quick. Verse 42. Cast himself down upon the earth—
Betook himself to prayer. This kept him from becoming elate, and indicated his deep con-
cern for the mercy of God to come upon the stricken land. Verse 46. Hand of the Lerd—
Supernatural energy, anda Divine ecstacy. Entrance of Jezreel— Where Ahab had a summer


palace (xxi. 1).—W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-18.
Anas tHE Tyrz oF A WEAK AXD Wicxkep Kuve.


I. He was the occasion of prolonged national distress (verses 1, 2). For
three years and a-half Israel lay gasping under a parching drought, with all ita
attendant horrors of famine (Luke iv. 25; James v. 17). Everywhere was
desolation and barrenness; the soil seemed scorched up with the wrath of God.
The labours of the field had ceased, and the joy of the harvest and vintage was
hushed. The market-places were empty and silent, and the cottages were occu-
pied by thin, bony forms, in which the pulse of life but faintly throbbed. The
bright-plumaged birds had fled, and none but carrion fowl hovered in the air,
or fattened on the carcases that were strewn in ghastly plenty on the plains.
The calamity was so great and widespread that the indolent and reckless Ahab
was compelled to bestir himself, and, in harmony with the simple manners of
many Eastern monarchs, went in search of provender. And yet the thought
never seemed to dawn on the mind of the king that he was a principal cause
of the suffering he everywhere witnessed. Unhappy, indeed, is the people
whose sovereign is both weak and wicked}


II. He was served by a God-fearing officer. It is no unusual coincidence
for a Godless king to desire God-fearing men for his ministers and counsellors,
Many a prince, though himself no Christian, holds in his service a Christian,
and esteems him more highly than the others who are ot Christian. 1. Oba-
diah’s piety was practical (verses 3, 4,13). He protected the prophets of the
Lord from the persecuting fury of Jezebel, and, at considerable personal cost,
when everything was at famine prices, fed them with bread and water, when
bread and water were luxuries very difficult to procure. Religion does very
little for a man if it does not inspire him to generous activity. Noble thoughts


look better when crystallized into noble deeds. 2. Obadiah’s piety was main-
283


»
CHAP. XVII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


eee





tained in the midst of moral corruption and danger (verses 9-14). It is credit-
able to Ahab that he had an officer like Obadiah, and though he had steadily
refused to bow the knee to Baal, and though it was publicly known that he
had befriended the prophets, Ahab must have been so attached to him that
- even Jezebel had not ventured to bring about his dismissal from the court.

And yet Obadiah could not fully trust the king; he was compelled to confess
that he might be unrighteously put to death by him (verse 14). Obadiah was
not located in a remote and lonely place, but in the midst of a busy court, where
he saw and heard nothing good, surrounded by Godless men, and exposed to
every temptation to Godlessness, frivolity, rioting, and licentiousness. ‘‘To be
pious with the pious, to maintain one’s faith in the midst of the faithful, is not
difficult; but in the midst of the world, to preserve one’s self unspotted from it,
to keep apure heart, and have God before our eyes and in our hearts, wherever
the Lord places us, this is, indeed, greatly to fear the Lord.” 3. Obadiah’s
piety was put to a severe test (verses 7-16). The faith that had sustained the
soul amid the corruptions of idolatry was staggered by the simple request of a
man of God. That Elijah, journeying on his weary way, should meet the very
man who was the only true friend of the prophet at the court, was no more
accidental than that Obadiah, going forth in search of provender for the cattle,
should find the man who was to test severely his faith and his fear of God.
Even those who fear the Lord, and walk by faith, are sometimes, in the hour of
peril, overcome by an agony of fear, which bows them down as reeds before a
whirlwind. Peter, who first threatened with the sword, became suddenly
terror-stricken before adamsel. It is good for us to recognize our human weak-
ness, for this knowledge preserves us from over-security, and leads us to pray:
Lord, atrengthen our faith.


III. He was callously indifferent to the sufferings of his people (verses
5, 6). He was more concerned about his horses and mules than the condition
of his subjects. How totally unfit was such a mean-spirited man to wear a
crown! It is the fatal result of idolatry to steel the heart against human sym-
pathy. Itis a melancholy sight to see in Ahab one who can submit to great
personal inconvenience to search for ‘‘ grass,” but who has no desire to enquire
after a justly-offended God; while in his whole conduct in this transaction we
have the type of all grovelling, sordid souls, who will spend more upon their
kennels in a month than upon their cottagers in a year, and who will lose ina
few seconds, amid the gambling of the turf, what would endow many an
orphanage, and establish a hundred schools.


IV. He was mistaken as to the true cause of national suffering (verse 17)
‘“« Art thou he that troubleth Israel?” All men who deal faithfully with care-
less souls are denounced as troublers. There are hundreds who, like Ahab,
think of the trouble, but ignore the sin that causes the trouble, Ahab attri-
buted the national distress to the man who had plainly announced to him its
cause, and the method by which cause and effect could be removed. In his
mad delusion he sought in every country (verse 10) for the life of the heroic
prophet. He was swallowed up in revenge when he ought to have been
swallowed up in penitence. Idolatry was continued with all its shameless
enormities, and its punishment was continued too.


V. He was cowed by the fearless indictment of the faithful prophet
(verse 18). ‘The meeting of Ahab and Elijah in the valley of Jezreel was of a
very remarkable character; it was one of those scenes which become historic.
The savage, hot-tempered accusation of Ahab is met by the calm, stern repl
of Elijah: “I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy father’s house.”
The a quails before the man in sheepskin, and at once becomes pliant in

384


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHLAP, XVI,





his hand. A consciousness of right fills the heart with courage. Truth never
fears the light ; torch like, ‘‘the more it’s shook it shines,” and every falsehood


is exposed by its searching glare,


Lussons :——1. Jé #2 an awful responsibility to bea king. 2. The worst kings
have often the most exemplary servants. 38. Idolatry és an unmitigated curse to


king and people.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-18. Elijah’s re-appear-
ance. In this incident we have three
eminent men brought before us, and
the conduct of each suggests some use-
ful lessons. I. With regard to Elijah
we heve—1. an illustration of self-
denial. It would be no easy matter
for Elijah to leave Sarepta. He was
surrounded with many inducements to
remain—peace, security, plenty, com-
fort, ease, enjoyment. On the other
hand, the duty to which he was called
was by no meansa pleasant one. The
prospect of meeting Ahab would
awaken any but agreeable feelings in
his heart. He had no reason to expect
anything from such a wicked king but
harshness and severity. But in the
face of these circumstances he is ready
to obey the voice of God. That voice
is supreme, and he follows it, whatever
self-denial it may involve on the one
hand, or risk on the other. 2. An
illustration of courage. The righteous
are as bold as alion. Elijah showed
such boldness on this occasion. He
was the messenger of God, doing His
bidding, and he could rely upon his
God for safety and help; therefore he
had no fear at the prospect of meeting
Ahab. And when he did meet him,
he boldly charged the calamity of the
country upon his wickedness and
idolatry. We need not only self-
denial to withdraw ourselves from the
pleasant associations of life, but also
courage and determination to do
Christ’s work in the face of difficulty
anddanger. II. Withregard to Ahab,
we see the hardening and blinding injflu-
ence of sin. While the famine pressed
sorely upon all the land, the king was
most anxious about himself and his
royal stud. We read of no effort to
alleviate the sufferings of the people:


no famine subscriptions; no relief
fund for the poor. This is the fruit —
of sin and heathenism. What a con-
trast tw the teaching of Christ and the
conduct of Christian nations, especially
our own nation! Let distress come
upon any portion of our people, and at
once efforts are put forth to relieve
them. And Ahab was not only hard
and selfisk, but he was blind to the
true cause of the famine. He attri-
buted it to Elijah. He did not see it
was his own sin against God This is
one of the fruits of sin; it is blind-
folding. It throws a veil over the
mind of men, so that they do not see
themselves as sinning against God.
Hence the need of the Spirit of God
to convince of sin. III. With regard
to Obadiah we have—1. An illustration
of fidelity. Obadiah’s position would
expose him to many temptations, but
in the midst of all he was enabled to
be faithful to his master and true to
his God. He could relieve and help
the people of God amid distress and
persecution, and at the same time dis-
charge his duty to the king. Similar
illustrations of fidelity we have in the
case of Josephin Egypt, and of Daniel
in Babylon. 2. An illustration of the
advantage of early piety. Obadiah
feared God from his youth. This is
the secret of his excellent character.
Youth isthe time to form those habits
which fit men for positions of useful-
ness and importance. When youth has
been neglected, one’s after years are
of much less value in the world and
in the church.—The Study and Pulpit.


Verses 1, 2. The commands of
God. JI. Are made known at tha
right time. ‘And it came to pass


aiter many days.” IL. Are authors-
28S


%»


GaaP. iVIi,





tative and peremptory. ‘*Go, show
thyself unto Ahab.” III. Have ever
a promise of blessing linked on to them.
‘‘And I will send rain upon the
earth.” IV. Are promptly obeyed by
His believing servants. ‘And Elijah
went to show himself unto Ahab.”


Verse 2. Famine. 1. Imposes in-
describable sufferings. 2. May be
used as a scourge to punish a sinful
and idolatrous people. 3. Presents
ample materials to the conscientious
ruler for repentance and reform.

— Daily bread was scarce, for the
land was dried up and unfruitful;
but the bread cf life, the Word of God,
was likewise scarce, for the nation
itself was dried up, and those who
would have sown the seed of the
Word were persecuted and compelled
to silence and concealment. Woe to
that country upon whom famine,
bodily and spiritual, both fall, and
who yet are driven by neither to re-
pentance and conversion.


Verses 8, 4. Eminent piety. I.
Is found in the highest social rank,
and in the most unlikely places. II.
Consists in ‘‘ fearing the Lord great-
ly.” III. Is intensely practical in its
aims. IV. Has a lofty regard and
generous care for the suffering ‘“ pro-


phets of the Lord.”


Verse 4. Obadiah could not do this
without great risk and the exposure
of his own person to great danger ;
neither in that extreme famine could
he maintain those hundred prophets
without great expenditure of his own
substance. Obadiah not only pre-
served the lives of a hundred innocent
men, he saved a hundred worshippers
of Jehovah, and yet more, a hundred
men who, immediately the persecution
was over, and the Baal-worship in
Israel destroyed, became useful to the
ignorant and bewildered people as
their instructors in doctrine. Thus,
although Obadiah, as the lieutenant of
the royal watch, could not do much
for the kingdom of God by direct testi-
mony and instruction, yet indirectly
he did a great deal by preserving these

286


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ey,


witnesses for the truth at the peril of
his own life and at the expense of his
own fortune. Thus many people, by
the maintenance of the witnesses for
evangelical truth, by the spread and
promotion of the Christian Scriptures,
do much for the kingdom of God,
which otherwise they could not do,
and lay up a reward in heaven, if they
do not shun disgrace, nor prefer earthly
and perishable gains to the celestial
and imperishable.-—enken.

— O degenerate state of Israel!
anything was now lawful there, saving
piety. It is well if God’s prophets
can find a hole to hide their heads in.
They must needs be hard driven when
fifty of them are fain to crowd to-
gether into one cave: there they had
both shade andrepast. Good Obadiah
hazards his own life to preserve theirs,
and spends himself in that extreme
dearth, upon their necessary diet.
Bread and water was more now, than
other whiles wine and delicates.
Whether should we wonder more at
the mercy of God in reserving a hun-
dred prophets, or in thus sustaining
them, being reserved? When did
God ever leave His Israel unfurnished
of some prophets? When did He
leave His prophets unprovided of some
Obadiah? How worthy art thou, O
Lord, to be trusted with thine own
charge! While there are men upon
earth, or birds in the air, or angels in
heaven, thy messengers cannot want
provision.— By. Hall.


Verses 5,6. A heartless monarch.
1. A monstrosity in a time of famine,
2. Is more concerned about his stables
than the lives of his famishing sub-
jects. 3. Prepares for himself inevit-
able punishment.

— Pitiful man! Anxious care for
the life of his horses and the mainten-
ance of his stables—this is all that
the three years and a half of chastise-
ment of the Almighty had called forth
in his soul. How often does one think
of a person, ‘‘ Now he will be quite a
different person’’; and then, behold }
where one hopes to find at length
thoughts of God and eternity, there
are only thoughts of horses and mules;


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : KINGS.
ea he ee ee ee eee


and in place of holy emotions, instead
of aspirations, prayers, and reflections
upon the great and eternal interests of
life, you find a thick swarm of pitiful
cares and considerations which hover
about the soul, and hover with it into
an awfuleternity. Ahab and Obadiah
both journey on together through the
land, but each goes his own way alone
—a picture of their life journey.
Ahab walks in the broad, Obadiah
in the narrow, way: the latter alone
leads to the green pastures and still
waters which refresh the soul.—
Krummacher.


Verse 5. The terribleness of unim-
proved warnings. Whata mournful
picture have we here! For three
years God had tried this monarch with
sore judgments. He had shut up
heaven, closed the fountains of the
land, decimated his people with
famine. The voice seemed too loud,
too solemn and awful to be disregarded.
We might have expected to see Ahab,
like the heathen king of Nineveh, put
sackcloth on his loins and dust on his
head, calling his people to humiliation
and repentance. Butalas! the Divine
monition scems utterly disregarded.
God has emptied His quiver upon
him; but arrow after arrow has
bounded back from that heart of
adamant. He has neither tear for his
own guilt, nor tear for his suffering
subjects. So far as we are told, the
one miserable, petty thought that fills
that narrow soul is, to get provender
for his stables, and save his mules and
horses. Ah! terrible indeed itis when
judgments thus lead to an open defi-
ance and resistance of the Divine will;
a mocking of his hand, a laughing to
scorn of His righteous reproofs; no
penitence, no remorse; but rather a
more intense selfishness. An unsancti-
fied trial becomes a curse. It indurates
if it does not soften. It is like the
heat of the sun, which melts the wax,
but hardens the clay.—Jlucduf.


Verse 6. Ahab had found Obadiah
faithful, and therefore trusted him in
this weighty business, ratner than
any otber. Of o man that truly


CHAP. XVIIL





feareth God it may better be said than
of Cato, that he never did well that he
might appear to do so, but because he
could not do otherwise.— Zapp.


Verses 8-14. Obadiah finds this load
too heavy; neither is he more stricken
with the boldness than with the un-
kindness of this command—boldness in
respect of Elijah, unkindness in respect
of himself; for thus he thinks—‘ If
Elijah do come to Ahab, he dies; if he
do not come, I die. If it be known
that I met him and brought him not,
itisdeath. If I say that he will come
voluntarily, and God shall alter his in-
tentions, it is death. How unhappy a
man am I that must be either Elijah’s
executioner ormyown! Were Ahab’s
displeasure but smoking, I might hope
to quench it; but now that the flame
of it hath broken forth to the notice,
to the search, of all the kingdoms and
nations round about, it may consume
me; I cannot extinguish it. This
message is for an enemy of Elijah,
for a client of Baal. As for me, I
have well approved my devotion to
God, my loveto His prophets. What
have I done that I should be singled
out either to kill Elijah, or to be killed
forhim?” Many ahard plunge must
that man needs be driven to who would
hold his conscience together with the
service and favour of a tyrant. It is
a happy thing to serve a just master;
there is no danger, no stain, in such
obedience.—Bp. Hall.


Verses 15, 16. A consciousness
of right. I. Nerves the soul with
invincible bravery. II. Brings the
soul in contact with the most colossal
embodiments of iniquity. III.
Prompts the soul to the most faithful
denunciations of wrong.

— A strong, resolute word of faith
exercises power over the heart. It
strengthens the weak, supports the
tottering, encourages the fearful, and
tranquillizes the anxious-minded. A
teacher must not shrink from his office
through fear or cowardice, let tyrants
look grim as they may (1 Peter iii.
14).—Lange.


Verse 15. Tho fear of God putteth
287


*


@mAP, XVII


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





out the fear of any mortal wight, as
the sunbeams do the fire on the
hearth. When Gardiner, Bishop of
Winchester, said to Dr. Taylor, the
m ‘¢ Art thou come, thou vil-
lain? How darest thou look me in
the face for shame? Knowest thou
not who I am?” ‘ Yes,” quoth
Taylor, ‘‘I know who you are; you
are Dr. Gardiner, Bishop of Win-
chester and Lord Chancellor, yet buta
mortal man, I trow. But if I should
be afraid of your lordly looks, why
fear you not God, tha Lord of us
all? How dare you for shame look
any Christian man in the face, seeing
you have forsaken the truth, denied
our Saviour Christ and His Word,
and done contrary to your own word
and writing?’ Thus spake that vali-
ant martyr, like another Elias.—Zrapp.


Verses 17, 18. The source of
national trouble. 1. Is not in the
messenger who announces its pre-


sence. 2. But in the infidelity and
wickedness of the throne. 38. In the
national desertion of God. 4. In the


adoption and practice of idolatry.

— Aremarkable meeting. 1. A
numerously attended monarch, and
alonely prophet. 2. The impersona-
tion of great moral weakness in the
presence of great moral strength. 3.
An angry question met by a calm,
overwhelming reply. 4. The autho-
rity of the prophet triumphing for
the time over that of the king.

— At last the mysterious prophet,
whom each had desired to see for 80
long, appeared suddenly before them.
‘Behold Elijah!” was the message
which the faithful Obadiah was to take
back to Ahab—two awful words
which he thrice repeats, before he
can be induced to return. ‘‘ Art thou
my lord Elijah ?” was the reverential
salute of the minister. ‘‘ Art thou the
troubler of Israel?”? was the angry
question of the king. But it was an
anger which soon sunk into awe.
Face to face at last they met, the pro-
phet and the king. In that hour of
extreme despair, the voice of Eiijah
sounded with an authority which it
had never had before. The drought,

288


we are told, had been threatened by
him. It was then, doubtless, as it
still is, the belief of Eastern countries
that seers and saints have the power
of withholding or givingrain. Inthe
convent of Mount Sinai the Arabs
believe that there is a book, by the
opening or shutting of which the
monks can disperse or retain the rain
of the peninsula.— Stanley.


Verse 17. Doubtless Ahab, startled
to hear of Elijah coming to meet him
as one that did not more hate than
fear the prophet. Well might he
think, ‘‘ Thus long, thus far, have I
sought Elijah; Elijah would not come
to seek me but under a sure guard,
and with some strange commission,
His coarse mantle hath the advantage
of my robe and sceptre. If I can
command a piece of the earth, I see
he can command heaven.” The edge
of his revenge is taken off with a
doubtful expectation of the issue; and
now, when Elijah offers himself to the
eyes of Ahab, he who durst not
strike, yet durst challenge, the pro-
phet— Art thou he that troubleth
Israel??? Jeroboam’s hand was still
in Ahab’s thoughts; he holds it not
so safe to smite as to expostulate. He
that was the head of Israel speaks
out that which was in the heart of all
his people, that Elijah was the cause
of all their sorrow. Alas! what hath
the righteous prophet done? He
taxed their sin; he foretold the judg-
ment, he deserved it not, he inflicted
it not; yet he smarts, and they are
guilty; as if some fond people should
accuse the herald or the trumpet as
the cause of their war; or, as if some
ignorant peasant, when he sees his
fowls bathing in his pond, should ery
out of them as the causes of foul
weather.—ZBp. Hall.


Verse 18. This stern rebuke led
the poor king to feel that he had hig
muster before him, and that the hairy
mantle of the proplet was a symbol
of greater power than the royal robe,
and his staff an emblem of higher
authority than his own sceptre. He
quailed before the fearless prophet;


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP. XVIII:


rE EN RI ee


and the same facility of temper which
inclined him to evil when under the
influence of Jezebel, swayed him to
good in the presence of Elijah. We
have heard of men whose whisper
could quell the rage of the wildest
horse, and bend him down to sudden
tameness. Power of the like kind
some men possess over other men.
Elijah possessed it eminently; it was


the gift of God, and such a man as’


Ahab was a proper subject for its in-
fluence. Besides, Ahab seems to have
had some capacities for right feeling
when away from under the deadly in-
fluence of his wife; and whatever may
have been his first purpose when he
heard that Elijah awaited him, he
had time to cool on the way to the


—— O, the heroic spirit of Elijah!
He stands alone amid all the train
of Ahab, and dares not only repel
this charge, but retorts it. ‘I have
not troubled Israel, but thou.”” No
earthly joy can daunt him who hath
the clear and heartening visions of
God. This holy seer discerns the true
cause of our sufferings to be our sins.
Foolish men are plagued for their
offences, and it is no small part of
their plague that they see it not. The
only common disturber of men, fami-
lies, cities, kingdoms, worlds, is sin.
There is no such traitor to any state
as the wilfully wicked ; the quietest
and most plausible offender is secretly
seditious, and stirreth quarrels in
heaven.— By Hail.


place where he was.— Kitt .


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 19-40,
Tor Traut axp Dergzat oF Inontey.


Tue grand, imposing spectacle on Mount Carmel described in these verses has
an interest anda lesson to humanity forall time. As in other ages and countries,
a great delusion was here tested, exposed, and overthrown. Truth long
despised and persecuted had the opportunity of vindicating itself, and the vin-
dication was so public and complete as to constitute an example for universal
reference. The place was worthy of the scene to be enacted there. Carmel
was the peculiar haunt of Elijah. Situated on the west of Palestine, immediately
to the south of the Bay of Acre, it rises at its highest point sixteen hundred
feet above the level of the Mediterranean Sea, from the shores of which it
stretches in a south-eastern course, and in ranges of different heights, for five or
six miles, commanding a view of the great plain of Esdraelon, just where the
glades of the forest sink into the usual bareness of the hills of Manasseh. In
the distance, and on its commanding position, overlooking the whole valley, rose
the stately city of Jezreel, with Ahab’s palace and Jezebel’s temple embosomed
in its sacred grove. Immediately under their feet spread, far and wide, that
noble plain—the battle-field of sacred history—the plain of Megiddo or Jezreel,
with the torrent Kishon passing (as its name implies) in countless windings
through the level valley—that ancient stream on whose banks had perished the
host of Sisera and the host of Midian, before the army of Deborah and Barak,
before the sword of the Lord and of Gideon. In sucha scene, with such recol-
lections of the past, were the people of Israel gathered for a conflict as momen-
tous as any which had taken place in the plain beneath. On the one side were
ranged the king and people, with the four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal
dressed in their splendid vestments; and on the other side the one solitary
figure of the prophet of the Lord in his rough sheepskin cloak, though supported
all the time by an invisible throng of heavenly intelligences. Observe—


I, That idolatry was here put on its trial under the most favourable

circumstances to secure its triumph. 1. Zook place at the seat of its greatest

ower. Idolatry was the established religion of Israel, and those who did not

iiesrtily accept it were awed into submission by the terrors of Ep oretion.
@


¥


GHAP. XVIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
a


The multitude now gathered on Carmel, from the king downward, were wor-
shippers of Baal, and were ready to defend their favourite deity. It seemed
a daring and hopeless thing to offer the slightest opposition. 2. Was accepted
by its acknowledged leaders. The four hundred and fifty priests might have
declined the contest, and the king might have forbade it; but whether com-
pelled by the unanimous voice of the people, or assured of victory by observing
the lonely and unfriended condition of Elijah, or urged by an influence they
were powerless to resist, they accepted the challenge. Could it be that they
had any real confidence in the power of Baal? Alas! there is no knowing to
what depth of delusion idolatry may sink its victims. The maddening earnest-
ness of the reiterated appeals to Baal (verses 26, 28) was a sight to make one
sad. 3. Appealed to what the worshippers believed was the most prominent attre-
bute of their deity (verse 24). Baal was the sun-god, and his worshippers
might readily suppose that, having at his command the source of light and fire,
he would in such a strife vindicate himself by answering by fire. Surely,
Elijah might have urged, your sun-god should find it easy, in the use of his
own element, to triumph over Jehovah! He takes the Baalites on their own
ground, and agrees that by a sign from heaven in the form of fire the claims of
their respective religions shall be determined. The proposition is startling,
because it was of the very essence of Judaism that there was no other God but
Jehovah. It was a great concession on the part of Elijah to heathen notions,
where contests as to the power of rival deities were of frequent occurrence.
Thus Baal had everything in his favour, and if he could do anything at all, now
was his opportunity.


II. That idolatry exhausted all its resources in the contest (verses 26-29),
Confident of success, the priests of Baal dress the bullock, and place the cut
pieces dripping on the altar. The condition was they should put no fire under ;
although St. Chrysostom has preserved an old tradition which asserts that inside
their altar the Baalites had secreted an accomplice who was to kindle a fire, but
that in the act of so doing he died of suffocation. And now for three long hours
the cry is heard—the anxiety of king, and priests, and people, growing more in-
tense and feverish with each repetition—‘‘O Baal, hear us!’”? But there was
no voice, nor any that answered. To hurry the answer, they begin the wild,
frantic pagan dance. ‘‘As the Mussulman dervishes work themselves into a
frenzy by the invocation of Allah! Allah ! until the words themselves are lost
in inarticulate gasps; as the pilgrims round the church of St. John at Samaria
formerly, and round the chapel of the Holy Sepulchre now, race, run, and
tumble, in order to bring down the Divine fire into the midst of them; so the
four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal performed their wild dances round their
altar, or uponit, springing up or sinking down with the fantastic gestures which
Orientals alone can command, as if by an internal mechanism, and screaming
with that sustained energy which believes it will be heard for its much speak-
ing.” Still no answer. This afforded an opportunity Elijah could not resist,
and he mocked the devotees with words of bitter irony (verse 27). His object
was to stimulate the priests to greater exertions, and so to make their failure
more complete, and to suggest to the people that such failure would prove abso-
lutely that Baal was no God. Elijah’s scorn has the effect intended; it rouses
the Baalites to increased effort. Louder and louder grow their cries, wilder and
more rapid their dance, more frantic their gesticulations. At length, when
the frenzy has reached its height, knives are drawn from their sheaths, lances
are upraised, and the blood spurts forth from hundreds of self-inflicted wounds.
And this was all idolatry could do: Baal was unresponsive to the most piteous
cries, was powerless to help, and his worshippers are driven to suicide and
despair! Could anything more completely expose the utter helplessness and
vanity of idolatry ?

290


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, XVIII,


—___-





ITI. That idolatry suffered a signal and crushing defeat (verses 30-38).
1. Was defeated by the Being it ignored and insulted. Elijah was careful in
his arrangements to give prominence to Jehovah, of whom he was but the
humble and intermediate agent. The altar was built in the name of Jehovah
(verse 32); the offering was arranged according to the injunctions of the law of
Jehovah (verse 83 compared with Levit. i. 3-9); and the short, simple, and beaut.
fully suggestive prayer was designedly addressed to ‘‘ the Lord God of Abraham,
Isaac, and of Israel” (verses 36, 37). Jehovah had been forgotten; His ever-
living presence is again asserted : He had been ignored and insulted; His peer-
less majesty and righteous claims are again vindicated. 2. The defeat was
signal and complete (verse 38). As the sky was still perfectly clear, this fire
cannot have been a flash of lightning. It was altogether, in its nature as well
as in its opportuneness, miraculous. From the clear blue ether overhead,
deepening as the sun declined towards the sea, the whole multitude saw the
bright white flame descend, and in a moment consume everything—the frag-
ments of the ox on the summit of the altar, the pile of wood heaped from the
foreet of Carmel, the very stones of the altar, the dust, and also the water that
filled the trench, till everything is consumed, and the crackle and hiss are gone.
‘The prayer of a moment has accomplished what the howlings of a whole day
have failed to achieve.”” The most obdurate heart could not fail to be convinced.
The neglected and insulted God of Israel has triumphed, as He ever must.
3. The defeat was publicly acknowledged (verse 39). Unable to endure the brilli-
ance of the Divine light, the people fell on their faces before it, and hid their
eyes lest they should be blinded (Lev. ix. 24; 2 Chron. vii. 3). The people
understand thoroughly the nature and bearing of the whole scene, as a trial to
determine whether Baal or Jehovah is the true God. And they now pronounce
the matter to be clearly and certainly decided. Baal is overthrown; he is
proved to be no god atall. The Lord Jehovah, He and He alone, is God. Him
will they henceforth acknowledge, and no other. The time is coming when
truth shall universally triumph, and the supremacy and glory of God be every-
where adored (Phil. ii. 10, 11).


IV. That idolatry involves its votaries in disgrace and punishment
(verse 40), The vindicator of Jehovah becomes His avenger. The slaughter
of the idolatrous priests was in harmony with the express commands of the law
(Deut. xiii. 5; xvii. 2-5; xviii. 20). Moreover, a prophet under the theocracy
had a right to step in and execute the law when the king failed in his duty.
In this act we may see some retaliation for Jezebel’s slaughter of the prophets
of the Lord. It is an unalterable principle of the Divine government that evil-
doers shall be punished for their sins, and often by the same instruments with
which they have wrought theevil. Robespierre perished on the same scaffold
on which he had shed some of the best and bravest blood of France.


Lzssons:—1. Error ts sure to fail when fairly put to the test. 2. The claims of
God to universal homage are absolute and unchangeable. 3. The enemses of God
wll meet with their merited punsshment.


GERM WOTES ON THE VERSES.


interested—an object which may in-


19-40. The challenge.
eee ; volve the welfare of a people, or the


Whenever we read of a meeting of
crowned heads or prominent states-
men, we generally infer that they have
geen called together by some pressing
object in which they are mutually


destiny of anation. And when Elijah

and Ahab met face to face, such an

object as this engaged their thought

and discussion. The people of Israal
ag}


my


OHAP. ZVI


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





had for a long time been suffering
from a severe famine, and the king
attributes it to Elijah, who disclaims
the responsibility, and charges it
upon the conduct of the king. Not
only does he makes this charge, but
he is anxious to put it to a fair trial,
and consequently he gives Ahab the
challenge contained in the above
verses. Concerning the challenge, we
shall notice the object, the test, the
decision, the result.


I. The object. 1. To confirm his
statement that Ahab was responsible
for the prevailing distress. This
could only be obtained on the assump-
tion that Jehovah would support Eli-
jah in his denunciation of the king by
some manifestation of Himself which
would carry convietion to the mind of
Ahab and others; and by this chal-
lenge Elijah sought such a manifesta-
tion of God. 2. To establish his claim
as the prophet of God. In all proba-
bility the people would regard Elijah
with the same unbelief and hostility
as Ahabdid. And before Elijah could
gain a hearing from them, he needed
to overcome their unbelief and opposi-
tion. This could be done by means of
the challenge. 3. To prove that
Jehovah was the only true God, and
that Baalim was no god. This was
the most important object of the chal-
lenge. At this time the people be-
lieved Jehovah to be one among many
gods. Elijah sought to show them
that besides Him there was no god;
that Baalim and all other supposed
gods were the creations of men’s
minds, aud, therefore, false. 4. To
restore the people of Israel to their
allegiance to Jehovah. They had for-
saken Him, and transferred their
allegiance to Baalim. Elijah seeks to
recover them from this apostacy ; and
the means by which he sought it was
admirably adapted to his purpose.
If God should answer Elijah, then the
people would be reminded in a forcible
manner of their own past history, the
most prominent and grandest feature of
which was the appearance of Jehovah
at various times to their fathers; to
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ; to Moses

393


in the burning bush ; in Egypt; at the
Red Sea; throughout the wilderness ;
to Joshua at the Jordan; at Jericho;
and in giving them possession of the
land wherein they dwelt. A similar
manifestation to themselves woulé
surely impress them with a sense o*
their sin, and awaken repentance it.
their hearts.


II. The test. 1. This test was fair
to the Baalites. They acknowledge
Baal as the god of fire. If he coulé.
manifest his power in any way, surely
he could in the way proposed. 2. It
was honourable to Elijah. His appeal
was to the special prerogative of Baal.
He does not ask for a manifestation of
power not claimed for him by his
followers. 3. It was adapted to thr.
multitude. It was one upon whick
they couldalljudge. It would appeal
to their senses, involving ne
mystery, and leaving no room for
doubt.


III. The decision. Elijah’s pro-
posal being accepted, he suggested to
the Baalites that they should be the
first to make the trial to which they
agreed. No sooner had they retired,
than Elijah steps forward to prepare
the altar for his bullock. His prepa-
ration is more elaborate. He has a
trench dug round it, and water poured
upon the sacrifice and the wood; this
is repeated three times. Here we see
his wisdom and his faith. He is pro-
tecting himself against any charge of
procuring fire by false means. He can
afford to do this, because he believes
that God can send sufficient fire to
consume the sacrifice, notwithstanding
the water. With what excited feeling
would the multitude watch Elijah, as
he came near and asked the God of
Abraham to show Himself this day
that He was God in Israel, so that His
apostate people might be convinced of
their sins and return unto Him. At
the close of his prayer, the fire fell
and consumed the sacrifice, the wood,
the stones, and the dust, and licked uy
the water that was in the trench. I;
required no delibera‘ion to form 4
judgment upon the point at issue.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





When all the people saw it, they fell
on their faces, and said: ‘‘ The Lord
He is the God, the Lord He is the
God !”


IV. The result. The prophets of
Baal were slain. There are some
objections raised against the conduct
of Elijah in such a slaughter. Could
he slay these prophets in the face of
the authority of the king? Would
the people obey Elijah in this thing ?
How is it to be reconciled with
justice? To these objections we may
answer: 1. Ahab was a coward; he
would be overwhelmed with fear, and
would shrink from opposing his autho-
rity to one who could in such a way in-
voke the God of Heaven. 2. The people
knew that God had spoken against
idolatry, and His law was that those
who practised it were to be put to
death. 38. God sought to establish
His claim to be King of kings and
Lord of lords: that He was a jealous
God, and would not share His glory
with another. The people needed to
be taught this, and by such terrible
means they would learn the lesson.
Let us learn: 1. That God’s claims
are submitted to our intelligence and
judgment, as well as to our hearts. 2.It
is our duty to examine His claims and
to yield to them. 3. It is unreasonable
and dangerous to be undecided with
regard tothem.— The Study and Pulpit.

—A memorable day. 1. Because of
the unique assemblage it gathered.
2. Because of the distinguished person-
ages it engaged. 3. Because of the
extraordinary nature of its transactions,
4. Because of the momentous truths
involved. 5. Because of the impor-
tant results that followed.


Verse 19-38. Elijah on Mount Car-
mel, surrounded by all Israel, while the
prophets of the groves, and those that
ate at Jezebel’s table, were offering their
bullocks, or crying ‘ O Baal, hear us!”
and leaping upon the altars, and cut-
ting themselves with knives, is a picture
with which we are allfamiliar. Ifyou
try to recall the impressions which it
has made upon you, I think you will
feel that it has not proceeded mainly


GHAP. XVII.


from the sudden appearance of the fire

which came forth to consume Elijah’s

sacrifice, but from the contrast between

the fever and restlessness of the priests,

and the calmness and minute regularity

of all the proceedings of the prophet.

To testify by the form of the altar that

the people were even then a portion of

the twelve tribes, that they were united

in God’s sight, though visibly separated

by the sins of men, was one great part

of Elijah’s work. But it was not a

less important part of his duty to re-

mind the people that God had appointed

the method and time of the sacrifice ;

that prayer to Him was not a violent

effort to bring about some mighty re-

sult desired by the worshipper, but

was an act of quiet obedience, of self-

surrender: all its earnestness being de-

rived from a belief in the willingness of
God to make His creature that which

without Him he cannot be. ‘‘0 Lord

God, turn the heart of this people back

again! they are in an unnatural, dis-
orderly condition ; they are trying to be
independent of Thee. And they have’
s0 fixed and rooted themselves in that
which is false, that they cannot break
loose from it. The evil power to which
they have done homage holds them
fast bound in his fetters. Good has bee
come evil to them; evil has become
good. Ruler of the heart and reins,
who desirest good and nothing but
good for them, make them reasonable
beings, restore them to the state of
men!” To this prayer the fire was an
answer. It came down as a witness
that God himself is the Author as well
as the Accepter of every sacrifice ; that
all fire must be false which He has not
kindled.—Maurice.


Verse 21. The necessity of decision
in religion. 1. Because of its superior
claims. 2. Because of its exalting
benefits. 8. Because of the moral
deterioration and inevitable misery
involved in prolonged hesitation.


— 1. Israel’s double-mindedness.
%. Israel’s unreasonableness. 3.
Israel’s coldness and indifference
under appeal.

— ‘And the people answered him

203


%


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





CHAP, XVII
not a word.’ The sullenness of
unbelief. 1. Unbelief is slow to ac-


cept evidence. 2. Is reluctant to
admit conviction. 38. Stubbornly re-
fuses to act in harmony with both
evidence and conviction.

— Israel is met together. Elijah
rates them not so much for their
superstition, as for their unsettledness
and irresolution. Nothing is more
odious to God than a profane neutra-
lity in main oppositions of religion.
To go upright in a wrong way is a less
eyesore to God than to halt betwixt
right and wrong. The Spirit wished
that the Laodiceans were either hot or
cold; either temper would be better
borne than neither, than both. In
reconcileable differences, nothing is
more safe than indifferency both of
practice and opinion; but in cases of
so necessary hostility as betwixt God
and Baal, he that is on neither side is
the deadliest enemy to both. Less
hateful are they to God that serve
Him not at all, than they that serve
Him with a rival.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 22. The solitariness of the
good. 1. A picture of indomitable
bravery when menaced by overwhelm-
ing numbers. 2. Calls forth pro-
found sorrow in view of the popular
and prevailing iniquity. 8. Yearns
for companions to share the bliss of a
holy life.


Verse 24. We see the god of the
blind, mad world; and the God of
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob.
The generation of to-day thinks itself
elevated far above the Baal worship,
which in its nature was deification of
nature and the world; and yet how
often does it happen that it serves the
creature rather than the Creator!
Men no longer make gods out of wood
and stone, but construct them out of
their own thoughts, and worship their
own ideas. The world wishes to hear
nothing of the God who is holy and
ready to sanctify the sinful heart of
man; who is just, and metes to each
man the measure which he deserves;
who does not suffer Himself to be
scorned ; of the rebukes and chastise-

294


ments of such a God as He has re-
vealed Himself in His Word, the
world makes nothing; and will only
hear of a God who never rebukes or
punishes, who is no avenging judge,
who works no miracles, can hear n¢
prayers. Elijah, could he return to
earth, would scorn such a divinity
no less than he did the idol Baal.—
Lange.

— The people now find a voice.
They had hesitated before, not wish-
ing to decide between the two wor-
ships, or wholly to relinquish either.
They now readily accept a proposi-
tion which promises them an exciting
spectacle, and will relieve them of the
trouble of making a decision by
mental efforts of their own.—Speaker’s
Comm.


Verses 26-29. The infatuation of
idolatry. 1. May beguile minds of
the highest order. 2. Incites its
votaries to the most extravagant acts.
3. Is more resolute the less it suc-
ceeds. 4. Presents a painful picture
of what self-deceived humanity may
become.


Verses 36-39. The sublimity and
efficacy of true prayer. 1. If we
consider the glorious Being to whom
it is addressed (verse 36). 2. If we
contrast it with the wild iterations
of raving idolaters (verses 26-28). If
we consider the practical good it seeas
to confer on men (verse 37). 3. If
we consider the remarkable answers
vouchsafed (verses 38, 39).


Verse 87. All knowledge and re-
cognition of God is inseparable from
the conversion of the heart to Him.
That is the aim of every testimony
and revelation of God, and for that
every true servant of God should daily
pray in behalf of those entrusted to
his care. Elijah, unlike the priests
of Baal, who called upon their god
the whole day, used few words,
yet was he heard, because in those
few words he expressed infinite
meaning, and his prayer came from
the depths of a believing, unquestion-
ing soul.


HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHaPr. xviii.


SS ene enayeeeneecveencenrere seen rere


Verse 88. What is the miracle of
that fire which devoured the burnt
offering and compelled the whole peo-
ple to ery out: “The Lord He is
God,” in comparison with the miracle
that God hath sent His Son into the
world to kindle the greatest fire which
has ever burnt in the world; compared
with the miracle that the Word has
become flesh and dwelt among us, and
we have seen His glory? In Bethle-
hem, and upon Golgotha, the glory of
the Lord is infinitely higher in its
manifestation than upon Carmel.—
Lange.


Verse 40. The appeal of Elijah
was tothe people. He called upon
them to inflict then and there, upon
these ringleaders of the people in
idolatry, the punishment which the
law denounced, and such as would have
been inflicted upon himself had the
victory been on their side; and the
king seems to have been too awe-
stricken to interfere. From the cha-
racter of Elijah, we have no doubt
that he executed this act of blood
heartily and with entire satisfaction.
{t is not for us to vindicate him ; the
only question is: Was this in accord-
anve with the law and with the spirit
of the times? It certainly was; and
Britons, not so much as fifty years ago,
performed under their own laws, with
perfect peacc of mind, upon far less
heinous offenders, the deadly execu-
tions which wenow regard with horror.
If, then, in looking back upon the last
generation, we make allowance for this
great change of law and sentiment
within so short a time, we must needs
make the same allowance in surveying
the more remote and less refined age
in which Elijah lived.— Kitto.

— A fearful vengeance, surely!
Does the thought occur to you—‘ If
this book be, as is alleged, not a mere
history of that which is strange and
exceptional, but a revelation of perma-
nent laws and principles, may not this
act be pleaded in justification of any,
even the most outrageous punishment
of worshippers false, or thought to be
false, that has ever taken place in any
age of the Christian church ?” 1 answer,


I conceive this story ss a revela-
tion of permanent priniciples, just as I
believe Elijah’s declaration that there
should be no rain nor dew, or his com
manding the widow’s cruse not to fail,
is the revelation of a permanent princi-
ple. The one shows forth God’s indig-
nation against those who corrupt and
demoralize a nation by trading in
religious arts and fears, just as the
others show God’s continual govern-
ment over the outward universe, and
His protecting care over every person
who dwells in it. The method in
which the revelation of these truths
was made belongs to a peculiar period
of the world’s history. In a general
way, it may be said to belong to the
whole Jewish dispensation, Including
in that the period down to the destrue-
tion of Jerusalem. In another sense,
it belonged to the special circumstances
ofthe time in which Elijah was liv-
ing. We do not need to have pro-
phets executing these purposes of the
Divine government, which famines,
pestilences, revolutions execute withe
out them, or those which are accom:
plished through the intervention of the
ordinary minister of health and
nourishment. But if no prophet had
ever been commissioned to do one
kind of work as well as the other,
weshould not have known to whom
we might refer them. An infinite
darkness would have rested both upon
human andnatural proceedings, which
except through our own fault and un
willingness to profit by God’s illumi-
tion, does not rest upon them now.—
Maurice.

— The sentence upon the idol-
priests was a terrible but necessary
one, which should serve us not as an
example, but as a warning; for al-
though under the new covenant super-
stition and unbelief, idol-worship and
apostacy, arenot chastised with fireand
sword, yet there is not wanting a
certain fearful looking for of judgment
and fiery indignation which shall
devour the adversaries. Those who
tread under foot the blood of the Lamb
will shrink from the wrath of
the Lamb (Luke ix. 54-56; Heb. x.
27-31; Rev. vi. 16).—Lange.

394


%


GuAP, XVII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
t
HOMILETICS OF VERSES 41—46.


SucexrstrvE PHases oy THE Prarine Srrarr.


I. It is quick to perceive the indications of coming blessing (verse 41),
“There is a sound oF abundance of rain.’”’ To the keen, sensitive ears of the
prophet, the splash of the long-wished for rain was already falling on the
parched soil, and roaring along the hitherto empty torrent beds. He heard in
reality, or by anticipation, the gentle wind sighing through the forest of Carmel,
and waving the tree tops which have been poetically spoken of as so many bells
summoning this lone worshipper to prayer: and in the Kast the wind is the
precursor of the approaching shower. A certain Polish Jew, whose great musical
genius raised him to eminence and wealth, had become so familiar with the
different kinds of wood of which he made his flutes and reeds when in the
capacity of a poor shepherd, that he knew every tree of the forest by the pecu-
liarity of itssound. §o, long practice in prayer sharpens every sensibility of the

soul, and familiarizes it with the faintest indications, unheard by other ears,
of the nearness and character of advancing benedictions.


II. It seeks retirement (verse 42). ‘‘Elijah went up to the top of Carmel.”
Leaving Ahab to take his meal at the place where the sacrifice had been con-
sumed, the prophet ascended not quite to the highest elevation, as appears from
his words to his servant (verse 48), but toa point little below the highest,
whence the sea was not visible. He needed to retire only a short distance to
the West, and there, on the slope just below the summit, sequestered by bushes
and trees, such as are still to be found there, he could pour out his heart to God
in secret. Devotion needs times of quietness and solitude in order to store up
spiritual strength for the bustle and conflict of life. How often is it said of the
great prophet of mankind that ‘he went up into a mountain apart to pray!”
And all who would catch his spirit and tone, in however humble a degree, must
seek it in private communion (Matt. vi. 6).


ITI. It has ever some special subject for personal supplication. Elijah
had prayed before that it might not rain, and a prolonged period of drought and
famine was the answer. But now the great burden of his prayer was for the
rain that had been so long withheld (James v. 17, 18). 1. Zhis supplication
was intensely earnest. ‘‘He cast himself downupon the earth and put his face
between his knees’’ (verse 42), by this unusual attitude indicating the extra-
ordinary intensity of his prayer. The highest results of prayer can be attained
only by fervent, agonising efforts. The greatness of the blessing sought stimu-
lates the urgency of the petitioner. 2. Zhts supplication was persevering (verse
48). ‘*@o again seven times.” There was spiritual discipline here. Delaying
isnotdenying. The blessing is withheld, partly to certify the fact that it comes
from God, to show the necessity of hourly dependence, and to teach that, whatever
apparent difficulties there may be in the way, ‘‘ men ought always to pray, and
not to faint.’’ Six times the messenger returned with the disappointing intelli-
gence, ‘‘ There is nothing ’’ ; but the Tishbite’s faith was undaunted; he had
unswerving confidence in the prayer-hearing God. Though he had the definite
promise of God that rain should be sent (verse 1), and had caught with pro-
phetic instinct the precursive sign of its coming (verse 41), yet he continued
pleading with unabated earnestness. Persevering prayer wins the victory.


IV. It is privileged to witness substantial answers to prayer (verses
44,45). ‘A speck at length darkens the distant heavens.


Comes « vapour from the margin, blackening over heath and holt,
Cramming all the blast before it, im its breast a thunderbalt,
296


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. XVIII.





It is the first that has been seen for three years andahalf. It is abundantly
visible in a sky which too clear, like a too beautiful check, tells there is surely
something wrong. It rises higher and higher—it becomes broader and broader
—it moves with amazing celerity. The glow of the sunset is lost in gloom.
Long raven wings are extended all overthe hill. The banks of the Kishon put
on a ghastlier hue. lt breaks; and there, amid a hoarse thanksgiving murmur
from the forest around, rains down the grateful deluge—token that the prayers
of the bent prophet have been graciously heard, and that his victory over Baal
is now, in fire and water, visibly complete.” Few of God’s praying people but
can refer to some period in their history when their prayers were answered with
overwhelming copiousness.


V. It is the best preparation for active and important service (verse 46).
Divinely directed and divinely upheld, Elijah, instead of resting after the
excitement and fatigues of the day, girded up his loins, and ran in advance of
the king’s chariot, which was no doubt driven at speed, the entire distance of at
least sixteen miles to the entrance of Jezreel. He thus showed himself ready to
countenance and uphold the irresolute monarch, if he would turn from his evil
courses, and proceed to carry out the religious reformation which the events of
the day had inaugurated (Speaker’s Comm.). The stern and fiery-spirited prophet
was, aiter all, a faithful and obedient subject; though severe in matters of
religion, he was constitutional and loyal in matters of state. His aim was, not
to injure king or people, but to defend and restore the worship of the God of
Israel. Praying and working must never be disjoined. The best work is done
by him who prays the best.


Lzssons :—1. Some characters would have no greatness at all sf tt were not for
their spirit of prayer. 2. Prayer should not be less, but more, earnest because of
the evident approach of the answer. 8. Prayer ts absolutely essential for efficiency
0 all Christian work.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


procure rain for the parched tand
Let us learn from his example to keep
a clearly defined object before our
faith. With regard to God—His


Verses. 41-46. Therain. In this
incident Elijah reaches the great crisis
of his life. It was to him a time of
suspense and anxiety. He would


wonder whether God wouid now hear
him by sending rain, as He had re-
cently done by sending fire. If God
should answer him this time, then his
great work would be accomplished,
and he should experience the joy of
success. It was for this hour he had
been living during the last few years.
This was to be the crowning point of
his life—that point in which the past
and the future meet—when his soul
would be filled with anxiety and
concern as tothe issue. Such were
the feelings with which Elijah for the
second time ascended Carmel to seek
the manifestation of God’s presence
and power. Notice—


I. The object of his faith. To


fatherhood, His mercy and love, His
nearness to us and readiness to help:
with regard to our life—the con-
quering of sinful temper or passion,
the increase of holiness and devoted-
ness to God: with regard to our work
—in the family, in the Sunday school
class, in the pulpit. II. The means
by which he sought this object.
The attitude of prayer. He might
have been tempted to have left God
to fulfil His own promise, but he did
not. His faith was operative, and led
him to pray earnestly. True faith
will always influence us to labour and
pray for its object. III, The en-
couregementhe received, “ A sound
of abundance of rain.” pet was al
29


%


GWAP, XVITi.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





indication of God’s nearness to him,
and a token that his prayer would be
answered, This sound, in all likeli-
hood, was heard only by himself. And
so is it ever with the man who has
strong faith in God, and who livesin
elose union and intimate fellowship
with Him. He has visions of God
unseen by others. Itis by such tokens
that he is sustained and stimulated in
the work God has given him to do.
IV. The discouragement he met
with. ‘There is nothing.” He
hoped for intelligence of the clouds
rising and bearing in their bosoms the
plentiful showers; but there was no
sign of them. The discouragement
came to Elijah from the servant and
the circumstances of the case; not
from God—from Him he received
encouragement and stimulus. Like
the prophet, we receive discouragement
every day from men and from circum-
stances. From men and things we
receive constant disappointment; but
from God we receive no disappoint-
ment—He never fails. V. The
perseverance he manifested. ‘‘Go
again seven times.” Many a one
would have grown weary on being
told by the servant two or three times,
‘‘There is nothing.”’ But Elijah was
not to be turned aside from his object
by having to wait. He continues to
watch and pray. While doing so he
was the object of conflicting influences,
of a discouraging and encouraging
character; but by the assistance of
the latter he was enabled to overcome
the former, and to persevere. Like
him we are exposed to the two classes
of influences, but we are encouraged to
persevere. WI. The success realized.
‘‘There was a great rain.” Though
he had to wait, yet God heard him.
Who can imagine the feeling of joy
that. would rush into the prophet’s
heart as he received the answer to his
prayer? His character as a true
prophet would be established, and God
would be honoured by the steadfastness
and perseverance of His servant.—
The Study and Pulptt.


Verses 41, 42. Wretched man!
We was no more touched by the great,
298


heartsearching events of the day, thar
if he had witnessed an interesting bu‘
very long play, after which refresh
ment is most welcome, and food taste.
well. Yet where are not such Ahab
souls to be found? Ah! woe to you
who permit the strongest evidences.
the most powerful appeals to consci-
ence, and the most touching works oc
God, to glide before you like a magic:
lantern before your eyes: you enjoy
it alittle, perhaps, but you bring home
from the churches and meetings noth-
ing except some complaints over the
long divine service, or some matter for
lively conversation or self-satisfied
criticism, and a good appetite for the
meal that now follows, and a gay look-
ing forward to the pleasures and enjoy-
ment which the evening of the Sabbath
day willbring you. Who has greater
cause than Ahab to seek solitude, fall
down upon his knees and say, God
be merciful to me, and blot out my
sins after Thy great mercy, and make
us glad according to the days wherein
thou hast afflicted us (Psa. li. 3; xe.
15). Butof all this, notaword. The
rain alone was of importance to him,
not the Lord and His mercy. How
many like-minded ones in our day !—
Krummacher.

Verse 41. The sensitiveness of
faith, 1. Is on the alert for answers
to prayer. 2. Is conscious of the
nearness of great blessings. 38. Pre-
pares the soul for the reception and
use of heavenly visitations. 4. Gives
additional urgency to prayer.

— No ears but Elijah’s could a.
yet perceive a sound of rain: the
clouds were not yet gathered, the
vapours were not yet risen, yet Elijak
hears that which shall be. Those that
are of God’s counsel can discern either
favours or judgments afar off. The
slack apprehensions of carnal hearts
make them hard to believe that as
future which the quick and refined
senses of the faithful perceive as pre-
sent.— Bp. Hall.

— Glad and grateful must that
moment have been to the many thou.
sands of Israel, when the gasping
earth that hed for three long yean


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS.


Ghar. RVI





suffered in dumb agony, drank in the
refreshing flood of God ; when the true
shurch, who had beheld in that sky
of brass and these furrows of iron the
visible tokens of the Divine curse, now
witnessed the heavens unfolding their
black, inky scroll, with the joyful
tidings that the curse was removed!
Can we participate in this joy in a
loftier spiritual sense? Do we see
the curse of sin taken away; God
propitiated; and from the rain with
which He is filling the pools, are we
drawing all needfulsupplies for our
parched souls? If we are drooping
and desponding; if our cry is, ‘My
flesh longeth for thee in a dry and
thirsty land where no water is”; we
again echo Elijah’s words, ‘‘ Get thee
up, for there is the sound of abundance
of rain.” Our privileges are many.
The spirit of God is ever and anon
moving ‘‘on the tops of the mulberry
trees.”? The small clouds have been
rising, and copious showers have fallen.
Go, get thee, like Elijah, get thee to
the oratory, pray that the cloud may
spread, that it may stretch across the
heavens !— Vacduff.


Verses 42, 43. Elijah praying.
We propose to consider the conduct of
Elijah as suggestive of important
lessons to the people of God in refe-
rence to a subject which claims their
utmost solicitude, namely, the descent
of spiritual blessing, the coming of a
gracious rain upon the church and the
world. Mark—I. The circumstances
by which Ehjah’s prayer 18 distinguished.
1. The place to which he resorted.
He ‘“‘ went up to the top of Carmel.”
It was a place of privacy, retirement,
seclusion. Hence we read of those
who did ‘‘hide themselves in the top
of Carmel” (Amos ix. 8). It is by
secret prayer manifestations of power
and blessing are secured, and revivals
ushered in. ‘‘Come! my people!
enter into thy chambers, and shut thy
door about thee!” ‘‘ Enter into thy
closet,” &c. (Matt. vi. 6). 2. The
attitude he assumed. ‘“‘ He cast him-
self down upon the earth,” &. In-
dicative of reverence, humility, fer-~
vour. Our prayers should be thus


distinguished. Think of the majesty
of the Being we address; the disparity
existing between ourselves and Him ;
the infinite importance of the blessings
sought (Isaiah vi. 3; Gen. xix. 27;
Exodus iii.5). 8. The faith which he
exercised. That for which Elijah
prayed, God had promised (verse 1).
The promise of God is faith’s warrant.
Prayer is the condition, the promise,
the encouragement (Ez. xxx. 387).
Elijah believed God ; hence he “ said
to his servant, Go up now, and look
toward the sea,’’ whence clouds and
vapours usually arise. Oh! how un-
like Elijah have we frequently been !
How does his conduct proclaim, ‘‘ Have
faith inGod.”’ 4. The perseverance he
manifested. Six times he sent his ser-
vant up the hill, and he sees nothing,
brings no good news to his master; yet
Elijah continues praying. Like his
father Jacob, his conduct says, ‘I will
not let thee go unless Thou bless me.”
(See xvii. 21; Psalm Ixxx. 5-7—
xe. 138-16.) Delays are not denials
‘‘Though the vision tarry, weit fo1
it.”” Send your prayers up the hill of
Zion, not seven times, but seventy
times seven. Though the cloud cannot
be seen, the promise can.
“Faith, mighty faith, the promise sees,
And looks to that alone.”


Il. The success with which Elyah’s
prayer was crowned. 1. Andit came to
pass at the seventh time (44, 45). The
cloud was small at first ; but it was the
precursor of ‘agreatrain.” 2. Every
succeeding age has supplied examples
equally remarkable. The disciples in
the ‘upper room”; Cornelius at
Cesarea ; Paul and Silas at Philippi;
Peter in prison, &c. 3. Other in-
stances besides those which the inspired
record supplies—e.g., the Reformation
of the sixteenth century; the Wes-
leys at Oxford; the Revival in
America and Ireland in 1857; per-
sonal history. You prayed till you
could praise—the blessing came, &o.
III. The encouragement which Eliyan’s
servant, and that of past agen, supplies te
the church of the present day. Seen in
the unchangeable character of God.
“T am the Lord, I change not.” What
399


y


GHAP. XVIII,





He was to Elijah on Mount Carmel,
Heistous. 2. The unalterable effi-
cacy of prayer. It is still the way of
approach, the medium of success, the
hand which moves the arm which
moves the world. 3. The immuta-
bility of God’s promises. The great
rain which is to precede the world’s
harvest is the subject of explicit
promise (see Isaiah xliv. 3; Joel ii.
29; Psalm Ixxii. 6-8; Numbers xiv.
21).— The Lay Preacher.


Verse 42. The worldly and the
religious spirit—a contrast. 1. The
worldly spirit finds relief in festivity ;
the religious spiritin prayer. 2. The
worldly spirit is but temporarily
affected by the most imposing spec-
tacles of divine power; the religious
spirit bows in reverence and humility
before God. 8. The worldly spirit
is moe intent in looking for temporal
results; the religious spirit for spiri-
tual reformation.

Verses 43, 44. All that while is the
prophet in his prayers, neither is any
whit undaunted with that delay. Hope
holds up the head of our holy desires,
and perseverance crowns it. If we
receive not an answer to our suits at
the sixth motion, we may not be out
of countenance, but must try the
seventh. At last a little cloud arises
out of the sea—a handbreadth. So
many, 80 fervent prayers cannot but
pull water out of heaven as well as fire:
those sighs reflect upon the earth, and
from the earth reflect upon heaven,
from heaven rebound upon the sea, and
raise vapours up thence to heaven
again. If we find that our prayers
are heard for the substance, we may
not cavil at the quantity. From how
small beginnings have great matters
arisen! It is no otherwise in all the
gracious proceedings of God with the
soul. Scarce sensible are these first
works of His spirit in the heart which
grow up at last to the wonder of men
and applause of angels.—Bp. Hall.


Verse 43. ‘There is nothing.” A
common verdict. 1. Ofthe world con-
cerning the church. 2. Of the church
concerning the world. 3. Of the

800


ROMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


od


disappointed worshipper concerning
idolatry. 4. Of the baffled inquirer
concerning infidelity. 5. Of the sur-
feited votary concerning pleasure.

— Oftentimes we look in vain, and
yet sce nothing of the comfort of the
Lord, nothing of His help and salvation.
He leaves us awhile prostrated in dust
and misery, does not at once, hearken-
ing and comforting, raise us up, but
appears as if the voice of our crying
reached Him not. But if we do not
lose our confidence in Him, if we re-
double our prayers and entreaties, He
will not let us be ashamed (Isa. xlix.
23). He will comfort, help, and
hearken to us at His own, the best
time. .A man must not weary of
prayer, even though it appears to him
useless (Jer. xvii. 1; Col. iv. 2;
Eph. vi. 1).—Menken.

— ‘Go again seven times.’? Here
was an act of faith on Elijah’s part,
and on that of his servant, and also a
prophecy. Thecloud, which promised
the long expected rain, appeared at the
seventh time. The walls of Jericho
fell down after they had been com-
passed seven times, on the seventh
day (Josh. vi. 15-20). Naaman was
cleansed after he had washed seven
times (2 Kings vy. 14). There are
seventy-seven generations from Adam
to Christ.— Wordsworth.


Verses 44, 45. All the merciful
works of God seem small and un-
important in the beginning, but thence
they are seen to be noblerand greater
in the end. Let the man rejoice who
sees even so much asa little cloud of
divine mercy and peace arising upon
the horizon of his life! The time
approaches when this cloud will cover
his whole heaven. When the hour
strikes, help comes in with mighty
power; and, to put thy mistrust to
shame, it must come unexpectedly.—
Lange.


Verse 44. “There ariseth a little
cloud like a man’s hand.” The
gradual development of the greatest
good. 1. In the world of nature. 2.
In the world of mind. §$. In the


spiritual sphere. 4. In the aggre


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,





gate of national life. 5. In the con-
version of the world to Christianity.


Verse 46. Divine strength. 1.
Increases the capacity for physical
endurance. 2. Makes us willing to
occupy the humblest position to gain
over the morally weak. 3. Prepares
us for future obedience and service.

— The picture of the fleet runner is
suggestive to the Christian of many
profitable thoughts, and chiefly of this,
that loyalty to God is simply ‘‘ running
in the way of His commandments.”
And with this let nothing interfere.
Let us runin the right spirit, stripped
of every encumbrance, with concentra-
tion of purpose, in humble reliance on
God. Elijah-like, tm the way, His
strength and support shall never be
wanting ; for, ‘‘ the hand of the Lord”
shall be onus; and then, tm the end,
we shall have, what at least at Jezreel
Elijah had not, the chaplet of glory to
crown our brow. There is an old
eastern tale of the swift Persian Shatirs.
To one his sovereign had promised the
hand of a princess if he accomplished in
running a certain feat. Girt as tightly
as possible, when to stoop was death,


GHAP. KIX,


we ees


he ran for miles like a gazelle in front
of the royal train. Alarmed at his
success, and fearing the promise would
have to be kept, the monarch dropped
his whip ; but, scarce pausing in his
progress, the adroit, skilful runner
picked it up with his foot. Next the
monarch dropped his ring, and finding
that that he could not recover with his
foot, the runner exclaimed, ‘ O King,
you have broken your word, but I am
true to the last’’—stooped to the
ground, picked up the ring with his
finger, gave a deep groan of pain, fell
down, andexpired. But with God and
the runner in the Christian race there
is no deceit. Hewho has said, ‘So
run that ye may obtain,” will confer
the mark of the high calling of God on
the humblest who reaches the goal at
the last.— Howat.

— Elijah, a true shepherd, he goes
after the lost sheep, and leaves them
not when he sees the wolf coming ; but
the Lord, who is neither weary nor
faint, giveth power and strength to the
faint, and to them that have no might,
so that no way is too far, no toil too
heavy.





CHAPTER XIX.


ELIJAH DEJECTED,


REPROVED,


AND ENCOURAGED.


moaL AND ExpianaTory Nores.—Verse 2. 80 let the gods do to me—The pl.


DTN is used commonly for Gop, Jehovah ; but here appears for Jezebel’s idols. The S®pt.
/ *


prefixes to this oath the words, El ov ef "HAiod Kal eye ‘IefdBeA—“If thou art Elias, and I
Jezebel.” Verse 3. And when he saw that—N")*) may be future of JN, re saw, or RD,


TT

.  Aecordingly the Sept., Vulg., and Peshito read, “ And he was afraid.” But the

Hal easeareaens oe would Elijah if likely, after facing the Carmel ordeal, to take fright
at this miserable threat of Jezebel? Verse 4. Juniper tree—Broom plant, 5: the most longed
for and most welcome bush of the desert’”’ (Robinson). It is enough— ‘I have already
endured tribulation enough” (Keil). ‘‘I have now lived long enough (Lange). Verse 6.
Cake baken on the coals—On hot stones among ashes and coals (Gen. xviii. 6). Verse 8.
Went in the strength of that meat, &c.—This does not state that he occupied forty days and
forty nights in the journey to Horeb, distant only forty geographical miles from Beersheba,
but that he went in the strength of that meat during that prolonged period ; was supernaturally
sustained by that supernaturally provided meal, Verse 9. What doest thou here ?- Not a
reproach, but an interrogation, designed to call out the depressed ery of his soul, that God
might correct and alleviate his despondency. Verse 11. Go forth, and stand upon the mount—
Go forth to-morrow (so Sept., but without any authority). “ To the complaint of the prophet,
the Lord answers, first, by the manifestation of His nature im deeds (verses ee ines thes


’


CHAP, Kix. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KING8.


by the declaration of His will in words (verses 15-18)” Keil. Great and strong wind—earth-
quake—fire—Natural phenomena, calculated to impress the mind with Jehovah’s power, and
indicate the Divine resources for destruction of His enemies. Verse 12. Still small voiee—
miejeni Sip TTDI, lit., sound of a soft blowing. This gentle phenomenon suggested, in con-
nA fell — "
trast, the tenderness and compassionateness of God towards His people. Verse 13. Wrapped
his face in his mantle—As even the seraphim veil their faces in reverent awe. Verse 18.
Yet I have left me 7,000—To be taken as future: “I wild leave in Israel.” In the judg-
ments which Hazael, Jehu, and Elisha shall execute, that number would remain faithful to
Jehovah. Verse 20. Go back again; for what, &c.—2'W 7; Luther renders, ‘ Go (to
thy parents), and come (then) again.” (Keil) “Go, but return soon, for it isa great thing
that thon shouldst be my successor.” (Lange) “Return to thy parents as thou wishest; I
have not intended to coerce thee; I leave the decision as to thy prophetic call to thy free
will. What have I done to thee 1—Bids him recognise the solemn meaning of the symbolical
action in casting his mantle upon him, It laid him under obligation to assume the prophetic


mission._-W. H. J.


Seer at


HOMILETICS OF VERSES i-1&.
Tar Wrak Moments oy a Great Man,


I. Here we see a great man giving way to an unworthy fear (verses 1-8).
1. Elijah quatled before the threat of an unscrupulous woman (verse 2). The
hero of Carmel is the coward of Jezreel. He who had overawed Ahab and the
host of Baal worshippers found more than his match in Jezebel. He was not
prepared for so sudden a collapse of the influence he had gained: he had ex-
pected that the bare rehearsal of the victory of Carmel would have subdued the
idolatrous queen, and prepared her to listen with respect to the prophet, and
to encourage the king in bringing about religious reform. (n the contrary, all
the wild, savage nature of the idol-enthusiast was aroused, and she swore a
tremendous oath to be avenged for the slaughter of her priests by compassing
the prophet’s death. Like the Lady Macbeth, of the great English dramatist,
her spirit of revenge might be expressed in similar terms :-—


Come, come, you spirits
That tend on mortal thoughts, and fill me
Top-full of direst cruelty !
That no compunctious visitings of nature
Shake my fell purpose.


Elijah was seized with fear to which he had hitherto been a stranger, and
trembled before the threat of a Jezebel. And alas! he is not the only brave
and noble spirit who, after performing the most heroic exploits in the cause of
morality and religion, has succumbed. before the scowl and scorn of a wicked
and deceitful woman. 2. He deserted the post of duty from fear of death
(verse 3). Fora lesser man to have runaway might have been excused, but for
Elijah to prove renegade was a calamitous blow to all trust in human great-
ness. The work ofthe prophet was so public and so important to the religious
interests of the nation, that even the fear of death ought not to have
prompted him to relinquish it: and had he been absolutely certain thut God
would not have interposed to protect him, and that to remain was death,
how could he know but that the cause of Jehovah might be better promoted,
and His name glorified, by his death than by his life? Of all men, we should
have looked to Elijah for a display of the true martyr-spirit But when faith
in God erste the loftiest fall and the bravest fiee.
802


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGR. CHAP, XIX.





IT. Here we see a great man giving way to querulousness and despair
(verse 4). The disappointment of his expectations, the failure of his mission
following so closely on the heels of such signal success, his long abstinence
from food, and great physical exhaustion arising from rapid and extended
travelling, would all tend to prostrate his powers; and when he sank down
under the sheltering broom tree, he gave utterance to the deep dejection of his
mind in the querulous words, ‘‘It is enough; now, O Lord, take away my
life.” Strange contradiction! says Kitto. Here the man who was destined
not to taste of death, flees from death on the one hand, and seeks it on the other.
And who told him it was enough? God did not. He knew what was enough
for Elijah to do and to suffer. God had more to teach him, and more work
for him to do. It is an affecting sight to see a great, strong man sink into
helplessness and despair; and yet in the hour of disappointment and defeat many
a gallant spirit has cried out for the oblivion of death! Desertion of duty—a
fleeing from the word of God—is sure to be followed by trouble, and often the
deepest mental anguish.


III. Here we see a great man miraculously sustained in the moment of
his greatest weakness (verses 5-8). God granted Elijah not the oblivion of
death, but the refreshing oblivion of sleep—riches to the poor, health to all;
and while he was locked in the arms of forgetfulness, a repast was prepared for
him by angel-hands, to which he was summoned by an angel’s touch. In the
strength of that meat he went forty days and forty nights across the platform
of the Sinaitic desert, till he came to Horeb, the mount of God. ‘‘ The
journey ” was not simply a pilgrimage to Horeb, which was less than two hun-
dred miles distant, and might have been reached in six or seven days; it was to
be a wandering in the wilderness, not unlike that of the Israelites when they
came out of Egypt, only it was to last forty days instead of forty years. It
was not without significance that Elijah was directed to Horeb: amid its sacred
solitudes he was to learn a lesson never to be forgotten. God is a wise
physician—food first; instruction, rebuke, after. He comes to man in the
moment of his greatest helplessness, restores and strengthens him, and then
prepares him for future usefulness and more splendid triumphs.


IV. Here we see agreat man Divinely instructed. (verses 9-14). ‘What
doest thou here?’’—a question ever pertinent andtimely. The answer of Elijah
betrays in him what some have called ‘‘a spirit of pious fault-finding,” and
also a disposition to exalt himself above measure. He does not accuse Jehovah,
but his words imply that he himself was the only sain‘ in Israel, and it was

too bad that Divine power had allowed idolatry so far to triumph. Elijah’s
notions of the Divine government were manifestly shaped too much by external
displays of awful power, and he needed to learn a profounder lesson of the
Divine nature. He is directed to “‘ go forth, and stand upon the mount before
the Lord ”’ (verse 11), and in rapid succession the most demonstrative symbols of
Jehovah’s mighty power in storm, earthquake, and fire, pass before him. But
not in these, but in the ‘still small voice,” the prophet detected the true
grandeur and comfort of the Divine presence. Humbled at the revelation, he
wrapped his face in his mantle, and listened for further instruction. The
thoughts under this heading may be arranged and treated in the following
order :—1. The pointed expostulation(verse 9), 2. The attempt at self-justification
(verse 10). 8. Zhe power of Divine gentleness (verses 11-13). 4. Lhe influence
of Divine gentleness not always immediately apparent (verses 18, 14). The
question is now put again to the prophet by the Lord himself. Will he have
taken to heart the lesson of the great parable which has been acted before him,
and make a humbler and more gentle answer? No; he is satiefied with his
own statement of his case, and does but repeat his former words! ‘‘ He hae
303


*


OnAP. XIX. EHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





been very jealous—he is left alone—his life is sought—he has done right, there-
fore, to quit an ungrateful country, and relinquish a thankless office.”


V. Here we see a great man encouraged to return to the work he had
forsaken (verses 15-18). The best remedy for dejection is work ; absorbed in
the duties of a lofty mission, man forgets his sorrow and regains his normal tone.
Elijah is reminded that God did not overlook the sins of Israel, and he is
instructed to anoint others who shall carry out His judgments against the house
of Ahab. Again, Elijah had supposed he was alone in his witness for God.
“It was a thought of anguish,” says Maurice,” and yet it was a thought of
pride. He felt the misery of solitude, yet there was self-exaltation init. ‘I
alone am left, and they seek my life.” No; there are seven thousand who have
not bowed the knee to Baal. Is itso indeed? What, Elijah, the great prophet,
after all, does not know more than a multitude beside! He is not more faithful
than they are! God has called them as well as him. Whocan tell whether
Elijah could have borne that discovery a few hours before ? The still small
voice had made it the most blessed of all discoveries. That voice had taught
him not to care whether he was better than his fathers, or better than his
brethren; to desire only that God might be glorified in his strength and in his
nothingness.” It isat once a humiliation and an encouragement to reflect that
man is only one amid a host of seen or unseen workers for God !


Lessons:—1. Great men are liable to failure. 2. Great men often fail at the
point where they are considered strongest—the fearless become cawardly, the pure
smmoral, the honourable dishonest, fo. 3. God restores the erring soul by a method
which +s best suited at once to humble and encourage.


Exvan’s DxsponpENcy.


If there were anything for which Elijah is remarkable, we should say it was
superiority to human weakness. Like the Baptist, he dared to arraign and
rebuke his sovereign; like the commander who cuts down the bridge behind
him, leaving himself no alternative but death or victory, he taunted his adver-
saries, the priests of Baal, on Mount Carmel, making them gnash their teeth
and cut themselves with knives, but at the same time ensuring for himself a
terrible end, in case of failure, from his exasperated foes. Now it was this
man—so stern, 80 iron, 80 independent, so above all human weakness—of whom
it was recorded that in his trial hour he gave way to a fit of petulance and
querulous despondency, to which there is scarcely found a parallel.


I. The causes of Elijah’s despondency. 1. Relaxation of physical strength.
On the reception of Jezebel’s message, Elijah flies for his life, toils on the whole
day, sits down under a@ juniper tree faint, hungry, and travel-worn, the gale
of an Oriental evening, damp and heavy with languid sweetness, breathing on
his face. The prophet and the man give way. He longs to die. You cannot
mistake the presence of causes in part purely physical. We are fearfully and
wonderfully made ; of that constitution which, in our ignorance, we call union
of soul and body, we know little respecting what is cause and what is effect.
We would fain believe that the mind has power over the body, but it is just
as true that the body rules the mind. Causes, apparently, the most trivial; a
heated room, want of exercise, a sunless day, a northern aspect, will make all
the difference between happiness and unhappiness, between faith and doubt,
between courage and indecision. To our fancy there is something humiliating
in being thus at the mercy of our animal organism. We would fain find
nobler causes for our emotions. We talk of the hiding of God’s countenance.

804


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. XIX.








and the fiery darts of Satan. But the picture given here is true. The body is
the channel of our noblest emotions, as well as well as our sublimest sorrows.
2. Want of sympathy. ‘I, even I only, am left.” Lay the stress on only.
The loneliness of his position was shocking to Elijah. Surprising this: for
Elijah wanted no sympathy in a far harder trial on Mount Carmel. It was in
a tone of triumph that he proclaimed that he was the single, solitary prophet
of the Lord, while Baal prophets were 450 men. Observe, however, the
difference. There was in that case an opposition which could be grappled with ;
here there was nothing against which mere manhood wasavailing. The excite-
ment was passed, the chivalrous look of the thing gone. To die as a martyr;
yes, that were easy, in grand failure ; but to die as a felon, to be hunted, caught,
taken back to an ignominious death—flesh and blood recoiled from that. And
Elijah began to feel that popularity is not love. The world will support
you when you have constrained its votes by a manifestation of power, and shrink
from you when power and greatness ure no longer on your side. ‘I, even I
only, am left.”” What greater minds like Elijah’s have felt intensely, all we
have felt in our own degree. Not one of us but what has felt his heart aching
for want of sympathy. We have had our lonely hours, our days of disappoint-
ment, and our moments of hopelessness—times when our highest feelings have
been misunderstood, and our purest met with ridicule—days when our heavy
secret was lying unshared like ice upon the heart. And then the spirit gives
way : we have wished that all were over; that we could lie down tired, and
rest like the children, from life; that the hour was come when we could put
down the extinguisher on the lamp, and feel the last grand rush of darkness on
the spirit. Now the final cause of this capacity for depression—the reason for
which it is granted us—is that it may make God necessary. In such moments
it is felt that sympathy beyond human is needful, Alone, the world against
him, Elijah turns to God: ‘It isenough, now, O Lord.” 3. Want of occupa-
tion. ‘As long as Elijah had a prophet’s work to do—severe as that work was—
all went on healthily; but his occupation was gone. To-morrow, and the day
after, what has he left on earth to do? The misery of having nothing to do
proceeds from causes voluntary or involuntary in their nature. Multitudes of
our race, by circumstances over which they have no control, in single life or
widowhood, in straightened circumstances, are compelled to endure lonely days,
and still more lonely nights and evenings. They who have felt the hours hang
so heavy can comprehend part of Elijah’s sadness. The law of life is, in the
sweat of thy brow thou shalt eat bread. No man can evade that law with
impunity. Like all God’s laws, it is its own executioner. It hasstrange penal-
ties annexed to it. Would you know them? Go to the park or the esplanade,
or the solitude after the night of dissipation, and read the penalties of being
useless in the sad, jaded, listless countenances—nay, in the very trifles which
must be contrived to create excitement artificially. Yet these very eyes could,
dull as they are, beam with intelligence; on many of those brows is stamped
the mark of possible nobility. The fact is, that the capacity of ennui is one of
the signatures of man’s immortality. It is his very greatness which makes
inaction misery. If men with souls live only to eat and drink and be amused,
is it any wonder if life be darkened with despondency? 4. Disappointment in
the expectation of success. On Carmel the great object for which Elijah had lived
seemed on the point of being realized. Baal’s prophets were slain—Jehovah
acknowledged with one voice—false worship put down. Elijah’s life aim—the
transformation of Israel into a kingdom of God—was all but accomplished. In a
single day all this bright picture was annihilated. The tradesman sees the noble
fortune for which he lived, every coin of which is the representative of so much
time and labour spent, squandered by a spendthrift son. The purest statesmen
find themselves at last neglected, and rewarded by defeat. Almost never cana
man look back on life and say that its anticipations have been realized. For
x 805


»


Cuar, RIK, HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: KINGS.








the most part life is disappointment, and the moments in which this is keenly
realized are moments like this of Elijah’s.


II. God’s treatment of Elijah’s despondency. 1. First He recruited His
servant's exhausted strength. Miraculous meals are given—then Elijah sleeps,
wakes, and eats; on the strength of that goes forty days’ journey. In
otber words, like a wise physician, God administers food, rest, and exercise, and
then, and not till then, proceeds to expostulate ; for before, Elijah’s mind was
unfit for reasoning. Persons come to the ministers of God in seasons of des-
pondency ; they pervert with marvellous ingenuity all the consolation which is
given them, turning wholesome food into poison. Then we begin to perceive
the wisdom of God’s simple homely treatment of Elijah, and discover that there
are spiritual cases which are cases for the physician rather than the divine.
2. Next Jehovah calmed his stormy mind by the healing influences of Nature. He
commanded the hurricane to sweep the sky, and the earthquake to shake the
ground. He lighted up the heavens till they were one mass of fire. All this
expressed and reflected Elijah’s feelings. The mode in which nature soothes
us is by finding meeter and nobler utterance for our feelings than we can find
in words—by expressing and exalting them. In expression there is relief.
Elijah’s spirit rose with the spirit of the storm. Stern, wild defiance, strange
joy, all by turns were imaged there. Observe, God was not in the wind, nor in
the fire, nor in the earthquake. It was Elijah’s stormy self reflected in the
moods of the tempest, and giving them their character. Then came a calmer
hour. Elijah rose in reverence, felt tenderer sensations in his bosom. He
opened his heart to gentler influences, till at last, out of the manifold voices of
nature, there seemed to speak, not the stormy passions of the man, but the
‘still small voice” of the harmony and the peace of God. There are some
spirits which must go through a discipline analogous to that sustained by
Elijah. The storm-struggle must precede the still small voice. There are
minds which must be convulsed with doubt before they can repose in faith;
there are hearts which must be broken with disappointment before they can
rise into hope. 3. Besides, God made Elyah feel the earnestness of life. What
doest thou here, Elijah? Life is for doing—a prophet’s life for nobler doing—
and the prophet was not doing, but moaning. Such a voice repeats itself to all
of us, rousing us from our lethargy, or our despondency, or our protracted leisure,
‘What doest thou here””—here in this short life? There is work to be done,
evil put down, God’s church purified, good men encouraged, doubting men
directed, a country to be saved, time going, life a dream, eternity long, one
chance, and but one for ever. What doest thou here? Then he went on fur-
ther: “Arise, goon thy way.” That speaks to us: on thy way. Be up and
doing ; fill up every hour, leaving no crevice or craving for a remorse or a re-
pentance to creep through afterwards. Go! return on thy way, if thou art
desponding—on thy way, health of spirit will return. 4. God completed the cure
by the assurance of victory (verse 18). So, then, Elijah’s life had been no failure
after all. Seven thousand at least in Israel had been braced and encouraged
by his example, and silently blessed him, perhaps, for the courage which they
felt. In God’s world, for those that are in earnest, there is no failure. No
work truly done, no word earnestly spoken, no sacrifice freely made, was ever
made in vain. We turn naturally from this scene to a still darker hour and
more august agony. If ever failure seemed to rest on a noble life, it was
when the Son of man, deserted by his friends, heard the ery which proclaimed
that the pharisees had successfully drawn the net around their Divine victim.
Yet, from that very hour of defeat and death, there went forth the world’s
life; from that very moment of apparent failure there proceedeth forth into
the ages the spirit of the conquering Cross. Surely, if the Cross says any-
thing, peeve that apparent defeat is real victory, and that there is a heaven foy

3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, xIx


enn


Hose who have nobly and truly failed on earth. Distinguish, therefore, bo-
tween the real and the apparent. Elijah’s apparent success was in the shout
of Mount Carmel. His real success was in the unostentatious, unsurmised
obedience of the seven thousand who had taken his God for their God.


Lxssons:—1. For all teachers who lay their heads down at night, sickening
over their thankless task. Remember the power of ¢ndirect influences—those
which distil from a life, not from a sudden brilliant effort. The former never
fail: the latter often. 2. For ministers, again, what is ministerial success?
Crowded churches, full aisles, attentive congregations, the approval of the
religious world—much impression produced? Elijah thought so: and when
he found out his mistake, and discovered that the applause on Mount Carmel
subsided in hideous stillness, his heart well-nigh broke with disappointment.
Ministerial success lies in altered lives and obedient, humble hearts: unseen
work recognized in the Judgment Day. 3. Get below appearances, below
glitter and show. Plant your foot upon reality ; not in the jubilee of the
myriads on Carmel, but in the humble silence of the hearts of the seven thou-
sand, lay the proof that Elijah had not lived in vain —F. W. Robertson.


Tnx Suspurne Powrr or roe Divers Wuispre.


Elijah hastened first to the court to find the queen overwhelmed with defeat
gnd humiliation; but Jezebel, so far from being terrified into conviction by the
appalling wonders of Carmel, was preparing to take his life. This was so heavy
and sudden a blow to Elijah’s faith in the converting power of judgments, that
sourage and dignity forsook him for a time, and he fled like a frighted deer
vecause a woman had threatened him! An angel of God found him in the
yilderness of Beersheba, lying under a juniper tree, bitterly complaining of his
lot, and praying the Lord to take his life. It wasnow that Jehovah explained
to His servant, by the impressive signs described in these verses, that power
might avenge and destroy, but could not win; that the silent intellectual
process of instruction and spiritual influence can alone reach the heart, and
change the man. The theatre of these signs was Horeb, celebrated of old for
displays of the Divine terrors. Here Moses saw the flaming majesty of the I am
in the bush. Here was Sinai, the mount that might be touched, that burned
with fire, and trembled when the trump of God gave forth the voice of words.
Recalling these events, and impressed by these associations, Elijah, after a jour-
ney of forty days, drew near to this Hore», the mount of God; and, entering
a cave or grot hollowed out in one of its sides, he lodged there. There God
found him. ‘‘ What dost thou here, Elijah?” The prophet answered, in a dis-
tempered mood, that he had been jealous for the Lord of Hosts: that in spite
of all he had done to reclaim Israel, the Divine covenants were yet broken, the
altars profaned, the prophets slain, and himself, the sole remaining witness for
the truth, they were seeking to destroy. Then the Lord commanded the melan-
choly and despairing seer to ascend to the top of the mount; and while he stood
there, surrounded by bleak and barren hills, fit images of power and desolation,
the Lord passed by in a succession of grand and suggestive phenomena. There
were four signs; of which three were material, and the fourth intellectual. 1. A
strong wind swept by, rending the imbedded cliffs of Horeb, and scattering them
like stubble. The stormy soul of Elijah found a congenial element in this untamed
ynd mighty agent; and he, perhaps, wished he could ride upon its wings, turn its
head toward Samaria, and demolish the usurpation of Baal. But while he watched
for some particular appearance to indicate the presence of Jehovah, some strange
glory or voice, to show that the hurricane was a fit chariot for the carcer of
God, the storm Eee err canoe net the: Land wpa are wind,


%


CHAP, XIX. BOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


I <_<


2. Then followed another sign, more terrific than a tempest. Perhaps in all
nature there is nothing which so nearly resembles what we should think to be
the immediate interposition of God as an earthquake. ‘‘ After the wind ar
earthquake.” As the prophet felt that ancient and lofty pile of hills, apparently
immortal in their steadfastness, give way beneath his feet, writhing helplessly in
the grasp of some unseen power, like a convulsed child, he must have thought,
‘Surely God is here! These fearful shakings and hurlings are the tokens of
His dread presence ;’”? and he might have repeated to himself the triumphant
chant of a psalm he had often sung, ‘‘ What ails ye, ye mountains, that ye skip
like rams; and ye little hills like lambs? Tremble, thou earth, at the presence
of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob.” But the Lord was not in
the earthquake ; the convulsions subsided without a sign. 38. Thethird wonder
that passed before the eye of the now perplexed prophet was an element as
destructive as an earthquake, but far moreimposing. Shining above the bright-
ness of the sun, roaring and consuming, a huge fire played about the rocks on
which Elijah stood. And as he saw its nimble tongues of flame lick up the
hard verdure of the ground, and split and melt the rocks with its devouring
heat, he knew that this fierce brightness had been from the beginning a chosen
vehicle of Jehovah. He remembered Sodom and Gomorrah; he remembered
Sinai, part of the very hill that now blazed around him, when lightnings had
accompanied the declaration of law, and he probably waited to receive from that
fire another commandment for Israel. There stood the stern man in the midst
of devastation. The wind had shaken, the earthquake had swallowed up, the
fire had consumed ; but God had not spoken! The prophet had been awed, but
not instructed. He had gone to the mount doubtful, dissatisfied, perhaps, self-
condemned; the material signs gave him no relief. They were splendid and
dreadful, but there was no mind in them. 4. While he thus stood bewildered,
debating with himself what this might mean, the last sign explained all: it was
a still small voice. It was still, because no sound struck audibly on the ear; it
was small, because no ostentatious medium conveyed it; it was the voice of
mind whispering to mind. God spake to Elijah, and without any symbol there
were thoughts interchanged that bowed the prophet’s soul to the dust. And it
came to pass when Elijah heard it, or felt it, he wrapped his face in his mantle,
and returned to his cave, standing in the entrance to hear the voice again, as it
repeating the words of Samuel—* Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth.”


I. My dear brethren, that which bows the mind, that which makes a man
wrap his face in his mantle in silent and intelligent reverence, is not a sign
that strikes upon the senses, but a thought understood and felt in the heart.
Miracles have an historic value, but they have seldom produced in those who
witnessed them a moral benefit; neither error nor vice can spring from a miracle,
nor can either be rejected by a miracle: they arise from the connection of mind
with mind, and must be destroyed by a new mental fellowship.


II. This wili be manifest if we follow the course of the Divine revelation.
The patriarchs transmitted a few simple and fixed beliefs; the Jewish economy
dispensed miracles and types; the knowledge of God became more defined and
enlarged; it was systematized in laws, but national and local in its application.
When Christ came, He made the gospel the subject and instrument of teaching,
fulfilling the prediction—dAnd they shall be all taught of God. Divine knowledge,
in coming down to us from the past, has become more and more a voice speaking
to the heart, more and more free from material mediums. When Abraham
embraced the knowledge of God, it was on its way to us; when Moses lodged it
in the Jewish Tabernacle, it was purifying itself for us; when Christ found it
there, and baptized it with the Holy Ghost and with fire, He sent it forth to us.
It is pow doing its greatest work, not by flood and fire, although there are cities


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, xtx,











mare


in the world as wicked as Sodom; not by miracles, although there is as hard g
scepticism as ever reigned in Judea or Rome; but by the sted small voice of in-
struction, supported and carried out to gracious results by the silent communion
of the Holy Ghost.


III. These are the last and crowning means of Christianity ; everything else
by whatever name you call it, belongs to the three first signs. And what a
fondness we have for these signs, the picturesque and the striking! But what
do they gain who seek to embellish the church with a gorgeous architecture ;
who cultivate the sublimity of domes and capitals; who subdue by a solemn
colouring the very light that falls upon the worshippers ; who place in imposing
situations the picture, the statue, the emblem; who burnish their altars with
gold, and bring to the holy crucifix the homage of tapers and the genuflexions
of surplice and mitre; who enter the assembly with the music of chanted litanies,
and terrify the people by the thunder of anathemas? The Lord is not in the
architecture, the picture, the music, the pomp ; you see no more here than the
three signs of the prophet. . You must seek the Lord in the voice of the con-
science ; this is the sign of the gospel dispensation—the word, and not the picture;
Christ, and not the crucifix; the Holy Ghost, and not the seven candles.


IV. If we stop with the three signs, we go no farther than the heathen.
The negro falls down before the whirlwind and the earthquake, and cries, Lo!
God is here! The Parsee worships the shining fire. But their impressions are
sensuous and temporary ; fading before the heart is touched, for the still small
voice of instruction is wanting. Look at the people around us! Wesee whole
nations prostrate before the three signs. To the Hindu the splendours of Hin-
duism are the whirlwind, the earthquake, and the fire; and his homage is
fear and admiration. When I have seen an idol arrayed in traditionary terrors,
and magnificently paraded through the streets of a large native town—and in
the night too—and when ten thousand human beings have pressed near to wor-
ship amid the gleaming of innumerable torches of coloured lights, and rockets
and candles of every device shooting up into the air, and when the priests have
sung in solemn cadence, and the multitudes have shouted their acclamations, I
have caught the prevailing awe. With all my better knowledge, I could not
resist the terror and beauty of the spectacle; but the Lord was not there. The
multitudes returned to the homes with an intoxicated sense, and a fevered ima-
gination ; but no silent voice to instruct and win them to God. But I have
taken one of those Hindus whom the earthquake and the fire had dazzled, but
not changed; I have drawn him away from the three signs, and invited him to
await with me for the fourth; and while we listened, a still small voice spoke
in our hearts; and when he heard it, he wrapped his face in his mantle, and
cried, What must Ido to besaved? And the effect of that voice was a new heart
and a new life. It was the silent winning of Calvary, and not the fiery testi-
mony of Carmel. It was not Moses or Elijah thundering forth the law upon
the senses, but Jesus breathing truth and grace into the soul.


VY. Have you ever bowed before this voice, and hidden your face in penitence ?
Perhaps, amid the clamour and discord of louder voices, the still accents of
Jesus escaped you. We cannot catch the sound without profound listening.
When we do hear it, speaking pardon from the Cross, speaking help from the
right hand of God, speaking victory in the conflict—

Tis music in the sinner’s ear,
*Tis life, and health, and peace,


For the comfort of those who have been terrified by the storm and fire of the


law, I am commanded to promise thst the blessed sign of a Saviour’s presenos
809


%®


CHAP, XIX,





shall follow. You have been convinced of sin; have


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


quaked beneath the


threatenings of Horeb; a storm of distemper and doubt is rending your soul.
But follow Elijah’s example; wait, be of good courage, and He shall strengthen
your heart. The thick cloud of sin shall pass away before the still small voice
of heavenly peace.——. HL. Jenkins’ Madras Sermons.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-8. Elijah under the
juniper tree. How are the mighty
fallen! He who stands before us in
the preceding chapter as the fearless
champion of the God of Israel, putting
to shame the worshippers of Baal, and
slaying his prophets, is presented to
us in this chapter as being overcome
with fear, the victim of cowardice and
despondency. He who could boldly
defy the king is now terrified by the
threat of a vile and angry queen, and
flees for his life, until the shade of a
juniper tree in the wilderness affords
shelter to his exhausted frame. I.
His deection. ‘*He requested for
himself that he might die.’? This is
the feeling which dejection generally
awakens, the desire to be separated
from the object of trial or annoyance.
Whenever men’s hearts fail them in any
work, their first wish is to get away
from it. This will account for the
frequent instances we hear of desertion
from the post of duty. In this dejec-
tion of Elijah we have an instance of
men breaking down in the strong point
af their character. He was fearless,
bold, and courageous, yet these were
the points on which he failed—he was
afraid of Jezebel. Moses was the
meekest man, yet it was for impati-
ence and anger that he was excluded
from Canaan. Peter was fearless and
impetuous, yet he denied his Lord.
Men generally fear their weak points,
their besetting sins; but they have
need to fear as well those they think
strong. What were the causes of his
dejection? 1, Physical exhaustion.
The anxiety and excitement of Carmel
would be extremely exhausting to
him. After such a strain there would
come a reaction; the nerves unstrung
—irritable; taking a gloomy view of
things. This is the common experi-
ence of those who suffer from bodily

$10


exhaustion. 2. Disappointment.
Elijah in all likelihood expected that
after the scenes on Carmel the whole
of Israel, including Ahab and the
royal house, would be converted and
restored to God. He would think
that the evidence afforded would be
irresistible in favour of Jehovah.
But instead of Jezebel being converted,
she was enraged, and her enmity in-
creased. At this unexpected result,
the prophet would be disappointed,
and his heart would sink within him.
8. Eclipse of faith. The figure of
Jezebel so appeared before him as to
hide or obscure his vision of God.
When he saw ‘‘ that,” the threat, he
arose, and went for his life. ‘‘ The
God before whom I stand,” were the
words with which he confronted Ahab,
and he was as bold asa lion. Now he
saw nothing but Jezebel’s threat, and
fear takes hold upon him. Men are
strong and steadfast only as they see
God. Let anything obscure this
vision, and their strength is gone—in
temptation, in work, in sorrow, in
death.


II. His recovery. ‘* And ashe lay
and slept under a juniper tree, behold,
then an angel touched him, and said
unto him, Arise and eat.’’ There is
no rebuke here. Men often notice
the words most which are spoken in
anger or irritation. But God passes
over those which escaped Elijah’s lips
in his time of depression. They repre-
sented his despondency, not his real
self. Undeterred, therefore, by the
prophet’s request for death, God pro-
vides him with food to refresh his
exhausted frame. He also addressed
to him words of kindness to comfort
his mind: ‘ The journey is too great
forthee.’? What a beautiful instance
is this of the watchfulness and con-


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


{


GHaP, xix.





sideration with which God attends
His servants. In their times of des-
pondency and difficulty they may
forget Him, and wander from His
ways, but he does not forget them,
or leave them to themselves.—-Zhe
Study and the Pulpit.


Verses 2, 3. The tyranny of fear.
1. May overpower the bravest spirit.
2. Is intensified when life is threat-
ened with a cruel termination. 3.
May be wielded by the most con-
temptible individual. 4. Drives the
hitherto dauntless worker from the


post of duty.


Verse 2. Neither scourges nor
favours can work anything with the
obstinately wicked. All evil hearts
are not equally disaffected to good:
Ahab and Jezebel were both bad
enough, yet Ahab yields to that work
of God which Jezebel stubbornly
opposeth. Ahab melts with that
water, with that fire, wherewith
Jezebel is hardened; Ahab was bash-
fully, Jezebel audaciously, impious.
The weaker sex is ever commonly
stronger in passion, and more vehe-
mently carried with the sway of their
desires, whether to good or evil. She
swears and stamps at those whereat
she should have trembled ; she swears
by those gods of hers, which were
not able to save their prophets, that
she will kill the prophet of God, who
had scorned her gods, and slain her
prophets.—Bp. Hall.


Verse 8. Strange spectacle! The
man at whose words, but yesterday,
the fire of Jehovah miraculously fell,
and five hundred and fifty false pro-
phets were slain, now flies for his life
before the threat of an idolatrous
queen! Jehovah seems to have left
him for a season to himself. Perhaps
there was danger that, like the Apos-
tle, he might become exalted above
measure by the abundance of revela-
tion and of power which were mani-
fested through him, and it was needful
to remind him by an impressive ex-
perience that he was still a man en-
compassed with human passions and


infirmities. To many it may seem
that a great opportunity to reform
the worship of the kingdom was lost
by Elijah’s flight. The people were
convinced. Ahab was awed to reve-
rent silence and submission. Only
Jezebel and Asherah priests seem to
have remained an obstacle in the way
of reform; and how easily might they
have been removed by the Divine
power which had already wrought
such wonders! So we might judge.
But there is a point beyond which
Divine power will not multiply mira-
cles, and the turning-point here was
the instability of Ahab. He had the
power, and ought to have shown the
courage, to silence the ravings of his
impious wife, and to command his
household and the whole kingdom to
keep the way of the Lord. But he
was governed by his wife, became
false to his deepest convictions of
truth, and Jehovah would proceed no
further at that time to magnify His
name. But the moral lessons of the
scene at Carmel have never been lost.
Though failing to reform the king and
the nation, they speak to every after
age, and form a part of that Divine
revelation which claims the admira-
tion and reverence of all that desire to
know and worship the true God.—
Whedon. .
— The fear and flight of Elij

are very remarkable. But yesterday
he was a conqueror in the full glory of
an unprecedented triumph, imposing
his will as law on king and people.
To-day he is an outcast, a fugitive,
broken down in spirit, only anxious to
place the greatest possible distance
between himself and his enemies.
What had produced the extraordinary
change? Not, probably, Jezebel’s
threat alone, but in part, perhaps,
physical reaction from the over-excite-
ment of the preceding day: in part,
internal disquietude and doubt as to
the wisdom of the course which he had
adopted.—Speaker’s Comm.


Verses 4-138. The prophet’s hour
of darkness. We learn more from
example than from precept. The
human weakness of 2 ola charac-

all


%y


CHAP. xx.


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY:


KINGS.





ters, as well as their spiritual strength,
is shown us. We are taught as much
by the one as by the other. I. The
human sorrow. After the prophet’s
triumph came his time of depression.
i. When Elijah overcame the pro-
phets of Baal it was his time of
triumph. Then came the reaction.
He heard of Jezebel’s threat, and fled
into the kingdom of Judah. We can
picture to ourselves the wearied old
man resting under the shade of the
juniper tree. He complained of the
failure of his life, and desired to die.
Then there fell upon him sleep, God’s
gift to the wretched. Thus it is with
us; after our time of triumph comes
our time of reaction. In the day of
joy we scarcely believe it, but it is
so. It is very difficult to make the
child who has never before seen the
sea understand that in a few hours the
waters will have ebbed from the bay,
and left it covered with long stretches
of brown-ribbed sand and jagged rocks,
2. It is so in the Christian life. We
may have our hours of rapture, but
they will be succeeded by our hours of
depression. The glow of first love
will not always last. Nor is it well
that it should. It is beautiful, but
not deep. The flowers must fall from
the fruit tree, if the autumn store
is to hang on its boughs. If it were
not so, we should walk by sight, not
by faith. 3. It is so with tempta-
tion. Our sins often seem to be
trodden down; but unless we are
careful, they will rise again. It may
be painful to be told this, but it is
true, and therefore it is well to know
it. 4. Is, then, our religion a delu-
sion? Bynomeans. It is a discip-
line. Look at the Saviour’s hour of
trial; it came after the glorious life,
and before he was able to throw open
the gates of immortality to all be-
lievers. 5. After trial, God sends
sleep, or rest. ‘‘ He giveth his beloved
sleep.” II. Zhe Divine consolation.
1. But the time of refreshment
came: it was the darkness before the
daybreak, not the darkness of death ;
yet the deliverance was not such as
the prophet wished. He was a wan-
derer for forty days more before he
412


saw the morning. Thus it is with
us; our gloom lasts a long time, but
not forever. Wedo not understand
Christ’s way of working. We want
to arrange everything. Yet it were
better to put a child to manage machi-
nery than entrust us with the concerns
of our own lives. 2. The prophet
said all was dark, that there was no
godliness left in the land. But the
Lord showed him that it was not so
evil as he feared—seven thousand had
not bowed the knee to Baal. 3.
After his journey of forty days, when
he was at Horeb, the Lord commanded
him to stand upon the Mount. First
there came a whirlwind which rent
the rocks, then an earthquake, and
afterwards a fire. But God was not
in these. With any of these forces
He could have destroyed the guilty
king and queen ; but such was not His
way of working. Last of all came
a still small voice; and by this Jehovah
spoke to His servant. Thus God
comes to us, and speaks to us, not
with a voice of desolation, but with a
whisper of love. The wind, the
earthquake, the fire, are the law: the
still smail voice is the Gospel. Christ
thus addresses us, and by it assures
us of returning peace.


Lessons:—1. Our day of triumph
8 not always our day of prosperity.
12. In the silence of the desert, and the
solitude of own hearts, we have our
deepest communion with God. 38. He
speaks to us, not in a voice of terror,
but by thé quiet consolations of the
Gospel of forgiveness and peace.—Pul-
pit Analyst.


Verse 4. Despondency. 1. The
reaction from a state of high mental
excitement. 2. Renders the victim
indifferent to physical sustenance.
3. Indulges in excessive self-depre-
cation. 4. Seeks relief in personal
oblivion.


Verses 5-8. The visit under the
juniper tree. The guardianship of
Divine grace becomes evident. 1. In
the hearing vouchsafed to the pro-
phet’s prayer. 2. In the appearance


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. XIX,





of an angel which the Lord sends to
him. 3. In the wonderful nourish-
ment which he experiences. 4. Inthe
delightful prospect which God opens
_ before him. 5. In a supernatural
strengthening for his wandering
through the wilderness.—rum-
macher.

— Divine succour. 1. Is adminis-
tered in extremity. 2. Is supplied
by unexpected agencies. 3. Affords
strength in a time of unusual but salu-

trial.

— Oh! the never-ceasing care and
providence of the Almighty ; not to be
barred by any place, by any condition !
When means are wanting to us, when
we are wanting to ourselves, when to
God, even then doth He follow us with
His mercy, and cast favour upon us,
beyond, against expectation! What
variety of purveyance doth He make
for His servant! One while the
ravens, then the Sareptan, now the
angel shall be his caterer; none of
them without a miracle; those other
provided for him waking, this sleeping.
Oh, God! the eye of Thy providence
is not dimmer, the hand of Thy power
is not shorter; only teach Thou us to
serve Thee—to trust Thee.—Bp. Hall.


Verse 5. There have been in all
ages faithful servants of God and
Christ, who have been weakened and
discouraged by the thought that it was
all in vain, all their anxiety and
labour were fruitless, nothing more
could possibly be gained for the Lord,
and no more work of any importance
could be done by them for His cause
and kingdom, and they have been on
the point of finding joyous, spirited,
zealous work in the service of the Lord
—nay, even life itself—distasteful.
But they have always tound consola-
tion from the Lord in His Word, and
have been aroused and strengthened by
His Spirit to new courage and to un-
remitted perseverance in their work
for the truth. They have learned to
think of Him who endured similar
contradiction of sinners against Him-
self, The Lord Jesus Christ had taught
them not to estimate the value of their
Jabour according to the effect which


they produced by it, nor according ta
the visible results perceptible to them-
selves, but with joy and confidence to
persevere unweariedly, even though it
should appear as though all they said
was addressed to an uninhabited
desert.— Menken.


Verse 8-18. Elijah on Mount
Horeb. 1. The wonderful consola-
tion which he enjoyed on his journey
thither. 2. The exalted revelation
which he there received. 3. The new
duties and encouragements which were
his lot even there.— Bender.

— The lessons Elijah learned at
Horeb were full of instruction. The
symbols of wind, earthquake, and fire,
followed by the still small voice, have
& wide and varied significance and
application. 1. The central lesson of
these symbols is, that there are
mightier influences at work in human
history than physical force. Men are
ever prone to think otherwise, or, at
least, to disregard this fact. That
which is tangible to the outer senses,
which blows, and shakes, and burns
before the eyes of men; confounding
and confusing, and, for the time, over-
whelming and crushing all opposi-
tion—that is too apt to exhaust all our
ideas of mightiness. We should, there-
fore, be reminded that in the silent
workings of mind and heart there are
often developed forces stronger than
the whirlwind, mightier than the
earthquake shock, and fiercer in their
burnings than fires which many waters
cannot quench. In this we may dis-
cover just the relation of miracles to
the truth, which they have oftenserved
to introduce and confirm. We are in
danger of esteeming the former above
the latter, whereas the law and the
prophets and Christ have taught a
different lesson. The seven thousand
devout hearts in Israel are a mightier
power for good than even all the
miracles of Elijah. So, too, Jesus
taught his disciples that it is better to
have one’s name written in heaven
than to have power to work miracles

Luke x. 20), and that the true be-

iever, led by the Spirit, shall de

even greater works than the Messiah.
813


~


CHAP. XIk,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





2. The immediate application of this
lesson was to Elijah’s undue estimate
of the miracles at Carmel. He seems
to have supposed that the answer by
fire that consumed his sacrifice, and
the mighty wind and rain that came
so quickly after, together with the
‘slaughter of the false prophets, would
accomplish the speedy reformation of
Israel; but because they did not, he
yielded to discouragement and despair.
His radical. error was in placing too
much confidence in the outward and
the marvellous. So the still small
voice, as it developed itself into the
sure word of prophecy, showed him
how groundless was his despair, how
mistaken his notions of Jehovah’s
ways, and how manifold might be
other agencies of judgment yet at
God’s command. 3. At the same
time, the lesson might remind him
that the impious Jezebel from whom
he fled, and who now, after all his
work against her gods, seemed to be
triumphant still, was trusting in the
outward appearance of power at her
command. She might array against
him and his fellow-prophets all the
forces of government, and all the pomp
and pretensions of the idolatry to which
she was devoted; but these would
soon exhaust themselves, for God
would not be in them. The wind and
fire of her presumptuous wrath would
soon pass by, and after all its fury
was spent, there would rise the seven
thousand who had not bowed the knee
to Baal ; a silent force, perchance, but,
with God in them, mightier far than
all that could come against them.
4. But the deeper and grander lesson
of these symbols is the contrast they
present between the Old Dispensation
and the New—the Law and the Gospel.
The miracles of the Exodus, the clouds
and thunders and lightnings that
attended the giving of the Law at this
same Sinai, and all the later marvels
in the sacred history of Israel, only
prepared the ear of man to catch more
readily and appreciate more fully the
gentle voice of Him who did not cry
or lift up His voice in the streets, but
still spake as no other man spake. The
rweetest, holiest sound that ever steals
$14


upon the soul of man is the voice of
the Word that was made flesh; and
that voice, ever speaking in the Gospel,
shall go forth throughout the earth,
and its words unto the end of the world,
until all idols fall, and all tongues con-
fess that Jesus is the Christ.—
Whedon.


Verse 9-14. The powerlessness of
the terrible in moral teaching.
Storm, earthquake, and fire, are the
symbols of the Divine punishments
exterminating the ungodly. God is
not in the storm, not in the earth-
quake, not in the fire, to show that
His sway in the theocracy is not im-
placable, annihilating vigour and all-
consuming jealousy. Jehovah appears
in the sound ofa gentle blowing or soft
murmur—the sign of the nearness of
God—which is the love that endures
the sinner with sparing mildness, with
patience and long-suffering, and delays
the punishment as long as mercy is
possible. The acted parable is, infact,
an anticipation of the evangelical
rule—a condemnation of that ‘‘ zeal ”
which Elijah had gloried in, a zeal
exhibiting itself in fierce and terrible
vengeance; and an exaltation and re-
commendation of that mild and gentle
temper which “ beareth all things,
believeth all things, hopeth all things,
endureth all things.”” Read in the
light of after revelation, we can thus
understand the true drift of this most
marvellous scene; but it may be
questioned how far Elijah was able to
perceive its meaning. Perhaps he felt
dimly something of the true force of
the lesson; perhaps for a while it
moderated his excessive zeal, and in-
clined him to gentler courses.—
Speaker's Comm.

— Though I do not read in this
story of Elijah’s deep despondency
the condemnation of his last act—the
slaughter of the priests of Baal—I do
see in it the natural effects of any
great exercise of destructive power,
perhaps of power at all, upon the mind
of him to whem it has been entrusted.
The sense of exhaustion, the cry, ‘I
am no better than my fathers,” though
I have done such wonders ; the hopeless-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ouAr. sik.





ness of the future becoming all the
more deep from the apparently useless
triumph that had been won already—
surely every prophet must have these
bitter experiences, if he is not to sink
into a Baal-worshipper, and after all to
regard the God of Truth and Righteous-
ness merely asa God of Might. Elijah,
though he wrought so many miracles,
was comparatively still a novice when
he sat under the juniper tree. When
he left the cave he was an initiated
man. He had thought that the
earthquake, the fire, the wind that
rent the mountains, must be the great
witnesses of the Lord. But He was
not in them. Not they, but the still
small voice, had that awe in it which
forced the prophet to cover his face
with his mantle. What a blessed and
a beautiful conclusion of all the past
history! What an interpretation ofits
meaning! The glaring outwardsigns,
which the priests of Baal sought for,
were feeble; the living power which
spoke to the heart within, this only
demanded and compelled reverence.
He who could send bread to the woman
of Zarephath was indeed the God who
answered by fire.—/aurice.


Verses 9, 10. Elijah at Horeb.
We may feel a little surprised to find
him at Horeb, so far away from the
kingdom of Israel, the place to which
God had sent him to make known His
will, and to fulfil His purpose. But
it may be that Horeb had special
attractions forhim. It was far away
from the scenes through which he had
been passing, and it was in the midst
of a mountainous region, away from
the habitations of men, abounding in
caves and ravines; so that its solitude
and security would afford him a quiet
retreat where he could rest awhile and
feel secure from the wrath of his
enemies. Its religious associations,
too, would doubtless exert a healthy
influence upon his mind. It was here
that God appeared to Moses while
tending the sheep of Jethro, his father-
in-law, and commissioned him to
deliver His people from the bondage
of Egypt. It afterwards became a
place of encampment for the Israelites


during their journey through the wilder-
ness, and it was from the adjoining
mountain of Sinaithat God delivered to
Mosesthe Ten Commandments. But he
was notlong left alonethere. He little
thought how he was watched, until he
was surprised by the voice of the Lord.
Notice—I. The rebuke administered.
“ What doest thou here, Elijah?”
Elijah was now in a fit state, both of
body and mind, to be dealt with.
He was a deserter. It was necessary
to make him feel his cowardice and
his want of faithin God. When under
the juniper tree, he was too weak in
body and too dejected inmind to re-
ceive rebuke, and God dealt tenderly
and considerately with him. But now
he was stronger, and able to bear con-
viction. In thisquestion he is rebuked
for forsaking duty. He was sent to
Israel as the messenger of God, and to
remain there during the Divine plea-
sure. In former instances of his life
God showed him when to leave and
when toreturn, but now he did not
wait for God’s direction; he goes him-
self. He had chosen his own way,
and so set God aside. He would be
reminded of this by the question:
“What doest thou here?’—so far
away from the place whither he had
been sent; as much asif God had
asked him, ‘‘ Who is to do the work
in Israel when thou art here?” The
question would also be a rebuke to
his want of faith in God. What
doest thou here? He, above all men,
should have remained at his post.
His past experience of God’s favour
should have served him now; his
faith should have been strengthened
by the remembrance of such favour, so
that when Jezebel threatened him, he
would have fled instinctively to Him
who could restrain her wrath and pro-
tect his servants. How often do men
still act as Elijah did? They forsake
God’s way, and choose their own. He
has assigned them some special work,
but they have withdrawn from it.
And God follows them into their wan-
derings, as He followed Elijah, and
proposes the same question to them,
Sinner! backslider! lukewarm pro-
feasor! what doeat thou here? IL
315


%
Gar, XIX.





The defence. He does not frankly
acknowledge his error, and come to
God with a penitent heart, seeking to
be restored, but he seeks to justify
himself, and that upon these grounds.
1. Former service. ‘‘I have been
very jealous for the Lord God of
hosts.”’? He looked with satisfaction
upon his past labours, and claimed
some merit because of them, and that
now he might retire from his arduous
toil, Thus he clung to a feeling of
self-righteousness. He overlooked his
obligation toGod. Asit was God who
called him to work, so it was for God
to release him from it. 2. Isolation.
‘“‘T, even I only, am left.”” No doubt
he felt weary of continuing his work
by himself, without sympathy from
anyone. But, admitting the influence
of loneliness, his service had not been a
very long one—three and a-half years
at the utmost. And he overlooked
the never-failing presence of God. Our
Lord experienced this loneliness, but
He did not yield to it. He said, “‘T
am not alone, for the Father is with
me.” 8. Persecution. ‘They seek
my life, to take itaway.” He shrunk
from the opposition which his enemies
now raised against him, and fled from
it, thinking he was justified in doing so.
But he had been in as much danger
before, when the king had searched the
country for him. He forgot this, and
forgot also the Arm by which he was
then protected. These are the grounds
upon which Elijah sought to defend
his conduct before God. But that
defence reveals to us a departure from
God. He had lost, for the time, faith
in God ; his heart was not aglow with
love anddevotion to Him. These were
the true reasons of his being at Horeb.
And the example of Elijah is often
imitated by those who wander from
God, and who are arrested in their
wanderings by the question: ‘* What
doest thou here?” The sinner will
excuse himself—time enough yet—a
more convenient season. ‘The back-
slider may blame difficulties, associates,
change ot circumstances. The luke-
warm Christian hides himself beneath
the increase of other duties, want of
success in his work for God, weariness.
$16


HOMILLTIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





All these excuses reveal a departure
from God in heart, and the only safe
course is to acknowledge this, and re-
turn to Him at once.—TZhe Study and
Puipit.


Verse 10. Elijah’s zeal for the
Lord. 1. A pure and sincerezeal. It
was solely for the Lord, not for him-
self, for his opinion, honour, glory, or
advantage, just as with the apostle who
counted all things but loss that he
might win Christ (Phil. iii. 8). How
often folly, dogmatism, passion, and
injustice are mingled with zeal for the
Lord and for His kingdom! Would
that all who would be, or pretend to
be, zealous for the cause of God, could
stand before the Searcher of hearts and
say in sincerity, I have been zealous
for the Lord. 2. A persevering and
regardless seal. Like Paul, he shrunk
from no distress or labour, from no
strife or affliction, nor hunger, nor
nakedness, neither scoffing nor disgrace
(Phil. iv. 12,18; 2 Cor. vi. 4-10).
He had no respect of persons, did not
ask whether he was a king, serving
Baal, or a beggar ; whether he was lord
or servant; whether his opponents
were few or many. It could be said of
him—The zeal of thine house hath
eaten me up. How few of those have
any knowledge of such a zeal, who
follow their calling mechanically, and
never become warm in its behalf;
whose zeal is like a smothered fire,
and grows less and inefficient, and
cools, both when temptation arises, and
when they are in prosperity.—Lange.


Verses 11-17. The disclosure on
the mount. We learn from this
incident—1. That men are not brought
to acknowledge God merely by outward
manifestations of power or greatness,
Elijah needed this lesson. Our Lord,
in the days of His flesh, constantly
met with those who sought signs and


.wonders asthe only means of produc-


ing faith. The rich man prayed that
Lazarus might be sent to warn his five
brethren, pleading that if one went to
them from the dead, they would repent.
And the same feeling is still shown by
men in the importance they attach to


HOMIUETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. ZIx.





some outward circumstances for pro-
ducing repentance—calamity, bereave-
ment, affliction. Others look with
great confidence to special means or
special men, the various revivalistic
agencies, revival preachers, thinking
that without these the work of God
cannot be promoted. We need to
learn that all these may be present
to us, and still God be absent. 2.
That outward circumstances may be
helpful in bringing men to acknowledge
God. While some depend too much
upon the outward and circumstantial,
others go to the opposite extreme, and
ignore them altogether in the work of
God, whereas they have a place in
that work. Calamity or affliction may
not produce repentance, but they tend
to subdue the spirit, and make it more
susceptible to the work of God. They
break up the fallow ground, and pre-
pare it for the seed of truth. 3. That
true repentance ts produced by the voice
of God. It was when Elijah heard
the still small voice that he wrapped
his face in his mantle, and went out,
and stood at the entrance of the cave.
He had been prepared for such sub-
mission by the terrible displays he
had witnessed. And so, when the
voice of God speaks to the conscience
of the guilty, or to the heart of the
sorrowiul, there comes peace to the
one and comfort tc the other. 4. That
Christian work +8 needful to spiritual
health. Elijah was commanded to
return to the wilderness of Damascus,
and to do the work assigned him. He
obeyed, and we never read of him
wandering away again. Many Christ-
ians get low-spirited, and wander into
forbidden paths, because of inactivity.
Earnest work for God would restore
and preserve them.—The Study and
Pulpit.


Verse 11. Go forth and stand upon
the mount before the Lord! This
call is issued to all those who, like
Elijah, lodge in cavesand dens. The
caves, however, are of various kinds.
Our heart is a cave, a dark tomb. The
soul attacked and tormented by doubts
isina cave. Bodily distress and exter-
pal affliction may be calledacave. Q,


go forth and go upon the mount, and
look aloft to Him who hangs upon
the tree. Goforth! spread the wings
of hope, soar and place thyself upon
the heights of the everlasting promises
of God, which are yea and amen, and
from thence cast 8 look of confidence
into the heart of Him whose council
is truly wonderful, but who, never-
theless, doeth all things gloriously.—
Krummacher.


Verse 12. In that God was! Behold,
in that gentle and mild breath there
was omnipotency; there was but
powerfulness in those fierce represen-
tations; there is not always the greatest
efficacy where is the greatest noise.
God loves to make way for Himself by
terror; but he conveys Himself to us
in sweetness. It is happy for us if,
after the gusts and flashes of the law,
we have heard the soft voice of evan-
gelical mercy.— Bp. Hall.


Verses 15-18. The answer of the
Lord to Elijah. Includes—1. 4 direo-
tion. ‘Go, return!’’ which is the
answer to—Thus far have I been
zealous in vain. Carry forward the
work already begun, doubting not the
result ; let thy hands fall not ; fear not,
for I am with thee. So the Lord
always calls to all workers in the
vineyard. 2. A commission. ‘ Anoint
Hazael,” &. That is the answer to—
They have forsaken thy covenant,
thrown down thine altars. Through
Hazael will I chastise rebellious Israel,
through Jehu destroy the house of
Ahab, through Elisha preserve the
order of the prophets. Observe how
the royal government of the Lord in-
fluences so deeply and so powerfully,
and yet so quietly and noisclessly, all
human undertakings, contrivances,
and conditions, all worldly events; and
how so much happens under His direc-
tion which seems to happen without
Him, as if by accident. 3. 4 pro-
mise. ‘* Yet have I left, &c.” This
is the answer to—I only am left, and
they seek my life. The race of be-
lievers will never perish; no storm,
no earthquake, no fire will destroy
them. They are the salt of ase

31


*%


@may. XIX.


EOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





which preserves the world from cor-
ruption and ruin.— Lange.


Verses 15-17. Return to active
duty the cure of despondency. 1.
The soul finds true health and vigour
in obedience to God. 2. The exam-
ple of a faithful worker is an inspira-
tion to others. 3. The vengeance
of God against evil-doers will never
lack instruments to carry it out—
Hazael, Jehu, Elisha.


Verse 18. God’s hidden ones. 1.
Exist in the worse times, and in the
most unexpected places. 2. Illus-
trate the unremitting care of God over
His persecuted people. 3. Are often
made manifest for the encouragement
of the solitary worker.

— Thou art deceived, O Elijah!
Thou art not left alone; neither is all
Israel tainted. God hath children
and prophets in Israel, though thou
see them not. Those clear eyes of
the seer discern not the secret store of
God: they looked not into Obadiah’s
caves, they looked not into the closets
of the religious Israelites. According
to the fashion of the wealthy, God
pleaseth Himself in hidden treasures :
it is enough that His own eyes behold
His riches. Never did He, never will
He, leave Himself unfurnished with
holy clients, in the midst of the foulest
depravations of His church. The
sight of His faithful ones hath some-
times been lost, never the being. Do
your worst, O ye gates of Hell! God
will haves his own. Jt was a true
cordial for Elijah’s solitariness that
he had seven thousand invisible abet.
tors; neither is it a small comfort to
our weakness to have companions in
good.— Bp. Hall.

— Learn. 1. Never to take too
gloomy or desponding a view of the
position and prospects of the Church.
2. Beware of harsh judgments on our
fellow-men and fellow-Christians. 3.
The influential power of a great
example.— Macduff.


Verse 18. The faithful seven thon-
sand. We learn from these words.
1. Dhat nen may be often deceived with

ol


regard to the strength of Gods church.
Many have possessed a similar feeling
to that expressed by Elijah. They
have looked upon the prevalence of
sin, in all ranks and conditions of life ;
they have looked upon the wide-spread
indifference to religion, and that,
too, in the midst of religious privilege
and effort; and at such a sight their
hearts have failed them; they have
thought that the people of God were
very few, and they have been tempted
to think that their efforts to increase
the number were vain and useless,
and under such temptation many have
relinquished their work. Such
thoughts and feelings as these often
arise in_ consequence of ignorance and
a partial view of the subject. And
are we not often very narrow in our
views of Christian life? We are apt
to look for that life to manifest itself

in one particular form; for those who

profess discipleship to conform to

one outward mode of conduct, with-
out taking into consideration the differ-

ence of temperament, education, &c.

God’s spirit comes into men as they

are; He does not change the constitu-

tion of their minds; He inspires the

powers already there, and brings
them into submission to His will. 2.

That God has a perfect knowledge of
His own people. The children of God

may be unable to recognize each other,

especially in times of persecution,

which may restrain men from making

an open avowal of their faith. And

even in ordinary times there are many

who may not feel called upon to make

this avowal, so that their relation to
God remains unknown to those around
them. But God sees and knows them.
8. That God can heep His people
amid the most widespread sin and evil.
It is not without reason that Christian
people fear for themselves and for
others when sin and evil abound, and
when temptations are numerous and
powerful. They know their own
weakness, and they know, teo, how
many have fallen in the conflict with
sin. but they may be delivered from
their fears by the assurance’: that God is
able to keep that which they commit to
Him. Nothing can separate


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. XIx.


00 tone SS, Ss


from the love of God. Trusting in
Him, they shall never be confounded.
4. That men should be faithful to
their duty, and leave results with God.
Elijah was so discouraged at not see-
ing the result he looked for, that he
shrank from his work, and fled from
the post of duty. And many since his
day have acted in a similar manner.
They have looked for certain results to


doing. They have forgotten that they
were responsible for the faithful dis-
charge of their duty, not for the re-
sults. And whilst they have been
mourning over failure, their efforts
may have been bringing forth fruit
which they little thought of. And in
the great harvest of the world, many
who in this life mourned over a want
of success to their efforts will find that


their labours were not in vain.— Zhe
Study and Pulpit.


their labours, and have not seen them ;
then their hearts have failed them,
and they have grown weary in well


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 19-31,


Tar Divine Catt ro Dury.


Tuesez words describe the call of Elisha to the office and work of a prop] ¢
of Jehovah. The contrast between Elijah and Elisha was striking and comple.
Elijah appears on the scene abruptly, without warning and with an unknown
history ; Elisha is first introduced to us asa domesticated man, at home with
his father and mother, and familiar with the pastoral scenes and employmunts
of the rich Jordan valley. Elijah is the solitary, haunting the grots and caves
of the wilderness and the solitudes of the hills; Elisha tarries at Jexicho
(2 Kings ii. 18), is a frequent visitor at Shunem (2 Kings iv. 8, 9), has his own
house in Samaria (2 Kings vy. 9), and lingers now and again among the schools
of the prophets (2 Kings iv. 88; vi. 1): Elijah is robed in a rough mautle of
sheepskin, with his massy hair waving in long shaggy locks; Elisha is attired
in the ordinary dress of the period, and with a shaven crown at which the young
men mocked (2 Kings ii. 23): when Elijah appears in connection with kings
and courts it is as their opponent; Elisha as their counsellor and friend:
Elijah was fierce, furious, stern, unbending; Elisha gentle, peaceful, calm,
approachable: Elijah was the bold, intrepid Luther of his age; Elisha the
Melanchthon. Observe—


I, That the Divine call to duty is significant and unmistakable. ‘And
Elijah cast his mantle upon him” (verse 19). Elisha at once understood the
meaning of this act. 1t was a formal investiture with the prophetic office, and
a sign of adoption asason. This ceremony is considered by the Eastwin people
as an indispensable part of the consecration to the sacred office. It is in this
way the Brahmins are still invested with the priestly chaacter, a yeliow mantle
being thrown across their shoulders, which is buckled round the waist with a
sacred ribbon: in this way, too, the Persian suffees are appoi.ved. Elisha
realized the solemnity and obligation of the call, and as soon as he recovered
from his surprise, ‘he left the oxen and ran after Elijah.” ‘fue Lord leaves
his servants in no doubt as to the reality and meaning of their, call to work for
him. In some way or otherwise, sufficiently distinct and imj cessive, that call
will be made known ; it may be in a deep inward impress..o which no self-
battling against can remove, it may be by significantly fave srable providential
events, or by the unanimous call of the church. The oall is ulways so plain and
unmistakable that it cannot be disobeyed without imolv.og acute suffering ;
and what suffering is more constant and aggravated tian w feel every day of a
rapidily fleeting life—‘‘ I am in my wrong gioove; 4 have missed my raed "8


%


OuAb. Ix: HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








II. That the Divine call to duty is the occasion of much anxious thought.
‘Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother” (verse 20). Can it be
wondered at if Elisha’s heart still clung to home and kindred—s home where
he had every comfort, and that in abundance, and where, perhaps, he was the
only child of fond, loving parents? The prospect was not inviting. The un-
tamed Jezebel still reigned; and every prophet of Jehovah would be exposc. to
her vindictive fury. Elijah had no luxuries to offer, for he had none himself ;
sustenance was at least sure, if the fare was coarse and simple; but to Elisha it
was exchanging affluence for comparative poverty. Besides, there was the sense
of personal unworthiness for so high and holy a calling, and this to a sensitive
nature is the exciting cause of much mental anguish. It isaduty we owe to
ourselves as well as to God to give to the Divine call the most pains-taking
consideration. At such a time the destiny of an individual life isat stake; and
who can say how many will be affected by the decision either way ?


III. That the Divine call to duty demands an immediate and absolute
response (verse 21). 1. J¢ ts superior to the claims of the most lucrative worldly
calling. lisha’s occupation is an indication of his character. He is emphati-
cally a man of peace. He lives in the rich Jordan vale, on green meadowland,
where village festivals are held with dance and song. He passes the year in
those rural occupations which are natural to the son of a wealthy yeoman,
superintending the field-labourers himself, and, with the simplicity of primitive
manners, taking a share in their toils. But all this he willingly surrenders.
The most flattering worldly prospects may turn to bitter disappointment if we
resist the Divine call on their behalf. 2. Jt 4s superior to the claims of home
and kindred. It was at this point that Elishe seemed to show hesitation. This
may account for Elisha’s somewhat cold rsply, ‘“‘Go back again; for what
have I done to thee f—i.e., ‘Go, return to thy ploughing ; why shouldst thou
quit it? Why take leave of thy friends, and come with me? What have I
done to thee to require such a sacrifice ? for as a sacrifice thou evidently re-
gardest it. Truly I have done nothing to thee. Thou canst remain as thou
art’’ (vide Speaker’s Comm.). But Elisha has meanwhile made up his mind to
choose the better part. The exigencies of a Divine call supersede human
duties and relationships (Luke ix. 61, 62). 3. Jé¢s justly regarded as a die-
tinguished honour. No longer hesitating, Elisha returns afew steps to his oxen
and labourers, indicates the complete relinquishment of his home and calling by
the slaughter of two oxen and the burning of the instruments, makes a feast to
his people to show his gratitude for his call and his sense of the honour done to
him, and then, leaving father and mother, cattle and land, good position and
comfortable home, attaches himself to the fortunes of the wandering Elijah.
It is no small dignity put upon man when he is called to be a ‘‘ co-worker with
God.” 4. Jt brings man into association with the noblest spirits. ‘‘Then he
arose and went after Elijah, and ministered unto him” (verse 21). Elisha had
heard of the startling exploits of {he mountain-prophet, and it would be with
feelings of reverence and awe that he found himself in such intimate fellowship
with the fearless and august Tishbite. They were together as father and son,
as is evident from the final address of Elisha to Elijah: ‘‘ My father! my father!”
(2 Kings ii. 12); and in the request for a “double portion ” of Elijah’s spirit (7.,
verse 9). God calls us into companionship with the loftiest and choicest spirits
of the universe: these are ever in the vanguard of the holiest progress. Above
all, we have the exalting and sublimating friendship of God Himself!


Lxssows :—1, It is disastrous to embark in any sacred work without a consctousness
of the Divine call. 2. Everything should be freely surrendered in obedience to the
Déoine call. 3. To persist im resisting the Divine call ts to entail the bitterest
remorse and suffering,

830


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. xix,





GERM NOTES UN THE VERSES.


Verses 19-21. The call of Elisha,
Note—1. The variety of character
among God’s servants. 2. The honour
God puts on the ordinary secular oceu-
pations of life. 38. The spirit of joy-
ful self-sacrifice manifested at the call
of duty.— Macduff.


Verse 19. The dignity of labour.
1. A blessing toman. 2. Not to be
despised by any. 38. Sanctioned and
approved by God.

— Though master of the ground and
oxen and servants, yet he himself laid
his hand to the plough. Idleness is
no man’s honour, nor is husbandry any
man’s disgrace. An honest calling
in the world does not put us out of
the way of our heavenly calling.

— Elisha is found, not in his study,
but in the field; not witha book in
his hand, but a plough. His father
Shaphat was a rich farmer in Abel-
meholah, himself was a good husband-
man, trained up, not in the schools of
the prophets, but in the thrifty trade
of tillage; and behold this is the man
whom God will pick out of all Israel
for a prophet. God seeth not as man
seeth; neither doth He choose men
because they are fit, but therefore fits
them because He hath chosen them.
His call is above all earthly institu-
tion. I hear not aught that Elijah
said; only he casts his cloak upon
Elisha in the passage: that mantle,
that act, wasvocal. He findsastrange
virtue in that robe; and, as if his
heart was changed with that habit,
forgets his team and runs after Elijah.
The secret call of God offers an inward
force to the heart, and insensibly
draws us beyond the power of our
resistance.—Bp. Hall.

— Another in his place would long
before have come to the conclusion
that he was too good for the plough;
he was born for a higher sphere than
that of a simple peasant; he was not
at liberty to withhold his talents from
mankind; he must study, and then
enter upon the theatre of public action
to help te enlighten and govern the


world. Consider: the lights have
the fairest and clearest lustre which
know not that they shine; and those
flowers of God scatter the sweetest
perfume around them which, well con-
tented with the little spot the Lord
has appointed them, bloom hidden in
silent dales. It does not follow from
the calling of Elisha away from the
plough to become a prophet, that every
one without much gifts and without
much knowledge can leave the plough,
or any other ordinary occupation, and
take up the prophet’s calling. Men
often think the Lord calls them to
another, higher position, while it is
only their vanity and the over-estima-
tion of their gifts and powers which
impel them. If God has called thee
to anything, he will also open the
way for thee, and furnish the means
that are requisite thereto.—rum
macher.


Verses 20, 21. Grace is no enemy
to good nature: well may the respects
to our earthly parents stand with our
duties to our Father in heaven. I do
not see Elisha wring his hands and
deplore his condition, that he should
leave the world and follow a prophet ;
but for the joy of that change he
makes a feast ; those oxen, those uten-
sils of husbandry, whereon his former
labours had been bestowed, shall now
be gladly devoted to the celebration of
that happy day wherein he is honoured
with so blessed an employment. If
with desire, if with cheerfulness, we
do not enter into the works of our
Heavenly Master, they are not like to
prosper inour hands. Heis not worthy
of this spiritual station who holds not
the service of God his highest, his rich-
est preferment.—Bp. Hall.

— Elisha in comparison with the
three followers of Christ (Luke ix.
67, 62). 1. Although the son of rich
parents and heir to a great possession,

et he forsakes and renounces all, for
e considers it a greater gain to follow
and serve the poor prophet. 2. He


‘takes leave, indeed, of his parents, but


WL


%


OHAP. XX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS,





he does not put off the succession to a
later time, until after their death; he
does not disavow filial affection, but
it does not keep him from entering
upon his succession immediately. 3.
He looks not backward after his call,
but forward, and has no longing after
that which he gives up; he follows
on and serves with undivided heart
in complete and joyful consecration.
How deeply this Klisha shames many
amongst us, to whom, however, not an
Elijah, not a prophet, but the Lord of
glory calls—Follow me !—Zange.


Verse 20. A good home. 1. A
privilege to be improved. 2. An
opportunity to prepare for public life.
8. A centre of peace, sympathy, and
affection. 4. Never too good to be
left at the call of duty.


Verse 21. Obedience to the Divine
call. 1. Should be prompt: ‘He
returned back from him.” 2. Should
be thorough and complete: ‘Took a
yoke of oxen and slew them and boiled
their flesh with the instruments of the


oxen.” 8. Should be cheerful: “And
gave untothe people, and they dideat.”’
4. Should be apparent: ‘Then he
arose and went after Elijah.”

— Self-sacrifice for God is here
plainly inculcated. In the case of
Elisha we read of no struggle between
duty and convenience, between per-
sonal interest and obedience to the
unmistakable will of heaven. There
was compliance at once, hearty and
unreserved; and of his surrender to
Elijah it may be said, as of the
disciples with reference to a higher
master, he ‘“‘left all and followed
him.”’ The example is lofty, and the
invitation becomes us all. We are
not asked to relinquish our homes,
and our friends, and our substance to
anything like the same extent; but
if the sacrifice in our case be easier, it
should be all the more willingly and
cheerfully made. Why speak of un-
reasonable demands in relation to Him
who gave what even He could never
exceed in gift—‘‘that whosoever
believeth should not perish, but have
everlasting life” ?—Howat.


CHAPTER XX.


THE DEFEAT OF THE SYRIANS,


CrrricaL AND Expianatory Norrs.—Verse 1. Benhadad—Son of the king of the same
mame mentioned (chap. xv. 20). Thirty and two kings with him—Vassals or viceroys who
ruled single cities or districts (eomp. Josh. xii. 7). With him—))¥ ; not confederated ag
equals, but connected as dependent and tributary. Verse 4. According to thy sayi
I am thine, &c.—Not an ironical taunt, “ acconitug ts thy saying ” it is so 2 for Hs hadinos
spirit enough to resent Benhadad’s insolent domination: it wastimoroussubmission. Verse 10,
If the dust of Samaria shall suffice, &c.—Braggart menacing. Its purport is: Thou re-
fusest me thy treasures, but with so great an army will I cover Samaria that, if every soldier
wished to carry away a handful, its sand would not suffice. Josephus incorrectly interprets
the words thus : “He could with his army cast up a dyke higher thar his walls were, if every
one of his people contributed only a handful of earth.” Verse 11. Boast himself, &.—
Answered Benhadad with a good and apt proverb. The Latins say: Ne triumphum canas ante
victoriam—the victory must be won before it is celebrated (Keil). Verse 14. The young mea
of the princes—The ony) Thenius interprets as “ pages unaccustomed to fight;” Hwadd, aa


“‘young lads of very tender age”—rather, the armour bearers of the princes, a small and un-
equal band (see verse 15). Order the battle ?—Open it, or make attack. Verse 17. There
are men come out—Scornful; not an army, not warriors, but only a few men! Benhadad
ordered their capture, thinking it easy, and being content to drink on, contemptuous and self-
indulgent. Verse 20. On an horse with the horsemen—+.e., with horsemen surrounding him.


Verse 22. At the return of the year—iTIWiT Naw, with the beginning of the year—


the goa which time the wister rains would prevent another campaign. Verse 24
:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY EINGS. CHAP. XX,
SS


Put captains in their rooms—Not mere military ornaments, but experienced warriors.

enhadad now realises that he is engaged in no trifling conflict, to be airily undertaken and
easily won. Verse 26. Went up to Aphek—In the valley of Jezreel, not far from Endor
(L Sam. xxix. 1), “the largest plain of Palestine, where, from the times of Joshua to
Napeleon, so many great battles have been fought” (Keil), There is also an Aphek near
Beihshemesh, on the mountains of Judah (Josh. xv. 53), where the Philistines lost the ark in
battle (1 Sam. iv. 1). Verse 30. A wall fell upon 27,000—Interpreters say, by miracle or
earthquake; but most probably the fugitives crowded on to the old walls and attempted to
make a stand against their pursuers, whereupon the walls gave way under the weight and
pressure, burying the vast host in their ruins. Verse 33. Men did diligently observe—Took
his words as a good omen. Did hastily catch it—Hastened to seize or quote the words, ‘my
brother.” Ahab found his vanity flattered by their abject suit, and, losing sense and wit, yielded
to a sentimental magnanimity. Verse 84. Make streets for thee—I))3IT means business
thoroughfares. Verse 88. Ashes upon his face—Rather, head bandage for wounds (verse 37).
Verse 42. Thou hast let go a man, &c.—It was a wealminded act, an injustice, a clear
neglect of duty, and a dishonour to the God of Israel, whom the king of Israel represented.
Ahab knew Benhadad was Israel’s enemy, and the fact that God had so signally defeated him
showed Jehovah’s anger towards him. Verse 43. Heavy and displeased—FL YP), “WD, vexed


aud refractory, from 7D, to be stubborn (Deut. xxi. 18); more than gioomy and uneasy—
fretful and resentfelL —W. H. J.


en ed


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-%i.


Tue Vicz oy DaunkEenNuss.


A tmx came that tested the value of Baal as the guardian deity of Israel.
The Syrian king invaded the country, attended by a gay retinue of regal courtiers
and an immense army. Samaria was speedily invested, and threatened with
complete destruction. There is no appeal to Baal now: he is impotent to help
in time of trouble. Nor is the help of Jehovah sought in this extremity. Israel
is at the mercy of the foe; and the godless, unbelieving Ahab, with cowardly
supineness, surrenders himself to his fate. But the Lord has still a regard for
His deluded people, and sends a prophet to assure them of deliverance. Formid-
able as the army of Benhadad appeared, there was an element of weakness in
it which might readily bring about its defeat. The wine cup passed round
freely, and the Syrian king and his military staff became intoxicated (verses
12-16). This paragraph, therefore, while recording the fact of supernatural
interference on behalf of Israel, also illustrates the evils that may arise from the
vice of drunkenness. Observe—


I. That the vice of drunkenness inflates the mind with the most arrogant
pretensions (verses 1-9). Benhadad proudly demanded possession of all the
treasures of Ahab and of his people—money, wives, and children—and threatened
to search the palace and dwelling of the city for whatever was worth taking
away. The insolence of this is almost beyond precedent. Such treatment is
the worst that could be expected for a city taken by main force; and even an
unscrupulous Eastern conqueror could hardly demand it of a garrison that had
yielded without fighting. The whole conduct of Benhadad is another example
of how the consciousness of irresistible power is apt to breed a spirit of arro-
gance, especially when under the influence of intemperance. ‘‘ When drink’s in,
wit’s out.”” The drunkard blusters and boasts what he has done, and what he
will do; and though not backed by an immense force like that which surrounded
Berthadad, he threatens terrible destruction to every opponent. But alas! it is
only the froth of a pot-valiant swagger: when the fumes of the liquor are gone,


so 1s the courage.
823


~


CHAP, XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,

II. That the vice of drunkenness is closely associated with the vice of
blasphemy (verse 10). Benhadad swore by his gods, as the blasphemous
Jezebel had done by hers (chap. xix. 2). The meaning of Benhadad’s oath has
been differently understood. ‘In its general sense it is undoubtedly a boast
that the number of Benhadad’s troops is such as to make resistance vain and
foolish. We may parallel it with the saying of the Trachinian at Thermopylae,
that the Persian arrows would darken the light of the sun. Probably the exact
meaning is—When your town is reduced to ruins, as it will be if you resist, the
entire heap will not suffice to furnish a handful of dust to each soldier of my
army, 80 many are they. Thus there was a threat in the message as well as a
boast” (Speaker's Comm.). Such blasphemous presumption does not go un-
punished. Thus Julian, the apostate, going against the Persians, swore at his
return to sacrifice the blood of the Christians. So the Constable of France vowed
the destruction of Geneva: but God forbad it. The drunkard swears oaths of
which he is ashamed in his suber moments. Intemperance and blasphemy are


twin vices.


IfI. That the vice of drunkenness excites to deeds of recklessness (verse
12). The Syrian king was so enraged with the final message of Ahab, given in
the terms of a proverb (verse 11), and which was the only evidence of anything
like a courageous spirit shown by Ahab during the whole transaction, that he
gave orders for the battle to begin forthwith, little dreaming what would be the
result to his own army. A step taken in a moment of intemperate recklessness
is difficult to recall, and may involve ruinous consequences.


IV. That the vice of drunkenness renders the inebriate unable to discern
the hand of God in public events (verses 13-15). It seemed that Israel was
doomed ; in a few hours Samaria would be a heap of ruins, and Ahab and his
treasures in the hands of the warlike Syrian. But a power was at work, un<
noticed by the Syrians, too long despised by Ahab and ignored by his people.
God interposed, once more sent His prophet to explain the method of rescue, and
once more to call the apostate Ahab back to his allegiance. It was an evidence
of the feeble condition of Samaria at the time when 7,000 people comprised all
its inhabitants, and out of these was formed the little army that was to be led
by the 230 young men of the princes. It was a paltry, insignificant force to
oppose against the swarming host of the Syrians. But Jehovah was working His
purpose through that tiny band of soldiers; and such was the blind infatuation
of the intoxicated king that he saw it not. Drunkenness blears both the natural
and the mental eye, and darkens and impairs the moral sense.


V. That the vice of drunkenness incapacitates at a critical moment
(verses 16-18). The Syrians observe the sally of the young men from the city,
and inform Benhadad; but such was his sovereign, almost sottish, indifference
to any force that Samaria could send forth, that without troubling himself about
the matter, he simply gave orders to take them alive. This was easier said than
done. It was the crisis of the campaign, when the utmost vigilance and activity
should have been shown; but the drunken king could not see it until it was
too late. It is a great blunder to despise an enemy; and to be intoxicated
gives the enemy a double advantage. ‘‘Drunkards are besotted and disabled;
asa snuff of a candle in a socket drowned in the tallow yieldeth little or no
light, but only a stench.”

VI. That the vice of drunkenness subjects its victims to humiliating
defeat (verses 19-21). The enemy that had been treated so contemptuously
proved to be more powerful than was supposed. The 230 young men smote
right and left, and laid prostrate ali who opposed them ; and the Syrians, seeing

824


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP,





the 7,000 coming out of the city to join in the fight, were seized with a sudden
panic and fled, Benhadad escaping on horseback, leaving his army to be massa-
cred by the victorious Israelites. So that it now might be said to Benhadad
what Zebul once said to Gaal: Where is now thy mouth which just now boasted
such great things? (verse 10) Is not this the people that thou hast despised ?
Go out, I pray now, and fight with them (Judges ix. 38). Any undertaking
begun and carried on in drunkenness is sure to end in confusion and misery.
Intemperate boasting is often the prelude of defeat. Wisely did the Romans
say: “‘ Sing not the triumphal song before the victory.”


Lessons :—1. Drunkenness is a prolific source of national vice. 2. It is offen-


sive to God and injurious to man.


3. Lt 48 certain to be severely punished.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-21. The pride and inso-
lence of power.—I. Making extrava-
gant demands (verses 1-6). II. Using
blasphemous threats (verse 10).
III. Provoking the weak to cautious
and courageous opposition (verses 7-9,
11, 13-15). IV. Giving way to sen-
sual indulgence (verses 12, 16).
V. Contemptuously indifferent in
moments of danger (verses 17, 18).
VI. Brought to an ignominious down-
fall (verses 19-21).


— Who can look for other than
war when he sees Ahab and Jezebel
on the throne, Israelin the groves and
temples of Baalim? The ambition of
Benhadad was not so much guilty of
this war as the idolatry of that wicked
nation. How can they expect peace
from earth who do wilfully fight
against Heaven? Rather will the God
of hosts arm the brute, the senseless
creatures, against Israel, than He will
suffer their defiance unavenged. Ahab
and Benhadad are well matched: an
idolatrous Israel with a paganish Idu-
mean. Well may God plague each
other who means vengeance to them
both!— Bp. Hall.


Verse 2. The sacred historians
study brevity so greatly, that their
narrative is often, at the first look,
abnormal and strange. But in view of
this brevity, it is always lawful, as it
is most reasonable, to supplement their
narrative by supposing circumstances
of small moment, which would remove
the strangeness, to have happened, but


not to have been recorded. Here the
excessive demand of the Syrian king,
coming close upon the first announce-
ment of the siege, and placed at the
very commencement of the negocia-
tions for peace, strikes us as some-
thing very unusual. But if we sup-
pose a considerable time to have passed
in the siege, and the city to be reduced
to an extremity, and ambassadors to
have been sent by Ahab to ask terms
of peace short of absolute surrender,
then we can quite understand that
Benhadad might make such a demand
in reply. He would expect and intend
his demand to be rejected, since the
voluntary surrender of his seraglio by
an oriental monarch would be regarded
as so disgraceful that no prince of any
spirit could for a moment entertain the
idea. The rejection of his demand
would have left him free to plunder
the town, which was evidently what
he desired and purposed.—Speaker’s
Comm.


Verses 1-4. In these two kings we
see what a thing the human heart is,
how insolent and timorous by turns
(Jer. xvii. 9). It is insolent when
man, grown prosperous, powerful, and
rich, places his confidence in his suc-
cess, and haughtily despises his neigh-
bour. But itis timid when man falls
into difficulty, and neither sees nor
knows any help, just as was the
despairing, womanly heart of king
Ahab, who took it for granted that
everything was lost when he saw the
hosts of his enemies.—-Wurt. Suma.

825


¥


CHAP. EX.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Verses 1-8. Benhadad thought that
because he had the power to rob and
appropriate, he also had the right to do
so. But God gives power and might to
kings, not to distort the right, but to
protect it. The power of that one
who, confiding in his own strength,
treads the right under his feet, will
sooner or later miserably decline.—
Lange.


Verses 3, 4. Benhadad knows his
own strength, and offers insolent con-
ditions. Itis a fearful thing to be in
the mercy of an enemy: in case of
hostility might will carve for itself.
Ahab now, after the division of Judah,
was but half a king: Benhadad had
two-and-thirty kings to attend him.
What equality wasin this opposition ?
Ahab, therefore, asa reed in a tempest,
stoops to the violent charge of so
potent an enemy. It is not for the
overpowered to capitulate; weakness
may not argue, but yield. Tyranny is
but drawn on by submission; and,
where it finds fear and dejection,
insulteth.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 4. Abject submission.
1. Unbecoming the dignity of a king.
2. A revelation of 8 cowardly spirit.
8. Subjects to increased insults and
degradation.

—. Those who no longer have a Lord
in Heaven whom they fear, and before
whom they bow, cringe and fawn
before all men who can harm or serve
them. If Ahab had said to the King
of kings what he sent as a response to
the royal robber and boaster: ‘“‘ I am
Thine, and ail that I have,” he would
then have had the trust and assurance :
He that dwelleth in the secret place of
the Most High, &c. (Psa. xci. 1-3).
He who bows before God is sure to be
humble before men; but he does not
cringe to them nor throw himself
away. To submit to the superior
power and force that demands gold and
silver is no disgrace; but to surrender
wife and child is contrary to honour,
duty, and conscience.


Verses 5, 6. Haughty and insolent
men grow all the more overbearing
826


and ungovernable, and the more one
submits to them, and crawls before
them, and gratifies their desires, the
more exorbitant they become in their
demands. It is the curse that rests
upon avarice, that the more the appe-
tite after money and property is grati-
fied, the more it grows, not diminishes
(Prov. xvi. 8).—Lange.


Verses 7, 9. Overstrained subjection
turns desperate. If conditions be im-
posed worse than death, there needs
no long disputation of the remedy.
The elders of Israel, whose share was
proportional in this danger, hearten
Ahab to a denial; which yet comes
out so fearfully, as that it appears
rather extorted by the peremptory in-
dignation of the people, than proceed-
ing out of any generosity of his spirit.
Neither doth he say, I will not; but,
I may not.— 2p. Hall.

— Ahab and his people. 1. Ahab
feels himself helpless and perplexed.
Adversity teaches us how to pray,
but Ahab had turned from the living
God, who is a helper in every time of
trouble, to a dumb idol that cannot
help: He had forgotten how to pray.
He had sought to help himself by
cowardly submission, and now he
seeks help of men. In every distress
we should turn first to the Lord (Psa.
Cxvili. 8, 9; cviil. 18). IL. Zhe elders
and the people reproach Ahab. Instead
of his giving instructions to them
with the words of Joel iii. 15, like a
king, they gave commands to him.
He is no real king, realizing the posi-
tion which has been given to him by
God, whom the people control, in-
stead of allowing themselves to be
controlled by him. Tyrants are of
this class. At first they do not con-
sult the people, and do not scruple to
appropriate their most sacred posscs-
sions, take away their faith, and
burden their consciences. Ahab did
not consult his people about the in-
troduction of the worship of Baal and
the persecution of the prophets; but
now, when he does not know how to
counsel or help himself, he applies to
the wish of the nation—the aid of the


people is now very acceptable.—Lange,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Verses 10, 11. The proud Syrian,
who would have taken it in foul scorn
to be denied, though he had sent for
all the heads of Israel, snuffs up the
wind like the wild ass in the wilder-
ness, and brags, and threats, and
swears. O vain boaster! in whom I
know not whether pride or folly be
more eminent. Victory is to be
achieved, not to be sworn; future
events are no matter of an oath; thy
gods, if they had been, might have
been called as witnesses of thy inten-
tions, not of that success whereof thou
wouldst be the author without them.
Thy gods can do nothing to thee,
nothing for thee, nothing for them-
selves!, All thine Aramites shall not
carry away one corn of sand out of
Israel, except it be upon the soles of
their feet in their shameful flight; it
is well if they can carry back those
skins which they brought thither.
There is no cause to fear that man
that trusts in himself. Man may cast
the dice of war, but the disposition of
them is of the Lord.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 11. The Christian warrior.
Very generally the young and inex-
perienced, when about to enter on any
new enterprize, commence with feel-
ings of more or less self-confidence.
The young convert is often more con-
fident than the old Christian, and
thinks that he shall attain higher
eminence in piety than others who
are older in Christian experience. It
is well to aim high, but we must not
be too confident in our own strength,
lest, like Peter, we suffer a grievous
fall, or like others, sink down under
great disappointment. In this verse
we shall notice the contrast between
the young Christian’s anticipations,
and the old Christian’s experience.


I. The Christian soldier commenc-
ing his career.—1. The oath of allegi-
ance and servitude. When a young man
determines to enter the army, he
accepts the bounty, is examined,
sworn-in to serve his sovereign and
country, clothed in regimentals, and
joins the army tor actual service. So,
when God in His mercy converts a soul,


GHAP. XX.


oe


He is drawn by the cords of love and
the bands of a man. He feels his
vast obligations ; first gives himself up
in solemn covenant to God, and then
to His people, Then, in the Lord’s
house, in the presence of God, of angels,
and men, takes the sacramental cup
and swears allegiance to Christ. We
know no act so solemn as this but the
actof dying. It isa public dedication
of the soul to God and to His service
from henceforth. 2. Zhe service he
enters upon. As a soldier soon com-
mences actual service to protect his
eountry and defend its laws, so a
soldier of Christ immediately enters
on the Christian duties. He must
oppose sin, fight against Satan, and
withstand all the unhallowed intlu-
ence of an ungodly world, and, as far
as in him lies, promote the extension
of the kingdom of Christ. The stand-
ard around which he is to rally is
** The Cross,”’ and he must die rather
than strike his colours, His en-
couragement is that he shall come off
more than aconqueror. 3. Zhe armour
he wears. Ancient soldiers wore
armour (1 Sam. xvii. 5, 6, 54.) The
Christian soldier has a complete suit
from the armoury of God (Eph. vi.
13-15): “The girdle of truth,” or
Christian sincerity ; ‘‘ The breastplate
of righteousness,” being blest with
imputed and imparted righteousness ;
“The shoes of the Gospel,” having
gospel truths as the foundation of his
religion; “The shicld of faith,” an
indispensable thing, for without con-
fidence in Christ he would always
fail; ‘‘The helmet of salvation,” ever
keeping his salvation in view and aim-
ing after it ; ‘‘ The sword of the Spirit,
which is the word of God,” which
must be well handled both for offen-
sive and defensive warfare, and always
used with much prayer and with great
determination and courage. 4. Zhe
ardent feelings he evinces. he soldier
prepares himself with high expecta-
tions, and a determination not to desert
his post or betray his cause. And so
the young Christian soldier espouses
the cause of Christ with ardent feel-
ings, holy determination, and high
anticipations of final ms He
$2


%


ORAP. XX,





knows that an almighty arm is on his
side, that grace is promised, and final
victory insured. He has much reason
to rejoice, but none for self-confidence,
for the conflict will often be severe ;
he will frequently be discouraged, and
perhaps occasionally wounded, though
not finally defeated. Let him not
boast except in the Lord and in His
strength. 5. Zhe manner in which he
should conduct himself. It should be
with prayer, watchfulness, and perse-
verance (Eph. vi. 18). A Christian
cannot feel too much his entire depen-
dence upon God for all he needs. He
is commanded to ‘‘ watch and pray.”
Whatever be the strength of the foes,
their mode of attack, the severity of
the conflict, he must never lay down
his arms ; the decisive victory 1s often
won when the conflict is most severe,
and the soul most discouraged. Then
it is that the power of the Great Cap-
tain is seen.


II. The Christian veteran at the
close of his eareer.—1. His retrospect.
As the old soldier loves to recount his
past career, so the old Christian, on
the bed of death, can look back on
his past experience with adoring
gratitude, as he thinks of the begin-
ning of his Christian life, the enemies
he has had to face, the hard battles he
has been in, the wounds he has
received, the victories he has won, the
honours he has gained ; but even then,
and though about to put off his armour,
he feels that he has nothing to boast of,
but much to be thankful for. He has
lower thoughts of himself than ever,
and higher thoughts of Christ, feeling
that all his failings were from himself,
and that the praise of all his victories
belongs to the captain of his salvation.
2. His glorious end. The putting off
his armour, which is at death, not


before. When he has by grace con-
quered the last enemy, then his
warfare is accomplished, and his


honourable career ended; then he

exchanges the sword for the palm, the

helmet for the crown, the armour for

the victor’s robe, and conflict for

triumph, 3. His eternal triwnph. No

pooner is the last conflict over, and the
828


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





victory won, than he enters heaven
in triumph beyond all description or
conception. What more could he
wish for? He now thinks nothing of
the warfare in the greatness of his joy.


Lranw:—1. That tf you would enjoy
this glory you must become a soldier of
Christ. 2. That if you would be
eictorious you must put on the whole
Christian armour, and look to God for
grace. %. That tn order to stimulate
you tn the conflict, you should think of
the victory promised and the glory that
Sfollows.— Pulpit Sketches.


Verses 18-15. Who can wonder
enough at this unweariable mercy of
God? After the fire and rain fetched
miraculously from heaven, Ahab had
promised much, performed nothing;
yet again will God bless and solicit
him with victory. One of those pro-
phets whom he persecuted to death
shall comfort his dejection with the
news of his deliverance and triumph.
Had this great work been wrought
without premonition, either chance,
or Baal, or the golden calves .had
carried away thethanks. Beforehand,
therefore, shalt Ahab know both the
author and the means of his victory :
God for the author; the two hundred
and thirty young men of the princes
for the means. What are these for
the vanguard, and seven thousand
Israelites for the main battle, against
the troops of three and thirty kings,
and as many centuries of Syrians as
Israel had single soldiers? An
equality of numbers had taken away
the wonder of the event; but now the
God of hosts will be confessed in this
issue, not the valour of men. How
indifferent is it with thee, O Lord, to
save by manyor by few, to destroy
many or few! A world is no more to
thee than a man; how easy is it for
thee to enable us to be more than
conquerors over principalities and
powers !_—Bp. Halt.


Verse 18. Formerly Ahab wished
no instruction from the prophets ; now,
in his danger and distress, he admits
them and listens to them. In days of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





prosperity the world does not care for
any advice from faithful servants of the
Divine Word; it looks down upon
them and despises them; but ‘in the
hour of sorrow and mourning it grants
them access, ard is glad to avail itself
of their consolation. Before a great
troop which has been abandoned of
God, you have no cause to fear if God
has said to you, I will help thee
(Isa. xli. 13).—Starke.


Verse 16. Benhadad must have
sorely repented his drunkenness, as it
resulted in the loss of his army, his
horses, and chariots. How often still
is drunkenness the original cause of
great sorrow and distress (Eph. v. 18;
Isa. v. 22; Prov. xxiii. 29, 30)!

— There was nothing in Benha-
dad’s pavilion but drink and surfeit
and jollity, as if wine should make
way for blood. Security is the cer-
tain usher of destruction. We never
have so much cause to fear, as when
we fear nothing. This handful of
Israel dares look out, upon the pro-
phet’s assurance, to the vast host of
Benhadad. Itis enough for that proud
pagan to sit still and command amongst
his cups. O the vain and ignorant
presumptions of wretched men, that
will be reckoning without, against
their Maker !— By. Hall.


Verse 18. Great men often think,
when they have been disturbed in
their carnal rest and security, that they


CHAP. x¥





only need to speak the word of com-
mand in order tobe relieved from every-
thing disagreeable and wearisome ; but
they must learn that they cannot rid
themselves, by a command, of what
God has sent for their humiliation.


Verses 19-21. The way of the god-
less shall perish (Psa. i. 6). Their way
is covetousness and pillage (verses 3-6),
haughtiness, insolence, and assurance
(verses 10-18), service of their belly,
wantonness (verse 16). This way
shall perish ; they are as chaff which
the wind driveth away, utterly con-
sumed with terrors (verses 20, 21;
Psa, Ixxiii. 19).—Lange.

— How easy is it for Him who made
the heart to fill it with terror and con-
sternation, even whereno fearis! Those
whom God hath destined to slaughter
He will smite; neither needs He any
other enemy or executioner than what
He finds in their own bosom. We
are not the master of our own courage
or fears: both are put into us by that
overruling power that created us. Stay
now, oh stay! thou great king of
Syria, and take with thee those for-
gotten handfuls of the dust of Israel.
Thy gods will do so to thee, and more
also, if thy followers return without
their vowed burden! Learn now of
the despised king of Israel, from hence-
forth, not to sound the triumph before
the battle, not to boast thyself in the
girding on of thine harness as in the
putting off.— Bp. Hall.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 22-80.
Tar Supreme Power or JEHOVAH VINDICATED,


I. Against the flippant calumny of the heathen (verses 22, 23). The Syrian
chiefs placed the God of Israel on the same level as their own heathen deities, and
attributed their failure to the power of the Israelitish gods, who were gods of the
hills. The local power and influence of deities was a fixed principle of the ancient
polytheism. Each country was considered to have its own gods; and wars
were regarded as being to a great extent struggles between the gods of the nationa
engagedinthem. But not thus could the God of Israel be localised. His omni-
presence, as well as his omnipotence, must be vindicated ; and the slanders and
misconceptions of the heathen answered in a way they could understand. It is
one of the most mournful results of sin that it distorts the true idea of God;
and there are those to-day who have even less noble ideas of His being and
attributes than many of the ancient heathen. Jehovah is continually declaring
His power and godhead—in His works, by His ministers, in the events of His
Providence, in the story of redemption. a


»


CHAP. XX. HuUMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





II. By means apparently disproportionate (verses 24-27). The Syrime
were numerous—“ filled the country ” : the Israelites were comparatively few—
‘Slike two little flocks of kids,”” The Syrians were well appointed : the Israelites
but indifferently equipped. The Syrians chose their own battle-ground where
their peculiar method of chariot warfare would have everything in its favour:
the Israclites cautiously kept to the hills, and for six days harrassed the invaders
as they marched along the plains, until on the seventh day the battle was joined,
and it would seem to a spectator that the little band of Israelites would be
instantly swallowed up by the Syrian hosts. But Jehovah is not confined
to numbers, or to the best-considered human methods. He makes the weak
things of the world confound the things that are mighty, to show that the
excellency of the power is not of man, but of God.


III. By gaining a signal victory over the enemies of His people (verses
29, 30). Through the might of the Lord the Israelites were again victorious.
They fell upon the Syrians, and slew great numbers of them. Seized with panic,
the rest fled to Aphek, where a wall, probably cast down by an earthquake,
crushed some thousands more in its fall. The-vain boasting of the heathen
was silenced; the Syrian host was scattered, and their king a fugitive and a
suppliant. They had learnt that Jehovah was something more than the god
of the hills. How terribly was their blasphemy rebuked! A day is approach-
ing when all the detractors and enemies of God will be overthrown and punished,
and the glory of His Name vindicated in the presence of an adoring universe.


IV. For the instruction of the nations (verse 28). The Lord hasno delight
in war, nor does He take pleasure in the death of the wicked; but He is jealous
for His own honour. The Israelites do not deserve deliverance; but the
Syrians have blasphemed Him by denying His attributes of omnipotence and
omnipresence, and this sin of theirs must be punished. By destroying the
Syrians Jehovah shows in the eyes of all the nations round that He is not the
god of the hills only, but also of the valleys. It was similarly a denial of
Jehovah’s power which brought destruction on the host of Sennacherib (2 King:
xix. 35). All the actions of God are full of significance, and are intended to
reveal Himself more distinctly to the world. The more Jehovah vindicates His
character, the higher the blessedness possible to man.


Lessons :—1. The presence of Jehovah ts not confined to one locality. 2. Jehovah


$8 specially jealous of His glory. 3. Its in great defeats that man discovers his
own helplessness and the Almighty power of a righteous God.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 22-80. The two victories
over the Syrians were designed, ac-
cording to the declaration of both the
prophets who foretold them, to effect
that thou (the king) and ye (the en-
tire nation) may know that I am
Jehovah—that is to say, that Jehovah
is the only true God, the God of Israel.
In this declaration we have specified
the purpose of the entire narrative,
and, at the same time, the standpoint
from which it is comprehended. That
day on Mount Carmel, if it did not

$30


put an end to idolatry at once, had
at least broken its power, as was al-
ready evident from the mere fact that
the prophets were no longer perse-
cuted and put to death, but could
again go about openly, and continue
the work begun by Elijah. Still the
conversion was by no means complete,
but rather, being weak, it needed sup-
port and strength from above, if a
complete relapse was to be prevented
from setting in. This assistance came
from a display of the power of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Jehovah, a power which rescued in a
time of great need and distress. The
attack of the Syrian king who had
grown so mighty threatened Ahab
and his kingdom with destruction.
At this crisis God, who never forsakes
His people, repeatedly grants them the
victory, which was so extraordinary
and wonderful that it could not possi
bly be ascribed to human power and
strength, but only to God, to His
might, His grace and truth. We
have thus, in this account, not merely
an ordinary history of wars, but
a part of the divine history of salva-
tion before us. Although the first
victory is a marked evidence of the
saving might and grace of Jehovah,
the second, by which the entire
Syrian power was destroyed, was for
Israel, as well as for the Syrians them-
selves, a still more remarkable proof
of the fact that Jehovah was no mere
roountain and local or national divi-
tity, but that the whole earth was
His, and He was God of all nations
(Ex. xix. 5; Psa. xxiv. 1), He who
reduces the God of Israel toa mere
local or national deity, as is so often
done even now-a-days, stands on the
same footing with the servants of the
king of Syria (verses 23, 28).—Lange.


Verses 22-25. The invariable
symptoms of warlike policy. I.
Restless vigilance and expensive pre-
parations (verse 22). II. A facility in
finding reasons for recent defeat
(23, 24). III. A thirsting for re-
venge (verse 25).


Verse 22. God purposeth the deli-
verance of Israel, yet may not they
neglect their fortifications ; the merci-
ful intentions of God towards them
may not make them careless; the
industry and courage of the Israelites
fall within the decree of their victory.
Security is the bane of good success,
It is no contemning of a foiled enemy ;
the shame of a former disgrace and
miscarriage whets his valour and
sharpens it to revenge. No power is
so dreadful as that which is recollected
from an overthrow.— Bo. Hail.

— The advice of the prophet, Go,





CHAP. KK.








strengthen thyself, &c., is applica-
ble in another and higher sense to us
all. Our enemies are not idle, they
are constantly returning to the attack.
Even if we have by the help of the
Lord obtained a victory over sin, the
world, and the devil, that is not all
there is to be done; we must, even
after the victory, be on our guard and
arm ourselves, so that the enemy may
not fall on us unawares (1 Cor. xvi.
18; Eph. vi. 10; 1 Peter v. 8).


Verses 23-25. The evil counsellors
of Benhadad. I. They urge him on
to war and battle instead of counsel-
ling peace, because their pride was
wounded, and their hope of booty had
been frustrated. Place no confidence
in the man who incites you to begin a
quarrel. II. They plead religious
reasons, and make use of the supersti-
tion of their unwitting lord. It is
possible for a bad unholy thing to
become confirmed through supersti-
tion ; the man who plants himself on
truth, however, will not permit him-
self to be deceived on such a founda-
tion. III. They shove the blame of
the ignominious defeat on to the
thirty-two kings, instead of seeking
for it in themselves. A man always
prefers to find the cause of his own
misfortune and distress in another’s
rather than in his own sin and guilt.
—Lange.


Verse 23. What doltish conccits
doth blind paganism frame to itself of
a godhead! As they have many gods,
so finite: every region, every hill,
every dale, every stream hath their
several gods; and each so knows his
own bounds, that he dares not offer to
encroach upon the other; or, if he do,
buys it with loss. Who would think
that so gross blockishness should find
harbour in a reasonable soul? A man
doth not alter with his station: he
that wrestled strongly upon the hill,
loseth not his force in the plain; all
places find him alike active, alike
valorous. Yet these barbarous Aram-
ites shame not to imagine that of God
which they would blush to affirm of
their own champions. Superstition

331


¥
GHAP. XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a


infatuates the heart out of measure ;
neither is there any fancy so absurd
or monstrous, which incredulous infi-
delity is not ready to entertain with
applause.—Zp. Hall.


Verse 26. Benhadad followed their
foolish and perverse advice, because
it was entirely in accordance with his
own wish. So strong and _ over-
powering is sinful desire in the human
heart, that even the bitterest dispensa-
tion and chastisement of God sup-
presses it only for a time, and, as
soon asthe external impression ceases,
it breaks forth afresh.


Verse 27. The conditions of vic-
tory. I. Are not always decided by
numbers. II. Are in the hands of
God. III. It is vain for the most
powerful armies to fight against the
Divine purpose. IV. Valuable lessons
are gained by defeat.


Verse 28. The declaration of the
Divine Majesty. 1. Is made by com-
petent messengers. II. Seen in the
overthrow of blasphemous detractors.
IIT. Is intended to teach and reassure
the people of God.


Verse 29. Nothing among mortal


affairs is so inconstant as temporal
prosperity. There isa time for every-
thing. For that reason let no man
place his dependence on his good for-
tune, and exalt himself on its account,
for he does not know whether he shall
possess in the evening what was his in
the morning.— Wurt. Summ.


Verse 30. We may suppose a terrific
earthquake during the siege of the
place, while the Syrians were manning
the defence in full force, which threw
down the wall where they were most
thickly crowded upon it, and buried
them in its ruins. The great earth-
quake at Lisbon in 1755 18 said to have
destroyed 60,000 persons in a little
more than five minutes.—Speaker’s
Comm.

— ‘Benhadad fled into an inner
chamber.” Glad to hide himself in
any hole. So Manasseh, that faced the
heavens in his prosperity, in trouble
basely hides his head among the bushes
(2 Chron. xxxiii. 12). Gidlimer over-
come by Bellisarius and besieged, sent
to beg of him three things: 1. A
piece of bread to ease his hunger;
Z. A sponge to dry his eyes; 3. A
harp to cheer up his heart, well-nigh
broke with grief.— Trapp.


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 81-43.


Tre Remorse o¥ Neerxcrep OprortuNrries.


Lirs is but brief, yet it is full of great opportunities for usefulness.
opportunities correspond to our position, our means, and our abilities.
pects from no man what He has not given him power to do.


Those
God ex-
He who is wise to


see and prompt to act when the opportunity is presented will win success and


honour.


Not to do the plainly revealed duty of the moment is to entail weak-


ness, disappointment, and suffering. We shall be punished for the good we
neglect, as well as for the evil that we do.


I, That opportunities occur when we are called to do a great work for


God.


1. Every opportunity brings with tt corresponding responsibility (verses


31, 82). Victory, a victory achieved by direct Divine interference, had placed
Benhadad—the enemy of God and of Israel—in the power of Ahab. It was an
opportunity not to be thrown away. The Lord had appointed this man to
“utter destruction’? (verse 42), and Ahab knew it. Benhadad was to be
taught to know, in avenging justice, the greatness of that God he had blas-
a and the power of the state he ruled was to be so broken as to render


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OMAP, XX.
e


it incapable of giving further trouble to Israel. The purpose of God and the
safety of Israel were placed in the hands of Ahab; the enemy might now be
punished, and his power for ever crushed. Ahab neglected the opportunity,
end he lived long enough to see and regret it. It is a grave, solemn moment
when we are brought into the presence of an acknowledged evil which we have
power to destroy. We have need to pray for courage and fidelity to act wisely
and decisively. 2. We are not justified in indulging private sentiment at the
sacrifice of public duty (verses 33, 34). It was here that Ahabfailed. Whatat
first sight might seem anact of magnanimity becomes, when rightly viewed, a gross
weakness; and the generosity which might entitle a man to praise if shown
towards a private enemy, may become a crime in a king towardsa public adver-
sary. What would have been thought of the Regent of England, after the victory
of Waterloo, if, when Napoleon, the great troubler of Europe, was brought a
prisoner to ourshores, he had been set free? The sense of duty was weakened
in Ahab by his past disobedience and by his unlawful sympathy with idolatry.
The neglect of one duty incapacitates the soul for doing another; and so when
a great emergency comes upon us, we find ourselves unequal to its demands.
The king must lose sight of selfish ends and feeling in a righteous anxiety to
promote the public good.


II. That a time will come when we shall be made painfully conscious
of opportunities neglected. 1. This may be done through the sufferings of others
(verses 35-38). A son of the prophets submitted to be wounded that he might
the more effectively bring home to Ahab hissin. The faithful teacher must not
shrink from suffermg. It is rarely we can be faithful to others without pain to
ourselves. The most powerful method of preaching the truth is learned in the
school of trial. 2. Will be done ina way not to be mistaken (verses39-42). (1). It
was symbolic. This is the first example of those symbolical actions of the pro-
phets which occur so often in the subsequent history of Israel and Judah. The
man who refused to smite the son of the prophet became a representative of Ahab
in his refusal to obey the word of the Lord. The prophets mentioned in verses
13, 22, and 28 had said enough to show Ahab that when his royal enemy fell
into his power he must not covenant with him, but smite and utterly destroy
him. But his making a covenant with him and sending him away (verse 34)
was a refusal tosmite him. (2). It wasfaithful and pointed (verse 42). Here
Ahab, like David on another occasion (2 Sam. xii. 5, 6), pronounces his own
condemnation. As the son of the prophet was to answer by his life for letting
his supposed prisoner free, so Ahab is to answer with his life for granting liberty
to the doomed Syrian monarch. The sin of neglect will sooner or later be
brought home to every bosom, and the guilt will be self-acknowledged.


III. That the consciousness of neglected opportunities will fill the soul
with bitter remorse (verse 43). The slumbering conscience of the weuk,
easy-going Ahab was once more awoke, and he went to his home depressed and
angry—angry with himself, and angry with the means which had been intended
to bring him to repentance and disobedience. He felt the burden of a sense of
Divine wrath upon him, and, instead of humbling himself and seeking for mercy,
he became sulky and soured. He was still refractory and rebellious; and yet
he could not shake off the gloomy, stinging remorse of neglected opportunities.
His experience is a picture of the tortures which will for ever afflict the impeni-
tent: for ever conscious of oft-repeated sin, and for ever incapable of ridding
himself of its consequences !


Lussons:—1. Every soul will be judged according to its opportunities in life.
2. Opportunities for well-doing are offered to all. 3%. To neglect opportunities for
good +8 to condemn ourselves. Aa


“~


CMAP, XX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 31-48. When authority is
compassionate out of the proper season,
and neglects its office of correction, it
draws upon itself the guilt of the other.
God wants no mercy to be shown where
He has ordered punishment.— Cramer.


Verses 31-83. Praise, flattery, and
subserviency are only too often the siiare
with which kings and great men are
caught, so that under the appearance of
generosity and magnanimity they may
be led astray and act contrary to the
will of God. They ought, indeed, to
be merciful and gracious, but not forget
that to do justice is their first duty, and
that they do not carry the sword in
vain. Ahab persecutes an Elijah in
every kingdom, and threatens him with
death; but he permits a robber and a
plunderer to sit beside him in his
chariot, and makes acovenant with him.
What in the eyes of the world looks
like generosity, in the eyes of God, who
trieth the heart and reins, is only weak-
ness and folly. Great injury can be
done by seeming ill-timed generosity.—
Lange.


Verso 31. There can be no more
powerful attractive of humble submis-
sion than the intimation and conceit of
mercy. We do atonce fear and hate
the inexorable. This is it, O Lord,
that allures us to thy throne of grace,
the knowledge of the grace of that
throne ; with thee is mercy and plen-
teous redemption ; thine hand is open
before our mouths, before our hearts.
If we did not see thee smile upon
suitors, we durst not press to thy foot-
stool. Behold now we know that the
king of heaven, the God of Israel, is a
merciful God; let us put sackcloth upon
our loins and strew ashes upon our
heads, and go meet the Lord God of
Israel, that He may save our souls.—
Bp. Hall.


Verse 82 compared with verse 10.
Contrasts in the same individual life.
1. The king—the slave. 2. The
proud boaster—the craven suppliant.

834


8. The confident leader of a great army
—the defeated and dejected fugitive.


Verse 32. How well doth this habit
become insolent and blasphemous Ben-:
hadad and his followers! a rope and
sackcloth ! a rope for a crown, sackcloth
for a robe! He that was erewhile a
lord and king, is now a servant ; and
he that was servantto the king of Syria,
is now hislord. He that would blow
away all Israel in dust, is now glad to
beg for his own life at the door of a
despised enemy. No courage is so
haughty which the God of hosts cannot
easily bring under. What are men or
devils in those Almighty hands ?—Bp.
Hall.


Verse34. Complicity with idolatry.
1. Unfits for the proper discharge of
kingly duties. 2. Encourages a false
leniency towards the greatest enemy.
8. Blinds the mind to true conceptions
of public justice. 4. Sows the seeds
of future troubles.

— Ahab, without ‘inquiring of the
Lord,” who had given him so great a
victory (verse 28), whether he should
let Benhadad go or no, at once agreesto
the terms offered; and, without even
taking any security for their due obser-
vance, allows the Syrian monarch to
depart and return to his own country.
Considered politically, the act was one
of culpable carelessnessandimprudence.
It let loose an enemy whose talent,
ambition, and personal influence made
him peculiarly formidable ; and it pro-
vided no effectual security against the
continuance of his aggressions. Ben-
hadad might, or might not, regard him-
self as bound by the terms of a cove-
nant made when he wasa prisoner. If
he took the view that he was not bound
—as his after conduct shows that he
did (xxii. verse 3)—Ahab left himself
no means of enforcing the obligations
incurred except by a renewal of hostili-
ties. And if Ahab’s conduct was thus,
politically speaking, wrong in him as
the mere human head of a state, much
more was it unjustifiable in one whe


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP. XX.





held his crown under a_ theocracy.
“Inquiry atthe word of the Lord” was
still possible in Israel (1 Kings xxii,
verses 5, 8), and would seem to have
been the course that ordinary gratitude
might have suggested.—Speaker’s
Comm.

— Thisas impolitic as untheocratio
pee cine of Ahab arose by no means

om a ‘‘heart naturally very good,”
but from weakness, indecision, and
self-deluding vanity. To free a cruel
and faithless enemy was not only great
harshness towards his own subjects,
but also an obvious striving against
God, who, by granting the promised
victory, had given the enemy of His
people into His hand. Even though
Ahab had no express command, as Saul
had regarding Agag (1 Sam. xv. 3),
yet there lay upon him, if as theocratic
ruler he would respect the will of the
Lord, inasmuch as the Lord had given
him into his hands as a despiser of
His Divine Majesty, the sacred dut
of securing rest for himself and his
subjects by his death; as it was
natural to presume that the faithless
adversary, after his freedom was re-
covered, would not adhere to a treaty
formed on compulsion, which accord-
ingly happened (xxi. 1). The punish-
ment of his striving against God is
immediately announced to Ahab.—
Kat.


Verses 35-87. He who has his
calling and service from the Word of
God ought to allow no danger to detain
him from making an announcement of
the fact (2 Tim. iv. 2), and must
obediently submit himself to His com-
mands, even when the fulfilment of
them is joined with pain and sacri-
fice.


Verses 385, 86. Disobedience.
1. Is aggravated as committed against
the revealed will of God. 2. Is not
excused trom a reluctance to inflict
pain. 3. Is faithfully denounced.
4. Is inevitably punished.


Verse 85. ‘Smite me, I pray
thee.” 1. That hereby I may show
Ahab how he hsth wounded his own


soul by sparing Benhadad. 32. What
a wound both he and his people shall
hereafter receive hereby. 8. That I
may seem a wounded soldier, and sa
may have the easier access to Ahab.—
Trapp.


Verse 36. It is not for us to
examine the charges of the Almighty:
be they never so harsh or improbable,
if they be once known for His, there is
no way but obedience or death. Not
to smite a prophet when God com-
mands, is no less gin than to smite a
prophet when God forbids. It is the
divine precept or prohibition that
either makes or aggravates an evil;
and if the Israelite be thus revenged
that smote not a prophet, what shall
become of Ahab that smote not Ben-
hadad !— By. Hall.


Verse 40. Lost opportunities,
I. Important interests have been com-
mitted to our care. 1. Our personal
salvation. 2. The salvation of our
neighbours. 3. The religious educa-
tion of our children. 4. Sympathy
and relief for the poor and suffering.
Il. God furnishes an opportunity to ait.
1. He fits the opportunity to the
work required. 2. He provides the
means essential to success. 3. He
gives efficiency and certainty to the
effort. IIL. Opportunities lost are lost
for ever. 1. We lose them uncon-
sciously. 2. We lose them while
busied here and there with minor
things. 3. Lost opportunities bring
loss of happiness. 4. The conse-
quences of their loss will be eternal.—
Wythe.

— The danger of much worldly
business. Consider—1l. The extreme
brevity of seasons of spiritual advan-
tage. Shortness of life—illustrate
by metaphors of Scripture. Life as
the commencement of eternity, every-
thing; in competition with eternity,
nothing. Danger of procrastination.
Importance of every opportunity of
spiritual instruction. Il. Zhe difi-
culties and dangers against which we
have to guard, sf we would not sacrt-
fice them. 1. The absorbing character
of worldly business. 2. Liable to

835


=


CHAP, XXL.





neglect chief ends of existence for in-
ferior pursuits. 38. Much devotedness
to the world disqualifies for spiritual
services. 4. Positive losses of reli-
gious privilege accrue from multitude
of engagements. III. Zhe appalling
losses we may sustain through a soli-
tary act of negligence. Great business
of Satan is to draw off men from the
care of the soul. One act of indis-
cretion may, in the things of this
life, involve years of repentance ; but
one neglect of the soul may be the
cause of its everlasting ruin. ‘Oh,
that thou hadst known at least in this
thy day,” &c.


Lessons.—1. Cultiwate a spirit of
contrition over past indiffirence. 2.
Use all diligence to make your calling
and election sure.—TLhe Preacher's
Portfolio.


Verses 42, 43. Ahab listened well
pleased to the falsehood from the lips
of the Syrian nobles, for it gave
nourishment to his folly; the truth
from the mouth of the prophet made
him restless and angry, because it


HOMILETIC COMMENTA RY: KiNG8&.


—


punished his folly. There is no help
for the man who allows himself to
be irritated by the truth instead of
receiving it with meekness (Jas. i.
21). There is nothing that so rouses
and provokes an unconverted and
unbelieving man as to have his sinful
character so unveiled and set before
his eyes that he can no longer justify
or excuse himself.-. Lange.


Verse 42. The equity of punish-
ment. 1. The Divine order. 2. Is
regulated by opportunities granted.
3. Is afflicted according to nature and
degree of sin.


Verse 43. ‘‘ Heavy and displeased.”
Not with a ‘sorrow according to
God,”’ but such as arose from a slavish
fear. This heavy message in the
midst of his triumph being worse than
the whip and bell hung up usually
in the chariot of the Roman triumpher,
to show him what he might one day
come to—namely, to be whipped asa
slave, yea, to lose his head as an offen-
der.— Trapp.


CHAPTER XXI.
AHAB AND THE VINEYARD OF NABOTH.


OrrmdaL axnpD Exptanatory Norre.—Verse 1. Naboth the Jezreelite—Naboth’ n§33,
‘_


fruits, according to Gesenius; but pre-eminence, according to Fiirst. He was an Israelite resi-
dent im the town of Jezreel (the Alex. Sept. follows the Hebrew, and designates him an
Israelite throughout the whole chapter) owning a plot of ground (2 Kings ix. 25, 26) situate
on the eastern slope of the hill of Jezreel, as well, also, as the vineyard, whose location is un-
certain. Vineyard in Jezreel—a town in the tribe of Issachar (Josh. xix. 18), where the kings
of Israel aad a palace (1 Kings xviii. 46). Hard by the palace of Ahab—The Sept. reads
instead, “hard by the threshing floor of Ahab, king of Samaria.” The dispute as to location
of the vineyard turns upon the question whether “ the palace” here referred to was the kin g's
residence at Jezreel or at Samaria. Note, however, that che words in verse 4— Ahab came into
his house, &.—are identical with those in chap. xx. 43, where the further explanation points
to Samaria as hishome. Further, in verse 8, we find that Jezebel sends her letters to Jezreel
as if she were resident in some other place; and that the elders of Jezreel send her tidings
(verse 14) of Naboth’s death, which wouid certainly have been superfluous if she were at the
time resident in Jezreel. So probably the vineyard was hard by the palace in Samaria and
the king came to Naboth at Jezreel to ask this possession of itsowner.. Verse 3. Naboth said,


the Lord forbid it me—Lit., Be it to me far from Jehovah (TID %) that I, &c., indicating
eneans


both the personal loyalty of his faith in Jehovah, and his religious purpose not to sell God's
heritage to an idolatrous king. Verse 5. Why is thy spirit sad?—See for FJD note on
rr


chap. xx. 48—resentful. Verse 7. Dost thou now govern Israel t—LEither an ironical taunt,
336


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS, Guar, Xr.


ee


or a rallying call; for the words are usually translated imperatively: “Thou! exert thy royal
sway over Israel!” Verse 8. She wrote letters—This is the solitary instance recorded in the
Bible of a woman being able to write. Female education in the East then, as now, rendered
it extremely exceptional for a woman to possess such a qualification. Sent the letters (dit.
the letter) unto the elders and nobles that, in his city, dwelt with Naboth—a statement
which affirms both that Jezreel was the native city of Naboth, and his usual abode. These
elders and nobles were his fellow-townsmen. Verse 9. Proclaima fast—An observance only
proper on occasions of great distress and national calamities (Judges xx. 26; 1 Sam. vii. 6,
Joel i. 14; ii. 12). This would impart an appearance of gravity to the frivolous but foul
procedure. Verse 10. Thou didst blaspheme God and the king—J 70 orion roy) jo
vwvyTr On Ry avec ke


The word ya means to dless, reverence, adore. . “Thou hast blessed Elohim [not using the


name JEHOVAH] and the king.” Keil sccepts the words as meaning, Thou hast blessed—i. ¢.,
bid farewell to, taken thy leave of God and the king; because at departure one utters a bene-
diction [¢f. Deut. xiii.11; Lev. xxiv. 14 sg.; and 2 Sam. xvi. 9]. Verse 11. Did as Jezebel
had sent unto them—Shows their absolute moral degradation and slavish submission before
the tyranny of this woman. Verse 15. Arise, take possession . . . for Naboth is not
alive, but dead—His possessions became confiscated, falling into the king’s hands (ef. 2 Sam.
xvi. 4; Deut. xiii. 16). Verse 16. Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard—From Samaria
to Jezreel. Verse 19. Hast thou killed, and also taken possession {—Crime traced back to
the true criminal, for he, even more than Jezebel, actuated the deed. God is “swift to mark
iniquity.” See Note on chap. xxii. 88. Verse 20. Hast thou found me t— The Vulgate errs,
and Luther is thereby misled. ‘Hast thou ever found me thine enemy?” *JNZT,


from NYD, tocome at, overtake, acquire, arrest, seize. Werse 21. Will take away thy
TT:


posterity—Lit. “ Extinguish thee before me.” Verse 29. Seest thou how Ahab humbleth,
&c.—Even the external sign of Ahab’s repentance God regards as occasion for reprieve, though
Ahab was so notable and manifold a criminal (verses 25, any. He is ‘slow to anger and of
great mercy.” But the sentence would come upon his son, Jehoram, who, met by Jehu, waa
mortally wounded, and the house of Ahab thus ceased. Elijah’s prophecy of Ahab’s despic-
able death was literally fulfilled, as the following chapter shows.—W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-16.


Tue Ovenmasrenrne Power or a Covetous Sriare.


1. That a covetous spirit is unsatisfied with the most ample possessions
(verses 1-3). About twenty-five miles from Samaria Ahab had hissummer palace,
his vast park and favourite hunting seat at J ezreel—the Windsor of England,
and Fontainebleau of France. After his successful wars with Syria, he gives
himself to luxury and pleasure, and employs himself in enlarging and beautify -
ing his summer residence. Not content with what he already possesses, he
covets what belongs to his subjects, as the people who demanded a king were
forewarned would be the case (1 Sam. viii. 14). More particularly is he anxious
to possess & vineyard owned by one Naboth, of an illustrious family, and to add
it to the royal demesnes. But Naboth refuses to part with his property, and
confirms his refusal in the name of Jehovah. It is the curse of covetousness to
be never satisfied. Asa ship may be overladen with gold and silver even unto
sinking, and yet have compass and sides enough to hold ten times more, 80
ecovetous men, though they have enough to sink them, yet have they never
enough to satisfy them. ‘‘ This kyte-footed corruption, wherever it domineers,
blasts and banishes all nobleness of spirit, natural affection, humanity, reason,
discretion, manliness, mutual entertainment, intercourse of kindness and love 3
so that, for any fair dealing, a man had as good converse with a cannibal as


with a truly covetous caitiff.” 3 pe


ee


owAP. xxi. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KING8.





II. That > covetous spirit gives way to unmanly and helpless distress
when it caiiot have all it wishes (verse 4). Like a spoilt child, because he
cannot have his toy, Ahab punishes himself by yielding to a fit of fretfulness
and sour temper that completely prostrated him. Avarice, like every other
evil passion, leads to moral pauperism. ‘‘Had covetous men, asthe fable goes
of Briareus, each of them one hundred hands,” writes Dryden, ‘‘ they would all
af them be employed in grasping and gathering, and hardly one of them in giving
or laying out; a thing in itself so monstrous that no thing in nature besides it
is like it, except it be death and the grave, the only things I know which are
always carrying off the spoils of the world, and never making restitution.”
Covetousness has been well called ‘‘the great sepulchre of all other passions.”
The covetous monarch, surrounded with the luxuries and wealth of a kingdom,
olubbers and frets because he does not own a paltry herb garden.


“Some, o’er enamoured of their bags, ran mad,
Groan under gold, yet weep for want of bread.”
Young.


III. That a covetous spirit is utterly unscrupulous as to the means by
which its wishes are gratified (verses 5-14). 1. Jt ts at the mercy of the
vilest agents. Jezebel knew how to take advantage of the weak moments of
her weak husband, and, unhappily, had at her beck the agents who were ready
to carry out any diabolical plot she might invent. ‘‘ Big and black though
the villany appear, the wicked queen resolved that Naboth should be executed
for treason, and then his property, with the coveted vineyard included, would
all revert to the crown as a criminal’s possessions. While her poor fool of a
husband, therefore, is sleeping off his wounded pride, she, never accustomed te
stand upon trifles, commits the fourtold crimes of forgery, false-witness, perjury,
and murder. We are shocked when we read of the massacre of Glencoe in the
very midst of the open-handed hospitality of the children of the mountains.
Our whole soul shudders at the story of that Russian soldier who, during the
Crimean war, solicited in his dying agonies a cup of cold water from an English
officer, and then pointed his pistol right at his benefactor’s heart. And with
kindred feelings we read of the horrible contradiction before us—an unoffending
follower of God compelled to surrender his life, a victim to the machinations of
a heathen queen, screening, but only in reality aggravating, her wickedness
under the thin disguise of a new-born religious zeal.” 2. Jt weakly sanctions
deeds st has not ttself the courage to do or prevent. Ahab must have known
about the execution and its alleged cause; and he knew Jezebel well enough
to know that she would not hesitate at any means by which her ends could be
gained. Naboth stood between him and his avaricious purpose; and he cared
not how the obstacle was removed. The sufferings of Naboth and his sons, who
perisked with their father (2 Kings ix. 26), caused the king no uneasiness. A
eovetous spirit is essentially mean, cowardly, heartless.


IV. That a covetous spirit eagerly clutches its prize, little caring how
it has been acquired, and little dreaming what a curse it may bring
{verses 15, 16). Without wasting a pang of regret upon the cruel fate of his
harmless victims, Ahab drives with all speed to Jezreel, and jauntily enters
into possession of the confiscated estate. ‘‘He walks round and round; he
admires trellis and cluster, and branches hanging over the wall. He plans im-
Peeters here and enlargement there, by way of preparing for the flower-garden

e has in view. And now he turns to leave, when, just at the very moment,
let us indulge the fancy, he is plucking a bunch of the dead man’s grapes as a
gift for Jezebel, there confronts him—like an apparition from the other world,
like the ghost of Naboth, like Banquo in another seene—one he has not seen for
more ee seven years, never since they parted that night of the rushing storm

3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. xxi,





at the gate of Jezreel—one he had thought Jezebel had either effectually
frightened, or who had gone back to his mountains, or down to his grave; and
yet there he is! still with the long shaggy locks, the sheep-skin mantle, the dark
knitted brows, and the thunder peal about to issue from those awful lips.”
(Howat.) It is Exam! and from his mouth the trembling Ahab receives his


doom—the overthrow and ruin of his house.


A covetous man may gain his un-


holy ends, but he gains also disappointment, misery, remorse. What is wealth,
when peace of mind and the hope of the heavenly inheritance are gone?


Lzssons :—1. The demands of covetousness are insatiable, 2. A covetous spird
ts easily tempted to commit the worst crvmes. 8. Covetoueness prepares the instru-


ment of sts own torment.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-16. Naboth’s vineyard.
In this narrative we have an exhibi-
tion of the following topics :—I.
Covetousness. Ahab saw Naboth’s
garden ; its situation, and in all like-
lihood its condition, made it desira-
ble in his eyes. He offered Naboth a
price for it which he declined, because
it was unlawful and dishonourable to
sellit. This ought to have satisfied
Ahab, but itdid not; he was annoyed
and vexed at being refused, and wil-
lingly allowed his unscrupulous wife
to resort to any means to secure for
him his coveted prize. How many
are led away by covetousness; resort-
ing to illegal means to gain the ob-
ject of their desire. David conceived
an inordinate desire for Uriah’s wife,
and planned the death of her husband
that his desire might be gratified.
II. Manly independence. Naboth said
to Ahab: ‘‘The Lord forbid it me
that [ should give the inheritance of
my father unto thee.” It wasa great
temptation to Naboth to yield to the
expressed wish of the king; he might
gain favour, and be remembered by the
king in many ways to his temporal
advantage. Many yield to tempta-
tions of this kind; they will do almost
anything to gain the favour or the
kindly notice of the wealthy or the
influential in society. But Naboth
was no sneak. He would not satisfy
right to the pleasure even of the king,
and told him so. It is well for men
to cultivate kindliness and obliging
manners, but not at the expense of
their own self-respect and manly in-


dependence. III. Despotrsm. As


soon as Jezebel made the proposal to
murder Naboth, it was readily exe-
cuted. It does not appear as if there
was any protest against it, either on
the ground of illegality or unrighteous-
ness. There was no fear of any legal
consequences. The will of the queen
was supreme, and there would be no
desire to resist it. Such deeds as the
murder of Naboth fill the annals of
despotism. IV. Divine retribution.
The death of Naboth was duly an-
nounced to Ahab, and he arose to go
to take possession of the coveted vine-
yard. He little thought that the
whole proceedings were watched by
another King—that the blood of
Naboth had ascended into the ears of
the Lord of Hosts, crying for ven-
geance. He thought not of these
things; but God marked his sin, and
sent Elijah to charge him with it, and
to declare unto him God’s vengeancs.
Even so the sinner may indulge in
his sinful course, never thinking
that there is an all-seeing eye resting
upon him.—TZhe Study and Pulpit.
— Voices from Naboth’s vineyard
I. One of these is—Beware of covetous-
ness. That vineyard has its coun-
terpart in the case and conduct of
many still. Covetousness may as-
sume a thousand chameleon hues and
phases, but these all resolve them-
selves into a sinful craving after
something other than what we have.
Covetousness of means: a grasping
after material wealth, the race for
riches. Covetousness of place: aspir-
ing after other positions in life than
those which Providence has assigned
$39


%


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





to us, not because they are better,
but because they are other than our
God-appointed lot, invested with an
imaginary superiority. And the sin-
gular and sad thing is, that such in-
ordinate longings are most frequently
manifested, as with Ahab, in the case
of those who have least cause to in-
dulge them. How many there are
surrounded with all possible affluence
and comfort, who put a life thorn in
their side by some similar chase after a
denied good, some similar fretting
about a denied trifle. Be assured that
carping discontent will grow, if you
feed it, till it comes to eat out the
kernel of life’s happiness; a discon-
tented manhood or womanhood culmi-
nating in that saddest of conditions, a
peevish old age. II. Another of the
voices is, Acep out of the way of tempta-
tion. If Ahab, knowing his weakness
and besetting sin, had put a restraint
upon his covetous eye, and not allowed
it to stray upon his neighbour’s for-
bidden property, it would have saved
a black page in his history, and the
responsibility of a heinous crime. If
Achan had not cast his eye on the
goodly Babylonish garment, the
shekels of silver and the wedge of
gold, he would have saved Israel a
bloody discomfiture and himself a
fearful end. Each has his own strong
temptation—his besetting sin. That
sin should be specially watched, muz-
zled, curbed; that gate of temptation
specially padlocked and sentinelled.
III. Another voice is, Be sure your sin
will find you out. Ahab and Jezebel,
as we have seen, had managed to a
wish their accursed plot. The wheels
of crime had moved softly along with-
out one rut or impediment in the
way. The two murderers paced their
blood-stained inheritance without fear
of challenge ordiscovery. Their time
for retribution did come at last,
although years of gracious forbearance
were suffered to intervene. And are
the principles of God’s moral govern-
ment different now ?—Iacduff.


Verses 1-4, An undisciplined
nature, I. Fancies it may gain
possession of whatever it covets.


340


II. Cannot understand the motives of
those who refuse to gratify its desires.
III. Easily overwhelmed with disap-
pointment and chagrin.


Verse 1. Naboth had a fair vine-
yard ; it had been better for him to
have had none: his vineyard yielded
him the bitter grapes of death. Why
do we call those goods, which are many
times the bane of the owner? Na-
both’s vineyard lay near to the court
of Jezebel: it had been better for him
had it been planted in the wilderness.
It was now the perpetual object of
an evil eye, and stirred those desires
which could neither be well desired,
nor satisfied : eminency is still joined
with peril, obscurity with peace.
There can be no worse annoyance to
an inheritance, thanthe greatness of
an evil neighbour.—Bp. Hall,


Verse 2. Great lords often have fan-
cies which cost them more time and
money than do their chief and holiest
duties. Thus Ahab thought more of
the enlargement and adornment of his
garden than of the good of his sub-
jects. The desire for things which
serve for pleasure is often a tempta-
tion to grievous sin. Therefore says
the Scripture: ‘‘ Thou shalt not covet
thy neighbour’s goods, nor anything
that is his.” Let the needy be thy
first care, not thine own pleasure. It
is a great gain to be godly and con-
tented. Watch over thine heart, for
desires apparently lawful, if not
resisted and denied, may lead to ruin.
—Lange.


Verse 8. True courage the fruit of
righteousness. 1 Regards worldly
possessions as a sacred trust. 2. Wit-
nesses for God in the midst of prevalent
idolatry. 8. Dares to oppose the
wishes of an unrighteous king.

— Naboth shows, by the very first
words of his reply, that he is a
worshipper of Jehovah, not of Baal;
and that he does not fear to confess
his faith before the idolatrous king.
He also indicates by the form of his
asseveration that he considers it would
be wrong for him to comply with the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ON AP, XXI,





king’s request. Itis plain, therefore,
that we have not here a mere refusal
arising out of a spirit of sturdy inde-
pendence, or one based upon senti-
ment—the sentiment which attaches
men to ancestral estates. Naboth
objects to the king’s proposal as wrong.
This is best explained by those
passages of the law which forbid the
alienation of landed property, and
especially the transfer of estates from
one tribe to anothcr (Lev. xxv. 23-28;
Num. xxxvi. 7).—Speaker’s Comm.


Verse 4. Godless people regard the
care taken by the pious to observe
reverently the divine law as so much
useless scrupulousness. Even so, in
our day, does the worldling look with
an evil eye upon the Christian who, for
the sake of the Divine Word, refuses
to yield to his wishes, for either he
recognizes no divine authority, or
exalts his own above it. The chil-
dren of this world, whose aims and
designs are wholly material, will often
fret and grieve for days when they are
compelled to give up a temporal gain,
or a promised enjoyment, whilst the
condition of their souls never causes
them the slightest grief. The high
and mighty ones of this world often
think that all other people are placed
here simply to yield obedience to their
whims. They cannot comprehend that
all men are not to be bought with
gold, and woe to that inferior whose
refusal destroys their darling plans.—
Lange.

— O the impotent passion and
insatiable desires of covetousness!
Ahab is lord and king of all the terri-
tories of Israel: Naboth is the owner
of one poor vineyard. Ahab cannot
enjoy Israel if Naboth enjoy his vine-
yard. Whether is the wealthier? I
do not hear Naboth wish for anything
of Ahab’s; I hear Ahab wishing, not
without indignation of a repulse, for
somewhat from Naboth. Riches and
poverty are no more in the heart than
in the hand: he is wealthy that is con-
tented; he is poor that wanteth
more.—Byp. Hall.


Verse 5-16. The apparently


fortunate, but really unfortunate
and accursed, marriage of Ahab and
Jezebel. I. She seeks the sorrowful
man, shares his grief, and secks to com-
fort him, as is the province of a wife ;
but, instead of pointing him to the true
Comforter, and leading his heart to
higher and better things, she
strengthens himin his grasping desire
after others’ property, and leads him
on still further. II. She reminds him
that he is the lord and master, and
recognizes him as such, as a wife
should ; but, at the same moment, she
assumes the dominion, and the weak
man lets her manage and rule, as if
she were the man and he the woman.
III. She rejoices to accomplish an
ardent wish of her husband’s, and to
make him a worthy present, as every
faithful spouse should strive to do;
but it is a blood-stained and stolen
gift, obtained with deceit and false-
hood, and Ahab delights in it. Thus
both husband and wife, who together
should be blest after God’s ordinance,
together walk on to ruin and destrue-
tion.— Lange.


Verses 5-14. The terrible power of
an impiousqueen. I. Knows how to
take advantage of a weak and fretful
husband (verses 5-7). II. Shrinks
not from adopting the most diabolical
means of accomplishing her designs
(verses 8-10). III. (‘an command
accomplices in carrying out any deed
of villany (verses 11, 12). IV. Is
permitted to perpetrate the most hor-
rible acts of cruelty and murder
(verses 13, 14).


Verses 5-7. He that caused the
disease sends him a physician. Satan
knew of old how to make use of such
helpers. Jezebel comes to Ahab’s
bedside, and casts cold water in his
face, and puts into him spirits of her
own extracting. Ahab wanted neither
wit nor wickedness ; yet is he in both
a very novice to this Sidonian dame,
There needs no other devil than Jeze-
bel, whether to project evil or work
it. She chides the pusillanimity of
her dejected husband, and persuades
him his rule cannot be frea nmless it

34)


*


CHAP, XX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


TL


be licentious ; that there should be no
bounds to sovereignty but will.
Already hath she contrived to have by
fraud and force what was denied to
entreaty. Nothing needs but the
name, but the seal of Ahab: let her
alone with the rest. How present are
the wits of the weaker sex for the de-
vising of wickedness !— Bp. Halt.


Verse 9. But what damnable dissi-
mulation was it in this devilish crea-
ture to do her feats under pretext of a
fast! This was like that Italian de-
vice of a pocket stone bow which, held
under a cloak, shoots needles with
violence to pierce a man’s body, yet
leaves a wound scarcely discernible ;
or, rather, that other, more detestable,
of a pocket church-book with a pistol
hid in the binding, which turning to
such a page discharges—a plot to en-
trap him you hate, whilst you are at
your devotions together, when there
is less suspicion. If Jezebel proclaim
a fast, let Naboth look to his life. The
Jesuits enjoined a fast and set forth a
sevenfold psalmody for the good suc-
cess of the gunpowder plot; wherein,
Rabshakeh-like, they would persuade
the world that they come not up against
us without the Lord !—Trapp.


Verses 11-14. Evil masters can ever
find evil servants, who do their will


from ambition or covetousness. Woe,
where such things befall! and shame,
that in the fairest lands, as in the
plains of Jezreel, are often the worst
men to he found! Godlessness and
corruption in courts is a poison which
extends throughout the whole body
politic, even to the lowest rank; no
example is 80 powerful upon all classes
of society. How many gross, how
many refined, sins are committed out
of sheer complaisance to high person-
ages, whose favour men wish to seek
or preserve! Woe to those lords who
find such ready tools in their servants,
who will be accomplices in their mis-
doings, and palliate, or even laud and
praise, all their perverse dealings: they
undermine the throne more than open
enemies. The judgment and condem-
nation of Naboth compared with that
of our Lord. There, as in this instance,
offended pride, followed by hatred,
accusation of blasphemy and riot;
false witnesses and vile judges; and a
blind, infuriated populace erying out,
Crucify ! Cracify !—Lange.


Verses 15, 16. Ill-gotten gains.
1. Will not bear examination as to
the methods of their acquisition. 2.
Areeagerly and gladly seized. 3. Never
give the satisfaction expected. 4. En-
tail unspeakable anxiety and suffer-
ing.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 17-29.
Tux Mussrnerr or Approaching Doom.


Tux histories of the Old Testament were designed as standing |:ssons of
edification to the church; by them, those who are dead may be considered as
still speaking to us. They speak to us of the frailty of man, of the evil of
sin and its certain punishment, of the spirituality of the law of God, of the
need we have of a Saviour and a Sanctifier; they preach to us, as Paul did
to Felix, of temperance, righteousness, and judgment to come, and they make
us tremble. He who gives the dew, the sunbeam, the rain, and the snow to
refresh and fertilize the world of nature, has given to us the promises, pro-
phecies, doctrines, and histories of His Word to enrich and vivify the world of
grace. In this paragraph we learn the effect of the message of God sent by
Elijah in producing in Ahab a temporary humiliation; aad the effect of Ahab’s
humiliation in securing a temporary reprieve.


I. That the messenger of approaching doom is divinely commissioned
(verse 17). ‘‘The word of the Lord came to Elijah.” Daring and fierce as


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS. CHAP. Ext,





was Elijah, he would never have dared to pronounce this fearful doom on the
house of Ahab if he had not been divinely authorized. It is a vast privilege
to be the messenger of mercy to the erring, but it also involves the responsi-
bility of sometimes being the messenger of wrath and judgment. Woe be to
him who threatens more or less than God commands: in the one case he sins
by presumption ; in the other, by lack of fidelity. Some men are more fitted
by temperament and training to be messengers of doom. The stern and faith-
ful Elijah would not shrink from declaring all the counsel of God.


II. That the messenger of approaching doom comes to us when en-
joying the fruits of the sin he denounces (verse 18). Ahab got his vine-
yard, entered into possession, and was enjoying its produce and the prospect
of what he intended it to be, when he is startled by the voice of vengeance
sounding in his ears. The scene is changed, the very leaves of the vineyard
seem dripping with the blood of the murdered Naboth, demanding instant re-
tribution! Every sinner carries in his breast an Elijah—an accusing conscience,
which in the worst is never wholly extinct. As the serpent in the fable
which, while frozen with cold, was torpid and insensible, and seemed utterly
‘bereft of all vitality, yet when brought before the fire quickly recovered its
venom and its strength, so conscience may remain dull and lifeless for a season ;
but when once, through the Providence of God or the force of affliction or
the sentence of the law, it is quickened into life, the sinner will assuredly
find that it has not lost its energy, and will never lose its sting. The spirit
of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who can bear? By
rendering our moral consciousness so acute and discriminating, God retains a
powerful hold of the mind of man, and He has wonderfully adapted His holy
Word to act upon our affections, to awaken our fears, and to exhibit before us
the sad consequences of guilt.


III. That the messenger of approaching doom delivers his message
with fearlessness and fidelity (verses 19-26). 1. Zhe doom 4s pronounced
with unmistakable explicitness and fulness. It is threefold in its application.
The first had respect to Ahab himself (verse 19). The second to Jezebel
(verse 23). The third had respect to the posterity of both (verses 21, 22, 24).
As the sin of one is extended to and shared by others, so is its punishment.
The sinner will be made fully aware of the sins for which he suffers, and it is
this that will add sharpness to his suffering. 2. Zhe doom was justified by the
excess of wickedness committed (verses 20, 25, 26). These words intensify the
thought of Ahab’s extreme wickedness, and show the reason of the bitter judg-
ments that were pronounced against him. Le had become s0 utterly abandoned
to sin aud crime as to lose all moral principle and power to resist evil. He
allowed himself to be completely governed by his wicked and imperious wife.
Her influence caused him to introduce the worship of Baal (ch. xvi. 31), to
allow the slaughter of the prophets of Jehovah (ch. xviii. 4), to let ie be
driven into banishment (ch. xix. 2), and finally to murder Naboth and seize
his land (verses 6 and 15). The justice of God provides that the punishment
of the sinner shall be commensurate with the nature and extent of
his sin.


IV. That the messenger of approaching doom may not always see the
fulfilment of the prediction he is commanded to announce. 1. Threatened
doom may produce a temporary repentance (verse 27). Under the severe
threatening of the prophet, seconded by the sure voice of conscience, Ahab bowed
himself to the dust, oppressed by a burden too heavy for him. What could be
more foreign to the habits of this proud, luxurious, and tyrannical prince than
sackcloth and fasting—than torn garments and the slow footstep and dejected

343


GAP. XXI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


Ee —————————_ ———————————————— —————————— —


ave of penitential grief? What can be a greater proof of the power of God
aver the mind of sinners, when such a man is convinced, though he is not con-
verted ; is humbled, though he is not renewed. ‘here may be a sorrow of the
eyes, but not of the heart; sorrow for the threatened judgment, but not for the
sin which provoked that judgment. 2. A temporary repentance may delay
threatened doom (verses 28, 29). It is evident that Ahab’s repentance, if repen-
tance it may be called, was partial, transitory, and insincere, accompanied by
no change of heart or life; but such as it was it illustrates God’s readiness to
notice the first symptoms of return. Ahab’s humiliation shall prorogue the
judgment: such as was the penitence, such shall be the reward —a temporary
reward for a temporary penitence. If a partial penitent may be reprieved,
surely a sincere believing penitent will be justified |


Lessons :—1. Sin cannot remain long without discovery. 2. God gives ample
warning before He punishes the sinner. 3. God gives the utmost credit to the
slightest symptoms of repentance: He is slow to wrath. 4. Repentance, of not
genuine, though it may delay, well not finally avert, the deserved punishment.


Aas and Exrsan (verse 20).


The keynote of Elijah’s character is foree—the force of righteousness. The
whole of his career is marked by this one thing—the strength of a righteous
man. And then, on the other hand, this Ahab—the keynote of Avs character
is the weakness of wickedness, and the wickedness of weakness Think of
him weakly longing—as idle and weak minds in lofty places always do—after
something that belongs to somebody else ; with all his gardens, coveting the one ~
little herb-plot of the poor Naboth; weak and worse than womanly, turning his
face to the wall and weeping when he cannot get it; weakly desiring to have
it, and yet not knowing how to set about accomplishing his wish ; and then—as is
always the case, for there are always tempters everywhere for weak people—that
beautiful fiend by his side, like the other queen in our great drama, ready to screw
the feeble man that she is wedded to, to the sticking place, and to dare anything,
to grasp that on which the heart was set. And so the deed isdone: Naboth safe
stoned ous of the way; and Ahab goes down to take possession! The lesson of
that is, my friend, weak dallying with forbidden desires is sure to end in wicked
clutching at them. The king gets the crime done, shuffles it off himself on to
the shoulders of his ready tools in the little village, goes down to get his toy,
and gets it, but he gets Elijah along with it, which was more than he reckoned
on. When, all full of impatience and hot haste to solace himself with his new
possession, he rushes down to seize the vineyard, he finds there, standing at
the gate, waiting for hin—black-browed, motionless, grim, an incarnate con-
science—the prophet he had not seen for years, the prophet he had last seen on
Carmel bearding alone the servants of Baal, and executing on them the solemn
judgment of death; and there leaps at once to his lip, ‘‘ Hast thou found me,
O mine enemy ?”


I. I find here, in the first place, this broad principle: Pleasure won by sin
is peace lost. That is my tirst thought. Ah! my brother, it does not need
that there should be a rebuking prophet standing by to work out that law.
God commits the execution of it tothe natural operations of our own con-
sciences and our spirits. 1. Here is the fact in men’s natures on which
it partly depends: when sin is yet tempting us, it is loved; when sin is done,
it is loathed. Action and reaction, as the mechanicians tell us, are equal and
contrary. The more violent the blow with which we strike upon the forbidden
pleasure, the further back the rebound after the stroke. When sin tempts—:
when Se glittering before a man the golden fruits that he knows he


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. XXI.
I,


ought not to touch, then, amidst the noise of passion or the sophistry of desire,
conscience is silenced for a little while. Like a mad bull, the man that 19
tempted lowers his head and shuts his eyes, and rushes right on. The
moment that the sin is done, that moment the passion or desire which
tempted to it is satiated, and ceases to exist for the time. Passion fulfils
itself and expires. The desire is satisfied, and it turns into a loath-
ing. The tempter draws us to him, and then unveils the horrid
face that lies beneath the mask. When the deed is done and
cannot be undone, then comes satiety; then comes the reaction of the
fierce excitement, the hot blood begins to flow more slowly; then rises up in
the heart, conscience ; then rises up in majesty in the soul, reason; then flashes
and flares before the eye the vivid picture of the consequences. His encmy
has found the sinner. He has got the vineyard—Ay, but Elijah is there, and
his dark and stern presence sucks all the brightness and the sunshine out of
the landscape ; and Naboth’s blood stains the leaves of Naboth’s garden! There is
no sin which is not the purchase of pleasure at the price of peace. 2. The silence
of a seared conscience is not peace. For peace, you want something more
than that a conscience shall be dumb. For peace, you want something more
than that you shall be able to live without the daily sense and sting of sin.
You want not only the negative absence of pain, but the positive presence of
atranquillising guest in your heart—that conscience of yours, testifying with
you, blessing you in its witness, and shedding abroad rest and comfort. It is
easy to kill a conscience, after a fashion, at least. It is easy to stifle it. As
the old historian says about the Roman armies that marched through a country,
burning and destroying everything: ‘‘ They make a solitude, and they call it
peace ;”’ and so men do with their living consciences: they stifle them, sear them,
torcibly silence them somehow or other, and then, when there is a dead still-
ness in the heart, broken by no voice of either approbation or blame, but dole-
ful, like the unnatural quiet of a deserted city, then they say it is peace, and
the man’s uncontroHed passions and urbridled desires dwell solitary in the
fortress of his own spirit! You may almost attuin to that. Do you think it
is a goal to be set before you as an ideai of human nature? The loss of peace
is certain, the presence of agony is most likely, from every act of sin. 8. And
so it is not only a crime that men count it when they do wrong, but it is a
blunder. Sin is not only guilt, but it isa mistake. ‘‘The game is not worth
the candle,” according to the French proverb. The thing that you buy is not
worth the price you pay forit. Sin is like a great forest-tree that we may some-
times see standing up green in its leafy beauty, and spreading a broad shadow
over half a field ; but when we get round on the other side, there is a great dark
hollow in the very heart of it, and corruption is at work there. Itis like the
poison tree in travellers’ stories, tempting weary men to rest beneath its thick
foliage, and insinuating death into the limbs that relax in the fatal coolness of
its shade. It is like the apples of Sodom, fair to look upon, but turning to
acrid ashes on the unwary lips. It is like the magician’s rod that we read
about in old books. There it lies; and if tempted by its glitter, or fascinated
by the power it proffers you, you take it in your hand, the thing starts into a
serpent with erected crest and sparkling eye, and plunges its quick barb into
the hand that holdsit, and sends poison through all its veins. Do not touch it.
Every ain buys pleasure at the price of peace. Elijuh is always waiting at the
gate of the ill-gotten possession.


II. Sin is blind to its true friends and its real foes. “Hast thou
found me, O mine enemy?” Elijah was the best friend he had in his kingdom.
And that Jezebel there, the wife of his bosom, whom he loved and thanked
for this thing, she was the worst foe that hell could have sent him. Ay, and
so it # always. The faithful rebuker, the merciful inflictor of ae is the


ye


CHAP, XE, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





truest friend of the wrong-doer. The worst enemy of the sinful heart is the
voice that either tempts it into sin, or lulls it into self-complacency. 1. And
this is one of the certainest workings of evil desires in our spirits, that they
pervert for us all relations of things—that. they make us blind to all the moral
truths of God’s universe. Sin is blind as to itself, blind as to its own conse-
quences, blind as to who are its friends and who are its foes, blind as to earth,
blind as to another world, blind as to God. The man that walks in the vain
show of transgression, whose heart is set upon evil—he fancies that ashes are
bread, and stones gold (as in the old fairy story); and, on the other hand, he
thinks that the true sweet is the bitter, and turns away from God’s angels
and God’s prophets with ‘‘ Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?” That isthe
reason, my friend, of not a little of the infidelity that haunts this world—that
sin perverted and blinded stumbles about in its darkness, and mistakes the face
of the friend for the face of the foe, 2. And then, again, God sends us a Gospel
full of dark words about evil. It deals with that fact of sin as no other
system ever did. There is no book like the Bible for these two things—for the
lofty notion that it has about what man may be and ought to be, and for the
notion that it has of what man is. It does not degrade human nature because
it tells us the truth about human nature as itis. The darkest and bitterest
sayings about transgression, they are veiled promises. It does not make the
conseqisnces of sin which it writes down. You and I make them for our
selves, and it tells us of them. Did the lighthouse make the rock that it
stands on? Is it to be blamed for the shipwreck? Ifa man will go full tilt
against the thing which he knows will ruin him, what is the right name for
him that hedges it up with a prickly fence of thorns, and puts a great light
above it, and writes below, ‘‘If thou comest here, thou diest?” Is that the
work of anenemy? And yet that is why people talk about the gloomy views of
the Gospel, about the narrow spirit of Christianity, about the harsh things that
are here! The Bible did not make hell. The Bible did not make sin
the parent of sorrow. The Bible did not make it certain that “any trans-
gression and disobedience should reap its just recompense of reward.”” We are
the causes of their coming upon ourselves; and the Bible but proclaims the end
to which the paths of sin must lead, and beseechingly calls to us all, “Tum
ye, turn ye! why will ye die?” And yet, when it comes to you, how many
of you turn away from it, and say, “It is mine enemy!’ 8. Ay, and more
than that: sin makes us fancy that God Himself is our enemy; and sin makes
that thought of God that ought to be most blessed and most sweet to us, the
terror of our souls. God will not let us alone when we transgress. God in
His love hath appointed that sin shall breed sorrow. But we—we do wrong;
and then, for God’s Previdence, and God’s Gospel, and God’s Son, and God
Himself, there rises up in our hearts the hostile feeling, and we think that He
is turned our enemy, and fights against us! But oh! He only fights against
us that we may submit, and love Him. If He comesto you with rebuke, and
meets you when you are at the very door of your sin, and busy with your trans-
gression, usher Him in, and thank Him, and bless Him for words of threatening,
for merciful severity, for conviction of sin; because conviction of sin is the
work of the Comforter; and all the threatenings and all the pains that follow
and track like swift hounds the committer of evil, are sent by Him who loves
too wisely not to punish transgression, and loves too well to punish without
warning, and desires only, when He punishes, that we should turn from our evil
way, and escape the condemnation. An enemy, or a friend—w/hich is God in
His truth to you?


III. The sin which mistakes the friendly appeal for an enemy lays up
for itself a terrible retribution. 1. Elijah comes here and prophesies the
fall of Ahab. The next peal, the next flash, fulfil the prediction. There,

a8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY': KINGS. OHAP, XXL





where he did the wrong, he died. InJezreel, Ahab died. In Jozreel, Jezebel
died. The threatened evil was foretold that it might lead the king to repent-
ance, and that thus it might never need to be more than a threat; but, though
Ahab was partially penitent, and partially listened to the prophet’s voice, yet,
for all that, he went on in his evil way. Therefore the merciful threatening
becomes a stern prophecy, and is fulfilled to the very letter. And so when
God’s message comes to us, if we listen not to it, and turn not to its gentle re-
buke, Oh! then we gather up for ourselves an awful futurity of judgment,
when threatening darkens into punishment, and the voice that rebuked swells
into the voice of final condemnation. 2. When a man fancies that God’s pro-
phet is his enemy, and dreams that his finding him out isa calamity and a loss,
that man may be certain that something worse will find him out someday. His
sins will find him out, and that is worse than the prophet’s coming! Picture to
yourself this—a human spirit shut up with the companionship of its forgotten
and dead transgressions! There is a resurrection of acts, as well as of bodies.
Think what it will be for a man to sit surrounded by that ghastly company, the
ghosts of his own sins !—and as each forgotten fault and buried badness comes,
silent and sheeted, into that awful society, and sits itself down there, think of
him greeting each with the question, ‘‘ Thou too? What! are you all here?
Hast thou foundme, O mine enemy?” And from each bloodless spectral lip there
tolls out the answer, the knell of his life: ‘“‘I have found thee, because thou
hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the Lord.” 38. Ah! my friend, if
that were all we had to say, it might well stiffen us into stony despair. Thank
God—thank God! such an issue is not inevitable. Christ speaksto you. Christ
is your friend. He loves you, and He speaks to you now—speaks to you of
your danger, but in order that you may never rush into it and be engulphed by
it; speaks to you of your sin, but in order that you may say to him, ‘‘ Take
thou it away, O merciful Lord;” speaks to you of justice, but in order that

ou may never sink beneath the weight of His stroke; speaks to you of love,
in order that you may know, and fully know, the depth of His graciousness.
When he says to you, ‘‘I love thee; love thou Me; I have died for thee;
trust Me, live by Me, and live for Me,” will younot say to Him, ‘ My Friend,
My Brother, My Lord, and My God” ?—( Condensed from A. Maclaren).


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 17-29. The inevitable doom
of a wicked life. I. Does not come
without sufficient warning. II. Will
be commensurate with the sins com-
mitted. III. May be averted by
timely repentance.


Verse 17. Though much wickedness
goes apparently without further evil
results and without the chastisement
of the just Judge in heaven, yet still
all will be demanded; and at the
Divine judgment-seat everything will
be discovered, and everything, tothe
uttermost farthing, accounted for. The
blood of Naboth, which Ahab thought
had been swallowed up by the earth,
eried to heaven, and found there judg-
ment and vengeance. Like a light-


ning flash comes the word from heaven
into the dark soul of Ahab, and made
him feel that no net of human evil can
be woven thickly enough to conceal the
crime which it veils from the all-seeing
eye.—LMenken.


Verse 19. ‘‘ Hast thou killed?”
Individual responsibility for wrong
doings. 1. Nottransferable. 2. Not
to be evaded, though others commit the
wrong to which we consent. 8. Un-
alterably recognised in punishment.

— ‘In the place where dogs licked
the blood of Naboth,” &c. So Aristo-
bulus, king of Jewry, vomited abun-
dance of blood, and soon after breathed
his last, in the very place where he
had slain his brother Ty and


¥
Guar. xxl.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





acknowledged it to be the just hand of
God upon himself. So Selymus, the
great Turk, struck with a loathsome
and incurable disease, ended his days
at Chiurlus with an untimely and tor-
menting death, where hehaddisloyally
joined battle against his aged father
Bajazet, a.p. 1511. So Henry IIL,
cing of Fiance, was stabbed to death
by a Jacobin friar in that very
chamber where he and his bloody
brother Charles IX. had, some few
years before, plotted the Parisian
massacre.—Zrapp.


Verses 20-26. Great wickedness
and terribleretribution. I. Idolatry
is a great abomination in the sight of
God. II. There is no possible sin
an idolater may not be instigated to
commit. III. The consequences of
sin and its punishment extend to
others.


Verse 20. An unwelcome visitor.
I. The question of Ahab, ‘‘ Hast thou
found me,O mine enemy?” 1. This
question indicates past association.
“Thou!”? Ahab had frequently met
with Elijah before: in the previous
chapters we find the prophet and the
king in most intimate relationships.
2. The question indicates disquietude
on the part of Ahab. Directly the
stately form of Elijah appeared to him,
the greed, passion, and murder of the
last few days crowded in upon his
memory. How happy that Christian
man whose very presence strikes terror
into the sinful heart! 3: This ques-
tion shows that criminal offenders
often poss an incorrect judgment upon
men who administer rebuke to them,
Ahab designates Elijah his enemy.
What a mistake! Had notthe pro-
phet been the instrument of benefit to
the king and his country? Had he
not prayed on Mount Carmel that the
drought might cease, and had he not
worked at the same time for the ex-
termination of idolatry ? What more
could he have done, either for the
temporal or spiritual welfare of his
compeers? And yet Ahab calls such
a man an enemy, when he was in
reality his truest friend! See the

848


blinding power of covetousness! 4.
We gather from this question that the
gratification of unholy desire never
brings tranquillity. Humanly speak-
ing, Ahab was in the very height of
success. He was a king, the long-
desired vineyard had come into his
possession. What is there to prevent
enjoyment? Surely nothing. Yes;
God vindicates the oppressed; and
though Naboth is dead, he is not for-
gotten. Heaven will not permit so
foul a deed to gounpunished. Hence
the monarch’s unrest. II. Zhe re-
sponse of Elyah. ‘I have found
thee.” 1. Elijah was divinely com-
missioned to seek Ahab. ‘‘And the
Word of the Lord came to Elijah
the Tishbite, saying, Arise, go down
to meet Ahab, king of Israel, which
is in Samaria: behold, he is in the
vineyard of Naboth, whither he is
gone down to possess it” (verses 17,
18). How God pursues evil men with
mercy! Even punishmentis but love
speaking with more emphatic voice.
Elijah was obedient to the expressed
wish of God ; he did not plead timidity
at standing to rebuke a monarch; but
went boldly and faithfully to perform
his duty. What a happy pattern of a
Christian minister! 2. The reason
assigned for the search. ‘I have
found thee because thou hast sold thy-
self to work evil in the sight of the
Lord.” The prophet, no doubt, came
to rebuke Ahab, and also to be instru-
mental in his reformation. The king
must not be left without some effort
for his restoration to purity of cha-
racter. When ministers know that
men have fallen into deep sin, they
should at once visit them, to prevent
further apostacy, and, if possible, te
repair the past. In doing this the
prophet may meet with an unkindly
greeting, but the ultimate issue will be
good. 3. How high social position
is frequently degraded. We find here
that a king had sold himself to sin.
Kings, of all men, should be righteous
in their conduct, as their example must
necessarily exercise a great influence
upon the nation to which they belong.
How fearful their responsibility)
What a terrible bargain had Ahab


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. X&i.





made: ‘Sold thyself to work evil!”
1. It was a voluntary bargain—‘‘ Thy-
self.” 2. It was a mad bargain—
“To work evil.” For how many
fives would this be a fitting inscrip-
tion! To work evil seems to be the
life-purpose of many around us.
Think of the destiny to which this will
leadthem! Let the time past of our
lives suffice in which we have wrought
evil.—J. 8. Exell.

— Greatisthe power of conscience.
Upon the last meeting, for aught we
know, Ahab and Elijah parted friends.
The prophet had lackeyed his coach
and took a peaceful leave at this town’s
end : now, Ahab’s heart told him, nei-
therneeded heany other messenger that
God and His prophet were fallen out
with him. His continuing idolatry,
now seconded with blood, bids him
look for nothing but frowns from
heaven. A guilty heart can never
be at peace. Had not Ahab known
how ill he had deserved of God, he
had never saluted his prophet by the
game of an enemy: he had never
been troubled to be found by Elijah,
if his own breast had not found him
out for an enemy to God. Much
good may thy vineyard do thee, O
thou king of Israel! Many fair
flowers and savoury herbs may thy
new garden yield thee! Please thy-
self with thy Jezebel in the triumph
over the carcass of a scrupulous sub-
ject. Let me rather die with Na-
both than rejoice with thee: his turn
is over, thine is to come. The stones
that overwhelmed innocent Naboth
were nothing to those that smite thee.
—Ep. Hall.

— It is Ahab’s guilty conscience
which forces these words from him
the moment he sees Elijah. He has
no object in uttering them. He feels
that the last man whom he would have
wished to see has come suddenly upon
him, and found him—+.¢., caught him—
in the act of doing a great wrong.
‘¢Q mine enemy,” may refer partly to
the old antagonism (ch. xvii. 1; xviii.
17, 18; xix. 2, 3); but the feeling
which it expresses is rather that of
present opposition—the opposition
between good and evil, light and dark-


ness, through which ‘‘evaryone thai

doeth evil hateth the light, neither

cometh to the light, lest his deeds should

. reproved” (Jno. iii, 20).—Speaker’s
‘om.


Verse 25. Woe to the man wha
through the power that love gives him
over the heart of another, by means
of which he might become a minister-
ing angel, is to him as a misleading
fiend. How many fires of ruinous
passion, of anger, of discord, of un-
righteousness, and of hatred might and
should be quenched and extinguished
by the power of love—the power of
one heart over another, and especially
by the mildness and gentleness peculiar
to woman; and yet so often, by this
means, they are kindled and fanned
This belongs to the catalogue of un-
confessed sins of many men, and espe-
cially of many women.—Lenken.


Verses 27-29. A royal penitent.
1. Humbled by the terror of threatened
wrath. 2. Did not seek to repair the
wrong he had done. 3. Had the oute
ward signs of sincerity. 4. Was
granted a temporary reprieve.


Verse 27. What gave Ahab’s re
pentance its worth, and wherein it
was defective. 1. It was not merely
ostensible, feigned, it was a wholesome
dread and fear of the judgment of God
which came upon him, causing him to
fear and tremble. He bowed beneath
the mighty hand of God, and was not
ashamed to confess this outwardly,
but laid aside crown and purple, and
put on sackcloth, unheeding if he thus
exposed himself to the scorn of the
courtiers and idol worshippers. There-
fore the Lord looked in mercy upon
his repentance. Would that, in our
day, many would go even as far as Ahab
did in this case. 2. It boreno further
fruits. He retained the stolen vine-
yard, he desisted not from idol-worship,
he allowed full sway to Jezebel.
Everything in his house, at his court,
and in his kingdom, remained as of
old. He did not hunger and thirst
after righteousness. Fleeting impres-
sions and emotions are not true repent-

9


¥


OHAP, XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





ance. The tree which brings forth no
fruits is and remains a corrupt tree
(Matt. iii. 8). How wholly different
the repentance of David, (Psa. li).—
Lange.

— The very devils howl to be tor-
mented. Grief is not ever a sign of
grace. Ahab rends his clothes, he did
not rend his heart; he puts on sack-
cloth, not amendment; he lies in sack-
cloth, but he lies in his idolatry; he
walks softly, he walks not sincerely.
Worldly sorrow causeth death. Happy
is that grief for which the soul is the
holier.— Bp. Hall.

—— The repentance of Ahab resem-
bles that of the Ninevites (Jonah iii.
5). It has the same outward signs—
fasting and sackcloth—and it has much
the same inward character. It springs
not from love, nor from hatred of sin,
but from fear of the consequences of


sin. It is thus, although sincere and
real while it lasts, shallow and exceed-
ingly short-lived. God, however, te
mark Hisreadinessto receive the sinner
who turns to Him, accepts the imper-
fect offering, as He likewise accepted
the penitence of the Ninevites, and
allows it to delay the execution of the
sentence. Because Ahab humbled
himself, the evil was deferred from his
own to his son’s days (verse 29). So
the penitence of the Ninevites put off
the fall of Nineveh for a century.—
Speaker's Comm.


Verse 29. Jehovah makes this
announcement, not because He will
punish the son for the sins of his
father, but because He foresees that the
son will also do evil in the sight of the
Lord, and will, therefore, like his
father, deserve punishment.


CHAPTER XXII.


THE DEATH OF AHAB.


Oxiticat AND EixPLaNaTory Notrs,—Verse 2. Jehoshaphat the king of Judah eame


down to the king of Israel—This visit is


accounted for in Chronicles (chap. xviii. 1):


Jehoshaphat came to lerael for the marriage of his son Jehoram to Ahab’s daughter, Athaliah


(see 2 Kings viii. 18).


Ahab entertained with sumptuous hospitality J. ehoshaphat and his im-
mense retinue, composed largely of military officers ;


and then seized the occasion for forming


an alliance with the king of Judah against the Syrian king for the recovery of Ramoth-in-
Gilead. Veree 14. Iam as thou eee Chronicles’ account omits the words ‘my horses


as thy horses,” and gives instead fVDTT
Sif gat
Verse 6, Enquire of the Lord


(2 JiaYi, “and I am with thee in the war.”
—The king of Judah had conscientious misgivings; such, indeed,


as were unlikely to trouble the godless Ahab. Verse 6, The prophets—The number, ‘‘ 400,”
must not mislead. They were not the Astarte prophets again reinstated (xvili. 19, 22), but a
group of men who continued Jeroboam’s Jehovah-worship (calf worship) in the land, and


were probably employed by Ahab for seductive religious pu:


the true worship of Jehovah. Go up;


Lord shall deliver—what? Ramoth or
Ramoth into Jehoshaphat’s (or Ahab’


as their prediction is in ambiguous terms the


the Delphian oracle reply to Pyrrhus:
nunguam in bello peribia.


the Romans; that he should return ;
overcome Pyrrbus, he should return never;
punctuation of the sentence.


poses, to estrange the nation from


for the Lord shall deliver it into the hands of the
king —Notice: ‘‘it” isin italics; omit the word, and the


prophets merely affirm that the


‘srael?—into the hands of the king. What king ?
s) hands, or Israel into the king of Syria’s hands ? Couched
y evade the responsibility of failure.
Aio te vida, Romanos vincere posse: Ibis redibia


“T say to thee Pyrrhus the Romans shall overcome ; thou shalt go,
thou shalt return never in war shalt thou perish ;”’


Thus did


which may mean, Pyrrhus shall overeome


; never in war should he perish; or, the Romans should
in war he should perish, All depended on the
This prophecy is alike equivocal. Verse 7, Is there not a


prophet of the Lord besides !—Perhaps Jehoshaphat had heard rumours of Elijah, and
referred to him. Verse 8. Micaiah the son of Imlah—Who was this? Strong probabilities


favour the conclusion that he was the nameless prophet of chap. xx. 13, 85-41.


Whether this


man or not, Micaiah had incurred the guilty king’s hatred, which is to the honour of the prophet,


for Ahab counted every man his “
350


enemy” (xxi. 20) who denounced bis imquitous conduct


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS, OGHar. Xxii,
cr er SE EET Hee mmr ee


Verse 9. Hasten hither Macaiah—He was doubtless then in the prison to which he was
afterwards carried back (verse 27). Verse 10. Ina void plase—}4 33, probably an open
ena


threshing-floor, Verse 11. Zedekiah the son of Chenasmah—One of the “ four hundred”
who sought to convince the kings by assuming the symbolic manners of a prophet, probably
for the misapplication in the present instance of the grand promise formerly made to Ephraim
(Deut. xxxiil.17). Verse 15. Go and prosper, &c.—Micaizh repeats the delusive words, asin
irony. The angry king sees it to be mockery (verse 16); yet he resents with greater indigna-
tion the “true” word. Verse 19. I saw the Lord sitting on His throne—This is nota
parabolic form of speech, but a solemn recital of a prophetic vision. Verse 20, Persnade
Ahab—Entice. Verse 21. A spirit—j¥-} Vj}, the spirit ; definite art., é.¢, the prophetic spirit
=. TT
which moved the prophets to speak (1 Sam. x. 6,10; xix. 20, 23). Jehovah permits this
‘‘ spirit” (which must not be identified with the Spint Divine) to use the perverted prophetic
gifts of Ahab’s prophets for Ahab’s merited ruin, Ahab would have false prophecy, false
prophecy he shall have. God gave him over to believe a lie (Rom. i, 28). Verse 22. Iwill be a
lying spirit—pw 1-\"—not Satan, assuredly, nor aliguem ex Satane familia (us Grot.) ;
5 ah Ze as


for this spirit only assumed falsity for the time, whereas Satan was “a liar from the
beginning.” Verse 24. Zedekiah . . smote Micaiah—Feeling himself, after his ostenta-
tious conduct (verse 11), especially insulted. Keil thinks Zedekiah could only have come thus
boldly forward “because he was conscious to himself that he had not feigned his oracle.”
Possibly so; then this proves how the ‘‘spirit” had really moved these men to prophecy falsely
unknowingly to themselves, Zedekiah’s insolence called out no rebuke from Ahab, nor Micaiah’s
endurance his praise. Verse 28. And he said, Hearken, Q people, every one of you—These are
the words with which Micah the prophet opens his book (Micah i. 2), and manifestly were
interpolated by some scribe who identified Micaiah with Micah. Verse 82. They turned aside
to fight against him—-)7D°—they turned to him. Sept. has caveAwoay, surrounded him.
Yr


N
Verse 34.—Drew a bow at a venture—Zit., “in hissimplicity.” So 2Sam.xv.11. Verse 38,
fhey washed his armour—A manifestly incorrect reading. Lit., The harlots bathed; either
bathed him, or themselves bathed in the stream stained with his blood, his chariot having
been washed therein. To the prediction chap. xxi. 19, the Sept. adda: ‘“ And the harlots
shall wash themselves in thy blood.” Theodoret says it was customary for harlots—probably
temple prostitutes—to bathe at evening. Verse 41. History of the reign of Jehoshaphat
of Judah—Scant records of Judah occur in the Scnptures, but Chronicles give them more
fully. Verse 46. The sodomites . . he took out of the land—Lit., extinguished from the
land. Verse 49. Then said Ahaziah—At that time king of Israel. He wished to unite with
Jehoshaphat in maritime expeditions; the explanation ot his refusal is found in 2 Chron. xz.
85-87. Ezion-geber (verse 48) abounds in perilous and destructive rocks —W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-28,
Tue Farrurct Proper.


1. Is indispensable in great emergencies. 1. Js appealed to tn times of
sational difficulty (verses 1-7). A coalition had been formed between the kings
of Israel and Judah. The common danger to which they were exposed from the
growing power of Syria led them to forget for a time their differences, and to
combine for mutual protection. War was determined upon to wrest from the
hands of Benhadad one of the cities he had failed to give up according to treaty
(ch. xx. 34). The four hundred prophets of Ahab declared unanimously in
favour of the war, and assured the allied monarchs of victory. But there was
something wanting. The pious Jehoshaphat was suspicious of the four hundred;
and, in so grave a crisis, demanded a clearer indication of the Divine will. The
faithful prophet was needed. Great national emergencies demand the utmost
care and thought of men of piety and intelligence. 2. ls appealed to despite the
hatred of those who are compelled against their will to consult him (verse 8).
Probably it was this Micaiah who uttered against Ahab the oracle referred to in
ch. xx. 42. ‘“Ocorrupt heart of self-condemned Ahab! If Micaiah spake

$51


."y


our. xn, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





true to thee, how was it evil? If others said false, how was it good? And if
Micaiah spake from the Lord, why dost thou hate him? This hath wont te
be the ancient lot of truth, censure and hatred: censure of the message, hatred
of the bearer.”? Yet, however much the faithful counsellor is disliked, his
services are valued, and often anxiously sought. Cincinnatus was twice called
from his farm to the dictatorship of the Roman commonwealth, though the
opposing parties would have dispensed with his services if they could.


II. Is favoured with signal opportunities of declaring the will of God
(verses 9-12). The two kings were seated on their thrones in a ccnspicuoua
place, robed in royal vestments, attended by the gaily dressed officers of the court
and by the ministering priests, and surrounded by warlike horsemen and infantry.
The leading representatives of church and state were assembled together, and
the people in great number. It was an opportunity not to be neglected. The
faithful, earnest worker will never lack opportunities; and his divinely im-
planted instincts will teach what are the great opportunities of life, when God
can be most honoured.


III. Declares only what is divinely revealed. 1. He spurne all attempte at
bribery (verses 13, 14). The messenger who went for Micaiah seeks to influence
him to speak to the same effect as the false prophets, and assured him that by doing
so he would win the royal favour. ‘‘ Those who adore earthly greatness think
every man should doat on their idols, and hold no terms too high for their am-
bitious purchases. Faithful Micaiah scorns the notion: he knows the price ot
the word, and condemns it. Neither fears nor favours can tempt the holily
resolute. They can trample upon dangers or honours with a careless foot; and,
whether they be smiled or frowned on by the great, dare not either alter or con-
ceal their errand.” 2. Js not intimidated by the presence of royalty. (1).
Ironically exposes and rebukes the false (verse 15). Micaiah uttered the same
words as the four hundred prophets; but by his manner of voice and look
imitated the irony of Elijah at Carmel, as if to suggest to Ahab how misleading
and unworthy of Jehovah was such an ambiguous oracle as theirs. This
mocking manner, which might be familiar to Micaiah, galls by its contemptuous-
ness: it is a dangerous weapon; should be judiciously used; in some hands it is
strikingly effective. (2). Speaks the truth, though itis unpleasant to royal ears
(verses 16-18). Micsiah wholly changes his tone, becomes profoundly serious,
and relates his vision, the meaning of which Ahab could not possibly mistake,
especially as the metaphor of ‘‘sheep and shepherd” for king and people was
familiar to the Israelites from the prayer of Moses (Num. xxvii.17). ‘ He
was resolved to speak the naked truth, though he were sure to kiss the stocks
for his stiffness.’’ The man who is inspired to declare the Divine will is raised
far above the fear of his fellow-creatures, whether they are robed in silks or in
rags.


IV. Is sustained and confirmed in his work by heavenly visions (verses 19-238).
A vision like this of the ineffable glory of Jehovah was a great favour, and only
granted on special occasions and for special ends. It was granted to Isaiah
(Isaiah vi. 1), who immediately supposed he must die, because he had seen the
King, the Lord of Hosts ; to Ezekiel (Ezek. i. 26); to Daniel (vii. 9); and in
Christian times it was allowed to Stephen (Acts vii. 56) and John (Rev. iv. 2).
Thus God prepares His servants for special work by a course of training and
discipline in every way suited to bring about its faithful accomplishment—by
special arrangements of His providence, and by special and striking displays ef
His glory. The man who sees the Lord, and gains an insight into heavenly
realities, will be filled with indomitable courage and perseverance.

352


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. xxii.





V. Is often called to suffer for his faithfulness (verses 24-27). The king
to whom his fidelity was disagreeable nad cast Micaiah into prison, and the
leading spirit of the four hundred prophets, whose falseness and delusion he had
exposed, struck the bound and helpless prisoner, unrebuked by the great ones
in whose presence the insult and injury were committed. ‘It was enough for
Ahab to punish with the hand: no weapon was for Zedekiah but his tongue ;
neither could this rude presumption have been well taken, if malice had not
made magistracy insensible of this usurpation. Ahab was well content to see
that hated mouth beaten by any hand. Itis no new condition of God’s faithful
messengers to smart for saying truth. Falsehood does not more betray itself in
anything than in blows: truth suffers, while error persecutes. None are more
ready to boast of the Spirit of God than those that have the least; as in vessels,
the full are silent.”


VL Is not hindered by suffering from proclaiming his message (verse 28).
Though smitten and dragged back to prison, and threatened with the harshest
treatment (verse 27), the faithful Micaiah persists in maintaining the truthful-
ness of his message, and calls upon the people to bear witness to it. How little
do we know of suffering compared with what our forefathers endured for the
truth. We should be more energetic and earnest than they in making known
the will of God. There is danger that immunity from suffering should render
us less, rather than more, concerned in upholding and propagating the truth.
We prize that most for which we suffer most.


Lzssons:—1. Jt is a calamity to a nation when every faithful voice ts hushed.
2. The faithful prophet ts often alone in his witness-bearing. 3. The faithful are
nevertheless sustained by Jehovah, and will be by-and-by acknowledged and rewarded
by Him.


Taz Maw wo Saw tux Lorp (verse 19).


The prophets frown; the king turns pale; the people hiss; while the un-
compromising man of God delivers the unwelcome message. He is the master
spirit of that great multitude. How are we to account for his commanding
power? The text (verse 19) is the line that fathoms the mystery, the key
which unlocks the secret. ‘‘ J saw the Lord.” We are no longer astonished at
the effect now we know the cause. We think we can understand the man’s
behaviour; after such a sight, earth’s poor pomp must have appeared trivial
indeed. Faith’s perception of God has ever been the strength of the Church.
True—


‘‘Not with our mortal eyes,
Have we beheld the Lord,”


yet, Moses like, the Church “endures,” as seeing Him invisible. Notice—


I. The man who sees the Lord can best understand life’s mysteries.
1. We need not attempt to prove that life has its mysteries. The Psalmist was
not the only one who had been perplexed by them (Psa. Ixxili. 2-17). Many a
good man’s faith has staggered under the burden of mysterious providences,
Micaiah was a ‘‘man of like passions” to ourselves. It must have sorely tried
him to see godless Ahab upon a throne; godless prophets basking in royal
fayour and popular esteem; whilst he—who, true to his convictions, had
trodden the path of duty—was shut up in a dungeon. But God’s presence can
transform a dungeon to a palace. The dungeon was heaven’s ante-room. ‘TI
saw the Lord”—such a sight would wean his soul from earthly delights, and
help him te understand the hollowness of eartnly grandeur ye pomp. 2.

as


%


OMAP, ZxIT HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Micaiah also understood the mystertes of the Divine government. ‘The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear Him, and He will show them His covenant.”
The imprisoned prophet had seen the moving power—the unseen forces that had
acted upon the four hundred prophets. He had heard the evil spirit obtain per-
mission to lure Ahab to his ruin. He knew that the king was given over to
believe a delusion and a lie, that his damnation might be more speedy. He
alone, of all the crowd, regarded him as a ruined man. While others were
feasting their eyes with the trappings of royal pageantry, he saw the fingers
writing ‘“‘ Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin.” He understood the unanimity of the
prophets. There were four hundred Ayes, to one Vo; @ miserable minority,
the people said, and Jehoshaphat thought so too, or he would not have accom-
panied the doomed expedition. But truth is never in a minority. The man
who has God on his side is always with the majority. Such was Moses in
Pharaoh’s court; Luther before the Diet at Worms; Whitfield amid the
showers of rotten eggs on Kennington Common. Such is the God-fearing young
man in the shop or warehouse; who, amid the taunts of ungodly associates,
maintains a Christian bearing, and testifies to the Gospel’s worth.


II. The man who seesthe Lord can best perform life’s duties. 1. God
sometimes calls His pecple to very unpleasant duties. It is not pleasant to run
counter to the wishes of friends by giving our protest against their cherished
projects. Yet this was what Micaiah hadtodo. He knew the consequences of
such a course; he would exasperate a king whom he had already offended ; he
would make his own punishment more severe and intolerable than it had
already been; he would become the object of popular hatred and contempt.
Yet ‘none of these things moved him.’”’ God had the first claim. He had
seen the Lord, and that sight had changed unpleasant duties into delightful
pleasures 2. The sight of the Lord 4s essential to the possession of qualifications
necessary for religious work. ’Tis the basis upon which faith rests. Strong
faith is the mainspring of earnest work. Unbelief paralyzes Christian effort.
The man who has never seen the Lord is not the man for church work. Colleges
cannot give this qualification. Ten minutes beside the burning bush was more
useful in preparing Moses for his work, than all the years he had spent in ac-
quiring ‘‘all the wisdom of the Egyptian.” It took Gamaliel years to train
young Saul to be a bigoted persecutor. It didn’t take five minutes for Christ
to change him to a devoted Apostle, and from that hour his life testified the
truth of his assertion, that he ‘‘ looked at the things which are not seen.”
8. A sight of the Lord will cause men to regard worldly interests and personal comforts
as secondary matters. The narrative does not give the name of the officer who
conducted the prisoner into the royal presence. John Bunyan would call him
Worldly Wiseman. The man regarded his prisoner with something akin to
pity ; his haggard face and bent form moved him to advise him concerning his
conduct before the king: ‘‘ Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good
unto the king with one mouth; let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of
one of them, and speak that which is good.”” The man didn’t mean what he
said; he meant: ‘‘ Speak that which is pleasing.” And Micaiah said: ‘As
the Lord liveth, what the Lord saith unto me, that will I speak.” How that
reply would annoy the officer, who would regard him as an obstinate and foolish
man, whose singulur folly merited all the punishment he would get. He would
not understand such a man. A word, and his rags would be exchanged for
purple and fine linen: from a dungeon to a court; from famine to plenty ; from
degradation to position and fame. But he would not speak the word; he was
no time-server to pander to popular taste. ‘‘ What the Lord saith unto me, that
will I speak.”


III. The man who sees the Lord can best endure life’s sufferings. The
prison is no longer a prison if God is there. God loves to favour His suffering
354


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. Guar. XXII,
LL AA A


ple with manifestations of His presence, whether it be the three young men
in the fiery furnace, or Paul in prison, or John on Patmos; all alike shal
testify that ‘‘He is a very present help in trouble.” It was, probably, when
Paul had been beaten so severely by his foes as to be unconscious of all around
him, afterwards unable to tell whether he was ‘‘ in the body or out of the body,”
that he was caught up into the third heaven, and heard God say: ‘‘ My grace
is sufficient for thee.” We know it was when they had many stripes laid upon
them, after they had been subjected to the rough violence of a brutal mob, and had
spent hours with their swollen limbs in the stocks, that ‘‘ at midnight Paul and
Silas sang, and the prisoners heard them.’’? Such sounds had never before been
heard through the gloomy corridors of the prison; groans and curses had been
frequently heard there, but joyous Christian song, never. That inner cell was
dark—so dark, that though bolts and bars and fetters were felt, they could not
be seen; but the apostles saw the Lord that night, and ‘‘ endured as seeing Him
who is inyisible.”” A wild, excited mob is dragging a prisoner along to execu-
tion; the most brutal passions are depicted in their countenance; they cannot
reserve their insults and cruelty until they reach the spot where the bloody
scene is to be enacted; as they drag, they beat and stone him. But mark his
face, how calm, how joyous! And when they reach the place, the victim stands
until the stones bruise and gash his frame, but the blood cannot wash out the
expression of joy trom holy Stephen’s face. We can account for that joy: had
he not just said: ‘‘ Behold I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man
standing at the right hand of God.’”’ Such a sight enabled him to endure the
suffering ; and, in an atmosphere charged with the hatred of hell, and amid a
storm of death-dealing missiles, he calmly lay down and ‘fell asleep.”” The
presence of God is the saints’ solace under suffering. Micaiah saw more splen-
dours in his prison than Ahab in hispalace. That cell was illuminated by the
ineffable light, aud visited by the aristocracy. Rutherford compared his
dungeon to the king’s cellar, where all the best wines were kept; and like


Micaiah he would sing—


*¢ Thy presence, Lord, can cheer
This dungeon where we dwell ;
"Tis heaven itself if Thou art near—
If Thou depart ’tis hell.”


IV. The man who sees the Lord can best wait for life’s rewards. Alas!
how many have sacrificed truth and a good conscience for earthly rewards!
Micaiah could wait for future rewards. Ahab could not have rewarded him—
he had nothing that could have satisfied him. He had seen the Lord, and the
light of the Divine presence revealed how valueless earth’s poor tinsel baubles
are. Nothing but heaven could satisfy himn—


“ Had I a glance of Thee, my God,
Kingdoms and men should vanish soon;
Vanish as thouch I saw them not,

As a dim candle dies at noon.”


We can imagine the same officer taking him back, and, as the jailor pushed
him into his dark cell, he would say—‘ Serve him right!” And then he
would tell the jailor about the events of the day, and how foolish the prisoner
had behaved in being so blind to his own interests, and then they would
talk about what Ahab meant by keeping him until ‘‘I come in peace.” Did
he mean to restore him to liberty then? They knew better than that. The
day of Ahab’s return would be the day of Micaiah’s death. Such would be
their rational conclusion. How much or how long he suffered we cannot
tetl, but we know it was well with him to the last. “‘ Say ye to the righteous,
it shati be well with him.’’—Condensed from The Christian Age for 4 ee


*


OHAP. Xx.


EOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: KINGS.


po et ea ed


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-28. King Ahab appears
here in the last act of his career, just
as we have seen him always hitherto,
devoid of religious or moral character.
His penitence, which seemed soearnest,
and which certainly falls in the period
immediately preceding the renewed
war with the Syrians, had, as we see
from the story before us, borne no
fruit. His attitude towards Jehovah
and his covenant remained the same.
There is not a sign of any change of
heart. He is now enraged against
Benhadad, whom, after the battle of
Aphek, he called his “brother,” and
suffered to depart out of weakness and
vanity. He summons the chief sol-
diers to a war against Benhadad, and
calls for Jehoshaphat’s aid also, in
order to make sure of destroying him.
As Jehoshaphat desired, before engag-
ing on the expedition, to hear an ora-
cle of Jehovah in regard to it, Ahab
summoned only those in regard to
whose declarations he could be sure
they would accord with his own
wishes; and when Micaiah, being
called at the express wish of Jehosha-
phat, gives another prophetic declara-
tion, Ahab explains this as the expres-
sion of personal malice, as he had once
done in regard to Elijah’s declarations

ch. xxi. 20). He allows Zedekiah to

insult and abuse Micaiah, and even
ordersthe latter into close confinement.
Then, again, he becomes alarmed at
the prophet’s words, though before he
was passionate and excited; and he
goes into battle disguised.—Lange.


Verses 1-4. National alliances.
1. Are justifiable against a dangerous
and powerful enemy. 2. Are always
attended with peril where there is
want of harmony in religious beliefs.
8. Cannot result in permanent good
without the Divine blessing.


Verse 8. It is a misfortune when
great men have a fondness for war.
They are not satisfied when they must
be still, but seek war without neces-
sity, and imperil their country. Do

6


oO


ye not know that heaven is ours, yet
we be still! So should those cry
out to their hearers who are charged
with the cure of souls, and should en-
courage them to take the kingdom of
heaven by force (Matt. xi. 12).—
Wurt. Summ.


Verses 5-12. The delusion of false-
hood. I. All the more dangerous
when it is the consentaneous declara-
tion of acknowledged religious leaders
ee 6, 12). II. Never lacks an au-

cious and ingenious champion (verse
11). III. Meanly obsequious in the
presence of royal pomp and circum-
stance (verse 10). IV. Fears expo-
sure from the tongue of the faithful
(verse 8). V. Is ever suspected by
the truly good (verses 5, 7).


Verse 7. Their number consent;
confidence hath easily won credit with
Ahab: we do all willingly believe
what we wish. Jehoshaphat is not so
soon satisfied. These prophets were,
it is like, obtruded to him for the true
prophets of the true God. The judi-
cious king sees cause to suspect them,
and now, perceiving at what altars
they served, hates to rest in their tes-
timony. ‘‘Is there nowhere a prophet
of the Lord besides?’’ One single
prophet speaking from the oracles of
God is worth more than four hundred
Baalites. Truth may not ever be
measured by the poll. It is not num-
ber, but weight, that must carry itina
council of prophets. A solid verity in
one mouth is worthy to preponderate
light falsehood in a thousand.—By.
Hall.


Verses 10-12. There is nothing that
is more sinful and worthy of punish-
ment than to flatter the great, who
need to hear the truth. This is more
sinful, however, in the clergy than in
others. Who isnot disgusted by those
who fashion their words by popular
favour? Yet he who would go on
smoothly, easily, and prosperously
must do this. Then he will not meet


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


with opposition, nor lose his place at
Jexebel’s table, nor his other emolu-
ments. All the four hundred agreed
unanimously, and yet their prophecy
was false. In matters of Divine truth
it matters not how many agree. Here
voices ought tobe weighed, not counted.
The number of the unbelieving or
the superstitious was always greater
than that of the believers, for men
agree in error or falsehood much more
easily than in truth. Be not deceived,
though thousands may think and say
the same thing, and though the greatest
and most learned may be amongst
them; but cling thou to the word of
Him who said, ‘‘ Heaven and earth
shall pass away, but my word shall
not passaway.” Unanimity of opinion,
even in the largest congregations of
theologians, is not always a proof of
truth, for a great company may err.—
Lange.


Verses 12-28. Here we see the marks
of the true and false prophets. The
false teachers say what is popular, so
as to enjoy rewards; they rely upon
their numbers; they say that they have
God’s Word, though they have it not,
and claim to be in all things equal to
the true teachers; they dispute more
with blows and screams than with
proofs from the Word of God; they are
held in high esteem. Onthe contrary,
true teachers do not speak to please
anybody, but they preach fearlessly the
truth of God’s Word, letting it strike
whom it will, refusing to be turned
aside and submitting to persecution.—
Wurt. Summ.


Verse 12. These were fit helves for
such a hatchet as Ahab was; fit lettuce
for suchlips. Itching ears shall have
clawing preachers.—TZ/rapp.


Verses 13-28. The intrepidity of
truth. I. Is superior to the influence
of bribery (verses 13,14). II. Teaches
when to use judiciously the weapon of
irony (verses 15,16). ILI. Fearlessly
declares what is divinely revealed,
irrespective of consequences bisa 17,
18). IV. Is explicit and uncom-
promising in the exposure of falsehood


OBAP. xxit,





(verses 19-28), V. Refuses to be
silent, though threatened and afflicted
with severest sufferings (verses 24-28).


Verses 19-23. Heavenly visions.
I. Present sublime and elevating re-
velations of truth. II. Sustain and
strengthen the suffering faithful. III.
Are intended to guide and instruct ina
crisis of national and religiousdifficulty.
IV. Aggravate national ruin when
wilfully disregarded.


Verse 22. The difficulties which
attach to this passage are considerable.
While, on the one hand, it is hard to
suppose that one of the holy angels
would undertake to be, and be per-
mitted to be, a ‘‘lying spirit,” on the
other, it is not what we should have
expected, to find Satan, or an evil
spirit, included among the host of
heaven (verse 19), and acting as the
minister of God. Still, as Satan appears
sometimes to present himself to God
among the angels (Job. i. 6; ii. 1),
he may have done so on this occasion ;
and the service which he offered may
have been accepted. On the other
hand, we scarcely know enough of the
Divine government in its action upon
evil to say that the holy angels may
not sometimes be employed, when God
‘sends men strong delusion that they
should believe a lie” (1 Thess. ii. 12).
Finally, it may be doubted whether we
ought to take literally, and seek to in-
terpret exactly, each statement of the
present narrative. Visions of the in-
visible world can only be a sort of para-
bles ; revelations, not of the truth asit
actually is, but of so much of the truth
as can be shown through such a
medium. The details of a vision, there-
fore, cannot safely be pressed, any more
than the details ofa parable. Portions
of each must be accommodations to .
human modes of thought, and may very
inadequately express the realities which
they are employed to shadow forth to
us.—Speaker’s Comm.


Verse 28. These men called prophets
were only pretenders to prophecy,
whom the wicked king of Israel had
in his pay, mas a suit

35


¥


CHAP, Xx.


his humour and flatter his vanity.
Micaiah distinctly calls them Ahab’s
prophets. The address of Micaiah is
not areal representation of anything
done in the heavenly world, as if the
Almighty were at a loss for expedients,
or had any hand in the sins of b’s
creatures. It isa parable, and tellu
in figurative language the events
shortly to take place, and the per-
mission on the part of God for these
agents to act. It isa known idiom of
the Hebrew language to express things
in an imperative and active form which
are to be understood only permissively.
—T. H. Horne.


Verses 24-28. Micaiah’s suffering
for the truth. 1. He is publicly in-
sulted by Zedekiah, the chief of the
prophets (Matt. v. 11). 2. He is
thrown into prison by the godless king
Ahab (1 Pet. ii. 19). 8. He is left
unprotected by the pious king
Jehoshaphat (Matt. xxvi. 56).


Verses 26-28. Ahab’s conduct to-
wards the witness of the truth. I.
It was tyrannical. There is no greater
tyranny than to suppress by force the
Divine Word and the truth. II. /¢ was
foolish. We cannot accomplish any-
thing against the truth (2 Cor. xiii. 8).
We can put the advocates of it in
prison, but not the truth. It cannot
be bound in chains, nor starved. It


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





escapes and spreads, and only gains in
glory by our attempts to oppress it.—
Lange.


Verse 26. To prison, whence he was
fetched, and whereof he might say, as
that martyr did to the bishop who
reviled and threatened him: Send me
back to my frogs and toads, where I
may be free to pray for your lordship.


Verse. 27. This is the emphatic
clause of Ahab’s speech. Micaiah is
to be once more put in prison, but not
on the same terms as before. In order
to punish him for his uncomplying
spirit, he is to be placed upon a poorer
and scantier diet than he had been
previously allowed ; and this is to
continue until Ahab returns 1 peace.
Ahab introduces this expression pur-
posely, in order to show his entire
disbelief of Micaiah’s prophecy.—


Speaker's Comm.


Verse 28. The hope of unjust men
perisheth (Prov. xi. 7). Julian, for
instance, when ke went out to war
against the Persians, breathed out
threatenings against the Christians on
his return, which was never. And
that French king who promised to see
with his eyes a certain female martyr
burnt, had, before that time, one of
his eyes thrust out at the jousts, of
which wound he died.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 29-40.
Tur Dearne or a Wickep Kiya.


I, That the death of a wicked king may be precipitated by an un-
believing disregard of divine warnings (verse 29 compare with verses 17 -23).
1. A wicked king is not indifferent to human threats (verses 30, 31). It is very
likely that Ahab had heard, through the agency of his spies, of the
order of the Syrian king for his charioteers to fight only with the king of
Israel, and this had more effect upon him than the warning words of Micaiah
though he might regard them as an evil omen. To baffle the object of
Benhadad, and perhaps with a secret wish to prove the words of Micaiah
false, Ahab disguised himself. A wicked man is often more easily scared by
the bluster and bullying of a weak, sinful, human creature, than by the
threatenings of heaven. 2. A wicked king 1s reckless as to the danger in which
Hh aia ag ae al ay Jehoshaphat in his kingly robes was mis-

en ior the king of Israel, and very nearly fell a victim t i

358 : ry y im to the Syrian fury.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAP. XXII.
oe a et


He cried to Heaven for help (2 Chron. xviii. 31), perhaps using his own
peculiar battle cry, which, as it contained the name of Jehovah, would be dis-
tinct from that of Ahab’s, and was probakly known to the Syrians. Jehoshaphat
now sees to his sorrow the great inconvenience of being in bad company; and
that green wood also, if bound up with dry, easily takes fire and they burn
Sogether. Selfishness is the essence of wickedness; so that the sinner
himself escapes, it matters little to him what may become of his companions.


II. That the death of a wicked king may be brought about by what
seems the merest accident. 1. He may meet death with a princely fortitude
(verses 34, 35). An archer shoots an arrow in the air, little dreaming what
mischief it will work; it is the death warrant of the king of Israel. Feeling
himself mortally wounded, he directed his chariot to be quietly driven aside
that he might have his wounds dressed; and then returned to the battle, sup-
ported in his chariot in sight of his army until the sunset, when he expired.
Let us give Ahab full credit for whatever was commendable in his conduct.
Bad as he was, there was a touch of true heroism in the brave, resolute manner
in which he insisted on being stayed up in his chariot, while his life-blood flowed
about his feet, and his wound festered under the irritating heat ofthesun. His
death was kingly, and became him better than his life. 2. His death decides
the fate of an important expedition (verse 36). The attack on the Syrians
was abandoned and the army dispersed, according to the custom of the Orientals
on the death of the king. Death interrupts the work of the wicked, and in
some cases happily ends it. The decease of s wicked ruler is an opportunity for
the reform of national abuses.


III. That the death of a wicked king was accomplished in a manner
that fulfilled the disregarded warnings of heaven (verse 38). The manner
of Ahab’s end left its traces in a form not to be mistaken. The blood which
all through that day had been flowing from his wound had covered both the
armour in which he was dressed and the chariot in which he had stood for so
many hours. The chariot, perhaps the armour, was washed in state—according
to one version in the tank of Samaria, according to another in the spring of
Jezreel. The bystanders remembered that the blood, shed as it had been on the
distant battle field, streamed into the same waters which had been polluted by
the blood of Naboth and his sons, and was lapped up from the margin by the
same dogs and swine, still prowling round the spot; and that when the
abandoned outcasts of the city—probably those who had assisted in the profligate
rites of the temple of Ashtaroth—came, according to their shameless usage, for
their morning bath in the pool, they found it red with the blood of the first
apostate king of Israel. So were accomplished the warnings of Elijah and
Micaiah. So ended what may be called the first part of the tragedy of the
House of Omri (Stanley). What would be the thoughts of the dying king that
day on the battle field? Already he had proof of the fulfilment of one of
Micaiah’s warnings regarding himself, and perhaps sullenly anticipated that
the rest would follow. With what horror would he reflect upon his wicked
life—the warnings he had slighted, the idolatry he had committed and cham-
pioned, the stolen vineyard of Naboth, the heartless imprisonment of Micaiah !
If we reject the warnings of heaven, we shall not prevent their accomplishment,
The apparent delay affords time for repentance, and is not to be mistaken for
indiscriminate leniency or forgetfulness.


IV. That the death of a wicked king was the more striking and humili-
ating that it occurred in the midst of external magnificence and power
(verses 39, 40). All that Ahab lived for—affluence, pomp, pleasure—was
taken away in a moment. The ivory house—a rival of the stately vee of

35


%


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


Bs on


the kings of Judah—the fortified and prosperous cities he had reared, the ease
and ae of his luxurious court, must be abandoned for ever; and what would


he get inexchange? Death is no respecter of persons or circumstances.


The


mortal scythe is master of the royal sceptre. What will riches, magmificent
monuments, or heroic deeds avail when God requires the sinner’s soul? A


wicked life does not pay.


Lrssons :—1. Royalty ts no defenes against the havoo of death. 2. A wicked
life will be cut short by an ignominious end. 8. A monarch tho has lived for


himself will perish unregretted.


GERM NOTES UN THE VERSES.


Verses 29-40. Ahab’s end was truly
tragical. It was brought about, not
by a blind fate, but by a God who is
just in His ways and holy in all His
works (Psa. exly. 17), whose judg-
ments are unsearchable, and His ways
past finding out (Rom. xi. 38). The
conflict which Ahab had sought, and
which no warning could induce him to
abandon, became hispunishment. He
fell in battle with that very enemy
who had once been delivered into his
hands, and whom he had released
out of vanity and weakness, to the
harm of Israel; and so he made good
the words of the prophet (ch. xx. 42).
He thought that a disguise would
render him secure from the Syrian
leaders who sought to find him out,
and he did, indeed, escape them ; but
an unknown man, who did not know
him and had no intention against him,
shot him, while Jeshoshaphat, though
undisguised, escaped unharmed. The
arrow whieh struck him was not
warded off by his corselet, but just
struck the narrow opening between
the corselet and the skirt, where it
could penetrate and inflict a fatal
wound. Everyone, therefore, who
does not regard all incidents as acci-
dents, must recognize the hand which
guided the shaft. The words of the
psalmist held true—‘‘If he will not
turn, he will whet his sword, he hath
bent his bow and made it ready.
hath also prepared for him the instru-
ments of death; he ordaineth his
arrows against the persecutors” (Psa.
vii. 12, 18). Finally, Ahab did not
die at once, but at evening, in conse-
quence of the loss of blood. His blood

360


He.


flowed down in the chariot, which
was so besmeared by it that it had to
be washed. It was washed at the
pool before the city, where dogs
drank and harlots bathed. So it
came to pass, although he was buried
with all honour, that he was marked
in his death as one condemned by
God, and Elijah’s word was fulfilled
(ch. xxi. 19).— Lange.


Verse 29. It might have been
expected that Jehoshaphat, who had
pressed enquiry at the Word of the
Lord, and had not rested till a real
prophet of Jehovah was sent for and
made his appearance, would have
withdrawn from the expedition when
he heard Micaiah denounce it as fated
to end in disaster. It must be re-
membered, however, that he had
rashly committed himself to take part
in the war by a solemn promise,
couched in the strongest terms
(v. 4), before he bethought himself of
enquiring what was the will of God
in the matter. His honour was thus
pledged, and he would be ashamed to
draw back, especially as Ahab, whom
the prophecy chiefly threatened, was
resolved to brave it. He may also have
had a personal affection for Ahab, and
so have been loth to desert him in
his need. This seems te be implied
in the rebuke addressed to him by the
prophet Jehu after his return to Jeru-
salem—‘‘Shouldest thou help the
ungodly, and Jove them that hate the
Lord? Therefore is wrath upon thee
from before the Lord” (2 Chron. xix.
2).—Speaker’s Comm.

— Men do far too readily what


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





they want to do, although it is con-
trary to God’s will, putting aside God’s
Word, or the warnings of others, or the
voice of conscience. The event was
never good. How often men ask for
advice, yet follow their own will only!
Jehoshaphat’s example ought to make
us shy of the society of the wicked.
The sun of grace in his heart became
gradually dimmed. At first he had
courage to remonstrate with Ahab, but
gradually he comes to silence and in-
difference, even while Micaigh is abused
and remanded to prison. In the end
this evil companionship would have
cost him his life, if God had not
wonderfully interposed.— Xyburs.


Verse 30. The vanity of disguise.
I. An evidence of cowardice and fear.
II. Easily penetrated by the eye of the
OmniscientJudge. III. Does not pre-
vent the catastrophe it seeks to avoid.

— Unbelief in Ahab joined hands
with superstition. The king despises
and rejects the Word of God which is
announced to him, and yet he is
frightened, and seeks to escape the
threatened dangers by disguising him-
self. This stratagem was intended to
prove the prophet false. Neither cun-
ning nor might avails against God’s
will. Thou mayest disguise thyself as
thou wilt: God will find thee when
and where no man recognises thee
(Psa. cxxxix. 7-12).


Verse 31. The king of Syria gives
charge to his captains to fight against
none but the king of Israel. Thus
doth the unthankful infidel repay the
mercy of his late victor; ill was the
snake saved that requites the favour
of his life with a sting: thus still the
greatest are the fairest mark to en-
vious eyes. By how much more emi-
nent any man is ir the Israel of God,
80 many more and more dangerous
enemies must he expect: both earth
and hell conspire in their opposition to
the worthiest. Those who are ad-
vanced above others have so much
more need of the guard, both of their
own vigilancy and others’ prayers.
Jehoshaphat had liked to have paid
dear for his love: he is pursued for


CHAP. XxIt,


him in whose amity he offended; his
cries deliver him—his cries, not to his
pursuers, but to his God, whose mercy
takes not advantage of our infirmity,
but rescues us from those evils which
we wilfully provoke. It is Ahab
against whom, not the Syrians only,
but for himself intends this quarrel;
the enemy is taken off from Jehosha-
phat.—Bp. Hall.





Verse 84. The greatest calamities.
I. Often brought about by undesigned
and accidental causes. II. Often occur
to those who have taken the greatest
pains to avoid them. III. May be
traced to the unerring operations of
retributive justice.

— The less of the human there is in
those things which we commonly call
accidents, the more there is of the
Divine. The weal or woe of whole
nations often depends on those things
which are called accidents.

— O the just and mighty hand of
that Divine providence which directeth
all our actions to His own ends, which
takes order where every shaft shall
light, and guides the arrow of the
strong archer into the joints of Ahab’s
harness! It was shot at a venture,
falls by a destiny; and there falls
where it may carry death to a hidden
debtor. In all actions, both voluntary
and casual, thy will, O God, shall be
done by us, with whatever intentions.
Little did the Syrian know whom he
had stricken, no more than the arrow
with which he struck. An invisible
hand disposeth of both, to the punish-
ment of Ahab, to the vindication of
Micaiah. How worthily, O God, art
thou to be adored in thy justice and
wisdom! to be feared in thy judg-
ments! Too late doth Ahab now
think of the fair warnings of Micaiah,
which he unwisely condemned ; of
the painful flatteries of Zedckiah,
which he stubbornly believed. That
guilty blood of his runs down out of
his wound into the midst of his chariot,
and pays Naboth his arrearages.—Bp.
Halt.


Verses 37-40. O Ahab, what artthou
the better for thine ivory house, while
861


thou hast a black soul? What com-
fort has thou now in those flattering
prophets which tickled thine ears and
secured thee of victories? What joy
is it to thee now that thou wast great ?
Who had not rather be Micaiah in the
jail, than Ahab inthe chariot? Wicked
men have the advantage of the way;
godly men of the end. The chariot is
washed in the pool of Samaria; the
dogs come to claim their due; they
lick up the blood of the great king of
Israel. The tongues of those brute
creatures shall make good the tongue
of God’s prophet. Micaiah is justified,
Naboth is revenged, the Baalites con-
founded, Ahab judged. ‘‘ Righteous
art thou, O God, in all thy ways, and
holy in all thy works” !—By. Hall.


Verse 87. And now God was even
with him for his idolatry, persecution
of the prophets, cruelty to Naboth,
who now was in far better condition,
likely. The wicked are like hawks,
of great esteem while living, but after,
nothing worth. The godly are com-
pared to tamer fowls, which are hushed
forth and little heeded whilst living;
but after death are brought into the
parlour. Then, there is as much
difference as betwixt the falcon and
the capon, the hawk and the hen.—


Trapp.


Verses 37,38. The death of Ahab.
1. Tt was suiden (1 Sam. xx. 3; Luke
xii. 20). From sudden death, good
Lord, deliver us. 2. Jt was unrepent-
ant. Without conviction of sin, or re-
pentance for it, or longing for grace
and pardon. 3. Jt was shameful. He
was indeed buried with honour, like
the rich man (Luke xvi.); but the
dogs licked his blood, and his memory
does not remain in honour (Ps. lxxiii.
19; therefore, Ps. xc. 12; xxxix. 5).
As he lived, so he died; as he died,
80 he was judged. The death of Ahab
isa testimony to Rom. xi. 83; Gal.
vi. 7; Isa. xl. 8.—Lange.


Verse 38. The inexorable law of
retribution. 1. Is proportioned to
the character and. degree of the sin it

362


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


punishes. 2. Is the terrible comple-
tion of the warnings and threatenings
which foreshadowed it. 8. A proof
of the unchanging justice of Jehovah.
4, An awful yet salutary method of
instruction to all nations in all ages.


— From a narrative like this, it
need scarcely be said, the stern justice
of God may well be engraven on every
heart. The examples we have of re-
tributive providence in sacred Scripture
are, to say the least, exceedingly
striking. Judas hanged himself.
Herod the Great, who slew the children
of Bethlehem, was smitten with ulcers,
from which issued swarms of loathsome
vermin, and died in the greatest agony ;
a humbling spectacle to his meanest
slave. Herod Agrippa, who permitted
his fawning parasites to adore him as
God, ‘‘ was eaten of worms and gave
up the ghost.” The other Herod, who
sent and beheaded the Baptist, spent
his closing years with his guilty
partner an exile in Lyons; while
Salome, who asked the Baptist’s head
in a charger, met with her death, as
related by Nicephorus, at the hand of
&@ common assassin. Let examples
such as these stand alongside of Ahab,
to teach. that even in this world these
awful words have frequently an awful
meaning: ‘ Vengeance is mine, I will
repay, saith the Lord.”—Howat.


Verse 39. Nothing is known of
these cities; but the fact of Ahab’s
building cities is important, as indicat-
ing the general prosperity of the
country in his time, and his own ac-
tivity as aruler. The close relations
which he established with Phoenicia
and Judea tended naturally to bring
about a flourishing condition of things
in Samaria; and thus the decay of
religion was accompanied by a tempor-
ary increase in the material prosperity
(2 Kings iii. 4), the commercial enter-
prize (verse 49), and even the military
vigour ofthe country. Such prosper-
ity, it is plain, may for awhile co-exist
with causes which are sapping the
vital power of a nation, and leading
it surely, if slowly, to destruction.—
Speaker's Comm.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. GUAR. XXit.





HOMILETICS OF VERSES 41-650.
THe Prarsewoxtay Errorts or 4 Goop Kiya.


Aw agreeable change comes across the character of the history—like a waver-
ing stream of light which silvers and beautifies the dark and restless sea. The
last seven chapters have been wholly occupied with the history of the kingdom
of Israel; a dismal record of defection, idolatry, bloodshed, ever intensifying
wickedness, and of terrible judgments. Here we have interposed, as if to re-
lieve the blackness of the picture, a brief epitome of the career of the good
Jeiioshaphat. For a fuller account of his reign consult 2 Chron. xvii.-xx. In
the paragraph before us we have a representation of the praiseworthy efforts of a
good king.


I. He is solicitous to maintain the religious prestige of the nation (verse
43). 1. He follows the example of the good. ‘He walked in all the ways of
Asa, his father, he turned not aside from it.” On the general piety of Asa see
ch. xv. 11-15, and compare 2 Chron. xiv. 2-5; xv. 8-17. Jehosphaphat seems
to have been a still better king, for he did not, like Asa, fall away in his old
age (2 Chron. xvi. 2-12). It is an unspeakable advantage to have an early
pious training ; and to have constantly in view the best patterns of religious
excellence to imitate. 2. He strives after personal righteousness. ‘* Doing that
which was right in the eyes of the Lord.” Goodness should be sought and
practised for its own sake, and witha sincere desire to please God. Nothing is
good which will not bear the test of the Divine scrutiny—which is not right in
the eyes of the Lord.” 8. He may not accomplish all the religious reforms he
desires. ‘‘ Nevertheless, the high places were not taken away.” The only
faults with which Jehoshaphat is charged are his allowance of the high places,
and his tenderness towards the house of Ahab, which led him, first, to take a
wife for his eldest son from among Ahab’s daughters, and then to join both him
and his successor in their military and other enterprises (1 Kings xxii. 29 ;
2 Kings iii. 7; 2 Chron. xx. 35-37). There are few reformers who do not make
some mistakes; and few who accomplish all at which they aim. Even to
attempt a great and noble enterprise has an elevating moral influence on the
zealous reformer. It is one of the first and highest duties of a king to look well
after the religious condition of his people.


II. He labours to promote peace (verse 44). For sixty years, from the first
separation of the two kingdoms down to the accession of Jehoshaphat, there
was an uninterrupted series of wars between Isracl and Judah. This fratricidal
policy was ended by the declaration of a formal peace, which was perhaps at
once cemented by a marriage between the two children of the contracting
parties, Jehoram and Athaliah. A wise and judicious king will use all legiti-
mate means to promote and maintain an honourable peace, without the surrender
of any one essential right, or the least sacrifice of dignity.


III. He is alive to the importance of a judicious manifestation of kingly
power (verse 45). ‘‘His might that he showed and how he warred.” He
tries to promote peaceful relations with other nations, not because he is weak,
but because he is strong! He discourages war in others by being always pre-
pared for it himself. He will not suffer his authority to be despised, nor will
he allow a wrong to his nation to go unpunished. Government that is not backed
with power will soon drift into rebellion and anarchy.


IV. He is anxious about the morality of his people (verse 46). Sensual
indulgence grows into still more abominable enormities, the more it is practised
and tolerated. It saps the foundations of national lite and morality. Much had

862


GHAP. KXIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





been done to root out the wretched class referred to in this verse (ch. xv. 12);
but the evil was so inveterate and deep-seated that it could not be all at once
extinguished. An examination of the social life of the Greeks and Romans when
at the acme of their national greatness shows how possible it is for the most
brilliant attainments in literature, science, and art, to co-exist alongside the
most debasing and shameless immorality. Christianity is the apostle and donor
of the highest and purest morality.


V. He encourages the exercise of good government. ‘‘ There was then no
king in Edom: a deputy was king” (verse 47). The last reference to Edom was
in the time of Solomon, when Hadad, having returned thither from Egypt, was
‘an adversary unto Solomon” (ch. xi. 14), andreigned over Egypt. It seems
to have been again reduced, and to be dependent on the kingdom of Judah, being
governed by a.deputy, or viceroy, who, however, was allowed the royal title.
This government of dependencies by means of subject kings was the all but
universal practice in the East down to the time of Cyrus. A good king is care-
ful to provide effective government in every part of his dominions. When the
government is feeble, every other interest suffers.


VI. He seeks to advance commercial enterprise (verses 48, 49). Jehosha-
phat sought to re-establish the maritime trade to Ophir, which had proved such
a source of wealth in Solomon’s reign; and, though the shipbuilding in this
instance proved a failure, it illustrates the active desire of the king to promote
the commercial welfare of the nation. The ships were wrecked while in the
harbour, because they were badly built, the Jewish sailors having but an im-

erfect knowledge of the sea and of the rig and management of ships; or, accord-
ing to the prophet Eliezer, asa Divine judgment against Jehoshaphat for joining
himself with the idolatrous Ahaziah in this business (2 Chron. xx. 36, 37).
The commercial genius of Jehoshaphat would find scope in other directions,
which would all tend to increase the national prosperity. If commerce is
stifled, the nation is starved. ‘‘ Every profession implies system. The meanest
trade demands it, and would run to waste without something of it. The mar-
vellous achievements of modern commerce, stretching its relations over distant
seas and many lands, and gathering the materials of every civilization within its
ample bosom, are, more than anything, the result of an expanding and victorious
system, which shrinks at no obstacles and adapts itself to every emergency.”
A good king readily appreciates the application of system to commereial success,
and is not too proud or too indifferent to act accordingly.


VII. He transmits a heritage of good to his successor (verse 50). Jehoram
enters upon the government with all the advantages of his father’s achievements
and prestige. Fortunate indeed is the youthful king who succeeds a provident
and far-seeing father; and who has before him, as a constant inspiration, the
example of a holy and useful life. To leave a good name to posterity is better
than riches. It isa solemn and sacred trust to receive all that Jehoram received.
It may be shamefully abused, as, alas! it was in his case (2 Chron. xxi. 6).


Lrssons:—1. A crown brings great opportunttses and great responsibilities.
2. The best king cannot accomplish all the good he would. 8. .A good man is
honoured for the good he attempted, as well as for what he actually accomplished.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 41-50. The reign of Jehosh- externally. The author does not enter
aphat was a verysuccessfulandprosper- more particularly into the details of ita
dus one for Judah, both internally and history, evidently because, from the

364


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GELAP,





time of the division of the kingdom,
his main object was rather to give a
representation ofthe monarchy in Israel
untilits downfall. Jehoshaphat’s aim,
after he had established legal order in
his dominions as far as possible, reduced
the neighbouring people to subjection
again, and concluded peace with the
brother kingdom, was to restore the
times of prosperity that existed in the
days of Solomon, and to bring his king-
dom up to the height of that of Solo-
mon once more. The glory of the
kingdom, however, as it had existed
under Solomon, was, according to the
purpose of God, for ever gone by. Its
return was not a part of the divine
plan of salvation, and every human
attempt to restore it must necessarily
fail. The fleet of Jehoshaphat went
down in the harbour of Ezion-geber,
even before it had sailed out, and that,
too, not by human fault, but by a
storm—that is to say, by a dispensation
of God.— Lange.

— All Christian rulers and governors
ought to follow the example of the
pious king Jehoshaphat—to do what is
pleasing to God, to walk in His ways
without departing from them, to
maintain and extend pure religon, to
remove and destroy what is evil, and
especially not to permit whoredom, but
with earnestness to do away with it
sad punish it, and to guard themselves
from having too much intercourse with
godless persons, or from entering into
any covenant with them, because this
leads to no good, as indeed Jehoshaphat
got only danger and loss by it. Every
one should profit by the life experience
of Jehoshaphat. All that he under-
took according to God’s word and will
went on fortunately, and attained good
success, and wasattended with blessing;
but all that he undertook in conjune-
tion with Ahab and Ahaziah turned out
unfortunately : there was no blessing
upon that.— Wurt. Summ.


Verse. 48. An upright life. 1. Iz
modelled after a worthy pattern. 2.
Is marked by fidelity and perseverance
3, Is approved and owned of God. 4.
May not be free from some imper-
fections.


Verses. 48-49. The risks of com-
merce. 1. Demand great toil and enter-
prise. 2. Liable to great losses. 3.
May be involved in unfortunate
partnerships. 4. Cultivate decision
of character: ‘Jehoshaphat would
not” (verse 49).


Verse 48. “For his ships were
broken.” This cross was in great
mercy to Jehoshaphat. “Thou in very
faithfulness hast afflicted me,” said
David. This should be a patienting
consideration ; as it is said to have
been to Philip of Spain, upon the
defeating and scattering of his navy in
1588. fe gave, and commanded to
be given all over Spain, thanks to God
that the loss was no more grievous;
and used singular mercy in relieving
the distressed soldiers and sailors—


Trapp.


Verses 49-50. The heart of man
proposes its own way, but the Lord
alone allows it to proceed therein
(Prov. xvi. 9). He often confounds
our purposes and destroys our plans
which reach so far and so high, that we
may not become puffed up, but learn
to yield to His holy will, and to say:
“Tt is the Lord; let Him do what
seemeth Him good.’’—What God has
clearly destroyed asa punishment, that
let us not build up again at the counsel
or demand of any man, for when He
breaks in pieces, it cannot avail to
build again (Job. xii. 14).—So Jeho-
shaphat would not build again. The
offers of a man who had departed from
God, even if he offer thee ever so
much profit and pleasantness, do thou
reject with determined will—Lange.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 51-53.


Tue Power or Evm to Perprreroats Itser,


I. That evil perpetuates itself by the force of parental training and
example (verse 52). Ahaziah was cursed with a wicked ancestry. The evil
wrought by a wicked father may be counteracted by the influences of a pious

865


¥


GHAP. XXH; HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KING.





mother, or eice versa. But where both father and mother are morally bad, and
especially where the mother is the superior genius, no wonder that the worst
features of their characters are reproduced and perpetuated in their children.
It is a fearful calamity for children to be. born of the ignorant, the idola-
trous, the vicious. Parents have much to answer for who train up their
offspring insin. It is said that Plato, seeing a child doing mischief in the street,
went forth and corrected his father for it.


II. That evil perpetuates itself when it is individually sanctioned and
practised. ‘‘ For he served Baal, and worshipped him” (verse 53). Ahaziah
made the sin of his parents his own, by his own free, voluntary act. He re-
jected the God of Elijah, of Micaiah, and of Jehoshaphat, of whom he must
have heard, and he elected to serve Baal and worship him. He threw all the
weight of his kingly authority on the side of the national idol. Evil is strength-
ened and extended by the independent action of every additional votary.


I1I. That the perpetuation of evil is offensive to God. ‘‘ Provoked to
anger the Lord God of Israel, according to all that his father had done’
(verse 53). Sin is not annoticed, nor willitlong go unpunished. Every act of
iniquity provokes the Divine anger, and though God is slow to wrath and reluc-
tant to punish, the day is approaching when terrible and complete vengeance
will overtake the evildoer. ‘Ihe judgment which fell on the house of Abab is


a signal example of the ultimate fate of the impenitent wicked.


Lessons:—1. Parents are responsible for the moral condition of thetr children.
2. Sin ¢s a germ that has the alarming power of propagating stself. 8. Hvil,
though powerful, 1s not omnipotent, nor will st for ever triumph.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 51-53. As regards his rela-
tion to Jehovah, which was the main
point for every Israelitish king, Aha-
ziah was one of the very worst of
them. This is marked, in the general
description, by the fact that it is said
of him, not only that ‘‘ he did evil in
the sight of the Lord,” and ‘‘ walked
in the ways of Jeroboam,” but that it
is also added, ‘‘in the way of his
father,’’ nay, even also, which is ob-
served of no other king, ‘‘in the way
of his mother,’”’ the fanatical, idola-
trous, and bloodthirsty Jezebel, who
was still living, and perhaps controlled
him even more than she had controlled
his father. All the acts of God during
the reign of his father, of which he had
been eye-witness and ear-witness, the
proofs of God’s power, long-suffering,
and justice, even the tragical end of
Ahab, had made no impression upon
him. All had passed by him, and left
poeffect behind. For this very reason,
then, in the first place, he is worse than
Ahab.—Lange.


Verse 52. The curse of ancestral
866


iniquity. I. Is ever displeasing te
God. II. Pollutes succeeding genera-
tions. III. Is aggravated by volun-
tary adoption and individual practice
of iniquity.

— it is bad enough, indeed, when
one or the other of one’s parents is
godless, but how much more when
neither fears God? How can we hope
for the good nurture of children in
that case? The power of example is
not greater in any relation than in
that of parents to children. The way
in which the father or mother walks
has more influence upon the children
than all the doctrines and teachings
which they give them. It is not praise-
worthy, nor a thing for which one can
satisfactorily answer before God, if
the parents and ancestors have been
godless, or the adherents of a false re-
ligion, that the children should do the
same, and follow in their footsteps. It
will not suffice before God to say, ‘I
believe what my parents and ancestors
believed. They were of this religion,
and I will not believe that they have
been damned.” — Wurt. Summ.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY


ON THE


SECOND BOOK OF KINGS.





CHAPTER L.
THE SICKNESS AND DEATH OF AHAZIAH.


Orrmoat anp Expranatory Norres.—Verse 1. Then Moab rebelled—Since the time of
David the Moabites had been tributary to Israel (2 Sam. viii. 2; xxiii. 20). On the death of
Ahab and accession of Ahaziah (1 Kings xxii. 51) they revolted and cast off the yoke. Verse 2.
And Ahaziah felldown, &c.—This accident prevented his attempting to suppress the revolt.
Through the lattiee—/TIAWN—LFither the wooden parapet (or fence) running round the


1d e
flat roof, and which probably gave way as Ahaziah leaned over it; or a latticed skylight in
the roof itself, and which broke under him when he heedlessly stepped upon it. The latter is
most probable (and the Rabbins so regard it), for he fell into ‘‘ his upper chamber.” The
“lattice” may have been the roof window of this chamber. Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron—
35353 PyI—No other mention in the Old Testament of Baal-zebub. The name means the


fly-Baal. Sept. Bad pvtay. The fly-god, regarded by expositors either as the ‘defender
against flies,” and also the ‘“‘fly-god,” an idol in the form of a fly. Hkron—probably the
present Akir, nearest Samaria, of the five northern Philistian cities (Joshua xii. 8). Verse 3.
But the angel of the Lord said—Such consultation of “a god” violated a fundamental law
of the theocracy (Ex. xx. 3; Deut. v. 7), and deliberately repudiated Jehovah. Verse 6.
There came a man up to meet us—The messengers did not recognize Elijah, yet they were so
impressed by his words—“‘ his authoritative tone, commanding attitude, and affecting message”
(Jameison)—as to return instantly tothe king. Verse 8. He wasa hairy man—Not meaning
that he wore long locks and a flowing beard ; nor that his whole person was, as Esan’s, hairy ;
but that he was robed in a coarse hair garment (of sheep or goat skin, or of camel’s hair).
Elijah originated this distinctive attire, which became henceforth the mark of the prophets eg

reachers of repentance. This stern, rough garb was worn not as an act of mere asceticism,
at as a symbol of sorrow over the people’s iniquities and the impending judgments of God.
A girdle of leather—This 7} Ti} was the févm depparlyy (Matt. iii, 4) of John the
Baptist. The leather girdle was symbolic of self-denial and contempt for indulgencies;
the ordinary girdle of Hebrews being fine linen or more costly materials elegantly embroidered.
Verce 9. Captain of fifty with his fifty—The army was divided into sections of 1,000, 100,
and 50, and each had its own leader (Numb. xxxi. 14, 48; 1 Sam. viii. 12). He sat on the
top of an hill—probably on Carmel (see ii, 25; 1 Kings xviii, 42). Thou man of God !—
This name was used in contemptuons irony, and thus the captains abetted the insolence of the
king towards Jehovah, whose prophet Elijah was. Verse 10. If I b¢ aman of God, then let
fire, &c.—Elijah invoked proof of his having Divine authority for his message in the form of
a judgment upon them from the God they dared to insult. The destructive fire was both
proof and punishment in one. Verse 11. Come down quickly—Greater audacity still in this
demand—;J"71'D 7) T")—ae if he were fortified with irresistible authority. Verse 13. A

ark deena


captain of the third fifty—The second captain learned no awe from the fate of his pre-
decessor, but showed more obstinacy and daring; but the third, though commissioned by the
still wilful and wicked king, came with a changed attitude and tone. Verse 15, And he
arose, and went down with him unto the king—He knew how Ahaziah would greet him
with malice, and that his appearance before the king exposed him to perils, yet he fearlessly
obeyed God’s command. Verse 17. And Jehoram reigned—This Israel-Jehoram is here said
to have commenced his reign in the second year of the J udah-Jehoram; but inchap. iii. 1 he
is said to have come to the throne in the 18th year of Jehoshaphat. It would therefore appear
that Ahaziah reigned as regent during the seventeenth and the larger portion of the eighteenth

ears of Jehoshaphat, and that Jehoram (or Joram), Ahaziah’s brother, succeeded to the throne
in the end of Jehoshaphat’s eighteenth year.—W. H. J. ce


%


OHAP, %, ' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
seg ee


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-18.
Tre Exvosure awp Ponrsument or Iporarey.


We have seen that Ahaziah imbibed and adopted the idolatrous principles of
his father; and we are now to learn that he also possessed the ferocious and
God-defying spirit of his mother. A whole chapter is here devoted to the reign
of Ahaziah; not because of its importance, for it was both brief and disastrous,
but to expose the utter imbecility of the idolatry in which he trusted, and to
show by what terrible judgment the honour of the insulted and forgotten God
of Israel would be vindicated. The incidents of this chapter are also full of
interest, as they are connected with the last public exercises of Elijah’s pro-
phetic office. ‘he stern, fearless prophet is to the last what he has been from
the beginning of his career—the messenger of wrath, the rebuker of iniquity,
the prophet of fire. Observe—


J. That idolatry is a pitiable infatuation anda great crime. 1. Zt ts an
atrocious insult to the one oniy true God. By Ahaziah sending to a foreign
divinity to seek help and counsel, he transgressed not only the gemeral and
chief commandment (Ex. xx. 3), but also the special commandment (Levit.
xiv. 31; xx. 6, 27; Deut. xviii. 10, 11), which threatened with extermination
those who questioned soothsayers and wizards. It was a public and practical
declaration that he esteemed the fly-god of the Philistines above the living God
of Israel, and it was a formal degradation and contempt of, and an insult
Jehovah. Such a crime had not previously been committed by a king, and, i
ever, then certainly now, the time was come for the zealous defender of the
name of the God of Israel to emerge from his concealment and announce to
the bold scoffer the Divine retribution. All idolatry is an insult to the majesty
of heaven, and will not be allowed to pass unchallenged or unpunished.
2. It ts powerless to help in extremity. Idolatry is purely a human creation,
and is, therefore, imperfect and limited. While all goes well, the infatuated
worshipper may be amused and satisfied with the delusion; but when trouble
comes, then does he discover the vanity and helplessness of the imagination in
which he had misplaced his confidence. The man who has forsaken God is
without refuge in his distress. 3. J¢ $8 persisted in, notwithstanding affliction
and threatened death. Even the terrible announcement of Divine vengeance
was not sufficient to humble the dying man, or to bring him to repentance; it
rather embittered and filled him with anger, and even with plans of murder.
All this he does while on his death bed, face to face with death, so completely
has all reverence for what is sacred abandoned him, and been supplanted by
a stubbornness and wilfulness which extend even to madness. Ahab humbled
himself when Elijah announced to him the judgment of God (1 Kings xxi, 27).
Even Jeroboam sent, when his son was sick, to the prophet Ahijah (1 Kings
xiv. 2); but Ahaziah perseveres in his senseless perversity, and so falls far
below both of these. There is no infatuation so hopeless and insensate as the
infatuation of idolatry.


II. That the vanity of idolatry is repeatedly exposed. 1. By sts own
failures. The scene on Mount Carmel, and the public failure there, could not
be forgotten. In all ages and under all circumstances idolatry has been a
gigantic failure, notwithstanding its bombastic pretensions and colossal and
imposing proportions. It fails to meet the deepest needs of man, and retards
the development and progress of the race. 2. Jt #8 exposed by Divinely com-
missioned messengers. Its enormities have been confronted and denounced by an
Elijah. Such work needed a man divinely endowed with fiery strength and

868


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, 1.





with a fiery tongue. His weighty. irresistible personality, and his forcible,
energetic speech, made such an impression on the messengers of the king that
they did not dare to carry out the orders of their despotic master, but turned
back without further action. As always, co here also, when they sought to
seize him and make him a prisoner, he was not to be reached: the emissaries
came to disgrace. Without fear, courageous and unterrified, he appears before
the king himself, as he had done before his father, and announces to the proud
and stubborn man his approaching death. Elijah is the representative and
instrument of the jealousy of the Divine Judge, the herald of the Divine retri-
butive justice, and on that account the prototype of all the forerunners of the
great and terrible day of judgment (vsde Lange).


III. That idolatry is punished with terrible vengeance. 1. By personal
affiction (verse 2). The same hand that guided Ahab’s shaft cracks Ahaziah’s
lattice. How infinite variety of plagues hath the just God for obstinate sinners !
Whether in the field or in the chamber, He knows to find them out. How
fearlessly did Ahaziah walk on his wonted pavement! The Lord hath laid a
trap for him whereinto, while he thinks least, he falls irrecoverably. No place
is safe for the man that is at variance with God. Affliction has brought many
to reflection and prayer who might have gone down to the grave impenitent
and unforgiven. Suffering that does not soften, hardens the heart the more.
2. By fearful and signal destruetion (verses 9-12). Fire comes down from heaven
and consumes the insolent and idolatrous soldiers. What madness is it for him
whose breath is in his nostrils to contend with the Almighty! The conduct of
Elijah has been frequently censured. It is forgotten, however, that such
censure is, in reality, directed, not against the inferior agent, but against God
Himself. The facts were these, and it is important to ponder them well: As
Israel’s king, Ahaziah was bound by Israel’s laws; in religion especially, the
God of Abraham was the only divinity he should ever have known; to send to
Baal-zebub was to this jealous God a great affront; to apprehend His prophet
was open rebellion ; nay, utter excision was stated, in the plainest language, to
be the fate of all idol servers (Deut. vi. 14, 15). In harmony with this, there-
fore, our wonder should be, not that so many of the idolaters were slain, but
that any one in the guilty land was ever suffered to go free. It was the last
warning Elijah was permitted to give to the house of Ahab; and in every way
it was rendered memorable. Even then it was not too late for Ahaziah to
return; there was mercy wrapped in the dark sentence of doom. It was
unheeded ; and, stubbornly, fiercely clinging to his wretched idolatry, Ahaziah
died! Some live long that they may aggravate their judgment; others die
soon, that they may hasten it.


Lzssons:—1. It is the crime of idolatry that it ignores God. 2. Idolaters are
sufficiently warned, and are therefore without excuse. 3. The wrath of God is
directed, not against the idols, but against the idolaters.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-4, The judgment of upon the staff and support which could
idolatry. 1. Revolt (verse 1). 2. comfort him, but upon a stalk of
Affliction (verse 2). 3. Warning straw; he makes a work of man’s
(verse 3). 4. Death (verse 4). hands his consolation in life and in

death: that is the height of folly.

Verses 2-17. The folly of god- 2. He will hear nothing of death, and
lessness. 1. In the dark valley in hates and persecutes him who reminda
which he must journey, he seizes, not him of death: death comes, however;

BB 369


*


G@AP. I.


now


it is inevitable. To avoid every
thought of death, and to escape from
everything which may remind us of it,
is the greatest folly, for we must all
depart sometime (Psa. xxxix. 5), and
appear before Him who will give to
each according to his deeds (Rom. ii.
6). #. He sends soldiers against the

rophet who announces to him the
judgnient of God, and thinks that he
can thereby set aside the judgment
itself. But to attempt to do away
with the truth of God, and to accom-
plish something perforce against the
decision of God by means of human
power and might, isthe greatest folly.
—Krummacher.


Verse 2. By such mischance, besides
diseases, men may be taken as a bird
with a bolt, while he gazeth at the
buw; which made Augustine say that
he would not, for the gain of a million
worlds, be an Atheist for one half
hour, lest, in that time, death should
seize him.

— Let us pause for a moment, and
read, from the case of Ahaziah, the
impressive lesson that all our care,
forethought, and caution cannot ward
off accident, calamity, and inexorable
death. He who escaped the Syrian’s
venturous aim was laid low by an
accidental fall from the platform of his
palace in Samaria. He had probably
been leaning against the screen or
balustrade common on the tops of
Eastern dwellings, when, overbalan-
cing himself, the slender rail or lattice-
woik had given way. He fell on the
tesselated pavement below, stunned
and mangled, and he was carried toa
couch from which he was never to
rise. Age, character, rank, position,
station can afford no exemption from
such casualties, and from the last ter-
minating event of all, the universal
loom of dust. These royal robes cn-
circled a body perishable as that of the
meanest subject of his realm. The
hand grasping that ivory sceptre, as
well as the brawny arm of the strongest
menial in his palace, must moulder to
decay. ‘‘ Trust not in princes, nor in
the son of man, in whom there is no
help. His breath goeth forth. He

$70





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





returneth to his earth. In that very
day his thoughts perish.’ Poor and


rich, the beggar and the prince, the
slave and his master, Dives with his
purple and gold, and Lazarus with his
cruinbs and rags, are on a level here.
The path of glory and royalty, of
greatness and power, leads but to the
grave. The lattice on which the strong
man leans—the iron balustrade of full
health and unbroken energy—may in
& moment give way. Sudden accident
or fever may, in a few hours, write
Ichabod on a giant’s strength. The
touch of the old slave in the con-
queror’s triumphant car is never more
needful than when we are moving
through life, charioted in comforts,
wreathed with garlands, regaled with
music: ‘‘ Remember thou art mortal.”
And when accident or evil does over-
take, it is our comfort to know that it
is by God’s permission. Itis He who
puts the arrow on the bowman’s string.
It is He who loosens the balustrade in
its sockets. It is He who makes the
lightning leap from the clouds on its
mortal errand. It is He who come
missions the coral builders to rear the
fatal reef. It is He who guides the
roll of that destroying billow that has
swept a loved one from the deck into
a watery grave. Saddest of all is it
when accident or sudden death over-
take, without due preparation for the
great change. How much nobler,
wiser, happier, to anticipate the neces-
sities of that inevitable hour, that
whether our summons shall come by
the fall from the lattice, or the gradual
sinking and wasting of strength, we
may be ready, in calm composure, to
breathe the saying of the dying patri-
arch: ‘‘I have waited for thy salva-
tion, O God !”— Macduff.

— “Enquire of the God of Ekron
whether [shall recover of this disease.’’
Augury of the future. 1. Possible
only to God. 2. Leads men to pre-
sumption and extravagance. 3.
Highly offensive to God.

— Many lessons might be drawn
from that darkened chamber where lies
the son of Ahab, arrayed in the last
robe he will ever need. We mention
only one—the folly of men when they


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. 1.


—————


forsake the ways of God, to pay homage
to idols of any kind, or in hopeless
attempt to unveil the future. As to
the former, all the Ekrons of earth—
whether pride of reason, or personal
merit, or the general mercy of God—
are only vanity and a snare; there is
but one rock of hope, security, and
strength, and that rock is Christ. As
to the latter—the attempt to unveil
the future—we know what Saul made
of it in his visit to Endor, and we have
seen what Ahaziah made of it in his
proposed message to Ekron. The pre-
sent is ours, the future is God’s; let
as be thankful and content. No doubt,
at times, in anxious suspense, we
should like a glimpse of the issue of
certain affairs; but enovgh for our
guidance, sufficient horoscope for all,
that the great Bible principle is broadly
set down: ‘‘He that soweth to the
flesh,” &o. There is only one God
who can answer the question, whether
put by Ahaziah or any one else, ‘‘Shall
{ recover of this disease ?’? And yet
we live still in an age of divination. It
were useless, it were false to deny it.
Happily, not so much in this country,
but in France to some, and in America
to a fearful extent, we are told of all
manner of ways whereby to communi-
cate with the other world, and, from
the revelations received, to regulate in
this our conduct, present and future.
Spiritualism is pursued as a science,
believed asa creed. It has its learned
societies, its weekly journals, its
priestesses and priests, its thousands
of educated and rapt devotees. ‘I
would as soon think of doubting my
own existence as call in question the
facts of spiritualism,” said a Unitarian
minister from America. ‘‘ Why,
through means of it we have brought
hundreds of infidels to believe in
another world.” We shall not go
into the subject at length, but must be
permitted to say, that we can never
understand why spiritual revelations
are made only in the dark, and why
the presence of a determined sceptic is
always unfavourable to the manifesta-
tions. We feel constrained to add,
that while we believe, from the para-
ble of the =ieh man and Lazarus, that


departed spirits do not forget their
earthly history, that very parable
assures us there is no possible mode
for spirits, either good or bad, to com-
municate with the world they have
left. Dives found it impossible, and
hence desired Lazarus to send to his
father’s house; Abraham spoke of it
as both unprecedented and impossible :
“Neither will they be persuaded
though one rose from the dead.” Just
men made perfect have other occupa-
tion than to be the tools of the clatrvoy-
ant; and lost spirits we may be sure
are in no mood for such work. This
revival of Pagan superstition would
neither deserve mention nor serious
refutation, were it not for the hold it
is taking of the popular mind, especi-
ally in the United States, where we
are amazed that a nation, so acute and
quick-sighted in most other matters,
should bejuggled out of the truth of their
English Bibles by raps upon tables,
or the ridculous presagings of idle girls.
Away with your mediums, their ban-
daged eyes and pencilled messages,
hands waving in the air, and all the
dark arts of this latest charlatanry,
the most wretched and protane of all
modern shams. God is His own in-
terpreter; and neither to shrines at
Ekron nor Boston, neither to [D :l-
zebub nor Daniel Home, will He give
the power of unlocking the destinies of
men.— Howat.

— If a man has once torn himself
away from the living God and His
word, he does not, as infidelity pre-
tends, become wiser and more enlight-
ened, but only too often he becomes
the prey of the most insipid and
foolish superstition. How many do
not believe in a holy, omniscient, and
just God, to whom they must give an
account of all they do and leave un-
done, but, on the contrary, in ghosts,
or in the word of a gypsy, and seize
upon the most senseless means in need
and sickness. It is possible to so lose
God that one does not find Him even
when face to face with death.— Krum-
macher.

— In a literal sense, the parallel to
Ahaziah’s folly can in vain be sought
now in the changed ee of the

3


*%


Pe


a


church and the world. The heathen
oraclesaredumb. The prince of dark-
ness, who seems in former ages to have
wielded, by means of theseincantations,
amysterious power, hasnow changed his
ground. But yet how many in another
form have their Ekrons still? There
is the Ekron of self-righteousness—the
pride of what they themselves have
done, grounding their peace and confi-
dences, alike for a living and dying
hour, on some miserable fragmentary
virtue of their own; their charities and
alms-deeds and moral lives—the beggar
proud of wearing some tinsel on his
rags, the bankrupt proud of paying by
farthings a debt which is accumulating
by pounds and talents. There is the
Ekron of proud reason. Men will not
trust the simple word of the living
God. The Bible doctrines, or, it may
be, subordinate facts, do not square
with their predilections and preposses-
sions, their preconceived notions and
prejudices, and they send their impe-
rious intellectual messengers to this
haughty oracle. Happy are they who,
spiritually enlightened, are not curious
to know the process of cautery or cure,
but who, gazing on the glorious un-
curtained beauties of the moral world,
before hidden from their view, can tell
in the utterance of a simple faith:
“This one thing I know, that whereas
once I was blind, now I see.””’—Mao-


duff.


Verse 8. The word of God is the
sole, true, and correct oracle which we
are to question and to take counsel of
in every circumstance of life, and in
all darkness and doubt. This genera-
tion, however, seeks light, wisdom,
and truth amongst the Philistines, the
wise and prudent of this world, who
give out that the Word of the Lord is
an old and unreliable book which no
longer satisfies the existing grade of
eultivation. They that will not en-
quire of the Word of God for their
comfort shall be made to hear it,
whether they will or no, to their
amazement.— Comprehensive Comm.


Verses 4-8. If the messenger had
brought i the king a declaration of
872


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,


TY Ee


the fly-god, he would have accepted
it with faith; but he rejected the word
of the prophet because it did not con-
form to his wishes; nay, it even filled
him with anger and plans of murder.
Men value the falsehood which flatters
their inclinations and wishes, higher
than the truth which corrects them
and demands sacrifices and penitence
of them.—Lange.


Verses 7-12.— With the fall of Ahab
a series of new characters appears on
the eventful scene. Elijah still re-
mained for a time, but only to make
way for successors. In the meeting
of the four hundred prophets at
Samaria he was not present. In the
reign of Ahaziah and of Jehoram he
appears but for amoment. There was
a letter, the only written prophecy
ascribed to him, and the only link
which connected him with the history
of Judah, addressed to the young
prince who reigned with his father
Jehoshaphat at Jerusalem. There
was a sudden apparition of a strauge
being, on the heights of Carmel, to the
messengers whom Ahaziah had sent to
consult an oracle in Philistia. They
were passing, probably, along the
haunted strand, between the sea and
the mountain ; they heard the warning
voice; they returned to their master.
Their description could apply only te
one man; it must be the wild prophet
of the desert whom he had heard de-
scribed by his father and grandfather.
Troop after troop is sent to arrest
the enemy of the royal house, to seize
the lion in his den. On the top of
Carmel they saw the solitary form.
But he was not to be taken by human
force ; stroke after stroke of celestial]
fire was to destroy the armed bands.
They retired, and he disappeared. Is
was to this act, some centuries after-
wards, not far from the same spot, that
the two ardent youths appealed and
provoked that Divine rebuke which
places the whole career of Elijah in ita
fitting place, as something in its own
nature transitory, precursive, prepara
tory.—AStanley.


Verse 8. The faithful prophet


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
a a ny





I. Has an unmistakable reputation.
IT. Isi easily identified. III. Has
great nfluence over the minds of
others. IV. Is a guarantee of truth-
fulness in either threatening or pro-
mise.


Verses 9-14. The judgment by
fire. I. A token of the indignation
of heaven against idolatry. II. An
answer to the stubborn daring of a
godless king, and the insolence of his
troopers. III. May te avoided by
prayer and submission.

— We have here not the act of
revenge of a prophet who was insti-
gated by personal jealousy, but an act
of divine judgment, and a revelation
of God’s wrath against all godlessness
and wickedness of men ‘‘ who hold the
truth in unrighteousness.” All judg-
ments of God are represented in the
Old Testament as a consuming fire
(Numbers xi. 1; xvi. 85; Deuter-
Onomy xxxii. 22; Psa. xxi. 9; Isa.
xxvi. 11; Ezek. xv. 6 and 7; Job
xx. 26). He Himself, even in His
retributive justice, is called a consum-
ing fire (Deut. iv. 24; ix.3; Heb.
xii. 29; x. 27). It is therefore per-
fectly in accordance with the concrete
and literal character which the Old
Testament economy bears through-
out, that this actual fire should be
the form of revelation of the divine
wrath, so that in many places we can
hardly distinguish whether it is in-
tended to be taken literally or figura-
tively. Just as once the rebellious
host of Korah was consumed by fire,
and so Moses’ authority as the servant
of God was ratified (Num. xvi. 35);
so the scoffing band of the idolatrous
Ahaziah perished, and thereby the
second Moses was corroborated as the
man of God. As an act of divine
judgment this catastrophe is rather a
revelation of the highest moral in-
tensity—a testimony to the unchange-
able justice and holiness of God. Who-
ever finds it shocking, must be still
more shocked at the prophetic declara-
tion, ‘“‘God is jealous, and the Lord
avengeth; the Lord revengeth and is
furious; the Lord will take vengeance
on Hie adversaries, and He reserveth


OHAP.


wrath for His enemies. Who can
stand before his indignation? and who
can abide in the fierceness of His
anger? His fury is poured out like
fire, and the rocks are thrown down by
Him” (Nahum i. 2-6).—Zange.


Verses 9-12. Wherein consisted the
grievous crime of these captains and
their men, who merely executed the
command of their master? Accord-
ing to the simple words of the text in
the address, man of God. Most inter-
preters say, the captains had used
this designation in a contemptuous or
ironical sense. But this is not satis-
factory. Two cases are conceivable:
either the captains held Elijah to be
no true prophet, and then their ad-
dress, as an insult to the prophetic
office in the person of a man whom
God had acknowledged by so many
miracles as His servant, was a direct
insult to the Lord; or they held
Elijah to be a true prophet, and then
the summons to surrender himself, in
order to be led bound to the king, was
a direct and still more daring contempt
of the prophet as well as of the Lord
his God. In either case, therefore,
the punishment was just. The cap-
tains did not merely what they as
servants of the king were bound to do,
but shared in the ungodly disposition
of their sovereign, and with reckless
audacity insulted the Almighty God
in the person of the prophet. This
wicked opposition t» God the Lord is
punished, and certainly not by the
prophet, but by the Lord Himself,
who realizes the word of his servant.
Whoever, therefore, on account of
this act charges the prophet with
cruelty, does not reflect that this
charge falls not on the prophets, but
much rather on God the Lord.— Kvel.

— The time was when two zealous
disciples would fain have imitated this
fiery revenge of Elijah, and were re-
pelled with a check; the very place
puts them in mind of the judgment ;
not far from Samaria was this done by
Elijah, and wished to be done by the
disciples. So churlish a rejection of
a Saviour seemed no less heinous than
the endeavour of apprehending a pro-

878


ye


CHAP. 2





phet. ‘Lord, wilf Thou that we
command fire to come down from hea-
ven and consume them, as Elias did ?”’
The world yielded but. one Elias;
that which was zeal in him might be
fury in another: the least variation
of circumstance may make an example
dangerous; presently, therefore, do
they hear, ‘“‘Ye know not of what
spirit ye are.” It is the calling that
varies the spirit: Elijah was God’s
minister for the execution of so severe
a judgment; they were but the ser-
vants of their own impotent anger;
there was fire in their breasts which
God never kindled. Far was it from
the Saviour of men to second their
earthly fire with this heavenly. He
came, indeed, to send fire upon earth,
but to warm, not to burn; and if to
burn, not to persons of men, but
their corruptions. How much more
safe is it for us to follow the meek
prophet of the New Testament, than
that fervent prophet of the Old!
Let the matter of our prayers be the
sweet dews of mercy, not the fires
of vengeance.—Bp. Hall.


Verse 9. Every servant of the
Lord who is really earnest in his
office must make up his mind that rude,
low, and godless men will scorn him
and name him ‘‘Man of God” in
mockery. Although no fire from hea-
ven falls down to destroy them, yet
the Word of the Lord stands firm for
all time: ‘‘He that despiseth you,”
&c. (Luke x. 16); and the Lord will
not leave those unpunished who
despise Him in His servants, and
exercise their art upon the calling of
reconciliation (Isa. xi. 10, 11).

— Great rulers always find people
who will lend themselves as instru-
ments of their perverted will, who
execute with exactness and without
scruple what ‘‘the king says”; but
do not trouble themselves at all about
what God says.—Lange.

— Behold the true son of Jezebel!
The anguish of his disease, the expec-
tation of death, cannot take off his
persecution of Elijah ; it is against his
will that his deathbed is not bloody.
Had eure meant any other than s

874


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


= oi ew





cruel violence to Elijah, he had sent a
peaceable messenger to call him to the
court. He had not sent a captain,
with a band of soldiers, to fetch him;
the instruments which he useth
carry revenge in their face. If he
had not thought Elijah more than a
man, what needed a band of fifty men
to apprehend one? and if he did think
him such, why would he send to
apprehend him by fifty? Surely Aha-
giah knew of old how miraculous a
prophet was; what power that man
had over all their base deities; what
commands of the elements, of the
heavens! And yet he sends to attack
him. It isa strange thing to see how
wilfully godless men strive against
the stream of their own hearts, hating
that which they know good, fighting
against that which they know divine.
What a gross disagreement is in the
message of this Israelitish captair!
«Thou man of God, the king hath said,
Come down.” If he were a man of
God, how hath he offended? And
if he hath justly offended the
anointed of God, how is he a man of
God? And if he bea man of God,
and have not offended, why should he
come down to punishment? Here is
a kind confession, with a false heart,
with bloody hands. The world is full
of these windy courtesies, real cruelties.
Deadly malice lurks under fair compli-
ments, and, while it flatters, killeth.
—Bp. Hall.


Verse 10. This was a miracle of
Divine judgment, and in _ perfect
keeping with the spirit of the old dis-
pensation. In this respect the new
dispensation widely differs from the
old (Luke ix. 51-56). But it must
not be understood that when our Lord
rebuked the two disciples, and showed
them the difference between the Law
and the Gospel as to the spirit of
each, He thereby blamed this act of
Elijah’s. He blamed the two disci-
ples who dishonoured Elijah by en-
deavouring to pervert his act intoa
precedent for a proposal which was
altogether dissimilar to that act of
Elijah in all the circumstances of the
ease, Elijah was God’s minister for


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP, &





executing His Divine judgment. The
two disciples were but the servants of
their own anger.— Wordsworth.


Verse 12. Ahaziah could not fail
by this time to be fully cognisant of
these appalling judgments. He might
possibly have ventured to put an
Atheist construction on the death of
the first fifty; that they had been
victims of unhappy and untoward
accident; that the lightnings, the
capricious shafts from the quiver of
nature, had by sad mishap fallen on
the slopes of Carmel, where his sol-
diers were. But now that the very
same catastrophe had overtaken the
second relay, there could surely be
little debate that a Higher Hand had
put the bow on the string, and made
ready the arrows. Blinded indeed
must that dying monarch be, if he
still refuse to desist from his mad,
impotent rage. Alas! how much it
takes to humble the proud heart! It
is the saddest picture of moral apos-
tasy—the saddest exponent of the
enmity oi the unregenerate heart—
when even the king of terrors brings
no terror to the seared conscience and
indurated soul; the banner of proud
defiance against God and His Christ
waved, even when the awful gloom of
mortal darkness is closing in all
around !—Vacduff.


Verses 13, 14. What marble or
flint is harder than a wicked heart ?
As if Ahaziah would despitefully
spit in the face of heaven, and wrestle
a fall with the Almighty, he will
needs yet again set a third captain
upon so desperate an employment.
How hot a service must this com-
mander needs think himself put upon ?
Who can but pity his straits! There
is death before him, death behind
him. If he go not, the king’s wrath
is the messenger of death: if he go,
the prophet’s tongue is the execu-
tioner of death. Many a hard task
will follow the service of a prince
wedded to his passion, divorced from
God. Unwillingly, doubtless, and
fearfully, doth this captain climb up
the hill to scale that impregnable fort ;


but now, when he comes near to the
assault, the battery that he lays to it
is his prayers; his surest fightis upon
his knees. This was the way to offer
violence to the prophet of God, to
the God of that prophet, even humble
supplications. We must deprecate
that evil which we would avoid; if
we would force blessings, we must
entreat them. There is nothing tobe
gotten from God by strong hand ; any-
thing by suit.— Bp. Hall,


Verses 15-17. A memorable death-
bed scene. I. A dying monarch
faithfully warned. II. The fearless
prophet alone in the midst of danger-
ous enemies—sees no peril in duty.
Iil. A baffled and disappointed king,
unsubdued by suffering, dying in
silence, in impenitence, in darkness.

— The fifth of February, sixteen
hundred and eighty-five, witnessed a
sad scene in the palace of Whitehall.
The second Charles lay in the last
agony, while, amid the courtly circle
around his bed, stood Sancroft, arch-
bishop of Canterbury, and Ken, Bishop
of Bath and Wells. ‘‘The king is
really and truly a Catholic,” whis-
pered the Duchess of Portsmouth to
the French Ambassador, ‘‘ and yet his
bed-chamber is full of Protestant
clergymen.” The fact had been long
suspected, and gave additional earnest-
ness to the holy men who desired to
prepare the dying monarch for his
inevitable and solemn change. ‘It is
time to speak out, sir,’’ exclaims San-
croft, ‘‘for you are about to appear
beforeaJudge whois norespecter of per-
sons.’ ‘* Will you not die in the com-
munion of the Church of England?”
anxiously asks Ken. The king gave
no response. On which the Bishop
put forth all his eloquence, till his
pathetic exhortation awed and melted
the bystanders to such a degree, that
some among them believed him to be
filled with the same Spirit which in
the old time had, by the mouths of
Nathan and Elias, called sinful princes
to repentance. To complete the
parallel, we must notice another inci-
dent in the dying scene. ‘If it costs
me my life,’ exclaims ee Duke of

875


®


OHAP, I.


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.





York, afterwards James II., “I will
fetch a priest.” With some difficulty
he is found. He is smuggled into the
royal presence and the chamber of
death. ‘‘He is welcome,’ says
Charles. The monarch who refused
to listen to Sancroft and Ken, has an
open ear for Father Huddleston. The
monarch who was unwilling to die in
the Church of England, is perfectly
willing to die in the Church of Rome.
Apologising to his attendants that he
has been ‘an unconscionable time
dying,” he breathes his last, an
apostate from the faith inseparable
from England’s throne, and for his
abandonment of which his own suc-
cessor died an exile on the charity of
a foreign land. Let Ahaziah take the
place of Charles IT. ; let his idolatry be
represented in the popery of the
British monarch; let the application
to the god of Ekron-be symbolized in
the welcome given the Romish monk ;
and, last of all, let Elijah by the bed-
side of the king of Israel, dealing faith-
fully with the soul departing there, be
the type of good Sancroft and Ken by
that other couch, using all their en-
treaties to make the sufferer think of
his approaching end—and the parallel
is well-nigh complete.— Howat.


Verses 15, 16. A minister of God
must not fear to hold up their sins
before sinners and scoffers upon their
death bed, and to draw their atten-
tion to the judgment of God, in order
that, if possible, even in the last hour
they may come to a knowledge of that
which belongs to their peace, for to
offer eternal blessedness to the rich
and great, instead of calling them to
repentance, is the worst trangression
of a prophet; to conceal the approach
of his end from one who is sick unto
death, and to hold all thoughts of it
from him, or even to console him with
false hopes of recovery, is no genuine
love ; for no man can be properly pre-
pared for death who does not think of
it often and much.—Lange.


Verse 17. His death, like that of
the two companies of fifties, was a
judgment from heaven. It would
not do to punish these messengers of
the king for insolence towards Jeho-
vah and his prophet, and let the king
himself go clear. So this impious
monarch is made to drag out his last
days under a consciousness of being
an object of Jehovah’s wrath.—
Whedon,


CHAPTER II.


THE TRANSLATION OF ELIJAH TO HEAVEN.


OrirroaL and Exrtanatory Nores.—Verse 1. Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal—
Not the Gilgal in Judah, but the Gilgal (now Jilgil) in Ephraim, near Ebal and Gerizim
(Deut. xi. 80). Both Amos (iv. 4) and Hosea (iv. 16) mention it as, together with Bethel, being
the chief seat of the calf-worship. Here was one of the schools of the prophets, and from theae
young men Elisha followed Elijah, as being divinely impelled to become the great prophet’s
successor, Verse 2, Tarry here, I pray thee—Hlijah thought none beside himself knew of
his near translation; but Aisha knew it (verse 3)—“ Yea, L know it,’ lit., I also know;
and “the sons of the prophets,” both at Bethel (verse 8) and Jericho (verse 6) knew it. The
Lord hath sent me to Bethel—Obeying the Spint’s impulse, Elijah paid a farewell visit to


each of these schools. Verse 3. Sons of the prophets—The 2°13 77-933 were the scholars,


and not necessarily natural sons, of the prophets. Take thy master from thy head—Scholare
sat at their master’s feet (Acts xxii. 8); but the expression here has a more specific meanin
than that cust.m suffices to explain, the phrase literally rendered being “‘ from over thy head a
and Keil, Bunsen, Thenius, and Bottcher accept it as intimating his removal by ascension ‘as
avaroupdvew in Acts i. 10. Hold ye your peace—This és not a surly retort, nor merely an


876


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. IL
a er a a ae ms Dg Tad Dal


sppeal that they would not spread the tidings, which might arouse publie excitement and
gather a concourse; but a request that they would preserve their minds calm, and neither
afflict themselves nor him by sad thoughts of Elijah’s near departure. Verse 7. Stood to view
afar off—Watching in wonderment and anxiety their arrival at the river J. ordan, over which
there was no arrangement for these two to cross, and possibly antisipating for them some
supernatural accommodation or sign. What occurred would necessarily remind them of Moses
act (Exod, xiv. 16). The “rod” of Moses by which Ae smote the waters waa the symbol ot
his commission ag leader of the pilgrim hosts ; the “ mantle ” of Elijah was the symbol of his
prophetic office. And the parting of the waters was in each instance a Divine authentication
of his office. Verse 9. A double portion of thy spirit—The “two parts”—D'IW )—


was the legal share in his father’s possessions appointed to the firatborn (Deut. xxi. 17).
Elisha requests—F7-2 Dw ‘3—“a deuble portion in thy spirit.” Some expositors


have sought to show that Elisha asked and received larger prophetic endowments than Elijah
possessed; but this isa false interpretation of the words. Keil wiscly says:—‘ He that is
departing cannot bequeath to his heir more than he himself has.” Elisha only asks that he
may inherit Elijah’s office, not merely as one of the prophets, but aaa worthy successor to Elijah
in foremost and powerful service for Jehovah. Verse 10. Asked a hard thing—An extra-
ordinary blessing and honour which is not mine to give, but God’s (comp. Chriat’s answer to the
sons of Zebedee, Matt. xx. 23); yet if Elisha was divinely allowed to see Elijah’s departure—
a favour denied to all other ‘‘ sons of the prophets ””—it would doubtless indicate his election to
succeed his master to eminent prophetic dignity. Verse 11. Chariots of fire and horses of fire—
Oriental imagery (comp. Psa. Ixvili. 17 ; Isa, Ixvi. 15; Hab. iii. 8) suggestive of an angelic train :
‘‘His ministers a flame of fire” (Psa. civ. 4) ; comp. also 2 Kings vi. 14-17. Observe that
the words “there appeared” are not in the text. Possibly a supernatural storm-clond, illu-
mined with lightning, rushed between them. Elijah went up by a whirlwind—Not in
literal “chariots,” &c., at all, but simply ine whirlwind, TIVO, which confirms the idea of a
Tress


storm-cloud. Verse 12. My father, my father—Thus doubly asserting his sonship, and
claiming his double portion. Own clothes and rent them—Expressive of extre me grief over
his loss; perhaps, also, a sign ot abandoning his own past humble lot, and taking up the mantle
of a new and higher career. Verse 14. Where is the Lord God of Elijah? and when, &c.
—In the Hebrew text, following the word Elijah, come the words §3;7-|N, which have
been by some expositors changed into various forms, but unsatisfactorily ; their natural mean-
ing is, “even he,’ and should be added to the question, Where is Jehovah, God of Elijah,
even He t—Verse 16. Lest peradventure, &c.—They had seen Hlijah pass miraculously over
Jordan, but did not witness his ascension. Even if he had been taken up to heaven, they
imagined that his body would be remaining somewhere on earth. Verse 20. A new cruse—
‘A symbol of the renewing power of the Word of God” (Kets). Verse 21. Death or barren


land ; death or abortion. Verse 28. Little children—see note on Ws in 1 Kings iii. 7;


same word asin 1 Kings xii. 8,10, 14, young men. O33 describes ages from children to
ae


young men inclusive. Possibly these youthful revilers in sceptical Bethel, acoffing at Hlisha’s
report of Elijah’s translation to heaven, derisively taunted him, bidding him likewise “ go up.”
Baldhead—an Eastern epithet of contempt used regardless of the person being bald or old.
Baldness was a mark of shame (Isa, iii. 17, 24); priests were forbidden to shave (Levit. xxi. 5).
Their destruction was appalling, but rendered necessary by the profanity of the town. Had
no judgment followed this insolent contemning of Jehovah in the person of His newly -designated
prophet, it would heve confirmed the people in their defiance and impiety.—W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-18,


Tux three grest dispensations of religion has each its illustration of a glorious
ascension into heaven. The translation of Enoch occurred in the patriarchal
age. The scene on Olivet represents the ascension or translation of the
Christian era. And the remarkable translation of Elijah recorded in this
paragraph very sppropriately belongs to the prophetic age. Regarding this
avent we remark— ee


OHAP. i, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ee er a Tt at


I. It was at a time that harmonized with the Divine purpose. ‘And it
came to pass when the Lord would take up Elij-h” (verse 1). The work of
the great prophet was done—a work never. agreeable to ordinary men—a work
of stern reproot, of faithful warning, of fiery vengeance. The time of his
departure was also revealed to Elijah. But mark the modesty of true greatness.
He does not assemble Israel; he does not summon Jehoram and his court,
nor his great opponent Jezebel, before whom he had once fied, to witness his
triumphant ascent to glory. He would fain be alone; his love of solitude
remains to the last, and he would like to leave the world as suddenly and
unobtrusively as it had been originally entered. But he could not shake off
the devotion of Elisha; nor could he hide his approaching departure from
the sons of the prophets whom he had been for years preparing for their
work. God chose the time; and it was not until due arrangements had been
made to carry on and perfect the work which Elijah had for a time carried on
almost alone. God knows the best time to send and take away His instruments.
Men depart; but the work of God proceeds.


II. It was in a manner that harmonized with the spirit and character of
his great life-work (verse 11). The prophet whose life has been like a flame,
bursting out now and then into an irresistible conflagration, very appropriately
terminates his career in a blaze of heavenly light. ‘‘ Suddenly over the valley,
asin Ezekiel’s vision, there breaks an unwonted sight. There seemsa burning
equipage, speeding down from heaven, swift as the lightning, and more vivid
than any flash. There seems a chariot of fire, with wheels of flame, and horses
of fire snorting flame from mouth and nostril. There seem reins of fire and
riders of fire, and wings of fire from fiery hosts on every hand. The aged
prophet bows his head, conscious that his hour has come; and there, as the
tempest weaves itself around him, we see him placed in the centre of the car of
flame, and in the sight of the astounded Elisha and the fifty students on the
heights of Jericho, Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.” If our life has
been in harmony with the will of God, we may safely leave the character of its
close to Him.


III. It was a type of the triumph of the good over the power of death.
Death is robbed of its sting and shorn of its terror to the lovers of Elijah’s
God ; it is but a change from a good to a better state of existence; it is not to
be feared, but to be welcomed; it is the gateway into a more glorious life.
The change which must have taken place in the body of Elijah was only more
rapid and less evident than what must take place in ours. Death is the hour
not of defeat, but of triumph.


Death is the crown of life,
Deatli wounds to cure; we fall, we rise, we reign;
Spring from our fetters; fasten in the skies,
Where blooming Eden withers mm our sight.
Death gives us more than was in Eden lost.


Young.


IV. It intensified the power of the prophet’s influence. A man like Elijah
could never be forgotten; but the miraculous and mysterious character of his
exit tends to keep alive more vividly his reputation and memory. He was
grievously missed, and his absence sincerely mourned (verse 12); but he lived
on in the spirit and power of Elisha ; and he lives to-day in the spirit of every
bold and faithful champion of the truth. ‘‘ Where is the court of Samaria now ?
Passed away and perished like the smoke of itsown idolatry. It is Elijah alone
who lives in deathless and fadeless renown. We pass by Herod, and remember
John Oe We pass by Felix, and remember the apostle Paul. We

8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. omar. Ti,








pass by Charles V., and remember Martin Luther. We pass by Ahab and
Jezebel, and remember only Exwau.”


Lussons:—1. Extraordinary times eall forth extraordinary men. 2. The
greatest men are made so by special Divine endowments. 8. The good influenos
of @ great spirit is immortal.


Tue Pazrore or Exwas amp Exrsna.


Azz partings bring with them a measure of sadness. Life is short, and
so the same parting can, at most, be only repeated a certain number of times;
life is uncertain, and so each parting carries with it the possibility that it may
be the last one. And if this is so with regard to the everyday partings of life—to
the good-bye said to the child as he leaves the hall for school, or the cottage for
service, to the farewell kiss to a daughter on her wedding morning, or to a
dear sun about to go abroad for some indefinite period, how is it with uz
when the parting is known on both sides to be (for this world) a final one?
How is it with us when a father about to commend his spirit to the hands
that gave it, calls his children about him to receive his latest blessing?
When some loving and beloved wife commits the little dear ones that she is
forced to leave behind her to the care of her agonized husband? When some
bishop like Ambrose, some pastor like Bede, is solemnly resigning to the
Great Shepherd the flock over which he has long and faithfully watched? Let
those answer who have passed through one such scene. These are the partings
which none can witness and remain unmoved; which no man can partake in,
and continue altogether the same man that he was before.


I. Now it is such a parting that this chapter sets before us. The elder of
those two men who are going down together to Jordan has been all in all to
the younger for many years. From the time when Elijah silently cast his
mantle on Elisha, from the day when Elisha ‘‘kissed his father and his
mother,” and left his home to follow the stern prophet of the deserts—
he has watched, he has listened, he has reverenced, and now he is watching,
he is listening to him for the last time. And not on Elisha orly, though
on him most heavily, falls the awe of the coming parting. There are
many young men, sons of the prophets, in training for the ministry of the
Word, to whom it has been revealed that Elijah has now paid them his latest
visit—has taught, warned, and advised them for the last time. Knowest thou
not that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head to-day? were
words addressed to Elisha at each school of the prophets—whether that of
Gilgal, of Bethel, or of Jericho, to which he had accompanied Elijah on this
his last visitation. And, from the last-named and nearest of these three places,
fifty young men had followed the prophet and his friend, till, left behind at
their miraculous passage of the Jordan, they stood on its farther bank only able te
send wistful glances after them, in spite of their earnest longing to catch at least
a glimpse of the glory of Elijah’s departure. These, in their measure, doubtless
felt the pain of parting, and kept treasuring in their hearts the words addressed
to them by their great teacher. But, if such the sorrow, such the love of
Elijah’s scholars, what must have been the love, and what the sorrow, of his
chosen companion and most intimate friend? We see something of them in
Elisha’s firm resolve to stay with his master till all was over. We hear some-
thing of them in his reply, which he cannot vary, let it sound, if it will, like a
refusal of his loved teacher’s last request. Thrice Elijah says to him, ‘ Tarry
here, I pray thee, for the Lord hath sent me unto Bethel, or to Jericho, or to


Jordan;’’ thrice Elisha answers, with a firmness that admits of no ead
3


~&


GHAP. I. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
ee a SS ET ee


‘As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee.” ‘The
apparent disobedience is forgiven, nay, approved of; for it springs from the
fountain of deep, long-tried holy affection. It turns Elijah’s mind from the
thought of the glorious future, from the backward glance on the eventful past,
to think how it is to fare with his dear Elisha in this wicked world in which
he must leave him for awhile.


II. We can picture the prophet to ourselves walking on absorbed in
solemn memories and in joyful expectation. Fearful dangers, wonderful
deliverances, fight after fight with crowned and sceptred wickedness. Ahab
rebuked, Jezebel denounced, Kishon reddened with the blood of Baal’s
prophets, perils in the city, hidings in the wilderness—all these things lie
behind him now. He is going to meet that God that sent the ravens tofeed him
by the lonely brook, and His angel to refresh him under the juniper tree of the
desert ; the God who granted his fervent prayer on Carmel, whose still small
voice spoke to him at the entrance of the cave Horeb. And yet neither crowd-
ing recollections, nor eager thoughts of the coming glory and gladness, make him
unmindful of his friend at his side. He turns to him with the words, ‘‘ Ask
what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee,’”’ and receives
in answer the wise petition for a first-born’s portion of his spirit. The pro-
phet’s last occupation on earth is to prefer this request, and to obtain an answer
to it favourable—yet suspended on a condition which he thus reports to
Elisha: ‘‘Thou hast asked a hard thing; nevertheless, if thou see me when
I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not beso.”
Now to see this great sight must, in any case, have been the young man’s
strongest wish. With so much depending upon it, how earnestly must he
have prayed for strength to behold it! His prayer was granted; when
the chariot of fire and horses of fire came down, and the angels of God carried
Elijah with a whirlwind’s speed up towards heaven, Elisha was enabled to
gaze steadfastly at the awful light that wrapped his master’s form: hidden
in which it retreated from his view. Then, like a last message, Elijah’s mantle
comes floating down to his feet. Elisha lifts it up, and knows by this token that
he has been appointed the successor to the great prophet. He has just rent his
own clothes with the plaintive cry of a bereaved heart, ‘‘ My father, my father,
the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof ;” but now something tells
him that the God who commissioned and upheld Elijah is giving a like charge to
him, and will assuredly, therefore, not fail to give him a like support. He
hushes the voice of lamentation, and with the mantle in his hand he goes back to
Jordan. An hour before, Elijah had with that same mantle smitten the waters of
the river, and they had parted, ‘‘so that they two went over on dry ground.”
Now it is Elisha who stands alone by the river’s brink, crying, “‘ Where is the
Lord God of Elijah ?”’ as he smites the waters as his master hasdone. And he
finds Him close at hand. The waters part for Elisha, as they parted for
Elijah. The young prophets, owning that the spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha,
hasten to do him homage. And from that day begins Elisha’s long and noble
career of wise and loving teaching, confirmed by sign and by wonder.


III. How often, since then, have two gone down to Jordan, and one returned
alone, but filled with the spirit and power of theother! An Augustine receives
a Monica’s last words, and the holy mother seems to live on in her holy son.
A Timothy stands by a St. Paul in his condemned cell at Rome, and returns to
Ephesus to earn from his Lord the praise—‘‘ For my name’s sake thou hast
laboured, and hast not fainted!’ A Polycarp listens to the aged St. John’s
short sermon on love, and goes forth to “be faithful unto death.’? How often
toa mind overwhelmed—not more by a sense of personal bereavement than by
that of irreparable loss to the Church at large—has come the intimation :

80


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. GaP, ia,


ee





“cYou are to fill this vacant place: it may be with weaker powers, yet to the
best of your ability you are to stand where that standard-bearer stood before !”’
And with the call there comes the strength to obey it. Elijah’s mantle, though
grasped by a feeble hand, can smite the waters asunder still, if its holder only
call faithfully on his master’s God.


TY. But no Christian can stop short at this reflection, without going on to
another: can look at one of the plainest foreshadowings of Christ in the Old
Testament, and not have the apostles’ feelings, as they witnessed their Lord’s
ascension, vividly brought before him. For, as it was with Elisha beside the
Jordan, so (only in more abundant measure) must it have been with them on
Olivet. Each of them had been called to follow Him, as Elisha had been by
Elijah: one of them, as Elisha did, had shown his joy at the summons by a
feast. To each of them, doubtless, it would have been a grief of griefs not to
have been allowed to follow Christ in His last walk on earth, past the Geth-
semane of His agony to the mount of His ascension. But we do not find that
their great Master tried their affections, as Elisha’s did his, by a request to
remain behind. On His way to resume that glory which was His from eternity,
our Lord’s mind could not be filled with the awe caused by the comin
new and strange thing, which made even the undaunted Elijah shrink from all
human observation. Nor could the Son of God doubt, as Elijah did, His own
power to bestow the firstborn’s portion—the fulness of His Holy Spirit—on each
of His beloved apostles. His word to them was not ‘‘ Ye have asked a hard
thing,” but ‘‘ Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you.” So when,
not by ‘‘ chariots of fire and horses of fire,’’ out by the might of His own Divine
nature, Christ, with His hands yet raised to bless, goes up, and is lost to the
apostles’ sight amid the clouds of heaven, there is no rending of their garments ;
no crying, as with an exceeding bitter cry, for a vanished defence, for a suddenly-
withdrawn support: they have heard and believed these great words, “I will
not leave you comfortiless ; lo! I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world!” And so they worship their ascended Lord, and return with great joy te
obey His commands at Jerusalem.


Y. And surely this grand story supplies an antidote to the bitterness of every
parting. The man who loves Christ, his friend in Christ, his enemy for Christ's
sake, is alone safeand happy. For he alone loses not one dear to him, to whom
all are dear in Him, who cannot be lost. And who is this, but Thou, O our
God! Thee none loses, but he who leaves Thee. Whoever, then, may be taken
from our sight, Christ still remains with us. Only let us keep close to His foot-
steps, cling to His Cross; see Him strike the waves with His sacred body, as
He, by dying, overcomes death; behold those dark waters parted by His resur-
rection ; see, by faith, His ascended glory, and daily seek and obtain by prayer
our own double portion of His Spirit. So, grasping our Master’s mantle,
His word and His sacraments, shall we find the waters of sin and sorrow
divide before them, or rather before His might who will come with them; till
at the last we stand beside the black river of death, yet fear no evil, for Christ is
with us still: and that torrent, too, parts asunder, and lets us safe through to
the other side.—Day of Rest for 1879.


Tuz Nosizsr Legacy oy tae Dzrarrep Goop (verse 9).


Tux time had come for Elijah to leave the world in which he had been God’s
faithful witness. The prophet’s stormy life is to receive appropriate termination
in the whirlwind, whose close shall be in the calm of heaven. He is to be dis-
tinguished by such honour aa have no othere of God’s saints. ee humax


»


GHAP. Ei. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
=


greatness sinks and ceases, his shall be most manifest. And while Ahab, at the
end of his days, falls from his chariot into the dust, and dies in dishonour,
Elijah is caught up behind the flaming coursers, and in more than royal grandeur
passes up to heaven. His own personal work upon the earth is over. All that
God gave him to do, when he came to the prophet in his despair, and spake to
him in the still, small voice, has heen accomplished. There is no regret at
departure, no desire to remain, no task undone that yet claims his presence.
But in the absence of any personal need, he turns to his companion, the successor
to his prophetic office. And ere yet the sound of the whirlwind is heard, or the
sky is lit by the chariot of fire, he kindly requires of Elisha, ‘‘ Ask what I shall
do for thee, before I be taken away from thee.”


The inquiry suggest to us what we are often slow to recognise: The greatest
necd, the most solemn position, ts not with those who are leaving the world, but with
those who remain. Not Elijah, but Elisha, requires strength and help. It was
a perception of Elisha’s greater need that prompted theinvitation. For himself
rest is at hand ; the periis of his life are past; his enemies can no longer harm
him. But the younger man, who is about to take the prophet’s place in Israel,
with all its responsibilities and trials—his was the need. And this is often true
where no chariot of fire waits to convey the departing, but where they die as
other men. Itis hard to die, say some. It may be; but it is a great deal
harder to live. And when in peace and hope the good man is sinking down
into rest, while our sympathy and affection go out to him, yet our most serious
and solemn thought should be for ourselves; for those into whose lives, because
of his departure, desolation and sorrow must come, and who have still to face the
responsibilities, and duties, and temptations of life. Not the Elijah, for whom
heaven’s chariot is waiting, but the Elisha, who has still to walk the world,
and before whom lie years of toil and trial, must be chiefly considered. It
suggests also that— Our power to bless others ts limited by our lives. ‘* Before I
be taken away from thee.”’ Elijah cannot pledge himself to anything after his
departure. While he yet lingers upon the earth he may help and bless his suc-
cessor. We can only blessthe world while we are present in it. It is true that
many have conferred good and blessing upon others long after themselves had
passed from the sight of men. But it is equally true that the good has come
out of what they were, and what they did, while yet present with men. We
have entered into a rich heritage of blessing from the departed good; we receive
manifold benefits from them to-day; but it is not, so far as we know, from any
direct relation in which they stand to us now—not from any unseen yet mighty
influence they consciously and directly exert over us now—not from any efforts
on our behalf made by them now, but simply from their characters and lives,
their thou, hts and words, before they were taken away from us. Looking
mainly at the younger prophet’s request, it seems to present to us—Zhe noblest
legacy of the departed good; and, the measure in which we should seek to possess tt.
‘Let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me.” This was the wisest request
Elisha could have presented. There were other things which he might have
desired, and which it would seem natural in him to have requested. He might,
for instance, have entreated Elijah to delay his departure, and to remain a little
longer on the earth as his leader and friend. Or, failing this, he might have
supplicated in passionate devotion that he, too, should accompany his father
prophet through the skies. Or, dazzled by the glory of his master’s departure,
he might have asked that for himself also a ehariot of fire might be dispatched
when his work on earth was done. But, passing by all the common instincts
and feelings of men, he earnestly beseeches: “ Let a double portion of thy
spirit be upon me.”

What are we to understand by “thy spirit?” Did Elisha refer to any
se tay endowment by which the prophet was of old distinguished, and

82


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS, : CHaP, Ti.





ee


by which he was fitted for the duties of the prophetio office? He surely could

not refer to the Holy Spirit in the sense in which we understand the blessing.

We think he must mean that which was the dominating principle of Elijah’s

Saar master passion of his soul—his fidelity to God, and zeal for his
ame.


I. This spirit of the great and good is their noble legacy—our richest
inheritance. 1. The spirit of Elijah was the secret of Llisha’s power. It was
this which had made him so mighty in Israel, which had enabled him to achieve
the transformation on Carmel, and rendered him stronger in his single self than
the hundreds of Baal’s priests and prophets. There was much that was strange
and marvellous about him; much in his garb and mien and speech that im-
pressed and overawed men. But hisreal grandeur was internal, not external;
and his power lay not in natural gifts or even supernatural endowment, but in
his sublime faithfulness to God—his burning jealousy for God’s honour and
name. So has it been with the great and good of past ages, and with those who
have been near and next to ourselves. We are prone to place a man’s power in
natural gifts and external advantages. But all experience proves that, in the
work of the Lord, a simple, earnest, soul-possessing faithfulness is superior to all
beside. He who has it, whatever else he may have or have not, is a true
Elijah, who shall bring down the sacred fire, not upon a slaughtered bullock,
but upon the soulsof men. 2. The spirit of the great and good alone ean compen-
sate for their departure and loss. Elisha felt that Elijah must go. But as he
looked upon the faithful prophet of God, he says, in effect, ‘‘ If I cannot have
thy presence, let me have thy spirit. I can bear the loss of the one, if I gain
the other.” So it is with the Church to-day. God is constantly removing his
servants, lifting them from our sight into that sphere whither Elijah was taken
in his chariot of fire. What is to compensate us for their departure? Not
their generous gifts, but their earnest spirit. We can do without them, and
still carry on successfully the work of the Lord, only as we catch and manifest
their spirit. Their loss to the Church is only made up as their spirit is trans-
mitted, received, and manifested in those who remain. 3. The spirit of the
great and good 18 alone unchanging n tts character, and meets the requirements of
every age. Hlisha’s work in Israel was very different to Elijah’s. A new
generation was springing up, and many changes had taken place. The pro-
phet’s person and office were very differently regarded. The method and
form of Elijah’s ministry would have been out of place, and a slavish adherence
to it would have been hurtful. But the same spirit was as needful as ever, and
was still adapted to the altered conditions. This is true of all the ages of the
world and of all the ages of Christianity. Vast and sweeping changes transpire :
the face of society, the attitude and disposition of the world to the Church, are
greatly altered in the course of years. We do not stand where our fathers
stood. We are not required to think, to speak, to act, in all matters as they
thought, and spake, and acted. But their spirit, their stern uncompromising
hatred to evil, their unflinching fidelity to God, is required by us, and alone
can fit us to serve our generation as they served theirs. 4. Zo catch and
inherit the spirit of the good and great ts to attain the deepest and truest resemblance
to them. There were many respects in which the younger prophet could never
be like his predecessor. They were two different men, presenting in many
points a bold, clear contrast in each other. Some might have said to Elisha :
‘‘Go forth among the people in the rough garment they know so well,
imitate Elijah’s gestures and movements, speak in his tone and manner,
pursue his mode of life and labour, and men will say: ‘Lo, a second Elijah
has appeared amongst us.’” But Elisha judged more wisely. He sought no
outward resemblance such 2s would make him a feeble counterpart of the
other—such as would do violence to his own nature, weaken his eva powers,


~*~


OHAP. 1. HOMILUTIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a LETTS


and lessen his usefulness. His cry was: “Let me have Elijah’s spirit, te
work through my own powers and according to the modes God shall appoint
and teach.” We do not honour, nor do we really resemble, the great and
good by any servile imitation of them. We must study their lives, and charac-
ters, and works, not that we may conform ourselves in all things to them, but
that their spirit may animate us, and work with equal, or even greater power,
through our varied gifts. If this be not our object, we shall utterly fail. The
man who studies the works of the great painters simply that he may reproduce
their style, imitate their lines and colouring, will never attain a high position
in the world of art. He only will succeed who studies those works in order
to catch therefrom the inspiration, the enthusiasm, that glowed in the breasts
of those who transferred to the canvas the visions of beauty that were given to
them.


II. The measure in which we should seek to possess it. ‘‘Let a double
portion of thy spirit be upon me.” The request may, in this aspect of it,
appear somewhat strange. It would seem as though Elisha coveted something
higher and better than was to be found in Elijah himself. Yet it may have
been the utterance of a genuine humility. It may mean: ‘‘My nature is so
weak and poor compared with my master’s, that I need a larger measure of
his spirit, in order to overcome my weakness and deficiency.” But, in any
sense, the torm of the petition is justifiable, and should serve as an example to
us. 1. Hach succeeding age brings with tt largely increased responssbilities. We
have greater means of knowledge, larger opportunities of usefulness, than men
had before us. Our temptations, if not so gross and palpable, are yet more
refined, and subtle, and ensnaring. The difficulties in the way of leading a
thoroughly earnest Christian life, and of fulfilling its duties, are greater now
than they ever were. The tremendous responsibilities of the age in which we
five should prompta prayer of this kind. 2. Christian character and useful-
ness should partake of the great law of progress everywhere observable. There is
not a ‘lepartment of human thought and human life but is affected by it. And
we should seek that our piety should be of a higher type, more complete, and
free from the defects that have been manifested in others. It isin harmony
with all that we see elsewhere that we should present for ourselves this prayer.
3. Such a petition in relation to the great and good is the echo of their own thoughts
and wishes concerning us. The greater and better men have been, the more
conscious have they been of their own infirmities and imperfections, and the
more anxious that others should be free from them. It has been their earnest
and continued prayer that those who should come after them should be greater
and more useful than themselves. 4. This petition is based upon the great prin-
ciple that absolute perfection 18 not to be found in any simply human example. We
are not to set up human standards for ourselves, or limit ourselves by the
attainments of others. We must learn to rise above the highest, to look through
and beyond the noblest, of God’s servants. Our limit is not fixed for us in any
like ourselves. We are called ‘‘to the measure of the stature of the fulness of
Christ.” — W. Perkins.


GERM NOTES UN THE VERSES.


Verses 1-15. Heavenward. It is
elear that a great day is come. The
young men in the schools of the pro-
phets at Gilgal, at Bethel, and at
Jericho, are in unusual agitation.
Elijah visits them all in succession.

884


His manner is that day even more
than commonly solemn, and his coun:
tenance and converse more heaven-
ward; and all his demeanour seems to
say, ‘* Ye shall see my face no more.”
They fear to question their great


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP, tL.


SS SS eS ne


master; but they venture to whisper
to Elisha the inquiry, if he knows
that his master and theirs was that day
to be taken away? They seemed to
want his confirmation of a fact of
which they had received a Divine
intimation, but feared to misapprehend.
His answer was—‘‘ Yea, I know it.
Hold ye your peace.” Being aware of
this, Elisha resolves not to quit his
master that day, notwithstanding
Elijah plainly declares a wish to pro-
ceed alone. They came to the Jordan,
for even an Elijah must cross the
Jordan before he passes from the world,
though it be not by the gates of death.
But, lo, a wonder !—the prophet takes
his mantle, and smites therewith the
stream, which then divides to let the
friends pass. Here, again, was faith;
but Elijah knew that seas, rivers, and
mountains are no obstruction to him
who, with steadfast feet, walks in the
path of duty. It was because he was
in that path, and because he knew
that what he asked was in accordance
with God’s will, that his faith was met
by miracles, which, apart from these
conditions, it had been presumption in
him todemand. Faith must have the
word or promise of God on which to
rest. It is in this we discern the
difference between the sublime and
effectual faith of the devout Elijah,
and the insane pretensions of such
men as William Hackett (afterwards
hanged), who, in the reign of Eliza-
beth, had the hardihood to declare,
that if all England prayed for rain, and
he himself prayed against, there would
be dry weather. ‘‘Thou, Lord,” he
said, ‘‘ hast the power, andI have tha
faith—therefore it shall be done!”

It was when they had passed the
Jordan that the departing prophet
asked his faithful disciple whut last
favour he desired of him. This was
a trying question, which few would be
able promptly to answer with entire
satisfaction to thcir after-thoughts,
But Elisha knew that of spiritual
blessings too much could not be asked.
He therefore said, ‘‘ Let double por-
tion of thy spirit be upon me.” His
master confessed that this was a hard
thing; but that it would be granted

6@,


if he took care to be present at the
moment of separation. But what was
that double portion of Elijah’s spirit
which his disciple desired? One
would think that it expressed the pos-
session of such qualities as should make
him twice as great a prophet as his
master. But it was not so; for al-
though Elisha became a great prophet,
and wrought miracles as great as those
of Elijah, and in greater number, no
one feels that he was greater as a pro-
phet or as a manthan his master, or
so great. His meaning is explained
by the fact that the heir was entitled
to adouble portion of hisfather’s goods;
hence, in asking for the double portion
of his master’s spirit, Elisha meant to
claim the heirship or succession to Eli-
jah in his place as prophet in Israel.
He had reason to suppose that it was
meant for him; but he wished to be
assured of this by some token which
should be satisfactory to himself and
others. Asthey went on, conversing
of high things, suddenly a whirlwind
reft Elijah from his companion, and
he was borne aloft like an ex-
halation, in a chariot with horses
of fire, or glowing like fire, to heaven,
followed by the cry of the forsaken
disciple, as he rent his clothes—‘‘ My
father, my father! the chariot of
Israel and the horsemen thereof!”
Meaning, as is generally understood,
that he regarded Israel as bereft of ita
strength, its chariot, and its horse-
men, by the departure of this great
prophet. He failed not, however, to
take up the precious mantle which
fell from Elijah as he rose; and he
felt, in the beating of his own heart,
the assurance that his prayer had
been granted. And he knew it
still more when he reached and smote
the waters with the mantle. At
first, it seems, there was no response ;
but when he repeated the stroke
with the words—‘‘ Where is the
Lord God of Elijah?” the waters
separated, and he passed over. The
sons of the prophets noted this on
their distant watch, and recognized
by this sign their new master, on
whom rested the spirit of Elijah.
This isa strange transaction, and we
385


CHAP. i,





cannot hope as yet to understand it
fully. It seems to us, however, that
it is but an isolated anticipation of
that which shall happen collectively
to the righteous that are alive on the
earth at our Lord’s second coming.
(1 Thess. iv. 16, 17). And, ‘in that
sudden strange transition,” the body
will undergo a change, divesting it of
its earthly essence, and bringing it into
conformity with the glorified bodies
of the saints raised from the dead.

Then what hinders that this rap-
ture of the living, and change in the
act of rapture—change, because the
flesh and blood cannot inherit the
kingdom of God, which is to take
place on so large a scale on that
great day—should be exemplified in
one or two instances before—in this
instance of Elijah, and in the earlier
instance of Enoch?

Under this view, there is no more
any objection to the departed Elijah
having his place in heaven, seeing
that his body must have undergone
all that change which was needful to
fit it for abiding in that place where
nothing corruptible can exist. Not
disceraing this, the old schoolmen
were of opinion that Elijah was taken
to some place—doubtless a pleasant
place—prepared of old, as they sup-
posed, for those pious spirits which
awaited the coming of the Messiah
who should open paradise for them.
Others have staggered at the text
(John iii. 16), understanding it
to allege that mone ascended to
heaven before Christ. Hence they
imagine that Elijah was taken to
‘‘Abraham’s bosom,” which they
conceive to be an intermediate state
in the air, granting, however, that his
garments were burned in the fire,
and his body changed and made im-
mortal. But is that really a stagger-
ing text? We think not. It is
not usually supposed to refer to the
Ascension at all; but allowing it to
have that reference, it could only
mean that none of the dead should
ascend to heaven before Christ, seeing
that He was the first-fruits of them
that slept—that is, that died. But
Elijah did not die,

386


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Elijah is supposed by the Jews to
be frequently employed in missions to
mankind, and as in some sense ubi-
quitous, being present in many places
at one time. He is visible only to
those deeply versed in the Cabbala,
and is described as a venerable old
man with a long beard. He is sup-
posed to be alway present at circum-
cisions, and there is a chair kept
vacant for him. Those who are the
special objects of his notice are highly
favoured.— Kiitto.


Verses 1-15. As in patriarchal
times Enoch walked with God, and
was translated to heaven without
tasting death (Gen. v. 24; Heb. xi. 5),
so under the Mosaic dispensation we
have this record of Elijah, whose whole
life was a monumental wonder of
Divine intercourse and power, and
whose removal from the world without
tasting death surpassed in sublimity
and grandeur the translation of the
patriarchal saint. To study and
appreciate the closing scenes in the
history of this great man is to tread
on holy ground. ‘The ascension of
Elijah has ever been regarded as
typical of the ascension of our Lord;
and there are points of resemblance, as
well as noticeable contrasts. Elijah,
says Kiel, ascended in the fiery tem-
pest, the symbol of the judicial right-
eousness of God. And appropriately ;
because, as a servant of the Lord, as
minister of the law, he preached with
fiery zeal to his apostate generation
the fire of the anger of Divine right-
eousness. Christ ascended calmly and
silently before the eyes of all His
disciples, and a cloud received Him
out of their sight. He ascended as
the Son, to whom all power in heaven
and earth was given. He was trans-
figured by His resurrection and ascen-
sion into the imperishable Divine
nature, and returned, by virtue of His
Eternal Godhead, to the Father.
Since Elijah’s ascension took place near
where Moses died and was buried
(Deut. xxxiv. 5), and since both these
holy prophets met with Jesus on the
Mount of Transfiguration. it is natural
for us to compare them in the manner


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





of their leaving the world. Moses
died on account of his sin at Kadesh
(Deut. xxxii. 50, 51), and, though he
was lawgiver, he passed from his
earthly life by the way of the law,
which worketh death as the wages of
sin. But Elijah, as typical forerunner
of Christ, and who, appearing again
in spirit and power in the person of
John the Baptist, prepares His way by
turning the hearts of the fathers to the
children (Mal. iv. 5, 6; Matt. xi. 14),
ascends to heaven without tasting
death, and thus further points to Him
who, by His resurrection and ascen-
sion, destroys the power of sin and of
death, and abolishes the curse of the
law from every one that believeth —
Whedon.


Verses 1-10. The approaching
dissolution of the good. I. While
viewed with solemnity, creates no
alarm. II. Does not interfere with
the active duties of the hour. III.
Gives a special significance to every-
thing done for the Church of God.
IV. Makes one anxious to catch and
retain for the world’s good the
ennobling influence of their divinely-
endowed lives.


Verses 1-6. True friendship. I.
Often exists between persons of opposite
characteristics. The rough, intrepid,
fierce Elijah stood in marked contrast
with the calm, gentle, persuasive
Elisha. IL. Js founded on mutual
admuration and affection. Contrasts of
character react on loving friends.
Elijah’s ruggedness would be some-
what smoothed by the tranquillising
spirit of Elisha; and the timid Elisha
would feel more courageous under the
infiuence of the fearless Elijah. III.
Is the more tenacious in the near prospect
of separation. *‘I will not leave thee”
(verses 2, 4, 6). It was known to
Elisha and to the sons of the prophets
that Elijah would be speedily taken
from their midst (verses 3, 5),
Notwithstanding Elijah’s craving to
be alone—a craving that may often
be noticed in the dying as the final
hour draws near—Hlisha persisted in
his attendance, eager to prolong to the
latest hour the hallowing fellowship,





CHAP. I





and perhaps expecting further revela-
tions as to his own future conduct.


Verses 2-6. The faithful love of
Elisha to his master and lord, 1.
The ground and source of tt. It does
not rest upon a natural, human basia,
but upon a divine and holy one. The
bond which bound him to Elijah was
living faith in the living God, and life
and labour in and with Him. He
honoured and loved his father after
the flesh (1 Kings xxx. 20), but he
left him ; with his spiritual father he
wished to remain unto the end. 2.
Lis test and successful endurance. Thrice
did Elijah beg him to remain behind,
but he would not be persuaded.
Whithersoever the path may lead, and
whatscever may come to pass, I will
not leave thee until God shall take
thee from me. His love was not a mere
passing, bubbling enthusiasm, but it
was strongas death. That love alone
is true which endures trial, and will
not be turned aside by any prayers,
for which no hindrance is too great, no
journey too long and too hard. 38.
tis victory and reward. Elijah opens
for him the path through the Jordan
after his fidelity has stood the test.
He is allowed to see what no human
being besides him might see. He at-
tains to that which he has prayed for ;
with Elijah’s mantle he inherits also
Elijah’s spirit ; he is a witness of his
master’s glory. That fidelity conquers
and is crowned which holds fast to
God and Jesus Christ.—Lange.


Verse 8. No over-hasty gossip or
sensation ought to be made about acts
of God, especially about those which
are still future; they may not be
treated as objects of curious or worldly
questionings. The acts of God are
meant to be awaited in respectful
silence. Those who are capable of
seeing the majesty of the living God
kept silent of themselves; upon others
they have to enjoin silence.—Vslmar.


Verses 6-8. They descended the
long, weary slopes that led from
Jericho to the Jordan. On the upper
terraces, or on the mountain heights
behind the city, stood afar off, in awe,
fifty of the young disciples ; es they

28


»


CHAP. Rf.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





two stood by Jordan. They stood by
its rushing stream; but they are not
to be detained even by this barrier.
“The aged Gileadite cannot rest till he
agai sets foot on his own side of the
river.”’ He ungirds the rough mantle
from around his shaggy frame; he
rolled it together as if into a wonder-
working staff; he smote the turbid
river as if it were a living enemy, and
the waters divided hither and thither,
and they two went over on dry ground.
And now they were on that farther
shore, under the shade of those hills of
Pisgah and of Gilead, where, in former
times, a prophet greater even than
Elijah had been withdrawn from the
eyes of his people, whence, in his
early youth, Elijah had himself de-
seended on his august career. He
knew that his hour was come, he knew
that he had at last returned home, and
that he had to go whither Moses had
gone before him .—Stanley.


Verse 7. Miracles are not purposed
to silence and obscurity. God will
not work wonders without witnesses,
since He doth them on purpose to win
glory to His name. Hisend were frus-
trate without their notice. Even so,
O Saviour! when thou hadst raised
thyself from the dead, thou wouldst
be seen of more than five hundred
brethren at once; and when thou
wouldst raise up thy glorified body
from earth into heaven, thou didst not
ascend from some close valley, but from
the Mount of Olives; notin the night,
not alone, but in the clear day, in the
view of many eyes, which were so fixed
upon that point of thine heaven that
they could scarce be removed by the
check of angels!— Bp. Hall.


Verse 8. On the other side of Jordan
is the place of the glorification of the
prophet. Between him and this spot
there flows yeta broad and deep stream.
Through this he must go. There
is no bridge, no ferryman; but he does
not despair. He knows, He who has
called me to the other side will help
me to the other side. Such incidents
occur to many on the pilgrimage of life.
No stream is so deep, and no flood of
calam nosey dangerous, that God could


not lead through it unharmed. The
prophet-mantle, which to-day, as ever,
when it falls upon any Jordan, divide,
its waves, is faith—strong, glad, living,
rock-firm faith.— Wirth.

— Jordan must be crossed by
Elijah on his way to heaven. There
must be a meet parallel betwixt the
two great prophets that shall meet
Christ upon Tabor—Moses and Elias.
Both received visions on Horeb; te
both God appeared there in fire and
other forms of terror; both were sent
tokings one to Pharaoh, the other to
Ahab; both prepared miraculous
tables—the one of quails and manna
in the desert, the other of meal and
oil in Sarepta; both opened heaven—
the one for that nourishing dew, the
other for those refreshing showers;
both revenged idolatries with the
sword—the one upon the worshippers
of the golden calf, the other upon the
four hundred Baalites ; both quenched
the drought of Israel—the one out of
the rock, the other out of the cloud;
both divided the waters—the one of
the Red Sea, the other of Jordan;
both of them are forewarned of their
departure; both must be fetched
away beyond Jordan; the body of
Elijah is translated, the body of
Moses is hid; what Moses doth by
his rod, Elijah doth by his mantle;
with that he smites the waters, and
they, as fearing the Divine power
which wrought with the prophet, run
away from him and stand on heaps,
leaving their dry channel for the pas-
sage of those awful feet.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 9. The reply of Elisha has
been much misunderstood. As early
as the days of Theodoret, these words
were interpreted: ‘‘ Let a gift of the
spirit of prophecy twice as large as
thine own rest upon me.” Luther
renders them: ‘Let thy spirit be
double in me;’? and Krummacher,
adopting the same view, justifies it
by saying, ‘‘The spirit of Elisha as
an evangelical spirit was twice as
great as the spirit of Elijah as a legal
spirit.” In ali humility, we venture
to differ from this interpretation, con«
sidering it entirely opposed to Elisha’s


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





humility, entirely out of the power of
Elijah to grant, and contradicted by
the history of Elisha himself, in whom
we have no proof of such superlative
endowment. Literally translated the
language of Elisha would run, “ Let
there be a mouthful or ration of two
with thy spirit to me’’—the reference
being totheinheritance of the first-born
son among the Jews, who, by reason of
his primogeniture, was to have a double
portion, or the ration of two, among
his brethren, which peculiar phrase-
ology was only a Hebrew synonym
or figurative expression for being
served heir and successor to the father
of the dwelling. The request of
Elisha, then, was simply this, that
Elijah, the great father or head of
the prophetic school, would in leaving
the world complete the symbolic act
begun in the field of Abel-meholah,
by constituting him the inheritor of
his position in the land of Israel, with
authority to continue the work which
he had begun.— Howat.


Verses 11,12. The Divine esti-
mate of Elijah and his work. Seen—
I. In the glorious method of his
translation to heayen—a unique close
to a unique career. II. In the
testimony Elisha was enabled to bear
to an idolatrous nation as to Elijah’s
miraculous exit—the man whose
messages had been despised was
honoured by a removal unlike that of
ordinary men. III. In the pro-
visior made for carrying on Elijah’s
work by a competent successor.


Verse 11. ‘And it came to pass
as they still went on and talked.”
A memorable conversation. 1. If
we consider the characters of the
talkers. 2. The probable themes dis-
cussed. 3. The abrupt and extra-
ordinary manner of its termination.

— This translation of Elijah to
heaven, and the appearance of the
chariot and horses of fire, like other
similar events of Old Testament Scrip-
ture, teach the existence of another
world beyond us, unseen by the
natural eye; a realm whose inhabi-


tants and hierarchies and orders of


CHAP.





ministries are numerous beyond all
computation. But Elijah entered this
heaven without tasting death, or at
least by a marvellous transformation.
The human body, with its earthly
modes of life, must be unsuited to
the heavenly state, and hence we
suppose, in harmony with the
Scripture, that at the moment of his
separation from Elisha, Elijah was
changed, as in the twinkling of an
eye, and ascended with a renewed
spiritualized body, made compatible
with the nature of heavenly exist-
ence. Thus has he become a repre-
sentative of those saints who shall not
die, but be changed at the coming
of the Lord (1 Cor. xv. 51, 52;
1 Thess. iv. 17). It is contrary to
the evident import of this account
of Elijah’s departure, and contrary to
the teachings of other Scriptures, to
assume that his body must have
become suddenly decomposed and dis-
solved into dust, or that it was
thrown down again, as some of the
sons of the prophets thought, on some
mountain, or in some valley, a lifeless
corpse (verse 16). Elijah truly as-
cended bodily to heaven, but his body
underwent such a _ spiritualizing
change as fitted it for the heavenly
life; hence our doctrine that man is
all immortal, body as well as spirit.—
Whedon.


Verse 12. In this inextricable
interweaving of fact and figure, it is
enough to mark how fitly such an
act closes such a life. ‘‘ My father,
my father,’ Elisha cried, ‘‘ the
chariot of Israel and the horsemen
thereof.” So Elijah has stood a sure
defence to his country against all the
chariots and horsemen that were ever
pouring in upon them from the sur-
rounding nations. So henow seemed,
when he passed away, lost inthe flames
of the steeds and the car that swept
him from the earth, as in the fire of
his own unquenchable spirit—in the
fire that had thrice blazed around
him in his passage through his troubled
earthiy career. According to the
Jewish legends, he was at his birth
wrapped in swaddling ce ae fire,


%


CHAP. I.





and fed with flames. During the
whole of his course “he rose up as
a fire, and his word blazed as a
torch.” And as in its fiery force and
energy, so in its mystery, the end
corresponded to the beginning. He
had appeared in the history, we know
not whence, and now he is gone in
like manner. The ascension or
assumption of Elijah stands out, alone
in the Jewish history, as the highest
representation of the end ofa great
and good career; of death as seen
under its noblest aspect; as the com-
pletion and crown of the life which
had preceded it; as the mysterious
shrouding of the departed within the
invisible world. By a sudden stroke
of storm and whirlwind—or, as we may
almost literally say of the martyrs of
old, by chariots and horses of fire—
the servants of God pass away. We
know not where they rest; we may
search high and low, in the height of
the higkest peak of our speculations,
orin the depth of the darkest shadow
of the valley of death. Legend upon
legend may gather round them, as
upon Elijah; but the Sacred Record
itself is silent. One only mode or
place there is where we may think of
them, as of Elijah—in those who come
afterwards in their power and spirit,
or in that One Presence which still
brings us near to them, inthe Mount
of Transfiguration, in communion with
the beloved of God.—Stanley.


Verses 13-15. The conscious
endowment of Divine power. 1.
Tested and verified (verses 138,14). 2.
Publicly recognized. ‘‘ And when the
sons of the prophets saw him, they said,
The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha.”
8. Commands the reverence of the good.
‘‘And they came to meet him, and
bowed themselves to the ground before
him.”


Verse 14. The Lord God of Elijah.
‘¢ Where is the Lord God of Elijah?”
1. This inquiry is suggested amid scenes
of temporal embarrassment. Next in
importance to the consecration of our
life, and the cultivation of ourintellect,
is the honourable conflict in which we

890


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ny


are engaved for the needed finance, the
current sustenance. Its importance
secured for it a distinct and prominent
place in the model prayer. He on
whose shoulders the responsibility of a
home rests has the highest sanction for
praying, as the morning dawns,
“Father God, feed me and mine;
give us this day our daily bread; con-
tinue to us our nightly shelter; keep
the fire aglow on our hearth, and
the bread sufficient, if not abundant, in
our cupboard. And when Satan has
suggested that the monetary obligation,
when due, would not be met, and the
bread, when needed, would not be found
in the store, then the cruise of oil and
the barrel of meal have yielded the re-
quired impetus. The mist has cleared
away, the gathering clouds have dis-
persed, as the question has ascended,
‘Where is the Lord God of Elijah ? ”

2. This inquiry has been suggested
when, disconcerted by current guiles, the
corruptions of society, you shrank from
a task which seemed to have the
absorbed attention and consecrated
energy of but afew. You were
lavish of health and life, in almost
laborious loneliness. And so circum-
stanced, you were tempted to suspend
further efforts; and, in comparative
solitude, bewail the apathy of the
Church, and the lapsed state of the
world. But you thought of the cave
near Horeb, which rung with the
recalling cry of Jehovah, ‘‘ What
doest thou here, Elijah?” And from
that date you have never indulged in
any ideas about leaving your official
duties, and passing to comfortable
quietude. Hiding in the caves has
been out of the question. You mean
now to toil on, until at the close of a
laborious life you may _ gratefully
exclaim, ‘‘I have finished the work
which thou gavest me to do.”

3. The inquiry ts suggested by the
controverstes upon which we are cast,
the disputes with the settlement of
which we may have something to do.
The nineteenth century has certainly
its Mount Carmel. Upon truths whick
we hold as sacred there is poured
such apparent and, in some instances,
rather acute oontemnt. Little ia


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





spared. Venerable names are tra-
duced. Hoary facts are changed into
airy fictions. A volume the most real
is now regarded as the most mythical.
Under these circumstances what is our
main, our supreme want? Our
secondary one is a body of Christian
scholars and scientists who shall be
quite equal to current discussions. Is
the development theory obtruded?
Then we want our Hugh Miller, who
shall show us that different links in
the development chain are wanting,
and that, therefore, the very rocks
thwart the whole theory. To meet
the sophistries of Hume we need the
logical acumen and elaborate learning
of Campbell, Chalmers, and Ward-
law. To meet the detractors, coarse
and scholarly, of our adorable Re-
deemer, weneed our Pye-Smith, with
his ‘‘ Testimony,” and our Hengsten-
berg, with his “Christology.” But
while this is our subordinate want,
we havea paramount, a supreme one,
which no logic, however conclusive,
and no scholarship, however extensive,
can supply. We want the influence
of the Holy Spirit—the power from on
high—the baptism of fire. The fire on
Mount Carmel settled the controversy,
and nothing else would have done it.
We may have everything else, but
without this we may inevitably fail.
Elijah reared the altar, he put the
wood in order, he adjusted the sacri-
fice; but it was the descending fire
which indicated the Divine honour,
which clothed and crowned the whole.
So we may build beautiful places of
worship; we may have an erudite
rainistry, and most ornate and en-
amouring music; but that which is
essential to the success of the whole is
the cloud of the Divine glory over the
mercy-seat,.

4. This inquiry 18 suggested when,
having done with life’s responsibilities
and controversies, we arrive at the
mystic river—the Jordan of death.
Elisha, having wrapped his mantle
around him, recalled those miraculous
interpositions which were associated
with the life of his prophetical prede-
cessor; then the waters, having been
smitten, “they parted hither and


CHAP, ft.


thither, and Elisha went over.” And
sre we to ford the river unescorted ?
Are we to die alone? Alone! ‘‘ Whero
is the Lord God of Elijah?” About
the dast hour, however, be not over
anxious. Its security is guaranteed.
Be most anxious about the current
one. As they speed on, gather up
the moments, as if they were grains of
gold. Be loyalto the last. Evade no
foe. Shrink from noencounter. You
are in the militant Church; let the
standard, therefore, be planted; let
the banner wave. The clash of arms
and the din of war will soon be hushed
—hushed forever. You will be more
than a conqueror through the blood of
the Lamb. Soon you will have
arrived at the gates of pearl. Soon
there will be thrown over your whole
life the accurate interpretations of
eternity. At eventide there shall
be light. May you have, during the
vicissitudes of your pilgrimage, guid-
ance which is unerring ; and in death,
underneath you, may there be the
everlasting arms—the everlasting arme
of ‘‘ the Lord God of Elijah.” —Homs-
letie Quarterly.


Verse 15. It was not the outside of
Elijah they were wont to stoop unto
with so much veneration ; it was his
spirit, which, since they now find in
another subject, they entertain with
equal reverence ; no envy, no emula-
tion, raiseth up their stomach against
Elijah’s servant; but, where they see
eminent graces, they are willingly
prostrate. Those that are truly
gracious do no less rejoice in the riches
of others’ gifts, than humbly under-
value their own. These men were
trained up in the schools of the pro-
phets—Elisha at the plough and cart;
yet now they stand not upon terms of
their worth, and his meanness, but
meekly fall down before him whom
God had honoured. It is not to be re-
garded who the man is, but whom
God would make him. The more un-
likely the means are, the more is the
glory ofthe workman. It isthe praise
of aholy ingenuity to magnify the
graces of God wherever it finds
them.— Bp. Hall.

39!


&


owaP. TT. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
ee EDEL ETT CT A CTE LITE


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 16-18.


Tee Mysrertousyrss oy THE Divive Actions.


I. A severe trial of faith. The sons of the prophets were slow to believe
that Elijah had so utterly vanished as to return no more. It is true that one
moment they saw him in company with Elisha; the next Elisha was alone, and
their great leader was nowhere to be seen. Still it might be only another of
the many sudden, abrupt disappearances which had marked Elijah’s errati¢
career. Besides, if the spirit had ascended to heaven, his body might have been
dropped on some mountain side, or into the depths of some valley; and this
should, if possible, be recovered, and reverently buried. Elisha’s account of the
great prophet’s exit only increased the mystery, and they wearied him with
speculations and suggestions. Faith must be prepared to take much on trust.
Where there is no mystery, there is no faith. ‘ Trials,” says F. W. Robertson,
“bring man face to face with God—God and he touch; and the flimsy veil of
bright cloud that hung between him and the sky is blown away; he feels that
he is standing outside the earth, with nothing between him and the Eternal
Infinite.”


II. Provokes diligent inquiry. The commonplaces of to-day were the
mysteries of yesterday. The phenomena of nature, which to our fore-fatherg
were occasions of superstitious dread, are to us familiar friends, and our most
valuable servants. Discoveries have been made by the diligent investigator
which would have remained unknown secrets, and are secrets still, to the indo. -
lent and indifferent. Mystery piques curiosity, and curiosity keeps alive
the investigating faculty. The more mystery there is surrounding a subject, the
more eager is the earnest student to svulve it.


III. Not always fathomed by the most laborious human endeavours, The
search of the fifty strong men among the mountains of Gilead was fruitless:
they found no trace of the missing Elijah, and they were compelled to accept
the testimony of Elisha without further question. Much has been revealed to
the diligent seeker after truth, there is much that is yet wrapped in mystery.
We cannot know everything about every truth. Revelation is necessarily
limited by two things: by the Divine will—there is nothing to impel the Divine
Being to reveal Himself beyond what He wiils to do—and by our human capa-
city. However effulgent the revelation on God’s part, its comprehension is
necessarily limited on our part. We soon come to the extreme boundary of the
known, and vainly we wave our hand in the darkness of the unknown. Much
as we may discover by persevering study, more yet remains undiscovered. The
pleasures of inquiry and discovery are endless. The investigation of all truth
is ennobling, but none more so than the contemplation of those redemptive
truths which, like the stars, their fittest emblems, fix the eye above in the very
act of vision; a countless procession of brightness and wonder, lights visible to
the humblest eye, yet fit to exercise the thoughts of angels: their full
grandeur to be approached only when we shall have passed the grave, and, not
or than sons of God, shall be free to enter into the mystery and magnificence
of heaven.


Lxssons:—1. The mystery of Divine truth is no sufficient reason for rejecting
st. 2. The truth essential to salvation is plainly revealed. 8. More mysteries are
solved by faith than by the moat daring unbelief.

39a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RINGB.


GHAP, ii,





GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 16-18. An obstinate incre-
dulity. I. Is dissatisfied with the
most reliable testimony. II. Con-
structs theories of its own (v. 16).
III. Prrsists in having ita own way,
notwithstanding repeated efforts to
persua‘le to the contrary (v. 17). IV.
Sufferr ignominious defeat (v. 18).

— How many, especially young and
inexperienced persons, will not be dis-
suaded from their opinions, views, and
doubts, and will not heed the words of
their teachers and parents, who have
the best intentions towards them, and
far more experience. They must
become wise by bitter experience, and
then bear to their shame, “ Did I not


Verse 18. Some men are best satis-
fied when they have wearied them-
selves in their own ways. Nothing
will teach them wit but disappoint-
ment. Their painful error leads them
to aright conceit of Elijah’s happier
transportation. Those that would
find Elijah, let them aspire to the
heavenly paradise. Let them follow
the high steps of his sincere faithful-
ness, strong patience, undaunted
courage, fervent zeal, and constant
obedience. Then God shall send the
fiery chariot of death tofetchthem up
to that heaven of heavens where they
shall triumph in everlasting joys.—
Bp. Halt.


say unto you, Go not?”


HOMILSTICS OF VERSES 19-23,
Tae Hearep Waters a Sympon or THR Errroacy or tHe Gospzt.


{t is a proof of the confidence Elisha has already won that the dignitaries of
the city came to consult him about a matter of great public concern; they
believed he could cure the malefic waters. How potent is the influence of a
good man! It is in times of distress and difficulty that his neighbours discover
his real value. The transactions related in this paragraph may be used to
symbolize the power of the Gospel to heal the poisoned waters of humanity.
Observe—


I. Humanity enjoys many privileges. ‘The situation is pleasant.” All
travellers agree in representing the site of Jericho as exceedingly beautiful;
its external surroundings were all that could be desired. So man’s position in
the world has its peculiar advantages. Scenes of beauty and of grandeur meet
his gaze in every direction. He is rich with the wealthy accumulations of
the historic past. He is surrounded by living examples of noble enterprise and
chivalry. He is on the current of an ever-advancing civilization. Opportu-
nities of usefulness open invitingly at every step, and there is everything to
eall out and sustain his best energies. Life on earth is a grand opportunity
which, wisely used, will be fruitful in everlasting good.


II. Humanity is infected with a dangerous and fatal malady. ‘‘ The
water is naught, and the ground barren.’”’ In the fairest prospect there is some
deformity; in the clearest and brightest crystal we may detect a flaw. So
the beautics of Jericho were shadowed by the sufferings and disappointment
of its inhabitants. The water was bad, and the land unfruitful. So is it
with man. The springs of his being are poisoned with sin. Every part of
his nature is tainted: ‘‘the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.”
The fatal malady infects every stream, disorders every project, blackens every
prospect, chills every aspiration, withers every hope. The soil of the heart
is barren, and every attempt to bring forth the fruit of righteousness is
abortive. aa


¥


Gnar. ii. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





II¥. The Gospel provides the power to heal humanity of its malady.
1. Jt és a Divine provision. ‘‘Thus saith the Lord, I have healed these
waters.” The healing power was not in Elisha, or in the cruse or the salt;
but in God. So the new cruse of the Gospel, and the salt of Christian
doctrine, would be ineffectual to heal humanity of its evils without the
permeating presence and active power of God. We should be careful, like
Elisha, to give to God all the glory of His own work. Man cannot eure
himself, any more than the broken pitcher can repair itself. 2. Lt #s eficactous.
‘¢So the waters were healed.” ‘The prophet cast the salt into the spring of
the waters. The fountain being healed, all its streams participated in the cure.
So the Gospel begins its restorative work in the heart, the fountain head of
human life. True reformation should ever begin at the source of evil; it will
then be thorough and permanent. ‘‘1f God cast into the fountain of our
hearts but one cruseful of the salt of His spirit, we are whole; no thought can
pass between the receipt and the remedy.’’ If we have not streams of Divine
blessing in abundance, we may have enough to refresh, to heal, and fertilize.


If not full showers of rain, yet, Lord,


A little pearly dew afford ;
A little, if it come from thee,
Will be of great avail to me,


Lessows:—1. The gospel has a remedy for every ovit. 2. The remedy must


be prayerfullu sought.


8. Lust be believingly applied.


GERM NOTES UN THE VEBSES.


Verses 19-22. As we see in the
translation of Elijah a type of Christ’s
ascension into heaven, so may we
also see in the subsequent career of
Elisha a type of the holy apostolic
church, clothed with the spirit of the
Master, and working even greater
miracles than he.


Verse 19. The material facts thus
combined and contrasted are very
suggestive to the mind of spiritual
conditions. The situation in which
we stand is pleasant. While so many
fair regions of the earth lie in
spiritual darkness, the full and blessed
light of God’s truth shines upon our
habitations. We have the written
word of truth—we have the uttered
word of truth—one of the first sounds
that entered our infant ears was that
name which is above every name;
and not aday passes in which, under
some form or other, we may not see
or hear the words of salvation. What
situation could be more pleasant, more
favourable to our spiritual progress ?

894


Surely our city stands upon the
delectable mountain whence on any
clear day we may have fair prospects
of the goodly land that lies beyond the
swelling Jordan. Yet, pleasant as all
things seem, it is not well with us,
‘‘The ground is barren.” —Xitto.

— Acrook in every lot. 1. True
of the most pleasantly situated city.
2. Of the most highly favoured
nation. 3. In the history of every
individual life.


Verse 20. The injurious property
and effect was not taken from the
water by the salt poured in; for even
if the salt actually possessed this power,
a whole spring could not be corrected
by a single dish of salt, even for ons
day, much less for a longer time or for
ever. The ponring in of the salt waa
a symbolic act with which Elisha
accompanied the word of the Lord, by
which alone the spring was healed,
Salt, on account of its power of pre-
serving from putrescence and decay, is
the symbol of incorruptibility and of


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS.


OS 2


hife removing death. The new dish
was also a symbol of purity and invio-
lateness.— (eel.


Verse 21. In a place where the
spiritual fountains are poisoned, and
the people receive to drink, from all
the pulpits and school-teachers’ desks,
not the water which streams forth unto
eternal life, but the death-draught of


OHAP. fi.





trict of Jericho. May the Lord of
Elisha raise up those who shall carry
the healing salt also into these foun-
tains.— Krummacher.

— Moral reformation. 1. Begins
in the soul—‘‘ He went forth unto the
spring of the waters.” 2. Is accom-
plished by human agency—“ And cast
the salt in there.” 3. Is a divine
work—‘‘Thus saith the Lord, I have


that modern babble of deceit
and falsehood, there is a more
deadly curse upon the land than
thet which once lay upon the dis-


healed these waters.” 4. Ie thorough
and permanent— There shall not be
from thence any more death or
barren land.”


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 28-28,
Tsar Doom or tHE Scorrer.


I. The scoffer reveals a spirit of hatred and opposition to that which
is good. Bethel was the headquarters of the great apostasy—the home of
idolatry. Here schools were established, in imitation of the schools of the
prophets, to instruct the people in idolatrous practices, and to inflame their
hearts with hatred towards Jehovah and His worship. Where people are
taught to despise and detest that which is good, no wonder they are ever
ready to indulge in profane, contemptuous, and splenetic scorn. 1. Sooffing
ts too common a sin of depraved youth. ‘There came forth little children out
of the city, and mocked him.” We are not to understand infantile or irres-
sponsible children, but those who had attained to youthful manhood, as distin-
guished from the middle-aged and the old. Perhaps these young people were
the pupils of a teacher of the calf worship at Bethel, and, meeting with Elisha
as they came from school, they assailed him with the contempt and ridicule in
which they had been too well instructed. Wicked and badly trained youth
take delight in holding the truth up to derision and mockery; they make
sport of the holiest things, and glory in their own wickedness—“ Fools make
@ mock at sin.” The scoffer is the lowest type of depravity; ‘‘ the seat of the
scornful’ is the nearest seat to hell. 2. Zo scoffat the servants of God is an
tnsult to God himself—‘‘Go up, thou bald head; go up, thou bald head.”
It is not likely that Elisha was really bald-headed, as he was then compara-
tively young. The word was applied to him out of pure contempt, and in 4
way that would be most insulting. It was ‘‘a term of great indignity with the
Israelites—baldness being usually seen among them as the effect of the loath-
some disease of leprosy. It was equivalent to calling him a mean and
unworthy fellow—a social outcast. In this sense it is still used as a term
of abuse in the farther East, and is often applied as such to men who have ample
heads of hair.” These profane mockers had heard that Elijah had been taken
up to heaven, and they sneeringly expressed their wish that Elisha might
share the same fate, and they would be well rid of him. But the sequel
shows that Jehovah regarded the insult to His servant as directed against Him-
self. He is jealous for the character, reputation, and influence of Hig
servants; he that ‘“‘toucheth them, toucheth the apple of His eye”


(Zech. ii. 8).


II. The scoffer may rouse the indignant threatening of the gentlest nature.
And be turned back and looked on them and cursed themin thename of the Lord.”
39°


¥


GHAR. it, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


How unlike the gentle, kindly, tender-hearted Elisha, as we have so far been
led to regard him! It is more like the fierce outbreak of the fiery Eljah, the
prophet of denunciation and wrath. But even the placid spirit of Elisha is
aroused when the honour of His God is concerned. He cursed the mocking
youths, ‘‘not from personal resentment, but under a Divine impulse, without
which no prophet ever dared to pronounce acurse. He cursed, and that was
all, He did not punish.” The servant of God may patiently endure the scoffs
and frowns and persecution of the world when they refer to himself only; but
when the character of his God is maligned and His grandest work derided, the
meekest become bold in vindicating the Divine glory. When Terantius,
captain to the emperor Adrian, presented a petition that the Christians might
have a temple to themselves in which to worship God apart from the Arians,
the emperor tore the petition in pieces and threw it away, bidding the soldier
to ask something for himself and it should be granted. Terantius modestly
gathered up the fragments. of the discarded petition, and said, with true
nobility of mind, ‘If I cannot be heard in God’s cause, I will never ask any-


thing for myself.”


IIT. The scoffer is sometimes signally punished. ‘* And there came forth
two she-bears out of the wood and tare forty and two children of them.” The
offence, writes Kitto, involving as it did a blasphemous insult cast upon one of
the Lord’s most signal acts, made a near approach to what in the New Testa-
ment is called the sin against the Holy Ghost. It became the Lord to vindicate
His own honour among a people governed by sensible dispensations of judgment
and of mercy; and it became Him to vindicate the character and authority of
His anointed prophet at the outset of His high career. The pride, irreverence,
and heartless disregard of the ecoffer, will sooner or later meet with due
recompense.

Hear the just doom, the judgment of the skies;
He that hates truth shall be the dupe of lies;
And he who eid? be cheated to the last,
Delusions, strong as hell, shall bind him fast,


Lessons :—1. Wot the least evst of idolatry is that st produces a race of scoffors of
the true God. 2. A sooffer ts hardened against ordinary rebukes. 3. But erelong
the scoffer mects with the just punishment of his sin.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


moral and religious ideas which exists
in public opinion. The separate
bearers and supporters of the truth


Verses 28, 24. The demoralizing
effects of idolatry upon the young.
I. It trains them in false ideas of God.


II. It destroys their appreciation of
the truly good. III. Itinflates them
with basest impertinence. IV. It
exposes them to confusion and suffer-
ing.


Verse 23. Young people are always
ready to make wanton sport of any
peculiar appearance which they do not
understand. The unripe behaviour of
the young generation which is grow-
ing up, always forms a shadowy re-
flection of the shallow opposition in

396


which is deep, and hence misunder-
stood by the masses, are, for the most
part, objects of blind scorn to wild
youth. That which found expression
against Elisha has also fallen upon
many in later times. He who, in the
exercise of his calling, goes up to per.
verted Bethel, must expect it—
Cassel.


Verse 24. As Elisha was not silent,
so also now a faithful servant of the
Lord may not keep silent if young


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





people are brought up badly and god-
lessly. He ought not to let pass un-
noticed their wickedness and impu-
dence, and their contempt for that
which is holy. Itis his duty to warn
them and their parents of the Divine
punishment. Woe to the watchmen
who are dumb watch-dogs, who cannot
punish—who are lazy, and who are
glad to lie and sleep.—Lange.

— O fearful example of Divine
justice! This was not the revenge of
an angry prophet, it was the pun-
ishment of a righteous judge. God
and His seer looked through these
children at the parents, at all Israel :
he would punish the parents’ mis-
nurturing their children, to the con-
temptuous usage of a prophet, with
the death of those children which they
had mistaught. He would teach
Israel what it was to misuse a pro-
phet: and if he would not endure
these contumelies unrevenged in the
mouths of children, what vengeance
was enough for aged persecutors?
—Bp. Hall.

— So Dr. Whittington, returning
from martyring a good woman at
Chipping-Sadbury, was gored by a
bull. Dr. Story, who narrated that
he had burned so many heretics, was





hanged at Tyburn for treason. Hem-
ingius tells of a lewd fellow in Den-
mark, who, showing great contempt
against a preacher, as he passed out
of the church, was brained with a tile
falling on him. Luther tells of
another who, going to the fields to
look to his sheep, after he had railed
most bitterly against a godly minister,
was found dead—his body being
burned as black as coal. ‘Be not
ye mockers, lest your bands be in-
creased.” — Trapp.


Verse 25. The uses of retirement.
I. Is sometimes sought by the most
active spirits. II. Affords an oppor-
tunity for study and preparation.
III. Gives new strength to grapple
with sin in its greatest strongholds.

— Whither dare not a prophet go
when God calls him? Having visited
the schools of the prophets, Elisha
retires to Mount Carmel, and, after
some holy solitariness, returns to the
city of Samaria. He can never be a
profitable seer that is either always or
never alone. Carmel shall fit him for
Samaria; contemplation for action.
That mother city of Israel must needs
afford him most work.—By. Hall.





CHAPTER II.


THE REVOLT AND DEFEAT OF MOAB.


CriTicaL AND Exrtanatorny Notrs.—Verse 1. Jehoram, the son of Ahab—See on chap,
i.17. The more distinctive name of this king, together with a helpful chronological state-
ment, will be found in chap. viii. 16. In character and conduct he was only comparatively
better than his parents: bad, but not so bad as they. Verse 2. He put away the rear te of
Baal—There were “‘ images” (chap. x. 26) in the house of Baal, which Ahab erected (1 Kings
xvi. 82) in Samaria; but there was one distinctive (probably very vast) statue, called here,
and in chap x. 27, ‘‘the image.” Probably those J))3N1D were wooden images; wheroas


this Syan pgm: ge) was a statue in stone or metal. Verse 4. An annual tribute on Moab—


The custom is common in the East to pay custom or taxes with the products of the land.
For a Moabitish king, with rich pastures in his own territory, and also in the Arabian wilder-
ness, this was but a small tribute to pay. Verses 6 and 7. Confederation of Jehoram and
Jehoshaphat—This was effected ‘‘ at the same time” I Mosse 6) as Jehoram began his reign and
Moab rebelled; and the confederation was with the design of crushing Moab. The king of
Israel ‘‘ numbered,” or mustered, @ considerable army from his subjects throughout ‘all Israel,”
and invited the king of Judah to join him in the campaign. Verse 8. The way through the
wilderness of Edom—4, ¢., not crossing the Jordan, but marching down by the Dead Sea to ita
southern extremity, and thence up through the wilderness, and over the Bait sge of Edom,
39


wy


GaP, DL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





approaching Moab from the south. Moab was best fortified on its northern boundary ; besidea
which, to reach Moab by a northerly route they would have had to risk a collision with the
Syrians, whereas Edom was at this time ruled by a deputy, whom Jehoshaphat had appointed
(1 Kings xxii. 47). Verse 9, Seven days’ journey—It was a weary route over the desert
region south of the Dead Sea, while also “the deep rocky valley of Ashy” (ei/) was most
difficult of penetration. They found, to their distress, that the Wady of this valley was dry.
Verses 19 and 11. Jehoram despairs; Jehoshaphat seeks a prophet of Jehovah. Verse 11.
Which poured water on the hands of Elijah—i.e., “who was about Elijah daily as his
servant, and who is certainly the most reliable prophet, since he [Elijah] is gone (Thenius).


The phrase, PWN PD, “ Here ie Elisha,” means that he was in the camp or close at hand.
wines
Perhaps, as Keil suggests, the prophet, led by Divine impulse, had come near the armies
to guide their kings in the hour of embarrassment and despair. Elisha’s ministry might now
eonvert Jehoram from idolatrous sympathies, by showing him the true God. Verse 13. Elisha
said to Jehoram, ‘* What have I to do with thee?”—Elisha meets him with sternness to
rebuke his pride and impiety, and then ironically refers him to the idols for which he lad
deserted Jehovah. “Nar ”—SN—i. ¢., not—not so; do not so answer and refuse me ; or, It
will not help me to go to the prophets of Baal. Verse 15. Now bring me a minstrel—To
soothe and elevate his mind into preparedness to heed the voice of God’s spirit within him. On
min "¥’, ‘the hand of the Lord,” see Notes on 1 Kings xviii. 46. Verse 19. Mar every


good piece of land—3N5, to inflict pain; grieve the land. Verse 20, Came water by
ah g


the way of Edom—Occasioned by sudden rains supernaturally given, which fell on the moun-
tain heights of Edom, and quickly filled the Wady, and overflowed into the “ditches.”
Verse 23. This is blood—For the rancour between the kinge of Israel and Judah was well
known ; hence the Moabites supposed they had slaughtered each other in some quarrel on their
march. Thus deluded by the sight of the water—reddened by the sun’s rays, or with the
colour of the earth into which they had dug (verse 16), the Moabites hastened, unprepared,
into the hands of their foes. Verse 25. NW77 7))—Called Kir Moab (Isa. xv. 1). It
was the capital city, and fortified—now called Kerak. Verse 27. Eldest son, and offered him
for a burnt offering upon the wall—In the sight of the assailing armies; and this spectacle
of horror roused in the allies of Israel such revulsion, because that their support of Israel had
driven the king of Moab to this dreadful aet, that they fell back from the siege. and left Israel
to its own fortunes.—W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES \-8.


Parris REFoRMATION,


I. That partial reformation is brought about by association with the
good (verse 1). This verse reminds us of the intimacy existing between Jeho-
ram, the son of the idolatrous Ahab, and the God-fearing Jehoshaphat. It was
by the mediation of the latter monarch that the war-like rancour so long
cherished between Israel and Judah was subdued, and more friendly intercourse
encouraged (1 Kings xxii. 44). The company of the good, if it does not change
the character of the wicked, greatly modifies their conduct. The influence of
a holy life makes itself felt in the most abandoned society. Lxample is more
potent than precept. The power of Jesus when on earth consisted more in
what He did than in what He said—more in the significance of His conduct than
in the fulness of His argument. ‘‘ Far more of God was revealed in what He
was, in what He did, and in what He suffered, than in what He taught.” If
all the good withdrew from society, one of the most powerfrl moral restraints
would be removed from the wicked, and the world would soon become a very
Tophet of unbearable suffering.


II. That partial reformation is seen in the abolition of the grosser forma
of sin. eee put away the image of Baal that bis father had made” (verse 2),


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. il.





The worship of the Tyrian Baal was encouraged by Ahab and Jezebel to such an
extent as at once to degrade and disgust the people. It was a national scandal.
Jehoram did his best to wipe out that disgrace, and to dry up that fountain of
popular pollution. Sofar good. It is a gain to the community when vice is
prevented from flaunting itself before the public gaze. If it cannot be at once
abolished, let it be narrowed to the smallest space and reduced to the minimum
of mischief. Partial reformation of abuses is better than leaving things as they
are. The vice in our large cities, notwithstanding all attempts to hide and cir-
cumscribe it, is something appalling. It is said that there are in London
10,000 prostitutes—a procession a mile long, walking double file—all some-
body’s daughters; and there are 20,000 thieves, making two more miles of that
dread procession. What would be the effect on public morality if all these
criminals were allowed unchecked and unrestricted scope ?


III. That partial reformation does not deliver from sins which have
become established by a generation of wicked examples. ‘‘ Nevertheless he
cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam ” (verse 3). How prolific is the progeny of
a single sin—how tenacious the effects of one evil example! It requires more
than ordinary courage to break away from sins that are hereditary and that have
been fastened on a nation by long usage and enforced by kingly example and


authority. No partial and half-hearted efforts will avail.
they ought, unless they do all that they can,”


‘“ Men do less than
Only by Divine help can a


thorough and lasting reformation be effected.


Lxssons:—1. Any efforts after sincere reformation are commendable,


2. Noth-


ing short of a thorough reformation can be acceptable to God. 3. The evil of a bad
example may be counteracted by a good one.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 2, 8. If we do in truth
tear down a statue of Baal or two,
and adhere nevertheless to the sins of
Jeroboam, and to his calf images—to
those ordinances which for political
reasons have been introduced and es-
tablished in the church contrary to the
will of the Lord—what will it help us?
He who, for himself, abstains from
that which is opposed to God’s word
and commandment, but continues to
tolerate it in those who are connected
with him, or subject to him, shows
thereby that he is not in earnest in his
own obedience to God, and that his
principles are deduced only from ex-
ternal considerations and relations.—
Lange.


Verse 2. A vacillating spirit.


I. Weakens kingly authority, IT.
Is easily discouraged in a work of
religious reform. III. Is hampered
by the influence of evil parental
example. IV. Never accomplishes
anything great.

— Eveninto the most wicked fami-
lies it pleases God to cast His powerful
restraints, that all are not equally
vicious. It is no news to see lewd
men make scruple of some sins. The
world were not to live in, if all sins
were affected by all. It is no thanks
to Ahab and Jezebel that their son is
no Baalite. As no good is traduced
from parents, so not all evil; there
is an Almighty Hand that stops the
foul current of nature at His pleasure.
No idolater can say that his child shall
not be a conyert.—Ze. Hall.


~


OAP, Til. HOMILETIO COMMENTALY: KINGS,


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 4-20.


Tor Powre or a Goop Man m Exrremrry.


On the death of Ahab the Moabites rebelled against Israel, and refused any
longer to pay the heavy tribute they had been accustomed to render. During
the short and unwarlike reign of the unfortunate Ahaziah, nothing was done
to chastise the Moabites for their revolt; but as soon as Jehoram seized th
sceptre, he organized un expedition against Moab to compel the payment of th
accustomed tribute. The whole undertaking would have ended in terrible
disaster and loss, but for the timely intervention of the despised Elisha. It is
in extremity that man discovers his own helplessness, and learns to venerate
and love that God who is a present help in trouble.


I, That the most carefully planned enterprise may be unexpectedly
reduced to great extremity (verses 4—9). Israel, Judah, and Edom united
their armies, and marched, a formidable host, against the revolted Moabites,
led in person by the monarch of each nation. A route was selected which, by
attacking the Moabites from the South, was intended to take them by surprise,
as they would hardly expect an attack from Israel in that quarter. The plot was
well laid—suecess was certain—the Moabites would be driven into immediate
submission ; when suddenly the advancing host found itself menaced by a danger
more distressing than that of the mightiest army—there was no water for man
or beast! Of what avail now was their multitude of warriors, and the im-
posing splendour of their equipment ? Their numbers aggravated the suffering,
and their proud display added to the ignominy of the failure. The most con-
summate strategist is often baffled by unlooked-for difficulties. History
furnished a melancholy example in Napoleon Bonaparte’s invasion of Russia
and his disastrous retreat from Moscow.


II. That in a time of extremit7 the help of a good man is anxiously
sought (verses 10-12). 1. Heathentsm ts powerless to help in extremity.
Jehoram yields at once to despair, and can see no possible way of deliver-
ance (verse 6). What an acknowledgment of the imbecility of his gods!
Idolatry had no comfort for the sorrowing, no resources in times of difficulty.
It breeds a spirit of sullen and forlorn fatalism. 2. The worshipper of Jehovah
knows where to go for help (verse 11). How different is the conduct of the
two kings! Jehoram wrings his hands in utter helplessness; Jehoshaphat calls
for a prophet. The believer in Jehovah has resources to fall back upon
in adversity of which the world knoweth not. A tender-hearted doctor once
said to a patient who was suffering excruciating pain, ‘It is a brave heart
that bears all this so grandly.” ‘Ah! no, Doctor,’’ was the meek and gentle
response, ‘‘it is not the brave heart at all; Jesus bears it all for me.” 3. In
extremity goodness commands the homage of greatness. ‘‘So the king of Israel
and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him’ (verse 12). They
did not summon Elisha into the royal presence, as was the case with Micaiah
(1 Kings xxii. 9). They were in distress. It was not a time to stand on
ceremony, or to make a vain display of royal pomp and greatness. They
eagerly and humbly sought the help of the man of God. True worth will
triumph in the end, however much it may be ignored and vilified; and will
command the respect even of its enemies.


III. That a time of extremity affords an opportunity for a good man to
exalt the Lord. 1. He is fearless in reproving wrong. Elisha repudiates
J ccatase claim to any consideration, and tells him to go “to the prophets of his


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, Til.


=


father and to the prophets of his mother” (verse 18). He has already
discovered the powerlessness of his national idol; and keenly as he must have
felt the rebuke of the man of God at this time, he could not but admit its
justice. No opportunity for reproving wrong should be neglected, and cir-
cumstances sometimes arise in which such neglect would be specially repre-
hensible. 2. He acknowledges the good in whomsocver found. ‘Were it not
that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, I would not
look towards thee, nor see thee”? (verse 14). One sovereign is condemned,
while another is commended, as if to show that no disrespect is intended to
the royal office, but that sin must be reproved, whether found in the person
of the sovereign, or in that of the meanest subject. ‘‘ What shall not be done
for a Jehoshaphat ? For his sake shall those two other princes, and their
vast armies, live and prevail. It is in the power of one good man to oblige a
world. We receive true though insensible favours from the presence of the
righteous. Next to being good, it is happy to converse with them that are
80; if we be not better by their example, we are blest by their protection.”
8. He recognises the Divine source of ali true help (verse 15). Elisha calls for
music to soothe and tranquillize his mind, and prepare himself for the reception
of Divine communications. He was fully aware that God, and God only,
could render help in such an extremity. Helpis found, not in the multitude of
an host, not in the power of the crown, not in the charms of song and the
grandeur of sacrifice, not in the goodness and greatness of the individual instru-
ment, butonly inGod. This cannot be too frequently iterated, or too constantly
acknowledged. 4. Hests favoured with revelattons of the Divine intentions (verses
16—i9). Not only is water promised to relieve their present distress, but the
kings are assured of victory over the Moabites. The good man is privilege to
know more of the Divine mind than can be understood by the ungodly.
“The secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him; and He will shew them
His covenant’’ (Psa. xxv. 14).





IV. That Divine aid in extremity is not sought in vain Wee 20). It
seemed very unlikely that the dry channels of the Edom valley should be
filled with water. The air was still, the sky was clear, not a shred of rain-
cloud was visible; and the work of the busy multitude in digging trenches
seemed a mockery. Faith in Elisha and in the God of Elisha was put to the
test. Evening sank into night, and night gave place to morning. But ‘at
the hour of the morning sacrifice, no sooner did the blood of that oblation gush
forth, than the streams of water gushed forth into their new channels, and
filled the country with a refreshing moisture. Elijah fetched down his fire at
the hour of the evening sacrifice; Elisha fetched up his water at the hour of
the morning sacrifice. How seasonably doth the wisdom of God pick out that
instant wherein He might at once answer both Elisha’s prophecy and Hia
people’s prayers.” The Lord will never disappoint His people’s confidence.
It is in extremity that He most signally displays His power and goodness.


Lessons :—l. Extremity reveals the helplessness of man. 2. Calle for special
Divine interference. 3. Teaches the most wholesome lessons.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 4. When kings and lords fall also be disobedient to them, for their
away from God, then their subjects punishment.
must fall away from them. And
when the fathers are disobedient te Verses 10, 11. What are the great-
Ged, the children and servants must est monarchs of the Lit if they
BD 1


GaP. Mi.





want but water to their mouths!
What can their crowns and plumes
and rich arms avail them, when they
are abridged but of that which is the
drink of beasts? With dry tongues
and lips do they now confer of their
common misery. Jehoram deplores
the calamity into which they were
fallen ; Jehoshaphat asks for a prophet.
Every man can bewail a misery ; every
man cannot find the way out of it.
Not without some specialty from God
does Elisha follow the camp; else that
had been no element for a prophet.
Little did the good king of Judah
think that God was so near him,
Purposely was this holy seer sent for
the succour of Jehoshaphat and his
faithful followers when they were so
far from dreaming of their delivery
that they knew not of a danger. It
would be wide with the best men if the
eyeof Divine Providence were not open
upon them, when the eye of their care
is shut towards it. How well did
Elisha in the wars! The strongest
squadron of Israel was within that
breast ; all their armour of proof had
not so much safety and protection as
his mantle.—Bp. Hail.

— In need and distress the state of
a man’s heart is brought to light.
Jehoram falls into despair, he does not
know what counsel to take, nor how
to help himself. Instead of seeking
the Lord and calling to Him for help,
he accuses Him and cast the reproach
upon Him that He means to destroy
three kings at once. Jehoshaphat,
who had always bent his heart to seek
God (2 Chron. xix. 3), does not
wring his hands in despair, but is
quiet and composed. He thinks with-
in himself, The Lord has neither now,
nor ever, withdrawn Himself from His
people. Therefore he trusts, and asks
for a prophet of the Lord.—Zange.


Verse 10. Despair. I. A natural
fruit of idolatry. II. Shows the
helplessness of man. III. Is ever
ready to throw the blame of misfor-
tune on others.


Verse 12. ‘“‘The word of the Lord
is with moi A true prophet. L
02


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


Is easily recognized by all lovers of
truth. II. Is invested with Divine
authority. III. Is eagerly and
humbly consulted in time of need.

— So long as men are free from
distress and danger, they ask nothing
about the ministers of the gospel, they
take no notice of them, they wish to
have nothing to do with them, they
throw their faithful warnings to the
wind ; but when an accident or a death
occurs, then they are glad to see the
despised preacher, and they desire to
make use of his services and his
prayers. Three kings descend from
their elevation and come humbly and
with petitions to the man who was
once a servant of Elijah, of whom
they had not even known so much as
that he had joined the expedition.
So now emperorsand kings bow the knee
before Him whocame to His own andHis
own received Himnot, whodidnot have
a place to lay His head, but who is now
confessed to be the Lord, to the glory
of God the Father.— Wurt. Summ.


Verses 13, 14. The vain pretences
of idolatry. I. Truthfully rebuked.
II. Unmistakably apparent in times


of difficulty. III. Invalidate all
claim for help.
Verse 18. How sharply dares the


man of God to chide his sovereign,
the king of Israel! The liberty of
the prophets was no less singular than
their calling; he that would borrow
their tongue must show their com-
mission. As God reproved kings for
their sakes, so did not they stick to
reprove kings for His sake. Thus
much freedom they must leave to
their successors, that we might not
spare the vices of them whose persons
we must spare.—Bp. Hail.

— Elisha stood before the Lord,
the living God; Jehoram before the
calf-god. That was not only a differ-
ence in religious views and opinions,
but also an entirely different stand-
point in life. Where there is a life
In God, there there can be no fellow-
snip with those who have denied and
abandoned the living God: the two
ways diverge directly and decidedly.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS.





The relation in which a man stands
to God is decisive for his relation to
other men; it divides from some by
a separation which is just as wide as
the communion into which it brings
him with others is close.—Starke.


Verse 14. He who has renounced
God and His word can make no claim
to esteem, even though he be a king.
Fidelity to God and holding fast to
His word are what make a man
truly estimable, even though he were
the poorest and lowliest. God does
not let the righteous perish with the
unrighteous; it rather comes to pass
that, for the sake of a single righteous
man, many godless persons are saved
and preserved.—Lange.


Verse 15. The power of music.
I. Soothes and tranquillizes the soul
ruffled by contact with wrong. II.
Prepares the heart for the reception of
Divine blessing. III. Finds its
loftiest use in the worship of God.

— Who wonders not to hear a pro-
phet call for a minstrel in the midst
of that mournful distress of Isreel
and Judah? Who would not have
expected his charge of tears and
prayers rather than of music? How
unseasonable are songs to a heavy
heart! It was not for their ears, it
was for his own bosom, that Elisha
called for music; that his spirits,
after their zealous agitation, might be
sweetly composed, and put into a
meet temper for receiving the calm
visions of God. None but a quiet
breast is capable of Divine revela-
tions; nothing is more powerful to
settle a troubled heart than a melo-
dious harmony.—Bp. Hall.


Verses 16—19. The Lord gives


GHAP. Wi.


beyond what we oray for, beyond
what we understand; He not only
saves from need and danger, but He
also gives the victory besides, out of
pure undeserved grace. That is the
fundamental feature of all Divine
promises. The Lord not only docs
not deal with us according to our
sins, but He gives us, besides that,
tks victory.— Lange.


Verse 16. Preparatory work.
I. Necessary in all Divine arrange-
ments. II. Must be done because
commanded, not always because it is
understood. III. Is an evidence of
genuine faith. IV. Its value will
be made apparent (verse 20),


Verses 17, 18. The methods of
Divine relief. I. Often unseen and
mysterious. II. Inevitably sure.
III. Superabundant in supply
(verse 18),


Verse 19. This is by no means a
mere prophecy, as Wordsworth says,
a simple prediction of what the allied
armies would inflict on Moab; but a
command as plain and positive as that
by which he had formerly authorized
the destruction of the idolatrous
Canaanites. So utter a destruction of
the Moabites did the Lord now
authorize, that He even suspended the
law of Deut. xx. 19, which forbade
the destruction of the fruit trees of
the enemy. This felling of the good
trees would be to the surviving Moab-
ites a memorable woe. Their ruined
cities they might speedily rebuild,
and unstop their wells, oe dig
new ones, and clear the land of
stones; but years must pasa before
new fruit trees could be reared.—
Whedon.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 21-27.


THe Danozr or TRUSTING TO APPEARANCES,


I. Appearances may deceive those who fancy themselves well prepared for
all contingencies (verse 21). Moab was aware of the approach of the iavad-
ing army, and made the most careful and elaborate preparation to withstand it.


All who were capable of bearing arms were march


to the frontier, and the
403


¥


OHAP, 151. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








brave little nation, keenly watching every movement of the enemy, seemed
determined to make a stout and desperate defence. It is important to prepare
for the conflict of life; to be armed with the whole armour of God, and ever
on our guard against the attack of our spiritual foes. But when we are best
prepared we are liable to be misled by false appearances. ‘Let him that
thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.”


{I. Appearances may surprise the most cautious into committing a fatal
blunder (verses 22-24). The shining of the early morning sun upon the water
that filled the red earth-pits newly dug in the valley was mistaken for blood,
and the Moabite leader, without taking any pains to verify his impression,
jumped to the conclusion that the invading army had quarrelled, and what he
saw shining in the sunlight was the blood of the slain. The word of command
was given to advance, with the expectation that there was now nothing to do
but to gather the spoil; but, too late to remedy it, the mistake of the Moabites
was seen, and the compact little army that was strong and formidable when
entrenched in its defences was speedily smitten and put to flight when it came
into unexpected contact with the refreshed and well-armed Israelites. A false
glitter did all the mischief, Alas! how many have been thus lured on to their
destruction—the lover of strong drink, who has ‘‘looked upon the wine when
it ig red,’ until he has been fascinated with its mocking sheen and whelmed in
its intoxicating vortex; the insatiate seeker of pleasure, who has been capti-
vated by beauteous forms and pleasant sounds, and lost in giddy mazes; the
grasping money-getter, for whom the glare of wealth has had an irresistible
charm that has robbed him of the love of home, of kindred, and of honour.
Enchanted with the glamour of false appearances, the generous have become
penurious—the modest, bold—the careful, recklessly extravagant—the
virtuous, base.


III. Trusting to appearances is often followed by the most ruinous
consequences (verses 25-27). In this case we see an army utterly routed—
a fruitful country made barren and desolate—and the only heir-apparent to a.
throne cruelly immolated by a distracted father. Many a promising nation
has been brought to naught by yielding to the unholy lust of power, following
the ignis fatuus of military glory, or craving for the crimsoned reputation of a

annical ascendency. The Sclavonians have a legend that a certain river was
infested with a water-demon who had the power of assuming the shape of a clus-
ter of red flowers waving and spreading themselves out in graceful and attractive
forms on the surface of the water; but if the passer-by was tempted to put
forth his hand to pluck one of the fragile blossoms, he was at once seized by
invisible hands, dragged beneath the surface, and suffocated in the treacherous
stream. It is perilous to trust to false appearances: it may lead to irrepara-
ble disaster. Many who have plucked the flower of pleasure have found it
to contain a fatal sting.


Lessons:—1. Appearances have a great influence over us. 2. Are often false
and fictitious. 8. Entice many into hopeless ruin.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 22-25. They rise soon Moabitesasemblanceof blood. A few
enough to beguile themselves. The eyes were enough to fill all ears with
beams of the rising sun, peas, & false noise: the deceived sense mis-
upon those Ne gait and unexpec carries the imagination. Civil broils
waters, arn in the eyes of some give just advantage to a commen


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: EINGS&. —





enemy ; therefore must the camps be
spoiled, because the kings have smitten
each other. Those who shall be de-
ceived are given over to credulity : the
Moabites do not examine either the
conceit or the report, but fly in con-
fusedly upon the camp of Israel, whom
they find, too late, to have no enemies
but themselves. As if death would
not have hastened enough to them,
they come to fetch it, they come to
challenge it: it seizeth upon them
unavoidably. They are smitten, their
cities razed, their lands marred, their
wells stopped, their trees felled, as if
God meant to waste them but once.—
Bp. Hail.


Verses 22-23. Optical illusions.
I. May deceive the most wary. II.
May lead to very serious mistakes.
III. Should be carefully tested.

— The Divine aid by which the
army of Israel was not only saved from
destruction, but even obtained a com-
plete victory over their enemies, con-
sisted here not ina miracle of God sur-
passing the known laws of nature, but
only in this, that God the Lord, as he
had announced before by His prophet,
introduced the laws of nature working
to the determinate end in the predeter-
mined way. As the suddenly appear-
ing mass of waters was affected in a
natural way by a violent rain in the
distance, so also the illusion that was
so fatal to the Moabites is explained
in a natural way, indicated even in the
text. From the red earth of the pits
the water collected inthem had assumed
ared colour, which was considerably
increased by the rays of the rising sun
falling upon it, so that, seen from a
distance, it must have appeared like
blood. But the Moabites might be
the less disposed to think of an optical
illusion, as by their familiar acquaint-
ance with the region they knew that
the Wady had at that time no water,
and they had scen or learned nothing
of the rain which had fallen far from
them in the Edomite mountains.—
Keith.


Verse 23. The self-destruction of
the allied armies of Moab, Ammon,


GRAP. 10.


——


and Edom (2 Chron. xx. 22-25) was
still fresh in the minds of the Moabites;
and knowing the enmity and jealousy
existing between Judah and Israel, and
confident that the Edomites were no
fast friends of either party, they very
naturally imagined, from the sight of
what appeared so much blood, that the
different kings had fallen out among
themselves, and destroyed each other.
They supposed it only remained for
them to go, as did Jehoshaphat on that
former occasion, and gather up the
precious jewels and other spoil from
among the dead bodies.


Verse 25. The terrible havoc of
war. I. Sacrifices precious lives.
II. Ruthlessly destroys the work of
years. III. Exhausts the resources of
a nation. IV. Checks national growth.


Verses 26, 27. No onsets are so
furious as the last assaults of the des-
perate. The king of Moab, now hope-
less of recovery, would be glad to shut
up with a pleasing revenge. With
seven hundred resolute followers, he
rushes into the battle towards the
king of Edom, as if he would bid death
welcomo might he but carry with him
that despited neighbour, and now, mad
withrepulse, he returns; and, whether
as angry with his destiny, or as bar-
barously affecting to win his cruel
gods with so dear a sacrifice, he offers
them, with his own hands, the blood
of his eldest son in the sight of Israel},
and sends him up in the smoke to those
hellish deities. Oh, prodigious act,
whether of rage or of devotion! What
@ hand had Satan over his miserable
vassals! What marvel is it to see men
sacrifice their souls in an unfelt obla-
tion to these plausible tempters, when
their own flesh and blood have not
been spared! There is no tyrant like
to the prince of darkness.— By. Hail.


Verse 26. Bravery. I. Called
forth by the stress of circumstances.
II. Challenges admiration irrespective
of the causvit champions. JT. Often
unavailing.


Verse 37. The offering was doubt-
40f


»


GaAP. ii.





less made to the Moabitish god Che-
mosh, not to the God of Israel. Mesha
supposed that his misfortunes were
owing to the vengeance of his gods,
whom he had in some way offended,
and by this costly sacrifice he sought
to propitiate them. Human sacrifices
were common among many of the
ancient heathen nations. The story
of Iphigenia sufficiently shows the
existence of the practice among the
Greeks. It prevailed, also, among
the Carthaginians and Phoenicians,
and most of the nations in and arcund
Palestine. Causing children to pass
through the fire to Molech (chap.
xiii. 10; Deut. xviii. 10) is an allu-
sion to this abominable custom. Dio-
dorus Siculus relates that when Aga-
thocles was going to besiege Carthage,
the people, seeing the extremities to
which they were reduced, ascribed
their misfortune to the anger of their
god, in that they had latterly spared
to offer him children nobly born, and
had fraudulently put him off with the
children of slaves and foreigners. To
make an atonement for this crime, two
hundred children of the best families
in Carthage were at once offered in
sacrifice, and no less than three
hundred of the citizens voluntarily
sacrificed themselves. Philo, in a
fragment preserved by Eusebius, says :
‘Tt was a custom among the ancients,
on occasions of great distress, for the
rulers of a city or nation, instead of
leaving the entire population to
destruction, to sacrifice the beloved of
their children as a ransom to the
vengeful deities.— Whedon.

— Various accounts of the origin
of human sacrifice have been given,
but all are necessarily conjectural. It
seems to us that the practice grew out
of the notion that whatever was most
costly and precious must needs be most
acceptable as an offering to the gods;
and it being established that the life of
an animal was an acceptable offering,
perverse ingenuity reasoned that the
life of the human creature—the noblest
of creatures—and his life-blood the
most precious on earth, must be still
more acceptable to heaven, riiil more
valuable in the sight of the gods,

406


EOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a


This being the case, it further followed
that the more illustrious, the more
pure or exalted the person whose life
was offered, the more proper still was
the offering, and the more cogent its
force in gratifying, soothing, or render-
ing propitious the stern powers that
ruled the destiniesof man. As to the
precise object, it appears to us that in
all, or nearly all, the cases fully known,
these offerings were propitiatory at
least, if not expiatory.— Kitto.


— The inhuman cruelty of
heathenism. I. Immolates the
choicest human victims. II. Is


prompted by despair. III. Rouses the
indignation of the righteous. IV. In
specially offensive to God.


— The departure of the Israelitish
army in consequence of the human
sacrifice of the king of Moab is a very
remarkable sign of the difference be-
tween the fundamental opinions of the
Israelites and of the heathen.
Whereas, amongst almost all heathen
peoples, sacrifice culminates in human
sacrifice, and this is considered the
most holy and most effective, in the
Mosaic system, on the other hand, it
is regarded as the greatest and most
detestable abomination in the sight of
God. It is forbidden, not merely from
considerations of humanity, but also
because, as the law declares with special
emphasis, the sanctuary of the Lord is
thereby defiled and His Holy Name
profaned (Lev. xx. 1-5. xviii; 21).
Human sacrifice stands in the most
glaring contradiction to the revelation
of God as the Holy One, in which
character He was known in Israel
alone ; hence it was to be punished,
without respite, by death. From the
preceding narrative we see how deep
roots the detestation of human sacrifice
had struck in the conscience of the
people. Neither the cultus founded
by Jeroboam, nor that of Baal whick
Ahab had imported, with all its bar-
barism, had been able even to weaken
this detestation. It was still so strong
that a victorious army allowed itself to
be led thereby to withdraw again
from a land it had already subdued.-—
Lange.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OWAP. IV.





CHAPTER IV.
THE MIRACLES OF ELISHA


Onrrtcat anp Expianatory Norzs.—Verse 1. Two sons to be bondmen—The law entitled
& ereditor to the slavery or service of debtors till the year of Jubilee. Verse 2. Pot of oil—
Gesenius suggests unctio—“ oil for anointing,” as the rendering of JION—instead of “ pot”;


no oil loft for food, only enough for the anointing. Verse 8. Borrow not a few—She had
none, should borrow many. Elisha had faith! Verse 8. Shunem, in the plain of Esdraelon,

the base of Little Hermon, now Suiam. Verse 10. Chamber on the wall—Probably, as in
2 Sam. xviii. 33, a chamber in the oleaA, or porch, usually appropriated to strangers; secluded
and suitable for quiet retirement. Verse 13. I dwell among mine own people—i. ¢., I do not
need court notice, for my life is serenely simple, and I am satisfied with the esteem of my neigh-
bours. Verse 16. Thou shalt embrace a son—Thus experiencing the same proof of Divine
favour as was given to Sarah in her old age (Gen. xviii. 10-15). Verse 22. That I may rum
to the man of God—Not waiting to inform her husband of the reason of her mission, lest he
shuld dissuade her, not doubting the miraculous help she would gain from the man of God.
Verse 23, She said, It shall be well—Simply Di7U), peace. With the one single word she

?

likewise answers Gehazi (verse 26), the Eastern Salam ! “it is well!” for she desired silence till
she could tell all the truth to the servant of Jehovah. Verse 27. Let her alone, for her soul


is vexed within her—Gehazi thought her eager attitude an undue freedom, not sufficiently
respectful towards his master. But fervid grief stays not at punctilios, ‘her soul is ditter.”’
Verse 31. There was neither voice nor hearing—W)) }°N) Sip YN—i.¢., the dead gave
chit cd “
no sign of life, no response to tke mere staff. The act was allowed to fail, in order to show
that only through humble and dependent prayer could God's power be entreated. Verse 34.
Kay upon the child—Following the method of his great predecessor, Elijah (1 Kings xvii. 21).
Yet the effects differed, the resuscitation was by gradual and progressive stages. Verse 38.
fons of the prophets were sitting before him—This means, not that they lived in common
with “lisha, but sat as scholars before him for teaching. Seethe pottage—A kind of thick
broth of rice or meal, vegetables, and meat. Verse 40. There is death in the pot—Probably
the “ wild gourds’? (verse 39) were the fruit of the colocynth, exceedingly bitter, and causing
severe cholic. Freely eaten, they might cause death. Verses 42-44. Barley loaves, super-
aaturally multiplied—A foreshadowing of Christ’s greater miracle of feeding the thousands.
This man from Baal-shalisha brought the first fruits (Deut. xviii. 4, &c.) to Elisha as be‘ng
“the man of God,” rather than to the false priests of Baal who overran the land, but were
judged by this man to be less worthy to act as Jehovah’s representatives and receive his reli-
gious offering than the prophet.—W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-7.


Tae Mreacutovs Surrry or Ow Symsoxioc oF THE IwEXHAUSTIBILITY oF Divo
Gracz.


In this and the four following chapters we have a detailed account of the
miracles of Elisha. We catch glimpses of the quiet, unobtrusive life spent in
the schools of the prophets; and we cannot but observe the striking difference
in the spirit and character of Elisha’s ministry as contrasted with that of his
predecessor. Elijah represented the whirlwind, the earthquake, the fire;
Elisha, the still small voice—less terrible and imposing, but more extensively
influential for good. As Stanley beautifully puts it: ‘‘The whole appearance
of Elisha revealed the difference. The rough mantle of his master appears no
more after its first display. He uses a walking staff like other grave citizens
(verse 29) He was not secluded in mountain fastnesses, but dwelt in his
owa house in the royal city (chap. v. 9, 24; vi. 82; xiii. 17), or lingered
amidst the sons of the prophets, within the precincts of ancient colleges,
ewbowered amidst the shades of the beautiful woods which overhang the crystal
spring that is still associated with his name; or was sought out oy admiring

40


~%


omar, Iv. HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.
en Te


disciples in some tower on Carmel, or by the pass of Dothan; or was received
in some quiet balcony, overlooking the plain of Esdraelon, where bed and table
and seat had been prepared for him by pious hands. His life was not spent,
like his predecessor’s, in unavailing struggles, but in widespread successes.
He was sought out, not as the enemy, but as the friend and counsellor, of
kings. His deeds were not of wild terror, but of gracious, soothing, homely
beneficence, bound up with the ordinary tenor of human life.” The miracle
related in this paragraph indicates the sympathy of the prophet with the
troubles and needs of human life. In treating the miracle as symbolic of
the inexhaustibility of Divine Grace, the following thoughts are suggested.


I. That humanity is reduced by sin to a state of moral bankruptcy and
ruin, Like the widow in the narrative, we are hopelessly in debt, and have
nothing wherewith to discharge our liabilities. The law of Moses provided
(Lev. xxv. 39-41) that in case of inability to pay his debts, a man and his
children might be sold and remain in bondage until the next year of jubilee.
The laws we have outraged have handed us over to a bondage of the worst
kind—the bondage of sin. ‘‘ Know ye not that to whom ye yield yourselves
servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey.’ The more sin is
 hasaerti the greater moral ruin it works, and the more tyrannical the slavery
it entails.


II. That every provision has been made by Divine grace to restore
humanity to a state of moral solvency. Great as is the havoc wrought by
sin, the remedy is greater. ‘‘Foras by one man’s disobedience many were
made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous.
Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound” (Rom. v.). All the per-
fections of the Divine nature are engaged in the restoration of fallen humanity.
The redemption by Christ Jesus is universally applicable. Restoration is
possible to the most abandoned—the heaviest debt may be cancelled. Heaven
itself is too narrow for the full display of the Divine goodness—its streams
flow down to bless and replenish the neediest on earth.


III. That individual effort is demanded in order to participate in the
ample supplies of Divine grace. The widow in her extremity seeks for help,
and readily obeys the directions given. The vessels are collected and the oil is
poured out (verses 1-5). So Divine grace, to be enjoyed, is to be sought, and
the Divine commands humbly and believinzly obeyed. ‘‘ Ye have not, because
ye ask not.” It is not for man to question the Divine directions, but to obey;
not to slight or ignore the Divine provisions, but eagerly and gratefully to ac-
cept them. The rarest treasures of earth are discovered by the diligent and
persevering seeker. The blessings of heaven are worthy of the most laborious
effort. Conscious need sharpens the vision and stimulates exertion.


IV. That the supply of Divine grace islimited only by the capacity of the
receiver. Every available vessel was filled with the oil. When there were no
more vessels to be obtained, the supply ceased (verse 6). The grace of God is
practically inexhaustible; itis limited, not in itself, but by the capacity of the
individual receiver. Copious as may be the rain-fall, a very limited quantity
will suffice for the needs of a single flower. To a certain extent it may be
true that the grace of God enlarges the vessel which it enriches ‘vith its blessings.
The enjoy went of spiritual good increases the desire for more,


V. That the reception of Divine grace furnishes the loftiest motives to an
upright and useful life. ‘Go, sell the oil and pay thy debt, and live thou and
fea aacpetgmeek ts 7). One of the deceased simplest principles of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY’? KINGS. OHAP. Iv.





true religion is honesty—it teaches a man to pay his debts. He is to dojustly-
Some time ago the clothes of a gentleman were found on the seashore where he
was accustomed to bathe, but no trace of his body was discovered. After due
delay the amount for which his life was insured was paid. He swam out toa
passing ship, assuming to be a political offender of whom the police were in
search, and wastaken on board. Undera new name, in the United States, he
prospered ; and, what was more, he became a subject of renewing grace. Ina
short time after he remitted to the insurance office a sum of money—principal
and interest—of which it had been robbed under such false pretences. It brings
religion into disgrace to neglect to pay just debts when fully able to do so.
“« For the grace of God was manifested, bringing salvation to all men, disciplining
us, in order that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, justly, and godly in the present world” (Titus ii. 11, 12).—Aljord.
Religion supplies the most powerful motives to live the highest life, and teaches
us how to act in all our relationships and duties.


Lussons:—1. The grace of God és universally needed. 2. Is boundless in
generosity, 3. Hes wrought marvellous changes in the condition and prospects of
humansty.


Tue Winow’s Por or Or.


Very abrupt and striking were the transitions in the life of Elisha. Yesterday
he wrought a stupendous miracle which supplied the wants of a whole army,
and was the means, more than the sword of Jehoram and Jehoshaphat, of sub-
duing the rebellious kingdom of Moab ; to-day he works a miracle for the relief
of a poor and friendless widow, to save her sons from slavery and herself from
starvation. In this respect Elisha is a typeof the faithful Christian minister,
who has to pass through scenes as chequered and transitions in their own way
as sudden and remarkable, who, abstracted from common interests and habits,
and lifted by his unworldly character and mission above all human precedences,
is debtor alike to the rich and the poor.


I. To this widow Elisha stood as the representative of the compassionate
Saviour, before whom all the world’s glory pales, and whose presence alone can,
without disturbance to the order of society, equalise all human ranks and level
all their conventional distinctions in the dust. She was in circumstances that
made her feel with peculiar painfulness the gradations of ranks and the vicissi-
tudes of life. If we are to believe the voice of tradition as expressed by Josephus,
she was one who had seen better days, being the widow of Obadiah, the lord
high-chamberlain of Ahab. While her husband lived she breathed the atmo-
sphere of a court, and was nourished in the lap of luxury. But when he died,
she seems to have been reduced to the utmost poverty. On account of these
trying circumstances, her case was one that peculiarly warranted the inter-
position of heaven. But she had another claim still, beside that of her wretched-
ness, upon the sympathy and help of Elisha. Her husband feared the Lord
while he lived. He was the son of a prophet, and cherished the deepest regard
for the person and the work of those who filled that sacred office. If he was
indeed Obadiah, the steward of Ahab—and there seems no reason to doubt the
Jewish tradition—then the sacred story informs us that during the fierce perse-
ceution of the prophets of Israel by Jezebel he took an hundred of these prophets,
and, at the peril of his life, hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread
and water during the whole continuance of the famine. He may have spent
upon the prophets of the Lord what he meant for bis own wife and children.
Like Joseph in Pharaoh’s court, like Daniel in Babylon, the upright and pious
chamberlain in the palace of Ahab did not take advantage of his eee ot


OSAP, IV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS8.








OO eal


enriching himeelf, as the officers of Eastern monarchs have so often done. On
the contrary, he spent his fortune in benefiting the needy, and died poor. On
this ground his widow might well appeal to Elisha for assistance.


II. Elisha willingly acknowledges the claim. He is filled with pity for the
poor broken-hearted widow. Who knows what terrible privations she underwent
without complaining while she had the company of her sons tocheer her? But
when they were about to be taken from her, she could no more hide her suffering.
She must get help, else she will die. Elisha’s first question to her evinced a
wonderful knowledge of the human heart, and of the best mode of dealing with
poverty and suffering. Instead of volunteering to give her aid at once, as most
persons would have done, carried away by an overpowering impulse of compassion
at the recital of the tale of sorrow, like a wise and judicious friend he enquires
how far she herself has the power to avert the threatened calamity—‘‘ What
hast thou in the house ?”? His assistance must be based upon her own assis-
tance. He will help her to help herself. And this is the only true way to
benefit the poor. By reckless and indiscriminate almsgiving, by wholesale gifts
of money, we run the risk of pauperising the objects of ourcharity. Our assist-
ance, therefore, should be of such a nature as to call forth the resources which
they themselves possess, and to make the most of them. No help from without
can benefit, unless there be a willingness of self-help within. Of course such a
mode as this of administering charity is more troublesome, and requires a
greater expenditure of time and self-denial, than the plan of throwing a dole to
a beggar to get rid of his importunity. But putting him in the way of helping
himself will be truer charity than any gift of money.


III. The widow of Obadiah had nothing in the house save a pot of oil. Out
of this last pot of oil—the sign of her utmost poverty—Elisha furnished the
source of her comfort and happiness. Like Elijah, who made the handful of
meal and the cruse of oil already existing an unwasting provision for each new
day’s want; like a greater than Elijah, whose miracle of the multiplication of
the loaves and fishes took its point of departure into the supernatural from the
common barley loaves and fishes before Him; so Elisha, in the case of Obadiah’s
widow, made the produce of nature and of man’s labour the basis of his wonder-
ful act. [n the fables of all nations we are told that a magician, by a mere wave
of his wand, or by pronouncing a certain charm, produces at once wealth and
luxuries that had no existence before. Aladdin rubs a ring, and immedi-
ately a genius appears, and at his command providesa rich feast for him out of
nothing. He rubs an old lamp, and at once a gorgeous palace rises up before
him in substantial reality created out of the formless ether around. By putting
on Fortunatus’s wishing cap, the lucky possessors of it can get anything they
want, and create things unknown before. But there is nothing like thisin the
miracles of the Bible. The prophets and godly men of old were no such
magicians as these. Their most wonderful works are in beautiful accordance
with the wise laws of labour and economy which pervade the ordinary arrange-
ments of life. Even the miracles of Christ, which approached nearest to crea-
tions out of nothing, rested upon a fulcrum of existing materials, by means
of which their supernatural leverage was exerted. In miracles, man must be
a fellow-worker with God in subduing the earth, and in removing the limita-
tions and disabilities of the curse. In these actions men prepared themselves
by the miracle wrought within them—the triumph over natural unbelief and
the objections of reason—to believe in and to benefit by the miracle about to
be wrought without. They heated the iron, as it were, which the hammer of
Omnipotence was about to strike and to mould for His purposes.


IV. Sophos? of Obadiah might well be astonished at the command ef


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHa. IV.

Sig ete i on a rate ee a ea

Elisha. But, in spite of all the objections of reason and common sense, she
hastened to obey the prophet. Her faith triumphed over all difficulties. Itis a
significant circumstance that he should have commanded her to shut the door
upon herself and her sons. Revercnce, stillness, and solitude are needed for the
miracle, and therefore the door must be shut, and the unsympathetic world must
be excluded. It is not in the crowd that God works His wonders in nature
and grace; it is in the lonely place, to the solitary individual. Who is it that
sees the grander revelations of nature, but he who turns his back upon the human
multitude, and seeks communion with her alone in the sanctuary of her hills
and desert places? But, besides being necessary to prepare the widow of Obadiah
for receiving the benefits of the miracle, the solitude and secrecy which Elisha
enjoined were significant of the mysterious character of the miracle itself. It
was veiled in the same obscurity as all creative acts—as all beginnings. The seed
germinates—or, in other words, multiplies itself—in darkness ; anima] Sife begins
in the mysterious secrecy of the womb ; formless matter crystallizes in the sunless
caves of the earth into more than the glory of living flowers. Who catches the
exact moment when the evening star first twinkles in the transparent blue ?
Who has noticed the unfolding of the full-blown rose from the bud? God’s
arm wrought unseen for Israel in the bosom of the dark cloud which rested over
the Red Sea all the night; and in the morning the dry path was revealed be-
tween the crystal walls of water. The veil of darkness concealed the falling of
the manna from heaven ; and the dawn only disclosed it as it whitened the tawny
sand of the desert around the tents of Israel. Verily God hideth himself—shuts,
as it were, the door upon all His origins and commencements, and leaves us
baffled outside. Science and religion and all life bring us back to unfathomable
mystery—a closed door, whose magic ‘‘ sesame’ no human being can utter.


VY. How great must have been the astonishment of the widow when, pouring
into the first vessel a quantity of oil from her pot, the vessel filled immediately
after the first few drops; and the same thing happened as she passed from
vessel to vessel, each filling to the brim as soon as she poured a little from her
own store into it; until at the end, pouring the last remaining drops into the
last vessel, her own stock of oil and the supply from heaven failed together.
The process by which the oil was multiplied we labour in vain toconceive. We
cannot explain the phenomenon by the observation of any known laws; and yet,
in truth, the miracle is not more strange, save in the rapidity with which it is
effected, than that which is every day going forward in nature in those regions
where the olive tree grows. You sow the seed of an olive tree; that seed con-
tains a very small quantity of oil. It grows and becomes a tree and produces an
immense quantity of fruit; so that from the little drop of oil in the small vessel
of the seed, you have thousands of vessels in the shape of the berries, each filled
with oil. The miracle teaches us that the natural process is not the result of an
impersonal law or of a dead course of things, but the working of our Father in
heaven ; while the natural process in its turn shows to us that God in the
miracle is working in the line of the ordinary events and dispensations of His
providence.


IV. Awestruck and filled with amazement, the widow went and told the Man
of God what had happened. She asked for counsel in the strange and unex-
pected emergency. She needed assurance of the reality and permanence of
this marvellous good fortune. The oil might vanish as mysteriously as it
came. How calmly the prophet receives her! He knew what would happen.
And does not this show a wonderful amount of faith and confidence in God on
the part of Elisha? He told the widow to sell the miraculous oil and pay
her debt with the price of it, and use what she could not sell as food for herself
and her children. The miracle goes no further than is absolutely ome It

41


*%


GEAR. W. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





blends with common life. It does not permanently enrich the poor; it pro-
vides only for the temporary necessity. How strikingly does this incident
show that we must be fellow-workers with God throughout, from first to last,
in our own deliverance aud blessing? Thus, in a most interesting manner, was
the bread cast upon the waters found after many days. The widow proved
in her experience the truth of the Saviour’s words: ‘‘ Blessed are the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy ;’’ or, as the phrase should be translated literally,
‘‘ Blessed are the olive givers, for olives shall be given tothem.” Obadiah had
poured the oil of his bounty into the afflicted heart of God’s servants ; and God’s
servant in return gave his widow the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment
of praise for the spirit of heaviness.


VII. We might make many practical uses of the widow's pot of oil, for it is
full of significance, but we prefer turning the incident into a parable, and using
it as an encouragement to prayer. We are all in the condition of the poor
widow; we are destitute of everything, and are ready to perish. But God ia
far more tender and considerate to us than Elisha was to the widow. If we
have but the feeling of want, but the desire for God’s help, that very want or
desire will be to us what the pot of oil was tothe widow—the source of an
abundant supply of all we need. If we come to God with the longing of our
hearts tor His salvation, He will come with the fulness of His Godhead, and
supply all our needs according to the riches of His glory in Christ Jesus. If
we provide vessels, God will furnish the oil with which to fillthem. For our
own little oil He will give us overflowing measure; for our feeble desire,
He will do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think. Let
us, borrow, then, many vessels; let them be empty, nothing of self in them,
and let us lay them before Christ, and He will fill them to the brim with the
oil of His grace. Gethsemane, the place where He suffered the last agony,
means a press for olive oil. From that oil-press of sorrow He will provide a
sufficient supply of the oil of gladness for us.—Condensed from the Sunday
Magazine for 1878).


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-7. The widow's cruse. I. knows what we have need of. A just
The widow's dificulty. (1). The God. Would equally defend the nght
nature of it. A debt. One that she of the creditor, as well as the case of
could not pay. Might not be much, the widow. (2). In harmony with
but she waspoor. (2). Hadcomeupon His Word. Widows and orphans are
hersuddenly. Otherwise herhusband His special care. (8). In aiding her
would not have left her thus. Some He employs the prophet. It may be
provision would have been made. (3). that her husband’s connection with the
Aggravations of the difficulty. Her prophets had brought her into this
sons, instead of being her stay and  sstrait. If so, there was a fitness in
support in her widowhood, must now the selection of her instrument of
work for another. Instead of being deliverance. Man the helper of man.
prophets, they must be bondsmen. It Man blessed that he may become a
does not necessarily follow that her blessing. (4). He aided in answer to
creditor was hard-hearted. He may prayer. She sought and found. She
have been; he seems only to have came first to Elisha. Trial of faith
wanted his own. He may have been and reward of it. III. Zhe widow's
Fae. On the other hand, he may deliverance. (1). Speedily effected.

ave rejoiced at breaking up sucha Not long years of hard service of her
home. II. The widow's helper. sons and herself. This prompt help
God. (1). Pace to Hw nature, snows the prophet’s sympathy and


tr


‘ HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. FV,





rense of justice too. (2): Strange
method. Vessels borrowed. Great
many. Allher neighbours’. (3). The
command. Close doors. No prying
eyes of people who might misunder-
stand the whole case. ‘‘ Pour out.’’
She does so, and her cruse fills all the
vessels. Sells the oil and pays the
debt. (4). The effect. Her character
for honesty vindicated. Her sons
saved to her and to their high vocation.
She is saved from the need of hard and
unaccustomed toil. The Divine
friend of the helpless and poor is, by
this history, commended to all widows.
The story is one of many encouraging
events that may lead widows, and
such as are friendless, to trust in God.
Many sad hearts, empty of comfort,
have been filled with the oil of joy
out of her cruse.

Leann:—1. The best people are some-
times exposed to trial. 2. God ts a
present help in the time of need. 3. We
should sympathize with the sad as Elisha
with the widow. 4. Our little may go far,
with God’ sblessing.— The Class and Desk.


Verse 1. The griping tyranny
of debt. I. May fasten upon those
who do their best to avoid it. II. Is
the more keenly felt in proportion to
the desire to do everything in the
fear ofthe Lord, III. Brings suffering
and slavery upon the family.

— How thick did the miseries of
this peor afflicted woman light upon
her! Her husband is lost, her estate
clogged with debts, her children ready
to be taken for slaves. Her husband
was a religious and worthy man;
he paid his debts to nature, he could
got to his creditors. They are cruel,
and rake in the scarce closed wound
of her sorrow, passing an arrest worse
than death upon her sons. Virtue
and goodness can pay no debts. The
holiest man may be deep in arrearages
and break the bank, not through
lavishness and riot of expense, but
through either iniquity of times, or
evil casualties. Ahab and Jezebel
were lately on the throne; who can
marvel that a prophet was in debt!
It was well that any good man might
have his breath free, though his estate


were not. Wilfully to overlash our
ability cannot stand with wisdom and
good government; but no providence
can guard us from crosses. Holiness is
no more defence against debt than
against death. Grace can keep us
from unthriftiness, not from want.—
Bp. Hall.


Verses 3-5. In temporal affairs ex-
erience must precede and faith follow;
in spiritual affairs faith must precede,
and then experience follows, for we
do not find out the truth unless belief
in God’s Word has preceded (Jno. vii.
17). Whatever a man does in the
obedience of faith, whether it appears
foolish or vain in the eyes of the world,
is nevertheless blessed by God, and


redounds to his soul’s health.—
Cramer.
Verse 5. It was time to shut the


door, saith a reverend .man, when
many greater vessels must be supplied
from one little one. But why must
the door beshut? 1. That she might
be the more free to pray (Matt. vi. 6).
2. That she might manifest her own
faith, and not be hindered by the un-
belief of others (Mark vi. 5, 6).
8. That it might not be thought that
the oil was by anybody secretly con-
veyed into the house to them.

— The secrecy of the Divine
workings. I. Strengthens the con-
victions of theirsupernatural character,
II. Demands a more implicit faith.
III. Does not prevent their beneficent
results being apparent to all.


Verse 6. Out of one small jar waa
poured out so much oil as by a mira-
culous multiplication filled all these
empty casks. Scarce had that pot any
bottom, at least the bottom that it had
was to be measured by the brims of all
those vessels: this was so deep as they
were high ; could they have held more
this pot had not been empty. Even so
the bounty of our God gives grace and
glory according to the capacity of the
receiver. When he ceases to infuse, it
is for want of room in the heart to take
it in. Could we hold more, O God,
thou wouldst give more: if there be

128


%


GHAP. TV.


any defect, it is in our vessels, not in
thy beneficence!— Bp. Hall.

— This is a good emblem of the
grace of God. While there isan empty,
longing heart, there is a continual
overflowing fountain of salvation. If
we find in any place, or at any time,
that the oil ceases to flow, it is because
there are no empty vessels there, no
souls hungering and thirsting for
righteousness.— Clarke.


Verse 7. Imeans are given thee
to satisfy thy creditor, let it be thy
first duty to pay him before thou carest
for thyself! He who can pay his debts
but will not, takes what does not belong
to him, and sins against the eighth
commandment. Whenthe Lord gives
there is always something left over and


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.





above. He never merely takes away
distress, He gives a blessing besides.
He desires, however, that the obliga-
tion to our neighbour should first be
satisfied before we begin to enjoy Hin
blessing.—Lange.


— Some of the ancient interpreters
find in this widow an image of the
Gentile church. The husband being
dead signifies that she was no longer
joined to her ancient idolatries. Her
coming to Elisha and obeying his
word is explained as a type of the
eagerness with which the Gentiles
sought salvation at the hands of Christ
and His apostles; and the abundant
supply of oil represents the bountiful
provisions of the Gospel to deliver all
nations from the bondage of sin.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 8-17.


Genurne Kinpnzss 1s Never UnREWwARDED.


I, It is in the power of all classes to show kindness (verse 8). Elisha
was hospitably entertained by a “‘ great woman ’’—great in moral goodness as
well as in wealth. It is in the power of the rich to do much good with their
riches. All honour to those who of their abundance take pleasure in ministering
‘o the wants of the needy. It isin their power greatly toaugment the happiness
of the world. But alas! how many there are who, with ample means to do good
to others, have not the disposition. The lack of the disposition is more sad, and,
unfortunately, more common, than the lack of the ability. It is not, however,
the exclusive privilege of the rich to show kindness to others. The poor may,
and do, help the poor. There are many who, like the poor widow of Zarephath,
are ready to share their last crust and their last cruse of oil. There are arts of
kindness more precious than money. These it is in the power of all classes to
show—rich or poor, great or insignificant. A generous spirit is governed more
by the actual necessity of the case than by the expense. Great acts of kindness
are not accomplished without cost (1 Chron. xxi. 24),


II. It is a special privilege to show kindness to a true servant of God
(verses 9, 10). There was something about the mien and spirit of Elisha which
impressed the women of Shunem that he was “ an holy man of God.” He was
so different from the prophets of Baal, or from many who pretended to a character
of sanctity to which they had no claim. In a time of such widespread
degeneracy, a good man was too rare not to be easily distinguished. In showing
kindness to Elisha, she paid deference to the God whom he worshipped and
whose truth he taught. The love of kindness should spring from the love of
goodness. ‘‘ Those that are truly pious and devout think their houses and their
hands cannot be too open to the messengers of God, and are most glad to
exchange their earthly commodities for the others spiritual. Superfluity should
not fall within the care of a prophet, necessity must. He that could provide


oil for the Ut could have provided all needful helps for himself. What
414


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OnAP. IV.








room had there been for the charity and beneficence of others, if the prophet
should have always maintained himself out of power?’ A judicious use of
kindness to the truly good is more fruitful of blessing than the most lavish
generosity towards the undeserving. Indiscriminate charity does more to
pauperise than to really help.


III. A grateful heart knows how to appreciate genuine | im1iess (verse
11.13). The prophet was not unmindful of the thoughtfulness wud liberality
with which he was treated, and was anxious to bestow some substantial proof
of his appreciation and gratitude. Kindness begets kindness. It is the curse
of a sclfish and covetous spirit to receive : 11 and give nothing in return. The
heart that cannot respond to repeated acts of kindness is past all feeling—it is
petrified into stony hopelessness. Gratitude will manifest itself; it is restless to
show its appreciation of kindness. ‘‘ An ingenuous dispositiou cannot receive
favours without thoughts of return. A wise debtor is desirous to retribute in
such kind as may be most acceptable to his obligers. Without this discretion.
we may offer such requitals as may seem goodly to us—to our friends, worthless.”


IV. The reward of genuine kindness often comes in a form least expected
verses 14-17). The kind hostess of the prophet did not look for any recompense.
he had no difficulty in which Elisha’s influence with the king or the captain

of the host would be of any service to her. She was not conscious of needing
anything. The recompense came in a way wholly unexpected—all human pro-
babilites seemed against her being thus honoured—she received the promise of
a son. To an Israelitish wife childlessness was a reproach and disgrace
(Gen. xxx. 23; Luke i. 25). In some way unexpected, but ina way that will
bring much satisfaction and joy, kindness will meet with its reward. There is
a special blessing connected with what we do for the servants of God (Matt. x.
40-42).


Lessons :—1. Zhe love of moral goodness begets a true generosity. 2. A generous


spirit never lacks opportunity for sts exercise. 3. Kindness shown to the servants
of God ts never lost.


GERM NOTES ON THE VEESES.


Verse 8, There are always, among
those whose lot it is to have wealth,
some who do not attach their hearts to
it, and do not trust in uncertain riches,
but in the living God; who have not
become satiated and indifferent in their
hearts, but hunger and thirst after
righteousness, and have an earnest
desire for the bread of life. The ser-
vants of the Word ought not to with-
draw themselves from these, but
advance to meet them in every way.
God always gives to His children pious
hearts, so that they open their houses
and shelter strangers. Though the
Gadarenes beg him to depart (Luke
viii. 87), though there are Samaritans
who will not receive Christ (Luke ix.
63), yet there is alwaysa good soul


which is glad to take the Lord Jesus
and receive Him to itself. He who,
like the Shunammite, honours and
loves the Lord, and is anxious to lead a
lite in God, honours and loves also the
servants of the Lord, and seeks their
society. He does not seek them, how-
ever, a8 pleasant companions, or merely
in order to claim their help in bodily
need, but he seeks them as shepherds,
as soul-physicians, a3 guardians of
God’s mysteries, and aa messengers in
Christ’s stead.—Lange.


Verses 9-11. A true servant of
God. I. Distinguished by purity of
life and character. ‘‘A holy mun is
like a crystal glass with a clear lamp
in the midst of it.” II. Hxerts a

415


~*~


OmAP. IV


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.


rr STE


beneficial influence on all with whom
he comes in contact. III. Inspires
generous purposes in the hearts of all
lovers of goodness. IV. Sincerely
appreciates acts of kindness done for
his ownor his Master’s sake.


Verses 12-17. The conversation of
Elisha with the Shunammite. 1. Zhe
question of Elisha. A question inspired
by gratitude, although the woman
had far more reason to thank him
than he her. A noble heart does not
like to receive afavour and make no
return, but recognizes its obligation to
return it. It is also a test-question,
to see if the Shunammite had received
him in the name of a prophet, and not
for the sake of a reward, or for any
temporal gain. The question as to thy
wishes is a question as to the disposi-
tion of thy heart. 2. Zhe answer of
the Shunammite. She seeks no recom-
pense for the good she has done; she
wishes to have nothing to do with the
court of the king, and of the great ones
of this world; she has no desire for
high things—a sign of great humility
and modesty. Although she lacked
that which was essential to the honour
and happiness of an Israelitish wife—
a son—yet she was contented, and no
word of complaint passed her lipsp—a
sign of great contentment. The Lord,
according to His grace and truth, re-
members even the wishes that we
cherish in silence and do not express
before men, and He often gives to those
who yield to His holy will without
murmurs or complaints just that which
they no longer dared to hope for. It
makes a great difference whether we
doubt of the Divine promises from un-
belief, or from humility, or want of
confidence in ourselves, because we
consider the promises too great and
glorious, and ourselves unworthy of
them.—Lange.


Verse 13. Itis good hearing that
an Elisha is in such grace at the court
that he can promise himself access to
the king in a friend’s suit. It was
not ever thus. The time was when
his master heard, ‘Hast thou found
me, O mine enemy?” Now the late

426


miracle which Elisha wrought im
gratifying the three kings with water
and victory hath endeared him to the
king of Israel. Bad asJehoram was,
yet he honoured the man of God. Not
to his ownadvancement doth Elisha
desire to improve the king’s favour, but
to the behoof, to the relief of others.
There cannot be a better office, nor
more beseeming a prophet, than to
speak in the cause of the dumb, to
befriend the oppressed, to win great-
ness unto the protection of innocence.
—Bp. Hall.

— “I dwell among mine own
people.” Aspirit of contentment.
I. Finds its happiness in its immediate
surroundings. II. Is not allured by
offers of greater worldly distinction.
Ill. Is not involved in troubles
requiring the interference of the great
and powerful. IV. Does not show
kindness to others with the design of
securing any advantage, or receiving
anything in return.

— The good matron needs no
shelter of the great. ‘‘Idwell among
mine own people.” As if she said:
The courtesy is not small in itself, but
not useful tome. I live here quietly,
in a contented obscurity, out of the
reach either of the glories or cares of
a court; free from wrongs, and free
from envies. Not so hi*h as to pro-
voke an evil eye, not so low as to be
trodden on. I have neither fears nor
ambitions. My neighbours are my
friends, my friends are my protectors ;
and, if I should be so unhappy as to
be the subject of main injuries, would
not stick to be mine advocates. This
favour is for those that cither affect
greatness, or groan under oppression.
I do neither, for ‘I live among my
own people.” O Shunammite! thou
shalt not escape envy. Who can hear
of thy happy condition, and not say,
why amI not thus? If the world
afford any perfect contentment, itis in
a middle estate, equally distant from
penury, from excess. It isin a calm
freedom, a secure tranquillity, a sweet
fruition of ourselves, of ours,


Verse 16. How liberal is God by
His prophet in giving beyond hex


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ouaP. rv.


a a snssessSeensneswrnerenenterereneeveetenienene


requests. Not seldom doth His
bounty overreach our thoughts, and
meet us with those benefits which we
thought too good for us to ask. We
are never sure of what we desire, We


loath to distrust beneficial events.
She well knew the prophet’s holiness
could not stand with wilful falsehood.
Perhaps she might think it spoken by
way of tricl, not of serious affirmation


are not more hard toe believe than —JSp. Hail.


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 18-37,
A Gruar Tria anv rms Joyous Issuz.


Sorrow and joy, tears and laughter, lie close together in the ever-changing
experience of human life. The source of greatest joy is often turned into a
ehannel through which flows the bitterest anguish. ‘The son of the Shunamite,
whose advent brought gladness into the home, was also the means of bringing
over it the darkest shadow of trouble. But asthe star shines brightest in the
night, so in the gloomiest moments of our distress are we most conscious of the
radiance of the Divine presence, and are more impressed with the wisdom and
glory of His works.


I. Here we have the trial ofa first bereavement (verses 18-21). 1.
was the bereavement of an only son. It was not only the loss of a child, but of
the only child, and that child the son and heir—a child sent as a special and
unlooked-for gift of heaven, as of one ‘‘ born out of due time.” The first and
fondest affections of the parental heart had centred in this child, and his loss
was the heaviest affliction his parent had ever known. Words cannot depict the
keen and bitter pang of first bereavement—the heart lies pierced and bleeding,
writhing in voiceless and helpless agony. Happy is the sufferer who can find
relief in tears! 2. The bereavement wae sudden. One moment the lad is blithe
and merry in his gambols in the harvest field—the pride of his father, who
already sees in the abundance of his fields the means of blessing the future of
his son; the next moment he is smitten by the fierce rays of the sun that had
ripened his father’s wealth, and he is carried to his mother’s lap to die. The
eyes that had watched with a mother’s rapture the nimble form of her darling
boy as he bounded towards the fields in the golden light uf that harvest morning,
with his parting kiss fresh upon her lips, are now hent in tearless grief over
his corpse. A few brief hours have brought the change from light to darkness,
from life to death. Ah! how sudden are the great changes of life—how swift
is the messenger of sorrow! We live a life-time in a moment, and the heart
receives a scar that time will never efface.


II. Here we have a trial of faith in the Almighty power of God (verses
22-30). 1. Sorrow should not destroy, but intensify, our faith. As soon as the
first shock of alarm had subsided, the faith of the Shunamite woman in the
God of Elisha asserted its power. She believed her boy might be restored. So
strong was this belief that, for the time being, she hid the fact of his death from
her husband. She heroically bore the grief herself, strong in the confidence of
Divine interference. The soul that has no faith in God is paralyzed and help-
less in sorrow. The distress that drives the believer to God, drives the unbe-
liever to despair. ‘‘ Faith is the best lever at a dead lift.” 2. Fath prompts
to the use of all legitimate means to attain our most ardent desires. With all speed
she sought an interview with the prophet. poured her grief into his ears, and
passionately entreated his help ; nor would she cease ner supplications until she

revailed upon him to accompany her to the home where the dead child lay
he chamber of the prophet was, for the first time, the chamber: of death,
EB =e


OHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


“





Faith without works is dead. It is presumption to expect God to do what we
can do for ourselves. Only when we have exhausted all human means may we
patiently and believingly wait for the Divine interference. We cannot save
ourselves; but we are directed to ask, seek, knock.


III. Here we have the trial of a painful suspense (verses $2-35). Elisha
entered the chamber, shut the door, and was alone with the dead child and with
God. Who can describe the agony of suspense that tortured that mother’s
heart during the few hours of the prophet’s absence—how hope and fear alter-
nated? Will the door never open again? Will the prayers of the holy man
prevail? Willsheclaspagain herliving son? And yet most of us are acquainted
with such moments in life. How much has sometimes depended upon a single
hour—upon a letter—upon a telegram! Such moments have been experienced
at the rescue of a wrecked crew. Will the vessel hold together—will the line


bear the strain—till the last man is saved ?


IV. Here we have the sorrow of death exchanged for the joy of a miracu-


lous resurrection (verses 36, 37).


rapture ?
and marvellous changes in life.
give place to joyous deliverance.
cometh in the morning.”


The faith and prayer of the prophet triumph.
The child is restored to life, and given back to his mother.
“This my son was dead, and is alive again.”

After a storm,acalm. Trial, conflict, despair,
‘‘Sorrow may endure for a night; but joy


Who can describe her
A symbol of the rapid


Lessons :—1. There ts no home into which death does not sooner or later enter.
2. The only refuge and relief in sorrow ts wm God. 3. The greatest trials lead to


the realizaiton of the greatest blessings.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES,


Verse 18-37. The Shunammite’s
son. I. 4 proud mother’s delight.
(1). Her son. The pleasure she took
in watching his childhood and growth,
&c. He washer treasure. (2). He
was her only son. This would increase
her anxiety and also her delight in him

Judg. xi. 34; Lukeix. 38). (3).
The child of promise (verse 16, 17).
Hebrew wives anxious to have chil-
dren—especially to have a son.
This desire is natural, not confined to
Hebrews. Her husband was well
off, and here was a son to inherit the
father’s property and name. (4).
Harvest time. Her child sent out to
play in the harvest field. She watches
nim depart, and thinks of the happy
day he would have, and the meeting
at night. II. A tender mother’s trial,
(1). The child in the field. Youthful
sports. Playing at harvesting. The
father’s pleasure. The sunstroke.
‘‘My head! my head!’”? The father’s
sorrow. ‘Carry him to his mother.”

418


A mother the best nurse. (2). She
sees her child returning, not running
by the father’s side, but carried. Her
anxiety. Herfears. (3). Nurses her


child. The time drags on. The
mother does not tire. The child dies.
She has faith left. Faith a good com-


panion in trouble. This child of
promise could not be lost—should
not die if she could help it. Carries
the child into the prophet’s chamber.
III. A good wife’s example. (1).
Considers not her own feelings only,
but her husband’s also. How great
his grief on his return, and finding
deathin his house! (2). Resolves on
immediate action. Will visit the man
of God. Cannot do this without assis-
tance. The distance is very great.
Calculates the time- can accomplish
it before the day is over. (8). Hastens
to the field—begs for one of the young
men, &c. Does not tell her husband.
Would not grieve him, A hint for
those who unnecessarily burden other


dAOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





people with their troubles. IV. 4
happy mother’s reward. (1). She
returns with the prophet. Who
would bring a doctor to a dead child ?
Her faith. (2). The child’s wonder-
ful restoration to life. (3). The first
reward. Clasping the living child to
her heart. (4). Second reward.
The father’s return and greeting.
Pleased to find that the child is well.
Astonishment at learning the history
of the day. Men at their occupations
little think of the trials at home.
Should commend their dear ones to
God. (5). Her after rewards. The
preservation and growth of this child.

Lzarn:—1l. Zo repay a mother’s
love and anxious care. 2. Try to bear
your trial nobly without making other
people bear tt. 3. Jesus will aise all
cheldren up at the Last Day.— Class and
Desk.


Verses 18, 19. His father grew
young again with the pleasure of this
aight, and more joyed in this spring
of his hopes than in all the crops of
his harvest. But what stability is
there in earthly delights? The hot
beams of the sun beat upon that head
which much care had made tender and
delicate. The child complains to his
father of his pain. Oh, that grace
would teach us, what nature teaches
infants, in all our troubles to bemoan
ourselves to our Heavenly Father!


Verse 18. A day in a mother’s
life. There are times when every-


thing goes on smoothly, and one day
is like another. Again there are
times when changes come, and whole
years of joy or sorrow may be concen-
trated into a single day. So it was
with the household at Shunem. It
was 8 hallowed day when Elisha first
entered the house (verse 8). Itwasa
joyous day when a man-child was
born (verse 17). But most memorable
of all was that day when the only son
was lost and found; was dead, and
received back to life again (verses
18-37). 1. Lorning joys. Itis the
harvest time. ‘‘ Man goeth forth unto
his work and to his labour until the
evening ” (Psalm civ. 22, 28). First,
we see mother and child at home.


Char, iv.


rien ward


She is called “a great woman”
(verse 8). This implies not greatness
in wealth, but in character (Prov. xii.
26; xxxi. 10-31). Doubtless she
would show her “ greatness’? not only
in her management of household affairs,
but in her care of her child. How
tenderly she would watch over him;
with what gentle wisdom she would
train him in the ways in which he
should go! Day by day he grew
before her in strength and comeliness.
He was herjoy and pride. His birthhad
taken away her reproach; his training
had developed all the deepest feelings
of her nature; his fellowship was her
delight, and his future the dearest hope
of her life. He should live and
prosper. He would yet do worthily
in Shunem, and be famous in Jezreel.
Oh, happy mothers,
“ Who carry music in their heart ;

Plying the daily task with busier feet

Because their secret souls a holy strain

repeat.”

The next scene is in the harvest field.
Here, too, allis joy. The father is
glad at sight of his boy. His coming
is not the result of command, but of
his own choice. There is such love
between him and his father as makes
their meeting and intercourse a joy
to both. They are happy together.
See them watching the reapers, or
walking hand in hand amidst the
yellow corn. The father’s heart
swells with gladness. His boy is more
to him than all his fields. He is his
only son, his heir, his treasure, the
hope of his old age. He sees in him
his mother’s love and image, and the
stay of her heart when he himself is
gone. How fervently he prays:
“The God of Jacob bless the lad.”
2. Darkness at noon. How soon may
the brightest sky be clouded. How
quickly may the happiest home be
darkened by sorrow and the shadow
of death! ‘ We know not whata day
may bring forth.” The sun is high
and hot in the heavens. Suddenly a
erv of agony is heard—‘‘ My head,
my head!’’ It is the ory ofa child.
How strange the association—child-
hood and pain! Surely here is a
proof of the ravages of jie (Rom. v,


»


OHAP. .V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


i


14), We may hear many sermons,
and give no heed; but hard and
callous is the heart that can behold
the sufferings of a child and yet not
feel humbled and awed before God.
It is a ery raised in the midst of inno-
sent labour The work going onis good,
and notevil. It is in accordance with
God’s ordinance. It is wholesome and
pure. &id and young may join in it
freely. Such, at least, it was in the
olden time, when the simplicity of
and purity of pastoral life was still
known in the land (Ruthii. 4). And
yet here death comes. There is no
place safe. There is no people or
work with immunity from trouble.
The cry brought woe to the father’s
heart. His son’s voice was sweet to
hisear. Many a time had he heard
it and been glad. Butnow the words
“my head” are like a sword. Well
did he know the import of that
terrible cry. He ishelpless. But he
knows where comfort is to be found.
“‘To his mother.” It was the instinct
of his heart. It was what the boy
himself would have said, could he
have spoken, Where is there a com-
forter like a mother? It may be the
childis hurt. Others may make light
of it: not so his mother. It may be
he is weary of learning. Others may
be hard and impatient: not so his
mother. It may be he has committed
a fault. Others may be severe and
unsympathizing: not so his mother.
It may be he has been stricken by sick-
ness. Others may not understand or
take heed: not so his mother. Work
is laid aside. Comforts are got.
Books, pictures are bought. Every-
thing must give way tothe littleinvalid.
‘‘His mother.” Sure refuge for the
weary ; true resting-place for the sick
and stricken child. Picture the sad
home-coming. ‘Carry him.” The
lad obeys. Whata change! Hecame
out full of life and frolic; he is borne
back helpless as a clod. ‘His
mother.” Perhaps on household busi-
ness intent. Perhaps preparing for
the return of father and child, and
busy in heart shaping joyous things.
Alas! how dreadful the awakening
(verse roe Mark ber geméleness.
0


“* On her knees”*—where often she had
dandled him with delight. Her
patience and hope. Till noon. What
suspense! What hoping against hope !
Her terrible distress. “* Died.”
Seemed like as if the sun had gone
down at noon. All was dark. In
that moment what thoughts crowded
upon her soul! What a trial to her
faith! God seemed to have forsaken
her. Thus with many—


‘¢ Too common ! Never morning wore
To evening, but some heart did break.”


ITT, Light at evening time. Allis
not lost, since God liveth. This
woman, like her countryman of Gospel
times, was great in faith. Therefore,
instead of giving way to despair, she
strengthens her heart in God. Per-
haps she said to herself, like David,
‘¢Why art thou cast down, my soul ?
Still hope in God.”? Mark the prepara-
tion. What promptitude and decision !
The long ride to Carmel. At other
times might have admired the “ glory
of Carmel,” but now she is pre-
occupied—her heart is fixed. She is
silent. The passionate appeal to the
prophet (verses 27-30). Nothing will
satisfy her but Elisha. He is to her
the man of God. He stands as the
prophet of the Lord to her, in sorrow
asin joy. She will not leave off till
he yields. Such importunity pleads
notin vain. Thereturn and restoration
(verses 32-37). Hope has sprung up
again in her breast. Nothing is too
hard for the Lord. How strange and
solemn the scenes in the chamber
of death! How wonderful the revival !
God is great. Oh, what joy when the
mother clasps again to her breast her
beloved boy! Nothing Diviner could
she feel short of heaven. Think of
the happy close of the day in that
Hebrew home! Dearer than ever was
the son that had been dead, and re-
ceived back to life again. Stronger
than ever was the faith of father and
mother in the God of Jacob, who had
proved their Refuge and Help in the
time of trouble. With what quiet and
assured peace would they kneel in
prayer, With what joyful hearts
wouid they sing praises to the God of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAR. IV.





Israel (Psalm xxx. 11, 12). What
lessons to young and old are here
(Kee. xii. 1; Prov. xxii. 6; Eph. vi. 4).
Trials willcome. In the darkest hour
God can help. Here the child cries
to his father, the father sends to the
mother, the mother appeals to the
prophet, and the prophet casts himself
on God. So let us cast ourselves on
Christ, our God and Saviour (Isaiah
Ixvi. 13; Johu xi. 25).—Zhe Study
and Pulpit.


Verse 19. What an undivine
inference was that of the Bishop of
Hereford, in his sermon at Oxford upon
this text, in the reign of Edward II.,
pursued at that time by his queen and
son, that an aching and sick head of a
kingdom was of necessity to be taken
off, and no otherwise cured !—TZrapp.


Verse 20. The death of a child.
I. Lightly regarded by some. II. Is
the first real sorrowtomany. III. A
proof of the prevalence and power of
sin. IV. Gives a deeper interest to
the bereaved in the better land.

— The death of loved children
eomes often suddenly, like the light-
ning from a clear sky, and destroys
our joy and our hopes. Therefore,
we should possess these gifts as not
possessing them. The Lord will not
abandon, in days of adversity, him who
trusts in Him in days of prosperity.
He who in the latter has learned
sobriety, and maintained his faith, will
not be without wisdom and consola-
tion in the former, but will be com-
posed in all adversity.—Lange.


Verses 22, 238. A prudent wife.
I. Will control her own feelings for
the sake of her husband. II. Will
consult her husband on every needful
occasion. III. Enjoys the respect and
confidence of her husband in all things.

— A pious woman does nothing
without her husband’s knowledge, and
does not willingly call his attention to
anything by which he may be sad-
dened.— Starke.


Verses 26, 27. This scene is
natural and very graphic. If you ask
after a person whom you know to be
sick, the reply at first will invariably


be Well, thank God, even when the
very next sentence is to inform you
that he is dying. Then the falling
down, clasping the feet, &c., are
actions witnessed every day. I have
had this done to me often before I
could prevent it. So also the officious
zeal of the wicked Gehazi, who would
thrust the broken-hearted mother
away, probably thinking her touch
pollution, agrees perfectly with wha
we know of the man, and of the cus-
toms of the East.— Thomson.


Verse 26, ‘It iswell.” The ver-
dict ofhope. I. May be uttered when
the heart is full of sorrow. II. Indi-
cates an unwavering faith in God.
III. May be true in a higher sense
when present circumstances do not
warrant the verdict.

— The highest Christian optimism.
I. Teaches that all is well in its rela-
tion to the wisdom and love of God.
II. In its present moral bearing on
ourselves. III. In its relation to the
compensation and glory of the future.


Verse 27. Do not make known at
once to every one you meet that which
distresses you, but keep it to yourself
until you find one who understands
you, and whose heart you have tested.
Beware lest thou treat harshly sad
souls who are overcome by grief, and
who seek help and consolation, and
lest thou thrust them away or judge
them hastily. Do not cause still more
grief to a bruised heart.


Verse 31. The powerlessness of
some religious actsexplained. I. Not
because they are not done as commanded
and with all due proprie!y and solem-
nity. II. But because there is a lack
of earnest, acting, living faith. III.
Because there are defects and incon-
sistencies of religious character.

— Why was Gehazi’s mission with
the steffi a failure? First of all, we
maintain that it is far from certain or
evident that Elisha expected his staff
and his servant would be effectual in
raising the dead. On the contrary, it
is very possible that he meant Gehazi’s
mission should be a failure, in order to
show that the miracle could not be

421


*


CHAP, IV,





wrought by any supposed magic of the
staff, by any mere human agency
whatever. But on the other supposi-
tion, certainly admissible, and even
probable, that the prophet expected
his staff to resuscitate the child, the
failure is thus well explained by Kitto:
‘Elisha did not at first mean to go
himself to Shunem, and for that reason
sent his staff to supply the lack of his
own presence. But after he had sent
away the servant, his observation of
the uneasiness of the mother, whom
he had expected to have gone home
satisfied, and her avowed determination
not to leave him, induced him to alter
his purpose, and, with the kindness
natural to him, to forego his own en-
gagements at Carmel, and to accom-
pany her to her forlorn home. It was
probably in consequence of this change
of plan that no response was made to
the first claim of faith by means of the
staff. That appeal, in fact, was super-
seded the moment he resolved to go in
person, the Lord thus reserving forthe
personal intercession of His prophet
the honour of this marvellous deed.”
But Gehazi’s supposed unfitness to
work the miracle, and the woman’s
lack of faith in him, are facts not to
be overlooked. They may be a suffi-
cient reason for the failure of Gehazi’s
mission. For in the realm of the
miraculous, Divine Power works not
blindly nor arbitrarily, but according
to sacred laws. To affirm that there
must be a sympathetic union or spon-
taneous affiliation between the human
agencies employed and those deeply
concerned in a given miracle, is only
to say what is abundantly suggested in
the Scriptures. Nor is this to degrade
a class of miracles to the low plane of
animal magnetism, or explain them
away on naturalistic principles; yet
it need not be denied that the psycho-
logical basis of animal magnetism was
a medium through which many mira-
cles were performed, and without which
some miracles could not have been
wrought. When the disciples, after
their failure to heal a lunatic child,
asked Jesus why they could not work
the miracle, He replied, ‘‘ Because of
your unbelief” (Matt. xvii. 20, comp.
423


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





xili, 58; Mark vi. 56; ix. 28).—
Whedon.

— The staff of the prophet is of no
use if the spirit and power of the pro-
phet are wanting. Do not mistake
the sign for the thing signified. It is
God alone who can help, and His help
is not dependent on external instru-
ments and signs.


Verses 32-35. The power of prayer.
1. The best preparation for a great
spiritual conflict. 2. Inspires an invin-
cible faith. 38. Suggests the use of
the best means for obtaining an an-
swer. 4, Achieves great victories.


Verses 32, 33.—Merit and impor-
tunity have drawn Elisha from Carmai
to Shunem. He finds his lodging
taken up by that pale corpse. He
shuts the door and falls to prayer.
This staff of his, whatever became of
the other, was long enough, he knew,
to reach up to heaven, to knock at
these gates, yea, to wrench them open.
Bishop Halt.


Verse 34. He knew what Elijah
had done in a similar case (1 Kings
xvii. 21), and followed his example;
but doubtless both Elijah and Elisha
used these natural means in accordance
with some special revelation that was
given them. This placing of his
mouth, eyes, and hands, upon those
of the child, bore the same relation
to this miracle which the spittle and
the washing in Siloam did to the
miracle by which Jesus gave sight to
the man blind from his birth (Jno. ix.
1-7). Divine power could have raised
this child to life in answer to Elisha’s
prayer without any other action on
the part of the prophet, but Divine
wisdom decreed otherwise. Christ
opened one blind man’s eyes by a sin-
gle command; but in the other case
He adopted peculiar measures to work
substantially the same miracle. We
cannot tell why, but we accept the
facts, and argue from them the depth
of the riches both of: the wisdom and
knowledge of God (Rom. xi. 33). We
do not presume to deny that our God
might have adopted a different plan
of redemption from the one we have,
but we may wall question the possi-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OnAP. ry.





bility of a wiser one, and though we
cannot fathom all its mystery, we
accept with joy the fact of ‘“‘ God
manifest in the flesh;”? and in the
blessed incarnation of our Lord, to use
the analogy of this miracle of Elisha,
we see with wonder how the God-man
stretches himself upon our cold, life-
less humanity that wes dead in
trespasses and sins, and even con-
tracts himself to the narrow span of
our infancy, childhood, manhood. His
blessed mouth and eyes and hands
come into contact with our own. He
breathes upon us the Holy Ghost, and
we are quickened and warmed into a
new and eternal life. We are thus
raised from spiritual death, and our ears
hear, and our eyes aee, and our hands
handle the word of life.— Whedon.


Verse 35. Thus the work is done
by degrees and with difficulty, mys-
tically showing how hard it is to raise
one dead in sins and trespasses, and to
bring the work to any good effect. To
comfort a wounded conscience is as
great work, saith Luther, as to raise
one from the dead.—-Zrapp.


Verses 36, $7.-The mother is called


in to receive a new life in her twice-
given son. She comes in full of joy,
full of wonder, bows herself to the
ground, and falls down before those
feet she had so boldly laid hold
of in Carmel. Oh, strong faith of the
Shunammite, that could not be discou-
raged with the seizure and continuance
of death, raising up her heart still in
an expectation of that life which to
the eyes of nature had been impossible,
irrevocable! Oh, infinite goodness of
the Almighty, that would not suffer
such faith to be frustrated, that would
rather reverse the laws of nature, in
returning a guest from heaven, and
raising a corpse from death, than the
confidence of a believing heart should
be disappointed !—Bishop Hall.

As might be expected, there have
not been wanting rationalistic inter-
preters who have explained this mira-
cle as a case of suspended animation,
or fit of apoplexy, and Elisha’s efforts
as the manipulations of animal mag-
netism, by which sensation was re-
stored. Of course such expositors
ignore or deny the plain statement
that the child was dead, and so do
not explain, but contradict and torture
the word of Scripture.— Whedon.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 38-41.
Tux Porsom or Sra anv mrs Curz.


Tus miracle of the healing of the poisonous pottage is a counterpart of that
of the healing of the waters of Jericho (ii. 19-22). There the power of Elisha’s
God works on the water; here on the food of the prophets. The chief value of
both miracles lies in the rich typical lessons they suggest concerning the coming in
of Divine grace and power into the domain of man’s most common life and
wants, to leaven and heal with gracious influences all the disturbances and
bitternesses of earthly experience. The incident related in this paragraph is
illustrative of the potson of sin und tts cure. Observe—


I. That humanity is infected with the poison of sin. It penetrates all
classes, and mingles with the ever-changing circumstances of human life. It is
30 subtle in its workings, and so deceptive in its appearance, as to escape detec-
tion till its effects are felt, as was the case with the wild gourds innocently
gathered by a son of the prophets (verse 39). It weakens everything it taints.
Tt is a foe to all stability. It is said that when Nicephorus Phocas had built a
strong wall about his palace for his own security, in the night time he heard a
voice crying to him, ‘‘O Emperor! though thou build thy wall as high as the
clouds, yet if sin be within, it will overthrow all.” It is the custom of hunters
in Africa, when they have killed a poisonous snake, to cut off its head, and
earefully bury it in the grovad, well knowing that if a naked STs on one


ye


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





of these fangs it would be fatally wounded; the venom is as deadly after the
snake is dead. But sin is a venomous snake which no human hunter can slay ;
it insinuates itself everywhere, and everywhere spreads its deadly virus.


II. That the poison of sin is fatal in its effects. ‘‘There is death in the
pot” (verse 40). Sin when it is finished bringeth forth death (James i. 15).
The almond tree blossoms before the foliage appears. The splendour of its ruby
flowers lures the winged insects of the air, but as they sip its poisoned chalices
they fall dead in myriads at its root. So sin is like that tree, attracting human
souls to drink in pleasure from its luscious flowers until they fall, deluded, in-
toxicated, dead. ‘‘By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin;
and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned” (Romans vy. 12).


III. That the poison of sin is neutralized by the gracious provisions of
the Gospel (verse 41), There was no virtue in the meal itself to dissipate the
poison of the pottage; it was but the means by which the miraculous power
wrought the cure. So in the restoration to moral health of sin-poisoned
humanity, while means are used, and must be used, the healing, saving power
is Divine. The gospel, divinely devised, divinely developed, and divinely
applied, is the unfailing panacea for the world’s evil.


Ig sons:—1. Sin ts the great source of all human misery. 2. The remedy for


humun misery ts Divinely provided. 8. God ts not indifferent to the common datly
wants of human life.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 88. The pursuit of truth.
I. Js carried on by earnest souls tn the
midst of national distress. ‘* There
was adearthintheland.” IT. Brings
men into the presence of the great and
good. ‘‘The sons of the prophets were
sitting be ore him.” III. Contented
with a v.edest supply of physical needs.
‘“‘Set on the great pot, and seethe
pottage for the sons of the prophets.”

— The prophets were poor, and glad
of pottage. The saints are kept at
hard commons, but have their keeping
of free cost. The wicked have larger
cakes, but pay sweetly.—Zrapp.

— The sons of the prophets had to
struggle with want and distress, but
no want could hinder them from en-
teiing the community, or could induce
them to separate. Life in common,
in faith, in prayer, in the praise of
God, was dearer to them than pleasant
days, and enjoying the pleasure of sin.
Where unity of spirit and true love
eall people together to a common meal,
there is no need of great preparations
and e: pensive dishes; they ure readily
satisfied with the simplest food.—


Lange.
424


Verse 39. Ignorance of simple
things. I. Inexcusable, because
within the reach of all. II. Yet,
alas! too prevalent. III. May be the
occasion of fatal consequences.


Verse 40. The deadly power of
sin, I. Mingles itself with the
sweetest experiences of life. II.
Causes many to turn with loathing
even from their necessary food. III.
Beyond all human power to conquer.

— It isoften with spiritual good as
it is with bodily good: it looks as if it
were healthful and nourishing—#e.,


. the words are beautiful and attractive—


and yet there is soul-poison in it,
which is destructive, if we are not on
our guard,


Verse 41. What was there in the
meal to counteract the bad properties
ofthe gourds? Nothing, necessarily.

The meal, like the salt cast into the
foul waters of Jericho (ii. 21), and the
tree at Marah (Exod. xv. 25), was
merely the suggestive symbol of the
Divine powers of nourishment and
healing which subsisted im Elisha’s


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS,


God. It borea similar relation to this
miracle that Elisha’s stretching him-
self upon the body of the dead child
did to the Divine power that raised the
child to life. It was the earthly
medium through which the spirit
worked. All the bad properties of the
pottage weremiraculously taken away,
So, say some of the older divines, the


OHAP. tv.





2 ee


doctrine, entering into the mind and
heart of the church, shall counteract
and take away the poison of ill-born
heresy.

— Eminent goodness. I. Is not
lifted above the commonest wants of
life. Il. Sympathizes with the needy
and the suffering. III. Is the medium
of timely relief.


healthsome meal of sound Christian


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 42-44,
THz Suprrapunpant Goopness or Gon.


I. Provides for the daily wants of man. ‘Give unto the people that they
may eat”? (verse 42). How enormous are the thought and toil involved in
supplying the daily wantsof asimple city—¢.g., London! How unremitting the
care, how affluent the goodness, of that God who supplies the multifarious and
incessant demands ofthe world! Vast as is the consumption, the supply never
fails. ‘‘ The eyes of all wait upon thee; andthou givest them their meat in due
season. Thou openest Thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing”
(Ps. cxlv. 15, 16).


II. Difficult for the unbelieving to appreciate. ‘‘ What, shall I set this
before an hundred men?” (verse 43). The selfish and unbelieving mind is
blinded to the infinite resources of the Divine goodness: the limitation of the
means is inadequate to the greatness of the need. Butthe eye only sees what it
brings with it the power to see. The eye of faith sees what is invisible to the
ordinary vision. ‘I'rue faith is undaunted, even when it sees only the last crust,
pa tn last pot ofoil. Necessity isa great test, and a great strengthener of
ai


III. Multiplies the little to supply the needs of the many, ‘And they
did eat and left thereof, according to the word of the Lord” (verse 44). What
seemed humanly insufficient, was so Divinely blessed as to be more than enough.
A contented mind needs but little to ensure its happiness, while the abundance
of the rich may fail to give satisfaction and peace. ‘Too much wealth is very
frequently the occasion of poverty. He whom the wantonness of abundance has
once softened, easily sinks into neglect of his affairs, and he that thinks he can
afford to be negligent, is not far from being poor. He will soon be involved in
perplexities which his inexperience will render insurmountable; he will fly for
help to those whose interest it isthat he should be more distressed, and will be
at last torn to pieces by the vultures that always hover over fortunes in decay.”
It is the blessing of heaven that makes the little more, and teaches man when
be has enough.


Lussons :—1. The goodness of God is most evident in times of need. 2. Should
be unhesitatingly trusted. 8. Should be gratefully adored.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 42-44. The grandeur and
minuteness of Divine Providence. I.
So blesses the earth that it provides
for the wants of all. II. The scarcity
of one locality is counterbalanced by
the abundance of another. III. Does


not overlook the commonest needs of

man. IY. Makes a little go a great

way.

— Jehovah ordered it so that a

etrange man, unvalled and unexpected,

should bring to the prophet in a
425


Ye


CHAP. Wo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





time of famine the first fruits which
belong to Jehovah according to law
(Num. xv. 19, 20; Deut. xxvi. 2);
and He blessed this gift so that it
sufficed to satisfy the entire community
of the prophets. The Lord himself,
at the feeding of the five thousand,
makes reference, not to this narrative,
but to the feeding of the people with
manna in the wilderness, and He gives
to His miracle an express object and
significance (John vi. 32) such a8 we
cannot at all think ofinthiscase. Be-
sides that, the historical connection,
the occasion, the persons, all are
utterly different, and the asserted
similarity is reduced simply to this,
that through the Divine influence a
little suffices for many—an altogether
ordinary truth which pierces through
many other incidents in the history of
redemption which are _ entirely
different from this one.—Zange.


— From the miracle of the healing
of the bitter pottage it is appropriate
to pass immediately to one by which a


few barley loaves and ears of corn are
made tosupply the wants of many.
As the one suggests the power ol,
Divine truth to counteract the evils of
heresy, the other may represent that
not only must heresy in the church be
offset with truth, but, to keep out
heresy, the church must be abundantly
fed with the true bread from heaven,
which giveth life unto the world.—
Whedon.


Verse 48. A covetous spirit. I.
Would withhold from others even the
necessaries of life. II. Has no faith
in an abundance it cannot see; or in
the axiom—‘“ There is that scattereth
and yet increaseth.” IIf. Is often
rebuked by acts of Divine generosity


Verse 44. Here isa specimen of the
work of Christ in apostolic churches,
receiving the alms of the faithful at
God’s altar, and seeking for true riches
by bestowing those offerings, blessed
by God with increase, to the benefit
of His people.— Wordsworth.





CHAPTER V.
NAAMAN, THE SYRIAN LEPER.


ORITICAL AXD Expianatory Notes.—Verse 1. Naaman was a great man with his
master—5'1J pila does not refer to mere physica! force, but to the high esteem in which


he was held at Court. Lord had given deliverances unto Syria—Not victories only, but
national prestige, advantages, and prosperity. Verse 2. By companies—Maraudine bands,
These went out on predatory incursions. Verse 3. Would God—*5TIN should be (as in


Pasa. cxix. 5), “O! that,” an optative particle from mn, which, in Piel, means to caress,
rr


to beseech. Verse 4. And one went in—i.¢., he, Naaman, went in. Verse 5. Ten talents of

silver, &c.—The silver would value £3,421; the gold is not definite, but doubtless very con-

siderable. Changes of raiment—Theso Oriental “holiday garments”—OD'I92 maon—
ee Ae


are costly state dresses, worn on festal occasions, Verse 7. King of Israel rent his clothes—
Not from horror at the impiety of the thought ; the unbelieving Jehoram was not likely to be
so much troubled by the religious side of the case, as by the fear of a misunderstanding which
might eventuate in war, And after the closing events of previous chapter, deserted as he then
was, he had a barren outlook ifwar should arise, Verse 11, Strike his hand over the place—
Ww Fy) J I—to wave the hand, or to stroke with it. Verse 12. Abana and Pharpar—The


former, Amana, coming from the hill Amana, and now called Barady ; the latter, also a smal]
stream flowing from the Antilibanus, probably now called Fyjeh. Verse 13. My father—An
address full of respect and regard. How much rather—as in 2 Sam. iv. 11. Verse 15. Take
a blessing of thy servant—i. ¢.,a gft—NIIA—es in Gen, xxxiii. 10,11. Verse 17. Shall


there a sesa-Siomd read literally, “ And Ob!™ of, “ And if not.” Two mules’ burden of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, ¥,
Re behee
eerth—Foran altar (see Exod. xx. 24), under the idea that Jehovah would prefer the soil of His
own land, on which sacrifices should be offered to Him by Naaman in Syria. Verse 18. House
of Rimmon—-}}79, either from 04, to be high ; or pa, the pomegranate, the Oriental sym-
bol of fruitfulness. Verse 19. A little way—i. ¢., a length of country, as in Gen, xxxv. 16
Verse 21. He lighted down from the chariot—Not merely dismounted, but quickly did 60,
sprang out ef the chariot, 722, to cast oneself, to throw oneself, to rush. It indicates Naaman’a


anxiety. Verse 24. Came to the tower—JDPT—the hill, i. ¢., a hil! well understood in the


locality of Elisha’s house. Verse 26, Went not mine heart—In contrast with Gehazi’s
words, ‘‘ Thy servant went no whither.” ‘My heart "—a9—i. e., in spirit, discerning the
entire transaction. Is it a time to receive money, &c.—i. ¢., in any other case rather than
this thou mightest have gratified thine avarice, bu’ now, with so many hypocritical prophets
abroad, this is no time for bringing the true proph»tic office into disrepute by an act which
seems to imply that the servant of the High God is only intent on selfish aggrandisement in
his sacred end supernatural work.— W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-18.
Naaman a Picrvns or ree Hearuen m Seance or Savina Trors,


The story of Naaman is full of bewitching interest, and is one on which
volumes have already been written. It is so suggestive of spiritual analogies
that it reads like a page of New Testament doctrine inserted in the midst of
Old Testament history. Though dealing with simple facts of history that
occurred nearly three thousand years ago, we cannot resist the temptation to
interpret it in the light of the Christian ideas of the nineteenth century. It
is a testimony to the liberal and impartial spirit of Judaism that does not
refuse help to a foreigner, a heathen, and he belonging to a people who
were the enemies of Israel. It recognised the religious needs of humanity ; it
was the bigotry and unfaithfulness of its adherents that made Judaism exclusive
and intolerant. There were many Israelitish lepers in Elisha’s time, but they
were not cleansed, because they sought it not from the God of Elisha (Luke
iv. 27). Naaman, the heathen, manifests a faith not to be found in Isracl,
and is cleansed of his leprosy. He thus prefigured the gentiles of a later age,
who earnestly sought and found the salvation of God from which many Jews
were cut off because of their unbelief. The whole narrative is the scheme of
salvation epitomised. It may be viewed as a picture of the heathen in search of
saving truth.


I. Like Naaman, the heathen enjoys many worldly advantages (v. i).—
By his strength end bravery Naaman had won the esteem of his king; he was
loaded with honours, and surrounded with affluence and luxury. So the
heathen lives among the fairest scenes of earth,


Whose every prospect pleases,
And only man is vile.


He is often raised to the highest dignities of earth, has unlimited command of
wealth, and has the resources of commerce, science, art, and refinement minister-
ing to his pleasure. Heathen is not always synonymous with barbarian.
Some of the achievements of heathen genius have excelled the best productions
ef Western civilization. Tobe a heathen is not to be bereft of honour, of


tn or of i
greatness, power op


»


GHAP. V. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








II. Like Naaman, the heathen is suffering from a deadly disease.—“ But
he was a leper” (v.1).—‘‘ Every man has some éw¢ or other in his character,
something that blemishes and diminishes him, some alloy to his grandeur, some
damp to his joy. He may be very happy, very good, yet in something or other
not so good as he should be, nor so happy as he would be. Naaman was as
great as the world could make him, and yet, as Bishop Hall quaintly remarks,
the basest slave in Syria would not change skins with him.” The heathen is
smitten with the leprosy of sin. This tarnishes every worldly honour, blights
the loveliest scene, dims the brightest prospects, moderates every joy, poisons
every cup.


III. Like Naaman, the heathen hears, often through insignificant agencies,
of the possibility of cure (verses 2-4).—A little captive maid, strong in her
simple faith in the God of Israel, was the means of directing the proud but
afflicted Naaman to the Divine source of healing. When she was borne away
from her home and native land, it seemed very unlikely she would be instru-
mental in bringing the light of a higher truth to illumine the darkness of a
heathen court. It has often happened in the history of nations that an obscure
prisoner has been the means of acquainting his captors with the knowledge of
the only true God; the vanquished has been crowned with a brighter glory
than that of the conqueror. Numerous and extensive as are the various
agencies of the Christian church in heathen lands, they are but feeble and
limited compared with the greatness of the work to be done. ‘ But God hath
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things that are mighty”
(Cor. i. 27-29). Thesimple words of a solitary missionary, the artless conduct
of achild, the stray teaching of a voiceless tract, the impression caused by a
passing incident, may be Divinely blessed in leading a soul to light and truth
and rest.


IV. Like Naaman, the heathen is intensely in earnest in seeking the means
of deliverance (verses 5-9). The interest of Naaman is roused, a ray of hope
enters his breast, his prejudice is conquered, and, laden with rich presents and
attended by an imposing retinue, he journies into the land of Israel, and stands
at the door of the prophet. He is conscious of his malady, is distressed with
its unsightly ravages, and, sustained with the prospect of recovery, he counts
no toil too great, no sacrifice too costly, if he may but gain relief. So the
heathen, when convinced of his deplorable condition, and catching a glimpse of
the promised remedy, seeks, with all the greedy avidity of need and all the
cheering buoyancy of hope, the help that brings deliverance. The cry of
awakened and struggling heathendom enters the ear of a merciful an
all-powerful Saviour.


V. Like Naaman, the heathen is offended at the method prescribed for
obtaining the needed cure (verses 10-12). Naaman expected that Elisha
would come out to him, and make certain mysterious passes and signs, after the
manner of a professional thaumaturge, and that the leprosy would vanish. It
was a severe blow to his pride to be asked to bathe his stately though leprous
limbs in the turbid waters of the Jordan, rather than in the clear limpid rivers
of his native Damascus. The offence of the cross has not yet ceased. Heathens
and Christians alike are offended at the simple terms of salvation. If it were
necessary to do some exploit that would afford opportunity for the display of
personal prowess and skill, thousands more would be eager candidates for salva-
tion. But to repent—to confess sin—to submit to self-humilation—to trust in
the power and virtue of another, and the unseen and impalpable—this is too
much mare human nature, and stirs up a spirit of rebellion,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAR. ¥,








VI. Like Naaman, the heathen, when complying with the prescribed eon-
ditions, is cured of his deadly malady (verses 13, 14). The rage of Naaman
passed away, but his leprosy remained. In his cooler moments he began to
reflect. The gentle persuasions of those around him prevailed. He obeyed
the prophet’s directions, perhaps doubtfully, almost sullenly, but he did it. He
dipped himself seven times in Jordan, and was healed. So when the heathen
is persuaded to submit to the Divine terms, he obtains spiritual healing and
renewal. Obedience is the pathway te clearer light, to the highest truths, and
to the holiest experiences.


VII. Like Naaman, the heathen gratefully acknowledges and adores the
power and goodness of God (verses 15-19). Who can describe the wonder and
gladness of Naaman as he witnessed and felt the marvellous renovation! He
hastens to the man of God to express his gratitude, to acknowledge the supre-
macy of Jehovah, and his determination henceforth to worship Him, to offer
gifts, and to seek still further instruction. His ideas of Jehovah are still
restricted. He is convinced of His superiority over all the gods of the Syrians,
but he has not yet grasped the grand thought of the Divine presence being
everywhere. ‘Now I know there is no god in all the earth but in Israel.” So
the heathen, after witnessing the saving power of God, sees the vanity of the
idols in which he had trusted, and renders homage to the only true God. With
further instruction his idea of Jehovah are expanded, and his worship is the more
fervent and reverent.


Lessons :—1. Man everywhere is tainted with the moral leprosy of sun. 2. The
remedy for human sin is universally available. 3. The eagerness of the heathen in
search of saving truth is a significant rebuke to the apathy of multitudes tn so-called
Christian nations.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.
Verses 1-19. The Divine method of Did not harbour
healing sin-smitten souls. I. Is not
restricted in its operation to any one
nation under heaven. II. Is often


prophet of Israel.
feelings of revenge.


The fairest action of our humnn life
Is scorning to revenge an injury ;


revealed by humble instrumentalities.
III. Is offensive to human pride and
consequence. IV. Is effectual onl
with the humble and obedient. V. Is
an inexhaustible theme for universal
gratitude and praise.

Lrssons:—1. an would fain heal
himself, but cannot. 2. Man’s only
hope of recovery ts in believing sub-
mission. 8. All the power and
glory of human salvation belong alone
to G


Verses 1-14. Naaman the leper. 1.
The captive maid. A prisoner in @
strange land. Torn from home and
friends. Carried with her both pity
and piety. Had compassionate regard
for the master who detained her in


pondave, and a pious regard for the


For who forgives without a further strife,

His adversary’s heart to him doth tie.

And ’tis a firmer conquest, truly said,

To win the heart than overthrow the head.
Lady E. Carew.


Il. The proud general. A commander
of armies, himself the slave of a foul
disease, and, worse still, of a proud
heart. Must receive instruction of a
slave. His visit to Elisha. Ostenta-
tious arrival. His expectation. God’s
plans and human thoughts.
Humble we must be, if to heaven we go;
High is the roof there, but the gate is low:
Whene’er thouspeakest,look with lowly eye—-
Grace is increased by humility.

Robert Herrick.
III. The magnanimous prophet. Wil-
ling to be the servant of man. Elisha
is also a servant of God, can therefore

429


*


GHAP. ¥.





serve man only in God’s way. Is
willing to bless Naaman, though an
enemy of Israel. Though he knows
the restored health of Naaman may be
employed against his countrymen.
Cures Naaman, but will receive
nothing for the cure. Might have
exacted conditions—promises of peace.
The character and conduct of Elisha
an illustration of the mercy of God in
a wicked age and amongst rebels.
The mercy so luminous in the Old
Testament shines in New also. One
God of the whole Bible. Would not
have any, even rebels perish.

:—1. Zo forgive injuries. 2.
To pity the unfortunate, even tf your
enemies. 3. To guard against pride.
4. Our cure 48 offered without money
or price.—The Class and Desk.


Verse 1. The lights and shadows
of life. I. There is always something
to modify the pleasures of human life
—something to mar the most brilliant
success—the fly in the ointment—the
skeleton in the closet. II. Shows the
universal prevalence of sin. III.
Teaches the necessity for moderation
and humility atall times. IV. May lead
to the attainment of the highest good.

— Honour with degradation. I.
Naaman’s honours were as varied as
they wellcouldbe, of war and peace, in
the camp and in the; a'ace. He hadthe
admiration of the soldiery and the
approval of the king; was the trusted
leader in battle and the favoured
attendant in the house of Rimmon.
Earthly honours may imply real dis-
honour before God, while real worthi-
ness may involve a present degrada-
tion. According tothe measure of our
self-denial will ultimately be the
measure of ourhonour. According to
the excellence of our motives of self-
denial will its worthiness be deter-
mined at the last; and the value of
those motives depends always on and
everywhere on the desire to serve and
honour Jesus. Great and mainfold as
were Naaman’s honours, he seems to
have deserved them. 1. He was a
mighty man in valour. Strong and
brave the man seems to have been 3
and ath SS uacany and even animal

3


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KING8.


oman §


bravery, are not to be despised or
lightly esteemed. To speak to young
men and women of might and valour,
of health and bravery, is a Christian
duty ; for ominous signs of the lack of
bothabound. Many waysof living and
spending time nowadays are keeping
back the young from the might and
valour, from the strength of body and
fortitude of spirit, that come from God.
2. As a mighty and valorous man
Naaman had been God’s instrument in
Syria’s rise and prominence. In the
front rank of honourable emotions is
the love of country and of kin, honour
to our race, and the sense of duty to
our fatherland. The spirit of
righteous patriotism is continually
appealed to inthe word of God, and
sacrifice for the land of one’s birth has
been crowned by poet’s praise and
exalted by admiration. We may here
notice the candour of the writer of this
book and the breadth of his conception
of the ways of the Lord, in that he
ascribes Syria’s military success to
God; and that, too, ata time when
Syria and Israel were continually at
war. Every true deliverance of asoul
orof a nation is of God. 3. Out of
these things came Naaman’s honours
with his king and master. Peace as
well as war brought him greatness, for
he had the approval of him whom he
served. Let us try to bring honour
and give honour in all service, in the
house or the warehouse, and be more
than parts of a machine that works out
its daily round aud no more. There
is room for honour everywhere, if one
will give place to it; and, though
lowlier than Naaman, we can each
have his share of the honour that God
gives to the valorous, the patriotic, and
the faithful. II. But to this strong,
valorous, honoured man’s life there
was another side—of degradation and
disappointment. ‘* He was a leper;’?
and though this in Syria had not the
same terrible social consequences as in
Israel, yet it was a blight and a curse.
1. Most lives have some qualifying, if
not vitiating, of earthly joy and human
credit. It must be horribly troubling
to stand in God’s beautiful world
infirm and blemished when we would


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. ¥.





be strong, humiliated when we might
have been exalted, and degraded with
bodily weakness in a world where self-
asserting strength succeeds. 2. Some-
times these ‘‘ buts,’”’ these humilia-
tions of life, are self-made, coming
out of the hotbed of our pride and love
of consequence and attention. Morbid
self-seeking will blight and embitter
a life that might be happy and
honourable. 3. But of more value is
it to notice the sterling worth and
bravery of Naaman, in that with the
horrid degradation and disadvantage of
leprosy he attained to glory and high
esteem. To the young his name
ought to stand as a bright light of
encouragement, he being the man who,
with a leper’s hand, plucked honour
from the red grasp of war, and made
it no shame for a king to lean on a
leper’s shoulder. Think, in your
humiliation, of Him who was “despised
and rejected of men.” Andif we see
shame on man’s face, blemish on the
body of his humiliation, and the degra-
dation of death on his honour, can we
not look up from disease and deformity
and death, and see the most suffering
and dishonoured —even Jesus —
crowned with glory and honour?—
Condensed from Christian World
Pulpit.

—‘‘But he was a leper.” Not
from his birth, nor yet to his death.
Hence a learned writer compares the
whole Church of Christ in all ages to
this Naaman the leper, He was first
pure and sound, and did many honour-
able acts, and thereby represented the
Primitive Church, pure end clean,
without spot or disease appearing ;
howbeit, there might be some secret
seeds of diseases unperceived, which
in continuance of time grew to a visi-
ble leprosy. In his middle time
Naaman became leprous, diseased, and
deformed, foully infected in himself,
and infecting others; and thereby re-
presented the latter Church of Rome.
Afterwards, by the prophet’s direction,
he was washed and cleansed from his
leprosy, and his flesh restored to
become pure and perfect, like the
flesh of a young child; and thereby
represented the Reformed Churches.


And as Naaman in all these three
estates was the same person, and not
a new, diverse, or several man, 80 our
Church is not a new Church, but the
old Church reformed from errors and
corruptions, and restored to her an-
cient purity and soundness.— Zrapp.

— Everywhere where there is, or
seems to be, something great and for-
tunate, there is also aslight discordant
but, which, like a false note in a
melody, mars the perfectness of the
good-fortune. A worm gnaws at every-
thing pertaining to this world; and
everything here below carries the
germs of death in itself. We ought
to consider all human suffering and
misery worthy of consideration, where-
ever we find it. It is found every-
where ; it dwells in the palace and in
the hovel; it is interwoven with the
life of prince and beggar, and it is
inseparable from all worldly happiness.
The poor and lowly have no reason to
envy the rich and great. That which
makes us happy in truth and for
eternity does not depend upon rank or
upon wealth.—JZenken.


Verses 2-4.— The power of a
child. 1. Unspeakably beneficent
when religiously trained. 2. May ex-
cite a whole court with religious
interest. 3. May be the means of
great and lasting good. Naaman
cured. God of Israel exalted. Undy-
ing interest of mankind in the incident.
How much would the world have lost
had the story of Naaman been un-
known! ‘A small chink may serve
to let in much light.”

— The ministry of little voices.
I. The little maid’s pity. It seems as
though the shame and grief of Naaman
found opportunity of expression at
home. So acutely did the sense of
his dishonour show itself in his house,
that the little slave maid one day ex-
claimed, ‘‘ Would God my lord were
with the prophet that is in Samaria,
for he wonld recover him of his
leprosy!” Her ‘ young-eyed ”
wonder saw what the strong and
valorous soldier hid from all outside
his home. Many a man’s children see
a look on his face and signs of agony

431


y


OMAP. VY.


HOMILETIG COMMENTARY: KINGS.


REET


that the associates of daily life never
think could belong to the strong and
vigorous man, who, in their sight,
fights the battle of life more manfully
then they. There are known those
who, honoured in public, in private
wish themselves dead. As the joys
that we ean share with a child are the
simplest and the purest, so those are
the most blessed griefs that can touch
the sympathy of a little maid. Let us
try to bring our nature, our experience,
our life, nearer the children. It may
help us in sad days, if nothing else,
just as this pity of the Hebrew girl
led to the cure of Naaman’s leprosy,
and the liberation of his soul. The
soul that isin sympathy with children
will live a truer life because of it ; and
the man whose grief is pitied by a
strange child in his household has some
gentleness in him. God teaches us by
‘little voices ” oftener than we think,
and ministers to us by little hands that
we seldom associate with the almighti-
ness of God. All our little children
are His messengers, and out of their
mouths He wishes to ordain strength.
‘¢ Little voices’’ call us home, as well
as ‘‘@od’s all-animating voice,” or
rather God calls us by them. Justas
the man whose child was lost in a
mist that came suddenly down on one
of the American rivers heard the little
one calling, ‘‘This way, Father!”
was led at last to hear the dead child’s
call as from heaven, whither, in that
night of mist and sorrow, she had gone;
so God leads many home by these
angels in the clouds, these little ones,
dead for awhile to us, but who are
ever living unto God, II. Over
against the little maid’s pity we have
now to set what looks like her mistress’s
neglect. The wife of Naaman let the
word of the Hebrew girl go unheeded.
Had the child more pity than the
woman? Was the Hebrew slave more
tender than the Syrian wife? Perhaps
the child, from her Jewish training,
had a pecular horror of leprosy and its
shame, that the Syrian woman would
not have. May we not, ought we not,
to call one another’s hearts to attend
to the misery of sin? When God has
linked hearts in home life, shall we
482


slightly regard impenitence and un-
cleanness? Shall the parent cease to
hope and pray for the prodigal child,
and the goodly child be careless over a
father or mother unsaved? If we
wonder at the seeming apathy of
Naaman’s wife, what shall we say of
many of ourselves, for neglecting the
eternal welfare of each other’s souls ?
While we wonder at this woman we
condemn ourselves. III. Zhe wise
listener. Naaman was doubly fortu-
nate in having, not only a pitiful slave
girl, but another servant who listened
wisely to what the girl said. He was
certain of this, that, true or not, it was
worth telling. So he ‘‘ went in and
told his lord.” Our vitiated nature
inclines us to speak of others only too
readily when there is evil to be re-
ported, too slowly when there is any-
thing good. But here we have one
ready to tell helpful news. Naaman
must have been more fortunate in his
servants and slaves than in his wife,
IV. Now we come to the last link in
the chain of influence and of persons
that ultimately led to Naaman’s re-
covery, and this is the king of Syria,
the wisely acting king, who, when he
heard only the report of a captive girl,
said at once, ‘‘ Go,” and give a letter
to the king of Israel. First there waa
the child, then the prudently listen-
ing servant, and then the wise king.
Each was an agent of God in this
matter; each was needed, and who
shall say which was most necessary ?
Little hands have brought about great
things, and feeble voices have often
given its character to history. The
boy dreamer Joseph telling his dreams
is the occasion of four hundred years
of Israelitish history. The little hand
of the child Samuel was lifted by God,
and his little voice was charged by God
to show to Eli the coming of an awful
doom. We know not how delicate is
the balance of human affairs; but we
know that God in His purposes unites
the strong and the weak, and that
when He touches the faithful, though
they may be feeble, they become
mightier than the strong.—C. W. P.


Verses 3, 8. The children’s service.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


Oar. V.





The little lady’s maid.—Syria was ea
kingdom near to Canaan. For some
time a little girl lived in Syria. She
may not have been more than eight or
ten years old. We wish to say seven
things about her. 1. Zhis Uittle girl
was @ Jewess. Abraham was the first
Jew. To him and his descendants
God was exceedingly kind. How He
spake to them, and what He gave
them. This young person, as the text
shows, was one of them. She belonged
to the best land and the best people.
What advantages she had. In this
respect you are equal, yea, superior
to her; (anaan and the Israelites then
compared with England and the
English now. A complete Bible and
a Saviour who has come. To whom-
soever much is given, of them much
shall be required. 2. This little girl
was @ slave. The Syrians were the
enemies of the Jews. Accustomed to go
by companies to Canaan. Took away
grain, cattle, and human beings.
This girl was kidnapped on one occa-
sion. Think on her sad condition,
forced away from her land, home,
friends, and parents.

Many children have been in the
same circumstances. Rome, Greece,
America, some even in the present
day—Madagascar and Africa. ‘‘ Slaves
cannot breathe in England.” Why?
Education, government, above all,
the gospel. Should you not believe it
and love it? 3. This little girl
worked as a@ slave in the house of
Naaman. Naaman was the general
of the Syrian army, and a great
favourite with the king. He had
plenty of money, and lived in a
splendid house. He may have bought
the little maid, or she may have been
his share of the spoils of the war. At
any rate, she was in his house, and
waited on his wife. A lady’s maid.
From this we learn that, though young,
she was clever, and did all her work
well. Imitate her in these things; never
be careless about what you do. Try to
read, write, and spell, &c., inthe best
way, so in after-life you will do these
things easily and well. This will bea
great comfort to yourselves and others.
4. This litle girl was very kind.


Naaman, her master, had an awful
disease—leprosy. It was painful,
loathsome, and incurable by man.
But Naaman had captured the little
girl, and made hera slave. Hadshe
been like some people, she would have
been glad because her master was a
leper. Instead of that, she thought
about his disease. It was to her a
source of sorrow, and she was anxious
that he should be delivered from it.
Here was kindness to one who had
not been kind to her. This was the
spirit of Jesus. Hear Him and see
Him on the cross. Itshould be your
spirit. You cannot have it without a
new heart, any more than there can be
a stream without a fountain. Because
the little maid had the one, she had
also the other. He who gave her a
new heart will give you one. Ask Him
forit. 5. This little gird was exceedingly
intelligent. She spoke with wisdom
to her mistress about her master and the
prophet in the land of Israel. The
prophet had never cured a leper
(Luke iv. 27). How, then, did she
believe that he would cure her master ?
Here we see her intelligence. She
had heard of other wonderful things
which the prophet had done. See the
preceding chapter. This is how she
reasoned :—Elisha, who, by the power
of God, could raise a dead body to life,
could also, if it pleased God, restore a
diseased body to health. Wonderful
reasoning fora little girl. Learn to
put things together in your minds.
Do this with your school lessons;
when you are reading books, looking
at persons, watching the birds flying,
and the ships sailing. You will then
be not dull, but clever, and so be able
to push your way through the world.
6. This little girl did @ great amount
of good. She moved her mistress, the
wife ‘her husband, the husband the
Syrian king, the Syrian king the king
of Israel, the king of Israel the
prophet. Naaman was delivered from
his leprosy, and likewise from his
heathenism. Besides, the whole
narrative has been used by thousands
to illustrate the Gospel, by which
multitudes have been saved from sin
to holiness. Similar results have been
PY aad


CHAP. V


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGE.


a ae ae


produced by a single book, tract,
action, or word. You can all do good ;
do it every day. 7. This little girl
was highly honoured. By the attention
she received from somany in Syria; by
obtaining a place in the Bible; by
having thousands speaking well of her,
as we have been trying to do. Her
case illustrates the text, ‘‘ Them that
honour Me, I will honour.” Go ye
and do likewise. Speak for God like
her. Speak for others, and especially
the suffering like her.
A. McAuslane, D.D.


Verses 5-14. Danger in the sim-
plicity of God’s ways. 1. A prophet
in Israel. A kindly God in the earth, a
healer of men abroad in all the lands,
a loving presence with usin dark and
troublesome days, a light lighting
every man from his infant obscurity
and slow ascent to the true vision of
life, to the swift descent into the
valley of the shadow of death. How
few know and believe this! and how
few of those who profess that they do
can direct weary lives to it as they
ought! And yet, if we cannot say
more than this king, if we cannot
enter into Elisha’s confid_ace both for
diseased bodies and dead or leprous
souls, how sad are we! If for our
bodies, and all the more if for our
souls, we know no other help than
man, and can turn only to one another
in our necessities, we are little better
than the king who rent his clothes
over Naarian’s leprosy, and knew not
what to do. But there is a Divine
healer in the earth now as then—a
prophet aad more than a prophet, who
speaks to all human disease, and care,
and helplessness. 2. Zhe prophet’s
confidence. Elisha had the conviction
that through himself Naaman might
be healed. What a dignifying econ-
fidence in God thisis for God’s workers
to have! for Elisha to know that God
would cleanse by him, would save at his
faithful word! Weshould have a con-
fidence like Elisha’s, at least the
spirit of it. For every calamity that
befalls men Jesus has a word of love
snd hope and deliverance. 3. Th
leper’s expectation. It was just wha

434


we might look for from his success
and honours and riches and power,
and his ignorance. He evidently
thought that Elisha would make much
of him, since he had and could give
so much. It was not so blameworthy
in a Syrian heathen as it is now with
many who seem to think that God,
and the people of God, must make
much of them if they come to God.
We must not come with prejudices or
fancies of our own knowledge and
consequence to God and His word and
people, for life and purity and health.
God will not minister to any soul’s
self-consequence and self deceiving
pride. 4.. The process of cure was
different from what Naaman expected.
It was so absolutely simple, and be-
cause it was so simple it was so
authoritative. ‘Go and wash in
Jordan seven times.” A child could
understand it, a child could do it.
So simple was it that only a proud,
and therefore a foolish, man would
resent it. God never makes His way
hard, difficult, obscure, or involved.
His simplicity is our salvation. 5.
The leper’s pride. There is much dan-
ger made by ourselves in the simplicity
of God’s ways, and many, like Naaman,
stagger at the promise of God through
unbelief, their unbelief rising because
the way is so light and plain. In
this we are exposed to a two-fold dan-
ger: that of the love of pleasure in
religion, by which anything will pass
for religiousness that excites or soothes
our emotions enjoyably, and that of
mingling our prejudices with our
search for purity, and so clouding and
hurting our sight of Jesus. These
were practically Naaman’s self-made
dangers in the way of his leprosy
being cleansed, and they are the old
but ever new miseries of seeking after
signs and wisdom, when all that God
wants is the acceptance of His way
and the use of His means of saving
grace in our blessed Lord. 6. But
Naaman was saved from utter folly
by the servant’s good sense and his own
true-heartedness. The servant’s word
showed Naaman that the pride ofa
soldier was at the bottom of his re-
fusal and rage. ‘‘If the prophet had


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP Wy





bid thee do some great thing, wouldst
thou not have done it? That gives
the explanation of his passion; there
was too much of God in the plan of
cure, and too little of self to make it
attractive ; there was too great a call
on unobjecting obedience, and too little
of self-pleasing to make it alluring.
The same thing holds good of most of
us. Do not let the simplicity of God’s
way become a hurt to your soul. By
loving obedience end the uncleanness
of sin for ever. 7. Following upon
his trusting obedience came Naaman’e
cure. He was fresh and pure; with
new life and new strength, pure life
and pure strength. That was the end
of his faith, as it will be of ours.
Childlike and pure for ever is to be
the soul’s everlasting portion.—


(C. W. P.)


Verses 5-7. The ignorance and
imbecility of man. I. Man is slow
to apprehend the nature and cause of
human suffering (verse ei 2.
Believes that money and diplomacy
can accomplish anything (verse 5, 6).
3. Compelled to acknowledge his own
powerlessness in dealing with human
misery (verse 7). 4. Sees more his
own danger than the divine teaching
in the significant events of life
(verse 7).


Verse 8. The counsel of a good
man.—1l. Valuable to king and court
in times of difficulty. 2. Based on a
profound faith in the power and good-
ness of God. 3. Prompted by gracious
intentions towards the suffering and
needy. 4. Tends to augment. the
reputation of true piety.


Verses 9-14. The haughty sup-
pliant. God made the prophet, not
the king, the medium of His blessings
to Naaman. God selects His own
workmen, and His selections some-
times chasten our pride. ‘‘ His ways
are not as our ways; neither are His
thoughts as our thoughts.” ‘It is
neither by might nor by power.”
*¢ He chooses the weak things to con-
found the wise.”


Up tothis point Elisha lived un-


appreciated, subsisting upon the hos-
pitality of the Shunammite. And how
often do God’s nobility live and die
unrecognized? They are men of
whom the world is not worthy. They
are unknown. And it is the obscure
good which is the world’s foundation,
the salt of the earth. But by force
of circumstances they become recog-
nised. There are crises when we call
for the good we have despised. God
has many uncrowned kings—heirs of
immortality in flesh. He cometh to
make up His jewels, and they shall
come from many an obscure place.
**They shall come from the East. and
the West.” ‘‘ The last shall be first,
and the first last.” Many a Lazarus
shall find his home in God’s bosom,
while the pampered beast shall become
worm-food and fire-fuel.

There is much modern application
in these Old Testament circumstances.
There is so much humaneness in the
Bible, which makes it always a new


book. Principles know nothing of
years. Truth is not hampered by
time. The Scriptures are as old as


eternity, and yet as new as every
morning. The Gospel in the narrative
may thus be developed. 1. The gospel
appeals to the man, not his acci-
dents. The prophet’s message was to
the leper, not to the courtier. Naaman
came with his horses and with his
pageantry. He came ina lordly air,
but the prophet did not even meet him.
The true man is never moved by glitter.
Some of us would have bowed as
sycophants; it would have been the
reddest-letter day of our lives, if the
premier of Syria had stood at our doors.
Even if a trinket, or a book, be given
to us by a royal hand, we transmit it
as an heirloom. When will all this
mammon-worship and man-homage,
fawning, and cringing end? When
will men remember that there is a
higher kingliness—that instead of
virtue cringing to vice, she should
stand in her God-like form erect?
There is a nobility of office, but there
is a higher nobility of character. There
is a kingliness of name, but there is
also a kingliness of nature. We
should not judge by appearance, but
435


yy


GHAR, ¥.





judge by righteous judgment. The
prophet saw through all the haughti-
ness of Naaman, a leprousman. God
sees through all life’s accidents—all
our intelligence, parade, wealth, and
respectability—a heart of corruption
and sorrow. He sees that the
‘‘imagination of the thoughts of man
are evil continually.” The message
is to man, not to his circumstances.
It speaks tousas sinners. It speaks,
not to contingencies, but to the human
nature that isin us all. It was man
that fell, and to man the message is
sent. ‘‘ He came to seek and to save
that which was lost.” 2. The gospel
message and conditions are always
simple. It speaks in a language all
can understand. It speaks to the
heart, and the heart has but one
language the wide world over. The
tongue speaks many a vernacular, and
the lips chatter many dialects, but the
heart’s voice never varies. The great
universal heart beats in us all. The
gospel sees us fallen, and it sends forth
the common message and a universal
welcome, ‘‘Come unto me all ye that
labour and are heavy laden.” The
message is one, but its emphasis is
varied according to our deafness, and
its strokes to our hardness. The
stone is hard, and the sculptor’s mallet
must be heavy and his chisels sharp.
The wound is deep, and the corrosive
must burn, and the instrument probe
deeply. The jewel is encased in
adamant, and the lapidary must select
his instruments accordingly. Our
prejudices are great, our hearts are
haughty, and the conditions are
adapted. Christianity is to us what we
are. Loving in disposition, it speaks
in s still small voice. Impenitent in
heart, it speaks in thunder tones. Some
are 80 deaf that they can only hear
thunder, others are so divinely sensitive
they can hear angels’ whispers and
God’s steps on the wind. According to
our heart-life, God is either a father, or
a consuming fire. A revengeful God is
the creation of a wicked life. The
Gospel speaks to the heart, and of
necessity must temper its voice to its
disposition and difficulties. It is a
message aries that a child can


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS8.





understand it, and yet its inexhaus-
tibleness challenges the highest minds,
So plain, that the wayfaring man
need not stumble, and yet its sub-
limity creates a sensation new in angel
bosom. Its simplicity reveals its
wonders, as its stoop manifests its
height. 3. The gospel conditions
are repulsive to human prejudices.
We might swear that it is night
when the sun shines, but the light
would only prove our insanity. We
may curse the book, but its truth is
inviolable. We may blaspheme the
Gospel, but the loudness of our voice
may only reveal the perfectness of our
idiocy. How presumptuous is man!

‘¢ Man, proud man, dressed in a little briof

authority,
Plays such fantastio tricks before high heaven,
As make the angels weep.”


1. How we presume on God’s ways!
** T thought he would surely come out
to me,” &c. 2. How we presume on
God’s means! ‘‘ Are not Abana and
Pharpar . . better than all
the waters of Israel?” 8. How we
presume on God’s patience! ‘ And
he turned away ina rage.” 4. How
we presume on _ self-sufficiency!
‘“‘Some great thing, would thou not
have done it?’”? The conditions of the
Gospel may arouse our resentment,
but to resist is to be blind to our best
interests. The prophet said: ‘* Wash
and be clean,’”? and Naaman turned
away in a rage. Christ says, ‘Sell
all thou hast and give to the poor;’’
and the young man went away sorrow-
ing. The Gospel says, ‘‘ Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt
be saved;’’ and we are disgusted
with the conditions, The answer to
all our prejudices is—that #¢ ts God’s
appointed way. There is no royal
road. The conditions are, believe and
live; and the authority is, ‘‘he that
believeth shall be saved, and he that
believeth not shall be damned.”
Our prejudices may recoil, and we
may turn away in wrath; but we
turn our face from the sun only to see
our shadow.—W. Mincozr in the
Study and Pulpit.

Verses 9-13.


Pride. 1. Fond ef


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





splendid ostentation. 2. Indulges
lofty expectations of notice and defe-
rence. 3. Is keenly sensitive to the
sting of insult, whether intended or
not. 4. Blinds the soul to its best
interests. 5. Must be humbled before
the soul can be blessed.


Verses 9,10. The cure of Naaman.
I. Jilustrative of the influence of
humble instrumentality. Il. Of the
obstructive power of prides. III. Of
the value of faithful counsel. IV. Of
the dlessedness of obedience. 1.
Naaman’s obedience led to his ob-
taining a perfect cure. 2. Naaman’s
cure wrought in him true humility.
3. Naaman’s cure led him to God.
4. Naaman’s cure filled his heart with
gratitude.—E. Workman.


Verses 10-12. Naaman, an ex-
ample of barriers to religious deci-
sion. I. The barrier was his own dis-
position. IT. His choosing the means.
III. His wanting to do something.
IV. Hse not applying the remedy.—
H. Bons.


Verses 11, 12. We, knowing much
better than Naaman did, the character
and claims of Elisha, are apt to be
amazed at the petulance and pride of
Naaman, Yet, in fact, there are few
of us—are there any ?—who have not
manifested many times in the course
of our career, as much or more resis-
tance to the demands upon our faith,
and to the exigencies appointed by
God for the humiliation of the proud
mind of the flesh, than ever Naaman
did, and often with far less reason.
Let us rather admit that the demand
upon the faith of Naaman, and the ex-
tent to which he was required to bend
down his natural reason, formed some-
what of a severe exertion from one 60
raw and inexperienced in the things of
God. Yet it is the common course of
the Lord’s dealings with those whom
He brings under the operation of His
healing grace. The course is paternal.
As a father deals with his children, so
He deals with us. He demands
obedience, exacta submission. He re-
quires faith; aud then, the mind being


ORAP.








et a a


brought into the rightstate, He teaches,
He leads, He heals.— Xiéto.


Verse 12. Is there not another
way? I. Sinners dislike the plan of
the Gospel. 1. Self-abandonment.
2. Salvation by faith. IL. They dis-
like tts object. 1. Salvation from sin.
2. The renewal of the heart. ITI.
They dislike the means to be used. 1.
Self-denial. 2. Humility. 8. Earnest-
ness. 4. Publicity.


Verses 13, 14. fhe soul’s desire
and submission. —I. A desire ts fre-
quently shown to do some great thing to
obtain = ealvation. Illustrate from
heathen pilgrims, Fakirs; devotees
who used to cast themselves under
wheels of Jaggernaut, also Roman
Catholic austerities, self-flagellations,
crusades, &c. Both (1) condemn and
(2) approve. The form in which such
zeal shows itself superstitious. The
motive wrong. But earnest self-
sacrificing spirit prompted by love to
Christ very admirable, What is not
permissible is seeking tu do something
as procuring cause of salvation. First
receive asa free gift, and then give
and do as much as the heart will
prompt. Il. The simplicity of what
has to be done, and consequently urgent
reason we should do st. (a) Because
no act of ours could be allowed to atone
for sin—(4) the work of Christ com-
plete, needs no addition—(c) a free
salvation comes within reach of all.
Who could say, if otherwise, but that
even in our great things, there might
be some coming short, and multitudes
would be excluded from hope? All
the more, then, rejoice that the
command is ‘‘ Believe and live,’ yet,
remember, there is wide scope after-
wards, especially a daily life of
patient piety and godliness, often
more difficult than a single act of self-
devotion. In this fulfil the desire
and glorify God. ILf. The wisdom
and blessedness of obcdience. Picture
the scene. So when humbled, anxious,
submissive, a sinner adopts the means
of mercy, there is (1) a Divine,
(2) an instantaneous, (3) a lasting effect.
From darkness to, light unregeneracy

437


e


OHAP. V.





to renewal. How wise the obedience!
The only chance of recovery. How
blessed! It must have been sweet to
feel the past cancelled, heart set right.
Men have fabled there is a fountain
of youth. Plunge in its waters and
the wrinkles fade out of the brow.
But it is true we may be made young
and happy again in spirit—children of
God.—Hom. Quarterly.


Verse 18. The art of persuasion.—
I. Knows when to select the right
moment to speak. II. Knows how
to subdue the most violent temper.
III. Appeals to the strongest motive
inman, IV. Should be used in turn-
ing men from sin to virtue.


Verse 14. It was not the water
either of Jordan or of Abana which
could heal, it was the obedience of this
haughty general to a mandate which
seemed to him frivolous and absurd.
In the Gospels faith is the first requi-
site in similar cases of healing, and so
it was here also—faith and obedience.
Naaman came with his mind all made
up as to how he was to be healed, and
he turned away in anger and disgust
from the course which the prophet
prescribed. Yet, when he turned back
even with alame and _half-doubting
faith and a half-unwilling obedience,
he was healed. This is the perma-
nent truth which is involved in the
story. Naaman was a type of the
rationalist whose philosophy provides
him with a priors dogmas by which
he measures everything which is pro-
posed to his faith. He turns away in
contempt where faith would heal him.
That is the truth which the story
serves to enforce.—Editor of Lange.

Not the unjust fury and tetcbiness
oft the patient shall cross the cure;
lest while God is severe the prophet
should be discredited. Long enough
might Naaman have washed there in
vain, if Elisha had not sent him.
Many a leper hath bathed in that
stream, and hath come forth no less
impure. It is the word, the ordinance
of the Almighty, which puts efficacy
into those means which of themselves
are both impotent and improbable.

438


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





What can our font do to the washing
away of sin? If God’s institution
shall put virtue into our Jordan, it
shall scour off the spiritual leprosies
of our hearts, and shall more cure the
soul than cleanse the face.—Bp. Hall.

God’s plan of salvation. We take
the narrative as illustrative of the
great truth, the necessity of con-
forming with God’s plan to secure
salvation. I. Zhat God's plan is
contrary to the expectations of man.
So it was here that Naaman had been
thinking within himself how the pro-
phet would act. He merely sent a
Inessenger commanding him to wash
in the Jordan. How simple, and so
he thought, how foolish! The very
simplicity bewildered him and kindled
his wrath. But if his own plan would
have been sufficient, he might have
cured himself without going to the
prophet at all. So the salvation which
is in Christ Jesus has always been a
stumbling block to men on account
of its simplicity, and many havedogged
the simple Gospel with innumerable
ceremonies of men’s devising, painting
the pure lily, and bringing their own
faint rush-light to increase the splen-
dour of the noonday sun. Men would
cross ocean and wander in far-off lands
in search of wisdom; they would survey
the heavens, and descend to the lower-
most parts of the earth; but God’s
word of life is nigh unto us, in our
mouth and in our heart.


“OQ, how unlike the complex works ot man

Heaven’s easy, artless, unencumbered plan !

From ostentation as from weakness free,

It stands like the cerulean arch we see,

Majestic in its own simplicity ;

Legible only by the light they give

Stand the soul-quickening worda, believe and
tive. CowPER.


II. That God’s plan tends to humble
the pride of man. Naaman thought
there was some royal cure for a royal
patient, and an honourable way to
deal with such an honourable man.
How indignant he felt when the
prophet only sent a messenger to him,
and the remedy prescribed being so
humiliating too. He could not under-
stand going to wash himself in the
river Jordan, the river of despised


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. V.





Israel ; whilst if it was necessary to
apply the waters of any river, could
he not have washed himself in the
proverbial crystal streams of Damas-
cus? ‘‘So he turned and went away
in a rage.”” So God’s plan of salva-
tion is mortifying to the pride of the
sinful heart. The Pharisees were
offended at the Saviour for making no
distinction between them and the
sinners. They were entangled in the
snares and pride of life. Their plan
was to glorify self and humble others;
but to enter the kingdom of Jesus
Christ, the first step required is for a
man to deny himself. Faith consists
in leaving our own frail vessel and
taking our passage on board the ark
of God, to deem ourselves nothing and
God allin all. We find Peter, having
received the consent of the Master,
walking on the sea; but the moment
he began to trust himself, and feel safe
in the power of his own strength, the
boisterous winds and the treacherous
waves frightened him, and, conscious
of his weakness, he with gladness
entered the ship and was ‘‘safe in
the armsof Jesus.’ The gateis strait
and the road is narrow, but he who is
humble and obedient is led at last to
safety and bliss. 3. That he who truly
feels his need will accept God’s plan.
Though Naaman was at first most
seriously disappointed, and turned
away in a rage, yet on the counsel of
his servants, strengthened by his own
need and his inward conviction, he
complied with the directions given by
the prophet. A sense of need is a
propelling power that will work
wonders, and, in conjunction with
faith, will send the mountain to the
sea, and chain the lion that is on the
way. This feeling impelled that
poor woman to force her way through
the crowd and touch the hem of the
Saviour’s garment; and, urged by the
same motive, the blind man willingly
went tothe lake of Siloam. When
the sinner really feels sin a burden,
and believes that the meek and lowly
Jesus is powerful te remove it, he will
not quarrel with the method of salva-
tion, but will come at once and cast
his burden down; and when he truly


feels his guilt he will come to the
fountain opened for sin and for un-
cleanness. When a man is bent upon
becoming rich, or learned, or great in
the estimation of the world, he is
willing to comply with the world’s
terms, be they ever so hard. Is it
wonderful that the sinner, with his
broken heart and contrite spirit, closes
in with the overtures of the gospel,
and accepts the salvation which is in
Christ? IV. That conformity to
God's plan will secure a man’s salva-
tion. Naaman obeyed, and he was
accordingly cured. 1. Some means
are generally used. The miracles of
the Old and New Testaments are
similar in this, that means were used
in bringing about such wonderful
deeds. It would have been all the
same to God to cure Naaman with a
word, but Naaman himself would have
lost the valuable lessons he received,
and the necessary training he went
through. 2. The means were not suff-
cient in themselves apart from the bless-
ing of God to cure his leprosy, but as
it was God’s plan it effected its pur-
pose. The ark was rendered safe from
the waters of the Deluge, as it was con-
structed according to the directions
given by God. The waters of Marah
lost their bitterness by a tree being
thrown into them, because that was
the means appointed by the Lord. To
encompass the walls of Jericho with
rams’ horns might have seemed very
foolish and useless to some, but it
was of Divine appointment, and so it
succeeded. Menare thus taught to do
their duty, and then to wait for the
Divine blessing. Naaman could wash
himself in the Jordan, though he could
not cure himself. We are to come to
the Saviour to be healed, we are to
look upon Him, to stretch out our
hands, withered as they are, to Him.
8. Naaman’s cure was ‘instantancous.
What a happy moment for him when
he discovered that the cause of his
anxiety, trouble, and humiliation was
removed! So the man who believes
on the Lord Jesus Christ, and flees to
Him for refuge, is from that moment
free from condemnation. 4. His cure
was complete, His flesh was made like
439


GHAP, V.


EHOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ee


the flesh of a little child. He
possessed a thoroughly renovated body.
No taint of the malady to cast its dark
shadow over the future. So he who
accepts God’s plan is wholly renewed,
created anew in Christ Jesus. True,
he retains the marks of the leprosy of
sin whilst in this world. As Mr.
Joseph Cook remarks, although the
particles of the body have been
changed many times, still the scars
made when the fingers were too young
to be trusted with edged tools continue
through the years, and are absolutely
unchangeable in the changing flesh, so
the scars of sin continue after years of
reformation ; but, thanks be to God,
day by day the nature becomes sancti-
fied, and at last the ransomed soul
will take its flight to the realms of
purity and bliss. The Church will be
at last a ‘‘ glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing;
holy, and without blemish.”—Hom.
Quarterly.


Verses 15-19. Gratitude to God and
earthly policy. Naaman, instead of
going straight away to Syria, turned
back to Samaria, not this time to the
king, but with the same retinue and
wealth of gifts he came back to Elisha’s
door. In this act he takes his place
with that one Samaritan leper of the
New Testament who turned back to
Jesus and blessed Him for His mercy
in freeing him from the same horrible
curse, while nine others went away
healed, but ungrateful. I. Naaman’s
journey back was @ grateful return to
Elisha and an honourable but only duts-
ful acknowledgment of God. It was an
owning of the God of Israel because of
Elisha’s work. This deduction of
spiritual truths from bodily blessings
ehows health of soul and soundness of
mind. Naaman recognized God by
His mercies, and acknowledged the God
of Elisha in the work that Llisha had
done. Mercy is the great mark of our
God; itis that by which He may be
most easily recognized ; and works of
mercy are the signs of the true and
most eminent servants of His pleasure.
God is ready to let His claim on our
loving recognition be determined by

440


what every heart can easily discover
of His merciful kindness. His message
and work among us are still the same ;
His servants and workers now are all,
if they are true to Him, workers of
mercy, messengers of love and peace
and healing. IL. Hlisha’s refusal of
wealth. In this, like Abraham with
the King of Sodom, and like Paul with
the Corinthians, Elisha kept the mercy
of God as God intended it to be,
‘‘ without money and without price.”
The true gift in return for God’s mercy
is the offering of ourselves in Christ,
and when that is made the silver and
the gold will find their proper piace.
It was noble in Naaman to make the
offer ; and it would have been wrong
in Elisha to have taken the gift. The
greatest blessings cost, at first, the
least. No one can be paid, no one can
pay, for the mercy of God, or for the
conferring of spiritual blessings. God
gives us His mercy, and He wants our-
selves as His right and due. III.
Ignorant devotion to the true God. Only
a little while ago, in rage and pride,
Naaman had sneered at the waters of
Israel ; but now the soil of the land
of the Lord was sacred to him,
and he wanted an altar of it in
his Syrian nome. Nor for this is he
to be condemned, as we should be
justified in condemning the like spirit
when it is foisted upon the purity of
Christianity or associated with the faith
once committed tothe saints. Christi-
anity knows nothing of exclusively
holy places and days and services and
classes; for now all places and times
may be sacramental and holy to the
Lord. IV. There was, however, in
Naaman’s case » worse thing than his
excusable superstition, and that was
—an attempt to mingle the claims of
God with the advantages of earthly
policy. It is not for us or any to press
heavily on the conscience of a man in
such a position. The only thing that
gives us a right to judge the case at
all, for our own caution and guidance,
is the evidence that Naaman himself
felt that bowing down with his master
in the house of Rimmon might be in-
consistent with his proposed devotion
to the God of Israel. From Naaman’s


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.
Sad Pa ST a= ccc aecnemeeeemmamemeeee a ee Oe





easily understood mistake let us learn
to hate laxity of principle in ourselves,
and to judge gently the weakness and
fall of others. V. From Eilisha’s
tenderness to a weak convert, learn the
more to trust the greater tenderness
that Jesus has for our frailties and
dangers. Do not think that Jesus
does not see the wretchedness of your
temptations and the hazard of your
position when all things seem to
beckon you to sin, and sin hides its
vile image under a mask of attractive-
ness and interest and prosperity.

Then learn to scorn the praise of men,

And learn to lose with God;

For Jesus won the world through shame,

And beckons thee His road, cee


I. Gratitude. The mighty Naaman,
who had doubtless often bathed with-
out benefit in the waters of Damascus,
tried the river Jordan, and was imme-
diately cleansed. He returns to Elisha
to thank him. How different now is
Naaman, old things passedaway! He
acknowledges the supreme God as the
only God. Does this publicly in the
presence of all his company. Would
make an acknowledgment to Elisha,
not as a recompense, but as a gift of
gratitude. Il. Generosity. Elisha by
no means a man of great wealth.
Dependent on the bounty of Providence.
Followed no regular calling. Lived
in an age when the servants of God, as
such, were ill-rewarded. Yet would
not receive a gift at the hands of
Naaman. His desire to lay Naaman
and the king of Syria his master
under an obligation to Israel. This
is to preserve peace. Especially he
desired to impress them with the
greatness and goodness of God; to
remind them of those higher blessings
which God would freely give. Hence,
for the sake of God’s honour, and his
country’s welfare, he would take no
reward. III. Superstition. Although
thus grateful, and making his con-
fession of the true God, Naaman is not
fully enlightened. Still regards God
as a local deity. The mightiest God
in the world, but limited to Israclitish
soil. He would therefore like toc
back with him some of that soil.


CHAP. ¥.


thought to worship in any spot on
that soil would secure the favour of
God. Elisha makes no reply to this
request. Certainly cannot approve
this course. Sends Noaman back with
his blessing. Naaman felt that to
worship Rimmon was wrong, but hoped
to be forgiven by him on whose conse-
caated soil he stood. Learn:—-l. Zo
oultivate gratitude, 2. Te do good
without the hope of any return. 3.
Guard against all forma of superstition.
The Class and Desk.


Verse 16. The unselfishness of
goodness. I. Cannot be bribed into
showing kindness. II. Refuses legiti-
mate offerings when the cause of
religion would suffer by accepting them.
IIT. Falls back upon God for all need-
ful supplies.


Verses 17, 18. Imperfect religious
ideas. I. Not uncommon at the early
stage of religious life. II. Leads to
imperfect religious practice. III.
Attaches too much importance to the
externals of worship. IV. Hinders a
thorough reformation and forsaking of
the old life.


Verse 17. As Naaman was the type
of the converted heathen world, and
he carried the soil of Palestine to
Aram, so did the heathen carry over
into their own lands, together with
Christianity, the doctrine, life, dis-
position, and _ spirit, which had
flourished in the Holy Land, and
thereby they established themselves a
rew home. When we hear, here and
there in Christian lands, the names
Bethany, Bethlehem, Zion, what are
they but holy places transferred, in
their spirit, from their original loca-
tion, into our life, and thought, and
fecling? In their religious obser-
vances, the main point is not the
correctness and truth of thy know-
ledge, or of the doctrine which thou
professest, but the truth and purity of
thine own character. What one may
do under his circumstances without
violating his conscience, the conscience
of another, under other circumstances,
will forbid him todo. We have no
right to judge him: to eae each

a4


my


GHAP. V.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


——————————


one stands or falls (Rom. xiv. 1—7),
— Cassel.

— Well did this Syrian find that
the man of God had given a super-
natural virtue to the water of Israel,
and therefore supposed he might give
the like to his earth. Doubtless it
was devotion that moved this suit.
The Syrian saw God had a propriety
in Israel, and imagines He will be best
pleased with his own. On the sudden
was Naaman half a proselyte; still
here was a weak knowledge with
strong intentions.—Bp. Hall.


Verse 18. The compromises of
life. The significant éu¢ in the social
position of Naaman is to find its
counterpart in his religious character.
A great man, but a leper; a believer
pleading for an inconsistency. Con-
version and compromise. When he
has found God beyond the sign of
water, and come back to the prophet
with the confession of his new faith,
you expect a complete change in his
exterior life, that he will go among
his heathen countrymen a full-orbed
religious man ; but he counts the cost,
or perhaps is insome mental perplexity.
At least he will put the difficulty to
the prophet, and be guided by his
decision. We are startled to hear the
answer ‘‘Go in peace.” Here was
an opportunity to rebuke cowardice,
to chastise the poor selfishness that,
having received so much from God,
asks, “And how little need I pay
back?” An opportunity to discuss an
interesting question of casuistry and
to decide upon the comparative forces
of conscience and necessity. But Elisha
accepts his convert, with this excep-
tion, whether in the passive non-
aggressiveness of that old Hebrew
religion, or in the conviction that the
man would do his best under the
circumstances, we cannot tell. Set
Naaman in the light flung back by
the cross, and we can soon pronounce
judgment. We know our Lord deals
with these human “ buts.” “Let the
dead bury their dead,” &. “If a man
love father and mother more than me,
he is not worthy of me.” But the
judgment would be unjust Men are

442


always more or less in subjection to
the ideas that govern the age in which
they live. It is only the few who
draw themselves apart, and press for-
ward to a grand isolation. The Church
has ten thousand Naamans where it
has one Paul. The very uncertainty
in which, spite of Elisha’s benediction,
the incident is left, suggests some
remarks on the compromises of life.


I. Religious decision, as tt 4s affected
by earthly relationships. This man
was a servant, and the conditions of
his servitude were not simple, but com-
plex. He was in command of the
army, and while this conferred on him
a large authority, it imposed a large
trust. These had opened to him wide
opportunities for loyalty, bravery, and
patriotism. It was part of his service
to go with his master into the house
of Rimmon. Refusal would take on
it an ugly air of ingratitude. The
king had made him the man he was,
and a feeling of indebtedness and ob-
ligation may enter very acutely into
questions of conscience and right.
This to a noble mind would be a far
greater difficulty than the loss of po-
sition and the imminent death that
might result from the wrath of an abso-
lute monarch, unaccustomed and un-
able to enter into nice questions of
religious casuistry ; indeed, the line of
duty between the obligations imposed
by earthly relationships, and our ser-
vices to God, is not always so distinct as
men think. Many atleast who, withloud
protestations, scorn all compromise,
have never found that line. Clear is
the right, at all sacrifice, if king or
master exact the positive crime; ask
me to disown Christ, to give up prayer,
to outrage any distinct conscientious
conviction, but along this line is a
very borderland of mist in which the
traveller is often brought to a stand,
asking after the right way. It is
enough to instance questions of poly-~
gamy, of slavery, with which the
early Church had to deal. Of course
it may be said, if a heathen, having
two or more wives, became a convert,
he must put away all butone. Which
one? What if each were the mother of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


=


children ? The Christian master must
manumit his slaves. Cornelius, says
the Peace Advocate, should forsake
the Roman service, and take no longer
the heathen’s pay. But these, and
a multitude of similar questions, are
not decided by inspired authority at
all, or are decided in their special
instances against the ruling principle.
The New Testament has faith in time,
in the thousand years of God’s work-
ing, in the antagonism of the spirit of
the Gospel to every form of injustice
and wrong. It cares less to estimate
and adjudge the differing shades of
darkness in the night of error, so much
as to bring in that daybreak before
which all the shadows shall flee away.
Christianity has entered as a sword
into many a worldly home, happy in
its own way; it has resulted in wide
divisions between parent and child,
master and servant, monarch. and sub-
ject. The records of the Church glow
with bright instances of heroic sacri-
fice, of daring disobedience to man in
obeying God. And yet how much
has to be borne, how much ought to
be borne, before the daughter forsakes
her mother, or the son breaks asunder
the bond of the household! There is
much in Naaman’s knowledge of the
inconsistency. He who sins against
that mner light will be scarcely free
from sin against God.


ITI. By society. Naaman does not
refer to the difficulty of maintaining a
monotheistic faith in a pagan land, to
the power of many against the one;
but society is full of suggested com-
promises resulting from these condi-
tions. There is a compulsion in the
pressure both of social forces and of
civil laws; and many a man discovers
that the house of Rimmon is co-exten-
sive with the state in which he lives.
He pays the tribute money to Cesar,
or the temple tax, withholding faith
in the lawful government in the one,
and really teaching that the other must
pass away. He takes up his share of
the country’s expenditure, though
part of it may go toward objects from
which he conscientiously dissents.
His plea is the necessity of his posi-


CHAP. V,





tion; but his neighbour takes that
plea toa far wider field, and justifies
many a compromise on the same
ground. It is convenient to charge
our personal responsibility on an in-


tangible irresponsible something ealled


society. But what society is to sup-
ply our code of ethics? Syria or
Isracl? England or Fiji? Every
man shall bear his own burden. The
law of truth is in and from the change-
less God. Customs, fashions, luxurious
living, appearances, amusements,
friendships, business, all tempt to
compromise and have prophets Goe
never sent, who say to the conformist,
“* Go in peace.”


III. By the necessities of life. The
plea, we must do this to live. Refer
to common practices in trade, the
pressure of competition. The world’s
practices contrary to the great princi-
ple. A man’s life consisteth not in
the abundance of the things that he
possesseth,


IV. By the personal temperament,
One man’s supreme difficulty is ano-
ther man’s agreeable work. The cost
of sacrifice differs with different men.
To one it is easier to die on the battle-
field than to confess his faith—to give
largely, even to Gehazi, with generous
or grateful subscriptions, than to break
with former friendships. There is no
open confession of Christ’s name by
secret disciples, to whom One greater
than all prophets may say, ‘Go in
peace.” Let character only be of so pure
a transparency that the light ofa holy
conscience may shine through. 1. God
does not take back from men of partial
failure the good he has bestowed. The
leprosy does not return to the cleansed
leper, if one leprous spot be on the
soul. The impotent man healed, goes
straightway to our Lord’s enemies to
tell them that it was Jesus who made
him whole, and the strength ungrate-
fully used remains. We have all need
to say, somewhere, ‘‘ The Lord pardon
thy servant in this thing.” 2. Is the
silence of Scripture as to any useful
future in Naaman’s history to be re-
garded as evidence of a good life hin-

das


OWAP. V.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KING8.





dered by the appearance of evil? 3.
We shall destroy no house of Rimmon
by worshipping in it on any pretence
whatsoever. 4. In the Gospel, this,
at least, is clear—he that putteth his
hand to the plough, and looketh back,
is not fit for the kingdom of God.—
Hom. Quarterly.

— Far, therefore, is Naaman from
being a pattern, save of weakness;
since he is yet more than half a Syrian ;
since he willingly accuses himself,
and, instead of defending, deprecates
his offence. As nature, so grace, rises
by many degrees to perfection. It is
not for us to expect a full stature in
the cradle of conversion. Leprosy was
in Naaman cured at once, not corrup-
tion. —Zyp. Hall.


Verse 19. One does not know what
to admire most in Elisha’s mild and
simple answer, the clear. and correct
insight into a genuine heart experi-
ence, which, whatever may surround
and obscure the main point, 5 ll seizes
this quickly and clearly; or the holy
moderation which, even in the case
where it is its prerogative to urge,
limit, bind, loose, or burden, still re-
strains itself; or the pure humanity of
disposition which can so thoroughly
sympathize, so completely put itself in
the position and at the standpoint of
the other. The knowledge of the liv-
ing God, and the experience of His
saving grace, is the fountain of all
peace, with which alone a man can go
gladly on his way.—Menken.


BOMILETIOS OF VERSES 20-27,
Tus Corsz oy AvARICE.


I. That a spirit of avarice loses no opportunity to gratify its greed.
Gehazi was the Judas Iscariot of the Old Testament. Covetousness was his
besetment. He was doubtlessin many ways valuable to Elisha, and perhaps was
at first a sincere enquirer after truth. But the spirit of avarice gained the
mastery over what was good in him, and ultimately wrought his ruin. The
wealth of Naaman was too great a temptation to him, and he could not forego
the prospectof benefiting by the lavish generosity of the grateful Syrian. ‘Ag
the Lord liveth, I will run after him and take somewhat of him” (verse 20).
Gehazi acts under the guise of religion while disregarding its teaching of dis-
interestedness, which it was particularly needful to make evident in those days of
worldliness and time-serving among the national priesthood—the sycophantic
Baalites. He showed contempt for the judgment of his master in the matter of
receiving gifts, end cared not how far he disparaged the prophet in the eyes of
his new convert. He mainly misrepresented Elisha by making him ask for
what Naaman had just heard him most positively refuse. Avarice knows no
scruples ; is reckless of results; it sees only what is to be gained, and cannot
relinquish the slightest hope of securing it.


II. That a spirit of avarice hesitates not to employ falsehood in at-
taining its purpose. Covetousness and lying go together; they are twin-vices,
The burning desire for gain suggested to Gehazi the fabrication of a plausible
story which would easily deceive the unsuspecting and generous Naaman
(verses 21-23). ‘What a round tale hath the craft of Gehazi devised of the
number, the place, the quality, the age, of his master’s guests, that he might set
a fair colour upon that pretended request, so proportioning the value of his de-
mand as might both enrich himself, and yet well stand with the moderation of
his master! Love of money can never keep good quarter with honesty, with
innocence. Covetousness never lodged in the heart alone ; if it find not, it will
breed wickedness. What a mint of fraud there isin a worldly breast! How
readily can it coin subtle falsehood for an advantage!’ To find out the covetous,
go round with a subscription book. It is perfectly appalling what lies you will
hear told to evade giving. ;

444


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. Guar. ¥.

III. That a spirit of avarice finds its pleasure in secretly storing its
gains (verse 24). Gehazi carefully stowed away the goods with which the
liberality of Naaman had supplied him, and began already to indulge in dreams
of increased possessions and of the pleasures his wealth might purchase. The
miser wastes his best powers in the fond idolatry of his money, and gloats in secret
over the piles of treasure which he counts with trembling joy. Avarice, says
Channing, is a passion full of paradox, a madness full of method; for although
the miser is the most mercenary of all beings, yet he serves the worst master
more faithfully than some Christians do the best, and will take nothing for it.
He falls down and worships the God of this world, but will have neither its
pomps, vanities, nor its pleasures for his trouble He begins to accumulate
treasure as a means to happiness, and by a common but morbid association he
continues to accumulate it as an end. He lives poor to die rich, and is the
mere jailer of his house and the turnkey of his wealth. Impoverished by his
gold, he slaves harder to imprison it in his chest, than his brother slave to liberate
it from the mine. The avarice of the miser may be termed the grand sepulchre
of all his other passions, as they successively decay. But, unlike other tombs,
it is enlarged by repletion and strengthened by age.


IV. That a spirit of avarice is unexpectedly exposed and faithfully
warned (verse 25, 26). Little did Gehazi think that the whole transaction
which had been carried out with such consummate craft and privacy was
already known to his Master. He secks still further to hide his duplicity by
further lying. ‘He who tells a lie,” says Pope, ‘‘is not sensible how great a
task he undertakes; for he must be forced to invent twenty more to maintain
one.” The wickedness of his servant was discovered by the prophetic insight
of Elisha, and, to the utter confusion of the culprit, he is addressed in words of
severe and faithful remonstrance—‘‘Is it a time to receive money, &c?”
Miserable Gehazi! how didst thou stand pale and trembling before the dreadful
tribunal of thy severe master, looking for the woful sentence of some grievous
judgment for so heinous an offence !’’ Itis well when the money-loving world-
ling has a faithful monitor at hand to warn him of his danger and reprove him
for his sin: it is better still when warning and reproof lead to reformation.


V. That a spirit of avarice is cursed with a terrible doom (verse 27),
Swift upon the heels of the transgression came the punishment, and that a
punishment most loathsome and abhorrent : it was like a living death !—“ He
went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.” O heavy talents of
Gehazi! O the horror of this one unchangeable suit which shall never be but
loathsomely white, mnoisomely unclean! How much better had been a light
purse and a homely coat with a sound body, a clear soul! Too late doth that
wretched man now find that he hath loaded himself with a curse, that he hath
clad himself with shame. His sin shall be read ever in his face, in his seed.
All passengers, all posterities, shall now say—Behold the characters of Gehazi’s
covetousness, fraud, sacrilege!—Bp. Hall. Perhaps the punishment cured the
sin, and led to repentance. Gehazi the leper had more hope of salvation than
Gehazithe miser. Gain got bya lie will burn your fingers, burn in your purses,
rot your estates, and root out your posterity.


Lussons :—1. The love of moncy is the root of all evil. 2. The avartoious spirit
ts ever ready to take advantage of the generous. 8. Covet earnestly the best gifts.


Deritement or Gop’s Work sy Coverous Mzw (verses 20-24),


It is saddening to know that some of the best wor«s, nd some of God’s most
eminent workers, have been defamed and lowered, if their influence has not been
actually counteracted and nullified, by inferior workers and by unworthy men.

445


*


UHAP. V. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ey ointment ec cit ttl EA CT APL ESR OAT Lee


This defiling of God’s work has generally come from one souree, and is the result
of one vile lust or passion—covetousness. As illustrating this, read the repul-
sive histories of Balaam, of Achan, of David’s impious numbering of Israel, the
story of Gehazi now before us, and the dark atrocity of the life and death of
Judas Iscariot. : . . f

I. The action and duplicity of Gehazi are of singular unworthiness. Like so
many other histcries, they show that intercourse with good men and assocvation with
God-like work may become only the occasion of more vileness ina man. To the
influence of his noble-minded master, to the refining and elevating power of such
a character as Elisha, to the special needs of his fatherland and day, Gehazi
seems to have been insensible, or, if not insensible, yet, which is worse, inclined
to undervalue them, and to use the privileges and opportunities of his position
for the gain of money. Noris Gehazi lonelyin this. On every side evidence of
the like iniquity accumulates when we look into Scripture or other history.
Few followers of greatmenhave any of theirreal greatness, though they may share
their honour. Few imitators of great teachers catch sight of anything but their
own false exaggeration of their master’s position, and the opportunities thereby
given of personal advance. The followers of Luther were seldom worthy of him.
The followers of Calvin have not been true to their master. The adherents of
the hallowed Wesleys did not take their sacred work only. The converts of
Paul almost broke his heart. And the followers and servants of Jesus—where
is there one of us who is worthy of his master? Do not many of us come to
Christ with selfish feelings and serve our God for hire? We may find it helpful
against this danger ever to remember that God’s gift of salvation was both
undeserved and unsolicited. Being with the good and great will not necessarily
make us similar; otherwise Gehazi would have been a better man, and it would
not have been Christ’s sorrowful experience that ‘‘ he who had eaten bread with
Him lifted up his heel against Him.”

II. Gehazi’s covetousness was of a gross; material kind—the love of money;
and the miserable influence of it upon him is seen in this—that «t produced in-
ability to appreciate Elisha’s spiritual motives. Ali that Gehazi let himself see
was that with the departing Naaman so much money went away too. As
with Gehazi, so generally the covetous and unprincipled man lowers himself to
a level on which he is unable, in daily life and business, to appreciate other
motives than those of getting gain, or measure anything in life’s movements
and enterprises by any other gauge than that of the money that can be gained or
must be lost. Gehazi could not feel the power of Elisha’s spiritual motives in
sparing Naaman and letting him go free of payment. Elisha’s noble determi-
nation that the mercy of his God should, in Naaman’s case, be had literally for
the asking; his resolve that the goodness of God should be then, as we say
now, of grace, and not of buying or selling—this, to such a soul as Gehazi’s,
was useless, fanciful, intangible. He was, evidently, a practical vigorous man,
who had not much room for fancies, whether religious or any other. Covetous
men in the world, and Gehazis in the Church, are too many and too influential.
Too many of us have this coarse grain in us, and when there is ever any beauty
or tenderness of feeling in us, we get into the habit of hiding it from what we
think would be the rude looks and unappreciating touch of others.

III. In several other ways Gehazi’s covetousness involved him in sin, and further
defiled the good work that had been wrought by Elisha. These are no lonely,
single sins. Sin needs sin to help it along, to buttress it, to back it, and give
it success. One deception leads to another, and needs it, and each becomes a
pledge of worse. Gehazi had to lie to Naaman; and it speaks of the power of
greed and covetousness, to see this man telling the lie so plainly and confidently,
misrepresenting his master, and dishonour:ag God’s work as done by his master,
All the food and fame of this grand world are not worth one little lie. Let us
be careful not to want anything beyond the reach of honesty, nor to go where

446


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. ¥
eee


we need lies and double-dealing for advancement. To be simple-minded, with
Christ, is better than all the successes of duplicity. Gezahi’s lie deceived a
trusting man, and made the liar take still greater and more ungencrous advan-
tage of Naaman’s goodness, in doubling the amount of silver. The covetous
liar has no room for generosity.

IV. The success of the ie. The falschood has thriven; to deceive has been
found to be the short road to wealth; to insult God, to defame his work, to
misrepresent Elisha, and to plunder Naaman. These things have “ paid,” as
men say. It is this kind of thing that is enough to shake a feeble faith, to see
the wicked in great power. Gehazi had gotten his wealth, but what could he
do with it? He hid it, hoarded it up for a few hours, and then the judgment
came. He got his money like Achan, he hid it like Achan, and God troubled
him as he troubled Achan. This is the life of those who are greedy of gain.
It is like sowing the barren sea. We can only hoard earth’s gain, or hide it
away, or spend :t on the world that passes away, for a few hours, and then God
must come, and judgment must begin.—C. W. P.


Oxz May’s Brzsstne AnoTHER Maw’s Curse (verses 25-27),


Gehazi has to face that from which a liar never escaped, and a false tongue
never was delivered—even detection, exposure, shame, and everlasting contempt.
The whole transaction had been decided on so quickly, and carried out so easily,
that the probabilities were all in his favour, and warranted his hope that having
gained his wealth by a bold stroke he would be able to keep it by effrontery.
I. Lying and false ways of earthly prosperity always leave out God. Liars and
deceivers ignore God’s interest in their life, God’s knowledge of their plans and
schemes, and the execution of them. And intheir apparently untroubled doing
without God these men and their actions become most hurtful stumbling-blocks
to many tender souls. Oh, guard in your daily actions against this perilous
thought, this most hurtful habit of ignoring God, and his knowledge of your
ways! Let us take the word of God as a “wholesome” blame to ourselves,
and as a wise correction of.many shameful things in our daily life. Let us
really and solemnly believe in God’s omnisicence, not as a theological article only,
but as a matter for daily life and care; and let us try to cultivate the ever-
present sense that God knows all our ways, and understands our hearts with
their pitiful vileness. Yea, let not this beget terror and horror, like that of
the prisoner in his cell, who, having been condemned to have some one day and
night watching him through a hole in the prison door, became haunted and
horrified by the eye that was ever looking at him; but, rather, let us gladly
believe that “‘the Lord has searched us, and known us;” that He ‘‘ understands
our thoughts afar off;’’ and let us bare and open ourselves to the Infinite
Searcher of hearts. II. They who will not do this, will have to prove the
experience of Gehazi, that one sin, one lie, makes others easier and worse. Gehazi
presumed that Elisha was ignorant of his doings, and when he went in and was
asked, ‘‘ Whence comest thou?” he had his answer ready, ‘‘ Thy servant went
nowhither.” The lie came from him easily and readily, for he had prepared
himself beforehand; and the lie he had told to Naaman trained him to insult,
by deceiving, his master. The way to perdition is downhill, ona slippery way,
with a descent that is ever quickening. The first step down gives us impetus,
and every after step is easier to the soul that is going down away from the
light. One act of lying or deceiving needs another, and begets its own kind
until the liar deceives himself, imagining himself to be secure, when he is on
the edge of perdition, and thinking his schemes are all doing well, when ‘‘ He
that sitteth in the heavens laughs at them, and the Lord has them in derision.”
In thus leading to a vile, false security of self-deception, lying becomes its own


enemy andjudgment. Though others may be hoodwinked, and ss


’


OHAP. ¥. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





may be blindfolded, so that right and wrong are not clearly discernible, yet
deception must end somewhere. Somewhere, and with some one, a lie must be
of no use, be wasted breath and ruinous sin. It is of no use with God; it
stops at the throne of God; there it must stand revealed; and we have yet to
see whether the boldness of earth’s deceptions will be continued there. Who
shall be boldin the day of God? Certainly not the false man. III. Gehazi’s
exposureand shame come now before us. How soon the scheme came to an end,
and such an end! How soon the bubble burst! Gehazi had deceived Naaman
and had gotten his money, but he had misled himself much more. For
Elisha’s spirit had been with him, and it is notable that Elisha says, that from
the moment in which Gehazi began to deceive Naaman, he knew the whole. It
is not a light thing to God when we allow ourselves to glide into an iniquity,
but it must be and is before God a much viler thing when, in addition to wrong-
ing our own souls, we hurt and sin against others. Sin has been vile enough
when, in cases that have come before our law courts, men have lied, and forged,
and perjured themselves; the outrage on truth has been bad, but when widows
and orphans and others have been ruined by trusting their money to such men,
has there not risen a cry to God, a cry clamorous as that of Abel’s unexpiated
blood? Samuel Rutherford spoke tenderly yet terribly when he said, ‘‘ I find
it would be no art, as [ see now, to make hypocrisy a goodly web, and
to go through the market as a saint among men, and yet steal quietly to
hell without observation, so easy it is to deceive men. Men see but as
men, but to be approved of God (may I add in business?) is no ordinary
mercy.” Gehazi got Naaman’s money; would that we all in our trading
and toil had the spirit that would lay all gains before God, saying, Lord,
whose money have 1? IV. Elisha’s patriottsm orsed out against Gehazvs sin.
‘‘Ts it a time to receive money and garments and oliveyards, and vineyards and
sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?” This protest is based
not only on Elisha’s desire that Naaman’s cure should be from beginning to
end the evident work of the free grace and mercy of the God of Israel, but rises
also from the condition of Israel as a nation at that time. It wasa time of strife
and care, of war and rumour of war, ir which everyone ought to have been
ready for the call of self-sacrifice, and for the encouragement of self-denying
motives for the sake of the time and the fatherland. During all the period of war
and siege and famine of which you may read in the next chapter, Elisha was
the leader of the patriotic and no-surrender party in Samaria. He it was who
encouraged the people to resist even to the uttermost; and even when the city
was so reduced that women ate their own children, and the king sent a man to
strike off Elisha’s head as the leader of the resisting party, Elisha still kept the
gates of the city shut against a surrender. Knowing the vigorous patriotism of
this man of God, his readiness for self-devotion, we may well and easily under-
stand Elisha’s detestation of Gehazi’s conduct when all that he seemed to wish
for was the increase of his money and the accumulation of hoarded wealth. It
was not a time to receive money, and pander by false ways to the lust for ©
gain, though there are men who, in any crisis of a nation or society or religion,
will put the claims of self-interest in the foreground. and judge only under the
impulse of insatiable appetite for wealth. The patriot as well as the prophet
speaks to us here, and his word declares that a man is required by the condition
of his country and the state of the times in which he lives to forbid himself
any gain, to deny himself any advance, that may involve him in meanness and
sinfulness. With broader meaning also, out of which all other special applica-
tions come, we must learn from this that the Christian man is required to govern
all his life by such a feeling as this of Elisha, that time on earth is to be passed
in the actual subordination of earthly gains of money, or rich dress, or pro-
perty, or social status. The present time is a time for honest toil and labour in
the fear of God and the love of Jesus; but not for aiming at the misealled —
448


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP, ¥.





* goods s: of this world. V. Now, coming to the last of this history, we see
Gehazi pierced through with many sorrows. We had sought his good here, but
with Naaman’s money he got his leprosy too. The blessing of the Syrian
became the curse of the servant of the man of God. Let us get this matter
close to ourselves. The day of God, we may fear, will show many who have
blighted themselves, marked themselves with a curse by their part in connection
with God’s word ; many who have helped to do good, but therein doomed them-
selves by the spirit that they have allowed to grow on the work. Itis nota
light thing to assume leadership in the Lord, or eldership in His work, for if
we are hurtful #» these things, who shall heal the hurt ?


‘For what shall heal, when holy service banes ?
Or who may guide
ae Gey) plains
y lov’d, yet sinful people wandering wide,
If Aaron’s hand, unshrinking, iaoald
An idol form of earthly gold ?””


What shall save when being an instrument of good is made its own curse by any
soul? This doom of Gehazi is prophetic of all uncleansed ein and its miserable
end. Any unrepented wrong against man or God must come back to the wrong-
doer. Sin that we will not let Christ wash away must ‘find us out,” for it is
our sin, owr own ghastly belonging for ever and ever. We are its author, owner,
and home forever. We raise a demon that we cannot lay but by taking it home to
ourselves. Unpardoned—that is, unrepented—sin is asthe unclean spirit of which
the Lord spake: it has no end till it returns whence it setout. We began with
honour and degradation in Naaman; and it all ends in this dishonour and degrada-
tioninGehazi. ‘ He went outa leper””—the curse of God had fallen on him by
the word of the gentle master whose work he had defiled. Elisha’s kindliness gave

lace to the word of vengeance. Oh, remember that there is such a thing as
“‘the wrath of the Lamb,” and that when the gentleness of God, the Lamb in the
midst of the throne, gives way to judgment, there shall be found no place for
the liar, the covetous, orany impenitent. In the free grace and love by which
Naaman was washed and purified we have our hope; and in the outraged love
by which Gehazi was blighted we have our warning. Take both the hope and
the warning.—C. W. P.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES,


Verses 20-24. A sordid spirit. Verse 20. How mighty are the evil


I. Remains unchanged, though in
daily intercourse with the most un-
selfish nobleness. II. Cannot appre-
eiate the motive that relinquishes a
single opportunity of getting gain.
III. Deludes itself in assuming a reli-
gious guise for its basest acts (verse 20).
IV. Displays unseemly haste in getting
possession of coveted treasure (verse
21). V. Is facile in manufacturing
falsehood (verse 22). VI. Does not
scruple to take every advantage of the
generosity of others (verse 23). VII.
Is careful to conceal the extent of its


hoardings (verse 24).


inborn lusts of the human heart!
Even in the case of those who have for
years enjoyed the society of the noblest
and most pious men, who have heard
and read the Word of God daily, and
who have had the example of holy con-
duct daily before their eyes, lusts
arise, take possession of them, and
carry them captive (James i. 13-15).


Verse 23. He who himself thinketh
no evil, and is sincere, does not suspect
cunn ng and deceit in others. Goode
hearted, soble men, to whom it is
more leased to give than to receive,

@¢@ 449


be)


CHAP. V.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





are easily deceived, and they follow
the inclination of their hearts instead
of examining carefully to whom they
are giving their benefactions.


Verse 24. ‘That which we must
conceal brings no blessing.


Verses 25-27. The audacity of a
liar. I. Stands unabashed in the
holiest presence. IL. Under the neces-
sity of adding lie to lie. III. Un-
expectedly exposed. IV. Does not
escape signal punishment.

Verse 25 compared with verse 27.
‘* But he went in and stood before his
master. And he went out from his
presence a leper as white as snow.”
A never-to-be-forgotten interview.
I. He went in guilty, yet little dream-
ing of detection; he came out baffled,
exposed, humbled. II. He went in
hardened, impenitent, and prepared
with excuses; he came out smitten
with a punishment as little expected
asit was terrible. III. A single inter-
view may wither the happiness of a
lifetime ; judgment, though unantici-
pated, is switt and sure. IV. The
way in which we shall come out of the
last judgment will depend upon the
character with which we go in.


Verse 26. It is folly to presume
upon sin in hopes of secrecy. When
thou goest aside into any bye-path,
does not thy own conscience go with
thee? Does not the eye of God go
with thee?

— Giving is kind, and taking is
courteous, and both may at times and
in some cases be done without sin.
There is much use of godly discretion,
doubtless, in directing us when to open,
when to shut our hands.—7Zrapp.


Verse 27. It is a woful exchange
that Gehazi hath made with Naaman;
Naaman came a leper, returned a dis-
ciple. Gehazi came a disciple, re-
turned a leper. Naaman left behind
both his disease and his money ; Gehazi
takes up both his money and his dis-
ease. Now shall Gehazi neverlook
upon himself but he shall think of
Naaman, whose skin is transferred

450


upon him with those talents, and shall
wear out the rest of his days in shame,
in pain, and sorrow. His tears may
wash off the guilt of his sin, but shail
not, like another Jordan, wash off his
leprosy; that shall ever remain as a
hereditary monument of Divine
severity. Happy was it for him if,
while his skin was snow white with
leprosy, his humbled soul was washed
white as snow with the water of true
repentance.—Bp. Hall.

— Theleprosy of riches, Gold is
tainted. Strength required to use it
aright. A curse cleaves to it when it
is ill-gotten or ill-used. This curse
crops out most frequently in the
children. A father absorbed in the
pursuit of wealth, and mother absorbed
in fashion, will bring up corrupt and
neglected children. Parents who love
gold, fashion, and display, train their
children to hold these the chief things
in life.

— As Naaman was a living monu-
ment of the saving might and grace of
Jehovah, so Gehazi was a monument
of the retributive justice of the Holy
One in Israel; a living warning and
threat for the entire people. By his
conversion Naaman was taken up into
God’s community of redemption in
Israel; by his unfaithfulness and
denial of this God, Gehazi brings
down upon himself the punishment
which excludes him from the society
of the prophet-disciples and of the
entire covenant people. As Naaman’s
cure and conversion was a physical
prophecy that God will have pity upon
the heathen also, and will receive him
into His covenant of grace, so Gehazi’s
leprosy prophesied the rejection of the
people of Israel who should abandon
the covenant of grace and persevere in
apostasy (Matt. viii. 11, 12; xxi. 43).
—Lange.

— Let not the punishment of Gehazi
be thought too severe. Important
principles were involved in his con-
duct, for it wasa time when the repre-
sentatives of the sacred office needed
to observe the greatest caution against
the spirit of worldliness. Gehazi’s
acts on this occasion were a complica-
tion of wickedness. He showed eom


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


1


tempt forthe judgment of his master
in the matter of receiving gifts; he
meanly misrepresented the prophet by
making him ask for what Naaman had
just heard him most positively refuse ;
he invented a false story to blind the
eyes of Naaman; and, finally, told a
miserable lie in the hope of escaping
detection from Elisha. Add to ail this
the foul spirit of covetousness that actu-
ated him through all this evil course,
and his curse will not appear too


OHAP, vi,





exhibition of the terrible consequences
of human sinfulness. Gehazi’s poste-
rity, innocent of their father’s sins,
but, like many others, they were com-
pelled to bear the consequences of
ancestral crimes. That thousands of -
innocents are subjected to suffering
because of the sins of others is a fact
which none can deny. Why this is
permitted under the government of
an all-wise God is a question which
He has not seen fit fully to answer.—





great. The extending of his curse to Whedon.
his children after him is but another
CHAPTER VI.


ELISHA AND THE SYRIAN INVASION.


OrrricaL anp Exprianarory Notrres.—Verse 2. Take thence every man a beam—Tho
wooded banks of the Jordan would furnish timber readily ; probably Bethel or Jericho.
Although, evidently, the students of Elsha were of a humble character, and he offered them
but few indulgences and delicacies, yet their number grew so as to need a larger home, or a
more commodious lecture-hall. Verses 8, 9. In such a place shall be my camp, i.e., shall ye
hide yourselves—Probably the word here is from the same root as in verse 9, where it is ren-
dered, For thither the Syrians are come down, t.c., there the Syrians hide themselves ; or the
two words may have as their roots respectively mn and nn; but the word in verse 8


Tr

nlv there in that form throughout the Bible. Verse 12. Elisha . . telleth . .
ue wopde thot speakest in thy bedchamber—Elisha apprised king Jehoram of the designs of
the Syrian king, who thereby was enabled to anticipate and defeat his guerilla attacks.
Verse 13. Behold he isin Dothan—In a narrow pass through mountains, on the caravan road
from Gilead to Egypt, twelve miles north of Samaria, in the Esdraelon plain. Verse 17. The
mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire—For in this case, and in contrast with the
mere “horses and chariots” (verse 16) of the Syrian army, this was a fiery host, WR, denoting


their supernatural and divine origin, for it is the symbol of Deity. Verse 19. I will bring you
to the man whom ye seek—This was an evasion for a good purpose, and not an untruth, for
Elisha did bring them to him, vanquished and grateful; in the sense of having won them to
him, capturing them in the meshes of kindness, instead of their capturing him in hatred and
vengeance. Verse 25. A great famine in Samaria—The high prices of revolting articles of
food is given to show the extremes of distress to which the people were driven. An ass’s
bead—Regarded as unclean food, yet sold for £5 68. A cab of doves’ dung—A cab was the
smallest Hebrew dry measure, about half-pint, and its price was 12s. 6d. Doves’ dung is

robably the name for a kind of pea or seed, which was contemptuously so called. Josephus,

owever, relates that in the seige of Jerusalem by Titus, the sewage even of the city was
drained, and the excrements eaten! Verse 27. If the Lord do not help thee—Rather, Nay !
Jehovah help thee! Verse 29. So we boiled my son—Misery had culminated in so abhorrent
adeed! The other woman had hid her son, not to consume it, but to shield it from such a fate,
Verse 30. Sackcloth within upon his flesh—Visible under his torn outer garments he wears
the penitential robe of sackcloth. Butin his case it showed no humiliation of spirit before God ;
it was but as the phylacteries of the Pharisees. His imprecation on Elisha shows his evil dis-
position to be unsubdued. He blamed not himself, but the prophet, as Ahab did Elijah
(1 Kings xviii.17). Verse 32.'Son of a murderer—By descent, the son of Ahab; and in dis-
position lixe him i Kings xxi. 19). Hold him fast at the door—Keep him of with the coor,
i.e. by pressing against it. Is not the sound of his master’s feet behind himt—+.e., of the
king’s feet, who would impetuously follow on the heels of his messenger. Elisha urges the
eldoce not to let tel bin g’s executioners enter at once, but detain him till the king himself
arrives. Verse 33. The messenger came down— “or “messenger,” Ewald re Gratz read


>


CHAP, Vi. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


“a,





‘6 king,” and the sense requires this. Doubtless he would be admitted to the prophet’s pre.
sence; and as he meets Elisha he utters a cry full of despair, in which he confesses that the
Lord’s hand is against him, and that he sees now no hope of deliverance from the prevailing
distress ; yet in his cry of despair there ia a tremulous suggestion of possible help from the
Lord he had incensed.—W. H. d.


—_——


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-7.
Tse Diving SympParuHy ror Litrie Sorrows.


The miracle recorded in this paragraph presents a striking contrast to
that which was wrought on behalf of Naaman. In the case of the
great Syrian captain his cure was a public display of Divine power
and mercy, and served to extol the God of Israel among the nations.
It was a great work, wrought upon a great personage, and would become
the talk and marvel of a great and populous nation. The miracle we
are now considering was of a humbler character, and taught a different
lesson. An obscure and nameless prophet of Jericho is the subject of
Divine compassion, and the Divine power is put forth in connection with the
humblest and most insignificant affairs of human life and toil. The omnipotence
which startles a world with its wonders is also available, in the most modest
and unobtrusive form, for'the relief of genuine distress. Of this class of
Elisha’s wonderful works, this is the last one recorded, and makes a fitting
conplement to his other miracles of blessing. The healing of the waters of
Jericho, the increase of the widow’s oil, the raising of the Shunammite’s son,
the healing of the poisoned pottuge, the multiplying of the loaves, and the
healing of Naaman, all had more direct reference to the wants of families or
societies, and did not so much enter into the particular anguish of one single
heart as did this. This reieving of a comparatively little loss and that of a
single individual, give assurance that Divine providence will work for the
comfort of one suffering heart as well as for the interests of societies or
families ; and shows that sorrows which we may think of little moment receive
great attention from Him who numbers the hairs of our head. It presents a
touching and suggestive picture of the Divine sympathy for little sorrows. Note—


I. That the Divine sympathy is interested in the temporal comfort of the
good (verse 1-4). The school of the prophets had outgrown its accommoda-
tion, and Elisha was consulted as to a more commodious dwelling. The
disciples, not content with simply gaining the consent of their revered teacher
to the undertaking, prevailed upon him to accompany them. Elisha repre-
sented the Divine interest and intention in the work. God is not indifferent
to the temporal welfare and happiness of His people. He looks down
sympathizingly on a good man, struggling with straitened circumstances, or
upon a church making efforts for extension in the midst of poverty and perse-
cution. He ensures the comfort of the good irrespective of external
surroundings. Riches and poverty are more in the heart than in the hand;
he is wealthy who is contented, while the disconted millionnaire is poor indeed,
The Lord bestows upon His people the unpurchasable blessing of contentment
which fills up all the chinks of desire as the molten metal fills up the minutest
eavity in the mould.


II. That the Divine sympathy does not overlook the individual fm the
many (verse 5). There was a number of workers in the forest, all engaged im
453


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, VI.








the same occupation—felling timber for the house of the prophets; but there
was one only of the number who specially arrested the Divine notice, and
called forth the Divine power, and he was unfortunate and distressed. Man
often loses sight of the individual in the multitude, but Jehovah never. It ia
easy for us to sympathize with a nation, and shed tears over its sufferings and
sorrows, while we have no particular interest in any one member of the nation.
Jehovah cares for the whole human race, by caring for every individual
member of it. And if there is one who more quickly than another attracts
the Divine sympathy, it is the unfortunate and suffering. The tramp and
bustle of the crowd could not deafen the ear of Jesus to the cry of blind
Bartimeus. The unseen touch by trembling, but believing fingers, of the
fringe of his robe, awoke a sympathetic response in the Saviour’s heart, and
the sufferer for years was in a moment healed. Amid the thousands of war-
like Syrians who surrounded the city of Dothan (verse 14), the Lord did not
forget the solitary Elisha, but provided for his rescue and safety. It is with
significant emphasis the psalmist declares a truth which is being constantly
exemplified: ‘‘ This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him
out of all his troubles” (Psa. xxxiv. 6).


III. That the Divine sympathy does not hesitate to exert miraculous
power to alleviate what may seem the little sorrows of life (verses 6,7). It
might appear a trifling matter to lose the iron head of an axe, but to this poor
prophet it was a real and serious loss. It was not only that he was prevented
taking his share in helping his fellow-workers, but it was the loss of borrowed
property which he had no possible means of replacing. This toa conscientious
mind would be torture enough, and would exalt what might seem a small
trouble intoa great one. But with our God these are no little things. What
we regard as the little cares and sorrows of the poor may have a magnitude
in God’s eye as great as the cares of empire and the afflictions of princes. The
loss of the axe was to the hapless borrower a calamity greater than would
have been to Naaman the loss of all the treasures he had brought from
Damaseus. The sorrow was not too insignificant to evoke the Divine
sympathy, and the exertion, through the prophet Elisha, of miraculous power
for itsassuagement. ‘The greatness of God appears in the minute attention and
finish that he gives to little things. The tiniest flower, the smoothly-rounded
pebble, the geometrically-shaped snowflake, the delicately-tinted ocean-shell,
each bears witness to the infinite care and artistic touch of the Divine hand.
The smallest troubles of humanity are not unnoticed. The tear quickly dashed
away, the half-suppressed sigh, the silent hidden anguish of the heart,
bring down the helping arm of God to the soul that appeals to Him—the arm
which is as gentle in its soothing ministrations as it is mighty in its terrible
vengeance.


Lessons :—1. There ts nothing too insignificant for the Divine notice. 2. What
may seem little sorrows to others are great enough to the sufferer. %. We should
carry every trouble, however minute, to God.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ve es1-7. Theprosperity ofthe man. 8. Demands harmonious co-
Church. 1. Advances, notwithstand- operation among all Christian workers.
ing abounding wickedness and per- 4. Receives the divine sanction and
secution. 2. Often results from the blessing,


earnestpess and diligence of one good ree


x


OHAP. VI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Verse 1. There was no loss of
Gehazi; when he was gone the
prophets increased. Anill manin the
Church is but like some shrubby tree
in a garden, whose shape keeps better
plants from growing. The kings of
Israel had succeeded in idolatry and
hate of sincere religion, yet the
prophets multiply. Persecution en-
larges the bounds of the Church.
These tempestuous showers bring up
flowers in abundance. The Church,
like the palm tree, the more it is
pressed with weight, the more it
fructifies; like camomile, it flourishes
when most trodden; like the lily, it
grows by its own tears.


Verses 5-7. The borrowed axe.
I. The loan. 1. Kindly lent to men
in need ; probably with many promises
on the one side, and many injunctions
on the other. 2. A very valuable
loan at that time. Manufacture of
metals imperfectly understood then ;
manufactured articles were, therefore,
more expensive, and more difficult to
obtain, 3. A willingness to lend
shows a kind heart; sympathy with
the object and purposes of the
borrower should not, therefore, be
abused. A willingness to lend, but
never to borrow, which is the proud
boast of some, is a pitiful spirit.
Sometimes to give one the opportunity
of lending, is to do him good by
exercising his benevolence and good-
will. Il. Zhe loss. 1. Accidental.
Not altogether void of thoughtless-
ness. Should have taken care that
the head was more firmly united to
the haft, or that the blow was
delivered in another direction. 2.
Serious. Could not be easily
replaced. Axe heads scarce and ex-
pensive, and the borrower poor; but
the most serious part of the loss was
the moral effect of it. The non-return
of loans makes lenders chary of assist-
ing those who neec such help,
People who are remiss in returning,
in due time and undamaged, borrowed
property, little think what injury they
do to benevolent and neighbourly
feeling, or what damage they inflict

454


upon others. III. Zhe recovery. 1.
He who had lost it did not treat the
matter as of noimportance. His con-
cern agood sign. Would there were
more of it in the world. 2. He
noticed where it fell, looked anxiously
at the water, probably sounded it,
found it deep and turbid. Could not
find or recover it. He wentin dismay
to the prophet. 3. Elisha compre-
hended the situation at once. The
axe must be recovered for monetary,
and, above all, moral reasons. He
was not the man to work miracles on
every pretext. This was no slight
matter; no one should have reason to
regret hehad aided, even by a loan,
in the building of the prophets’
college. Confidence in the prophets
should not be damaged by the loss of
theaxe. Learn:—1. To be conscien-
tious tn the matter of borrowing and
lending. 2. To be more anxious con-
cerning the safcty of borrowed articles
than even of our own.—The Class and
Desk.


Verse 5. Genuine honesty. 1 An
evidence of true religion. 2. Is
found among the poorest. 8. Is
scrupulous in caring for and returning
that which is borrowed. 4. Is deeply
distressed in losing what belongs to
another. 5. Will use all possible
means to restore what is lost.


Verse 6. O God! how easy it is
for thee, when this hard and heavy
heart of mine is sunk down into the
mud of the world, to fetch it up again
by thy mighty word, and cause it to
float upon the streams of life, and to
see the face of heaven again.— Bishop
Hall,


Verse 7. God’s might and good-
ness are revealed in the smallest detail,
as well as in the greatest combination,
He helps in what are, apparently, the
smallest interests of the individual, as
well as in the greatest affairs of entire
nations; and He rules with His grace
especially over those who keep His
covenant, and turn to Him’in all the
necessities of life. That is the great
truth which this little story proc aima,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GAP, VE.


eee


aud, just for the sake of this truth, it
was thought worthy to be inserted in
the history of the theocracy. The
restoration of the axe, whereby aid
was given to the prophet-disciple in
his need, strengthened all the others
in the faith that the God in whose
honour they were erecting the
building was with them, and would


blessing. They worked now the more
zealously and gladly.—Lange.

— It often happens that the Lord
takes from us some possession, or
appears to do so, only with the purpose
of returning it after a longer or shorter
time in some unexpected way, that it
may thus come to usas a gift of Divine
love, and a pledge of His grace.—


accompany their work with his Krummacher.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 8-17.
Tue TriumpeyHs or Prayer.


We have seen the power of Elisha in the working of miracles in the realm
of private life, and, for the most part, on behalf of the individual. Now we
are to witness the beneficent power of the prophet as it operates in the wider
sphere of public and national life. He appears as the seer, the man of super-
natural insight, the prophet who is in habitual and prayerful communion with
God, the adviser and friend of a perplexed sovereign and a harassed nation.
In him is a combination of great gentleness with great power. The character
in which the history now reveals him, as a man of prayer, may explain the
source of his enormous power, and the vast range of his influence. The
incidents here described illustrate the triumphs of prayer.


I. Seenin giving extraordinary insight into the plottings of the enemy
(verses 8-12). Elisha had power to read the secret counsels of the invading
Syrian, and thus enabled the king of Israel to disconcert the plans of Benha-
dad, and to escape his ambuscades. Prayer intensifies the sensibilities of the
soul, and makes it more keenly alive to the movements of the wicked one; it
can see sights and hear sounds unperceived by others. After Elijah had
wrestled with God in prayer, on Mount Carmel, he heard ‘a sound of
abundance of rain,” though others heard it not. The sky was cloudless and
hard as steel, the earth seamed and cracked, vegetation withered, the cattle
were perishing, and the gaunt figure of famine, which had been tightening its
grasp upon the land for two years and a half, was as pitiless and inflexible as
ever. The soul that is quick to perceive coming good, is also quick to detect
soming evil. The man of prayer is more than a match for the subtlest adversary.


2. Seen in inspiring a fearless courage in the midst of threatened danger
(verses 13-16). The glittering spears and chariots surrounding the city,
which filled the servant of Elisha with so much alarm, struck no fear in the
breast of his undaunted master. With what unutterable confidence he
whispers those reassuring words: “Fear not; for they that be with us are
more than they that be with them.” The praying spirit is ever brave and
strong in great emergencies. It was prayer that sustained Moses when at
Rephidim he was surrounded by the mutinous host clamouring for water, and
threatening to stone him to death (Exodus xvii. 1-4). Before Luther weut to
the Diet of Worms, where he expected the worst, and before Knox was tried
for high treason, which threatened his own life and the ruin of the Reformation
movement in Scotland, they both found relief in prayer. When a steamer
went down in the Bay of Biscay a short time ago, what enabled the minister
and his wife to speak with such calmness and hope te their fellow-passengers

4565


~


CHAP, VI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.








and the crew assembled in the already flooded cabin, when they expected the
next lurch of the vessel would be the last? It wasprayer. Thesolitary praying
prophet felt far more confidence and courage than did Benhadad with all his
warlike hosts.


TI. Seen in giving the soul sublime visions of the nearness and all-
sufficiency of heavenly help (verse 17), The horses and chariots of fire were
there before; but they were not seen by the young man, though they were seen
by Elisha. Both had the ordinary common sense by which external objects are
apprehended; butin Elisha’s case there was superadded the God-given sense of
supernatural vision. Our common sense, however sound and accurate, is limited
in its scope. When the comet of 1858 appeared, an observer declared that its
luminous tail was just four feet long, while to the educated scientific sense it was
known to extend for millions of miles. So the glories of the heavenly firmament
are diminished or altogether hidden to the ordinary sense, and are revealed only
to the eye of faith. Prayer intensifies the spiritual vision, and the soul beholds
around it the shining hosts of heavenly ministrants ready to do the bidding of
the all-powerful Jehovah.


IV. Seen in giving power to baffle and defeat the foe (verses 18-20).
Through the prayer of Elisha the Syrian host is smitten with blindness, so that
they could not recognise him, nor the way in which he led them. What was
their astonishment when, the blindness being removed at the instance of the man
of prayer, they beheld themselves in the midst of Samaria, at the mercy of the
soldiers of Jehoram. The soul has to contend with enemies, fierce and for-
midable. When Napoleon at Waterloo watched the tremendous charge of the
Scots Greys, and witnessed the havoc wrought among the French columns, he
exclaimed ‘‘ How terrible are these Greys!’ But more terrible still are the
enemies with which we have to fight. Prayer only can give the skill and power
to conquer. Gideon prayed, and though his army was reduced from 32,000 to
300, he inflicted upon the Midianites a most disastrous defeat (Judges vi. vii),
Samson prayed, and with restored strength he pulled down the Philistian
temple, and destroyed more of his own and the Lord’s enemies in his death
than he had done in his lifetime.


V. Seen in treating a conquered and distressed enemy with clemency and
kindness (verses 20-23). The king of Israel, seeing the Syrians thus brought
into his power, was anxious at once to despatch them. Perhaps he remembered
Ahab’s great mistake in not slaying the Syrian king when in his power, and
for which mistake he was sternly rebuked by one of the prophets (1 Kings xx.
35-43), But the man of prayer interposed between the fury of the king and
his captives; instead of being slaughtered, they were hospitably entertained
and then released, refreshed and unscathed. There are enemies of the soul
to whom no mercy should be shown ; no opportunity to crush them should be
missed. There are enemies, again, who, when their wrong is exposed and
acknowledged, we may generously forgive. Prayer fills the soul with sympathy
and mercy, and expands it with magnanimity. Abraham prayed -for
Abimelech, and he and his house were healed. Moses prayed, and Miriam,
who was punished because she had joined in the sedition against her brother,
was cured of her leprosy.


VI. Seen in giving rest and security to a harrassed nation. “So the bands
of Syria came no more into the land of Israel ” (verse 23). The prayers and
wisdom of one man relieved the troubles of the court and of the people. The
nation ia unspeakably indebted to the prayers of afaithfulfew. Hezekiah


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAR. Vi.








prayed when Rabshekah thundered at the gates of J erusajem, and the Assyrians
were smitten with death (ch. xix. 14-36). Ezra’s prayer led to national
reform and prosperity (Ez. ix. x). More solid good is wrought in a nation
by prayer than by diplomacy or arms,


Lrssons :—1. Prayer is essential to building up a great and influential moral
character. 2. Prayer intensifies the perceptive and realizing power of faith. 8.
Prayer is an all-potent agency in conquering spiritual adversaries.


Tae Vision Permirrep To Exisna’s Servant as ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE TRUE
Farru oF THE Sout (verse 17).


The chariots and horses are not here, as in the account of the ascent of
Elijah a few chapters before, vehicles for a glorious passage to the skies, but
simply symbols of the Divine power and protection; but in both passages the
highest intelligences are represented as taking shapes, like the forms in
Ezekiel, which imply that their true nobility is always service. The imma-
terial spirits become cognizable by the servant of Elisha under forms best
calculated to reassure his fainting faith. Fire is a symbol of the Godhead,
because fire is the most ethereal of the earthly elements. The gift of Pentecost
sat as tongues of fire on the heads of the apostles. God is said by His
prophet and His apostle to be “a consuming fire.” ‘‘ The seraph is properly the
burning spirit.” The horses and chariots mean, therefore, warlike force. Still,
what theservant sees is nota material, it is aspiritual reality, taking a form which
assures him of God’s sure protection, through the agencies of these ministers
of His who do His pleasure, and at atime when all was death to the eye of flesh.


I. Now, here we see, as if through a microscope, the act or process of faith
in the human soul. Faith, first of all, is not an act of the natural imagina-
tion. Itisnecessary to say this, because a great many persons constantly
allude to faith in terms which imply that it is. They speak of a person of
great faith, meaning that he is a very imaginative person, that he has quite
an unusual share of that privileged, that versatile faculty which does indeed
achieve so much in society, so much for literature, which is the very well-
spring of poetry, which is the soul, the genius of constructive art, but which
is less welcome in the sphere of religious truth, because its highest efforts
result in surrounding us with the unreal, while investing it with the attributes
of reality. When menspeak of faith asa vivid and energetic form of imagina-
tion, they mean to imply this, without stating in terms that they do so; they
mean to imply that just as the poet Virgil projected a picture of the nether
world out of the immense wealth of his fancy, so evangelists and apostles have
traced their own beautiful pictures of heaven, and their awful descriptions of
hell and of judgment, on the pages of our testaments, by the aid of an
extraordinary variety of the religious imagination. The evangelists and
apostles, whatever else they were—I say it with reverence—were not poets,
they were eminently prosaic; and the remarks of Rousseau that the inventor
of the gospel history must have been not less wonderful than its hero if he
were entirely unassisted from above, is at least a satisfactory reply to this
theory of faith doing the work of pure imagination. In the case before us
Elisha’s servant did not create, by an act of imagination, a splendid picture in
the air, after the manner of a Milton or a Rubens, a picture of fiery beings
eircliang round the form of his beloved, of his imperilled master. The thing is


psychologically impossible. He had his eye upon the hard and ee fact
45


Gap. Vi HOMILETIO COMMEN«LARY: KINGS.


before him, upon the lines of the Syrian troops who were sent to capture the
prophet his master. He could, for the time, see nothing beyond the sphere of
sense, His new power of seeing the chariots and horses of fire sweeping
round Elisha did not create these spiritual forms and beings; there they were,
whether he and other men saw them or not, just as the more remote planets
were certainly revolving in their orbits during the centuries when our science
had not yet reached them by her reckonings and telescopes. lisha had been
just as much encompassed by the spirit-world the moment before his servant
saw that this was the case, as he was the moment afterwards. The man’s
new sight could not create, as his blindness could not have destroyed, the super-
natural reality.


II. Nor is faith only the conclusion, the final act, of a process of natural
reasoning. If this were the case, if faith were merely the conclusion of a
syllogism, it would necessarily follow that all people with good undertandings
must necessarily be believers in Christianity. We know, my brethren, that
this is not the case. We know, alas! that many persons of great natural
abilities, such as was Voltaire, are and have been unbelievers; and this alone
would seem to show that something besides intelligence is implied in an act of
faith. No man whose mind was not impaired could go through a proposition
of Euclid and'refuse to assent to a conclusion; but many people do read
‘* Paley’s Evidences,” or, what is more to the purpose, what St. Paul himself
says about the resurrection, and yet do not admit Paley’s and St. Paul’s con-
clusion that Christianity comes from God. If believing in Christianity were
simply an affair of the natural understanding, this could not be. It would be
just as inevitable to believe St. Paul as it is intellectually to believe Euclid.
The affections and the will have a great deal to say to every pure act of faith.
The understanding cannot compel faith. The evidence at the disposal of the
understanding is always less than absolutely mathematical ; it does not convince
unless the moral nature is in such acondition that it is possible for it to be con-
vincing. What is it which makes the desire, the heart on the one side, and the
evidence at the disposal of the understanding on the other side, result in the
complex, in the perfect act of faith? What is it which strikes the sacred spark
which thus combines the action of the understanding and the yearnings of the
heart into the single act which supersedes while it combines them?


II. Faith is, in the last resort, the fire which is lighted up in the soul
by a ray from Heaven, by a ray of grace. It isa gift from God. It isa
fresh gift, which nature can neither rival nor anticipate. Elisha might have
insisted upon many considerations which ought in reason to have satisfied his
servant that God and His holy ones were now, as of old, near at hand, that
the near presence of the Syrians did not amount to a real reason of despair.
Elisha did not argue. There are times when it is worse than useless. Elisha
prayed; he prayed that the Lord would open the eyes of the young man to
see things, not as they appear to sense, but as they are; to see, not merely
the world of sense, but the world of spirit ; and his prayer was granted. Reason
can do very much for faith. Reason stands to faith just as did the Baptist to
Christ our Lord. She is the messenger which goes before the face of faith to
make ready its path within the soul. Reason can explain, she can infer, she
can combine, she can reduce difficulties to their true proportions, she can make
the most of considerations which show what, upon the whole, is to be expected ;
but here she must stop. She cannot do the work of God’s grace; she can-
not transfigure the moral nature so as to enable it to correspond to the conclu-
sions of the illuminated intellect ; she eannot open the eyes of the young man
and make him see. If this last triumph is to be achieved, it must be by grace
given in answer to prayer.

458


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. char. Vi,


\








IV. Let us see in this history a remedy against despondency, such as
good Christians often feel on contemplating the state of tiie world at particular
periods. All seems to be going against the cause of right, of truth, of God.
Intellectual assailants, political adversaries. all the passions, all the preiudices,
all the misapprehensions of an unregenerate humanity come down and besiege
the prophetin Dothan. All might seem to be lost again and again, if it were
not that again and again the eyes of the spirit are opened to perceive that they
which are with as are more than they which are with them. Courage; the
unseen is greater than the seen, the eternal will surely outlive the things of
time. An actof faith may cross the threshold of the door which separates us
from that world which is beyond the senses, and may at once correct the
apparent preponderance of evil by a vision of the throne, and the resources of
the All-good.


V. And see, too, in this history, our true pattern of nobility. It has been
& common saying, quoted again and again of late, to explain and justify
changes on the Continent that have taken place within the last ten years, that
it is better to be the citizens of a great state than the citizens of a small one.
It is better for many reasons; for this among the rest, there is an inspiration
for good, which comes from the sense of wide and noble fellowship, of high
and distinguished associates and guardians, which is denied to those who are
members of a small society that have it not. And in His kingdom God has
provided us with this. All the races of the world furnish their contributions
to the universal church. But the frontier of sense is not the frontier of the
church of Christ. It embraces both worlds, the unseen world as well as the
visible. The church is a mixed as wellas a world-embracing society, consist-
ing, here of the faithful, there of the blessed angels and of the spirits of the
dead, united in the bonds of one indissoluble communion, and all ranged beneath
the throne of thrones, the throne of God, the throne of Jesus. The Syrian
host may press us hard; the host of temptations and bad thoughts and bad
acquaintances; of haunting memories; but when, at the voice of prayer, our
eyes open upon the realities around and above us, we must remember that we
have a destiny before us, and means at hand to prepare for it.


VL Lastly, we see here the secret of real effective prayer. Why is
prayer, public prayer especially, in so many cases nothing better than the
coldest of cold, heartless forms? For two reasons especially. They enter on
it without having any true knowledge of themselves whatever ; of their sins and
wants, as well as of their hopes and fears; of their real state before God, as
well as of their reputed character in the eyes of men; in a word, they have no
true knowledge of that for which prayer wins something like a remedy, and
thus they have no personal interest of their own which they can import into
and identify with the public language of the Church. This is the first reason.
But there is a second. Prayer is so cold and heartless a thing in numbers of
instances, because men see nothing of Him to whom prayer is addressed,
nothing of God, nothing of Jesus, nothing of thespirit-world around the throne,
nothing of the majesty, the beauty, the glory which encircles God, such as is
possible, really possible, to our finite and purblind gaze—nothing of the
everlasting worship which surrounds Him, nothing of the ministers of His that
do His pleasure. There are, believe it, few better prayers on entering a church
than Elisha’s, ‘Lord, open mine eyes, that I may see.” “I do not wish to
mock Thee by lip service, Ido not wish to pile up my ordinary business
thoughts, or my thoughts of pleasure, on the very steps of Thy throne; open
mine eyes, then, that I may seein Thy beauty, and in Thy glorious presence may
lose all relish which belongs only to the things of time.” It is te the soul

269


OHAP. Vi.





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


eo ecg


struggles thus in an honest spiritual agony that it is really emanicipated from
the tyranny of sense, and, like the young man in this history, or rather like the
dying martyr of the gospel times, see the heavens opened, sees Jesus standing
at the right hand of God.—Canon Liddon, condensed from Hom. Quarterly.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 8-17. Hints of the course
of things in Zion. 1. The revealed
plot. 2. The military expedition
against one man. 38. The peaceful
abode. 4. Thecryof alarm. 5. The
unveiled protection from above.—
Krummacher.


Verses 8-12. The mischief maker.
1. Consults with kindred spirits who
are most likely to carry out his designs.
2. Delights in plotting evil against the
weak and inoffensive. 3. Fondly
dreams his schemes are too cunningly
devised for discovery. 4. Is intensely
mortified when his plans prove abor-
tive. 5. Is first to suspect his accom-
plices of treachery. 6. Cannot tole-
rate @ superior.


Verse 9. It is no treason to bring
crafty and malicious plots to the light.
It is a sacred duty (Acts xxiii. 16).
Beware of going into places where
thou-wilt be in jeopardy of soul and
body. Be on thy guard when the
enemy advances.—Osvander.


Verse 11. When God brings to
naught the plots of the crafty, they
become enraged, and, instead of recog-
nizing the hand of God and humbling
themselves, they lay the blame upon
other men, and become more malicious
and obstinate. He who does not
understand the ways of God thinks
that he sees human treason in what is
really God’s dispensation. Woe to the
ruler who cannot trust his nearest
attendants.— Starke.


Verse 12. God-given wisdom. 1.
Bestowed on men eminent for prayer
and obedience. 2. Enables man to
discern the unsuspected secrets of
others. 8. Is more than a match for
the most consummate subtlety of the

460


wicked. 4. Should be used in warn-
ing and delivering the innocent.

— Tremble with fear, ye obstinate
sinners, because all is bared and dis-
covered before His eyes, and shudder
at the thought that the veil behind
which ye carry on your works does not
exist for Him! All which ye plot in
your secret corners to-day, ye will find
to-morrow inscribed upon His book;
and however secretly and cunningly
ye spin your web, not a single thread
of it shall escape His eye !|—Arumm.


Verses 13-16. Moral courage. 1.
Is gained by communion with Ged.
2. Is a tower of strength to man in
whatever locality he may dwell. 8,
Is not intimidated by the most formid-
able host. 4. Inspires confidence in
the timid and fearful. 5. [s conscious
of being backed by superior force.


Verse 17. The vision of the super-
natural. 1. Hidden from the most
highly educated natural powers. 2.
Granted by a special operation of the
Divine Spirit on the humanmind. 3,
A dazzling revelation of heavenly
power and beauty. 4. Inspires in-
vincible bravery in times of peril.

— In answer to Elisha’s prayer,
God opened his spiritual eyes, un-
veiled his inner sense, and lifted him
fora moment to the high plane of
Elisha’s supernatural vision, whence
he obtained a view of the mighty
creations of the spiritual world around
him. This sight into the spiritual
world was not an instance of halluci-
nation, but a miracle of grace; an
instance of that Divine ecstacy or
trance in which the holy seers were
enabled to behold the visions of the
supersensual world, and which con-
sists essentially in this, that the human
spirit is seized and compassed by the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. Vi.





Divine spirit with such force and
energy, that, being lifted from its
natural state, it becomes altogether a
seeing eye, a hearing ear, a perceiving
sense, that takes most vivid cognizance
of things in either heaven, earth, or
hell.— Whedon.

— Invisible armies guard the ser-
vants of God while they seem most
forsaken of earthly aid, most exposed
to certain dangers. If the eyes of our
faith be as open as those of our sense, to
see angels as well as Syrians, we can-
not be appalled with the most unequal
terms of hostility. Those blessed
spirits are ready either to rescue our
bodies, or to carry up our souls to
blesseduess.—Bp. Hall.


Verses 18-23. The Divine treat-
ment of sin. 1. Sin blinds the soul
so that it does not justly apprehend
the true character of what it sees. 2.
Sin causes the soul to wander in dark-
ness and error. 8. The wicked are
always eager to take advantage of the
mistakes of their opponents. 4. God
spares the sinner, though he is com-
pletely in His power. 65. Divine


mercy has mado every provision for
the present and future welfare of the
sinner. 6. The Divine clemency should
disarm hostility, and promote amity
and peace among men.


Verse 18. The Lord smites with
blindness those who fight against Him,
not in order that they may remain
blind, but in order that they may
truly see, after they shall have ob-
served how far they have strayed, and
shall have recognized the error of their
way.


Verse 23. The king of Israel has
done by his feast what he could not
have done by his sword. The bands
of Syria will no more come by way of
ambush or incursion into the bounds
of Israel. Never did a charitable act
go away without the retribution of a
blessing. In doing some good to our
enemies, we do most good to ourselves.
God cannot but love in us this imita-
tion of His mercy, who bids His sun
shine, and His rain fall, where He is
most provoked; and that love is never
fruitless.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 24-38.
THe Horgzors or Famine.


I. Famine is the dread companion of war (verses 24, 25), Benhadad soon
forgot the clemency with which his soldiers were treated when in the power of
the king of Israel (verses 21-23). Perhaps he was chagrined with the failure
of his previous attempts with detached bands of warriors, and determined to
invade Israel with a vast army. The Syrians poured into the ill-fated country
in overwhelming numbers, and 80 thoroughly invested Samaria, that in a short
time the city was reduced to a state of abject famine. The horrors of war
and of famine are always in ghastly association.


“Loud the shrieks of battle roar,
Streaming down the hollow wind;
Wor and slaughter go before,
Want and death are left behind.”


When David had a choice of three punishments for his sin in numbering the
people—famine, war, or pestilence—he was in a strait which to select, and in
his bewilderment threw himself upon the mercy of God (2 Sam. xxiv. 14)
The four lepers who brought the intelligence of the flight of the Syrians
evidently concluded there was nothing to choose between famine and the sword
(chapter vii. 4). The pathway of war is etreaked with blood, and aan with


*


Gia®. Vi. HOMILETIOC COUMENTARY: KINGS.





the bones of the famished. In the extremity of hunger the most nauseous articles
are seized for food. The history of besieged cities reveals the loathsome dishes
on which the most delicate were compelled to dine.


Ii. That famine blunts and demoralises the tenderest feelings of human
nature (verses 26-29). A mother’s love for her offspring is the strongest passion
in the human heart. It is the last foul stroke of famine when this love is
shattered; when all delicacy and refinement, all sense of right and wrong, all
fond endearment and deep-seated love are so thoroughly extinguished that a
mother can share a meal with a neighbour on the boiled body of her own child,
then the horrors of famine have reached their climax! And yet this was
among the woes that Moses foretold would come to pass with this people in
case of disobedience (Deut. xxviii. 53). Kitto furnishes a number of
particulars concerning a terrible famine in Egypt, in the year 1200, when the
people, after resorting to the most unclean and abominable tood in the extremity
of their hunger, began to feed on young children; and it was not uncommon
to surprise parties with children half boiled orroasted. At first this was treated
by the authorities as a horrible crime; but by-and-hye the horror entirely sub-
sided, and every one spoke of it, and heard it spoken of, as an indifferent and
ordinary matter. It is very humbling to man to discover the overwhelming
power of the lower passions in extremity. There seems but a brittle barrier
between civilized man and the savage. The restraints of Divine grace, direct
and indirect, are more potent upon society thau the artificial laws imposed by
“ use and wont.”


Ill. That famine is the source of great distress to the humane ruler
(verse 30). The first duty of a king is to provide for the immediate physical
needs of his subjects. This much is recognised among the wildest tribes. It
is, therefore, a cause of unspeakable suffering to a considerate monarch when
he is unable to supply his own and his people’s wants. This was the condition
of the king of Israel at this time. The barn-floor was swept, and the winepress
empty. The staple articles of food were consumed, and king and people were
involved in a common suffering. No wonder Jehoram wore the sackcloth of
humiliation, and rent his clothes in despair. Kings have their troubles,
Great honour means great responsibility. In famine, the king is as powerless
as the beggar.


IV. That the innocent are often unjustly blamed and threatened as the
cause of famine (verses 31, 32). There was evidently more sorrow in the king
of Israel than repentance. He was not yet brought to see that all this suffering
was in consequence of sin. He blames Elisha, and, in his despair and fury,
determines to take away the prophet’s life. And yet what had he done? If
Elisha foretold and warned them of the famine, did not their sins deserve it ?
If the prophet might have averted the calamity by his prayer, did not their
impenitence restrain him? If he advised the king to hold out the siege, did
he not foresee the remarkable deliverance that was at hand, and that only by
suffering would both king and people be prepared to acknowledge the hand of
God? ‘All Israel did not afford a head so guiltless as this that was destined
to slaughter. This is the fashion of the world; the lewd blame the innocent,
and will revenge their sin upon others’ uprightness,” If the soul is innocent of
the sins which the vileness of others attributes to it, it can afford to wait for the
Divine vindication. The character of His servants is safe in the hands of God.


V. That famine is here acknowledged as a Divinejudgment. ‘Behold, this
evil is of the Lord” (verse 33). We are tosuppose the king had, an reflactian‘
462


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, Vi.
—— eee


repented of his rash command to murder Elisha, and immediately hurried afte1
the messenger to stay the execution. He is convinced the famine is a Divine
judgment on the nation for his sins, Having reached this state of mind, he
enquires, in a spirit of more genuine repentance than he has before displayed,
“ Why should I wait for the Lord any longer?” He prays for a removal of the
famine, ‘The passage may be thus paraphrased :—I acknowledge that this
evilisa punishment for my sins; the Lord thus chastens me sorely; but now
when all this people are brought to such an extremity of woe, why should I wait
longer for the Lord to interpose and deliver this people from their sufferings? ”
It is hard to acknowledge the hand of God in our distresses ; itis pleasanter to
trace that hand in our gifts and prosperities. Jehovah punishes with reluctance.
and of the manifold instrumentalities of punishment at His call, the one to be
dreaded is famine. It is well when suffering operates in bringing the soul to


God.


Lessons :—1. War is a fruitful source of suffering and ruin.
apostasy from God is punished with national calamities.


2. National
3. Famine reveals the


helplessness of man, and his absolute dependence on God.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 24. Evil men wax worse and
worse. As Benhadad accomplished
nothing by his raids, he made an
attack with his entire force. A per-
verse and stubborn man cannot endure
to be frustrated, and when he is, in-
stead of leading him to submissiveness,
as it ought, it only hurts his pride and
makes him more irritated.—Lange.


Verse 25. The value and worth-
lessness of money. 1. Money is
valuable only as amedium of exchange
for the absolute necessaries of life.
2. Is freely parted with under the
pressure of starvation. 8. Is power-
less to avert death.

— The famine within the walls
was more terriblethan the sword with-
out. Their worst enemy was shut
within, and could not be dislodged of
their own bowels. Whither hath the
idolatry of Israel brought them?
Before they had been scourged with
war, with drought, with dearth, as with
asingle cord; they remainincorrigible,
and now God twists two of these
bloody lashes together and galls them
even to death. There needs no other
executioners than their own maws.
Those things which in their own
nature were not edible, at least to an
Israelite, were now both dear and
dainty. Bp. Hat,


— Of all the judgments of God in
this world, none is more terrible than
famine. It is a scourge which draws
blood. It often happens that God
takes this scourge in hand when, in
spite of manifold warnings, His name
is forgotten in the land, and apostacy,
rebellion, and unbelief are prevalent.
— Krummacher.


Verses 26-29. The horrible in
humanity. 1. Revealed in its most
revolting aspects in extremity. 2.
Seen in the triumph of sheer animalism
over the keenest instincts of natural
affection. 3. Beyond the power of
king or council to obviate. 4. Is con-
trolled only by the restraints of Divine
grace.

— Necessity leads to prayer when-
ever there is a spark of the fear of
God remaining ; but where that fear is
wanting, ‘* Necessity knows no law,’’
becomes the watchword. The crime
of the two women isa proof that where
men fall away from God they may
sink down among the ravenous beasts.
Separate sores which form upon the
body are signs that the body is diseased
and the blood poisoned. Shocking
crimes of individuals are proofs that
the community is morally rotien.—
Lange.


*


CHAP. Vz.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGE.


a EE


Verses 80-33. A desperate
monarch, 1. Humbled and bewil-
dered by the sufferings and extremities
of his people (verse 30). 2. Vows
vengeance on the innocent (verse 81).
8. Repents his rash decision, and
hastens to prevent its execution
(verse 32). 4. Is constrained to ac-
knowledge the national suffering as a
punishment for sin, and to seek Divine
help in its removal (verse 83).


Verses 30,31. Sce here a faithful
picture of the wrongheadednessof man
in misfortune. In the first place, we
half make up our minds to repent in
the hope of deliverance; but if this
is not obtained at once and in the
wished-for way, we burst out in rage
either against our fellow-men, or
against God Himself. Observe,
moreover, the great ingratitude of
men. Jehoram had already several
times experienced the marvellous
interference of God; once it fails,
however, and he is enraged. The
garments of penitence upon the body
is of no avail, if an impenitent heart
beats beneath it. Anger and rage,
and plots of murder, cannot spring
from the heart that is truly penitent.
It is the most dangerous superstition
to imagine that we can make satisfac-
tion for our sins, can become recon-
ciled to God and turn aside His wrath,
by external performances, the wear-
ing of sackcloth, fasting, self-chastise-
ment, or the repetition of prayers.
The world is horrified at the results of
sin, but not at sin itself. Instead of
confessing, ‘‘ We have sinned,”
Jehoram swears the man of God shall
die.—Lange.


Verse 31. This imprecation, which
the king wishes immediately to
execute, proves that his distress of
mind was no wholesome fruit of the
recognition of his own guilt, such as
the law coming to his view must have
produced, but only a consequence of
his contemplating the heart-rending
misery that now for the first time
stands before his eyes in all its fright-
joy which he wished to wreak


his vengeance on the prophet whom
he held to be the prime cause of the
appalling necessity, probably because
he had given the advice not to sur-
render the city on any condition, with
the promise that God would deliver
them if they humbled themselves be-
fore Him in sincere repentance and
implored His aid. By putting ona
garment of hair, the king believed he
had done his part; and since, not-
withstanding this, the expected help
did not come, he fell into a rage
which was to be expended on the
prophet. This rage arose, indeed, only
from amomentary ebullition of anger,
and soon gave way to the better voice
of conscience. The king hastened
after the messenger whom he had sent
to behead Elisha, in order himself to
prevent the execution of the death
order which he had given in the haste
of his burning rage; but it proves
that true repentance, which springs
from the recognition of the necessity
as a judgment imposed by the Lord,
was still wanting in the king. The
act of desperation to which his violent
passion had hurried him would have
taken place had not the Lord protected
His prophet and revealed to him the
design of the king, so that he could
take measures to prevent it.—Keil.


Verse 82. He that foresaw his own
peril provides for his safety. ‘ Shut
the door, and hold him fast at the
door.” Noman is bound to tender
his throat to an unjust stroke. The
same eye that saw the executioner
coming to smite him, saw also the
king hastening after him to stay the
blow. The prophet had been no other
than guilty of his own blood if he had
not reserved himself awhile for the
rescue of authority. O, the incon-
stancy of carnal hearts! It was not
long since Jehoram could say to
Elisha, ‘‘My father, shall I smite
them?” Now heis ready to smite him
as an enemy whom he honoured as a
father. Yet again, his lips had ne
sooner given sentence of death against
the prophet, than his feet stir to re-
call it.—Bp. Hall.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. Vil.


a


— “Is not the sound of his master’s
feet behind him?”—Repentance. 1.
Is a commendable feeling when it is
the reversal of a cruel and unjust
policy. 2. Loses no time in seeking
to undo the evil that was threatened.
8. Leads to the removal of suffering
that human rage is impotent to cure.


Verse 33. ‘‘ Behold, this evil is of


despairing man, in whose soul, how:
ever, a trace of faith is still concealed.
For in the very fact that the king
shows this frame of mind before the
prophet, he lets it be understood that
he still cherishes a feeble glimmer
of hope and confidence in the Lord,
and wishes to be directed and
encouraged by the prophet. This
encouragement is accordingly im-


the Lord.” These are the words of a parted to him.— Keil.





CHAPTER VIL.
THE FLIGHT OF THE SYRIANS.


Crrrican AxD ExpLanatory Nores.—Verse 1. A measure of fine flour—This seah would
probably contain about three gallons of flour. In the gate of Samaria—i.e., the market.
Agricultural and garden produce from the country were brought to the gates of cities for sale.


Verse 2. Then a lord, on whose hand the king, &«.—This wow may be described as a


knight or chariot-warrior; the plural word is rendered in 1 Kings ix. 20, “rulers of his
chariot”’ (see Note in loc.) The king, when on foot abroad, would usually be attended by his
highest courtier, resting his hand on kis arm. Behold, if the Lord would make windows in
heaven—Omit if. The Lord will, &.—/}3i7 is {jJ, demonstrative: ‘Lo! behold, the Lord


will.” Strong irony; scoffing incredulity. Verse 8. Four leprous men—Perhaps living in
some lazar-house outside the gate (see Numb. v. 8,4). Verse 5. In the twilight—This
“ twilight "—F\W3—was not the early dawn, but the evening twilight, as is evident from


verse 9, and also from the king’s prompt action, which was “in the night” (verse 12).
Verse 6. Hear a noise—>)). This sound as of the march of two hostile armies was evidently
a supernatural illusion ; aud it is an unimportant question whether the illusion was objective
or subjective. God created it for His own purpose. Kings of the Hittites . . . _kings
of Egypt—General phrases for the northern and southern kines. Verse 9. Some mischief
will come upon us—Guwilt, or punishment of guilt. Verse 10, Horses tied, asses tied, and
the tents—In Eastern encampments, the tents are placed central, and the cattle picketted
around outside as adefence. Hence the lepers first come to the “‘ horses and asses,” then to the
“tents.” Verse 11. And he called the porters—Being the scldier on guard, he could not
leave his post, so called to other soldiers within the gate, who carried the news to the palace
guards. Verse 13. One of the servants answered, &¢.— His advice to the king, who suspects
a stratagem, is given in confused words, but means—Send out five scouts ; if they perish, then
their fate will be only as the fate of “the multitude of Israel” is sure to be if no Divine


deliverance arises, Verse 14. Took two chariot horses—D°D10 354 IW, two pairs of


er the host of the Syrians—iit., after the camp. Verse 16. And the people
Be ieee news that the thes had fled in a panic sped through the city, and the crowds
poured out in a rush to seize the stores and spoil of the Syrian camp. Such plenty was found
that food was sold at nominal prices to the famished people. Verse 17. Charge of the gate—
Thus the king placed his ‘‘ knight,” who the day before had Gerided Elisha’s prophecy, in the
very position for the predicted fate to overtake him. By such blunders, knowing not what they
do, men unwittingly work out God’s fore-ordained plans.—W’. H. J.


OWAP, Vil. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








HOMILETIOCS OF VERSES 1-20.
THe Unrartine Certainty OF THE Divine Worp.


In this chapter we have an illustration of how the Scripture narrative sub-
ordinates everything to the setting forth of the Divine word and purpose. Tc
the historian there is ample material for the most graphic picture-writing : the
beleagured city wasting in famine—the lepers: their desperate decision, their
struggle with the spirit of covetousness in the midst of plenty; their generous
recognition of the claims of a common brotherhood—the alarm and rout of the
Syrians—the mad stampede of the famished citizens when the news of the flight
wasconfirmed, and the wild avidity with which the provisions and treasures of the
Syrians were seized—all this is told with the utmost simplicity, and would not
be told at all, but to point out the fulfilment of a promise and a threat (compare
verses 1, 2, with verses 18-20). Jehovah interposes to arrest anational calamity
at the last moment, and the people are taught. to respect His prophet, and to
receive His word for their warning and instruction. They are again taught
the utter worthlessness of their heathen deities in extremity. Observe—


I. That the Divine word is uttered at a time when it seems very unlikely
that its promises or threatenings will ever be fulfilled. 1. The natural
obstacles to its fulfilment seem insuperable. Samaria was closely invested by a
powerful and numerous army. Within was famine; without was the sword.
Every passing moment was in favour of the besieging host; starvation would
soon bring the victory denied to their arms. It seemed very improbable that
flour and barley, that had become almost a forgotten luxury to the besieged,
should be both abundant and cheap on the morrow. How oftenare the Divine
utterances environed with mystery and improbability: ¢.g., the promise to
Abram of a numerous posterity ; the threat of the deluge; the prophecies con-
cerning Messiah; the gifts and operations of the Holy Ghost; the call and
salvation of the Gentiles. What appears impossible to us is the normal order
with God. Human faith is tested ; Divine power is vindicated. 2. The Divine
word 13 ridiculed by the unbelieving. “If the Lord would make windows in
Heaven might this thing be.” Such was the sneer of a Jewish peer, probably
the prime minister of Jehoram. We can almost hear his scornful laugh, as he
pictures Jehovah opening heaven, and showering down meal and grain like rain.
Would it arrest his mockery to hear his doom so promptly threatened that he
should see it, but not partake of it? Unbelief is highly offensive to God; itis
the parent of the grossest sins, and deprives man of the richest blessings. The
discontented Hebrews saw the promised land; but their unbelief prevented
them entering into its possession. It is an evidence of the blindness and
audacity of sin, that it questions the word of infinite Goodness and Justice.


II. That the Divine word is fulfilled by unexpected agencies. ‘The Lord
made the host to hear a noise” (verse 6). This may have been the noise of the
same host whose movements David was once permitted to hear in the tops of
the trees, and which led him on to the conquest of the Philistines (2 Sam.
v. 24). Or the noise may have had no objective reality, but may have been
@ mere delusion produced in the minds of the Syrians. In either case it was
caused by the Lord, and the Syrians were led to imagine that Jehoram had
hired against them the armies of other nations. The sight of horses and
chariots encouraged the servant of Elisha (vi. 17). The noise of horses and
chariots terrified the Syrians. The Lord can make the ordinary senses and
peep the human mind the means of blessing or of punishment. The

6


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. VIL.


oe eee = -





Syrians fled in dismay, and in such headlong haste as to leave their provisions
and baggage behind them. Samaria was delivered and knew it not, and
might have remained in ignorance for several days. But the word of the Lord
must be fulfilled, and the lepers—beings from whom every one shrank with
disgust—are used as messengers of joyful tidings. Not till the lepers were
surfeited with spoil, did they listen to the dictates of a common humanity ;
but the night is deepening, and the word of the Lord must be fulfilled on the
morrow. The news of the leprous messengers is received with suspicion, and
the cautious king is unwilling to act; but the morn is breaking, and the word
of the Lord must be fulfilled. The counsel of the king’s servants prevails,
two chariots are timidly sent forth, the news is confirmed, and the camp that
threatened death a few hours before, furnishes in abundance the necessaries of
life. Thus, by the most unlikely agencies, and in the most unexpected way,
the Divine purpose is accomplished.


III. That the Divine word is fulfilled with unfailing certainty. ‘And
it came to pass as the man of God had spoken” (verse 18). The spoil of the
deserted Syrian camp fuliilled the promise of cheap food; and the death of the
unbelieving nobleman, who was crushed by the overwhelming crowd of famished
citizens, in their wild eagerness to press through the gate, fulfilled the threat,
‘‘Thou shalt see with thine eyes, but shalt not eat thereof.” With what
gratitude and with what awe should we regard the word of God! With
gratitude, because its promises are so rich and sure; with awe, because its
threatenings willbeinevitably fulfilled. Ascertainasthe moving glacier, impelled
by an irresistible law, bears down all obstruction, and buries in ruin whatever
lies in its course, so certainiy will the word of God, impelled not by blind,
unthinking force, but by the ivftiest intelligence and irreproachable justice,
bring to pass its threatenings against the impenitent and disobedient. That
people is hopelessly sunk that is not moved and instructed by either promise
or threatening.


Lessons:—1. Jt ts a solemn responsibility to declare or listen to the word of God.


2. The most formidab’e nation cannut prevent the fulfilment of the Divine word.
8. Zhe word of God should be reverenily feared, and implicitly trusted.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1, 2. The Divine method uf
relief. 1. Is seen in the moment of
human extremity. 2. Makes demands
upon our faith. 3. Is inexplicable to
the unbelieving. 4. Magnifies the
Divine power and generosity.


Verse 2. The children of this world
consider their unbelief to be wisdom
and enlightenment, and they seek to
put that which is a consolation and an
object of reverence to others in a ridi-
culous light. The Lord will not ieave
such wickedness unpunished. It is
only 100 often the case that high-born
and apparently well-bred men at Court
take pleasure in mockeries of the word
of God and of its declarations, without


reflecting that they thereby bear testi-
mony to their own inner rudeness,
rulgarity, and want of breeding. It
ssa bad sign of the character of a
rince, where scoffers form the most

timate circle of his retinue. Un-
belief is folly, because it robs itself of
the blessing which is the portion of
1aith.— Lange.

Prophecies before they be fulfilled
are riddles; no spirit can read them
out that by which they are delivered.
{t is a foolish and injurious infidelity
to question a possibility, where we
know the message is God’s. How
easy it is for that Omnipotent hand ‘e
effect those things which surpass a
the reach of human aa H

46


‘)
OHAP, Vil.


HOMILETIO COUMENTARY: KINGS.


i ST


God intended a miraculous multiplica-
tion, was it not as easy for Him to
increase the corn or meal of Samaria
as the widow’s oil ? Was it not as
easy for him te give plenty of victuals
without opening the windows of
Heaven, as to give plenty of water
without wind or rain? The Almighty
hates to be distrusted. —Bp. Hall.


Verses 8, 10. The conduct of the
lepers illustrative of varying phases
in human experience. 1. Desperate
tn extremity (verses 8, 4). Death
threatened them at every point. To
enter the city was to starve—to remain
inactive was to die—they could be no
worse if they threw themselves upon
the mercy of the enemy. A drowning
man will snatch at a passing straw.
The dread of death drives many to the
most desperate measures. 2. Forgetful
and selfishin sudden prosperity (verse 8).
They were intoxicated with the sight
of such abundant spoil, and not content
with allaying the pangs of hunger,
they were carried away with the spirit
of greed, and hid the treasure they
had so suddenly acquired. Their
captivity rendered them forgetfulofthe
starving city. The chief butler, when
restored to his wealth and dignity,
forgot the imprisoned Joseph (Gen.
xi. 23). Sudden prosperity brings its
special perils. 38. Zhe subjects of refice-
tion and of humane and generous impulses
(verses 9,10). Their consciences smote
them—they thought of their starving
brethren—they could no longer delay
to carry the tidings of deliverance and
plenty. The grosser demands of their
animal nature were satisfied, and the
Instincts of their higher nature began to
assert themselves. Hunger, and the
excitement of sudden plenty, had
demoralized their better feelings; but
when the famine fiend was expelled,
they felt again the generous pulse of a
common brotherhood. And yet how
few who are blessed with abundance
are remarkable for generosity !


Verses 8, 4. How often we meet
with a similar disposition. Instead of
a joyful and believing look up to
Heaven, a faithless looking for hekp

462


from human hands; instead of sub-
mission to God, a dull discontent—a
despair which quarrels with the eternal.
And what language is this—‘“ If they
kill us, we shall only die ? ”—as ifthe
grave was the end of men, and the
great beyond were only a dream; or as
if it were a matter of course that the
pain of death atones for the sins of a
wasted life, and most rightfully pur-
chases their pardon and a reception into
heavenly blessedness. Our life lies in
the hand of God, who sets its limit
which we may not anticipate. Circum-
stances may indeed arise in which
& man wishes for death. It makes
a great difference, however, whether
this wish comes from weariness of life,
or whether we have, with Paul, ‘‘a
desire to depart and to be with Christ.”
Only when Christ has become our life,
is death a gain.—Krummacher.


Verse 6. It is only necessary: that
in the darkness a wind should blow,
or that water should splash in free
course, or that an echo should resound
from the mountains, or that the wind
should rustle the dry leaves, to terrify
the godless, so that they flee as if
pursued by a sword, and fall, though
no one pursues them. It happens to
the unconverted man as it did here to
the Syrians. God causes him to hear
the rumbling of His anger, the roaring
of the death floods, the thunder of His
law, and the trumpet sounds of the
judgment day. Then he flees from the
doomed camp in which he has dwelt
hitherto, and hurls away the dead
weight of his own wisdom, justice, and
strength.— Lange.


Verses 8, 9. Many a one gets
chances to acquire property dis-
honestly, to enjoy luxury and
debauchery, to gratify fleshly lusts,
and to commit other sins; and, if he
is secure from human eye, he does not
trouble himself about the all-seeing
eye of God ; but his crime is discovered
at last in his own conscience, and, by
God’s judgment, it is revealed and
punished. Conscience can, indeed, be
benumbed for a time, but it will not
rest for ever; it awakes at last, and


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP, VII.


—————— erent


stings all the more the longer it has
been still. He who conceals what be
has found is not better than a thief.—
Wurt. Summary.


Verse 9. Glad tidings. 1. When
they offer life to the perishing.
2. May be borne by the afilicted and
despised. 8. May be wickedly sup-
pressed. 4. Should be eagerly pro-
claimed by all who have benefited by
them.

— How far self-love carries us in
all our actions, even to the neglect of
the public! Not till their own bellies
and hands and eyes were filled did
these lepers think of imparting this
news to Israel. At last, when they
themselves are glutted, they begin .to
remember the hunger of their brethren,
and now they find room for remorse.
Nature teaches us that it is an injury
to engross blessings, and so to mind the
private as if we had no relation to
a community. Weare worthy to be
shut out of the city gates for lepers, if
the respects to the public good do not
oversway us in all our desires, in all
our demeanour ; and well may we, with
these covetous lepers, fear a mischief
upon ourselves if we shall wilfully con-
ceal blessings from others.— Zp. Hall.


(Verse 9).—The moral and spiritual
claims of London. The lepers revelled
for some hours, forgetful of the
many of their countrymen who
were starving with hunger, and
after they had done all for themselves
that they could, then they thought of
their brethren. We may apply the
circumstances of this narrative to the
conduct of the citizens of London.
Observe—I. That wearein possession
of a blessing peculiarly adapted to
benefit our fellow-countrymen. The
gospel contains glad tidings to all
people, and is adapted to benefit man
in four senses. 1. 4% conscious of
guilt. All men know that they are
transgressors, and in a city like this,
who has not to Jook upon himself as
guilty and unholy? The gospel
reveals the remedy; and this message
it isin the power of the humblest to


communicate. It is not necessary he


should ascend the pulpit or the
hustings ; he may do it by his life and
by his visits. 2. As exposed to tempta-
tion. Great cities are ever the focus of
vice. Such was Ninevah, such was
Rome, suchis Paris, such is London.
8. As liable to suffering. Sorrow is the
portion to which flesh isheir; and as
a city these are generally concentrated.
Think of the want of labour, the high
price of provisions, the ravages of
disease, the frauds of the designing,
the failure of credit, &. 4. As subject
to death. It is the law of nature and
the sentence of God that all must die ;
and oh! what a mass does this city
present to death! II. That we have
been guilty of a culpable omission in
neglecting to communicate those
things. 1. Because the melancholy
cwrcumstances of our fellow-citizens have
not been realized by us. Had these four
lepers thought of the extent of actual
misery among their fellow-citizens,
they would have hastened to them as
soon as they had satisfied their first
cravings. Soit is withus; we do not
think of our fellow-men around us.
2. Because the relative importance of owr
Sellow-cttizens hasnot been by us regarded.
London, as it is the seat of royalty,
the head of legislation, the residence
of nobility and gentry, the mart of
commerce, is the resort of all classes.
We forget that we dwell in a vortex,
which draws from many a league
around, and draws many into ruin.
That grain of gunpowder, yonder, if
ignited, will explode, but will do
little mischief, because it is alone.
But let it be one of a vast magazine,
and where shall the mischief end?
8. Because our own necessities have been
exaggerated. The lepers would say
they had not hada meal fora month,
that they were so naked they wanted
clothing, so poor they wanted treasure,
so sick they wanted medicine. True,
heis to blame who does not keep his
own vineyard; but there is reason to
fear that a spirit of selfishness has
hitherto prevented the citizens of
London doing the good they might.
4. Because the design of the Divine
goodness has been overlooked. You are
blessed that you may bless. You are
480


a)


GHAP. VII.





fights, and your lights should shine.
We overlook the design of God in doing
us good, if we suppose it for ourselves
alone. III. We should experience
the most powerful emotions at the
remembrance of our past indiffer-
ence. 1. An emotion of shame for
our criminal neglect. While we have
thought of the distant village, and the
distant heathen, we have forgotten
those who breathe the same air, and
reside in the same city. 2. An
emotion of sorrow for inseparable mis-
chief. While the lepers were eating
almost to surfeit, and loading them-
selves with treasures almost to faint-
ness, another and another in the city
fainted and died. 3. An emotion of
alarm for threatening evil. We are
conscious of the anti-social and de-
moralizing effect of infidelity. Could
it be diffused, it would do infinite
mischief. 4. An emotion of pity for
present destitution. Think of the
claims of the metropolis. We ask
your pity for those by whom you
got your wealth. We must feel for
those who are perishing, as He who
felt beheld a devoted city, and wept
over it.— The Pulpit.

— The day ofgood things. I. Zhe
text describes the times in which we live.
“This day isaday of good tidings.”
1. Because Jesus Christ has obtained
a complete conquest over all our
enemies. 2. Because He has procured
an ample provision for all our necessi-
ties. 3. Because He has made many
ofus participate in the provisions of
His love. 4. Because He has opened
channels for the publication of these
good tidings to others. II. The
text reproves our indifference to the
miseries of others. ‘‘ We do not well;
this day isaday of good tidings.” 1.
While this disposition exists in our
minds, we dishonour our character.
2. We disobey Christ’s commands.
III. Consider our punishment if we
delay to send help to those who need tt.
‘Tf we tarry till the morning light,
some mischief will come upon us.”
1. If we delay in the work, our eyes
shall see the destruction of our
kindred. Our souls shall want the joys
of God’s salvation. 3. Our conduct

470


OMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—_


will receive the condemnation of Christ.
IV. The text suggests the course of con-
duct you ought to adopt under the present
circumstances. ‘‘Let us go and tell the
king’s household.’’ We should carry
the Gospel to our poor brothers and
sisters. 1. Because they are perishing
for lack of knowledge. 2. Because
success is certain. 3. Because oppor-
tunities are vanishing.


Verse 10. Outcast and despised
men were destined, according to God’s
providence, to announce to the
threatened city in the crisis of its
danger the great and wonderful act of
God. God is wont to use slight and
contemptible instruments for His great
works, that He may, by the foolish
things of the world, confound the wise.
Fishermen and publicans brought to a
lost world the best good news—the
Gospel, which is a power to make all
blessed who believe in it.


Verses 12-16. Hunger o. Sus-
picion. I. Suspicion, the frust of un-
belief—readily gives up the hope of
Divine deliverance. II. Suspicion
regards the tidings of relief asa ruse of
the enemy—the lack of truth and
righteousness leaves the mind a prey
to endless questionings. III. Hunger
catches at the faintest shadow of relief—
is prepared for great risks—the enemy
without cannot be more formidable
than starvation within. IV. The ezt-
gencies of hunger overcome the scruples
of suspicion. The wary king is per-
suaded to despatch two chariots to
reconnoitre, so that if one is seized,
the other may escape. The news
brought by the lepers is confirmed.
The risks of hunger are rewarded with
the much-needed provision.


Verse 12. By such a stratagem as
here mentioned, Tomyris, the Scy-
thian queen, circumvented and
destroyed Cyrus and his Persians. So
when the Christians besieged Ptole-
mais, and were themselves at the same
time besieged by Saladin, they were
so hard bested for victuals that they
were forced to beg and buy it of their
enemies. This, when Saladin per


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OMAP, VIEL


rr


ceived, he pretended to go his way,
leaving his camp full fraught with
plenty of all things; and when the
hunger-starved Christians fell upon
the spoi] in a confused way, he, turn-
ing short again, slew them.— Trapp.


Verse 17. The perils of a crowd.
In this incident, God speaks to us by
showing us—1. Whata terrible thing
isacrowd. 2. What a terrible thing
is thoughtlessness. 38. How terrible
it is to break God’s laws, natural and
moral. 4. Thatitissafesttodo always
thatwhichisright. 5. That we should
prepare to meet our God.—Spence.

— The judgment of the king’s
officers proclaims aloud, ‘Be not
deceived, God is not mocked.” His
corpse became a bloody seal upon the
words of Jehovah and of His prophet.
In the last days, also, when the
abundance of the Divine grace shall
be poured out like a stream, in the
midst of the greatest misery, many
despisers of the glorious promises of
God will see the beginning thereof,
but will not attain to the enjoyment
of it; they will be thrust aside by
marvellous judgments.— Lange.

— Whether he had been an
oppressor of the people, and was there-


fore justly trodden to death by them, is
ancertain ; but that he had shamefully
trodden under foot the honour of God’s
power is upon record, wherefore he
was worthily trampled on by the
hungry people who would not be kept
in by his authority. The belly hath
no ears; and hunger breaketh through
stone walls. Such a like death Con-
stantius Pilcologus, the last Greek
emperor, suifered in the gate of Con-
stantinople when the Turkish army
pressed into that city and took it,
A.D. 1453.—TZrapp.


Verses 18-20. Unbelief. 1. Is
rebuked by the faithful fulfilment of


the Divine word. 2. Is signally
punished. 3. Isa universal danger to
man. 4. Should be prayerfully


guarded against.


Verse 20. Extreme hunger has no re-
spect to greatness. Not their rudeness,
but his own unbelief, hath trampled
him under foot. He that abased the
power of God by his distrust, is abased
worthily to the heels of the multitude.
Faith exalts a man above his own
sphere; infidelity presses him into the
dust.” ‘‘ He that believes not, is con-
demned already.” —Bp. Hall.





CHAPTER VII.
ELISHA IN DAMASCUS.


OniTicaL AND Expianatory Norzs,—Verce 1. Thon spoke Elisha—The pluperfect tense,
Now Elisha had spoken. This section dates prior to chapters v. and vi., but is given here as an
introduction to the narrative which follows. Verse 4. And the king talked—Was (that
moment) talking, Note the coincidence, While talking; at that very moment “beheld the
woman!” (verse 5). God times incidents with precision ; ‘‘things work together,” interweave
(Rom, viii. 28). Verse6. King appointed a certain officer—D"D- Its primary meaning ig


a eunuch; its secondary, a court minister. All the fruits ofthe fleld since, &c.—The word
TIN IDS) is better rendered “ fruits” or produce, than rent; yet it has also the meaning, gain,
2 :


profits (Prov. iii. 14). Verse 7. And Elisha came to Damascus—Elijah, his master, had been
divinely commissioned to this (1 Kings xix. 15), and now Elisha, ‘by the instigation of the
Spint” (Thenius), sets out to the task he inherited to perform, Benhadad, king of Syria, was
sick—He, hearing of [lisha’s arrival, sent to euquire if he should recover ; his messenger bear-
ing propitiatory gifts for the prophet. Verse 9. Took a present with him, even of, &.—4it.,
present in his hand, and of every good thing of Damascus. Forty camels’ burden—A camel’s
burden is some six hundred pounds; but it wascustomary to give only a small burden to: ach,
in order that the presentation, being borne by many, might have a more imposing effect, and
express greater respect, Verse 10, Go, say unto him, thou mayst EM aa ola
4


~*~


HAP. VITL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a RE

sentence which, like Delphic oracles, has two possible meanings, each the contradiction of the

other, The words are, pW) mya No TON. The second word, written n°, is in sound
e3° :


the same as 45. The keri retains the form given in our text, N5, to him, ‘Say to him, thou wilt


hvew’ The kethibA adopts the form 4, not—“ Say, thou wilt no¢ live.” The sentence spoken
would convey either meaning, and each form has equal authority. Doubtless the eager king
would seize the hopeful meaning of the words, while Hazael would reserve in his own thoughts
the doom which the words held. It should, however, be noted that Hazael reports the prophet’s


words without uttering either the Ry) or . Verse 11. He settled his countenance stead.
fastly—Llisha’s fixed gaze, followed by his weeping, must have convinced Hazael that his
guilty purpose to usurp the throne of Benhadad was known tohim. Verse 13. But what, is
thy servant a dog, &c.—But surely dogs are less capable of guilty craft and horrid atrocities
than base men are! The more brutal Hazael should not have maligned the nobler brute, by


suggesting that any creature except man was capable of such villany. 223, dog, is an Eastern
term for a servile and despicable man (see 1 Sam. xvii. 43, &c.) Verse 15. Spread it over his
face—The bed coverlet, a quilt of thick cotton or wool This, steeped in water, would effec-
tually suffocate. It is, however, suggested that in warm countries guaze nets wetted, to keep
off flies and gnats, or in cases of fever, are spread over a sleeper’s face. But it is superfluous
to evade Hazael’s murderous design, for a wetted guaze would not prevent respiration. The
coverlet is properly described as “a thick cloth,” “A5'D (comp. Judges iv. 18), a mantle, and
it killed the king—which Hazael desired. Verse 16. Joramthe son of Ahab—See Notes on
chap. iii. 1. Veree 18. The daughter of Ahab—Attaliah, It was through her influence the
king introduced the worship of Baal into Judah (2 Chron. xxi). Verse 19, To give him
alway a light, and to his children—i.e¢., ‘‘even im his children,” that his kingdom
should be kept from becoming extinct. Verse 21. Zair—Vulgate says Seir; other authorities
suggest Zoar. The people fled to their tents—i. ¢., the menof Judah. Verse 22, Yet Edom
revolted-—So Edom revolted, thus fulfilling Gen. xxvii. 40, for though the Edomites were re-


subjugated for a brief period (chap. xiv. 7, 22), they were never again vanquished—W. H. J.


eee


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-6.
Tux Porent DyFivence oF a Goop Mam.


I. His counsel is valuable, and gratefully acted upon. The Shunammite
had good reason to respect the word of Elisha. She had evidence of the
sympathy and power of the prophet in the restoration of her dead son. When,
therefore, he warned her of the coming famine, and advised emigration, she and
her son promptly obeyed. The result showed the wisdom of the advice, and
justified their confidence in the prophet; they were preserved during the years
of famine, and received again the property they had relinquished. Here we
see how the kindness shown by the Shunammite receives still further reward.
There is nothing so fruitful in blessing as kindness. In the great dilemmas of
life we seek counsel, not from the frivolous and wicked, but from the wise and
good. A good man has the destiny of many lives in his hands; a word from
him has great weight. With what profound reverence and loving obedience
should we accept the words of Him who bringeth the counsel of the heathen to
nought! who maketh the devices of the people of none effect, and whose counsel
standeth fcr ever, the thoughts of His heart to all generations (Ps. xxxiii. 10, 11).


II. His beneficent acts are the theme of popular conversation ‘The
king talked with Gehazi, saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things
that Elisha hath done” (verse 4). A good action cannot be hid. Sooner or
later it will emerge from the obscurity in which it was first done, and become
the talk of a nation, until it reaches even royal ears. All good actions do not
attain such distinguished popularity. There were many good things that Elisha


said and tot which history takes no notice. A good act may beremembered and
472


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OWAP. VIN.





applauded for generations, while the name of the actor is unknown. Who can
tell bow much bloodshed was spared, in the already too bloody battle of the
military at Nanci, during the French revolution of 1790, by the bold, heroic
woman who screamed to the wild, unmanageable mutineers not to fire the second
cannon, and who made her screams effectual by flinging a pail of water on the
dangerousengine. Her name is unknown, but history immortalises the deed.
The more a good man is known and appreciated, the greater interest is taken in
all the details of his life. Indeed, there is danger in magnifying the most
ordinary sayings and doings into undue significance and importance. The
nation that can sing of the exploits of its heroes ‘‘in the brave days of old ”
should also be forward in extolling the noble efforta of good men in modern
times. If the age of chivalry is past, the spirit of chivalry lives and burns in
the breasts of not a few in our day.


III. His holy and unselfish life is a testimony for Jehovah in the
midst of national apostasy. The life of Elisha, if less bold, fierce, and meteor-
ike in its manifestations than that of Elijah, was more profoundly impressive in
its influence for good. The idolatrous Jehoram was smitten with admiration
for the gentle-mannered prophet, and must be convinced of the superiority of
Elisha’s God. But the better feelings of the king were transient; he was too
closely wedded to his idolatry to thoroughly break away from it, and, with
constant calls and warnings to return to his allegiance to Jehovah, he drifted
towards the doom in which all his house was to be involved. As every star in
the firmament declares the glory of God, as every flower of earth reveals some
feature of the Divine beauty, so every holy life testifies of the character of God.
Human goodness is but a reflection of the Divine. In the darkest night of
national apostasy, Israel was favoured with an Hlisha, whose divinely-illumined
life threw a bright stream of light across the gloom. How deplorable the
condition of that nation from which all moral worth is excluded! The modern
doctrine of Nihilism aims at this. A zealous propagandist of this rank mate-
rialism lately defined their teaching thus:—‘‘ Take heaven and earth, state
and church, kings and God, and spit upon them; that’s our doctrine!’’ This
is plain enough. And what would they substitute for God, the soul, and moral
law? A wild, conscienceless demagogy, without belief or scruple, giving the
rein to brute humanity, keeping open house for every appetite and lust. Such
would be the condition of the nation bereft of living witnesses for God and
truth.


IV. His reputation is the means of promoting the ends of justice (verses
5, 6). There was surely a Divine providence at work that brought the sup-
pliant Shunammite into the presence of the king at the very moment when
Gehazi was rehearsing the great works of Elisha. During her absence of seven
years her estate was occupied by others, and ordinarily it would be a moat
difficult proceeding to dislodge the occupants. She wisely went direct to the
highest authority, and while the influence of Elisha’s reputation was fresh upon
the mind of the king, for his sake the prayer of the Shunammite was immediately
granted. Justice triumphed; her land and all its produce for the seven years
were restored to her. It requires power to enforce the claims of justice, and
the highest kind of power is goodness. The arrangements of justice are more
likely to be permanent when brought about by the influence of righteous
principles, than when compelled by physical foree. The presence of a holy
character in society is a powerful check upon injustice and wrong.


Lessons :—1. Goodness ts not inherited, but divinely bestowed. 2. A good man
ia not always himself conscious of the value and extent of his influence. 3. It is an
unspeakable blessing to @ nation to possess men of eminent goodness. i

73


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-3. Famine, pest, war, and
all other forms of calamity, form an
army which is subject to the command
of God; which comes and goes at His
command ; which is ready to attack, or
ready to retire, as He may order; and
which can assuil no one without com-
mand. They are sometimes commis-
sioned to punish and to be the agents
of the Divine justice, sometimes to
arouse and to bring back theintoxicated
to sobriety, sometimes to embitter the
world to sinners and push them to the
throne of grace, and sometimes to try

e saints and light the purifying
fires about them. So no man has todo
simply with the sufferings which fall
upon him, but, before all, with Him
who inflicted them.— Arummacher.


Verse 1. Lessons taught by famine.
I. That God has entire control over
the productive powers of nature. 2.
That God may permit famine as ajudg-
ment on account of national sins. 3.
That a time of famine should induce
national humiliation and repentance.
4. That the extremity of human
suffering is the opportunity for
magnifying the Divine power and
goodness.


— It is a long famine that shall
afflict Israel. He upon whom the
spirit of Elijah was doubled, doubled
the punishment inflicted by his master,
Three years and a-half did Israel gasp
under the drought of Elijah; seven
years’ dearth shall it suffer under
Elisha. The trials of God are many
times more grievous for their sharpness
than for their continuance. This
scarcity shall not come alone; God
shall call for it. Whatever be the
second cause, He is the first. How
often, how earnestly, are we called
to repentance, and stir not! The
messengers of God fly forth at the least
beck, and fulfil the will of His revenge
upon those whose obedience would not
fulfil the will of His command.—
By. Hall.


Verse 2. No nation was more
474


opposite to Israel than the Philistine,
none more worthily odious; yet there
does the Shunammite seek and find
shelter. Even the shade of these trees
that are unwholesome may keep us
from a storm. Everywhere will God
find room for His own. The fields of
the Philistines flourish, while the soil
of Israel yields nothing but weeds and
barrenness. Not that Israel was more
sinful, but that the sin of Israel was
more intolerable. The offers of grace
are 80 many agegravations of wicked-
ness. No pestilence is so contagious
as that which hath taken the purest
air.


Verse 8. She that found harbour
among Philistines finds oppression and
violence among Israelites; those of
her kindred, taking advantage of her
absence, had shared her possessions.
How often does it fall out that the
worst enemies of a man are those of his
own house! Both our fears and our
hopes do not seldom disappoint us. It
is safe trusting to that stay which can
never fail us, who can easily provide
us both of friendship in Palestine and
justice in Israel. We may not judge
of religion by particular action; the
very Philistine may be merciful when
an Israelite is unjust; the person may
be faulty when the profession is holy,
—Bp. Hall.


Verses 4-6. What is here told us
by king Jehoram presents him to us
from his better side. His desire to
learn all of Elisha’s acts, still more
the way in which he was ready to
help the distressed Shunammite to
the recovery of her property, testify
to a receptivity for elevated impres-
sioas and to a disposition to yield to
them. By the fact that he recog-
nised all that was extraordinary in the
person of the prophet, and yet that he
did not desist from his false line of
conduct, he showed that, in the main
point, the relation of himself and of
his people to Jehovah, nothing good
could any longer be expected of him.
His better feelings were transitory and


HO MILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





ineffectual. He continued to be a
reed swayed hither and thither by the
wind, easily moved, but undecided and
unreliable, so that, finally, when all
the warnings and exhortations of the
prophet had produced no effect, he
fell under the just and inevitable judg-
ment of God.— Lange.


Verse 5. How happily does God
contrive all events for the good of His
own! This suppliant shall fall upon
that instant for her suit when the
king shall be talking with Gehazi,
when Gehazi shall be talking of her
to the king: the words of Gehazi, the
thoughts of the king, the desires of
the Shunammite, shall be all drawn
together by the wise providence of
God into the centre of one moment,
that his oppressed servant might re-
ceive a speedy justice. Oh, the infinite
wisdom, power, mercy of our God, that
insensibly orders all our ways, as to
His own holy purposes, so to our best
advantage !— Bp. Hall.


Verse 6. The word of God often
extorts from an unconverted man a
good and noble action, which, how-
ever, if it only proceeds from a sudden
emotion, and stands alone, resembles a


OHAaP. Vin





flower which blooms in the morning
and in the evening fades and dies
True servants of God, like Elisha, are
often fountains of great blessing, with-
out their own immediate participation
or knowledge.

— The widow may thank Elisha
for this. His miracle wrought still,
and puts this new life in her dead
estate: his absence did that for the
preservation of life which his presence
did for restoring it from death. She
who was so ready to expostulate with
the man of God upon the loss of her
son might, perhaps, have been ag
ready to impute the loss of her estate
to his advice. Now that for his sake
she is enriched with her own, how
does she bless God for so happy a
guest! When we have forgotten our
own good turns, God remembers and
crowns them. Let us do good to all
while we have time, but especially to
the household of faith.

— The true. spirit of obedience
I. Seen in a ready belief in the Divina
word. II. Seen inthe willingness to
abandon home and property at the
Divine call. III. Puts the soul and
all earthly things under the Divine
eare. IV. Has restored more thar
was abandoned.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 7-16.


Tux Lust or Amsrrion.


I, That the lust of ambition makes man keenly alive to every opportunity
of accomplishing its aims. Benhadad, the king of Syria, was sick. The
dream of Hazael, cherished, perhaps, for years, was coming nearer to its reali-
zation. Death may come any hour; then the sceptre, the crown, boundless
pomp and power are his, With what sinister eagerness would he watch every
changing phase of the sick king’s affliction! with what facility would his busy
brain lay down the plans of future enterprises! A crown has a dangerous
fascination for some minds. Gibbon describes, in his vivid and stately style,
the heroic manner in which Septimus Severus became emperor of Rome, an
ambition he had cherished for years. He waited his opportunity, his keen
glance took in the bearing of every revolutionary change in the imperial city,
and when the crowning disgrace was reached of offering the empire by auction
to the highest bidder, he saw the time for action was come. Though opposed
by two formidable rivals, his promptness and vigour conquered all difficulties.
He ascent. 1 the imperial throne, which he found, as others have done before
and since, was more difficult to sustain than to acquire. The ambitious man
lives an anxious, restless life: he is ready to seize on every favouring circum-
stance. ree


%


CHA. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








II. That the lust of ambition may be cherished underthe guise of devotion
to its victim. Hazael readily complies with the wish of the sick monarch, and,
with allthe oriental display of profuse generosity, and the oriental mingling of
pomp and humility, he enquires of the man of God as to the recovery of his
master. It would seem as though none was more concerned than he, and yet
the while plotting the most effectual way of removing the only obstacle to his
aspiring designs. An unholy ambition generates falseness and unreality: the
man’s outer life gives the lie to his true character. The great dramatist has
depicted this in the double-faced, hesitating conduct of the great regicide
—Macbeth—

To beguile the time
Look like the time: bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower,
But be the serpent under it.
Away, and mock the time with fairest show ;
False face must hide what the false heart doth know.


III. That the lust of ambition blinds man as to the atrocities it may urge
him to commit. When Elisha, looking with prophetic insight in the mirror of
the future, detailed to this man the horrible crimes he foresaw he would commit,
Hazael stood aghast at the bare possibility of sinking down into such a monster
of iniquity ; and yet, doubtless, all these cruelties were perpetrated in the wars
which this usurper carried on in Israel. Hazael reigned more than forty years,
and during that time greatly harassed and oppressed the Israelites (see verses
28, 29; ch. x. 32, 33; ch. xii. 17, 18; ch. xiii. 3-7, 22; Chron. xxiv. 23, 24).
A man who is under the spell of an unholy ambition is hurried on to sins and
excesses of which he little dreamed, and from which in earlier days his better
nature stoutly recoiled. He is spurred on by the—


Vaulting ambition which o’erleaps itself.


IV. That the lust of ambition is unscrupulous as to the methods by which
it attains its ends. 1. /¢ will employ falsehood (verse 14). Hazael assures
the king that Elisha prophesied his recovery—the exact opposite of what the
prophet had said. He purposely deceived Benhadad, intending to put him off
his guard. But he who meditated a darker crime, and in whose heart Elisha’s
words had roused a boundless ambition, was not too good tolie. Truth or talse-
hood is of small concern to one who grasps at power. The ambition must be
sated, though truth is trampied on at every advancing step. 2. Jt shrinks not
from murder (verse 15). The man who shrank with indignant horror at the simple
enumeration of the outrages he might commit, heartlessly smothered his royal
master on the following day—a method of assassination that would leave no
marks of violence on the dead body, and give colour to the suspicion of suicide
rather than murder. There was but one obstacle now between Hazael and his
long-coveted prize—a royal life—and that is sacrificed without compunction.
O, infatuate, short-sighted mortal! The sceptre rashly seized with the red hand
of the murderer will change into a cross of trial, the crown into one of thorna,
the throne into a bed of torture !


Lessons :—1. Ambition dissociated from sound moral principle ta full of porst,
2. There 18 no act of wickedness of which unholy ambition ts incapable. 3. The
most commendable ambition +3 to get and do the most good.


Tue Inrivence or Orecumsrancrs upon Human Cnanracrer (verse 18),


Hazael came to the prophet to inquire whether his master would recover from
his sickness. The answer is ambiguous. So far as the disease itself was con-
cerned, bes recover. Yet his days were numbered; and the purpose to kill

6


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAP. Vin.





him was already being formed in the heart of his hitherto faithful servant. The
prophet saw before him not only the king’s enemy, but also the man who would
one day inflict dire evils upon Israel. The thought of the horrors about to
come to his people made the man of God weep. Hazael asks the cause of his
sorrow. Elisha tells him frankly, and in the plainest terms, what was in the
not very distant future. HAS starts back with horror, when he sees in this
prophetic mirror the image of his own baseness. ‘Is thy servant a dog?”
The prophet seems to evade the question; and yet, in his reply, we have the full
and complete explanation, if not to Hazael, at least to us, of all that occurred.
“‘ The Lord hath showed me that thou shalt be king over Syria.” Is this man,
then, a base and guilty hypocrite? Is he a man who hides under the cloak of
pretended affection for his master, and reverence for humanity, his fiendish
designs? How are we to account for the fact that he actually did all that
Elisha foretold, if he was not a hypocrite? If we take humanity as it is, not
as it has been described in poetry, and sometimes in what was intended to be
prose, we shall have no difficulty in accepting both statements—that of Elisha
regarding the atrocities of Hazael, and that of Hazael regarding his horror and
amazement at the very mention of the crimes. Hazael simply failed to take
into account the influence of circumstances upon human character.


I, There is a doctrine of circumstances utterly at variance, not only with
the teachings of Scripture, but also with the experience and deepest convictions
of mankind—a doctrine which asserts, or appears to assert, that circumstances
make men, and that the only difference between the noblest saint and the basest
criminal is a difference simply in the structure of the brain, and the character
of the surroundings. Some men teach this, but no man believes it, or acts
upon it, either in his feelings respecting his own deeds, or his judgments of the
moral character of the actions of his friend. But we must, while rejecting a
doctrine so monstrous, yet remember that, in a very real sense, circumstances
have a power over character and life. Hazael’s error is one of the commonest
among ourselyes. How many promises are made in early life that cannot
afterwards be kept without doing moral wrong to ourselves and others! When
the public mind is filled with horrors of some tragedy, or when men see one
who has been universally trusted and respected, convicted of some base crime,
the tendency is to deny to the criminal the common feelings of humanity, and
to attribute to a momentary impulse of an insane mind, what has been the out-
come of long-formed habits of thought and settled purposes. Life grows not by
sudden freaks of this sort; but, like the plant or tree, derives its nourishment
from its surroundings, and, year by year, though it may be imperceptible,
assimilates these to itself. In order to form its present and its future, God
ever requires its past, which men may forget or ignore. We may here learn
a lesson from, and see some analogy in, the teachings of geology regarding the
formation of the solid earth on which we tread. Go to the rock, and learn
from its formation that once it was loose sand-dust, blown about by every
wind! Behold in that rock, now fossilised, the print of the tiny foot, the ripple
mark left by the wave on the falling leaf, even the march of the rain-drop as it
fell there ages before. Now allis solid, itis true; but once it was far otherwise.
So do we find character and life daily forming itself, and being formed, by the
slow action of outward circumstances. They are to the mind as food is tothe
physical frame. The babe grows under the influence of nourishing food, pure air,
and healthy exercise. So does our mental and moral nature grow up to a large
extent by means of what is supplied in the surroundings.


II. Circumstances bring men into new temptations never felt before.
Hazael king of Syria, or even with the throne within his reach, would be a very
different person from Hazeel the honoured servant of his gc pee The very


CHAP, VIR. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ae aac


thought passing through his mind, the very possibility of attaining such a
position, would give a shock to the moral nature of a man who had been
wont to regulate his life by expediency. Circumstances not only suggest
new temptations, but also give an intensity to those already felt. As we pase
from youth to manhood and womanhood, we enter into a new world, peopled
with inhabitants whom we may have seen before, but only as trees walking, not
in distinct and definite outline. Now they become actual powers in life. They
speak to us in a language we can understand, and inspire us with new ideas.
So when we enter into newrelationships in life we extend the area of our pleasures,
it may be, but we also make new desires and wants possible, and expose our
moral nature to new dangers. It is a mere commonplace to say that city life,
to those who have been brought up in the quiet of the country, will awaken new
cravings. A few years amid these surroundings will be sufticient to change the
old ways of thought and habits of life. It isnot so much that the promises
before made, and the views of life entertained, betokened any unreality or
hypocrisy, but that they were the outcome of ignorance and inexperience of
life. From this point of view, and in their bearing on this subject, nothing can
be more instructive than the examples recorded for our guidance in the Holy
Scriptures, ‘‘ profitable indeed for correction and discipline in righteousness.”
Had Cain been told that one day he would lift up his hand against Abel his
brother, he would, and not without feeling, have said, ‘‘ Am I a dog?”
Joseph’s brethren could hardly have sold their brother into slavery had they not
first fitted themselves for this by envy, malice, and hatred. Nor did Potiphar’s
wife persecute Joseph altogether from pure hatred, but because her conduct made
this necessary, in order that she might appear righteous in the eyes of his
master. Suppose we apply the same principles to the crimes associated with
Christ’s death. Pilate was not a dog, yet he did ‘‘ great things.” He simply
gave way to popular clamour, in order to gain popular favour (a vice by no
means confined to Roman governers), and out of this weakness, or time-serving
policy, came all his guilt and crime. If we judge the traitor Judas by the
same standard, we shall, perhaps, stand niore in awe of that which leads men
to awful crimes. His terrible end shows that he did not realise where his
avarice and his greed were leading him. Step by step, instead of resisting the
tempter, he yielded to circumstances, and at last found himself completely under
the powers of darkness. ‘‘ Andit was night,” says the Evangelist.

Ill. If we could, in one sentence, point the moral lesson of the history of
crime in all ages, and in all countries, it would be this for us all: ‘Is thy
servant a dog?” No, thy servant is no dog. He is a man—has in him two
natures struggling for the mastery. He is not without his good impulses.
Perhaps he often resolves to give himself up to their sway, but he yields too
readily to the passions that war against the soul; he gives way to the circum-
stances that surround him, and that appeal to him. Visit our great convict
prisons. Who are their immates? No doubt many of the so-called criminal
classes are men and women who come from the lowest ranks of the community.
Yes, but they are not all such; yea, these very names may blind us to the
origin, progress, and end of wicked deeds, The ‘criminal classes” are what
they are because of the power or circumstances over human nature; because
‘man is also.flesh,” and when once he gives way to the baser passions, tends
ever to sink lower and lower in the scale of being, to hand down his very vices
to his children. But you will find many in these crowds to whom all life’s
pleasures are now denied, who have belonged to the higher classes of society.
They yielded to the lie, they gave way to passion, they yielded themselves up to
the pleasures of sin. Now they stand aghast at the position in which they have
placed themselves, and the depth to which they have fallen. Had you told them
of this terrible fall years before, they would have been amazed and incredulous,
ss oan let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall.”

478


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. obAP VIN.
ee


IV. My text seems to suggest that much of what passes for virtue amongst us
muy simply be vice not manifested by circumstances. How much do women who
are sometimes boastful owe to the fact that the world is harder in its judgments
on their sins, than in the case of the other sex! How much to the fact they are
more protected by circumstances! The rich man knows nothing of the tempta-
tions of the man hard pressed by circumstances, and hence his hard and unjust
censures. The poor man, protected by his very poverty, knows not the tempta-
tion of those nursed in the lap of wealth; hence, when he hears of the sins of
the other, he flatters himself on his superiority. He owes it not to his moral
heroism, but to his surroundings. We have spoken much of the power of cir-
cumstances. Let not man think he is the creature of his surroundings. By
God’s grace he may rise above them, and triumph over them, making his very
passions minister to his success, and making his enemies his bencfactors. There
is for man, frail, weak, temptable as he is, and surrounded by everything that can
minister to his weakness, one, and only one safe path. Itis the way of holiness.
It is the path of humility and obedience to the Divine word. These examples
are given us as beacon lights to warn of danger, and to point to the one and only
way ofsafety. He only is perfectly safe who commits his way to the Lord, who
yields himself to the guidance of the word, who is conscious of weakness, and
who, ceasing from man, looks above him to the strong Son of God, who can
succour him when tempted. He only is safe who has been delivered from him-
Hrs a who is being ‘‘ kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation.”

eas cs


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 7-15. Hazaei discovered. If we love and serve God, we shall
1. Unconscious wickedness Hazael not be anxious to know whether we
had a heart that was capable of shall live or die. 3. Zhe prediction


planning and executing great wicked-
ness, yet knew it not. Would not
believe it when told. If we could
have the wickedness of our hearts dis-
closed to us, how appalled we should
be. We judge ourselves by the past.
That is bad enough. But we think
we shall and can do nothing worse
than that. We forget that the things
of the past furnish only a hint of the
direction of the future, and may be
excelled in the future. More evil in
each of us, even the best, than we
suppose. We should fear ourselves,
distrust ourselves, and only trust God.
What might we do under severe
temptation. No safeguard against sin
but in the help of God. 2. Anxious
enquiry. Benhadad a wicked and
idolatrous king. Very ill and full of
anxious concern. Haas no one to
enquire of but the prophet Elisha,
whose God he denied. In life many
deride those ministers of religion whom
they send for in sickness, and disobey
that God whose pardon they need in
sickness as the only source of comfort.


accomplished. Elisha lookedin Hazael’s
face and read his character and history
there. Wept at that sad sight.
Hazael was indignant, yet did the
crime predicted of him. Had he tho-
roughly believed it to be possible, and
been right-hearted, how he would
have prayed. Let us believe the pos-
sibility of future sin, and pray earnest-
ly for delivering grace. If we stand,
let us take heed est we fall. Many
strong men have fallen; let us not be
too self-reliant. Hazacl might recall
the prophet’s words when too late.
So may we. Let us seek Divine grace
betimes. Lxearn:—1. Zo trust in the
Lord at all times. 2. To put no con-
Jidence in the flesh. 3. Not to judge of
the future by our present feelings. 4.
Seek Divine forgiveness of the past, and
Divine guidance for the future.—Class
and Desk.


Verses 7-10. The power of a holy
character. 1. Is recognised every-
where, even by the enemies of God :
“The man of God is come hither”

479


A


(verse 7). 2. Inspires the hope of
succour in affliction: ‘‘ Enquire of
the Lord by him, saying, Shall I
recover of this disease?” (verse 8).
8. Commands the deference of the
rich ‘and powerful (verse 9). 4. Gives
the deepest significance to words
spoken at a critical moment (verse 10).

— The subduing power of suffer-
ing. 1. Bears down. the strongest
and proudest warrior 2. Convinces
the idolater of the helplessness and
vanity of his own deities. 3. Renders
the sufferer ready and eager to receive
help from any quarter. Benhadad
humbly seeks assistance from the man
whose life he had threatened (chapter
vi. 18). In the days of his health
and prosperity ke had not heeded the
lesson of Naaman’s cure, but in the
hour of sickness he consults the same
wonderful physician.


Verses 7, 8. Benhadad upon the
sick bed. 1. The rebellious, haughty
and mighty king, the arch-enemy of
Israel, who had never troubled him-
self about the living God, lies in
wretchedness ; he has lost courage, and
now he seeks the prophet, whom he
once wished to capture, just as a
servant seeks his master. The Lord
can with his hammer, which breaketh
in pieces even the flinty rock, also
make tender the hearts of men.
Those who are the most self-willed
in prosperity are often the most des-
pairing in misfortune. Not until the
end approaches do they seek God; but
He cannot help in death those who
have never thought of Him. 2. He
does not send to ask the prophet,
What shall I, a poor sinner, do that I
may find grace and be saved? but
only whether he shall recover his
health. The children of this world
are only anxious for bodily welfare ;
about eternal welfare they are in-
different. It should be our first care
in severe illness to set our house in
order and to surrender ourselves to
the will of God. The time and the
hour of death are concealed from men,
and it is vain to enquire about them.


Verse 7. The man of God is come!
480


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





That was the cry in the heathen city
of Damascus, and the news penetrated
even to the king, who rejoiced to hear
it. This did not oceur to Elisha in any
city of Israel. Blessed is the city and
the country where there is rejoicing
that a Man of God is come !—Lange.
— Whether for the idolatries, or
for the famine of Israel, the prophet
is gone into Syria, no doubt Naaman
welcomed him thither, and now would
force upon him thanks for his cure,
which the man of God would not
receive athome. How famous is he
now grcwn who was taken from the
team! His name is not confined to
his own nation ; foreign countries take
notice of it, and kings are glad to listen
to him, and woo him with presents.
The king of Syria, whose counsels he
had detected, rejoiced to hear of his
presence; and now, ashaving forgotten,
he had sent a whole host to beseige the
prophet in Dothan, sends an honour-
able messenger to him, laden with the
burden of forty camels.— Bp. Halt.


Verse 9. What will not princes part
with for their life and health?
‘Wherefore should I die, being so
rich?’’ said Cardinal Beauford,
Chancellor of England in the reign of
Henry VI. ‘‘ Ifthe whole realm would
save my life, I am able either by
policy to getit, or by riches to buy it.
Fie! will not death be hired? Will
money do nothing? ”


Verses 11-13. The possibilities of
human character detected and ex-
posed. I. That some men are especially
gifted in reading the tendencies of human
character. Elisha had supernatural
discernment. He saw in the eyes of
Hazael, as in a mirror, the reflection
of his true character, and had the
courage to tell him of it. Much ofthe
real man is imaged in the face, though
it is possible to cherish the foulest
villany under a misleading exterior.
Il. Zhat the vision of prospective
wickedness fills @ tender heart with pros
Sound grief. Elisha beheld, as in a
panorama, the enormities Hazael
would yerpetre¢te, and the prophet
wept not only because of the obduracy


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP, Viii,


SN


and cruelty of character he foresaw in
Hazael, but also because of the suffer-
ings he saw coming on his own nation
on account of their sins. How much
grief is spared to some parents that they
cannot see the crimes their children
afterwards commit! They have grief
enough when they dis over the un-
doubted facts, without the torture of
anticipation. III. That man indig-
nantly spurns the imputation of great
crimes of which he #8 unconscious.
‘‘ What is thy servant—a dog—that
he should do this great thing?’’ The
career of Hazael illustrates a humiliat-
ing truth, that, though unconscious of
it, there is in human nature the possi-
bility of the greatest crimes.


Verses 11,12. He who has a good
conscience is never disturbed or em-
barrassed if anyone looks him directly
in the eye; but a bad conscience can-
not endure an open, firm look, and
trembles with terror at every rustling
leaf. Elisha weeps. These were not
tears of sentiment, but of the deepest
pain, worthy of a man of God, who
knows of no greater evil than the
apostacy of his people from the living
God, the determined contempt for the
Divine Word, and the rejection of the
Divine Grace. Where are the men
who nowadays weep such tears?
They were also tears of the most faith-
ful love, which is not easily provoked,
thinketh no evil, vaunteth not itself,
and is not puffed up. So our Lord
wept once over Jerusalem (Luke
xix. 41), and Paul over Israel (Rom.
ix. 1-3).— Lange.


Verse 11. Heart reading. We
believe the man lives not, and never
did live, who could stand such inspec-
tion without quailing before it. Is
there one who can affirm that he could
stand with unblanched cheek before
the man whom he believed to be view-
ing his naked soul, divested of all the
purple and fine linen which cover its
littleness—its foulness—its deformi-
ties —its soreness from the outer
world? Is there one who could
endure, without confusion of face—
without a quivering frame—the keen


dissection of his character, his con-
duct, his spirit, by even the most
friendly hand in the world? Would
he be content that any human eye
should trace the tortuous meanderings
of feeling in regard to any one matter
in which he has ever been engaged—
the unholy thought—the ungenerous
imputation—the low suspicion—the
doubt—the dislike—the covetousness
—the hate—the contention—the lust
of the flesh—the lust of the eye—the
pride of life—that more or less enter
into, and defile with, the prints of
villanous hoofs the fairest garden of
life? In this we show how much more
fear we have of man than of God. To
us it is of infinitely less concernment,
both for this world and the world to
come, what man thinks of us, than
what God thinks—what man knows
than what God knows. Yet, while
we shrink with such instinctive dread
from the too near survey of fellow-
sinners, we manage to get on very
quietly, with small trouble of mind,
in the perfect knowledge that One
who cannot be mistaken has a sleepless
eye fixed with unceasing vigilance
upon our hearts. This keen suscepti-
bility to the inspection and good
opinion of man, and this comparative
indifference to the constant survey of
God, is a familiar thing, and strikes
us little because it is familiar; but it
is nevertheless one of the strangest
anomalies of our nature, and is beheld
with astonishment and grief by the
angels of God. In their view it is an
inversion of the whole order of life and
being. To them God is all—His
inspection is all; and that different
state of things which gives more
practical importance to the survey of
a sinful fellow-creature like ourselves,
must present a greater mystery than
any of those deep problems in material
or spiritual nature which men have
vainly laboured for a thousand years
to solve. Tous itis plainer. Evil is,
alas! more intelligible to man than to
angels; and the good and the true is
more intelligible to them than to us.
It is sin which has cast a veil between
our souls and God—a veil transparent
to Him, but opaque to us. He seer
qu 481


™%


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KING6.





us as clearly in our deformity as He
did in our beauty ; but we have ceased
to see Him as Heis. We do not realise
the unseen. We live by sight, and not
by faith. How different would be our
conversation and our walk if we lived
and moved in the ever-present con-
sciousness that the Unseen Eye was
upon us, and that the opinion of us
hereafter to be pronounced in the
presence of the assembled universe
is a matter of inconceivably more im-
portance to us than all that the world
can think or say. Let us believe that
to walk and act from day to day with
this as a vital consciousness about us
—without any supreme anxiety but
to walk so as to please God—is a most
pleasant life—ie ¢he very antepast of
Heaven. Thereisnobondageinit. It
is perfect freedom ; and is happiness as
complete as this world allows.— Aivtto.


Verse 18. Wicked men are carried
into those heights of impiety which
they could not in their good mood have
possibly believed. Nature is subject
to favourable opinions of herself, and
will rather mistrust a prophet of God
than her own good disposition. How
many, from honest beginnings, have
risen to incredible licentiousness,
whose lives are now such that it were
as hard for a man to believe they had
ever been good, as to have pursuaded
them once they should prove so des-
perately ill!—Bp. Hail.

— Subserviency before men is
always joined with falseness and
hypocrisy. Therefore, trust no one
who is more than humble end modest.
Hazael called himself a dog, while he
plotted in his heart to become king of
a great people. It is the way with all
hypocrites that they bend and cringe,
humble themselves and conceal their
tricks, until they perceive their oppor-
tunity and have found the key of the
situation. There is scarcely anything
more discordant and disgusting than
the dialect of self-abasement when it
bears upon its face the stamp of affec-
tation and falsehood.


Verses 14, 15. The regicide. 1.
Does not scruple to tell a lie. 2.
482


Seeks to commit his great crime in
such a way as to create least suspicion.
8. Is spurred on by an ungovernable
ambition. 4. Nevers reaps the advan-
tage for which he has sacrificed
everything.

— It is the curse which rests upon
him who has sold himself to sin, that
all which ought to awaken his
conscience and terrify and shock him
out of his security, only makes him
more obstinate, and pushes him on to
carry out his evil designs.


Verse 15. Buchanan tells of
Natholicus, the thirty-first king of
the Scots, that, having usurped the
crown, he sent a trusty friend to a
famous witch, to know what success
he should have in his kingdom, and
how long he should live. The witch
answered that he should shortly be
murdered, not by an enemy, but by
his friend. The messenger instantly
enquired, by what friend? ‘‘ By thy-
self,” said the witch. The messenger
at first abhorred the thought of any
such villany; but afterwards, con-
ceiving that it was not safe to reveal
the witch’s answer, and yet that it
could not be concealed, he resolved
rather to kill the king to the content
of many, than to hazard the loss of
his own head. Thereupon, at his
return, being in secret with the king
to declare to him the witch’s answer,
he suddenly slew him.— Trapp.

— At heart proud, haughty, and
imperious, Hazael affects humility and
submissiveness. Towards his master,
who had entrusted him with the most
important commission, he is false and
treacherous. He shrinks from no
means to attain his object. He lies
and deceives, but, at the same time,
he is cunning and crafty, and knows
how to conceal his traitorous purposes.
When, alarmed and exposed by the
words of the prophet, he can no longer
keep them secret, he marches on to the
crime; although he seeks to execute it
in such a way that he may not appear
to be guilty. With all this he com-
bines energy, courage, cruelty, and a
blind hatred against Israel, as the
sequel shows. On account of these


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP. VII.


————


qualities he is well fitted to be, in the
hand of God, a rod of anger, and astaff
of indignation. The Lord makes the
vessels of wrath serviceable for the
purposes of His government ; and here
we have again, as often in the history
of redemption, an example of wicked-
ness punished by wickedness, and of
godless men made, without their will
or knowledge, instruments of holiness
and justice.— Lange.

— O! Hazael; thou shalt not thus
easily stop the mouth of thine own
conscience. That shall call thee traitor,


even in thy chair of state, and shall
check all thy royal triumphs with,
‘Thou hast founded thy throne in
blood!” I am deceived if this wet
cloth shall not wipe thy lips in thy
jolliest feasts, and make thy best
morsels unsavoury. Sovereignty is
painful upon the fairest terms; but
upon treachery and murder, torment-
ing. Woeful is the case of that man
whose public cares are aggravated with
private guiltiness; and happy is he
that can enjoy a little with the peace
of an honest heart.— Bishop Hall.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 16-29.
THe Woerct Disasters or aN Unnoty ALLIANCE.


In this paragraph we detect traces of the baneful influence of the iniquitous
Jezebel. The brief histories of Jehoram and Ahaziah present a terrible
example of the way in which one bad woman can radically corrupt entire
dynasties and kingdoms, and of the curse that rests upon matrimonial conuec-
tions which are only formed in order to attain political objects. ‘The kingdom
of Judah became tainted with the idolatry that had degraded and enfeebled
Israel, and there was danger that the social morality of Jerusalem would sink
to the low, black levelof Samaria. The dynasty of Omri was the most disastrous
in the annals of Israel, and is stained with the darkest crimes. Such a succes-
sion of weak and wicked rulers could not continue for ever. The doom of the
dynasty is declared. The darkening clouds of vengeance are closing round.
The victims and the avenger are being prepared. The hour to strike is at
hand. We have here an indication of the woeful disasters that befell Judah
because of its unhappy connections with Israel, and how the wrong-doers were
ripening for punishment.


I That an unholy alliance may be unwisely sanctioned by good and holy
parents. Jehoshaphat, the father of Jehoram, was one of the noblest kings of
Judah. Influenced by genuine piety, he effected important reforms in his king-
dom. He abolished idolatry ; he raised a formidable army, and strongly fortified
the frontiers ; he promoted a flourishing commerce; he administered justice with
strict impartiality ; he maintained and encouraged the worship of Jehovah ; he
was beloved by his people, and his fame spread in every direction. It was a
serious mistake when he first entered into confederacy with the profane court
of Israel. His connection with Ahab in war (chap. iii.), and with Ahaziah in
commerce (2 Chron. xx. 35), both ended disastrously. But the greatest wrong,
and what became a fruitful source of evil, was his sanctioning the marriage of
his son with a daughter of the house of Ahab. If he was induced to it by
the prospect of advantage, he was utterly disappointed. Not only did he
suffer himself, but many calamities happened to his descendants in consequence
of this affinity. Parents cannot be too careful in advising their children as
to matrimonial alliances; and children should respect the counsel and riper
judgment of parents on so delicate and important a subject. Mere sentiment
and passion should not be allowed to blind the sense of what is just and wise
and holy. The best of parents in other respects may be weak in ae And


'»


CHAP. VIIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,





et, if a mistake is made, it is made for life, and many other lives are involved
in the suffering.


II. That an unholy alliance often leads to a career of unexampled wicked-
ness (verse 18). Though Jehoram reigned during the life-time of Jehosha-
phat, he did not follow the good example of his father, but chose Ahab for his
pattern, if he did not exeeed him in vileness and cruelty. He murdered his
six brothers, as it would appear, for no other reason than to become possessed
of the treasures which his father bequeathed to them (2 Chron. xxi.), not from
any jealousy that they would interfere with the succession to the throne. A
king who did not shrink from fratricide may be easily conceived capable of
any crime. Jehoram grew into a monster of impurity and wickedness, and,
after a brief reign of eight years, he died of a horrible desease, unhonoured,
and unregretted. It is some consolation to society that the career of its most
debauched and brutalised members is brief. Outraged nature retaliates with
suffering and premature death. Abad wife may drive her husband to the vilest
excesses; there is no escape from her baleful influence but in the grave. How
different would have been the history and career of some men if they had
married differently !


III. That an unholy alliance corrupts and demoralises the national life.
(verses 20-22). Edom and Libnah revolted. They despise a king who was both
weak and wicked. Jehoram made some attempt to put down the rebellion, and
though he was successful in a night engagement against the Edomites, his
soldiers gave up the battle and ran away to theirhomes. Edom, which had been
tributary to Judah from the days of David, was thus lost to Jehoram. The
national life was demoralised, and the people were heedless as to what became
of the national power and prestige. Jehoram had the memorable distinction of
being the first to introduce the abominations of Baal worship to Judah, and the
result was soon evident in the lowering of the moral tone of the national character.
In the rulership of Judah, it was a great drop from Jehoshaphat to Jehoram;
but in the moral life of the people it was a greater drop from Jehovah to Baal!


IV. That an unholy alliance infects posterity with its evils (verses 25-29).
The bad influence of Jehoram did not die with him. It survived in Ahaziah,
who inherited and practised the worst features of his father’s example. The
history, brief as it is, is careful to point out his relationship to the worst dynasty
that darkens the history of the Jewish kings, and to show the predominating
tendency of his life to be evil. ‘He did evil in the sight of the Lord, as did
the house of Ahab.”’ Sin hardens the heart and produces obstinacy of disposi-
tion. The practice of sin becomes an infatuation, until the sizner becomes
incorrigible. So that


“You may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon,
As by oath remove, or counsel shake,
The fabric of his folly.” —Shakspeare.


But the network of retribution is being drawn tighter round its victims. It is
not without design that Joram, Ahaziah, and Jezebel are brought together in
Jezreel. The avenger is at hand, and the three chief representatives of the
house of Ahab must be the first to fall.


V. That the worse sins of an unholy alliance cannot revoke the Divine
promise. ‘‘ Yet the Lord would not destroy Judah for David His servant’s sake,
as He promised him to give him alway a light and to his children” (verse 19
comp. an Kings xi. 36). By the formal adoption of idolatry Judah hed

4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OMAP. Vill.
rr
revolted from Jehovah and became as bad as Israel, and, but for the Divine
promise, the royal family of Judah would have been as thoroughly extirpated as
that of Israel. O, the infinite patience of God! The basest ingratitude, the
most outrageous sins, cannot invalidate the fidelity of God. David was assured
that he should not lack a successor on the throne of Israel, so that his name
should be as a light continually kept burning by a constant supply of oil, until
the Messiah came, in whose glorious advent the greatest earthly luminary should
be quenched. The pledge, though in abeyance for many long, weary years,
was fully redeemed. And now, ‘ while wicked men from generation to genera-
tion perish in their sins, the son of David, the light of His church, ever liveth
to protect, bless, and comfort His people.”


Lrssons:—1. Great care should be taken in forming the friendships and alliances


of Iife. 2. Unutterable mischief has resulted from an ill-assorted marriage. 8.
Vo union should be entered into that %s not based on the mutual love of God.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 16-29. The spirit of the
house of Ahab. I. Perversion of all
divine and human ordinances. Wicked
and corrupt women set the tone and
ruled over their weak husbands. II.
Immorality, licentiousness, murder,
and tyranny. III. Contempt, on the
ove hand, for the richness of God’s long-
suffering and goodness; and, on the
other, for the warnings of God’s judg-
ments and chastisements. What a
different spirit animated the household
of a Cornelius (Acts x. 2), of a Crispus
(Acts xviii. 8), of a jailer at Philippi
(Acts xvi. 34).


— The importance of family
relationships. I. The great influence


which they exert. They necessarily
bring about relationship in spirit and
feeling. They work gradually, but
mightily. One member of the connec-
tion draws another with him either to
good ortoevil. Inspite of their pious
father and grandfather, Jehoram and
Ahaziah were tainted by the apostasy
of the house of Ahab. How many are
not able to resist the evil influences of
these connections, and therefore make
shipwreck of their faith, and are either
drawn into open sin and godless-
ness, or are transformed into a
superficial, thoughtless, and worldly
character. II. The duty which
theréfore devolves upon us. The
calamities which even the pious
Jehoshaphat brought upon his house,
nay, even upon his country, arose from


the fact that he gave the daughter of
Ahab and Jezebel to his son, asa wife,
and did not bear in mind that relation-
ships which do not rest upon the word
and cammandment of God brine dis-
content and ruin. Therefore beware
of entering into relationships which
lack the bond of faith and unity of
spirit, however grand or advantageous
externally they may seem to be. Do
not, by such connections, transplant
the Ahab and Jezebel spirit into your
house, for it eats like a cancer, and
corrupts and destroys to the very
heart.—Lange.


Verse 18. An indiscreet marriage.
I. May be mistakenly promoted by
the best of parents. II. Makes the
beginning of married life morally
perilous. III. Leads on gradually to
the commission of great sins. IV. In-
volves many in disgrace and suffering.


Verse 19. Behold the faithfulness of
God, who, for the sake of the fidelity
of the father, chastises indeed the son,
but yet will not utterly destroy him.
God will sustain His kingdom to the
end of the world, in order that a holy
leaven may remain, no matter how
many may be found who scoff at His
promise to sustain His church.—
Cramer.

—The Divine faithfulness.—1. Is
not rendered inefficacious by human
sin. 3. Guarantees the fulfilment of

485


CHAP. Ix.





every Divine promise. 38. May well
inspire the unbeliever with alarm. 4.
Provides the light of hope in the
darkest period of human history.


Verses 20-24. A  demoralised
monarch, 1. Weakens government.
2. Is powerless to suppress rebellion.
8. Loses the respect and attachment of
his subjects. 4. Dies without being re-
gretted, and is buried without sorrow.


Verse 27. The influence of a bad
example. 1. Is felt by succeeding
generations. 2. Is difficult to counter-
act when emanating from a near rela-
tive. 8. When deliberately followed
tends to shorten life, and leads to
misery and ruin.


Verses 28, 29. Confederates in a
false religion. 1. Are capable of
strong personal attachments. 2. Share
with one another the risks and fortunes
of war. 8. Not devoid of sympathy
in affliction.


EOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KI





himself to Ahab’s family, and was so
fond of spending his time with them,
there it was, by the ordering of Divine
providence, that he met his end.
Those who, by their hostility to the
Lord, belong together, must come
together, that they may perish
together. Jehoram was so anxious to
be healed of the bodily wound which
the Syrians had given him, that he left
the army, and returned to Jezreel;
but the wounds of his soul, which he
had inflicted upon himself, caused him
no trouble, and did not lead him back,
as they should have done, to Him who
promised, ‘‘I will restore health unto
thee, and I will heal thee of thy
wounds’? (Jeremiah xxx. 17). The
children of this world visit one another
when they are ill. They do it, how-
ever, not in order to console the sick
one with the word of life, and to
advance God’s purpose in afilicting
him, but from natural love, from
relationship, or other external reasons.
Their visits cannot, therefore, be re-


garded as Christian work.—Calwer


Verse 29. Ashe so gladly joined Bid.





CHAPTER IX.


THE FALL OF THE OMRIAN DYNASTY.


CriricaL aND ExpLanaTorY Notrs.—Verse 1. Elisha called one of the children of the
prophets—A prophet-disciple, occupying towards Elisha the same relation he himself once
stood in towards Elijah, The rabbis suggest it was Jonah. This anointing of Jehu was a
further heritage of duty bequeathed by Elijah to Elisha (comp. 1 Kings xix. 17 ; see Votes on


2 Kings viii.7). Box of oil—Flask or vial, JD from 7JD5, totrickledown. Ramoth-Gilead—
ey TT


A city of peculiar importance to Judah and Israel, as affording a strong defence, east of Jordan
against the Syrians. Verse 2. Jehu—Doubtless Joram’s ablest general, and entrusted ao
Josephus states, with supreme command of the Israelitish army at Ramoth-Gilead by Joram
on his being wounded (viii. 29). Make him rise up from among, &c.—Do it privately, for
sake of thine own safety, and that none may interrupt thine act of anointing him. Verse 4.
Even the young man the prophet—Or, even the prophet’s young man; or, himself a prophet
(see Note on v. 1, supra). Verse8. I will eut off, &.— Vide Critical Notes on 1 Kings xiv. 10.
The phrase “Shut up and left” stands for those who are of age and those who are minors.
Verse 10. In the portion of Jezreel—It was formerly Naboth’s vineyard (1 Kings xxi. 15 89-5


and 23). The “ portion ”— pan —in its wider sense, refera to the strip of country outside the

city’s wall, hence a place for foul deposits, and thus suggests Jexebel’s degradation that upon

it her body should be cast. Verse 11. This mad fellow—yy3W7371— Wild rhapsodist. Soldiers
eerie


would regard the grotesque appearance and mysterious conduct of this young man as indi-

cating that he was crazy. Prophets were not infrequently regarded as ‘“ mad” ; the divine

fervour in aca and their asceticism, being viewed as proof (Jeremiah xxix. 26; Acts xxvi. 26).
486 | ree ae eee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. Ix.





Ye know the man and his ecommunication—Jehu half suspects that they had plotted to
hoax him by this man’s action, in order to incite him to revolt, and intimates that they knew
more than they appeared to know. Hence their reply, ‘‘ False!’ (v.14). They deny the
insinuation. Verse 13. Then they hasted . . Jehu is king—Their prompt acquiescence
in Joram’s overthrow, and their proclamation of Jehu, proves that the army had no respect
for Joram, who seems to have quitted the scenes of war on receiving wounds from the Syrians
(viii. 29), but whose wounds were not 80 serious as to prevent his riding out (ix. 21), albeit it
is said in v. 16, perhaps satirically, that “Joram lay there.” Yet, although able to ride out
to meet Jehu, he was much too sick to go back to the scene of war! Such conduct of indul-
gence or indifference would make his captains contemptuous, which prepared them to welcome
Jehu, who was evidently popular with the army, as king. Took every man his garment, and
put it under him—Spreading it on the floor for a carpet, as sign of homage (Matt. xxi. 7).
Verse 21. Each in his chariot went out against Jehu—Rather, to meet Jehu. They would
not have ridden out in royal equipages for a hostile attack on him. This self-indulgent king,
who had been idling in his summer palace with Ahaziah, now found himself well enough to
exert himself. Verse 22. Is it peace, Jehut?—Anxiety in the enquiry ; fear of bad tidings
as to the war, or of conspiracy against himself. What peace, so long as, &c.—Such a rebuke
from a subject would at once convey to Joram Jehu’s revolt. Her witeherafts are so many—


Her many witchcrafts continue D331; spiritual whoredom, idolatry, and O°DU/9, magical
incantations, witchcrafts in general. Verse 25. Remember how . . the Lord laid this
burden upon him—Or “took up thiz oracle concerning him.” A divine sentence against a
person or place is commonly called “a burden” (Isa. xiii. 1, Sc.) nwo means burden ;


something uttered, a sentence ; and NW) means to take up, lift up; hence by nwD ni


took up a sentence or oracle. Jehu and his lieutenant were together in Ahab’s retinue, and
overheard the prophet’s sentence. Verse 27. Smite him also in the chariot—After these
words there is an omission in the MS., which is, however, naturally supplied by inserting the


verb of execution, ‘7D%). Verse 30. Jezebel painted her face and tired her head—i.e.,
decorated herself royally, brightening her eyes, or darkening her eyelids with antimony or
lead-ore powder, and building up her head adornments, or put on her crown. Her object


was surely less to captivate Jehu than to overawe him with her majesty as queen. Verse 31.
Had Zimri peace— Warning Jehu of a like fate (1 Kings xvi. 10-18).—W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-14,
Toe Mousrer or Diving VENGEANCE.


Iz was a datk day for Israel when Omri became its king. He imposed
idolatry upot the people by the strong hand of law. He was the author of
those celebrated “statutes ”—celebrated for their infamy—which ‘‘ made Israel
a desolation” (Micah vi. 16). Ahab and Jezebel maintained and improved
upon this idolatrous policy. Israel became utterly corrupt, and, as an evidence
cf the vigour and influence of the rule of Ahab, Judah was being infected with
the same moral poison. Had this rule continued much longer, there was
danger that the Jewish people would be lost in heathenism, and the grand pur-
pose of their being chosen and trained—the maintenance and spread of the
religion of Jehovah—would have been frustrated. In furtherance of the
Divine designs and in the interest of the world, the dynasty of Omri, after a
career of more than forty years, must come to an end. All warnings were dis-
regarded, and every attempt at reformation had failed. Judgment can be no
longer delayed, and the minister of Divine vengeance 1s ready to enter upon his
work. It is terrible, sanguinary work that has to be done, and the man who
undertakes it must be above all effeminate qualms. He must bea man of iron,
of iron will, of iron hand, of iron heart, pe


oe)


CHAP. 1x. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





—_—_


I. That the minister of Divine vengeance may be for years unconsciously
preparing for his work. More than twenty years before, the Lord revealed
to Elijah the agencies by which the wicked house of Ahab should be destroyed,
and among them was Jehu the son of Nimshi (1 Kings xix. 16,17). This man
was familiar with the fearful prediction of Elijah against Ahab when he went
to take possession of Naboth’s vineyard, and though fifteen years had rolled
away since then, those terrible words of doom were vividly remembered
(1 Kings xxi. 17-24; somp. with verse 25). Jehu little dreamed that he was ta
be the selected instrument of vengeance, and yet circumstances were preparing
him for the office. His warlike training developed the qualities necessary
for his stern and sanguinary work. In the court of Ahab was being prepared,
all unconsciously to himself, the agent who was to destroy, with unrelenting
pitilessness, the whole house of Ahab. Wrong cannot triumph for ever. It
generates the power which by-and-bye works its destruction. The very means
by which evil gains its ends are used for its punishment. Napoleon, the
dictator of Europe, won his power by war, and by war he was defeated and
humbled. In the neighbourhood of the bane there grows the antidote.





II. That the minister of Divine vengeance is elevated to a position of
power and authority by which he may accomplish his mission. 1. Jehu ss
solemnly anointed king. It was not customary to anoint kings, except on the
disturbance of the succession, as in the case of Solomon; or on the interruption
of it, as in the case of Joash (chap. xi. 12); or on the transfer of the govern-
ment to another family, as in this case of Jehu. It seems singular that a man
like Elisha should lend himself to conspiracy and rebellion; but the prophet
was acting not from any factious spirit, but according to Divine direction. The
time to act was come, and the man who had so much to do—so much that
ordinary men would shrink from—must be shown by the solemn and significant
act of anointing that he is fully called and commissioned. The greater the work
man is called to do, the more important is it he should be powerfully impressed
he is empowered to do it. 2. is authority 18 speedily and publicly recognised
by those who are ready to help him im his mission (verse 13). The validity of
Jehu’s appointment to the kingship is at once acknowledged by his companions
in arms, and preelamation is made with trumpets and shouting. The army is
with him; his authority is unquestioned ; his power is supreme; he has the
means of carrying out his terrible work of vengeance. The readiness with
which the soldiery acquiesce in the new order of things indicates how feeble
was their attachment to the house of Ahab, and the power that Jehu must have
gained over them. Perhaps the impression was deepening on the popular mind
that the doom of the house of Ahab was at hand, and could no longer be delayed.
When God arises to judgment, He can make all the powers of heaven and earth
contribute to the accomplishment of His vengeful purposes.


III. That the minister of Divine vengeance is clearly informed as to the
character of the work he is called to do. 1. Jt 1s a work of complete and
terrible vengeance (verses 7-10). The whole house of Ahab is to be cut off;
none are excepted. ‘‘ When wickedness is ripe in the field, God will not let it
shed to grow again, but cutteth it up by a just and seasonable vengeance.” A
weak man would have quailed and trembled before such bluody work as now
lay before Jehu. He could not complain of ambiguity ; he clearly understood
what was expected of him. He was braced up for the occasion. Hisimpetuous
and callous nature would lead him to do, without the least symptoms of com-
punction, what other men would have sickened even to contemplate. He was
reminded by the reference to the fate of Jeroboam and Baasha (verse 9) what
would be his own fate if he failed to carry out the Divine commands. 2. Zhe
reason for gle vengeance 6s also set forth: ‘That I may avenge the blood of my

48 ~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP., Ix.





servants of the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of the Lord” (verse 7).
God does not forget the sufferings and wrongs of His people. Injury done to
them is done to Himself, and His justice will render the recompence. Jezebel
has hunted down and destroyed the worshippers of Jehovah, wherever found
until she thought they were extinct, and that the abominations of the Baal-
worship were universally adopted. It was a savage disappointment to her that
she could not crush Elijah and Elisha. But the day of reckoning has come;
the ery of innocent blood is heard; the murdered prophets shall be avenged.
It is an addition to the punishment of the punished when they clearly under-
stand the reason of it. Long-forgotten sins are brought back vividly to the
memory, and the suffering is increased by the consciousness of its justice. Yet
it may be that neither executioner nor victim fully comprehend all the reasons
for retribution.


Lessons :—1. Jt ts utterly futile to oppose God. 2. Though the patience of God
delays the blow, iniquity shall not go unpunished. 8. The ministers of Divine
vengeance are ever within call.


ExisHa and Jen (verses 1-8).


The phrase, ‘‘children of the prophets,” in this passage, indicates men who
were taught by a prophet or prophets, and who might hope in due time to fulfil
the office themselves. The notion of acclass of men under this kind of education
is very puzzling to some modern readers. ‘‘ Was not the prophet,” they ask
emphatically, ‘the inspired man? Were not his words false if they did not
proceed directly from the mouth of the Lord? How could he be trained or
disciplined to utter such words?” The subject is a very important one.
Elijah was, in a remarkable sense, the solitary man. ‘I alone,” he said, ‘am
the prophet of the Lord, while the prophets of Baal are four hundred and fifty.
I alone am left, and they seek my life.’”?” On the contrary, his successor, Elisha,
is nearly always surrounded by companions, disciples, or servants. Kvery
passage of his history makes us understand how great the influence of the
previous teacher had been; how true it was that there were numbers who had
not bowed the knee to Baal during his stay upon earth; how soon, according
to what seems the general law in such cases, they discovered themselves after
he had left it. In the particular instance of which the text speaks, a young
man out of the schools goes by the direct command of Elisha to execute an errand,
which involved nothing else than the overthrow of a dynasty, and a revolution
of two kingdoms.

I. If the main work of the prophet was to declare that such an event would,
or would not, come to pass, or if he was a mere Aolian harp from which a chance
breeze drew forth certain wild and irregular, however beautiful, notes, the idea
of preparation involves an absurdity, or something worse than an absurdity.
On that supposition it must mean, if it means anything, an initiation of
the scholar into certain tricks by which his predecessors had been wont
to impose upon the vulgar, or the communication to him of certain facts
and principles known to them by which he might acquire a reputation for
sudden insight and discovery. No doubt such an education as this was not
unknown in the old world, as it is not unknown in the modern. It is the
ordinary discipline of adepts and conjurors, of those who practise on men’s
fears or upon their curiosity, of those who appeal to their conscience by
religious deceptions, or to their sense of mysterious powers in the natural world
by philosophical deceptions. But the Jewish prophet was not primarily or
characteristically a foreteller. The essence of his office did not lie in what he
announced respecting the future. His sole power of declaring that which should

489


CHAP. IX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





be, arose from his knowledge of that which had been and which was. He
meditated in the law of the Lord, and in that law did he exercise himself day
and night. In this exercise he learnt what was in conformity with the law,
what was contrary to it. In this exercise he learnt to believe in a Divine
Teacher, and to commune with Him, to believe in Him as a permanent and
continual Teacher, as the Guide of his own heart, to believe that all other men’s
hearts were right so long as they were under the same guidance, and wrong
when they were breaking loose from it. The fruits of revolt, the inward
monitor enabled him to foresee and predict. The prediction might take a
general form and point to a distant issue, or a number of issues; it might speak
of that which was definite and immediate. There would be the same proof in
both cases that the word came from a hidden source, and from a moral being;
a proof addressed to the conscience of the hearer, seeing that the prediction
would always come forth with some warning respecting his actual conduct,
some denunciation of an idolatrous or unrighteous act. Everything, ther, that
was sudden in these utterances, bore witness to previous trains of thought and
habits of reflection. So far from wishing to deny the existence of these, as if
they interfered with the genuineness of his inspiration, the prophet would be
grieved if his hearer did not give him credit for them. The knowledge of
passing events, too, would be sought for, not declined, by the true prophet.
He had no need to bandage his eyes that the spectator might be sure he
derived his insight from some other source than actual observation. All facts
were to him signs of a Divine purpose, solemn indications of truths which they
could not themselves make known, but which nevertheless lay in the heart of
them, and which God could discover to the patient and faithful seeker. Nor
can I suppose that the knowledge which the wise king is said to have possessed
of trees and plants, from the cedar of Lebanon to the hyssop upon the wall, so
far as the means of obtaining it lay within their reach, would have been scorned
or scouted by these men of God. They might not have had much of it—pro-
bably much less than the soothsayers and magicians of Egypt or Assyria—less,
perhaps, of traditional information on such matters than the Pheenician priests
of Jezebel’s court. But what they had they would make use of, looking rather
to the secret powers of things than to their outward mechanism; referring the
former in all cases to the government of a Personal Being; believing that in
many, perhaps in most, cases they were subject to man as His vicegerent.


II. Supposing the habitual belief and work of the prophet to have been of
this kind, it does not seem very strange that he should have been an educator
of others, or that one main object of his education should have been to fit
$hem for the exercise of functions like his own.

It would have been the most glaring contradiction to all his professions if
he had regarded the prophetical power as something bestowed for his honour,
a gift to separate him from the rest of the people. Ina prophet of Baal such
an opinion would have been most natural; in a prophet of the Lord God of
Israel it would have been most detestable. God had given His law to the
whole nation; all were under it; therefore all might study it and delight them-
selves in it. It was a law which imported a government over the inner man.
The conscience and heart and will of every man might be awakened to know
the nature of this government, to receive light from the source of light. And
since light is given that it may be communicated, since it shines into a mind
that it may shine forth from that mind, there was no reason why any one of
the Lord’s people should not be prophets. The training of the prophet would
teach the king the ground of his authority, his relations to those whom he
governed, his responsibility for the government of them. It would teach the
elders of the city that they were not to obey the commands of an evil woman
when she told them to charge an innocent man with blaspheming God and the

490


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS, OWar. i<


king, that she might get possession of his inheritance. It would teach the
priests that they were not to pollute the sacrifices of God, or offer them to devils
and not to Him. It would teach the owners of the land that the land was held
by them of Him who had committed it to them in trust for the good of his whole
people. It would teach the seller the sin of having the false measure and the
bag of deceitful weights. It would teach the master the sin of oppressing the
hireling in his wages. It would teach all that they were the members of one
commonwealth, over which a higher than Ahab or Jehoram was ruling, and
would set aside their rule to assert his own.


III. The sons of the prophets, then, were a continual witness to the
Israelites against certain errors into which they were apt to fall respecting the
prophetical office. The man of God might have been looked upon as a mere
separate being, cut off by the awfulness of his character and dignity from the
rest of his countrymen, an object of distant admiration or dread, not an example
of what they ought to be. These men, taken from among themselves and asso-
ciated with him, declared that he was only withdrawn from their communion
that he might the better claim privileges for them which they were in hazard
of losing ; that he was only chosen out by the Lord God of Israel that he might
the more clearly understand their national calling. If he did any strange acts,
or put forth any marvellous powers, the people would see that they were
exercised not in his own name, but in the name of the Lord God; not for his
sake, but for theirs, since some very humble person, scarcely distinguished by
a name, known only as one of an order, could perform some of the most impor-
tant and perilous tasks which were committed to his master. If the sons.f the
prophets were entrusted with messages like that which one of them bore to
Jehu, a proof would be given that the prophet was merely declaring and carry-
ing out a purpose which must be accomplished; he did not go himself to plot
against an existing order, or to earn the favour of some particular chicftain.
The repeated allusions to these sons of the prophets in the story of Elisha are
specially worthy of note, because there are more passages in that story which
favour the notion that the man of God is a worker of prodigies and portents,
than in all the rest of the Bible. Not that there is any great number of those
stories. Open at hazard the life of almost any comspicuous saint in the middle
ages, and you will find five miracles attributed to him for one that is given to
Elisha. The more strong one’s apprehension is of the degradation of the
Israclitish people at that time, of their low sensual idolatry, of their reverence
for evil powers, the more one feels how acts of this kind must have been needed
to counteract their materialism, to undermine their religion of fraud and hatred,
to establish, as no words or arguments could, the proof of an actual and a
gracious ruler.


IV. Retribution is the main subject of the Scripture narrative. Elijah had
told Ahab that the blood of Naboth would be required of his house. His
humiliation had delayed the sentence. His enemy, who had found him out,
seems henceforth to have left him alone. Perhaps the great prophet passed the
remainder of his own days in peace. But there were other prophets to torment
Ahab, and a still greater number, freshly brought, perhaps, by Jezebel from her
own land, to deceive him. The lying spirit in their mouths drove him to
Ramoth-Gilead, and Israel was left, as Micah had foretold, without a shepherd.
His son Joram finds Elisha almost as terrible as his master had been to Ahab.
Yet their relations were different. Joram is less of a Baal worshipper than his
father. He consults Elisha; is asked by him why he does not go to the
prophets of his father and mother; still is promised deliverance and victory in
a war which he has undertaken with the Moabites, and is saved not once or
twice by the prophet’s knowledge from the Syrians. These ae Ps Israel


CHAP. IX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
m


look upon the prophet with especial dread. Once he is surrounded by them ;
but his servant is permitted to see invisible hosts which are on hisside. These
visions, Elisha’s acts of power, his words of wisdom, the ruin which threatened
the land from the Syrians, its unexpected rescue, are all signs that the God
who had made a covenant with their fathers was with the king and the people
then. Trust was then, as always, what the prophets demanded of them.
They could not trust too boldly or unreservedly. To trust, would have
been to repent of the calf worship, to rise out of the brutal habits which it had
engendered, to begin a new life as men. But the custom of idolatry had
destroyed trust in their hearts. They could only worship and tremble. The
sin of the father descended upon the son with the weakness and cowardice,
which were the fruits of it, increased tenfold. At the appointed day and hour
the vengeance came, by just such an instrument as would seem likeliest to carry
it out. Jehu the son of Nimshi had been declared to Elijah as the joint
successor with Elisha in the work he had left unperformed. No two men in
Israel could have been more unlike, One cried to have a double portion of his
master’s spirit, the other was known only as a man who drove furiously. Yet
Jehu had the kind of faith which might be expected in a soldier, somewhat
reckless, but with his sense of right not quenched by religious falsehood. He
had heard the burden which Elijah had pronounced on Ahab as he sat with him
on his chariot when they entered the plot of ground that had been Naboth’s.
He felt that there was an everlasting truth in the sentence, and that it must
come to pass. Who should execute it he did not know then. When the
anointing oil of Elisha’s messenger had been poured on his head, and his com-
rades had cried, ‘‘ Jehu is king,’’ all the savage impulses of the soldier became
quickened and elevated by the feeling that he was commissioned to punish evil-
doers, and assert justice. Esteeming himself a scourge of God, and rejoicing
in the office, he gives full play to all his bloody instincts.


V. It causes great scandal to many amiable and worthy people, that the
Scripture does not stop to comment on the atrocities of Jehu, but appears to
commend his zeal, and to rejoice that what he began he accomplished. A true
portrait can never be a mischievous one, and this is essentially true. Nothing
is said to gloss over the ferocity of Jehu; itis exhibited broadly, nakedly. You
do not want words to tell you that you must hate it. Your impulse—and it is
a right one—is to do so; but there may be in the most ruffianly and brutal
characters, not merely strength, not merely a clear distinct purpose, and a steadi-
ness in following it out, but, along with these, an intense hatred of hypocrisy,
a determination to put it down, not for selfish ends, but because it is hateful,
which determination is good, and inspired by God. We do not meet with these
characters in the world—characters with something devilish, going close beside
something which is really divine; and, though the devilish is the obtrusive, and
may become the pervading, part of the man’s soul, you cannot help feeling that
the other is in the very depth of it, and marks out what he is meant to be, and
can be. Honour it; confess that it is not of earthly origin; that it does not
spring from any dark root in the selfish nature. Say boldly, ‘‘ that honesty, that
zeal, is from above ; it has the sign of a celestial parentage; just so far as that
governs him, he will be a servant of his kind; aftertimes will bless him.” But it
is also true that the grovelling elements of his character, if they are not destroyed
by this nobler fire, will only glare the more fiercely for the light which it sheds
upon them, and that soon, when the fire begins to burn low, you will see, instead
of that glare, nothing but dull, smouldering ashes. ‘‘Jehu took no heed to
walk in the law of the Lord.” It is in the quiet time that a man is tested;
then we find out not only what he can do, but what heis; whether his zeal for
righteousness means that he will obey it; whether his hatred for what is false
aie tags adherence to the true. The test in this case failed. Jehu destroyed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OWAP. rx.





Baal-worship, for that was foreign. He clave to the calf-worship, for that was
the tradition of his fathers; and, therefore, the people went on in the down-
ward course. They sought after evil powers. They could not trust God.


VI. Elisha, the son of Shaphat, and Jehu, the son of Nimshi, did then carry
out together the words of the prophet. For these words depended upon no
mortal agency. They were the expressions of an eternal law which, in some
way or other, would fulfil itself. This is the great lesson which the Bible
teaches in every page. The righteous Will moves on steadily and irresistibly
towards its own end. The unrighteous will struggles with it, seems to prevail,
is broken in pieces; but, seeing that it is Will, and not a blind necessity, which
rules in the armies of Heaven and among the inhabitants of men, it is all-
important whether those who execute its decrees work in cheerful submission
to it, or, in blindness, with base and private designs. This was the great
question for the ministers of God’s purpose, whether they were prophets or
soliiers, to consider then. It is the great question for us now. Zeal is so
precious a giit, is so much wanted for the service of mankind, it is so rare,
that the evil spirit is certain to assault those who possess it; and, seeing that,
there are a multitude of kindly, compromising men, who represent all energetic
indignation against wrong as unnecessary, disturbing, unphilosophical, un-
christian, and those who believe that no form of falsehood is to be tolerated, but
to be abhorred, are stirred up by the indifference which others exhibit and boast,
of, to a kind of savageness and fury. They must, if they can, hasten on the
purpose of God, and themselves execute part of His wrath. Alas! what are
they striving for? ‘‘It is the driving of Jehu, for he driveth furiously.” This
is the best memorial that will remain of him who has let his zeal become his
master, when it was meant to be his servant, and who has counted it a pleasure,
instead of a hard necessity, todestroy. ‘‘O my father, the chariot of Israel, and
the horses thereof!’? These are the words which 2 king of Israel, of Jehu’s
house, spoke to Elisha as he lay sick and dying. He felt that a power was
passing out of the world which was greater than his and than that of all the kings
who had been before him, because it was a power that had, in the main, been con-
secrated to God, had been used in conformity with His mind, and, therefore, had
spread health and peace around it. Was it better to kill the seventy sons of
Ahab, or to bring up sons of the prophets? To be the executor of God’s ven-
geance on the land, or to show that He was the healer of its sicknesses? To
make clear that death is the certain wages of sin, or to affirm by acts and words
that there is one who raiseth the dead? Which mission was the nobler in the old
time? Which must be nobler for those that believe that God gave His only
begotten Son, not to condemn the world, but that the world through Him
might be saved ?—Condensed from F. D. Maurses.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-14. Years had rolled away
since Jehu’s meeting with Elijah in
the vineyard of Naboth. He was
now high in the favour of Ahab’s son,
as captain of the host in the Syrian
war. In that war of chariots and
horses he had acquired an art little
practised by the infantry of the
ancient Israelites. He was known
through the whole army and country
for driving his horses like one out of


his mind. The army which he com-
manded was at Ramoth-Gilead. That
was still the point round which the
interest of the Syrian war revolved.
The king himself had been present at
the siege, had been in personal danger,
and had returned home to Jezreel to
be cured of his wounds from the
arrows of the Syrian archers. It was
in his absence that a young man—said
by tradition to be the futurer pophet
493


CHAP. Ix,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


SS EE SE RR a SES


Jonah, son of the widow of Zarephath
—arrived at the camp withasmall flask
in his hand. His garments were girt
round him as of one travelling in haste,
and his appearance was wild and
excited as of a madman. From the
midst of the captains he singled out
Jehu. Once more there was a conse-
erated king of Israel. The oil of in-
auguration had been poured on the
head of Jehu. He was to go forth
‘‘the anointed of the Lord” to exter-
minate the house of Ahab. It was as
if a spark had been set to a train long
prepared. There was not a moment’s
hesitation. The officers tore off their
military cloaks and spread them under
his feet where he stood on the top of
the stairs leading down into the court.
As he stood on this extempore throne,
with no seat but the steps covered by
the carpeting of the square pieces of
cloth, they blew the well-known blast
of the ram’s horn which always ac-
companied the inauguration of a king
of Israel. From this moment the
course of Jehu is fixed. The destiny
long brooding over him—the design
perhaps raised in his own mind from
the day when he had first met Elijah
—is to be accomplished.—Stanley’s
Jewish Church.


Verses 1-10. The service of God
and the young. I. The service of
God is the highest service to which
youth can be consecrated. II. The
service of God teaches the young to
reverence and obey the aged good.
III. The service of God familiarises
the youthful mind with the procedures
of Divine justice and equity. IV.
The service of God employs youth in
enterprises involving great risk and
difficulty. V. The service of God
teaches youth to act with discretion,
rapidity, and decision.


Verse 1. Old Elisha hath neither
cottage nor foot of land, yet, sitting in
an obscure corner, he gives orders for
kingdoms, not by way of authority—
this usurpation had been no less proud
than unjust—but by way of message
from the God of kings. Even a mean
herald may go on a great errand. The

494


prophets of the gospel have nothing te
do but with spiritual kingdoms, te
beat down the kingdoms of sin and
Satan, to translate souls to the king-
dom of heaven. He that renewed
the life of the Shunammite’s son must
stoop to age: that block lies in his way
te Jehu. The aged prophet employs
a speedier messenger, who must also
gird up his loins for haste. No com-
mon pace will serve us when we go
on God’s message; the loss of minutes
may be unrecoverable. He is prodigal
of his success that is slow in his
execution.


Verse 8. How is it that of all the
kings of the ten tribes none was ever
anointed but Jehu? Is it that the God
who would not countenance the erec-
tion of that usurped throne would
countenance the alteration? Or is it
that by this visible testimony of
Divine ordination the courage of the
Israelitish captains might be raised up
to second the high and bold attempt
of him whom they saw destined from
heaven to rule ’—Bp. Hall.


Verses 4-10. The prophet disciple.
I. His mission. He is one of the
humblest in Samaria, a poor insignifi-
cant boy, and he carries a kingdom to
Ramoth! How great the Lord appears
in this incident, but also with what
cutting irony He meets all the arro-
gance of the self-made gods of earth!
Il. His obedience. He raises no ob-
jections, though the task is hard for
him. He is to go into a besieged city,
to go before the generals of the army,
to put his life and liberty at stake.
Yet he goes with no sword at his side ;
without a companion he ventures into
the army of the king to anoint another
to be king. All human scruples and
fears disappear before the duty of
obedience. In obedience he does not
fear, and lets not danger terrify him.
III. His fidelsty. He does no more
and no less than he isdemanded. He
has a great commission entrusted to
him, but he does not boast. He keeps
the secret, and departs as he came. He
does not care what may be thought of
him, or what people may say, whether


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





they think him a mad fellow or not.
So the apostles also carried the secrets
of God out into the wide world, and
had no other interest than that they
might be found true.—Lange.


Verse 5. The Divine message of
mercy. I. Is entrusted to the
earnest and faithful, notwithstanding
their youth. II. Is often delivered
under circumstances of difficulty and
peril. III. Is suited to all classes of
society. IV. Is personal and direct
in its application: ‘To thee, O cap-
tain!”


Verses 7-10. Oh, the sure, though
the patient justice of the Almighty !
Not only Ahab and Jezebel had been
bloody and idolatrous, but Israel was
drawn into the partnership of their
crimes: all these shall share in the
judgment. Elijah’s complaint in the
cave now receives this late answer.
Hazeal shall plague Israel, Jehu shall
plague the house of Ahab and Jezebel.
Elisha’s servant thus seconds Elisha’s
master. Ahab’s drooping under the
threat hath put off the judgment from
his own days; now it comes and
sweeps away his wife, his issue, and
falls heavy upon his subjects. Please
yourselves, O ye vain sinners! in the
slow pace of vengeance; it will be
neither less certain nor more easy for
the delay ; rather it were to pay for
that leisure in the extremity.—
Bp. Hall.

— The world of to-day will not
hear that ‘‘the Lord will take venge-
ance on His adversaries,’’ and declares
that this is only an Old Testament
notion, and that the Gospel knows
only one God, who is a God of love.
It is true that God does not seek
revenge, but he is a holy, and there-
fore a just God, who requites men as
they have deserved, and repays each
according to his conduct (Job xxxiv.,
ii.; Rom. ii. 6). A God without
vengeance, who cannot and will not
punish, is no God, but a divinity
fashioned from one’s thoughts. The
same gospel that teaches that God is
love, says also, “It is a fearful thing


to fall into the hands of the living


CHAP. 1x.





God,” and “Our God is a consuming
fire.” The same law which says that
God is an avenging God towards His
enemies, also says that ‘‘ He is merci-
ful and gracious, 1ong-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth.”


Verse 7. The Divine concern for
the martyrs. I. Sustains them in
times of trial and suffering. II. Ele-
vates them to sublime examples of
heroism and devotion. III. Punishes
their tormentors with terrible retribu-
tion.

— ‘The blood of thy servants.”
Listen ! He has indeed permitted them
to lay violent hands upon His servants,
but He has not overlooked or forgotten
it. Nothing cleaves more irresistibly
up through the clouds than the voice
of the blood of persecuted saints.
Nothing is better adapted to pour oil
upon the flames of the Divine wrath
against the godless than the sighs
which their cruelty forces from a
child of God. The blood of the saints
has often cried from earth to heaven,
and what judgments it has called
down! Let the persecutors of all
centuries appear and bear witness.
Nebuchadnezzer, Belshazzar, Herod,
Agrippa, Nero, Inquisitors of Spain,
the Louises cf France, Charles [X.—
bear witness all what a dangerous
thing it is to lay hands upon the
saints of the Most High! This is not
the only instance where God has raised
the destroying axe over a dynasty
which was morally rotten. He often
makes use of royal families which
have fallen into moral decay for the
discipline of nations, but the time
never fails to come when He passes
sentence of destruction upon them,
and brings speedy ruin upon the con-
demned. A family tree does not stand
firm in gilded parchments and regis-
ters: only when it is planted by the
waters which flow from the sanctuary
of God will it continue to flourish
vigorously.— Arumm.


Verse 10. Work for God. 1. Should
be entered upon with due preparation.
2. Should be done expeditiously. 3.
Should be left to work its own results

495


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Verse 11. ‘‘ Wherefore came this
mad fellow to thee?’”’ Religious zeal.
J. Obtains its purest inspirations from
the love of God and of His service.
II. Often leads the messenger of God
to adopt methode which are misunder-
stood by the world. III. Is regarded
by the unbelieving and unspiritual as
a species of insanity.

— So God’s prophets were ever
counted and called by the mad world,
always beside itself in point of salva-
tion (Jer. xxxix. 26; Hosea ix. 7;
Acts xxvi. 24; 2 Cor. v.13). These
profane ruffians could not name such
a one without a flout, because the
prophets declaimed against their
wickedness, and contemned _ the
world’s vanities which they so much
esteemed. But though their tongues
thus spake after the wicked guise of
it, miscalling the prophet’s innocency,
yet their desire to know what he said
and did, did abundantly show what
eredit they gave him secretly; and
after, they made him king whom that
fellow had anointed, to the hazard of
their own lives. God giveth a secret
authority to His despised servants, so
as they which hate thetr persons, yet
reverence their truth; even very
scorners cannot but believe them.—
Trupp.


Verse 12. If the generals, when
they heard that God had anointed
Jehu to be king, hastened, spread out
their garments, and shouted, ‘‘ Jehu is
king,” how much more should all
shout Hosanna to Him whom God hath
anointed with the Holy Ghost, and has
seated Him at His right hand in
heaven, who will rule until He has
subdued all enemies under his feet.


Verse 13. Their readiness in throw-
ing off their allegiance to Jehoram is
something remarkable. But it was
known that the house of Ahab was in
the present generation doomed to ex-
tinction. This was a thing people
were not likely to forget. It was
kuown that Elisha, who had sent this
man, was a commissioned prophet,
authorised to declare the will of the
Lord, who had reserved the right of

496


appointing whom he saw fit to the |
kingdom. And itis probable that the
military were dissatisfied with the rule
of a house so completely under the
influence of one bad woman, and the
errors and crimes of which had first -
and last brought so much discredit
upon the nation. Add to this, that in
the absence of a fixed succession to a
throne which so many aspiring ad-
venturers have already won, loyalty
sits but lightly upon the soldiery ;
and they are very prone to vote a
popular commander into the throne
when it becomes vacant, or even te
make it vacant for him.—Kvtio.


Verse 14. There are few persons in
the sacred history who have been so
variously judged as Jehu. To some
he is a stirrer up of rebellion and a
bloody despot ; others see in him a pure
and unimpeachable servant of the Lord.
Both equally err, for both depart alike
from what the sacred record declares,
and all depends, especially in the case
of Jehu, on allowing ourselves to be
led simply by the record. If we re-
strict ourselves to what is said in this
chapter, this much is certain, that he
did not make himself king. There is
not a word to justify the suspicion
that he plotted and conspired before
he was anointed king; on the con-
trary, the story shows clearly that the
prophetical calling to be king sur-
prised and astonished him, and also
that his fellow-commanders knew
nothing of it. He ought not, there-
fore, to be put in the same category
with Baasha, Zimri, Shallum, Mena-
kem, Pekah, and Hoshea, who, insti-
gated by ambition, without authority
and in self-will, took the royal power
into their hands. He was called to
be king by the prophet, by the name
of Jehovah. The explanation of the
selection of just this man as the instru-
ment for the destruction of the house
of Ahab, and for the uprooting of
idolatry, is found in the fact that at
that time there was scarcely a man
who united, as he did, all the necessary
qualifications. In the first place, Jehu
was a decided opponent of idolatry,
and of the abuses which were connected


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. Tk.


rc


with it (verse 22). He wasa man of
the greatest energy. Pushing onward
with boldness and enterprise, decided
and pitiless, he shrank back before no
difficulty (verses 20, 24, 32). More-
over, he did not lack prudence or wis-
dom (verses 11, 15, 18). Finally, he
stood high in the popular esteem as a
military leader. We see from the joy
with which his fellow-commanders
caught up his nomination and anoint-
ment, and from the readiness with
which they obeyed his commands, that
he enjoyed their fullest confidence
(verses 14-16). It is true that his
subsequent conduct is fierce and
soldier-like; that was the natural
product of his character, calling, and
education.— Lange.

— So much credit hath that mad
fellow with these gallants of Israel,
that upon his word they will presently
adventure their lives and change the
crown. God gives a secret authority
to His despised servants, so as they
which hate their person, yet reverence
their truth; even very scorners can-
not but believe them. If, when the
prophets of the Gospel tell us of a
spiritual kingdom, they be distrusted
of those which profess to observe


them, how shameful is the dispropor-
tion—how just shall their judgment
be!—Bp. Hall.


— Ifwesee here, and in the suce
ceeding chapters, the horrors of revolu-
tion on the one hand, none the less
do we see when and how revolution
becomes a terrible necessity. All
authority is a means, not anend. It
is established, recognised, and obeyed
because it serves those ends. Its
rights and privileges are correlative
with duties, obligations, and respousi-
bilities, viz., to accomplish the objects
for which it was created. Its claims
to obedience stand and fall with its
fidelity in fulfilling its trust. If it
fails in this, if it goes farther, and in
the pursuit of its selfish aims and the
gratification of its own self-will,
threatens to crush and ruin the very
interests it was created to serve, the
time comes when obedience ceases to
be a virtue, and becomes complicity in
acrime. Inthe absence of prophetical
authority to fix the time ani designate
the leaders for renouncing allegiance,
it is difficult to see who is to judge of
these, save the nation whose intereste
are at stake.—LHditor of Lange.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 15-87.


Tue TERRIBLE WorkK Or REVENGE.


I. Is entered upon with prudence and decision. 1. The avenger secures a

werful following. ‘If it be your minds, let none tell itin Jezreel” (verse 15).

his politic appeal to the army gained its purpose. The brother-officers of
Jehu were fully committed to the new order of things, and there was no
drawing back. With the army devoted to his cause, Jehu was prepared to
carry out his work of vengeance without faltering. It is folly to attempt any
enterprise involving risk and difficulty without the most careful and judicious
preparation. 2. Zhe avenger acts with promptness and energy (verses 16-19).
Jehu mounts his chariot and drives towards Jezreel, determined to be the first
to confront the deposed king. The messengers sent vut by Joram are detained
prisoners. Still uncertain of the purpose of Jehu, the two kings drive out of
the city to meet him, little dreaming of the fate that awaited them; and there
is surely something specially ominous in the fact, mentioned in the narrative
with such severe and artless simplicity, that they ‘‘ meet him in the portion of
Naboth the Jezreelite” (verse 21). The rapidity and decisiveness of Jehu’s
movements gave no opportunity to his victims to protect themselves. They
were at once placed in ai, power. The man of promptness and decision has
the advantage in every enterprise.


KK 497


OWAP, RX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


rr


II. Is committed to one who is every way fitted to carry it out. “The
driving is the driving of Jehu, for he driveth furiously ” (verse 20). In this
one reference we have the key to Jehu’s character, a man who having once
made up his mind toa certain course, will pursue it with a wild, reckless,
madcap energy, utterly indifferent toallsentiment and feeling. It was horrible
work that Jehu had todo. An ordinary man would have recoiled from it
with fear and loathing. Jehu was cautious, crafty, and perhaps slow in com-
mitting himself to a certain course of action; but having done so, he prosecuted
it with a hot, hasty, and unrelenting energy, unmoved either by pity or fear.
‘‘He did not shrink from difficulties, did not hesitate at harsh means of
accomplishing his purpose, did not feel pity in striking down those who stood
in his way, did not leave behind him anything that might, at a later time, rise
up to mar or overthrow his work. His isnot alovely character. It does not
present the amiable virtues—patience, pity, mercy, kindness. It is not 2
character to be imitated in modern civilised life; neither ought it to be
measured or judged by the standards of a society trained to peace and order,
fearful of revolution and encased in law. Inthe providence of God suchmen
are often raised up for great crises in church and state. The man is swallowed
up in the movement. His personal virtues and faults are lost sight of in the
stormy, tumultuous crises in which he lived. He was needed and was called ;
he responded and accomplished his calling well. That is his place in the
history, and that is the judgment on his career.”


III. Falls upon the leading representatives of the wickedness to be
punished (verses 22-35). Joram, Ahaziah, Jezebel—a royal trio—representa-
tives of the idolatrous curse that had blighted both Israel and Judah, and
brought down the judgment of heaven. Jezebel, whose end was so ignominious,
and which is described with such dramatic vigour, was at the rooo f the
nation’s apostasy, and her crimes hastened the catastrophe. Joram, though
taking his part in war, as his wound testified, appears in general ‘‘in the light
of an oriental monarch, indolent, careless, luxurious, fond of ease. His death
fulfilled a malediction upon his father. Ahaziah seems to have been one of
those weak men who float on in the direction which their education and family
traditions have given them. He followed the family traditions down to the
family ruin. The two kings appear to be to a great extent the victims of
the sins of their ancestors; and as Jezebel had controlled Ahab, we are led
back to her as the origin of all this individual, family, and national calamity.
She was one of those strong, bold, wicked women who have played such im-
portant roles in history. By Ahab’s marriage with this woman, the licentious-
ness of the worship of Baal and Astarte, the freedom of manners of the Phe-
nician court, the luxury and sensuality of the heathen nations, were imported
into Israel. It became her aim to override and destroy all that was peculiar
and national in Israel, but in so doing she was contravening all that belonged to
and sustained God’s plan for Israel in human history. She braved the con-
flict, and re-asserted it in her last hour; and she and her descendants went
down in the catastrophe” (ditor of Lange). The stroke of God’s vengeance
never misses its object, and never mistakes its victim. The leaders of iniquity
are sure to be smitten.


IV. Fulfils the Divine word with significant exactitude (verses 36, 37),
Fifteen years had passed away since Elijah prophesied— “The dogs shall eat
Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel” (1 Kings xxi. 23); and now the Divine word
is fulfilled with such precision that the body of the proud, luxurious Jezebel
is not recognizable—not a vestige is left buta few bones. ‘“ Though so great
@ woman iad birth, connexions, and alliances, she has not the honour of a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OBAP IX,





tomb. ‘There was not even a solitary stone to say, Here lies Jezebel / not even


a mound of earth to designate the place of her sepulture!


Judgment is God’s


strange work; but when he contends, how terrible are His judgments!”
Thrones totter and fall, but the word of the Lord abideth for ever.


Lessons:—1. The triumph of iniquity ss short-lived.
punish, but when he does so itis with terrible severity.


2. Jehovah ts slow te
3. The threatenings of God


should lead to repentance and reformation ; +f disregarded and defied, ruin 18 inovst-


able,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 15. Jehu is no less subtle
than valiant. He knew thatthe notice
of this unexpected change might work
a busy and dangerous resistance. He
therefore gives order that no messen-
ger of the news may anticipate his
personal execution, that so he might
surprise Jehoram in his palace of Jez-
reel, whether tending his late wounds,
or securely feasting his friends, and
dreaming of nothing less than dan-
ger. Secresy is the safest guard of
any design. Disclosed projects are
either frustrated, or made needlessly
difficult—Bp. Hall.


Verses 17-20.—The minister of
God’s word, a watchman. 1. He
occupies an elevated and conspicuous
position. 2. He keeps a vigilant look-
out. 38. He is quick to discern the
signs of the times. 4. He is faithful
in reporting what is good, and in
warning of coming danger. 5. He
has keen insight into character, and
the tendency of human conduct.


Verse 17. There was usually in
ancient times a watch-tower over
the royal residence, where a man was
always stationed, night and day, to
keep a good look-out in all directions
from which any sort of tidings might
be expected. What he beheld that
he deemed of any consequence, he
declared below in the courts of the
palace.

The Agamemnon of ischylus opens
with the soliloquy of such a watch-
man—


For ever thus? O keep me not, ye gods,
For ever thus, fixed in the lonely tower


Of Atreus’ Palace, from whose height I gase


BAS eee and weary, like a night-dog

sti

Fixed to my post; meanwhile the rolling year

Moves on, and I my wakeful vigils keep

By the cold star-light sheen of spangled
skies.


In the present case, the frequency
of reports from the seat of war, and
the king’s desire for intelligence,
naturally kept the attention of the
watchman much in that direction.—
Kitto.


Verse 20. Reckless drivers.
‘Like the driving of Jehu, for he
driveth furiously.” By the flash of
that one sentence, we discover Jehu’s
character. He came with such speed,
not merely because he had an errand
to do, but because he was urged on
by a headlong disposition, which had
won him the name of a reckless
driver, even among the watchmen.
The chariot plunges until you almost
expect the wheels to crash under it,
or some of the princely party to be
thrown out, or the horses to become
utterly unmanageable. But he always
goes so; and he becomes a type of
that class of persons to be found in
all the communities, who in worldly
and religious affairs may be styled
reckless drivers.

I. To this class belong all those
who conduct their worldly affairs in
a headlong way, without any regard
to prudence or righteousness. Many
a man sits in his pew on Sunday night,
and sings Rock of Ages, and rolls up
his eyes very piousiy, who, on coming
out at the close of the service, shuts
the pew-door and says, “ Good-bye
religion, I will be back next Sunday |”
A religion that does not work all the

499


&


CRAP, IX,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





week, as well as on Sunday, is no re-
ligion at all. There are to-day in our
midst, many of our best citizens who
have come from affluence into straight-
ened circumstances, because there
wasapartner in their firm, ora cashier
in their bank, or an agent represent-
ing their house, or one of the largest
ereditors, who, like Jehu, the son of
Nimshi, was a furious driver. Once
in a while a swindler is arrested, and
ifthe case be too notoriously flagrant,
the culprit is condemned, but the offi-
cials having him in charge must take
the express train, and get to Sing Sing
in briefest time, or the governor's par-
don gets there before him. We have
feet of lightning when we get on the
track of a woman who has stolen a
paper of pins, or a freezing man who
has abstracted a scuttle of coals; but
when we go out in pursuit of some
man who has struck down the inter-
ests of a hundred, and goes up along
the Hudson to build his mansion, the
whole city hangs on our skirts, crying,
“Don’t you hurt him!’ Ifa teams-
ter, passing down the street, dashes
heedlessly along and runs down a
child, the authorities catch him; but
for the reckless commercial drivers,
who stop not for the rights of others,
and who dash on to make their for-
tunes over the heads of innocence,
virtue, and religion—nochastisements.
When I see in the community men
with large incomes, but larger out-
goes, rushing into wildest undertak-
ings, their pockets filled with circulars
about gold in Canada, and lead in
Missouri, and fortunes everywhere,
launching out in expenditures to be
met by the thousands they expect to
make, with derision dashing across
the path of sober men, depending
upon their industry and honour for
success, I say, ‘‘ Here he comes, the
son of Nimshi, driving furiously.”

II. Now you may, in worldly
affairs, be cautious, true, honourable,
and exemplary; but all those who
are speeding towards eternity without
preparation—flying with the years,
and the months, and the weeks, and
the days, and the moments, and the

§00


seconds, towards an unalterable des-
tiny, yet uncertain as to where they
speed, are reckless drivers. What
would you think of a stage-driver
with six horses andtwenty passengers,
in the midnight, when it is so dark
that you cannot see your hand before
your face, dashing at full run over
bridges, and along by dangerous pre-
cipices? Such a man is prudent,
compared with one who, amid the .
perils of this life, dashes on towards
an unknown eternity, not knowing
where he goes. If, in driving, you
come to the forks of a road, and one
goes to the right, and the other to the
left, you stop and make enquiry as
to which road you ought to take. To-
night, you have come to the forks of
aroad. Oneleads to heaven, and the
other to hell. Which road will you
take? I see multitudes of people who
do not even stop at the forks to make
enquiry. The coursers behind which
they go are panting with the speed,
nostrils distended, foam dropping
from the bit and whitening the flanks,
but still urged on with lash, and shout,
and laughter; the reins undrawn, the
embankments unwatched, the speed
unnoticed. Alas, for the reckless
drivers! They may after awhile see
the peril and seize the reins, and lay
back with all their might, and put on
the brakes, and cry for help until the
hands are numb, and their eyes start
from their sockets, and the breath
stops, and the heart chills, as over the
rocks they plunge, courser and chariot
and horsemen tumbling in long re-
sounding crash of ruin.

Ill. Some are drawn along by
sinful pleasures—a wild team that ran
away with all who have persisted in
riding behind them. Once fully under
way, no sawing of the bit can stop
them. They start at every sudden
sight or sound, and where it needs a
slow step and great care, they go with
bound terrific. Their eyes are a-flame
with terrors, and their hoofsred with
the blood of men whose life they have
dashed out, and, what is worse, the
drivers scourge them into more furi-
ous speed. We come out and tell


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OvaP, ix.


Ce


them of dangers ahead, but with jeer
they passon. The wild team smoke
with the speed, and their flying feet
strike fire, and the rumbling of swift
wheels over rotten bridges that span
awful chasms is answered by the
rumbling of the heavens, “ Becausel
called and ye refused, and stretched
out my hands and no man regarded,
therefore I will laugh at your calam-
ity, and mock when your fearcometh!””
When this world gets full power over
a man, he might as well be dead—he
is dead! When Siseracame into the
house of Jael, she gave him some-
thing to drink, and got him asleep on
the floor. Then she took # peg from
the side of her tent, anda mallet,
and drove the peg through the brain
of Jae] into the floor. So the world
feeds a man, and when it has him
sound asleep, strikes his life out.
Perhaps there are some who say,
‘Would God I could stop my bad
practices! But I cannot stop. I
know that I am on the wrong road,
and that I have been a reckless driver;
but I try to rein in my swift appe-
tites, yet they will not heed.” I tell
such that there is an Almighty hand
which can pull back these wild racers.
He whose beck the stars answer, and
at whose mandate the chariots of
heaven come and go, is more than 4
master for these temptations. Help-
less yourself, and unable to guide
these wild coursers, give Jesus Christ
the reins ; mighty to save unto the
uttermost. Better stop now. Some
years ago near Princetown, New Jer-
sey, some young men were skating on
& pond around an air-hole, and the
ice began to breakin. Some of them
stopped, but a young man said, “‘ Il am
not afraid, give us one round more |!”
He swung nearly round, when the ice
broke, and not until next day was
his lifeless body found.—T7almage.

— Impetuosity of disposition. 1.
A valuable power when used in a
good cause. 2. Should be under con-
trol without being utterly crushed. 3.
Absolutely necessary to accomplish
certain results. 4. May hurry one
into dangerous excesses.


— Dilatory and careless people d.
not accomplish anything. Onl;
diligent and energetic persons succeed,
Test thyself to see what spirit moves
thee. The right motive power is the
Holy Spirit, which never guides to
folly. One may conduct spiritual
affairs and manage the concerns of the
kingdom of God with folly, want of
judgment, and heat (Rom x. 2).
Those only are children of God who
are moved by the spirit of God (Rom.
viii. 14).— Osiander.


Verses 21-37. A terrible day of
judgment. 1. It comes with awful
suddenness. 2. It brings destruction
to three notable monarchs when they
little expected. 3. It is irresistible,
and leaves no possible way of escape.
4. It fulfils and confirms the Divine
threatenings.


Verses 22, 28. Wicked tyrant !
What speakest thou of peace with
men, when thou hast thus long waged
war with the Almighty? That cursed
mother of thine hath nursed thee with
blood and trained thee up in abomin-
able idolatries. Thou art not more
hers than her sin is thine; thou art pol-
luted with her spiritual whoredomsand
enchanted with her hellish witchcrafts.
Now that just God, whom thou and
thy parents have so heinously despised,
sends thee by me this last message of
His vengeance, which, while he spake,
his hand is drawing up that deadly
arrow which shall cure the former
wounds with a worse. ‘Too late now
doth wretched Jehoram turn his
chariot and flee and ery, Treason, O
Ahaziah! There was treason before,
O Jehoram! Thy treason against
the majesty of God is now revenged by
the treason of Jehu against thee.—
Bp. Halt.


Verse 22. “Is it peace?” So it is
to-day also: a false peace is
demanded of those who are sent to
make known the stern truth, in order
that hoary evils may not be exposed.
Those who have not true peace,
generally want an aye shameful

1


OHAP. WZ.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





peace at any price (Ezek. xiii. 16).
Ask thyself first of all, “Is there
peace in thy heart?” and seek peace
from Him who is our peace (Eph. ii.
14). There can be no lasting peace
where there is apostasy from the
living God and His word; there
licentiousness, injustice, tyranny,
strife, and war, with all their atten-
dant miseries and horrors, must come.
Though His sword rests for a time,
yet it does not rest in its scabbard.—
Lange.


Verses 23-29. The death of the
kings of Israel and Judah. It was
sudden, unforeseen, and fell uponthem
in their security and blindness. The
proverb applies to Ahaziah: ‘“‘ Hunt
with the fox, and you will be hung
with him.” Refrain from bad com-
panions, if thou wouldst not be
punished with them. The one is
thrown upon Naboth’s field, and left
without a grave; the other is brought
indeed to the sepulchre of his fathers,
but what is the use of a_ royal
sepulchre to him who has lost his soul ?
—Wurt. Summ.


Verses 25, 26. The inflexible
exactitude of retribution. 1. Isnot
affected by the changes of time. 2.
Is the operation of a Divine law
which is startlingly minute in its
application. 38. Makes the place of
the sin the place of the punishment.
“‘T will requite thee in this plat.”
4. Should lead the evil-doer to pause
and think.

— How just are the judgments of
God! It wasin the field of Naboth
wherein Jehoram met with Jehu;
that very ground called to him for
blood. And now this new avenger
remembers that prophecy which he
heard out of the mouth of Elijah in
that very place, following the heels of
Ahab, and is careful to perform it.
Little did Jehu think, when he heard
that message of Elijah, that his hands
should act it. Now, as zealous of
accomplishing the word of a prophet,
he gives charge to Bidkar his captain
that the bleeding carcase of Jehoram

bua


should be cast upon that very plat of
Naboth. O Naboth’s blood well paid
for! Ahab’s blood is licked by dogs
in the very place where those dogs
licked Naboth’s.—Bp. Hall.


Verse 25. Jehu remembers, and in
substance repeats, the word of the
Lord by Elijah (1 Kings xxi. 19, 29),
and, conscious that he himself is the
minister of judgment, he fulfils the
word of the Lord. ‘ This,’’ says Kitto,
‘completes the first act of this awful
tragedy, which reads like the old
Greek dramas—but far less old than
this—of accomplished fate. The
appointed executer of the doom was
himself the witness of its being im-
posed. Allis complete.”


Verse 27. The danger of evil
associations. 1. Begets a distaste to
that which is good. 2. Leads to apos-
tasy from God, and to excesses of
wickedness at one time indignantly
deemed impossible. 3. Results in
suffering and premature death.


Verses 30-37. What does the
frightful end of Jezebel teach? 1.
The transitoriness and nothingness of
human might and glory. Jezebel
relies upon her might. Before her the
people tremble. She controlled and
directed three kings. She raged
against all who did not submit uncon-
ditionally to her will. Now she lies,
thrown down from her height, like
dung upon the field, so that no one
could say, “That is the great and
mighty queen Jezebel.” 2. The cer-
tainty of Divine retribution. Jezebel
was an enemy of the living God and of
His word. She seduced old and young
to apostasy. She persecuted all who
still held firmly to Jehovah. Her
terrible end proves that such a temper
is certainly punished. Her end has no
parallel in Israelitish history. It calls
aloud to all unto this day, ‘ Woe unto
him that buildeth his house b
unrighteousness’ (Jer. xxii. 13), and
it is a pledge of the truth of this asser-
tion, “‘ Only with thine eyes shalt thou
behold and see the reward of the
wick ed Ps, xci. 8).—Lange,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OMAP. Ix.





Verses 30-35. Jezebel: the igno-
minious fall of pride and beauty. 1.
The proud queen, defiant to the last,
decks herself with ornaments, not
hoping to captivate the impetuous Jehu
with the charms of her beauty, but to
awe him into submission by her impe-
rious assumption of royal state and
authority. 2. Her untamed, un-
daunted spirit is evident in the stinging
reproof she uttered to Jehu as soon as
he came within earshot, and which she
seemed almost to hiss between her
clenched teeth—‘‘ Had Zimri peace,
whoslewhis master?” This is her last
glory, to remind her enemy of the fate
of one who had, like him, usurped the
royal power, and killed his king, and,
as Kitto says, ‘‘to cast one bitter
burning word upon the head of the
destroyer, such as should haunt and
scorch him all his life.” But Jehu was
not the man to be intimidated by
words, though such fierce expressive
words, and from the lips of such a
woman. 8. She is instantly deserted
and betrayed by those she considered
her obsequious and obedient slaves.
At the word of command, which they
saw it was dangerous to disobey, her
decked and painted body is ignomini-
ously flung out of the window, dashed
to the ground, and the last spark of life
crushed out of it by the horses and
chariot of the furious driver, the blood
of the royal victim splashing against
the wall, and sprinkling the horses.
‘“‘ This is one of the most terribly vivid
and fearful pictures in all the annals
of tragedy.” 4. Her body is left to be
devoured by the pariah dogs, is denied
even common sepulture, and, in a short
time—quicker than it takes the king
to banquet—a few bones are all that is
left of the once imperious, queenly, but
cruel and idolatrous Jezebel.

—The tidings of the revolution
under Jehu, and of the death of Joram,
spread with the greatest rapidity
throughout Jezreel, and quickly
reached the ears of the haughty
Jezebel. One would suppose that, on
hearing it, she would have trembled
with terror, and gone to hide herself in
some dark recess of the palace ; but her
fierce, masculine, vindictive spirit


asserts its pre-eminence to the very
last, and if she has to perish with the
rest of Ahab’s house, she resolves to die
the regal mistress she had lived.—
Whedon.


Verse 30. How accurately this

description fits many of her sex. The
highest occupation they can con-
ceive of is to adorn themselves, to
conquer, and produce effects. Thou
fool! IfGod demands thy soul of
thee to-day, what shall all paint and
powder upon the face avail before Him
who tries the heart and the reins?
Can velvet and silk cover thine inner
stains (Isa. iii. 16)? There could be
no sterner reproof of vanity, pride, and
coquetry, and no more severe warning
to take to heart the apostle’s words
(1 Peter iii. 3) than the fate of
Jezebel. Lange.
Who would not have looked
that Jezebel, hearing of this bloody
end of her son and pursuit of her ally,
and the fearful proceedings of this
prosperous conspiracy, should have put
herself into sackcloth and ashes; and
now, finding no means either of defence
or escape, should have cast herself into
such a posture of humiliation as might
have moved the compassion of Jehu ?
Her proud heart could not suddenly
learn to stoop; rather she recollects
her high spirits, and, instead of
humbling her soul by repentance, and
addressing herself for an imminent
death, she paints her face, and, as one
that vainly hopes to daunt the courage
of an usurper by the sudden beams of
majesty, she looks out and thinks to
fright him with the challenge of a
traitor, whose either mercy or justice
could not be avoided. Extremity finds
us such as our peace leaves us. Our
last thoughts are spent upon that we
most care for. Those that have re-
garded their face more than their soul,
in their latter end are more taken up
with desire of seeming fair than being
happy. It is no marvel if a heart,
obdured by the custom of sin, shut up
gracelessly. Counterfeit beauty agrees
well with inward uncleanness.—By.
Halt.


Verse 31. Whocan be moreperverse
503


GHAP. Ix,


_HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





and pitiful than a man who boasts and
puts on airs in the very face of death,

and passes out of the world with abuse
and insults against God, instead of
begging for pity, and crying, “God
be merciful to me a sinner!” Jezebel,
who murdered the prophets, and Na-
' both, who revolted against the Lord of
heaven and earth, calls Jehu a
murderer and arebel. The blind and
stubborn human heart always finds in
others just those sins of which it is
itself guilty in a far higher degree.—
Lange.


Verse 34. This scene of hilarity and
cheer in the midst of such fearful
bloodshed makes one shudder. But
the minister of doom to Ahab’s guilty
house must need: be such a one as
Jehu. Tenderness and sympathy
would unfit the avenger of blood for
his work of death. Not till after his
feast does Jehu reflect that so much
royalty and greatness have fallen. He
had left the mangled corpse of the
once mighty Jezebel on the mourds
of offal outside the gate, a prey to the
dogs which in the East ever prowl
about such spots.— Whedon.


Verse 35. The vanity of human
greatness. I. Its external splendours
tade. II. Its wicked and ambitious
schemes are overthrown. III. Its
boasted and bewitching beauty is
represented at last by a few revolting
fragments.

— In illustration of this shocking
end of the corpse of Jezebel, it remains
to remark that the more than half-wild
street dogs of the Kast, living upon
their own resources, and without
owners, soon make a rapid clearance of
the flesh of dead bodies left exposed,
whether of human creatures or beasts.
An Eastern traveller, describing the
remains of some human bodies that had
been devoured by dogs, says: ‘‘ The
only portion of the several corpses 1
noticed that remained entire and un-
touched, were the bottoms of the feet,
and the insides of the hands; a preof
of the rooted antipathy the dog has to
rey upon the human hands and feet.”
br. apace supposes that the dogs


under Jezebel’s palace may have been
taught to devour the wretched victims
of her cruelty, in which case the
retribution would be remarkably
striking.

— The dogs have anticipated Jehu
in his purpose, and have given Jezebel
a living tomb, more ignoble than the
worst of the earth. Only the skull,
hands, and feet remain—the skull,
which was the roof of all her wicked ~
devices; the hands and feet, which
were the executioners—these shall
remain as the monuments of those
shameful exequies, that future times,
seeing these fragments of a body, might
say: ‘‘The dogs were worthy of the
rest.” Thus Jezebel is turned to dung
and dog’s meat, Elijah is verified,
Naboth is revenged, Jezreel is purged,
Jehu is zealous, and, in all, God is
just.— Bp. Hall.


Verses 36, 37. The infallibility
of the Divine word. 1. Seen in the
precision with which its threatenings
are fulfilled. 2. Isacknowledged and
declared by those who are called to
carry out its threats. 3. Is as precise
and full in the fulfilment of its promises
of blessing.

— The story of the end of Jezebel is
given with particular detail, because
therein the prophet’s threat was ful-
filled with especial frightfulness. As
the sin of the house, Ahab was
represented to the fullest extent in
Jezebel, the originator and patroness
of idolatry, so her terrible end forms
the crisis of the Divine punishment.
Ahaziah is fatally wounded, and dies
in a strange place. Joram falls dead,
pierced through the heart; but is
thrown upon the field of Naboth, and
not buriec. Jezebel is thrown down
from the window by her own attendants;
as she lies weltering in her own
blood, she is trodden “under foot by
horses, and the corpse lies unburied,
“like dung upon the fields.” She
appears here, in her last moments,
such as she had ever been—proud and
impudent—arrogant and domineer-
ing—defiant and insolent. She places
herself at the window, painted and
grandly dressed, and presumes upon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. x,


ee errs oe


her assumed majesty. Instead of
recognising in the judgment which is
falling upon her house the just recom-
pense for her misdeeds, instead of
sueing for grace, she, who had shed so
much innocent blood, and had exalted
herself against the God of Israel,
insults the instrument of the Divine
vengeance as a murderer and a traitor,
demands that he shall submit to her,
end threatens him, relying upon her


imagined power, with destruction if
he persists. Just here, judgment
overtakes her; her nearest attendants
forsake the hated queen, and hurl her
down from her position. She does not
reach the rest of the grave, and re-
mains, even in death, marked with
infamy for all time—a proof of the
truth of the words: “It isa fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living
God.” —Lango.








CHAPTER X.
THE FALL OF BAAL


CerrtoaL axp Eixetanatory Nores.—Verse 1. Seventy sons—t.c., descendants, sons
ndsons, &c. The rulers of Jezreel—“ Jezreel ” has no authoritative place in the text. The
xx. suggests ‘ Samaria,” and the Vulgate supplies civitatis ; other translators have changed


Sy (Jezreel) into Syn (Israel). Keil suggests that “the rulers of Jezreel” mean
2 gas oe a


“the supreme court officials ‘of the royal house of Ahab.” Them that brought up Ahab’s
children—These DIDNT are the guardians and educators of the royal princes of Ahab.
ane


Verse 2. This letter—lt is full of satire. Jehu is so sure he is possessor of the throne that he
tantalizes those he addresses by urging them to select a rival! Verse 2. Your master’s sons,


&c.—This “ master” meant Joram. Verse 6. He that was over the house—WN, perfect.


Verse 11. So Jehu slew all—How remarkable this honest record in God’s book! The
cunning dissembler wished to impress “all the people” (v. 9) with the idea that the chief men
in charge of Ahab’s house had conspired to murder these seventy descendants of Ahab, and
then had hypocrisy enough to quote Elijah’s prophecy as being fulfilled in the extirpation of
Ahab’s house. But neither his dissembling nor his religious cant hinders the plain record
that “Jehu slew all.” Verse 13. Brethren of Ahaziah—Rather, blood relations—step-
brothers, nephews, cousins—for Jehoram died when he was forty years old, and it ia incredible
that he could have forty-two sons. To salute the children of the king—i.c., as they in their
ignorance of Jehu’s conspiracy and murders supposed, Joram ; and the queen meant the queen-
mother, Jezebel. Verse 16. My zeal for the Lord—Ambitious blood-thirstiness ra\her; but
a villain knows how to use religious phrases, as the devil did (Matt. iv. 6). Verse 19. But
Jehu did it in subtilty—His subterfuge for the destruction of Baal’s priests and votaries
must not be regarded as proof of Jehu’s attachment and loyalty to Jehovah, but because he
knew these priests and prophets were adherents to Ahab’s dynasty, and would be unfriendly
to his own. He used religion for his own guilty ends, as verse 29 proves. Verse 22. Vest-
ments for all the worshippers of Baal—These priestly vestments were white robes, and
kept within the temple by the master of the wardrobe; as, indeed, the holy garments of the

riests of Israel were kept in the temple at Jerusalem. Verse 26. Images out of the house of

aal—See Noteon J Kings xiv. 28. Verse 27. A draught-house—A sink or filth-closet, in
order to cover ¢he scene with infamy and detestation. Verse 29. The golden calves that were
in Bethel—Political reasons led to the origin of calf-worship (1 Kings xii. 28), and doubt.
less for political reasons Jehu continued it. Verse 32. To cut Israel short—Instead of


nizp, to out off from, the Targum and others read Hp? to be enraged, wrath. In all


the coasts of Israel—i.e., along the entire frontier, the land beyond Jorden belonging to the
tribes of Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh.-W. H.. J. Por


@HAP. X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-17.
Yea, m Exxrourme Divine Jupomerrs.


I. Is not deficient in resources for accomplishing its purpose (verses 1-11)
‘Joram, Ahaziah, and Jezebel have fallen, but the Divine vengeance, which had
so long and patiently slumbered, will not have finished its work of retribution
till every member of Ahab’s guilty house is brought to judgment. Jezreel
was in the power of Jehu, and with his characteristic promptitude, he seeks to
get Samaria in his grasp, and wreak his vengeance on the children of Ahab
there. His artifice in writing to the rulers in Samaria to set up a child of
Ahab’s as king, and fight for him, is full of both irony and menace—of irony
because he knew how unlikely it was that they would champion the cause of
a fallen house, known to be doomed of God, and of menace, as it seemed to
involve a demand, either to surrender, or else prepare for the worst. Bahr
paraphrases it thus:—‘ I am king, but if ye, who have in your possession the
chariots and horses and arms, are desirous of placing a prince of the house of
Ahab on the throne, you thereby begin a war with me.” They submitted;
and it is a melancholy evidence of the utter demoralisation caused by the pre-
vailing idolatry, that the guardians, without the least show of defence, coolly
massacred the seventy sons of Ahab, many of them young and tender, who
had been committed to their care, and sent their heads to the blood-thirsty
Jehu. By this stratagem it would seem that the slaughter of these descend-
ants of Ahab was charged upon the rulers of Samaria, and that Jehu gained
his object without the odium of the guilt. Notso. Jehu takes the full responsi-
bility, and regards it as a fulfilment of the Divine word (verses 9-11). The
man fired with zeal to do a work which is so congenial to his own taste and
aims, knows how to make the best of his power and opportunities.


II. May excite a love of slaughter which tempts it to exceed the limits
of its original commission (verses 12-}4), Jehu moves on to Samaria te
take possession of the capital of his newly-acquired kingdom, and every stage
of his progress is marked with blood. When the thirst for blood is once
aroused, it is not readily slaked. ‘“ On the way he met a gay and gallant party
of princes from Judah, proceeding on a visit to the court of Israel, whom the
tidings of the revolution had not reached, so rapid had been Jehu’s movements,
These, in his still unslaked-thirst for blood, he ordered to be slain on the spot;
and it is quite possible that, like the early Moslem conquerors, he sincerely
thought that, while performing these and other atrocities, which were greatly
beyond his commission, though under cover of it, he was doing God service,
and that he suffered not himself to perceive that he was following to a greater
extent the ferocious instincts of his nature, or that sanguinary excitement
under which he laboured, combined with an undercurrent of selfish policy,
which taught him that, after such a beginning as he had made, the more com-
plete the riddance he accomplished of all the adherents of the house of Ahab—
whether from sympathy of principle, or from alliance of blood—the more
thoroughly the power of future reaction would be weakened. Jezebel’s question
—‘ Had Zimri peace when he slew his master?” rang constantly in his ears ;
and he was answering it after his hard fashion, which seemed to say: “ Zimri
had no peace, because he slew only his master; I slay more that I muy have
peace.” —(Kitto). The intoxication of slaughter is a dangerous symptom in
any nature, and will soon hurry one beyond the bounds of duty and justice.

606


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. %
a!


Ill. Finds sympathy and encouragement in those who fully believe in
the righteousness of the judgment (verses 15, 16). Here Jehu comes across
a figure who might have reminded him of Elijah himself. It was Jehonadab,
the son of Rechab—that is, the son of the “‘ Rider,” an Arab chief of the Ke-
nite tribe, who was the founder, or second founder, of one of those Nazarite
communities which had grown up in the kingdom of Israel, and which, in
this instance, combined a kind of monastic discipline with the manners of the
Bedouin race, from whom they were descended. It seems that he and Jehu
were already known to each other. The king knew the stern tenacity of
purpose that distinguished Jehonadab and his tribe. The hand was grasped
in a clasp which was not afterwards parted. The king lifted him up to the
edge of the chariot, apparently to whisper into his ear the first indication of
the religious revolution which he had determined to make with the poli-
tical revolution already accomplished. Side by side with the king, the
austere hermit satin the royal chariot ashe entered the capital of Samaria,
the warrior in his coat of mail, the ascetic in his haircloth (Stanley). Jehona-
dab had probably mourned over the prevailing idolatry, and hearing of what
Jehu had done and said, he recognised in him a minister of Jehovah, to exe-
cute judgment on the wicked house of Ahab, and went forth to meet him, and
declare that his heart was with him in this ministry of judgment. To have
the sympathy and approval of such a man would be no small advantage to
Jehu ; and one does not know how far Jehonabab restrained him from excesses
into which his impulsive nature might have driven him. It is an unspeakable
benefit to any cause when zeal is at once encouraged and controlled.
Even the fierce minister of Divine judgment is relieved when the terrible
responsibility of his action is shared by a congenial and sympathizing
companion.


IV. Persists in fully carrying out the Divine command (verse 17). Jehu
was commissioned to destroy the whole house of Ahab, and he rested not till
he had done in Samaria what he had done in Jezreel—put to death all the
members of the doomed house. It was customary in the East, from the earli-
est times, for the founder of a new dynasty to put to death, not only the dee
posed monarch, but also his descendants and relatives—especially all the males
—and we have several examples of this in these books of Kings (1 Kings xv.
29; xvi. 11; 2 Kings xxv. 7). Jehu, therefore, did not commit an uns
heard of crime, but followed, in this respect, the example of other founders of
new dynasties, though there was in his case the solemn charge and warrant
from Jehovah. A zealous nature is restless until the work committed to it is
finished, and finished with all fidelity of detail. The marvel is that such
strong, fiery spirits do not oftener exceed their commission and plunge into
deeper crimes. Naturalists tell us that, among birds and butterflies, the swift-
est, strongest flyers approach man much nearer than those with weaker wings,
feeling confident that they can dart away from any threatened danger ; and
this misplaced confidence brings them into the net of the collector. How
often has a confidence similarly inspired, and similarly misplaced, brought a
strong ardent nature to the very brink of some terrible excess. How few can
do just as much, and no more, than he is authorised to do!


Lessons :—1. It 18 no enviable office to be the executioner of Divine vengeance,
2. There are natures to whom the work of slaughter is congenial. 8. If 30 much
real is shown in carrying out the Divine judgments, with how much eagerness should
the Divine mercy be proclaimed | :

60


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





GEEM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-7. Ydolatry: its emascu-
lating and degrading tendency.
I. It has not the courage to defend the
interests of its best patron but trembles
with fear before the ambiguous threat
of a usurper (verses 1-4). II. It
makes a cowardly and humiliating
submission (verse 5). III. Without
even a remonstrance it surrenders its
guardianship over lives it had
pledged itself to protect and educate
(verse 6). IV. It does not hesitate to
commit thecruellest and most infamous
crimes (verse 7).

— Moral decline among the highest
ranks of a nation generally proceeds
from a corrupt court which sets the
fashion. As is the master, so is the
servant. He who has the power in
his hands always finds instruments
among the great and those of high
rank who shrink back from no demand
which is made upon them, however
much it may conflict with honour and
duty. Those who no longer fear God,
must fear men. Fear of men may
become the cause of the greatest
crimes.—Lange


Verse 1. The plentiful issue of
princes is no small assurance to the
people. Ahab had sons enough to
furnish the thrones of all the neigh-
bouring nations—to maintain the hopes
of succession to all times. How secure
did he think the perpetuation of his
posterity when he saw seventy sons
from his own loins. Neither was this
royal issue trusted either to weak
walls or to one roof; but to the strong
bulwarks of Samaria, and therein to the
several guards of the chief peers. It
was the wise care of their parents not
to have them obnoxious to the danger
of a common miscarriage, but to order
their separation, so asone may rescuethe
other from the peril of assault. Had
Ahab and Jezebel been as wise for their
souls as they were for their seed, both
had prospered.—Bp. Hall.

— Though a large family of chil-
dren is a blessing of God, yet we must
not rely upon them, or be self-willed
on that account, as if the family could

508


not die out; but we must fear God,
must not stain ourselves with sin
against our consciences, and must bring
up children in the fear of God, else
He will take them away, an\ destroy
the entire family.


Verse 5. Unconditional submis-
sion. I. Unjustifiable when it in-
volves a greater wrong than continued
resistance. II. Should not be made
till every other expedient is first
exhausted. III. Evidence of a weak
and cowardly spirit. IV. May involve
irreparable disgrace and ruin. V. Is
always legitimate when made to the
King of Heaven.

— Well may Jehu think—These
men which are thus disloyal to their
charge cannot be faithful to me; it is
their fear that draws them to this
observation. Were they not cowards,
they would not be traitors to their
princes, subjects to me. I may use
their hands, but I will not trust them.
It is a thankless obedience that is
grounded upon fear. ‘There can be no
true fidelity without love and rever-
ence. Neither is it other betwixt God
and us. If, out of a dread of hell, we
be officious, who shall thank us for
these respects to ourselves? — Bp. Hall.


Verses 6, 7. Here we have an ex-
ample of unfaithful tutors, governors,
and friends, who look in their actions
not to the interests of the orphans, but
to their own advantage, and let the
orphans and their cause be ruined. As
Jehu nevertheless destroyed them all,
so will the just God also bring upon
the heads of false friends and trustees
all the unfaithfulness which they
inflict upon orphans ; therefore let such
be warned against all violation of their
trust. How they probably promised
with all zeal to guard the life, the
honour, and the rights of these
princes. Now they themselves become
their murderers. Let no man trust
the golden words of him who fears man
more than he fears God. Unfaithful-
ness ruins those who practise it.
Though the crime which these men


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHP, X.


rr


perpetrated against their wards could
hardly occur in our day, yet instruc-
tors and guardians are not wanting
who become murderers of the souls of
their pupils, in that they mislead
them by example and precept into
apostasy from the living God, and dis-
belief in His holy word, instead of
educating them in the fear and admoni-
tion of the Lord. What is the worth


_ of all the friendship, favour, and trust


of this world? Itis like atree in soft,
loose ground, which, so long as thou
holdest it aright, covers thee pleasantly
with its shadow; but which, when the
storm roars through its top, and it is
overthrown, no longer takes account of
thee, but crushes thee iz its fall—
Lange.


Verse 7. No doubt among so many
sons of Ahab some had so demeaned
themselves that they had won zealous
professions of love from their guar-
dians. What tears, what entreaties,
what conjurations must here needs
have been! What have we done, O
ye peers of Israel, that we deserve
this bloody measure! We are the
sons of Ahab, therefore have yehitherto
professed to observe us. What change
isthis? Why should that which hath
hitherto kept you loyal now make you
cruel? Is this the reward of the long
peaceable government of our father?
Are these the trophies of Ahab’s
victories against Benhadad, Jehoram’s
against Hazael? Ifwe may not reign,
yet at least let us live; or, if we must
die, why will your hands be imbrued
in that blood which ye had wont to term
royal and sacred? Why will ye of
tutors turn murderers? All pleas are
in vain that are deafened with their
own fears. Perhaps these expostula-
tions might have fetched some dews of
pity from the eyes, and kisses from
the lips of these unfaithful tutors, but
zannot prevent the stroke of death.
These crocodiles weep upon those
whom they must kill; and if their own
sons had been in the place of Ahab’s,
doubtless they had been sacrificed to
the will of a usurper, to the parents’
safety. It is ill relying upon timorous
matures: upon every occasion


crazy reeds will break and run into
our hands. How worthy were Ahab
snd Jezebel of such friends! They
had been ever false to God; how should
men be true to them? They had sold
themselves to work wickedness, and
now they are requited with a merce-
nary fidelity. Fora few lines have
these men sold all the heads of Abub’s
posterity. Could ever the policy of
Jezebel have reached so far as to sus-
pect the possibility of extirpation of so
ample an issue, in one night, by the
a of her trustiest subjects ?—Bp.
all. .


Verse 8. This cutting off of heads
in collective masses, and making them
into heaps, is and has been frightfully
common in the East, and an Oriental
familiar with blood and beheading
from his cradle would read this por-
tion of Scripture with little, if any, of
the disgust and horror, and certainly
with none of the surprise, with which
it inspires us. After a battle, or a
massacre, or the rout of a band of
robbers, the heads are, as in the pre-
sent instance, heaped up pyramidally,
face outward, on each side the palace
gates; and the builder of this horrid
pile, if a man of taste and fancy,
usually reserves a picturesque head,
such as one with a fine long beard,
to form the crown of his handiwork.
Indeed, we nave it on credible autho-
rity, that these men make little scruple
of taking off the head of a bystander
for the purpose, if they find not one in
their stock equally becoming for the
apex of the pile. Nothing in the East
so much snocks a European as the
frightful cheapness of human life, and
with it of human heads. In Persia,
the king has not seldom been known
to express his displeasure at a town cv
village by demanding from it a pyra-
mid of heads of given dimensions.—
Kitto.


Verse 9. ‘Who slew all these?”
The terrible havoc of sin. I. The
fruitful source of suffering and misery.
II. The instigator of anarchy anda
confusion in the family, the court, the
nation, the universe. IIT. Provides
the ghastly harvests of death.

509


Gaap. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


pT


Verses 9,10. He wished the people
to understand that in this work of
blood, there were other ministers of
Divine judgment besides himself.
Most commentators explain these
words as the language of sarcasm or
irony, and suppose that Jehu either
intended to involve them in the odium
and guilt of this slaughter, or at least
to keep them in ignorance of the fact
that he had himself given orders for
their slaughter. But this is altogether
unnecessary and unauthorised by any-
thing that appears in the text.
Doubtless what Jehu had done to-
wards this massacre was well known
to all the people of Jezreel. He had,
indeed, in a certain sense, ordered it,
but yet insuch a way as to involve the
nobles, elders, and guardians in the
guilt as much ashimself. Their ready
and prompt obedience in beheading
these seventy persons was, perhaps,
hardly expected by Jehu; and when
he saw it, he at once began to feel that
he was comparatively guiltless of their
blood. Jehu wishes them to under-
stand that these massacres are no works
of private revenge, but a must signal
fulfilling of Jehovah’s word by the
prophet Elijah (1 King xxi. 19-29).
Strange that the man who so clearly
recognised his mission as a minister of
Divine judgment, utterly failed to see
that, by cleaving to the sins of Jero-
boam, he exposed himself to the same
judgment, and that sooner or later
Divine righteousness would ‘ avenge
the blood of Jezreel upon the house of
Jehu.” — Whedon.


Verse 10. The righteous judg-
ments of God. 1. May be wrought
out by the basest villanies of man.
2. Are brought about by persistence in
disobedience and sin. 38. Impress the
most obdurate with awe. 4. Should
lead to humiliation and repentance.


Verses 12-14. A _ thirst for
slaughter. 1. A dangerous appetite
to indulge. 2. May impel to unneces-


sary cruelty, 38. Is indifferent to the
number of its victims. 4. May be
used as an instrument for inflicting
deserved punishment,

610


Verse 15. The right state of the
heart. Whatever professions of kind-
ness and friendship we receive from
men, their whole value depends on
their agreement with the sentiment
of the heart. We admit this so
uniformly, that there is nothing so
detestable as insincerity. The most
friendly smiles, the most engaging
attentions, become the objects of
aversion when seen to be separated
from the heart. When the base tinsel,
which had given currency to the
counterfeit coin, is worn off, we cast
the piece away, notwithstanding the
correctness of Cwsar’s image and
superscription impressed on it, and
hold its utterer as a deceiver and cheat.
Nothing is so thoroughly contemptible
as hypocrisy, when once the mask falls
off. If we exact this sincerity from
each other—and this is what Jehu
required from Jehonadab—how much
more strictly may we not expect that
it should be required from us by the
all-seeing God! He claims the heart
in all its principlesand feelings. ‘‘ He
searches the heart, and tries the
reins.”” He regulates his present pro-
ceedings towards us by the state of
our heart, and by this will He judge us
at the last day.


I. If the state of our hearts be
right, then they will be right with
God. The greatest idea that can be
presented to our mind is that of God.
He is not a distant being, unconnected
with us, unrelated tous; and the state
of our hearts towards Him must always
be either right or wrong. Every
sentiment we cherish contains in it, as
to Him, some positive good or evil.

1. A heart truly right with God
tmplies that we venerate him. How
little of this is expressed, or even felt,
on earth! Yet in Heaven, where all
hearts are right, the seraphim veil
their faces, and all living beings fall
prostrate before His throne. When,


' therefore, we are conscious of His


presence, when we walk as under His
inspection, fear His displeasure more
than the frowns of the world, and,
bowing before His Majesty with
lowliness of mind, give unto Him the


oe


oY


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP, XK.


a EE EE eee


honour due unto His name, then only
are our hearts right with him. 2. A
heart truly right with God implies that
we entirely submit ourselves to him.
The very word ‘ God,” is a name of
dominion, and never be it forgotten
that He to whom it belongs has a
supreme will concerning us. There
cannot be a sadder spectacle than a
heart wrestling with its Maker’s will;
but when we recognise His will as
our only rule, when we keep this
before us as our supreme law, regarding
it as the light and guide of our conduct,
when we acknowledge His sovereignty
in providence, take our place in society
as He appoints, submit to His dispensa-
tions, and, even in the greatest affilic-
tions, even when nature agonizes,
meekly bow, like Him in the garden,
and say: ‘“‘ Not my will, but thine be
done,’”’ then is our heart right with
God. 3. A heart truly right with God
smplies that, by the cultivation of a devo-
tional spirit, we maintain a@ sacred
sntercourse with Him. Prayer and
praise are the great instruments of
the fellowship of our spirits with God,
and illapses of light, and love, and
moral power, are the returns which
the condescension of God makes to
them. Ever since created intelli-
gencies existed, to desire good from
God, to receive supplies of it from
Himself, to be devoutly grateful, and
to express their love—so far as it can
be expressed—in praises, has been the
Heaven of happy spirits. It is the
Heaven even of earth, the only one to
be enjoyed, and which all may enjoy.
How dead the heart which has no
intercourse with Heaven! True joy
is a stranger there, and all is darkness
and sin. Barren and unwatered, it
bears no fruit of either righteousness
or peace.


Il. If our hearts be right, they
are right with Christ. Tull this be
the case, the heart cannot even be
right with God. Some have at-
tempted, indeed, to produce a state of
mind, reverential, submissive, and
devotional, without respect to Christ ;
but the attempt has been vain, That
ear heart be right with Christ is the


foundation of all religion. 1. J¢ ¢8 se
when tt accepts His sacrifice as the only
ground on which to claim the remission
of sins. How many are there that are
not, in this respect, right with Christ !
One depends on his own virtues,
another on his benevolence and
charities ; and more still (for the
heart will rest its hopes somewhere)
upon some undefined, unscriptural
views of God’s mercy. Others, more
enlightened, it is true, but still
egregiously wrong, repose a general
trust in the merits of Christ; forgetting
that this trust is the personal specific
act of a broken and contrite heart,
which not only flees to that atoning
sacrifice, but, despairing of all other
help, eagerly embiaces this, A heart
right with Christ in this respect has
gone through the process of awaken-
ing, of arousing fears, of conviction of
utter helplessness, and then surrenders
its whole case to Christ, trusting solely
in the merit of his death, and the
power of his intercession; looking
through them alone, and looking now,
for the mercy of God into eternal life.
2. The heart ¢s not right with Christ
unless tt loves him. Considered ab-
stractedly, all would pronounce it a
thing monstrous, and almost a diabolical
act, not to love the Saviour, and yet,
gad as is this state of the heart, what can
be more common? He stands before
us arrayed in the perfection of virtue
and holiness, and yet his character
possesses no interest for us, as though
it had no form or comeliness that men
should desire Him as their example.
He exhibits the tenderest benevolence,
but what heart is moved by it, or
shows forth its praise? Men are under
an infinite obligation to Him, for He
died to save them, but this excites no
gratitude. He holds out to them the
blessings purchased by His blood, and
they spurn them for every trifle. What
a state of the heart is this? You see
that it is wrong, awfully wrong. Yes,
and it never can be right till it loves
Christ supremely. 3. When the heart
isvight with Christ, there ts an habitual
confidence in His intercession. Thatis
what is called the life of faith, or
living by faitb.and it is by this that
&3)


GuAP. x,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





the real is distinguished from the
nominal believer. Faith is not one
single act, but a constant reliance on
the Saviour’s mediation, as that which
alone stands between the extreme of
justice and ourselves, and by which
we are looking for all good, for the
supply of every want. Thus when the
heart is right with Him it rests notin
acknowledging His merit, but draws
its virtue frum heaven. It is not satis-
fied with acknowledging a fulness of
spiritual blessings to be in Him, but
derives them from Him through its
specific and habitual exercises.


III. If our hearts be right, they
are right with the church of Christ.
1. When the heart 18 in a right state,
the church ts avowed. There is the
church and the world—the one is
renounced, the other embraced. Bap-
tism is not of itself a sufficient avowal.
We shall unite ourselves to some por-
tion of the visible church, and so place
ourselves under its discipline. Where
this is not the case the heart is not
right. That which keeps us in the
world is some bad principle which we
will not renounce, some guilty shame
which we will not cast off, some sinful
association which we will not break,
some evil practice which we will not
amend. 2. Jés members are loved. A
new sentiment is now awakened, and
cherished in obedience to the com-
mandment of Scripture, ‘‘ Love one
another.” And this is holy charity.
There would be some peculiarities in
the opinions and practices of Jehona-
dab; yet Jehu says to him, “ Is thine
heart right, as my heart is with th
heart ? If it be, give me thine hand.”
3. When our heart 4s right with the
church, we feel we are identified with st.
We grieve at its failures. in its suc-
- cesses we rejoice. We say, with the
psalmist, If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,
may my right hand forget its cunning.”
We pray for its prosperity, and say,
‘Peace be within thy walls.” We
are willing to labour in any part
which the providence of God may
assign to us, if we may but promote
ite interests.

513


IV. If the heart be right, it will be
right with itself. There are strange
oppositions and divisions in the heart,
and this cannot be a right state of it.
There is opposition between conviction
and choice. Many know the good,
who choose it not, who make no effort
forits attainment. There is opposition
between will and power. To will is
indeed present with them, but how
to perform they find not. There is the
struggle between the flesh and the
spirit ; the counteraction of graces by
opposite evils. There is the stunted
growth. The seed is at least so far
choked, that there is no fruit unto
perfection. When it is thus with us,
the heart is manifestly wrong. When
it is right, it exerts an enlightened
sway over the whole man. All its
powers are in obedient order, all its
graces fruitful and abundant. 1.
Perhaps our heart 1s wrong. Let us
be thankful that we perceive this;
but be patient and persevering. Go
to the very depths of its error and
wrong. Heal not the wound slightly.
The case may be hard; but it is not a
hopeless one. 2. Perhaps tt isin part
right. For this be thankful ; but rest
not here. Many evils have already
given way. I see you laden with the
spoils of some conquered enemies,
more are nearly overthrown. O pursue
the fugitives; seek them in their caves,
and dens, and hiding-places. Be
determined on their final, their utter
extirpation. 8. Know and use the
means by whichthismay bs accomplished.
Exercise faith in the Saviour, live in
habitual watchfulness and self-denial,
“keeping the heart with all diligence,
for out of it are the issues of life.’
O lovely sight, not only to men and
angels, but to God also, even a heart
renewed, stamped with the Divine
image, warmed with the Divine life, and
sanctified by the Holy Spirit. It is
the temple of God, the glorious work-
manship of Christ; and He shall ex-
hibit it at the last day as the fruit of his
passion, and the monuments of his all-
subduing all-restoring grace. — R.
Watson.

— Jehonadab and Jehu: asymbol
1. Of war and peace. 2. Of the man


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


euaP, i


rr


af action and the man of contemplation.
8. Of zeal and prudence. 4. Of the
union of various gifts and graces in the
common service of God.

— Jehonadab is a type of faithful
adherence to the faith and the customs
of the fathers in the midst of an
apostate, wavering people. Decided
and firm faith, combined with a strict
and earnest life, compels respect even
from those who themselves follow
another course. Where there is agree-
ment in the highest and most impor-
tant interests, there one may find a
speedy and easy basis of intercourse,
whatever may be the difference of rank
or nationality. Jesus says to me and
thee, what Jehu said to Jehonadab—
If thine heart is right with mine, as
mine with thine, then come to me upon
my throne (Rev. ili. 21).—Zange.


Verse 16. Zeal for God. I. A
laudable and desirable impulse. II.
Should be used in exposing and
punishing wrong, and in promoting
that which is good. III. Should be
under the control of a heart right with
God.

— Why should Jehu so desire that
his zeal should be noted and noticed ?
Hypocrisy is very ostentatious.
Drones make more noise than bees,
though they make neither honey nor
wax. It is reported of Jokn Fox that
as he was going along London streets,
a@ woman of his acquaintance met with
him, and as they discoursed together
she pulled out a Bible, telling him she
‘was going to hear a sermon; where-
upon he said to her, If you will be
advised by me, go home again. But
said she, when shall I then go? To
whom he answered, When you tell
nobody of it.—Trapp.

— Zeal for the Lord is a great and


rare thing when itis pure. It forfeits
its reward, however, when it aims to
be seen. How many a one deceives
himself with his zeal for the Lord and
for His kingdom, when at the bottom
he is zealous only for himself, for his
own honour and fame, his own interest
and advantage.—Lange.

— Some have thought that this
was all pretended zeal and showy
hyprocrisy, but in verse 30 the Lord
commends Jehu for having done well,
and declares that his bloody work was
right in His eyes and according to the
feelings of His own heart. In other
things Jehu sinned, and it is not pre-
tended that all his measures and
motives in his work of doom had the
approval of God; but in executing
judgment on Ahab’s house his zeal
was praised, though it was not with-
out a selfish ambition, and perhaps
other elements of wickedness. But
we need not call Jehu a_ heartless
boaster and a murderous hypocrite.
Shall he be blamed as murderous and
cruel who obeys to the very letter
Jehovah’s positive command? If the
fall of the tower in Siloam were really
a Divine judgment on the eighteen
hapless victims whom it ground to
powder (Luke xiii. 4), need we charge
the tower with blood-guiltiness and
cruelty ? Sometimes, indeed, God
uses wicked hands to execute His
counsels, and holds them guilty for
their deeds (Acts ii. 23); but never
does He blame a minister of vengeance
for doing what His own word has
positively commanded him todo. Let
us beware how we curse und blame
what God has not blamed. There are
in our times too many shallow and
unbiblical attempts to ignore the
awful severities of Divine justice, as
revealed in God’s word.— Whedon.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 18-28.


Tue Pounisument or IpoLatry.


JExv’s thirst for blood is not yet satiated. There remains one more power
that menaces his peaceful and safe possession of the throne. The Baal-idolatry
was 80 closely interwoven with the fortunes and prestige of the dynasty of
Ahab, that Jehu must feel his crown insecure while that culius was allowed to


aL 613


GHAP. X. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS&.


predominate. He rapidly matures a scheme by which the priests and
worshippers of Baal shall be utterly exterminated, and the very name of the
great Phcenician deity degraded and made an abomination for ever. It was
a horrible conception. But Jehu was in the temper of mind, in the fever-flush
of slaughter, when’ such conceptions had nothing revolting in them. He had
shed too much blvod already to shrink fora moment from shedding more. He
was the more confirmed in his resolution, as he had the countenance and co-
operation of the God-fearing Jehonadab, who saw in this subtle plan the
necessary and deserved punishment of idolatry.


I. That the punishment of idolatry is in harmony with Divine law.
Judged in the light of Mosaic ethics, the destruction of idolaters was a righteous
and laudable work. The law commanded that the devotees of idolatry should
be punished with death (Deut. xiii. 1-15; xvii. 2-4; xviii. 20). There is
nothing clearer in the history before us than this—that all the calamities that
fell upon Ahab were in consequence of his idolatry. Two of the grandest
prophets of Old Testament times were sent to instruct and warn him and his
people. Their counsels and miracles were unheeded, and the chosen people
of God were in danger of being irredeemably lost in idolatry, and His gracious
purpose concerning the race of being frustrated or indefinitely postponed. As
a just punishment for disobedience and rejection of Jehovah, and in the wider
interests of the nation and of the world, the Baal-worship must be utterly
destroyed. In-this respect Jehu was the instrument of just and righteous
vengeance.


II. That the punishment of idolatry may be accomplished by false and
unjustifiable methods. Here we cannot but blame Jehu, and here the Old
Testament morality rebukes him. He interposed the cunning and plotting of
the military stategist into the carrying out of a righteous work. His Divine
commission doubtless authorised him to cut off the worshippers of Baal, but not
by guile. God praised his zeal in rooting out idolatry, but not his subélety.
His craft and guile on this occasion were in fearfulness equal to the duplicity
and baseness which prepared the way for the massacre of St. Bartholomew,
Truth never requires a lie. The end does not justify the means. It is unjusti-
fiable to do a right thing in a wrong way. And yet what a large class of
people there is in the world who do this! There is an evil that is damaging
society ; the more licence it has, the more it grows; it must be put down; let all
possible force be put into operation to crush it; irrespective of the rights and
feelings and opinions of others, root it out. It isthe right thing to do; butin
the majority of instances it is done inthe wrong way. ‘There’s a friend yonder
going wrong ; he has no longer the humility and zeal and power he used to
have; he must be remonstrated with. It is the right thing to do; but in
nine cases out of ten it is done in the wrong way, and more harm is done than
good. A rude, impulsive, unsympathetic spirit hurried Jehu into acts of un-
necessary severity and cruelty while he was seeking to do what was right, and
he has many imitators in that respect in modern times.


III. That the punishment of idolatry should nevertheless be thorough
and final. ‘Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel” (verse 28). In slaying the
priests and worshippers of Baal, the sword of Jehu completed the work which
Elijah began at the brook Kishon (1 Kings xviii. 40). The deep corruption
into which this idolatry had sunk the nation is evident in the fact that there
was not one man with spirit and bravery enough to dispute the usurpation of
Jehu, and in the cowardice and cruelty with which men of the highest rank
assisted in the murder of the king’s sons. It was time that a system that

$14


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, X.





could produce such utter moral degradation as this should be extinguished,
Jehu was at home in such work; it was everyway congenial to his instincts.
The images of Baal are shattered, the sacred citadel of Baal himself is invaded,
his colossal figure is broken in pieces, the massive temple is pulled down in
ruins, and the very site made a place of filth—a degradation which would
cover the name of Baal with everlasting infamy and reproach. Such must
be the fate of all that seeks to oppose and substitute itself for God. Evecy aga
of shams and unrealities has its Iconoclast who will shatter them in pieces.


The world should be wiser and better as it reads the history and fate of all
false systems.


Lessons :—1. Jehovah cannot tolerate a rival, 2, AN idolatries must perish.


3. In the midst of the deepest degeneracy God is preparing the instrument of tts
punishment,


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 18-28. Idolatry a national
curse. I. Demoralizes the people.
Il. Is hateful to Jehovah. III. Not
to be abolished by deceitful and un-
just methods. IV. Witnesses in its
destruction no greater enormities
than it generatesitself. V. Its com-
plete uprooting essential to national
growth and prosperity.

— In an objective light the slaying
of the servants of Baal was quite in
harmony with the law, and quite
legitimate on theocratic grounds ; but
the subjective motive which, irrespec-
tive of the artifice, influenced Jehu
was thoroughly selfish. As the priests
and prophets of Baal in the land of
Israel, with all their interests and
their whole existence, were bound up
with the dynasty of Ahab, they might
be dangerous to Jehu, if he did not,
from political considerations, earnestly
promote their objects; whereas by
their extermination he might hope to
bring to his side the whole of the
certainly very numerous party of the
earlier legally constituted worship of
Jehovah in Israel, and thereby give
stability to his throne. But that Jehu
used religion only as a means to an
end is proved by the circumstance
that he continued the worship of the
calves —Keil.

— A work which is in itself pure
and holy loses its value when it is ac-
complished by falsehood and dissimu-
lation. One cannot battle for the


truth with the weapons of falsehood.
What things one may do by outward
acts, and yet be internally a hypo-
crite! Jehu dissimulated in order to
circumvent the hypocrites and idola-
ters in himself. Jehu destroys the
worship of false gods by the sword,
and by external violence. He had
full justification for this in the law,
for under the old covenant idola-
try was the worm at the root of the
Israelitish nationality ; it was high
treason to the Israelitish state. Under
the new covenant, it is not permitted
to make use of fire and sword against
heresy and superstition. No other
weapon may here be used than that
of the Spirit—te., the word of God.
Christianity is not bound to any
people; as it was not brought into
the world by violence, so it cannot be
extended and nourished by the sword.
Even now, every evil power has the
right and the duty to proceed to ex-
treme measures against a cultus like
that of Baal, which is interwoven
with licentiousness and abominations.
—Lange.


Verses 18-21. What a dead pale-
ness was there now in the faces of
those few true-hearted Israelites that
looked for a happy restoration of the
religion of God! How could they
choose but think—Alas ! how are we
fallen irom our hopes! Is this the
change we looked for? Was it only

616


CHAP. X.





ambition that hath set this edge upon
the sword of Jehu? It was not the
person of Ahab that we disliked, but
the sins; if those must still succeed,
what have we gained? Woe be to
us, if only the author of our misery
be changed, not the eondition, not
the cause of our misery. On the
other side, what triumphs sounded
everywhere of the joyful Baalites!
What glorying of the truth of their
profession, because of their success!
What scorn of their dejected oppo-
sites! What promises to themselves
of a perpetuity of Baalism! How
did the dispersed priests of Baal now
flock together, and applaud each
other’s happiness, and magnify the
devotion of their new sovereign ?
Never had that idol so glorious a day
as this, for the pomp of his service.
Before, he was adored singly in
corners; now solemn sacrifices shall
be offered to him by all his clients, in
the great temple of the mother city of
Israel. I can commend the zeal of
Jehu; I cannot commend the fraud
of Jehu. We may come to our end
even by crooked ways. He that bade
him to smite for Him, did not bid him
to lie for Him. Falsehood, though it
be but tentative, is neither needful
nor approved by the God of truth.
If policy have allowed officious un-
truths, religion never.—Bp. Hall.


Verses 18, 19. Duplicity. 1.
Should be beneath the dignity of a
king. 2. Not allowable, even in the
execution of a righteous punishment.
8. All the more detestable when
under the mask of religious zeal.


Verse 19. That it was possible for
a large number of persons to be im-
posed upon by this pretence, after
what Jehu had done, painfully evinces
the extent of religious corruption in
Israel. Something may, however, be
allowed for the still imperfect know-
ledge of the transactions at Jezreel,
News travelled but slowly in those
days; and the men who had come
over with the king to Samaria—his
personal rapsaele® and guards—had

16


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: KINGS.


oy


perhaps been instructed not yet to dis-
close the full particulars of the great
tragedy at Jezreel.— Kitto.


Verses 20-22. The popularity of
religion no proof of its genuineness.
I. The court set the fashion in re-
ligion, and the people followed. II.
Whatever pleases the outer senses—
in ceremony or vestments—is sure to
be popular. If. A national holiday
soon gathers acrowd. IV. Acrowd
is little aware of the peril with which
it is sometimes threatened.


Verse 23. Sincerity in worship.
I. Should be encouraged by self-
scrutiny. II. Essential to spiritual
profit, III. Demanded by an all-
seeing God.


Verse 25. How is the tune now
changed! Whatshrieking was here !
What outcries!] What running from
one sword to the edge of another!
What scrambling up the walls and
pillars ! What climbing into the
windows! What vain endeavours to
escape that death which would not be
shunned |! Whether running, or
kneeling, or prostrate, they must die.
The first part of the sacrifice was
Baal’s, the latter is God’s; the blood
of beasts was offered in the one, of
men in the other. The shedding of
this was so much the more acceptable
to God, by how much these men were
more beasts than those they sacrificed.
Bp. Hail.


Verses 26-28. The glory of Baal
1. Discovered to be empty and decep-
tive. 2. Powerless to resist the fury
of righteous retribution. 8. Dragged
down to the most loathsome degrada-
tion.


Verse 28. So ended this great
revolution. The national worship of
Baal was thus in the northern king-
dom forever suppressed. For a short
time, through the very circumstances
which had destroyed it in Samaria,
it shot up afresh in Jerusalem. But
in Israel the whole kingdom and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





thurch returned to the condition in
which it was before the accession of
the house of Omri. The calf-worship
of Jeroboam was once more revived,
and in that imperfect form the true
religion once more became established.
— Stanley.

— If we attempt with all this light
given to us by the text to estimate
Jehu’s personal feelingin regard to this
revolution, we shall reach the follow-
ing conclusion—Jehu was a military
man to whoin the crown presented
itself as an object of earthly ambition
worth some effort. Supposing him
to have been by conviction an ad-
herent of the religion of Jehovah, the
call to him to put himself at the head
of a reaction in favour of the Jehovah-
religion, and the anointment to the
royal office by a prophet of Jehovah,
might move him to make the attempt.
The adherence of thearmy determined
him. When he had won his victory,
he carried out faithfully the policy to
which he was bound as leader of the
Jehovah-party. He put anend to the
worship of Baal. The crown, how-


political reward, and he took political
means to secure it. He slew all the
possible pretenders to the crown from
the house of Ahab, according to the
oriental custom in such cases, as a
means of securing himself on the
throne. He stopped short with his
religious reforms, and did not destroy
the golden calves. He left them for
the same political reasons for which
Jeroboam erected them—that the
northern kingdom might have its own
religious centres outside of Jerusalem.
He saw in the revolution principally
a gratification of his own ambition.
He was willing to be the instrument of
the overthrow of a wicked dynasty
and a corrupt religion, and he stopped
just where his personal interests were
in danger ot being impaired. It is
not strange that his contemporaries
rejoiced so much at the rescue of their
ancestral religion that they were
indifferent to the excesses by which
Jehu tried to establish his royal power,
nor that later and calmer judges, on
the contrary, raised his bloodshed
into prominence in judging of his


ever, was his reward. It was a  career.—Haitor of Lange.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 29-36.
Tae Imezerections or a Great Rerormina Work.


Tux fearless and energetic efforts of Jehu at the beginning of his reign, while
they filled many with dismay, excited in others the highest hopes. There
were the hidden ones, the secret worshippers of Jehovah, who mourned over
the degeneracy of the tives, and sighed and prayed for a brighter day to
dawn. It seemed as if their prayers were heard, and they recognised in the
man who had dealt such fierce and summary justice to the adherents of Baal,
one who would again establish the worship of Jehovah, and thus save the
nation from the whirlpool of ruin into which it was rapidly sinking. It was
therefore a bitter disappointment to all lovers of the truth when Jehu stayed
his reforming hand, and gave his public sanction to the calf-worship of
Jeroboam, putting back the nation to where it was ninety years before. ‘The
paragraph suggests the imperfections of a great reforming work.


I. That reform is imperfect when it does not thoroughly root out the evil
against which it is directed (verse 29). If the worship of the golden calves
was not so gross us that of Baal, still it was idolatry, and as such should have
been abolished. It was a standing insult to Jehovah, a violation of the Divine
law, anda source of moral enfeeblement to the people, weighing upon them
like chains of habit which are generally too small to be felt till they are too


strong tobe broken. It was an opportunity for Jehu to rid the oy once and


CHAP. X. HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: KINGS.


——__—_—_—————————


for ever of the terrible curse. The hand that struck down Baal could als
crush the calves of Dan and Bethel It was here the reformer failed; his
work was ineffectual because it lacked thoroughness. Half reforms are always
unsatisfactory. An admitted evil can be cured only by complete eradication.


Il. That reform is commendable as far as it goes (verse 30). 1. Jt has
the Divine approval. ‘‘The Lord said unto Jehu, thou hast done well in
executiug that which is right in mine eyes.” Every attempt at reformation
is encouraged by the Divine favour. It is this that sustains the courage of
the reformer in the midst of formidable difficulties. We may well hesitate tc
touch any work of reformation that has not the Divine sanction, and on whick,
we cannot ask the Divine blessing. Jehu was an instrument of Divine
vengeance on the house of Ahab, and was commended so far as he carried ou‘
his commission.


2. fthas the Divine reward, “ Thy children of the fourth generation shal!
ait on the throne of Israel.” This was a favour not vouchsafed to any othe
king of Israel since the division of the kingdom. Lange supposes that the
succession is limited to the fourth generation because Jehu still retained the
calf worship ; but we prefer the prima facie teaching of the text, which clearly
indicates a promise of reward, rather than a threat of limitation. God will
not be indebted to any man, nor shall those who do or suffer aught for Him
complain of a hard bargain. The final reward of the Christian victor will be
to share the throne and honours of his Lord (Rev. iii. 21).


II. That reform is imperfect when it is not personal and sincere (verse
81). ‘* Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel with
all his heart.” It was not with him so much a question of religion as of
politics. He was not anxious first to have his own heart right with God, and
to render sincere obedience to His law, as he was to secure a firm footing as
king, and to compel obedience to his authority. Jehu, as Kitto justly remarks,
‘“‘was one of those decisive, terrible, ambitious yet prudent, calculating,
passionless men whom God from time to time raises up to change the fate of
empires, and to execute His judgments on the earth. He boasted of his zeal
—Come and see my zeul for the Lord—but at the bottom, it was zeal for
Jehu. His zeal was great so long as it led to acts which squared with his own
interests, but it cooled marvellously when required to take a direction in his
judgment less favourable to them.” All true and permanent reformation
hegins with theindividual. If theheart be renewed, the whole man is reformed:


the heart right with God is the motive-force that effects all necessary outward
reformation.


IV. That reform is imperfect when it is not national and general (verses
82, 33). Had the nation been wholly delivered trom idolatry, neither Hazael
nor any other enemy would have been permitted to invade the kingdom and
harass the people. The national spirit was broken, its prestige dimmed, even
the love of fatherland was not strong enough to bind all the people together te
resist and repel invasion. In the latter part of Jehu's reign, Israel began to
suffer those fearful punishments of invasion and conquest from the North and
North East, which finally ended in the total captivity of the land. Jehu’s
name occurs on the Assyrian monuments among others who paid tribute to
the king of Assyria, and Rawlinson inclines to the opinion that from this
date both the Jewish and the Israelitish kings held their crowns as fiefs, de.
pendent on the will of the Assyrian monarch, with whom it formally lay te


Laas new prince in his kingdom (chap. xiv. 5). Partial and incom


HO™ILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP X,


ER ee


a reforms always leave elements of weakness and discord behind them.


Vhen a nation is united in acknowledging and


serving God, it is invincible:


\t is respected and feared by its enemics.


VY. That reform is imperfect when it is employed for selfish ends (verses


54-36). Jehu carried on the revolution,


and wrought out reforms with an


:ron hand, to serve his own purposes—that he might reign securely and peace-
fully—might aequirs faine and power—might establish his throne for years,
and be able tc teave his own son in unquestioned and undisturbed possession


of the kingdom.
cessors reigned seventy-six years.


He reigned longer than any of his predecessors, and his suc-
If his zeal and ambition were expended in


founding a royal dynasty, he gained his end; but that was all he did gain.
The nation was not permanently benefited, nor was it long arrested in its


downfall.
from selfish motives;


It destroys the dignity and efficacy of reform when it is carried on
and yet God can work out His just retribution upon


evil-doers through the violence and selfishness of human passions.


Lessons :—1. It is a solemn responsibility to be a public reformer. 2. Itts dis-


appointing and disastrous when reform is not radical.


3. Lvery step of reform in


the right direction is pleasing to God, and shall not go unrewarded.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 29-33. Jehu is a type of
those who show great zeal in tearing
down and destroying superstition and
false worship, but do nothing to build
up the faith, because they themselves
have no living faith, and do not walk
before God with all their hearts.
Jehu did indeed destroy idolatry, but
he did not touch the chief sin of
Israel, because he considered it the
chief support of his own authority.
So many a one renounces gross, ex-
ternal sins, but will not think of
denying himself, of sacrificing his own
interests, and of turning his heart to
the living God. He who remains
standing half-way goes backward in
spite of himself. Jehu would not
desist from the sins of Jeroboam
because he thought it would cost him
his crown, but on that very account
he lost one province after another.—
Lange.


Verse 29. The exigencies of
government, 1. Cannot ignore the
influence of religion upon a people.
2. Will sanction an imperfect religion
rather than lose power. 3. In danger
of placing politics and dynastic inter-
este above religious reformation.


Verse 30. Zachariah, of the fourth
generation, was slain by Shallum, and
thus was this word of the Lord ful-
filled (compare chap. xv. 12); and
thus, too, according to the prophecy
of Hosea (i. 4), did the Lord “avenge
the blood of Jezreel upon the house
of Jehu.” For when the minister of
Divine judgment himself turned to
idolatry, the very blood of his guilty
victims might well call for vengeance
on him for doing the same things for
which he had executed the Divine
judgment on them (Rom. ii. 1).—
Whedon.

— The strict impartiality of
Divine Justice. 1. Recognises and
commends what is good in the worst
characters. 2. Apportions to every
action its exact measure of reward.
3. Does not interfere with the exer-
cise of individual freedom.

— Jehu first receives praise for the
work which he has done, and after-
wards is denounced, in his posterity
at least, for the same action (compare
verse 30 and Hosea i. 4). The first
of these two points throws much light
upon the second. The defection of
Jehu showed that he had other ends
in view than the pleasing of God.

619


Oar, X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


re SE ET


Personal ambition had been at the
bottom of his heart, and he had des-
troyed that form of idolatry which was
identified with the house of Ahab.
But having achieved his end, he took
no heed to walk in the law of the
Lord. The vengeance which had
fallen upon Ahab’s house had been the
righteous retribution upon Ahab’s
sins; but the executioner gloated over
and rejoiced in his work. He had his
reward in the establishment of his
dynasty for four generations. What
was righteous in his spirit—his steadi-
ness of purpose and hatred of injustice
—all this God blessed. But the brutal
ferocity, the remorseless indifference
to agony and bloodshed, these evil
elements prevailed over the better,
and when the fire against Baal had
burnt itself out for want of fuel,
nought was left but dull ashes. His
zeal for righteousness did not turn
inwards and burn up his own sins.
When there was nothing left to des-
troy, his occupation was gone. The
same thirst for blood which had
marked him, passed down, a ghastly
bequeathment, to his children, and
brought the Divine curse upon them.
—The Bible Educator.


Verse 31. The seductive power
of unbelief. 1. Arrests and paralyzes
the efforts of the most zealous re-
formers. 2. Creates indifference to
the most sublime revelations of God’s
word. 38. Unfits the soul for the
highest spiritual experiences. 4. Leads
to the practice of the basest idolatry.

— It is an entire goodness that
God cares for. Perhaps, such is the
bounty of our God, a partial obedience
may be rewarded with a temporal
blessing, as Jehu’s severity to Ahab
shall carry the crown to his seed for
four generations; but we can never
have any comfortable assurance of an
eternal retribution if our hearts and
ways be not perfect with God. Woe
be to us, O God, if we be not all
thine! We cannot but everlastingly
depart from Thee, if we depart not
from every sin. Thou hast purged
our hearts from the Baal of our gross
idolatries. O clear us from the

20


golden calves of our petty corruptions,
also that Thou mayst take pleasure
in our uprightness, and we may
reap the sweet comforts of Thy glorious
remuneration !—Ap. Hall.


Verses 82, 38. National apostacy
from God. 1. Will be Divinely
punished. 2. Leaves the nation a
prey to violent enemies. 8. Brings
national loss and degradation.

— The reign of Jehu closed in
disaster. The Syrian invasion, from
combating which he had hastened on
becoming king, had been vigorously
pushed forward by Hazael, and was
now successful. The whole country
east of Jordan, comprising half of the
kingdom of Israel, was wrested away.
And this had been done with the
accompaniment of horrible cruelty on
the part of Hazael (2 Kings viii.
12,18). The reign of Jehu, there-
fore, was one of misery end calamity.
He was the first Israelite king, too,
who is recorded to have paid tribute
to the king of Assyria. But one fea-
ture of his reign we mast not forget.
While he stands before us the one
figure in the picture, red-handed and
remorseless, we might, at first sight,
take him as the embodiment of the
whole monarchy and people. But he
isnotso. There was another emissary
of God at work in the kingdom,
though his name does not appear, his
hand doubtless busy with healing and
binding up the broken places. Elisha,
the son of Shaphan, was he. Many
ths afterwards he lay dying, and

ehu’s grandson came to bid him fare-
well. ‘‘ My father,” cried the king,
‘the chariots of Israel and the horse-
men thereof;” that is, the defence
and protection of the kingdom art
thou, and thou art passing away.
Joash was hereby confessing the truth
that deeds of violence and oppression
like Jehu’s have no power, and leave
no advantage, but the Lord’s delight
is in them that fear Him and put their
trust in His mercy.—The Bible Edu-
cator.
The character of Jehu is not
difficult to understand, if we take it aa
a whole, and consider the general im-


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: KINGS.





pression left us by the Biblical ac-
count. He is exactly one of those
men whom we are compelled to recog-
nize, not for what is good or great in
themselves, but as instruments for
destroying evil and preparing the way
for good; such as Augustus Cesar at
Rome, Sultan Mahmond II. in Turkey,
or one closer at handin the revolutions
of our own time and neighbourhood.
A destiny, long kept in view by him-
self or others—inscrutable secresy and
reserve in carrying out his plans—a
union of cold, remorseless tenacity,
with occasional bursts of furious, way-
ward, almost fanatical zeal; this is
Jehu, as he is set before us in the
historical narrative, the worst type of
a son of Jacob, the ‘‘ supplanter,” as
he is called, without the noble and
princely qualities of Israel—the most
unlovely and the most coldly com-
mended of all the heroes of his country.
It is a striking instance of the gradu-
ally increasing light, even in the
Jewish dispensation, that in the wider
and more evangelical revelations of the
later prophets the commendation on
Jehu’sacts isrepealed. It is declared
through the voice of Hosea, that for the
blood even of Jezebel and Ahaziah an
account must be rendered; ‘I will
avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the
house of Jehu”? (Hoseai. 4). Their
blood, like-the blood which has been
shed againand again inthe convulsions
of nations and churches, was 4
righteous retribution, is at last exacted


by the just judgment which punishes
the wrong-doer, not only of one party
in the church or state, but of both,
And the accursed spot of the ancient
dynasty, the very title and site of
Jezreel, seemed to draw down upon
itself a kind of Divine compassion.
The innocent child of the prophet was
to bear the name of Jezreel, and “‘ the
vow” of Jehu’s house ‘was to be
broken. ... in the great “day of
Jezrecl”” (Hosea i. 4,5, 11). It is
the same touching thought of life
growing out of death which has so
often forced itself on those who have
seen the rich harvest springing up out
of a battlefield, that out of that time
and place of humiliation the name is
to go back to its original signification
as derived from the beauty and fertility
of the rich plain, and to become a
pledge of the revived beauty and rich-
ness of Israel. ‘I will hear and
answer the heavens, and they will
hear and answer the earth, and the
earth shall hear and answer, and the
wine and the oil of that fruitful plain,
and they shall hear and answer
Jezreel (that is, the seed of God), and
I will sow her unto me in the earth.”
And from this time the image seems
to have been continued as a propheti-
cal expression for sowing the blessings
of God, and the people of Israel, as it
were broadcast, as though the whole
of Palestine and the world were to
become, in a spiritual sense, one rich
plain of Jezreel.— Stanley.


CHAPTER XI,


THE USURPATION OF ATHALIAH IN JUDAH.


CairicaL anD EXPLANATO
She herself usurped the
already destroyed “‘ forty-two
&c.—Her father was king Je
sister Ahaziah were daughte
bedchamber—i.¢, not thes
for 80 NYA VIMD means. No one wo


Hid in the house of


throne ; and, to ensure her hold, slew all rival claimants.
” brethren or relations of Ahazish (x. 13). c
horam, but her mother was not the queen Athaliah ; she at
rs by another wife of Jehoram. Took Joash and hid him in the
leeping apartment, but the storeroom in which bedding was kept,
uld be supposed to occupy that storercom. Verse 3.


‘the Lord—After a temporary hiding in the storeroom, he was removed


ny Norzs.—Verse 1. Athaliah destroyed all the seed royal—


Jehu had
Verse 2, Jehosheba,
she and her


into one of the temple chambers, aud thus placed in greatest security under Jehoiada, tho high-


621


OHAF, XL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KING8.


er


priest’s care, Verse 4. And the seventh year Jehoiada sent, &. —There are numerous points
of difference between this account and its parallel in the Chronicles; but probably both accounts
are summarised records of a longer original account., Their divergences are not disagreements,
Verse 56. The watch of the king’s house—This 9 73;J JV’ must be, not the royal palace,
Fie) = =
but part of the temple buildings occupied by Joash, the young king, Verse 12. Gave him the
testimony—Presented to him the J) Vit, book of the law, as the rule of his personal con-
I A
duct and royal government, for “The Testimony ” (Exod. xxv. 21; xvi. 34) was the law for
rulers as well as for those ruled (Deut. xvii. 18, sg.). Verse 14, Athaliah cried, Treason!
Treason !—Josephus supplies the record that she went from her own palace attended by her
troops (uera THs iSlas orparias), but that these troops were prevented going with her into the
temple. Verse 16. And they laid hands on her—Though the Sept., Vulg., Luther, and
others take the words as the 4. V. gives them; yet the Chald., Syr., Kimchi, Maurer, and
others render 0)7" a Ww). They made for her two sides—i. ¢., they opened in ranks on
eT Er. ae

both sides for her to pass through, Verse 20, And all the people rejoiced—Because, with
Athaliah’s death, the accursed house of Ahab ceased, and in Jehoash’s person the royal house
of David was again established on the throne of Judah.—W. H. J.


——


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-8.
Tur DEsPERATION OF REVENGE.


I. Is mingled with an ungovernable ambition.—As soon as Athaliah
heard of the death of her son Ahaziah, and of the sanguinary policy pursued
by Jehu, she determined to be revenged, and she set about the work with all
the ferocity and unrelenting hardihood that characterised her mother Jezebel.
Her imperious Zidonian nature and love of power were gratified, as well as her
thirst for revenge. Through the path of vengeance she saw her way to a
throne. A savage nature is always a suspicious one, and Athaliah saw that
to make her power secure, her work of revenge must be thorough and complete.
Revenge is a mean, paltry feeling, and cannot be cherished long, except in
connection with selfish and ambitious schemes.


Il. Hesitates not to adopt the cruellest measures to attain its object.—
‘She arose and destroyed all the seed-royal (verse 1), This insatiable ogress,
this she-vampire, was so utterly insensible to all natural affection, or had
become so consummate a mistress in the art of dissembling and stifling emotion,
that, without a tear or a sob, she massacred her own grandchildren. She
revelled in bloodshed, and rejoiced to ‘‘ wade through slaughter to a
throne.” It was an evidence of her great capabilities and domineering
influence, or of the utter moral degeneracy of Judah, that she, a foreigner and
an idolater, should be allowed to reach supreme authority, and by such un-
naturally cruel methods. Ambition, rendered desperate by revenge, is reck-
less as to the means used to achieve its purpose.


III. Is unconsciously frustrated when its plans seem most completely
carried out (verse 2). Joash, theinfant son of Ahaziah, was snatched from
the general massacre, and hid in a room used for stowing away beds. Little
did Athaliah dream that that helpless infant was to be the instrument of her
fall. Revenge is ever a mistaken policy. The ancient poet tells us that
Nemesis was transformed by Jupiter into a goose, to point out the folly of
revenge. ‘‘ Suppose a mad dog bites me,” argues Feltham in his Resolves,
“ghall I be mad, and bite that dog again? If I kill him, it is not so much ta
help myself, as to keep others from harm. My interest is to seek a present
remedy, while, pursuing the cur, I may at once both lose my wit and my cure


@


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. <i,





if wasp sting me, I pursue not the winged insect through the air, but straight
apply to draw the venom forth.” The right of vengeance belongs to God
alone. To take the matter into our own hands we usurp His authority and
insult Mis righteous Majesty. In seeking to rectify a wrong, we inflict a
greater, and bring ruin and confusion upon ourselves. ‘ While we throw a
petty vengeance on the head of our offending brother, we boldly pull the
Almighty’s on our own.”


IV. Cannot give permanency to its triumphs. ‘He was hid six years.
And Athaliah did reign over the land” (verse 3). Only six years, and then—
the swift-fo.ted Nemesis— the bitterest of the immortals ”—overtook the
imperial murderess. Six years of tyrannising power, of regal display, of
cringing adulation on the part of her professed supporters, and then—a sudden
and ignominious downfall. Six years of patient waiting, of vigilant watching,
of careful preparation on the part of those who had to redress the wrong, and
then—the blow fell with crushing and decisive effect. Was it worth while to
sommit such horrible crimes for such brief, illusive, and equivocal results? It
does not pay to sin. The triumph snatched by the red hand of crime withered
‘a the grasp. The sceptre is transformed into an avenging sword, the crown


“ato a wreath of torture, and the throne into a tomb.


Lessons:—1. An ambitious spirit has great temptations todo wrong. 2. Revenge


xe blind to the consequences of its acts.
wetaliate, to suffer wrong than resent tt.


8, lt is God-like to forgive rather than


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-8. Queen Athaliah. 1.
Her wicked plans. Idolatrous and
fond of power, like her mother
Jezebel, she takesthe royal authority
into her own hands, in self-will and
contrary to right, and murders all the
mai{e seed, in order to put an end for
ever to the house of David. We see
here whither ambition and love of
rule may lead men. 2. The frustra-
tion of her plans. No one can tread
down him whom God sustains. Thus,
Pharaoh would have been glad to
destroy Israel ; Saul would have slain
Wavid; Herod the child Jesus.
‘they could not accomplish it. They
only injured themselves and perished,
»s Athaliah did.— Wurt. Summ.

— We have reached the eve of a
great revolution and counter revolu-
tion, which alone of all the events in
the history of the kingdom of Judah
possesses the dramatic interest belong-
ing to so many other parts of the
sacred story, and which is told witha
vividness of detail, implying its lasting
significance, and contrasting remark-


ably with the scanty outlines of the


earlier reigns. The friendly policy
of the tworoyal houses had culminatea
in the marriage of Jehoram, the son
of Jehoshaphat, with Athaliah, the
daughter of Ahab. In her, the fierce
determined energy which ran through
the Phoenician princes and princesses
of that generation—Jezebel, Dido,
Pygmalion—was fully developed.
Already in her husband’s reign the
worship of Baal was restored ; and
when the tidings reached Jerusalem
of the overthrow of her father’s
house, of the dreadful end of her
mother, and of the fall of her
ancestral religion in Samaria, instead
of daunting her resolute spirit, it
moved her to a still grander effort.
It was a critical moment for the house
of David. Once from a struggle
within the royal household itself, a
second time from an invasion of
Arabs, a third time from the revolu-
tion in the massacres of Jehu’s acces-
sion, the dynasty had been thinned
and thinned till all the outlying
branches of those vast polygamous
households had been reduced to the
533


%


@HaP. Xi.


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a Se


single family of Ahaziah. Ahaziah
himself had perished with his uncle
on the plain of Esdraeion, and now,
when Athaliah saw that Ahaziah was
acad, she arose and destroyed all the
seed royal. The whole race of David
seemed to be swept away. In the
general massacre of the princes one
doy, stin a babe in arms, had been
rescued by Jehosheba. He was
known as ‘‘the king’s son.” The
light of David was burnt down to its
socket, bur tnere it still flickered.
The stem ot Jesse was cut down
to the very roots; one tender shoot
was all that remained On him
rested the whole nope of carrying on
the lineage of Daviu.— Stanley.


Verse 1. When the corpse of her
son was brought to J erusalem—when
she heard how horribly her mother
and how treacherously her brother
had been slain—that her yon’s kindred
had been cut off at the pit of the
shearing house, and that tne wor-
shippers of Baal had been immolated
in Samaria— Athaliah caught the
strong contagion of blood-thirsviness
from the report of these doings. she
saw herself a stranger in a strange
land, an alien by birth and by religion,
without common sympathies between
herself and the people among whom
she occupiedso high aplace, and with-
out support from the remaining
members of the family to which she
had become allied. All the strong
ones weregone. What hindered that
she should herself seize the dropped
reigns of government, and guide the
fierce steeds of ruin which threatened
to whirl her to destruction? What
had she to expect from the spirit
which had gone abroad, and fromthe
ulterior designs of Jehu, unless she
entered upon a bold course of reaction
which might insure both her safety
and her greatness! There have been
those who deemed themselves com-
pelled to leap into a throne to save
themselves from utter ruin; and we
would fain believe this was the case
with Athaliah.— Kitto.

— Such another imperious woman

§24


was Semiramis, Queen of Assyria;
Irene, empress of Constantinople and
mother of Constantinus Copronymus,
whose eyes she put out to make him
incapable of the empire, that she might
reign alone (vide “ Gibbon’s Roman
Empire,” ch. xlvii.); and Brumchildis,
queen of France, who is said to have
been the death of ten princes of the
blood, and was herself afterwards put
toacruel death. But the likest in
cruelty to Athaliah was Laodice, the
wife of Ariarathes, king of Cappa-
docia, who, her husband being dead,
seized upon the government, raged
cruelly against both nobility and
commons, whom she caused to be
murdered; poisoned six of her own
sons that she might keep the kingdom
more securely ; only one little one
escaped her fury, whom the people
at last advanced to the crown, and
slew her.— Trapp. ;

— Jehoshaphat’s marriage of his son
with a daughter of the house of Ahab,
although he brought it about in a good
intention, produced the result that
Athaliah ruled over Judah, and
brought the dynasty of David to the
brink of ruin. So many a quiet,
humble, God-fearing family has been
brought into calamities, affecting both
body and soul, by a thoughtless
marriage. The hope that those who
are brought up by godless parents
will themselves reform and turn to
the fear of God has very slight foun-
dation.—Lange.

Verses 2,3. Stolen from death.
Grandmothers are more lenient with
their children’s children than they
were with their own. At forty years
of age, if discipline be necessary,
chastisement is used; but at seventy,
the grandmother, looking: upon the
misbehaviour of the grandchild, is
apologetic, and disposed to substitute
confectionary for whip. There is
nothing more beautiful than this
mellowing of old age toward child-
hood. But here, we have a contrast.
It is old Athaliah, the queenly
murderess. She ought to have been
honourable. Her father was a king;
her husband was a king; her son was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. <2,





aking. And yet we find her plotting
for the extermination of the entire
royal family, including her own grand-
children. But while the ivory floors
of the palace run with carnage, and
the whole land is under the shadow of
a great horror, a fleet-footed woman,
a clergyman’s wife, Jehosheba by
name, stealthily approaches the
imperial nursery, seizes upon the
grandchild that had somehow as yet
escaped massacre, wraps it up
tenderly but in haste, flies down the
palace stairs, her heart in her throat
lest she be discovered in this Christian
abducticn. With this youthful prize
she presses into the room of the
ancient temple, the church of olden
time, unwraps the young king, and
puts him down, sound asleep as he is,
and unconscious of the peril that has
been threatened; and there for six
years he is secreted in that church
apartment. Meanwhile old Athaliah
smacks her lips with satisfaction, and
thinks that all the royal family are
dead.

I. The first thought is that the exter-
mination of righteousness in an impossi-
bility. When a woman is good, she
is aptto be very good; and when she
is bad, she is apt to be very bad, and
this Athaliah was one of the latter
sort. She would exterminate the
last scion of the house of David,
through whom Jesus was to come.
She folds her hands, and says: The
work is done—is completely done. Is
it? In the swaddling-clothes of that
church apartment are wrapped the
cause of God and the cause of good
government. That isthe scion of the
house of David; it is Joash, the
religious reformer; it is Joash, the
friend of God; it is Joash, the
demolisher of Baalitish idolatry.
Rock him tenderly; nurse him gently.
Athaliah, you may kill all the other
children, but you cannot kill him.
Eterna] defences are thrownall around
him, and this clergyman’s wife,
Jehosheba, will snatch him up, will
hide him for six years, and at the end
of that time he will come forth for
your dethronement and obliteration.


Just as poor a botch does the world
always make of extinguishing
righteousness. Just at the time when
they thought they had slain all the
royal family of Jesus, some Joash
would spring up and take the throne
of power. Infidelity says: “ Dll just
exterminate the Bible,” and the
Scriptures were thrown into the street
for the mob to trample on, and they
were piled up in the public squares
and set on tire, and mountains of
indignant contempt were hurled on
them, and learned universities decreed
the Bible out of existence. If there
should come a time of persecution in
which all the known Bibles of the
earth should be destroyed—all these
lamps of life that blaze in our pulpits
andin our families extinguished—in
the very day that infidelity and sin
should be holding jubilee over the
universal extinction, there shall be a
secreted copy of the Bible; and this
Joash of eterna] literature would
come out and come up and take the
throne, and the Athaliah of infidelity
and persecution would fly out of the
back door of the palace, and drop her
miserable carcase under the hoofs of
the horses of the king’s stables.
You cannot exterminate Christianity.
You cannot kill Joash.

II. The second thought is: That
there are opportunities in which we may
save royal life. You know that pro-
fane history is replete with stories of
strangled monarchs and of young
princes who have been put out of the
way. Here is the story of a young
king saved. Jehosheba, you hold in
your arms the cause of God and good
government. Fail, and he is slain;
succeed, and you turn the tide of the
world’s history in the right direction.
It seems as if between that young
king and his assassins there is nothing
but the frail arm of a woman. But
why should we spend our time in
praising this bravery of expedition,
when God asks the same thing of you
and me? All around us are the
imperilled children of a great king.
They are born of Almighty parentage,
and will come to a throne or a crown

625


GHAP, xz.


* HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





if permitted. But sin, the old
Athalah, goes forth to the massacre.
There are sleeping in your cradles by
night, there are playing in your
nurseries by day, imperial souls wait-
ing for dominion, and whichever side
the cradle they get out will decide
the destiny of empires. For each one
of those children sin and holiness
contend—Athaliah on the one side,
Jehosheba on the other. Jehosheba
knew right well that unless that day
the young king was rescued, he would
never be rescued at all. The reason
we don’t reclaim all our children from
worldliness is because we begin too
late. Parents wait until their children
lie before they teach them the value
of truth. They wait until their
children swear before they teach them
the importance of righteous conversa-
tion. They wait until their children
are all wrapped up in this world
before they tell them of a better
world. May God arm us all for this
work of snatching royal souls from
death to coronation. Can you
imagine any sublimer work than this
soul saving ?

Ill. The third thought is: That the
church of God is a good hiding place.
Would God that we were all as wise
as Jehosheba, and knew that the
church of God is the best hiding-
place. Perhaps our parents took us
there in early days; they snatched
us away from the world and hid us
behind the baptismal font, and amid
the bibles and the psalm books. Oh,
glorious enclosure! How few of us
appreciate the fact that the church of
God is a hiding-place! There are
many people who put the church at
so low a mark that they begrudge it
everything, even the few dollars they
give towards it. They make no
sacrifice. If your children are to
come up to lives of virtue and happi-
ness, they will come up under the
shadow of the church. If the church
does not get them, the world will.
Ah! when you pass away—and it
will not be long before you do—it will
be a satisfaction to see your children
tn parities society. You want to

526


have them sitting at the holy sacra-
ments. You want them mingling in
Christian associations. You would
like to have them die in the sacred
precincts! Oh! church of God, gate
of heaven, let me gothrough it! All
other institutions are going to fail.
Jay Cooke’s banking institution went
down, Duncan, Sherman, and Co.
went down, and all earthly institutions
will perish; but the church of God,
its foundation is the ** Rock of Ages,”
its charter is for everlasting years, ita
keys are held by the universal pro-
prietor, its dividend is heaven, its
president is God. God grant that
all this audience, the youngest, the
eldest, the worst, the best, may find
their.safe and glorious hiding-place.
where Joash found it, in the temple.—
(Talmage in C. W. P.)


— OGod! how worthy of wonder
are thy just and merciful dispensa-
tions, in that thou sufferest the seed
of good Jehoshaphat to be destroyed
by her hand in whose aflinity he
offended, and yet savest one branch of
this stock of Jehoshaphat for the sake
of sofaithful aprogenitor!—Bp. Hall.


Verse 2. The great agents of the


world’s reformation. 1. Are pre-
pared in secret. 2. May depend
upon a single life. 3. Cannot be


destroyed by the hatred and cruelty
of the wicked. 4. Will inevitably
come to the front


— The perils of a good move-
ment. 1. May appear to be extinct
when its reviving force is but in
hiding. 2. Its hopes may be sus-
pended on a frail infant life. 8. I,
is opposed with unrelenting cruelty.
4. It is unexpectedly befriended in
its greatest extremity.


— We have an instance in Jeho-
sheba how, even in the midst of ged-
lessness in a family, any one who will,
can make an exception. Jehosheba
stole him. That was not stealing
the child, but saving him. What can
a woman do better and nobler than
to save an infant from danger of
soul and body, and take him under


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. XI,


her protection for the sake of God
and his promises ?—Lange,


Verse 3. As mother of the king she
had great power, high influence, and
many dependants, which rendered her,
in default of a king and of a capable
xeir to the throne, the most powerful
person in the land. She was thus
enabled to accomplish all her objects ;
and Judah beheld the strange sight
of a woman, and that woman a
foreigner, seated upon the throne of
David. Undersuchauspices, idolatry
became rampantin Judah. It would
seem that nothing had been gained by
the expression of idolatry in Israel ;
the same thing existed still, the place
only having been changed, just as the
piece of wood which disappears for a
moment under the water comes up
again a little way off. No doubt, the


strengthened by large accessions of
fugitives who stole away from Israel.
—Kitto.

— When thegodless appear to have
succeeded in the attainment of their
objects, and believe that they have
conquered, the very moment of their
victory is the unperceived commence-
ment of their ruin. The cross of
Christ was the victory of His enemies,
but this very victory was what
brought about their total defeat.—
Krummacher.

— Mischief sometimes fails of
those appointments wherein it thinks
to have made the surest work. God
laughs in Heaven at the plots of
tyrants, and befools them in their
deepest projects. He had said to
David—* Of the fruit of thy body will
I set upon thy seat.” In vain shall
earth and hell conspire to frustrate it.


cause of the Baal-worship was —Sp. Hail.


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 4-16.


THe RestToRATION or Rea@at anp Nationa Riauts.


The coronation of the youthful Joash was not a revolutionary act, but the
just and legal restoration of a right that had been cruelly wrested from him.
Athaliah was the revolutionary, and the wrong her usurpation had inflicted
sank deep into the national conscience. The usurper was hated while she was
feared, and the ease with which her overthrow was accomplished showed the
slight hold she had on the popular affection. There was none who hed the
courage or the disposition to defend her. From this paragraph we learn Zhat
the restoration of regal and national rights—

I. Is often the work of one capable and resolute mind. Jehoiada, the
high priest, was in every way a remarkable man for his time. He was
evidently not influenced by selfish and ambitious motives, or he might have
aimed to raise his own wife Jehosheba to the throne, who, as the sister of
Ahaziah, had certainly a better and stronger claim than Athaliah. But aa
‘the servant of Jehovah, he was more concerned to carry out the Divine pur-
pose ; and he was no doubt strengthened in his resolve by the counsels and
exhortations of the prophets of the time. He showed great shrewdness and
capacity in the way in which he managed every detail in the restoration of
the line of David to the throne of Judah. 1. He knew the right time to act.
‘The seventh year” (verse 4). He had narrowly watched the course of
events, he carefully estimated the influence of Athaliah and the true feeling of
the nation, and had sufficient reasons why he should not act before or after the
period he fixed upon. It may seem to us that, as the king was but a child, a
few years either way could make but little difference. But Jehoiada was a
man ‘‘who had understanding of the times, te know what Israel ought
to do” (1 Chron. xii. 82). In all great national movements Ae wisdom


CHAP. XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


(eee


and insight are needed in order not unduly to precipitate or delay the right
moment to act. Many a great battle has been lost by not knowing when to
attack, or when to wait. 2%. He wins over the leading representatives of the nation
(verse 4). He consults all classes—civil, military, and ecclesiastical—and
when the day of trial comes, he is surrounded and sustained by an enthusi-
astic and united people. He succeeded in convincing the national conscience
of the existence of a great wrong, and the people rallied round him to seek
its redress. ‘ Men’s hearts,” says Carlyle, ‘ought not be set against one
another, but set with one another, and all against the evil thing only.” 3. He
makes elaborate provision against possible defeat (verses 5-11). He took ad-
vantage of a public and solemn festival, when a great number might assemble
in the neighbourhood of the temple without suspicion; he secured two relays
of Levites within the temple; he transformed the priests into soldiers, and
furnished them with weapons that David had deposited in the temple years
before, little dreaming that they would be used to defend his throne under
such circumstances ; and he surrounded the boy-king with a strong bodyguard.


“When any great designs thou dost intend,
Think on the means, the manner, and the end.”


The prudence and foresight of Jehoiada not only indicated his ability, but
ensured success. A great man cannot be more nobly employed than when he
is planning the best means to promote the prosperity and elevation of his own
eountry. ©

II. Ts accomplished with becoming ceremonies, and attended with demon-
strations of public joy (verse 12). 1. Zhere was the coronation. “He put
the crown upon him.” The kings of Judah generally succeeded each other
with little, if any ceremony, the solemn inauguration of the founder of the
dynasty being usually considered sufficient for his descendants. The only
kings whose accession was attended with ceremonial observances were Saul,
the first king; David, the first of his line ; Solomon, who had an elder
brother aspiring to the crown; and now Joash, in whose person the broken
line was restored. By this it is seen that the coronation was rather an excep-
tional than a customary ceromony, resorted to only when peculiar circumstances
seemed to require the solemn public recognition which it involved (Kitéo).
2. There was the solemn anointing. ‘‘They made him king and anointed him.”
There is nothing in the law respecting the anointing of kings. It speaks
only of high priests ; but as Samuel anointed the two first kings, and as it
was an ancient custom to anoint them, this came to be regarded as an
essential part of the ceremony. The king was anointed in the form of a
diadem encircling his head, to show that he was the head of the people; but
the high priest was anointed in the form of a cross, one line drawn in the
oil running down his forehead, crossed by another line drawn between his
eyebrows. 3. There was the recognition of the Divine law. ‘‘ And gave him
the testimony.” The book of the law was put into the royal hands, and
while he held it, he entered into a covenant with God to observe and keep
His commandments as set forth therein. ‘The king does more honour to
himself than to the Word of God when he openly accepts that Word as the
guide and directory of his regal career. 4. There was the public rejoicing.
‘“‘ And they clapped their hands and said, God save the King.” The feeling
of the people, so long suppressed, breaks out in joyous acclamation.


“One hour of joy dispels the cares
And sufferings of a thousand years.”


Little joys, says Richter, refresh us constantly like housebread, and never
bring discust : joys are our wings, and sorrows are our spurs. Well might
528


ea


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : KINGS.


CHAP, Xi





the people be glad—they saw in the restoration of their king the restoration of
the national rights of which they had been wickedly defrauded,


II Is made the more secure by the ignominious overthrow of the usurper


(verses 13-16).


The noise of the people reached the ears of Athaliah in her


palace. What didit all mean? Had shea presentiment that it boded no good


to her and her rule?


Prompted by the undaunted spirit that animated her


mother Jezebel to the last, she determined to ascertain for herself the cause of


the tumult.


Unguarded and alone she entered the temple, and the scene that
met her gaze revealed the true state of affairs.


She must have felt her fate


was sealed. Her wild shrieks were unheeded: no one lifted a finger in her


defence.


She was seized, hurried beyond the precincts of the temple, which
was not to be desecrated with her blood, and was instantly slain.


Her over-


throw was complete ; and the throne of Joash was firmly established.


‘Though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heaven is just, and time suppresseth wrongs.” —Shakespeare.


Lessons :—1. No government is strong that is not based on the affections of the


people.


2. Time and the providence of God are always on the side of right. 3.


The purpose of God, though hidden and apparently defeated for a time, will inevit-


ably come to the front.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 4-12. Joash’s elevation to
the throne. I. How it was determined
upon and prepared. Jehoiada took
the initiative, for it was his right and
duty. It was no rebellion and con-
spiracy against a just authority, but a
fact by itself. Rebels violate law and
right in order that they may rule:
Jehoiada restored law and right, and
did not wish to rule; he remained
what he was. He conducted himself
with courage, but also with wisdom
and prudence.

Il. How it was carried out and
accomplished. With the participation
and approval of the different classes
of the entire people, without conspir-
acy, bloodshed, or violence; in the
house of God whose servant the king
was; the crown and the law were
given into his hands ; he was anointed
—significant symbols of his calling as
king of the people of God.


Verse 4. Jehoiada a fo thful priest.
It is not hard to proclaim the word of
God when the mighty and great of
this world hold toit; but the faithful-
ness which is needed in the stewards
of God’s mysteries is that which will


not be stayed or impaired when the
great of this world despise and perse-
cute the word, which will sail against
the windof courtly or popular favour,
and will persevere in patience. The
servants of the Church in the New
Testament have not the same calling
as the high priests in the Old, so that
they have not to meddle with worldly
affairs. Where spiritual and worldly
authority go hand in hand, where
both unite for the sake of God and for
His cause, there the Lord gives bless-
ing aud prosperity.— Lange.


Verse 10. New uses for old trophies.
After Solomon had built the temple,
the trophies of David’s victories were
hung up there. So they adorned the
walls. So they illustrated the valour
of noble sires. So they served to
kindle emulation in the breasts of
true-hearted sons. Thus it was while
generations sprung up and passed
away; till at length other days
dawned, darker scenes transpired, and
sadder things filled up the chronicles
of the nation. I. /t ts well for us to
hang all our trophies * the house of the
Lord. We, too, are warriors. Every

MM 529


=
OMAP, Fz.


FOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


rn ene tener


genuine Christian has to fight. Some-
times we have victories, a presage of
that final victory we shall enjoy with
our Great Captain for ever. We
have been defeated. when we have
gone in our own strength; but when
we have been victorious it has always
been because the strength of the Lord
was put forth for our deliverance.
Hang up the shield, hang up the
spear, let Jehovah’s name be exalted.
Bring forth the forgotten memorials
of loving-kindness, expose them to
public view, put them before your
mind’s eye, gratefully remember them,
lovingly praise Him and magnify His
name. If we have any victories, let
all the trophies be dedicated to the
Lord. II. These trophies may come in
useful at such times as we cannot foresee,
and under such circumstances as we wot
not of. When in after years David
hung up the swords and shields which
he had taken from Philistine heroes,
he did not surmise that one of his
descendants, of the seed royal, would
find the need to employ his own, his
grandsire’s, or further back from him-
self—his forefather’s trophies—in
erder to establish himself on the
throne. In all the battles we fight,
the trophies we win should be stored,
for they may come in for future use.
There is no experience of a Christian
that will not have some ultimate ser-
vice to render him. You know not
what may be the history of your life,
it is unfinished yet; if you did know,
you would see that in this present
trial there is a preparation for some
future emergency, which will enable
you to come out of it in triumph. The
shields and spears of David are hung
up for future action. III. Ancient
weapons are good for present use. Turn
to the seventy-seventh Psalm, and you
have a battle there. By looking
through this psalm you willsee David’s
shields and spears, and will soon learn
how to screen yourself with the one,
and how to do exploits with the other.
The first weapon he drew out of the
scabbard was the weapon ofall prayer
—another, that of remembering God
another, the teaching of tradition
§30


(he “considered the days of old”)—
another, his own experience—another
an appeal to God’s mercy (Ps. li.).
But the great master weapon was the
blood—* Purge me with hyssop,” &c.
Let sins come on, and let them be
more than the hairs of my head, loftier
than mountains, and deeper than the
unfathomed ocean ; let them come on.
God’s flaming wrath behind them, hell
itself coming to devour me; yet if I
can but take the cross and hold it up
before me, if I can plead the precious
blood, I shall be safe, and prove a con-
queror. See that in all your fights
you use the old, old weapons of David
himself—his shields and spears-- by
these same weapons shall you also win
theday. IV. Did not David herein pre
figure Him that was to cone—David’

Son and David’s Lord? Jesus Christ
our King, has hung up many shields
and spears in the house of the Lord.
Sin—Christ has borne it in himself,
endured its penalty, and overcome it ;
he has hung up the handwriting of
ordinances that was against us, asa
trophy in the house of the Lord.
Satan, our great foe—He met him
foot to foot in the wilderness, and dis-
comfited him—met him in the garden
—overcame him on the cross. Now
hell, too, is vanquished—Christis Lord.
Death, too, the last enemy—Christ
hath taken spoilsfrom him. And the
enmity of the human heart. How
many of these enmities has Christ
hung up in the hall, for he has con-
quered that enmity, and made thehater
into a lover. There are some great
sinners at this day who are wonderful
tokens of the power of His love.
What will heaven be when all of us
shall be trophies of His power to
save!—C. H. Spurgeon.


Verse 11. The true safe-guard of
aking. 1. Not the weapons of the
military. 2. But the legality and
righteousness of his claims. 38. The
respect and affection of his people.
4. The overshadowing presence and
blessing of Jehovah.


Verse 12. Hows bright morning


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





decame a dark night—a lesson for
the young. The priest Jehoiada was
& very wise man, and the young king
had sense enough to be led by him;
with his death began sins and mis-
fortunes which ended the life and the
glory of king Joash. Lrarn:—l.
That a good start is not everything. It
does not follow, because as boys and
girls you live in a comfortable home
and have all you want, that it will be
always so. Joash was a king, and of
course had many delightful things
even when a child; but he eame to
know the want of them before his
death. There is a wretched tramp
on the roads to-day, who will sleep in
the casual ward of some workhouse,
who has had a better education than
the master of the place. There are
lads in the forecastle of merchant
ships whose real names are not those
entered on the ship’s books, but who
might have been graduates at Oxford
if they had chosen to do well. Have
a care, boys and girls, lest the
comforts you now have be exchanged
for self-made misery, and -he good
start only lund you in darker depths
than you would otherwise have
known. LEARN :—2. That crowns do
not make kings. The boy never was
the ruler of the country. His uncle
was master. Solomon says something
about a jewel in aswine’s snout; that
seems a strange place to put a jewel,
but you might as well look for it
there as expect a coarse nature to
become gentle because it is wearing
a fine coat. Perhaps you have yet to
learn that power means much more
than strength. Joash was crowned ;
but when the old man died his real
self came to the front. He chose
foolish companions, turned aside to
sin, caused the son of his benefactor
to be murdered (2 Chron. xxiv. 21),
and finished his poor vain life in
shame, and was buried away from his
kingly ancestors, while the priest was
laid among those who ruled the land
(ib., verses 16 and 25). It will pay
us to think, when we are tempted to
do wrong—How will this appear
when I am dead? What will people


say as they carry me to my grave!
Have you some gift which, like that
crown on Joash’s head, lifts you up
above your companions? Beit money,
strength, beauty, or learning, it will
only make you kingly and keep you
crowned, as you use it in the service
of God, and in unselfish efforts to
make others good and happy.—
T. Champness.

— The oil wherewith he was
anointed signified his designation to
that high service and those endow-
ments from heaven that might enable
him to so great a function. The
crown wherewith he was adorned
signified that glory and majesty
which should both encourage and
attend his princely cares. ‘The book
of the testimony signitied the divine
rules and directions whereto he must
frame his heart and actions in the
wielding of that crown. These
three— the oil, the crown, the testi-
mony—that is, inward powers, out-
ward magnificence, true piety and
justice—make up a perfect prince.
None of these may be wanting. If
there be not a due calling of God, and
abilities meet for that greatness, the
oil faileth: if there be not a majestic
grace androyalty that may command
reverence, the crown is missing: if
there be not a careful respect to the
law of God as the absolute guide of
all counsels and determinations, the
testi.-ony is neglected: all of them
concurring make both king ond
people happy.—Bp. Hail.


Verses 13-16. Athaliah’s fall.
I. Her last appearance. She comes
boldly and impudently into the midst
of the people, blinded to their dis-
position towards her. Insolently
relying on her imagined majesty, she
commands resistance to the move-~
ment which is in progress—a faithful
type of many tyrants. Pride goes
before a fall. IL. Her terrible end.
Abandoned, despised, and hated by all
the people, who rejoice over her fall,
she goes to meet her doom, and
receives the fate whieh her deeds
deserve. She is punished by that

631


@aAP. KI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





by which she has sinned. Sedition!
treason ! is the cry of Joram, Jezebel,
and Athaliah, and of all those who are
themselves most to blame for it
(Acts xviv. 5).—Lange.


Verse 14. O Athaliah! to whom
dost thou complain? They are thy
just executioners wherewith thou art
encompassed. If it be treason to set
up the true heir of Ahaziah, thou
appealest to thy traitors—the treason


thy ambition shed. Wonder rather
at the patience of thislong forbearance
than the rigour of this execution.


Verse 16. How like is Athaliah to
her mother Jezebel! asin conditions
and carriage, 80 even in death. Both
killed violently, both killed under
their own walls, both slain with
treason in their mouths, both slain in
the entrance of a changed govern-
ment; one trode on by the horses, the


other slain in the horsegate ; both paid
their own blood for the innocent
blood of others.—Bp. /iall.


was thine; theirs is justice. The
time is now come of thy reckonings
for all the royal blood of Judah which


EROMILETIOS OF VERSES 17-21.
Tur RestoraTION oF THE Pusiid Worship oF JEHOVAH.


I. Was signalized by formal and impressive covenant. 1. This covenant
recognized the supreme claims of Jehovah. ‘‘And Jehoiada made a covenant
between the Lord and the king and the people” (verse 17). This was a re-
newal of the national covenant with Israel (Exodus xix.-xxiv; Deut. iv. 6;
xxvii. 9) to be unto the Lord “a people of inheritance,” by which they
solemnly engaged themselves to renounce and root out all idolatry, and set
up and maintain God’s true worship. Whep the national conscience has been
demoralized by idolatre2s practices, it is impurtant to present the supreme
claims of God to our homage by the most impressive mettuds. 2. This
covenant guarded the rights of both ruler and ruled. ‘Between the king also
and the people.” This was a civil covenant whereby the king engaged him-
self to rule them justly and in the fear of God, and the people obliged them-
selves to defend and obey him (comp. 2. Sam. v. 2). Government is im-
possible where the rights and privileges of both ruler and ruled are not duly
respected and observed.

Il. Ensured the downfall of idolatry (verse 18). This was the logical
and necessary consequence of the restoration of the true worship. Athaliah
had transplanted idolatry into Judah. She was the first to erect a temple to
Baal in the holy city, and plundered the temple of Jehovah to enrich the
shrine of her favourite deity. The people looked on aghast at this wanton
sacrilege to their sacred fane and daring insult to the God of their fathers ;
but they were powerless to prevent it; they were held in check by the threats
and tyranny of the usurper. Many a pious soul wept in secret because of the
prevalent iniquity, and many an anxious prayer was ofered for a day of
deliverance. And now thatday had come. The people, animated by a sprit
of righteous indignation, rose against the Baal worshippers, and demolished
their idol temple. Jehovah can admit no rival. The idols he shall utterly
abolish (Isaiah ii. 18).

No more at Delos or at Delphi now,
Or e’en at mighty Ammon’s Libyan shrine,
The white-robed priests before the altar bow,
To slay the victim and to pour the wine,
While gifts of kingdoms round each pillar twine,
Bcarce can the classic pilgrim, sweeping
From fallen architrave the desert vine,
Trace the dim names of their divinity ;
Gods of the ruin’d temples, where, oh where are ye |—Bethene,


932


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS, CHAP, XI,


—_





THT. Was the guarantee of stability to the throne (verse 19). ‘It seems
to me a great truth,” says Carlyle, ‘that human things cannot stand on selfish-
ness, mechanical utilities, economics, and law courts; that if there be not a
religious element in the relations of men, such relations are miserable, and
doomed to ruin.”

King-becoming graces
Are justice, verity, temperance, stableneag,
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude.


Where can such virtues be found, and where be better cultivated, than in the
humble and reverent worship of Almighty God? No nation can be permanent
or prosperous where king and people ignore the obvious claims of Divine
worship,


Safety and equal government are things
Which subjects make as happy as their kings.— Waller.


IV. Was the occasion of national joy and tranquility. ‘And all the
people of the land rejoiced, and the city was in quiet” (verse 20). The good
rejoiced that the character of Jehovah was at length vindicated: their sighs,
their tears, their prayers for Zion had not been in vain. The aged rejoiced
that before their eyes closed in death they beheld their country free from the
oppressor, and their loved worship once more restored. The young rejoiced in
the brightening prospect of noblest service for God and king and country.
‘And the city was in quiet.” As in many otlier countries, the condition of
the metropolis ruled the provinces. If Jerusalem was in anguish, the nation
was in sorrow; if Jerusalem was happy, the nation shared the joy. If the
vast populations of our great cities were penetrated with a love and enthusiasm
for the worship of Jehovah, how readily would the rest of the country be won
over to share in a like experience! It is not without significance that the first
preachers of the Gospel directed their earliest endeavours to gain a footing in
the great populous centres of their day. Flood the cities with light and joy,
and the nations will soon be won. Then will come the time of which Alford
sung—

What throbbings of deep oy
Pulsate through all I see; from the full bud
Whose unctuous sheath is glittering in the moon,
Up through the system of created things,
Even to the flaming ranks of Seraphim !


Lessons :—1. The nation 18 a prey to anarchy when God ts not publicity acknow-
ledged. 2. The pure worship of God tends to develop all that is best in national
character. 8. To worship God aright, we must get rid of every tdolatrous rival.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 17,18. Covenanting with Jehoiada renewed. I. The covenant
God. I. Allthemorenecessary when of the king and the people with God.
consvious of unfaithfulness. II. The basis and fountain of all national
Should be solemn and impressive. prosperity. Amnirreligious state is a
III. Shown to be sincere by the folly andan impossibility. It is no-
destruction of that which led the soul thing. LL. Zhe covenant between king
astray. IV. Has a tendency to and people. It is built upon the
foster and strengthen right relations former. ‘There is prosperity in a
between God and king and people, country only when the prince rules

before and with God, and the people

Verse 17. The covenant which are obedient through obedience w

; 633


CHAP, XII.





wod, Without this fundamental
gondition all constitutions, laws, and
wstitutions, however good they may
wppear, are useless. No relation of
_ sevjects and ruler is sound if it has
wv the covenant of God as its basis
w either side.—Lange.


Verse 18. It isa grand national
svent when a people destroys its idols.
He who stands by God and his word
tolerates neither gross nor refined
idolatry. Where there is deeided
faith in the living God, the altars of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


———


settled on a stable foundation. II.
When religion triumphs over idolatry,
oppression, and wrong. III. When
peace and prosperty are guaranteed.
O beauteous peace,

Sweet union of a state! What else but thou
Gives safety, strength, and glory toa people.
Governments which are founded in
blood always end disastrously.


Verse 21. The sceptre of Judah is
changed from a woman to a child;
buta child trained up and tutored by
Jehoiada. This minority so guided


was not inferior to the mature age of
many predecessors. Happy is that
land the nonage of whose prince falls
into holy and just hands.—Bp. Hall.


the false gods fall of themselves.


Verse 20. National joy. I. May
well be expressed when the throne is








CHAPTER XII.


THE RESTORATION OF THE TEMPLE BY JOASH.


Cririca, axp Expuanatory Norss.—Verse 2. Jehoash did right all his days wherein
Sehoiada, &c.—The word “ wherein ’’ may be rendered because, and that alters the meaning
from during the period in which J ehoiada instructed him, into ‘all his days,” é.¢., during the
king’s entire life, because Jehoiada instructed him. This difference of meaning depends on the
preservation or rejection of the suffix Jin the word vi. The account, however, in the


Chronicles is, that Jehoash acted rightly ‘‘all the days of Jehoiada the priest.” But the
grammatical construction of the sentence in Kings requires “WR because, rather than


“wherein,” Verse 3. But the high places were not taken away—See Notes on 1 Kings
1ii, 2. Consider the popular tondness for the evil practices, the youthfulness of the king, and
the sanction given to all such idolatrous iniquities during the evil sway of Athaliah, and this
inability to suppress so gross an impiety is not unaccountable. Verse 4. All the money of
the dedicated things—i. ¢., consecrated money ; and it is specified as threefold : 1. Money of
the numbered (so read the words), viz., those who pass through the enumeration (see Exod.
xxx. 12-14). 2. Money of the estimation, viz., the redemption price of a person who had
devoted himself or his property to the Lord, and wished to effect his or its redemption
(Lev. xxvii. 1-8). 8. Freewill offerings. Verse 7. Why repair ye not the breaches of the
house }—The natural interpretation of the failure is that the priests had been negligent, and
that the money paid in liquidation of vows, and the voluntary gifts of the people, had been
used for other purposes than those the king intended. But that the king consulted these
priests concerning a new method indicates that he did not regard them as guilty of embezzle-
ment. The case probably was, that the current expenses of the maintenance of the priests
and of the temple worship absorbed all the finances, /eaving no surplus for repairs. Yet they
ought to have shown more seal, and this is to their reproach. Verse 9. Jehoiada took a
chest—-A scheme for preserving the account for repairs separate from the current and incidental
expenses. The people welcomed the arrangement (2 Chron. xxiv. 9, 10), for they knew now
that their gifts would go to their intended purposes. Verse 10. They put it in bags, and
told the money—The king sent his own secretary, together with a scribe of the high priest,
that the money might be counted. It was then handed to the overseers, who directed the
work of repairs. In Oriental countries money is still counted, put in bags, labelled, and sealed
by a duly authorized officer, and then passed into currency, Verse 18. Howbeit there were
not made bowls, &c,—Until the repairs were completed, this money was not used for neces-
sary articles of temple furniture, Verse 15. They reckoned not with the men—Their in-
tegrity being beyond suspicion, Verse 16, It was the priests—According te direct enact-
534


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY~ KINGS. CHAP. XL
ee en neem wane eM inh


ment (Lev. v. 16; Numb. v. 8). Verse 17. Hazael, king of Syria, fought against Gath—
Gath, formerly a town of the Philistines. According to Chronicles, the expedition against
Jerusalem occurred in the last year of Jehoash’s reign, and it is there marked that this was a
punishment from the Lord for the king’s unfaithfulness to Him, and his cruelty to the pro-
phet Zechariah. To secure Jerusalem, the king purchased the withdrawal of the Syrians
with the treasures of God’s house. Verse 20. His servants arose and slew Jehoash—He was
at the time in his bed with wounds, probably received in battle with the Syrians. Comp. the
account in Chronicles—-W. H. J.





—_p—=


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-8,
Tue WortsH or Gopty CounseEL.


I. That godly counsel is a powerful help to a consistent and upright life.
“And Jehoash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord.’ ‘There is
nothing in the history to lead us to suspect the sincerity of Jehoash’s religious
devotion in the earlier years of his reign. He was carefully instructed in his
infancy, and grew up in the midst of godly influences. His religious character
was moulded under the wise and capable counsel of good Jehoiada. It is an
unspeakable advantage to grow up under the fostering shelter of a good and
holy life. A few words of warning or encouragement at the right moment have
often saved a soul from ruin. ‘‘Good counsels observed are chains to grace
which, neglected, prove halters to strange undutiful children.’’ Sometimes bad
men will give good advice, and the man who can take it and act upon it shows
his good sense and superiority. He who is wise enough in youth to take the
advice of his seniors, unites the vivacity and enterprise of early, with the
wisdom and gravity of later, life.


II. That godly counsel is potent with some only when under the direct
influence of aliving personal example. ‘ All his days wherein Jehoiada the
priest instructed him.”’ While Jehoiada lived, Joash faithfully observed the
covenant he had made with Jehovah, and, though the fact is not stated, it is
implied that he afterwards departed from the counsels of his benefactor. This
defection is related inthe Chronicles. It is difficult todo wrong in the presence
of the good; their holy and upright example isa rebuke and a deterrent to
every evil tendency. The influence of Samuel was a powerful check upon the
impulsive rashness and violence of Saul; and when that influence was with-
drawn, it is not difficult to trace the degeneracy of the unhappy monarch, and
how speedily he came to his doom. We shall never know how much we owe
to the holy and consistent lives of those with whom we come in frequent con-
tact. <‘‘ A virtuous man,” says Felltham, ‘shining in the purity of a righteous
tife, is a light-house set by the seaside, whereby the mariners both sail aright
and avoid danger; but he that lives in noted sirs is a false lantern which ship-
wrecks those that trust him. Nothing awakens our sleeping virtues like the
noble acts of our predecessors. They are flaming beacons that fame and time
have set on hills to call us to a defence of virtue whensoever vice invades the
commonwealth of man.’’ We all need the encouraging influence of example ;
but there are some natures so feeble in moral stamina that they cannot stand
alone. They have been so accustomed to depend upon others, that when their
adviser failsthem, they succumb. It would seem Joash’s was such a nature.


IIT. That godly counsel does not always avail to bring about the
thorough reform of long standing abuses. ‘‘ But the high places were not
taken away” (verse 3). The popular fondness for the private and disorderly
rites performed in the groves and recesses of hills was so inveterate that even

535


omar, Xn. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





_





the most powerful monarchs had been unable to accomplish their suppression; no
wonder that in the early reign of a young king, and after the gross irregularities
that had been allowed during the mal-administration of Athaliah, the difficulty
of putting an end to the superstitions associated with the high places _ Was
greatly increased (Jamieson). Besides, Jehoiada, while acting with surprising
energy in the restoration of the dynasty, was an old man—a hundred years old
when Joash was crowned, and he lived thirty years after. He might therefore
feel himself unable to cope with the demolition of long-established customs that
had baffled and defied younger and stronger men. If his counsel halted at this
point, it was co far defective. He knew the danger to Judah of these idolatrous
practices, and should not only have counselled their extinction, but have had
the courage of carrying out what he counselled. The unreformed abuses were
a snare to the people in after years, and, as the sequel showed, led to the ruin


of the king whose career begun so auspiciously.


Lessons :—1. They who give counsel to others should be exemplary themselves.
2. It ts the mark of a noble nature to receive counsel and profit by tt without


taking offence.
we give to others.


3. We should be prepared to carry out to tts consequences the counsel


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-3, That which appears to
be the greatest misfortune for a child,
to be left fatherless and motherless at
an early age, often becomes a great
blessing in the gracious providence of
God. What would have become of
Jehoash if he had been brought up at
the court of his idolatrous father and
his depraved mother? God gave him
in Jehoiada far more than he had lost
in his father and his mother. None
need instruction more than those who
are called to govern; there is no more
responsible calling than that of in-
structing those who will have to rule.
Unfortunately, this task is rarely in-
trusted to those who, like Jehoiada,
are fitted for it by age, learning,
experience, and piety.


Verse 2. A faithful teacher.
I, A great boonto a young and in-
experienced king. II. Has the
opportunity of exerting a potent and
widespread influence for good. III.
Is all the more powerful when
associated with a consistent religious
character.

— The part played by Jehoiada
raised the priesthood to an importance
which, with the single exception of
Eli, it had never before attained in
the history of the Jewish nation, and

638


which it never afterwards altogether
lost. Through the priesthood the
lineage of David had been saved, and
the worship of Jehovah restored in
Judah even more successfully than
ithad been in Samaria through the
prophets. During the minority of
Joash, Jehoiada virtually reigned.
The very office was in some sense
created by himself. He was regarded
as a second founder of the Order, sc
that in after days he, rather than
Aaron, is described as the chief
(Jer. xxix. 26).—Staniley.

— A statesman, we are told, should
follow public opinion. Doubtless asa
coachman follows his horses, having
firm hold on the reins, and guiding
them.— Hare.


Verse 3. The inveterate evils of
idolatry. I. Have a powerful ally
in the corruptions of human nature.
II. Are the occasion of worse evils in
the future. III. Survive the most
violent efforts of reform. IV. Can
be cured only by thorough eradication.

— Even these holy and just hands
came short of what they might have
done. The high places remained still:
those altars were erected to the true
God, but in a wrong place. Itisa
marvel if there be not some blemishes


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





found in the best government. I
doubt Jehoiada shall once buy it dear
that he did not his utmost.—Bp.
Hall.

— Custom had so prevailed that
Jehoiada durst not advise the king to
cross the people in this superstition,
lest it should cause a tumult; lest
they should moreregard commotioners
than commissioners, and be more
guided by rage than by right—
violence and obstinacy, like two un-





CHAP. XIL.


in a blind-fold career, as it fell out in
England when King Edward VI.
began to reform.— Zrapp.

— Rulers ought not to allow them-
selves to be restrained from carrying
out what is good and r ght from any
fear of persons, lest they may possibly
incur the disfavour of the people.
There never was a prince who was
not himself guilty of faults and errors,
as we see here from the example of
Jehoash, who did not abolish the


tamed horses, drawing their desires sacrificeson the high places.—Lange.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 4-16.
Tue Restoration oF THE Hovse or Gop a Woux or Genurne Prery.


Tux prominence given in the history to the repair of the Temple by Joash
indicates that it was the chief incident of hisreign. As David was the founder,
and Solomon the builder, of the House of Jehovah, so Joash, with whom the
house of David recommenced, was the restorer of the Sanctuary. It must
have been an act of gratitude and joy on the part of the king to repair the
breaches of that temple which had been his shelter and home from his tenderest
years. He engaged the priests and people in the work, to give to the move-
ment a national character, and to give this outward proof that the king and
people were sincere in renewing their covenant with Jehovah. Observe—


I. That the restoration of the house of God may be delayed by the
indifference of those who might be supposed most anxious for its promo-
tion (verses 4-6). The work was committed to the priests, who would naturally
be expected to be most interested in hastening its completion; but in this both
king and people were disappointed. Years rolled away, and nothing was
done. It does not appear that the priests can be charged with any intention to
misappropriate the money; but it is evident that there was gross mismanage-
ment and neglect somewhere. It is a painful spectacle when the officers of the
temple are apathetic as to its condition, and disappoint the expectations of those
who have cheerfully offered their help; worse still when the gifts of the people
are wrongfully applied. There are those in the churches to-day who imbibe
too much of the spirit of these priests. They would see the sanctuary almost
tumble about their heads in ruins before they would initiate any movement to
repair and renovate it, and would do all they could to debar others from
working in that direction. Piety is at a low ebb in that soul which is so
indifferent to the outer fabric of God’s house. °


II. That the restoration of the house of God is a work worthy ofa
monarch’s zeal (verse 7). The soul of David burned with a holy and fervent
desire to build a house for God; but he was permitted to do nothing more than
prepare for it. The climax of Solomon’s great works was the building and
dedication of the Temple, and now Joash regards it as an honour and privilege
to repair the delapi ations of that sacred fane. He stirred up the zeal of his
aged instructor, rebuked the priests for their supineness and negligence, and
organized the enterprise on a sound and popular basis. It is a work befitting a
king to be concerned in the honour and beauty of God’s house. The prince
who is interested in the religious welfare of his people will not be inattentive


to inferior matters.
637


OHAP, XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





III. That the restoration of the house of God is accomplished only by
resolute and united effort. 1. By the willing and liberal offerings of the people.
Money is a talent, not to be squandered in reckless extravagance, but to be
wisely and discreetly employed. It cannot be better employed than in con-
nection with the house of God. The gift, to be acceptable, must be voluntarily
and cheerfully offered: ‘All the money that cometh into any man’s heart te
bring into the house of the Lord” (verse 4). Where this spirit of generosity
prevails there is no difficulty in carrying out great religious undertakings.
‘“‘The manner of giving,” says Lavater, ‘‘ shows the character of the giver morv
than the gift itself.”’

The truly generous is the truly wise;
And he who loves not others, lives unblest.


2. By the strict and impartial administration of funds (verses 9-12). The
mismanagement of the priests had brought the work into discredit, and checked
the flow of offerings into the church treasury. All this was altered. An
offertory chest was especially provided; to show that the priests were no}
regarded as intentionally dishonest in the misappropriation of previous gifts
the chest was placed under their care. At stated times it was opened, the
money counted in the presence of the high priest and the king’s secretary,
and handed over in definite sums to those who had charge of the work. Public
confidence was restored, and the people gave cheerfully of their substance.
“Put it out of the power of truth to give you an ill character, and if anybody
reports you not to be an honest man, let your practice give him the lie; and to
make all sure, you should resolve to live no longer than you can live honestly,
for it is better to be nothing, than a knave. An honest death is better than a
dishonest life.” 3. By the judicious avoidance of unnecessary expense (verse 13).
Vessels of silver and gold were afterwards provided (2 Chron. xxiy. 14); but
not until the substantial part of the restoration was completed. Utility and
beauty are not antagonistic, but may be gracefully combined.

Thou shalt learn


The wisdom early to discern
True beauty in utility.—Longfellow,


To spend money in decoration and display to the neglect of actual and immediate
necessities isan unjustifiable extravagance. 4. By the conscientious and Saith-
ful labour of the workmen (verses 14, 15). A vigorous administration makes itself
felt in every detail of the work it undertakes, and communicates its own
enthusiasm to the humblest worker. It gives a dignity to labour when it is
done conscientiously, and from the love of it. ‘Where love is, there is no
labour; and if there be labour, that labour is loved.” In this re-organization
of the restoration movement we observe all the elements of success—prompt
decided action, generous giving, careful but not stinted expenditure, earnest and
united toil. Addison writes: ‘ If you wish success in life, make perseverance
your bosom friend, experience your wise counsellor, caution your elder brother,
and hope your guardian genius.’’


IV. That the restoration of the house of God does not interfere with
the necessary maintenance of the duly appointed servants of that house
(verse 16). The priests had surrendered in favour of the restoration fund much
of what they had been accustomed to receive (verse 8), but the revenue from
the trespass offerings and sin offerings was still given to them. This belonged
to them by law (Num. v. 8-9, Levit. v. 16). The due maintenance of the
ministry is divinely authorized. The necessities of one branch of the service of
God ought not to interfere with the claims of another. The minister of God
should be so provided for as to raise him above all anxieties that would divert
his mind ae complete devotion to his proper work.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP X¥i.


-—--——ee—r


Lessons:—1. The house of God ts not only a convenience for worshippers, best


also a public witness for religion.


the liberality and united seal of Lis people,
effort in buslding up the spiritual temple.


2. The building of ahouse of God calls for


3. Suggests the need of continued


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 4. The responsibility of
wealth. I. Not to be used for per-
sonal aggrandisement and indulgence.
II. Is most nobly employed in pro-
moting the worship of God. III.
Should be offered to God with a liberal
hand and a cheerful heart.


Verse 5. The decay of God’s

house a symptom of moral decay.
I. Shows the prevalence of a worldly
and selfish spirit. II. Shows an in-
difference to the highest claims of
God and the soul. III. An evidence
of national deterioration. IV. Calls
for repentance and reformation.
When the building in which a
congregation assemblesto worship God,
to hear His word, and to receive the
means of grace, is left ruinous, God
does not receive the honour which
belongs to Him. Where the churches
fall to ruin, there religion and piety
also fall into decay ; but where there
is love of God and joy in His word,
there no ruinous churches are seen.
A time in which magnificent palaces,
theatres, and ball-rooms are repaired,
or built at great expense, but in
which the houses of God are left small,
wretched, dirty, and ruinous, is a time
of religious decay, and resembles the
time of Athaliah in Judah. The
spiritual temple may in time become
ruinous through unbelief, worldly life
and behaviour, and immorality.
Where are the congregations in which
there is nothing ruinous or decayed,
in which nothing could be improved ?
How many are in ruins and ready to
fall !— Lange.


Verses 7-15. Thorough organiza-
tion an aid to success. 1. Emphasizes
the importance of the work to be done.
II. Interests and engages all classes of
the community. III. Adopts the
best methods to elicit the generosity of


the people. IV. Creates confidence
as to the just administration of the
funds. V. Reacts upon the enthusi-
asm and fidelity of all engaged in the
work.


Verse 7. ‘Why repair ye not the
breaches of the house?” A search-
ing question. I. Addressed to the
wealthy. II. To all the worshippers
of Jehovah. III. To all unfaithfw
ministers. IV. To imperfect believers

— Works which are pleasing ts
God cannot be accomplished by care-
less hands. They are only accow-
plished where zeal is united with
perseverance, patience, and fidelity.
How many a congregation has fallen
into decay and remained so, because
those who were appointed to be the
builders of it, who ought to have re-
paired and built it, have not raised
their negligent hands (Heb. xii. 12;
Jerem. xlviii. 10). Although no
earthly king may ever call them to
account, yet the Heavenly King, before
whose judgment-seat they must ap-
pear to give an account of their office,
will ask—‘‘ Why repair ye not the
breaches of the house ?”’


The necessary precedes
the ornamental. I. It is so in the
economy of nature. II. Should be
so in the house of God. III. Should
be so in the arrangements of social life.
IY. The ornamental is not condemned
in itself—only when it supersedes and
ignores the necessary and useful.

The utilitarian. He is a
slave to science. He would pull—
Great heaven to pieces, and anatomize

Each fragment of its crystal battlements,
Weigh out its hymns, divide its light, and

class


The radiant feathers of archangels’ wings.
Do we not know—doth he not know—that


Verse 18.


8
Mysterious wonder aye must reign poh ua,
&3


ay


cuar, XI.  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


asain


Struggle howe’er we may? Doth he not Verse 16. Ministerial mainten-
teh ieee . ance. I. Authorized by the Word
That adoration and great wonder, like of God. Il. A just arrangement.


Good deeds which bless the giver, ever lift :
The soul above the dust, and atren gthen us ? III. Not to be interfered with by


Cornwall. other claims.


ROMILETICS OF VERSES 17—21.
Toe Unnarrpy Fare oy aw Unvrarrarun Kree.


Arrer the death of Jehoiada the career of Joash was a series of disasters. He
became unfaithful to his covenant vows, and was seduced into idolatry. Having
forsaken Jehovah, he was abandoned to his courses, and soon became a prey to
his own evil passions and to the enemies who swooped down upon him with
deadly intent.


I. His kingdom is harassed with war and rapine (verse 17). The
Syrians invaded his dominions, and, though insignificant in number, wrought
much slaughter, and bore away great spoil. Under the pious rule of the good
Jehoiada the nation was in peace, and grew in prosperity and riches. The nation
that turns its back on Jehovah will not go unpunished. It is no wonder if it
is smitten with the scourge of war and all its attendant woes. ‘‘ War,” says
Luther, ‘‘is one of the greatest plagues that can afflict humanity. It destroys
. religion, it destroys states, it destroys families. Any scourge, in fact, is prefere
able to it. Famine and pestilence become as nothing in comyarison with it.
Pestilence is the least evil of the three, and ’twas therefore David chose it,
willing rather to fall into the hands of God, than into those of pitiless man.”
War is the sink of all injustice.


II. He is demoralized with cowardice and fear (verse 18). Instead of
rallying his forces and meeting the enemy with a brave, determined spirit,
Joash weakly yielded, and even despoiled the House of God of its valuables,
and sacred vessels to bribe the Syrian king to withdraw. Conscious unfaith-
fulness is the parent of craven fear.


Cowards die many times before their death ;

The valiant never taste of death but once.

Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,

It seems to moe most strange that man should feas,
Seeing that death, a necessary end,

Will come when it will come.—Shakespeare.


TI. His life is hurried to an untimely and ignominious end (verses 20-21).
Joash is smitten with disease, and yet, as if this was too slow a process to end
his wretched life, a conspiracy was formed, and he was quickly despatched with
the assassin’s sword. His murder of the son of his benefactor met with a
speedy retribution. His ignominy did not end with his death. To show the
popular execration in which he was held, his body was refused burial in the
sepulchre of the kings—a terrible warning as to the fate of all apostates. Another
illustration of how dark and dismal @ night may settle upon a life that opened
with so fair and hopeful a morning,


Lessons :-—1.—Jt ¢s a fatal step to reject the pious counsels and training of one’s
youth. 2. A king cannot go wrong without involving @ nation in suffering. 3%
Wo rank sn life can sercen the evil-doer from punishment.

540


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 17-21. The best instruction
cannot preserve against a fall if the
heart is not firm andstrong. Only he
who endures unto the end shall be
saved. The noblest commencement
is vain, if the end is perverse and
wicked. Joash was taught what
calamities it brings to abandon the
Lord God (Jer. ii. 19). The Lord
rewards everyone according to his
works, whether in this or the next
world. What a man soweth, that
shall he also reap. Joash was mar-
vellously preserved as an infant; he
ends his life wretchedly. This is an
example how near the ruin of a man
is when he abandons the good to
which he was educated from his youth
up, nay, even is glad to be rid of those
who annoy him by their warnings. —
Lange.


Verse 18. A cowardly spirit. I.
A result of conscious infidelity. II.
Weakly succumbs even to an inferior
force. III. Has no scruples as to how
money is raised wherewith to bribe an


enemy. IV. Is despised ty its
oppressor. V. Encourages a renewal
of hostilities.


Verses 20, 21. All the people
shouted to the child-king, ‘‘ Long live
the king!” and rejoiced and blew
trumpets. Conspiracy and murder


were the end of his forty years’
reign |

Verse 20. Assassination. I. A
symptom of national discontent. II.
A dastardly and brutal method of
revenge. III. Brings no advantage
to the parties concerned in it.


Verse 21. He that was guilty of
abominable idolatry, yet, as if God
meant to waive that challenge, is
called to reckoning for his cruel un-
thankfulness to Jehoiada. This crime
shall make him odious alive, and shall
abandon him dead from the sepulchre
of his fathers, as if this last royalty
were too good for him who had for-
gotten the law of humanity. Some
vices are such as nature smiles spon,
though frowned at by Divine justice;
others are such as even nature itself
abhors. Such is this of ingratitude,
which therefore carries so much more
detestation from God, as it is more
odious even to them who have blotted
out the image of God.— Bp. Hall.

— So ended the last remains of the
great struggle of the house of Omri
for power. So was preserved the
house of David through the fiercest
struggles, inward and outward, that
it witnessed till its final overthrow.
So wae confirmed the establishment of
the priesthood in the heart of the
monarchy.—Stanley.





CHAPTER XIII.


THE DEATH OF ELISHA.


Curricat axp Exptanatory Notes.—Verse 1. Jehozhaz, the son of Jehu, began to reign
over Israel—Here the historian turns from the records of Judah to those of Israel. The
date—* three and twentieth year ”—does not accord by two years with that given in verse 10,
as the corresponding year of the reign of Joash [or Jehoash}, king of Judah; but copyist’s
blunders in Hebrew numerals occurred so easily. Verse 4. The Lord saw the oppression of
Jarasl—He allowed the Syrians to become His scourge for Israel’s guilt in apostatizing from
His worship. Verse 56, The Lord gave Israel a saviour—Not a supernatural saviour—angel
or prophet—but in both the kings Joash and Jeroboam He gave them a JUA/D, “saviour,”
4vom the Syrians, for the former recovered all the lost cities (verse 25), and the latter restored
af che od boundaries of Israel (xiv. 25). Verse 6. But walked Canes Geen


GBAP. <TH, BOMILEYIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


or Ierae} ? son MD—“ walked he” (Jeroboam), or “walked it” (Israel). There remained


the grove—Comp. 1 Kings xvi. 38. Verse 14. Elisha was fallen sick—The pro-
phet’s presence was felt by Jossh to bea guarantee of the safety of his kingdom, and he
dreaded to lose him, fearing that after the prophet’s death he must again confront the destruc-
tive Syrians, and therefore cries, My father! my father ! the chariot of Israel and the horse-
men thereof! It implies'tke king’s conviction that this man of God had been, by his counsels
and prayers, the secret of Israel’s valour and victories. Verse 17. The arrow of the Lord’s
deliverance, &c.—-War was then significantly proclaimed by an arrow or war-missel being
thot into the enemy’s country. By the prophet’s putting his hands upon the king’s hands
(verse 16) he indicated the supernatural power which would go with the king in his invasion of
Syria. The Syrians had established themselves in the Hast, therefore the arrow was shot
Eastward (verse 17), Verse 18, Smite upon the ground—As a symbolic act of subjugation.
The king did not use up all the arrows in the quiver. Why? Perhaps because he obeyed the
theory that what was done thrice was done efficiently and absolutely ; or, possibly, because he
lacked in persistency. The latter; for Elisha’s command, “ Take the arrows ; smite!” im-
plies with ali the arrows ; but he stopped on his own accord. A bad omen. Verse 19. The
man of God was wroth with him— for the king thereby predicted his incomplete conquest.
Verse 20, Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year—/1]U NI—it., @ year
v’qT Tr
came; but it may be interpreted as the Spring season, in ancient times the usual period for
opening campaigns or commencing invasions. Verse 21. As they were burying a man, &¢.—
i. e., @ corpse of some unknown person about to be interred in the same burial place in which
Elisha’s sepulchre was situate, The sudden appearance of one of these Moabite hordes urged
them to cast the body hastily into the grave of Elisha, which, if not open, was quickly acces-
sible by removing the stone from its mouth. Verse 25. Three times did Joash beat him—
me ppp the son of Hazael ; according to the number of arrows he shot (verse 19).—


—


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-18.


Nationa Decay.


In this paragraph we have grouped together the history of the two sister
kingdoms of Judah and Israel. Their condition is alike. They are both dragged
down to the same level. The same evil that has been so fatal to Samaria is
now prevalent in Jerusalem. The same dark record is true of both—a record
of apostasy, intensified corruption, and rapid decay of national prestige. In
the case of Judah, one bright ray relieves the gloom; there are indications of
repentance and return; but it seems more a desire to be delivered from
ee that have become intolerable, than a genuine effort to reform.

serve—


I. That national decay is the inevitable result of religious apostasy
(verses 2, 3). Religion exalts a nation by exalting the individual. It is
equally the basis of private virtue and public faith; of the happiness of the
individual and the prosperity of the nation. When God is honoured, the
nation is blessed ; but when He is forsaken and despised, suffering and disaster
follow. ‘‘True religion,” says Burke, ‘‘is the foundation of society. When
that is once shaken by contempt, the whole fabric cannot be stable nor lasting.”
How strikingly is this illustrated in the history of the Jewish kingdom |


II. That national decay is hastened by the devastations of continuous
war (verses 3-7). War exhausts the sources of a nation’s strength, and destroys
its noblest sons, It isa waste of blood and treasure. If it does not utterly
obliterate the nation, it puts back for years its progress and advancement. A
strong nation may recover with surprismg rapidity the damage inflicted by a
single war; but the strongest nation cannot long survive the sufferings of un-
a ie warfare. Nor is it always evident which suffers most—the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. Xi.





victorious or the vanquished. No greater calamity can happen to a nation
than to be given up to the horrors and ravages of war.


Oh world !
Oh men! what are ye, and our best designs,
at we must work by crime to punish crime,
And slay, as if death had but this one gate ?—Byron,


III. That national decay may be arrested for a time by humiliation and
prayer (verses 4, 5). We may here trace the influence of Elisha upon king
Jehoahaz. It was a familiar teaching in the lips of the prophet that the nation’s
troubles were brought about by forsaking God, and the only way of deliverance
was to be found in returning to Him in penitence and prayer. ‘ Jehoahaz
besought the Lord, and the Lord hearkened untohim.” The grip of the Syrian
was relaxed, the terror of war passed away, and once more peace and security
were restored. The Lord has no pleasure in sights of suffering, even where
suffering is most deserved. His compassion is touched with the ery of the
helpless, and He is swift to save.


More things are wrought by prayer
Than this world dreams of. ;
For what are men better than sheep or goats,
That nourish a blind life within the brain,
lf, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer,
Both for themselves and those who call them friend ?
For so the whole round world is every way
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.— Tennyson,


IV. That national decay cannot be prevented while temptations to
apostasy are allowed to exist. ‘‘There remained the grove also in Samaria
(verse 6). The incompleteness of the reforming work ot the father became a
snare to the son (chup. x. 29). The seductions of idolatry led the people
away from the worship of Jehovah, and from the path of virtue and upright-
ness. No nation can rise to its true purity and strength until every public entice-
ment to evil is abolished. There is no safety with idols, but in their destruction.


Still they plead and still they promise ; wilt thou suffer them to stand ¢
They have pleasures, gifts, aud treasures, to enrich thee, at command.

Heed not thou, but boldly strike them ; let descend the faithful blow.

From their wreck and from their ruin first will thy true riches flow.— Treneh,


Lrssons:—1. Zhe blessing of God ts the strength and glory of a nation.


2. When that blessing is forfeited by unfaithfulnesa the nation rinks into ruin
3. Prayer for Divine help should be followed by reformation of life.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 2, 8,11. A bad example.
I. Transmits its baneful influence to
succeeding generations. II. Is all
the more potent for evil when found
in persons in the highest station.
III. Is no excuse for any who do evil
—does not absolve from personal
responsibility. IV. Rouses the anger
of God against all who imitate it.


Y. Cannot be followed without suffer-
ing and chastisement.


Adversity. I. A sharp
spur to devotion. II. Appeals to the
Divine compassion. III. Affords an
opportunity for the gracious exercise
of Divine power.

— The house of correction is the
543


Verse 4.


OmAP, XI,


fittest hospital for those cripples whose
legs are lame through their own


laziness.—Fuller.
God slone

Instructeth how to mourn. He doth not

trust
This higher lesson to a voice or hand
Subordinate. Behold! He cometh forth !
O sweet disciple —bow thyself to learn
The alphabet of tears.—Sigourncy.


— Prayer—I. An evidence of
repentance. II. Should be addressed
to the Being whom we have offended.
III. Secures the Divine compassion
and help. IV. The best method of
obtaining victory over our enemies.

— Repentance is God’s choicest
and deepest gift; repentance for our
habitual dreariness and coldness, for
that shallowness of heart which over-
takes us when we are surrounded
with the tokens of His presence, when
we are partakers of the ordinances of
His grace; which those very privi-
leges seem to produce in us; from
which troubles, individual or national,
cannot of themselves deliver us.
Divines may have infinite refinements
about the mode, degrees, and effect of
repentance. That one phrase of Scrip-
ture, ‘‘turning to God,” contains all
that we can say of it. Man, thou art
living, moving, having thy being in
One whom thou art habitually for-
getting. That forgetfulness makes
thee forget thy brethren; yea, and
in the truest sense forget thyself.
Thou dost not know what thou art,
whither thou art tending. All the
earth is ariddletothee. Thy fellow-
men are hindrances inthy way. Thou
art thine own great curse and terror.
Recollect from whom come the
thoughts and impulses of the mind


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KING&.


and will within thee; who can make
those thoughts and impulses an order
instead of a chaos. Turn round to
the light which is ever sending flashes
into the midst of thy darkness. Ask
that instead of such momentary
appearances, from which thou shrinkest
as from a guilty thing surprised, it
may penetrate thee and possess thee,
and become thy constant habitation.
When thou yieldest thyself to its
transforming energy, thou wilt not
bear to see the earth lying crushed
under the weight of its sins and
oppressions. Thou wilt believe in
thy heart and declare with thy lips
that in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem,
in the church which God has set up,
in the people who believe in His love,
there is a prophecy of deliverance for
the universe.—F. D. Maurice.


Verse 5. The Lord gave Israel a
temporal saviour in its hour of physical
need ; to us He has given a spiritual
Saviour, who can and will save us out
of the hands of the greatest of all our
enemies. Many a one prays, like
Jehoahag, in his time of distress; and
when the trouble is past, the good
impulses quickly disappear.


Verse 7. No nation is so great
and mighty that God cannot take away
its might, and make it so small and
slight that it is only like dust which
the wind scatters (Ps. xviii. 42),.—


Lange.


Verse 12. War-like valour. I.
Not the highest kind of valour. II.
Called into exercise by the extremi-
ties of a nation. III. Is of no avail
when opposed to Divine chastisements.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 14-19.


Satvation THE ALL-assonBine THEME or A True Proves.


I. It is a theme on which he delights to dwell in his dying moments,
The ministry of Elisha was one of peace and good will. He sought to build up
rather than to destroy. He loved to speak of mercy and deliverance rather than


of wrath and destruction.


He had witnessed the sins of Israel, and had faith-


fully denounced them. He saw and grieved over the sufferings that had come
upon the nation. And now, worn down with age and disease, and rapidly
544


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP, XITi,








—


approaching the end of his career, his last message is one of hope and salvation.
The theme of his youth had lost none of its freshness and power in his old age.
The herald of salvation cannot close his career more grandly than in proclaiming
his loved message with his dying lips:


“ Happy, if with my latest breath
I may but gasp His name;
Preach Him to all, and cry in death,
Behold, tehold the Lamb!”


Ii. It is a theme which raises his own character into dignity and power.
“The chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof.” This seemed to mean
that Elisha was regarded as the strength and protection of [srael. ‘‘ What use
there was of chariots and horsemon in those wars of the ancients all history
tells us. All the strength of the battle stood in these ; there could be neither
defence nor offence but by them. Such was Elisha unto Israel. The greatest
safeguard to any nation is the sanctity and faithfulness of their prophets,
without which the church and state lie open to utter desolation.” And there
is that in the truths which a faithful minister declares which re-acts upon and
elevates his own character. The diligent student becomes great by the great-
ness of the truths he studies. He becomes familiar with great ideas, and is
purified and strengthened by the Divine spirit that lives and breathes in them.
The grand elements of greatness and power are found in closest communion
with God and truth.


III. It is a theme illustrated by suggestive symbols, (Verses 15-19).
In these symbols we are taught: 1. That salvation ts from the Lord. Elisha
directed Joash to take bow and arrows as a symbolical act designed to intimate:
more fully and significantly the victories promised to the king of Israel over
the Syrians. His laying his hands upon the king’s hands was to represent the
power imparted to the bow-shot as coming from the Lord through the medium
of the prophet. Salvation is not by armies, or by the subtlety of human
diplomacy, but of God, who can save by many or by few. ‘Salvation is the
confluence of every attribute in Deity, extinguishing by contrast whatever else
was splendid, while God himself effused the sparkles of heaven upon the
question of despair, and dissolved the darkness of human destiny in a flood of
everlasting light!” 2. That the measure of salvation ts limited by our faith.
Joash’s shooting the other arrows into the ground was in token of the number
of victories he was to gain ; but his stopping at the third betrayed the weakness
of his faith ; for as the discharged arrow signified a victory over the Syrians, it
is evident that the more arrows he shot, the more victories he would gain; and
as he stopped so soon, his conquest would be incomplete. Faith in God is the
measure, and unbelief the limit, of His blessings. ‘‘ According to your faith be
it unto you.”


Lxssons:—1. The chief joy of @ true prophet is to proclaim deliverance to the
oppressed. 2. That @ true prophet ts ennobled by the spirst of his message.
8. That Jehovah carries on Hts work of salvation by human agenores.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 14. A touching death-bed
scene. I. A young, healthy, vigorous
king weeping in the presence of an
aged, venerable, and dying saint. II.
The tears of the monarch bore

us


eloquent testimony to the worth and

power of the dying prophet. III.

Counsels given under such circum-

stances carry with them a weight and

solemnity that cannot be forgotten.
Bh


OHAP, XTi.


‘ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





— The longest day must have its
evening. Good Elisha, who had lived
some ninety years, a wonder of pro-
phets, and had out-worn many suc-
cessions in the thrones of Israel and
Judah, is now cast upon the bed of his
sickness, yea, of hisdeath. That very
age might seem a disease, which yet is
seconded with a languishing distemper.
It is not in the power of any holiness
to privilege us from infirmity of body,
from final dissolution. He saw his
master Elijah rapt up suddenly from
the earth and fetched by a fiery
chariot from this vale of mortality—
himself must leisurely wait for his last
pangs in a lingering passage to the
same glory. There is not one way
appointed to us by the Divine Provi-
dence unto one common blessedness;
one hath more pain, another hath more
speed; violence snatcheth away one,
another by an insensible pace draws
every day nearer to his term. The
wisdom and goodness of God magnifies
itself in both. Happy is he, who,
after due preparation, is passed through
the gates of death ere he be aware!
Happy is he, who, by the holy use of
long sickness, is taught to see the
gates of death afar off and addressed
for a resolute passage. The one dies
like Elijah, the other like Elisha—
both blessedly.— Bp. Hail.

— O, thou, who canst do more by
thy prayers than all the soldiers can
with their weapons of war! LElisha’s
piety and prayers were the strength of
the state, as this wicked king could
now acknowledge with tears, though
before he had slighted him. Staple-
ton says that he called Elisha ‘ the
horsemen” of Israel, because by his
holy life and doctrine he led all Israel ;
and ‘‘the chariot,” because by his
virtue and prayers he preserved the
people, that God destroyed them not
for their sins. The death of such is
very ominous, a forerunner of great
ealamities.— 7rapp.

— The death of godly ministers
a subject for lamentation.—Death
reduces all things to their proper
level. Circumstances and characters
never find their just estimate until the
shadows of mortality have abated the

646


glare of life, and its chills have
tempered the fluctuating state of life.
On this occasion, what is the crown
of Israel to the dying prophet ? Death
brought the purple of the monarch
into contact with the coarse garment
of the prophet. The prophet under
that dispensation was what the minis-
ter is now to the church. There is 4
difference in some respects; but in
origin and design the office is one.
Times and modes change; but prin-
ciples are eternal. And thus we may
adopt the lamentation of Joash over
the expiring Elisha,—‘‘ Oh my father,
my father, &c.”” We may be in-
structed by it in the following par-
ticulars. I. The importance of a
faithful minister to the church and
the world in his life and in his
death. 1. Zhe tmportance of his
ministry. What is there in the
world to compete with it? It is to
show the ruins of the fall repaired and
paradise restored. It is to save souls
from death. 2. The importance of
Jidelity in tt. Woe unto those who
conceal, or deny, or alter, or add to
the truth. 8. The tmportance of the
life of a faithful mintster to the church
and to the world. The life will preach
when the tongue is silent. Renders
his preaching singularly impressive.
4. The importance of the death of a
Saithful minister. Though it does not
determine character, what consolation
does it afford to the survivors! What
a savour of Christianity does it leave
behind. The faithful minister is a
strong bulwark to those around him.
(1. The attention awakened by his
removal and the respect due to his
memory. 1. Jsracl’s chariot and
horsemen are departed. They are im-
mortal till their work is done. Some
fall newly green, and others newly
grey; and how swiftly are they re-
moved. 2. Attention vs awakened by
events like these. An attention that
too often sleeps before. We do not
find the attention of Joash awakened
before. O! if we were aware we were
hearing the last sermon, with what
attention should we listen. 3. There
te respect due to the memory of a faithful
mintsier. This is claimed on every


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





te of reason and gratitude.
I. The tender recollections of
those more immediately connected
with him, and the special duties
devolving uponthem. The king wept.
Such intimacies stand connected with
every man and with every minister,
All the charities of human nature are
connected in the sacred office, and
ealled into contact with all its parts.
IV. Anticipate the day when all the
ravages of death shall be repaired
and all the fruits of ministerial
usefulness gathered. 1. Such a day
shall come. A day when the harvest
shall be reaped. 2. The anticipation of
this day 18 solemn, delightful, smportant.
—The Pulpit.

— It is rarely recognised how great
and irreparable is the loss of a true
man of God, a great benefactor and a
faithful servant, until he is gone.
King Joash was not ashamed to come
to the dying prophet, and to confess
with tears his own helplessness ; but
how many shu such holy men, and
are glad if they need never have any-
thing to do with them.—Lange.


Verse 15. Here we see Elisha’s
patriotism. If we would know what
true love of one’s fatherland is, let us
ask the prophet. In his case it re-
ceived a Divine consecration. It is
truly touching to see with what tender-
ness the prophets enfold in their hearts
their country and people, even when
they see in them little but spiritual
death, decay, and corruption, and ex-
nee from their fellow-countrymen
ittle but bitterness, hate, and persecu-
tion.— Hrummacher.


Verse 17. The arrows of the
Cord’s deliverance. That death-bed
scene speaks volumes for the power of
holiness. Elisha was the prophet of
God—a man of vo honourable station,
except that he is always honourable
whom God calls to serve him. Joash,
the king of Israel, who has often re-
jected Elisha’s admonitions, and con-
tinued to worship in the groves of
Baal, though Elisha had denounced
them, now that the prophet is about
to die at the good old age of ninety,


CHAP. XIiy.





comes to weep at his bed-side. It was
something remarkable for the king to
come there atall. Kings do not often
visit death-bed scenes, especially the
death-beds of God’s servants. But it
was something more remarkable for
that king to stand and look upon the
decaying form of the aged prophet,
and to weep over his face. More
notable still was the language in which
the king expressed his sense of the
value of the prophet to the state.
“QO my father! my father! the chariot
of Israel, and the horsemen thereof!”
He felt as if now all his strength was
cut off. The king had trusted in his
cavalry, though he had but a slender
force, and he compares the prophet to
that which he looked upon as being
the strongest arm of his military
service; or he looks upon the state
now as being a chariot with wild
horses, and no stately prophet to stand
erect and hold the reins. Now have
the reins dropped, and whither will
the chariot go? It will soon be over-
turned, and the mad coursers will drag
it hither and hither. Sothe king, out
of a sort of selfish respect for the
prophet—for it was respect, and yet
it was selfishness—stands and weeps
over the prophet’s dying bed.


I. Let us consider the significant
sign. Israel was at that time engaged
in warfare against Syria. As a sign
that God intended to give victory to
his people, the king is bidden to take
the bow and arrows; Elisha, as God’s
representative, puts his hand upon the
king’s hands; forthwith the window is
opened, and the arrow is shot. As it
flies through the air, the prophet says
that that arrow is the arrow of the
Lord’s deliverance of his people out
of the hand of Syria. The interpreta-
tion of this symbolical act is simple
enough. God will save. Deliverance
is of the Lord; but it must be accom-
plished by human instrumentality.
Joash must take the bow and arrows;
but the hands of Joash cannot make
the arrow speed, save as Elisha, the
representative of God, puts his hands
there. So the man, divinely strength-
ened bw God, shoots the arrow, and

647


OMAP, XII.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a LE


the deliverance comes. We grant you
that God can work without means, and
even when he uses means, he still takes
the glory to himself, for it is all his
own; yet it has been the rule, and
will be the rule till the day of means
shall come to an end, that just as
God saved man by taking upon him-
self man’s flesh, so everywhere in the
world he calls men by speaking to
them through men of their own flesh
and blood. We are not to let the
arrows lie still, and say, ‘‘ God will do
his own work, Elisha will shoot the
arrows.’ This is idleness; we have
had enough of this. Look at those
churches which say, ‘‘ God will do his
own work.” You will find that the
more these people talk about God’s
doing his own work, the more they
sink into a fatal apathy. And when
they have entangled brethren whose
conversion was effected under other
ministry than their own, they talk as
if they had been re-converted, and did
not know the truth till they had heard
the particular, excellent, hot-pressed
gospel which they deliver. On the
other hand it is an equally dangerous
error to suppose that we are to take
the arrows and shoot without God.
This is, in fact, the more dangerous of
the two; although, if I have to com-
pare two devils together, I know not
which is the worst of these evil spirits
—the spirit which idly says, ‘‘ Leave
it to God,” or the spirit which goes
about God’s work without dependence
on him.


II. Let us censure the slack-
handed king. The prophet gave him
the bow and arrows, and bade him
shoot down upon the ground. It was
left to him. He is bidden to shoot,
and he shoots once; he draws his bow
and he shoots again; a third time he
draws the bow, and then throws it
down slack upon the ground. The
prophet is angry with him, for he will
only have three victories. If he had
smitten the ground six times he would
have had six victories. The king is
to be censured, and censured severely ;
but as he is dead and gone, and our
censure cannot affect him, let ws

648


censure those who now imitate him.
1. How many believers have but little
faith, and seem quite content to have
but that little. They cannot grasp the


‘promise of God and believingly expect


to have it fulfilled. They cannot take
God at his word, and therefore their
temporal troubles and their spiritual
cares press very heavily upon them.
Oh, that they had grace to smite the
ground six times! Oh, that they knew
how to cast all their burden on Him
who careth for them! 2. Then you
see another class of people who are
just the same as to their knowledge.
They do not understand the deep
things of God; they are content to
know that which saves the soul from
ruin, and the remedy which is provided
by Christ, but they let the deep things
of God lie still for strong men, but
they themselves are content to be
babes. 3. You will see these same
people, or others like them, who are
content about their daily walk and
conversation. They are not drunkards;
they do not swear; they are scrupu-
lously truthful; they commit no
breach of the Sabbath day; but when
you have said this, you have said
about a8 much as you can say of them.
Their religion seems to have made
them moral, but it would be difficult
to perceive that it has made them
holy. These brethren have, in fact,
shot three times, and they have
smitten the ground once or twice, but
they have not made a clean sweep of
their besetting sins; they still tolerate
some of them; they have not reached
to a high point of holiness. 4.
So, too, there are many Christians
who do not shoot more than three
times, inasmuch as they are content with
very low enjoyments. Shame on us
that we are content to be such dwarfs,
when we might grow into giants; that
we are here frittering away our time,
when we might immortalize ourselves
and glorify our Lord. How is it we
are content to bring forth a lean ear,
and then a scanty ear, when there
should be seven ears upon one stalk,
like the plenty of Egypt. Consider
some of the reasons why the king did
not shoot more. (1). Porhap: he fett


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP, XIIE,


ner eernree en


rather tender towards the Syrians. It
is just possible that he felt he did not
want to hurt them too much. He would
be victorious; he would get his
enemy under his feet; but, if he did
more, he would crush him outright,
and he hardly wanted to do that. So
some professors do not want to be too
hard upon their sins; they have a sort
of hidden tenderness towards their own
corruptions. (2). Again, perhaps the
king did not go on to shoot because
he thought tt was hardly his business to
be employed as a bowman. ‘‘ Why
should I stay here for ever,” saith he,
“shooting arrows? I did _ not
object when the prophet’s hand was
upon me, to shoot; but to stand here
and keep smiting the ground is hardly
the occupation for a king.” (3). And
then the thought, perhaps, that he
should have three victories, and that
would be enough. You do not want to
be made good; you do not want to be
made Christ-like; you do not want to
be able to triumph over your sins;
you mistake your high calling; you
think you are called to be a slave,
when you are called to reign; you
fancy you are called to wear sack-
cloth, when you are bidden to put on
scarlet and fine linen; you think that
God has called you to a dunghill,
whereas He has called you toa throne;
you imagine you are to be but here
and there the skirmishers in the battle,
when He has called you to stand in
the front rank and to fight constantly
for his cause. (4). The king may
have begun to doubt whether the victories
would really come. He knew very
well that he had not many soldiers,
and that Syria was very strong, so he
thought: ‘‘ Well, it takes some faith
to think that I shall beat them three
times; but it is not likely I shall do it
in the fourth.” He doubted the
Divine power and the Divine promise,
because of his own weakness; and
many Christians do that. (5). And
it is very likely the king despised the
prophet’s plan. Why, he seemed to
say, this was absurd, smiting the
ground in this way! If there were
any men to be shot at, he would not
spare the arrows; but to smite the


ground in this way—absurd! ridien-
lous! So, too often we miss a blessing
because we do not like God’s plans,


III. Let us justify the righteous
wrath of the prophet. We do not
like to see either an old man or a
dying man angry; but the prophet
here did well to be angry, even though
at the hour of death. He loved the
people, and wept to think that their
king was standing in their light, and
robbing them of precious privileges.
1. How much Israel suffers from the
slack-handedness of the kéng. Oh,
Christians ! you suffer yourselves; you
miss a thousand comforts. What you
might do for God you are unable to do.
What you might sit down and feed
upon yourselves, you utterly miss, be-
cause you will not go on farther, an!
seek higher attainments: and all your
brethren suffer too. 2. How easy the
triumph that might have been achieved /
Why, if this king had shot more
arrows, Syria would have been quite
overcome, and cut in pieces; but be-
cause he was slack in this, Syria waves
her proud banner over captive maids
and sorrowing widows whose husbands
have been slain in battle, and weep in
the streets of Samaria. The devil
rejoices when he sees slumbering
Christians. The world laughs in its
sleeve at professors now-a-days.
8. Low Jehovah's name was dis-
honoured! In Assyria’s streets they
laughed at Jehovah; they said that
their gods were greater than He. Oh,
what a shame it is that you and I
should ever put Christ to more shame
than he endured for our sakes! Let
us bethink ourselves whether we have
not been shooting too few arrows;
whether we have not thought too much
of the little we have been doing;
whether we might not have done more.
I am sure there is room for great im-
provement in the best of us. O Lord,
what a spark is my love to thee! Oh,
that thou wouldest blow it into a flame
till it were as coals of juniper !— C. H.
Spurgeon.

— The arrow shot towards the
enemy’s country signifies the deliver-
ance which the Lord will soon grant

549


CHAP. xii,





Israel from the Syrian yoke. The
casting of a spear, or shooting of an
arrow into an enemy’s country was a
common signal for the beginning of
hostilities.
is said to have hurled a dart into his
enemy’s land when he came to the
borders of the Persian territory.—
Whedon.

— After the Scythians had laid
waste their country before the legions
of Darius, and thus reduced the
invading army to the greatest distress
for want of provisions, they sent an
ambassador to the Persian king to
present him a bird, a mouse, a frog, and
five arrows. The ambassador was
asked what these presents meant. He
answers that he had nothing else in
charge but to deliver them, and
return with all speed; but that the
Persians, if they were ingenious,
would discover what interpretation
to put upon them. Darius, judging
according to his wishes, gave it as
his opinion that they were tokens of
submission. ‘‘The mouse,’’ said he,
“being bred in the earth, indicates
that they yield up their lands; the
frog, living in water, that they yield
up also their lakes, rivers, &c.; the
bird, represented all the wild and tame
fowl; and the delivering up the five
arrows was the same with the
Scythians as delivering up arms is
with other nations.” ‘Alas!’ said
Gobryas, one of the seven princes who
had ejected the magi, ‘it is far other-
wise. For O, Persians! unless as birds
ye fly in the air, or as mice ye retreat
under the earth, or as frogs ye swim
in the water, ye shall never return
whence ye came, but shall perish by
these arrows.” And so in fact it
turned out; for it was only by the
merest accident that Darius and the
whole of the army were not cut off by
the Scythians.—Perey Anecdotes.

— How readily doth Elisha now
make good the words of Joash! How
truly is he the chariots and horsemen
of Israel! Israel had not fought
without him—much less had been
victorious. If theirs be the endeavour,
the success is his. Even the dying
prophet puts life and speed into the

550


Thus Alexander the Great °


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





forces of Israel; and while he is
digging his own grave, is raising
trophies to God’s people.-—Bp. Hall.

— Many an “arrow of the Lord”
is shot from the lips or looks of
a dying saint—e.g., a mother’s last
appeal, a father’s farewell counsel,
a friend’s request.


Verses 18,19. Elisha’s reproof te
Joash. Consider: 1. What messages
of mercy God has sent to us. 1. By
significant emblems. 2. By express
promises. 3. By the declarations and
examples of dying saints. II. Whence
it is that we profit so little by them.
The fault is in ourselves alone, just
as it was in the king of Israel. 1.
Our desires are faint. 2. Our expecta-
tions low. 38. Our exertions langutd.
Conclusion: 1. Improve the oppor-
tunities God affords you by his minis-
ters. 2. Trifle not with the im-
pressions which are at any time upon
your mind.— Simeon.

— Cease not to shoot arrows of
love into the heart of God, so shall
one arrow of deliverance after another
come back from the Lord, and be given
to thee in the word of truth. So
shalt thou smite thy spiritual foes and
tread them under foot, even more
completely than Joash did the Syrians.
He who is called to execute work for
God may not stop and desist according
to his own good judgment, but must
go on in it tirelessly and faithfully till
the Lord commands him to cease.
Faith must hold firm until the end.
When one battle is won, the conflict
is not over. How much is it to be
regretted when one only half believes
—half obeys; or when one, after a good
beginning, desists.—Lange.


Verse 19. The conflict with evil
I. Should be carried on under the
direction of those competent to advise.
II. Complete victory can be achieved
only by resolute and persevering effort.
III. To stop short of complete victory
is to entail greater calamity in the
future.

— The prophet himself did not yet
know how many victories Joash should
obtain against the Syrians; but God


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP, ZITI.





had signified to him that he should
learn that by the number of the king’s
strokes; and he was angry with him,
not simply because he smote only
thrice, but because, by his unbelief
and idolatry, he provoked God so to
over-rule his heart and hand that he
should smite but thrice, which was
a token that God would assist him no


further, although his smiting but
thrice might proceed either from his
unbelief or negligence. For, by the
former sign, and the prophet’s com-
ment upon it, he might clearly per-
ceive that this also was intended as
a sign of his success, and, therefore,
he ought to have done it frequemly
and vehemently.— Pool.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 20,21.
Tue INFLUENCE oF THE GREAT aND Goon.


I. Does not terminate with their life. ‘‘ And Elisha died, and they buried
him ;” but they could not bury his influence for good; that is one thing over
which death has nopower. ‘‘ There is nothing,” writes Dickens, ‘no, nothing
innocent or good, that dies and is forgotten; let us hold to that faith or none.
An infant, a prattling child, dying in its cradle, will live again in the better
thoughts of those who loved it, and play its part through them in the redeem-
ing actions of the world, though its body be burnt to ashes, or drowned in the
deepest sea. There is not an angel added to the host of heaven but does its
blessed work on earth in those that loved it here. Forgotten! Oh, if the good
deeds of human creatures could be traced to their source, how beautiful would
even death appear, for how much charity, mercy, and purified affection would
be seen to have their growth in dusty graves.” The life of Elisha was a
precious treasure to the nation; his name could not be forgotten; his deeds
shone as the stars of heaven; his power penetrated all ranks, from king to
peasant.


II. Keeps alive the hope of deliverance in the breasts of an oppressed
people (verse 20). The Moabites had partially recovered from the reverses they
suffered at the beginning of Elisha’s career (ch. iii.), and became strong enough
to make an annual predatory incursion. Harassed by Syrian and Moabite, the
Israelites might have yielded to despair; but the spirit of the dead prophet
sustained them. They loved his memory; they revered his stainless character ;
they believed his prophecies, and in the darkest hour of oppression and suffering
they cherished the hope of deliverance. The influence of a good man lives
through many generations, and inspires many to nobler thoughts and more
heroic action.

O! who shall lightly say that fame

Is nothing but an empty name |!
Whilst in that sound there is a charm

The nerves to brace, the heart to warna;
As, thinking of the mighty dead,

The young from slothful couch will start,
And vow, with lifted hands outspread,

Like them to act a noble part !—Batllie.


Ill. Is sometimes vindicated by miraculous occurrences (verse 21).
This miracle of Elisha’s, after his death, is more surprising than any of those
which he performed during his lifetime. No exact parallel offers itself in the
rest of Scripture. Still it may be said to belong to a class where the miracle
was not wrought through the agency of a living miracle-worker, but by a
material object in which, by God’s will, virtue for the time being resided.
The most familiar example of this class is the staunching of the issue of blood,

651


daar. xi HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: KINGS.


rn re see enna neenernene


by the touch of the hem of Christ’s garment; but the cures wrought by
handkerchiefs and aprons brought to the sick from the body of St. Paul
(Acts xix. 12) are still more nearly parallel. In the present instance, no doubt
the primary effect was greatly to increase the reverence of the Israelites for the
memory of Elisha, to lend force to his teaching, and especially to add weight to
his unfulfilled prophecies, as to that concerning the coming triumphs of Israel
over Syria. In the extreme state of depression to which the Israelites were
now reduced, a very signal miracle may have been needed to encourage and
re-assure them (Speaker's Comm.) It was not the dead body of Elisha, but the
living God, that gave life again to the dead; and Omnipotence worked by
contact with the dead Elisha to show that the Divine efficiency that was in the
prophet had not disappeared from Israel with his death. The future fame and


influence of the good may be safely left in the hands of God.


Lrssons:—A good man.—1. Js the frutt of divine grace. 2. Isa great boon
to a nation. 8. Ls smperishable in his influence.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 20. The death of the good.
I. A calamity to a distracted country.
II. Suggests that the most con-
spicuous piety cannot evade the
penalty of sin, III. The cause of
wide-spread and genuine sorrow.
IV. Leads men to reflect upon the
influence and power of the life just
terminated.

— Such was Elisha, greater yet
less, less yet greater, than Elijah. He
is less. For character is the real
prophetic gift. The man, the will,
the personal grandeur of the prophet
are greater than any amount of
prophetic acts, or any extent of
prophetic success. We cannot dis-
pense with the mighty past, even
when we have shot far beyond it.
Nations, churches, individuals must
all be content to fare as dwarfs in
comparison with the giants of old
time—with the Reformers, the
Martyrs—the heroes of their early
youthful reverence. A prophet like
Elijah comes once, and does not
return. Elisha, both to his country-
men and to us, is but the successor—
the faint reflection of his predecessor.
When he appeared before the three
suppliant kings, his chief honour was
that he was Elisha, the son of Shaphat,
who ‘‘ poured water on the hands of
Elijah.”

Less, yet greater. For the work
of the great ones of this earth is

$52 ;


carried on by far inferior instruments,
but on a far wider scale—and, it may
be, in a far higher spirit. The life
of an Elijah is never spent in vain.
Even his death has not taken him
from us. He struggles, single.
handed as it would seem, and with-
out effect; and in the very crisis of
the nation’s history, is suddenly and
mysteriously removed. But his work
continues; his mantle falls; his
teaching spreads; his enemies perish.
The prophet preaches and teaches;
the martyr dies and passes away; but
other men enter into his labours. By
that one impulse of Elijah, Elisha
and Elisha’s successors, prophets, and
sons of prophets, are raised up by
fifties and by hundreds. They must
work in their own way. They must
not try to retain the spirit of Elijah
by repeating his words, or by clothing
themselves in his rough mantle, or by
living his strange life.

What was begun in fire and storm,
in solitude and awful visions, must be
carried on through winning arts, and
healing acts, and gentle words of
peacefal and social intercourse. Not
in the desert of Horeb, or on the top of
Carmel, but in the crowded thorough-
fares of Samaria, in the gardens of
Damascus, and by the rushing waters
of Jordan. Elisha himself may be
as nothing compared with Elijah,
His wonders may be forgotten. Hg


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP X11.


SS reer


flies by the long decay of years; no
chariots of fire are there to lighten his
last moments, or bear his soul to
heaven. Yet he knows that, though
unseen, they are always around him.
Once in the city of Dothan, in the
ancient pass, where the caravans of
the Midianites and the troops of the
Syrians stream through into Central
Palestine—when he is compassed
about with chariots and horses of the
hostile armies, and his servant cries
out for fear, Elisha said, ‘‘ Fear not:
for they that be with us are more than
they that be with them. And, be-
hold, the mountain was full of horses
and chariots of fire round about
Elisha.’”’ It is a vision of which the
meaning acquires double force from
its connection with the actual history ;
as if to show, by the very same figure,
. that the hope which bore Elijah to
his triumphal end, was equally present
with Elisha. Elijah, and those who
are like Elijah, are needed in critical
and momentous occasions to ‘‘ prepare
the way for the Lord.” His likeness
is John the Baptist: and of those that
were born of women before the times
of Christendom, none were greater
than they. But Elisha, and those
who are like Elisha, have a humbler,
and yet a wider, and therefore a holier
sphere; for their works are not the
works of the Baptist, but are the deeds,
if not of Christ Himself, at any rate
of ‘“‘the least in His kingdom ”—the
gentle, beneficent, ‘‘holy man of
God, who passeth by us continually.”
— Stanley.

Before closing this account of Elisha,
we must not omit to notice the
parallel which Elisha presents to our
Lord—the more necessary because,
unlike the resemblance between Elijah
and John the Baptist, no attention is
called to it in the New Testament.
Some features of this likeness have
already been spoken of. But it is not
merely because he healed a leper,
raised a dead man, or increased the
loaves, that Elisha resembled Christ,
but rather because of that loving,
gentle temper, and kindness of dis-
position—characteristic of him above
all the saints of the Old Testament—


ever ready to soothe, to heal, and to
conciliate—which attracted to him
women and simple people, and made
him the universal friend and “ father,”
not only consulted by kings and
generals, but resorted to by widows
and poor prophets in their little
troubles and perplexities. We have
spoken above of the fragmentary
nature of the records of Elisha, and
of the partial conception of his work
as a prophet which they evince. Be
it so. For that very reason we should
the more gladly welcome those en-
gaging traits of personal goodness
which are so often to be found even
in those fragments, and which give us
a reflection—feeble, it is true, but still
a reflection—in the midst of the stern-
ness of the Old Dispensation, of the
love and mercy of the New.—Smith’s
Bible Dictionary.

Verse 21. The virtue of a corpse.
The chief lesson this story teaches is
the mighty influence a good man may
exert after hisdecease. 1. We should
be ambitious of this influence. Our
lives at the longest are brief. That
portion of our lives devoted to holy
aims is briefer still. How consolatory
and inspiring is the fact that, when
our brief life is finished, we can still
be a power for good! Think that,
from your seat in glory, you may see
men inspired by the memory of your
generosity, zeal, courage, purity, and
prayerfulness. Their deeds in turn
are remembered, and inspire others.
Thus you will havea share in blessing
men to the end of time. 2. Let me
remind you how much we owe to this
influence. Would you be what you
are were it not for the memory of the
dead? 38. Zhe best methods for securing
this posthumous influence for good. 1.
By publishing through the press our
thoughts and opinions. How man
a book is like the body of Elisha—
lifeless itself, yet giving life! 2. By
a definite and public profession of
religion. 3. By active engagement in
Christian work. We must all exert
some influence after death, either for
weal or woe. Let us, then, be jealous
over ourselves with a godly jealousy.
—R. A. Griffin.

662


AUVUMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGB.





— Were not the men of Israel
more dead than the carcase thus
buried, how could they choose but see
in this revived corpse an emblem of
their own condition? How could they
choose but think, if we adhere to the
God of Elisha, He shall raise our
decayed estates, and restore our nation
to its former glory.—Bp. Hall.

— The miracle of Elisha’s bones has
been the subject both of criticism and
ofallegory. The rationalist, of course,
admits no miracle. In his view, the
deceased was only apparently dead,
fallen into a trance, perhaps, but sud-
denly brought to his senses again by
the shock of being roughly cast into
Elisha’s tomb; others admit a real
miracle, but seem to look upon it with
suspicion. ‘‘ This,” says Clarke, ‘is
the first, and, I believe, the last, ac-
count of a true miracle performed by
the bones of a dead man, and yet on
it, and such like, the whole system of
miracle-working relics has been
founded by the Popish Church.”
‘Elisha’s works,” says Stanley,
‘“‘stand alone in the Bible in their
likeness to the acts of medieval saints.
There alone, in the sacred history, the


gulf between Biblical and ecclesiastical
miracles almost disappears. In this,
as in so much besides, his life and
miracles are not Jewish, but Christian.’’
By others the miracle is made a type
of Jesus’ power to raise to life by hia
own death and burial those who are
dead in trespasses and sins. ‘So,
too,” says Wordsworth, “the apostles
and evangelists, being dead, yet speak
to all the world in the Gospels and
Epistles, and, by the word of God in
them, they raise souls to life eternal.”
— Whedon.

— Which miracle God wrought,
partly to do honour to that great
prophet, and that by this seal he might
confirm his doctrine, and thereby con-
fute the false doctrine and worship of
the Israelites ; partly to strengthen the
faith of Joash and the Israelites in his
Peomise of their success against the —
Syrians; and partly, in the midst of
all their calamities, to comfort such
Israelites as were Elisha’s followers
with the hopes of that eternal life
whereof this was a manifest pledge,
and to awaken the rest of that people


to a due care and preparation for it.—
Pool.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 23-36,


Tae UncHANGRABLENESS OF THE DIVINE Mernroy,


I. Seen in commiserating the sufferings of His people.—‘‘ Hazael oppressed


Israel ; and the Lord was gracious unto


23).


the s them and had compassion ” (verses 22
The Divine heart is moved with the sight of suffering and woe.


It i


impossible for Him to be callous and indifferent to the afflictions of His people ;
the more they suffer, the more they are endeared to Him. The tenderness of


the Divine mercy is unspeakably exquisite.
mercy with coldness and persistent unbelief!


How great is our sin to treat that
Suffering is often the first thing


that opens our eyes to the enormity of our sin and the marvellous condescension


of the Divine mercy.


II. Seen in His reluctance to inflict the extreme penalty of disobedience.
—‘‘The Lord would not destroy them, neither cast He them from His pre-


sence as yet” (verse 23).


The sins of the Israelites cried for chastisement.


The greatest chastisement would be to be abandoned by Jehovah to the fury of
their enemies, as was ultimately done (ch. xvii. 18, 20). But, though their


iniquities deserved it, this extreme


mercy is always


punishment was delayed by the Divine
mercy. That mercy was reinforced by the Divine faithfulness.
membered ‘‘ His covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.”


The Lord re-
The exercise of


in harmony with every attribute of the Divine nature. If


God be slow to punish because of His mercy, His justice ensures the certainty


of punishment.
bod


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


IMT. Seen in His faithful fulfilment of the promise of deliverance (verse
25). The dying Elisha, as the mouth-piece of Jehovah, had promised Israel
three victories over Syria, and the resuscitation of the corpse when it touched
the bones of the buried prophet would tend to strengthen faith in the fulfilment
of the promise. In this verse the fact of that fulfilment is recorded—another
indication that the history was written, not to set forth the valour and prowess
of the Hebrews, and the external glory of the kingdom, but to illustrate the
dealings of God with them, and trace the true causes of their decline and ex-
tinction asa nation. Every page of the history bears testimony to both the
mercy and faithfulness of God. Mercy rejoices in providing means of deliver-
ance, and faithfulness in carrying them out.


CHAP. KYW





Lxssons :—The Divine mercy.—1. Js tender and long-suffering. 2. Gives no
licence to wrong-doing. 3. Provides an opportunity for repentance and reform.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 25.—Property wrongfully
acquired. I, Has no security in its
possession. IT. Acquired by violence,
may be restored by violence. III. Is
not worth the trouble it costs to ac-
quire and keep.


Verses 22,23.—National suffering.
I. A chastisement for national sin.
II. Awakens the Divine compassion.
Ill. Is alleviated by the Divine
mercy. .

Verse 23.—When God turns Him-
self from us, then we are given over
to wretchedness: when he turns back
# us again, then we find salvation.


— Tyrants are rods by means of
which God chastises His people; but


Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had been
dead for a thousand years, and yet
their blessing was efficacious. God
does not take pleasure in our ruin,
but remembers, even in the midst of
His anger, His promised grace and the


finally the tyrants themselves are
chastised by God and cast into the fire.


— These cities were unjustly ob-
tained and quickly lost. Unrighteous
wealth rarely comes to the third gene-


covenant He has made.—Lange. ration.— Lange.





CHAPTER XIV.


AMAZIAH IN JUDAH AND JEROBOAM II. IN ISRAEL.
CrirtcaL AND Expuanatony Norgs.—Verse 1. Amaziah, king of Judah—Historian re-
tarns to the records concerning Judah. Verse 3. Yet not like David, his father—Chronicles
suys, “ Not with a perfect heart,” acting in general obedience to God’s law, yet lacking in
spiritual loyalty and heartfelt piety. Verse 5. Slew his servants which had slain his father—
It was a Mosaic law that a son should—as both an act of justice and filial piety—avenge hia
father’s murder ; but he did this without malice, leaving their children untouched, contrary to
the prevailing custom of antiquity. This act of revenge was wisely delayed till the kingdom
was confirmed in his hand, thus indicating that these servants were men of state influence and


eminence. Verse 7. Called the name of it Jokkeel—Its former name, yon, the rock;


# Tlérpa, afterwards Arabia Petrea, situate amid steep rocks. This ancient Petra is still a
scene of splendid ruins. Its new name—JN/1)—signifies given, or conquered by God,
Creer 7


8. Come, let us look one another in the face—An insvlent challenge ; perhaps inspired
Leela to avenge the massacre of his ancestors by Jehu (chapter ix.), more probably from
ELvion over his success with the Edomites. Verse 9, The thistle that was in Lebanon—A
parable couched in most contemptuous form. Amaziah a mean thistle; Rick of Lebaron

7)


omar. xxv. ' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
NT I ee ecah ici  Eie l l


being, in its grand contrast, the sovereign of Israel; the wild beast being the desolating army
of Israel. But thistle should be briar or briar bush. Givethy daughter to my son to wife—
Only a superior could assume such an air of authority and make such a demand. Verse 19.
They made a conspiracy against him—Mal-administration of the kingdom followed upon
this fatal war, and was accompanied with spiritual apostasy (2 Chron. xxv. 27); and the rum
of Jerusalem, the sack of the temple, with the captivity of the children carried away as
hostages, roused Judah ‘to conspire and overthrow him. Verse 20. They brought him on
horses—D"D-1D/J J; 4.6. on the royal equestrian chariot. Verse 21. All the people of
Judah took Azariah—So that the popular hostility was not against Amasiah’s family, but
against himself. Verse 22. He built Elath, and restored it to Judah—Elath was the Edomite
seaport (see on 1 Kings ix. 26). Verse 23. In the fifteenth year, &c., Jeroboam, king of
Israel, &e.—Israel’s history resumed. This was Jeroboam Ii. His reign was marked by
idolatry, yet also with great political success (verse 25). Verse 25. Spake by his servant
Jonah—Not found in the Book of Jonah which we possess. Verse 26. There was not any
shut up, &c.—Comp. Notes on Kings xiv. 10. Verse 27. The Lord said not that He would
blot out thename of Israel—The Divine Debas had not yet announced the obliteration of
the ten tribes of the house of Isracl.— W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-28,


Mitrrary AMBITION,


Amaztan was a warrior-king, and throughout his reign we hear the incessant
clash of sabres and the hurried movements of the military. He dragged his
country down to disaster and defeat, and was himself a victim of the vicissi-
tudes of war. He forsook the Lord and became infatuated with idolatry; and
we learn once more how certain and how terrible is the downfall of the man
who abandons Jehovah (2 Chron. xxv. 14-16). His career illustrates the
different phases of mslitary ambition.


I. Military ambition may be associated with a defective piety (verses
1-4). He did what was night, but not with a perfect heart, like David.
His standard of right was too low. His piety was not vigorous and indepen-
dent enough to lift him above all human examples, or even to strive to imitate
the best. He chose an inferior example to copy. ‘‘He did according to all
things as Joash his father did.’”’ There was a remarkable similarity in the
lives of Joash and Amaziah. Both began their reigns, professing zeal for the
worship of Jehovah, and afterwards lapsed into idolatry: both ignored the
warnings of faithful prophets; and both, having forsaken God, perished by the
hands of the assassins. War and religion, though representing directly oppo-
site principles, are often strangely united in the history of nations, but always
to the damage of religion. The war-spirit is an enemy to genuine piety. The
love of military glory weakens the religious conscience.


II. Military ambition delights in scenes of slaughter and bloodshed
pane 5-7). It is mentioned to his credit, that when Amaziah avenged his
ather’s death by the execution of his murderers, he did not slay the children
of the murderers, according to the usual custom in the East. He so far
respected the law of God (verse 6). But we soon read of great slaughter in his
Idumean wars, and of the wanton destruction of 10,000 prisoners, who were
thrown down from a precipice and broken to pieces (2 Chron. xxy. 12).
When the war-demon is once let loose, it riots in scenes of carnage and cruelty.
The indulgence of military ambition begets am indifferenee and recklessness in
the treatment of human life.

556


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. GHAP, xiv.





III. Military ambition generates a boastful spirit and an insatiable love
of conquest (verses 8-10). Amaziah’s victories in Edom turned his head. He
felt equal to anything. He was ambitious to reign over Israel. He challenged
the rival kingdom to battle, and the reply of Jehovah, in the form of a sarcastio
parable, piqued his vanity and determined him to risk the encounter. There
are some minds to whom success is more dangerous than failure.


Good succeas
Is oft more fatal far than bad, one winning throw,
Cast from a flattering die, tempting a gamester
To hazard his whole fortune. Chapman.


IV. Military ambition is often humbled by ignominious defeat (verses
11-14). It was not long before Amaziah had reason to regret his boastful
challenge. By the prompt action of his rival hostilities were precipitated ;
Judah was utterly defeated, the king taken prisoner, the wall of Jerusalem
broken, the temple stripped of its treasures, and hostages taken to prevent any
further molestation. Another illustration of Prov. xvi. 18.


Ah, curst ambition! to thy lures we owe
All the great ills that mortals bear below. Ticke®,


Of all kinds of ambition, military ambition is most disappointing, and sub-
ject to great fluctuations of fortune. History teems with examples of how the
ambitious warrior is at length defeated with the same weapons and by the same
methods with which he sought to defeat and humble others. ‘‘ The stone falls
back upon the head of him who casts it into the air.”


VY. Military ambition is detrimental to good government.—l. Ff is
dangerous to the ruler himself (verses 17-20). The disastrous issue of the war
with Israel created national dissatisfaction. The nobles were scandalized that
their children were draughted away as hostages, and the people were grievously
annoyed to see their city invaded and their loved temple pillaged by a despised
rival. The disaffections grew into serious proportions. A conspiracy was
formed to assassinate Amaziah, as the cause of all their trouble. The fear and
anguish of that period would be the bitterest experience of his life. Of what
avail now were his military powers and his bannered hosts? The interests of
his own people had been sacrificed to his ambitious folly, and he at length
becomes the victim of their disaffection and anger. What Hume says of
Richard Coeur de Lion would apply with equal force to Amaziah: ‘‘ He was
better calculated to dazzle men by the splendour of his enterprise than either
to promote their happiness or his own grandeur by a sound and well-regulated
policy.” 2. It entails trouble to his successor (verses 21, 22). The conquest of
Edom by his father required Azariah to capture and fortify the seaport of
Elath. The results of past victories can be retained only by ceaseless vigilance
and effort. The conquests of the father often impose serious burdens upon the


son.


Lessons :— Zhe love of military glory ts the bane of any nation. 2. The throne
that is won by war is lost by war. 3. It is a nobler ambition to be good than to be
great; to build up and consolidate rather than destroy.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1-4. Imperfect piety. I. sight of the Lord.” II. Js lackeng
May be genuine up toa certain point. im thorough consecration. ‘Not like
“He did that which was right inthe David his father.” III. eee by the

&5


i


GHAP. XIV.





sxample tt imitates. ‘‘ He did accord-
ing to all things as Joash his father did.


Verse 8. In cases like that of
Amaziah, where faith is not com-
pletely and sincerely an affair of the
heart, it has no firm foundation, and
is quickly overwhelmed, either by
unbelief or by superstition. A half-
and-half disposition in what is good is
a bridge that leads to what is evil.
In sacred and spiritual affairs we have
not to ask, How did our fathers do?
but, How would God have us do?
Because Amaziah only did as his
father had done, he finally fared as
his father had fared.— Lange.


Verses 5, 6. Arevengeful spirit. I.
Knows how to wait for its opportunity.
II. Carries out its purpose with terrible
exactness. III. Js controlled by respect
for the Divine law.

— It is as much a sin to leave the
guilty unpunished, as to punish the
innocent. Right and justice are dis-
torted by both courses. Where regi-
cides are allowed to go unpunished,
out of pity or weakness, there all
justice ceases. The throne and the
civil authority are not established by
weak concessions, but by righteous-
ness.— Lange.


Verse 6. ‘‘ But the children of the
murderers he slew not ’—-wherein he
showed some faith and courage that
he would obey this command of God,
though it was very hazardous to him-
self, such persons being likely to seek
revenge for their father’s death.—
Pool.

Verses 7-14. The intoxication of
success. I. Leads to indiscreet and
boastful challenges (v. 7, 8). Il. In-
dignantly repudiates all advice and
warning (v. 9-11). III. Precipi-
tates humiliating defeat and widespread
disaster (v. 12-14).


Verses 7-14. Extraordinary suc-
cess in our undertakings is a great
temptation to arrogance. Those must
be strong legs which cau support great
geod fortune and prosperity. God

658


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KIHGE.





blesses our undertakings in order that
we may become not haughty, but
humble (Gen. xxxii. 10, 11). Every
undue self-exaltation robs us of the
blessing again.— Wurt. Summ.


Verse 8. We learn from Chronicles
that Amaziah had hired a large body
of Israelite soldiers for his Idumean
war, but, warned by a prophet, had dis-
missed them. These persons, disgusted
at their treatment, ravaged the Jewish
territory on their way back to Samaria
(2 Chron. xxy. 13), thus affording
to Amaziah a sufficient ground of
quarrel. This, however, was the
occasion rather than the cause of the
war. The cause was Amaziah’s pride
and ambition. His success against
Edom had so elated him that he
thought himself more than a match
for his northern neighbours (comp.
verse 10, and 2 Chron. xxv. 19).—
Speaker's Comm.


Verse 9. People in the East very
often express their sentiments in
a parabolic form, especially when they
intend to convey unwelcome truths,
or a contemptuous sneer. This was
the design of the admonitory fable
related by Joash in his reply. The
thistle, a low shrub, might be chosen
to represent Amaziah, a petty prince;
the cedar, a powerful sovereign of
Israel; and the wild beast that trode
down the thistle, the overwhelming
army with which Israel could desolate
Judah. But, perhaps, without making
so minute an application, the parable
may be explained generally as
describing in a striking manner the
effects of pride and ambition, towering
far beyond their natural sphere, and
sure to fall with a sudden and ruinous
crash. The moral of the fable is con-
tained in verse 10.—Jamieson.

— The destroyer is represented as
passing by, not as sent out by the
cedar. So Jehoash might wish to
suggest to Amaziah that in case he
meddled with things beyond his
province he would be suddenly smitten
by some judgment of the Almighty.
He does not proudly boast and pre-
sume to tread down Amaziah and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: XINGS.


—


Judah by his own warriors and martial
prowess.— Whedon.


Verse 10. He who desires to correct
another for his arrogance must take
good care not to fall into the same
fault himself. Blame and complaint
for the pride and arrogance of others
often come from hearts which exalt
themselves too much. Do not parade
your wisdom and strength, if you
really possessthem. The Lord breaks
down even the cedars of Lebanon
(Ps. xxix. 5; Isa. ii. 12, 13).—Zange.


Verse 12. The author of Chronicles
notes that Amaziah’s obstinacy, and
his consequent defeat and captivity,
“came of God” (2 Chron. xxv. 20),
were judgments upon him for an
idolatry into which he had fallen after
his conquest of Edom.—Speaker’s
Comm.

Oh, the depth of Divine justice
and wisdom in these outward adminis-
trations! The best cause, the best
man, doth not ever fare best. Ama-
ziah did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, Joash evil; Ama-
ziah follows David, though not with
equal paces; Joash follows Jeroboam ;
yet is Amaziah shamefully foiled by
Joash. Whether God yet meant to
visit upon this king of Judah the still
odious unthankfulness of his father
Jehoiada, or to plague Judah for their
share in the blood of Zechariah and
their late revolt to idolatry ; or whether
Amaziah’s too much confidence in his





OHAP. XIV,





own strength, which moved his bold
challenge to Joash, were thought fit
to be thus taken down; or whatever
other secret ground of God’s judgment
there might be, it is not for our
presumption to inquire.—Bp. Hall.


Verses 18-22. The vicissitudes
of a monarch’s life. 1. His fame
is the great theme of the historian
(ver. 18). II. He is the subject of
dark and dangerous conspiracy (ver.
19). III. Notwithstanding the most
anxious precautions, he falls a victim


‘to the assassin (ver. 19). IV. His


dead body may be more reverenced
than his character (ver. 20). V. His
successor reaps the benefit of his
successes (ver. 21, 22).


Verse 19. His turning after the
gods of Edom (2 Chron. xxv. 27),
his defeat by Jehoash, the hostages
taken of him, and the spoliation of
the temple, all served to make the
last half of his reign unpopular. The
discontent of the kingdom culminated
in conspiracy. So he perished like
his father (chap. xii. 20).— Whedon.


Verse 20. They conveyed his body
back to Jerusalem in the royal chariot
and with the horses which had brought
him to Lachish. The combination of
relentless animosity against the living
prince with the deepest respect for his
dead remains is very characteristic of
an Oriental people.—Speaker’s Comm.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 23—29.


Warrowat Prosperrry—an Oprortonity ror Nationat Rerorm.


Jrnopoam reigned longer than any other king of Israel, and soon gave evidence
of possessing considerable capacity and energy. He not only checked the
Syrian invasion and regained the portions of his kingdom which had been
seized by the foe, but carried the war into Syria and overawed Damascus into
submission. Adversity having failed to bring back Israel to the true worship
of Jehovah, a period of prosperity is granted, with no better result. Instead
of tracing the goodness of God in their national blessings, the people are con-
firmed in their calf-worship, and attribute their successes to the influence of
Baal. It is their last opportunity, and they see it not. Whom the gods wish
to destroy, they first madden. The subsequent history of Israel is one -f
decline and disaster, until as a nation it becomes extinct. eee tong and


O@AP. XIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





prosperous reign of Jeroboam II. may be regarded as an opportunity for national
reform. Observe—


I. That the misfortunes of a nation awaken the Divine compassion
‘‘ For the Lord saw the affliction of Israel that it was very bitter” (ver. 26).
The Divine compassion seen—1. In promising help and instruction by a duly
authorized messenger. ‘‘ According to the Word of the Lord God of Israel,
which He spake by the hand of His servant Jonah, the son of Amittai, the
prophet ’”’ (verse 26). We have no record of the prophecy uttered by Jonah on
this occasion, but it doubtless had reference to the victories over the Syrians
that would be granted to the arms of Jeroboam, and be accompanied with
warnings and instructions to recognise the authority and power of Jehovah.
The Lord pitied the ignorance and infatuation of Israel, and the misery which
their own sins had brought upon them, and He once more sends His servant to
call them to repentance and reformation. A faithful and earnest ministry is a
boon to any people, and brings with it a solemn responsibility to all who hear.
2. In suspending the threat of extinction.—‘‘ And the Lord said not that He
would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven” (ver. 27). The idolatry
and corruption of Israel merited the punishment of Jehovah, but in mercy He
deferred the desolating stroke to give them space for repentance. The time
came when the Divine compassion ceased, and the prophets Hosea, Amos,
Micah, and others foretold the ruin that fell on Israel with such terrible force.
Reprieves are not pardons. The Lord waits to be gracious; but where impeni-
tence continues, the threatened vengeance will surely fall. 3. In providing a
competent deliverer—‘‘ He saved them by the hand of Jeroboam”’ (ver. 27).
Jeroboam was ‘‘a man of might”’ (ver. 28), distinguished by personal prowess
and military ¢cuius, and by those qualities that make the successful statesman
and ruler. Though himself an idolater, he is used as an instrument to deliver
Israel and raise the nation to an extraordinary height of prosperity. The
Lord has His agents planted in unseen and unexpected quarters. They may
seem the most unlikely to carry out His purposes, and may themselves be
unconscious of the real drift of the work they are permitted and aided to
accomplish.


II. That national prosperity isa token of the Divine beneficence. ‘He
restored the coast, recovered Damascus” (comp. ver. 25, 28). The dash and
enterprise of Jeroboam roused the nation into new life. The success of his
arms at the boundaries of his kingdom ensured protection and peace; and the
wheels of commerce, once more set in motion, carried prosperity into every
part of the land. Confucius has thus portrayed the signs of national
prosperity—

Where spades grow bright, and idle words grow dull;
Where jails are empty, and where barns are full ;
Where Church paths are with frequent feet outworn §
Law court-yards weedy, silent, and forlorn ;

Where doctors foot it, and where farmers ride};
Where age abounds and youth is multiplied—

Where those signs are, they clearly indicate

A happy people and well-governed State,


Prosperity, like every other blessing, is from God; it is often the severest
test applied to the conduct of individuals and of nations. The glitter and glut
of prosperity may hide the hand that gives. The heart that adversity could
not vitiate has been seduced by the subtle smiles of inconstant prosperity.


III. That national prosperity is abused when it does not lead to nationa}
reform. ‘He did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord; he departed
560


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. omar. xrv,





not from all the sins of Jeroboam (ver. 24). Aswas the king, so were the people
The sins of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, like a close-fitting Nessus garment,
still clung to his idolatrous descendants. The goodness of God, that was
intended to lead them to repentance, was misinterpreted as sanctioning and
even rewarding their apostacy, and instead of weaning them from their idols,
lulled them into a false confidence in the supremacy of Baal. It is sad to
see blessings abused, opportunities neglected, warnings disregarded, and a
whole nation sinking into the gulf of ruin. How unspeakable is the com-
passion of Him who observes the follies and sins of mankind, and yet shows
Himself more eager to restore than destroy !


Lzssons:—1. That prosperity and adversity are tests of fidelity to principle.
2. An opportunity for reformation comes to every indiridual and every nation.
3. The abuse of opportunity intensifies the inveteracy of evil.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 25-27. I. Israel's deep misery
Jer. ii. 19). IL. God’s great pity
Ps. ciii. 10; Hos. ix. 8).—Zange.

— Uur faithful God helps us out of

trouble, according to His great com-
passion, even when we have not de-
served it of Him; but often not until
our distress has reached the highest
pitch, and no help is to be expected
from any other quarter.


Verse 25. Jonah must have been
prominent among his order in these
stormy times, for we find him the
counsellor of Jeroboam in a policy of
vigour against Syria. Enthusiastically
patriotic, the depression of Israel
weighed on his heart. But he did
not despair of his country even in its
darkest hour. It was under the pro-
tection of Jehovah, and must rise again,
if it repented and returned to its in-
visible King. With keen insight into
the capacity of the new ruler in Sa-
maria, he recognised him as the de-
liverer promised by God to save His
chosen people, and animated him to
take the field against the long-dreaded
enemy, by the inspired assurance that
he would be victorious, and would even
extend the narrow limits of Israel
well-nigh to the grandeur of David’s
empire—from Hamath, in the northern
valley of Lebanon, on the Orontes, to
the south of the Dead Sea. That
Jonah should Lave been sent on an
errand of mercy to a great heathen
city (Nineveh) is specially interesting,
as the first prominent expression of

ao


the Divine love to all mankind found
in the Old Testament. The very
harshness and exclusive narrowness of
the prophet himself heightens the
charm of the narrative. God has pity
on the great city, although idolatrous;
but Jonah is unwilling to carry a mes-
sage of love outside his own nation,
His very conceptions of the Almighty
show the imperfect ideas of his time.
He thinks to escape from Him by leay-
ing Palestine for a region beyond the
sea, And even when forced on his

ourney, his Jewish bigotry shows itself
in his anger that a heathen population
should have averted its threatened
doom by a timely repentance.—Gerkie’s
Hours with the Bible.


Verses 26, 27. God’s unfailing
interest in His people.—-I. He is
minutely acquainted with their abject
affliction. Il. He delays the execution
of the judgment their sins deserve. III.
He mercifully delivers them from their
distress.


Verse 27, The reign of this king,
which was distinguished by so extra-
ordinary a flow of prosperity, increased
the religious apostacy, and by conse-
quence the moral degeneracy, of Israel.
Under him the corruption of manners
became extreme, and laid the founda-
tion for those public calamities which
befel the kingdom soon after his de-
mise, and quickly accomplished the
destruction of the nation. Hengsten-
berg observes: ‘‘The prosperity only

661


=


GHAP. XV


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: KINGS.


Oe nen


confirmed the people still more in their
temerity. Instead of being led to
repentance by the unmerited mercy of
God, they considered this prosperity as
a reward of their apostacy, as a seal
by which Jehovah-Baal confirmed the
rectitude of their ways. The false
prophets, too, did what was in their
power to strengthen them in their
delusion, whilst the true prophets
preached to deaf ears.” Hengstenberg
refers in this last sentence to the em-
phatic warnings addressed to Jeroboam
by Hosea and Amos. Although his
whole reign was marked by signal
successes, notwithstanding that apos-
tacy, which was usually punished by
war and loss ef national independence,
the wrath of God was denounced
against Israel, as well as the destruc-
tion of the house of Jeroboam, by the
two named prophets, whose writings


sufficiently attest the faithful execution
of their mission. —Jamieson.


_ Verses 28, 29. Jeroboam had striven

for the external prosperity of his
people, and when he died, he left the
kingdom in a more flourishing condi-
tion than any previous king of Israel.
For its spiritual welfare, however, he
had done nothing. Calf-worship and
other service of false gods had con-
tinued, and a moral rottenness had
found entrance, which brought the
kingdom near toruin. So has many a
one at his death left to his children
treasures which he has won by long
labour and care, but those children
have not been bred in the fear and
love of God, and have not been taught
that ‘the world passeth away,” &e.
(1 John ii. 17; 1 Peter i. 24).—
Lange.


ee


CHAPTER XV.


AZARIAH AND JOTHAM IN JUDAH, AND THE LAST SIX


KINGS IN ISSAEL.


CriricaL anpD Expianatory Nores.—Verse 1.—Azariah, son of Amaziah, king of
Judah—This king is the Uzziah of 2 Chron. xxvi. See there the more extended explanation
of his leprosy. His act was the assumption of sacerdotal functions, which the Lord had re-
stricted to the Levitical priesthood. He arrogated the office of Sovereign Pontiff, and God
rebuked his arrogance and impiety. His heart was lifted up to his destruction (2 Chron. xxvi,
16). Verse 5. Leper unto the day of his death—In his pride he aspired to be more than
king, usurped the functions of God's consecrated priests ; would have seized “the holy crown”
of the high priesthood, and added that to his own royal crown. Therefore God took away
what was rightly his, and might have enjoyed till his death, debased him to a leper, and thus
he died, So covetousness beggars, not ennobles men, and profanity ensures overthrow and
contempt. Dwelt in a several house—An array of authorities regard Mwannt m3

a a cs


as meaning house of sickness, a hospital, from WOM, which (without any Scriptural analogy
Lh ¢


in the use of the word) they render to be prostrate, weak, or sick. The natural meaning of
the verb is to be loosed, set free, as (in Pual form) Lev. xix. 20, the release of a slave. 4 sepa-
rate house, therefore, is the best rendering, and fulfils the law of Levit. xiii. 46, that lepers
sould dwell apart, outside the camp or city. He was thus an outcast. Even im burial
(verse 7) he was only interred in the “ field of the burial” of the kings (2 Chron. xxvi. 28),
not in the royal vaults, as being a leper. As the record stands, it marks God’s displeasure
against presumption, for ‘the Lord smote the king ;’”’ and this Divine judgment denotes guilt.
Even though his rushing to the altar might have been through ‘‘too much zeal rather than
too little,” as is suggested, zeal must not violate law. To go beyond God’s direction is guilty
as to fall behind. To ‘“add to” what is written is denounced equally as to ‘take from”
(Rev. xxii. 18, 19). Verse 10. Assassination of Zachariah by the conspirator Shallum—
The compound word rendered “ before the people,” would seem to record a public act of regie
cide to which the populace offered no resistance.. But Dr. H. Gratz reads it as “in Ib/cam™
(4.¢., @ town in the plains of Jezreel), Yet py->ap naturally mean what the text records,


662


TOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP, XV.


—


sithough Gratz notesthat the A. V. is ungrammatical; The Sept. translate thus :—na) érdratey
avtoy ev KeBAaku. Verse 12. This was the word of the Lord unto J ehu; soit came to pass—
See chap. x. 30. Thus Jehu’s dynasty perished ignominiously, and the verity of God’s pledge
was vindicated equally with the severity of God’s judgments. Verse 19, King of Assyria
came against the land; and Menahem gave talents , . that he might confirm the
kingdom in his hand—This was the first effort by a king of Israel to ensure his own throne
by purchase of protection from a foreign power, Hosea denounced it (Hosea v. 13; vii. 11;
x. 6). It opened the pathway which led onwards toIsrael’s doom. Protection from a mighty
nation issues in oppression by them. And verse 19 leads forward inevitably to verse 29, “the
king of Assyria carried them captive to Assyria.” Verse 29. Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria
—He was the successor of Pul (verse 19). Sirith’s translation of the cuneiform inscriptions
gives the name as Taklat-pel-ashir, which may mean “ Lord of the Tigris ;” but this is uncer-
tain. His annals and the records of his expedition into Syria have been found at Nimroud,
but his genealogy is not given; and as this is the only instance of silence concerning a king’s
per it is supposed he was ausurper. Verse 37. The Lord began to send against Judah,

c.—This was the beginning of a confederacy by the Israedites with the Syrians against Judah,
an alliance which shows, for the first time in the history of the divided kingdoms, that hostility
had grown so intense between Israel and Judah that a foreign force was called in to make
violent attack upon Judah’s borders. So, when such fellowship and affection as are hallowed
and Divinely sanctioned are violated, evil confederacies are sure to be sought, and antagonism
grows rife where unity and love should have ruled—W. H. J.








——


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-7 and 32-88.
Tue Brsurcan Estrmare or Natronat AFrares,


Tue reigns of Azariah and Jotham, here referred to with such marked brevity,
covered a most eventful period in the history of Judah and Israel, extending
over nearly seventy years. The prophets Hosea, Amos, Joel, Jonah, and the
sublime Isaiah, flourished during the period, and uttered their faithful protest
against the national apostacy. Under the vigorous administration of Azariah
aud Jotham the kingdom of Judah was placed in a condition of great strength
and prosperity. ‘The success of Azariah in all departments seemed to correspond
to his double name: Azariah, the strength of Jehovah, and Uzziah, the help of Je-
hovah. But prosperity, asin other periods and nations, was not without its baleful
effects. With the increase of wealth, the nobles of Judah rose into importance,
and their luxury, indolence, drunkenness, and oppressive exactions, were in
a high degree scandalous: “‘They skinned the poor to the very quick, they
picked their bones and ground them to powder.’”’ The haughty ladies of Zion,
decked in gayest apparel and covered with tinkling ornaments, forgot the
modesty of their sex as they mincingly tripped along the streets. The licentious-
ness and irreligion of the times were interrupted and perhaps punished by two
great calamities—the awful, dearthful visitation of locusts, who found a garden
of Eden, and left it an empty, desolate wilderness ; and the ever-memorable
earthquake which shook the solid building of the Temple, and moved through
the land like a mighty wave of the sea (vide Joel ii. 1-20; Amos iv. 6-9;
Amos i. 1, 2; Zech. xiv. 5). The paragraph before us is a suggestive illustration
of the Biblical estimate of national affairs.


I. It views the nation in its relation to the claims of Jehovah. 1. Com-
mands obedience to the Divine purpose (ver. iii. 34). So far as Azariah and
Jotham imitated the theocratic kings, they had the approbation of all lovers of
Zion. The highest exercise of kingly power is to use it in furthering the ends
of Divine government. 2. Js careful to record the monarch’s interest in the
House of God (ver. 83 and 35). The history emphasises the fact that the name
of Jotham’s mother was ‘“‘ Jerusha, the daughter of Zadok,” who was probably
8 priest, and would thus show the close association of the pre with the


=


CHAP, XV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





lee enaedl


religious order. Special reference is also made to his building ‘‘the higher
gate of the House of the Lord.” He thu: sought to induce the worshippers to
bring their offerings to the temple of the true Jehovah, and forsake the forbidden
‘thigh places’? where many were accustomed to sacrifice. The king does him-
self honour in all he does for the house of God. 38. Hzxposes the defects of
religious duty (ver. 4 and 85). Both Asariah and Jotham were favourable to
the worship of Jehovah, but they showed no great zeal in it. Their govern-
ment was not remarkable for any decided religious reform, or the quickening
of new religious life. The false worship was allowed to exist side by side with
the true. The word of God notices this, and while it commends what is good,
it faithfully denounces the evil.


II. It takes note of any signal instance of Divine judgment. ‘And the
Lord smote the king, so that he was a leper” (ver. 5). The writer of Kings is
silent as to the circumstances under which the king was thus afflicted. He
simply records the fact, and regards it as a judgment of Jehovah. (For
particulars read 2 Chron. xxvi. 16-21). The Bible abounds in examples of
‘Divine judgments on nations and individuals (¢.g., Sodom and Gomorrha, Gen.
xix.; Egyptians, Ex. ix.; Amalek, 1 Sam. xv.; Cain, Gen. iv.; Saul, 1 Sam.
xxviii.; Jezebel, 2 Kings ix.; Ananias and Sapphira, Acts v). These
examples might be multiplied indefinitely. ‘‘ Every story,” says Feltham, ‘‘is
a chronicle of this truth, and the whole world but the practice. We live not
long enough to observe how the judgments of God walk their rounds in striking.
Neither always are we able. Some of God’s corrections are in the night, and
closeted. Every offence meets not with a market lash.”


Accuse not heaven’s delay ; if loth to strike,
Ita judgments, like the thunder-gathered storm,
Are but the greater. Webster,


TI. It dismisses with briefest notice the public acts of a great and
victorious monarch (ver. 6). The successful wars of the king, his elaborate
defences, his public buildings, his encouragement of agriculture and commerce—
all these are passed over with the brief formula—‘‘the rest of the acts of
Azariash, and all that he did.”” The sacred writer was more concerned to show
how the king served God and exalted His worship than how he aggrandized
himself and his people. External prosperity is delusive and evanescent: growth
in piety is a permanent blessing to the nation.


IV. It reveals the combination of powers by which Jehovah would
punish the nation for its sins (ver. 37). When the Arctic voyaver penetrates
the northern seas, the first indication of his approach to the great ice region is
a white streak of light seen in the stratum of air nearest the horizon called
“the ice-blink.”” He then observes loose pieces of ice floating on both sides of
his vessel—-the modest vanguard of the terrible army of ice-giants with which
the stout-timbered ship has to do battle, and by which it is ultimately crushed
and vanquished. So this alliance of Rezin and Pekah was the beginning of
a series of attacks on Judah which ended in its utter overthrow. Thus Jehovah
punished the nation for its idolatry. It is a mercy when the first signs of
coming calamity are noted, and its severities avoided by timely repentance and
reform. Jehovah can disconcert and scatter the most potent combinations of
men, or use them as his instruments for avenging wrong.


Lessons:—1. The sacred writers are more careful to depict the moral condition
than the external magnificence of the nation. 2. We learn that the great object
of revelation is to give prominence, not to merely historical details, but to the
development of the Dwine purpose in redeeming the race. 3. The fidelity and
impartiality of the sacred writings should command our reverence and belief.

564


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





CHAP, XV.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-7, and 82-38. At this
time the people turned their attention
to money-getting not so much, as had
formerly been the case, in particular
provinces and districts, but through-
out the country, even in Judah; and
not so much because a single king like
Solomon favoured commercial under-
takings, as because the love of trade
and gain, and the desire for the easy
enjoyment of the greatest possible
amount of wealth, had taken posses-
sion of all classes, All the scorn
poured out by the prophets upon this
haste to be rich, and all the rebuke of
their tendency to cheat, which was
one of the fruits of it, mo longer
availed to restore the ancient simpli-
city and contentment (Hosea xii. 8;
Isa. ii. 7). The long and fortunate
reign of Uzziah in Judah was very
favourable to the growth of this love
of gain and enjoyment. Many were
the complaints in Judah of the in-
justice of the judges and of the op-
pression of the helpless (Amos iii. 1;
vi. 1; Hosea v. 10). There was a
perverse and mocking disposition pre-
valent which led men to throw doubt
upon everything, and to raise objec-
tions to everything (Amos vi. 3; ix.
10; Hosea iv.4). It made them treat
with harsh contempt the rebukes and
exhortations of the best prophets, as
we feel distinctly from the tone of the
writings of Amos, Hosea, and Isaiah.
It led them to desire to know heathen
religions and to introduce foreign
divinities, even when the king himself
held aloof from any such movement
(Amos ii. 4; Hosea iv. 15; vi. 11;
xii. 1; Isa. ii. 8).— Ewald.


Verse 3. Azariah not only main-
tained the worship of Jehovah, but
was a good and religious monarch dur-
ing the greater portions of his reign.
See 2 Chron. xxvi. 4, 5. Becoming
puffed up, however, with his military
successes, he attempted to invade the
high priest’s office, and forfeited God’s
favour for this sin.—Speaker’s Comm.


Ver. 5. The Judgment of God.—


I. Is never inflicted but on the gross
violation of His law (comp. 2 Chron.
xxvi. 16-21). II. Knows no distine-
tion of person or rank—‘‘ The Lord
smote the king.” III. Involves ter-
rible suffering—‘‘ He was a leper unto
the day of his death.” IV. Isolates
the sufferer from all he loved and
prized—‘‘He dwelt in a_ several
house.”’

— The only incident which is men-
tioned during the long reign of Uzziah
is that God touched him, and that he
was a leper until his death. It fol-
lows that this fact must have seemed
to the author to be important before
all others. Leprosy is not for him an
accidental disease, but a Divine judg-
ment for guilt, as it is often described
(Num. xii. 10; Deut. xxiv. 8, 9;
2 Sam. iii. 29; 2 Kingsy. 27). He
does not tell more particularly what
the sin of the king was; perhaps it
was hateful to the king alone, and
personally, and not to the whole
people, like the sin of Jeroboam.—
Lange.
— We should not be over bold to
undertake duties which do not devolve
upon us. He who covets more than
he has any right to have, loses even
what he has. We cannot break over
the bounds which God has set, without
incurring punishment. Think no man
blessed until thou hast seen his end.—
Ibid.


Verse 6. These acts were recorded
by Isaiah, and have come down to us
in Chronicles. They comprised, be-
sides the re-establishment of Elath—
1. Successful wars (a) with the Philis-
tines, which resulted in the capture
and dismantling of Gath, Jabneh, and
Ashdod, and in the planting of a num-
ber of Jewish colonies in the Philis-
tine country ; (6) with the Arabians of
Gur-baal; and (¢) with the Mehunim
or Maonites. 2. Extension of the
power of Judah over Ammon. 3.
Fortification of Jerusalem. 4. Exten-
sion of pasture and of agriculture
towards the East and South, and pro-
tection of the agricultural and pastoral

665


CHAP. XY.


pulation by means of towers. 5.

eorganisation of the army. And 6.
Construction of numerous engines for
the attack and defence of towns (see
2 Chron. xxvi. 6-15). Compare for
the flourishing condition of Judea at
this time, Isaiah ii. 7-16.—Speaker’s
Comm,


Verse 7 compared with Isa. vi. 1-3.
Isaiah’s vision of the majesty and
glory of Jehovah.—Special work
needs special training. This is a prin-
ciple recognized in all God’s dealings.
He prepares His servants for special
work by a special course of training
and discipline, and by special and
striking displays of His glory. As
Moses was prepared for his work by
his Egyptian experience and by eplen-
did revelations of Jehovah; as the
disciples were prepared for their mis-
sion by the teachings of Christ and
the extraordinary endowments of the
Spirit, so Isaiah was qualified for his
work by the teachings of this glorious
vision. His commission as a prophet
was renewed, his faith confirmed, his
religious fervour intensified, and his
soul braced up for the important duties
before him. I. Zhis vision was a reve-
lation of the universal government of
Jehovah. ‘‘In the year that king
Uzziah died, I saw also the Lord sit-
ting upon a throne.” The throne of
God is the centre and source of uni-
versal government, including in its
conception the two leading ideas of
dominion and power. 1. Dominion.
This extends over the whole universe
of existing things—great and small—
reaching and acting upon the most
distant with the same ease and com-
prehensiveness as is shown in the
management of those nearest the cen-
tral throne. 2. Power. It is by the
exercise of this attribute that Jehovah
makes His dominion felt, and accom-
plishes His gracious and righteous
purposes. That power is infinite and
absolute, but its exercise is ever limited
by His will, and controlled and regu-
lated by His wisdom: it is constantly
operating for our good, both in the
material and spiritual realms. II.
This vision was a revelation of the ador-

566





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—


able holiness of Jehovah. ‘ And one
cried unto another and said, Holy,
holy, holy is the Lord of hosts.”
The holiness of God is the beauty and
glory of all other perfections. If it
were possible for one attribute to have
any excellency over another, that pre-
eminency must be given to His holi-
ness. Power is the hand or arm of God,
Omniscience His eye, Mercy His heart,
Eternity His duration, but holiness is
His beauty. He is called “‘the Holy
One,” the ‘‘ Holy One of Israel,” and
is said to be “glorious in holiness.’
This glimpse of the surpassing holi-
ness of Jehovah overwhelmed the
prophet. He was smitten with the
sense of his own vileness, and cried,
‘’ Woe is me, because I am a man of
unclean lips!” It was a picture of
conscious sin, cowed and shrinking
betore the presence of infinite purity.
*Tis ever so. Nothing humbles us
more than the coutrast of our own in-
significence and sin with the majesty
and ineffable perfections of God. III.
This vision was a revelation of the higher
order of beings engaged in the service
and worship of Jehovah. 1. Observe
their exalted station. ‘‘ Above, or
around the throne stood the seraphim.”
This indicates their superiority over
the heavenly hosts. Jehovah has
legions of angels, varying in ability
and rank ; highest in the innumerable
grades stand the seraphim. 2. Ob-
serve their extraordinary endowments.
‘¢ Each one had six rings; with twain
he covered his face’”’—a token of deep
reverence and adoring awe, as though
unable to bear the insufferable blaze
of the Divine glory, or to fathom the
incomprehensible mysteries of the
Divine nature. ‘‘ With twain he
covered his feet ””—a token of profound
respect and humility, as if he would
fain hide the humblest instrumentali-
ties by which he might accomplish the
Divine purposes. ‘‘ With twain he
did fly’—an emblem of the willing-
ness and speed with which he would
execute the Divine commands. 8.
Observe their delightful employment.
“‘One cried unto another and said,
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of
hosts; the whole earth is full of His


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. XV.





glory.” They chant in responsive
strains the praises of Jehovah. What
a lofty example of worship and service
have we here! Burning with holy and
unquenchable love, we may well strive
to emulate the adoration of the glow-
ing seraphim.

The church of to-day has special
work to do, and to do it successfully
needs special help and instruction.
The age in which we live demands the
exercise of every kind of power the
church can legitimately wield. To
meet the multiform aspects of the
active thought of our time, to sympa-
thise with all that is true, and denounce
wisely and boldly all that is false and
misleading ; to soothe the world’s deep
sorrow and lessen its distracting woes;
to conduct the troubled heart of
humanity to the satisfying rest for
which it daily groans—this is a work
demanding superhuman aid. We
never feel so weak as when we come
to grapple with the difficulties of
earnest Christian work. It is then we
touch the furthermost point of human
limitation, and, conscious of our power-
lessness, we cry out, like one of old—
‘*T beseech thee, show me thy glory.”
And as the vision dawns and pours its
splendours on our stricken spirits, we
feel the throb of a new ecstatic life,
and, with the glow of an intenser love,
and sustained by an invincible resolu-
tion, we press on to grander achieve-
ments !

— We have been hearing of a vision.
Does that word sound as if it belonged
to times which we have left far behind,
as if it pointed to something fantastical
and incredible? Oh! if there were no
such visions, what an utterly dark and
weary and unintelligible place this
world would be! How completely we
should be given upto the emptiest phan-
toms, to the base worship of phantoms!
What mere shows and mockeries
would the state and ceremonial of
kings, the debates of legislators, the
yearnings and struggles of people
bFecome! How truly would the earth
be what it seemed to the worn-out
misanthropical libertine—‘‘ A stage,
and all the men and women merely
players.” A thousand times we have


been all tempted to think it so. The
same painted scenery, the same shift-
ing pageants, the same unreal words
spoken through different masks by
counterfeit voices, the same plots
which seem never to be unravelled,
what does it all mean? How do men
endure the ceaseless change, the dull
monotony? Satirists and keen ob-
servers of the world’s follies have asked
this question again and again. The
best man may often doubt what he
should reply. But he hears a voice
saying to him, ‘Try to be true to
thyself; resist the powers which are
tempting thee.to go through thy acts,
common or sacred, as if thou wert
a mere machine; hold fast thy faith
that God is, andis working when thou
seest least of His working, and when
the world seems most to be going on
without Him; assure thyself that
there is an order in the universe when
all its movements seem most disorderly.
So will the things around thee by
degrees acquire a meaning and a pur-
pose. And when Divine love has
kindled thy flagging and perishing
thoughts and hopes, thou mayest
learn that God can use thee to bearing
the tidings of His love and righteous-
ness to a sense-bound land that is
bowing to silver and gold, to horses
and chariots. And if there should
come a convulsion in that land, such
as neither thou nor thy fathers have
known, be sure that it signifies the
removal of such things as can be
shaken, that those things which cannot
be shaken may remain.”’—J/aurice.


Verse 34. Josephus gives Jotham
a very high character, that he was
pious towards God, just towards men,
and laid himself out for the public
good; that whatever was amiss he
took care to have it rectified ; and, in
short, wanted no virtue that became
a good prince.


Verse 35. ‘‘He built the higher
gate of the house of the Lord.” The
love of Divine worship.—I. Shown
in reverence for God’s house. II. In
cheerful sacrifice and labour for the
improvement of that house. III. In

tT


GHAP. KY,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ee


making the house and worship of God
attractive to others.

— Itis a glorious thing for a prince,
instead of beautifying his palaces and
building ivory houses (Amos iii. 15),
to restore the temple gates, and so
say to his people, ‘‘Enter into His
gates with thanksgiving, and into His
courts with praise.”


Verse 87. It appears by this that
the alliance between Pekah and Rezin
was made in the reign of Jotham. It
had for its object in all probability
the consolidation of a power in Syria
which might be strong enough to
resist the further progress of the
Assyrian arms. The recent invasions
of Pul and Ziglath-Pileser had effec-
tually alarmed the two northern
monarchs, and had induced them to
put aside the traditional jealousies
which naturally kept them apart, and


to make a league offensive and de-
fensive. Into this league they were
anxious that Judea should enter; but
they distrusted the house of David,


’ which had been so long hostile both


to Damascus and to Samaria. They
consequently formed the design of
transferring the Jewish crown to
a certain Ben-Tabeal (Isa. vii. 6),
probably a Jewish noble, perhaps
a refugee at one of their courts, whom
they could trust to join heartily in
their schemes. Hostilities apparently
broke out before the death of Jotham ;
but nothing of importance was effected
until the first year of his successor
—Speaker’s Comm.

— National troubles—I. Cast
their shadows before as a warning to
prepare. II. Are sent to rectify the
abuse of prosperity. III. Are aggra-
vated by the active opposition of
envious neighbours.


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 8-81
Tue Unmistakasie Sterns or Nationatn Decay anp Roum,


I. Seen in rapid and violent dynastic changes.—During the tranquil
and prosperous reigns of Uzziah and Jotham in Judah, the kingdom of Israel
was plunged into anarchy and civil war, as in the days of Omri; and no less
than six different monarchs occupied the throne, one of them retaining the
throne only for a singie month. Of the five kings after Jeroboam, only one
died upon his bed. As Kitto puts it, the history sounds much like this—B
murdered A and reigned in his stead; C murdered B and reigned in his stead ;
D murdered C and reigned in his stead; EK murdered D and reigned in his
stead.

Ay, sir, our ancient crown, in these wild times

Oft stood upon a cast—the gamester’s ducat,

So often staked and lost, and then regained,

Scarce knew so many hazards, The Spanish Father.

No nation can be permanent where the governing power is unstable, com-
merce is paralysed, life imperilled, and the national spirit broken.


II. Seen in the prevalence of tyranny and bloodshed (verse 16-20),—
Menahem waded to the throne through a stream of blood. One district refusing
to recognize him, he compelled submission by the perpetration of the most
horrible eruelties. To buy off an attack from the Assyrians, he exacted heavy
sums of money from his people. When a nation is drained of its life-blood by
civil discord, and of its wealth by a foreign power, its final doom is not very
distant.


Til. Seen in the powerlessness of the nation to repel invasion (verse
19, 29). It is at this point of the history we first come in sight of the great
Assyrian power that is to play so important a part in the future destiny of the

568


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS, OHAP, Kv.
a


Jewish nation—a presage of the catastrophe which was finished fift

later. Menahem, though a bold warrior, knew it was madness to sepetethta
power so formidable, and bribed the Assyrian to withdraw by offering tribute.
But in the days of Pekah the Assyrian was not so easily pacified. He ravaged
the kingdom east of the Jordan, and swept away the tribes of that region into
_ taptivity ; and, such was the enfeebled condition of the nation, it does not
appear that Pekah made the least resistance. The steps of the process now
going on with Israel have often been repeated in history. The first danger is
averted by a bribe, which only serves as a temptation to new aggression. ‘Each
new attack leaves the doomed state weaker and weaker, till it is reduced to
tribute; and at last a despairing effort to shake off the yoke brings down
destruction. It is a noble sight to see a brave nation struggling for life and
sad 2 Aad superior a: Rote. had become so demoralised

at the spirit of resistance was crus and, for the most part, the i
to their fate with supine pect sett oi Bechet


Lrssons:—1, The nations that abandon God will be abandoned by Him.
2. The ruler who uses his power for his own aggrandisement and pleasure lives in
sonstant peril, and perishes without any to mourn his loss. 8. The sins and follies
of one nation are punished by another.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 8-31. The five kings who ‘tyrants.” As is the master, so is the


followed Zechariah persevered in the
sins of Jeroboam, which was, from
the very commencement of the king-
dom, the germ of its ruin. It is to
them that the prophet’s words apply
—‘‘ They have set up kings, but not
by me; they have made princes, and
I knew it not” (Hosea viii. 4). Only
one of them died a natural death and
left the succession to his son, who, in
his turn, could only retain the sceptre
for a short time. Of the others, each
one killed his predecessor in order to
gain the throne, the authority of
which was, in the meantime, shattered
by these commotions. One of the
most important factors in the history
of this period is the conflict with the
rising Assyrian monarchy, which came
to assist the internal dissension in
hurrying the nation to its downfall.
Assyria was destined, in the purpose
of God, to be the instrument for in-
flicting the long-threatened judgment.
— Witsius.

— Rulers who seized power by
force and violence have never been
the deliverers and protectors of their
people, but rather tyrants who led it
to its ruin. ‘‘In one demagogue,”’
says Luther, “there are hidden ten


servant; as is the head, so are the
members. A succession of rulers,
who attained the throne by con-
spiracy, revolt, perjury, and murder,
is the surest sign, not only that there
is something rotten in the state, but
also that there is nothing sound in the
nation. The corruption in Israel ex-
tended, in the first place, from the
head downwards. Jeroboam made
Israel to sin. Then it came from
below upwards. The rebels and
murderers who came to the throne,
came from the people. These kings
were so hostile that the one killed the
other ; but they were of one accord in
abandoning Jehovah and persevering
in the sin of Jeroboam. This was the
cause of their ruin. When there is no
fear of God in the heart, then the
door is open to every sin and vice.


Verse 10. The public assassina-
tion of a monarch—I. Readily ac-
complished if he is unpopular. II.
Reveals the demoralization of the
times. III. Increases rather than
diminishes the public calamities. IV.
Exposes the assassin to a similar fate
(verse 14).

— ‘‘Smote him before the peuple”

669


GHAY, EV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





openly and impudently—which he
presumed to do, either because he re-
membered that the prophecy of the
kingdom made to Jehu was confined
to the fourth generation (chap. x. 30),
which he observed to be now expired,
or because he perceived that the people
were generally disaffected to their
king and favourable to his attempt.—
Pool.


Verse 12. The inflexible fidelity
of the Divine Word—l. Is based on
the unchangeableness of the Divine
nature. II. Is frequently illustrated
by facts of history. III. Is a source
of strength to the obedient, and of
wholesome fear to the wicked.

— God keepeth promise with His
foes: shall He fail with His friends?
—Trapp.

This was an actual confirmation of
the declaration in the fundamental
law of Israel, that God visits the sins
of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generations
(Exod. xx. 5; xxiv. 7; Deut. v. 9
—that is, the sin against the first an
chief commandment: ‘Thou shalt
have none other gods before me.”
This commandment was the founda-
tion of the covenant with Israel, and
the centre of the Israelitish nation-
ality. The meaning is, that the sin
of Jeroboam will not be permitted by
God to run on beyond the third or
fourth generation. No dynasty in
Israel which followed the sin of Jero-
boam lasted for more than three or
four generations. The house of Jero-
boam, like that of Baasha and Mena-
hem, perished with its first members;
the house of Omri with its third; and
the house of Jehu with its fourth.
Zimri, Shallum, Pehah, and Hosea
died without successors; while the
house of David remained without long
interruption upon the throne. Al-
though single kings in the line were
guilty of apostacy, yet the sin was
never continued until the second gene-
ration.—Lange.


Verse 16. The barbarities of
revenge. I. Indicate a debased and
brutal nature. II. May terrify into

570


submission, but cannot command
genuine obedience. III. An unstable
foundation on which to build a throne
(ver. 17). IV. Reveal the coward
when confronted with a superior
power (verse 19).


Verse 19. The instrument of
Divine retribution. I. A time for
solemn reflection when its shadow
first crossesour path. II. It is vain
to think it can be bribed with meney.
III. Soon demonstrates the pitiless-
ness of its power (verse 29).

— The tie that had bound Samaria
to Assyria from the reign of Jehu to
that of Jeroboam II. had ceased to
exist during a period of Assyrian
depression. Menahem now renewed
it, undertaking the duties of a tribu-
tory, and expecting the support and
assistance which the great paramount
state of Asia was accustomed to lend
to her dependencies in their struggles
with their neighbours. Hence the
reproaches of Hosea, who sees in the
submission of Ephraim an unfaithful
reliance on an arm of flesh, which was
at once foolish and wicked (Hosea v.
13; vii. 11; viii. 9).—Speaker’s
Comm.

— Now for the first time appeared
on the Eastern horizon that great
power which for a hundred years was
the scourge of Asia. The ancient
empire of Assyria, possibly repressed
for the time by the dominion of Solo-
mon, rose on its fall, and was hence-
forth intermingled with all the good
and evil fortunes of the kingdom of
Israel. Already in the reign of Jehu
her influence began to be felt. His
name is to be read on the black obelisk
which records the tributes offered to
Shalmaneser I. in the form of gold and
silver and articles manufactured in
gold. The destruction of Damascus
by Jeroboam II. brought the two
powers of Israel and Assyria into close
contact ; there was now no intervening
kingdom to act asa breakwater. Long
before its actual irruption the rise of
the new power is noted by the prophets,
Jonah had already traversed the desert
and seen that great Nineveh. Amos
had already, though without naming


GHAP. xvi.
SS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


it, foretold that a people should arise
which should crush the powerful
empire of Jeroboam from end to end,
and sees the nations one by one swept
into captivity. Hosea brings out the
danger more definitely, sometimes
naming it, sometimes speaking of it
only under the form of the contentious


catches the sound of the irresistible
advance of the Assrrian armies ; their
savage warfare, their strange language,
the speed of their march, their inde-
fatigable energy, their arrows sharp,
their bows bent, their horses’ hoofs
like flint, and their chariots like
a whirlwind.—Stanley.


king. The wakeful ear of Isaiah





CHAPTER XVI.


THE REIGN OF AHAZ IN JUDAH.


CrrricaL aND Expitanatory Nores.—Verse 2. Twenty years old was Ahab when, &c.
—The Sept. MS. of the Vatican, and other MSS., give “twenty-five” in the corresponding
account of 2 Chron. xxvili.l, Adopting this alteration, he died at the age of forty-one,
having reigned sixteen years. He could only have reached the age o fifteen when his son
Hezekiah was born, for the son was twenty-five at his father’s death (chap. xviii. 2). Yet a
youth of fifteen is not unduly young for such a relationship in the East. Verse 3. Made his
son to pass through the fire—This is the first record of human sacrifice among the Israelites.
The force of evidence is against the lighter interpretation of the king’s act, viz., that this was
a mere fire-baptism, an act of lustration and purification—passing his son through the heat
or flames. The phrase “go through the fire” is shown in Numb, xxxi. 23 to mean a testing
in the fire, as metal, &c. (verse 22), so that what could be consumed by the fire was consumed ;
and 2 Chron. xxviii. 3 records that Ahab ‘ burnt his children in the fire.” It was the immo-
lation of his children to Moloch, in the Valley of Hinnom. Comp. chap. xvii. 81; Jer. xix. 5,
Josephus delares it to have been a holocaust: nal cov dAokattwoe waltda. There remains, how-
ever, the probability that the children were “slain” before being committed to the fires of
Moloch (cf. Ezek, xvi. 20, and Psa. cvi. 37). Verse 7. Ahab sent messengers to Tiglath-
pileser—Zsrael had asked Assyrian help (chap. xvi. 9); now Judah throws herself upon the
protection of a heathen power. Already Jehovah had become discarded in the nation’s
worship ; how could any trust in his guardianship continue? Yet he sinned against most
emphatic expostulations from Isaiah, and assurances sealed by supernatural signs (Isa. vii, 14;
viii. 4). Werse 9. King of Assyria took Damascus, and carried the people captive to Kir—
The aid Ahaz sought was purchased with the treasures of the palace and the Temple (verse 8),
Tiglath vanquished the confederate kings—Rezin of Syria, and Pekah of Israecl—and seized
Damascus. This occurred B.o. 732. A year later he held a court of his vassals there, and
twenty-three abject kings there did him obeisance, among them being mentioned Pekah, king
of Israel, and Ahaz, king of Judah, “Kir” is thought to have been Karine, now Karend, in
Media. Verse 10. Ahaz saw an altar that was at Damascus—Charmed with its elegance
and novelty, he transmitted a sketch of it to Urijah the priest at Jerusalem, and ordered that
one be made forthwith to supplant the altar of Jehovah in the Temple. Yet that old altar
was designed under express direction and authority of the Lord God! It is called “the grecé
altar” (verse 15), doubtless more because of its gorgeous splendour. The priest of Jehovah
raised no remonstrance, so perfidious had become the sacerdotal spirit (verse 16). Verse 15.
The brazen altar shall be for me to enquire by—Jehovah’s sacrifices were transferred to a
heathenish altar. There were as yet no idolatrous offerings sacrificed in the Temple ; no dis-
eontinuance of outward worship to the God of Israel. But the Divine altar was removed
from its position in the Sanctuary, and left neglected ; its destination was not yet clear to
Ahaz, he would consider about, it. For the words, ‘ for me to enquire by,” is the simple
significance of the phrase p29 oF) my. Verse 17. Ahaz cut off the borders of the


bases, &c.—Spoiling the adornments to gratify his capricious fancies in, probably, decorating
his own palace. ‘Thus men debase what is sacred to suit their own purposes, but God watches
the sacrilege, and He will requite the dishonour done to Him. Verse 18, The covert for the
Sabbath—A portico used by the priests. Dr. Abraham Geiger renders these words “ molten
images of the Shame” (i. ¢., Baal), following 2 Chron. xxviii. 2; but pieha) was, says Keil,


“ unquestionably a eovered place, a platform or hall, in the forecourt of the temple, eet apart
571


i


%
GUAT. EVE. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








for the king when he visited the temple with his retinue on the Sabbath or feast days.” So went
forward the abasement of Judah ; the Church yielding every trust for the sake of retaining
State favour and glory. Jehovah deposed from supremacy in His own Temple, that a corrupt
Court might be gratifled, and the smile of a depraved king be retained. “If any man defile
the temple of God, him shall God destroy ’’ (1 Cor. iii. 17).—W. H. J.


HIOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-20.
Aw Iponatrovs Rorer a Natrona Scovren.


Axaz inherited the wealth and magnificence that had accumulated under the
masterly government of his father, Jotham, and his grandfather, Azariah, but
he had also inherited the pernicious effects of luxury and indulgence that ever
follow in the train of prosperity. From his earliest years he seems to have
fallen into the hands of a court party who championed idolatry, and he never
acquired strength of character sufficient to shake off the baleful influence of
their teaching and example. He was fundamentally weak. He cringed before
the great Assyrian power (ver. 7), but, like all other cowards, he was imperious
and exacting towards those who were subject to him (ver. 10-16). Under
his feeble and idolatrous administration, Judah sank lower and lower, till it was
brought to the verge of ruin. There was nothing to mitigate the successive
series of national disasters: his influence upon the nation constantly operated
as a blighting, withering curse. Observe—


I. That idolatry becomes a dangerous power in a nation when patronised
and encouraged by royalty (ver. 2-4). 1. The religious leanings of a youthful
prince are anxiously scanned. ‘‘ Twenty years old was Ahaz when he began te
reign, and did not that which was right in the sight of the Lord” (ver. 2).
The heathen party and the worshippers of Jehovah were on the outlook as to
what stand the young king would make. Would he set his face against the
idolatrous innovations which had already gone too far; and would he show more
zeal and fidelity than his immediate predecessors had done towards the ancient
faith? Neither party were kept long in suspense. The old court party
triumphed; they had intrigued and flattered to some purpose. The idolatrous
tendencies of Ahaz were soon detected; and the emphatic condemnation of the
sacred writer was richly merited—he ‘did not that which was right in the
sight of the Lord his God.” It is a sincere grief to the good to witness a reign
begun in defiance of the great religious principles which had given life and
prestige to the nation, The fate of such a reign it is not difficult to predict.
2. Idolatrous practices rapidly degenerate to the level of the most atrocious examples
(ver. 3, 4). Ahaz excelled his idolatrous predecessors not only in imbecility
but also im cruelty. He descended to the most inhuman practices of the
heathen: he “made his children to pass through the fire’”—an abomination
against which the Israelites were solemnly warned (comp. Lev. xviii. 21: xx,
24; Deut. xviii. 10). The Jewish rabbis have mildly interpreted this passing
through the fire as merely passing between two burning pyres as a purificato
rite; but the truth is, the victims were first slain and then burned (vide
2 Chron. xxviii. 3, compared with Psa. evi. 37, +8; Jer. vii. 31 ; xix. 4, 5; Ezek,
xvi. 20, 21; xxiii.37). The brazen image of the idol was made red-hot, and
the victim passed within its glowing arms. Other kings of Judah had allowed
their people to sacrifice and burn incense in the high places ; but Ahaz was the
first, 80 he we know, to countenance the practica by his own example


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. XViL.





(verse 4). Idolatry debauches the moral sense, and prepares its votaries for the
worst abominations.


II. That an idolatrous ruler wantonly sacrifices the national prestige
and independence (ver. 5-9). I. Mis weakness exposes the nation to invasion
and loss (ver. 5, 6). The kings of Syria and Israel, who had been held in check
by the strong hand of Azariah and Jotham, despised the feebleness of Ahaz, and
harassed his kingdom with war and siege. They aimed at dethroning Ahaz and
substituting a nominee of their own, whom they could compel to unite with
them in resisting the encroachments of the Assyrian power. Had Ahaz been
decided and open in his attachment to Jehovah, they would not have insulted
him and his people with a proposal to form a league with Judah, nor would
they have dared to use force. But the idolatry of Ahaz was a sufficient plea
for them to take liberties : he was now so much like themselves that they might
readily conclude he would be willing to unite with them in any enterprise.
When the ruler sinks in moral reputation and force, the stringency of a whole-
some government is relaxed, and the nation suffers. 2. He tamely subjects his
people to the oppression of @ foreign power (ver. 7). Judah had injured and
oppressed Israel, and could not therefore hope to wean her from her compact
with Syria. Israel and Syria had already won two battles against Judah, in
which the flower of her troops had been destroyed. Egypt was at this time too
weak to afford any assistance, and Ahaz was conscious of serious disaffection
spreading among his own people (Isa. vii. 13). In this emergency he abjectly
throws himself at the feet of the Assyrian monarch, and piteously implores his
help. It might be that this was Judah’s only alternative from a point of view:
but what a fall was this compared with the days of Azariah and Jotham!
There was one resource yet open to Ahaz: he might have fallen back on
Jehovah. But his apostacy was too complete and his idolatry too flagrant to
allow such a thought to take deep root. Blind with infatuation he runs for
refuge into the embrace of a power that ere long uses its advantage in oppressing
his people. 3. He does not scruple to strip the temple of God of its sacred
treasures to purchase an tdolatrous alliance. ‘* And Ahaz took the silver and gold
that was found in the house of the Lord, and sent it for a present to the king of
Assyria’? (ver. 8). Here begins the work of spoliation. It does not appear
that he took anything from the. shrines of the idols he loved so much—that
would be sacrilege m his eyes—and yet without compunction or misgiving he
desecrates and robs the temple of Jehovah. In this we have another proof of
the debasing influence of his heathenism, and how completely he had severed
himself from Jehovah aud His worship. The man who turns his back on God
is ready for any deed of infamy.


III. That an idolatrous ruler is reckless in the introduction of innova-
tions in worship which are an insult to the only true God (ver. 10-18).
1. He substitutes a heathen altar in the place of the one used in the worship of
Jehovah (ver. 10). Carried away with the idolatrous ritual of the Assyrians,
Ahaz, captivated with the pattern of a certain altar, has one made after the
same model and placed in the inner court of the temple. Human fancies and
predelictions are indulged in defiance of Divine authority and commandment.
The temple altar was made after a Divine pattern (Ex. xxv. 40; xxvi. 303
xxvii. 1); und the mtroduction of the Assyrian specimen was an insulting and
sinful intrusion. 2. tle finds co-workers tn those whose duty ta to resist all
heathentsh innovations (ver. 11-16). The supine conduct of Urijah is in marked
contrast with the stout, heroic opposition of Azariah and his priests to the proud
assumptions of Uzziah (2 Chron. xxvi. 16-18). Ahaz was too weak
a character to have succeeded in winning over Urijah to idolatry, either by
threats or cajolery, unless therxx ad been a predisposition on a epart. He


GHAP, XVI. * TOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








was infected with the theological laxity of the period, and instead of boldly
maintaining the absolute supremacy of Jehovah, he was beginning to recognize
Him as but one among the many deities to be worshipped. With confused ideas
and impaired convictions, Urijah was not prepared to risk the loss of his place
and income by cpposing the wishes of the capricious monarch. 38. He adopts
methods calculated to disparage and pour contempt on the worship of Jehovah
(ver. 17, 18). We are prepared now for any act of impiety Ahaz may commit.
His reverence for God is gone, and with it his reverence for the sanctuary.
The sacred vessels are mutilated, the treasures and costly ornaments appropriated
to political exigencies, and the royal entrance to the Temple closed. There
was no distinction now between Judah and the most idolatrous nations. The
safeguard of Judah—the love and worship of Jehovah—was broken down, and
the nation soon became a prey to the invader and involved in ruin.


Lessons :—1. Idolatry debauches the moral sense of king and poople. 2. A wicked
king will always find those who will imitate him in his most extravagant follies and
vices. 3. The ruler who systematically ignores the claims of God inevitably drags
his people into degradation and suffering.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. Under this most wicked in the reigns of Azariah and Jotham


prince prophesied Isaiah, Hosea, Mi-
cah, and Nahum, but with little good
success, 80 incorrigibly flagitieue were
now all sorts grown.—TZrapp.


Verses 2-4. An idolatrous en-
thusiast—1. Eagerly embraces the
advantage gained by his accession to
power and authority in propagating
his favourite theories. ‘‘ Twenty years
old was Ahaz when he began to reign,
and did not that which was right”
(verse 2). 2. Is ever ready to quote
and imitate the examples of those
whose policy favoured his own views.
‘‘He walked in the ways of the kings
of Israel’’ (verse 3). 38. Soon out-
strips the most notorious examples,
and sinks to the abominations of the
rudest heathenism. ‘‘ Yea, and made
his son to pass through the fire’”’
(verse 3). 4. Spreads the blight of
his pernicious system in every avail-
able place. ‘‘He sacrificed in the
high places, on the hills, and under
every green tree” (verse 4).


Verse 2. The character of this
king’s reign, the voluptuousness and
religious degeneracy of all classes of
the people, are graphically portrayed
in the writings of Isaiah. The great
increase of worldly wealth and luxury

674


had introduced a host of corruptions
which, during the reign and by the
influence of Ahaz, bore fruit in the
idolatrous practices of every kind
which prevailed in all parts of the
kingdom (see 2 Chron. xxviii. 24).—
Jamieson.


Verse 3. A man that is once fallen
from truth knows not where he shal}
stay. From the calves of Jeroboam
is Ahaz drawn to the gods of the
heathen; yea, now bulls and goats are
too little for those new deities; his
own flesh and blood is but dear enough.
Where do we find any religious Is-
raelite thus zealous for God! Neither
is our dull and niggardly heart ready
to gratify Him with more easy obedi-
ences. O God, how gladly should we
offer unto thee our souls and bodies,
which we may enjoy so much the
more when they are thine, since zealous
Pagans stick not to lose their own
flesh and blood in an idol’s fire !—Bz.
Hall,


Verses 8,4. Men are so blind that
they think they serve God most truly
by those very actions by which they
sin most grossly against Him. The
Moloch-sacrifice, or child-sacrifice, is
a proof of the extravagance of errog


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


AP. XV,





into which men can fall when they
have not the knowledge of the living
God and His revealed blood, or when
they have rejected the same (Rom. i.
21, 22). This abomination, which
still continues among heathen nations,
is the strongest and most direct call to
all who know the living God and who
possess His Word, to take part in the
work of missions, and to help to bring
it about that light may come to those
who sit in darkness and the shadow of
death. God commands us to give our
dearest and best to Him, but not to
Moloch. There are no longer any
sacrifices to Moloch in Christendom;
but it happens often enough, even
now, that parents sacrifice their chil-
dren to the idols of the world which
consume them, so that they are lost
eternally.— Lange.


Verse 4. Wherever God has a
Church, the devil builds a temple by
the side of it.


Verses 5-9. The disastrons results
of national apostasy.—1. The enemy
is emboldened to make combined at-
tacks upon the nation (verse 5). 2.
Involves loss of prestige and of terri-
tory (verse 5). 3. The national spirit
is demoralised (verse 7). 4. The
nation is put in the power of those
who, while professing to help and
protect it, drain its resources and ulti-
mately hasten its ruin (verses 7-9).


Verse 7. The more plausible, really
the more insane, desire of Ahaz to
secure the favour of an empire which
was the common enemy of all nations,
that he might get rid of the two that
were tormenting him, showed that
faith had departed from Judah also.
The idols of silver and gold had
driven God out of its heart, and made
the worship of Him a mockery.—
Maurice.


Verse 10-18. Innovations in Di-
vine worship.—1. Are not to be
confounded with an improved fervour
and spirituality of service. 2. Are
evidences of religious decline. 3.
Are an insult to the Divine Being.


4. Should be firmly resisted by the
faithful minister of God. 5. May
lead to the most reprehensible acts of
contempt and sacrilege.

— See in this a clear picture of the
lack of Christian spirit in the two
highest ranks. The State desires to
see everything arranged according to
its whims; the Church yields for the
sake of the temporal advantage. It
is the fashion of depraved rulers that
they think they can command in reli-
gions as well as in similar matters,
and can control everything according
to their own good pleasure.—Lange.

— A spirit of innovation is gene-
rally the result of a selfish temper and
confined views. People will not look
forward to posterity who never look
backward to their ancestors.— Burke.

— It is a dangerous presumption
to make innovations if but in the cir-
cumstances of God’s worship. Those
human additions, which would seem
to grace the institution of God, de-
prave it. That infinite Wisdom knows
best what pleases itself, and prescribes
accordingly. The foolishness of God
ig wiser than the wisdom of men.
Idolatry and falsehood are commonly
more gaudy and plausible than truth.
That heart which can, for the outward
homeliness, despise the ordinances of
God, is already alienated from true
religion, and lies open to the grossest
superstition.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 10. A fit helve for such a
hatchet. Urijah had been a main-
tainer of God’s true worship in the
temple, and by the prophet Isaiah
counted and called a faithful witness
(Isa. viii. 1, 2); but now he becometh
an apostate, as Damascen turned Ma-
hommedan, after he had written
against that execrable impiety; and
Ahaz knew him, belike, to be a tempo-
riser.—Zrapp.


Verse 18. Uzziah, for so doing,
was smitten with leprosy; but Ahaz
of a far worse disease, an incurable
hardness of heart.—7Zrapp.

— For the heathens, and Ahaz’s
imitation of them, offered the same
sorts of offerings to their false gods

676


%
HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: KINGS,
nc et i a are Ty Sig pl i lk ae ke a en


CHAP. XVIL,


which the Israelites did to the true,
the devil being noted to be God’s ape
in his worship.— Pool.


Verse 16. We have in this high
priest a specimen of those hypocrites
and belly-servants who say, ‘‘ Whose
bread I eat, his song I sing; who
veer about with the wind, and seek to
be pleasant to all men; dumb dogs
who cannot bark; who wish to hurt
no one’s feelings, but teach and say
just what any one wants to hear.
But God’s word alone, and not the
favour of men, nor the goods and
honours of the world, ought to be the
rule from which we ought not to turn
aside, although it may involve risk
of life or limb to speak the truth._—
Lange.


Verses 19, 20. The reign of Ahaz
was the most disastrous of any through
which Judah had yet passed. The
kingdom sank so low, both internally
and externally, religiously and politi-
cally, that it was on the verge of ruin.
Such an incapable ruler had never
before ascended the throne. The pre-
dominant feature in his character was
weakness—weakness of spirit and
weakness of intellect. History records


nothing about him worthy of respect.
—Bahr.

— Of ail the kings of Judah hither.
to, there is none so dreadful an ex-
ample, either of sin or judgment, as
this son of good Jotham. I abhor to
think that such a monster should
descend from the loins of David.
Where should be the period of this
wickedness? He began with the high
places; thence he descended to the
calves of Dan and Bethel; from thence
he falls to a Syrian altar, to the Syrian
god; then he falls to an utter exclu-
sion of the true God and blocking up
His temple; then to the sacrifice of his
own son; and at last, as if hell were
broken loose on God’s inheritance,
every several city, every bigh place of
Judah, has anew God. No marvel if
he be branded by the Spirit of God
—This is that “king Ahaz!”—Bp.
Hall.

Verse 20. His subjects complain
that he died solate; and, as repenting
that he ever was, denying him a room
in the sepulchres of kings, as if they
had said—‘‘ The common earth of
Jerusalem is too good for him that
degenerated from his progenitors,
spoiled his kingdom, depraved his
people, forsook his God.—Jbid.


EE ss


CHAPTER XVII.


THE EXTINCTION OF THE ISRAELITISH KINGDOM.


CririoAL AND Expianatory Norses.—Verse2, Did evil
Israel—Scripture merely records the fact, does not explain wherein Hoshea sinned less.


but not as the kings of
But


even an abstention from wrong, which others wrought, is noticed by Jehovah, and kept in


eternal memory. Verse 3. Came up Shalmanes
he subdued the king of the ten tribes, and made him tributary,


er, king of Assyria—Thirsting for conquest,
Shalmaneser’s reign followed


Tiglath-pileser’s, who died B.o. 727. From this Assyrian despot Hoshea, after a few years,


sought relief by alliance with So, king of Egypt (verse 4),


This name ~ ND — becomes by


unctuation Seveh, and is recognized as Shebek of the 25th dynasty. This Ethiopian monarch,
ord of Upper Egypt, in the year B.c. 725 invaded Lower Egypt, and proved so mighty a
conqueror that the small kingdoms which had groaned beneath the despotism of Assyria turned
to him for defence and security. Verse 9. Children of Israel did secretly things not right
against the Lord—The word N57} has been rendered variously, as secret blasphemy, acts of
treachery, dissimulating words; but its meaning, to cover, cloke, when taken with O17,
may be accepted as they hid or eoncealed Jehovah Srom attention and homage by idolatrous ine


trusions, so that He was ignored. Verse 17. Worshipped all the hosts of heaven—The idol
Astarte represented the moon, and Moloch {or Baal) the sun; and between these they arrayed


for worship ‘‘all the hosts of heaven.”
576


Bf


his was an addition to their objects of idolatrous


ROMILBTIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. xvi.
ee ES


veverence, and appears as a new feature of Israclitish worship. This astral homage came in
upon Israel through the Assyrian alliances by Pekah and Ahaz, for star worship was distinc-
tively an Assyrian importation. Verse 18. Removed Israel out of His sight—After 256 years
of separate existence from Judah, the kingdom of the ten tribes thus ignominiously ended,
its nationality perished. On this kingdom of Israel lay the twofold sin: first, of revolting
from loyal tribes of Judah and Benjamin, thus violating the unity of God’s chosen nation ;
and, next, of revolting against Jehovah and His worship, thus debasing the sacred distinction
for which God called them to be His people; therefore Israel became not useless only, but an
affront to Jehovah, and was consigned to just retribution, Werse 24. King of Assyria brought
men from Babylon, &c.—Had the land been depopulated there would have seemed promise of
the exiles’ return ; but under the royal direction Assyrian subjects came in und possessed the
sacred soil, making it the home of foreigners. This king, called here “).1WN a Pe) is regarded
- 've
by many expositors as Esarhaddon ; but a doubt naturally springs from the fact that Esarhaddon
did not come to the throne for some twenty-six years after Shalmanezer, who carried Israel
into captivity. From Ezra iv. 2 we gain information that Esarhaddon brought these colonists
into Samaria. Verse 27. Carry thither one of the priests —The country was too thinly
populated to subdue the growth of those beasts of prey by which the land had been infested
prior to its occupancy by Israel (Judges xiv. 6; 1 Sam. xvii. 34, &c.); now they again multi-
plied and ravaged the country. Interpreting this as a judgment from God for the neglect of
His worship, an exiled priest was sent back to the people to teach them Jehovah’s will. And
from this event arose that mingled religion which became distinctive of the Samaritans; also
the Samaritan version of the Peatateuch, which acquired such historic importance. Verse 30.
The men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth—“ Booths of the daughters,” i. ¢., tents of
voluptuousness, where lust was sanctioned asa religious observance. Nergal—Identified in
the British Museum inscriptions as Mars, the god of war. Ashima—a goat idol. Nibhaz—
a dog. Tartak—anass, or planet of illomen. Adrammelech—Either Moloch the Assyrian
sun-god ; or, as others think, a mule or a peacock. Anammelech—An idol in form of a hare.
Thus the Samaritans became a people of varied religious forms and vagaries, the true worship
and knowledge of God being perverted by the rival heathenish fallacies and rites which the
immigrants of Babylon had brought into the land. So even though Jehovah was in some way
“feared ” (verse 32), idolatry was fostered, and they “served their graven images’’ through
generations following (verse 41).—W. H. J.


———


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-6,
Tun Urrer Downrart or [srarn


I. Was effected notwithstanding the superior capacity and modified
idolatry of the ruler.—Hoshea ‘‘did that which was evil, but not es the
kings of Israel that were before him” (verse 2). He did not enforce the
edicts of Baal with such determined fanaticism as some of his predecessors.
He allowed more liberty in religious worship, and while not approaching the
true worship of Jehovah, he did not descend to the abominations of the lowest
heathenism. Some have thought that the last king of Israel was the worst;
but the history does not favour that view. He was a man of considerable
military and political capacity. It is true he reached the throne by violence
and bloodshed (chap. xv. 30); but the people were weary of national abuses
and of the imbecility of their kings, and welcomed the advent of any one who
had the courage and vigour to rectify matters. Hoshea yearned for liberty,
and his whole reign was spent in repeated efforts to cast off the foreign yoke,
to excite a more enterprising national spirit, and to arrest the downward ten-
dency of the kingdom. But no human power could now save Israel. The
ablest generalship, the most consummate statesmanship, the cleverest combina-
tions, were all in vain. It was a melancholy sight to see this man grappling
with a falling kingdom, whose ruin he was powerless to prevent.


II. Was accomplished notwithstanding the most brave and desperate


struggles for continued existence (verses 4, 5).—Hoshea a the mistake
rr a7


&


OHAP. XVII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





that Menahem and Pekah had made in calling in the assistance of Assyria, and
what had been the sad results to the country. He made a bold stand for
national freedom. He refused to pay tribute, and prepared to withstand the
fury of the great Assyrian power. It is a tribute to the superior diplomacy of
Hosea that he succeeded in persuading So, the warrior king of Egypt, that it
was their mutual safety to oppose Assyria; and though So was but a fickle
colleague, he must have rendered considerable assistance until he was obliged
to retire within his own kingdom and defend himself from the common enemy.
The fact that Samaria held out for three years against the Assyrian army, with
all its formidable appliances for siege and assault, indicates the obstinacy and
desperation of the defence. They were the last frantic efforts of despair.

“It is remarkable,” says Ewald, ‘‘how strong a resemblance the fall of
Samaria bears to the first and second destructions of Jerusalem, in the heroic
resistance of its inhabitants.”


III. Was associated with scenes of humiliation and suffering (verses 5, 6).
Israel was afflicted with all the terrible consequences of war—war carried on
by an enemy who was determined to win. The horrors of the siege of Samaria
may be inferred from Isaiah xxviii. 1-4; Hosea x.14; xili. 16; Amosvi. 9-14.
Added to the chagrin of defeat, was the degradation of enforced captivity and
estrangement—torn from the midst of loved and familiar scenes, and placed in
a strange and distant country, subject to the sarcasms and, it may be, cruelty
of its inhabitants. The people who had been delivered from Egyptian slavery
by the strong arm of Jehovah are again relegated to bondage, because they had
abandoned their Deliverer. The punishment for sin is ever attended with
suffering and shame.


_ IV. Was inevitable, as the opportunity for reformation had passed
unimproved.—lInstruction had been despised, reproof unheeded, the best of
prophets ignored, prosperity abused, and repeated overtures of mercy callously
spurned. The time for compromise was passed, the opportunity of salvation
was sinned away. Nothing remained but to allow the national infatuation to
run its course and produce its inevitable results. The nation must reap what
it had sown; it had sown the wind, and must reap the whirlwind. A certain
king once caused a lamp to be lit in his palace, and a proclamation made
throughout his dominion that every rebel who came and tendered his submis-
sion before the light burnt out should be forgiven, whatever the nature of his
offence ; bnt that those who refused to obey the summons within the required
time should be put to death. The lamp of Israel’s opportunity had long been
lit, and the conditions of submission made sufficiently public. When therefore
the light became extinct, and Israel refused to return, the threatened punish-
ment must inevitably follow. Shakespeare says truly of opportuity, “‘ Whe
seeks, and will not take when once ’tis offered, shall never find it more.”


Lessons :-—1. Tt ts not in the power of any one man unaided to save a kingdom.
2. National sins involve national ruin. 3. Lvery nation, as every individual, has
ample opportunities for reformation. y


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Ver. 1-6. A doleful picture of 4). 8. The country overrun and im-
national desolation. 1. Fanatical poverished by hosts of invading foes
persistence im the evil that works its (ver. 5). 4. Struggling bravely, but
ruin (ver. 2). 2. Vainly seeking the uselessly, against superior numbers
protection ee powers (ver. 8, (ver. 5, 6). 5. Draughted un-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


_


resistingly into strange and distant
lands (ver. 16). 6. An imprisoned
king and scattered people.

— The last king of Israel. I.
He did that which was evil, but not as
the kings of Israel before him. Though
he did not go so far in wickedness as
the eighteen kings who preceded him,
nevertheless, he did not walk in the
way of salvation. Half-way conver-
sion is no conversion. In order to
bring back the nation from its wicked
ways, he should have been himself
devoted to the Lord with all his heart.
When people are not fully in earnest
in their conversion, then there is no
cessation of corruption, whether it be
the case of an individual or a state.
II. He makes a covenant with the king
of Egypt (ver. 4). By this he showed
that his heart was not perfect with
God. Egypt, the very power out of
whose hand God had wonderfully
rescued his people, was to help him
against Assyria. But ‘‘ cursed be the
man that trusteth in man and maketh
flesh his arm” (Jer. xvii. 5; Hosea vii.
11-13). ILI. He loses his land and
his people, and is cast into prison.
By conspiracy and murder he had
attained to the throne and to the
highest pitch of human greatness, but
his end was disgrace, misery, and life-
long imprisonment. Upon him who
will not be humbled by small evils
God sends great and heavy ones.—


Lange.

Ver. 2. Wickedness—1. May be
modified in its enormity. 2. Every
modification observed and impartially
recorded. $3. Modification does not
alter its nature, or escape its punish-
ment.

— It looks like the bitter irony of
fate that this Hosea, who was to be
the last king, was a better one than
any of his predecessors. The words
of the prophets who had uttered so
many and such important truths con-
cerning this kingdom during the last
fifty years, many have exercised
a powerful influence over him and
instilled into him better principles.
But they had always predicted its
fall as certain ; and now the irresistible
feroe of history was to prove that no


CHAP. XVEE.





single man, whatever might be his
position and superiority, could be
strong enough to delay the ruin of
the whole structure, if the right
moment for its reformation had passed.
—wald.


Ver. 3. Payment of tribute. 1.
A humiliating evidence of subjection
(ver. 3), 2. Chafes the spirit of
a liberty-loving people (ver. 4). 3.
Brings disaster if ineffectually resisted
(ver. 4).


Ver. 5. As the end drew near,
they gave themselves up to the frantic
revellings of despair. At last the
city was stormed. With the ferocity
common to all the warfare of those
times, the infants were hurled down
the rocky sides of the hill on which
the city stood, or destroyed in their
mothers’ bosoms, Famine and pesti-
lence completed the work of war.
The stones of the ruined city were
poured down into the rich valley
below, and the foundations were laid
bare. Palace and hovel alike fell;
the statues were broken to pieces; the
crown of pride, the glory of Ephraim,
was trodden under foot.— Stanley.


Ver. 6. The fall of Samaria and
Damascus was, according to the pre-
diction of the prophet, synchronous
(Isa. vii. 7-9); and the devastation
both of Syria and Israel was foretold
at a time and in circumstances when
no human sagacity could have antici-
pated it (Amos i).—Jamieson.

— Oterrible examples of vengeance
upon that peculiar people whom God
had chosen for Himself out of all the
world! All the world were witnesses
of the favours, of the miraculous de-
liverances and protections; all the
world shall be witnesses of their just
confusion. It is not in the power of
slight errors to set off that infinite
mercy. What was it, O God, what
was it that caused Thee to cast off
Thine inheritance? What but the
same that made Thee cast the angels
out of heaven—even their rebellious
sins. Those sins dared to emulate the
greatness of Thy mercies, no less than
they forced the severity of Thy
judgments.—Bp. Hall. ms

6


OWAP. XVII. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 7-83
Ynoratrezy roe Destructive Force mum Narronar Lous,


From the lengthy review embraced by this paragraph we again obtain a glimpse
into the moral purpose of the historian of kings. In the writer’s estimation
everything is to be subordinated to the setting forth of the Divine purpose in
raising up the Hebrew people, and the miseries that came upon them for the
violation of their part of the covenant. The rise and fall of dynasties, the conduct
of great battles, the advance of the nation in commercial prosperity and civiliza-
tion, the notice of contemporary nations, are all dismissed with the briefest
reference ; but whatever affects the theocratic aspect of the history is described
with significant fullness of detail. The downfall of Israel was a catastrophe so
momentous that the historian pauses in the midst of his narrative to enlarge
upon its moral aspects. One of the most impressive lessons we learn in this
review is that Idolatry ts the great destructive force in national life. Observe—


I. That idolatry demoralises the national spirit. 1. J¢ weakens the sense
of moral obligation to obey the Divine law (ver. 12). When Israel was rescued
out of Egyptian bondage, they became God’s covenant people, and pledged them-
selves to obey Him. The fact of this great and signal deliverance stands at the
head of the covenant law (Ex. xx. 2), and is always cited as the chief and
fundamental act of the Divine favour (Lev. xi. 45; Josh. xxiv. 17; 1 Kings
viii. 51; Psa. lxxxi. 10; Jer. ii. 6). The discipline of the wildnerness and the
awful displays of the Divine power and majesty, were intended to divest them
of the remnants of heathenism that still clung to them, and to instruct them in
the knowledge and worship of the only True God. Every relapse into idolatry
was a loss of moral stamina, weakened the bonds of obligation, and made
obedience more difficult. We have need to be on our guard every moment
against the seductive lures of idolatry—all the more dangerous because there is
so much in us ever ready to respond to its bewitching overtures. We have need,
in moments of temptation, to cultivate towards our Heavenly Father the artless
simplicity of the child who, in a state of alarm, ran to his parent, and cried,
‘‘Mother, my goodness grows weak—help me!’ 2. J¢ leads its votaries inte
the lowest depths of wickedness (ver. 7-11, and 15—17). In these verses we
have the genesis and career of the idolater graphically portrayed. Distaste and
neglect of the Divine statutes and commandments—a preference and love for
other gods—secret indulgence, unblushing publicity—enforcing by statute on
others what he had at first but timidly practised himself; a more complete
wrenching away from his allegiance to Jehovah ; a defiant, menacing attitude
assumed ; utter rejection of God; reckless and unreserved abandonment to his
self-chosen deities; ‘‘selling himself to do evil”; infatuated devotion to the
most revolting practices; the end, desolation and ruin.


II. That idolatry hardens its victims against the most faithful warnings
and appeals (ver. 13,14). L[srael was not allowed to drift to her fate unchecked
and unwarned; the most gifted prophets of the Hebrew schvol were sent to
instruct and admonish the people. Doubtless some gave heed to their teachers,
and mourned over the infatuation of their countrymen. But the bulk of the
nation, following the lead of those high in authority, shut their ears te
instruction, disdained reproof, and persevered in their sins. It is illustrative of
the subtle, dangerous power of idolatry, that it renders its votaries so oblivious
to the truth and so impervious to its strokes. The action of water, which, im
an early stage, will soften a given substance when continued incessantly, only
petrifies it the more ; so is it with the moral influence of truth : the nature that
was once easily melted is now defiant and obdurate.

580


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; KINGS. OHAP. XVIL.


eee,





UI. That idolatry involves the nation in decay and ruin (ver. 18-23).
In these verses the writer takes pains to show that their idolatry was the parent
of every other sin that weakened and degraded the national character. The
heroism and compact union which rendered them invincible in days when
Jehovah was honoured and worshipped no longer existed, and they became an
easy prey to the spoiler. The Knights of St. John of Malta, in the early
period of the order, were remarkable for their devout Christian spirit as well as
for bravery and prowess. In 1565 they defended the island against 30,000
Turks. When, after incredible acts of heroism and endurance on both sides, the
fortress of St. Elmo fell, the Turkish commander, looking from its ruined
bastions across the harbour at the lofty ramparts of St. Angelo, exclaimed,
‘¢ What will not the parent cost us when the child has been gained at so fearful
a price!’ He was obliged to raise the seige, and of the 30,000 Turks scarcely
10,000 found their way back to Constantinople. What was invincible to war-
fare in the 16th century yielded too easily to bribery and corruption in the
18th. The gold of Napoleon accomplished what the combined forces of Turkey
had failed to do; and as Napoleon entered the gates of Malta, General Caffarelli
remarked to him, glancing at the massive defences, ‘‘ It is fortunate we have
some one to admit us, for we should never have got in of ourselves.” So
greatly had the knights of 1798 degenerated from the brave defenders of St.
Elmo in 1565. The nation, as the individual, is strong only as it is genuinely
religious: decay in piety means decay in all that gives greatness and
permanence to a nation.


Lessons :— 1. Whatever lowers the national moral tone ts a calamity. 2. Idolatry
$s on audacious attempt to live without God in everything. 3. The nation that
persistently ignores God will come to naught—st produces im itself the elements
that shall destroy st.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 7-23. A review of the friends; ambition, honour’s over-


moral causes of national decay.—
1. Civil dissension and revolt (verses
21-23). 2. Flagrant abandonment of
God (verses 15, 16). 8. Voluntary
choice and practice of grossest idolatry
(verses 8-12). 4. Habitual neglect
of prophetic warning and instruction
(verses 13, 14). :
— Their iniquity was their ruin.
Out of Hosea and Amos their sins
may be gathered; and especially their
abominable idolatry, contempt of (rod’s
prophets, and abuse of His benefits.
Of the ruin of the Greek empire the
historian assigns these for the chief
causes: First, the innovation and
change of their ancient religion,
whereof ensued a world of woes;
then covetousness, coloured with the
name of good husbandry, the utter
destruction of the chief strength of
the empire; next envy, the ruin of


the great; false suspect, the looser of


throw; distrust, the great mind’s tor-
ment; and foreign aid, the empire’s
unfaithful porter, opening the gate
even to the enemy himself.—Zrapp.
— Here where the kingdom of the
ten tribes comes to an end and dis-
appears for ever from history, was the
place for casting a glance back upon
its development and history. This
the writer does from the old Testa-
ment standpoint, according to which
God chose the people of Israel to be His
own peculiar people, made a covenant
with it, and took it under His special
guidance and direction for the welfare
and salvation of all nations. The
breach of the covenant by the Northern
Kingdom is in his view the first, the
peculiar, and the only cause of its
final fall, and this fall is the judgment
of the holy and just God. If he had
not known that this covenant law, in
the form in which he was familiar
68}


OHAP, XVII.


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





with it, had existed long before the
division of the kingdom, he could not
have declared so distinctly and de-
eidedly that the fall of the kingdom
of the ten tribes was a Divine judg-
ment upon it for its apostacy from that
law.-—Lange.

— Would that men, when they
read such passages, would stop and
think, and would enter upon a com-
parison between the peoples of God at
that time and of this, and would thus
make application of the lesson of his-
tory. The people of Israel were
hardly as wicked as the Christians of
to-day. The responsibility of to-day
is far greater, for they were called to
righteousness under the old law, we
under the Gospel of free grace. The
people of the Ten Tribes did not reject
belief in God at first; but, contrary to
the law of this God, they made to
themselves an image of Him. This
was the beginning of their downfall,
the germ of their ruin. This led from
error to error. They commenced with
an image of Jehovah; they finished
with the frightful sacrifices of Moloch.
He who has once abandoned the centre
of revealed truth, sinks inevitably
deeper and deeper, either into unbelief
or into superstition, so that he finally
comes to consider darkness light, and
folly wisdom. So it was in Israel, so
it is now in Christendom. He who
abandons the central truth of Christi-
anity—Christ, the Son of God—is in
the way of losing God. A nation
which no longer respects the Word of
God, but makes a religion for itself,
according to its own good pleasure,
will sooner or later come to ruin.—
Ibid.


Versca 9-12. The progressive de-
velopment of evil.—1. Begins in
secret. 2. Gradually gains the mastery
over conscientious scruples. 38. Soon
acquires a shameless effrontery in
public. 4. Becomes universally estab-
lished by popular usage and example.
5. Reckless of consequences, to either
God or man, cares not how deeply
God is grieved or man is injured.


Verse 9. ey hid, or covered, or
6


cloaked over what they did; but iz
vain; for God is all eye, and to Him
dark things appear, dumb things
answer, silence itself maketh confes-
sion.— Trapp.


Verse 12. But they did it the
rather; taking occasion by the law,
that their sin might appear to be
exceeding sinful (Rom. vii. 13). Such
is the canker of our vile natures, that
the more God forbids a thing, the
more we bid for it.—Zbsd.


Verse 18. The obduracy of im-
penitence.—1. Is coldly indifferent
alike to warning or entreaty (verse
13). 2. Is intensified by persistent
unbelief (verse 14). 8. Is confirmed
in its defiant attitude by the character
of its daily worship (verse 15). 4.
Utterly rejects every vestige of Divine
authority and guidance (verse 16). 5.
Voluntarily abandons itself to the
most debasing practices (verse 17).
6. Inevitably incurs the Divine dis-
pleasure (verse 18).


Verse 18. Neither were these slips
of frailty, or ignorant mistakings, but
wilful crimes, obstinate impieties, in
spite of the doctrines, reproofs, men-
aces, and miraculous convictions of
the holy prophets. Thy destruction
is of thyself, O Israel! What could
the just hand of the Almighty do less
than consume a nation so ineorrigibly
flagitious—a nation so unthankful for
mercies, 80 impatient of remedies, so
incapable of repentance. What nation
under heaven can now challenge an
indefeasible interest in God, when
Israel itself is cast off? He that
spared not the natural olive, shall He
spare the wild ?—Bp. Hall.


Verse 16. ‘And worshipped all
the host of heaven.” It is not easy to
determine the exact form which the
worship of the heavenly bodies took in
the various nations of Western Asia.
The purest form of star worship was
that of the Assyrio-Persian Magism;
it admitted of no images of the Deity,
and in its adoration of the heavenly
bodies it drew its deepest inspiration


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP. KVix.


er nec


from the thought of their perfect
beauty. This was the cultus to which
Job felt himself tempted when he
‘‘beheld the sun when it shined, or
the moon walking in brightness” (Job
Xxxi. 26, compared with Deut. iv. 19).
A second mode of regarding the stars
was that of the Phonicians, by whom
they were looked upon as the origi-
nators of the growth and decay of
nature—the embodiment of the cre-
ative and regenerative principle; and
from this view there was readily de-


veloped a further symbolism, which .


led ere long to the grossest idolatries.
The third great system of astral wor-
ship was that whose leading tendency
was to dwell rather on the contempla-
tion of the eternal unchangeableness
of the heavenly bodies, as contrasted
with the chances and changes of this
transitory life. This was the form
most common among the Chaldeans,
and naturally produced the astrology
for which they were famous. It is
not always possible to determine which
form of the worship of the host of
heaven was that which presented itself
as a temptation to the children of
Israel. On the whole, we may assume
it to have been the second, not only
from the connection in which it is
mentioned, but also from the circum-
stances of the case.— Wilkins’ Phenicia
and Ierael.


Verse 17. ‘And they sold them-
selves to to do evil in the sight of the
Lord.” The responsibility of the
sinner. 1. Is grounded in his free-
dom of volition. 2. Is abused by
every act of iniquity he voluntarily
commits. 38. Cannot be destroyed by
the most frantic efforts of self-forget-
fulness and sin. 4. Will one day
make him terribly conscious how
deeply he bas offended God.


Verse 18. The kingdom of Israel
had nineteen kings, and not one of
them was truly pious. Wonder not
at the wrath, but at the patience of
God in that He endured their evil
ways for many hundred years, and at
their ingratitnde that they did not
allow themselves, by His long-suffer-


ing, to be brought to repentance. Is it
any better now-a-days ?—Lange.

— Speaking humanly, the state was
past redemption ; the utter corruption
and impenitence of the people are
attested by the denunciations of Hosea,
and confirmed by their scornful rejec-
tion of Hezekiah’s call to repentance
and union. Even the king was only
some shades better than his prede-
cessors; and it was no partial reform
that could save and renew the state.
Viewing the case from the higher
ground taken throughout the Scripture
history—the inseparable connection
between national prosperity or ad-
versity, and religious obedience or
rebellion—we cannot say that it was
too late for Israel to be saved; as
Sodom would have been, if five righte-
ous men had been found in her; as
Nineveh was, when her people re-
pented at the preaching of Jonah.
They had only forty days of grace;
Heshea and his people had three years.
Had the kine of Israel made common
cause with Hezekiah, and thrown him-
self upon the protection of Jehovah,
we have aright to believe that the
times of David might have returned.
But Hoshea took the very course de-
nounced by the law of Moses—reliance
upon Egypt. His sudden destruction
is compared by the prophet Hosea to
the disappearance of foam upon the
water.—Dr. Smith’s Student Scripture
History.


Verses 20-23. A God-forsaken
people. 1. The fruit of obstinate
and continued disobedience (verse 22).
2. Become a prey to suffering and
spoliation (verse 20). 3. Cannot but
observe the contrast between the good-
ness and patience of God, and the
cruelty of their despotic conquerors
(verses 21, 23). 4. May be restored,
if the Divine favour be sought in
penitence and humble submission.


Ver. 23. The ultimate fate of the
Ten Tribes of Israel. The main body
of the inhabitants were transplanted
to the remotest provinces of the As-
syrian empire. After this it is ditk.
cult to discover any distinct trace of

683


CHAP, XVI.





the Northern tribes. Some returned
with their countrymen of the South-
ern kingdom. Inthe New Testament
there is special mention of the tribe
of Asher, and the ten tribes generally
are on three emphatic occasions ranked
with others (Jamesi.1; Acts xxvi.
7; Rev. vii. 5-8). The immense
Jewish population which made Baby-
lonia a second Palestine was in part
derived from them; and the Jewish
customs that have been discovered in
the Nestorian Christians, with the
traditions of the sect itself, may indi-
cate at any rate a mixture of Jewish
descent. That they are concealed in
some unknown region of the earth is
a fable with no foundation either in
history or prophecy.—Stanley.

— There has been a wide-spread
belief among modern Christians that
the Ten Tribes, having never returned
to their native country, must still
exist somewhere in a collected body.
Travellers have thought to discover
them in Malabar, in Kashmir, in
China, in Turkistan, in Afghanistan,
in the Kurdish mountains, in Arabia,
in Germany, in North America.
Books have been written advocating
this or that identification, and the
notion has thus obtained extensive
currency that somewhere or other in
the world the descendants of the Ten
Tribes must exist, and that when
found they might be recognized as
such by careful and diligent enquiry.
It seems to have been forgotten that,
in the first place, they were scattered
over a wide extent of country (Harran,
Chalcitis, Gozan, or Mygdonia and
Media) by the original conquerors;
that, secondly, in the numerous con-
quests and changes of populations
which sre known to have taken place
in these regions they would naturall
become more scattered ; that, thirdly,
a considerable number of them proba-
bly returned with the Jews under
Zerubbabel and Ezra (Ezr. vi. 17;
villi. 35; 1 Chron. ix. 8); that,
fourthly, those who remained behind
would naturally either mingle with
the heathen among whom they lived,
or become united with the Jews of the
dispersion ; and that, fifthly, if there

584


 HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: KINGS.





had been anywhere in this part of
Asia at the time of Alexander’s con-
quests, or of the Roman expevlitions
against Parthia and Persia, a com-
munity of the peculiar character sup-
posed, it is most improbable that no
Greek or Roman historian or geogra-
pher should have mentioned it.
Against these arguments there is
nothing to be set but a statement of
Josephus, in the first century of our
era, that the Ten Tribes still existed
beyond the Euphrates in his day (he
does not say in a collective form) ; and
a similar declaration of Jerome in the
fifth. Neither writer has any personal
acquaintance with the countries, or
speaks from his own knowledge.
Both. may be regarded as relating
rather what they supposed must be,
than what they knew actually was
the case. Again, neither may mean
more than that among the Hebrews
of the dispersion (Acts ii. 9) in Parthia,
Media, Elam, and Mesopotamia were
many Israelites. On the whole,
therefore, it would seem probable (1)
That the Ten Tribes never formed
& community in their exile, but were
scattered from the first; and (2
That their descendants either blend
with the heathen and were absorbed,
or returned to Palestine with Zerub-
babel and Ezra, or became inseparably
united with the dispersed Jews in
Mesopotamia and the adjacent coun-
tries. No discovery, therefore, of the
Ten Tribes is to be expected, nor can
any works written to prove their
identity with any existing race or
body of persons be regarded as any-
thing more than ingenious exercita-
ticns.— Speaker's Comm.

— Esdras has a vision of the Ten
Tribes separating themselves from the
heathen and migrating to a distant
land, never before inhabited by men
(2 Esdras xiii. 40-47). Perhaps this
vision of Esdras was the starting point
of all the speculations about the
‘“‘Lost Tribes,” for they have been
lost and found in nearly every part of
Asia, Europe, and North America.
But vague traditional tales and in-
genious speculations are of little
weight to counter-balance the abund


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





ant testimony of Scripture on the sub-
ject, which may be stated as follows:
—1l. A considerable portion of the
Teraelitish population never went into the
Assyrian exile. The first deportations
were by Pul and Tiglath-Pileser, and
in all probability were composed of
fewer captives than Sargon carried
away after the capture of Samaria and
the fall of the Northern Kingdom.
Sargon’s inscription, which would not
be likely to make too low an estimate,
mentions 27,280 captives; but the
Northern Kingdom must surely have
had a population far exceeding these
numbers. Multitudes were of course
slain in the siege of Samaria and in
previous wars; but supposing the
eaptives to be ten times the number
given, what became of all the rest of
Israel, which in David’s time num-
bered 800,000 warriors, which implied
@ population of many millions (2 Sam.
xxiv. 9). Only the cities of Samaria
seem to have been depopulated, so that
in other and remoter districts of the
kingdom a larger majority of the
populaton seem to have been left to
care for the land. Thus the Kingdom
of the Ten Tribes ceased to exist; but
numerically the mass of the people were
left in their ancient homes. Certain
it is that they were not all carried into
exile. 2. The captives were not allowed
to settle in one district. Perhaps a ma-
jority were placed in Halah and along
the Habor; but others, and how large
a proportion does not appear, were
scattered abroad in various cities of
Media. This fact of their being scat-
tered throughout various parts of the
vast Assyrian empire argues against
the notion of their continuing their
tribal distinctions, and especially of
their perpetuating the Ten Tribes as
an organized community. 3. There ts
reason to believe that after the fai of
Samaria the old enmity between Judah
and Israel began to cease. In the reign
of Hezekiah numbers of the tribes of
Israel accepted the public invitation
to celebrate the Passover at Jerusalem
(2 Chron. xxx.); and at the close of
the Passover ‘‘all Israel that were
present went out” and destroyed all
the signs of idolatry ‘‘ out of all Judah


CaaP, XVie


and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and
Manasseh”” (#6, xxxi. 1). The like
thing was done by Josiah (2 Kings
xxili. 19; 2 Chron. xxxvii. 7; xxxv.
8). Such a coming together in their
now oppressed land would rapidly
efface from Judah and Israel their
ancient bitterness and jealousy. The
better portion of all the people would
see and obey the manifest will of
Jehovah, and the rest, having no
bond of union, would gradually die
and fade away. 4. Zhe prophets, with
one voice, represent both Judah and
Israel returning together from ther
ezile. More than a century after the
fall of Samaria, Judah also was led into
exile, and Jeremiah, who flourished at
that time, began at once to comfort
them with prophecies of a restoration.
(Compare Jer. iii. 18; xxx. 3; xxxiii.
7; 1.4; Ezek. xxxvii. 21, 22; Isa.
xi. 11-18; xiv. 1; Hosea i. 11;
Micah ii. 12). So we may believe
that the chastisement of the exile not
only cleansed all Israel from idolatry,
but also utterly crushed out the tribal
feuds and jealousies. Some of these
prophecies are doubtless Messianic,
but all have more or less to show that
in their exile Judah and Israel became
united in all their higher sympathies
and hopes, and were thus prepared,
whenever opportunity offered, to re-
turn together to the land of their
fathers. 5. Finally: All we know of
the subsequent history of Israel tends to
show that in the lands of their exile, and
elsewhere, Judah and Jsrael became
largely intermingled. It is likely many
of the exiles from Judah were settled
in cities and districts already occupied
by descendants of those Israelites from
the cities of Samaria, who had been
carried off by the Assyrian kings more
than a century before. “ince the cap-
tivity the common name for all Isracl-
ites, wherever scattered abroad, is
Jews. With the fall of Samaria,
‘the kingdom of the house of Israel”
had no longer an existence, but was
largely absorbed by Judah; and there-
fore it is not to be wondered at that
no express mention is made of descend-
ants of the Ten Tribes returning along
with Judah from exile. But there
585


GaAP. XVM


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a


were vast multitudes of Judah and
Israel that never accepted the offer to
return to the father-kand. They are
spoken of as “scattered abroad’’ in
the Persian empire (Esther iil. 8).
They are referred to on the day of
Pentecost as ‘out of every nation
under heaven” (Acts ii. 5-10).) Jo-
sephus speaks of the great numbers
of Jews who, in his time, dwelt in
Babylon, Mesopotamia, and beyond
the Euphrates (Antiq. xv. 22; iil. 1;
xviii. 9, 1). Paul speaks of ‘‘ our
Twelve Tribes” Acts xxvi. 7); and
James addressed his Epistle ‘‘to the
Twelve ‘Tribes scattered abroad.”
From all this we infer, that after the
Babylonish exile, the old dominion of
‘‘ Judah and Israel’? became lost—all
the scattered tribes became intermixed,
no one region held any one tribe, or
any definite number of tribes—the
name of Jews was applied to them all;
the Ten Tribes, as a distinct nation,
had long ceased to exist, and the whole
body of Israelites throughout the
world became amalgamated into one
people, recognizing themselves as the
descendants and representatives of the
twelve ancient tribes.— Whedon.

— Respecting the fate of the captives
we have had the statement of their
transplantation to certain districts of
Assyria and Media, where we almost
lose sight of them. Nor is this sur-
prising. The gradual contraction of
the limits of the Samaritan kingdom
suggests, what the inscription of Sar-
gon confirms, that the numbers carried
captive at last were far less consider-
able than is commonly supposed.
Their absorption in the surrounding
population would be aided by their
long addiction to the practices of
idolatry ; and the loss of reverence for
their religion involved absence of care
for the records of their national
existence. As they furnished no con-
fessors and martyrs, like Daniel and
“the three children,” so neither did
they preserve the genealogies on which
Judah based the order of the restored
commonwealth. But yet their traces
are not utterly lost. The fact that
a priest was found among them, to
teach the Samaritans to fear Jehovah,

586


proves that they maintained some form
of worship in His name. The Book
of Tobit preserves the record of do-
mestic piety among captives of the
tribe of Naphthali. After the great
captivity of Judah, it is most interest-
ing to see bow continually Ezekiel
addresses thy captives by the name of
Israel. The prophetic symbol of the
rod of Judah and “the rod of the
children of Israel his companions”
being joined into one, in order to their
restoration as one nation, as Isaiah
also had predicted, seems to imply
that all that was worth preserving in
Israel became amalgamated with
Judah, and either shared in the resto-
ration, or became a part of the ‘‘dis-
persion” who were content to remain
behind, and who spread the knowledge
of the true God throughout the East.
The edict of Cyrus, addressed to the
servants of Jehovah, God of Israel,
would find a response beyond the
tribe of Judah, and though none of
the Ten Tribes appear, as such, among
the returned exiles, there is room for
many of their families in the number
of those who could not prove their
pedigrees. As for the rest, according
to the very images of the prophet,


Like the dew on the mountain,
Like the foam on the river,
Like the bubble on the fountain,

They are gone, and FOR EVER.


The very wildness of the speculations
of those who have sought them at the
foot of the Himalayas and on the
coast of Malabar, among the Nestoriang
of Abyssinia and the Indians of North
America, proves sufficiently the hope-
lessness of the attempt. Have, then,
the promises of God concerning their
restoration failed? No! They were
represented, as we have seen, in the
return of Judah; and for the rest,
though they are lost to us, “‘the Lord
knoweth them that are His.” When
God shall reveal out of every nation
those who have ‘‘feared God and
wrought righteousness,” all the tribes
of believers in Israel will be owned,
in some special manner, as His peo-
ple. That this restoration will not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. CHAP. XvVii.





be temporal, but spiritual, seems to New Testament authority on the
be the plain teaching of St. Paul in whole subject (Rom. ix—xi).—JDr.
the passage which forms the great Simith’s Student Soripture History.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 24-41,
Retietous Compromise.


I. That religious compromise is the offspring of human fear (verse
24-28), The incursion and ravages of the lions aud wild beasts that multiplied
so rapidly in the Jordan Valley and the forests of Samaria filled the now
scattered inhabitants with dread. Regarding their sufferings as an indication
of the anger of some local deity, they were anxious to be instructed in ‘the
manner of the god of the land.”’ Thus it came to pass that Jehovah was wor-
shipped as one of many other deities. Fear—fear of consequences, fear of
offending, fear of suffering—leads to the most calamitous compromises. ‘In
morals,” says a certain writer, ‘‘ what begins in fear usually ends in wicked-
ness; in religion, what begins in fear usually ends in fanaticism. Fear, either
as a principle or « motive, is the beginning of all evil.”


II. That religious compromise is ever productive of error and confusion
{verse 29-34). What a curious and pitiable jumble of creeds and deities we
heve here! It is an illustration of what must happen when man is left to
himself. The key-note of the paragraph is verse 33—‘‘ They feared the Lord
and served their own gods.” They sought to accomplish the impossible—to
blend what can never be united, as there are certain metals that can never weld
together, and certain fluids that can never coalesce. One part of the day the
worshipper enters the temple of vehovah, and at another part the temple of
Succoth-Benoth. So confused and mixed a cultus could not but produce serious
misconceptions of religion in the minds of both old and young. The haphazard
mixture of glaring colours in the pattern offends the eye and vitiates the taste.


III. That religious comvromis? creates a class of inferior and incompe-
tent teachers. ‘‘ They made unto themselves of the lowest of them priests”
(verse 32). There is in the sinful human heart that which responds too readily
to what is broad and vague in religious thought. Eccentricity of religious
opinion has many imitators. It is an easy matter to procure teachers—and
sometimes men gifted with no mean intellectual ability—who are willing to
teach what is agreeable to believe and pleasant to practise. A false system of
religion never lacks advocates, such as they are.


The sweet words
Of Christian promise, words that even yet
Might stem destruction, were they wisely preached,
Are muttered o’er by men, whose tones proclaim
How flat end wearisome they feel their trade;
Rank scoffers some, but most too indolent
To redeem their falsehoods, or to know their truth,

Coleridge.


Iv. That the claims of true religion admit of no compromise (versus
85-41). In these verses the writer rehearses the terms of the covenant between
Jehovah and His people, and shows that nothing short of full submission aud
obedience could be acceptable to God. Religion is a necessity of the soul.
“The ivy cannot grow alone; it must twine around some support or other ; if
not the goodly oak, then the ragged thorn; round any dead stick whatever,
rather than have no stay «r support at all. It is even so ao 2? heart and


GHAP. XVIL ~ BOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





affections of man; if they do not twine around God, they must twine around
some meaner thing.” ‘True religion demands the absolute surrender of the
whole man to God. When he begins to hesitate, to palter, to compromise, he
begins to drift away from God. The Divine claims become an irksome bondage
He seeks to snap one fetter of obligation after another; but when he has
snapped the last fetter, as he thinks—a belief in a personal God—he has atill
himself left. Which is preferable—the golden fetters of a righteous and
impartial Ruler, or the tyranny of a Frankenstein monster, generated from the
dreary swamps of a perverted self? It is dangerous to trifle with the absolute
claims of true religion.


Lxssons:—1. Compromise may be useful in settling external difficulties, but ta
tnadmissible when itt touches vital principles. 2. The man who compromises reli-
gious principle, loses caste with those to whom he ytelds, and loses strength in
himself. 3. The claims of Jehovah should be reverently recognised and faithfully
observed.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 24-28. The religion of
fear. 1. To be carefully distin-
guished from a spirit of reverential
awe. 2. Is based on a natural dread
of suffering and calamity (verse 25).
8. Will pay court to any deity who
promises protection and safety (verse
26). 4. Readily listens to any teacher
who professes to know anything about
the deity who is dreaded (verses
27, 28).


Verse 25. Not the veriest Pagan
can be excused for his ignorance of
God. Even the most depraved nature
might teach us to tremble at a Deity.
The brute creatures are sent to re-
venge the quarrel of their Maker.
Still hath God left himself champions
in Israel. Lions tear the Assyrians in
pieces, and put them in mind that,
had it not been for wickedness, the
land needed not to have changed
masters. ‘The great Lord of the world
cannot want means to plague offenders.
There is no security but in being at
peace with God.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 26. These blind heathens
that think every land hath a several
god, yet hold that god worthy of wor-
ship; yet hold that worship must be
yrounded upon knowledge, the want
vf that knowledge punishable, the
punishment of that want just and
divine. How much worse than As-

538


syrians are they who are ready to
ascribe all calamities to nature, to
chance !—who, acknowledging but one
God, are yet careless to know and serve
Him !—Jdid.


Verse 29-33. Polytheism. 1. Be-
wilders the worshipper by the multi-
plicity of gods (verses 29-31). 2. Is
not scrupulous as to the character of
its priests (verse 32). 8. Makes no
distinction between the only true God
and false deities (verse 33). 4. Can
never meet the deepest needs of man’s
nature.

— Acountry cannot fall lower than
it does when eavh man makes unto
himself his own god. We are indeed
beyond the danger of making to our-
selves idols of wood and stone, silver
and gold; but we are none the less
disposed to form idols for ourselves
out of our own imaginatons, and not
to fear and worship the one true God
as He has revealed Himself to us.
That is the cultivated heathenism of
the present day. Some make to them-
selves a god who dwells above the
stars, and does not care much for the
omissions or commissions of men upon
earth. Others, one who can do any-
thing but chastise and punish, or one
in whose sight men forgive themselves
their own sins; who does not recoms
pense each according to his works;
but forgives all without discrimine


CHAP. Xvi.





tion, and who opens heaven to all
alike, no matter how they have lived
upon earth.—Lange.


— What a prodigious mixture
was here of religions—true with
false, Jewish with Pagan, divine with
devilish! Every division of these trans-
planted Assyrians had their several
deities, high places, sacrifices, No
beggar’s coat is more pieced than the
religion of these inhabitants of Israel.
I know not how their bodies sped for
the lions; I am sure their souls fared
the worse for this medley. Above all
things God hates a mongrel devotion.
If we be not all Israel, it were better
to be all Ashur. It cannot so much
displease God to be unknown or ne-
glected, as to be consorted with idols.
—By. Hall.


Ver. $4-41. The sin of dis-
obedience. 1. All the more grievous
when it is the violation of solemn
covenant. 2. When committed against
a Being who has wrought out great
deliverances and bestowed signal bless-
ing. 3. When it is a breach of the
plainest and oft-repeated command-
ments. 4. When it is perpetuated
generation after generation. 65. Is an
occasion of sorrowful regret to every
lover of the Divine law.

Ver. 34. Rightly they fear him
not, because neither truly nor totally.
Their religion was galimfrey, a mix-
ture of true and false, which is as

es none; for God will not part
stakes with the devil at any hand.
Such a religion is a mere irreligion,
because—1. Contrary to God’s law
which rejects heathen rites he 34,
B6;07 81 ,47,06, 40). = 2. ontrary
to God’s covenant, which heathens
have nothing to do with (ver. 23, 38).
—Trapp.

— Decay in religious matters, lack
of unity of conviction in the highest
and noblest affairs, prevents a nation
from ever becoming great and strong.
It is a sign of the most radical corrup-
tion. Similarity of faith and com-
munity of worship form a strong
uniting force, and are the conditions of
true national unity. The existence


of different creeds and professions by
the side of one another is a source of
national weakness. It is an error to
try to produce this unity by force: it
is a blessing only when it proceeds
from a free conviction.— Lange.


Ver. 41. Mongrel religion. This
base union of fearing God and serving
other gods is by no means obsolete.
From generation to generation there
have been mongrel religionists who
have tried to please both God and the
devil, and have been on both sides, or on
either side, as their interest led them.
Some of these wretched blunderers
are always hovering around every
congregation. I. The nature of this
mongrel religion. 1. These people
wore not infidels. Far fromit. ‘They
feared the Lord.” They did not deny
the existence, or the power, or the
rights of the great God of Israel,
whose name is Jehovah, They had
faith, though only enough to produce
fear. It was better to dread God than
to despise Him; better slavishly to
fear than stupidly to forget. 2. They
were willing to be taught. The man
sent to teach them was a Bethelite,
one who worshipped God under the
symbol of an ox, which the Scripture
calls a calf. He was a very slight
improvement upon a heathen; but we
must be glad even of small mercies.
3. They were willing to learn, yet
they stuck to their old gods. Thus
this mingle-mangle religion left the
people practically where they were:
whatever their fear might be, their
customs and practices remained the
same. Have you never met with
persons of the same mongrel kind ?
They take delight in divine services,
and yet are much at home with the
God of this world. Some worship a
deity as horrible as Moloch, whose
name in the olden time was Bacchus—
the god of the wine cup and the beer
barrel. There are others who adore
the goddess Venus, the queen of lust
and uncleanness, Too often the god
is Mammon, who is as degraded a
deity as any of them. II. The man-
ner of the growth of this mongrel
religion. 1. These people came to tive

589


CHAP, XVII,


‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





where the people of God had lived. If
the Sepharvites had stopped at Sep-
harvaim they would never have
thought of fearing Jehovah; if the men
of Babylon had continued to live in
Babylon they would: have been per-
fectly satisfied with Bel, or Succoth-
Benoth. But when they were brought
into Canaan they came under a
different order of things. God would
not allow them to go the whole length
of idolatry in His land. It sometimes
happens to utter worldlings that they
are dropped into the midst of Christian
people. A kind of fashion is set by
the professors among whom they dwell,
and they fall into it. 2. Zhe Lord
sent lions among them. Affliction is a
wild beast by which God teaches men
who act like wild beasts. This is the
growth of mongrelists. First, they
are among godly people, and they
must, therefore, go a little that way ;
and next, they are afflicted, and they
must now go further still. They
argue that if the ills they feel do not
reform them, they may expect worse.
If God begins with lions, what will
come next? 3. Notice that the root of
this religion ts fear. Their hearts go
after their idols, but to Jehovah they
yield nothing but dread. If sin were
not followed with inconvenient con-
sequences they would live in it as
their element, as fishes swim in the
sea. They are only kept under by the
hangman’s whip or the jailer’s keys.
They dread God, and this is but a
gentler form of hating him. 4. They
had a trimming teacher. The king of
Assyria sent them a priest: he could
not have sent them a prophet, but that
was what they really wanted. He
sent them a Bethelite, not a genuine
servant of Jehovah, but one who wor-
ships God by means of symbols; and
this the Lord had expressly forbidden.
I know of no surer way of a people’s
perishing than by being led by one
who does not speak out straight, and
honestly denounce evil. If the prea-
cher trims and twists to please all
arties, can you expect his people to
honest? Those who are afraid te
rebuke sin, of to probe the conscienee,
will have much to answer for.
680


Ill. The value of this mongrel
religion, 1. Jt must evidently be


feeble on both sides, because the man
who serves Succoth-Benoth cannot do
it thoroughly if all the while he fears
Jehovah ; and he who fears Jehovah
cannot be sincere if he is worshipping
Moloch. The one sucks out the life
of the other. The man is lame on
both feet, impotent in both directions.
He is like the salt which has lost its
savour, neither fit for the land, nor
yet for the dunghill, 2. Jt looked
like an improvement. It had a look in
the right direction. They feared the
Lord only in a certain sense, but in-
asmuch as they also served other gods,
it came to this, when summed up,
that they did not fear God at all.
The man who is religious and also
immoral, to put it short, is irreligious,
The value of this mixture is less than
nothing. It is sin with a little var-
nish upon it. It is enmity to God
with a brilliant colouring of formality.
3. These Samaritans in after years
became the bitterest foes of G'od’s peo-
ple. Read the Book of Nehemiah,
and you will see that the most bitter
opponents of that godly man were
these mongrels, Their fear of God
was such that they wanted to join
with the Jews in building the Tem-
ple, and when they found that the
Jews would not have them, they
became their fiercest foes. No
people do so much hurt as those who
are like Jack-o’-both-sides. The mis-
chief does not begin with the people
of God, but with those who are with
them, but not of them. As the cling-
ing ivy will eat out the life of a tree
around which it climbs, so will these
impostors devour the church if they
be left to their own devices. 4. How
provoking this adulterated religion
must be to God. It is even provoking
to God’s ministers to be pestered with
men whose hypocrisies weaken the
force of his testimony. How provok-
ing must it be to God Himself ! True
religion suffers for their falsehood.


IV. The continuance of this evil
‘* As did their fathers, so do they, unte


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





this day.” I am almost obliged to
believe in the final perseverance of
hypocrites; for, really, when a man
once screws himself up to play the
double, and both to fear God and serve
other gods, he is very apt to stick
there. On the anvil of a false pro-
fession, Satan hammers out the most
hardened of hard hearts.


V. The cure of this dreadful evil
of mongrelism. He who in any way
tries to serve God and His enemies, is
a traitor to God. Suppose God were
to treat us after the same double
fashion; suppose he smiled to-day and
cursed to-morrow. You want one
course of conduct from God—mercy,
tenderness, gentleness, forgiveness ;
but if you play fast and loose with
Him, what is this but mocking Him ?
O thou great Father of our spirits, if
we poor prodigals return to thee, shall
we come driving all the swine in front
of us, and bringing all the harlots and
citizens of the far country at our heels,


OHAP. XVIII.





and introduce ourselves to thee by
saying, ‘‘Fiuther, we have sinned,
and have come home to be forgiven,”
and to go on sinning? It were in-
fernal; I can say no less. Lastly,
what shall I say of the Holy Spirit ?
If He does not dwell in our hearts we
are lost; there is no hope for us unless
He rules within us. None can hang
between spiritual death and spiritual
life, so as tobe partly in one and
partly in the other. Be one thing or
the other.—C. H. Spurgeon.


— In time the idolatrous dross got
purged out, and eventually the Sa-
maritan system of belief and practice
became as pure as that of the Jews,
though less exact in some of its ob-
servances. In some respects it may
have been purer, as the Samaritans
would have nothing to do with the
mass of oral traditions with which,
before the birth of Christ, the Jewish
system became disfigured and over-
laden.—Kitto,


CHAPTER XVIII.
THE REIGN OF HEZEKIAH THE GOOD.


QerrroaL axp Expuanatory Notzs.—Verse 1. Hezekiah the son of Ahaz began to reign
—See Note on chap. xvi. 2 as to the age of Ahaz. Verse 4. He removed the high places,
and brake the images—His sweeping reformation, by which the land was purged of idois,
and the true religion of Jehovah re-established, is more fully depicted in 2 Chron. xxix. The
brazen serpent that Moses had made— For even that symbol of salvation by faith had become
prostituted to idolatrous purposes, just as the symbol of the cross of Christ has become abused
in degenerate Christendom. He called it Nehushtan—4 thing of brass, or ‘the so-called
brass god” (Ewald). Verse 7. He rebelled against the king of Assyria—Emancipated Judah
from the hateful yoke. At this time Shalmanezcr was engaged in war with Tyre; and Heze-
kiah, acting out his noble faith in Jehovah as his nation’s Supreme King, threw off heathenish
oppression, and placed himself and people under the Theocracy again. Verses 9-12. Record
of Israel’s deportation by Shalmanezer—lnterposed in the story to mark the date of its
occurrence in Hezekiah’s reign. So that while this good king was restoring Judah to alliance
with Jehovah, and recovering the independency of the kingdom, the debasing kingdom of
Terael was falling into ruins, Verse 18. In the fourteenth year of Hezekiah did Senna-
cherib, &c.—Comp. Isaiah xxxvi. This mighty Assyrian was with his vast army on his way
to war with his hated and dreaded rival, Egypt. Judah lay in the line of his march, and its
conquest was essential to his safe advance to Egypt. Hezekiah trembled as this terrible foe
swept down upon the land; and being without support from Egypt, he purchased temporary
respite by a heavy tribute valuing £351,000, to raise which he had to empty the palace, and
even strip the gold from the temple (verse 16). Verse 14, The king of Assyria to Lachish —
A strongly fortified town south-west of J erusalem on the way to Egypt. One of the Assyrian
bas-reliefs recently discovered represents the seige of atown; shows the figure of an Assyrian
king conducting it, and a string of captives whose physiognomy is unmistakably Jewish,
Over the head of the king runs this inscription: “ Sennacherid, the mighty king, king of the
country of Assyria, sisting on the throne of judgment before the city of pes s give permis.


e


CHAP. XVIIE. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





sion for its slaughter.” Verse 17. Tartan and Rabsaris . . against Jerusalom—Senna.
cherib himself marched forward against: Egypt, where he found himself engaged in a three

ears’ campaign, ending in defeat. Tartan was general; Rabsaris, chief of the eunuchs;

ab-shakeh, chief cup-bearer, The general’s insolent message to Hezekiah was met with tha
silence aire 36) which the king had imposed on his delegates (verse 18), and which the
people also maintained. - This avoided provocation to the Assyrian general, Tho ambassadors,

ieved at the menacing and insulting language to their king, and the blasphemies against
Soe to which they had listened, returned to Hegekiah covered with the signs of humilia-
tion and mourning.—W, H. J.


ad


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-1%
A Resotvre Retieious RerorMEr,


I. Is characterised by the possession of a profound and genuine personal
piety (ver. 5, 6). The great movements that have blessed the world sprung
from the religious spirit. Hezekiah’s piety was the actuating force in his
reforming work. ‘‘ He trusted in, he clave to, the Lord’: these words reveal
the secret of his inspiration and power. We trace the beginning of his religious
life to a similar source where many a great and good man received his best and
most lasting impressions—the potent influence of a mother’s teaching. It is
suggestively stated in the text—‘‘ His mother’s name also was Abi, the daughter
of Zachariah” (ver. 2): on which Wordsworth remarks—“ The names of the
mothers of all the later kings of Judah are mentioned in holy scripture,
intimating the importance of a mother’s influence, especially in evil days. It
needs a brave heart and vigorous hand to attack and reform abuses that have
become chronio and popular, and only the man who is sustained by the most
intense religious convictions will attempt it.


II. Is fearless and unhesitating in destroying all popular symbols of
idolatry (ver. 4). As soon as the king began his reforming work he found
there was plenty todo. His kingdom was studded with heathen shrines and
idolatrous images. Among the rest was the brazen serpent of Moses, which
would acquire a mysterious sanctity because of its antiquity and associations,
and would readily be made an object of worship by a people so habituated to
idolatry. To the practical eyes of the reformer this object of reverence was but
a piece of brass, and he did not hesitate to snap it in pieces, It might seem
sacrilege to break up such a relic, but it was idolatry to preserve it; it must
share the same fate as the rest. The earnest reformer has a sharp definition in
his own mind of what is essential and non-essential, and he makes a clean sweep
of whatever balks the attainment of his loved object. He deals in what to him
are stern realities. He cannot tolerate shams: away with them!


III. Secures the prospering blessing ef Jehovah (ver. 7, 8). God honours
the man who is zealous for His glory. So Hezekiah soon realized. He with-
held tribute from Assyria, and asserted the freedom and independence of his
kingdom. He crushed the Philistines who, encouraged by the weakness of
preceding rulers, had harassed the borders of Judah. ‘‘ He prospered whither-
soever he went forth.” His kingdom was small; no larger than the triangle in
the North of England defined by the towns of Stockton-on-Tees, Whitehaven,
and Berwick-on-I'weed—rather smaller than Yorkshire ; but it had great natural
resources for maintaining a considerable population. (For an interesting
description of ‘‘Judah in Hezekiah’s day,” see Geikie’s ‘Hours with the
Bible an How so insignificant a territory rose to such importance and affluence
umder Hesekiah is explained by the recorded fact—‘“ The Lord was with him.”

692


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OuAP. xvitr





The man that works for God shall not go unblessed; and the most enriching
blessing is the Divine Presence. It gives strength to weakness, grandeur to
the insignificant, turns defeat into victory, and suffering into joy.


IV. Is stimulated and encouraged in his reforming work by witnessing
the disastrous results of apostacy (ver. 9-12). The destruction of the king-
dom of Israel was regarded as an event of such significance that the sacred
writer interrupts his narrative once more to refer to it, and to reiterate the truth
that disobedience was the cause of its ruin. With the example of the fate of
the neighbouring kingdom before his eyes, Hezekiah would be excited to fresh
zeal in carrying out hisreforming work. He saw unless he rooted out idolatry,
it would root him out. It is related of a celebrated British ambassador to the
Court of Berlin that at one time he possessed a huge boa censtrictor, and
interested himself in watching its habits. One day the monster escaped from
the box where he supposed it was asleep, quietly wound itself around his
body, and began graduaily to tighten its folds. His position became extremely
perilous; but the consummate coolness and self-possession which hed enabled
him to win many a diplomatic triumph, befriended him in this emergency.
He remembered there was a bone in the throat of the serpent which, if he could
find and break, he would save himself. He was aware that either he or the
snake must perish. Not a moment must be lost in hesitation. He deliberately
seized the head of the serpent, thrust his hand down its throat, and smashed
the vital bone. The coils were relaxed, the victim fell at his feet, and he was
free! So Hezekiah saw his kingdom enswathed in the deadly coils of idolatry,
aud that unless he acted with promptitude and vigour, both he and his kingdom
would perish as Israel had done. He attacked the vulnerable part of the evil
with such resolution that he and, for a time his people, were saved.


Lessons :—1. Ne man can be a reformer who has not deep religious convictions,
2. It is an important advantage hen reform ts championed by royalty. 8. Genuine
reform arrests the progress of decay and ruin.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


into the heartless remnant of God’s
people. The wisdom of our good God
knows when His aid will be most


Verses 1-8. Israel is gone. Judah
is left standing; or rather, some few
sprigs of those two tribes. So we


have seen, in the shredding of some
large timber tree, one or two boughs
left at the top to hold up the sap.
Who can but lament the poor re-
mainders of that languishing kingdom
of David! Yet, even now, out of the
gleeds of Judah, doth God raise up a
glorious light to His forlorn Church ;
yea, from the wretched loins of Ahaz
doth God fetch a holy Hezekiah. It
had been hard to conceive the state of
Judah worse than it was; neither was
it more miserable than sinful, and, in
regard of both, desperate. When be-
yond hope, God revives this dying
stock of David, and, out of very
ruins, builds up His own house. Good
Hezekiah makes amends for his
father’s impiety, and puts a new life
e@


seasonable, most welcome, which He
then loves to give when He finds ue
left of our hopes. That merciful
hand is reserved for a dead lift; then
He fails us not.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 8. The conversion of Heze-
kiah was not due to Isaiah, but toa
less famous contemporary. It would
seem that the corrupt state of morals
and religion, against which the pro-
phets of the age of Uzziah complained,
continued into Hezekiah’s reign. Sud-
denly, in the midst of an assembly, in
which the king himself was present,
there appeared the startling appari-
tion, in the simplicity of his savage
nakedness, of the prophet Micah
With the sharp, abrupt, piercing cry

693


GHAP, XVIM,


_


peculiar to his manner, he commanded
each class to hear him. The people
listened with awe to the bitter satire
with which the nobles were described
as preparing their cannibal feast out
of the flesh and bones of the poor.
They heard him denounce the unholy
compact, then first begun, between
the mercenary priests and the traitor
prophets (Micah iii). There was a
pause when he concluded. It would
seem as if for a moment an indignant
king and people would rise and crush
the audacions seer. But Hezekiah
was not a mere tool in the hands of
nobles, or priests, or prophets. Micah
was left unscathed. And even in the
prophet’s own life-time—it may be
almost immediately after his warning
—succeeded the promise of a pros-
perity before unknown; when the
nation should in peace be like the
gentle dew, in war like the lion in
forest and fold, or like a fierce bull
treading down his enemies on the
threshing-floor, with horns of iron and
hoofs of brass. The wild dirge of
Micah had been aimed against the
moral evils of the nation. Of any
moral reformation the chronicler tells
usnothing. But the outward reforma-
tion which he describes was doubtless
the expression of an inward change
also.— Stanley.

— Hezekiah and Luther—a
parallel. 1. Both had a@ personal
realization of the truth. 2. They hada
high regard and love for the Divine Word.
8. They were distinguished by strong
faith. ‘Trusted in the Lord God of
Israel.” 4. They were men of prayer.
Chap. xix. 15-19. Isa. xxxvii. 6-20.
Luther said he could not get on with-
out spending three hours a day in
prayer. 5. They had definite beliefs
and convictions. 6. They had the
courage of their convictions. Seen in
definite and decisive action. Hezekiah
attacked the idolatries of his time, and
Luther the ecclesiastical corruptions of
his day. 7. They enjoyed the guardian
providence of God. How marvellously
did God interfere in both histories.
8. They witnessed the success of their
efforts. The Lord was with them and
prospered them. Which of these traits

694


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


of character do we possess in our
sphere as reformers ?—/. Holmes,

— Iconoclast. The first and
second commandments make a full
sweep of idolatry. We are not to
worship any other god; we are not
to worship the true God by the use of
representativesymbols. Our reformers
acted well, and afterascriptural model,
when they poured contempt upon the
idols of Rome, and made a mockery of
her saints, relics, images, masses, and
priests. There was a deep meaning
in their breaking of crosses and the
burning of holy roods. Whenever we
see superstition in any shape, we must
not flatter the folly ; but, according to
our ability, act the iconoclast’s part
and denounce it. First, we shall
apportion a share of image-breaking
work to believers; and secondly, pre-
scribe another form of this same work
for seeking souls. I. We have much
idol-breaking work for Christians
todo. 1. There is much tdol-breaking
to be done tn the ehurch of God. We
are all too apt as Christians to place
some degree of reliance upon men
whom God, in His infinite mercy, raises
up to be leaders in the Christian
Church. We must get beyond men,
or else we shall be very babes in grace.
We are not to exalt the pipes, but the
fountain head; not the windows, but
the sun must we thank for light ; not
the basket which holds the food, or
the lad who brings the loaves and
fishes, must we reverence, but the
Divine master who blesses and multi-
plies the bread, and feeds the multi-
tude. Love the ministers of Christ,
but fall not into that form of brazen
serpent worship which will degrade
you into the servants of men. There
is too much exaltation of talent and
dependence upon education, especially
in reference tou ministers. On the slabs
of stone which mark the burial places of
the early Christians in the catacombs of
Rome, the inscriptions are nearly all
ill-spelt, grammar is forgotten, and
orthography violated ; a proof that the
early Christians who thus commemo-
rated the martyred dead, were many of
them uneducated persons; but, for all
that, they crushed the wisdom of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHaP. KVIIX.


et


sages, and smote the gods of classic
lands. We are not to select our
pastors simply because of their talents
and acquirements; we must regard
their unction, we must look at their
call, and see whether the spirit of God
is With them. The same may be said
of human eloquence. Let the men
speak well—the truth ought to be
delivered in the best of sentences ; but
the noblest language ever uttered by
man never convinced a soul of sin, or
bound up a wounded conscience, or
raised a sinner fiom his death in sin,
for oratory is but a sounding brass
and tinkling cymbal if the Holy Ghost
be not there. 2. Much superstition
requires to be broken downin reference
to a rigid adhesion to certain modes of
Christian service. There is a class of
persons who object fo every holy pro-
ject for evangelisation, however right
and judicious, if it happens to be novel;
and they will continue to object till
the work has been long in action and
has placed itself beyond fear of their
opposition or need of their assistance.
Fetters are none the less burdensome
for being antique. Let the brazen
serpent be broken if it become a
barrier to the onward progress of the
cross. 3. Let us turn to the temple of
our own hearts, and we shall find much
work to be done there. Are you con-
gratulating yourself upon your ad-
vanced position? Do you think twenty
years’ experience has changed your
corruptions, that your tendencies to sin
are not so strong as they were, that you
have less nved to watch, less need to
depend simply on the merit of Christ
and the work of His Spirit? I have
heard that more horses fall at the
bottom of the hill than anywhere else,
and I know that more professors make
shipwreck towards the close of life
than at any other time. The falls
recorded in the Old and New Testa-
ments are the falls, not of young men
in the heat of passion, but of old or
middle-aged men. Lot was no boy
when he disgraced himself. David
was no young man when he trans-
gressed with Bathsheba. Peter was no
ehild when he denied his Lord. An
old Puritan quaintly says, suppose a


loving husband were to give to his wife
many rings and jewels out of love to
her, and she should come to think so
highly of the love tokens that she sat
and admired them and forgot her hus-
band, would henot be ratherinclined te
take these things away to turn her love
once again to himself? So with our
graces and enjoyments; if we think
too much of them, the iconoclastic
hammer will come in, and these things
will vanish because they have pro-
voked the Lordto jealousy. II. Those
who are seekers of Jesus. There is
some idol-breaking to be done for
them. Many think they ought to be
much better than they are; they have
faults to be corrected; their minds
are ina wrong condition, they must
be put right, and they are trying to do
this with the intention, when they feel
better, to put their trust in Jesus.
With some, the Nehushtan which they
set up is their sense of sin ; either they
do not feel the need of Christ as they
ought, or else they do feel their need,
and therefore think they are in a fair
condition. Many are resting in their
fear of self-deception. Do you think
that your being afraid of presumption
is a better thing than believing God’s
testimony concerning His Son? Many
are resting in sermon hearing, or in
reading the Bible regularly; others
are making an idol of brass out of
their prayers. Seekers of Christ con-
tinually start new difficulties. Their
doubts, reasonings, and questions are
like an endless chain : pull up one link,
and it brings up another. Their
suspicions are like achain of dredging
buckets that come up all full of mire,
and over they go and empty them-
selves but to come up full again. If
one-tenth part of the ingenuity they
use in rebelling against the command
of God, which bids them believe,
were used in simply investigating
what they are told to believe,
they would come to faith and be saved
from their doubts. Sinner, let thy
artful doubts and reasonings be nailed
to yonder tree: crucify them. God
grant you grace to break up these idols
of yours, and take your Saviour now.—
CO. H. Spurgeon.
; 598


s


CHAP. XVII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Verse 4. The preservation of this
remarkable relic of antiquity (the
brazen serpent) might, like the pot
of manna and Aaron’s rod, have re-
mained an interesting and instructive
monument of the Divine goodness and
mercy to the Israelites in the wilder-
ness; and it must have required the
exercise of no small courage and reso-
lution to destroy it. But in the pro-
gress of degeneracy it had become an
object of idolatrous worship; and as
the interests of true religion rendered
its demolition necessary, Hezekiah,
by taking this bold step, consulted
both the glory of God and the good of
his country. Amongst the numerous
hypotheses advanced to account for
the origin of this singular reverence,
not the least likely is, that it arose
from vague and distorted rumours of
the miraculous healing of the Israelites
in the wilderness; and the image of a
serpent became the deitied symbol of
something good and beneficent. The
prevalence of ophiolatry in Egypt,
Phoenicia, Syria, and Assyria, could
scarcely fail to arrest the attention
and impress the minds of the Hebrew
people, till in times of ignorance and
idolatry they adopted the same super-
stition; and, although the brazen ser-
pent in the wilderness had no symbolic
import, but was merely an external
sign, selected, probably, for the general
ground of removing all ideas of the
natural accomplishment of the cure,
yet the tradition concerning the animal,
the sight of which had restored the
wounded Hebrews, and the reverence
felt for it by the neighbouring nations,
naturally produced similar sentiments
in the minds of the Israelites, till
admiration for a venerable relic of
antiquity, combined with the con-
tagion of contemporary usages, had,
in the degenerate times of the mon-
archy, gradually led to the worship of
the brazen serpent.—Jamicson.


Verse 5. The character and life
of Hezekiah. I. His public life.
1. The spiritual was in his estimation
the foundation of the political.
2. Was indebted for his religious
waining toa pious mother. Il. His

§96


great characteristics. 1. Strong faith
inGod. 2. Generousideas. 3. Great
zeal in carrying out great movements.
4, Penitent submission under affliction.
5. Vanity which proved fatal._—
Hi. Kendall,


Verses 5-8. Religion, the strength
of aruler. 1. When founded in a
deep and firm trust in God. 2. Ia
evidenced by practical obedience. 3.
Ensures the mighty help of Jehovah.
4. Enhances the prestige and autho-
rity of the throne. 5. Promotes
national freedom and prosperity.


Verses 5,6. True piety. 1. Con-
sists of a faith which is at once trust
and confidence (Heb. xi. 1). 2. Cling-
ing to the Lord, in adversity and in
prosperity without departing from him
(Psalm lxxiii. 25). 8. Keeping the
commandments of God (James ii. 17;
1 John v. 3).—Lange.


Verse 7. Pursuing the policy of a
truly theocratic sovereign, he was,
through the Divine blessing, which
rested on his government, raised to a
position of great public and national
strength. Besides the revived activity
and moral vigour of the people of
Judah, connected with the material
prosperity of the country, and the
religious reforms carried on by Feze-
kiah, and which, doubtless, was the
primary motive that encouraged him
to shake off the Assyrian yoke, it is
necessary to take into account the
secret influence of Egypt upon the
councils of the king. Against this,
Isaiah all along raised a decided and
earnest protest (Isa. xxx. 1-5; xxxi.
1, 3). In counselling Hezekiah, he
did not advocate either revolt or sub-
mission; he proceeded upon a principle
entirely different from that of ordinary
politics—that of urging an unwaver-
ing faith in the protection of the
Divine King and Head of the nation,
by an immediate and universal re-
establishment of the worship and law
of God. This step he recommended
to the king as, in the first instanee,
the most becoming a theocratic ruler,


and the most certain of realizing the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GHAP, XVil.





fulfilment of the promises made to
his people. Acting in this way, the
prophet assured him he would find
that, with the Divine favour, “one
would chase a thousand, and two put
ten thousand to flight :” whereas, with-
out help from above, all his military
preparations and strategic manoeuvres
would not secure the deliverance of
his kingdom,—Jamieson.


ruin of one nation recorded as a warn-
ing to others. 3. The potent cause of
national decay and extinction is neglect
of God.

— Hoshea and Hezekiah. The
former came to the throne by con-
spiracy and murder, and he did not do
what was pleasing to the Lord, there-
fore he perished with his people. The
latter trusted in the Lord and clung


to Him, and therefore he came out
with his people victoriously from the
peril.— Lange.


Verses 9-12. The fate of nations.
1. Is in the hands of God. 2. The


ROMILETICS OF VERSES 18-83.
A Boasrrct and ARROGANT SPIRIY.


I. Is the offspring of military success (verses 13.16). The Assyrian
king invaded Judah, captured the fenced cities, compelled Hezekiah to pay a
heavy tribute, and now his victorious legions surrounded Jerusaiem and threat-
ened it with immediate destruction. Flushed with success and with unlimited
confidence in the power of their arms, the captains of the great king indulge
in a spirit of proud vaunting. It is the tendency of all military success—
especially as war was carried on in those days—to inspire an arrogant and self-
confident spirit. Few men know how to behave themselves in the moment of
victory. Some soldiers are so elated with triumph, that their bounce and
vanity are intolerable.. It is forgotten that, in the changing fortunes of war-
fare, the winners of the fight to-day may be the vanquished of to-morrow.


II. Is plausible in speech and lavish in promises (verses 17-32). There
isa sort of cleverness in this speeeh of Rabshakeh’s—the cleverness of craft
and guile and flattery. He rallies Hezekiah on his trust in Egypt and in
Jehovah, as though they were one. and the same in the Assyrian estimation.
He promises 2,000 horses if the Jews will come out and fight, though by their
inability to find a sufficient number of horsemen he thus shows off the superi-
ority of his attacking forces. He claims to have the authority of Jehovah for
his enterprise, and, turning to the people who crowded the city walls, he
entices them to submission by promises of peace and plenty. A boastful and
arrogant spirit has endless inflexibility ; it can adapt itself to anything to gain
a purpose. It can hide the most sinister designs under a mask of bewitching
plausibility, like certain birds which imitate in their attitudes the forms of the
grasses and flowers where they watch for their prey.


III. Hesitates not to insult and defy the only true God (verses 33-35).
Rabshakeh boasts that none of the gods of the vanquished nations have been
able to deliver their worshippers from the invincible power of the Assyrian
arms; and in insulting and defiant terms he charges Jehovah with similar
helplessness. But ah! Rabshakeh, thou dost not know the God of the Jews,
or thou wouldst not so speak. Thou art carried away with the bombast of
pride; and thy mind shaded with the dark screen of idolatrous ideas, thou
canst not conceive the superlative greatness and grandeur of Jehovah. Ere
long thou shalt be startled with His presence and awed with the ghastly
evidences of His desolating power.


IV. Is best treated with dignified silence (verse 36). eg is what 8
69


CHAP. XVI.


“HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


gee


proud man least can bear. It irritates and annoys him. He does not know
whether you are laughing at him or are afraid of him. _And yet what better
answer than silence can we give to the threats and coaxings of the arrogant?
Euripides was wont to say silence was an answer to a wise man; but we seem
to have greater occasion for it in our dealing with fools and unreasonable
persons; for men of breeding and sense will be satisfied with reason and fair


words.


Lessons :—1. Few men can bear with becoming modesty and dignity the power
which success brings. 2. The flatteries and promises of a boastful man are unworthy
of credence. 8. Neither threats nor flattertes should seduce us Jrom our trust in


Jehovah.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 13-16. Submission. 1. Dis-
tasteful to a liberty-loving king. 2.
Inevitable in the face of superior force.
8. May prevent or postpone more
serious consequences. 4. Often a
heavy drain on national resources.

— The gold of faith can only be
made to appear through the fires of
adversity. If thy faith is not a mere
notion, or opinion, or fecling, or sensa-
tion, then it will not diminish in time
of trial, but grow and become stronger
and purer. Whence should we have
had David’s Psalms, if he hadnot been
tried ?


Verses 14-16. Hezekiah held it good
policy to make his enemy a golden
bridge to go over: so to be rid of him.
If Ahaz, that church-robber, had done
this, it would better have become him.
Hezekiah, for doing it, lost his cost
(verse 17).—Zrapp.


Verses 17-37. Diplomatic rhetoric.
1. Is a dangerous weapon in the hands
of an unscrupulous orator. 2. Is
often a specious mixture of truth and
falsehood. 3. Seeks to weaken alle-
giance by flattering promises. 4.
Awakens grave anxiety with its tone
of confidence and power. 5. Some-
times best answered with dignified
silence.


. Verses 17-35. Rabshakeh, the wolf

in sheep’s clothing.—I. He appears

to warn against Egypt as a power

which neither can nor will help, just

as Isaiah himself does, while he him-

self comes to destroy and devour
598


(Matt. vii. 15; 1Jno.iv.1). II. He
represents what had been ordained by
Hezekiah, according to the law of the
Lord.and for His honour, asa sin and
a breach of religion, while he himself
cared nothing whatever for the law of
the Lord or the true and right wor-
ship. Beware of those who represent
as weakness and folly that which is
Divine wisdom and strength. III.
He claims that the Lord is with him,
and has commanded to do what he is
doing, whereas, in fact, he is only the
rod of God’s wrath, the staff of His
anger, a ‘‘ hired razor’’; and ambition,
lust for gold and land, desire for glory
and plunder, are his only motives
(Matt. vii. 22). Be not deceived by
the prosperity and the victory of the
godless. They are like chaff which
the wind scatters, and their way dis-
appears.— Lange.


Verse 17. O lamentable and in sight
desperate condition of distressed
Jerusalem! Wealth it had none ;
strength it had but a little; all the
country around about was subdued to
the Assyrian; that proud victor has
begirt the walls of it with an innumer-
able army, scorning that such a shovel-
ful of earth should stand out but one
day. Poor Jerusalem stands alone,
blocked up with a world of enemies,
helpless, friendless, comfortless, look-
ing for the worst of a hostile fury,
when Tartan and Rabsaris, and Rab-
shakeh, the great captains of the
Assyrians, call to a parley. Lord!
what insolent blasphemies does that
foul mouth of Rabshakeh belch ont


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP. XIX.


against the living God, against His
anointed servant !—Bp. Hall.

— We can never rely upon the
fidelity of a man who is simply bought
with money. Want of courage in
one’s self invites an enemy to arro-
gance. The more humbly one ap-
proaches an enemy, the more insolent
he becomes. Peace and quiet which
are bought with money have no dura-
tion.— Lange.


Verse 21. A false friend compared
to the reed of an Egyptian bulrush,
1. Because though it appears oat-
wardly strong, it is brittle and hollow.
2. Because it fails when we most
depend uponit. 3. Because it injures
us When we expected it would help us.


Verse 30. ‘‘The Lord will deliver
us.” J. A noble saying in the mouth
of a king speaking to his people. He
thereby admits that his own power is
insufficient and vain. He leads his
people in that faith which is a confi-
dence in what is hoped for, and which
admits no doubt of what is not seen.
How well it would be for all princes
and people if they had such faith.
II. In this saying, all the hope of the


Christian life is expressed. With
God we overcome the world, for the
Lord will at length deliver us from all
evil, and bring us to His heavenly
kingdom. The blasphemer and
boaster wanted to remove these words
of the king from the heart of the
people, because he knew he should then
have won. Now-a-days, also, these
words are laughed at and scorned. Let
them not be torn from your heart! —
Lange.


Verse 36. Silence, 1. Is the wisest
answer to provocation and threatening.
2. Increases the perplexity ofa proud
and cruel aggressor. 38. Implies con-
fidence in the help which has been so
grossly maligned.

— They punished him with silence,
as Isaac did Ishmael. Silence is the
best answer to words of scorn and
petulency. 1t is best to stop an open
mouth with saying nothing. Princes
used to punish the indecencies of am-
bassadors by denying them audience.
Rabshakeh could not be more spited
than with no answer. This sulphu-
rous flask therefore died in his own
smoke, only leaving a hateful stench
behind it.— Trapp.








CHAPTER XIX.


JERUSALEM SUPERNATURALLY DELIVERED.


CriticaL anD ExpLanatTory Notrs.—Verse 2, Sent to the prophet Isaiah—The prophet,
in that Jewish age, was regarded as the messenger and representative of Jehovah. While the
kwng was entrusted to witness of the Royalty and Majesty of God, the prophet was recog-
nized as the oracle of Divine Wisdom and Truth. Here was a crisis of eminent peril to the
nation, in which the people and the Name of Jehovah were alike contemptuously menaced.
It was a moment for the Word of God to come forth; so Isaiah was sought by the king.
Verse 6. And Isaiah said unto them, Be not afraid—Terror met by cheerfulness; deliver-
ance assured to Judah, destruction threatened to Assyria. ‘* The servants of the king of
Assyria” are called contemptuously WD "IYI, ‘the young men of the king,” 1. ¢., his


boastful and blasphemous generals. The literal fulfilment of these predictions proves so keen
a difficulty to modern naturalism (as opposed to the supernatural) that critics are intent on
discrediting these verses 6 and 7 asaninterpolation, But “the Word of the Lord endureth for
ever.”’ Verse 9. He heard of Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia—This was the “rumour ” (verse 7).
The name of Tirhakah, king of Upper Ezypt, a monarch of mighty conquests, lingers still in
the inscriptions in the Egyptian temple of Medinet Abou. Apprehending the arrival of this
Egyptian warrior, the Assyrian king sent Hezekiah a terrifying letter urging immediate sur-
render. Verse 12. The children of Eden in Thelasar—Not the Eden of Amos (i, 5), situate
amid the beauties of Lebanon, but the Assyrian Eden mentioned by Ezekiel (xxvii, 33),
Verso 14. Hezekiah spread the letter before the Lord—This act oo ag charmingly
9


Gwar. Xix. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





described by Delitsch as ‘‘a prayer without words, a prayer in action, which then passes inte
a spoken prayer.” Verse 20. Then Isaiah sent to Hezekiah—While the king prayed, the
prophet was receiving the answer. ‘The simultaneousness of prayer and answer is emphasized.
The message from God through Isaieh is a rhetorical outpouring of scorn upon the Assyrian
king’s pretensions, followed by direct and withering denunciations, which are sealed by minute
prophecies, whose fulfilment should indicate to Hezekiah that the Lord Himself would effect
the boastful blasphemer’s overthrow. “ The zeal of the Lord of hosts shall do this” (v. 81);
Verse 29. This shall be a sign unto thea—An address to Hezekiah. ‘The sign was that for
two years the peaceful labours of husbandry would be impracticable in consequence of the
enemy’s presence near at hand, but that agriculture would proceed in quiet in the third year,
labour being crowned with bounty. Verse 32. Nor come before it with shield—Perhaps an
assault, advancing with shield held in front; or, more probably, Not occupy any position before
the city defended by a fence or breastworks. None of the processes of seige or war should be
permitted against Jerusalem. Rawlinson’s readings of the Assyrian slabs discovers extended
and minute records of this expedition of Sennacherib, graphically reproducing the Scripture
story of events. No account of the catastrophe is there given; the Assyrians only recounted
their victories. Verse 35, That night the angel of the Lord went out, &c.—Two years
interposed, during which the invasion of the land by Sennacherib went forward. “ That
night,” therefore, refers to the ultimate concentration of the Assyrian army upon Jerusalem,
with the mtention of commencing the seige nextday. ‘‘ The angel of the Lord,” even as “the
destroying angel” (Ex. xiii. 23), went forth against the first born of Egypt ; and 185,000
perished. How was this effected? By the scorching simoom, which still destroys entire
caravans ? or, as Josephus records (Antig. x. i. 5), rob Ocod Aominhy évonipayros abrov re
crparg vécov? ‘God had sent a pestilential distemper upon his army.” Verse 87. Senna-
cherib slain—His reverses in battle rendered him furious; his rage and tyranny grew intoler-
able. Judgment fell upon him from the hands of his own sons. And a thirdson, Hsarhaddon,
came to the Assyrian throne. Berosus informs us that this Asordanss was first viceroy of


Babylon, and afterwards eight years king of Assyria.—W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-87.
Tur Resources or tak Goop Maw rn Tre ory Trovste.


Tus was a day of sore trouble to Hezekiah. The veteran hosts of Senna-
cherib, flushed with victory, invested Jerusalem, and threatened it with destruc-
tion. The expected help from Egypt was not forthcoming. The defensive
resources of Hezckiah were circumscribed, and it seemed hopeless to offer resist-
ance. He had but one refuge—a refuge the proud Assyrian despised: but it
proved all-sufficient in the day of his calamity. The whole chapter is a
striking illustration of the resources of the good man in time of trouble,


I. He seeks counsel from those who are most competent to advise him.
(ver. 1-7). It is not every prince who has an Isaiah at his elbow to advise in
difficulty and comfort in distress. God’s way of helping in trouble is often in
directing us to the best human counsellors. 1. Zhe good man, like Hezekiah
recognizes the need of Divine intervention (ver. 1-5). While the supercilious
Assyrian trusted in his arms, Hezekiah trusted in his God. There are times
when we are reduced to such straits that none but God can help us. No one
sees these times with a keener eye than the good man. His common sense
teaches him to exhaust all natural, human means, and not to stand wringing
his hands in despair, or folding his arms in indifference; but he is aware a
point is reached where all he can do is to trust: God must do the rest. lt is
wise to recognize this. It honours God and saves us from presumption. 2,
The good man, like Hezekiah, recognizes the utility and power of prayer by a true
servant of Jehovah ‘‘ Wherefore lift up thy prayer, &c.’’ (ver. 4). The herit-
age of God’s people is a heritage of prayers. It isa strength to us in trouble
to know alin own prayers are reinforced and supplemented by the prayers


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS, OWAP. KIX,








of others. Every praying agency we can set in operation is a positive gain.
Even the prayerless are benefited by the supplications of praying souls on their
behalf. We may be receiving blessings to-day in answer to the anxious
prayers of parents who are no longer with us. 8. Zhe good man, like Hezehial,

48 encouraged with the promise of Divine help (ver. 6, 7). The message of Isaiah
must have convinced the king of the wisdom of the course he adopted in seek-
ing the advice and help of the prophet. Jehovah will punish the insolence of
the blasphemous Assyrian, and deliver the distressed monarch from his fangs.
How tenaciously we cling to the most indefinite promise of help when we are
in trouble ; it is the silvery rift in the cloud, the distant gleam of the squad.
rons rapidly hurrying to our relief. But with what calm confidence should we
rest on the slightest word of the living God!


IT. He is reminded of the nearness and reality of his peril (ver. 8-13),
There are plenty of real dangers in lite without unduly harassing ourselves
with imaginary ones. If Hezekiah, with the powerful Assyrian forces en-
eircling his only stronghold, had been tempted to regard the peril as but
trifling, he would be undeceived when he received the fierce, war-breathing
message of Senvacherib. The wildest threats of Rabshakeh were reiterated,
and Jehovah again insulted and blasphemed. Well did Hezekiah know the
terrible might of the Assyrian arms; and yet, while he trembled, he was un-
dismayed. It is fanaticism to treat danger with indifference. It is to court
defeat and ruin.


III. He resorts to God in earnest prayer (ver. 14-19). The prayer is
short, but it is sublime in its style and comprehensive in its range, and burns
throughout with incandescent earnestness. Its salient features are worthy of
study. It is a model prayer for a distressed soul. (1) The petitioner
acknowledges the supreme Rulership of Jehovah (ver. 15). (2) He traces the
ruin of nations to their idolatry (ver. 17, 18). (3) He calls upon Jehovah to
vindicate His supreme Lordship by delivering him from the threatened peril
(ver. 19). Prayer isthe grand refuge of the distressed ; it is the passionate
outcry of conscious need. The more vividly we realise our peril, the more
sincere and earnest will be our prayer. in prayer, says Bunyan, it is better
to have a heart without words, than words without a heart.


IV. He is assured of a signal answer to his prayer (ver. 20-34). 1f there
were no answer, it would still be our duty to pray, though without an answer
we should be in danger of becoming simply mechanical in our prayers. As by
a letter Hezekiah was plunged into deepest grief, so by a letter of a different
import shall his heart be made glad. This letter was written in the gorgeous
imagery familiar to the gifted Isaiah. It is true a draught of water is as sweet
to the thirsty, whether drank from a common earthenware vessel, or from a
richly chased goblet; still, the precious fluid may be found in the one vessel
as in the other. In this Divinely inspired answer Sennacherib is rebuked for his
proud boasting, and his humiliation and retreat predicted; a pledge is given
thet Judah shall still flourish in peace and prosperity; a solemn announcement
is made that Sennacherib shall utterly fail in carrying out his boasted threats,
and Jehovah promises himself to defend and deliver the beleagured city. How
great is the condescension of our God, in not only hearing prayer, but in assur-
ing the suppliant of an answer—an answer adequate to meet the case, turning
fear into confidence, humiliation into triumph, sorrow into joy.


V. He is privileged to witness a great and miraculous deliverance (ver
85-37). One hundred and eighty-five thousand Assyrians smitten in one night,
and Scnnacherib murdered by his own sons! Surely Judah w sufficiently

601


OHAaP. XIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—_








avenged, its insults and suffering atoned, and the word of the blasphemed
Jehovah solemnly vindicated. It is probable that the supernatural agent of
Divine vengeance made use of a deadly plague or pestilence in the destruction
of the Assyrian soldiers. Dr. Kitto contends that a simoom, or hot pestilential
wind, was the destroying agent. Whatever the means used, the awful fact
that so many perished cannot be explained away. Herodotus refers to it in his
history, though in a legendary form, when he relates :—‘‘ As the two armies
(Egyptian and Assyrian) lay opposite one another, there came in the night a
multitude of field mice, which devoured all the quivers and bowstrings of the
Assyrians, and ate the thongs by which they managed their shields. Next
morning they commenced their flight, and great multitudes fell, as they had


no arms with which to defend themselves.”


one method in punishing his enemies.


Jehovah is not restricted to any


Lessons: —1. Prayer ts the best refuge of the distressed. 2. National calami-
ties give anxiety to the true-hearted monarch. 8. Sincere prayor ts never offered


in vain.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1. O the noble piety of Heze-
kiah! Notwithstanding all the straits
of the siege and the danger of so
powerful an enemy, I find not the
garments of this good king any other-
wise than whole and unchanged ; but
now, 80 soon as blasphemy is uttered
against the majesty of his God, though
by a pagan dog, his clothes are torn
and turned into sackcloth. There can
pe no better argument of an upright
heart than to be more sensible of the
indignities offered to God than of our
own dangers. The more wesce God’s
name profaned, the more shall we, if
we be truly religious, love and honour
it.—Bp. Hall.


Verses 2-7: 20-384. Isaiah a
sublime example of a great prophet.
1. Was himself unmoved and confident
while king and court were perplexed
and distressed. 2. His influence and
power were fully recognized in the
depth of the national crisis. 3. Was
familiar with the intentions of Jehovah,
and rejoiced in vindicating His
character. 4, His predictions were
couched in terms of inimitable grace
and dignity.


Verses 2-7. A sorrowful embassy.
1. Its external appearance was sym-
bolic of the desperate straits of the
nation and its leaders, 3. It was sent


to the only man who seemed able te
advise in the emergency. 8. It re-
turned with a message that inspired
confidence and hope.


Verse4. Pray to thine utmost,
strive and strain, tug hard and bestir
thee all that ma, be. Prayer ts a.
.aborious exercise; and as a man that
would be good at lifting must set his
sides and shoulders to work, he must
also often use himself to’ lifting, so
here. This getsa dexterity, a handi-
ness to the work.—TZrapp.


Verses 8-13. The arrogance of
power. 1. Is fed by military suc-
cesses. 2. Is exasperated by resist-
ance. 8. Is imperious and blustering
initsdemands. 4. Refuses toacknow-
ledge any power superior to itself.


Verses 8-19. The two contrasted
kings: Sennacherib and Hezekiah
—the godless and the just. I.
Sennacherib, who sees himself in
peril and obliged to retreat by the
approach of Tirhakah, does not on that
account become more modest and
humble, but only more obstinate and
arrogant. This is the way with god-
less and depraved men. In distress
and peril, instead of bending their will
and yielding to the will of God, they
only become more stubborn, insolent,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





andassuming. Hezekiah, on the con-
trary, who was in unprecedented
trouble and peril, was thereby drawn
into more earnest prayer. He
humbled himself under the hand of
God, and sought refuge in the Lord
alone. II. Sennacherib rejects faith
in the God of Israel as folly, and boasts
that all the gods of the heathen were
powerless before him. He lives with-
out God in the world, and knows no
God but himself. Heasks, ‘‘ Whereis
the God of Hamath?” &c. But where
is now Sennacherib, who talked so
proudly? He is gone like chaff before
the wind, for the way of the godless
shall perish. But Hezekiah will not
let himself be drawn away from his God.
His faith becomes only somuch warmer
and deeper. He prays, and seeks not
his own honour, but that of the Lord,
in whom he puts his confidence. The
greater the cross, the greater the faith.
The palm grows under weight.
Sweetness flows from the grape whenit
is well trodden.—Lange,


Ver. 14. A king introuble. It
is evident that Sennacherib did not
desire to make peace with Hezekiah.
The destruction of Jerusalem would
have been of great advantage to the
Assyrians ; to have left that strong city
unsubdued behind them as they ad-
vanced towards Egypt would have
been impolitic and unsafe. So Sen-
nacherib determined to destroy it,
and sent a letter full of boastful
arrogance, threats, blasji.emy, false
insinuations, and insults to its king.

I. Hezekiah’s trouble. 1. Kings
cannot escape the scorching sparks
of trouble that fly in all directions
from the burning wheels of life.
Palatial walls are often no barrier, and
perfumed chambers are no relief.
Trouble, like death, enters all dwell-
ings. The higher the station, the
greater the liability to woe. Storms
howl on mountain tops when sunshine
gilds the plain. ‘‘Uneasy lies the
head that wears a crown.” ‘The
lofty pine the great wind often rives.”
2. Neither does piety prevent trouble.
Hezekiah had manifested the most
ardent zeal for the worship of Jetovah.


CHAP. Xf,





He walked before God in truth and
righteousness. And yet this trouble
fell upon him. Trouble is not an
absolute evil. If it were, the pious
would escape it. It is an angel in
dishabille stooping to serve us. ‘‘ Ce-
lestial benedictions often assume dark
disguises.” Trouble is a divine factor
in human life. ‘‘ Divine diet,” as an
old writer phrases it, is as necessary
for moral growth and strength as
daily food is for our physical natures.
Trouble is often a proof of God’s interest
in us. The best need discipline.
The pious are often more benefited by
trouble than by joy. 3. Trouble,
too, may arise, not from our own
wrong-doings, but from the wrong-
doings of others. Sennacherib’s law-
less ambitions then troubled the whole
earth. God uses evil men to discipline
his saints. Our troubles are shaped
by God. He controls them, though
they appear wild and formless. Men
rage like a storm, but we may be


“ Assured that He, who from the tempest’s
neck
Hath loosed his grasp, still holds it at His


eck ;
And with a pulse too deep for mortal sense,
The secret pulse of His omnipotence,
That beats through every motion of the
storm,


Oan check destruction in its wildest form.”


The hand that holds these sharp
threshing instruments, these pruning
knives, these fashioning chisels, is
a firm one, and guided by infinite
wisdom. God knew what Hezekiah
needed. God used Sennacherib to
discipline him. 4. Great troubles
may be conveyed to us by insignificant
means. A letter only was received,
and yet what a universe of woe there
was init. Only a letter! But it has
crushed a noble spirit, broken a
mother’s heart, cast a man upon the
earth writhing in unutterable anguish,
blotted out his life’s sun, and driven
him forth an exile to wander over
a dark and desolate waste for ever.
Only a letter!’ But who can tell what
troubles tbe reception of a letter may
convey ? Postmen often carry social
aes in their bags. But, further,
what was the trouble which now dis
603


GHAP. XIX.





tressed Hezekiah? 1. The threatened
loss of his kingdom. Men cling to
their possessions. They have an in-
stinct to retain as well as gain. Loss
is always painful. To lose his king-
dom was to lose his all. 2. The
threatened loss of his position. None
like to be compelled to abdicate, even
if his throne be only the chief seat in
the synagogue, the vestry hall, the
market-place, or the workshop. Men
grip high places tenaciously. Dread
of social humiliation will blacken
life’s fairest pictures. Hezekiah saw
before him the loss of all his greatness
and honour. 3. Threatened captivity
or death. To grace @ conqueror’s
triumph, to pine away in a dungeon,
or to endure a cruel death, would most
probably be his lot if he were not
delivered from his powerful foe, Little
mercy was shown to the conquered in
those days. A dark doom stared him
in the face. That which men hold
most dear—liberty and life—were
imperilled. 4 Possible demolition of
the royal city, Imperial cities have
ever been dear to monarchs. The
most heartless have wept over their
destruction. Jerusalem was dear to
every Jew. It was especially 80 to
its kings. Hezekiah had fortified and
beautified it. Its threatened destruc-
tion would fill him with dismay. 5.
The ruin and exile of his people.
Hezekiah felt deeply for his people’s
welfare. Under his reign they had
enjoyed much peace and prosperity.
That they should be exposed to the
brutalities of an invading host, their
houses and vineyards destroyed, and
themselves ultimately carried away
captive into a strange land, would
overwhelm him with grief. Such a
calamity seemed nigh. 6. The dis-
honour of Jehovah. Sennacherib had
insulted God, and Hezekiah’s pious
heart burned with a holy indignation.
If Jerusalem were taken, God’s holy
and beautiful house would be pro-
faned, His glory tarnished, and His
worship, which had been lately re-
stored, obliterated from the earth.
These were the bitter elements thrown
into his chalice of grief. With a
heavy heart ae his way to the


‘HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


a et





house of God, taking the letter with
him.

II. Hezekiah’s refuge.—All men
have nota Divine refuge in trouble.
The irreligious cannot rush into the
sheltering arms of God. If earthly
refuge fails, they are like a ship
caught in the tempest without anchor
or haven; a warrior exposed to his
enemies without shield or fortress; a
traveller under the pe\ting storm with-
out covert or home. Earthly refuges
are insufficient in times of extreme
peril. Life’s insecurities throw us on
God. The pious have an advantage
over the godless in hours of trial:
they can use every means of pro-
tection and help which the irreligious
have, and then shelter themselves in
God. Hezekiah had availed himself
of every earthly defence. He had
done all that a wise monarch could do
to defend his city, and after this, he
committed his cause to God. Fana-
ticism despises means, but true faith
uses them, and then soars above them
to rest in omnipotence. 1. Hezekiah
sought God in his refuge in the Temple
He went there because, in that holy
place, God more particularly mani-
fested Himself. Special promises
were given to those who prayed
within its sacred precincts. Hezekiah
had often beheld the Divine glory
there. It was his accustomed place
of worship. His trouble had not
driven him there, as trouble often
drives one to the sauctuary. He went
there because he believed that he
would find God most easily in that
place. Helpful memories often crowd
upon us in places where we have often
prayed, and bear us up, a8 upon
eagles’ wings, intothe Divine presence.
Sacred places are often the gale of
heaven to the troubled spirit. Men,
then, strive to find the quickest way
to the sympathetic heart of God. 3.
Hezekiah would set a good example {6
the nation. He would lead his peopm
to seek God in that day of trouble.
Kings have great influence. Many
follow them either to the temples 2%
vice, or to the temples of religion. A
king’s example is often more potent
than a Divine command. 3. ©


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP, XIX,





would publicly mantfest his confidence in
God’s power to protect and save. His
faith found expression in'an act which
honoured God and quickened his
confidence in Him. It was not under
the paralysis of despair, nor from an
ostentatious display of formal piety,
but from the promptings of a sincere
trust in the living God, that Hezekiah
*‘ went up into the House of the Lord.”
Hezekiah spread the letter before the
Lord. This was a most significant act
—‘‘a prayer in action.” It probably
was done in solemn silence, words
afterwards rising to his lips. He
would not reply to this letter, but he
would leave it with God to answer it.
Many letters might better be left with
God than answered. He wished to
show how completely he could place his
trouble before God. It is not every
trouble that can be spread before God.
Troubles that come from our follies,
or that are the sequences of our sins,
and that are the result of our opposi-
tion to the will of God, cannot be fully
spread ‘‘before the Lord.” Some
reserve is necessary, and this is often
fatal to our success in prayer. Heze-
kiah had nothing to hide: he placed
himself and his trouble entirely in
the hands of God. This was his
refuge, and his deliverance was sure.

Learw:—1l. Jo live 30 as to have
those troubles only which come by Divine
aopointment. 2. In the greatest of
these troubles never to despair of Divine
help, but to expect it. 3. To be pious
tx prosperity, that when adversity comes
we may have God for our refuge.—
Hom. Quarterly.

— The devout spirit of this prayer,
the recognition of the Divine Being
in the plenitude of His Majesty—so
strikingly contrasted with the fancy
of the Assyrians as to His merely local
power; his acknowledgment of the
conquests obtained over other lands,
and of the destruction of their wooden
idols, which, according to the Assyrian
practice, were committed to the flames,
because their tutelary deities were no
gods; and the object for which he
supplicated the Divine interposition,
that ail the kingdoms of the earth
might know that the Lord was the





only God—this was an attitude worthy
to be assumed by a pious theocratic
king of the chosen people.— Jamieson.


Verses 14-19. A pathetic spec-
tacle. 1. A monarch pleading for a
nation in distress (verse 14). 2. Je-
hovah reminded of His close relation.
ship to His cevenant people (verse 15).
3. A picture of the havoc wrought in
a nation by its idolatry (verses 17, 18).
4. A touching appeal to Jehovah to
vindicate His character (verse 19).

— Distress and misfortune are the
school in which a man learns to pray
aright. How many a one repeats
prayers every day, and yet never prays
aright. Every one knows from his
own experience that he has never
talked so directly with God as in the
time of need. Who is a true man?
He who can pray, and who trusts in
God.—Lange.


Verse 15-19. A king in prayer.
Prayers have their histories. Their
ancestry is trouble, struggle with cir-
cumstances, and helplessness. They
mark epochs in our lives. They are
born in those hours which leave an
indelible impression upon us. The
sublimest strains which men have
uttered have been towards God in
moments of agony. A great man’s
prayers in the anguish of trial lay
bare the inner heart of humanity, and
should be treasured up asa revelation.
‘‘ Misery sees miracles.” Prayer is a
great relief to the troubled heart. To
utter our distress is to relieve it. To
tiuly cast it upon God in prayer, is to
remove it. Hezekiah sought relief in
his trouble in prayer.


I. Hezekiah prayed to Jehovah
as the God of his nation. O Lord
God of Israel. 1. The nation bore the
name of one of its progenitors, that
“ as a prince had prevailed with God.”
The name Israel had been more gene-
rally applied to the northern kingdom
of Samaria, which had already been
overthrown; but Hezekiah claims it
for the remnant that was left. Did
he wish to remind himself of Jacob’s
power in prayer whe» he uttered that

605


™


GHAP, XIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





name ? or of God’s special interest in
his nation? Perhaps both. What
God has been to our forefathers, our
churches, our nation in times of
trouble, He will be to us amid the
perils of our day. History is a hand-
maid in the service of faith. 2. His
nation was Jehovah’s peculiar dwell-
ing-place—“ which dwellest between
the cherubims.” The Shekinah—the
holy light—as a symbol of the Divine
presence, ever shone forth from be-
tween those weird and colossal figures
which Solomon had carved and placed
on either side of the mercy-seat.
There might be seen a constant mani-
festation of the presence of God. But
Hezekiah’s reference to this peculiar
Divine manifestation—using words
which were probably common among
the Jews—was to suggest that as God
dwelt among them He would protect
His own dwelling-place. God would
surely save His chosen habitation.
This is true, God will protect where He
dwells. While He remains, there is
perfect safety. When He departs
there is ruin. (1). God dwelling in a
nation saves tt. God now manifests
Himself, not by a material brightness,
but by righteousness, purity, and
truth. (2). God dwelling in a man
saveshim. Every Christian is a temple
of God. The true cherubim and she-
kinah are inthe soul. (3). God dwell-
ing ina chureh saves it. No enemies
can overthrow a church that has the
Divine glory shining in the midst of
it. (4). We can appeal to the mani-
festations of the Divine presence to
increase our confidence in God in times
of danger.


II. Hezekiah recognizes, in his
prayer, the sole supremacy of Je-
hovah. ‘Thou art the God,” &c.
1. Hezekiah asserted that Jehovah
was the only true God. Polytheism
was a foolish delusion. It probably
arose from men’s innate propensity to
materialize spiritual taings, from the
worship of natural objects as the
manifestation of the Divine power,
from the sinful and insatiate imagina-
tion of men’s hearts, from the deifica-
tion of departed heroes, or from the

606


attempt to give visible shape to ap-
plauded virtues. But there ean be
but one infinite and eternal God. He
may reveal Himself in many ways—
in flaming fire, in human forms, in
religious truth, in nature, in Christ,
in the Spirit—He is one only—infinite,
eternal, and incomprehensible—God
alone. None can be associated with
Him. None can be placed in com-
parison with Him. All other gods
are ‘‘no gods.” Fualse and dead
images, they cannot save themselves
from destruction. But Jehovah, the
true and living God, could save. 2.
That He exercised supreme control
over all the kingdoms of the earth.
He was not only the God of Israel,
but of all nations. Where His power
was not acknowledged it was supreme.
Where He was not worshipped He
reigned, King of all kings, and Lord
of all Lords. Hezekiah rested upon
God’s sovereignty, though it was then
obscured. It is oftenobscured. Evil
powers seem triumphant. Anarchy
reigns. ‘‘ High uproar lords it wide.”
But God’s order manifests itself. His
purposes unfold themselves. He over-
rules all dynasties, overthrowing one
kingdom and setting up another, curb=
ing the restless might of men, not
destroying human freedom, but con-
trolling it. Hezekiah’s faith grasped
the truth that no earthly power could
exist without the permission or sur-
veillance of God. Assyria, as well as
Judah, belonged to God.


III. He appealed to Jehovah as
the Maker of heaven and earth.
Heaven and earth to the Jewish mind
included all things. Here was an
assertion of universal creatorship. In
this sublime idea of God is involved:
—1. That He 1s eternal. He existed be-
fore all things; delighting in the
glory of His own nature before the
worlds were made, no material form
or spiritual existence sharing that
eternity with Him. 2. Zhat He 4s
separate from His works. The uni-
verse is not He, as the ancient pan-
theists taught, and as some teach now.
He is immanent in all His creatures,


but independent of them. The Maker


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





is not His work. God transcends all
beings and worlds. 3. That He ts
omnipotent. He who made the uni-
verse must be almighty. Its great-
ness is inconceivable, and the power
that produced it must be infinite. 4.
That He has an absolute right to control
all things. The Maker has indefeasi-
ble rights in his productions. This is
admitted of men. 5. Vhat He has all
things under THis direct control. As
He has created all forces, all laws, all
agencies, all worlds, all angels, all
men, He has them under His im-
mediate direction, and can turn them
whithersoever He will. This con-
ception of God afforded solid ground
for Hezekiah’s faith. Before the
greatness of Jehovah the might of
Hezekiah’s enemies sank into nothing-
ness. Large conceptions of God will
ever give large expectations in prayer.
The more we widen our views of God,
the more confidence we shall have in
Him in trouble.


IV. Hezekiah prayed with great
earnestness. ‘‘ Lord, bow down Thine
ear,” &c. ‘‘ Now, therefore, O Lord
our God, I beseech Thee.” He ardently
craves the attention of God. God’s
knowledge is always perfect, and His
interest in His troubled saints always
sure; but it sometimes seems as if He
heeded not. Faith needs testing. De-
sire must betried. Hearing and seeing
in men are the chief means of obser-
vation. The heart in its agonies ever
feels the humanity of God. Heart
cries to heart, deep unto deep, soul to
soul. Earnestness is the living spirit
in prayer. Our prayers may have
order, beauty, and eloquence, but
without earnestness they are vain.
To desire fervently will lead invariabiy
to ardent expressions. Cold prayers
are no prayers. ‘I beseech Thee”
is the natural cry of a praying heart.
Earnestness is needed, not tolead God
to observe our condition, or to create
a disposition in Him to help us, but—
1. That the strength of our desires may
be revealed. 2. That we may be raised
from the low condition of formal devoe
tion. 3. That we may have all the
epiritual culture which the outeries of


CHAP. XIX.


real need may impart. 4. That we
may be prepared to receive Divine
deliverance thankfully. Hezekiah was
stirred with the most powerful
emotions as he prayed. His trouble
heated his soul as fire.


VY. Hezekiah recognized the
greatness of the deliverance which
he sought. ‘Of a truth, Lord,” &c,
Other kingdoms had fallen, why not
his? Only that his hope was in God.
No human ingenuity or might could
deliver him. No gods could protect ;
Jehovah alone must save. Men must
be brought to see that deliverance is
God’s work. The soul is a besieged
city. The forces of Diabolus are
around Mansoul. The deliverance
which it needs is great. Its Sen-
nacherib is mighty. ‘Of a truth.”
The whole race has come under his
power. We cannot estimate the
greatness of our danger. ‘* When
Napoleon Buonaparte, watching the
fortunes of the battle, saw the charge
of our Scots Greys, at Waterloo, as,
launched on his columns, they dashed
like a thunderbolt into the thick of
them, crushing and bearing down all be-
fore them, he exclaimed, ‘‘ How terrible
are these Greys!” But what mortal
foe so terrible as him we have to
fight—so relentless, so malignant.
ever walking Btoue seeking whom he
may devour! No serpent so cunning.
no lion so savage! From other ene-
mies escape mav be fonnd; from him.
none. Neither the world, nor the
Church itself, offers any asylum, nor
the universe, other than the hollow
of God’s hand, the shadow of His
wings” (Guthrie). To recognize the
greatness of the deliverance we need,
will—l. Deepen our sense of helpless-
ness in ourselves. 2. Stimulate the exer-
cise of great faith. 3. Prepare us for
the manifestation of God's great deliver-
ing hand.


VI. Hezekiah associates the glory
of Jehovah with the deliverance
which he sought. 1. The reproaches
which had been cast upon him had
been cast upon God. This deliver.
ance would be one of those great

7


CMAP. EM,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





revelations of the true and only
God which, in an age when power in
the Deity would be more influential
than righteousness or love to impress
men, would exercise a most potent
influence in shaping their spiritual
destinies, and, perhaps, set forces at
work that for centuries would operate
upon men in giving them a deeper.
reverence for the unseen God, and
thus checking their vices and pre-
paring the way for more exalted un-
foldings of His character. 2. Heze-
kiah’s prayer prevailed. God’s might
was put forth; whether, as reagents,
suggests, “‘ by a stream of poisonous
vapour, such as often comes forth out
of the ground during earthquakes and
eruptions of burning mountains, and
kills all men and animals that breathe
it,” or by a pestilence, or by the
simoom, or by a plague of mice—
according to the Egyptian legend of
Herodotus—we cannot tell. But it
was God’s delivering arm put forth in
answer to Hezekiah’s faith and prayer
—(1) That his people might learn to
put their trust in Him; and (2) that
all the earth might know that none
could defy His power and prosper.—
Hom. Quarterly.


Verses 20-84. Jehovah, the de-
fence of His people. 1. He vindi-
cates His character from the wicked
aspersions of His enemies. 2. He
treserves His people inviolate. 3.
He delivers them from distress, and
restores to them prosperity and power.
4. He is unchanging in His fidelity to
His covenant.


Verse 21. There is no more fitting
punishment for a proud and arrogant
man than to be laughed at and derided,
without being able to take revenge.
The derision of the daughter, Zion, at
‘the blasphemous boaster, Sennacherib,
is not due to sinful malice; it is rather
a joyful recognition and a praise of
the power and faithfulness of God
who reigns in heaven and laughs at
those who scoff at Him (Psalm ii. 4;
xxxvii. 12, 13).—Lange.


Verse 32. Impotent men! What
608


are we in the hands of the Almighty ?
We purpose, He overrules; we talk
of great matters, and think to do
wonders, He blows upon our projects
and they vanish with ourselves. He
that hath set bounds to the sea hath
appointed limits to the rage of the
proudest enemies; yea, even the devils
themselves are confined. Why boast
ye yourselves, O ye tyrants, that ye
can do mischief? Ye are stinted, and
even within those lists is confusion. —
Bp. Halt.


Verses 32-34. Jerusalem, the
earthly city of God, a type of the
eternal city, the Church of Christ.
If God protected the former, so that
no arrow could come into it, how
much more will He protect the latter,
break in pieces the bows of His enee
mies, and burn their chariots in fire |—
Lange.


Verses 35-37. The proud boaster
humbled. I. He is smitten with dis-
may by the terrible evidences of @
Divine avenging power (verse 35).


Like the leaves of the forest when summer
is green,

That host with their banners at sunset were
seen;

Like the leaves of the forest when autumn
hath blown,

That host on the morrow lay withered and

strown.


For the Angel of Death spread his wings on
the blast,

And breathed in the face of the foe as he
passed ;

And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly
and chill,

And their hearts but once heaved, and for
ever grew still!


And the widows of Asshur are loud in their


wail,
And A idols are broke in the temple of
aal 5
And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by
the sword,
Hath melted like snow in the glance of the
Lord!


II. He relinquishes in fear and
disgrace his proudly-cherished enters
prise (verse 36). III. He comes to an
See and ignominious end (verse


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





— God’s judgments are often de-
layed for a long time, but then they
come all the more suddenly and
mightily (Psalm lxxiii. 19). A single
night may change the whole face of
the matter. Where is now the boaster?
Where is the multitude of his chariots?
Sennacherib’s calamity and his retreat
proclaim to all the world that God
resisteth the proud; and they are a
testimony to the truth of 1 Sam. ii,
6-10. He who had smitten whole
kingdoms and peoples, fell under the
blows of his own sons. When God
has sufficiently chastised His church,
He throws the rod of His wrath into
the fire (Isaiah xxxiii. 1).—Lange.


Verse 37. Sennacherib was the
last of the great Assyrian conquerors.
No Assyrian host again ever crossed
the Jordan. Within a few years from
that time, the Assyrian power suddenly
vanished from the earth. The effect
of the event must have been immense,
in proportion to the strain of expecta-
tion and apprehension that had pre-
ceded it. Isaiah staked upon his
prophetic word the existence of his
country, his own and his people’s faith
in God. So literally had that word
been fulfilled that he was himself, in
after times, regarded as the instru-
ment of the deliverance. There is no
direct expression of his triumph at
the moment, but it is possible we have
his hymn of thanksgiving, when he
afterwards heard of the world-re-
nowned murder which struck down
the mighty king in the temple at
Nineveh. The earth again breathes
freely. The sacred cedar-grove feels
itself once more secure. The world
of shades, the sepulchre of kings, pre-
pares to receive its new inmate (Isa.
xiv.) If there is any doubt as to the
prophet’s utterance, there is none as to
the burst of national thanksgiving, as
incorporated in the Book of Psalms
(Psalms xlvi.lxxvi). The weapons of
the great army, such as we see them
in the Assyrian monuments—the
mighty bow and its lightning arrows,
the serried shields—were shattered to
pieces. The ieng array of dead horses ;
the chariots, now useless, left to be

BR


CHAP, XIX,





burnt; the trophies carried off from
the dead, all rise to view in the recol-
lection of that night. The proud
have slept their sleep, and the mighty
soldiers fling out their hands in vain.
The arms have fallen from their grasp.
The neigh of the charger, the rattle of
the chariot, are alike hushed in the
sleep of death. The wild uproar is
over, the whole world is silent, and in
that awful stillness the Israelites de-
scend from the heights of Jerusalem,
like their ancestors to the shores of
the Red Sea, to see the desolation that
had been wrought on the earth. As
then, they carried away the spoils as
trophies. The towers of Jerusalem
were brilliant with the shields of the
dead. The fame of the fall of Sen-
nacherib’s host struck the surrounding
nations with terror far and wide. It
was like the knell of the great poten-
tates of the world; and in their fall
the God of Israel seemed to rise to a
higher and yet higher exaltation. The
importance of the deliverance was not
confined to the country or the times of
Hezekiah. It is not without reason,
that in the churches of Moscow the
exultation over the fall of Sennacherib
is still read on the anniversary of the
retreat of the French from Russia; or
that Arnold, in his lectures on Modern
History, in the impressive passage in
which he dwells on that great catas-
trophe, declared that for ‘‘ the memor-
able night of frost, in which 20,000
horses perished, and the strength of
the French army was utterly broken,
he knew of no language so well fitted
to describe it as the words in which
Isaiah described the advance and de-
struction of the host of Sennacherib.”’
The grandeur of the deliverance has
passed into the likeness of all sudden
national escapes.— Stanley.

— Thou art avenged, O God, Thou
art avenged plentifully of thine ene-
mies! Whoever strives with thee, is
sure to gain nothing but loss, but
shame, but death, but hell. The Ase
syrians are slain; Sennacherib is re-
warded for his blasphemy; Jerusalem
is rescued; Hezekiah rejoices; the
nations wonder and tremble.— By,
Hall.

609


ua. xx. ‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.
re renee nS SE


CHAPTER XX.
HEZEKIAH’S SICKNESS AND RECOVERY.


CkrricaL AND Expianatory Nores.—Verse 1. In those days was Hezekiah sick—The
Assyrian invasion occurred in the fourteenth year of his reign (xviii. 18), and now fifteen
more years are to be added (xx. 6), making twenty-nine years, the total length of his reign
(xviii. 2); therefore this sickness must have occurred the very year of the invasion—“ in those
days” —at which time he was thirty-nine years of age. Set thine house in order—Not his
domestic affairs, but those of his kingdom, for being without a child, his successor should be
selected. Verse 3. Hezekiah wept sore—So painful is it to quit life in the very prime of
years; but the distress was to him greater because of the flerce menaces of the foe at the
gates of his kingdom; and his plans for the religious reformation of the nation were yet
jacomplete. Verse 4. Before Isaiah was gone out into the middle court—i. ¢., of the royal
castle, not of the temple. Verse 6. Add to thy days fifteen years—Why fifteen? He was
now in the fifteenth year of his reign ; God would add an equal period to that he had already
enjoyed. He thus stood midway between the beginning and end of his reign. Verse 7.
Take a lump of figs—The remedy does uot determine the precise character of the ailment,
for Orientalists apply a poultice of figs to plague-boils, and inflammatory ulcers, and carbuncles,
But it was so located as certain to prove fatal but for miraculous intervention. Verse 10. Let
the shadow return backward ten degrees—This miracle hag created antagonistic criticism.
Hither Isaiah, knowing that there would be a partial eclipse of the sun at that time, shrewdly
used his knowledge; or else the story of the shadows being deflected is a myth! But the
result was possible without any violent derangement of nature—‘‘a phenomenon of refrac-
tion in the rays of light’’ (Hei?) would effect the sign required. Yet, accepting the muracle
in its most supernatural form, the phenomenon was so local and temporary as to carry with
it no disturbance of universal nature. Verse 11. The dial of Ahaz—N)2Y1 may be inter-


preted steps, for myp means an ascent, or that which ascends. It can therefore be imagined
el


that some contrivance had been arranged so that the shadow fell on a succession of steps, or
slopes, each so measured as to mark the hour of the day. It was of such dimensions, and so
conspicuous an object in the court, that Isaiah could point to it, and Hezekiah see it from his
sick chamber. Verse 12. Merodach-baladan, king of Babylon—This is the first mention of a
king of Babylon in Bible history, for hitherto Babylon had only viceroys sent from the
Assyrian court. The name “ Merodach” is that of the Babylonian Mars. He has been
variously identified as the Mardo-Cempados of Ptol. Canon, and the Merudach Baldanes of
Berosus, Hezekiah’s imprudent vanity awakened so much cupidity in these ambassadors as to
lead to prolonged intrigues and ultimate conquest by this very power he tried to propitiate.
And God was angry with his self-glorying pride. Verse 19. Good is the word of the Lord
—It signifies, I bow submissive to its justice, resign myself to His will. For the vision of
coming ill is softened by the assurance that his own ‘days’? should close in the enjoyment of
‘peace and truth.” God would pepeed the execution of His judgment. Verse 20. Madea
pool and a conduit—The pond was formed between the outer and inner walls surrounding the
city ; and the agueduct conveyed the water from the Upper Gihon, underground, into the city
itself, where it flowed into the pool afterwards called Hezekiah’s, but now named Berket of
Hamman.—W. H. J.


HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 1-11,
Lirz Protoneep my ANSWER TO PRAYER,


Tux anxiety of the people was now transferred from the nation, so miraculously
delivered, to the monarch. Hezekiah was smitten with a fatal sickness—
perhaps he had been suffering for some time, and the mental anguish through
which he had lately passed would tend to exacerbate the disease. He is
startled to be informed that his recovery is hopeless. With cries and tears he
pleads for life. He is heard, and fifteen more years are added to his career.
A miracle is wrought in confirmation of the Divine promise of recovery. How
highly favoured is this man for whom Jehovah so freely exercises his miraculous
power! Observe-—
610


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. GuaP, XX





I. That the sudden approach of death fills the stoutest heart with alarm
and sorrow. Death is a painful shock at any time; but, while cherishing the
hope of recovery, to be abruptly assured that death is inevitable and at hand,
strikes terror into the bravest heart. Hezekiah was utterly prostrate. ‘ With
that plaintive tenderness of character which he seems to have inherited from his
great ancestor, he could not bear to part with life. He turned his face away
from the light of day to the blank wall of his chamber. He broke into a
passionate burst of tears. The darkness of the grave was before him, with
nothing to cheer him. His tent was struck, his thread of life severed. The
ery of a dying lion, the plaintive murmur of a wounded dove, were the only
sounds that could be heard from the sick chamber. There seemed no hope of
recovery” (Stanley’s Paraphrase of Isaiah xxxviii.)


Sooner or later all things pass away
And are no more, The beggar and the king
With equal steps tread forward to their end. Southerne.


II. That there are circumstances in which prayer for continued life is
justifiable. Hezekiah was in the prime of life, and with, to all natural
appearances, years of useful labour before him. He had succeeded to the throne
in a time of national decay, and his spirited reforms had done much to restore
the national prestige. He had been rescued from great troubles, and was now
in a position to look forward hopefully to a period of rest, peace, and prosperity.
He was eager to do more than ever he had done for his beloved country. When,
therefore, he is brought unexpectedly face to face with death, we cannot wonder
that he should ask for life. Life is sweet; with all its burdens and cares, it has
its enjoyments. It is a positive luxury to ve. And when the powers of life
are sacredly devoted to promoting the good of others, we cannot but yearn for
the opportunity which continued life affords. But when wrongs have to be
righted and faults rectified, how necessary and precious does life then become.
Zimmerman remarks, ‘‘ There appears to exist a greater desire to live long than
to live well. Measure by man’s desires, he cannot live long enough ; measure
by his good deeds, and he has not lived long enough ; measure by his evil deeds,
and he has lived too long.”


III. That life and death are absolutely in the Divine disposal. 1. Zhe
best natural remedies are futile without the Divine blessing. The poultice of figs
would have had no efficacy if the Lord of life had refused to interfere.
Hezekiah knew this well, and he appeals immediately and directly, not to the
physician, but to God. In His hands are the issues of life, and on Him they
depend for their continuous outflow. ‘‘ Every ene,” says a certain writer, ‘is
willing to allow that he received his life originally from the Almighty, and that
the Almighty takes it away from him when He pleases. Few, however, are
willing to regard themselves as existing only by virtue of His constant influx,
the only way in which it can be true that in Him we live and move and have
our being.” It is our duty to do all in our power to prolong life; but our best
efforts must ever be in subordination to the will of God. 2. The Lord con-
descends to confirm the faith of His servants by the exercise of miraculous power.
The transition to life was to Hezekiah as sudden and unexpected as the prospect
of death. To possess what a few moments before he despaired about, seemed
incredible: it was too good to be true. His faith staggered, and he asked for
asign. The shadow of the dial, visible from the window of the king’s palace,
was put back ten degrees, probably by refraction—none the less a Divine act—
and Hezekiah could no longer doubt. He recovered at once, and in three days
passed up the steps in royal procession to the Temple to offer thanks and praise
to the Lord and Giver of Life. How slow we are to believe, and how pains
taking and patient is our gracious Father in encouraging us to he Him}


>


CHAP. XK.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Lessons:—1. A time of sickness ts @ time for special prayer. 2. God has


a profound interest in the sufferings and sorrows of His people.


3. Restored health


should be used in increased devotion to the service of God.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 1 and verse 5. ‘‘ Thou shalt
die, and not live.” ‘I will heal thee.”
The two messages. 1. How diffe-
rent their import—the one announcing
death, the other promising life. 2.
How different their effects—the one
creating sorrow, the other joy. 8.
Both emanating from the same autho-
rity. 4. Both demanding undoubted
faith.


Verse 1. As it is wise, in time of
health and strength, to set one’s house
in order in a worldly sense—t.e., to
make one’s will and arrange one’s
affairs—so is it still more wise to set
one’s house in order in a spiritual
sense, and not to put off making one’s
peace with God until one stands on
the brink of the grave.—Lange.


Verse 3. Conspicuous piety. 1.
Gives no immunity from sickness or
death. 2. 1s often severely tested.
8. Should guard against self-righteous
boasting. 4. Leads the troubled soul
to God.


— The course of Hezekiah’s
thoughts was evidently directed to
the promise made to David and his
successors on the throne (1 Kings viii.
25). He had kept the conditions as
faithfully as human infirmity admitted,
and as he had been all along free from
any of those great crimes by which,
through the judgment of God, human
life was often suddenly cut short, his
great gricf might arise partly from
the love of life and the promise of
long life and temporal prosperity made
to the pious and godly, which would
not be fulfilled to him if he were cut
off in the midst of his days; partly
from the obscurity of the Mosaic dis-
pensation, where life and immortality
had not been fully brought to light;
and partly from his plans for the
reformation of his kingdom being frus-

613


trated by his death, and from his hay-
ing as yet, which was most probably
the case, no son whom he could leave
heir to his work and his throne. He
pleaded the fulfilment of the promise.
Jamieson.

— Death is dreadful in his best
looks, as is the lion, though his teeth
and claws be beaten out; or asa hawk
to the partridge ; or as a serpent’s skin,
though but stuffed with straw. But
why should a saint be fond of life or
afraid of death, since to him it is but
as his Father’s horse to carry him to
his Father’s house, or as Joseph’s cha-
riot rattling with its wheels to carry
old Jacob to his son Joseph, so a to
Christ ?—TZrapp.


Verse 6. A fixed time to live.
1. A doubtful advantage, apt to keep
the shadow of the grave ever in view.
%. Should be a constant reminder of
the circumstances under which the
period was fixed. 4. Is best spent in
earnest, religious work.


Verse 9. Human life a dial.
1. On which time flings its shadow.
2. It has its morning. 38. Noon.
4. Evening. 5. A Divine hand regu-
lates the time-shadow.


Time, and how to
measure it. The dial was made to
measure time. Every line has a mean-
ing; minutes and hours are numbered,
and all scientifically combined, so as
to tell the time of day. The Bible is
God’s dial, by which we have to mea-
sure life. Every page has a meaning
—a purpose—and its lines of doctrine
radiate from Christasthe centre through
the whole circumference and circumflex
of every-day life. To the uninitiated
eye the lines on the dial have no
meaning; to the mind of the un-
enlightened and unbelieving the Bible
has no spirityal value, for ‘the


Verse 11.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


OHAP. Xx,


natural man knoweth not the things
that are spiritual, because they are
spiritually discerned.” But the dial
may help us to understand this word,
and serve as a foil to throw up in re-
lief, doctrine, precept, promise, pro-
spect. I. The dial must be so placed as
to receive the rays of the sun. Every
line will then come into use. The
indicator concentrates the light; the
angle of incidence falls within the
shadow, marking off the numbers as
the earth travels round the sun, and
tells the time. The Bible is a system
of revealed truth. Outspread before
us in type and form, it invites atten-
tion. But without the light of the
Sun of Righteousness it will only be
as a sealed book. The Holy Spirit
must shine on its pages before we can
read it so as to measure life. Christ
erucified, Christ our righteousness, and
Christ our life, are set forth in the
Bible so as to ‘‘make us wise unto
salvation.” God in Providence, and
grace in the heart, are also in this
Book. ‘The hairs of your head are
all numbered,” said Jesus. A sparrow
cannot fall to the ground without His
Father’s knowledge and permission,
and all the steps of 2 good man are
ordered by the Lord. But the Bible
is our guide. We must place it in
the sunlight of His Spirit, and not let
it lie on the shelf until you may write
‘‘Death,”’ “Judgment,” ‘‘ Eternity,”
on the dust of its boards. II. Zhe
dial of Ahaz was a public instrument
intended for all the people of Jerusalem.
Like some of the dials in Egypt at the
present day, it was, the only means
whereby the common people could
regulate their daily duty. All would
not see it at once, but those who con-
sulted it could tell others the hour by
number and by voice. In that land
of sunny skies the dial was of daily
value and of daily use. The Bible is
for all. There was a period in the
history of England when it was a rare
and costly book, and a time when the
‘¢ King’s Book”’ and ‘‘ Bishop’s Book,”
as it was called, were used and set up
on the churches, but not allowed to
the laity and the common people. It
was even chained up to the desk in


the crypt of St. Paul’s. But after the
Reformation, and the right of private
judgment was aflirmed, it became pub-
lic property, and is now the cheapest
book in the land. An Eastern princess
once sent an ambassador to the English
Court, to ask of our Queen what was
the secret of England’s greatness.
There is a picture representing a scene
in which Queen Victoria is seen stand-
ing by the side of the late Prince
Consort, and surrounded by ministers
of State, presenting the Ambassador
with an elegantly bound Bible, saying,
Tell your royal mistress that this ¢s the
secret of England’s greatness. Let us
cling to this Bible as our birthright.
Take what you can get from the pul-
pit, but let those who cannot or will
not come to hear, have the ‘‘ Book and
its story” taken to them. There must
be some knowledge before there can be
any faith. The Book is for all; see
then that, like the Bereans, you
‘search the Scriptures,” for because
of this they were more noble than the
Christians of Thessalonica, who took
for granted that which they ought to
have proved.

IIL. Clouds would sometimes obscure
the sun, and then the dial of Ahaz was
tn shadow. Time could not then be
measured, but past experience on judg-
ing of light would keep faith steady,
and work would still be done. In
this cloudy land of ours the dial is
often in the shade, but the sun is
always in its place, and his light is
precious. Clouds sometimes come
between the mind and God’s Book.
But the Sun of Righteousness never
sets; and there isa silver lining in the
darkest cloud of the Christian’s ex-
perience. Some time since Mr. Glaisher
went up in his balloon to measure the
atmosphere and analyze it ; and just as
he was looking down and admiring
the glorious landscape outspread be—
low, a cloud overshadowed him, and
all was dark as night. But rising
higher and higher, the huge machine
got into sunshine again, and looking
up, the big sun himself was seen pour-
ing down his golden rays, making the
dark cloud white and wavy, like a sea
of fieecy down. He was in a new


613


GHuP. xXx.





world. So with the believer. In the
darkest hour he may be rising higher
and higher, until the cloud is pierced,
and in the smile of his Father’s love
he enjoys his life again. Clouds, tco,
will come when we seek to solve by
reason doubts and difficulties that can
only be solved by faith. But the sailor
is not to throw his lead line overboard
because it will not fathom the depths
of the Indian Ocean, nor his chart
because he sees no lines of latitude
and longitude on the sea. If the line
is long enough to enable him to take
such soundings as will show where
thers is danger, and the chart such as
may be relied upon by experience, he
needs no more to ensure safe naviga-
tion. Just so with the Christian
mariner. He has faculties, but they
are limited—they cannot fathom the
mind of God, but they are sufficient
to discover danger, while the Bible is
a chart by which he can safely work
his course, and in due time reach the
desired haven.


IV. The sun went backward, and
not forwurd on the dial of Ahaz, as a
sign to King Hezekiah that he would
get well again. This was simply a


‘HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





miracle. With God all things are
possible, and there we must leave it.
In the moral world the law of progress
appears to be sometimes in abeyance,
and the dial plate indicates a down-
going sun. But although at present
there are signs which indicate a return
to the days of darkness, let us not be
alarmed, for God hath said, ‘‘ At even-
ing time it will be light.” Standing
on the sea shore, you have seen the
back-going wave running out and
tearing away the landmarks of its
former progress; but look again, it is
getting strength as it rises, and,
gathering itself like a giant, comes
roaring forward to make a higher mar-
gin than it left before. So will it be
with our tide of Christian progress.
It is, perhaps, in the back-going wave
at present, but when the Church, like
Hezekiah, rises from the bed of sick—
ness, or it may be indifference, the Sun
of Righteousness will again appear—
the tide of progress will flow onwards,
and the world shall yet be brought to
the rule of Christ.—C. W. P.

— OGod, thou wilt rather alter the
course of heaven and earth, than the
faith of thy children shall sink for
want of support.— Bp. Hall.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 12-21.


Tue Pero or Ricuzs.


I. That the possession of riches is a grave responsibility. Some writers
suppose this Babylonian embassy visited Jerusalem before the second invasion of
Sennacherib, and therefore before Hezekiah’s treasury had been drained by the


heavy tribute demanded by the Assyrian.
events as here recorded, argue that Hezekiah


Those who accept the order of
had much private treasure left,


that he was enriched by the magnificent presents brought to him by other
nations who came to congratulate him on his recovery, and that he gathered


great spoils from the smitten Assyrian army.


The riches were there, and it


remained to be seen how Hezekiah would act concerning them. Wealth brings


its own cares and anxieties.


It puts into the hands of its owne
which may be weilded for good or evil. The tin eee


rich man is but the steward of


his possessions, and is accountable to the Absolute Proprietor of all things.


II. That riches may become a sn


at gold has debauched the holiest.
their riches than upon God. It is no
614


are to the truly good. It seemed un-
kely that the man who had just been snatched from the j f
»ttach any importance to the perishable a aria


trifles of earth. And yet the glitter


The rich are apt to depend more upon
ain to be rich; but we must be prepared


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP, XX.


—_———_


to find that the snares of life are increased with the increase of wealth. Saya
old Chaucer—“ In getting and using riches ye should always have three things in
your heart: our Lord God, conscience, and a good name.’”’ The most wakeful
diligence is imperative if we would counteract the temptations of wealth.
Riches will sometimes work great mischief, and then leave us helplessly
struggling. ‘‘For riches certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as
an eagle towards heaven.”’


Iil. That the ostentatious display of riches often leads to disastrous
results. The Babylonian visitors, who came professedly to congratulate Heze-
kiah on his recovery, to inquire into the extraordinary astronomical phenome-
non of the sun dial, and to institute an alliance with Judah, carefully observed
this accumulation of treasure, and the weak point of the king in his vain dis-
play. This would be reported in Babylon, and was remembered in after years
to the utter ruin of Judah. This ostentation is the worst we can read about
Hezekiah, and we should not be too severe in judging and condemning him
after the Christian standard of the 19th century. The simplicity with which
he answered Isaiah (verse 15) reveals an openness and frankness of disposition
we vannot but admire. There are men to-day, surrounded with Christian light
and influence, who give way to contemptible varieties of display. They are
not unnoticed; and there are those who know how to deal with such. It is
said that when the upper part of the steeple of the Church of St. Bride, Fleet
Street, built by Sir Christopher Wren, was rebuilt in 1764, it was discovered
that an old hawk had inhabited the two upper circles, the open arcades of
which were filled with masses of birds’ bones, chiefly those of the City pigeons,
upon which he had preyed. And there are wily hawks of society who are
ever ready to prey with merciless and ingenious greed upon the simple and un-
suspecting. The discovery of such is all the more difficult when they make
the Church of Christ their hiding-place; and the clean-picked relics of their
victims are all the more painful to contemplate when one finds the work of
plunder has been carried on under the sacred garb of religion.


Lussons:—1. Great riches are liable to great changes. 2. Riches are not to be
selfishly hoarded, or vainly displayed, but wisely used. 8. The best of characters
may be spoiled by riches.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 12,17, 18. A future ene-
my. 1. May be introduced in the
guise and with the professions of
friendship. 2. Is quick to detect the
vulnerable point of attack. 3. May
be the instrument of accomplishing
the Divine threatenings.


Verses 12, 18. Hezekiah and the
ambassadors, or vainglory rebuked.
A man with a worn and stained gar-
ment may walk without spoiling his
robe, where another, clothed in white,
might not venture; a spot might not
show upon a filthy garment, but the
cleaner the robe the more readily is


the spot discovered; and from the very


fact that Hezekiah was so superla-
tively a holy man and a man favoured
of God, his sin showed itself, and
God visited it at once with chastise-
ment. I. To bring out what Heze-
kiah’s offence was, it will be best to
begin by describing his circumstances
and state at the time of the trans-
action. 1. He had received very
singular favours. Sennacherib had in-
vaded the land with a host reckoned
to be invincible; but when he came
near Jerusalem, he was not able even
so much as to cast a mound against it,
or to shoot an arrow at it, for God
singularly interposed, and the host of
Sennacherib, smitten by the sudder
618


GAP, xX.





breath of pestilence, or by the deadly
air of the simoon, fell dead upon the
plain. He had been granted a singu-
lar escape from the gates of death;
where another man must have died,
he was enabled within three days to
go up to the house of the Lord.
Added to all this in connection with
his recovery, God had seen fit to do
for him what He had only done for
Joshua before, namely, to interrupt
the orders of the heavens, and to
make the sun go back ten degrees
upon the dial of Ahaz as a token by


which the servant’s faith might be .


comforted.

In addition to all this, the Lord
gave Hezekiah an unusual run of
prosperity. Everything prospered.
Many serpents lurk among the flowers
of prosperity; high places are
dangerous places; it was not easy to
carry a full cup with a steady hand;
a loaded waggon needs a strong axle,
and a well-fed steed requires a tight
rein. 2. Hezekiah, at this time, had
become singularly conspicuous. The
world’s mouth was full of Hezekiah.
What a temptation is this! When
many eyes are upon one, they may,
unless grace prevent, act like the
eyes of the fabled basilisk which
fascinated their prey. A full sail
needs much ballast, or the vessel will
be overturned. Much grace was
needed in the case before us, but this
the king did not seek as he should
have done. 8. Hezekiah had remark-
able opportunities for usefulness. Why,
Hezekiah, hadst thou been in thy
right senses, and had grace kept thy
wits about thee, what a sermon thou
mightst have preached, with death
beneath thee and heaven above thee
for the text, and the eternal power
and Godhead for the theme! He
ought to have made the courts of
princes ring with the name of Jehovah.
He should have placed himself in the
rear of the picture, and have filled the
earth with his testimony to the glory
of his God. 4. He, above all men,
was under obligation to have loved his
God, and to have devoted himself wholly
to Him. Unto God be the glory of
our life, though it be but given to us

616


 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINCB.





once; but oh! with what emphasis
should God have all the glory of it if
it be given to us twice! But it is
written of him in the Chronicles,
‘that he rendered not again according
to the benefit done unto him, for Ass
heart was lifted up. He enjoyed
the blessings, but bowed not before
the Giver; he remembered the fruit,
but he forgot the tree; he drank of
the stream, but did not enough regard
the fountain; his fields were watered
with dew, but he was not sufficiently
grateful to the heaven from which the
dew distils. He stole the fuel from
the altar of love, and burned it upon
the hearth of pride. 5. It appears
that at this time God left his servant,
in @ measure, to try him. ‘‘ Howbeit,
in the business of the ambassadors of
the princes of Babylon, who sent unto
him to enquire of the wonder that was
in the land, God left him, to try him,
that he might know all that was in
his heart.” It was said by the old
masters of metaphors that in the
soundest pomegranate there are always
some rotten seeds, and the whitest
swan has a black bill; to which we
may add, there are worms under the
greenest turf, and dead men’s carcases
at the bottom of the calmest seas. In
the best Christian there is enough of
sin to make him the worst of trans-
gressors if God should leave him.

II. We must now consider the
occurrence itself and the sin which
arose out of it. 1. It is evident from
the passage in Isaiah xxxix. that he
was greatly delighted with their com-
pany. It is said, ‘‘ Hezekiah was
glad of them.” In this chapter it is
said, ‘‘He hearkened unto them,”
He was very pleased to see them. It
is an ill sign when a Christian takes
great solace in the company of the
worldling, more especially when that
worldling is profane. Courtesy is due
from the Christian to all men, but the
unholy intimacy which allows a be-
liever to receive an unregenerate
person as his bosom friend is a sin.
2. The next sin which he committed
was that he evidently leaned to thesy
alliance. Now Hezekiah was the king
of a Ettle territory, almost as in.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


CHAP, XX.





significant as a German principality,
and his true strength would have been
to have leaned upon his God, and to
have made no show whatever of mili-
tary power. It was by God that he
had been defended; why should not
he still rest upon the invisible Jehovah?
But no, he thinks: ‘‘If I could asso-
ciate with the Babylonians, they are
a rising people, it will be well for
me.” It was this getting away from
God, this ceasing to walk by faith,
this wanting to depend in a carnal
manner upon the king of Babylon,
which provoked the Lord to anger.
3. The next sin was, his unholy silence
concerning $$ God. He does not
appear to hse said a word to them
about Jehevian. Would it have been
polite? Etiquette, now-a-days, often
demands of e@ iristian that he should
not intrude his religion upon company.
Out on such etiquette! Some one
onee complained of Mr. Rowland Hill
that he was too earnest, and he told
them in reply the following story.
When walking at Woolten-under-
Edge, he saw part of a chalk-pit fall
in upon some men. ‘ So,” said he,
“T ran into the village, crying,
‘Help! help! help! and nobody said,
‘Dear me, how excited the old gentle-
man is; he is much too earnest.’
Why,” said he, ‘“‘and when I see
a soul perishing, am I not to cry
‘help!’ and be inearnest? Surely,
souls are yet more to be cared for than
bodies.” 4. Meanwhile, mark that
Hezekiah sadly made up for his silence
about his God by loudly boasting about
himself. If he had little to say of his
God, he had much to say of his spices,
his armour, and his gold and silver;
and I daresay he took them to see the
conduit and the pool which he had
made, and the various other wonders
of engineering which he had carried
out. 5. Surely, also, his sin lay in
his putting himself on a level with these
Babylonians. Suppose he had gone
to see them, what would they have
shown him? Why, they would have
shown him their spicery, their
armoury, their gold und them silver.
Now, they come to see him, and he is
a worshipper of the invisible God, and


he glories in just the same treasures
as those in which they also trusted.
When a Christian man constantly acts
like a worldly man, can it be possible
that he is acting rightly? Jf they
say, ‘‘ Here are my treasures,’ let us
tell them about the city which hath
foundations, whose builder and maker
is God,” and say, ‘Our treasure is
above.” Let us imitate the noble
Roman lady, who, when her friend
showed her all her trinkets, waited
till her two fair boys came home from
school, and then pointed to them, and
said, “These are my jewels.”

Tlf. The punishment and the
pardon. We may generally find
a man’s sin written in his puitishment.
‘We sow the thorns, and then God
flogs us with them. Moreover, he
threatened to make the same persons
the means of his punishment who had
been the means of his sin. ‘ You
were so pleased while you showed
these Babylonians your treasures;
these very ones shall take them away.”
And so the things in which we confide
shall be our disappointment; if we
take our hearts away from God. and
give them to any earthly thing, that
earthly thing will be a curse to us.
Our sins are the mothers of our
sorrows. Judgments being therefore
threatened, Hezekiah and the people
humbled themselves. The child that
bares his back to the rod shall not be
very hardly emitten. Submission
more easily averts blows from God’s
hand than anything else.

Yet though God did forget the sin
and promise to remove the punishment
from Hezekiah, yet He did not avert
the consequences from another gene-
ration. So with us. You let loose
the river, and it will flow on for ever.
The action of to-day will affect all
time; more or less remotely it will
affect every coming age, for you tell
on another man, and that other man
on another, and even eternity itself
shall hear the echo trembling along
its halls of yon momentary action,
which you, perhaps, without thought,
committed against the living God.

IV. I have now to gather up the
lessons of this narrative. 1. See,

617


OHAP, XX.


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: KINGS.





then, what is tn every man’s heart.
This was in Hezekiah’s heart—he was
one of the best of men; the same is in
your heart. You are humble to-day ;
you will be proud as Satan to-morrow
if left by God’s grace. Perhaps it is
not possible for any one of us to know
our full capacity for guilt. Only let
the restraining hand of providence
and grace be taken away, and the
wisest of us might become a very
madman with the rage of sin. 38.
Tremble at anything that 1s likely to
bring out this evil of your heart.
Above all, be afraid of prosperity ; be
thankful, but do not be over-enjoyed ;
walk humbly with your God. A
pirate very seldom attacks a ship that
is going unloaded; it is the vessel
that is well stored that the buccaneer
will seek to gain, and so with you:
when God loads you with mercy, the
devil will try to take you if he can.
Riches and worldly company are the
two cankers that eat out the very life
of godliness. 3. We should be taught
to ory out every day against vainglory.
Do not you believe there may be as
much pride in rags as in an alderman’s
gown? Is it not just possible for
a man to be proud in a dustcart, as if
he rode in her Majesty’s chariot? A
man may be just as proud with half
a yard of ground, as Alexander with
all his kingdoms, and may be just as
lifted up with a few pence as Croesus
with all his treasure. Pride will
grow on a dunghill, as well as in the
king’s garden. 4. And then, supposing
that you should have given way to it,
see the sorrow which tt will bring you;
and tf you would escape that sorrow,
wmitate Hezekiah, and humble yourself.
When God is wrestling with man’s
pride, let the man struggleas he will,
he will throw him; but when the
man is down, God liftshimup. None
so ready to lift up a fallen fce as our
God. 5. Lastly, let us cry to God
never to leave us. Lord, keep me every-
where. Keep me in the valley, that
I murmur not of my low estate!
Keep me on the mountain, that I wax
hot giddy through pride at my being
lifted up so high! Keep me in my
youth, when my passions are strong !
618


Keep me in my old age, when I am
conceited of my wisdom, and may
therefore be a greater fool than even
the young. Keep me living, keep me
dying, keep me labouring, keep me
suffering, keep me fighting, keep me
resting, keep me everywhere, for
everywhere I need Thee, O my God.
—C. H. Spurgeon.


Ver. 13-18. A spirit of ostenta-
tion. 1. May mar a character other-
wise commendable. 2. Excites the
cupidity of the designing. 3. Should
be rebuked by the faithful minister.
4. Leads to ruinous consequences.


Ver. 13. The display was wrong
as making a vain exhibition, for his
own aggrandisement, of what had been
offered him from reverence and respect
to his God, and at the same time
presenting a bait for the cupidity of
these rapacious foreigners who, at no
distant period, would return from the
same city of Babylon and pillage his
country, and transfer all the possessions
he ostentatiously displayed, to Baby-
lon, as well as his posterity, to be
court attendants in that country.
Besides, it was wrong in a higher
point of view, as all alliances with
foreign or heathen states were at
vatiance with the fundamental prin-
ciple of the theocratic kingdom of
Judah. This passage affords a strong
argument as to the prophecy respecting
the captivity to Babylon, showing that
the words must have been spoken very
long before the event. The folly of
the king and the reproof of the prophet
must stand or fall together; the one
prompts the other; the truth of the
one sustains the truth of the other ; the
date of the one fixes the date of the other.
Thus the period of Hezekiah’ s display of
his finances being determined to
a period soon after the downfall of the
Assyrians, this rebuke of the prophet,
which springs out of it, is determined
to the same. Then the rebuke was
a prophecy ; for as yet it remained for
Esarhaddon, the son of Sennacherib, te
annex Babylon to Assyria by conquest;
it remained for the two kingdoms ta
continue united for two gencrations


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





more; it remained for Nabopolassar,
the satrap of Babylon, to revolt from
Assyria and set up that kingdom for
itself; and it remained for Nebuchad-
nezzar his son to succeed him, and, by
carrying away the Jews to Babylon,
accomplish the words of Isaiah. But
this interval occupied a hundred years
and upwards; and so far, therefore,
must the spirit of prophecy have carried
him forward into futurity, and that,
too, contrary to all present appearances.
For Babylon was as yet but a name
to the people of Jerusalem; it was
a far country, and was to be swallowed
up in the great Assyrian Empire, and
recover its independence once more,
before it could be brought to act
against Judah.—Jamieson.

— How easily have we seen those
holy men miscarried by prosperity,
against whom no miseries could pre-
vail. He that stood out stoutly
against all the Assyrian onsets, cling-
ing the faster to his God, by how much
he was harder assaulted by Sen-
nacherib, melted now with these
Babylonian favours, and runs abroad
into offensive weaknesses.—Bp. Hall.

Ver. 15. O Hezekiah! what means
this impotent ambition? It is not
long since thou tearedst off the very
plates of the Temple doors, to give
unto Sennacherib; and can thy trea-
sures be suddenly so multiplied, that
they can be so worthy to astonish
foreign beholders? or, if thy store-
house were as rich as the earth, can
thy heart be so vain as to be lifted up
with these heavy metals? Didst thou
not see, that heaven itself was at thy
beck, whilst thou wert humbled ? and
shall a little earthly dross have power
over thy soul? Can the flattering
applause of strangers let thee loose
into a proud joy, whom the late mes-
sage of God’s prophet resolved into
tears? O God! if thou do not keep
us, as well in our sunshine as in our
storm, we are sure to perish ; as in all
time of our tribulation, so in all time
of our wealth, good Lord, deliver us!
—lbid.

— We still show our spiritual
treasures to the friends from Babylon,
pspecially when we admire our own


OHAP. ZX,


NE


gifts, and like to have others admire
them. As soon as strangers arrive we
hasten to show our gifts, and powers,
and accomplishments, in order to win
respect. This is just the way to lose
all those things. If one collects trea-
sures, let him store them up in
heaven, where no spies will come to
see them.—Lange.


Ver. 19. A submissive spirit.
1. Acknowledges the righteousness of
the Divine procedure. 2. Is thankful
for the gracious suspension of the
Divine judgment. 3. Cannot but
regret the sufferings that must fall
upon its descendants.

— This rod was smart, yet good
Hezekiah kisses it: his heart struck
him no less, than the mouth of the
prophet ; meekly, therefore, doth he
yield to this Divine correction. ‘‘ Good
is the word of the Lord which thou
hast spoken.” I have deserved
a present payment; O God! thou
deferrest it. I have deserved war
and tumult; thou favourest me with
peace. I have deserved to be over:
run with superstition and idolatry ;
thou blessest me with truth. Shouldst
thou continue truth unto me, though
upon the most unquiet terms, the
blessing were too good for me; but
now thou hast promised, and wilt not
reverse it, that both truth and peace
shall be in my days. (God’s children
are neither waspish nor sullen when
they are chid or beaten, but patiently
hold their backs to the stripes of
a displeased merey.—Bp. Hall.

— The hopes of Hezekiah, as we
have scen, were entirely confined
within the limits of this life. None
of the Jewish kings had a keener
sense of the grandeur of his mission ;
but to none was it so closely identified
with the interests of the present.
The fifteen years of the remainder of
his life seemed to be so much rescued
from the desolation of impending
calamities. When his end at last
came, his funeral was marked with
unusual honour. The whole popula-
tion of the city and of the royal tribe
of Judah were present. His burial
forms a marked epoch in the royal

619


ye,


OWAP, XXI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





interments. It may be that David’s the ancient burial-place of his family,
catacomb was filled. Hezekiah is and from this time no prince of the
the first king who was buried outside royal house was interred within the
the city of David. Apparently his walls.—WStanley.

tomb was on the road approaching to


CHAPTER XXI.
MANASSEH: THE REIGN OF TERROR IN JERUSALEM.


OxrticaL anp Explanatory Notres.—Verse 1. Manasseh was twelve years old, &c.—
Born, therefore, three years after his father’s recovery. His reign was the longest of any king
in either kingdom. Verse 2. He did evil . . after the abominations of the heathen—
His minority was passed under Court influences wholly alien from Hezekiah’s aspirations ; for
there was a powerful party in the realm who revolted in heart from all the religious reforms which
king Hezekiah introduced into the kingdom; ‘scornful men, who ruled the people in Jerusa-
lem” (Isa. xxviii. 14); ‘‘ rebellious and lying children, that would not hear the word of the
Lord” (Isa. xxx. 9-12). Verse 3. Altars for Baal, and made a grove—i.e., an image of
Astarte, Ahab introduced these idolatries into Israel (see xvi. 3, 4). And worshipped all the
hosts of heaven (comp. Notes on xvii. 16)—From this worship of the heavenly bodies—sun
moon, planets, zodiacal constellations (cap. xxiii. 5)—arose the Chaldean system of astrology ;
and this being introduced among the people, led to the multiplication of astrologers, sooth-
sayers, and magicians; and these became the nation’s oracle in place of Jehovah. Verse 6.
Altars for all the hosts of heaven in the two courts of the house of the Lord—This was
the most advanced stage of profanation which had yet been reached. ‘‘Iniquity added unto
iniquity :” impiety becomes more blasphemous as it proceeds. Verse 6. Observed times ana
used enchantments—Impostors, whose trade was in occult arts, poured into Israel from Chaldea,
and Manasseh became their patron, and found delight in becoming himself an adept in the


black craft. The word wid comes from wr, & serpent, and means omen ex serpentibus


petere, and passes into the meaning of divination in general. He dealt with familiar spirite,
i. ¢., either trained such persons, or practised with them, or patronized them; but the result was
that he raised them into an official status in the realm. Verse 7. Set up a graven image


. » in the house, &c.—That is, TWN, Asherah or Astarte. Clearly, from 1 Kings viii.


16; ix. 3, “‘the house” was the very sanctuary in which Jehovah Himself had dwelt, not
merely in “ the courts” (verse 6). Verses 8, 9. The terms of Israel’s stability—“ Only of
they observe to do” (verse 8); “but they hearkened not” Neer 9). From their first being
planted in Canaan this condition was affirmed (2 Sam. vii. 10), but they so completely degene-
rated from the covenant as to do more impiously than the very Canaanites who were expelled
from the land that Israel might inherit it; for the Canaanites were faithful to their deities,
but Israel rejected their God, and worshipped base innovations. Verse 10. The Lord spake
by His servants the prophets—These were Hoshea, Joel, Nahum, Habakkuk, and Isaiah.
These “words of the seers” were kept in the national annals, along with the records of
Manasseh’s deeds (2 Chron. xxxiii. 18). Verse 13. The line of Samaria, and the plummet
of the house of Ahab—The vanquished, or war prisoners, were measured off with the line


(“\p), a8 marked or separated to slaughter (2 Sam. viii, 2); the use of the plummet implies a


levelled and cleared space, suggesting the complete clearance of Ahab’s house, Verse 16
Moreover, Manasseh shed innocent blood—Of the godly people who would not concur in
his impious deeds, and protested against them, A Jewish tradition survived even to the time
of the Christian fathers that Isaiah was among the victims of Manasseh’s intolerant persecu-
tions; and it is reported that he was sawn in two while fastened to a cedar tree in which he
had secreted himself. Verses 19-26. Amon’s guilty reign—Following all the evils of
Manasseh, he stirred such animosity among his Court attendants (“his servants ”) that an
mtrigue sprang up in the palace, issuing in regicide. “ The people of the land” (verse 24), who
avenged the king’s death; suggesting that a popular outburst of indignation ensued, in which
the conspirators against Amon were put to the slaughter, These conspiracies may suggest
the opposing religious or irreligious conflicts which were struggling for ascendancy ; they whe
slew Amon may have regarded themselves as doing God’s service; the Cromwellian era in
English history harmonizing therewith. And “the people” who took vengeance on. these
*‘ servants” were probably prompted by exarporated attachmem to Amon’s idolatry, and
620


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OwaP. XXI.








thought to re-mstate Amon’s regime when placing his son on the throne; but they knew not
what would be the policy of that child’s life. Who can predict what course will be chosen by
child as yet but “eight years old” 1—W. EL J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-16,
Reuierous ANaRncHy.


THe reign of Manasseh was the longest and darkest in the history of Judah.
The reformation under Hezekiah was superticial. Idolatry had a firm hold
upon the nation, and receiving once more the patronage of royalty, rapidly
became the predominating power. Being intolerant of any rival, and dreading
another reaction, it strove to secure permanent supremacy. A great struggle
ensued between the lovers of Jehovah and the zealots for heathenism. As in
other similar conflicts in the history of the Church, the stronger party sought
to drive the weaker into submission by the terrors of a blood-thirsty persecu-
tion. The most faithful and gifted of God’s servants were victims; and
according to tradition Isaiah was sawn asunder by the savage emissarics of
Manasseh. This paragraph furnishes a gloomy description of the prevalence
of Religious Anarchy.


I. Seen in the reckless reversal of the policy of reformation (verse 3).
Manasseh showed little respect for the memory and life-work of his father.
He pulled down what his father had painfully toiled for years to build up: it
is so much easier to destroy than to construct. It is also a revelation of the
fickleness of the people, and the shallowness of the reformation under Heze-
kiah, that they so readily fell in with the idolatrous policy of Manasseh.
Alas! how few are there whoclearly comprehend and earnestly maintain great,
vital reforming principles! It takes years and generations to thoroughly
impregnate the bulk of the people. And yet truth must ultimately triumph
over all opposition. Over the principal gate of the city of Konigratz is a bas-
relief representation of John Huss, the Bohemian Reformer, in the act of
kneeling, before his martyrdom, and underneath are inscribed the words, ‘‘ The
blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, cleanseth us from all sin.”” A reaction
set in. The enemies of Huss triumphed foratime. They sought to destroy
every vestige of the Reformer’s work; and, as one means of obliterating his
memory, they plastered over this public memorial. But the principles of the
Reformation were again in the ascendant, and time crumbled the plaster which
had hidden the monument, leaving distinct once more this public reminder of
the great Reformer’s work and sufferings. So ia it with all honest reforming
work. It may be obscured for years; but it will re-appear. Work done for
God is immortal. It is vain to struggle against it.


II. Seen in the shameless outrages perpetrated by the votaries of a
false religion (4-9). Not content with their liberty to worship idols and with
the restoration of the high places and the erection of altars to Baal, the heathen
party desecrated the temple of Jehovah by placing in it a carved figure of
Asherah. This is regarded by the historian as the most aggravated outrage of
the idolatrous king. The worst features of the reigns of Athaliah and Ahas
are outrivalled. No insult offered to Jehovah can be too offensive; no enormity
the ingenuity of the heathen priests can devise is too low for the tastes and
practices of the debauched king. Little do we ee eeroe a infamy ta


>


Gwar. XXI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.





which we may be dragged by our sins. Manasseh, beginning life amidst the
holiest influences, sank down till he became the execration of history.


III. Seen in the outbreak of a crnel and sanguinary persecution
(verse 16). The heathen party began to feel their power; and they used it
mercilessly. Injury is added to insult. When they had once tasted blood
they were insatiable. Every opponent, every Nonconformist, shall cease te
breathe. The attempts of any future reforming kings shall be made impossible ;
they have had enough of that. The noblest patriots and choicest teachers were
victims; among them, as is supposed, the venerable Isaiah. As in similar
eruptions of fanatical cruelty, all classes suffered. It is estimated by Prud-
homme that the victims of the first French Revolution numbered 1,022,351;
and in the dismal catalogue of the different classes of socicty, he shows that,
while the flower of the nobility was despatched, the humbler orders suffered
the most. It is a mad, futile policy to enforce governmental or religious prin-
ciples by terror and bloodshed. It only provokes reprisals often more savage
than those sought to be avenged.


IV. Calls forth the special vengeance of heaven (verses 10-15). The
wickedness of Manasseh was not carried on without protest and warning. The
voice of the faithful prophet might be cruelly hushed in death, but the testi-
mony was delivered and heard. Jehovah was not an indifferent spectator of
the agonies of His martyred servants; and He will be avenged on the adver-
sary. Before He~strikes, He warns. The punishment of degenerate Judah
shall terrify all who hear of it. The kingdom shall be shattered, and the
people who are not exterminated in war shall be driven into ignominious cap-
tivity. ‘‘It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.”


Lessons :—1. Reform, to be permanent, must be thorough. 2. A nation may


well mourn when the wicked are in power. 3. The God of tha martyrs will not
fast to take vengeance on His enemies and theirs.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-9. Manasseh the seduced
and the seducer. Even God-fearing
parents often have perverse children
without any fault of their own. So
much greater is the guilt of those who
lead infant children astray after the
death of their parents, instead of giv-
ing them care and good training. It
is especially important that princes
should be guided in their youth by
good counsellors and governors. God
is not confined with His word to any
land or people. If His word is not
received with love and gratitude, and
if it is not feared, then He will come
soon and remove the candlestick from
its place, so that men may go astray
and become a prey to terrible errors.
To fall is easier than to rise. If the
infection comes from above, it spreads
with greater celerity.—Lange.

622


— The one subject of the only col-
lection of Hebrew books we possess is
—God. How different with the lite-
rature of every other people! It is
necessary to remember this striking
characteristic, if we would rightly
estimate the religious enthusiasm
under Hezekiah, or the mortal struggle
against heathenism under his son Ma-
nasseh. The national party, zealous
for the worship of Jehovah, the God
of their fathers, looked back to a
golden age under David; but since his
day had seen the rise and occasional
triumph of forsiga hoathenism. couate-
nanced by a number of their kings and
by the court and upper classes. But
as in all communities, in every age, it
was only a minority who cherished,
with a full and intelligent conviction,
the great principles which thus for ¢


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS


time were triumphant The mass of
the people now, as always, passively
yielded themselves to the spirit of the
day ; ready to follow Hezekiah’s re-
forms in the excitement of the hour,
but no less so to pass over to the
heathen party, should it again get the
ascendancy. Two forces contended
for supremacy: the national party, or
Jehovah-worshippers—under the pro-
phets—and the patrician party, who
sighed for the glitter of foreign
manners and the fancied security of
foreign alliances, and, to secure both,
were eager to adopt the heathenism
of the neighbouring monarchies.—
Geikie’s Hours with the Bible.


Verse 1. Kingship. 1. Involves
great cares and responsibilities. 2. Is
too heavy and cumbrous for inex-
perienced youth. 3. Presents an op-
portunity for working out great good
or great evil.

— Manasseh’s minority, spent under
the influence of guardians who were
hostile to the religious principles and
reforming policy of his father, may
account in part for the anti-theocratic
principles of his reign. The work of
religious reformation which Hezekiah
had zealously carried on was but par-
tially accomplished. There was little
appearance of its influence on the
heart and manners of the people at
large. On the contrary, the true fear
of God had vanished from the mass of
the people, corruption and vice in-
creased, and were openly practised by
the degenerate leaders who, having
got the young prince Manasseh into
their power, directed his education,
trained him up in their views, and
seduced him into the open patronage
of idolatry.— Jamieson.

— Manassehand Josiah. 1. Both
began to reign in early life. 2. Both
were powerfully influenced by their
mothers. 38. Both had widely diffe-
rent careers—the reign of Manasseh
was the darkest, and of Josiah the
brightest period of the later history of
Judah.


Verses 2-9. Unexampled wicked-
ness~—-Kvidenced. 1. In the oon-


CHAP. XXL


temptuous manner in which the ex-
ample of a good father is regarded.
2. In the irreverent and insulting
treatment of God’s own house. 3. In
the way in which the worst abomina-
tions of the heathen are outrivalled.
4. In enforcing idolatry upon the
people, and utterly ignoring the exist-
ence of Jehovah. 5. The more repre-
hensible in those who have been
ae the knowledge of the true
od.


Verse 6. Therule of superstition.
1. Depends upon the extent of popu-
lar ignorance. 2. Maintained by
sleight of hand and a parade of wis-
dom. 3. Is dissipated by the advance
of true science.

— A great influx of these impostors
had, at various times, poured from
Chaldea into the land of Israel to
pursue their gainful occupations,
especially during the reigns of the
latter kings; and Manasseh was not
only their liberal patron, but zealous
to appear himself an adept in the
arts. He raised them into an in-
fluential ‘class at his court, as they
were in that of Assyria and Babylon,
where nothing was done till they had
ascertained the lucky hour and
promised a happy issue.—Jamieson.


Verses 7, 8. Idolatrous intrusion
into the Temple. i. Outrages the
majesty and supremacy of Jehovah.
2. Insults the Divine purity. 38. In-
dicates the loss of all respect for the
Divine commands and promises.


Verse 9. There was a gradation
in the apostacy of Judah similar to
that of Israel. Ahaz abandoned the
worship of Jehovah, but did not seduce
the generality of his subjects ; whereas
the height and front of Manasseh’s
offending was that his pernicious in-
fluence carried the whole nation along
with him into idolatry.—Jamieson.

— What havoc does this wicked
son of Hezekiah make in the church
of God. As if he had been born to
ruin religion; as if his only felicity
had been to untwist or tear in one


day that holy web which his fathes
623


GHAP. Xx,





had been weaving nine and twenty
years; to set up that offensive pile
which had been above three hundred
years in pulling down: so long had
the high places stood: The zeal of
Hezekiah in demolishing them
honoured him above all his pre-
decessors; and now the first act of
this green head was their re-edifying.
That mischief may be done in a day,
which many ages cannot redress.—
Bp. Hall.


Verses 10-15. Unexampled punish-
meat. 1. Shall be of such a character
as to appal all who hear of it (verse
12). 2. Shall be a complete and
humiliating national overthrow (verse
13). 3. Shall abandon the victims to
the cruel ravages of the enemy. 4.
Merited by lengthened provocation.


Verse 10. This doom of utter and
universal extermination, which was
threatened against Judah, was averted
by repentance, at least to a certain
extent, inasmuch as a large portion of
Judah was restored from the Baby-
lonish captivity. But it was executed
on the kingdom of Israel, which, as
the sin of its people had been over
a longer duration and of a more agera-
vated character, was more severely
punished.—Jamieson.


Verse 12. We are sensible of the
least touch of our own miseries;
how rarely are we affected with other
men’s calamities! Yet this evil shall
be such as that the rumour of it shall
beat no ear that shall not glow with
an astonishing commiseration.—Bp.
Hall.


Verse 138. The standard of Divine
judgment. 1. Is based on unchanging
principles of justice. 2. Takes into
account the circumstances under which
the offence is committed. 3. Necessi-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


tates the most thorough punishment
of unrepented wrong-doing.

— A dish is turned over when there
is nothing more in it. That is the
hardest punishment which God can
inflict on a soul which turns away
from Him. There is then no longer
a drop to be found in it of that which
was in it before.


Verse 16. The persecuting spirit.
1. Riots in cruelty and bloodshed.
2. Makes no distinction between the
innocent and guilty. 8. Is most vin-
dictive towards those who have the
courage to expose its wickedness. 4.
Is limited only by its power and
opportunities.

— Idolatry and tyranny are closely
allied. Those whom Satan has in his
toils he leads from one sin to another.
Enmity to the word of God is not
merely a different opinion or contra-
diction in regard to religious matters,
but a devilish power which impels
even to the shedding of innocent blood.
It is possible to kill the preachers of
truth, but not the truth itself. He
who was the Truth was nailed to the
Cross, but His words remain, though
heaven and earth pass away. The
blood of the martyrs only fertilized
the soil of the Church, so that it has
borne richer and more abundant fruit.
All innocent blood cries to heaven as
that of Abel did.— Lange.


Verses 17, 18. The variations
respecting the fate of Manasseh are
complicated. In the Jewish Church
his name was stamped with peculiar
infamy. If a noble name had to be
replaced by an odious one, that of
Manasseh was substituted. His life
in the book of Kings closes without
any relieving trait. It was considered
as the turning-point of Judah’s sins.
The doom was pronounced irreversible
by any subsequent reforms. —Scanley.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 19-26,


Tux Cre or AssassDxATION.


I. Ys but lightly regarded where religious principle is demoralized
(verses 20-22). When the bonds of religious obligations are relaxed, the way


624


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. Chap. xxt





ia opened for the commission of the worst crimes. Every sin blunts the moral
sense and makes it easier to sin again, until the lowest grade of crime is
reached. The peace, safety, and prosperity of a nation are more indebted to
the prevalence of true religion than the majority are inclined to admit. Rvli-
gion is the curb that holds in check the fierce monster of crime, that would
otherwise stalk through the land and work irreparable mischief.


II. Is unjustifiable, notwithstanding the wickedness of its victim. We
stand aghast at the wickedness of those in power, and are apt to think any
means justifiable that will put an endtoit. Even the unjust detest the in-
justice of others. A hatred of evil may tempt one into hasty and excessive
punishment of wrong, forgetting that ‘‘ when our hatred is violent it sinks us
even boneath those we hate.” It is difficult to restrain the national thirst for
revenge when in the midst of injustice and suffering. ‘‘If the wicked flourish,”
says Fuller, ‘‘ and thou suffer, be not discouraged; they are fatted for destruc-
tion, thou art dieted for health.’”’ We may safely leave the wicked in the
hands of God. We may create greater evils by the way in which we strive to
redress one single offence.


Ill. Is aggravated when committed by those whose duty it is to guard
and protect (verse 23). Amon was slain by his court attendants, who took
advantage of the confidence and trust reposed in them. In the most unguarded
moment, and when least suspecting treachery, he was slain in the privacy of his
palac>; his servants, towards whom he had shown kindness and honour, became
traitocs and murderers.

Is there a crime
Beneath the roof of heaven that stains the soul
With more infernal hue than damned
Assassination } Cibber.


And it certainly adds to the heinousness of the crime when the fatal blow is
prompted by a false heart.


IV. Sooner or later meets with terrible punishment (verse 24). The
eonspirators and assassins met with a similar fate to their victim. Sin carries
within it its own punishment. The most cleverly devised mischief is sure to
return in some shape or other to plague the inventors.


This even-handed justice
Commends the ingredients of our poisoned chalice
To our own lips.


In the history of the kings we are now studying, there is nothing more fre-
quently and impressively revealed than the operation of the inexorable law of
retribution. The triumph of the wicked is brief. The gains of sin are not
worth the ingenuity and toil. The wages of sin is death.


Lessoms :—1. Assassination ts not only a savage, but a useless, policy. 2. A
wrong 18 never rectified by inflicting @ greater wrong. 3. Tue religion teaches the
sacredness of human life.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 19-26. How wretchedly officers; as is the governor, so are the

a king appears of whom history has citizens. A depraved king ruins his

nothing more to record than his god- country. Unfaithfulness is punished

lesanses | As ithe king, s0 ore bis by unfaithfulness. Pats was not
68


OAP, XXII.





faithful to God: unfaithfulness was
his punishment. He was murdered
by his own servants, and these in their
turn were punished by their own sin
—they also were murdered (Matt.
xxvi. 52; Luke vi. 28). Tumult
and murder, perpetrated now by the
authorities, now by the people—those
are the natural fruits which are pro-
duced in a land which has abandoned
God, and in which His word is no
longer respected.— Lange.


Verses 20-24. Amon himself seems
to have been popular; but, from what-
ever cause, he roused the enmity of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—


in his father’s steps, and served and
worshipped the idols he had set up,
multiplying his trespasses, and show-
ing some of the penitent humility of
Manasseh’s late years. It may be,
however, that signs of a serious
thoughtfulness, not as yet carried inte
outward act, alarmed the dominant
faction, for within two years he was
cut off by a palace conspiracy, like
that by which his ancestor, king
Joash, perished.— Gerkie.


Verses 28, 24. Conspiracy and
murder. 1. Reveal a melancholy
picture of national demoralization.


2. May occasion a worse state of mis-
rule than that which is sought to be
removed. 3. Recoil in terrible ven-
geance on the actors themselves.


the court party. It could not be laid
to his charge that he refused to com-
ply with the established heathenism,
for it is expressly said that he walked





CHAPTER XXII.


THE LAST EFFORT OF REFORMATION UNDER JOSIAH.
CrittcaL AND Expianatory Notes.—Verse 2. He did that which was right—In his
minority Josiah was guarded and directed by godly teachers and counsellos. Yet training is
not to be wholly accredited with the difference between Manasseh and Josiah, who both, during
their minority, must have been under tutors and governors. The natural bent of disposition
is a factor in reckoning; and yet further, the sovereign operation of God’s grace. Verses 3-7,
The repair of the temple—For 250 years, since the reign of Jehoash (xii. 5), the fabric had
been allowed to decay. Besides ‘‘Shaphan the scribe” here mentioned, Chronicles adds
Maaseiah the city governor, and Joah the chancellor (2 Chron. xxxiv. 8) ; for the work was not
to be a private undertaking by the king and priests, but civicand national. Verse 8. Hilkiah
the high priest said . T have found the book of the law—The temple roll was ordered
to be kept by the side of the ark (Deut. xxxi. 26), but during the idolatrous profanations
under Ahaz, Manasseh, and Amon, the very ark had been removed (comp. 2 Chron. xxxv. 8)
from the house; and doubtless in this way the “book ” had become lost. Dr, Bahr notes that


NSD is here emphatic, and does not mean to fall in with something which is known to be


Tr
somewhere at hand, but to discover what was concealed, It would seem that the written law of
God had passed from human knowledge, lost in the haze of heathenism, which had so long
enveloped the land, Although this finding of ‘the book of the law’ does not imply that
the nation or the priests had no other copy, yet the narrative clearly indicates that king and
people were strangers to its contents. Shaphan the scribe “read it” (verse 8) as if it were a
new thing come to hand. He moreover “ read it before the king ” (verse 10) as being an un-
known book to the monarch, and deserving his attention; whereas the effect its words pro-
duced upon Josiah plainly show that he heard them then for the first time (verse 11). Con-
troversy is keen as to what this ‘‘ book”’ was; whether only a section of the Pentateuch—i, e,
the hook of Deuteronomy—of the complete book of the law of Moses. Hilkiah calls it


nA 2D. ‘‘the book of the law,” the technical form of expression distinctive of the


entire Pentateuch. Shaphan. however, speaks of it to the king as “a book” (verse 10), with-

out describing it in any way further. Hilkiah’s emphatic word, “ the book,” implies that

either no other copy had been known to exist, or that this copy was different from, mere complete

than any other possessed. And the latter alternative meaning of his words gives opportunity

for the theory that Deuteronomy was then first seen by them, for Deuteronomy contains just

those west ge which would lead the king to distress. But if other copies emisted, and
6


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. XXIL








Deuteronomy were an appendage, comparison would soon have led to the rejection of this
spurious addition to the book as Moses left it. The natural meaning is that the written law
had been lost, its substance meanwhile only existing in memory, or as a tradition ; but that
now the very Word of God wasfound, Verse 11. When the king had heard the words—
Shaphan did not read the entire book, but read therein, \3j (2 Chron. xxxiv. 18); and if
Deuteronomy were read (see chaps. xxvii., xxviii.) there would be found sufficient there to
account for Josiah’s alarm (comp. v. 18), Verse 14. Huldah the prophetess (now she dwelt
in Jerusalem)—This fact of her being accessible accounts sufficiently for their seeking her.
Jeremiah, the conspicuous prophet of Josiah’s reign, who for five years had been witnessing
for Jehovah against His godless nation (for he began his work in the thirteenth year of Josiah’s
reign, see Jer. i, 2, while this finding the law occurred in the eighteenth year) lived at that
time in Anathoth in Benjamin. Ot Huldah we know nothing beyond what this incident
reveals, Her husband was “‘ keeper of the wardrobe,’ more probably of the priests’ garments
than of the royal wardrobe, and she ‘‘ dwelt in the college,” rather, ‘‘in the other part,” or
the lower city. Verses 15-20. God’s denunciations should have absolute fulfilment, albeit
Josiah should be spared seeing them, because his “heart was tender,” and he had humbled
himself before the Lord.—W. H. J.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-18.
Toe Awaxenine Power or tHe Divine Worn.


I. Thatit isa great national calamity when the Divine Word is neglected
and forgotten. For more than half a century the infiuence of idolatry, in its
grossest aspects, reigned supreme in Judah. The apostate people ignored the
Divine law, which accused them too faithfully of their sins. By many it was
forgotten, and treated as if it did not exist. Only a few of the taithful—the
prophets and some of the better chasses—would possess a copy. The guiding
star of the nation was quenched; and the people grovelled in ever deepening
darkness. The state, like a rudderless vessel, drifted into anarchy and crime.
The Bible— read, studied, loved—is a nation’s blessing, and its absence a national
calamity. Napoleon, with true insight, placed the Bible in the political division
of his library ; and he who faithfully teaches the contents of that book, gives to
the world its fairest, happiest shape.


II. That the most striking discoveries of the Divine Word are often made
in connection with the Temple. No repairs of any moment had been done to
the Temple since the days of Joash—more than two hundred years before. One
of the first acts of Josiah was to restore the mutilated building and purge it of
its idolatrous abuses. In the progress of this laudable work, the Divine Law
was formed, probably in the hand-writing of Moses ; and this discovery had an
important influence upon the succeeding efforts of religious reform. And is it
not in connection with the work of the Temple that we have first sighted our
freshest, most awe-inspiring, and most abiding views of Divine truth? The
Bible has become another book to us, in its flashes of celestial light and open-
ings of profound depths, as we have “‘ enquired in the Temple.”


III. Thatthe declarations of the Divine Word awaken the deepest
interest and concern in the mind of the sincere seeker after truth The
Bible has an interest all its own to the antiquarian, the historian, and the philo-
sophic critic ; but it comes with a piercing significance and manifold suggestive
ness to the man who is in quest of the highest truth. Josiah was singularly

repared for the revelation vouchsafed to him. His mind was keenly alert in
its receptiveness; hence the profound, alarming impression created by the
Divine record. The Bible will be a closed or open book to us according to the
spirit we bring to its study. To the cold, scoffing sceptic it is : ee Sphinx,


+


GHAp, Xx, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





refusing to utter its secrets; tothe humble, earnest student, it sparkles with the
radiance of a palace of gems. Its threatenings may well terrify, for they are
true ; and its promises soothe the distress its denunciations cause.


IV. That a mind awakened by the Divine Word is emboldened to under-
take the most difficult work of reform. Whatever dim visions of reform
Josiah may have cherished before, it is noticeable that from the moment he be-
came acquainted with the mind of God as contained in the discovered bovk, his
efforts after reformation amounted to a passion. He saw it to be the one work
of his life, and he entered into it with a zeal, a determination, a thoroughness
that might be accused of violence. It was a desperate attempt to reverse, if
possible, the threatened doom of Judah. It isin the light and teaching of God’s
word that our life-work becomes most clearly defined to us. Here we learn what
sacrifices must be made, what points must be guarded, what work is worthy of
our powers and possible for us to do, and where to find the source of inspiration
and strength in every struggle.


Lessons:—l. The light of the Divine Word cannot be permanently obscured.


3. The Divine word is the surest guide amid national defection and error. 38.
The Divine word supplies the most potent motives tn all aggressive reforme.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1,2. Josiah, the kingly indulges in this glowing panegyric


reformer: an example of youthful
piety. For many reasons, Josiah is
one of the most interesting characters
in Old Testament history. The son
and successor of a weak and worthless
king, he was a mere child when
called by the unanimous voice of the
nation to the throne. He is remark-
able as having been the most faultless
of ail the kings of Judah or Israel ;
and his reign is remarkable for the
thorough and wide-spread national
reformation, of which he was the
moving cause. His premature death,
at the age of thirty-nine, may be said
to have brought toa close the pros-
perity of the kingdomof Judah. ‘The
reign of this prince is like a gleam
cast from a lowering sky before it
bursts with the tempest. Under his
government Judah rose only to fall
with greater violence afterwards”
(Evans). Noue of her kings had been
more deservedly beloved; none was
more tenderly lamented. The prophet
Jeremiah, who flourished during the
greater part of his reign, composed his
funeral elegy, and for ages afterwards
his memory was cherished with the
fondest regret. The author of the
apocryphal a of ‘‘ Ecolesiastious ’’
628


(chap. xlix. 1-4):—‘“‘The remem-
brance of Josias is like the composition
of the perfume that is made by the
art of the apothecary; it is sweet as
honey in all mouths, and as music at
the banquet of wine. He behaved
himself uprightly in the conversion of
the people, and took away the abomina-
tion of iniquity. He directed his
heart unto the Lord, and in the time
of the ungodly he established the
worship of God. All, except David,
and Hezekiah, and Josias, were defee-
tive.’ To have perpetuated such
tender regards in the hearts of the
Jewish nation for so long a period, and
to be spoken of to this day as the
Timothy of the Old Testament, the
pattern of youthful piety, and of
reverence for God’s word—the last
good king of Judah must have beenno
ordinary man. ‘Lhe records of the
first half of his comparatively brief
life are very scanty, yet they contain
some points worthy ofnote. We have
here—1. A child king; 2 A  boy-
king seeking God; 3. A youthful
royal reformer. 1. He was the good
son of a wicked father. We see Hezen
kiah, a most pious king, succeeded by
Manasseh, by far the most abandoned


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


=


prince who ever sat on the throne of
David. Butin Josiah we have a ‘‘root
out of adry ground.” Young persons
who are secking to live a godly life
under unfavourable circumstances, in
anirreligious or careless family, among
ungodly companions, should take com-
fort and courage from the case of
Josiah, whose father’s influence and
example, in so far as they could be
impressed on one so young, were
wholly evil. 2. Itis probable that
the bias of his mind towards religion
was due to maternal training. The
only notice of his mother is a very
brief one, and nothing definite is re-
corded as to her influence upon his
earliest years; but considering that
even though a king, he was too young
to dispense with a mother’s care and
training, and that twenty years of his
life were passed in comparative privacy,
may we not reasonably infer that the
seeds of religious instruction dropped
from a mother’s hand into his young
mind, bore fruit many days after in
personal decision for God, and national
reformation? A mother’s influence,
in a religious point of view, cannot be
over-estimated. 3. We see this early
training bearing fruit in due season in
what would have been spoken of as
his conversion: ‘‘ While he was yet
young” (viz., at 16 years of age),
‘‘He began to seek after the God of
David, his father.” Religion became
to him what it must become to all—a
matter of personal concern. His
father’s wickedness would not con-
demn, nor his mother’s piety avail to
save, him. Amos saw his father
Manasseh penitent and forgiven when
he was old, but did not copy his ex-
ample. Josiah was the son of ungodly
Amon, and yet he became a godly
child. Grace is not hereditary like
houses, and lands, and titles. Piety
does not runin the blood. Religion is
a personal matter. ‘‘ Every one shall
give account of himself unto God.”
“The salvation of a father does not
bear his son into heaven; the loss of a
parent in his own sin does not tear
away his converted child from the
love of God.— Arnot.

(4) The piety of Josiah wae developed





OHAP. XXEi,


——y


tn spite of unfavourable surroundings.—
““The people were surely deteriorate
ing; sinking lower and lower in the
social and moral degradations insepar-
able from the cruel and licentious
forms of worship to which they were
so fatally addicted. Idolatry had
eaten into the heart and life of the
nation ( Venables). Yet this awful con-
dition of national life did not lead
Josiah to swim with the current.
Single handed he resolved to stem the
tide of national ungodliness. Instead
of becoming the creature of circum-
stances, he rose to the occasion, and
became their master. Personal piety
was followed up by religious zeal. It
needed courage to declare himself on
the Lord’s side, when the whole current
of the nation’s life was sweeping on in
an entirely opposite direction. This
is the. true order. Personal piety
Jirst ; zeal for the religious welfare of
othersnext. Like charity, piety must
‘“begin at home,”’ if it is to be of any
value ina wider sphere. 5. He begins
the work of @ religious reformer.
‘Acting as only Eastern monarcha
can, he set about ridding the country
of every trace of idolatry” (G@eskie).
He had now the authority fairly in
his own hands, and displayed indepen-
dence of action. His great design was
to extirpate idolatry, and restore the
religion of Jehovah. The desperate
case of the nation demanded stringent
measures. ‘‘The pagan worship was
uprooted with the same punctilious
care as that which, during the Paschal
season, the houses of Israelites were to
be cleansed from every morsel of leaven.
Every instrument or image, if of
wood, was burnt; if of metal or stone,
was shattered to pieces and ground to
powder ’’ (Stanley.) Notice, as to
this reformation—(a) It was person-
ally superintended. He made a tour
throughout his kingdom, and even
beyond it (2 Chron. xxxiv. 6). At
least six years were occupied in this
work. It could not be done in a
moment; it would not have been done
thoroughly had he not been present,
lending th weight of his example and
authority. Work for God is best done,
as arule, when done in person. (6)
629


CHAP. XXII.


rrr


RE was perseveringly carried on.
Though carried out with zeal, and even
severity, the work could not be accom-
plished all at once. ‘‘ The very act of
destroying every idol, and extermina-
ting the idolatrous priests, which
would require a minute search into
every remote dwelling, would neces-
sarily occupy much time. But proba-
bly, in addition to this, Josiah had to
encounter much obstinacy. All who
know anything of human nature must
be aware how very difficult it is to
cleanse the fountain of men’s minds,
and force the stream from a defiled to
a purer channel” (The History of
Josiah—Anon—Lond., 1842.) In
spite of the unfriendly spirit of the
bulk of the nation, cheered only per-
haps by a single prophet, Josiah per-
severed in his arduous, but necessary,
work of destruction. There is need
not only of courage, but of persever-
ance in the Lord’s work still. (c) Z
was brought to a successful tssue. The
six years’ labour were not in vain.
The country was, for the time being,
effectually cleansed, leaving Josiah
free to turn his attention to the con-
dition of the temple at Jerusalem.
Though his work can scarcely find its
exact parallel in modern times, and
under the more benignant dispensa-
tion of Christ, Josiah’s spirit of per-
severing zeal against all evil may well
be copied by Christian workers.


GenExaL Lessons :—(1) The possi-
bility and the beauty of early piety.
Josiah, ‘Joseph, Samuel, Obadiah,
Timothy. (2) Seeking and finding
God early saves from many evils, and
ensures many blessings. 8. The most
useful Christians are generally those who
have sought the Lord in their early days.
Did not Josiah’s early piety help him
to the formation of a strong, earnest,
godly, useful manhood? Oh! let no
young life be tempted to say :—


“I am too young—the stirring voice of
morning,

Calls me to wander gaily while I may ;

My heart leaps up, restraint and task-work
scorning ;

Not now the hard won steep—the narrow


way.
630


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





a ey


When time shall bring my treasure’s desola«
tion,
And no more sweetness in life’s cup shall


@
The bitter dregs will do for a libation
To Him who died for me.”


Hom. Quarterly.


— We ovght not to despair of the
children of the godless, and to give
them up; they may become, as in this
case Josiah did, the most pious,
through whom God accomplishes
wonders. Good instruction and disci-
pline may, by the blessing of God,
correct much evil which such children
have inherited or learned from theix
parents.—Lange.


Verse 2. Josiah an example for
young men. I. The piety of Josiah
as illustrative of the power ofa good
example. ‘He walked in all the
ways of David his father.” Few in.
fluences are more powerful than that of
example. The child imitates his
pareut; the school-boy his class-mate ;
the youth his play-fellows ; and so on,
through every stage of life. Note in
what recorded actions of Josiah there
were marks of an imitation of David's
example. 1. The first of these in
order of time was his attachment to
God’s house and his devotion to God’e
service. When he had purged the land
of idols, he gave directions for the re-
pair of the Temple. For this object
the people contributed liberally;
incited thereto by the example of their
princes, and especially of their young
king. Josiah’s acts remind us of
David’s preparation for the building of
the Temple. 2. Hits love to the word
of God. Turn to the narrative in
2 Chron. xxxiv. 14-21. David said of
the man who is blessed, that ‘his
delight is in the law of God.”? There
is no book more valuable to the young.
‘‘Wherewithal shall a young man
cleanse his way? by giving heed there-
to according to thy word.” What boy
is not delighted with stories of enter-
prise and adventure? Where can
more entrancing ones be found than
which tell of Israel’s war, the pro-
phets’ dangers, and Paul’s travels?
What youth does not love poetry f


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





And what are Milton and all his com-
peers—what their writings—to the
poetry of the Hebrew bards? 3. His
reverence for Godly men. See Chap.
xxiii. 15-18. We know enough of
David’s life to recognize in this respect
for a man of God an imitation of his
example. The servants are to be
revered ; to be ‘‘ esteemed very highly
for their work’s sake.” Goodness is
always worthy of regard, and he who
does not respect it tells us that he has
no goodness in himself to be respected.
II. The piety of Josiah as illustra-
tive of the strict intregrity of god-
liness. ‘‘ He turned not aside to the
right hand, nor to the left.” The
man of the world may turn his creed,
and shape his course “ according to the
fashion of the varying hour;” but not
the Christian. He must bear in mind
the words of wisdom: ‘Let thine
eyes look right on, and let thine eye-
lids look straight before thee.” 1.
Josiah was not influenced by the force
of ancient custom, when that custom
ran counter to the course pointed out
by conscience. Amidstall the idolatry
already referred to, the Temple service
was still performed— but slovenly, dis-
gracefully, repulsively. Josiah said
this should be so no longer. His re-
forms, depend upon it, were cried out
against as innovations. The service
had been good enough for his seniors :
why were they not good enough for
him? Because they were not good
enough for his God; and, heedless of
fault-finding, and complaining, and
backbiting, and all the usual resources
of the followers of ‘‘ ancient custom,”
he had the Temple repaired, and the
sacrifices slain, and the singers and
skilled musicians employed, and the
porters waiting at the Temple gute;
and all was done ‘“‘according to that
which was written in the law of the
Lord.” 2. He was not influenced by
any fecling of false shame. When the
book of the law was found and read
before him, he rent his clothes, feeling
that he was a sinner. Calling his
servants, he said: ‘‘ Go and inquire of
the Lord for me and for them that are
left,” &c. Many are turned away
from the way of God for fear of others.


OHAP. XXm.





This is especially the danger of
young people, who shrink from ridi-
cule. Remember that those who
honour God, He will honour. III.
The piety of Josiah illustrates the
course of life that ensures Divine
approval. ‘‘ He did that which was
right in the sight of God.” It is
comparatively easy to pursue a course
that seems right to ourselves, or that
may secure the applause of the world.
It is a widely-different matter so to
live as to ensure the approval and
commendation of God. 1. By far the
greater part of men seem to live for
self. They have no care or considera-
tion for others. Selfishness is the
vilest principle that ever spread in this
world. 2. Others care most about the
approval of the world These are
selfish, too. It is because that ap-
plause is gratifying to their selfish
vanity. The man who would lick the
dust to secure the favour of a fellow
mortal would sacrifice his dearest
friend for gain. 38. They only are
God-like whodo and love that which is
holy and true; who live not for them-
selves, but for others and for God.


APPLICATION :—

Have an object in life! Live! Do
not be content with mere existence.
Remember, there is but one unfailing
condition of true greatness, and that
is— goodness.


“ Life’s more than breath and the quick
round of blood :

It is a great spirit, and a busy heart.

* * Cs He most lives

Who thinks most—feels the noblest—acts the

best.” The Study and Pulpit.


Verses 8-8. The restoration of
God’s House.—1. Is prompted by a
devout and generous love for the
sanctuary. 2. Is carried on with en-
thusiasm and fidelity by those whose
hearts are inthe work. 3. May be the
occasion of making important discover-
ies of truth.

— How well doth it beseem the
care of a religious prince to set the
priests and scribes in hand with re-
edifying the Temple! The command
is the king’s, the charge is the high

631


GHAP. EXii,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


i


priest’s, the execution is the work-
men’s. When the labourers are faith-
ful in doing the work, and the high
priest in directing it, and the king in
enjoining it, God’s house cannot fail of
a happy perfection ; but when any of
these slackens, the business must
needs languish.— Bp. Hall.


Verse 7. Honesty.—1. A strong
recommendation for work requiring
trust and responsibility. 2. Can
afford to dispense with count and
reckoning. 3. Should not be less
honest by keeping strictest count and
reckoning. 4. Ought not to be un-
necessarily tempted.


Verse 8. The preservation of the
Holy Scriptures.—1. One of the most
marvellous features of their history.
2. Accomplished, notwithstanding
unfaithfulness of custodians, jealousy
of sects, and fierce attacks of numer-
ous enemies. 3. A strong collateral
proof of their Divine character.

The whole history of Israel
bears witness to the guiding and con-
trolling hand of God; but if there is
any one event in which, more than in
any other, the providence of God is
visible, then it is this important dis-
covery. It was a physical proof that
God watches over this document,
which is the testimonial to Israel of
its election, and the highest Divine
revelation, that He preserves from the
rage of idolaters, and that, even if it
lies long unnoticed and unknown in
the night of apostasy, he will bring it
again to light and make it to show
its force once more. The discovery
of the book was a pledge to the king
and people of the indestructibility of
the Divine written word.— Lange.

It is hard for us to realize the
full force of this discovery. We can
scarcely conceive of a state of things
in which, during centuries of the nomi-
nal establishment of Christianity, the
people should still observe solemn
testivals at the old sites of Druidical
worship, the altars of Thor and Woden
and Freya should smoke with sacri-
fiovs in every city, town, and village ;
their statues be set up in our cathe-

632


drals, and the heights round London
should be crowned with the temples
of Sivah and Juggernaut, all this
lasting for centuries, with an occa-
sional and partial return to the purey
form of worship, while the Bible,


never multiplied by printing, and only


known in older and purer timesthrough
infrequent readings by the clergy,
should have been utterly lost and for-
gotten. Add to this the supposition
that the lost volume contained, not
the dark symbols of the apocalypse,
but the cloar warning #f national de-
struction and captivity to befal us
because of these idolatries, and then
let us imagine our feelings on its
sudden discovery. No wonder that
Josiah rent his clothes, and could not
rest till he found a prophet ¢e3 xpound
these terrible denunciatieas ! — Dr.
Smith's Student Scripture History.


— What ashame isit that Bibles,
now 80 common, are so little set by
amongst us, when our devout fore-
fathers would have purchased some
few chapters at a great rate! It is a
sad complaint that Moulin makes of
the French Protestants; whilst they
burnt us, says he, for reading the scrip-
tures, we burnt with zeal to be read-
ing them. Now with our liberty is
bred also negligence and disesteem of
God’s word.—Zrapp.


Verse 11. O gracious tenderness of
Josiah! He does but once hear the
law read, and is thus humbled;
humbled for his father’s sins, for the
sins of his people. How many of us,
after a thousand hammerings of the
menaces of God’s law upon our guilty
souls, continue yet insensible of our
danger! The very reading of this
law thus affects him, the preaching of
it stirs not us; the sins of others
struck thus deep with him, our own
are slighted by us. A soft heart is
the best tempered for God. So phy-
sicians are wont to like those bedies
best which are easiest to work upon
O God! make our clay wax, and our
wax pliable to thine hand, so shall we
be sure to be free either from sin, o1
from the hust of sin.——Bp. Hell.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. XX.





HOMILETIOS OF VERSES 14-20.
Tue RevELation oF THE Divine Purposr.


I. Is clearly interpreted by a duly authorised messenger (verse 14).
Though little is known of Huldah, the prophetess, there is sufficient to indicate
that she must have been a remarkably gifted woman. Her great influence in
Jerusalem is shown by the fact that the high priest and the king’s most trusted
ministers seek light from her. It is but rare that the prophetic function is
bestowed on woman. There are only two other prophetesses mentioned in the
Old Testament—Miriam (Ex. xv. 20), and Deborah (Judges ix. 4); but
neither of these seemed to touch the high spiritual elevation reached by Huldah.
In the spirit of ecstacy, they sang sacred songs and excited the enthusiasm of
the people after signal victories; but they did not prophesy, like Huldah, in
that higher sphere of Divine authority which warranted the use of the phrase
‘Thus saith the Lord.” The Divine Spirit is no respecter of person or sex in
the distribution of His precious gifts. The Divine word can be interpreted
only by those who are taught by the Divine spirit. As the scientist should be
most competent to interpret science, so the spiritual man should be the best
authority in explaining spiritual things.


II. Furnishes reasons for the exercise of Divine vengeance (verses 15-17).
God never strikes without sufficient warning and remonstrance. In this in-
stance Huldah announces that punishment will be imposed because Judah had
abandoned Jehovah, and rendered homage to other gods. This treachery was
so bold, so persistent, so inveterate, that vengeance wasinevitable. Still Jehovah
pauses to reason, to explain, to make it clear He does not act from vindictive-
ness and passion; the offender provokes his own ruin. Napoleon once said,
‘Vengeance has no foresight;” and this is true regarding human vengeance.
Not so with God; the reasons for the Divine procedure are so far revealed as
to justify God, and leave man without excuse or cause of complaint.


III. Indicates the Divine willingness to show mercy to the sincerely
penitent (verses 18-20.) The tears and pleadings of Josiah touched the heart
of God, and he was spared the pain of witnessing the calamities of his country.
How eager is our God to show mercy ; how slow to punish.


Heaven has but
. Our sorrow for our sins, and then delights
To pardon erring man. Sweet mercy seems
Ita darling attribute, which limits justice,
As if there were degrees in infinite :
An infinite would rather want perfection,
Than punish to extent. Dryden.


Lxssoxs:—1. The Divine purpose may be deciphered in great national changes.
2. The Divine purpose is plainly revealed in rewards and punishments.
8. The Divine wr-ath may be averted by timely repentance and reform.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 14. The dignity of woman. ing the respect and homage of the
1. In being exalted to an office of great. 4. In being honoured and in.
great responsibility and power. 2, In  spired to authoritatively interpret the
being highly gifted with intellectual will of God.
and spiritual insight. 3. In command- — The grave priest, the learned

638


OnaP, XX.





scribe, the honourable courtiers do not
disdain to knock at the door of a
prophetess; neither do any of them
say, it were hard if we should not
have a8 much acquaintance with God
as a woman. But, in humble ac-
knowledgment of her graces, they
come to learn the will of God from her
mouth. True piety is modest, and
stands not upon terms of reputation in
the businesses of God, but willingly
honours his gifts in any subject, least
of all in itself— Bp. Hall.


Verses 16-19. The Divine wrath.
1. Is explicitly declared against all
workers of iniquity (ver. 16). 2. Is
unalterable in its attitude towards
obstinate apostasy (ver. 17). 8. Is
postponed by sincere repentance and
self-humiliation (verses 18, 19).
4. Will inevitably overtake the im-
penitent wicked.


19. A tender heart. 1. Is keenly
susceptible to good influences. 2. Is
powerfully affected with the malignant
nature of sin. 3. Compassionates the
terrible condition of the victims of sin.
4. Finds a profound and immediate
response in the tender mercy of God.

— How happy a thing it is to be
areed unto God’s judgments, rather
than an oak! The meck and gentle
reed stoops, and therefore stands; the
oak stands stiffly out against the
strongest gust, and therefore is turned
up by the roots. At least, let us
lament those sins we have not avoided;
and mourn for the sins of others while
we hate our own.— Bp (all


Verses 19,20. Josiah, a pattern for
the ignorant. Both the character and
the fortunes of Josiah are described in
these words: his character, his heart
was tender and he feared God: his
fortunes, an untimely death, designed
as a reward for his obedience. Josiah
was brought up among very wicked
men, in a corrupt court, after an
apostasy of more than half a century,
far from God’s prophets and in the
midst of idols. He had every temp-
tation to go wrong; and had he done
80, we might have made allowances,

634


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—a








and said that he was not so bad as the
other kings, for he knew no better; he
had not sinned against light. Yes,
he would have sinned against light—
the event shows it ; for if he had light
enough to go right (which he had, for
he did go right), it follows, that if he
had gone wrong, it would have been
against light. Thisis very important.
Everyone, even the poorest and most
ignorant, has knowledge enough to be
religious. Education does not make
a man religious; nor is it an excuse
for a man’s disobedienes that he has
not been educated in hisduty. Josiah
had that which all men have, heathen
as well as Christian, till they pervert
or blunt it—a natural sense of right
or wrong; and he did not blunt
it. His heart was tender; he
acknowledged a constraining force in
the Divine voice within him; he heard
and obeyed. Though all the world
had told him otherwise, he could not
believe and would not, that he might
sin without offence, with impunity;
that he might be sensual, or cruel,
after the manner of idolaters, and
nothing would come of it. And
further, amid all the various worships
offered to his acceptance, this same
inward sense of his, strengthened by
practice, unhesitatingly chose out the
true one, the worship of the god of
Israel. Such was the beginning of
Josiah’s life. At sixteen he began to
seek after the god of his fathers; at
twenty he commenced his reformation
with a resolute faith and true-hearted
generous devotion. From the lan-
guage of Scripture, it would seem, he
began of himself; thus he is left a
pattern to all ages of prompt obedience
for conscience’ sake. At first not
having the book of the law to guide
him, he took such measures as natural
conscience suggested; he put away
idolatry generally. Thus he set out
not knowing whither he went. But
it is the rule of God’s providence that
those who act up to their light shall
be rewarded with clearer light. Ac-
cordingly, while he was thus engaged,
after a few years, he found the book of
the law in the course of his reforma-
tions. Josiah’s conduct on this dis.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS,


GHAP. xXIii,





eovery marks his character. Many
men, certainly many young men, who
had been so zealous as he had already
shown himself for six years, would
have prided themselves on what they
had done, and though they began
humbly, by this time would have
become self-willed, self-confident, and
hard-hearted. Far from it; his pecu-
liar praise is singleness of mind, a pure
conscience. His was not that stern
enthusiasm which has displayed itself
in some so-called reformations, fancy-
ing itself God’s peculiar choice, and
despising others. Here we have the
pattern of reformers, singleness of
heart, gentleness of temper, in the
midst of zeal, resoluteness and deci-
sion in action. All God’s saints have
this union of opposite graces: Joseph,
Moses, Samuel, David, Nehemiah, St.
Paul; but in which of them all is the
wonder-working power of grace shown
more attractively than in Josiah ? Ob-
serve his conduct when the law was
read to him—‘‘he rent his clothes.”
He thought far more of what he had
not done, than of what he had done.
He felt how incomplete his reforma-
tion had been; and he felt how far
more guilty his whole people were
than he had supposed, receiving, as
they had, such precise guidance in
Scripture what to do, and such solemn


command to do it; and he learned,
moreover, the fearful punishment
which was hanging over them, for in
that Book of the Law were contained
the threats of vengeance to be fulfilled
in case of transgression. Observe in
what Josiah’s chief excellence lay—
“he turned not aside to the right hand
or to the left” (verse 2). He kept the
narrow middle way. Now what is
this strict virtue called? It is called
faith. It is no matter whether we
call it faith or conscientiousness, they
are in substance one and the same,
Where there is faith there is conscien-
tiousness, where there is conscientious-
ness there is faith. They may be dis-
tinguished from each other in words,
but they are not divided in fact. They
belong to one, and but one, habit of
mind—dutifulness; they show them-
selves in obedience, in the careful,
anxious observance of God’s will, how-
ever we learnit. And this is called
faith, because it implies a reliance on
the mere word of the unseen God over-
powering the temptations of sin. May
God grant that we, like Josiah, may
improve our gifts, and trade and make
merchandise with them, so that when
he cometh to reckon with us, we may
be accepted !—Condensed from g, H.
Newman.








CHAPTER XXIII.


THE DESTRUCTION OF IDOLATRY BY JOSIAH.


CriricaL AND Expianatory Nores.—Verse 1. The king sent and gathered all the
elders of Judah—Not content to hide from coming ill under God’s promise of immunity to
hims+lf personally, Josiah’s patriotism led him to a fervent effort to recall his nation to the
Lord, and turn aside impending doom. Verse 6. He brought out the grove from the house
of the Lord (see on xxi. 7), Cast the powder thereof on the graves of the children of the
people—In 2 Chron. xxxiy. 4 it is rendered, “ upon the graves of them that had sacrificed unto
them,” thus profaning the sepulchres of those idolaters. Verse 7. He brake down the houses
of the Sodomites—Concerning these ‘“‘Sodomites” see Notes on 1 Kings xiv. 24. These
booths were scenes of Jusiful revelry ; these “‘ women who wove hangings for Asherah,”’ being
debased creatures, who, together with others of their sex, prostituted themselves in homage
w this goddess, All this ‘in the house of the Lord.” Verse 9. Did eat of the unleavened
pread—The phrase means that they lived upon the altar offerings; they came not near God’s
altar, brt stayed at home enjoying the fruit of their profession “among their brethren,”
Verse 10. He defiled Topheth—The spot in the valley of Hinnon where childrem were sacri-
ficed to Moleeh. “Tophet” is variously interpreted, as from *))", to apit out, detest, an
abomination, therefore; or from ®))F, a drum, the dominating interpretation of Jewish writers
being that the cries of the perishing children were dr wued by that instrumen, \ vw ‘1,

639


2


GaaP, XXiI. HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: KINGS.





Took away the horses—Not figures of horses, but living, kept for drawing the sun-chariot
in the idolatrous processions. Horses were also sacrificed in the worship of thesun. Verse 13.
On the right hand ofthe mount of corruption—The hilly range on the east of Jerusalem,
called the Mount of Olives, has three summits, whose central or southernmost peak is named
the ‘‘ Mount of Corruption,”’ from the idol temples there reared by Solomon. Verse 15. Altar
that was at Bethel—In Samaria; so that he traversed the land to sweep away every vertige
f idolatry. j
4 Note A literal and remarkable fulfilment of prophecy at Bethel—Against that very
altar at Bethel, where the guilty Jeroboam burned odious idolatrous incense, a man of (tod,
326 years before Josiah’s birth, came forth and cried, “OO, altar, altar! thus saith the La
Behold a child shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name, and upon thee sha
he offer the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men’s bones shall be
burnt upon thee’? (see the narrative ] Kings xiii. 1-8). No more emphatic verification of pro-
phecy is contained in Scripture, ;
Verses 21-23. The revival of the passover festival—Not only were the king’s own sub-
jects called to this august celebration of this most sacred festival, but many of the remnant of
srael also came to the s-emnity (see 2 Chron. xxxv. 18) ; not even Hezekiah’s celebration
of this feast was so complete and imposing as that of Josiah. Verse 26. Notwithstanding tha
Lord turned not—The nation’s heart was not changed by all this fervour of the king and the
reformation of external worship. Jeremiah’s ministry during Josiah’s reign shows the gross
moral corruption end total spiritual falsity of this hopelessly apostate people. Verses 23-30.
Josiah slain at Megiddo—-Necho, the son of Psammeticus, ascended the throne of Egypt in
the twentieth year of Josiah. The two rival monarchies of Egypt and Assyria were then
still struggling for ascendancy. Palestine wasa coveted frontier territory. From Manasseh’a
time Judah was tributary to Assyria, and Josiah felt necessitated to rally to Assyria’s side
against Necho of Egypt. On the Egyptian monarch’s way to Charchemish, by the Euphrates,
Josiah intercepted his line of advance by meeting hin in the great vale of Migeddo, in the plain
of Esdraelon, Although Necho remonstrated (Chronicles account), yet Josiah opposed him, and
was slain. Verses 81-34. Jehoahaz—It was the people’s act to raise Shallum, Josiah’s youngest
son, afterwards named Jehoahaz, to the throne in preference to his elder brother Eliakim,
This popular choice may be accounted for by Shallum’s military spirit (Ez, xix. 8), and his
resolute opposition to the Egyptian monarchy ; for there were two parties in the Jewish state,
the one favouring allegiance with Assyria, the other with Egypt. He was quickly deposed by
Necho. Verses 34-37. Eliakim, named Jehoiakim by Pharoah-Necho, followed an evil
course, and wasarecklessruler, Jeremiah portrays his character most vividly (ch. xxii. 18-19)


= e e


—_———


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-24,
Canacrenristics oy a Great Rexiaious ReForm.


I. It is suggested by a clearer understanding of the Divine Word
(verse 1). Josiah had begun his reforming work before the discovery of the
law, but when he read the very words of God his views were expanded, and
his zeal newly inflamed concerning the work he had to do. The effect on the
king was like that produced on Luther by his finding an old Latin Bible in the
library of the Augustine convent at Erfurt. In both cases, the character and
life-work of the reformers were irresistibly influenced by what they read. The
best and loftiest work we do, is that which is inspired and sustained by our
study of the Divine Word. It is the light and teacher for all time.


A glory gilds the sacred page
Majestic, like the sun ;

It gives a light to every age;
It gives, but borrows none.—Cowper.


II. It seeks to interest and, by solemn covenant, secure the co-operation
of all classes of the community (verses 1,2). All genuine reform must be
based on intelligence, The people Josiah sought to benefit he sought first to
instruct. Too much publicity cannot be given to principles which threaten te


change the existing order of things. It they will not bear the light of day,
636


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. OHAP. xxiit.





and the freest public criticism, they are unworthy our adherence. Josiah set
the example. It wasa striking scene—the more highly dramatic because so
utterly unconscious—to see the youthful king publicly entering into solemn
covenant to obey the Divine commands. The people followed. In the East,
whatever the king initiates and champions, the people readily accept. The
broader and more searching the reform, the more important is it to interest all
classes and engage all legitimate agencies. The most gigantic efforts of the
reformer would be fruitless if unsupported by public opinion. He is shrewd
enough to see that the first thing he has to do is to mould and educate public
opinion. Hume once observed, ‘All power, even the most despotic, rests
ultimately on opinion.”


III. It aims at the utter destruction of the system, with all its degrading
practices, that had led the people astray. (ver. 4-20, 24). Josiah attacked
the idolatry of his kingdom with a promptness, zeal, and vigour that amounted
almost to fierceness. The evil must be torn out, root and branch. The higk
places, the images, the vessels, were not only broken in pieces, but defiled, and
their ashes scattered on the stream to be borne away for ever. The reformer
warmed to his work, and grew fiercer still. He slew the idolatrous priests.
He violated the graves of the dead, and burnt their bones on the altar. The
reformer became a persecutor. Judging Josiah from the standard of his times,
much might be said in palliation of this violence. Idolatry was the oppressive
curse under which his kingdom lay crushed. Asa theocratic king, he could
admit no rival to Jehovah ; idolatry must be utterly stamped out. Much may
be forgiven a man for the excesses into which he may be betrayed in the heat
of his reforming zeal. But no reforming work can be permanently advantaged
by violence and persecution. Tyranny never cures tyranny ; it only provokee
endless reprisals.


IV. It restores the pure worship of God in its most imposing features
(ver. 21-23). The festival of the Passover was held on an unexampled scale of
magnificence and publicity, and in a faithful adhesion to the minute details re-

uired by the Divine law that had not been recognized for years. The icono-
clastic reformer should be careful to have something to put in place of what he
destroys. Man will worship, and every facility should be afforded him in
keeping up fellowship with the Highest and Holiest, else he will seek inferior
and degrading objects of worship, as did the Hebrews. We must not mistake
the reverent and decorous observance of an elaborate ritual for true worship.
Acceptable worship must be intelligent, sincere, and spiritual. ‘‘If a person
were to attend the levee of an earthly prince every court day, and pay his
obeisance punctually and respectfully, but at other times speak and act in
_opposition to his sovereign, the king would justly deem such an onea hypocrite
and anenemy. Nor will a solemn and stated attendance on the means of grace
in the House of God prove us to be God’s children and friends.’’— Salter.


Lessons :—1. A genuine reformer regulates his zeal by sound discretion. 2. It
$s difficult to avoid excesses in carrying out great reforms. 3. The best reforms
are those suggested and carried out by the teachings and spirst of the Divine Word.
4. It ts an unspeakable gain to the moral life and power of a nation when the true
God +8 better known and worshipped.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-3. The public reading structing the ignorant, and being a
of God’s Word.—1. An important testimony.to all. 2. A serious loss
and time-honoured institutien—in- and injury toa people pee neglected.

BS


CGuAe. XU,


8. Worthy of the most careful study
to do it with efficiency. 4. Stimu-
lates the formation of the best resolves
towards God and His service.

— This pious and patriotic king,
not content with the promise of his
own security, felt, after Huldah’s re-
sponse, an increased desire to avert
the threatened calamities from his
kingdom and people. Knowing the
richness of the Divine clemency and
grace to the penitent, he convened the
elders of the people, and, placing him-
self at their head, accompanied by the
collective body of the inhabitants,
went in solemn procession to the tem-
ple, where he ordered the book of the
law to be read to the assembled audi-
ence, and covenanted, with the unani-
mous concurrence of his subjects, to
adhere steadfastly to all the command-
ments of the Lord. It was an occa-
sion of solemn interest, closely con-
nected with a great national crisis,
and the beautiful example of piety in
the highest quarter would exert a
salutary influence over all classes of
the people, in animating their devo-
tions and encouraging their return to
the faith of their fathers.—Jamieson.


Verse 1. Instructed by the law
and by the prophetess, the king does
rest in security, feeling that the evil
will not come in his day, but takes
immediate measures to instruct the
people in the law, and to destroy idol-
atry throughout the land.


Verse 2. Woe be to them that hide
God’s book from the people, as they
would do ratsbane from the eyes of
children! Ignorant souls cannot
perish without their murder. There
is no fear of knowing too much; there
is too much fear of practising too
little —Bp. Hall.


Verses 4-24. A violent persecu-
tion like that of Manasseh must have
produced terror, bitterness, stubborn
thoughconcealed opposition, and a re-
lentless purpose, on the part of those
who had all the law and traditions of
their nation, together with patriotism,
on their side, and who could compare

638


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : KINGS.


with pride the moral purity of their
religion with those abominations of
heathenism which were shocking and
abhorrent to the simplest instincts of
human nature, to repay their persecu-
tors at the first opportunity. Where
those abominations were the only
religious observances taught, educs-
tion might avail to make them pasa
without protest; but where there was
any, even a slight, knowledge of a
purer religion and a better morality,
the protest could never entirely die
out. The Jehovah religion was, as
compared with heathen things, aus-
tere. It warred against the base
passions of men and the vices which
they produce. Heathenism therefore
seemed to represent enjoyment of life,
while the Jehovah religion seemed to
repress pleasure. It is remarkable
that a boy-king should have chosen
the latter. Judaism certainly had
intolerance as one of its fundamental
principles. Violence in the support
of the Jehovah-religion was the duty
of a Jewish king. In attempting to
account for and understand the con-
duct of Josiah, it would be senseless to
expect him to see and practise tolera-
tion, as to expect him to use fire-arms
against Necho. We can never carry
back modern principles into ancient
times, and judge men by the standards
of to-day.— Lange.


Verse 4. The Kedron winds along
the east and south of the city, the
channel of which is, throughout a
large portion of the year, almost or
wholly dry, except after heavy rains,
when it suddenly swells and overflows. .
There were emptied all the impurities
of the temple (2 Chron. xxix. 15, 16)
and the city. His reforming prede-
cessors had ordered the mutilated relics
of idolatry to be thrown into that place
of graves and receptacle of filth
(1 Kings xv. 13; 2 Chron. xv. 16,
xxx. 14); but Josiah, while he
imitated their piety, far outstripped
them in zeal, for he caused the ashes
of the burnt wood, and the fragmenta
of the broken metal, to be collected
and conveyed to Bethel, in order
thenceforth to associate ideas of horror


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; KINGS.


GAP, XXDI,





and aversion with that place, as odious
for the worst pollutions.


Verse 7. Sin—1. Has depths of
infamy which the beginner would
shudder to contemplate. 2. Finds its
readiest and most zealous votaries in
idolators. 3. Reigns supreme when
God is abandoned. 4. Can be cured
only by being thoroughly rooted out.


Verse 8. ‘The gate of Joshua, the
governor ofthe city.” —A great man,
but none of the best. He had a good
name; but Josiah might have said to
him, as Alexander did to a soldier of
his own name, but a coward, Either
change thy name, or put on more
courage ; 80, more piety.—TZrapp.


Verse 11. ‘‘And burned the
chariots of the sun.” —Chrysostom
saith that Peter, for his seal, was
like a man made all of fire walking
among stubble. Josiah was surely so.
Angelomus saith, that herein he repre-
sented Christ, who, by the fire of the
last day, shall destroy allimpiety, and
not suffer any defiled one to enter into
his kingdom.—ZJb:d.


Verse 14. Every monument of
idolatry in his dominions was in like
manner destroyed, and the piaces where
they stood he defiled by strewing them
with dead men’s bones. The presence
of a dead carcase rendered both persons
and places unclean in the eyes both of
Jews and heathens.—Jamieson.

— He was resolved to make a hand
with them all. We may give peace to
buy truth, but we may not give truth
to buy peace.—Trapp.


Verses 15, 16. The unerring
certitude of the Divine word.—1. Its
threats and promises are faithfully
and minutely fulfilled. 2. The flux
of time strengthens rather than
weakens its authority—350 years had
elapsed since the prophecy was uttered.
3. The instrument of accomplishing
the Divine word may himself be un-
conscious of it—Josiah was more in-
tent in destroying idolatry than in
fulfilling a Divine prediction.


Verse 15. His zeal as a theocratic
sovereign was specially directed against
“the high places ” reared and conse-
crated by Israelitish monarchs in all
the Samaritan cities, as being indica-
tions of the same spirit of disloyalty to
Jehovah which the policy of Jeroboam
had inaugurated at Bethel and at Dan.
But the altar at Bethel which had been
sumptuously and elaborately fitted up
in the Egyptian style of architecture,
and at which the worship of the golden
calf was performed with a splendour
that rivalled or surpassed the pure
ritual celebrated at Jerusalem, was
thespecial object of hisabhorrence, both
on account of its vicinity to his own
kingdom, and the outrage which its
establishment, on a spot hallowed by
the memory of the patriarch Jacob,
inflicted on the feelings of all the
pious in Judah.— Jamieson.


Verse 16. Intervention of time
breaks no square in the Divine de-
crees; our purblind eyes see nothing
but that which touches their lids; the
quick sight of God’s prescience sees
that, as present, which is a world off,
—Bp. Hail.


Verse 17. Compare with 1 Kings
xiii. Lessons from an old tomb-
stone. Aswe stand by the sepulchre
of the man of God, many admonitory
lessons press themselves home upon us.

I. That the path of duty is the
way of safety. So long as the man
of God continued in the path of duty,
he was safe. The anger of the king
and his command to the bystanders
could not harm hima whit. No moral
or spiritual danger will befall us if we
continue in the path which God marks
out forus, ‘They that be with us
are more thanthey that be with them.”
II. That the path of duty is the path
of power. So long as the man of God
was faithful in the discharge of his
duty, he had great moral influence.
When King Jeroboam’s hand withered
and his arm became rigid, he had no
faith either in his false god, or in the
priests who were sacrificing to him.
‘¢Entreat the Lord for me,” cried the
frightened, horror-stricken king. Be

639


OHAP, XXXZZ


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


ng


it is still. The good man may be per-
secuted and ridiculed, but often it is
seen that the devout man, who con-
tinues, despite all trials, ‘‘the even
tenor of his way,’’ is requested to
intercede with God on behalf of those
who would have harmed him. But
power is lost the moment the good
man departs from the right way. III.
The danger of tarrying upon for-
‘bidden ground. The command to the
man of God was clear and decisive,
He must so appear before the false
priests of Jeroboam and deliver his
message, and leave the place, that his
appearance and disappearance may be
startling in their suddenness. He
must not return by the same way that
he went. But he lingered in the way
not far from Bethel. He was upon
dangerous ground, and the temptation
presented by his seducer was fitted to
his physical need and circumstances,
as all strong temptation is. He
yielded, and we know his fate.
Bunyan very quaintly says, after
Christian and Hopeful wandered from
the right path and found themselves
in Doubting Castle, ‘‘ So I saw it was
easier going out of the way when in,
than going in when out.” IV. The
fearful crime of an enlightened man
ruining another. The old prophet
might take up the corpse of the dis-
obedient man of God and attend to its
interment, and mourn over him, say-
ing, ‘‘ Alas, my brother!” but he
could not bring back again the lost
life. He might charge his sons to
bury him with the men of God, adding
that the prediction which had been
uttered would certainly be fulfilled ;
but this made no atonement, no
separation. The man who will ruin
another is a baser man than he who
will ruin himself. And be it that this
act of disobedience on the part of the
man of God was a sin unto the death
of the body only—as perhaps the en-
tire context warrants—yet little did
he think, when he journeyed from
Judah, that he would never return
again; and that being entrusted with
such amessage, and charged with such
responsibilities, he should fail in part.
Let him, therefore, who stands by his
640


sepulchre, remember the judgment
which arrested the man of God, and
he will find another illustration of the
need of heeding the warning, ‘ Let
him that assuredly standeth, take heed
lest he fall.”—Hom. Quarterly.

This is one of the most remark
able prophecies contained in the Bible.
Had the prediction referred to the
entire suppression of idolatry through-
out the kingdom of Israel, and its re-
union with that of Judah in the com-
mon celebration of national worship at
Jerusalem, the spirit of patriotism
would assuredly have kept alive the
remembrance of the announcement
both in the court and throughout the
country, making a consummation so
devoutly to be wished the favourite
and distinguishing policy of the best
kings. But the demolition of the
single altar at Bethel was too limited
an enterprise, too trivial an act, to
stimulate the ambition of a Jewish
king, or to continue a subject of
interest in the councils of his cabinet ;
and hence the prophecy seems tu have
fallen into comparative neglect or
oblivion. But not one jot nor tittle of
the Divine word ever fails to be
fulfilled. God chooses his own time,
as wellas his own accomplishments of
His providential purposes; and
although no king of Jadah before
Manasseh had an opportymity of pass-
ing the confines of his kingdom;
although Manasseh, with Amon, had
not, probably, the slightest knowledge
of the prophecy, and was influenced
solely by motives of humble penitence
and devout gratitude for his own
temporal and spiritual deliverance in
bestowing the name of Josiah upon
his grandson; he was unconsciously,
but by an unseen overruling power,
led to do what verified the word of the
Lord which the man of God proclaimed
to Jeroboam, regarding the overthrow
of the altar at Bethel.— Jamieson.


Verses 21-24. The building up of
a new life must follow upon the
eradication of sin. The Passover can-
not be celebrated until all the old
leaven is removed. The Passover wag
the feast with which each new yeax


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS.


—Sa


begun; we also have a Passover or
Easter lamb (1 Cor. v. 7, 8). The
festivals and fasts are the framework
of the common life of the congregation;
where they are neglected this life is
decaying. IfIsrael had kept up the
celebration of its appointed feast, it
would never have fallen so low.—





CHAP. XXift.


Verse 24. The Bible and reform.
1. The Bible exposes the dangers and
abuses of all false systems. 2. Sup-
plies clear and authoritative ideas of
what is right, and the most powerful
motives to act up to those ideas. 3.
Demands that all efforts of reform
shall be thorough and complete.


Lange.
HOMILETICS OF VERSES 25-87.


Farure ix Taz Worx oF Rerormation.


I. That the work of Reformation may fail, notwithstanding the ex-
emplary character of the principal agent (verse 25). High praise is here
accorded to Josiah. It is usually maintained that Hezekiah equalled or sur-
passed him in trusting Jehovah (xviii. 5), but that he excelled Hezekiah in his
scrupulous adherence to the minute details of the Mosaic law. It is, however,
evident from this verse that Josiah was also conspicuous for his trust in
Jehovah, for he turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul,
and with all his might. The eulogy of Josiah, as of Hezekiah, may be regarded
as a passage worded after the manner of oriental hyperbole, not to be literally
understood, but as intended to distinguish a person who was gifted with speci-
ally great qualities. Josiah was the best character that age could produce, and
was the fittest to grapple with the abuses that others deplored, but were
powerless to rectify. With all the high personal qualifications and supreme
royal influence possessed by Josiah, his reforming work was not permanently
successful. He was not the first, or the last, great man who has attempted a
great and much-needed reform, and failed.


II. That the work of Reformation fails when it does not prevent the
accomplishment of the threatened doom (verses 26, 27).—After all the
colossal and drastic efforts of Josiah to remove the dark curse that lowered over
his kingdom and people, we learn from these verses the fateful sentence is still
unrepealed. The evil was too deep and inveterate to be easily eradicated. By
a comparatively early death, the good king was removed from the evil to come,
Scarcely had the wail of lamentation for the popular monarch died away, ere
the people relapsed into their former sins. The nation sank into deeper gloom,
and the vial of Divine wrath, so long and patiently restrained, was at length
poured out. The position of Judah at this time was similar to that of the
Netherlands when William the Silent retired for a time from his loved Father-
land, which he felt himself unable to save, and a thunderbolt burst upon the
land in the savage onslaught of the Duke of Alva and his butchering army—
the thunderbolt that ultimately fell on Israel being Sennacherib and his vic-
torious legions.


III. That the work of Reformation fails when it does not raise up com-
petent agents to perpetuate its policy (verses 28-37).—Josiah left no succes-
sor, either clerical or lay. The priests whose cause he had so bravely
championed, had not the ability, or the will, to press forward the good work;
and his two sons—Jehoahaz and Jehoiakim—who held the sceptre but as vassala
under the dominating authority of the Egyptian monarvh, showed their dislike
to their father’s reforming work by throwing in their lot with the opposing
perty. They forsook the God of their father, and became idolaters. A great
work of genuine reform usually creates its own agents, who rae. and com-

22


OHAP, XXITE. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





solidate the work, when the pioneer advocate is no more; and there must have
been something defective about the plans and methods of Hezckiah’s work that
failed to do this. ‘‘ Reformation,” says Sir Joshua Reynolds, ‘is a work of
time. A national taste, however wrong it may be, cannot be totally changed
at once; we must yield a little to the prepossession which has taken hold on
the mind, and we may then bring people to adopt what would offend them if
endeavoured to be introduced by violence.”


IV. That the work of Reformation fails when it does not thoroughly pene-
trate the heart and life of every member of the community.—Reform, to be
real and gbiding, must be personal, convincing the judgment, biassing the will,
changing the spirit. ‘Reform, like charity, must begin at home. Once well
at home, how will it radiate outwards, irrepressible, into all that we touch and
handle, speak and work; kindling ever new light by incalculable contagion,
spreading in geometric ratio, far and wide, doing good only wherever it spreads,
and not evil” (Carlyle). National evils are thoroughly cured only so far as the
individual is morally transformed and exalted.


Lessons :—1. The mightiest efforts of reform may come too late. 2. The Sailure
of any worthy effort is an occasion of sincere sorrow to the good. 8. Failure
should lead to self-examination and more complete trust in God.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


which described his momentary re-
vival. It did not reach the deeply-


Verses 25-28. We cannot doubt
that the sanguinary acts of Josiah, no


less than of Elijah and Jehu, are con-
demned by Him in whom was fulfilled
the spirit of the true Deuteronomy,
the Revived Law, which the impetuous
king carried out only in its external
observances, and by its own hard
measures. It was the first direct
persecution that the kingdom of Judah
had witnessed on behalf of the True
' Religion. Down to this time the
mournful distinction had been reserved
for the half-Pagan king Manasseh.
But cruelty had here, as in all like
cases, provoked a corresponding
cruelty; and the reformation of Jo-
siah, if from his youth and zeal it has
suggested his likeness to our Edward
VI., by its harsher features encouraged
the rough acts which disfigured so
many of the last efforts of that and
other like movements of the Christian
Church. But, in spite of all this
effort, the kingdom of Judah was
doomed. Perhaps the very vehemence
of the attempt carried with it its own
inefficacy. Even the traditions which
invested Josiah with a blaze of preter-
natural glory, maintained that in his
day the sacred oil was for ever lost.
Teo late is written on the pages even
642


seated, wide-spread corruption which
tainted rich and poor alike.— Stanley.


Verses 26, 27. The downward
course of sin. 1. May reach a depth
from which recovery is hopeless. 2.
The best considered efforts of reform
may fail to arrest. 8. Sinks at last
to its inevitable doom.


Verses 29, 30. The hope of Judah.

1. Rose to its brightest zenith amid
the reforming efforts of Josiah. 2.
Was queuched in that monarch’s
death. 3. Rose no more in the his-
tory of the kingdom. 4. Will revive
and burst into perfect glory, only
under the sceptre of the Messiah-
King.
— The early death of the king was
no punishment for him, for he was
thus gathered in peace to his fathers;
but it was a chastisement for his un-
repentant people, who now lamented
him, and saw, when it was too late,
what noble purposes he had had in
their behalf.


Verse 80. His fall caused a unk
versal mourning. Jeremiah wrote a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


lamentation for him (Lam. iv. 20).
His loss formed the burden of regular
songs even after the captivity, when
“the mourning of Hadad-rimmon in
the valley of Megiddon”’ was still the
type of the deepest national affliction
(Zech. xii. 11). Well might such
feelings be excited by the battle of
Megiddo. That great valley of Es-
draelon, the lists of Palestine, the
scene of the great victories of Barak
and of Gideon, was now stained with
a second defeat more disastrous than
that in which Saul lost his life. Then
it had witnessed the fall of the short-
lived dynasty of the people’s choice,
but now it saw the virtual end of the
earthly monarchy of the house of
David. Hence may be traced the
mystic significance which surrounds
the name of this battlefield. The
prophet Zechariah employs the mourn-
ing of Megiddo as a type of the more
wholesome sorrow of Judah, in the
day when God shall pour out upon
them the spirit of grace and prayer,
as a preparation for His final destruc-
tion of all the nations that come up
against Jerusalem; and his imagery is
adopted in the visions of the Apoca-
lypse. On the very scene of the two
most signal defeats of Israel and
Judah by their most inveterate ene-
mies, the Philistines and Egypt, the
seer beholds the mystic ‘‘ Battle of
Armageddon,” which avenges all such
defeats by the final overthrow of the
kings of all the world in the great
day of God Almighty” (Zech. xii.
9-14; Rev. xvi. 14-16).—Dr. Smith's
Student’s Scripture History.

— What eye doth not now pity
and lament the untimely end of Josiah?
Whom can it choose but affect to see
a religious, just, virtuous prince,
snatched away in the vigour of his age ?
After all our foolish moan, the Pro-
vidence that directed that shaft to his
lighting place, intends that wound for
a stroke of merry. The God whom
Josiah cerves, looks through his death


GHAP. XAT.





at his glory, and by this sudden
violence will deliver him from the
view and participation of the miseries
of Judah. O the wonderful goodnees
of the Almighty, whose very judg-
ments are merciful! O the safe con-
dition of God’s children, whom very
pain easeth, whom death revives,
whom dissolution unites, whom their
very sin and temptation glorifies !—
Bp. Hail.


Verses 31-37. Royal automata.
1. Divested of personal freedom and
power, and manipulated by a grasping
and imperious will (verses 33-35). 2.
Imitating with mechanical helpless.
ness and precision the worst features
of wicked predecessors (verses 32-37).
3. Maintained by the privations and
sufferings of their subjects (verse 35).
4. Indicate a lowering of natural
spirit and prestige.


Verse 32. The reassertive power
of sin. 1. Repressed for a time by
the influence of public reformution.
2. Ready to take advantage ot the
slightest relaxation of restraint. 3.


Defiantly awaits its unavoidable
punishment.
Verse 35. ‘‘ He exacted the silver


and the gold of the people.” Though
he received likely from the subjects
no less sums of curses than of coin.—


Trapp.


Verse 37. Jehoiakin was a most un-
principled and oppressive tyrant.
Jeremiah sternly rebukes his injustice
and oppression, his cruelty and avarice,
and his reckless luxury in building
himself a magnificent palace ; and
contrasts all this with his father’s
justice to the poor (Jer. xxii 13-19),
In the Chronicles his name is dis-
missed with an allusion to ‘all the
abominations that he did.” To all his
other evils he added this, that he slew
Urijah, the prophet (Jer. xxvi. 20, 23).


OHAP. XXIV. | ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.








CHAPTER XXIV.
THE FALL OF THE KINGDOM OF JUDAH.


CrirtcaL AND Expianatory Nores.—Verse 1. In his days Nebuchadnezzar, king of
Babylon—Nebuchadnezzar’s reign commenced in the fourth year of Jehoiakim’s. Hales
\ Sacred Chron.”’) shows that Jehoiakim was made king by Pharaoh-Necho, of Egypt, in

uly, B.0. 607; whereas Nebuchadnezzar mounted the throne of Babylon January 21,
B.c. 604. The Chaldean cylinders place all chronology back by twenty-two years, 80
that these dates become B.c. 590 for Jehoiakim’s accession, and B.c. 586 for Nebuchadnezzar’s,
This Nebuchadnezzar was son of Nabo-polassar, and founded the Chaldee monarehy. This
invasion of Judea occurred in Jehoiakim’s fourth year, therefore, in Nebuchadnezzar’s first
year. Werse 2. Bande of the Chaldees, and bands of the Syrians, &c.—Not an organized
army, but a congregate host from various nationalities. These, doubtless, had been compelled
to own Nebuchadnezzar’s supremacy, and now, in attacking Judah, both gratified their own
hostility against this kingdom, and fulfilled Nebuchadnezzar’s commands, Joining with the
Chaldean troops that were left on the borders, they attacked Judah. Verse 8. Surely at the
commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah—The judgments long threatened by God
through the prophets Micah, Huldah, Habakkuk, and Jeremiah, now began. These bands
were but instruments of God, unconsciously working out His behests. Verse 6. Jehoiakim
slept with his fathers— We have no record of his death; certainly he was not buried in his
father’s sepulchre. Jeremiah records the reverse of that (see Jer. xxii. 18, 19). Probably he
died soor after reaching Babylon, burdened with his captive chains; but it is equally probable
that he was slain by Nebuchadnezzar, and his corpse cast aside unburied. Certainly he
perished ignobly, and at the age of thirty-six. Verse 8. Jehoiachin was eighteen years old,
&c.—His reign lasted but three months and ten days. For thirty-six years he lingered a
captive in Babylon—i, ¢, through Nebuchadnezzar’s lifetime—but was elevated into some
dignity and respect by Evil-merodach, who succeeded Nebuchadnezzar (comp. chap. xxv. 27-30;
Jer. lit, 81-34). With the admonitory example and warning doom of his father before him,
this wilful and impious youth defied God and His prophets, and reaped disasters which over-
whelmed the entire royal household and the nation. Verse 12. Jehoiachin, king of Judah,
went out to the king of Babylon—This act, N'¥) describes the going out to surrender. Pos-

vr

sibly, persuaded thereto by Jeremiah, but improbably so. It might have been a part played
in the hope of gaining favour with the enemy, and retaining his throne as vassal. But Nebu-
chadnezzar was in no mood to show clemency now. Verses 13-16. He carried away all
Jerusalem (verse 14)—-in all, about 10,000exiles. Only “the poorest of the people” (verse 15)
were left. Every article of worth in palace and temple was seized. The land was thus
bereft of all those inhabitants who were of value to Jerusalem or useful to Babylon. Jere-
miah (xxix. 1) records that priests and prophets were included; and Josephus tells that
Ezekiel was among the prophets who were carried away with these exiles (comp. Ezek. i. 1-8).
The numbers were: 2,000, consisting of the royal household, princes, state officers, priests, and
prophets; 1,000 craftsmen; 7,000 warriors, Verses 17-20. The king of Babylon made
Mattaniah king—An act of grace ; instead of sending a foreign viceroy. He was Josiah’s
third son (1 Chron. iii. 15), brother of Jehoahaz, and uncle of Jehoiakin. Zedekiah means
“the righteousness of God,” and as a Hebrew name it intimates that he was allowed himself
to choose the title by which to dignify his pitiably poor kingship. A false name in its descrip-
tive import, for he was hardened and impious.—W. H. J.


—_—~——
HIOMILETICS OF VERSES 1-18,
A Nation at Bar.


Wrru the death of Josiah the history of the Judaic Kingdom virtually closes.
The historian treats with almost contemptuous brevity the reigns of the last
four kings, who were mere puppets of Egypt and Babylon. The period of the
remaining twenty-three years, called by Ewald ‘the death-agony of the
nation,” is occupied by successive conquests and deportations. The nation is
picked at by the invading vulture, bit by bit, till it is picked clean. In the
graphic simile of the prophet, the dish is at length emptied and turned upside
down. This chapter portrays a nation at bay.


I. A pathetic sight when we consider the greatness of its past history. No
nation ender the sun had been so favoured as Israel. It was called out of
644


HOMIL ETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS. Guar, XXIV.





obscurity and was raised into a great nation. From its cradle and throughout its
career it was the special ward of heaven. Its pathway was strewn with flowers,
margined with mercies, and adorned with brilliant miracles. It was allowed to
reach a height of imperial greatness that commanded the honour and astonish-
ment of the mightiest nations in its day. Its soil, its wealth, its culture, its
overflowing peace and plenty were the envy of all. But now, see to what
unfaithfulness and repeated disobedience has reduced it! How complete a
contrast have we here between the expansive greatness and world-wide
influence of Solomon, and the lustreless crown and limited resources of Jehoi-
kim! Israel had glittered like a signet ring on the right hand of the Almighty,
but it was now plucked off and cast aside (Jer. xxii. 24-26). And yet, in its
decay, there is a touch of the old brave spirit which awakens both sympathy
and respect.


II. A pathetic sight when we observe the gigantic forces against which
it struggles (2-4: 10-16). The kinglets and small dependencies that had
been accustomed to look up to Judah with awe, now swarmed around her in
her downfall, and took a savage delight in inflicting injury and indignity.
They pecked at her like a speckled bird, and ceased not while there was a
feather left. Behind and above all these was the overshadowing power of Baby-
lon with its vast and invincible army. But the most formidable foe of all was
the Friend and Patron whom they had offended beyond remedy (verses 3, 20)
Now that Jehovah is against Judah, all her struggles are in vain. And yet,
with all these odds against her, Judah obstinately resists. Every one can see
the inevitable but herself.


Ill. A pathetic sight when it is compelled at length to succumb
(verse 12). It had held out with all the tenacity of despair; to have persisted
in opposition would have been fanaticism—madness. Grimly it yields to stern
necessity. The sins of Manasseh (verses 3, 4), sins which the people had
approved and practised, had stained too deeply the national character, and
emasculated the national life. The strength of true bravery is conscious
virtue. In the midst of that beleagured city was a man (Jeremiah) whose
counsels, if sooner followed, would have led to a different result ; and Jehoia-
chin, like Hezekiah, might have defied the investing forces to do their worst.
Even the victor admires the brave and gallant resistance of the foe who is now
his captive.

IV. A pathetic sight wnen the noblest of its people in rank, usefulness,
and moral worth are dragged into ignominious captivity (verses 14-16).
The brain and sinew of the nation were now to be employed in the aggrandise-
ment of a strange land. The impoverishment of Judah was the enrichment of
Mesopotamia—the fall of Jerusalem meant the glorifying of Babylon. The
favourites of heaven are now the servants of Nebuchadnezzar; the rulers are
changed by the fortunes of war into slaves. It is difficult to describe the
feelings of the captive emigrants as they took their last look of the Holy
City on their march to Babylon. They were leaving behind all they loved and
prized most. Jerusalem was never so dear to them as when they were com-


pelled to leave it.


Who would not bleed with transports for his country,
Tear every tender passion from his heart
And greatly die to make a people happy !— Thomson.


Lessoxs:—1. A brave nation +3 slow to believe in tts possible extinction.


2. The calamitics of a nation are all the more painful when conscious they wers
preventible. 3. The nation that discards the Divine protectorate is absolutely


defencoless.
afonceless 445


OHAP. XXIV.





HMUMiILKETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verses 1-4. The beginning of the
national catastrophe. 1. A despe-
rate but futile attempt to recover na-
tional independence (verse 1). 2. The
harrassing inroads of combined enemies
(verse 2). 38. The forces of destruc-
tion are under the Divine sanction
(verse 3). 4. The national iniquity
attains a malignity and turpitude that
utterly forfeit the Divine pardon (v. 4).


Verse 2. This passage describes the
irruption of different inorganic bands
of freebooters. The time of it may
eorrespond to the time of that Scythian
domination of which Herodotus speaks.
In such an anarchy, waifs and relics


of the different nations, which had ©


been extinguished by the Assyrian
Empire, would be gathered together.
What the Greek historian describes
under one vague general name, would
present itself to each particular land
as a collection of different neighbour-
ing tribes, one more conspicuous and
civilized than the rest as its leader.
Nebuchadnezzar now presents himself
to us as the head and representative
of the Chaldean race, as the organiser
of these loose bands into a new em-
pire, as the conqueror of Egypt, as the
Babylonian ruier of his day.— Maurice.


Verse 8. The judgment came not
merely for the actual sins of that one
idolatrous king, but, as the whole
course of the history shows, because
the nation persisted in a class of sins
of which those of Manasseh were most
conspicuous representatives.— Whedon


Verse 6, A mystery hangs over
his death, befitting the gloom and
mystery of the times; one account
speaking of him as having fallen in a
skirmish with a band of raiders, or in
a battle with Nebuchadnezzar, and
being left unburied ; another as hav-
ing been murdered in Jerusalem, and
cast out on the streets; a third, as
having been enticed to Nebuchad-
nezsar’s camp, and there put to death,
and left without burial. But, what-
ever the mode ef his death, so bitterly

646


was he hated that no funeral dirge
was raised for him, though he was
the son of Josiah, and his corpse was
left thrown out, like that of a dead
ass, on the waste land outside the
gates of Jerusalem, in the sun by
day, and the frost by night. Ulti-
mately, indeed, if we may trust the
Septuagint, his dishonoured body was
rescued from this last shame, and
interred alongside Josiah and Man-
asseh, in their tomb in the garden of
Uzzah, which was connected, appa-
rently, with the royal stronghold on
Aphel. But men whispered that on
the dried skin of the corpse, as it lay
naked before all, the name of the de-
mon, Codonazer, to whom he had sold
himself, appeared stamped in clear
Hebrew letters.— Geikie.


Verse 7. The fall of a nation
1. A part of the Divine plan in the
government of the world. 2. Re-
moves @ prop on which a weaker
nation had been accustomed to lean.
8. Prepares the way for the desolat-
ing march of Divine vengeance.

— The judgment upon Judea
was really a judgment upon all na-
tions. Egypt, the land of the Philis-
tines, the kings of Tyrus, the kings
of Sidon, the kings of Arabia,
the kings of the mingled people
that dwelt in the desert, were all
forced to drink of a wine cup of
fury which had been mingled for
them. It was a time of far-reaching
destruction and desolation. The great
conqueror, the destroyer of boundaries,
had gone forth; God had given the
inhabitants of earth into his hands for
a certain season ; no strength or policy
would avert or delay the sentence.—
Maurice.

— Easy won, easy lost. This has
always been the fortune of conquerors;
what one has won by robbery and
force, another mightier takes from
him. The Lord in heaven makes the
great small, and the rich poor (1 Sar
ii. 7; Ps. lxxy. 7).


Verses 8-17. A crown 10st. I


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





By a stubborn persistence in sin (verse
9). 2. In sheer inability to resist
overwhelming numbers (verses 10-12).
3. Involves all its former supporters
in degradation and servitude (verses
14-16). 4. Is followed by the total
impoverishment of a nation (verse 13.)


Verse 8. Though his reign at
Jerusalem was so short and unfortu-
nate, he was looked upon by the exiles
as the last lawful successor to the
throne of David; and notwith-
standing the appointment of Zede-
kiah, Jehoiachin remained the repre-
sentative king of Judah, and in the
preservation of his life through thirty-
seven years of imprisonment, and his
elevation to kingly honours in the
court of Babylon, the theocratic his-
torian discerned the purpose of Je-
hovah to perpetuate the throne of
David.— Whedon.


Verse 12. The incident was never
forgotten. Writing after the last fall
of Jerusalem, Josephus tells us that
as long as the city stood the anniver-
sary of an event so touching was
commemorated in the services of the
temple as a signal instance of self-
sacrifice for the public good. Jehoia-
chin had gone, with his family, men
said, into voluntary captivity, to save
the temple from being destroyed, and
we may, also, readily believe, to save
the city and its inhabitants.—Geskie.


Verses 14-16. Liberty lost. 1.
When the king is dethroned and cap-
tive. 2. When its brave defenders
are vanquished and demoralised. 3.
When the Fatherland is in the piti-
less grasp of a victorious foe.

— The shock of such a calamity
was terrible. Nearly a hundred-and-
fifty years had passed since the
glades beyond the Jordan had re-
sounded with the lamentations of
the captives of Gilead, dragged away
to Assyria by Tiglath Pileser, and
it was over a hundred-and-twenty
years since Sargon had marched back
to Nineveh, leading the people of
the Western half of the kingdom





OHAP, XXIV.





of the Ten Tribes into exile. As-
syria had fallen within the last few
years, and now itself lay in ruins as
desolate as those of the Hebrew cities
it had turned into solitudes. But
another power had risen as fierce and
ruthless, and Judah, the last hope of
the chosen people, saw its king and
its leading citizens swept off in chains
to the Euphrates.— Geshe.

— Notice God’s mercy and long-
suffering even in His judgments.
He still allows the kingdom to stand,
and turns the heart of the enemy so
that he does not yet make an utter
end of it (Ezek. xviii. 23, 32).


Verses 18-20. The infatuation of
rebellion. 1. Notwithstanding the
hopelessness of success. 2. An evi-
dence of the blinding nature of in-
corrigiblesin. 3. Invites and hastens
the approach of Divine vengeance.

— The reign of Zedekiah presents
us with the most vivid picture of a
king and people sinking deeper and
deeper into an abyss, ever and anon
making wild and frantic efforts to rise
out of it, imputing their evil to every
one but themselves—their struggles
fora nominal freedom always proving
them to be both siaves and tyrants at
heart.— Maurice.


Verse 20. It is characteristic of
the high standard of prophetic mo-
tality that the violation of this oath,
though made to a heathen sovereign,
was regarded as the crowning vice of
the weak king of Judah.—Stanley.

— In the course of (tod’s righteous
Providence, his policy as king would
prove ruinous to his country. Inati-
gated by ambassadors from the neigh-
bouring states who came to congratu-
late him on his accession to the throne
(Jer. xvii. 8, with xxvili. 1), and at
the same time get him to join them
in a common league to throw off the
Assyrian yoke, Zedekiah rebelled.
Though warned by Jeremiah against
this step, the infatuated and perjured
Zedekiah (Ezek. xvii. 18) persisted
in his revolt by forming an allianc .
with Egypt.—Jemteson.


O#AP. XXV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





CHAPTER XXYV.
THE UTTER DESOLATION OF JERUSALEM.


Carsican AnD Expianatory Nores.—Verse 1. In the ninth year of his reign—The
revolt of Zedekiah so incensed Nevuchadnezzar that he determined on the final act of the utter
spoliation of Judah. With an immense army, which he conducted in person, he swept down
upon the northern parts of the country, taking almost all the fanced cities (Jer. xxxiv. 7), and
marched direct against Jerusalem to besiege it. He wae drawn aside temporarily from the siege
to oppose the coming of the Egyptian army to the relief of the Jews. This prolonged the
siege to a year and a half. At length (date given in Jer, xxix. 2), at midnight, in our month
of July, s.o. 587, when the city was reduced to misery and starvation, an entrance was foreed
into the lower city on the north side, It was a moment for fearful slaughter (2 Chron. xxxv..
17; Lam. i. ae Zedekiah, with his wives and children and guards, fled through an opening
made in the wall (Ezek. xii. 12), but were captured in the plains of Jericho, his troops scattered
(Jer. lii, 8), he and his family manacled, and marched to Riblah to confront the wrathful
Nebuchadnezzar (Jer. xxxix. 5). Doomed for his violation of his oath of allegiance to Baby-
lon, Zedekiah was first made to behold the slaughter of his family and courtiers, then his own
eyes were put out, and he was carried in chains to Babylon. Verse 8. Came Nebuzar-adan,
captain of the guard—A month elapsed, during which the Chaldean princes had probably
gone to Riblah to consult the king as to the fate of the city; and they then returned with
orders to destroy Jerusalem with fire, While fire consumed the city, fonl ravages were com-
mitted upon the inhabitants (Lam. v. 11, 12), and desecration heaped upon the dead. Verse 11.
Did Nebuzar-adan carry away—Among these captives carried off to Ramah (Jer. xxxix. 9)
was Jeremiah the prophet oe 1). Pilgrims from around afterwards came to wonder and
bewail over the ruined city (Jer. xli. 6, 6). Verse 21. So Judah was carried away out of
their land—This was the end of the Israelitish monarchy ; but the last king who occupied
the throne of the House of David, and called himself “The Righteousness of God,”
WYP IS (Tsidkiyahu), but falsified such a name, left the throne vacant until He

stare


should come who was truly “ The Righteousness of God,’ and the Eternal King, predicted by
Jeremiah as ‘VD TY mm (Jehovah Isidkener), “THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.”


Verses 98-26. Gedaliah’s rule—This Gedaliah had been Jeremiah’s firm and trusted friend
through the period of the prophets’ struggles (comp. Jer. xxvi. 24), and is described by Stanley
as “a man of a generous, genial nature, such as might have rallied the better spirits of the men
around him, and taken the place of the fallen dynasty.” Against him Ishmael conspired.
This Ishmael was the most conspicuous of a band of chiefs who fled across the Jordan during
the siege. There he became closely leagued with Baalis, king of Ammon (Josephus, Antig.
x. 9,2); and prompted by him, as well also as coveting Gedaliah’s power, he plotted his
assassination (Jerem. xl. 1). Then, soneaey Jeremiah’s dissuasions, the whole people
turned to Egypt for protection against the Idean king. Verse 27. Evil-merodach did
lift up the head of Jehoiachin—It was on the occasion of his accession to the throne of
Babylon, upon Nebuchadneszar’s death. Spake kindly to him, &c. (verse 26)—Gave him
liberty upon parole. This kindness is traced to a record that Evil-merodach himself was @
fellow-prisoner with Zedekiah, in consequence of some antipathy of Nebuchadneszar towards
him, and that a sympathetic goedwill towards the captive king was engendered. Yet had not
God declared that though, for their apostasy the seed of David should be severely chastised,
et they should not be utterly abandoned (2 Sam. vii. 14, 15)? And to the captives in Baby.
on it was a promise of good things to come, when the term of their exiled lot should close
and merciful deliverance should reach them according to the good promises of the Lord God.—


Ae: Or


——¢——


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 130,
THe Last Dismat Scenes mv a Narton’s Overtnnow.


Nothing of interest remains to be recorded of king or people. The historian
is chiefiy concerned in this chapter in relating how unmistakeably the Divine
Word was fulfilled in the total overthrow of Jerusalem. The city was sacked,
its palaces and public buildings demolished, and its massive walls pulled down.
And the Temple—the house of Jehovah, the pride of the Hebrews, the pivot
of their national history, the lament of the pious to this day— was pillaged,
dismantled, burnt to the ground, amd its sacred vessels and furniture brokex
and scattered.

Gass


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: KINGS, OHAP. XY 7,


—s=





I. Here we have all the horrors of siege and famine (ver. 1-3). Ths
Babylonish hosts, like a flock of vultures with outspread wings, closely invested
the fated Jerusalem as if eager to devour it. The hour of final doom rapidly
approached. A sword furbished, sharpened, and glittering, seemed to leap
from the Divine scabbard, like that which, in the siege of Titus, was believed
to flame across the heavens. The blockade was so complete that the besieged
were reduced to great extremities. Hunger fastened upon them with its re-
morseless grip, and under its maddening torture the most inhuman atrocities
were committed. The fathers ate their sons, and sons their fathers; and the
pestilence consumed what hunger spared (Lam. ii. 20, 22; iv. 9, 10; Ezek. v.
10). In all this we see the dire fulfilment of the prophetic denunciations
hurled against an apostate people (Lev. xxvi. 29; Deut. xxviii. 53-57 ; Jer. xv.
2; xxvil. 13; Ezek. iv. 16).


II. Here we have a desperate but unavailing effort to escape (ver. 4-6).
The ponderous enginery of the Chaldees battered down the outer wall, and ad-
mitted a stream of the besieging forces into the northern part of the city.
Seized with fear and weakened with famine, the king and his brave defenders
made a night sally towards the Jordan Valley, with the hope of effecting an
escape. But too many Chaldean eyes were awake, the retreat was cut off, and
the king and his party captured. The toils of the Babylonian net were too
thickly and widely spread to admit of successful flight; and the military
strategy of Nebuchadnezzar was favoured by the avenging power of heaven.


III. Here we have a king cruelly degraded (ver 7). Perfidious and re-
bellious as Zedekiah undoubtedly was, his punishment was a horrible example
of the barbarity of the times. The last sight on which he gazed was the
butchery of his own sons, and then he was rendered for ever incapable of ruling
by his eyes being gouged; that—as Bishop Hall strongly puts it—“ his sons
might be ever dying before him, and himself in their death ever miserable.”
This painful incident fulfilled two prophecies that were apparently contradic-
tory of each other: that Zedekiah should come to Babylon, but should not see
it (Jer. xxxii. 5; xxxiv. 3; Ezek. xii. 13; xvii. 16). The last vassal king
of Judah perished in a Babylonian prison. His was a life of religious vacilla-
tion, of stirring incident, of frightful carnage, of suffering and shame,


IV. Here we have a great and world-famed city utterly demolished
(ver. 8-12). The Babylonian conqueror was not satisfied with the subjection
of the Jewish people ; his rage extended to the buildings in which they lived
and worshipped. The celebrated buildings for which David had made such
elaborate and wealthy preparations, and which Solomon had erected with in-
finite labour, and adorned with so much pomp and magnificence, were ruthlessly
destroyed with fire and crowbar. Jerusalem, which was invincible, and had
for centuries maintained a proud pre-eminence, while Jehovah was ac-
knowledged and worshipped within its walls, was no sooner forsaken by that
guardian Presence, than it shared the fate of many a great heathen city, and
was levelled with the dust. The mightiest city cannot long survive the loss of
virtue and religion; walls and bastions are no protection when the garrison is
demoralised.


Vv. Here we have the sacred vesse.s of the Temple contemptuously broken,
and the chief officers of religion savagely massacred (verses 13-21). Persons,
places, and things lose the sacredness which, like the delicate bloom of fruit,
was their adornment and glory, when they are Divinely abandoned. The
blessing changes into a curse that blackens, disfigures, and destroys. Years
befere Jeremiah had predicted that even the vessels of the Temple should be

Gad


@aaP. EKV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.


em hiner





carried away to Babylon; but, like Cassandra, though he spake the truth, he
was fated not to be believed. Little did the sacrilegious Babylon care for the
sacred uses and hallowed associations of the Temple furniture, and little did he
understand that he was, after all, to be the safe custodian of those relics till
better days should dawn for Israel, when they should again resume their place
and office in a purified temple (Jer. xxvii. 21, 22). The priests and other
temple officers were nothing in the eyes of the exasperated destructionists but
so many rebels and instigators of sedition; and they shared the same fate as
the shrine they had disgraced.


VI. Here we have, as the last record of the national remnant, a scene
of conspiracy, assassination, and flight (verses 22-26). The sagacious
Nebuchadnezzar did not leave the country without some form of government,
and Gedaliah was, perhaps, the best adapted for the post of governor or over-
secr. He saw it was infatuation to contend with the Chaldees, and was dis-
posed to rule the land in submission to their authority. But the prospect of
rest and peace was dissipated with the plottings of envy. Once more the land
istorn with faction and stained with bloodshed. Stricken with fear and despair,
the feeble remnant fled into Egypt, where their forefathers had been enslaved,
and from which they had been miraculously delivered, and where greater
troubles awaited them than those from which they sought to escape. Such is
the grim irony of history; the people who had sprung from poverty and serf-
dom, after a brilliant career among the foremost nations of the earth, sank
again into poverty and serfdom !


VII. Here we have, as a relief to the dismal series of panoramic
pictures, a commendable instance of royal clemency towards a captive
prince (verses 27-30). It could not but add bitterness to the grief of the
exiles, as they sat by the waters of Babylon and wept, to know that two of
their monarchs were miserable tenants in prison garments, in one of the
dungeons of the city—the lamented Jehoiachin and the sightless Zedekiah.
After thirty-seven years’ imprisonment, on the death of Nebuchadnezzar, his
captor, Jehoiachin was released, and treated with great kindness and distinction
by the successor to the Chaldean throne. It was some compensation for the
dreary years of humiliation he had endured, that the last years of his life were
spent amid brighter surroundings. Jehoiachin represented the faded glory of
Israel; and the last reference made to him in the history suggests a faint hope
of the future restoration and elevation of his unhappy people. ‘‘ Doubtless,
the improvement in Jehoiachin’s condition is to be traced to the overruling
providence and grace of Him who still cherished purposes of love to the House
of David” (2 Sam. 14, 15).—Jamieson. The longest, weariest, darkest uight
comes to an end, and the long looked for dawn breaks at length, bringing rest,
and hope, and gladness with its expanding light.


Lrssons:—1l. The power of a great conqueror is sometimes used to inflict
Divine punishment for sin. 2. The destruction of the most highly favoured nation
does not frustrate the progress and triumph of the Dwine purpose. 3. In national
as in individual life, the greatest sufferings are not unmixed with blessings.


HOMILETICS OF VERSES 8-21,
Tue Fart or JERUSALEM.


I. Was a calamity of world-wide significance. It was the grand cates.
trophe of the Jewish nation. The other cities of Palestine were insignificant;
they were all subsidiary to, and received the law from, the great Metropolitan
Its influence dominated and governed the nation. Ip its midst the Zemph

650


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. KINGS. CHAP. XXVe





reared its stately pile, the political and religious centre of the State, the basia
and bond of the national unity. When the Temple fell, the national life was
smitten, the national hope extinguished. The Jews fought with unexampled
desperation, and endured incredible sufferings (ver. 8, 18-21) in defence of the
holy city ; and to the last clung with dogged pertinacity to the very ruins of
the Temple (ver. 18). Other great cities have fallen; but their loss has not
been mourned with a pathos and a grief like that which is continued by the
wailing Israelites to thisday. The significance of such a downtall dilates itself
through the centuries, and stands out asa warning-beacor to the great cities of
modern times.


II. Was a Divinely-declared punishment for persistent disobedience.
The decline and fall of great cities have been traced to the inevitable operation
of natural and universal forces. Gibbon attributes the ruin of Rome to the
injuries of time and nature, the hostile attacks of the barbarians and Christians,
the use and abuse of the materials, and the domestic quarrels of the Romans;
and thus he seeks to aiminate the operation of a Divine retributive Providence.
But the movements of the Divine Hand cannot be eliminated from the fall of
Jerusalem, though we may trace the action of similar causes to those which
have wrecked the fortunes of other great cities. While Israel remained true to
Jehovah, the city was invincible and impregnable; and it was only after un-
paralleled obstinacy in sin that Jerusalem was abandoned to its fate (Amos iii. 2;
Lev. xxvi.; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 14-17; Jer. xxv. 8, 9). This mournful truth is
admitted by the Jews with sighs and tears.


III. Was asolemn and impressive proof to all ages of the Divine fidelity
and justice. The promises and threatenings of the Divine Word have been
faithtully fulfilled, and the Divine justice fully vindicated. ‘In the history
of the Jewish State this great truth is clearly and powerfully impressed, that,
as ‘‘righteousness exalteth a nation, so sin isthe reproach of any people ”—
(Prov. xiv. 34)—a lesson which, but for the immediate and extraordinary
Providence displayed in this awful dispensation, could never have been so
forcibly inculcated, or so clearly understood ’—(Graves). The Jews are living
witnesses to-day of the truth and faithfulness of God—

Amazing race! deprived of land and lawa,
A general language, and a public cause;
With a religion none can now obey,
With a reproach that none can take away};
A people still, whose common ties are gone ;
0, mixed with every race, are lost in none.—Crabbe.


Lessons:—1. A city where piety predominates is a great power for God.
2. The nost strongly-fortified city may become a tomb in which its wicked inmates
areinterred. 3. The holiest and most renowned city is degraded and ruined by sem.


GERM NOTES ON THE VERSES.


Verse 8. Famine. 1. A more
formidable enemy to contend with than
an armed force. 2. Shows how
rapidly consumption follows in the
wake of production—it is like the Salt
Sea swallowing the Jordan. 8. One
¥ the most dreaded evils of war.

Verse 7. Asuffering captive. 1.
fo the humiliation of defeat is added
the excruciating agony of destroyed
eye-sight. 9%. It would intensify the


pangs of the sufferer that the last sight
on which his eye rested was the cruel
massacre of his own sons. 8. The
man who acts the traitor and rebel
exposes himself to severe penalties.
4. It tarnishes the reputation cf the
mightiest conqueror to needlessly
torture his helpless victim. 5. War

is a prolific source of human misery.
— The eyes of whose mind had |
been put out long before, else he might,
661 \


|


GBAP. EXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





have foreseen and prevented this evil
—as prevision is the best means of
prevention— had he taken warning by
what was foretold (Jer. xxxii. 4;
xxxiv. 3; Ezek. xii. 13). The Dutch-
men have a proverb: When God in-
tends to destroy a man, He first puts
out his eyes.— Zrapp.


Verses 8-17. Three other like
events of parallel magnitude have been
witnessed: the fallof Babylon, as the
close of the primeval monarchies of
the ancient world; the fall of Rome,
asthe close of the classical world; and,
in a fainter degree, the fall of Con-
stantinople, as the close of the first
Christianized empire. But, in the
case of Jerusalem, both its first and
second destruction have the peculiar
interest of involving the dissolution of
a religious dispensation, combined with
the agony of an expiring nation, such
as no other people or city has
witnessed, such as no other people
have survived, and, by surviving,
carried on the living recollection, first
of one, then of the other, for centuries
after the first shock was over.—
Stanley.


Verse 9. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
the wonder of all times, the paragon
of nations, the glory of the earth, the
favourite of heaven, how art thou now
become heaps of ashes, hills of rubbish,
a spectacle of desolation, a monument
of ruin! If later, yet no less deep
hast thou now pledged that bitter cup
of God’s vengeance to thy sister
Samaria! Four hundred and thirty-
six years had that temple stood, and
beautified the earth, and honoured
heaven; now, it is turned into rude
heaps. There is no prescription to be
pleaded for the favour of the Almighty :
only that temple not made with hands
is eternal in the heavens. Thither he
graciously brings us, for the sake of
the glorious High Priest, that hath
once for all entered into that holy of
holies.— Bp. Hail.

— Those of the captivity bewailed

destruction of Jerusalem by an
ual fast (Zech. vii.; Ps. cxxxvii.)
Jews at this day, when they
a ope one part of it un-


finished, in remembrance that Jerusa-
lem and the Temple lie desolate. At
least they leave about a yard square of
the house unplastered, on which they
write in great letters: ‘If I forget
thee, O Jerusalem, &c.;” or else the
words, ‘‘The memory of the desola-
tion.””— Trapp.


Verses 13-17. The changing
aspects of religious work. 1. That
religious work is carried on with a
great variety of instrumentalities
(verses 14,15). 2. That the value of
religious work depends on the strength
and symmetry of moral character
(verses 13, 16, 17). 3. That there
are Chaldean enemies ever ready to
destroy character and depreciate
religious work (verse 13).


Verses 18-21. Official responsi-
bility. 1. Demands that the post of
duty should be the more tenaciously
held in time of danger. 2. Exposes
to the first and fiercest attacks of the
enemy. 38. Involves great suffering,
and even death itself (verse 21), in
trying times. 4. Often makes one long
for the peace and security of the poor
and obscure (verse 12).


Verse 18. These likely were fired
out of those secret corners of the
temple where they lay hid. Our
chroniclers tell us that William the
Conqueror, firing the city Mayence in
France, consumed a church there, in
the walls whereof were enclosed an
anchoret, who might but would not
escape, holding it a breach of his reli-
gious vow to forsake his cell in that
distress. At the last destruction of
Jerusalem, certain Jews who had
taken sanctuary in the Temple came
forth when it was on fire, and besought
the emperor Titus to give them quarter
for their lives; but he refused so to
do, giving this for a reason, which,
indeed, was no reason—Ye deserve
not to live, who will not die with the
downfall of your Temple.— Trapp.


Verse 21. ‘So Judah was carried
away out of their land.” The curse
and the blessing of the exile. I.
The curse consisted in this, that the
Lord removed the people from before


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KINGS.





his face (chap. xxiii. 27; xxiv. 3, 20);
that is, He removed them from the
land of promise, in which he gave
them his gracious blessings, and placed
them in a distant country, where
nothing was known of the true and
living God. This curse, which had
long been threatened (Levit. xxvi. 33;
Deut. iv. 27; xxviii. 26; Dan. ix. 11)
is a proof of the truth of the words,
“ Be not deceived, God is not mocked,
&c.”’ (Gal. vi. 7). God still does
spiritually to individuals and to nations
what he did to Judah—He removes
them from before His face; He re-
moves from them His word and His
means of grace, if they do not repent,
and leaves them to live in darkness,
without Him. II. The curse became
a blessing for this people. It humili-
ated itself and repented. It experi-
enced that there was no greater curse
than to live far from its gracious God,
and it longed for the land of promise.
When it had lost its earthly kingdom
and its earthly king, it learned to look
for the kingdom of heaven, and for
that One in whom all God’s promises
to man are fulfilled. The exile
became a blessing for the whole world,
for the Jewish nation was thereby
made fit to fulfil ite destiny in the
redemptive plan of God. It was ‘‘a
great opportunity, by which the name
and glory of Jehovah were spread
abroad, as a preparation for the preach-
ing of the gospel of Christ”? (Starke).
We all lay under the curse of the law,
but Christ has redeemed us (Gal. iii.
13, 14).—Lange-.

— The mercy, the justice, and the
wisdom of God are all equally dis-
played in this event. His mercy
appears in bringing this judgment so
gradually—frem less to greater, dur-
ing the space of twenty-two years—eo
that most ample warning was given,
and abundant opportunity of repent-
ance was afforded. That it was a most
just punishment for their sins no one
ever questioned, and the Jews them-
selves have constantly admitted it,
even with tears. It was, in particu-
lar, a most righteous punishment of
their idolatry, as Moses had long ago
foretold in Ley. xxvi., where the ens-


OHAr. EXV,





(ht sameeaare


cession of the Divine judgments is
most remarkably traced out. But the
wisdom of God is also seen here. He
did not mean utterly to cast off His
people, and he therefore brought them
under this great affliction, because, as
had too plainly appeared, nothing less
would suffice to purify them, and turn’
their hearts from the love of idols. It
is certain that after this captivity—
and under occasional inducements, as
strong as any to which they had ever
been subjected in former times—there
was never among them the least ten-
dency to idolatry, but the most intense
and vehement abhorrence of it, as the
true cause of all their ancient miseries
—so deep and salutary was the impres-
sion made upon them by this great afflic-
tion, and so effectual the cure.—Aittto.

— While the work of destruction
was carried on by the Chaldean army,
it was viewed with malignant exulta-
tion by the nations which had so long
chafed beneath the yoke of their kins-
man Israel. The Ammonites cried
“Aha!” against the sanctuary, when
it was profaned ; and against the land
of Israel when it was desolate; and
against the house of Judah when they
went into captivity. Moab and Seir
said, ‘* Behold the house of Judah is
like unto all the heathen.” The more
active enmity, which was but natural
in the Philistines, who ‘‘ took venge-
ance with a despiteful heart, to des-
troy it for the old hatred,” was emu-
lated by Edom, the nearest kinsman
and bitterest rival of his brother Israel.
All these nations soon fell victims to
the like fate, which the prophets again
and again denounce upon them.— Dr.
Smith's Student's Scrip. History.

Ver. 22-26. The last vestige of
government in Judah. 1. Might
have been an important rallying point
for the scattered remnant. 2. Was
destroyed by the blind infatuation of
envy. 3%. When destroyed, completed
the desolation of the country.

Verse 25. We see by the example
of Israel, how envy and jealousy,
pride in high descent, and destiny,
and love of power, lead te the most
utter ruin. Passion makes men fools.
Ishmael could not hope with his small

65a


GiAP, XEV.


sompany to resist the Chaldean power.
— Lange.

Self-love and envy teach men
to turn the glass to see themselves
bigger and others lesser than they are.

—- Anenvious spirit. 1. Cannot
brook s superior. 2. Is disquieted
with ambitious and wicked designs.
8. Does not hesitate to commit the
worst crimes to attain its ends.
4. Loses the prize at which it clutches.
(Jer. xli. 15).

Verse 26. en the godless attempt
to flee from a calamity they plunge
themselves into it (Isa. xxiv. 17).—
Starke.

-—— Jeremiah lived on in the land to
see the misery and amarchy which
followed the murder of Gedaliah ; to
tell the Jews who were flying to Egypt
that if they stayed in the land they
would be safe, that in Egypt they
would meet with destruction—for that
Egypt had been given up to the king
of babyloe anally to sing the future
ruin of Babylon itself; the confusion


and breaking in pieces of her idols,’


the deliverance of those in whose de-
struction and desolation she had re-
joiced.— Maurice.

Ver. 27-30. The release and pre-
ferment of Jehoiachin suggestive of
the future restoration of his exiled
people. i. Their captivity, like his,
might bepainful and prolonged. 2. As
in his case, a prince might arise who
would have compassion on their suffer-
ings. 8. Asin his experience, they
might be restored to freedom and com-
parative prosperity. 4. The darkest
distress isnot without some ray of hope.

— The new king, Evil Merodach,
having no such personal feeling against
Jehoiachin as had swayed his father,
strove to atone for the long sufferings
of the unfortunate exile by setting
him free, and entertaining him thence-
forward at the royal table in suitable
splendour. Legend has brightened
the story of his last days, describing
him as living on the Euphrates, in a
sumptuous house, surrounded by a
spacious paradise, and married to the
fairest woman of his day, the chaste
Susannah, the companion of the king
ef Babylon, and the chief personage of
and high judge among the captives.


ROMILETIO COMMENTARY: EINGS.


een ere TER ECCLES A ST TTS EAT A SR TET OSE 8 GALE MR





It is added, moreover, that amidst all,
he was etill mindful of his native land,
listening, with his brethren, to Baruch
as he read the prophecies before them,
and amidst weeping, fasting, and
prayer, sending off help to the rem.
nant of his people in Jerusalem. But
this touching picture is only a creation
of national pride, to adorn with a
fictitious prosperity the closing years
of the last direct heir to the Jewish
crown. — Geskse.

Verse 29. The like whereto befel
Joseph, whose fetters one hour
changed into a chain of gold, his rage
into robes, his stocks into a chariot,
his goalinte a palace. So God turned
again the captivity of Job, as the
streams in the South.—7Zrapp.

Verse 30. So is, or might be,
every true believer’s portion; who
should therefore ‘‘eat his bread with
joy, and drink his wine. with
cheerfulness all the days of his life,”
which are not to be numbered by the
hours, but measured by spiritual
mirth ; a3 monies are not by tale, but
by value.—Jbid.

Great principles illustrated in the
books of Kings.

1. That the Divine purpose in raising
up the Jewish nation as a means of
conveying greater blessing to the world
$8 steadily kept in view.

Il. That the nation is prospered and
strengthened in proportion to tts fidelity
to the Divine purpose.

III. That the ambition to form
foreign alliances was contrary to the fun-
damental law of the theocracy, and led to
the introduction of the idolatry which
ultimately wrought the nation’s ruin.

IV. That a nation, as an indwidual,
cannot be purged of great evils without
great suffering.

V. That God ts slow to punssh, and
delays the final blow till all posssble
means of reclamation are exhausted.

VI. That great emergencies bring to
the front the noblest and most highly
gifted talent of the nation.

VII. That the unfaithfulness and otoe
of the Jewish people did not prevent the
carrying out of the Divine purpose.

VIII. That true religion can alone
gives greatness and permanenes te
masional ifs.


GENERAL INDEX,


—

PAGR PAsx

Atouss of and ita Nemesis ... 121  Athalish . — oro oem wwe 2B
Secession of Solomon, typical of the Athaliah’s Fall soe vo = wees «OSL
Kingly Character of Christ ... «» 16 Audacity of a Liar, The... coy coe 450
Accused, The Solemn Appeal of the ... 120 Augury of the Future ... 870


Adonijah’ s Attempt to Gain the Crown 6
Adonijah, The Revolt of ove =a
. Frustration of 34 coe 19
Adonijah’s Attempt to Gain the ‘Throne 85

Adversity...
Affliction, The Disciplinary Aspect ef...
~ The Teachings of ... ove 250
Age, The Sedate Caution of <‘"* eco 202
Aged and Infirm, The Isolation of ... 11
Agents of Divine Retribution, The ... 180
= n the World’s aaah tg he 526


Ahab, The fees: Ba aaa . 262
» and Baal 2 260
w» the Type of a Weak and Wicked


King 3 . 288

» and his People * ooo «-. 826

» and Elijah one ove oor O44

Ahab’s Repentance ae . 849
» Conduct towards the Witness of

the Truth _... «» 858

Ahab, The Death of ... --. 362

, The Spirit of the House of... 485

ance, An Unholy ss... . 264

The Woetul Disasters of 3 an

Unholy .. - 483

x The Evil Results of an ’ Unholy ae

Alliances, National eae a6
Altar the Refuge of the Guilty, , The cor “0a
Ambassador, The Christian inister an 86


Ambition, The Lust of ... ane ese 475
7 ee, ase wes oe 566

y. ove eos «. 258

= Religious eee se» 621
Ancestral “entered The Curse of vee 366
Anger, The Divine.” postr tial
Answer of tie Lord to Elijah, The ... 817


» of the King to the People, The ns
Anxious Forebodings ... ae BA
» Enquirer, The... ane ne - tba
Appearances, The Danger of Trusting to 408
Approaching Dissolution of the Good,
Nee ce: eee eee eee
Architecture, National . Be
Arguments in Pleading with God... 126
Ark an Emblem of the Human Heart, “pe
The “ee coe eee eee 0


Art, Religion and 94
Arrows of the Lord’s Deliverance, The 547


Assassination... . 541
ss of a Monarch, The Public 569

The Crime of... ove 824
Associations, The Danger of Evil sro 502


Authority of the Divine Word, The :..
Automata, Royal can aan
Avarice, The Temptations of ... se 46
» The Curse of ... on
Awakening Power of the Divine Word,
The * ox vee 627
Axe, The Borrowed rae nee coe 454


Baal, Ahaband ses ene ven one 260


» The Glory of : soe oe 516
Barrel of Meal and Cruse of Oil eos 276
Bathsheba before the King... ee 11
Bay, A Nation at... aA ve 644
Benhadad, The Evil Counsellors of -- 381

os upon the Sick Bed . eos 480


Biblical Estimate of National Affairs +. 563
Bible and Reform, The .. ; » 641
Blessings of Peace 6c “es woo 67
Blood, The Retribution of ace oa 89


Boastful and Arrogant Spirit, A vee 597
Boaster Humbled, The Proud .. ove 608
Borrowed Axe, The Wey we oe 454
Bravery ow =16


Building of the Heavenly Temple «os Ol
7 Temple Emblematic of

Christian Character ... 89

Business, The Danger of much Worldly 335


Calamities, The Greatest ons we 361
National 45 eee wee 122
Calf Worship Denounced cos oe 214


Call of Elisha, The vee coe 821
Call, Obedience to the Divine ... woe 322
Captivity and Freedom... tee coo 124


Captive, A Suffering... tae oo 652

Certainty of the Divine Word . eos 466

Changing Aspects of Religious Work ... 652

Character, A Good 7
= The Building ‘of the ‘Temple

Emblematic of 89

» Influence of Circumstances on 476

» The Power of a Holy... es 479

» Detected and Exposed coe 480


Characteristics of a Great atari Re-


form ... re --. 636
Challenge, The .., see veo 291
Charms of Philosophy, The . 159
Ohastisement, National .. a . 270
Cherubim Emblematic of Forms : of Lite 84
Child, The Death ofa ... aes . 421

5 The Power of a an ooo oon 492
Children’s Service, The ... oa eo 489


fi @RNERAL INDEX.


P20k
Ohrist, David a Type of... oes aw. 33
, Bolomon a Type of see 70


», the Head and King of the Church 152


Christian Minister an Ambassador ... 86
a Warrior, The... . $37
Oburch of God, Solomon's Temple an
Kmblem of _... 79
» the ie, Depository of the Divine
Word, Th . 104
n The Divine Solicitude for the... 189
» The ree of the ... 458
Clemency, Ro aes rey ps
Cloud of the an The... ae soe --. 108


Commands of God, The... ae voe 285


Commerce one ooo 145

The Risks of... ese ee 865
Complicity with Idolatry, oes wo. 834
Compromises of Life, The wee oo. 442


Compromise, Religious .. coe coe 587


Conditions of Victory, The ss. vee 332
Confederates in a False Religion 486
Conflict, Prayer a Preparation fer ... 124


Conscience, The Voice of nee vee 280
Consciousness of Right ...
Conscious Endowment of Divine Power 890


Conspiracy ase oon . 251

os and Murder ... iss o-. 626
Conspicuous Piety Se ee oe 612
Contentment, A Spirit of . 416


abel Worldly and the "Religi-
ous Spiri ae .. 800
Contrasts in the same Individual Life
Conversation of Elisha with Shunam-
mite ... we coe 416
A Momorable “5 Ree
Corosation of Solomon .. aon a Le
Corpse, The Virtue of s.. ee ... 553
Counsel of the Wise and Good. a rea
», ofa Good Man, The ic
» Worth of Godly...
Courage of a Divinely Authorised Mes-
senger 218


A ined Fruit of Righteousness rae 40
6

aa Spirit, “The Over- mastering

Power ofa _ a. nee ba vee BOT
Covetous Spirit, A . 426
Covetous Men, Defilement of God’ 3

Work by eee sos 445
Oivensiting with God . . 588
Covenant which J eholada ‘Renewed, The 533
Cowardly Spirit, A vee B41


Crime, The Sullen Stubbornness of ... 42
ye Rectan Saher? The): sce
Crook in every Lot, A ... oes nee 894
Crowd, The Perils of a ... on
Grown) Adonijah’s Attempt to gain the 6
» The Dangerous Glitter ofa ... 183
» Lost, A... a er oo» G47


Cruelty of Heathenism ., tee eos 406
Cruse, The Widow’s ai = coe 412
Cry of the Oppressed, The... «, 201
Cunning, The Mental Tofls of the ... 209


Curse, The Retribution ofa... coe 43
Ourse of Slavery, The ... aoe so
» Of Avarice, The ...
a One Man’e Blessing another Man's $47


Denger of Trusting to Appearances... 408

» of much Worldly Business, The 335

» inthe Simplicity of God's Waya 434

» of Transitions in Life, The ... 187

David's Decision... Ge 3 oo. 18

David’s Dying Charge to Solomo re 2°)

David, Death and Burial of .. oe ©6838

»» A Type of Christ eco nee

meet of Good Things, The ccs eee 470

A Meoratiaat eee ae seo 298

» Ina Mother's Life, A ewe 419

Death of the Kings of Israel and Judah 502

» Stolen from eb ase o» 524

» of Great Men, The at o- 186

Death-Bed Scene, A Memorable we 875

A Touching... coe 545

Death of 8 Child ane oe 421

» of Godly Ministers wwe wae BAG

x of the Good, The oe woo 552

» of a Wicked King sco oe 858

a Journey ora oo. 37

Debt, The Griping Tyranny

Decay, Moral Corruption He Cause of 268

» of God’s House ... es eo. 589

»  Mational ... 542

Decision in Religion, The Necessity of 293

Declaration of the Divine Majesty, The 882

Dedication of the Temple oe eo. 183

Defeat of Rebellion ... ees aoe by

Defective Piety, The Paradoxes of .., 47
Defilement of God’s Work by Covetous


an . 445
Defence of a Nation, The True coe 160
Delay, The Danger of . 224
Deliverance, The Arrows of the Lord's 647


Demoralising Influence of Idolatry on
National Life
Departure of Israel from the House of


David ... oes wee oes
Despair ree xO «. 267, 102
Despondency ... on oes 312
Return to Duty the Cure of 818
Destiny Decided by Moral Character... 22
Devotion, The Elevating Power of ... 125
Dignity of Woman, The ose eo. 633


Diplomatic Rhetoric... ose coe 598
Disclosure on the Mount, The ... eS


Disguise, The Vanity of . 361
Disobedience, The Divine Anger and

Human eee mesh gai

= Temptations to «+. 219

wD eee see ose eee $35


The Sinof eve 583

Display of Miraculous Power will nos
avail to Change the Heart ... woe 218
Disposition, Impetuosity of ... «. 501
Dissolving of Doubts, The
Divine Knowledge of Man woe
Purpose, The re) eve 204


Purpose "Fulfilled, ‘The ... 129
Purpose, The Revelation of the 633
Manifestation to Man... -» 186
Solicitude for the Church «. 189


Commands, The Reason fer is 219


Seszz-zrrsess


Judgments, The nee . 229
Vengeance ave oe ace 259
Strength ose cow woe ame 391


GENERAL INDEX.





PAGER
Divine ba brrg eed Subduing Power of <
7


eos aos eee


® Becca : . 813
Actions, Mysteriousness| of the... 392
» Grace, The Inexhaustibility of ... 407
= Sympathy for Little Sorrows ... 452
Division of the Kingdom ese 2U0
Dominion, Power and . ok eeelOd
Doom of a Treasonable Spirit . zee . 88
y» ofthe Usurper ... . 253
» The Messerger of Approaching... 342
» ofa Wicked Life. oo 847
» ofthe Scoffer ... .-. 895
Dream of Wisdom and its Reality ee 53
» of Solomon, The... ose areUD
Drivers, Reckless aoe cee eo. 499
eae ese oe eee eco 256
he Vice of ose woe 323
Duplicity eee ove - 516
Duty, The Divine Call to eee cen BI)
Dutiful Son, A ... co fe
Dynasty, The Night of an Old... woe (82
Earthly Greatness, Uncertainty of .. 22
Effort after High Things a 6
Elevating and ns Power of
Devotion one an yoo ee
Elah, Kiog eee ~~ on oo. 255
Elijah at Cherith coe ove « 278
Elijah’s Re-appearance wos eve eee 285
Elijah Praying eee eee coe oon 299
Elijah’s Despondency ... - woe 304
Ekijah under the Juniper Tree ee 310
» on Mount Horeb... eco ooo 313
Seat tloreb: x ose oe 316
Elijah’s Zeal for the Lord ose eo. 816
Elijah, Ahab and soo vee 344
The Translation of eos see OUT
» 22d Elisha, The Parting of . 379
x» end His Work, The Divine
Estimate of ... eve . 689
» The Lord God of ooo 390
Elisha, The Call of aee $21
» in Comparison with the Three
Followers of Christ... . 821
Elisha’s Love to his Master and Lord 889
Elisha and the Shunammite woe 416
and Jehu ... ooo rd eco 489
Elisha’ s Reproof to Joash cos eee 550
Embassy, A Sorrowful ... o0e coe 602
Enemy, A Future ote coo = ove G15,
Enquirer, The Anxious... ove ewe 154
Enthusiast, AnIdolatrous ee eos 574
Envious Spirit, An ees ove vee 654
Equity of Punishment, The eo» 336
Ethical Significance of the Palace of
Solomon ee coo 92
Evil Doers, Romonsirsncs with fey, 7)
» Circumscribed, The Powerof .. 46
» Results of an Unhoiy Alliance ... 177
y» Counsellors of Benhadad, The ... 331
» The Power of, to Perpetuateitself 365
n The Conflict with . . 550
» Lhe Progressive Development of... 582
Example, The Influence of a Good... 242
The Influence of a Bad 486, 543
Exile, The Curse and Blessing of the so 658





PAGR
Expostulation of a Faithful Minister ... 11
Extravagance, Luxury and... ee 161
Failure in the Work of Reformation ... 641
Faith of the Wicxed in the Prayers of
the Good . ... 219
nh Characteristics of a Ohild-like ... 278
x ried : soe 274
» The Power of an Intrepid wee 277
» The Sensitiveness of sce ... 298
» of the Soul, The True ... . 457
Faithless Friendahip, Retribution of ... 36
Faithful Seven Thousand, The... -.. 818
= Prophet, The: aaa 851, 372
Faithfulness, The Divine ach woe 485
Fall of Solomon and its Lessons oe 162
» Jerusalem, The ... ene we. 651
Falsehood cos . 224
is The Delusion of aoe . 856
False Friend Compared to a ati A... 599
Famine ... soe 286
» The Horrors of | eee ooo 461
» Lessons Taught by ... . 474
Family ee The Importance
o0 eos . 485
Verona | 0 pposition ar vee 249
Fate of an Unfaithful King, The eo. 540
Fate of the Ten Tribes of Israel coe 583
Fatheriand, The Love of ose Sa LOO
Fear, The Tyranny of ... eee .. SIL
” The Religion of rr) oa ceo 588
Fickle Humanity aa ies ove 185
Fidelity, Reward of a Tried .. vos eee
Fire, The Judgment by... # asp tar)
Flood-tide of National Erosperity The... 154
Fool, The Wise ... sae » 174
Forebodings, Anxious ... eos vee 232
Freedom, Captivity and ace - 124
Friendship, True eos a. 387
” Instability of eee oo ©«=—sdG


of .. e060 eee ese
Gains, Til-gotten... ee eon see
Generous Spirit, A on one
Generosity, See, coe eee


Glad Tidings —...
God, The Greatness and Condescension
of .. ooo eee eee eco

» The Presence of... see

The Public Worship of

The Severity and Tenderness of ..

The Illimitable Power of...

The Commands of

The Superabundant Goodness of...

God's Hidden Ones
” ere The Danger and Simplicity


i me }


coe ooo


House; The Decay of
House, The Restorkton of ae
Unfailing Interest in His People
Godlessness, The Folly of
Godly Men, The Sins of
Gold, The Eloquence of...
Good Man, The [nfluence ‘of a. ;
in Extremity, The Power ot
B v0


»
»


oon eoe ooo


°° Tested in Trouble, The Value


842


. 469


400





Good Man, The Counsel ofa ...


PAGE
436


% 9 Lhe Potent Influence of a... 472
»  » in Time of Trouble, The Re-
source of the... «- 600
» Way, The ... coo . 122
» lhe Heritage of the ove .. 134
» The Solitariness of the ... . 294
w» The Noblest es of the De-
parted ... 881
7 ae Approaching ‘Dissolution of 4
Ps Thines, The Day of we so. 470
The Influence ab the Great and... 551
Goodness, Imperfect nod wee 234
” Eminent woe 425
The Unselfishness of | woe 441


Gospel, The Mission of the...

The H
the...

Government, The Tvory "Throne a Sym-


99


Heald Waters a Symbol of
893


bol of Regal... . 156
co The Exigencies of . 619

» in Judah, The Last
Vestige of Bs . 654

Gradual Development of the Greatest
Good ae . 300
Gratitude, ‘Saorifice a Test of ... aco LB
= to God and Earthly Policy... 440
reat Work, Preparations for a coo 13
4 Wickedness and Retribution wo. 848
» ‘Trial and its Joyous Issue, A ... 417
Greatest: Works Proceed in Silence 88
Greatneas, The Vanity of pera one 504
Grief oc see oo. 226
Haughty Suppliant, The | t00 «. 435
Hazael Discovered ooo 479
Healing Souls, Divine Method of .-. 429
Healed Waters a Symbol of the Bee 893
Heart-reading ... we 481
Heart, The Right State ‘of the... +. 510
Heathenism, The Inhuman Cruelty of... 406
Heavenly Temple, The Building of the 81
a Visions ae or 357
Heavenward soe ceo . 385
Heritage of the Good, The ate ve 184
Hezekiah and Luther—a Parallel ewe 54
= The Character and Life of ... 596
n and Sennacherib_... e-- 602
6 and the Ambassadors ee 615
Hiram, The Heathen King ... .. 77
a» end Solomon ... woe UT

» rin pions between Solomon
78

os The Pillars of, “Emblematic of
the Church ... « 101
Holiness the Supreme End of Life ... 130
Home, A Good ... aoe cee coe 322
Honesty *0 oe ove ee. 682
” Genuine eee see coe 454
Honour with Degradation .s. eee 430
Hope, The Verdict of ... eos vee 421
"4, of Judah,The ... ose eee 642
Horrible in Humanity, The .. e 463
Hoshea and Hezekiah ... coon es ROOT
House of God, The Restoration of _ .., 537

How a Bright, Morning became a Dark
Night erry ose one eco eee 530


GENERAL IND BX.


Human Heart, The Arkan Emblem of





Te?


Humanity, The Moral Plagues of ... 132


Human Greatness, The Vanity and


Insincerity of .. sve coe 178
Hunger versus Suspicion cee ow 470
Iconoclast... coe eee 594
Ideal, On Maintaining a High ws —_ ane. 118
Ideals Unrealized not Useless ... eo. 113
Idolatry, The Sin of ... we cp HAD

” a Sin coe ooo eee eee 210
x see 228
co as a Cause of National Decay 238
The Emptiness of ... ... 256
» The Trial and Defeat of ... 289
» The Infatuation of ... vee 294
» Complicity with .. ... 384
» The Exposure and Punish-
mentof ... 0 . 868
oa The Judgment of ... +. 369
" Effect upon the Young se 396
» The Vain Pretences of . 402
~ Its Emasculating Tendency .. - 508
» The Punishment of oo» 518
» National Curse... ... 615
The Inveterate Evils of .. 536
Idolatry the Destructive Force in Na-

tional Life... . 580

Idolatrous Ruler a National Scourge, An 572
Intrusion into the Temple ... 623
Ignorant, Josiah a Pattern for the .., 634
Ignorance of Simple Things . eo 424
x and epee od of Man eee 435
Ill-gotten Gains . cop ey
Tilusions, Optical “0 eo. 405
Impenitence, The Obduracy of... ae 582
Imperfect Goodness... “ ee. 234
; Religious Ideas ise .. 461
Imperfections of a Reforming Work ... 517
Inconstancy of Wicked Accomplices ... 20
Incredulity, An Obstinate i. «. 393
Individual Responsibility aes Re a0
; Responsibility for Wrong
OINgSs ses aoe we 847
Individualism, The Power of ... fe UGLY
Industry, The Man of ... ane . 484
Inevitable Retribution of ete

Indulgence... ove ap fy
Infant Life, Perils of ... owe 62
Infallibility of the Divine Word. eee 226
Influence of a Good Man 75, 472

on of Circumstances on Character 476
* of the Great and Good, The... 551
Iniquity, The Curse of Ancestral see 866
Injuries, Personal eee ee 121
Innovations in Divine Worship.. re ee 575
Instability of Human Friendship 6
Intellectual Greatness, The Responsi-
bility of.. ee U1
Intellectual Endowments "Perilous «- 166
Interview, A Never-to-be- me eee 450
Intrepidity of Truth ... oe: 857
Introduction 960 so we
Is there not Another Way oho vee 487
Isaiah a Sublime Example of a Prophet 602
Isaiah’s Vision of the Majesty of Jehovah 566
aon of the Aged and Infirm i


GENERAL INDEX. °


Israel, The Utter Downfall of eos
» The Last King of... 40
» The Ultimate Fate of the Ten
Tribes of .
Ivory Throne a prea of Regal ‘Govern-
ment ... eee on . 156


Jealousy a Fruitiul Source of Mischief 241
Jehoiachin, The Release and Preferment
of Es Ser ene aoe . 654
Jehonadab and Jehu... oe wo 512
Jehovah the Deliverer of His People ... 14
»  Vindicated, The Supreme
Power of ¢ . 329
» Isaiah’s Vision of the Majesty of 666
» the Defence of His at Bei o- 808
Jehu, Elisha and.. na wee 489
Jeroboam, The Sin of... 300 ees 208
- in Need and Distress coe 231
Jerusalem a Type of the Church eee 608
The Fall of ... woe 651
Jezebel, The Marriage of Ahaband ... 341
» _ the Fall of Pride and Beauty ... 503
Joab, The Terrible End of aes so 5
Joash’s Elevation to the Throne eco 529
Josiah the Hangly Reformer ... ... 628
»  @ Pattern for the Ignorant we. 634
Journey, The Last Dread ae eee 225
Toy of Aged and Dying Saints .. ooo
of an Accomplished Purpose, The... 110
, National... 5 scr ee. 584
Judah, The Deep Fall of eee coe 239
» The Hope of ae eco coe 642
Judgment of God, The ... Arn, aD
= » The Righteous ew 510
w ATerrible Day of ... ee 601
» of Idolatry, The ooo ee. 369
by Fire, The ... o00 oo. 373
of Solomon, The .«. eee OU
-. 229
. 509


Judgments, Divine sen
Zeal in Executing Divine..


Justice, The Strict Impartiality of


Divine ... ove oe oo. 519
Kindness, A Spirit of ... soe coe 81
Never Unrewarded . oe 414

King, Ahab the Type of a Weak and


Wicked ... Se .. 283
The Death of a Wisked ce eee 808


: The Praiseworthy Efforts of a
Good ... wae see oe 863
» The True Safeguard of a - 530
» The Fate of an Unfaithful eo» 540
», of Israel, The Last oe ea 579
9, in Trouble, Anes noe e. 603
in Prayer, A «oo 605
Kingdom, The Rending of the .. Fy, --- 196
‘ of Solomon a Type of Mes-
siah’s vos ses 67
Kingly Wisdom ... 17


Character of Christ, The Ae:
cession of Solomon Typical of 16


Kingship .. hoes 6I8
Knowledge of the Truth — eee vo. 280


”


Labour, The Dignity of oe = wee B21
Lady’s Maid, The Little ay ooo 488





P.
Last and Best Will of Father to Son ... ry
Last Dread Journey, The ote ove 22E
Law to the Sinner, The Voice of ao Gi)
» Of Retribution, The Inexorable .., 862
League between Solomon and ee nee. 183
Learning, The Fascination of . ono. fl


Legacy of the Departed Good ... - 881
Lepera, lustrative of Varying Phases in
Human Experience ... ove axe 468
Leprosy of Riches, The coe eve 450
Liar, The Audacity of a we eco 450
Liberty Lost coe 647
Lite a Dial eo 612
y Prolonged in ‘Answer to Prayer soe 610
» The Compromises of aes soe 443
»» Lights and Shadows of... cee 430
» An Upright .. « 366
~) Cgateaes in theSame Individual... 334
» and Lessons of the Great Hebrew
Reformer... ese vee 268
» The Power of 6 Wicked tos vee 258
» Winter of .. ooo eo 8


Lily Work aon ovo ove eon ©6980
Literature, A Pure ice ooo oo Al
Live, A Fixed Time to ... an .-- 619
London, Moral and Spiritual Claims of 469
Lord, The Oloud of the 600 .-- 108
y, The Man who Saw the ... eee 358
y God of Elijah, The wee «oe 890
Lost Opportunities ees 600 cco O80
Love ot Wisdom, The ... eco eee 147
» Wasted . soe eee 175
95 of Fatherland, The ooo ee 183
Luxury and Extravagance 161


Majesty, The Declaration of the Divine 332
Man, The Divine Knowledge of . 128
yy of Industry, The .. 600 oor 184
wn of God out of Judah, The a. 216
» The Weak Moments of a Great... 302
» Who Saw the Lord, The... 358
» The Ignorance and Imbecility of 435


Man-made Religion... 206
Manasseh, The Gediaced and the » Seducer 622
Bs aha Josiah ... «o» 628
i a (a


p Oaot Ahab and Jezebel |. 841


An Indiscreet - 485
Martyrs, The Divine Concern for the... 495
Meeting, A Remarkable eee -- 288
Men, The Death of Great ons ... 186
Mental Toils of the Cunning, The . 209
Mercy, The Divine Message of wo 495
* e Poche: eae ef the
Divine .. 861 ve 564
Messenger a Truthful .., 19
» The Invincible Courage of a
Divinely Authorised ... 213
+ of Approaching Doom a. 842
Message, The True Prophet and His ... 266


Messages, The Two __... cco AL


Method of Healing Sin-emitten Souls... 429
Micaiah’s Suffering for the Truth . 358
Military Ambition vee 556


Minister, Watchfulness of the Faithful 9
The Expostulation of a Faith-
ful 23, pp con 1d


”


GENERAL INDEX.


Et


c |
PAG
Minister of Divine Vengeance, The ... 487
Ménisterial Maintenance ace ve 540
Ministry, The Authoritative Source of
the ... eos +o. 228
» of Little Voices ° 1. ee 431
Miraculous Supply of Oil bet oct
the Inexhaustibility of Grace . 407
Miechief-Maker The .. Gee . 460


Mission of the Gospel .. a5 ve 9
Mixed Marriages Inexpedient and
Dangerous... . 264
Monarch, Grave Responsibilities ofthe 11
A Heartless ... ooo 286
A Desperate ... ose ene 464
A Demoralized aes . 486
» The Public Assassination ofa 569
Monarch’s Life, The Vicissitudes of a 559
Money, the Value and Worthlessness of 463
Mongrel Religion +. 589
Moral Character, Destiny Decided by. fo PY)
Character, The Strength and


nn
”
»?


» Beauty of ay Lh
5, Plague of Humanity, The . 122
»» Corruption the Cause of Decay... 262
» Reformation . 895
» and Spiritual Claims of London 469
Mother, Persuasive Pleading of oo («CS
Mother’s Life, A Day ina — ave vee 419
Murder, The Crime of . soe coe 256
+3 Conspiracy and ooo a. 626
Music, The Power of ... coe 403
Mysteriousness of Divine ‘Actions as. 892


Naaman the Heathen in Search of Truth oa
» the Leper ee
x The Oureof .. os 4 "437
an Example ofBarriers to Reli-


- gious Decision ... - 437

» an Example of Gratitude, Gene-
rosity, and Superstition —... wee £41
N aboth’s Vineyard =... + w- 839
» Voices from... woe 839


Nathan, the Type of a True Prophet os ty
Nation, Religion the eet ¥orce in


the eos 107
oF Religion the Glory phat soe 187
4, The True Defence of a .. eos 160
ay bin ee A. eco . 236
9 at Bay, A eon oon eee 644
The Fall ofa ... 646

Ni ation’ 8 Overthrow, The Last Scenes ‘in
ose ene ee eve 649
Nation: al Decay .. aes oon vee 542


Suffering |
Prosperity an Opportunity for


Affairs, The Biblical Estimate


”?


Reform


r scent HRS. 56
- Troubles eve «» 568
yw Decay and Ruin, "The Signs of 568
» Scourge, An Idolatrous Ruler a 572


» Apostasy, The Disastrous Re-
sults of 575
Desolation, A Doiefal Picture of 578
Decay, The Moral Causes of ... 581
Catastrophe, The Beginning of 646


Calamities, Sin the Source of... 266


@es-~-


National Alliances eee i emo b) | igse "356
» Apostasy eo. 520
y Apostasy and National Chastise

_ment.. aes tee cos . 276
* Architecture... coe . 144
ley Sas . 534
= Calamitios and their Lessons 122
» Crisis, The Value of a Pause in
a eee 203
a Decay, Idolatry : a Cause of ... 238
» Life, The Peeling Influ-


ence of Idolatry on
» ‘Trouble, The foams of. acts


| 288


y» Reformation... 51
» Prosperity, Prominent Features
ofeen: ae ses we «=<64
Peace... ese “re thy
Nations, The Fate of ... mee «- 597
Nature, 4n Undisciplined be) . 340
Night of an Old Dynasty and Morning

of New... 82
Necessary Precedes the Ornamental,

The see eee 539
New Uses for Old Trophies 7 --. 529
Obedience oS a of Blessing ... 28

of os: eon 277

” to the Divine Call see aaee 302

S The True Leis Of 2. eo. 476

Obscurity ... a0 coe 273

Official Responsibility see ewe vce 652

Oil, The Widow’s Pot of... coe ee 409

Old Age ... = oe ose soe L7G

Weakness and Infirmit ty = 6

One Man’s Blessing another Man’s Curse 447

Opposition, Factious +. 249

Opportunity, Piety Limited by .. 60
Opportunities, The ae of N eg-

lected oo eee -. 832

Lost .. *s eve ee. 335

Oppressed, The Cry of the wee eo 201

Optical Ilusions.. eee 405

Optimism, The Highest Christian... 421

Organization an Aid to Success we 539
Ornamental, The Necessary Precedes

the wee -.. 589
Ostentation, A Spirit of... ds eo 618
Palace of Solomon, The Ethical Signifi-

cance of the... sy EP
Paradoxes of a Defective. Piety... 47
Parental Indulgence, Sainte: Retri-

bution of eee soe we 8
Partial Reformation ... abe o.. 398
Parting of Elijah and Elisha ... 379
Pause in the Midst of » National Crisis 202
Peace, Blessings of aoe ose eae Oe

»> National ... ses ace SG 1G)
Penitent, A Royal ee . 849
People, Jehovah the Deliverer of His... 14

3 of God, The Rest of the vor 128

A God-F orsaken fee see 582
Perils of Infant Life ewe en 62

» of a Crowd rm Ah oe 471

» ofa Good Movement cee ase 526
Personal Injuries ve LI
Persecting Spirit, The... eee coe 624


GENERAL INDEX. vil





Paes
Persuasive Pleading of an Says
Mother... eee nee oes
Pertinacity of Revenge... oss Re ir tf


Persuasion, The Art of .. . 438

Philosophy, The Exalted Mission of a
True = ewe 154
The Charms of «. wo. 159


Piety Limited by Opportunity... ... 50


”» Eminent ... oon eee oo. 286
x» Imperfect ... ese ooo . 657
» True ah os pee oo. 596
x3 Conspicuous aso see --. 612
Plan of Salvation, God’s 438


Pillars of Hiram Emblematic “of the


Church .. os . 101
Poison of Sin and its Cure nee eee 423
Polytheism 588


Popularity of Religion | no Proof of ita
Genuineness ... - 516
Possibilities of Human "Character, The 480
Poverty, The Pride of ... ese oe 241
Power of Evil Circumstances ... soe 46


» of Individualism... oes oo. 189
» and Dominion ... . 157
» of the Little to Annoy the Great 182
» of a Wicked Life, The ... .. 258
w» The Pride and moat - coe 324
» of Jehovah Vindicated . eee 329
x» ofan Impious Queen ... oo. 341
n of Evil to Perpetuate itself ... 365
» The Conscious Endowment of
Divine .. ... 890
» of a Good Man in Extremity -- 400
» of Music, The ... eee ... 403
" of a Child, The ... ove we 431
The Arrogance of °e 602
Powerlessness of the Terrible in Moral
Teaching ... . 814
” of Religious Acts Ex-
plained ... . 421
Praiseworthy Efforts of a Good King .. . 863
Prayer, A Model Dedicatory ... . 114
» of Solomon, The eae 59, 117
» and Natural Law ne fcr, (PH
x9 The Unifying Power of soe a
4


x», A -Preparation for Conflict...
» The Sublimity and Efficacy of 294
»» The Power of ... aes oo. 422
sy The Triumphs of Aa eon 455
» ss coe 544
Life Prolonged in Answer to ... 610
Prayers of the Good, The Faith of the
Wicked in the ... oo. 219
Praying Spirit, Suggestive Phases of the 296
Preparations for a Great Work 73
Preparatory Work ae. oes .. 408
Presence of God, The 129
Preservation of the Holy Beriptures,


8 see eos ooo coe ooo


Pride see eee eco ose eee 436
Principles Illustrated in the Books of


Privilege and Responsibility of Divine
Manifestation to Man.. soe -. 185
Property Wrongfully Acquired eo. 555
Promptitude in Christian Service .. 14
Prophet, Nathan the Type ofa True... 9


Prophet, The Unfaithful oe 851, "372
” A True .. eon eee woe 402
i Disciple, The cee cx coo 494
An Unfaithful... are coe (a2)
Prophet’ 8s Hour of Darkness ose eee 811
Prosperity, Prominent Features of
National of 64
= Its Abuse and its Nemesis 121
5 The Flood-Tide of National 154
a Of the Church, The _... 453
a An Opportunity for Re-
6h . 559
Providence, Divine 300 see 274
<4 The Grandeur and Minute.
ness of ... . 425
Public Worship, The Kestoration of ... 532
Reading of the Divine Word ... 637


Punishment of Sin, The Certainty of ... 182
eve . 224

> of the Wicked by the
Wicked oo eo. 250


The Equity of ... oo. 836

Pure Literature aes 71
Purpose, The Joy of an Accomplished... , 110
5 The Divine... os. 204

» Fulfilled, The Divine... «. 129
Pursuit of Truth...  ...  ..  ... 424


Queen of Sheba a Type of the Heathen
Seeking after Truth ... tee se. 148
is As Comes to Solomon ... 150
- = The Interchange of

Gifts between Solo-
monand .. sas

The Generation of the
present day in com-
parison with the ...
w» The Terrible Power of an Im-

pious ... eve ove vee 841

»,  Athaliah ... vee oe see
Question, A Searching ... ooo ee 539
Questionable Generosity eee eee


Rabshekah, the Wolf in deers r)
Clothing ooo coe

Rain, The coe ae ane

Raising the Widow’s Son aoe eee 279

Rank, The Responsibilities of ... eos 255

Reasons for the Divine Commands ... 292

Rebellion, Defeat of ... ane Ce LT.


153
& »


3 en rT 186
mo and its Lessons... sss 199
The Sources and Causes of... 200

* The Infatuation of ... vee
Reckless Drivers... -.. 499


Reform, Characteristics ‘of a Great es. 636
» The Bible and ... eee vee G41
Reformation, National ... eee coe Ol


” True eee eco veo 24 7
» Moral ove eee eee 396
a Partial... . 898


Failure in the Work of... 641
Reformer, Life and Lessons of the
Great Heb TOW ooo coo een eco 261
A Resolute Religious -- 592
Reforming Work, Say ee ofa... 517


Regal Magnificence, The Mxigenciea of 142


GENERAL INDEX.





wa
Paes
Regai Soren eey The Ivory bs ok a Dae
Regictie,’ nies oor ee cis . 482
Rehoboam Holds a Council was 202
Rejection of God the Acme of Wicked-
ness. -.. 258


Relief, The ‘Divine Method of . os eee 467


», Methods of Divine ane ... 403

Religion and Art 94
» ‘the Mightiest “Foros in the

Nation eee . 107

» _ the Glory of a Nation... oe 137

w» A Man-made ... - 206

» The Necessity of Decision in 293

» of Fear, The ... .. 588

w Mongrel eee 589


the Strength of a Ruler -» 596
Religious Life, The Heart the Bigot!


Force of the ... Ree ves LUO
Reform oy aes . 244
Reaction, The Symptoms of... 247

« Compromise ... eee --. 587
a Anarchy one ae os. 621
Remonstrance with Evil-doers Pe a 1)


Remorse of Neglected Opportunities ... 832
Rending of the Kingdom, The... th


Repentance 08 eee see vee 465
Rescue in Extremity ... oe vee 274
Responsibility, Individual _... ee 20
“A of Intellectual Greatness 71

for Wrong Doings... 347


Respo: nsibilities of the Monarch soon


Besa of the People of God, The ao eek!
Restoration, Solomon’s.. 167
e of Regal ‘and ‘Notional

Rights oe. 5237
» of Public Worship | eo. 582
» of the House of God... 537
is of God’s House, The... 631
Retirement, The Uses of 20 «. 397
Retribution of a Faithless Friendship... 36
of Blood ... . 89
a of a Curse ... oe 48
a The Agents of Divine .-- 180
4 Great Wickedness and ... 840
- The Inexorable Law of ... 862
" a Inflexible gecesi


The Instrument of Divine o70

Revenge, The Terrible Pertinacity of... 27
» The Secrecy of ae . 183

» The Terrible Work of . 497


* The Desperation of ... «. 622
The Barbarities of ... ee 570
Revengeful Spirit, A... oe 558
Revelation of the Divine Purpose, The 638
Revolt of Adonijah see o. (8
» Its Cause and Consequence oo. 194


Rewaro of a Tried Fidelity... vee 42
Riches, “he Leprosy of... woe

» ‘tbe Perilof ... coe
Right, Th -Standard of... soe a
eae ess, True Courage the he


. 840

Ritualiom, T he Empty Pretences of . sco 2AKY)
Royal Clemency ... Ap cos ap Pal
“ Poritcnte A asciatoas oo. B40


Peek


Sacrifice the Test of Gratitude... ee 181
» The Essence of cor ie
Worship _.. soe . 133


Safeguard of a King, The True... -- 530
Balvesn: The Theme of a True Prophet 544

»  God’s Plan of... ose oe 488
Scenes in a Nation’s Overthrow ene 649
Scriptures, The Preservation of eee 632


Scoffer, The Doom of a... ae eee 895
Secresy of the Divine Workings vee 413


» of Revenge, The eee oe, 183
Sennacherib and Hezekiah  ... eee 602
Sensual Indulgence... “06 coat
Servant of God, A True oc5 vee 415
Service of God and the Young coo 449


»  Promptitude in Christian .. 14

- te ae Gods, The ebb
216
Shemaiah, : type° of the Lord’s 3 Servants 205
Shunammite’s Son ac eee 418
Silence ... . 599
» the Greatest Works Proceed in
Deepest eee ace oo. 88


se eee ABO nee eee 639
» The Downward Course of ... ve. 642
» ‘The Reassertive Power of... woe 643


The Fatal Consequences of eo. 236


n”
» ARevolt ... mee soe eo. 205
xy of Jeroboam coe one eo. 208
» Idolatry, The see ove a Lyf
» The Way of Death... vce eo. 46
» Infallibly Exposed... ose a oP
» The Terrible Havoc of ... es. 509
w» The Divine Treatment of ... oo. 464
» The Deadly Power of eee oe 424
» Its Poison and Cure eee eve 423
» The Victims of, a Warning 265
» The Source of ‘National Calamitios 256
» Morally Blinding ... aes oo 252
The Enormity of ... eee ooo 239
Sins of Godly Men... soe 29
Sinner, The Responsibility of the ... 583
An lnveterate ... vos 227


*, The Voice of Law tothe ... 38


Slaughter, A Thirst for... eos ... 510
Slavery, The Curse of ... eae wow 144
Solitariness of the Good ove oe. 294


Solitude, The Teachings of ... 6
Solomon, The Coronation of ... nove PK!


»  Accessionof ... ese eee 16
» _David’s Dying Charge to .. 26
Solomon’s Sacrificial Festivity ... ee 52
Solomon, The Dream of ooo oe §=55


Solomon’s Choice of Wisdom ... ao Ly)
Solomon, The Judgment of ... eee 66

Solomon’s Kingdom, A T ef the
Mescish’s) 9+ 1+ ae ne
Selomon, The Unique Wisdom of .. 68
A Type of Christ... noone

Solomon’ 8 Purpose to Build a House to
the Lord aoe
Solomon, Second Appearance “of Je-
hovah to.. 5 505

® and Hiram tee eee





GENERAL INDEX. fe
PAGE Paer
Solomon Receiving the Queen of Transitions in Life, the Danger of . 137
Sheba—A Type of Christ 150 Translation of Elijah, The .. 877
The Glory of a « 157 Treasonable Spirit, Te Doom of @ .. 33
Solomon's Fall and its Lessons... ... 162 ‘Trial and Defeat of Idolatry .. «es 289
Restoration ... 167 ita Joyous Issue ae woe 417
Solomon, The Example given. “by the Tribute, Payment of ... cos wo. 579
Bible in the Case of ... 172 Triumphs of Prayer, The eee woe 445
9 The Punishment that fell Trophies, New Uses for Old... vce 529
upon nee ans ee» 179 Trouble, The Good Man in Time of ... 600
Solomon’s Enemies... xe -.. 182 True Prophet, A... - 402
Solomon, A Type of Christ... .. 187 and His Message, The .. . 266
Reflected Rays from the Best + Philosophy, The Mission of a 154


”
Literary Lights on the Cha-


racter and Career of eee 205
Son, a Dutiful ... tes coo ao J
Sordid Spirit, A .. eas ooo ee 449
Sorrow for the Dead... . 236
Sorrows, The Divine Sympathy forLittle 452
Soul as the House of God, The oy EU
Soul’s Desire and Submission, The ... $37
Spectacle, A Pathetic ... a eee 605
” A Sublime eee ee 183
Spirit, A Generous xo eos 141
n A Boastful and Arrogant ace 597
» ASubmissive ... aoe «. 619
» of Kindness nes 81
» The Over-mastering Power of &
Covetous x woe 837
» A Vacillating ... ax wo. 339
A Covetous ae eo. 426
Standard of Divine Judgment, “The _.. 624
Strength one ined of Moral Cha-
see eos or 90
a Divine” ue os coo eo. 301
Stubbornness of Crime... we «. 42
Submission SAE 55 eco = wes 598
» Unconditional 00 a. 508
=r Abject aes 326
Success, ‘Thorough Organization an Aid is
ane 39
ae The Intoxication of 4... . 558
» The Vanity of an Ill-gotten . wee 257
Succour, Divine .. oo. 313
Suffering, The Subduing Power of... 480
National ove vee 555
Supernatural, The Vision of the ooo 460
Superstition, The Rule of ove o- 623
Suppliant, The Haughty ooo vo. 485
Suspicion, Hunger versus eee oe. 470
Symbolic Teaching of the Temple ... 98
Symptoms of Religious Reaction .. 247
Teacher, A Faithful... . 536
Temple cf Solomon, an Emblem of the
Church of God 78
Temple, The Glory and Pomp “Of the... 87
» The Symbolic Teaching of the 98
» Dedication  .«..- ove woe 188
Temptations of Avarice eos woe 46
to Disobedience oe 219
Tender Heart, A.. vee 634
Testimony against Bervice of False
Go «. 216
Time, and "How to Measure it .. ren eee 616
Tombstone, Lessons of an Old coe 639
Trade, How to bea Christian im oe Be


20 eee


Trading ..


Truth, The Queen of Sheba, the
the Heathen, Seeking after ... 148
» Real Knowledge of the coe 280
a The Intrepidity of vee 357
ry] The Pursuit of ... oso eee 424
Unbelief, The Audacityof co ex. 264
a The Sullenness of oe coe 294
” The Seductive Power of rat
oe 471
Uncertainty of Earthly Greatness ww. 32
Unchangeableness of the Divine
Mercy, The oes e - 554
Undisciplined Napare An oy .. 840
Unexampled Wickedness oo 284, 623
Punishment soo oo. 624
Unfaithful Prophet, An eco coo 221
Unifying Power of Prayer, The eo 123
Unrealized Ideals Not Useless .+ eo. 118
Upright Life, An one coe 865
Usurper, The Doom of the are eo. 253
Utilitarian, The... coo oee eco 539
Vacillating Spirit, A.» coe 899
Vain Pretences of Idolatry os» soo 402
» Glory Rebuked ooo eo. 615
Valour, Warlike .. oo . 544
Value of Friendship Tested in Trouble... 6


Vanity and Insecurity of Greatness, The
», of Disguise, The... ree con
», of Human Greatness on
Vengeance. The Ministers of Divine .
Divine
Verdict, AOommon ... A AG
” of Hope, The .. oO
Vessels of the Tesiples Signification
the
Vicissitudes of a Monarch’s Life
Victims of Sin—a Warning
Victory, The Conditions of
Vineyard, Naboth’s ose
Virtue of a Corpse, The.. oo
Visit under the Juniper Tree
Vision to Elisha’s Servant a
» ofthe Supernatural, The
Visions, Heavenly ANC
Visitor, An Unwelcome .
Voices from Naboth’s Vineyard
» he Ministry of Little ...


ove coe


ee


erry


War, The Terrible Havoc of oso
The Scourge of ... ree
Warlike Policy, The Symptoms of
» Valour ... eee


oer


173
361
- 504
. 486
252
300
421


102
559
265
832
339
558
312
457
460
357
848
339
431


405
121
331
644


u GENERAL INDEX.





P.
Warnings, The Terribleness of Unim-


proved se vee 287
Warrior, The Christian .. a eee 327
Wasted Love . -. 175
Watchfulness of the Faithful Minister... 9
Watchman, The Ministera ... eee 499
Way, The Good .. 122
Weak Moments of a Great Man, The ... 802
Weakness and infirmity in Oid Age woo 6
Wealth, The Responsibility of .. 589


of and Wisdom Compared and


Contrasted . see --» 158
What wouldest thon? 11
Vicked Accomplices, Inconstancy of... 20
» he Devices of the , 249
ae ei apizen: of the Wicked
. 250
A Litt The Inevitable Doom of a 847
Wickedsess . 579
m Rejection of of God the Acme
aes eee 268
ry The Progress er soe 262
i “66 .. 679
rs Unites Strange Elements... 6
Unexampled ae eee 234
Widow's Pot of Oil, The ose see 409
»> Cruse, The ose aaa coe 412
Wife, 4 Prudent ooo ove . 423
Winter of Life, The... oon we «68
Wisdom, The ‘Love of . - 147
» A Dream of, and its Reality... 58
n Solomon’s Choice of ... 1 59
» Of Solomon, The Unique .. 68
1 2 The:> |.3 poo!)
IDG can tee eee we 0
God- ~given i coe 440
Wise a S008, The Counsel of the OS. ah
1, The 174
Woeal D Disasters of an Unholy “Alliance 483
Woman, The Dignity of & 633
Word, Infallibiligy of the Divine 226, G04
AATIOND
444720
{HEOLOGY LIBRARY


CLAREMONT, CALIF.


—








ene A ORT,


Paes
Word, The Unfailing Certainty a tae yr


Divine .

- The  Inflexible Fidelity ‘of the
Divine ... 570

» The Awakening "Power of the
Divine . 627

49 ‘The Church the "Depository of
the Divine cece 104
» The Authority of the Divine |.. 205

x, of the Lord to the King and the
Host... oe .-- 206
» The Public Reading of God’s ... 637

The Unerring Certitude of the
Divine ... ose sce oe. 639
Work, Preparatory coe see ee. 408
» forGod .. 495
Wenn, at the Temple Building soo Hf
World’s Reformation, The Agents of the 526

Worldly and the oe Spirit a Con-
trast coo -. 806
Worship, A False eae es . 264
» _ Sincerity in 616
we _ Imnovations in Divine -. 575

» Sacrifice the Eszence of Ac-
ceptable... ae 107
Th: Love of Divine ... bee OOM
Worth of Godly Counsel, The ... ewe 535
Wrath, The })ivine aaa = voe 634

Young, The Effects of Idolatry oPea
the . 396
An The {Service of God and the ... 404
A Leison for the 208 vee 531
Youth, The Reckless Frivatity of aac PALE!
Youthful Piety, Josiah an Example of... 630
Zeal for God . 613
iin Executing Divine ‘Judgments |. - 506
Religious ... vee ABE
Bioa, Hints of the Course of Things in 624























BS491 .P65/vol@
The Preacher s complete homiletical com


“THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY

AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
Aeoy 9i7i1 ee





SS OMG Be fo Bt bo de fe Do fo hen do des dade bes ei fe es Bs bo Bd es
TIER AIAIE ISS INATEDPESIEEPER OEE DE
LDAP IN AS SS SAGE TIVO OT A OES

ALLEL IMAIA LIA LIT IA AIA LNA SIRE VOLD EDD
LAL IAD LIDIA SEATED AIAG EM EIA E EEE ED
LIMA ISIS MAMAS A AS LR EDTA PAPA PE LAPT ROEREG

LI IRA IIS DS SAPS AAS IAI ATTA EEA OATS

LY LMI IM ISS EIN M INA EDIT ASTD IPD AEPEREEDMA TIAA PERE
LIMA IAL IAA A SALSA EAI AM STM EEA AA TOOT ORO
PPM MMIII TIMING A DEMS TSE ELIA PA ERA COCOA TOES S

MMMM INV IPMS TS PLA DIATE AMES AOE E PETES TOS
LVL MMMM YETI SS TOPPED EN OM POE OE Dt

MMMM MYMEL DES TEMPER OS EASED
4 My YN MMS MSI MIATA EAD AME EO


POP OT OOS Pe NIM IM LIN SMAI IA OSA IS TEED IM AS CTP OP TEP TETOREEP OCCUPA TSO OEG
VVUVUV EUV OOO











WVU UEEVENE EYEE TNS
SYNE we easy


MARIE YVR ES a es























NON OO LILIAN AMINA MTD SAEED OSE ERE RAPE ED OOESA PERG
vs ITIVE Oo OO A ONO MMMM LIN TS AIY ADE DPSS OS ETAL TASES OIVS OLE PER FECT ERSD

a POV OO OUT MM MM MMMM PM POPES EDI AEA PAO SPORES EP OTTO CTO

MMMM VN NVM SV YUM IAT OD MP OPP





NNN PA AERA PAD rag AP


ON MILI NAAT NASI A AMAA ALA AAA AAA IA PEAPAVAIAD OD
VIN VV NEV VY UV OM Pr aT AP a


VVYV IVS STAI OES SEEDS SST OM A
INN MMS S ISM IMM ISLS PY SIMS ESE OTST ARORA ESOC CEG
OPO OD OOO DOM UM MM MUM VU IY A ATM ST UUW Oa anon IMM MM AMM EMA SIA TOA NAAT DAE O ATELY
Weve ye yay VEO ES OOO Ae OU OG TU OM MIM ORM MEM WW ND Area ray Aa ae WP NO MM MMA MNS ig
VUES Ma OU NTR ON MMMM MSL MOM WN OF aU UU ri Way ad at ors lan ahs ar an a PURO SO
OYE ROO OU MOM MILM M RMU RU ACP ATU AAW paar pra ase arr Tapa AT OA MMOD!
AN Oe OO UO MMMM MMIC AZM RTA AAU yn an OUI ARUN Dn wad ear aD ah odie ela NON
Oe A MVM VM SOLS TUES OM TS ROT SO ed Oe oe
ODDO DE DOU IE M VME TM VOT SUPT OT OOS SOOM SEG TS de ou
SOV VSO ON POO OOO OOO MMMM MET STL O OPUS ETOP P OT PESTO NESTE NG
SPO EVER TO NM ELL VO P TOM ATT OG TSS POTEET SEAS OTA O TRON TH
EVV SOOO ey OO A OMNI Oe MALE II ETAL IDA MAAS COREL TAA LG,
IIE T OY OV OV UOT RM MMMM MUM CODED SINT PDMS RETO DA PEON S OUT OTTO aly
SUMO ON MMMM UNV SEM POE ML APT AE AP EID SF a) Or doe MIM IMM IST A IMMA MAD IA SSAA IOLA ALORA EPO
MEY NY VMN PME AIAN MC ab SNM NM MIN MAI IN SISA IMME STAIN PEA TEASED TERETE TEOCOREES
VV vw OPO DIP OOD MY IN III AM IMA SIA AMATI ANAL LOMT EA LAMT NTO OEE E ED
MEER REV SD IAT ad ow A OP ME AS MPN YM MM IMAM SLIM IMAL ASDA TEM AEA E PTE E ES
MY NV EVV UU EVN VU VV UV UO UI OO er ae ODN NALS ANIMAS IETS DIST SORES PTE PAA OER OA OOD
VE Ye See ON YOO ION OO OOOO TTS NOT OI INAV ALTA ASR OAS EREDAR EDEN TN
POA ee Was POW AP Ma UN MYM UNI ATMO DUNC OSD EGC Cea Ka)
PEO V OVO V OT TOT POON SMI ISSN AIISSA LIMA IMAGES ETAT AOL TTATPE IA DT ADA ARATE LAGS YG
POOP OW SOT DOCS OOOO NOON NT NTI NN IIA ISS ALAS ASDA EGS EASA NE OE AA EROCTEG IEEE TSG
LOOP OO SOT OST OP OTTO OTIS NIL IIMA AAD INA SADIE TAD EA TAA EER TORE EEORELCCTTG
MEMV MV YY VV INEST SOS T POV IME OTEOCT OLD TOS OT
POM MY EY NSD EEO SOU EMED LOOP OOS
V¥VVVVY VV VV VY CUO UTE CU OW ho


EMMIS SAY IIE TAMAS A POOL ESOT EIN SEATS
VV VV YI AS eae to nd 8






















































TMI IIMS A OMY ED SDD

POPOV Or MM IM SY OST SESS OD YT TSP SEPT DOPE TG
SV VEN EEE USO OU MU VU VN ORV YEU TP ST CONGO OTOO OT Se RG ECCS

WVU MRMMMM EMV EVE Os al an ce ah WTO Oe

MAVEN





NM NIN MINS IMM MMI SST PIAA EAE I AAMC UTE A TPE A POTEET TH

PO NNT NS INI INIT IAA A DIMA AIDA AAS ADI OT TRA TOATE TY

PUG Ne OOO NSS NLT MINIS AAA INAS IMAL TPO EAGA INA OD TOA ATE LPT OOS

MMMM NM MIM A DETAILS OMA ES OPES P ROTO OTT

VEV UV OV ONG Od MN MMMM I MMII NID SL OMS TM IEP ILL OTA LOVE DA EOE SNORT OD

VE VV VV SU i OPM OPM MIM SIO STS TATA ETRE D EDT

Vuvvvvrvvve vy yyy MMM NM VS IMI NM AIMS IMAM ID IEP DE PIPATESA OS 9

VV VEY Oa A ALD DADA DAAD ODD MDD EAE AD AER EEE ERE EER LEE CLE

OOO MMM ENV VN PV SSS TES OV OTT ISTE SSS T OSS f f

SO DOOM DEVIN TUM UN COS MMOD SS CHM NS NN NSM I DTA IAI IS ASA AAAI AL AV AG APD

OV OOO Oana MO MMU IOLA OMT eprint DPM MM MMMM MAS LID SII IIMA ATA PAPAL AANA LOOTED
VEVUVV VEY TEN UCU OVE EU TD 4


VYVINVUV VV VV YTV ODEON OO
MMV VM V VV Ve he ew)
VUV VEY VIN EYE MAS OV OM ATP







































MMM MMIII DSI IMM AIMS PEP AA A OES O ROTO
POO MMM MMM ISLIP ISIS ESD OPO TPO
POO YN EVV TIN SUT S PETS SECO OTP OTT TONG
V VV VV VERN OV IU OY STOO OTE SOPOT PILI IIIS ATTA AIAAN ADA TD ADELE DCT EOP EEEGG /
MEV EE COUN TOROS US OO OOS S SO OP TOG TOA NP IAN III AINA INIT A TIMI ALI AV IED AT ODETTE OVI ET
[LEVI EVV UNM E UU DOS Sop ey OU POO OGM EP OOOO L LINN IIS TIAN ANAT ALTON EAA DELI EA TIAAETA TOO
QE PR ahs oe PO a a MIM MMMM MMMM MMU CWE wey UMUC Genera ads
NO MM ONY YUVA TNT SOA WT A ATAD TP Pd Oo op OD OPP





VVVEUV VN ON UR yy
VEN VV VE yy
VVV VV VOU ie ey






MN MMMM YON MM MM ISIS ISDA SS PO IASOMVET OES CPEG SD
VUVIN VV YETI TOS TOUT OR TDI ELT OOD OO He
VVMV UNIS OMS SSD ed ONL OI II AI ALATA LOLA TRAE ATTA
YMAII EMIS DIS AA ONS OEDOPER LOOM TD OSE
PINS TOT OTT UPS NNT NN Ma NAN AMET I LLAMA INMATE TEA TERIA AGT AAAS
1 RIM N MI MDDOT PDO STAM
POPS SOO DO ee NM NM MALIA IDNA DEIN APM EADDAAPT SAE EPPO OTOP ORAEAEG
TIS INSIST SLIME TESS EO i ‘
OOS a OO TP MIN MINA IIMS ILIA TOTES TR AERA EA ERODES
YMMV MN VOM SSD EMP
OMNI IE DT SM EO AP EP
SONY VT I TP PAM ED MOE OOP POT OD og
SOM YOR MEMS MMV UP INET ONE AD DAL MA PD PTSD SP oP at ap

VENA VN VS A Oy VINNY OS SETS Ge
VV VN V VY VAI OOO ey VEY STIMU MESSED TOTES ETO
VVEVV VV VV VOU EVV VU DUO UU oe SPSS SCO OID NI SN SIA IAIS INA TINIDAA TEA TOS UNG TERETE

MO MS TMT ISIN ONT VOT OTERO PESO OG
VV VV VON ry MMMM YIM IIMS TEST SOS DETER a

VV YN UNM SEV TVS TAD OMT POE DTS PPPS MO NS SNA IMAI TY IAL AVA SLOG E OE EL COHORT
OOOO OOM MY IMI MILT ISM SPAS P OL SEER E LATE POD POISE
VV VEU VV YUN VN IVEIG EE ETSI VT OCT OCCT IO OEP INS OG AT NTA TNT I ELE LEELA ATE ASI LD GAL A AGG GIIGO


ONL Tt NOTIN OLT Pr TT re,
VevVVUV VEU ON VMI ICS SLOOP OPTS TS OT ONIN NM NNN MOL INI IEAIVDA ALL ADAICA EA ASA SGSGGRERIIG
VY VEVUV VV US VEU EN MEVVV YAN VIS S SV TOT OU ESET CEO





















vu





















LAGI VSAM ASSL
LPP A SEO ISSA IGE ASSET SILI LN III OLENA IAI ADT EL IDA ETI SPRING ATG CALE EEA
VE VV Vy IMO IR LAM MOO TITS SI CO OTST MSM LTTE DELILE EEE RNA AG ROA ARSE IEEE 7
POY MU DY PW PTS MD OTT SEM MSO EON TOOT NN

OIVOY


VV VVMUSOE VY VU OAT O


REM Le Me Med ee ee ee ee
NN II MIM IM MMMM MANS DY TTP IAA SET LA TPES

vs YUN MME MPS eS GI ‘

VV UV VY vey


ry
YN APSE AD
VEVVVVV VV UNO VE UV Vw On


VIMY IMIS SINS D EMITS SESE STO LT fs ‘ . LEP EPL ELLE T ELE
. ON SI I IIASA MAM EON TDS STS ESEE AEA OPED TLL PLN CELI Tr tg

OO OO UM EVN UV Vy a A OP Or) APA aa reo er ap area

OOOO OE MY DI TV STOTT IPD TE OS PNT a eae CEO OD tr ee

NORMS ME MY UV VO Te NU ANA) TP aU rr Arar PSNI ISON ML ISA IANA AINA TAMA LOLP EAMES ETON

PO MIN TLE POO D OD SPAT ah aad WAP PA AD POD SUIS IDS Se TAREE RAIDER ARAL LLEESILS LLL DD IGS AAA A ATS

VVVMUV EVE VOUS VV OLY OD UN ENON OTS SORT SAO NDING TSI NTE IEEE LL ILE LL SDSL AAA ALDER AMASES LOLL ESE ,

POCO OO Oa wT UN NS eM MAMA NM LID TON TESA TA GER ASNSTN OL PS TI CECE

EMM SSVI DU VM PIV TSG TO We OOO MONS ioe

VEEL VVC UE OT ONO Ut VON DOO T TO OOO TTT OO NINA MSAD TAA A AA SAE ODLAPTATSAG STG


LLL EAL CLG LLL T LIES
Eee re Nhe Oe OM OOM MEM OLL SEM TT TEETER EEG ALERT RTA TG 7














A Oa FMM VY MEUM PION DIME VA OMAP aN op ill VPS LTO ERIG RLM EAL APRA L IL SLE STASIS DAIS,
AN a ds Oo UMM MMU MMMM NTP ease ppd ur CLL TN TMA ASIA TETRA ETD ry
TAUKUAD WIV VM MS SU yoy ie OO OD





















rte? LL LLL LILLIE EL ATG EE Ly
LIVI PIE LIS IOS T EEN TOR PECTED LAGI EAE RELL LEI LIIG LCE SSS SELLA EAA OGMGED re
PI YT ISS TLE MEEPS TOL TEE SLOG TH NO OP IE LS GLIA ELAR TG TEA LEA APTI TIT CTIEE AOTIDG SG SDS AGATA
SO OO MIEN VV TSUN SOOM OL CT TTPO SESS OTE SOOO LA AAAI DRA GGG LLL IL LAGS GG BEAM
PRM er Rt RT TN STI TO NIN AM Oe SLL LI SSID MSE NAR STE STG
Re RY TOME OO TO OO OSM ONIN MMII AD DV OSTT SLES TOD G OAS SRT
VEN SV I Oe DW ly Vue Vo





VV vaveVvee vu.


EL LLL OOOO ETT TOE OPE ELGG GY
VPS ADT NN IIIA NAAT IMTS AIG AE EPPA DETR AD DLP
BV VAD SEV Wy Vy)


LLP PL LE LTE T ETD

VVVUVN VON SE Ward yu ae SE TTC RT SOT STERN TIPE IELTS IS LED AL IDI LALA AAG GV ISG

VECO COTO I ODS GOTO DIN DOT ONS OTSA LIE LL SIDED LEA RIAASS SOPOT

VEO YOY NAIR AAT REA RDM KORO Ke, DIGESTER SA TOTAAL V ECORI SAA STEELE LLE SGD EAS GLASS
: DPSS I GIS GILES SAIS PENG SAA APRA GAAP LLLLI SSL ALLL ILL ML AEG

PADMA ADA ALA DEALER EME EAE MA RE








luvv very WY PUL ONION Yr
VEN VETO ow FYIV IT ee
UV V VV VY VOY UN UCN EY OO Wi














LONE T IEE TTT TY TY ODP
VvVVY IMI MST ESTOS II DING * v , , + ’ cer fd
NOAA Oh a AATAA SONALI BORER TOU OR KURI TE DOK SAL is eh ah ae UR aa he LIED ELE ED ELLE LEME LEED MMMM ME MALLE 2





VV VV UNNI VW oy VEIN DPD Sb Ad
VENA EMT CDA oe De Oe
WVU MVS VS EY Oy





reer ee
x LOLOL OLD LL DAL MAC L S Tee
PPPS SSPE SAL IAD LCSD AGREE ESAS S EPL ELE LEIS LLL ELL LLL MLSS TY r
POS NN od MM IM IIIT ED DOREY PLLA DAEPE LA OLLI LOLS S ISIS IGG












rr
yrrrerver ery ers
$ SEE PEALE CLL LDS SS TED
VV VUVV YOY ows VR ae tat de Be Oh hh de hae) PPLE LALIT EAA RAN ELLIOTT FILE TT ET HY 16
MRO MEN MR OCU UT UV ETO eT ee PO LD LT TN CONTI IA CANTEEN
ROR UVO TIVO Ie VU VOTO OTD Peo TMM Sere
EES OOOU OPE OCCU NO





EE ee ee ae oh ahd
LAL PAOLA Ee AGGRO SD GLAS SAA LISSA SIR

vs MIM MMM IMM IAM SPS SOMA DIS OP TT GTS SERS EPIL LDL EEE EDEL EEE ERE EERE ALE AMEALEA AME ELLE LEE Le fds

SE NEDO AME TAT I Dw aah ay OPAPP ahd Prarie aed LAAT OTT EIA STS TLC ER ETAL A GDL ELLIS LETS GA ITS

MVP VV VV eS Oey Sa war warn Sure wa DRE POSES EMO D PLO MGA TLLEELL EL ALATA EEL AA TOT OTT Te eee

VV SVV UVP VOVOU YVR OU OU ye MRI IMIS IE POM SASSI EEDA LTO PIPED LANGELLA TNA TRESTLE EL LLL VSS GST ODOT KAR ee,

SSO EM PT Se OTT NY MMI NILA L OTN CHET COREE

MUU PN OOO d ve ve
vey Seay


LN FTG LN LAL TIT IAL OI DAT OTT TE TD:
‘ D 7 " i
RAR OPA EI IADR SOTO P OEE T TAM OER ICTR NN OILED TALI IG ry Che ry)














MVEA VY
NY SO AC



































COCO Te eG AAAs
A LTE LLL LLL ELL TOLL OTE ‘ OTT ee
LOSS IS PSI PSO LON LAN TEMA NM A DNATA ISDA AV ARTO ree LIL R  e LLL LN if ry
Vows LISI SE INS LP TEAST TEEPE CEOS ANTI IIIT TINIE ATG TT TE te ter
ww ye vay \ yy es) IM IIS ET EIT ETL COSTES T GDN TP LE LITLE ILL TL OGD GR TG rerrrerverrc veg ie rey
tay yy 4 YE III IIA AIMS TIA GPS DES ETAT SN PPO He LLL INI IMT VOLE DT OPV US MC PTET ory.
eeu aay PUL INLIILIIT SS AAT S TD PEE EES PERI Pilea? AEM MELEE EE ALES EARLE (GG Ply ,
we ¥ LISS SES ECHL TP PT ETAT INTENT IOS TIAIV OND TO NG i rere
SRA DENC DID SAAR RS VEEL AY TEEN EDT RE EL EDO RT VEE Ue Cane ‘ y* LECLERC LETS SLID SLIT ERS
SIT ae aera TONG Tea NON NER AVEVOV AL VEMUSTEG AARNE NEVNW ARENAS TUNA O ED CS DORON ERG : es ‘ 5 f PPE GINA ST ITEC OTERO RTL IDLER AGG
JAIN VV Va yt JOOS EES Wes ? g ¢ v K PS PAD TIT EAA AIT PAPO ODT LOOT TOOT TV Oe Doe aa Mn a A ae Ae
AEA Da Pa PAP BA DA DS PAA DAD DS DDD Tea a DAC sR DSR ASC AC AS TD ASB y ni “1 LILI VLD EPL NOPE IOSTTOING CAAA,
Seta tate ea enero e a tanat bate a tele Ue WUTC TUDE EGY SSS ATICE LV ATA a OU SS Ae ‘ +s PIPETTE POV MAC TMT TIPO TTT ETPOT TE Purr he AA A A A A 8 OS 8
Mata tela ta tae ta tata te tM TOUS ISU ANT a erey a ya yatta tas Sy Le Poy Mitte ee eR Male ap LA TACT PITH T Deer Dr BO HTK COT er he ae
eae arava a taba tata vat TaNV TOV M WN CAALMVINENVSONEN TW ADALNLS. GSW W TANNA WAS DEUTER aA DAL PP SLD O GHEE NT TTT ON AE TC GATTO GGG ad
REREDPAPLER A Ba TBS ATA 28 DDS Dh Bh ASTURIAS Dh DD DAD DOD SRT Ka PIAA CTR CO CC OS ‘ VIS LIAS PP SEER PTR EDN CLIN LITE TET GGT ODORS
LSS AD SAM . ; : LA PLIST PLR CPPS ASG HL EO LLL OS CIT
BRAM RAMA PARA RADA tae MMe Da ; J dd
SOR ; ;


re PAEEEE
ray a Chit OT PT Pr.

TALI IL IID TE PDT PD Pare if f 4 4 as Sf s| TAA A

LLL LL LL LIE

¥ ster ON PTT TD OP Te VTP LV PO DP i ) MAA A ee Ae
We ya ; ‘ : : ‘ ; GG ee Ase ele Meee
AAA EN " } : FARR

a tens











LT RTT TIL TTT PT re Dr VO OD
VAAN,











PM IASC LEA TP WG PTE: fe rr ny F
8 LT LIED ATI TAT OPEV GHD ou CG te a
; ‘ PAPE REM EAH Mi alt eed Ae aE PAO Ane
WUT NITY: VU, ‘ f : ads UO ty TED Tr bpd
\ wii ONIN) Ho CLT Ua OHO EEE ETD ‘ ¥ Cee
NASD M OEM tac ODS Re ROA RRP AAPR DP








i" TGV GLO OV ot ott
f NIP sy i vy ERR P eA AHA Ud ORR RUD Hee AA ‘i
HD DM eli til iat tel MLL IVP DY DOLE LMT EU reel ely perl lvlal oat ot OtE eas
Le NG iG ET Ml oly ytar ONT PUG V ET Hr PRP OTe Kr BMAD NOH Hot vt rl rh vlatpl ate
LR ey tay CR suet DE rare POAT ELH PP EAPO EYEE pyle pvr MM it
ML AAs HAD f , if - ! CPDL Kae
RENE A SR ee A eek a ed RE EGOLRAAM eK tA eds CARRE GEGL Hon Mai
NA Aa es A he Aa AMAA
PG


y 4 14
Oaaisataaeie Hehe taste poche Gi
POG
a oh Seated My


oY DOU aaa bi Ws
FOLD OGN GR DEL


SCIEN USI SV easy ayy yy aya
Seay iets aes UMA 3
PAPA PAPA APA MAR OG PAD  Pa a DARA DB PAD DSRS BAA WATS DADS DG
ae os aes Neyer SRA AN PAAR RASS PAPAL as
Seen NINN Nae atetetet hattis VI,

ANE NS NOES CEN,
SSRIS RAS OUR SACLE i
DEAPAPARA DARA RASA Fah PAPA Ba Da DODD Di SPSPAPOEST Maa
DPLPa Pave PAA SSARTA 7a Pa Mh AE Rata Oh PhDs nici Da aD WDD DOLL RUNS BR
ARVANA VAVIOU NAAN US A CaS Ne YO’
PAPA RODS DPSS PAD DO Oa DAR OS a DS SOE DE DORK RETA cS Dono

NP APAPA PA Ps PAD Sh DEAD DDS PD SEG DO DCD OO TOT VINSON AUC HN Sos,

TWN INSU EN VON RS, DEAR PAP PPAF AS. Pyrat yy Nan gs NG te woe if

PORES ROE KR RPP IRTREG t
SIKREDR IRAE DE DC De Bas ROWCAT CATALIN Brae MEAT DU Dr


























VX








; aan Nt
AOS OM ASN COR Ok fe Gd





eo AHR MPR DUOMO tit

PERN APO nnn WMO ror

ne Rane iM yarn ohare , CU HE
; ) PAE POPU rarerPye eh OREO Der pep


PoP Pr PO PBI Rr bob BO Do HL,
Mists SORRY eRe stats








hit
eH ‘ ny! 4
HASSLES TASCA AAAS
