DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe18wesl 


THE 


WORKS 


OF  THE 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 

Late  Fellow  of  Lvuoh-CoUege,  OxFORl>. 


, Volume  XVIII. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street, 

MDCCLXXIII. 


\ 

. ■ ■ 


■'.i)r 


: T , ': 


ii- 


C 3 ] 


^^13  yJfT 


A brief  ACCOUNT  of  a 


TRIAL 

At  the  Assize  held  at  Gloctjler,  xh.t  3d  of 
March,  1743. 

•Extraaed  from  Mr.  WHITEFIELD’s  Letter. 


To  the  R E A D E R. 

0A!E  great  reafon  of  my  publifnng  this  extraB. 

IS,  , to  declare  to  all  mankind,  that  I intirely 
concur  in  Mr.  Whhsfic.\d’s  j udg?nent  with  regard 
to  this  whole  affair.  For  1 am  convinced,  that  to 
frevent  open  violations  of  the  law  is  a part  of  my 
dut\/  both  to  God  and  the  king:  and  that  1 am 
as  much  obliged  to  give  information  to  the  pozoers 
that  be  againfl  rioters,  as  againf  highwaymen, 
traitors  or  murderers. 

JOHN  WESLEY. 

May  1,  1744.  A 2 THOUGH 


C 4 3 


‘HOUGH  perhaps  there  is  nothing  in  the 


world  more  abufed  than  the  law,  and  there 
are  very  few  that  go  to  law  out  of  a proper  prin- 
ciple ; yet  we  hold  that  there  is  a proper  ufe  of 

it,  and  the  law  is  good  when  ufed  lawfully. 

Whether  or  no  we  have  ufed  it  lawfully  in  the 
prefent  cafe,  I fliall  leave  my  friend  to  judge, 
after  I have  told  him  the  motives  that  induced 

us  to  engage  in  it. The  Method^s,  you  know, 

are  every  where  accounted  enthufialls,  in  the 
worft  fenfe  of  the  word;  but  though  they  are 
accounted  fuch,  yet  they  would  not  be  emhufiaits 

in  reality. Now  we  look  upon  it  to  be  one 

fpecies  of  enthufiafm,  to  e.vpeft  to  attain  an  end 

without  making  ufe  of  proper  means. We 

alfo  think  that  believers  fhould  be  very  careful 
net  to  be  fond  of  fulfering  perfecution,  when 
they  may  avoid  it  by  making  application  to  the 

higher  powers.- We  are  likewife  of  opinion, 

that  good  Chriflians  will  be  good  fubjeffs,  and 
confequently  it  is  their  duty,  as  much  as  infhem 
lies,  to  put  a Hop  to  every  thing  in  a rightful 
way,  that  may  prove  deftrudlive  to  the  king  or 
the  government  under  which  they  live. — Chrif- 
tian  mlniHers  in  particular,  we  think,  ought  to 
confider  the  weaknefs  of  people’s  grace,  and  in 
pity  to  fouls,  do  what  they  can  to  remove  every 


thing 


[ 5 ] 

iFirng  out  of  the  way,  that  may  difcoiirage  or 
prevent  poor  people’s  hearing  the  everlafting 

gofpel. Thefe  confiderations  for  fome  time. 

paff,  have  led  me  to  examine  whether  the  Me- 
tkodijls  in  gtTierdL\  (and  I myfelf  in  particular) 
have  a6fed  the  part  of  good  fubjedfs  and  judici- 
ous Chriftian  minifters,  in  fo  long  negledling  to 
make  an  application  to  the  fuperior  courts,  and 
putting  in  execution  the  wholefome  laws  of  the 
land,  in  order  to  prevent  thofe  many  dreadful 
outrages  which  have  been  committed  againft  us. 

— I need  not  defcend  to  particulars. Several 

of  our  brethen,  hoih  in  England  auA  Wales,  liave 
received  much  damage  from  time  to  time,  and 
been  frequently  in  great  hazard  of  their  lives. — 
Wiltjhire  has  been  very  remarkable  for  mobbing 
and  abufing  the  Methodijls ; and  for  about  ten 
months  lafl  pall  it  has  alfo  prevailed  very  much 
in  Glocejlerjliire,  efpecially  at  Hampton,  tvhere 
Mr.  Adams  has  a dwelling-houfe,  and  has  been 
much  blelfed  to  many  people.  This  difpleafed 
the  grand  enemy  of  fouls,  who  flirred  up  many 
of  the  bafer  fort,  privately  encouraged  by  fom.e 
of  a higher  rank,  to  come  from  time  fo  time  in 
great  numbers,  with  a lowbell  and  horn  to  befet 
the  houfe  and  beat  and  abufe  the  people. — About 
the  beginning  oijuly  laft  their  oppofuion  feemed 
to  rife  to  the  highell.  For  feveral  days  they 
alfembled  in  great  bodies,  broke  the  v.'indows, 
and  mobbed  the  people  to  fuch  a degree,  that 
many  expefled  to  be  murdered,  and  hid  them- 
A 3 felves 


[ & ] 

felves  in  boles  and  corners  to  avoid  the  rage  of 
their  adverfaries.— Once,  when  I was  there, 
they  continued  from  four  in  the  afternoon  till 
midnight  rioting,  giving  loud  huzzas,  calling 
dirt  upon  the  hearers,  and  making  proclamations, 
*■*  That  no  anabaptills,  prefbyterians,  &c.  fhould 
preach  there.” — At  another  time  they  pulled  one 
• or  two  women  down  the  hairs  by  the  hair  of 
their  heads.  And  on  the  loth  oi  July  they  came 
to  the  number  of  near  a hundred,  in  the  ufual 
way,  with  a low’bell  and  horn,  about  five  in  the 
afternoon  forced  into  Mr.  Adams'^  houfe,  and 
demanded  him  down  the  flairs  whereon  he  was 
preaching,  took  him  out  of  his  houfe,  and  threw' 
him  into  a fkin-pit  full  of  noifome  things  and 
ftagnated  water. — One  of  our  friends,  named 
Williams,  afking  them.  If  they  were  not  afhamed 
to  ferve  an  innocent  man  fo  ? They  put  him  into 
the  fame  pit  twice,  and  afterwards  beat  him  and 
dragged  him  along  the  kennel.  Mr.  Adams 
quietly  returned  home  and  betook  himfelf  to 
prayer,  and  exhorted  the  people  to  rejoice  in 
fuffering  for  the  fake  of  the  gofpel.  In  about 
half  an  hour  they  came  to  the  houfe  again,  drag- 
ged him  down  the  flairs,  and  led  him  away  a 
mile  and  a half  to  a place  called  Bourn-brook, 
then  threw  him  in.  A flander-by,  fearing  he 
might  be  drowned,  jumped  in  and  pulled  him 
out;  whereupon  another  of  the  rioters  immedi- 
ately puflied  him  into  the  pool  a fecond  time, 
and  cut  his  leg  againft  a ftone,  fo  that  he  went 

lame 


C 7 ] 

Fame  for  near  a fortnight.— —Both  the  conftable 
andjuftices  Wf?re  applied  to,  but  refufedto  aft; 
and  feemed  rather  to  countenance  the  mobbing, 
hoping  thereby  ]^ethodifm{^%  they  called  it)  would 
be  put  a flop  to,  at  leaft  at  Hampton.  For  a fea- 
fon  they  gained  their  end. — ^There  was  no 
preaching  for  fome  time,  the  people  fearing  to 
affemble  on  account  of  the  violence  of  the  mob. 
— Upoft  my  return  to  town  I advifed  with  my 
friends  what  to  do. — We  knew  we  wanted  to 
exercife  no  revenge  againft  the  rioters,  and  yet 
we  thought  it  wrong  that  the  gofpel  fhould  be 
flopped  by  fuch  perfbns,  when  the  government 
under  which  we  lived  countenanced  no  fuch 
thing ; and  alfo,  that  It  was  abfurd  to  thank  God 
for  wholefome  laws  if  they  were  not  to  be  made 
ufe  of.  We  knew  very  well  that  an  apoftle  had 
told  us,  that  magiftrates  were  ordained  for  the 
punifhment  of  evil-doers;  and  that  they  bear  not 
the  fword  in  vain. — We  are  alfo  fearful  il  any 
of  our  brethren  fhould  be  murdered  by  future 
riotings  (as  in  all  probability  they  might)  that  we 
fhould  be  acceffary  to  their  death  if  we  neglefted 
to  tie  up  the  rioters  hands,  which  was  all  we  de- 
fired  to  do. — Befides,  we  could  not  look  upon 
this  as  allowed  perfecution,  fmce  it  was  not 
countenanced  by  the  laws  of  the  land,  and  we 
might  have  redrefs  from  thefe  rioters  and  inferior 
magiflrates  by  appealing  to  Caefary  whofe  real 
friends  and  loyal  fubjefts  we  judged  ourfelves  not 
to  be,  if  we  fuffered  his  laws  to  be  publicly  trara- 
A 4 pled 


[ 8 ] 

pled  under  foot  by  fuch  notorious  villainy;  and 
which,  though  begun  againft  the  Methodijls, 
might  terminate  in  open  rebellion  againft  king 
George. — For  thefe  reafons  we  thought  it  our 
duty  to  move  for  an  information  in  the  King’s- 
Bench  againft  five  of  the  ringleaders,  and  fixed 
upon  the  riot  which  they  made  on  Sunday,  July 
lo,  when  they  put  Mr.  Adams  and  Williams  into 
the  ftcin  pit  and  brook.  But  before  this  w’as 
done,  I wrote  a letter  to  one  whom  they  called 
captain,  defiring  him  to  inform  his  aflbciates, 
That  if  they  would  acknowledge  their  fault, 
“ pay  for  curing  a boy’s  arm,  which  was  broke 
“ the  night  I was  there,  and  mend  the  windows 
of  Mr.  Adams’s  houfe,  we  would  readily  pafs 
“ all  by ; but  if  they  perfifted  in  their  refolution 
“ to  riot,  we  thought  it  our  duty  to  prevent  their 
“ doing,  and  others  receiving,  further  damage, 
“ by  moving  for  an  information  againft  them  in 
“ the  King’ s-Bench.”  I alfo  fent  a copy  of  this 
letter  to  a minifter  of  the  town,  and  to  a juftice 
of  the  peace,  with  a letter  to  each  from  myfelf: 
but  all  in  vain.  The  rioters  fent  me  a moft  info- 
lent  anfwer,  wrote  me  word,  “ they  were  in  high 
'' Jpirits,  and  were  refolved  there  fhould  be  no 
“ more  preaching  at  Hampton.” — Finding  them 
irreclaimable,  we  moved  the  next  term  for  a rule 
of  court  in  the  King’ s-Bench  to  lodge  an  informa- 
tion againft  five  of  the  ringleaders,  for  the  out- 
rage committed,  violence  offered,  and  damage 
done  to  Mr.  Adams  and  Williams,  on  Sunday, 

July 


[ 9 ] 

July  10.  The  rioters  were  apprized  of  it,  ap- 
peared by  their  council,  and  prayed  the  rule 
might  be  enlarged  till  next  term. — It  was  granted. 
In  the  mean  while  they  continued  mobbing, 
broke  into  Mr.  Adams’s  houfe  one  Saturday 
night  at  eleven  o’clock,  when  there  was  no 
preaching,  made  thofe  that  were  in  bed  get  up, 
and  fearched  the  oven,  cellar,  and  every  corner 
of  the  houfe,  to  fee  whether  they  could  find  any 
Methodijls.  Some  time  after  they  threw  a young 
man  into  a mud-pit  three  times  fucceflively,  and 
abufed  the  people  in  a dreadful  manner.  The 
next  term  came  on. — We  proved  our  accufations 
by  twenty- fix  affidavits;  and  the  defendants 
making  no  reply,  the  rule  was  made  abfolute, 
and  an  information  filed  againft  them. — To  this 
they  pleaded  NOT  GUILTY ; and  according 
to  the  method  in  the  crown-office,  the  caufe  was 
referred  to  the  affizeheld  at  Glocejier,  March  the 

3d. Thither  I went,  and  on  Tuefday  morning 

iaft  the  trial  came  on.  It  was  given  out  by  fome, , 
“ That  the  Mttkodijls  were  to  lofe  the  caufe, 
“ whether  right  or  wrong.”  And  I believe  the 
defendants  depended  much  on  a fuppofition  that 
the  gentlemen  and  jury  would  be  prejudiced 
againft  us.  We  were  eafy,  knowing  that  our 
Saviour  had  the  hearts  of  all  in  his  hands.  Being 
aware  of  the  great  confequences  of  gaining  or 
lofing  this  trial,  both  in  refpeft  to.  us  and  the 
nation,  we  kept  a day  of  falling  and  prayer 
through  ail  the  focieties  both  in  England  and 
A 5 Wales,. 


[ 10  ] 

Wales.  Our  Scotch  friends  alfo  joined  with  us, 
and  chearfully  committed  our  caufe  into  his 
hands  hy  whom  kings  reign  and  princes  decree 
juftice.  We  had  about  thirty  witneffes  to  prove 
the  riot,  and  the  faffs  laid  down  in  the  informa- 
tion.— Our  council  opened  the  caufe  (as  I heard, 
being  not  prefent  when  the  trial  begun)  with 
much  folidity  and  found  reafoning : — They 
fhewed,  “ That  rioters  were  not  to  be  reformers, 
“ and  that  his  majefty  had  no  where  put  the 
“ reins  of  government  into  the  bands  of  mob- 
“ bers,  or  made  them  judge  or  jury.” — One  of 
them  in  particular,  with  great  earnellnefs,  re- 
minded the  gentlemen  on  the  jury  of  the  advice 
of  Gamaliel,  a doftor  of  law,  recorded  A&s  v. 
38,  39.  “ Refrain  from  thefe  men,  and  let  them 
“ alone  ; for  if  this  counfel,  or  this  work  be  of 
“men,  it  will  come  to  nought:  but  if  it  be  of 
“ God  ye  cannot  overthrow  it,  left  haply  ye  be 
“ found  even  to  fight  againft  God.”  Our  wit- 
nelfes  were  then  called. — I came  into  court  when 
the  fecond  witnefs  was  examining; — Mr.  Adams 
and  four  more  (three  of  which  were  not  called 
Methodijls)  fo  clearly  proved  both  the  riot  and 
the  faffs  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  defendants, 
that  the  judge  was  of  opinion  there  needed  no 
other  evidence. -The  council  for  the  defen- 

dants then  rofe,  and  exerted  a good  deal  of  ora- 
tory, and  I think  faid  all  that  could  be  faid,  to 
make  the.  belt  of  a bad  matter.  One  urged. 
That  wie  were  enthufiafts,  and  our  principles 

“ and 


[ ] 

“ and  praftices  had  fach  a tendency  to  infect  and 
“ hurt  the  people,  that  it  was  right  in  his  opi- 
“ nion,  for  any  private  perfon  to  ftand  up  and 
“ put  a flop  to  us;  and  whoever  did  fo  was  a 
“ friend  to  his  country.” — He  ftrove  to  influence 
the  jury,  by  telling  them,  “ That  if  a verdift  was 
“ given  againft  the  defendants,  it  would  coft 
“ them  two  hundred  pounds : — That  the  defen- 
“ dants  rioting  was  not  premeditated;  but  that 
“ coming  to  hear  Mr.  Adams,  and  being  offended 
“ at  his  doHrine,  a fudden  quarrel  arofe,  and 
“ thereby  the  unhappy  men  were  led  into  the 
“ prefent  fray,  which  he  could  have  wifiied  had 
“ not  happened  ; but  however,  it  did  not  amount 
“ to  a riot,  but  only  an  c^auUA — Their  other 
council  informed  the  jury,  “ That  they  would 
“ undertake  to  prove  that  the  Meth&dijis  began 
“ the  tumult  firft.”  He  was  pleafed  alfo  to 
mention  me  by  name,  and  acquainted  the  court,. 
“ That  Mr.  Whitef.dd  had  been  travelling  from 
“common  to  common,  making  the  people' cr}v 
“ and  then  picking  their  pockets  under  pretence 
“ of  collefting  money  for  the  colony  of  Gtojgia', 
“ and  knowing  that  Qlocejhrjidre  was  a populous, 
“ country,  he  at  laft  came  there. — That  he  had 
“ now  feveral  curates,  of  which  Mr.  Adams 
“ one,  who  in  his  preaching  had  found  fault  with. 
“ the  proceedings  of  the  clergy,  and  fald  if  the 
“ people  went  to  hear  them  they  would  be 
“ damned.” — He  added,  “ That  there  had  lately 
“‘-been  fuch  mobbing  in  Staffer dJJiire,  that  a 
A 6.  regiment 


[ 12  ] 

“ regiment  of  foldiers  was  fent  down  to  fupprefs 
“ them;  infinuaiing  that  the  Methodijis  were  the 
“ authors. — That  we  had  now  another  caufe  of 
“ like  nature  depending  in  Wiltjhire,  and  that  we 
“ were  not  of  that  mild,  pacific  fpirit,  as  we 

“ would  pretend  to  be.” This  and  much 

more  to  the  fame  purpofe,  though  foreign  to  the 
matter  in  hand,  pleafed  many  of  the  auditors, 
who  expreffed  their  fatisfaftion  by  frequent 
laughing. — The  eyes  of  all  were  upon  me. — Our 
Saviour  kept  me  quite  eafy. — I thought  of  that 
verfe  of  Horace, 


Hie  murus  aheneus  ejlo. 

Nil  confcirejtbi,  nulla  pallefcere  culpa. 

I looked  upon  myfelf  as  highly  honoured  in 
having  fuch  things  fpoken  againfi;  me  fallly 

for  Chrift’s  name  fake. To  prove  what 

the  defendant’s  council  had  infinuated,  they 
called  up  a young  man,  who  \yas  own  brother 
to  one  of  the  defendants,  and  one  of  the  mob. 
— He  fwore  point  blank,  “ That  Mr.  Adams  faid, 
“ if  people  went  to  church  they  would  be  dainn- 
“ ed;  and  if  they  would  come  to  him  he  would 
“ carry  them  to  Jefus  Chrift. — He  fwore  alfo  that 
“ the  pool  in  which  Mr,  Adams  was  thrown,  was 
“ no  deeper  than  half  way  up  his  legs.  He  faid 
" firfi,  that  there  was  but  about  ten  of  them  that 
“ came  to  the  houfe  of  Mr,  Adams-,  and  then  he 
“ fwore  that  there  were  about  threefcore. — He 

“ faid 


[ 13  ] 

“ faicl  there  was  a lowbell,  and  that  one  of  the 
“ defendants  did  alk  Mr.  Adams  to  conae  down 
“ off  the  ftalrs,  but  that  none  of  them  went  up  to 
“ him,  upon  which  Mr.  Adams  willingly  obeyed, 
“ went  with  them  brifkiy  along  the  ftreet,  and, 
“ as  he  would  have  reprefented  it,  put  himfelf 
“ into  the  fkin-pit  and  pool,  and  fo  came  out 
“ again.”  He  faid  alfo  fome  other  things,  but 
through  his  wdrole  evidence  appeared  fo  fla- 
grantly falfe,  that  one  council  faid,  “ It  was 
“ enough  to  make  his  hair  ftand  on  end.” 
The  judge  himlelf  wilhed,  He  had  had  fo 

“ much  religion  as  to  fear  an  oath.” So  he 

went  down  in  difgrace.  Their  fecond  evidence 
w'as  an  aged  woman,  mother  to  one  of  the 
defendants.— — She  fwore,  “ That  her  fon  did 
“ go  up  the  flairs  to  Mr.  Adams,  and  that  Mr. 
“ Adams  tore  her  fon’s  coat,  and  would  have 
“ broke  his  neck  dowm  flairs.”  But  fhe 

talked  fo  JaJi,  and  her  evidence  was  lb  palpa- 
bly falfe,  that  flie  was  font  away  in  as  much 
difgrace  as  the  other.  Their  third  and  laft 
evidence  was  father  to  one  that  was  in  the 
mob,  though  not  one  of  the  defendants.  The 
chief  he  had  to  fay  was,  “ That  when  Mr. 
“ Adams  was  coming  from  the  pool,  one  met 
“ him,  and  faid,  brother,  how  do  you  do  ? 
“ Upon  which  he  anfwered,  that  he  had  re- 
“ ceived  no  damage,  but  had  been  in  the  pool 
“ and  came  out  again.”  So  that  all  their  evi- 
dences, hoYv'ever  contrary  to  one  another,  yet 

corroborated 


[ >4  ] 

corroborated  ours,  and  proved  the  riot  out  of 
their  own  mouths.  The  book  was  then  given 
to  a juftice  of  the  peace,  who  had  formerly 
taken  up  Mr.  Cennick  for  preaching  near  Stroud, 
and  liad  lately  given  many  fignal  proofs  that 

he  was  no  friend  to  the  Methodifls. But 

he  intending  to  fpeak  only  about  their  charac- 
ters, and  the  council  and  judge  looking  upon 
that  as  quite  impertinent  to  the  matter  in  hand, 

he  was  not  admitted  as  an  evidence. Upon 

this,  his  lordlhip,  with  great  candor  and  impar- 
tiality, fumed  up  the  evidence,  and  told  the 
fury,  “ That  he  thought  they  fliould  bring  all 
“ the  defendants  in  guilty  ; for  our  evidences 
“ had  fufliciently  proved  the  whole  of  the 
“ information,  and  alfo  that  the  riot  was  pre- 

“ meditated.” He  faid,  “ That,  in  his  opi- 

“ nion,  the  chief  of  the  defendant’s  evidence 
“ was  incredible-,  and,  that  fuppofing  the  Me- 
“■  thodijls  were  heterodox,  (as  perhaps  they 
“ might  be)  it  belonged  to  the  ecclefiaflical 
“ government  to  call  them  to  an  account ; 
“ that  they  were  fubjefts,  and  rioters  were 

“ not  to  be  their  reformers. He  alfo  re- 

“ minded  them  of  the  dreadlul  confequences 
•*  of  rioting  at  any  time,  much  more  at  fuch  a 
“ critical  time  as  this ; that  rioting  was  the 
“ fore-runner  of,  and  might  end  in  rebellion  r 
“ that  it  W’as  felony,  without  benefit  of  clergy, 
“ to  pull  down  a rneeting-houje;  and,  for  all 
as  he  knew,  it  was  hgh-treajon  to  pulL 

“ down. 


[ i'5  J 

” down  even  a bawdy-houfe.= That  this 

" information  came  from  the  King' s-Bench, 
thath  is  majefty’s  juftices  there  thought 
“ they  had  fufficient  reafon  to  grant  it;  that 
“ the  matters  contained  in  it  had  been  evi- 
“ dently  proved  before  them,  and  confequently 
” they  fhould  bring  in  all  the  defendants  guilty." 

Upon  this  the  jury  were  defired  to  confider 
of  their  verdift.  There  feemed  to  be  forae 
little  demur  amcngft  them.  His  lordfhip  per- 
ceiving it,  informed  them,  “ They  had  nothing 
“ to  do  with  the  damages,  (that  was  to  be 
“ referred  to  the  King' s-Bench)  they  were  only 
“ to  confider  whether  the  defendants  were 
“ guilty  or  not."  Whereupon,  in  a few  mi- 
nutes, they  gave  a v.erdi6f  for  the  profecutors^ 
and  brought  in  all  the  defendants  guilty  of 

the  zchole  information  lodged  againf  them. — 

I then  retired  to  my  lodgings,  kneeled  down, 

and  gave  God  thanks. Afterwards  I went 

to  the  inn,  prayed,  and  returned  thanks  with 
the  wntnelTes,  exhorted  them  to  behave  with 
meeknefs  and  humility  to  their  adverfaries,  and 
after  they  had  taken  proper  refrefhmenis  fent 
them  home  rejoicing. — The  next  morning  I fei 
out  for  London,  from  whence  I take  the.  firft 

opportunity  of  fending  you  this. Let  me 

entreat  you  to  give  thanks  to  the  bleffed  Jefus  in 
our  behalf,  and  to  pray  that  his  word  may  have 
free  courfe,  may  run,  and  be  glorified,  and  a 
fiop  be  put  to  all  fuch  rebellious  proceedings. 

MODERN 


[ ] 


MODERN  CHRISTIANITY: 

t 

EXEMPLIFIED  AT 

WEDNESBURY, 

And  other  adjacent  Places  in 


STAFFORDSHIRE. 


Tua  res  agitur,  paries  quum  proximus  ardet. 


1,  T John  Eaton,  of  Wednejbury  wi  Slaffordjhire, 
X heard  the  Rev.  Mr.  Charles  Wefley,  in  the 
latter  end  of  the  year  1742,  preach  falvation  by 
faith,  in  the  Colepit  Field.  I and  many  others 
rejoiced  to  hear  it,  particularly  many  of  the  poor 
people  at  Darlajlon,  feme  of  whom  foon  after 
began  to  meet  together  in  the  evenings,  to  fing, 
and  pray,  and  read  the  bible. 


Some 


[ ^7  J 

Some  oiWenJhiiry  iifed  to  go  and  meet  wiiti 
them  ; but  one  evening  the  mob  at  Darlcjion, 
rofe,  pelted  them  with  clods  and  Hones,  and 
broke  all  the  windows  of  the  houfe  where  the)*^ 
bad  been. 

On  the  30th  of  May  1743,  John  Adams 
(whofe  houfe  it  was)  fetched  a warrant,  to  carry 
fome  of  the  rioters  before  juftice  P.  of  Waljal, 
He  defired  fome  of  us  of  Wednjbury  to  go  with 
him  ; fofour  or  five  of  us  went : but  the  mob  at 
Walfal  immediately  rofe  upon  us  : fo  that  we 
were  obliged  to  take  flielter  in  a public  houfe. 
Here  we  were  kept  clofe  prifoners  till  it  was 
dark,  feveral  of  us  having  been  much  hurt  and 
abufed.  When  it  was  night,  we  efcaped  one 
or  two  at  a time.  Francis  Ward  and  I went 
laft. 

On  the  21ft  of  June  1743.  a large  mob  came 
to  my  houfe  at  Wednejbury . I was  then  conftable, 
fo  I went  to  the  door  with  my  conftable’s  ftafif, 
and  began  reading  the  a£l  of  parliament  againft 
riots  ; but  the  Hones  flew  fo  thick  about  my 
head,  that  I was  forced  to  leave  off  reading  and 
retire;  fo  they  broke  about  half  my  windows  and 
went  away  : but  fome  hours  after,  they  came 
again,  and  broke  alb  the  rell,  and  the  door  of 
my  houfe,  and  the  clock,  to  pieces.  This  is  a 
fliort  account  of  the  firfl  damage  that  was  done  to 
me. 

John  Eaion.^ 


2;  On. 


C ] 


2.  On  the  30th  of  May,  I James  Jones  went 
with  John  Eaton,  and  feme  others  to  WaJfal. 
As  we  were  'going  to  and  from  the  juftice’s 
houfe,  the  mob  pelted  us  with  dirt  and  ftones. 
They  raged  more  and  more,  till  Francis  Ward 
defired  the  jufrice,  who  was  prefent,  to  quiet 
them  : but  in  head  of  that  he  fwung  his  hat 
round  his  head  twice,  and  cried,  “ Huzza  P' 
On  which  encouragement,  they  grew  fooutraget- 
ous,  that  we  were  forced  to  take  fhelter  In  a 
public  houfe,  and  to  flay  there  till  it  was 
dark. 

On  the  2 ill  of  June,  a great  multitude  ga- 
thered together  in  Wenjbury  church-yard  ; 
among  them  was  Harvey  Walklet  of  Werjbury, 
and  Richard  Dorfet  of  Darlajlon.  Harvey  faid  to 
Richard  Dorjet,  “ Methinks  fhey  are  not  fo  well 
armed  as  I would  have  them.”  Richard 
“ There  are  many  pretty  fellows  from  Darlcjlcn  ; 
I know  them  to  be  good  blood.”  Harvey  replied, 
“ There  is  John  Baker  with  the  oak  bough  in  his 
hat,  he  will  break  the  firft  pane  of  Mr.  Eatons, 
windows.”  Accordingly  they  went  to  Mr.  Eatons 
firfl,  and  from  thence  to  other  houfes.  Here 
are  above  fourfeore  houfes  In  and  about  ’V mjbury, 
in  many  of  which  there  are  not  three  panes  of 
ol  glafs  left. 

Wednejbury,  June  29.  James  Jones. 

3.  1 Jonathan  Jones,  In  the  county  of 
Stafford,  farmer,  am  willing  to  pay  the  king 

and 


[ ^9  J 

and  country  their  due,  might  I be  at  peace,  and  gO' 
about  my  lawful  occafions,  as  I ought  to- 
do. 

On  the  20th  of  Jane,  at  my  neighbour  Adam's 
houfe,  two  or  three  were  finging  a hymn,  and  a 
parcel  of  apprentices  and  others  in  a very  rude 
manner,  came  and  threw  many  hones  thro’  the 
windows;  in  particular  Mr.  Rickard  Taylor's  ap- 
prentice.  So  my  neighbour  ^okn  Adams  goes  to 
'"fquire  P.  and  brings  a warrant  for  him  ; but  Mr. 
Taylor  goes  to  Walfal,  to  the  juftice,  before  the 
offenders  were  brought,  and  he  was  with  ’fquire 
P.  when  we  came,  who  would  not  aft  at  his  own 
hall,  but  fent  us  down  into  the  town  ; where,  a 
great  mob  was  waiting  for  our  coming. 

So  the  conftable  gave  him  the  warrant,  and  he 
faid,  “ What ! I underhand  you  are  Methodijis  I 

I will  not  aft  for  you.”  Then  he  went  to  the 
door,  and  told  a great  mob,  “ They  might  do 
what  they  would;”  and  look  offhishat,  and 
fwung  it  about  and  went  away.  They  gave  a 
great  fhout,  and  fome  of  them  fwore  bitterly 
they  would  murder  us  all.  W e fent  for  the  con- 
hable,  to  help  us  out  of  the  town  ; but  he  was 
not  to  be  found.  So  we  haid  in  the  houfe  about 
two  hours,  till  we  thought  the  mob  w'as  gone ; 
btit  as  foon  as  we  came  out,  fome  began  to  hol- 
low, and  the  hreet  was  quickly  full.  They  beat 
and  bruifed  us  very  much  ; but  thro’  God’s  mercy 
we  efcaped  with  our  lives. 


About 


[ 20  ] 

About  a week  after,  there  arofe  a great  mob 
at  Darlajlon,  and  broke  me  nine  large  windows, 
and  many  of  my  goods.  The  fame  day  my  man 
Vitas  coming  home  with  my  team,  and  they  met 
him,  and  beat  him,  and  much  abufed  my  horfes. 
At  night  they  came  to  break  the  reft  of  ray 
goods ; but  I gave  them  money,  and  they  went 
away. 

So  I was  at  Rickard  DorfcC%,  our  chuich-war- 
den,  and  many  of  the  mob  came  in  and  faid, 
“ Come  now,  d — n you,  Dorjet,  we  have  done 
“ our  work,  pay  us  our  wages.”  And  I faw  the 
drink  come  in,  in  large  jugs,  and  every  one 
drank  what  he  would. 

What  I have  here  faid,  I am  ready  to  make 
oath  of, 

Jonathan  Jones. 

4.  I Francis  Ward,  01  Wenjhury,  went  to  WaU 
Jal,  May  30,  with  John  Eaton,  to  fee  if  we 
could  have  juftice  done  to  the  rioters,  who  had 
abufed  our  neighbours  at  Darlajion.  We  went 
io  Benjamin  JVeJlley  s,  at  the  fign  of  the  George, 
when  one  Mr.  Taylor,  curate  of  Walfal,  came 
with  the  mob  to  the  houfe,  and,  in  our  hearing, 
encouraged  them  to  infult  us.  Accordingly  they 
pelted  us  with  dirt  and  ftones,  all  the  way  we 
went  to  the  juftice’s  gate.  The  juftice  came  out 
and  faid,  “ We  muft  go  down  in  the  town,  and 
then  he  would  hear  our  complaint.”  But  asw'e 
went,  the  mob  continued  to  pelt  us,  though  the 

juftice 


- C 21  ] 

juIHce  was  with  us.  I defired  he  would  be  pleaf- 
ed  to  read  the  aB.  of  parliament  againft  riots ; but 
Jae  would  not.  When,  we  came  to  Benjamin  WeJl- 
ley’s,  the  juftice  would  have  had  a hearing  in  the 
ftreets,  among  the  mob  ; but  at  laft  he  was  pre- 
vailed with  to  go  into  the  houfe.  Then  he  caT 
led  for  John  Adams,  or  his  %vife,  and,  without 
hearing  them  fpeak,  faid,  “ Vv’^hat,  you  are  ilfe- 
ikodijis,”  or  words  to  that  purpofe,  and  immedi- 
ately went  out  to  the  mob.  We  haid  in  the 
houfe  a conftderable  time,  hoping,  they  w'ould 
difperfe  ; hut,  as  foon  as  ever  we  came  out,  they 
gathered  round  us  again,  and  beat  and  pelted  us 
with  whatever  they  could  find.  One  of  them 
came  to  me,  and  ftruck  me  on  the  eye,  and  cut 
it  fo,  that  I expefred  to  lofe  my  fight.  I got  in- 
to a fhop,  and  had  my  eye  drelfed,  and  then  re- 
turned to  my  friends.  The  mob  purlued  me  a- 
gain,  fetched  me  out  of  the  houfe,  and  beat  me 
very  much,;  but  with  much  difficulty  I got  from 
them  again,  and  efcaped  a fecond  time  into  the 
houfe.  They  fetched  me  out  again,  and  dragged 
me  along  the  ftreet,  and  through  the  kennel  to 
and  fro,  till  I had  quite  loft  my  ftrength,  and  was 
foweak,  I was  not  able  to  get  up.  There  came 
a poor  woman  and  faid  to  the  mob,  “ Will  ye 
-kill  the  man  ?”  and  lifted  me  up.  With  much 
ado  I got  home  ; hut  the  abufe  I there  received 
threw  me  into  a fever. 

5.  About  Whitf untide,  I JoJhua  Conjlable,  of 
Darlafion,  had  all  my  windows  broke  by  the 

mobf 


[ « ] 

TOob,  and  many  of  my  goods  damaged  or  fpoiled, 
and  fo  had  many  of  my  neighbour’s ; in  particu- 
lar, John  Cotlerdl,  fmith,  Thoinas  Butler^  Tho^ 
mas  Wilkinfon,  Aaron  Longmore,  Willtarn  Powdly 
Antie  Evans,  Walter  Carter , Samuel  Fojler,  and 
Thoinas  Wilks^  had  their  windows  all  broke. 

Edward  Martin,  Anne  Low,  John  Fletcher, 
Edward  Horton,  Mumford  Wilks,  Jof.  Yardly, 
and  Robert  Deacon,  had  all  their  windows  broke 
twice. 

James  Fojler,  nailer,  Sarah  Hires,  widow, 
and  Jonathan  Jones,  had  their  windows  broke, 
and  money  extorted  to  fave  their  houfes. 

John  Fojler,  nailer,  and  Joice  Wood,  had  their 
windows  broke,  and  their  goods  broken  and 
fpoiled. 

JoJ.  Spittle,  collier,  had  his  windows  broke, 
his  houfe  broke  open,  fome  goods  taken,  and 
■fome  loft. 

William  Woods,  brick-maker,  had  his  windows 
Taroke  tw’ice,  and  was  compelled  to  go  along  with 
the  rioters. 

Elizabeth  ■Lin^am,  z widow  with  five  children, 
had  her  goods  fpoiled,  her  fplnning-wheel  (the 
fupport  of  her  family)  broke,  and  her  parilh  al- 
lowance reduced  from  2s.  6d.  to  is.  6d.  a week. 

Valentine  Amberjly,  collier,  had  his  windows 
broke  twice,  his  wife,  big  with  child,  abufed 
and  beat  with  a club. 

■George  Wynn  had  -his  windows  and  goods 

broke 


t 23  ] 

broke,  and  to  fave  his  houfe  was  forced  to  give 
them  drink. 

Thomas  Day  had  his  windows  and  goods  broke 
and  was  forced  to  remove  from  the  town. 

Jof.  Stubs  had  his  windows  broke  tv/ice,  and 
his  wife  fo  frighted  that  (he  mifcarried. 

6.  On  June  20,  Jokn  Baker,  Thomas  Grif- 
fiths, and  Daniel  Oniens,  at  the  head  of  a large 
mob,  came  to  my  houfe  Jonas  Turner  by  name, 
at  Wefi  Bramwick,  near  Werjbury,  and  alked, 
“ Whether  ! would  keep  from  thefe  men,  and 
go  to  the  church  ? I anfwered,  I go  to  the 
church  very  often,  but  I never  fee  any  of  you 
tliere.”  Prefently  Daniel  Oniens,  with  a great 
club,  broke  great  part  of  my  windows  at  one 
blow.  Others  laid  hold  of  me  and  faid,  “ You 
“ fhall  go  along  with  us.”  I told  them,  “ 'I 
“ would  not.”  They  dragged  me  by  force  about 
60  yards,  and  then  I got  loofe  from  them.  After- 
wards they  broke  all  my  windows,  and  threw  in- 
to my  houfe  three  balkets  full  of  ftones  to  break 
my  goods. 

7.  Some  time  in  June,  about  four  in  the  after- 
noon, a mob  came  to  my  houfe  at  Wejl-Bram- 
wick  ; J-was  W'ithin,  and  my  two  daughters  with- 
out. They  threw  in  ftones  and  bricks  fo  fall,  that 
I thought  I fhould  have  been  knocked  on  the 
head.  Whereupon  I opened  the  door,  and  ran 
out  amongft  them.  One  of  my  daughters  cried 
out,  “ My  mother  will  be  killed.”  On  which 
-they  fell  to  throwing  ftones  at  her.  She  ran  into 

a neigh- 


C 24  ] 

a neighbour’s  houfe ; but  before  flie  could  fhut 
the  door,  they  broke  the  bottom  off  with  a brick 
end.  They  followed  ray  other  daughter  with 
ftones,  and  one  with  a great  Hake.  She  run  into 
another  houfe,  much  frighted,  expe£l;ing  to  be 
murdered.  I afked  them,  “ How  they  could 
come  and  abufe  us  thus  ?’’  Upon  which  one  came 
with  a large  club,  and  fwore,  “ If  I fpoke  another 
“ word,  he  would  knock  me  on  the  head,  and 
“ bury  me  in  the  ditch.”  Then  he  went  to  the 
window,  and  broke  two  or  three  panes  of  glafs, 
which  wer-e  ail  that  were  left.  A woman  then 
came  with  a club,  and  broke  to  pieces  part  of  the 
tiling  of  the  houfe. 

Of  this  I am  ready  to  make  oath. 

Mary  Turner: 

8.  On  the  loth  of  June,  James  Yeoman,  of 
IValfal,  faw  me  in  my  father’s  houfe  at  Weijbury, 
and  fwore,  “ By  G — you  are  there  now  ; but 
we  will  break  the  windows,  and  kill  you  to- 
morrow.” Accordingly,  he  came  with  a mob 
the  next  day : and  after  they  had  broke  all  the 
windows  he  took  up  a ftone  and  fald,  “ Now,  by 
G — I will  kill  you.”  He  threw  it,  and  ftruck 
me  on  the  fide  of  the  head.  The  blood  guflied 
out,  and  I dropped  dowm  immediately. 

Mary  Bird. 

9.  June  20.  The  mob  came  to  the  houfe  of 
me  John  Bird,  and  demanded  5 s.  of  my  wife, 

or 


[ 25  ] 

or  they  would  break  all  the  windows.  She  of- 
fered them  fome  money,  which  they  fnatched 
out  of  her  hand,  and  then  broke  ten  windows  in 
front,  the  fafh-frames,  Ihutters,  cafes,  chert  of 
drawers,  and  hanging-prefs,  and  damaged  the  ciel- 
ing,  doors,  drerter,  and  many  other  things, 

John  Bird, 

10.  On  the  loth  of  June,  the  mob  came  to 
my  houfe,  John  Baker  by  name,  firrt.  They 
threw  in  ftones  and  bricks  as  fart  as  they  could 
throw  them  ; fo  that  we  within  were  afraid 
of  our  lives.  They  broke  all  the  windows  I 
had  in  mv  houfe,  and  hkewife  the  cafement  and 
the  deling  ; and  when  there  was  no  more  damage 
for  them  to  do,  one  of  them  cried  out,  “ I 
“ fuppofe  now  you  will  go  to  your  dear  Jefus’s 
“ wounds,  and  fee  them  opened  for  you.” 

John  Turner. 

11.  June  9:0,  one  Daltjlon,  my  neigh- 

bour at  ll'  enfbury.  after  fome  words,  took  me  by 
the  throat,  fwore  he  would  be  the  death  of  me, 
gave  me  a great  fwing,  and  threw  me  on  the 
ground.  As  foon  as  I arofe.  Equal  Baker,  a 
collier  gave  me  a blow  on  the  eye,  and  knocked 
me  down  again.  "W  hen  I got  up,  he  came  after 
me  to  my  houfe,  and  faid,  “ You  dog,  I 
will  kill  von.”  I went  in,  got  a proper  applica- 
tion to  my  eye,  and  lay  down  on  the  bed.  In 
about  half  an  hour,  there  came  a large  mob  to 

VoL.  XVIII.  B mv 


[ 26  ] 

my  lioufe,  and  broke  all  the  windows,  except 
about  twenty  panes.  The  kitchen  windows 
they  cleared,  lead,  bars  and  all,  and  broke  the 
window  polls,  and  threw  them  into  the  houfe. 
My  fhop  was  fliut  up  ; but  they  foon  broke  it 
open,  broke  all  my  pots  and  bottles,  and  de- 
ftroved  almoft  all  my  medicines.  They  broke 
alfo  the  flielves  and  drawers  in  the  fhop  to  pieces, 
and  many  of  my  houfhold  goods. 

That  day  and  the  next,  they  broke  the  win- 
dows and  goods,  in  more  than  fourfcore  houfes. 

Humphrey  Hands. 

12.  In  the  latter  end  of  June  1743,  I John 
Griffiths  of  IVetfflitry,  w’ith  Francis  Ward,  went 
to  Mr.-'Z).  juflice  of  the  peace.  We  told  him 
what  condition  we  and  our  neighbours  w’ere  in, 
our  houfes  broken,  and  our  goods  fpoiled.  He 
replied,  “ I fuppofeyou  follow  thefe  parfons  that 
come  about.”  So  he  talked  to  us  very  roughly, 
refufed  us  a warrant,  and  faid,  “ I will  neither 
meddle  nor  make.”  And  after  he  and  fome  gen- 
tlewomen that  were  with  him,  had  made  as  much 
game  at  us  as  they  thought  fit,  we  came  away 
without  any  juflice  at  all. 

13.  I Mumjbrd  Wilks,  heard  the  Rev.  Mr.  E. 
fav  to  the  mob  at  Darlajlon,  (after  they  had  com- 
mitted thefe  outrages)  “ Well,  ray  lads,  he  that 
has  done  it  out  of  pure  zeal for  the  church,  I do 
not  blame  him.  My  lads,  I hope  you  will  let  us 
fettle  our  affairs  in  our  own  parifh  ourfelves  : but 

if 


C 27  1 

if  thefemen  fliould  come,  and  they  fliouid  fol- 
low them,  then  will  be  needful.'' 

,14.  Line  and  Mare's  Green  have  been  long 
notedj'or  wickednefs  of  every  kind  ; for  curfing 
and  fwearing,  fabbath-breaking,  idlenefs,  and  all 
manner  of  debauchery.  Few  thereabouts  ufed  to 
go  to  church,  or  trouble  themfelves  about  reli- 
gion, till  fome  of  them  heard  Mr.  fohn  and 
Charles  Wefey,  who  then  had  a defire  to  flee  from 
the  wrath  to  come.  In  order  to  this,  they  fbt 
apart  one  evening  in  a week,  to  meet  and  en- 
courage one  another,  by  reading  a chapter,  fling- 
ing a pfalm  or  hymn,  and  praying  and  conver- 
fing  together. 

The  revellers,  finding  their  old  companions 
had  forfaken  them,  were  enraged  at  them  more 
and  more  ; infomueh  that  they  -came  one  evening 
when  they  were  met,  in  ’November  1743,  and 
unroofed  the  flrop  that  was  afide  the  houfe,  and 
thruft  down  the  walls. 

The  next  time  we  met,  they  came  in  more  fu- 
ry than  before,  threw  great  flones,  broke  the 
windows  and  looking-glafs,  and  made  the  roof 
of  the  houfe  to  crack  and  fink,  and  fleemed  every 
moment  as  if  it  would  break  in  upon  us  ; in- 
fomuch  that  we  were  obliged  to  prefls  out  in  the 
dark,  in  the  midfl:  of  a fhower  of  flones. 

We  thought  it  would  be  beft  afterwards,  to  meet 
in  the  day,  and  accordingly  we  did.  Immediately 
they  blew  a horn  to  gather  their  company  together. 
When  they  had  gathered  fifty  or  fixty,  they 
B 2 went 


[ 28  ] 

went  from  one  houfe  to  another,  threatening  to 
kill  thofe  who  would  not  go  along  with  them. 
They  went  together  to  a houfe,  where  were 
things  of  value,  with  a great  fhout,  fwearing  they 
would  plunder  it.  The  woman  of  the  houfe  went 
out  and  afked  what  they  wanted  ? They  did  not 
make  much  reply;  but  part  of  them  immediately 
went  into  the  garden,  and  dalhed  in  pieces 
things  which  coll  feveral  pounds. 

We  made  complaint  hereof  toajuflice,  Mr. 

. G.  He  took  a warrant  to  fill  up,  and  afked 
us,  “ What  number  there  was  in  all  ? We  told 
■him,  about  fixty,”  He  then  faid,  “ What, 
you  are  Methodijis  ! Get  about  your  buftnefs; 
you  fhall  have  no  warrant  ; I am  informed  you 
are  the  vileft  men  that  live.” 

• George  Hadley, 

Samuel  Hadley, 
jqf.  Moore. 

ij.  Upon  January  13,  1743-4,  I Jonathan 
Jones  of  Darlajlon,  about  eight  or  nitie  at  night, 
met  in  the  flreet  a great  company  of  rioters,  who 
told  me,  they  were  going  to  deflroy  the  rell  of  my 
goods,  and  pull  my  houfe  down,  as  they  had  Jof. 
Conjiable'^.  So  I afked  for  Tho?nas  Tanks,  who 
was  called  the  captian  of  the  mob,  and  gave  him 
many  good  words,  and  he  took  of  me  2 s.  6 d. 
and  foine  others  I treated  w ith  ale  ; fo  they  per- 
fiiaded  the  reft  to  let  me  alone  for  that  time. 

The  next  day  came  John  Stokes  with  a great 

club. 


[ 29  ] 


elub,  and  wanted  fome  money,  or  he  faid  be 
would  break  ray  windows:  but  I put  him  away 
for  the  prefent  with  fome  drink.  The  fame 
night,  about  fix  o’clock  came  John  Bagot  and 
John  Linyard,  with  each  a great  club,  and  faid, 
“ You  have  given  money  to  others,  and  we 
will  have  fome  too ; or  elfe  we  will  call  the 
reft  of  our  company,  and  ferve  you  as  we  have 
done  your  neighbours.”  So  I gave  them  fome 
money,  and  they  went  off  about  nine  or  ten 
o’clock.  About  fix  or  eight  w'ith  clubs  and  ftaffs 
came  after,  and  John  Wilks  with  a fhort  gun ; 
but  my  neighbours  and  I,  with  giving  them  fome 
drink,  -perfuadedthem  to  go  away. 

It  was  fome  time  before,  juft  after  the  great 
mob  had  broken  all  our  windows,  that  the  Rev. 

Mr. , with  others,  met  at  'Thomas  Forjhew’s, 

at  the  fign  of  the  crown,  and  made  a writing, 
• and  the  mob  was  fent  to  bring  as  many  as  they 
had  a mind  to  fign  it,  they  declared  whofoever, 
did  not  come  and  fign  this,  they  would  immediately 
pull  his  houfe  down.  It  was  to  this  effeft : 
“ That  they  would  never  read,  or  fing,  or  pray 
together  again,  nor  hear  Mr.  IFf/Zr).' preach.” 
i6.  In  the  month  of  January,  I Sarah  Long- 
more,  late  of  Darlajion,  was  coming  to  Wetjbury, 
with  my  brother  and  fifter-in-law ; and  about 
thirty  men  ftopped  us  in  the  fields,  and  afked, 
“ Where  we  were  going  ?”  We  faid,  “ About 
our  bufinefs,”  Without  any  more  to  do,  they 
began  to  throw  dirt  and  ftones  at  us,  and  then 
B 3 went 


[ 30  ] 

went  before  tis,  and  flopped  us  at  the  flile.  Sec- 
ing  a gap  in  the  hedge,  we  offered  to  go  through 
there  ; but  they  would  not  let  us.  I was  knock- 
ed down  only  once,  but  was  bruifed  in  many 
places. 

Some  time  before  this  happened,  the  mob 
rofe  at  Darlajion,  to  near  a thoufand  people. 
They  took  me  by  force  out  of  my  mother’s  houfe, 
gave  me  a club  in  my  hand,  and  faid,  “ If  I did 
not  go  with  them,  and  pull  down  Jofeph  Spittles 
houfe,  they  would  murder  me.”  William  Cor- 
fidd  was  the  man  who  put  the  club  in  my  hand, 
and  bawled  me  along  the  ftreet.  I threw  down 
the  club,  and  when  I came  to  the  place,  faw  them 
break  open  the  houfe,  and  bring  out  fome  of  the 
goods,  the  people  belonging  to  it  being  fled  for 
their  lives. 

The  fame  day  the  Rev.  Mr.  E.  came  to  Dar~ 
lajlon  ; and  Nicholas  Winfpur,  the  common  crier 
of  the  town,  gave  notice,  ringing  his  bell,  that 
all  the  people  belonging  to  the  fociety,  muff 
come  to  Mr.  Forjhezu’s  houfe,  and  there  fet  their 
hands  to  a paper,  fignifying,  “ That  they  would 
not  hear  thefe  men  anymore:  but  if  they  did 
not  come  and  fet  their  hands,  they  mull  expeft 
to  have  their  houfes  pulled  down.” 

When  I came,  Mr.  Forjhew,  afked  me,  “ If 
J could  write  ?”  I faid.  No.  Then  he  bid  me 
.make  my  mark  ; fo,  through  fear,  I did.  I then 
laid  down  a penny,  which  they  made  every  one 
of  us  do,  to  make  the  mob  drink. 


17.  About 


C 3^  ] 

17.  Ahoui  Candlemas , my  wife  was  going  to 
Wenfltury,  and  a mob  met  her  in  the  road,  and 
threw  her  down  feveral  times,  and  abufed  her  fadly, 

(The  manner  is  too  horrible  to  write.  The 
nearefl:  to  a parallel  cafe,  is  that  of  the  woman 
abufed  by  the  men  of  Giheak  ; although  in  this 
cafe  are  many  circumftances  exceeding  that.) 

I got  a warrant  for  fome  of  them  from  jullice 
G.  As  foon  as  this  was  known,  the  mob  rofe 
and  broke  all  my  windows  again.  All  who  were 
ferved  with  the  warrant  efcaped,  but  one  the 
conftable  took  and  brought  before  thejuPuce, 
who  came  back  and  told  his  companions,  “ That 
the  juftice  bid  them  go  home  about  their  bufi- 
nefs.”  So  they  went  home  and  told  the  mob ; 
and  then  they  came  to  my  hou.fe,  broke  forne  - 
goods,  and  went  away  for  a little  time ; but  when 
they  came  again,  they  broke  and  deftroyed  all 
the  neceffary  goods  we  had  in  the  houfe.  They 
likewife  broke  and  fpoiled  all  myfhop  tools ; threw 
the  tiles  off  the  roof  of  the  houfe,  pulled  down 
one  room,  the  joift  of  which  they  carried  away 
with  them.  Many  things  they  took  away;  par- 
ticularly all  my  gunlocks,  both  them  that  were  fil- 
ed, and  them  that  were  in  the  rough.  They  tore 
to  pieces  all  my  wife’s  linen,  cut  the  bed  and  bed- 
flead,  fo  that  it  was  good  for  nothing;  broke  her 
box  into  little  bits,  and  tore  her  bible  and  com-  ' 
mon-prayer  book  all  to  pieces.  We  retired  to 
a friend’s  houfe  ; but  one  telling  them  we  were 
there,  they  fwore  they  would  tear  it  down,  if  he 
B 4 let 


[ ] 

Jet  us  ftay  any  longer.  So  we  went  out  in  the  froft 
and  fnow,  not  knowing  where  to  lay  our  head. 

18.  John  Allen  oiWenJbury,  in  the  county  of 
Stafford,  John  Darby,  of  Brerely,  in  the  faid 
county,  and  James  Conjiable  of  Werjhury  afore- 
faid,  jointly  and  feverally  make  oath  and  fay: 
and  JirJl,  John  Allen,  for  himfelf  faith,  that  on 
Monday,  the  6th  day  of  this  inllant,  February,  be- 
ing informed,  that  the  mob  would  come  the  next 
day  to  plunder  feveral  of  his  friends  and  acquain- 
tance, he  went  to  the  houfe  of  one  Francis  JVard, 
olWenJbury,  and  affilled  in  removing  the  goods  and 
furniture  ; and  that  on  Tutfday  morning,  (being 
Shr ove-TueJday ) this  deponent  hearing  the  mob 
was  come  to  the  town,  alTilted  in  removing  divers 
other  goods;  and  that  afterwards,  on  the  fame 
day,  he  met  about  300  perfons,  alfembled  toge- 
ther in  a riotous  manner  ; and  that  prefently  after, 
one  George  IVinJpur  of  Darlajlon,  and  divers 
others,  broke  and  entered  the  houfe  of  Francis 
Ward,  broke  down  the  fire-grate  fixed  therein, 
and  then  pulled  down,  took  and  carried  away  all 
fuch  goods  as  were  left  there,  and  which  they 
were  able  to  carry.  After  which  one  John  Baker 
o^WenJbury,  and  a great  number  of  other  riotous 
perfons,  came  to  the  houfe  of  Francis  Ward,  and 
broke  the  windows  ; and  then  the  faid  Baker, 
with  divers  others,  entered  the  fame,  and  broke 
to  pieces  and  defiroyed  the  bedfieads  and  other 
goods  and  furniture. 


The 


[ 33  ] 

The  faid  riotous  company  then  went  to  ano- 
ther village,  called  Wejl-Bramwick,  and  returned 
back  again  to  Wet^my,  where  this  deponent  faw 
one  Tho.  Horton,  of  Darlajion,  with  divers 
others,  go  in  a riotous  manner  to  the  houfe  of 
John  Griffiths  oiWenJhury,  and  faw  Thomas  Hor- 
ton, with  a fledge  hammer,  break  open  the  door 
of  that  houfe,  which  he,  with  others,  entered, 
and  deftroyed  and  broke  to  pieces  divers  of  the 
houfhold  goods,  and  took  and  carried  away  the 
remainder,  or  the  greatefl  part  thereof. 

19.  And  the  faid  John  Darby  for  himfelf  faith, 
that  on  ihe  6th  day  oi February,  he  heard  a great 
many  people  making  a noife  : that  he  went  there- 
upon  into  his  own  houfe,  and  locked  and  bolted 
the  door:  that  in  about  a quarter  of  an  hour,  a- 
bout  feven-fcore  perfons  came  up  to  this  depo- 
nent’s houfe  ; nine  or  ten  of  whom  bid  him  give 
them  money,  elfe  they  wmuld  break  the  door  : 
that  John  Hammerjley  of  Darlajion,  and  feveral 
others,  with  a great  rail  of  wood,  broke  down  the 
door,  and  entered  the  houfe,  and  caught  up  a 
large  ax,  and  broke  to  pieces  and  deftroyed  this 
deponent’s  goods  _and  windows.  After  which 
they  deftroyed  five  flails  of  bees,  and  killed  and 
took  away  all  his  hens,  and  threw  the  hay  out  of 
his  barn  ; and  carrying  away,  what  they  ihought 
proper:  went  to  the  houfe  o{  Samuel  Smith,  a 
quarter  of  a mile  further,  and  broke  his  w'indows. 
Thence  they  went  in  a riotous  manner  to  Btljlon^. 
and  in  the  morning  to  Wenjbury, 

B 5 20.  Jumes- 


[ 34  ] 

20.  James  Conjlable  faith,  that  on  Monday  the 
6th  inftant,  Henry  Old,  Thomas  Adams,  and 
Francis  Longmore,  all  of  Darlajlon,  came  to 
Wenjbury,  and  with  oaths  and  curfes,  in  this  de- 
ponent’s hearing,  protefted,  “ That  they  would 
come  the  next  day,  and  pull  down  the  houfe  of 
one  Benjamin  Conjlable,  and  have  his  heart  and 
his  liver  out.”  That  accordingly  the  next  day, 
about  ten  in  the  morning,  he  heard  a great  huzza 
in  the  Town-ftreet,  and  went  to  fee  what  was 
the  matter,  when,  he  this  deponent,  was  imme- 
diately, by  one  Samuel  Cotlerel  of  Datlajlon,  and 
three  others,  feized  by  the  collar,  and  forced  to 
go  into  a great  concourfe  of  people,  (about  300 
perfons)  who  had  jull  broken  into  the  houfe  of 
one  John  Bird,  and  v/ere  throwing  the  goods  of 
the  faid  John  Bird  out  of  the  windows  of  his 
houfe  ; that  thofe  who  held  this  deponent  then 
letting  him  go,  and  running  to  get  their  fhare  of 
the  plunder,  he  went  to  the  houfe  of  Benjamin 
Conjlable’,  and  about  two  or  three  o’clock  the 
fame  day,  the  faid  riotous  perfons  came  up  to 
the  houfe,  which  was  locked  and  bolted;  and  as 
this  deponent  flood  on  the  outfide,  he  faw  Tho~ 
mas  Horton,  with  a large  hammer  flrike  at  the 
door,  in  order  to  break  it  open  ; which  he  not 
being  able  to  do,  Jofeph  Page  of  DarlaJlo7i,hrcV.e 
the  window,  and  forced  out  the  iron  bars  of  the 
faid  window,  with  a pike,  and  afterwards  broke 
and  entered  the  fame,  and  unbolting  the  door,  let 
the  other  rioters  in  : that  Thomas  Tanks  of  Dar- 

lajlcn. 


C 35  ] 

lajlon,  and  divers  others,  with  an  ax,  wrenched 
and  forced  open  the  door  of  Benjamin  ConJlabLes 
warehoufe,  riotoufly  entered  into  the  fame,  and. 
broke  to  pieces  and  deflroyed  the  goods  thci'ein, 
fpilt  the  Jiquors  therein  placed,  plundered  and 
deflroyed  fuch  goods  as  they  could  not  carry 
away,  both  houfliold  goods  and  grocery  goods, 
and  alfo  chandler’s  ware;  that  afterwards  they 
went  to  this  deponent’s  houfe,  broke  to  pieces  all 
the  windows  of  his  houfe,  plundered  the  fame 
from  top  to  bottom,  broke  to  pieces  many  of 
his  goods,  and  carried  a great  part  of  them  away  : 
that  thence  they  went  to  the  houfe  oi Daniel Con- 
Jiable,  broke  open  and  plundered  it  in  the  like 
manner;  and  from  thence  to  the  houfe  of  7/^^?- 
mas  Atherley,  which  they  alfo  damaged  and  plun»^ 
dered. 

All  three  fworn  at  Serjeants  Inn,  ^ John  Allen, 
London,  on  Feb.  24,  1743,  i John  Darby, 
fore  V/ m.  Chappie,  ) James  Conjlable. 

21.  Monday,  Feb  6,  we  kept  as  a faff.  Sixty 
or  more  of  us  met  at  one,  and  joined  in  prayer*. 
About  eight  we  heard  the  mob  was  at  John 
Griffith’s  the  elder,  breaking  the  houfe  and 
fpoiling  his  goods.  This  put  fome  of  us  on 
removing  our  moft  portable  goods.  When  I 
came  home,  my  wife  had  awakened  my  youngefl 
girls,  and  carried  them  to  a neighbour’s  houfe,^ 
We  then  laid  down  and  committed  our  own  foul . 
to  God.  ^ 

B 6 


Next 


[ 36  ] 

Next  morning,  Feb.  7.  {Shrove-Tuefday)  all 
Things  were  pretty  ftill  till  ten.  We  were  all 
very  chearful.  The  grealeft  fear  we  had,  was 
left  we  fhould  deny  our  Mafter.  For  they  had 
got  a paper,  which  if  any  one  would  fubfcribe, 
bis  houfc  was  not  to  be  plundered;  but  the  far 
greater  part,  by  the  grace  of  God,  chofe  rather 
the  lofs  of  all  things. 

About  half  an  hour  after  ten,  great  numbers 
of  men  were  gathered  on  the  Church-hill.  We 
could  fee  them  march  down,  fome  armed  with 
fwords,  fome  with  clubs,  and  fome  with  axes. 
They  firft  fell  upon  Benjamin  Watfons  houfe  and 
broke  many  of  the  tiles,  and  all  the  windows. 
Next  they  came  to  Mr.  Addinbrook's,  broke  a 
Sne  clock,  with  many  of  his  goods,  and  ftole 
all  the  things  they  could  carry  away  ; among 
which  were  writings  of  importance,  and  papers 
relating  to  the  land-tax.  The  next  houfe  was 
yarn  Smith’s,  whofe  windows  they  broke,  with 
what  little  goods  fhe  had.  The  next  was  Mr. 
Bird’s,  where  they  deftroyed  every  thing  they 
found,  except  what  they  carried  away,  cutting 
'the  beds  in  pieces,  as  they  did'  all  the  beds  they 
could  any  where  find.  Thence  they  went  to 
Mr.  Edge’s  houfe;  he  was  ill  of  a fever;  fo, 
for  a fum  of  money,  they  paft  it  over.  The  next 
houfe  was  mine  : they  were  going  by  it  ; but  one 
who  ufed  to  be  my  familiar  friend,  called,  them 
back.  They  broke  my  counter,  boxes  and 
drawers,  to  chips,  aijd  all  that  ax  or  hammer 
. could 


[ 37  ] 

Could  break,  except  my  bedfteads.  They  fpik 
all  my  drugs  and  chymical  medicines,  and  Hole 
every  thing  tliey  could  carry,  even  all  my  wife’s 
wearing  apparel  and  mine,  befides  what  we  bad 
on. 

Mr.  Eaton's  houfe  was  next.  They  broke  ail 
his  windows,  and  all  his  inftde  doors  in  pieces, 
cut  the  lead  ofFhis  houfe,  deftroyed  or  hole  what- 
ever they  could  lay  their  hands  on.  The  gentle- 
men offered  to  flop  them,  if  he  would  fet  his 
band  to  the  recantation  paper.  But  he  told  them, 
“ He  had  felt  already  what  a wounded  confci- 
ence  was ; and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  he  would 
wound  his  confcieiice  no  more.’’ 

The  next  day  they  came  with  another  mob, 
and  faid,  “ If  he  did  not  fign  it,  they  w’ould  le- 
vel his  houfe  to  the  ground.”  He  told  them, 
“ They  might  do  as  tney  pleafed  ; but  he  w'ould 
not  fign  it  it  they  tore  him  bit  from  bit.” 

The  mob  on  Tuefclay,  after  they  had  done  at 
Mr.  Eaton’s,  plundered  feveral  other  houfes  in 
Wtr^ury,  and  feveral  in  TFeJi-Bramtoick.  It  is 
impoffible  to  defcribe  the  outrages  they  have 
committed.  We  keep  meeting  together  morn- 
ing and  evening,  are  in  great  peace  and  love  with 
each  other,  and  in  nothing  terrified  by  our  ad- 
verfaries.  God  grant  we  may  endure  to  the 
end. 

Feb.  26.  Humphrey  Hands. 


22.  On  Tuefday,  Jan>  31,  1743-4,  Henry 

Old 


[ 38  ] 

Old  came  to  John  Griffiths  fenior’s  houfe, 
faying,  “ If  they  did  not  leave  following  this 
way,  he  had  a hundred  men  at  his  command, 
who  fhould  come  and  pull  the  houfe  down.” 
Soon  after  he  brought  feven  or  eight  men  with 
him,  fwcaring  what  he  would  do,  unlefs  they 
gave  him  a guinea.  She  faid,  “ A guinea  was 
not  fo  foon  fhaken  out  of  poor  folks’  fleeves.” 
Then  he  faid  he  would  go  and  fetch  the  mob; 
but  the  neighbours  gave  him  money  and  fent  him 
away  for  that  time. 

Monday,  Feb.  6.  Between  feven  and  eight  at 
night,  came  in  part  of  the  fame  company. 
Hearing  them  afar  o%John  and  his  wife  faftened 
the  door  and  left  the  houfe.  Some  of  the  neigh- 
bours going  in  foon  after,  found  them  dedroying 
all  they  could.  Two  chairs  and  feveral  bundles 
of  linen  were  laid  upon  the  fire.  They  did  not 
dare  to  touch  them,  but  perfuaded  the  men  all 
they  could  to  go  home.  After  they  had  defiroyed 
what  they  could,  they  loaded  themfelves  with 
deaths  and  meat,  and  went  their  way. 

John  Griffiths  fenr. 

23.  My  father  fending  me  word  that  the  mob 
had  been  at  his  houfe  and  broke  many  of  his 
goods,  and  Hole  many,  I removed  as  many  as  I 
could  of  mine  before  they  plundered  my  houfe. 
And  hearing  they  would  force  me  to  go  with 
them,  I fent  my  wife  and  children  before,  and 
then  followed  them  to  her  father’s ; but  he  did 

not 


[ 39  ] 

not  care  to  receive  us.  My  wife  wept ; I was 
full  of  love,  and  not  at  all  moved.  At  laft  their 
hearts  relented,  and  they  took  us  in.  This  in- 
deed was  the  cafe  with  many  of  us.  We  were 
driv'en  out  of  our  own  houfes,  and  our  friends 
did  not  dare  to  receive  us  into  theirs.  The 
reafon  for  which  my  old  companions  have  the 
greateft  fpite  to  me  is,  becaufe  I will  not  drink 
and  game,  and  break  the  fabbath  with  them,  as 
I ufed  to  do. 

John  Griffiths  yam, 

24.  I Edward  Smith,  oiWerffbury,  Handing  by 
my  own  door  on  Shrove-Tuejday,  there  came  a 
great  mob,  and  broke  into  and  plundered  Benja- 
min Conjlables  houfe ; then  they  came  to  my 
houfe,  and  the  foremoft  of  them,  Thomas  Horton, 
with  a great  hammer  broke  open  the  door.  I 
begged  them  to  let  me  unlock  the  door,  but  he 
fwore  if  I did  not  get  away  he  would  knock  me 
down.  At  the  fame  time,  Richard  Adams,  with 
a large  bar,  broke  the  houfe  window  and  got 
through.  A great  number  of  them  followed 
both  ways,  and  plundered  the  houfe,  breaking 
fome  goods  and  Healing  others,  feveral  neigh- 
bours endeavouring  to  fave  them,  but  to  no 
purpofe. 

25.  I Edward  Slater,  of  Werffury,  was  in- 
formed the  night  before,  that  the  mob  defigned 
to  plunder  my  houfe  the  next  day.  And  be- 
tween ten  and  eleven  on  Tuefday,  Handing  in 

the 


[ 40  ] 

the  fields,  I faw  them  come  down  the  town  with 
clubs  and  other  weapons,  to  Mr.  Eatons  houfe. 
Then  the  colliers,  by  themfelves,  Twinging  their 
clubs  round  their  heads,  gave  a great  (hout  and  a 
jump  together.  Then  they  began  breaking  his 
windows;  and  thofe  who  firft  broke  into  the 
houfe  and  went  up  flairs,  threw  the  goods  out  of 
the  chamber  windows,  which  Henry  Old  cut  to 
pieces  vvlth  an  ax.  I faw  fome  come  out  with 
their  pockets,  and  waiftcoats,  and  breeches, 
loaded  with  goods.  I wenj  down  the  field  to- 
wards my  own  houfe,  got  into  a valley,  read  part 
of  a chapter,  and  prayed  for  them.  Then  I got 
up,  and  faw  the  light  through  my  own  houfe, 
both  doors  atid  windows  being  knocked  to 
pieces.  After  they  had  plundered  fome  other 
houfes,  I faw  them  go  up  the  ftreet,  laden  with 
brafs,  pewter,  and  linen. 

26.  According  to  your  requeft,  I fend  you  fome 
account  of  what  the  mob  did  on  Shrove-Tuejday. 
When  I heard  they  were  in  town,  and  broke 
and  flole  all  before  them,  I got  out  our  beds  and 
wearing  apparel  and  hid  them  in  the  hedges,  and 
went  and  flood  afide  of  a hedge,  about  fixty 
yards  off  my  own  houfe. 

When  the  mob  came,  they  .began  with  break- 
ing the  windows.  They  then  broke  and  flole 
all  they  could  lay  hands  on.  They  fearched  and 
found  the  beds  and  linen  which  I had  bid,  and 
took  all  they  thought  worth  carrying  away-  I 

waded 


[ 41  J 

waded  through  the  brook  to  try  if  I couid  fave 
fome  of.  my  goods,  which  a man  was  pulling  out 
of  the  ditch  where  I had  hid  them,  his  name  was 
David  Carrington.  He  told  me.  It  would  be 
the  faine  here  as  it  was  in  Ireland,  for  there 
would  be  a maffacre  very  quickly ^ and  he  wifhed  it 
was  now. 

When  they  were  gone,  my  wife  and  I,  and 
two  children  came  home.  Our  houfe  was  all 
laid  open ; for  both  the  doors  were  gone,  and 
all  the  windovvs,  and  the  middle  pods  were 
broke  out.  Being  wet  and  very  cold,  we  ga- 
thered up  fome  of  the  chips,  (for  our  goods 
were  moftly  broke  into  chips,  and  ftrewed  about 
the  rooms)  and  made  a fire  ; but  the  wind  blew 
the  fmoak  fo  about,  that  we  could  not  bear  to  fit 
by  it.  We  knew  not  what  to  do,  till  one  of  our 
neighbours  fent  us  word  we  might  come  to  his 
houfe.  But  one  went  to  Walfal  the  next  day 
and  told  the  landlord,  who  came  and  told  them 
that  received  us,  “ They  muft  turn  out.”  And 
we  expefted  there  would  not  be  an  houfe  to 
receive  a Methodiji  in  the  whole  country. 

On  Ajh-Wednejday  I was  helping  Mr.  Eaton 
to -remove  fome  iron,  which  they  had  not  found 
the  day  before,  when  Mr.  William  Horton 
came  with  a paper  in  his  hand,  and  about  a hun- 
dred perfons  with  him.  He  preffed  Mr.  Eaton 
to  fign  it,  who  refufed.  Then  they  laid  hold  of 
me,  and  fwore  I fliould.  I told  them,  I would 
not.  They  caught  hold  of  my  collar,  fhook  me, 

tore 


[ 42  ] 

tore  my  fliirt  and  waiftcoat,  puflied  me  from  one 
to  another,  and  afked  again,  “ Will  you  fign 
the  paper  yet  ?”  I told  them,  No.  They  then 
got  a cord,  put  it  about  my  neck,  and  fwore  they 
■would  hang  me  out  of  hand.  Others  cried  out, 
“ draw  him  through  the  brook.”  But  one  of 
them  fnatched  away  the  cord,  and  faid,  “ If  I 
would  not  fet  my  hand,  I might  go  about  my  bu- 
finefs.”  They  followed  me,  however,  with 
many  ftones ; but,  by  the  providence  of  God,  I 
was  not  hurt. 

March  25,  1743-4.  John  Turner. 

27.  Having  notice  that  the  mob  was  coming,  I 
William  Sitch,  of  Wejl-Bramwick,  and  my  wife 
(who  had  been  delivered  but  a fortnight)  thought 
it  belt  to  go  out  of  the  houfe,  and  leave  it  to 
them.  My  wife,  with  her  young  child,  'v\’as 
forced  to  flay  in  the  fields,  none  daring  to  take 
her  into  their  houfe.  At  length  one  man  did, 
but  he  was  in  a little  time  perfuaded  to  turn  her 
out  again. 

The  rioters  plundered  my  houfe  three  feveral 
times,  and  did  all  the  mifchief  they  could ; but 
bleffed  be  God,  I could  rejoice  therein.  He 
has  faid.  As  thy  day,  fo  thy Jlrength  Jhall  be.  And 
never  did  I find  his  promife  fulfilled  more  than 
at  that  time. 

William  Siick. 

28.  On  Shrove-Tuejclay,  after  two  large  mobs 

were 


[ 43  3 

were  paft  by,  came  four  or  five  men  to  my  next 
neighbour,  Jonas  Turner  s houfe.  I and  another 
woman  followed  them  to  fee  what  they  w'ould 
do.  They  firft  broke  the  windows,  then  broke 
down  the  door,  and  went  into  the  houfe.  Soon 
after  they'  were  in  they  flung  out  a box  at  the 
chamber  window,  and  fwore  if  any  touched  it 
they  would  murder  them.  Soon  after  they  flung 
out  a bible,  and  one  of  them  came  out,  and  in 
great  rage  cut  it  into  pieces  with  his  ax. 

Mary  Turner,  oiWeJi-Bramwick. 

* 29.  They  that  came  to  my  houfe  firft 
(Thomas  Parkes,  o^WeJi-Brainwick)  on  Tuejday, 
Feb.  7,  were  five  with  great  clubs,  whom  I met 
at  the  door.  They  demanded,  “ Whether  I 
would  deny  hearing  thefe  parfons  ?”  I told  them, 
“ No ; for  I believed  they  fpoke  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jefus,  and  if  I were  to  deny  them,  I fliould 
deny  him  that  fent  them.”  They  told  me,  “ If 
I would  not,  they  would  plunder  my  houfe.”  I 
replied,  “ They  muft  anfwer  it  at  God’s  bar,  and 
I would  meet  them  there.”  I afked,  “ Whether 
I had  done  them  any  harm  They  faid,  “ No; 
but  they  would  have  me  keep  to  the  church.”  I 
told  them,  “ Some  of  you  may  know  that  I 
worfliip  among  the  diflenters  ; but  I love  a good 
man,  let  him  go  where  he  will;  for  there  is  but 
one  church  of  Chrift,  and  if  you  do  not  belong 
to  that  church,  you  had  better  never  have  been 
born.” 


I told 


[ 44  ] 

^ I told  them,  “ God  has  allowed  me  liberty 
of  confcience,  and  fo  have  the  king  and  parlia- 
ment, and  I hope  my  neighbours  will  too ; but 
if  not,  a day  is  coming,  when  the  perfecuted  and 
the  perfecutor  fhall  Hand  together ; and  if  you 
wrong  me  now,  God  will  right  me  then.” 

While  1 was  fpeaking  I caught  hold  of  their 
clubs,  and  the  words  feemed  to  have  fome  in- 
fluence on  them  : but  by  this  time  there  was  a 
great  body  of  them  gathered  together ; fo  they 
broke  my  windows,  and  then  the  door,  and 
flocked  into  my  houfe,  and  began  to  break  my 
goods.  But  here  the  Lord  buffered  them  not  to 
go  fo  far  as  they  had  done  in  other  places;  for 
they  foon  fell  to  plundering  and  loading  them- 
felves  with  the  things  I had  provided  for  myfelf, 
a wife,  and  feven  children. 

However,  in  a while  I had  prevailed  with 
fome  of  them  to  flop.  But  then  they  faid,  “ I 
muff  fet  my  hand  to  this  paper.”  I told  them, 
“ They  were  cloaked  over  with  the  name  of 
proteflants,  but  none  but  zpopifi  fpirit  would  tie 
mens  confciences.”  So  I commended  ray  caufe 
to  God,  and  withdrew  from  my  houfe  and  them. 

As  I went  along,  one  who  thinks  herfelf  a 
Chriftian  faid,  “ Now  I might  fee  God  w’as 
agalriff  me.”  I told  her,  “ I did  now  feel  that 
God  was  for  me,  and  that  he  loved  me  never- 
thelefs  for  this  ; for  God  loved  on  the  dung- 
hill with  only  a potfheard,  as  well  as  he  did  in  all 
his  plenty.”  I thought  flie,  in  effefl,  bid  me 

“ curfe 


C 45  ] 


-r' 

K-- 


curfe  God  and  die.”  May  the  Lord  make  her 
a Chriftian  indeed  ! 

* When  I returned  to  my  houfe  and  faw  it 
in  ruins,  I found  nothing  in  my  heart  towards 
my  perfecutors  but  love.  Neither  could  I doubt 
of  God’s  love  to  my  foul.  All  that  is  within  me 
blefs  his  holy  name  ! 

* One  day  fix  or  eight  of  the  mob  got  me 
among  them,  and  faid,  “ They  were  going  to 
make  a lav^f,  and  we  fliould  all  fet  our  hands  to 
it.”'  I told  them,  “ I would  fubmit  to  the  laws 
of  God  and  my  prince,  but  I could  not  to  the 
laws  of  the  devil.”  One  of  them  fwore,  “ He 
would  break  my  windows  again.”  I a&ed  him, 
“ If  ever  he  heard  of  Jefus  Chnfl  doing  fo  ? 
And  how  lie  duilt,  when  he  mufl  anfwer  it  at 
his  bar  ?”  At  which  he  flood  filent. 

30.  On  Shrcve-Tuefday,  about  eleven  o’clock, 
Sarah,  the  wile  of  Jchn  Sheldon,  of  Wejl-Bram- 
wicl,  being  told  the  mob  was  coming  to  her 
houfe,  went  and  met  them  at  the  gate.  Mr. 

vS , Mr.  J , and  Mr.  5 L , 

cornet,  were  at  the  head  of  them.  She  aflced 
John  Baker,  who  was  captain  of  the  mob.  What 
they  tvere  come  for?  He  anfweied,  “ If  Hie 
would  have  nothing  more  to  do  wi.h  thefe  peo- 
ple, not  a pennyworth  of  her  goods  fhould  be 
hurt.”  She  made  no  reply.  Then  they  broke 
the  door  open,  and  began  breaking  and  plunder- 
ing the  goods.  One  coming  out  with  a fire- 
fhovel,  fhe  begged  him,  “ not  to  take  it  away.” 

He 


C 46  ] 

He  fwore,  “ if  fhe  fpoke  another  word  he  would 
J beat  her  brains  out.” 

After  they  had  rifled  the  houfe  they  went  to 
fearch  the  barn.  Some  goods  were  hid  there, 
which  fhe  thought  would  now  go  with  the  refl ; 
fo  fhe  went  and  fat  contentedly  down  in  the 
ruined  houfe  : but  a man  of  their  own,  as  bitter 
as  the  reft  till  then,  defired  they  would  not 
pull  up  the  cow’s  ftakes,  fo  they  looked  no 
further ; but  feeing  a calf,  they  beat  and  lamed 
it  in  fuch  a manner,  that  they  were  obliged  to 
kill  it. 

* John  Sheldon  was  this  while  helping  Thomas 
Parkes  to  hide  his  goods,  though  he  knew  by 
the  noife  they  were  breaking  his  own  in  pieces. 
Between  two  and  three  he  came  to  his  houfe 
with  William  Sitch.  William  afked  Sarah  how 
fhe  did  .?  Saying,  “ For  his  part  he  took  joyfully 
the  fpoiling  of  his  goods.”  She  arifwered,  that 
“ feeing  fo  much  wickednefs  fhe  could  not  re- 
joice, but  fhe  bleffed  God  fhe  could  bear  it  pa- 
tiently, and  found  not  the  leaft  anger  in  her.” 
John  Sheldon  feeing  the  fpoil  thev  had  made, 
fmiled  and  faid,  “ Here  is  ftrange  work.”  His 
wife  told  him,  “ If  fhe  had  complied  with  their 
terms,  not  one  pennyworth  would  have  been 
hurt.  ’ He  replied,  “ That  if  fhe  had  complied 
to  deny  the  truth,  and  he  had  found  his  goods 
whole  on  that  account,  he  fhould  never  have 
been  eafy  as  long  as  he  lived ; but  he  bleffed 

God 


C 47  ] 

God  that  (he  had  rather  chofe  to  fuffer 
wrong.” 

31.  The  mob  continued  to  rife  for  fix  days 
together.  The  damage  they  did  in  and  about 
Wedn^ury,  at  the  very  lowed:  computation,  is 
as  follows : 


/. 

s. 

d. 

Benjamin  Conftable 

- 

103 

0 

0 

Humphrey  Hands 

- 

44 

6 

7 

John  Eaton 

- 

43 

11 

0 

John  Bird 

- 

43 

0 

0 

Richard  Bolton 

- 

40 

0 

0 

Erancis  Ward 

- 

22 

14 

6 

Godfrey  Ward 

- 

• 22 

6 

4 

John  Turner 

- 

20 

0 

0 

William  Mafon 

- 

19 

10 

4 

Thomas  Parkes 

• 

H 

0 

0 

John  Sheldon 

- 

9 

6 

6 

John  Griffiths 

- 

3 

^5 

8 

Lydia  Partridge 

- 

2 

0 

0 

Jofeph  Perry 

- 

1 

10 

0 

John  Darby 

- 

8 

13 

6 

Jonas  Turner 

. 

3 

12 

0 

Richard  Spittle 

- 

2 

17 

0 

Jofeph  Spittle 

- 

1 

5 

0 

Edward  Holdbury 

- 

4 

10 

0 

Humphrey  Hadley 

- 

»3 

11 

0 

John  Griffiths 

6 

6 

0 

Benjamin  Watfon 

- 

2 

11 

0 

Thomas  Smith 

- 

7 6 

Edward 

[ 48  ] 


iLdward  Smith 

2 

5 

0 

William  Sitch 

5 

6 

0 

Daniel  Conftable 

2 

13 

5 

Henry  Addinbrook 

H 

4 

Joftiua  Conftable 

1 1 

0 

Jofeph  Stubs  and  Robert  Dakin 

2 

0 

0 

Jonathan  Jones 

3 

0 

0 

William  Small 

4 

12 

7 

Thomas  Edwardly 

5 

0 

0 

Edward  Slater 

9 

12 

10 

17 

1 

02.  I Benjaynin  Conjiahle  was  induced  to  go  to 
a juftice  of  peace,  on  account  of  a warrant 
fetched  by  the  wife  o[  JoJhua  Conjlablt,  for  abufe 
done  to  her  as  the  went  over  the  field  betwixt 
WenJ}?ury  and  Darlajlon.  She  fwore  againft  five 
men,  before  Mr.  G.  The  warrant  was  executed 
upon  one  of  them  ; but  the  juflice  would  not 
a£i  any  thing  againft  him,  unlefs  the  other 
four  were  brought  before  him.  The  man 
returning  home,  railed  a mob  the  fame  even- 
ing, went  to  the  houfe  of  JcJliua  Corijlable, 
pulled  part  of  it  down,  and  deftroyed  his 
goods.  This  I thought  proper  to  acquaint  the 
juftice  of. 

A fecond  thing  which  induced  me  was, 
That  on  the  laft  day  of  January^  there  came 
to  my  houfe  Henry  Old,  Francis  Longmore, 

and 


C 49  ] 

aitd  Thomas  Baylis,  and  demanded  money.  “ e!fe 
they  faid  they  would  break  my  goods.”  But 
it  being  day-time,  and  their  ftrength  fmall, 
(though  they  had  large  clubs  in  their  hands)  I 
refufed. 

I fent  to  the  conflable  of  Darlajion,  to 
know  if  he  would  execute  his  warrant  on 
the  other  four.  He  fent  me  M'ord,  “ He  diirft 
not  do  it  for  fear  of  having  his  houfe  pulled 
down.  ’ 

I went  on  February  2,  to  Mr.  G , and 

gave  him  the  above  account  j and  withal  told 
him,  that  on  the  Tuefday  following,  February  7, 
they  threatened  to  rife  and  pull  down  our 
houfes.  He  anfwered  me  in  a rough  manner, 
and  afked,  “ What  I would  have  him  to  do  ? 
He  could  do  no  more  than  give  out  his 
warrant ; and  if  the  conftable  would  not,  or 
could  not  execute  it,  he  could  not  help  it.” 
I defired  him,  “ That  he  would  write  a line 
to  the  officers  of  Wer^ury  and  Darlajion, 
to  exert  themfelves  for  the  difcouraging  any 
rifmg  on  Tuefday F But  he  refufed,  and  told 
me,  “If  we  could  not  agree  among  one  ano- 
ther, we  muft  go  to  the  devil  which  way  we 
would.” 

33.  John  Bird,  of  Werjbury,  in  the  county 
of  Stafford,  carpenter,  is  ready  to  make  oath, 
that  he,  together  with  William  Mumford  and 
Mary  Bird,  on  the  loth  day  of  this  inftant 

April,  went  to  the  houfe  of  W- G , Efq; 

VoL.  XVIII,  C juftice 


[ 50  J 


juftice  of  peace,  in  order  to  have  a warrant 
for  fome  of  the  principal  rioters,  who  had 
lately  done  great  damage  to  this  deponent, 
and  divers  other  perfons ; but  the  faidjullice 
refiifed  to  grant  any  warrant  againft  them : that 
William  -Miimjord  then  demanded  a warrant 
agaiiifl;  fome  of  the  faid  rioters  who  had  done 
damage  to  him  ; to  which  the  faid  juftice  faid. 
They  were  Mdliodijis  ; and,  after  feveral  other 
■words,  refufed  to  grant  it  : that  on  the  13th 
inftant  this  deponent,  together  with  William 
Mumfoid  and  Mary-  Bird,  went  to  the  houfe 

oi  J D , Efq;  a juftice  of  the  peace 

in  the  faid  county,  and  requelfed  the  faid 
juftice  to  grant  him  a warrant  to  take  up  fome 
ol  the  rioters,  which  the  faid  juftice  refufed 
to  do:  that  on  the  17th  inftant  this  deponent, 
together  with  Mary  Bird,  went  to  the  houfe 

of  W P , Eiq;  a juftice  of  the  peace 

lor  the  faid  county,  and  requefted  a warrant  to 
take  up  fome  of  the  rioters,  to  which  the 
juftice  anlwered  him  roughly.  That  he  fhould 
have  no  warrant;  and  fariher  faid.  That  he 
and  the  reft  of  the  juftices  in  the  heighburhood 
had  concluded  and  agreed  to  grant  us  no  war- 
rants. And  this  deponent  further  faith.  That 
he  himfelf  hath  fuftained  damage  by  the 
rioters  to  the  value  of  ^o  /.  and  upwards ; 
and  that  neither  he,  nor  anv  other  perfon 
who  hath  fuftained  damage  by  them,  are  able 

to 


C 51  ] 

to  bring  the  faid  rioters  to  juftice ; becauftf 
not  any  of  the  above-mentioned  juftices  of 
the  peace  will  grant  any  warrant  to  apprehend 
them. 

Such  is  the  liberty  of  confcience  which  Pro- 
teftants  grant  one  another!  Does  not  He  that 
is  higher  than  the  highell  regard  it  ? 


C 2 


THE 


r 52  ] 


THE 

C A 

S E 

0 F 

J OH  N N E 

L SO  y. 

Written  by 

HIMSELF. 

The  lion  hath  reared,  who 
To\&hath  Jpoken,  who  can 
iii.  8. 

Will  not  Pear  ? The 
hutprophefy?  Amos 

May  4,  1744,  at  feven  at  night,  when  I 
had  done  day’s  woik,  I went  to  Adrial- 
ton,  and  expounded  ai  John  Boclk’s  fo  a well- 
behaved  congregation.  When  I had  done,  Jqppk 

Gibjon, 


[ 53  ] 

Gibjhn,  the  conflable’s  deputy  (an  alehoufe-' 
keeper,  who  found  his  craft  was  in  danger ) 
prefled  me  for  a foldier.  I afked  him  by  whofe 
order  ? He  faid,  “ Several  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  town,  who  did  not  like  fo  much  preaching 
and  by  his  own  talk  it  appeared  they  were  thofe 
of  his  own  craft. 

He  caiifed  me  to  go  to  the  White-hart,  w'hither 
Mr.  Charlejiiiorth,  and  Mr.  Holmes  of  Sikehou/e,. 
and  feveral  more  went  with  us  ; and  Mr.  CharleJ- 
wortk  offered  500  /.  bail  for  me  till  the  next 
day  ; but  no  bail  was  to  be  taken  for  a Methodift 
(fo  called.)  He  protefted  I flrould  go  to  his 
houfe.  I made  no  refiftance,  but  went  and 
feveral  of  our  people  with  us  ; and  we  fang  an 
hymn,  and  prayed  together,  and  fo  parted. 

Next  morning  feveral  people  came  to  fee  me 
before  we  went  from  Adwalton.  Here  I was 
kept  ten  hours,  before  the  warrant  came  into 
his  houfe  ; and  when  the  conflable  came,  he 
faid,  if  he  had  been  there  he  would  have  pre- 
vented what  Gibfon  had  done. 

Between  eight  and  nine  I went  to  Birjlal,  to 
my  houfe  ; and  after  I had  changed  my  deaths, 
we  fet  out  for  Halifax,  and  I was  brought  before 
the  commifTioners,  v.'ho  finiled  one  at  anotlier 
as  foon  as  they  faw  me.  They  bid  the  door-  ^ 
keepers  not  to  let  any  man  come  in  : but  Mr. 
Thomas  Brooks,  had  got  in  with  nie  ; and  they 
faid,  that  is  one  of  his  converts.  Then  they  cal- 
led John  Gibjhii,  and  afked,  How  many  men 
C 3 have 


[ 54  ] 

have  you  brought  ? He  faid,  one.  Well,  and 
what  have  you  againfl;  him  ? Why,  gemlemen, 
faid  he,  I have  nothing  to  fay  againll  him,  but 
he  preaches  to  the  people  \ and  fome  of  our  townf- 
men  do  not  like  fo  much  preaching.  They  broke 
out  into  laughter  ; and  one  of  them  /wore,  I was 
fit  to  go  for  a foldier,  for  there  I might  have 
preaching  enough.  I faid  to  him.  Sir,  you  ought 
not  to  fwear;  Well,  faid  they  to  me.  You  have  no 
licence  to  preach,  and  you  Jhall  go  for  a foldier-, 
and  to  the  captain,  Captain,  is  he  fit  for  you  ? Yes, 
he  anfwered  ; then  take  him  away. 

But,  I faid,  here  are  feveral  of  my  honeft 
neighbours  ; you  ought  to  give  me  the  liberty  of 
another  man.  and  hear  what  they  fay  of  me, 
whether  I am  fuch  an  one  as  the  warrant  men- 
tions or  no.  They  anfwered,  hai  is  your  minif- 
ter  [one  of  the  commiffionersj  and  he  has  told  us 
of  your  charadlcr,  and  we  will  hear  no  more.  So 
I found  I was  condemned  before  the  commif- 
fioners  faw  me. 

Then  Mr.  Brooks  laid  the  petitions  before 
them,  fent  hy  neighbouring  gentlemen  ; which 
leftified  I had  done  no  evil,  but  had  behaved  my- 
felf  well  in  my  neighbourhood,  and  had  always 
maintained  my  family  very  well ; and  they  defir- 
ed  them  to  fet  me  at  liberty.  And  Mr.  Brooks 
faid,  “ Gentlemen,  you  fee  he  is  not  fuch  a man 
“ as  is  mentioned  in  the  warrant.”  But  they  bid 
him  hold  his  peace,  and  faid,  “ You  are  one  of 
“ his  pupils,  and  you  ought  to  _go  with  him,” 

He 


[.  55  1 


PTe  anfwered,  “ Why  do  you-jiot  fend  me  then  ; 
“ for  you  have  as  much  right  to  fend  me  as 
“ him?”' 

“ So,  faid  I,  Gentlemen,  I fee  there  is  nel- 
“ ther  law  nor  jullice  for  a man  that  is  called  a 
“ Methodijl ; but  all  is  lawful  that  is  done  againft 
“ me.  I pray  God  forgive  you,  for  you  know  not 
“ what  you  do.”  They  anfwered.  Surely  your 
minijler  mujl  be  a better  judge  of  you  than  any 
other  man,  and  he  has  told  us  enough  of  you  and 

your  preaching.  “ Well,  faid  I,  Mr.  C , 

“ what  do  you  know  of  me  that  is  evil  ? Whom 
“ have  I defrauded  ? Or  where  have  I contrafled 
“ a debt  that  I cannot  pay  ?”  He  faid.  You  have 
no  vifible  way  of  getting  your  living,  I anfwered, 
“ I am  as  able  to  get  my  living  with  my  hands, 
“ as  any  man  of  my  trade  in  England  is,  and  you 
“ know  it : and  had  I not  been  at  work  yefter- 
“ day,  and  all  the  week  before  ?”  But  they  bid 
the  captain  take  me  away  ; and  he  came  and  faid, 
We  will  take  you  off  preaching  foon.  I anfwered, 
“ You  muft  firft  afk  my  Mailer  leave.”  But  we 
tuill  make  you  give  over.  But,  I replied,  “ It  is 
“ out  of  your  power.”  Then  he  thruft  me  into  a 
corner  of  the  room,  and  faid,  I Ihould  have  com- 
pany prefently. 

Afterwards  feveral  were  brought  to  the  com- 
miflioners,  and  there  condemned  to  go  with  me, 
and  four  or  five  acquitted.  But  all  had  their 
neighbours  to  fpeak  for  them,  except  me;  for 
what  need  was  there  of  any  other  witnefs  ? 

C 4 Glory 


[ J6  ] 

Glory  be  to  God  on  high  ! He  kept  my  foul 
all  this  time  in  perfea  peace,  and  I could  fay  to 
him  from  my  heart, 

W Iiilfl  thou,  O God,  aft  nigh. 

My  foul  difdains  to  fear  ; 

Sin  and  Satan  I defv. 

Still  impotently  near  : 

Earth  and  hell  their  wars  may  wage. 

Calm  I mark  their  vain  defign. 

Smile  to  fee  them  idly  rage 
Againll;  a child  of  thine. 

Then  the  captain  read  the  articles  of  war  to  us 
that  were  condemned,  and  faid,  Vou  hear  your 
doom  IS  death  ij you  difobey  us.  I anfwered,  “ I 
do  not  fear  the  man  that  can  kill  me,  any  more 
than  I do  him  that  can  cut  down  a dogllander. 
For  I know  my  life  is  hid  with  Chrift  in  God  ; 
and  he  will  judge  between  me  and  you  one  day: 
but  I befeech  him  not  to  lay  this  fin  to  your 

charge.”  And  to- Mr.  C , I faid,  “Sir,  I 

pray  God  forgive  you  ; for  you  have  given  me 
Inch  a charaQer  as  not  another  man  in  England 
Will  that  knows  me.” 

Then  we  were  guarded  to  Halifax  goal  ; (but 
the  keeper  would  not  let  us  come  into  his  goal) 
then  to  the  officer’s  quarters,  and  kept  till  fix  at 
night,  where  John  Rhodes,  and  Thomas  Charlef- 
luorth,  of  Little  Gummerjel,  came  to  fee  me,  and 
cared  for  my  foul,  as  if  they  had  been  my  mo- 

thers 


[ 57  J 

ther’s  fons.  O,  my  God,  remember  them  for 
good,  and  gi^’6  them  and  their  houfes,  and  all 
that  willr  well  to  onrSion,  to  rejoice  in  the  glad-  ^ 
nefs  of  thy  people  ! 

At  fix  wc  fet  out  for  Bradford,  and  many  of 
the  inhabitants  of  Halifax  prayed  for  me,  and 
wept  to  fee  me  in  the  hands  of  unrighteous  and 
cruel  men.  But  I faid,  “ Fear  not,  God  hath 
his  way  in  the  whirlwind  ; and  he  will  plead  ray 
caufe ; only  pray  lor  me,  that  nry  faith  fall  not.  ’ 

When  we  were  about  half  way  between  Huh' 
fax  and  Bradford,  one  of  the  foldiers  faid  to  me, 

“ Sir,  I am  forry  for  you  ; for  the  captain  is  or- 
dered to  put  you  in  the  dungeon;  but  1 will 
fpeak  to  him,  and  if  you  will  let  me.  have  the 
care  of  you,  you  fhall  lie  with  me  ; for  the  dun- 
geon is  a loathfome  place  as  ever  1 faw  L 
thanked  him  for  his  offer,  but  when  we  got  to 
Bradford,  we  were  driven  up  in  the  ftreet  where 
the  crofs  did  Hand  : and  the  captain  fent  and 
fetched  the  keeper  of  the  dungeon,  and  faid. 
Take  this  man  and  put  him  into  the  dungeon  ; and 

take  this  other  along  with  you (a  poor  harm- 

lefs  man,  all  the  cloaths  upon  whofe  back  were 
not  worth  one  {billing;  neither  did  they  lay  any 
thing  to  his  charge,  v,ihen  he  was  ordered  for  3- 
foldier.) 

But  when  they  came  to  the  dungeon  dopr, 
the  foldier  who  fpoke  to  me  by  the  way,  went 
to  the  captain  and  faid,  Sir,  if  you  will  give  me 
charge  over  Mr.  Nelfon,  my  life  for  his,  he 
C 5 fhall 


[ ] 

lhall  be  foith-coming  in  the  morning  ; but  the 
captain  threatened  to  break  his  head  if  he  fpoke 
about  me  any  more. 

* He  came  to  us  before  I went  down,  and  I 
afhed  him,  “ Sir,  what  have  I done,  that  I muft 
go  to  the  dungeon  ? If  you  are  afraid  of  me  that 
I fhould  run  away,  fet  a guard  over  me  in  a 
room,  and  I will  pay  them.”  He  anfwered. 
My  order  is,  to  put  you  in  the  dungeon.  So  I fee 
my  Lord’s  word  is  fulfilled.  The  fervant  is  not 
above  his  Majier.  For  thofe  that  were  accufed 
of  thieving,  and  great  evils  which  they  had  done 
in  the  neighbourhood,  muft  eat  and  drink,  and 
lie  on  feather-beds;  but  I only  defired  a little 
water,  and  it  was  reiuied  me  by  the  captain, 
although  I had  nothing  all  day,  except  a little  tea 
in  the  morning.  But  my  mafter  never  fends 
his  fervants  a warfare  at  their  own  charge.  He 
gives  ftrength  according  to  our  day.  For  when 
1 came  into  the  dungeon,  that  flunk  worfe  than 
an  hogftye  or  little-houfe,  by  reafon  of  the 
blood  and  filth  which  finks  from  the  butchers 
who  kill  over  it,  my  foul  w'as  fo  filled  with  the 
love  of  God,  that  it  was  as  a paradife  to  me. 

Then  could  I cry  out,  O the  glorious  liberty 
of  the  children  of  God  ! And  I fell  down  on 
my  knees,  and  gave  God  thanks  that  he  counted 
me  worthy  to  be  put  in  a dungeon  for  the  truth’s 
fake  ; and  prayed  that  my  enemies  might  be 
faved  from  the  wrath  to  come,  I think  svith  as 
much  defile  as  I could  feel  for  my  own  mother’s 

children. 


[ 59  ] 

children.  I wllhed  they  were  as  happy  in  their 
houfes  as  I was  in  the  dungeon. 

About  ten,  feveral  of  the  people  came  to 
the  dungeon  door,  and  brought  me  fome  can- 
dles, and  put  me  fome  meat  and  water  in  at  the 
hole  of  the  door.  When  1 had  eat  and  drank, 
I gave  God  thanks  ; we  fung  hymns  almofl,  all 
night;  they  without,  and  I within. 

* The  fame  night,  a man  that  lives  in  Bradford 
came  to  the  dungeon  ; and  though  he  was  an 
enemy  to  the  Metkodifs,  fo  called,  when  he 
fmelt  the  ill  favour  of  the  place,  he  faid,  “ hu- 
manity moves  me,”  and  went  away  direftly  : 
and  about  eleven,  came  again  and  faid,  “ I will 
alTure  you  I am  not  in  your  way  of  thinking, 
but  for  all  that,  I have  been  with  your  captain, 
and  offered  ten  pounds  bail  for  you,  and  myfelf  as 
a prifoner,  if  he  would  let  you  lie  in  a bed,  but 
all  in  vain  for  I can  get  nothing  of  him  but  bad 
words.  If  thcjullice  was  in  town,  I would  have 
gone  to  him,  and  would  have  foon  fetched  you 
out  ; but  fince  it  is  as  it  is,  I pray  God  plead 
your  caufe.”  O my  God,  let  not  him  that 
would  give  a cup  of  cold  water  to  thy  fervants^ 
lofe  his  reward  ; but  do  thou  blefs  him,  and 
blefs  thy  people  : and  I befeech  thee  to  have 
mercy  on  our  enemies,  and  let  not  thy  heavy 
judgments  fall  upon  them  : but  be  thou  glorified 
in  their  converfion,  not  in  their  deflruc- 
tion, 

C 6 


The 


[ 6o  ] 

The  poor  man  that  was  with  me  might  have 
iiarved,  if  my  friends  had  not  brought  him  meat : 
for  when  they  had  locked  us  up,  they  went  to 
their  lodgings,  and  took  no  more  thought  of  us 
that  nigltt. 

* When  tlie  man  and  I were  laid  down  upon 
a little  llinking  draw,  “ Pray  you.  Sir,  ffaid  he) 
are  all  thefe  your  kinsfolk,  that  they  love  you 
fo  well  ? I think  they  are  the  lovingelf  people 
that  ever  I faw  in  my  life.”  I anfwercd,  by  this  you 
may  know  that  they  are  Jefus  ChrifPs  difciples ; 
for  this  is  the  mark  he  himfelfhas  given,  where- 
by all  men  might  know  his  difciples  from  the  u.n- 
believing  world. 

At  four  in  the  morning,  my  wife  and  feveral 
more  came  to  the  dungeon,  and  fpoke  to  me 
through  the  bole  of  the  door  ; and  1 faid,  Jere~ 
miah\  lot  is  fallen  upon  me.  Then  it  came  to 
my  remembrance,  that  when  I was  about  thir- 
teen or  fourteen  years  old,  I often  thought  if  God 
would  make  me  like  Jeremiah,  to  Hand  and 
fpeak  his  words  to  the  people  in  the  flreets,  as 
he  did,  I fhculd  not  mind  who  calf  dirt  at  me. 
And  now  I am  in  fome  meafure  treated  as  he 
was,  for  perfuading  men  to  flee  from  the  wrath 
to  come. 

* My  wife  faid,  “ Fear  not ; the  caufe  is 
God’s  for  which  you  are  here,  and  he  well  plead 
it  himfelf.  Therefore  be  not  concerned  about 
me  and  the  children  ; for  he  that  feeds  the  young 


ravens 


r ] 

ravens  will  be  mindful  of  us.  He  will  give  you 
flrength  for  your  day ; and  after  we  have  fuffer- 
ed  awhile,  he  will  perfefl  that  which  is  lacking 
in  our  fouls,  and  then  bring  us  where  the  wick- 
ed ceafe  from  troubling,  and  where  the  weary  are 
at  reft.” 

So  faid  they  all  that  were  with  her  at  the  door. 
I told  them,  “ I cannot  fear  either  man  or  devil, 
fo  long  as  I find  the  love  of  God  as  I do  now  ; 
for  he  has  cheared  my  heart  as  with  fweet  wine 
ever  fince  he  fulfered  me  to  be  call  into  prifon. 
O that  I may  be  faithful  unto  death,  and  I fhall 
receive  the  crown  of  life  ! For  not  one  word  of 
Jefus  fliall  fall  to  the  ground  till  all  be  accom- 
pliflied.” 

About  five  in  the  morning  they  took  me  out, 
and  we  were  guarded  to  Leeds,  and  ftood  in  the 
ftreet  till  ten.  Hundreds  flocked  to  fee  me. 
Some  faid,  “ It  is  a (hame  to  fend  a man  for  a 
foldier  for  fpeaking  the  truth  ; many  of  our  neigh- 
bours that  follow  the  Mtihodijis,  and  were  as  wick- 
ed before  as  any  people  in  the  town,  are  now 
like  new  creatures  ; for  we  do  not  bear  an  ill 
word  come  out  of  their  mouths.”  Others  cried, 
“ I wifli  they  were  all  hanged  out  of  the  way, 
for  they  make  people  go  mad:  and  one  cannot 
get  drunk  nor  fwear,  but  every  fool  muft  correft 
us,  as  if  we  were  to  be  taught  by  them.  But  I 
hope  they  will  now  be  brought  to  nought,  for 
that  is  one  of  the  worft  of  them..” 


Juft 


[ 62  ] 


Juft  as  the  church  began,  I was  guarded  to 
the  goal,  and  the  others  ordered  to  the  alehoufe. 
The  goal-keeper  here  was  very  civil ; for  he  let 
my  friends  come  in  feveral  times  to  fee  me.  I 
thought  of  the  Pilgrim  s Progrejs  ; for  hundreds 
of  people  in  the  flreets  Hood,  and  looked  at  me 
through  the  iron  grate,  and  were  ready  to  fight 
about  me.  Several  would  have  given  bail  for  me, 
if  they  would  let  me  out ; but  I was  told  that  a 
hundred  pounds  was  refufed,  which  was  offered 
by  a ftranger  for  me.  I am  too  notorious  a 
criminal  to  be  allowed  fuch  favours ; for  Chrif- 
tianity  is  a crime  which  the  world  can  never  for- 
give. 

At  night,  I believe  an  hundred  of  our  friends 
were  with  me  in  goal  together.  We  fung  an 
hymn,  and  prayed,  and  I gave  an  exhortation  and 
fo  we  parted.  But  Mr.  H.  was  not  willing  I fhould 
lie  on  flinking  ftraw,  and  fent  me  a bed  to  lie 
on.  I find  the  time  is  not  yet  come  for  me  to  be 
hated  of  all  men  for  Cbrifl’s  fake.  I pray  God 
give  me  ftrength  in  that  day ! Glory  be  to  his  ho- 
ly name,  hitherto  his  grace  is  fufficient  for  me, 
and  I hang  upon  his  promife  for  ftrength  in  my 
next  trials. 

At  five  on  Monday  morning  I was  let  out  of 
goal,  and  we  marched  off  for  York  direftly;  many 
of  our  friends  went  with  us  out  of  the  town  near 
three  miles,  but  when  I came  to  take  my  leave, 
they  mourned  as  one  that  had  loft  his  firft-born. 

I fpake  comfortable  words  to  them, and  bade  them 

“ Hand 


[ 63  ] 

“ Hand  faft,  in  nolhing  terrified  by  your  adver- 
faries  ; which  is  to  them  an  evident  token  of  per- 
dition, but  to  you  of  falvation,  and  that  of  God. 
So  the  peace  of  God  be  with  you  all.” 

* We  came  to  Yor^  by  three,  and  were 
brought  before  feveral  of  the  officers  at  the  Black 
Swan  in  Coneyjired,  who  fecmed  to  rejoice  as 
men  that  had  taken  great  fpoil,  and  faluted  me 
with  many  a grievous  oath.  It  brought  fome- 
thing  to  my  mind  which  I had  fpoken  in  the 
fields  to  the  Lord,  when  he  had  broke  a great 
cloud  that  w'as  on  my  foul,  through  my  refufing 
to  preach  when  many  defired  me,  and  J bad 
time,  but  confulted  with  flefh  and  blood.  My 
foul  was  ill  great  diflrefs,  fo  that  I threw  myfelf 
on  the  ground,  and  requeffed  for  death  ; feeing 
it  more  agreeable  to  fiefli  and  blood,  to  be  a fliep- 
herd's  dog  then  a preacher  of  the  gofpel  : for  his 
hand  is  againll  every  man,  and  every  man’s  hand 
is  againft  him.  But  at  the  rem.embrance  of  the 
prophets  and  apoflles,  and  Chrift  himfelf,  what 
contraditlion  and  tribulation  they  all  met  with, 
the  cloud  broke,  and  my  foul  was  fo  refreffied 
with  the  love  of  God,  that  I cried  out,  “ My  Lord 
and  my  God  ! Now  thou  halt  given  me  ffrength, 
forfake  me  not  ; and  if  thou  fend  me  to  hell,  to 
preach  to  devils,  I am  ready  to  go.” 

When  I was  before  thefe  officers,  and  heard 
fuch  horrid  language,  I thought  hell  could  not 
be  much  worfe  than  the  company  I was  in.  I 
afleed  them,  Do  you  believe  there  is  one  God, 

and 


[ 64  ] 

and  that  he  is  a God  of  truth  ? They  faid,  jre  do. 
I anfwered  I cannot  believe  you,  I tell  you 
plainly.  Why  fo  ? I replied,  I cannot  think 
that  any  men  of  common  underllanding,  who 
believes  that  God  is  true,  dares  take  his  name 
in  vain;  much  lefs  do  you  believe  God  can  hear 
you  when  you  pray  him  to  da?7in  your  fouls. 
Now  fuppofe  God  fliould  grant  you  the  damna- 
tion you  pray  for,  what  miferable  wretches  would 
you  be  ? Do  you  know  that  you  muft  one  day 
appear  before  that  God,  who  will  not  hold  him 
guiltlefs  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain  ? 

As  I reafoned  with  them  about  a future  flate, 
they  feemed  to  flirink  as  if  I had  thrown  fire  at 
them  ; but  they  foon  put  away  the  convittion, 
and  faid,  “ You  mull  not  preach  here,  for  you 
are  delivered  to  us  for  a foldiei  ; and  muft  not 
talk  fo  to  us  that  are  olHcers.”  I anfwered,  there 
is  but  one  way  for  you  to  prevent  me.  They 
faid,  What  is  that  ? I replied,  “ It  is  to  fwear  no 
more  in  my  hearing.” 

Then  we  were  guarded  through  the  city;  but 
it  was  as  if  hell  was  moved  from  beneath  to  meet 
me  at  my  coming.  The  ftreets  and  windows 
were  filled  with  people  who  Ihouted  and  huzzaed 
as  if  I had  been  one  that  had  laid  wafte  the  nation. 
But  the  Lord  m.ade  mv  brow  like  brafs,  fo  that 
I could  look  on  them  as  grafshoppers,  and  pafs 
through  the  city  as  if  there  had  been  none  in  it, 
but  God  and  me.  O that  I may  never  offend 

my 


[ 65  ] 

my  gracious  God,  or  provoke  him  to4ake  his 
loving-kindnefs  from  me  ! Then,  though  I go 
through  the  valley  of  the  (hadow  of  death,  I will 
fear  no  evil.  Even  now  I find  his  word  fulfilled, 
where  he  faid,  I will  deliver  thee  from  fudden 
fear,  and  from  terror:  for  it  fhall  not  come  near 
thee,  veuly  thou  art  a God  of  truth  ! O be  mer- 
ciful to  this  great  city,  whole  llreets  ring  with 
curfes;  and  turn  upon  them  a pure  language, 
that  their  fouls  may  be  faved,  and  the  enemy 
difappointed  of  his  hope  ! 

I was  brought  to  the  guard-houfe,  and  the 

officers  call  lots  for  me,  and  it  was  captain  S ’s 

lot  to  have  me.  Then  they  offered  me  money, 
but  I refufed  to  take  it ; and  they  bid  the  fer- 
jeant  hand-cuff  me  and  fend  me  to  prifon.  I 
was  guarded  thither  by  a file  of  mufketteers,  but 
not  band-cuffed,  and  kept  two  nights  and  part  of 
three  days  ; during  which  time  I was  befet  with 
fuch  curlers  and  fwearers  as  could  hardly  be 
matched  out  of  hell.  So  I had  work  enough 
both  day  and  night  to  reprove  them.  I found 
they  could  not  Hand  my  words,  but  the  moft  har- 
dened among  them  fhrunk,  and  wifhed  they 
could  leave  it  off,  and  never  fwear  more. 

Several  of  the  town’s  people  came  and  afked 
me  of  the  do£lrine  that  the  preach - 

_ed  ; which  make  their  names,  faid  they,  to  be 
loathed  by  all  fefils  and  parties  in  the  nation. 
My  anfwer  was,  that  fame  do6lrine  it  is,  which 

made 


[ 66  ] 

made  Jewi  and  Gentiles  confpire  againft  Jefus 
Chrift  who  firft  preached  it ; and  wliofoever  he 
he  that  bears  the  fame  teftimony,  he  rrruft  meet 
with  the  fame  treatment.  Our  Lord  hath  faid. 
Ye  Jhall  be  hated  of  all  men  for  my  fake.  And 
again,  Jf  they  have  perfecuted  me,  they  will  alfo 
perfecute you.  What  1 Do  yon  think  Chrift  would 
be  found  a liar,  and  all  his  apoftles,  who  told  us 
of  the  things  that  are  done  in  this  our  day  ? Nay, 
verily,  heaven  and  earth  fhall  pafs  away,  but  not 
one  word  of  Chrift’s  fhall  fall  to  the  ground. 

When  I had  opened  the  fcriptures,  and  told 
them  the  fundamental  points  of  our  doftrine, 
they  faid  one  to  another,  This  people  is  not  what 
the  world  reprefents  them  ; for  if  this  is  their 
doftrine,  there  is  not  a man  in  England  can  con- 
tradift  them.-  They  offered  me  ftrong  drink  (but 
I told  them  I did  not  chufe  it)  wifhed  me  out  of 
my  enemies  hands,  and  left  me  to  my  company 
of  drunkards  and  fwearers. 

I may  fay  I have  fought  with  beafts  at  York, 
for  fo  thefe  men  live ; yet  my  fpeaking  to  them 
was  not  in  vain,  for  they  did  bridle  their  tongues 
in  my  prefence  after  the  firft  twenty -four  hours. 
When  they  did  fpeak  any  blafphemous  word, 
if  I did  but  turn  and  look  them  in  the  face, 
they  looked  like  criminals  before  the  magif- 
trate. 

On  Tuefday  night  my  wife  and  fifter  Mitchel 
came  to  fee  me,  and  found  me  lying  on  the 
boards.  I faid.  Behold  the  fruits  of  the  gofpel. 

Now 


[ 6/  3 

Now  you  fee  the  word  of  God  is  fulfilled,  Thty 
lay  a fnare  for  him  that  reproveth  in  the  gate,  and 
he  that  turned  f rom  evil  maketh  himfelf  a prey. 
But  God  looks  down  from  heaven,  and  will 
plead  our  caufe ; fear  not.  No,  they  anfwered, 
we  do  not  fear,  for  our  God  is  as  able  to  deliver 
now,  as  he  was  1700  years  ago.  So  they  took 
their  leave  of  me  that  night,  and  wifhed  me  a 
good  repofe  on  my  wooden  bed;  and  thanks  be 
to  God,  I flept  as  well  as  if  I had  been  on  a bed 
of  down. 

Next  morning  they  brought  me  fomething 
to  eat,  and  bade  me  be  ftrong  in  the  Lord,  and 
not  fear  them  that  can  kill  the  body  only.  My 
heart  was  rejoiced  to  fee  them  fo  ftedfaft  in  the 
faith. 

This  day  a court-martial  was  held,  and  I was 
guarded  to  it  by  a file  of  mufketteers,  with  their 
bayonets  fixed  to  their  pieces.  When  I came 
before  the  court,  they  afked  what  is  this  man’s 
crime  ? And  the  anfwer  was,  This  is  the  Metho- 
dfl  preacher,  and  he  refufes  to  take  money. 
Then  they  turned  to  me,  and  faid,  “ Sir,  you 
need  fiot  find  fault  with  us,  for  we  muft  obey 
our  orders,  which  are  to  make  you  a£l  as  a fol- 
dier  ; for  as  fuch  you  ate  delivered  to  us,  and 
if  you  have  not  juftice  done  you  we  cannot 
help  it.” 

My  anfwer  was,  “ I fliall  not  fight,  for  I can- 
not bow  my  knee  before  the  Lord  to  pray  for  a 
man,  and  get  up  and  kill  him  when  I have 

done ; 


[ 68  ] 

done : for  I know  God  both  hears  me  fpeak, 
and  fees  me  aft;  and  I ihould  expeft  the  portion 
of  the  hypocrite  if  my  aftions  contradifted  my 
prayers.  Well,  do  not  hand  preaching  to  us, 
faid  they,  for  we  muft  make  you  obey  us.  Ser- 
jeant, give  him  fome  money ; he  offered  me 
two  {hillings,  but  I refufed  to  take  it.  They 
threatened  me  fore,  but  I could  not  fear  them  at 
all.  Well,  faid  they,  if  you  run  away,  you  are 
as  liable  to  fuffer  as  if  you  had  taken  our  money. 
I anfwered.  If  I cannot  be  difcharged  lawfully, 
Ifhall  not  run  away.  If  I do,  punifh  me  as  you 
pleafe.  Then  they  ordered  the  ferjeant  to  go  to 
quarters  with  me.  * He  carried  me  to  the  IVild 
Man  in  Pctcr-gaU,  and  the  people  behaved  well 
to  me,  though  they  had  eight  more  quartered 
upon  them.  They  faid.  It  is  a pity  you  fhould 
come  amonof  fuch  a wicked  crew  as  ihefe  we 

O 

have.  Surely  there  are  but  few  like  them  in  the 
world.  They  ordered  me  a room  and  bed  to 
myfelf.  Bleffed  be  God,  who  give  me  favour  in 
the  fight  of  the  Egyptians,  who  have  been  fo  ufed 
by  thefe  of  our  own  church.  Thefe  people  were 
profeffedPfl^^j,  who,  I might  imagine,  would  fhew 
no  more  mercy  to  a man  that  preaches  falvation 
by  faith,  than  they  would  to  a mad-dog.  But  I 
fee  it  is  not  the  name  that  makes  a Chriflian,  but 
the  mind  thatw^as  in  Chrill;  and  whofoever  hath 
this  mind  in  him,  he  is  a Chriflian,  let  the  world 
call  him  what  they  will. 

I came  to  Margaret  Town/Iicnd’s,  and  met  with 

my 


C % ] 

my  wife  and  filler  Mitchel,  who  rejoiced  to  fee 
my  feet  once  more  out  of  prifon.  We  fang 
praifes  to  God  for  his  great  mercies  to  me  at  this 
time,  and  paffed  the  afternoon  in  encouraging 
each  other.  Next  morning  I fet  them  out  of 
town,  and  went,  as  I was  ordered,  to  parade  at 
the  Boar  at  Cajlle-gate.  The  officers  ordered 

corporal  W to  fetch  me  a gun  and  other 

warlike  inflruments.  He  feemed  to  fhudder  at 
the  talk,  but  was  forced  to  obey ; and  when  he 
brought  them,  and  came  to  gird  them  on  me,  he 
trembled  as  if  he  had  had  the  palfy. 

I afked  why  they  girt  me  with  thefe  warlike 
habiliments,  for  I am  a man  averfe  to  war,  and 
fhall  not  fight  but  under  the  Prince  of  peace,  the 
Captain  of  my  falvation  ; and  the  weapons  he 
gives  me  are  not  carnal  like  thefe.  Well,  fald 
they,  but  you  muft  bear  thefe  till  you  can  get 
your  difcharge.  As  you  put  them  on  me,  I 
anfwered,  I will  bear  them  as  a crofs,  and  ufe 
them  as  far  as  I can,  without  defiling  my  con- 
fcience,  for  that  I will  not  do  for  any  man  on 
earth. 

* The  officers  bade  them  march  us  off  to 
Hexvortk  Moor,  to  learn  the  exercife  of  a foldier; 

but  corporal  TV feemed  to  be  as  tender  of 

me  as  if  he  had  been  my  own  father,  and  carried 
the  gun  for  me  to  the  field.  But  when  he  came 
to  teach  me  their  exercife  his  heart  leemed  to 
fail  him,  and  he  bade  me  lay  down  the  gun,  and 
we  fell  into  difcourfe.  I found  he  had  the  fear 

of 


[ 70  ] 

oF  God  before  his  eyes,  and  the  Lord  hadfhewed 
him  the  light  of  his  countenance.  But  he  was  as 
a fparrow  alone  on  the  houfe  top ; none  cared 
for  his  converfation,  but  they  all  defpifed  him, 
becaufe  he  would  not  get  drunk  and  fwear  as  they 
did.  O my  God,  remember  him  for  good  always, 
I befeech  thee. 

Next  day  I was  ordered  to  the  field,  and  others 
muft  teach  me  the  warlike  exercife  ; who  all 
behaved  civilly  to  me.  I had  more  to  fee  me 
than  all  the  reft,  and  it  cjufed  the  truth  to  break 
out  the  more,  and  removed  prejudice  from 
many.  I found  the  people  of  York  looked  upon 
one  that  is  called  a MethodiJI,  as  one  that  has 
the  plague,  and  infefts  all  becomes  near;  and 
they  blefted  God  that  none  had  come  to  preach 
there. 

^ But  if,  I was  bound,  the  word  of  God  was 
not  bound  ; for  if  any  did  blafpheme,  I reproved 
them,  whether  rich  or  poor,  and  fell  into  many 
■difputes  with  them;  and  God  gave  me  words, 
fuch  as  they  could  not  refift.  My  difcourfe  had 
fuch  an  effeff  on  them,  that  they  faid.  They 
wifhed  Mr.  Wejley  would  come  and  preach  there. 

I gave  them  feveral  of  our  little  books  ; fo  by 
hearing  and  reading  they  found  out  the  doftrine 
to  be  only  the  plain  word  of  God.  And  now 
feveral  attended  my  coming  to  field,  not  to  fee 
me  as  before,  but  to  alk  queftions,  and  to  know 
of  the  new  doflrine  (as  forae  were  pleafed  to  call 

it.) 


[ 71  3 

25t.)  Surely  by  all  thefe  things  fhall  the  gofpel  be 
fpreacl.  The  Lord  is  in  the  temped,  and  it  lhali 
turn  to  his  glory  ; Satan  doth  but  whet  a knife  to 
cut  his  own  throat. 

On  Sunday  the  13th  I went  to  Coney-Jlreet 
ehurch,  and  my  Lord  manifelted  himfelf  to  me 
in  great  love  at  the  facrament.  At  night,  Han- 
nah Scolejield  and  I and  a brother  from  Man- 
chejlcr,  with  twm  or  three  more,  went  out  into 
the  fields,  thinking  to  retire  ; but  fome  had  feen 
us,  and  told  others  that  we  were  gone  to  fing 
hymns.  We  had  been  but  a few  minutes  toge- 
ther before  we  had  near  an  hundred  to  keep  us 
company.  We  fung  two  hymns,  and  I gave  them 
an  exhortation.  They  received  my  words  with 
meeknefs,  and  wifhed  to  hear  me  again. 

We  went  about  a mile  another  way,  but  there 
were  people  walking  there  alfo  who  knew  me, 
and  Cocked  to  us  and  defired  to  hear  what  fort 
of  doftrine  it  is  we  preach,  which  caufes  all 
men  to  hate  us.  I fair!,  It  is  the  doQrine  of 
Jefus  Chrid,  which  made  all  men  hate  him;  and 
yet  ye  are  fenfible  our  great  Shepherd  faid,  Ve 
Jhall  be  hated  oj  all  men  J or  my  Jake.  But  they 
faid,  This  is  a Chridian  land,  and  it  is  not  fo 
now.  Well,  faid  I,  then  you  mud  fay  the 
gofpel  is  not  an  everlading  gofpel,  or  y'ou  de- 
clare us  bled,  and  almod  all  the  preachers  in 
England  curd.  They  faid,  What  do  ye  point  the 
bleffings  to  you,  and  the  curfe  to  all  the  red  ? 
We  think  it  the  other  way.  Then  faid  I,  you 

de 


[ 72  ] 

do  not  think  as  Chrlft  fpake;  for  he  fald,  Bleffed 
are  ye  when  all  men  /peak  evil  of  you,  and  hate  you 
for  my  fake  and  the  gofpel's:  rejoice  and  be  exceeds 
ing  glad,  for  fo  they  did  to  the  prophets  of  old.  But 
woe  unto  you  when  all  men  fpeak  well  of  you  ; for  fo 
they  fpake  of  the  fafe  prophets.  Upon  this  they 
were  filent,  but  wifhed  they  could  hear  me  them- 
felves,  then  they  could  judge  better.  By  this 
time  a great  company  was  come  together,  defining 
to  hear  me,  and  God  gave  me  to  fpeak  plain,  and 
to  their  hearts.  When  I had  done,  feveral  of 
them  faid,  they  would  go  ten  miles  to  hear  fuch 
another  difcourfe.  The  prejudice  feemed  taken 
out  of  their  minds  at  a ftroke ; and  they  cried, 
this  is  the  doftrine  which  ought  to  be  preached, 
let  men  fay  what  they  will  again  ft  it. 

The  dav  following  I went,  as  before,  to  ex- 
ercife,  and  many  came  to  talk  with  me,  fome  to 
difpiue,  and  fome  who  earneftly  defired  to  be 
faved.  Among  the  difputers  was  a clerg)  man. 
I knew  him  ; for  I had  feen  him  in  his  gown 
ihiee  days  before.  When  feveral,  who  appeared 
as  gentlemen,  difputed  hotly  againft  all  the 
power  of  religion,  I fhewed  them  from  the 
articles,  and  homilies,  and  prayers  of  our  own 
church,  that  thofe  who  fpoke  as  they  did,  were 
no  members  of  the  church  of  England. 

When  they  were  put  to  filence,  the  minifter 
began  to  explain  the  Spirit  of  God  out  of  the 
world  ; as  what  could  not  be  felt  or  perceived  at 
all,  neither  was  it  neceffary,  now  we  bad  the 

fcriptures 


[73  J 

Tcriptures  to  go  by.  I faid,  it  is  highly  nc- 
ceirary,  if  the  fcriptures  be  true  : for  they  tell 
me,  if  I have  not  the  Spirit  of  Chrift,  I am 
not  his,  I mull  belong  to  the  devil ; for  they 
-two  fliare  the  world  between  them. 

I had  fome  every  day  todifpute  with  me  ; 
and  every  night  fonie  to  converfe  with  me, 
who  wanted  to  know  the  way  to  Zian.  The 
people  now  cry  out,  when  will  Mr.  Wejley 
come,  for  here  are  thoufands  in  this  town  would 
gladly  hear  him.  Indeed  I find  a great  defire 
in  them  to  know  the  way  of  falvation  ; nay, 
and  they  feera  willing  to  be  faved  God’s  own 
way;  that  is,  their  fins,  not  in  them.  Sure- 
ly the  Lord  will  be  mindful  of  them,  and  give 
them  teachers  after  his  own  heart. 

The  fecond  Sunday  I went  to  church,  and  my 
heart  was  comforted  again  by  the  love  of  God  in 
the  facrament.  God,  I find,  will  meet  v/ith  us 
in  his  own  ways,  O may  we  never  forfake  them  ! 

The  people  attended  iny  going  to  the  field 
all  this  wmek  : and  when  I w’ent  along  the  ftreets, 
they  came  out  of  their  houfes  to  flare  at  me,  as 
if  I had  been  a raonfter.  I have  read  that  they 
would  not  fuffer  them  to  buy  or  fell  in  the  cit\', 
unlcfs  they  had  the  mark  of  the  beafl ; but  here, 
without  his  mark  we  cannot  fo  much  as  pafs  the 
flreets.  O my  God,  why  is'^  thy  fervant  as  a 
fpeckled  bird  in  this  which  Is  called  a Chrillian 
country  ? Called  after  thy  mofl  facred  name ; 
which  whofoever  names  Ihould  depart  fronl  ini- 
'VoL.  XVIII.  D quity. 


C 74  ] 

quity.  How  is  the  faithful  city  become  an  harlot, 
and  thy  people  taken  captive  by  the  enemy  at  his 
will.  It  is  time  for  thee.  Lord  to  lay  to  thy  hand, 
for  they  have  deftroyed  thy  law. 

One  day  this  week,  after  my  exercife  on  the 
moor,  there  came  a gentleman  in  gold  lace,  and 
a minifter  in  difguife,  and  began  alking  me  quef- 
tions ; which  I anfwered  according  to  the  ability 
God  gave  me  ; many  flocked  round  about  us  to 
hear,  for  our  difpute  was  long,  and  not  on  their 
fide.  I believe  we  had  talked  half  an  hour  be- 
fore I perceived  he  was  a minifler;  for  I took 
him  for  a lawyer,  and  fuch  a one  as  believed 
there  was  no  God:  for  when  I fpoke  of  the  fcrip- 
tures,  he  threw  up  his  head  and  called  me  fool, 
and  bad  me  hold  my  nonfenfe.  I faid,  that  which 
you  call  nonfenfe,  I call  the  higheft  wifdom. 
When  I fpake  any  thing  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  he 
heaved  his  cane  at  me,  as  if  he  would  have 
ftruck  me  t but  God  gave  me  perfeft  peace  in 
my  foul,  and  words  that  made  him  flart,  and  con- 
vinced the  by-ftanders  of  the  truth.  He  was  fo 
enraaed  that  he  foamed  at  the  mouth  like  a horfe 
that  is  hard  rid.  But  when  I underftood  that  he 
was  a minifter,  1 faid.  Hold,  Sir,  let  me  fpeak 
a little  by  your  leave.  You  call  yourfelf  a minif- 
ter of  the  church  of  England,  do  you  not  ? I do. 
Pray  then,  Sir,  what  doftrine  do  you  preach  ? 
For  you  make  the  word  of  God  of  none  effeff, 
and  you  deny  all  infpiration.  So  I do  deny  allin- 
fbiradon.  How  dare  you  then  pray  for  the  in- 

fpiratioB 


[ 75  ] 

fpiratlon  of  God’s  Spirit,  when  you  do  not  be- 
lieve there  is  any  fuch  thing  ? When  he  had 
raged  awhile,  he  faid,  I believe  you  have  read 
the  book  of  Job,  and  made  it  all  your  own.  I 
anfwered,  I hav-e  need  of  patience,  svho  have 
men  of  fuch  principles  as  you  to  talk  with  ; that 
regard  not  w'hat  they  fay  to  provoke  one  ; But  I 
thank  God  you  have  not  done  it  yet.  He  replied, 
his  reafon  for  fpeaking  fo  was  becaufe  I could 
not  be  quiet  with  my  nonfenfe  and  infpiration. 
And  I hear,  you  have  preaclied  feveral  times 
Cnee  you  came,  and  have  filled  the  heads  of 
many  in  this,  town  with  your  new  doftrine.  I 
told  him,  I had  not  preached  publickly  fince  I 
came,  but  did  not  know  how  foon  I might. 
Then  he  (hook  his  Hick  and  Itamped,  and  faid 
in  anger,  “ If  vou  do  preach  publickly,  we 
fliall  take  an  order  with  you,  which  fhall  be  worfe 
then  fending  you  for  a foldier.”  Let  God  look 
to  that,  I anfwered  ; for  by  his  grace,  I can  love 
all  men,  but  fear  none  that  can  kill  the  body 
only.  I allure  you,  it  is  not  the  fear  of  man  which 
fhall  hinder  me  from  preaching  j lor  where  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty.  When  he 
began  to  be  calm  a little,  I afkf>I  him.  Sir, 
fuppofe  you  had  been  inwardly  moved  by  the 
Holy  Ghoft  to  preach  the  gofpel  ; if  the  out- 
ward ordination  was  refufed  you,  when  you 
believed  yourfelf  called  according  to  the  will 
■cfChtillto  preach,  would  you  forbear  preach- 
ing ? That  is,  would  you  obey  man  or  God  ? I 
D 2 fuppofe. 


[ 76  3 

fuppofe,  faid  he,  you  think  you  have  put  an  hard 
quefiion  to  me.  But  hard  or  eafy,  he  never 
anfwered  it  ; and  I cannot  remember  that  ever  I 
faw  him  fince. 

On  Saturday,  feveral  defired  me  to  preach  on 
Sunday  morning.  I told  them  I Ihould  take  a 
walk  out  to  the  moor,  at  half  an  hour  at  feven. 
Accordingly  I did  fo,  and  found  thrice  as  many 
as  I expefted,  and  preached  to  about  three  hun- 
dred well-behaved  people,  who  begged  me  to 
preach  again  at  night.  I anfwered  fome  of  them 
J did  not  know  but  I might  : yet  I gave  no  pub- 
lic notice.  But  one  told  another  and  fpread  it 
through  the  city. 

I went  to  the  minjltr,  and  heard  the  bithop 
' preach,  and  received  the  bleffed  facrament  at  his 
hands.  At  feven  in  the  evening,  I went  to  the 
moor,  and  found  an  unexpeffed  congregation,  I 
believe  fix  thoufand  people.  But  tliere  was  no- 
thing prepared  for  me  to  flarid  on,  and  great  part 
of  the  loldiers  were  there,  ahnofl  drunk,  and 
began  to  qnanel  with  the  people  that  crowded 
me  ; fo  that  I faw  there  was  likely  to  be  mifchief 
done,  and  prevented  it  by  withdrawing.  If  I 
had  preached,  I believe  they  would  have  behav- 
ed quietly,  for  they  fcemed  to  have  a great  defire 
to  hear  what  this  doftrine  is.  I had  not  the  op- 
portunity of  fatisfying  them  at  this  time:  but  they 
that  had  heard  in  the  morning,  told  others,  and 
inflamed  them  the  more  with  de fire  to  hear  for 
theinfelves.  Several  fent  forme  to  their  houfes, 

anl 


C 77  ] 

and  others  came  to  me  ; fo  I fee  God, will  work, 
and  who  fliall  hinder  ? Lord,  open  their  under- 
flandings  that  they  may  know  the  things  which 
belong  to  their  everlafting  peace. 

On  Monday  I heard  that  fome  clergymen  were 
with  the  officers and,  at  night,  one  of  the  offi- 
cers fent  for  me,  and  faid,  What,  you  cannot 
leave  off* your  preaching  yet;  but  we  muff;  be 
blamed  about  you.  But  if  ever  you  preach  pub- 
lickly  more,  you  fhall  be  feverely  whipped.  My 
anfwer  was,  I am  not  careful  in  this  matter.  It 
is  better  to  obey  God  than  men.  I believe  it  is 
the  will  of  God  that  I ffiould  preach;  and  I have 
not  taken  man  to  pleafe  in  any  thing  that  will  of- 
fend my  God. 

With  many  threats  he  bade  me  go,  but  I made 
no  promife  to  obey  him,  neither  did  I intend  it 
in  this  cafe  ; for  I had  promifed  to  go  to  Acombe, 
a village  about  a mile  out  of  Vor/^,  the  next  even- 
ing. Accordingly  I went,  and  preached  to  al- 
raoft  all  the  inhabitants,  in  a field.  The  Lord 
gave  me  to  fpeak  his  word  freely,  and  fent  it 
with  power  to  their  heart.  The  rock  w^as  ftruck, 
and  the  water-  gufhed  out.  All  whom  I faw  be- 
haved well.  Many  faid  they  hoped  I would 
come  again  ; “ for  let  men  fay  what  they  will  of 
“ this  people,  this  is  the  truth,  and  fo  we  fliall 
“ find  it  one  day.” 

As  Icame  down  the  ftreet,  an  alderman  ofThri 
and  his  wife,  who  had  been  to  hear  me,  were 
{landing  at  the  gate  of  his  houfe,  and  he  called 
D 3 , to 


[ 7^  J 

to  me,  and  fald,  if  you  pleafe  to  accept  of  a gla& 
of  any  fort  of  liquor  my  houfe  affords,  it  is  at 
your  fervice.  I faid,  I thank  you  for  your  good- 
will, but  I do  not  care  to  drink.  Several  others 
offered  me  drink,  but  I took  none.  They  pray- 
ed me  to  come  once  a week,  as  long  as  I flay- 
ed in  YorL  Lord,  be  mindful  of  this  people,  I 
befeech  thee,  and  fend  them  thofe,  who  will 
preach  righteoufnefs  by  faith  in  Jefus  Chrift. 
And  O that  they  may  be  found  in  the  wedding- 
garment  in  that  day,  when  every  covering, 
which  is  not  of  thy  Spirit,  will  be  found  as  fil- 
thy rags  before  thy  pure  eyes. 

All  this  week  I had  company  as  much  as  I 
could  tell  what  to  do  with.  Several  defired  me 
to  preach  on  Sunday  morning.  I did  not  pro- 
mifc,  but  w'ent  to  difcourfe  with  about  a fcore,  at 
feven,  on  the  moor.  Others  had  a fufpicion  of 
my  being  there,  and  I believe  200  flocked  round 
me,  as  foon  as  they  faw  me  walking,  and  begged 
me  to  preach  to  them.  I told  them  I Hand  in 
jeopardy  if  I do  ; but  they  anfwered,  we  are  in 
more  danger  than  you,  for  our  fouls  are  in  danger. 
It  came  into  my  mind,  that  I had  freely  receiv- 
ed, and  ought  to  give  freely.  Wherefore  I, 
preached  to  them,  and  God  was  with  us  of  a 
truth,  and  the  hearts  of  the  people  were  opened 
to  receive  the  word  in  love. 

I came  to  filler  Towiifkind’s,  and  found  my 
own  brother,  and  brother  Mitckd  come  to  fee 
me ; and  we  were  comforted  together.  Our 

time 


t 79  ] 

tmie  was  fiiort,  for  I had  but  half  an  hour,  before 
I went  to  anfwer  for  what  I had  done.  Some- 
body had  told  the  enfign  that  I had  been  preach- 
ing; andhe-fent  forme,  and  faid,  Damn  your 
blood.  Sir,  have  you  been  preaching  this  morning  ? 
I faid,  I had.  He  fwore  he  would  have  no 
preaching  nor  praying  in  their  regiment.  Then 
I faid,  “ Sir,  you  ought  to  have  no  fwearing 
nor  curfing  neither  ; for  furely  I have  as  much 
right  to  pray  and  preach,  as  you  have  to  curfe 
and  fwear.” 

* He  fwore  again  that  I Ihould  be  damnably 
whipped  for  what  I had  done.  I anfwered, 
“ Let  God  look  to  that,  for  the  caufe  is  his. 
But  if  you  do  not  leave  off  your  curfing  and  fwear- 
ing, it  will  be  worfe  with  you  then  with  me.” 
Then  he  faid,  “ Corporal,  put  this  fellow  in 
prifon  dire£l:Iy.”  The  corporal  faid,  “ Sir,  I 
muft  not  carry  a man  to  prifon,  unlefs  I give 
in  his  crime  with  him.”  Well,  faid  he,  it  is 
for  difobeying  orders.  So  I fee  an  hundred  may 
difobey  all  the  orders  of  God,  and  there  is  no 
notice  taken  of  them ; nor  do  the  common 
people  cry  out  hang  them  out  of  the  way ; but  if 
one  ofathoufand  begins  to  reprove  them  for 
fin,  they  hale  him  to  prifon,  as  if  he  had  killed 
father  or  mother.  But  fo  it  was  from  the  be- 
ginning ; for  a murderer  was  preferred  before  the 
Prince  of  life. 

I was  put  prifonerjuft  as  the  church  began, 
and  I fent  a man  to  tell  my  brother  that  the 
D 4 word 


[ ] 

'word  of  God  was  fulfilled,  Behold  ihe  devil Jhali 
cajlfome  of  you  into  prfon,  that  ye  may  be  tried,, 
and  defired  their  prayers,  that  I may  be  faith- 
ful unto  death. As  foon  as  I was  within  the 

prifon,  my  heart  was  filled  wfith  joy  unfpeakable, 
and  my  mouth  with  praife  to  my  dear  Redeemer. 
This  alfo  fhalJ  turn  to  the  glory  of  God  : for 
feveral  men  of  good  report  heard  me  this  morn- 
ing, and  tefiified  that  I had  fpoke  the  truth  ; 
and  they  would  not  (they  faidj  be  gulity  of  fend- 
ing  that  man  to  prifon  for  preaching,  not  for  all 
the  world.  This  caufed  many  to  come  to  me, 
who  offered  me  wine  and  flrong  drink.  I told 
them  I did  not  care  for  any  fort  of  flrong  liquor; 
but  fuch  as  I had  gave  I unto  them  ; fome  little 
books,  and  the  words  of  God,  which  he  gave 
me  plentifully  to  fpeak  to  them,  without  refpefil 
of  any  man’s  perfon. 

* Two  nights  and  near  three  days,  I was  kept 
prifoner  at  this  time  ; during  which,  my  foul 
was  as  a watered  garden,  and  I could  fing  praifes 
to  God  all  the  day  long,  for  he  turned  my  cap- 
tivity into  joy  ; and  gave  me  to  reft  as  well  on 
the  hoards  as  if  I had  been  on  a bed  of  down. 
Now  could  I fay,  God’s  fervice  is  perfect  free- 
dom, and  I was  carried  out  much  in  prayer, 
that  my  enemies  might  drink  of  the  fame  river  of 
peace  which  my  God  gave  fo  largely  to  me. 

Now  did  I more  plainly  fee  the  dreadful  flate 
of  the  unconverted  than  ever  before  : and  thought 
if  it  might  be  the  converfion  of  my  enemies.  I 

could 


[ ] 

could  be  content  that  they  fliould  tread  me  under 
their  feet.  But  God  only  knows  how  it  would 
have  been,  had  I been  fo  tried.  Yet  thus  far 
he  hath  helped  me,  and  given  me  flrength  for 
my  day.  Indeed  I have  found  him  a God  of 
truth,  as  far  as  I have  tried  him  ; and  I put  forth 
the  hand  of  my  faith,  to  lay  hold  of  his  ffrength 
for  what  he  fliall  next  call  me  to. 

On  Tuefday  I was  fetched  out,  and  brought  be- 
fore the  major.  There  were  leverai  of  the  young 
officers  with  him,  who  fmiled  when  I came  into 
the  room  ; for  they  had  been  feveral  times  to  fee 
me  in  prifon,  and  had  fwore  I fhould  be  feverely 
whipt.  But  I told  them,  if  they  did  not  repent, 
and  leave  off  that  fwearing,  they  fhould  periffi 
eternally,  (and  I ffiall  be  v/itnefs  againfl;  you)  and 
that  will  be  worfe  than  your  whipping  me  for 
Chrift’s  fake. 

Now  they  feemed  to  rejoice,  as  if  their  words 
were  going  to  be  fulfilled.  The  major  called, 

“ John  Neljon,  what  was  you  put  in  prifon  for  ?” 
For  warning  the  people  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to 
come,  I anfwered;  and  if  this  be  a crime,  I ffiall 
commit  it  again,  unlefs  you  cut  out  my  tongue  : 
for  it  is  better  for  me  to  die  than  difobey  God. 

“ Well,  but  if  that  be  all,  he  replied,  that  is  no 
crime:  for,,  when  you  have  done  your  duty,  1 
do  not  care  if  you  preach  every  night  in  an 
houfe,  or  any  private  place  out  of  the  town  ; but 
I would  not  have  you  make  any  mobs."'  That 
faid  I,  is  far  from  my  defign.  “ Well,  faid  he, 

D 5 you . 


[ 82  ] 

you  may  go  home  to  your  quarters,  and  if  I have 
a convenient  time,  I will  fend  for  you,  and  hear 
you  myfelf ; for  I wifh  all  men  were  like  you.” 
Here  my  adverfaries  hung  down  their  heads,  and 
gave  offfmiling. 

As  I went  to  filler  Townfend’s,  I heard  that  we 
were  to  leave  York  on  Thurjday  at  four  in  the 
morning,  and  march  to  Sunderland.  I had  a great 
defire  to  have  feen  my  wife  firft  ; but  Ihe  did  not 
get  my  letter  foon  enough.  Many  of  the  people 
came  and  faid,  “ We  are  forry  you  are  going  fo 
foon  from  York  ; but  if  you  get  your  liberty,  we 
hope  both  you  and  Mr.  JVeJley  will  come  : for  we 
have  need  of  fuch  plain  dealing,  and  thoufands 
in  the  city  would  be  glad  to  hear.  You  fee  what 
a populous  wicked  place  it  is:  pray  do  not  forget 
us,  but  think  of  us  when  you  fee  us  not.  We 
expefted  fome  of  you  two  or  three  years  ago  ; 
but  you  had  no  regard  for  our  fouls,  till  God 
brought  you  by  force.  Surely  you  was  not  fold 
hither,  but  fent  for  our  good  ; therefore  forget 
us  not.” 

O the  tendernefs  which  this  people  fliewed, 
and  defire  for  the  word  of  God ! It  moved  me  to 
cry  out.  Lord  have  mercy  on  them,  and  let  them 
hear  thy  gofpel,  and  find  it  thy  pow’er  unto  falva- 
tion  ; for  why  fhould  thy  people  perifli  for  lack 
of  knowledge  ? 

On  Thurjday  morning  we  flood  two  hours  in 
the  llreets  before  we  fet  out  of  town.  M e march- 
ed to  EfingWQuld  that  day,  and  when  we  were 

drawn 


[ 83 

drawn  up  in  the  ftreet,  the  people  perceived  me 
to  be  the  Methodijl  preacher  they  had  read  of  in 
the  news-papers.  They  told  one.  another,  and 
flocked  about  me,  as  if  the  foldlers  had  brought  a 
monfler  into  the  town. 

When  we  had  ftaid  near  an  hour  in  the  ftreet, 
I and  five  more  were  billeted  at  one  houfe,  where 
the  people  were  fo  poor,  they  had  not  fix  feats 
for  us  to  fit  on,  nor  any  beds  : fo  we  came  back 
to  the  officers  quarters,  and  they  ordered  four  of 
us  to  another  houfe. 

God  gave  me  to  fpeak  plain  to  them,  and  fe- 
veral  of  their  neighbours,  who  came  to  fee  the 
Methodijl.  And  they  faid,  if  this  be  the  Metho- 
diji  do6frine,  we  pray  God  we  may  have  it 
preached  in  this  town,  for  hundreds  would  be 
glad  to  hear  you. 

In  the  evening  the  head  man  of  the  town  came 
in.  He  is  a profeft  papift,  but  a moral  honeft: 
man,  and  one  who  bears  a good  charafter  in  his 
neighbourhood.  He  afked  me  many  queftions, 
and  God  gave  me  to  anfwer  him  to  his  fatisfaftion. 
Indeed  I never  faw  a man  of  his  rank  fo  teacha- 
ble and  fo  humble.  His  gold  lace  did  not  make 
him  above  liftening  to  the  gofpel,  he  feemed  a 
man  of  found  reafon,  as  well  as  liberal  education. 

I fpoke  near  an  hour,  to  prove  the  doftrine  of 
juftification  by  faith ; and  that  both  from  the 
Old  and  New  Teftament.  I ffiewed  the  fruits  of 
that  juftifying  faith,  and  the  neceffity  of  every 
man’s  having  it,  that  he  may  efcape  the  damna- 
D 6 ti<?a 


C 84  ] 

lion  of  hell.  The  word  had  fuch  an  efFeft  upon 
him,  that  his  eyes  difcovered  the  tendernefs  of 
his  heart ; and,  when  I had  ended,  he  faid,  1 
think  no  man  in  his  fenfes  would  dare  to  hinder 
you  from  inftrufting  Tinners  in  the  way  of  falva- 
tion  ; as  for  my  part,  I {hall  be  glad  to  fee  you  at 
liberty  ; and  if  .you  get  clear  of  thefe  men,  and 
come  again  this  w'ay,  I would  have  you  call  on 
me. 

I was  amazed  to  find  fuch  a man  among  the 
papifts,  having  met  very  few,  either  teachers  or 
hearers  of  our  own  church,  but  what  hold  the 
popifli  principles  ten  times  ftronger  than  this 
man,  who  calls  himfelf  a papifi.  When  he  went 
away,  he  forced  two  (hillings  into  my  hand, 
which  I would  have  returned,  telling  him  I re- 
ceived no  money,  and  needed  none  ; but  he 
would  not  take  it  again,  faying  he  could  afford 
it,  and  I might  have  occafion  for  it  on  my  jour- 
ney. O God,  be  merciful  to  him  that  gives  a 
cup  of  cold  water  to  thy  fervants. 

Next  morning,  at  two,  the  drum  beat  for  us 
10  march  out  of  town.  By  eleven  on  Friday, 
v}&  gox  io  Northallerton-,  and  by  twelve,  fettled 
in  quarters.  1 went  into  the  market-place,  and 
fpoke  to  thofe  I found  there,  of  the  way  of  falva- 
tion;  1 hope  not  in  vain.  Aftervvards  1 was  fit- 
ting alone,  and  there  came  a fhop-keeper,  and 
laid,  if  I would  go  to  his  houfe,  he  would 
give  me  a glafs  of  any  liquor  I pleafed  to  drink. 
Itold  him^  I did  not  drink  any'ftrong  liquors. 

Well 


[ §5  3 

Well  but,  he  faid,  I defire  your  company,  if  yoa 
pleafe,  for  half  an  hour.  I went  to  his  houfe, 
and  drank  tea  with  him  and  his  family,  and  fpoke 
plain  to  them.  They  received  my  exhortation 
with  thankfulnefs,  and  faid,  we  have  heard  much 
of  you,  but  never  heard  any  of  you  before.  Se- 
veral of  you  have  paffed  through  the  town,  and 
we  wondered  they  never  preached  here.  If  you 
come  again,  we  hope  you  will  call  and  fee  us. 
I gave  them  a book,  and  returned  to  my  quarters. 

Next  morning,  at  one,  the  drum  beat  for  us  to 
march,  and  we  got  to  Darlington  by  nine.  Flere 
I was  known  to  feveral ; and,  by  them,  made 
known  to  almoft  all  the  town.  Many  came  to 
my  quarters  to  talk  with  me  ; and  others,  fent 
for  me.  I find  the  people  hunger  after  the  word, 
as  if  there  were  no  bibles  in  the  nation. 

We  refled  here  on  Sunday,  and  I had  many 
to  fee  me.  When  they  beard  v/hat  our  doftrine 
was,  they  cried,  it  is  a fhame  to  fend  a man  for 
a foldier  for  fpeaking  the  truth  ; for  let  all  men 
fay  what  they  will,  this  is  the  gofpel  of  Jefus 
Chrift. 

In  the  evening  one  of  the  officers  came  to  me, 
and  faid,  Well,  Sir,  why  was  you  not  at  church 
to-day  ? I anfwered,  I was.  Sir,  and  if  you  had 
been  there,  you  might  have  feen  me  ; for  I ne- 
ver mifs  going,  w'hen  I have  an  opportunity. 
Well,  Sir,  he  added,  have  you  preached  fince 
you  came  hither.  Not  publicly  yet,  I replied. 
He  fv;ore  he  wifhed  I would,  that  he  might  pu- 

nifh 


t 86  ] 

nlfh  me  feverely.  But,  Sir,  (I  told  him)  if  you 
do  not  repent  and  leave  olF that  habit  of  fwearing, 
you  will  be  worfe  puniflied  than  you  are  able  to 
punifh  me.  He  faid,  I will  make  you  mind 
your  firelock,  and  leave  off  your  preaching. 
Yes,  Sir,  I anfwered  when  I leave  off  fpeaking. 

This  was  he  that  put  me  in  prifon  at  York  for 
preaching.  As  Saul  hunted  David,  fo  has  this 
man  hunted  my  foul ; but  I truft  the  fame  God 
that  delivered  David,  will  deliver  me  from  cruel 
men. 

I gave  feveral  books  away  in  this  town  alfo  ; 
which  we  left  the  next  morning. 

I was  much  furprized  at  the  good-nature  of 
the  foldiers  in  all  this  march,  for  I believed 
tw'enty  offered  to  carry  the  gun  for  me,  and  any 
thing  elfe  I had.  God,  I found,  fupported  me 
wonderfully  in  all  thefe  trials;  for  I could  travel 
fifteen  or  twenty  miles  falling,  as  well  as  thofe 
W'ho  eat  and  drink  tw’O  or  three  times  by  the 
way.  Surely  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone  ; 
but  the  Lord  is  the  llrength  of  Ifratl ; the  defen- 
der of  all  them  that  put  their  trufl  in  him.  O 
God,  be  thou  my  guide  unto  death. 

We  got  to  Durham  by  nine  on  Monday  ; but, 
in  our  way  to  Darlington,  we  had  a river  to 
crofs,  and  were  obliged  to  wade  through  it. 
The  day  was  very  hot,  fo  that  I had  fweat  much, 
and  catched  cold  immediately.  I found  myfelf 
much  out  of  order  when  w'e  got  to  Durham, 
and  defired  I might  lav  down  a little.  Corporal 

W 


[ 8;  ] 

jf — lay  down  with  me,  and  fell  afleeps  At 

twelve,  I awaked  fuddenly,  as  if  fome  man  had 
called  nte,  and  faid  to  the  corporal,  I muft  go 
to  the  market-place  direftly,  for  what  I know 
not,  neither  which  way  to  go  to  it.  Nor  I,  he 
faid,  but  I will  go  with  you,  and  we  can  enquire 
the  way.  Accordingly  we  did;  and  juft  as  we 
got  thither,  my  brother  Wejldl  was  enquiring  for 

me  among  the  foldiers.  Well,  faid  Mr.  W , 

I did  never  fee  fuch  a thing  in  my  life,  that  you 
fhould  thus  awake,  and  come  to  meet  your  friend 
the  minute  he  came  to  feek  for  you. 

We  were  much  comforted  together.  He 
told  me,  that  Mr.  John  Wejley  would  be  at  Dur- 
ham foon  after  four  o'clock.  I gave  God  thanks 
for  that  news.  We  went  to  a common,  about  a 
mile  from  the  town,  and  there  we  met  Mr. 

W . My  heart  rejoiced  to  fee  him,  and  great 

reafon  have  I to  give  God  thanks  that  I ever 
faw  him,  who  was  an  inftrumentin  God’s  hands 
of  plucking  me  as  a brand  out  of  the  fire.  And 
I have  found  him  God’s  meffenger  for  good  ever 
fince. 

We  came  to  the  fign  of  the  Angel,  and  had 
fome  converfation  together.  He  exhorted  me 
to  watch  and  pray,  and  did  not  doubt  but  my 
captivity  would  turn  to  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  furtherance  of  the  gofpel.  At  fix  I went  to 
anfwer  my  call,  and  Mr.  JV———  went  into  the 
minfier. 

Afterwards  I and  Thomas  Beard,  my  feDow- 

prifoner. 


[ 88  ] 

prifoner,  met  Mr.  W- and  our  brother 

'Errington,  and  went  with  them  to  the  inn  and 
flaid  till  nine.  When  we  had  prayed  together, 
we  commended  each  other  to  the  grace  of  God, 
and  fo  parted  in  body,  not  in  fpirit. 

Next  morning  the  drum  beat  at  one,  and  we 
were  called  up  info  the  market-place,  and  caufed 
to  hand  till  three,  and  then  marched  off  for  Sun- 
derland, which  we  reached  by  nine.  When  we 
were  brought  up  in  the  town,  I heard  feveral  of 
the  inhabitants  fay  to  one  another.  That  is  the 
Methodifl  mentioned  in  the  news-papers,  for  his 
look  is  not  like  other  mens.  O my  God,  why 
am  I and  my  fellows  become  men  that  are  won- 
dered at. 

While  we  flood,  a landlord  came  to  us  and 
faid,  Sir,  I wifli  you  would  quarter  at  my  houfe; 
for  1 expeft  two,  and  fhould  be  glad  to  have  you 
for  one,  and  whom  you  chufe  for  a comrade. 

I chofe  corporal  IV , and  afked  for  the  billet 

as  the  man  defired,  but  could  not  get  it.  But  1 
believe  we  got  the  befl  quarters  we  could  have 
in  Sunderland.  Thus,  I fee,  if  we  acknowledge 
God  in  all  our  ways,  he  will  diretl  our  paths. 

When  I went  to  exercife  I had  many  came  to 
fee  me,  and  fell  in  difeourfe  with  them,  but 
could  get  no  hold  of  them ; for  they  affented 
and  conlented  to  all  I faid  ; and  were  fo  full  of 
what  the  world  calls  good  manners,  that  all  I 
fpoke  was  as  written  on  the  fand,  though  I 
talked  with  them  feveral  days.  Yet  forae,  I 

tiufl. 


[ 89  ] 

trufl:,  will  be  mindful  of  their  everlafiing  wel- 
fare. 

On  Saturday  night  I was  ordered  to  ftami 
Gentry  on  the  Sunday  following,  and  defired  I 
might  Hand  another  day,  or  pay  for  my  guard. 
I believe  ten  men  offered  to  ftand  for  me,  but  all 
in  vain;  for  the  enfign  was  the  officer  of  the  guard 
that  day,  and  he  protefted  he  would  make  me 
do  it  myfelf.  I afked.  Sir,  what  have  I done 
that  I cannot  have  the  fame  liberty  as  another 
man  ? He  anfwered,  You  love  the  church  too 
well,  and  I will  keep  you  from  it,  and  make 
them  go  who  do  not  like  to  go.  Keep  me,  O my 
God,  from  all  anger  or  ill-will,  for  this  man  is 
fet  to  prove  me.  I went  to  the  guard-houfe, 
and  many  came  to  talk  with  me;  but  I did  not 
fland  Gentry,  till  fix  on  Monday  morning.  The 
enfign’s  faying  in  the  open  ftreet,  I ffiould  not 
go  to  church,  becaufe  I loved  it,  drew  many 
of  the  people  to  me;  and  will  turn,  I am  per- 
fuaded,  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gofpel. 

The  week  after  Mr.  M came.  He  had 

heard  what  the  enfign  had  done,  and  came  to  me, 
and  afked  me  how  I did,  and  faid,  I am  informed 

Mr.  A hindered  you  from  going  to  church  ; 

but  I will  affure  you,  you  ffiall  not  be  hindered 
again  as  long  as  you  are  with  us. 

I have  found  fomething  of  good  in  this  man 
ever  fince  I knew  him.  He  will  hear  reafon, 
and  feems  to  make  a confcience  both  of  his  words 
and  aflions. 


I was 


[ 90  } 

I was  near  an  hour  in  his  chamber,  and  he 
afked  me  of  the  principal  points  of  our  doftrinr. 
I made  them  as  plain  to  him  as  I could,  and  he 
heard  me  with  great  candor,  and  faid,  he  bad  no 
fault  at  all  to  find  with  it.  He  told  me.  The  firft 
time  that  ever  I faw  you,  I faw  you  was  no  va- 
grant; but  it  would  be  a fcandal  to  all  who  were 
concerned  in  fending  or  receiving  fuch  an  one  ; 
for  the  a£l  of  parliament  does  not  reach  fuch  as 
you.  But  the  reft  of  the  officers  faid,  they  could 
not  help  it,  for  you  was  delivered  to  us  as  a fol- 

dier  by  the  j s,  and  they  are  the  rogues- 

No,  Sir,  I anfwered  the  j s are  in  no  fault,. 

for  I was  never  before  one  of  them  yet.  He 
faid,  Who  fent  you  then  ? I replied,  the  com- 
miffioners.  What  evidence  bad  they  againit 
you  ? The  accufation  againft  me  was.  He  preaches 
to  the  people,  by  the  conftable’s  deputy;  and  he 
alfo  confeffed  he  knew  no  other  evil  of  me. 
Well,  blit  the  aft  of  toleration  clears  you  from 
that’s  being  a ctime.  What  had  you  no  man  to 
fpeak  for  you  ? Yes,  feveral  were  ready,  but 
none  were  fuffered  to  do  it ; neither  were  the  pa- 
pers regarded  which  my  honeft  neighbours  and 
gentlemen  fent  on  my  behalf.  For  one  of  the 
commiffioners  was  the  parfon  of  our  parifh,  and 
he  was  the  evidence  againji  me ; and  they  faid 
they  would  hear  no  other.  Nay,  faid  Mr. 

M , it  is  no  wonder  they  treated  you  fo,  if 

the  prieft  was  concerned  ; for  they  have  been  at 
the  head  of  all  the  perfecutions  for  religion  which 

have 


[ 9'  3 

have  been  fince  the  world  began.  I fee  them  fo 
wicked,  that  I do  not  mind  religion  at  ail.  Burt 
this  is  my  religion  ; I believe  there  is  one  God, 
and  that  Chrift  his  Son  died  for  the  world  ; and 
I llrive  to  do  honeftly  to  all  men  ; and  to  do  a 
good  turn  to  the  meaneft  if  I can.  And  I think 
my  religion  is  better  than  theirs  who  preach  one 
thing  and  do  another.  For  I have  feen  fo  much 
of  them,  that  I will  alTure  you,  I would  hear  you 
as  foon  as  any — in  the  land. 

He  faid,  he  could  like  to  read  fome  of  our 
books;  and  I made  him  a prefent  oi  An  earnejl 
Appeal,  and  the  CharaEler  of  a Methodijl,  and  the 
fermon  Awake  thou  that  feepef.  He  has  told 
me  fmce,  that  he  has  read,  and  likes  them 
well. 

This  day  he  procured  me  a furlow  to  go  to 
Newcafile  for  feven  days : and  I found  I did  not 
go  up  without  the  Lord;  for  my  foul,  and  thofe 
of  the  people  were  refrefhed  with  the  love  of 
God.  Several  of  the  foldiers  came  to  hear  me 
preach,  and  gave  great  attention  to  the  things 
that  were  fpoken.  I found  great  freedom  to 
fpeak  to  the  children,  whom  God  has  called  out 
of  the  evil  world,  to  ferve  him  in  this  place. 
Watch  over  them,  O my  God,  for  good,  and  be 
thou  their  guide  unto  death. 

On  Tuefday  my  time  was  out  to  go  back.  I 
preached  at  Pairfhee  in  the  afternoon,  to  an  at- 
tentive congregation,  and  got  to  Sunderland  by 
feven  at  night.  This  week  I received  a letter 

from 


[ 92  ] 

fVorn  Mr.  C IV , that  the  E.  of  S— — 

had  aflured  the  L.  H , that  I ihould  be  fet 

at  liberty  in  a few  days,  I faid,  The  Lord  hath 
not  forgotten  to  be  gracious,  for  be  hath  taken 
my  caufe  in  hand,  and  it  fhall  turn  to  hisglorv; 
for  he  alone  hath  done  the  work,  when  all  hu- 
man means  had  feemed  to  fail.  Mv  enemies 
cried.  We  have  made  his  bonds  flrong,  and 
none  can  deliver  him  out  of  our  fnare;  for  we 
have  put  it  out  of  the  officers’  power  fo  difcharge 
him  for  any  price.  Lord,  I befeech  thee,  open 
their  eyes  and  let  them  fee  the  fnare  which  Sa- 
tan hath  laid  for  their  fouls,  and  efcape  by  fpeedy 
repentance  and  faith  in  thy  blood. 

This  wee.k  I was  much  out  of  health  by  the 
furfeit  I got  in  marching  ; but  found  prefent  eafe 
by  being  blooded.  The  week  following  I w^as 
fent  for  by  the  captain  to  the  ftore-houfe;  and  he 
infilled  on  my  going,  though  I was  fo  ill.  When 
I came  there,  he  and  three  more  officers  came, 
and  alked  me  how  I did.  I told  them  ; and  they 
faid.  Here  is  a good  coat  for  you  to  keep  you 
from  cold,  that  you  may  recover  your  health. 
I faid,  I have  coats  enough  if  that  would  do,  I 
need  none  of  yours.  They  faid.  They  wmuld 
make  me  wear  it,  and  all  the  other  cloathing  be- 
longing to  a foldier.  I anfwered.  You  may  array 
me  as  a man  of  w’ar,  but  I fliall  never  fight- 
They  alked.  What  is  your  reafon  ? And  my 
anfwer  was,  I cannot  fee  any  thing  in  this  world 
worth  fighting  for.  I wan,t  neither  its  riches 

nor 


[ 93  J 

nor  Iionours,  but  the  honour  that  coraeth  from 
God  only.  I regard  neither  its  fmiles  nor  its 
frowns ; and  have  no  bufmefs  in  it  but  to  get 
well  out  of  it. 

* Then  they  ordered  the  ferjeant  to  pull  off 
my  coat,  and  put  a red  one  on  me.  When  he 
had  done  it,  they  turned  me  round  and  rejoiced 
over  me.  I faid,  you  fee  the  feripture  cannot 
be  broken,  where  it  faith,  If  they  do  this  in  the. 
green  tree,  what  will  they  do  in  the  dry?  What 
do  you  mean  by  that,  they  alked  ? And  I anfwer- 
ed,  The  foldiers  took  Jefus  and  Jlripped  him,  and 
put  a fcarlet  robe  upon  him,  and  mocked  hi?n,  as 
you  have  treated  me,  his  fervant,  this  day,  for 
fpeaking  his  words.  He  indeed  hath  the  greater 
condemnation  who  delivered  me  into  your 
I hands ; but  I pray  God  forgive  you  all.  Thefe 
words  turned  their  countenance  and  behaviour 
towards  me,  and  one  of  them  laboured  from  that 
I time  to  find  fome  way  for  me  to  be  fet  at 
[ liberty. 

■ During  my  three  weeks  ilinefs,  many  of  the 
I brethren  and  fillers  from  Newcaftle,  Biddick,  and 
I Painjher,  came  to  fee  me,  and  God  was  pleafed 
jj  at  that  time  to  give  fome  the  knowledge  of  falva- 
;;  tion  by  the  remillion  of  their  fins  ; and  to  com- 
fort  all  our  hearts  with  his  love.  O may  we 
ever  keep  his  commandments,  that  mav 
'continue  in  his  love;  even  as  he  hath  kept 
ibis  Fathei’s  commandments,  and  continued  in 
^ his  love. 


On 


[ 94  ] 

On  Friday,  July  27,  John  Graham,  of  Sun- 
derland, came  to  me  with  an  open  letter  in  his 
hand,  and  faid,  Come,  my  friend,  I have  good 
news  for  thee.  God  hath  heard  the  prayers  of 
ihe  people  in  thy  behalf,  and  fent  thee  deliver- 
ance. Here,  read  this  letter,  which  the  major 
hath  fent  the  captain  on  thy  account.  It  was  on 
this  wife,  “ I have  received  an  order  from  the 

harl  ot  S to  difcharge  John  Ndfon,  who 

was  preft  from  Birjlal,  in  the  weft-riding  of 
Yorkjhire,  Therefore  take  his  arms  and  cloath- 
ing-from  him  which  he  has  received,  and  let  me 
know  if  he  has  had  any  pay  fince  he  came,  and 
fend  him  to  me  with  a furlow.”  Accordingly  I 
delivered  all  things  I had  belonging  to  them,  to 

lieutenant  M who  faid.  He  was  glad  that  I 

was  to  be  releafed,  and  wilhed  me  well  where- 
foever  I went.  I had  a furlow  given  me,  and 
fet  out  in  the  afternoon  v.?ith  fome  that  were 
come  from  Nezvcafile  to  fee  me ; and  got  there 
by  feven. 

All  the  focicty  gave  God  thanks  on  my  behalf, 
as  foon  as  they  faw  me,  for  they  had  knowledge 
of  my  deliverance  before  I had.  Next  morning 
I went  to  the  major’s  quarters  about  nine. 
When  I had  waited  about  an  hour,  I was  ordered 
to  come  at  half  an  hour  paft  eleven;  I did  fo, 
and  v/aited  another  hour.  Then  the  major 
called  to  me,  and  bade  me  come  at  half  an  hour 
•after  two,  and  he  w'ould  fpeak  to  me.  I came 
aorain  as  he  ordered  me,  and  when  I had  ftaid 


near 


[ 95  ] 

neat'  an  hour,  one  of  the  captains  called  me,  and 
faid,  the  major  is  gone  to  dine  with  the  mayor  of 
the  town,  and  you  wifi  hardly  fee  him  to-night, 
but  you  will  be  fure  to  find  him  to-morrow 
morning.  I told  him  that  would  not  do  for  me; 
for  my  bufinefs  was  not  to  be  done  on  the  fabbath. 
Near  fix  in  the  evening  I faw  the  major  go 
along  the  flreet,  and  followed  him  to  his  lodg- 
ings. He  faid,  I have  an  order  from  the  Lord 
S to  difcharge  you.  He  fent  for  the  adju- 

tant, and  ordered  him  to  bring  two  primed  dif- 
charges  with  him.  He  came,  and  three  more 
of  the  officers  with  him,  and  filled  up  the  dif- 
charge. When  he  had  done,  he  faid,  I wiffi  all 
the  men  in  our  regiment  would  behave  as  well  as 
Mr.  Nelfon  has  done  fince  be  came  among  us,  it 
would  be  much  better  for  us  and  them  too. 
Then  our  lieutenant  faid.  Indeed  he  has  done 
much  good  fince  he  came  among  us  ; for  we 
have  not  one  third  of  the  curfing  and  fwearing 
in  the  regiment,  which  we  had  before  he  came. 
And  he  has  given  me  feveral  private  exhortations 
and  fome  of  their  books  ; and  I thank  him  for 
them  and  his  advice,  for  it  is  good.  Then  the 
major  faid,  I wifh  1 had  a regiment  of  fuch  men 
as  he  is  in  all  refpefts,  fave  that  one,  his  refufing 
to  fight ; I would  not  care  what  enemy  I had  to 
meet,  or  where  my  lot  was  caff. — Sir,  if  you  fear 
God,  I faid,  you  have  no  need  to  fear  any  thing 
elfe;  for  they  that  fear  him  depart  from  evil,  and 

feek 


[ 96  ] 

Feek  to  do  his  will,  and  not  their  own.  The}' 
know  that  in  his  hand  are  the  iflues  of  life  and 
death  ; therefore  they  fear  not  him  that  can  kill 
the  body  only,  but  him  that  can  deftroy  both  foul 
and  body  in  hell. 

Well,  faid  the  major,  if  you  are  fo  fcrupuloirs 
-about  fighting,  what  muff  we  do  ? I anfwered. 
It  is  voLir  trade,  and  if  you  had  abetter,  it  might 
be  better  for  you.  But  fomebody,  he  replied, 
muft  fight.  I faid.  If  all  men  lived  by  faith  in 
the  Son  of  God,  wars  would  be  at  an  end.  That 
is  true,  be  anfwered,  and  if  it  was  fo,  we  fhould 
iea:  n war  no  more. 

Here  one  of  the  captains  fpoke.  You  faid  one 
day,  if  we  have  not  the  -Spirit  of  God,  we  are 
dead  while  we  live.  Did  I fo  ? Yes  you  did. 
Then  I will  prove  it;  both  from  the  doftrine  of 
the  church  of  England  (of  which  I profefs  myfelf 
a member)  and  Irom  the  word  of  God.  God  gave 
me  to  fpeak  plainly  from  both  for  about  twenty 
minutes;  none  contradifling  me,  but  they  flood 
as  dumb  men. 

Theti  the  major  faid,  Here  is  fuch  a difcharge 
for  you  as  I never  gave  before,  but  once;  anl 
put  it  into  my  hand.  1 told  them,  1 have  now 
delivered  my  own  foul,  and  am  pure  from  the. 
blood  of  YOU  alH  for  I have  not  fpared  either 
poor  or  rich,  fince  I came  among  }'ou,  but  have 
let  life  and  death  before  you  all  as  you  came  rii 
my  way.  I have  declared  unto  you,  that  the 
•wicked  firall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  peo- 
ple 


[ 97  ] 

pie  that  forget  God ; and  contrarywife,  the 
bleffed  ftate  of  them  that  repent,  and  obey  the 
gofpel  of  Ghrlft  our  Saviour.  And  I pray  God 
give  you  all  to  underfland  the  things  which  make 
for  your  everlafting  peace,  and  blefsyou  in  turn- 
ing every  one  of  you  from  your  iniquities.  Then 
fliall  we  meet  anotlier  day  to  part  no  more.  The 
major  faid,  I wifli  you  well  whet  ever  you  go, 
for  I believe  you  Melhodijis  are  well  meaning 
people ; and  fo  faid  they  all.  I gave  them  a book, 
and  took  my  leave  of  them. 

I w'ent  to  the  room  and  preached  that  night, 
and  had  feveral  of  the  foldiers  to  hear  me,  who 
gave  great  attention  to  what  I faid.  Then  I 
took. my  leave  of  them  ; and  fome  of  them  wept, 
and  delired  me  pray  for  them,  and  faid.  We  are 
glad  you  are  fet  at  liberty,  but  lorry  to  part  with 
you.  I commended  them  to  God,  and  to  the 
word  of  his  grace,  and  trull  they  will  mind  the 
exhortation,  and  become  good  foldiers  of  Jefus 
Chrill. 

On  this  28th  day  of  July,  I w’as  fet  at  liberty 
to  go  wherefoever  I thought  w'as  moll  to  God’s 
glory,  wIto  has  delivered  me  horn  my  bonds.  For 
he  hath  done  the  work,  and  to  him  the  glory  is 
due.  What  am  I,  that  he  fliould  fo  care  for  me! 
But  he  is  a God  that  heareth  the  prayer  ; and 
the  cries  of  his  people  inclined  him  to  take  my 
caufe  in  hand,  Praife  the  Lord,  O my  foul, 
who  hath  kept  thee  in  all  trials,  and  hath  not 
fulfered  thee  to  faint  in  fore  temptation. 

VoL.  XVIII.  E 


Now 


C 98  ] 

Now  I find  the  words  true  which  Mr.  John 
Wejley  firft  fent  me  at  “Well,  my  bro- 

ther, is  the  God  whom  you  ferve  able  to  deliver 
you,  and  do  you  find  him  faithful  to  his  word  ? 
Is  his  grace  ftill  fufficicnt  for  you?  I doubt  it 
not ; he  will  not  fuffer  you  to  be  weary  or  faint 
in  your  mind.  But  he  had  work  for  vou  to  do 
which  you  knew  not  of,  and  thus  his  council 
was  to  be  fulfilled  ! O lofe  no  time  ! Who  knows 
how  many  fouls  God  may  by  this  means  deliver 
into  your  hands.  Shall  not  all  thefe  things  be  for 
the  furtherance  of  the  gofpel  ? And  is  not  the 
time  coming  when  we  fhall  cry  out  together, 
“ Nay,  in  all  thefe  things  we  are  more  than  con- 
tjuerors,  through  him  that  loved  us.”” 


A LETTER 


1. 


LETTER 

T O T H E 

Rev.  Mr.  B A I L Y,  of  Corkc. 

In  anfwer  to  a 

LETTER 

TO  THE 

Rev.  John  Wesley. 


Limerick^  June%  1750. 

Rev.  S I R, 

1.  T X T H Y do  you  not  fubfcribe  your  name 
V V to  a performance  fo  perfeflly  agree- 
j^ngboth  as  to  the  matter  and  form,  with  the 
) fermons  you  have  been  occafionally  preaching, 

I for  more  than  a year  laft  paft  ? As  to  your  feem- 
E 2 ing 


[ lOO  ] 

ing  to  clifclaim  it  by  faying  once  and  again,  | 
I am  but  a plain , Jimple  man  : and,  the  docb  ine  ! 
you  teach  is  only  a revival  of  the  old  antinominian  \ 
herefy,  I think  they  call  it.  I prefume  it  is  onJy 
a pious  fraud.  But  how  -came  fo  plain  and  fini- 
ple  a man,  to  know  the  meaning  of  the  Greek 
word  Philalethes  ? Sir,  this  is  not  of  a piece.  If 
you  did  not  care  to  own  your  child,  had  not  you 
betier  have  fubfcribed  the  fecond  (as  wellastl>e 
firll)  t letter,  George  Fijher  ? 

2.  I confefs  you  have  timed  your  performance 
well.  When  the  other  pointlefs  thing  was  j 
publiflied,  I came  unluckily  to  Corke  on  the 
felf-fame  day.  But  you  might  now  fuppofe  I 
was  at  a convenient  diftance.  However  I will 
not  plead  this  as  an  excufc,  for  taking  no  notice  i 
of  your  laft  favour : although,  to  fay  the  truth,  I 1 
fcarce  know  how  to  anfwer  it,  as  you  write  in  a i 
language  I am  not  accullomed  to.  Both  Dr. 
Tucker,  Dr.  Church,  and  all  the  other  gentlemen, 
who  have  wrote  to  me  in  public  for  fome  years, 
have  wrote  as  gentlemen,  having  fome  regard 
to  their  own,  whatever  my  charatler  was.  But 
as  you  fight  in  the  dark,  you  regard  not  what 
weapons  you  ufe.  We  are  not  therefore  on 
even  terms.  1 cannot  anfwer  you  in  kind.  I 
am  conllrained  to  leave  this  toyour  good  allies  of 
± Blackpool  and  Fair-lane. 

I fit  all, 

+ The  letter  thus  fubfcribed  was  publithcd  at  Corke,  on  May  | 
go  la(t. 

:{  Celebrated  parts  of  Gorke. 


[ lOl  ] 

I fliall,  firft,  ftate  the  fa£ls,  on  which  the 
prefent  controverfy  turns,  and  then  confider  the 
moft  material  parts  of  your  performance. 

FirJ},  I am  to  ftate  the  fafts.  But  here  I am 
under  a great  difadvantage,  having  few  of  ray 
papers  by  me.  Excufe  me  therefore  if  I do 
not  give  fo  full  an  account  now,  as  I may  pofTibly 
do  hereafter ; if  I only  give  you  for  the  prefent 
the  extraffs  of  fome  papers^  which  were  lately 
put  into  my  hands. 

Thomas  Jones  of  Corke,  merchant,  depofes. 

That  on  JWfTy  3,  Nicholas  Butler,  ballad- 

finger,  came  before  the  houfe  of  this  deponent, 
•and  aftembled  a large  mob;  that  this  deponent 
went  to  Daniel  Crone,TTc^,  then  mayor  of  Corke, 
and  defired  that  he  would  put  a ftop  to  thofe 
riots  ; aikingatthe  fame  time,  whether  he  gave 
the  faid  Butler  leave  to  go  about  in  this  manner  ? 
That  Mr.  Mayor  faid,  he  neither  gave  him  leave, 
neither  did  he  hinder  him  ; that  in  the  evening 
Butler  gathered  a larger  mob  than  before,  and 
went  to  the  houfe  where  the  people  called 
Methoclijls,  were  aftembled  to  hear  the  word  of 
God,  and  as  they  came  out,  threw  dirt  and  hurt 
feveral  of  them. 

That  on  May  4,  this  deponent  with,  fome 
others,  went  to  the  mayor  and  told  what  had 
been  done,  adding,  “ If  your  worfhip  pleafes  to 
fpeak  only  three  words  to  Butler,  it  will  all  be 
over : ’ that  the  mayor  gave  his  word  and  ho- 
nour, “ There  fliould  be  no  more  of  it,  he 
E 3 would 


f 102  ] 

would  put  an  entire  flop  to  it that  notwith- 
ftanding,  a larger  mob  than  ever  came  to  the 
houfe  the  fame  evening  ; that  they  threw  much 
dirt  and  many  ftones  at  the  people  both  while 
they  were  in  the  houfe,  and  when  they  came 
out:  that  the  mob  then  fell  upon  them  boih  on 
men  and  women,  with  clubs,  hangers  and  fwords, 
fo  that  many  of  them  were  much  wounded,  and 
loft  a confiderable  quantity  of  blood. 

That  on  May  5,  this  deponent  informed  the 
mayor  of  all,  and  alfo  that  Butler  had  openly 
declared,  “ There  fhould  be  a greater  mob 
than  ever  there  was  that  night  that  the  mayor 
promifed  he  w'ould  prevent  it : that  in  the  even- 
ing Butler  did  bring  a greater  mob  than  ever  ; 
that  this  deponent,  hearing  the  mayor  defigned 
to  go  out  of  the  way,  fet  tw'o  men  to  watch  him, 
and  when  the  riot  was  begun,  went  to  the  ale- 
houfe,  and  enquired  for  him  : that  the  woman 
of  the  houfe  denying  he  was  there,  this  deponent 
inftfted  he  was,  declared  he  w'ould  not  go  till  be 
had  feen  him;  and  began  fearching  the  houfe  : 
that  Mr.  Mayor  then  appearing,  he  demanded 
his  alTiftance,  to  fupprefs  a riotous  mob  ; that 
when  the  mayor  came  in  fight  of  them,  he 
beckoned  to  Butler,  who  immediately  came  down 
from  the  place  where  he  flood  ; that  the  mayor 
then  went  with  this  deponent,  and  looked  on 
many  of  the  people  covered  with  dirt  and  blood  : 
that  fome  of  them  ftill  remained  in  the  houfe, 
fearing  their  lives,  till  Janies  Chatterton  and  John 

Reily, 


I 


[ 103  J 

Reily,  efquires,  fheriffs  of  Corke,  and  Hugh 
MiHard,  junior,  Efq;  alderman,  turned  them 
cut  to  the  mob,  and  nailed  up  the  doors. 

2.  Elizabeth  Holler  an  of  Corke,  depofes,  ' 

That  on  May  3,  as  Ihe  was  going  down  Cajlk- 

Jlreet,  (he  faw  Nicholas  Butler  on  a table,  with 
ballads  in  one  hand  and  a bible  in  the  other : 
that  fhe  expreft  fome  concern  thereat ; on  which 
flierilF  Reily  ordered  his  bailiff  to  carry  her  to 
Bridewell ; that  afterward  the  bailiff  came  and 
faid,  “ His  mafter  ordered  fhe  fhould  he  carri- 
ed to  goal  and  that  fhe  continued  in  goal 
from  May  3,  about  eight  in  the  evening,  till 
between  ten  and  twelve  on  May  5. 

3.  John  Stockdale,  of  Corke,  tallow-chandler, 
depofes. 

That  on  May  5,  while  he  and  others  were 
affembled  to  hear  »the  word  of  God,  Nicholas 
Butler  came  down  to  the  houfe  where  they  were 
with  a very  numerous  mob  : that  when  this  de- 
ponent came  out,  they  threw  all  manner  of  dirt 
and  abundance  of-  Hones  at  him  ; that  they  then 
beat,  bruifed  and  cut  him  in  feveral  places  : 
that  feeing  his  wife  on  the  ground  and  the  mob 
abufing  her  ftill,  he  called  out  and  befought  them 
not  to  kill  his  wife  : that  on  this  one  of  them 
flruck  him  with  a large  flick,  as  did  alfo  many 
others,  fo  that  he  was  hurt  in  feveral  parts,  and 
his  face  in  a gore  of  blood. 

Daniel  Sullivan  of  Corke,  baker,  depofes. 

That  every  day  but  one  from  the  6th  to  the 
E q 16th 


[ ]- 

l6th  of  May,  Nicholas  Butler  affembled  a riotouJ 
mob,  before  ibis  deponent’s  houfe;  that  they 
abufed  all  who  came  into  the  fhop,  to  the  great 
damage  of  this  deponent’s  bufmefs;  that  on  or 
about  the  15th  Butler  fwore  he  would  bring  a 
mob  the  next  day  and  pull  down  his  houfe;  that 
accordingly  on  the  i6th  he  did  bring  a large  mob 
and  beat  or  abufed  all  that  came  to  the  houfe  : 
that  the  mayor  walked  by  while  the  mob  was  fo 
employed,  but  did  not  hinder  them  ; that  after- 
wards, they  broke  his  windows,  threw  dirt  and 
Hones  into  his  fhop,  and  fpoiled  a great  quantity 
of  his  goods. 

Daniel  Sullivan  is  ready  to  depofe  farther,  that 
from  the  16th  of  May  to  the  2bth,  the  mob  ga- 
thered every  day  before  his  houfe  ; that  on 
Sunday  the  28th,  Butler  fwore,  “They  would 
come  the  next  day  and  pull  down  the  houfe  of 
that  heretic  dog  and  called  aloud  to  the  mob, 
“ Let  the  heretic  dogs  indift  you  ; I will 
bring  you  all  off  without  a farthing  coft.” 

That  accordingly  on  May  29,  Butler  came 
with  a greater  mob  than  before  : that  he  w ent 
to  the  mayor  and  begged  him  to  come,  which  he 
for  fome  time  refufed  to  do;  but  after  much 
importunity,  rofe  up,  and  walked  with  him  down 
the  ftreet ; that  when  they  were  in  the  midft 
of  the  mob,  the  mayor  faid  aloud,  “ It  is  your 
own  fault,  for  entertaining  thefe  preachers  ; if  you 
will  turn  them  out  of  your  houfe,  I will  engage 
there  fhall  be  no  more  harm  done ; but  if  you 


[ lOi  ] 


will  not  turn  them  out,  you  muft  take  what  you 
will  get  that  upon  this  the  mob  fet  up  an 
huzza,  and  threw  Hones  failer  than  before  : that 
he  faid,  “ This  is  fine  ufage,  under  a proteflant 
government  ; if  I had  a prieft  . faying  mafs  in 
every  room  of  it,  my  houfe  would  not  be  touch- 
ed that  the  mayor  replied,  “ The  priefts  are 
tolerated  ; but  you  are  not  : you  talk  too  much ; 
go  in,  and  fliut  up  your  doors:”  that  feeing  no 
remedy,  he  did  fo,  and  the  mob  continued  break- 
ing tlie  windows  and  throwing  Hones  in  till  near 
twelve  at  night. 

That  on  May  31,  the  faid  Sullivan  and  two 
more,  went  and  informed  the  mayor  of  what  the 
mob  was  then  doing  : that  it  was  not  without 
great  importunity,  they  brought  him  as  far  as  the 
exchange  : that  he  would  go  no  farther,  nor  fend 
any  help,  tho’  fome  that  were  much  bruifed  and 
wounded  came  by  : that  fome  hours  after,  when 
the  mob  had  finifhed  their  work  he  fent  a party 
offoldiers  to  guaid  the  walls. 

5.  John  Stockdale  depofes  farther,  that  on 
May  31,  he  with  others  was  quietly  hearing  the 
word  of  God,  when  Butler  and  his  mob  came 
down  to  the  houfe  : that  as  they  came  out,  the 
mob  threw  fhowers  of  dirt  and  Hones  ^ that 
many  were  hurt,  many  beat,  bruifed  and  cut, 
among  whom  was  this  deponent,  who  was  fo 
bruifed  and  cut,  that  the  effurion  of  blood  from 
his  head  could  not  be  Hc>pped  for  a confidcrable 
time. . 

E 5 . 


6.  John 


[ io6‘  } 

6.  John  M'Nerny,  of  Ccrke,  depofes, 

That  on  the  31ft  ol May  laft,  as  this  deponent 
with  others  was  hearing  a fermon,  Butler  came 
down  with  a large  mob  ; that  the  Hones  and  dirt 
coming  in  faft>  obliged  the  congregation  to 
fhut  the  doors,  and  lock  themfelves  in : that 
the  mob  broke  open  the  door,  on  which  this  de- 
ponent endeavoured  to  efcape  through  a window  : 
that  not  being  able  to  do  it,  he  returned  into  the 
houfe  where  he  faw  the  mob  tear  up  the  pews, 
benches  and  floor,  part  of  which  they  afterwards 
burnt  in  the  open  flreet,  and  carried  away  part  for 
their  own  ufe. 

7.  Daniel  Sullivan  is  ready  to  depofe  farther, 

That  Butler  with  a large  mob  went  about  from 

ftreet  to  flreet,  and  from  houfe  to  houfe  abuf- 
ing,  threatening  and  beating  whomfoever  he 
pleafed,  from  June  ifl,  to  the  16th,  when  they 
affaulted,  bruifed,  and  cut  Ann  Jenkins',  and 
from  the  16th  to  the  30th,  when  a woman  whom 
they  had  beaten,  mifcarried,  and  narrowly  efcap- 
cd  with  life. 

Some  of  the  particulars  were  as  follows.^ 

Thomas  Burnet,  of  Corke,  nailor,  depofes, 

That  on  or  about  the  12th  oi  June,  as  this 
deponent  was  at  work  in  his  mafler’s  fhop, 
i^icholas  Butler  came  with  a great  mob  to  the 
door,  and  feeing  this  deponent,  told  him,  he 
was  an  heretic  dog,  and  his  foul  was  burning  in 
hell  ; that  this  deponent  afking,  “ Why  do 
you  ufe  me  thus  ?”  Butler  took  up  a flone  and 
ftruck  him'fo  violently  oa  the  fide,  that  be  was 

thereby 


[ 107  ] 

thereby  rendered  incapable  of  working  for  up- 
wards of  a week  ; that  he  hit  this  deponent’s  wife 
with  another  ftone,  without  any  kind  of  provoca- 
tion, which  fo  hurt  her,  that  ihe  was  obliged  to 
take  to  her  bed,  and  has  not  been  right  well 
fince. 

AnnCooJJiea,  of  Corke,  depofes, 

That  on  or  about  the  12th  oi  June,  as  Ihe  was 
Handing  at  her  father’s  door,  Nicholas  Rutler  with 
a riotous  mob,  began  to  abufe  this  deponent  and 
her  family,  calling  them  heretic  bitches,  faying, 
they  were  damned  and  all  their  fouls  were  in 
hell  ; that  then,  without  any  provocation,  he 
took  up  a great  Hone,  and  threw  it  at  this  depo- 
nent, which  ftruck  her  on  the  head  with  fuch 
force  that  it  deprived  her  of  her  fenfes  for  fome 
time. 

Ann  Wright,  of  Corke,  depofes, 

That  on  or  about  the  12th  oi  June,  as  this  de- 
ponent was  in  her  own  houfe,  Butler  and  his 
mob  came  before  her  door,  calling  her  and  her 
family  heretic  bitches,  and  fwearing,  “ He. 
would  make  her  houfe  hotter  than  hell  fire  that 
he  threw  dirt  and  ftones  at  them,,  hit  her  in  the 
face,  dafhed  all  the  goods  about  which  fhe  had  in 
her  window,  and  fixe  really  believes,  would  have 
dafhed  out  her  brains,  had  fhe  not  quitted  h^r 
fhop,  and  fled  for  her  life 

Margaret  Griffin,  oi  Corke,  depofes,. 

That  on  the  2qth  of  jfime,  as.  this  deponent 
was  about  her  bufinefs-,  Butler  and  his  mob  came 
up,  took  hold  on  her,  tore  her  cloaths,.  ftruck 
E 6,  ■ he^^ 


[ ] 

her  feveral  times,  and  cut  her  mouth  : that  after 
file  broke  from  him,  he  and  his  mob  purfued  her 
to  her  houfe,  and  would  have  broken  in,  had 
notfome  neighbours  interpofed  : that  he  had  beat 
and  abufed  her  feveral  times  before,  and  one  of 
ihofe  times  to  fuch  a degree,  that  fhe  was  all  in  a 
gore  of  blood,  and  continued  fpitting  blood,  for 
feveral  days  after. 

Jacob  Connor , clothier,  olCorhe,  depofes. 

That  on  the  24th  oi  June,  as  he  was  employed 
in  his  lawful  bufinefs,  Butler  and  his  mob  came 
up,  and  without  any  manner  of  provocation  fell 
upon  him  : that  they  beat  him  till  they  caufed 
fuch  an  effufion  of  blood,  as  could  not  be  ftopt 
fora  confiderable  time;  and  that  he  verily  be- 
lieves, had  not  a gentleman  interpofed,  they 
would  have  killed  him  on  the  fpot. 
g.  Ann  Hughes  of  Corhe,  depofes. 

That  on  the  29th  of  June,  (he  alked  Nicholas 
Butler,  why  he  broke  open  her  houfe  on  the  2i(l  ? 
That  hereon  he  called  her  many  abufive  names, 
(being  attended  with  his  ufual  mob)  dragged  her 
up  and  down,  tore  her  deaths  in  pieces,  and 
with  his  fword  (tabbed  and  cut  her  in  both  her 
arms. 

Daniel  Fills,  blackfmith,  olCorke,  depofes. 

That  on  the  29th  of  June,  Butler  and  a riotous 
mob  came  before  his  door,  called  him  many  abu- 
five names,  drew  his  hanger  and  threatened  to 
llab  him  : that  he  and  his  mob  the  next  day  af- 
faulted  the  houfe  of  this  deponent  with  drawn 

fwords  : 


[ 109  ] 

fwords  : and  that  he  is  perfuaded,  had  not  one 
who  came  b)^  prevented,  they  would  havfe  taken 
away  his  life. 

lo.  Mary  Fuller  of  Corke,  depofes,  that  on  the 
30th  ol  June,  Butler,  at  the  head  of  his  mob, 
came  between  nine  and  ten  at  night  to  the  de- 
ponent’s fhop,  with  a naked  fword  in  his  hand  ; 
that  he  fwore,  he  would  cleave  the  deponent’s 
fcull,  and  immediately  made  a full  ftroke  at  her 
head  ; whereupon  me  was  obliged  to  fly  for  her 
life,  leaving  her  fhop  and  goods  to  the  mob, 
many  of  which  they  hacked  and  hewed  with 
their  fwords,  to  her  no  fmall  lofs  and  damage. 

Henry  Dunkle,  joyr\er,  olCorke,  depofes, 

That  on  the  30th  of  June,  as  he  was  handing 
at  the  widow  Fuller's,  fhop-v/indow,  he  faw  But- 
ler, accompanied  with  a large  mob,  who  flopped 
before  her  fhop  : that  after  he  had  grofsiy  abufed 
her,  he  made  a full  ftroke  with  his  hanger  at  her 
head ; which  muff  have  cleft  her  in  two,  had  not 
this  deponent  received  the  guard  of  the  hanger 
on  his  fhoulder : that  prefently  after,  the  faid 
Butler  feized  upon  this  deponent : that  he  feized 
him  by  the  collar  with  one  hand,  and  with  the 
other  held  the  banger  over  his  head,  calling  him 
all  manner  of  names,  and  tearing  his  fhirt  and 
cloaths;  and  that  had  it  not  been  for  the  timely 
afTiflance  of  fome  neighbours,  he’verily  believes 
he  fhould  have  been  torn  in  pieces. 

Margaret  Trimndl,  of  Corke,  depofes. 


Tliat 


[ no  ] 

That  on  the  30th  of  June,  John  Aujlin  and 
Nicholas  Butler,  with  a numerous  mob,  came  to 
her  (hop  : that  after  calling  her  many  names, 
Aujlin  flruck  her  with  his  club  on  the  right  arm, 
fo  that  it  has  been  black  ever  fince  from  the  fhoul- 
der  to  the  elbow  : that  Butler  came  next,  and 
with  a great  flick  flruck  her  a violent  blow  acrofs 
the  back : that  many  of  them  then  drew  their 
fwords,  which  they  carried  under  their  coats,  and 
cut  and  hacked  her  goods,  part  of  which  they  threw 
out  into  the  flreet, while  others  of  them  threw  dirt 
and  ftones  into  the  fhop,  to  the  confiderable 
damage  of  her  goods  and  lofs  of  this  deponent. 

11.  It  was  not  for  thofe  who  had  any  regard 
either  to  their  perfons  or  goods,  to  oppofe  Mr. 
Butler  after  this.  So  the  poor  people  patiently 
fuffered  whatever  he  and  his  mob  were  pleafed  to 
infli^l  upon  them,  till  the  afhzes  drew  on,  at 
which  they  doubted  not  to  find  a fufficient, 
though  late  relief. 

Accordingly,  twenty-eight  depofitions  were 
taken  (from  the  foul  copies  of  fome  of  which  the 
preceding  account  is  molliy  tranfcribed)  and  laid 
before  the  grand  jury,  Augujl  19.  But  they  did 
not  find  any  one  of  thefe  bills.  Inflead  of  this, 
they  made  that  memorable  prefentment,  tvhich 
is  worthy  to  be  piefei  ved  in  the  annals  of  Ireland, 
to  all  fucceeding  generations. 

“ We  find  and  prefent  Charles  Wjley,  to  be  a 
pevfon  of  ill  fame,  a vagabond,  and  a common  dif- 
turber  of  his  majefly’s  peace,  and  we  pray  he 
may  be  tranfported.’’ 

We 


. [ ] 

We  find  and  prefent  Jamts  Williams,  &c. 

We  find  and  prefent  Robert  Swindle,  See. 

We  find  and  prefent  Jonathan  Reeves,  &c. 

We  find  and  prefent  Janies  Wkeatly,  &c. 

We  find  and  prefent  John  Larwood,  &c. 

We  find  and  prefent  Jqfeph  McAuliff,  See. 

We  find  and  prefent  Charles  Skelton,  &c. 

We  find  and  prefent  William  Looker,  &c. 

We  find  and  prefent  Daniel  Sullivan,  8cc. 

12.  Mr.  Butler  and  his  mob  were  now  in  higher 
fpirits  than  ever.  They  fcoured  the  fireets,  day 
and  night;  frequently  hollowing  as  they  went 
along,  “ Five  pounds  for  a + Swaddler’s  head:” 
their  chief  declaring  to  them  all,  “ He  had  full  li- 
berty now,  to  do  whatever  he  would,  even  to- 
murder,  if  he  pleafed,  as  Mr.  Swain  of  North 
Abbey,  and  others  are  ready  to  teftify.” 

13.  The  feflions  held  at  Corke,  on  the  5th  of 
Otlober  following,  produced  another  memorable 
prefentment. 

“ We  find  and  prefent  John  Horton,  to  be  a 
perfon  of  ill  fame,  a vagabond  and  a common 
difiurbet  of  his  majefiy’s  peace ; and  we  pray, 
that  he  may  be  tranfported.” 

But  complaint  being  made  of  this  above,  as 
wholly  illegal,  it  vaniftied  into  air. 

14.  Some  time  after  Mr.  Butler  removed  to 
Dublin,  and  began  to  fing  his  ballads  there.  But 
having  little  fuccefs,  he  returned  to  Corke,  and  in 
January  began  to  fcour  the  fireets  again,  purfu- 

ing 

+ A name  firft  given  to  Mr.  Cennick,  from  his  firfl;  preaching 
on  thofe  words,  Ye fiall find  the  huh  wrapt  in  JwaddUng  dethes,  Ijing  in 
t manner. 


[ “2  ] 

ing  all  oj  this  way,  with  a large  rrob  at  his  heels, 
armed  with  fwords,  ftaves  and  piAols.  Complaint 
was  made  of  this,  to  William  Holmes,  Efq;  the 
prefent  mayor  of  Corke.  But  there  was  no  removal 
of  the  thing  complained  of : the  riots  were  not 
fuppreft.  Nay,  they  not  only  continued,  but  in- 
creafed. 

13.  From  the  beginning  February  to  the  end, 
his  majefty’s  peace  was  preferved  juft  as  before  : 
of  which  it  may  be  proper  to  fubjoin  two  or  three 
inftances,  for  the  information  of  all  thinking  men. 

William  Jewell,  clothier,  of  Skandon  Church- 
lane,  depofes, 

That  Nicholas  Butler,  with  a riotous  mob,  fe- 
veral  times  afTaulted  this  deponent’s  houfe  : that 
particularly  on  the  23d  of  February,  he  came  thi- 
ther with  a large  mob,  armed  with  clubs  and  other 
weapons  : that  feveral  of  the  rioters  entered  the 
houfe,  and  fwore,  the  firft  w’ho  refifted,  they 
would  blow  their  brains  out;  that  the  deponent’s 
wife  endeavouring  to  ftop  them,  w'as  afTaulted  and 
beaten  by  the  faid  Butler  ; who  then  ordered  his 
men,  to  break  the  deponent’s  windows,- which 
they  did  with  ftones  of  a confiderable  weight. 

Mary  Philips,  of  St.  Peter's  Church-lane,  dc- 

That  on  the  26th  of  February,  about  feven  in 
the  evening,  Nicholas  Butler  came  to  her  houfe 
with  a large  mob,  and  afked,  where  her  huf- 
band  was  ? That  as  fooii  as  fhe  appeared,  he  firft 
abufed  her  in  the  groffeft  terms,  and  then  flruck 

her 


[ 113  ] 

her  on  the  head,  lb  that  it  flunned  her  ; and  fiie 
verily  believes,  had  not  foine  within  thrufl  and 
faftened  the  door,  flie  Tnoidd  have  been  murdered 
on  the  fpot. 

It  may  fuffice  for  the  prefent  to  add  one  in- 
flance  more  : 

Elizabeth  Garddel,  wife  of  Jofeph  Gardtltt, 
corporal,  in  Col.  PamtelP  regiment,  Capt.  Chari- 
ton’%  company,  depofes. 

That  on  February  the  28th,  as  flie  was  going 
out  of  her  lodgings,  the  was  met  by  Butler  and 
his  mob  : that  Butler,  without  any  manner  of 
provocation,  immediately  fell  upon  her,  ffriking 
her  with  both  his  fills  on  the  fide  of  the  head, 
which  knocked  her  head  againft  the  wall  : that 
fhe  endeavoured  to  efcape  from  him,  but  he 
purfued  her,  and  ftruck  her  feveral  tirnes  in  the 
face  ; that  flie  ran  into  the  fchool-yard  for  fhelter, 
but  he  followed,  and  caught  hold  of  her,  faying, 
“ You  whore,  you  Hand  on  confecrated  ground,” 
and  threw  her  with  fuch  force  acrofs  the  lane, 
that  fhe  was  driven  againft  the  oppofite  wall : 
that  when  fhe  had  recovered  herfelf  a little  fhe 
made  the  beft  of  her  way  to  her  lodging ; but 
Butler  ftill  purfued,  and  overtook  her  as  fhe  was 
going  up  the  flairs  : that  he  ftruck  her  with  his 
lift  on  the  ftomach,  which  ftroke  knocked  her 
down  backwards ; that  falling  with  the  fmall  of 
her  back  againft  the  edge  of  one  of  the  flairs,  fhe 
was  not  able  to  rife  again ; that  her  pains  im« 

raediately^ 


[ ] 

mediately  came  upon  her»  and  about  two  in  the 
morning  (he  mifcarried^ 

16.  Thefe,  with  feveral  more  depofitions  to 
the  fame  effeft,  v/ere  in  Apiil  laid  before  the 
grand-jury.  Yet  they  did  not  find  any  of  thefe 
bills  ! But  they  found  one  againft  Daniel  Sullivan, 
the  younger,  (no  preacher,  but  a hearer  of  the 

c^\\Qd  Methodi/isJ  who,  when  Butler  zx\A 
his  mob  were  difcharging  a fhower  of  ftones 
upon  him,  fired  a pillol,  without  any  ball,  over 
their  heads.  If  any  man  has  wrote  this  flor)-  to 
England  in  a quite  different  manner,  and  fixed  it 
on  a young  Methodijl preacher,  let  him  be  afhamed 
in  the  prefence  of  God  and  man — unlefs  fhame 
and  he  have  fhook  hands  and  parted. 

17.  Several  of  the  perfons  prefented  as  vaga- 
bonds in  autumn,  appeared  at  the  lent  affizes. 
But  none  appearing  againft  them,  they  were  dif- 
charged,  with  honour  to  themfelves  and  fhame 

. to  their  profecutors  ; who  by  bringing  the  matter 
to  a judicial  determation,  plainly  fliewed,  there 
is  a law  even  for  Methodijls-,  and  gave  his  ma- 
jefty's  judge  a full  occafion  to  declare  the  utter 
illegality  of  all  riots,  and  the  inexcufablenefs  of 
tolerating  (much  more  caufing)  them  on  any  pre- 
tence whatfoever. 

18.  It  was  now  generally  believed  there  would 
be  no  more  riots  in  Corke  : although  I cannot  fay 
that  was  my  opinion.  On  May  the  19th,  I ac- 
cepted the  repeated  invitation  of  Mr.  Alderman 
Pembtock,  and  came  to  his  houfe.  Underftand- 

ing 


[ *15  1 ■ 

ing  the  place  where  the  preaching  ufually  was, 
would  by  no  means  contain  ihofe  who  defired  to 
hear  me,  at  eight  in  the  morning  I went  to 
Hammond’s  Marjh,  the  congregation  was  large 
and  deeply  attentive.  A few  of  the  rabble  ga- 
thered at  a diflance;  but  by  little  and  little  they 
drew  near,  and  mixed  with  the  congregation. 
So  that  I have  feldom  feen  a more  quiet  and 
orderly  alTembly  at  any  church  in  England  or 
Ireland. 

19.  In  the  afternoon  a report  being  fpread 
abroad,  that  the  mayor  defigned  to  hinder  my 
preaching  on  the  Marjli-,  I defired  Mr. 
and  Jones  to  wait  upon  him,  and  inquire  con- 
cerning it.  Mr.  Skelton  aflted,  if  my  preaching 
there  would  be  ofifenfive  to  him  ? Adding,  “ If 
it  would,  Mr.  W.  would  not  do  it.”  He  replied 
warmly,  “ Sir,  I will  have  no  mobbing.”  Mr.  S. 
faid,  “ Sir,  there  was  none  this  morning.”  He 
anfwered,  “ There  was.  Are  there  not  churches 
and  meetings  enough  ? I will  have  no  more  mobs 
and  riots.”  Mr.  S.  replied,  “ Sir,  neither  Mr. 
rv.  nor  they  that  heard  him  made  either  mobs  or 
riots.”  He  anfwered  plain,  I will  have  no  more 
preaching.  And  if  Mr.  W.  attempts  to  preach,  I 
am  prepared  for  him. 

I did  not  conceive  till  now',  that  there  was  any 
real  meaning  in  what  a gentleman  faid  fome  time 
fince ; who  being  told,  “ Sir,  king  George  tole- 
rates Methodijls,”  replied,  “ Sir,  you  fhall  find, 
the  mayor  is  king  oiCorke.” 

20. 1 


[ ] 

£o.  1 began  preaching  in  our  own  houfe  foon 
after  five.  Mr.  Mayor  mean  time  was  walking 
in  the  ’change,  where  lie  gave  orders  to  the 

fh  iimmers  of  the  town,  and  to  his  ferjeants, 

doubtlefs  to  go  down  and  keep  the  peace ! They 
came  down  with  an  innumerable  mob  to  the 
houfe.  I'hey  continued  drumming,  and  I conti- 
nued preaching  till  I had  finifhed  my  difcourfe. 
When  I came  out,  the  mob  immediately  clofed 
me  in.  I defired  one  of  the  ferjeants  to  proteft 
me  from  the  mob;  but  he  replied,  *■  Sir,  I have 
no  orders  to  do  Jthat.”  When  I came  into  the 
ftreet  they  threw  whatever  came  to  hand.  I 
walked  on  Ifraight  through  the  midft  of  them, 
looking  every  man  in  the  face,  and  they  opened 
to  the  right  and  left  till  1 came  near  Dant's-bridge^ 
A large  party  had  taken  pofTelfion  of  this,  one  of 
whom  was  bawling  out,  “ Now,  high  for  the 
Romans  r When  I came  up,  thefe  likewife 
fiirunk  back,  and  I walked  through  them  into 
Mr.  Jenkins's  houfe. 

But  many  of  the  congregation  were  more 
roughly  handled  ; particularly  Mr.  Jones,  who 
was  covered  with  dirt,  and  efcaped  with  his  life 
almoft  by  miracle.  The  main  body  of  the  mob 
then  went  to  the  houfe,  brought  out  all  the  feats 
and  benches,  tore  up  the  floor,  the  door,  the 
frames  of  the  windows,  and  whatever  of  wood- 
work remained,  part  of  which  they  carried  off 
for  their  own  ufe,  and  the  reft  they  burnt  in  the 
open  ftreet. 


21.  Monday 


i 117  ] 

21.  Monday  the  2 iH,  I rode  on  to  Bandon. 
^'rom  three  in  the  afternoon.till  after  feven,  the 
mob  of  Corke  marched  in  grand  proceffion,  and 
then  burnt  me  in  effigy  near  Dant’ s-bridge, 

Tuefday  22.  The  mob  and  drummers  were 
moving  again  between  three  and  four  in  the 
morning.  The  fame  evening  the  mob  came 
down  to  Hammond's  MarJJt,  but  flood  at  a dif- 
tance  from  Mr.  Slocidale’s  houfe,  till  the  drums 
beat,  and  the  mayor’s  ferjeants  beckoned  to  them, 
on  which  they  drew  up  and  began  to  attack. 
The  mayor  being  fent  for,  came  with  a party  of 
foldiers.  Mr.  Stockd-ale  earnefily  defired,  that  he 
would  difperfe  the  mob,  or  at  leafl  leave  the  fol- 
diers there  to  proteft  them  from  the  . rioter?. 
But  he  took  them  all  away  with  him  ; on  which 
the  mob  went  on,  and  broke  all  the  glafs  and 
moft  of  the  window  frames  in  pieces. 

22.  JVed?ieday  23.  The  mob  was  flill  patrolling 
the  flreets,  abufing  all  that  were  called  Metho- 
dijls.  And  threatening  to  murder  them,  and 
pull  down  their  ho.ufes  if  they  did  not  leave  this 
way. 

Thurfday'  2J^.  They  again  aflaulted  Mr.  Stock- 
daft'^  houfe,  broke  down  the  boards  he  had 
nailed  up  againft  the  windows,  deflroyed  what 
little  remained  of  the  window-frames  and  ffiut- 
ters,  and  damaged  a confiderable  part  of  his 

Friday  25,  and  again  on  Saturday  26,  one 
Roger  O'Fa  rall  fixed  up  an  advertifement  at  the 

public 


C 118  ] 

public  exchange,  (as  he  had  alfo  done  for  fe- 
veral  days  before)  “ That  he  was  ready  to  head 
any  mob,  in  order  to  pull  down  any  houfe  that 
fhould  dare  to  harbour  a Swaddler'’ 

23.  Sunday  27,  i wrote  the  following  letter 
to  the  mayor; 


Mr.  May  or ^ 

An  hour  ago  I received  “ a letter  to  Mr, 
juft  re-primed  at  Coike.  The  pub- 
lifliers  aflert,  “ It  was  brought  down  from  Dublin 
to  be  diftribuled  among  the  fociety.  But  Mr. 
Wejley  called  in  as  many  as  he  could.”  Both 
thefe  aftertions  are  abfolutely  falfe.  I read  fome 
lines  of  that  letter  when  I was  in  Dublin,  but 
never  read  it  over  before  this  morning.  Who 
the  author  of  it  is  I know  not.  But  this  I know; 
I never  called  in  one  ; neither  concerned  myfelf 
about  it;  much  lefs  brought  any  down  to  diftri- 
bute  among  the  fociety. 

Yet  I cannot  but  return  my  hearty  thanks  to 
the  gentlemen  who  have  diftributed  them  through 
the  town.  I believe  it  will  do  more  good  than 
they  are  fenfible  of.  For  though  I diflike  its 
condemning  the  magiftrates  and  clergy  in  gene- 
ral, (feveral  of  whom  were  ncrt  concerned  in  the 
late  proceedings)  yet  I think  the  reafoning  is 
iftrong  and  clear.  And  that  the  faffs  referred  to 

therein. 


C 119  3 

therein,  are  not  at  all  mifreprefented,  will  fufE- 
ciently  appear  in  due  time. 

I fear  God  and  honour  the  king.  I earnellly 
defire  to  be  at  peace  with  all  men.  I have  not 
willingly  given  any  offence,  either  to  the  magif- 
trates,  the  clergy,  or  any  of  the  inhabitants  of  the 
city  of  Corke,  neither  do  I defire  any  thing  of 
them,  but  to  be  treated  (I  will  not  fay,  as  a cler- 
gyman, a gentleman,  or  a Chriftian)  but  with 
fuch  jullice  and  humanity  as  are  due,  to  a 
a Turk,  or  a Pagan.  I am, 

SIR, 

Your  obedient  fervant, 

J.  Wesley, 

II.  1.  Your  performance  is  dated.  May  28th, 
the  moll  material  parts  of  which  I am  now  to  con- 
fid  er. 

It  contains,  firll,  a charge  againft  the  Metho- 
dift  preachers,  fecondly,  a defence  of  the  cor- 
poration and  clergy  of  Corke. 

With  regard  to  your  charge  againft  thofe 
preachers,  may  I take  the  liberty  to  inquire,  why 
you  drop  fix  out  of  the  eleven  that  have  been 
al  Corke,  viz.  Mr.  Swindells,  Wheatly,  Larwood, 
Skelton,  Tucker,  and  Haughton  ? can  you  glean 
up  no  ftory  -concerning  thefe  ? Or  is  it  out  of 
.mere  compaffion  that  you  fpare  them  i* 

2.  But  before  I proceed,  I muft  beg  leave  to 
afk,  who  is  this  evidence  againft  the  other  five? 
Why,  one  that  neither  dares  fhew  his  face,  nor 

tell 


[ 120  ] 

tell  his  name,  or  the  place  of  his  abode  : one 
that  is  afhamed  (and  truly  not  without  caufe)  of 
the  dirty  work  he  is  employed  in  : fo  that  we 
could  not  even  conje£lure  who  he  was  but  that 
his  fpeech  bewrayeih  him.  How  much  credit 
is  due  to  fuch  an  evidence,  let  any  man  of  reafon 
judge. 

3.  This  worthy  witnefs  falls  foul  upon  + Mr. 
Cownly,  and  miferably  murders  a tale  he  has  got 
by  the  end.  Sir,  Mr.  M.  is  nothing  obliged  to 
you,  for  bringing  the  chara6ter  of  his  niece  into 
quellion.  He  is  perfeftly  fatisfied  that  Mr,  C. 
a£ted  in  that  whole  affair,  with  the  flriftefl  regard 
both  to  honour  and  confrience. 

You  next  aver,  that  Mr.  Reeves  i a/hed  a 
young  woman,  “ Whether  jhe  lead  a mind  to  go 
to  hell  with  her  father  F”  ’Tis  poffible.  I will 
neither  deny  nor  affirm  it  without  forae  better 
proof.  But  fuppofe  he  did  ; unlefs  I know’  the 
circumflances  of  the  caufe  I could  not  fay,  whether 
he  fpoke  right  or  w’rong. 

4.  But  what  is  this  to  the  § Monjlrous,  flock- 

ing, amazing  blafphemy,  fpoken  by  Mr.  Charles 
Wefley  ? IVho  one  day,  you  fay,  preaching  on 
Hammond’s  Marffi,  called  out, Has  any  of  yon 
got  the  Spirit  ? And  when  none  an  fevered,  /aid  I 
am  fare  fame  of  you  have  got  it ; for  I feei  virtue 
go  out  of  me."  Sir,  do  you  expeft  any  one  to 
believe  this  flory  ? I doubt  it  will  not  pafs  ev’en 
at  Corke Unlefs  with  your  wife  friend,  wdio 

faid 

i p 13.  t p.  i6.  S P-  18. 


L ] 

faid  “ Mdhodijls?  Ay,  they  are  the  people  who 
place  all  their  religion,  in  wearing  long  whif- 
kers.” 

5.  In  the  fame  page  you  attack  Mr.  Willimns, 
for  applying  thofe  words,  I thy  Maker  am  thy 
hufband.  Sir,  by  the  fame  rule  that  you  conclude 
thefe  exprejfions  could  only Jlow  from  a mind full  of 
lafcivious  ideas,  you  may  conclude  the  45th 
pfalm,  to  be  only  a wanton  fonnet,  and  the  can- 
ticles a counterpart  to  RocheJler’&  poems. 

But  you  fay,  he  \ made  ife  0/ unwar- 

rantable exprefions,  particularly  zuith  regard  to 
faith  and  good  works.  And  the  next  day  denied 
that  he  had  uftd  them.  Sir,  your  word  is  not  proof 
of  this.  Be  pleafed  to  produce  proper  vouchers 
of  the  fafts  ; and  I will  then  give  a farther 
anfwer. 

Likewife,  as  to  his  indecent  and  irreverent 
behaviour  at  church,  turning  all  the  preacher  faid 
into  ridicule,  fo  that  numbers  afked  in  your  hearing, 
why  the  church-wardens  did  not  put  the  profane, 
wicked fcoundrel  in  the  flocks  ? My  prefent  anfwer 
is,  I doubt  the  fafls.  Will  your  men  of  undoubted 
ckaratler  be  fo  good  as  to  atteft  them  ? 

6.  Of  all  thefe,  Mr.  Williams,  Cownly,  Reeves, 
llaiighlon,  Larwood,  Skelton,  Swindells,  Tucker 
and  Wheatley,  you  pronounce  in  the  lump,  that 
they  are  + a parcel  of  vagabond,  illiterate  babblers. 
Of  whom  every  body  that  has  the  leaf  fiare  of  rea- 
fon  mufl  know,  that  thoueh  they  amufe  the  populace 

VoL.  XVIII.  F with 

t p.  10,  11.  f p.  3,  4. 


[ *22  3 

mth  nonjenfe,  ribaldry  and  blafphemy,  they  are  net 
capable  of  writing  orthography  or  good  fenfe.  Sir, 
that  is  not  an  adjudged  cafe.  Some  who  have  a 
Irttle-fhare  of  reafon,  think  they  are  capable  both 
of  fpeaking  and  writing  good  fenfe.  But  if  they 
are  not,  if  they  cannot  write  or  read,  the)’  can 
fave  fouls, from  death  : they  can,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  bring  finners  from  darknefs  to  light,  and 
from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God. 

7.  But  they  + made  a woman  plunder  her  poor, 
eld  kujband,  and  another  abfent  herfelf  from  her 
hujband  and  children.  Pray,  what  are  their 
names?  Where  do  they  live  ? And  how  may  one 
come  to  the  fpeech  of  them  ? I have  heard  fo 
many  plaufible  tales  of  this  kind,  which  on  exa- 
mination vanifhed  away,  that  I cannot  believe 
one  word  of  this,  till  I have  more  proof  than  your 
bare  aflertion. 

8.  So  far  I have  been  pleading  for  others.  But 
I am  now  called  to  anfwer  for  mvfelf.  For  flheo- 
pkilus,  and  John  Wejley,  fay  you,  feem  to  me  the 
fame  individual  perjbn.  They  may  feem  fo  to 

you  : but  not  to  any  who  knows  either  my  ftile 
or  manner  of  writing.  Befides,  if  it  had  been 
mine,  it  would  have  borne  my  name.  For  I do 
not  love  fisjhtin^  in  the  dark. 

00  - 

But  were  v\qx.  a great  number  of  thofe  books 
brought  from  Dublin,  to  be  difperfed  throughout 
the  city?  Not  by  me.  Not  by  mv  order;  nor,  to 

mr 


t p.  24,  25. 


X P-  i- 


[ 123  3 

my  knowledge.  However  I thank  you  again,  for 
difperfing  them. 

9.  But  § while  charity  Jiands  in  the  front  of 
Chrifian graces,  the  author  of  fuch  a book  can  have 
none  of  that  grace.  For  you  viuf  allow  the  vulgar 
to  think.  Mal-a  propo  enough,  a lively  faying. 
But  for  any  ufe  it  is  of,  it  may  Hand  either  in  the 
front  or  rear  of  the  fentence. 

The  argument  itfelf  is  fomething  new.  A man 
knocks  me  down.  I cry,  “ Help ! Help,  or  I 
fhall  be  murdered.”  He  replies,  While  chari- 
ty {lands  in  the  front  of  Chriftian  graces,  the  au- 
thor of  fuch  a cry  can  have  none  of  that  grace.” 

So  now  you  have  fhewn  to  all  'flie  world,  the  un- 
charitable  and  confequently  unchriJHan fpirit  ofMe- 
thodifn.  What?  Becaufe  the  MethodiRs  cry  out 
for  help,  before  you  have  quite  beat  out  their 
brains  ? 

What  grimace  is  this  ? His  majeily’s  quiet, 
loyal,  proteflant  fubjefts  are  abufed,  infulted, 
outraged,  beaten,  covered-with  dirt,  rolled  in  the 
mire,  bruifed,  wounded  with  fwords  and  hangers, 
murdered,  have  their  houfes  broke  open,  their 
goods  deftroyed,  or  carried  away  before  their 
face  : and  all  this  in  open  day,  in  the  face  of  the 
fun,  yet  without  any  remedy!  And  thofe  who 
treat  them  thus  are  charitable  men!  Brimfull  of 
a Chriflian  i\nnt\  But  if  they  who  are  fo  treated 
appeal  to  the  common  fenfe  and  reafon  of  man- 
F 2 kind, 


§ p.  a6. 


[ ^24  ] 

kind,  you  :gravcly  cry,  See  the  uncharitable,  the' 
unchrijlian  fpirit  oj Methodijui ! 

10.  You  proceed.  Bui  pray,  what  are  thofe 
JaEis,  which  you  fay  arc  net  mijreprefented?  Do 
you  mean,  that  Butler  was  hired  and  paid  by  the 
corporation  and  clergy  ? Or,  that  this  remarkable 
loyal  city,  is  difaffecled  to  theprefent  government  ? 
And  that  a papiji  was  fupported,  nay,  hired  by  the 
■chief  magijlrates,  to  walk  the f reefs,  threatening 
b.loodfied  and  murder?  Declare  openly,  whether 
thefe  are  the  faEls.  Sir,  I underfland  you  well. 
But  for  the  prefent,  I beg  to  be  excufed.  There 
is  a time  and  a’  place  for  all  things. 

* 11.  I rejoice  to  hear  the  city  of  is  fo 
remarkably  loyal!  So  entirely  well-affecled  to  the 
prefent  government.  I prefume  you  mean  this 
chiefly  of  The  Friendly  Society,  (in  whom  the 
power  of  the  city  is  now  lodged)  erected  fome 
time  fince,  in  oppofition  to  that  body  of  Jacobites, 
commonly  called,  The  Hanover  Club.  I fuppofe 
that  zealous  Anti-methodill,  who  fome  days  ago, 
llabbed  the  Methodift-preacher  in  the  flreet,  and 
then  cried  out,  “ Damn  king  George  and  all  his 
armies  !"  Did  this  as  a fpeciraea  of  h is  eminent 
loyalty. 

It  cannot  be  denied,  thatthts  loyal  fubjeft  of 
king  George  (Simon  Rawlins  by  name)  was  upon 
oath  made  of  thofe  words,  committed  to  goal,  on 
the  31ft.  And  it  was  not  till  fix  dajs  after, 
that  he  walked  in  proceflion  through  the  town, 
with  drums  beating,  and  colours  fl)  ing,  and  de- 
clared 


[ 125  ] 

declared  at  the  head  of  his  mob,  “ He  wo'uld 
never  reft,  till  he  had  driven  all  thefe  falft  pro- 
pkds  ouioiCorke.’^  How  fincere  tliey  were  in 
their  good  wifhes  to  king  George  and  his  armies, 
they  gave  a clear  proof  the  tenth  of  this  inftant, 
June:  when,  as  ten  or  twelve  foldiers  were  walk- 
ing along,  in  a very  quiet  and  inoffenfive  manner, 
the  mob  fell  upon  them,  fwore  they  would  have 
their  lives,  knocked  them  down,  and  beat  thbm 
to  fuch  a degree,  that  on  June  tht  12th,  one  of 
them  died  of  his  wounds,  and  another  was  not" 
then  expefled  to  live  many  hours. 

12.  Butyou  have  more  proofs  of  my  tincharita-- 
blenefs,  that  is,  fuppofing  I am  the  author  of  that' 
pamphlet.  For  you  read  there,  “ Riches,  eafe- 
and  honour,  are  v;hat  the  clergy  fet  their  hearts 
upon.  But  the  fouls  for  whom  Chrift  died,  they 
leave  to  the  tender  mercies  of  hell.”  Sir,  Can 
you  deny  it?  Is  it  not  true?  Literally  true,  con- 
cerning fomeof  the  clergy?  You  z^k,  f But 
ought  we  to  condemn  all,  for  the  faults  of  a Jew  ?' 
I anfwer,  No ; no  more  than  I will  condemn  all, 
in  the  affair  of  Corke^  for  the  faults  of  a few.  It 
Is  you  that  do  this.  And  if  it  were  as  you  fay, 
if  they  were  all  coiKerned  in  the  late  proceedings, 
then  it  would  be  no  uncharitablenefs  to  fay, 
“ They  were  in  a miferable  ftate  indeed  ” Then 
they  would  doubtlefs  be  “ kicking  againft  the 
pricks,  contending  with  heaven,  fighting  againfl 


F 3 

f p.  20. 


[ 126  ] 

13'  I come  now  to  the  general  charge  againrt 
me  independent  on  the  letter  Butler.  And 

ift.  You  charge  me  with  t a frontlefs  ajfurance, 
and  a well dijfeinbled  hypozTify.  Sir,  1 thank  you. 
This  is  as  kind,  as  if  you  was  to  call  me  (with 
Mr.  Williams)  a profane,  wicked fcundrel,  I am 
not  careful  to  anfwer  in  this  matter  : Qrortly  we 
fhall  both  ftand  at  an  higher  bar. 

14.  You  charge  me,  fecondly,  with  being  an 

harebrained  enthujiajl.  Sir,  I am  your  moft 

obedient  fervant. 

But  you  will  prove  me  an  enthufiaft.  For  ^ 
you  fay  (thofe  are  your  words)  you  are  fent  of  God 
to  inform  mankind,  offome  other  revelation  of  his 
will,  than  what  has  been  left  by  Chrif  and  his  apof 
ties.  Not  fo.  I never  faid  any  fucb  thing. 
When  I do  this,  then  call  for  miracles.  But  at 
prefent  your  demand  is  quite  unreafonable.  There 
is  no  room  for  it  at  all.  What  I advance,  I 
prove  by  the  words  of  Chrift,  or  his  apoftles.  If 
not,  let  it  fall  to  the  ground, 

15.  You  charge  me,  thirdly,  with  being  em- 
ployed in  \ promoting  the  caufe  of  arbitrary  popijh 
power.  Sir,  I plead  not  guilty.  Produce  your 
witnefles.  Prove  this  and  I will  allow  all  the  reft. 

* You  charge  me  fourthly,  with  holding  ? 
Midnight  affembltes.  Sir,  did  you  never  fee  the 
word  Vigil  in  your  common  prayer  book  ? Do 
vou  know  what  it  means  If  not,  permit  me  tell 
you,  that  it  was  cuftomary  with  the  antient 

Chriftians, 

+ p.  7.  § p.  28.  II  p.  ?•  - P-  -4- 


-t  p.  22. 


[ ] 

CbriftTans,  to  fpend  whole  nights  in  prayer : 
and  that  thefe  nights  were  termed  VigilicE  or 
Vigils.  Therefore,  for  fpending  a part  of  fome 
nights  in  this  manner,  in  public  and  folemn 
prayer,  v.^e  liave  not  only  the  authority  of  our 
own  national  church,  but  of  the  univerfal  church, 
in  the  earlieft  ages. 

16.  You  charge  me,  fifthly  with  being  the 
eauje  of  all  that  Butler  has  done.  True  ; juft  as 
Latimer  and  Ridley  (if  I may  dare  to  name  my- 
felf  with  thofe  venerable  men)  were  the  caufe  of 
all  that  bifliop  Bonner  did.  In  this  fenfe,  the 
charge  is  true.  It  has  pleafed  God  (unto  him  be 
all  the  glory)  even  by  my  preaching  or  writings, 
to  convince  fome  of  the  old  Chriftian  fcriptural 
doftrine,  which  till  then  they  knew  not.  And 
while  they  declared  this  to  others,  you  fliewed 
them  the  fame  love,  as  Edmund  of  London  did 
to  their  forefathers.  Only  the  expreffions  of 
your  love,  were  not  quite  the  fame ; becaufe 
(blefled  be  God)  you  had  not  the  fame  power, 

17.  You  affirm,  fixthly,  that  I t rob  and  plun- 
der the  poor,  fo  as  to  have  them  neither  bread  to 
eat,  nor  rayment  to  put  on.  An  heavy  charge, 
but  without  all  colour  of  truth.  Yea,  juft  the 
reverfe  is  true.  Abundance  of  thofe  in  Corke, 
Bandon,  Limenck,  Dublin,  as  well  as  in  all  parts 
of  England,  who  a few  years  ago,  either  through 
floth  or  profanenefs,  had  not  bread  to  eat,  or 
rayment  to  put  on,  have  now  by  means  of  the 

F 4 preachers 

h P-  17* 


+ p.  a.- 


[ ^^8  ] 

preachers  called  MethoiHJls,  a fufEciency  oT  both. 
Since  by  hearing  thefe,  they  have  learned  to  fear 
God,  they  have  learned  alfo  to  work  with  their 
hands,  as  well  as  to  cut  off  every  needlefs  ex- 
pence, to  bte  good  Howards  of  the  mammon  of 
unrighteoufnefs. 

i8.  You  affert,  feventhly,  that  T am  d myfelf 
as  fond  of  riches,  as  the  mojl  worldly  clergyman. 
Tioo  i thouj and  pence  a week  ! A fine  yearly  revenue 
from  afj  urance  and  fialvalion-tickets ! I anfwer,  i. 
What  do  you  mean  by  cffiurance  and Jalvation- 
tickets?  Is  not  the  very  expreffion  a mixture  of 
nonfenfe  and  blafphemy  ? 2.  How  Hrangely  did 
you  under-rate  my  revenue,  when  you  wrote  in 
the  perfon  of  George  Fifier?  You  then  allowed 
me  only  an  hundred  pounds  a year  ? What  is 
this  to  two  thoufand  pence  a week  ? 3'  § There 
2S  not  a cleroyman,  you  fay,  who  would  not  willing- 
ly exchange  his  livings,  for  yonr  yearly  penny  con- 
tributions. And  no  wonder.  For  according 
to  a late  computation,  they  amount  to  no  lefs 
every  year,  than  eight  hundred,  eighty  fix  thou- 
fand pound?,  befide  fome  odd  fhillings  and  pence  : 
In  comparifon  of  which  the  revenue  of  his  grace 
of  Armagh,  or  of  Canterbury,  is  a very  trifle. 
And  yet.  Sir,  fo  great  is  my  regard  for  you  and 
my  gratitude  for  your  late  fervices,  that  jf  you 
will  only  refign  your  curacy  of  ChrifT s Church,  I 
will  make  over  to  you  my  whole  revenue  in  Ire- 
land, 

ig.  But 


+ p.  21. 


t p.  8. 


§ p. 


[ 129  ] 

ig.  But  //2€  honour  I gain,  you  tlilnk  is  even 
greater  than  profit.  Alas,  Sir,  I have  not  gene- 
rofuy  enough  to  reliih  it,  I was  always  of  Juve- 
nals mind, 

Gloria  quanlalibet,  quid  erit Ji  gloria  tanlum? 

And  efpecially,  while  there  are  fo  many  draw- 
backs, fo  many  dead  flies  in  the  pot  cn  ointment. 
Sheer  honour  might  talle  tolerably  well.  But 
there  is  gall  with  the  honey,  and  lefs  of  the  ho- 
ney than  the  gall.  Pray,  Sir,  what  think 
Have  I more  honour,  or  didionour  ? Do  more 
people  praife  or  blame  me  ? How  is  it  in  Corke  ? 
Nay,  [to  go  no  larther)  among  your  own  little 
circle  of  acquaintance?  Where  you  hear  one 
commend,  do  not  ten  cry  out,  “ Away  with 
fuch  a fellow  from  the  earth  !” 

Above  all,  I do  not  love  honour  with  dry 
blows.  I do  not  find  it  will  cure  broken  bones. 
But  perhaps  you  may  think,  I glory  in  thefe.  O 
how  fhould  I have  gloried  then,  if  your  good 
friends  at  Dant' s-bridge  had  burnt  my  perfon,  in- 
ftead  of  my  effigy  ? 

We  are  here  to  fet  religion  out  of  the  queftion. 
You  do  not  fuppofe,  I have  any  thing  to  do 
with  that.  Why  if  fo,  I fhould  rather  leave  you 
the  honour,  and  myfelf  fleep  in  a whole  fkin. 
On  that  fuppofuion  I quite  agree  with  the  epl- 
grammatift, 

F 5 VirgiliL 


[ *30  ] 

Virgilii  in  tumulo,  divini  prcemia  vatis, 

Explicat  en  viridem  laurea  lat  a comam. 

Quid  te  defunElum  juvat  hccc  ? Felicior  olim 
Sub  patulcE  fagi  tegmine  vivus  eras. 

20.  Your  laft  charge  is,  f That  1 profefs  myfelf 
to  be  a member  of  the  ejlablifhed  church,  and  yet 
aB  contrary  to  the  commands  of  my  fpntual  gover- 
nors, and flab  the  church  to  the  very  vitals.  I an- 
fwer,  1.  What  fpiritual  governor  has  command- 
ed me  not  to  preach,  in  any  part  of  his  majefty's 
dominions  ? I know  not  one,  to  this  very  day, 
either  in  England  or  Ireland.  2.  What  is  it,  to 
ftab  the  church  to  the  very  vitals  ? Why  to  deny 
her  fundamental  doftriiies.  And  do  I,  or  you, 
do  this  ? Let  any  who  has  read  her  liturgy,  arti- 
ticles  and  homilies  judge,  which  of  us  two  de- 
nies, “ That  we  are  juftified  by  faith  alone  ?” 
That  every  believer  has  “ the  infpiration  of 
God’s  Holy  Spirit  ?”  That  all  who  are  ftrong  in 
faith,  do  “ perfeftly  love  him,  and  worthil)'  mag- 
nify his  holy  name  ?”  He  that  denies  this  is  the 
treacherous  [on,  who  flabs  this  affeBionate  and 
tender  mother. 

If  you  deny  it,  you  have  already  difowned  the 
church.  But  as  for  me  I neither  can  nor  will  ; 
though  I know  you  Gncerely  defire  1 fliould. 

Hoc  Ithacus  velit  & magm  mercentur  achivi. 

But 


+ P' 


[ 131  3 

But  Ichufe  to  ftay  in  the  church,  were  it  only 
to  reprove  thofe  who  betray  her  with  a kifs'. 

21.1  come  now  to  your  defence  of  the  corpora- 
tion and  clergy.  But  fure  fuch  a defence  was 
never  feen  before.  For  whereas  1 had  faid, 
I dyiike  the  condemning  the  magiflrates  or  clerg 
in  general,  becaufe  federal  oj them  (fo  I charitably 
fuppofedj  were  not  concerned  in  the  late  proceed- 
vigs  : you  anfwer,  + “ Pray  by  all  means  point 
than  out,  that  they  may  be  dijlinguijhed  by  fome 
mark  of  honour  above  their  biethreni’  What  do 
you  mean  ? If  you  mean  any  thing  at  all,  it 
muft  be  that  they  were  all  concerned  in  the  late 
proceedings.  Sir,  if  they  were  (of  which  I own, 
you  are  a better  judge  than  I)  was  it  needful  to 
declare  this  to  all  the  world  ? Efpecially,  in  fo 
plain  terms  as  ihefe  ? Did  not  your  zeal  here  a 
httle  outrun  your  wifdom  ? 

22.  But  j;  the  magifrate,  you  fay,  was  only 
endeavauring  to  fecure  the  peace  of  the  city.  A very 
extraordinary  way  of  fecurimg  peace  ! Truly  Sir, 
I cannot  yet  believe,  not  even  on  your  word, 
that  all  II  the  magiflrates  except  one  were  con- 
cerned, in  this  method  of  feciiring  peace.  Much 
lefs  can  I believe,  that  all  the  clergy  were  con- 
cerned in  thus  endeavouring  to  bring  back  their 

fiock  led  ajlray  by  theft  hirelings  (an  unlucky 
word)  into  the  right  fold. 

23.  Of  the  clergy  you  add,  V/hat  § need  have 
they  to  rage  and f oam  at  your  preaching  ? Sitppcfi 

F 6 you, 

+ P-  ^9>  30'  IP‘6;  II  p-  29,  ao-  §P 


[ 132  ] 

you  could  delude  the  greater  part  oj their  Jlocks, 
this  could  not  ajfetl  their  temporal  intereJL  We 
do  not  defne  it  fhould.  We  only  defire,  to 
delude  a\\  mankind  (if  you  will  term  it  a delufion) 
into  a ferious  concern  for  their  eternal  intereft, 
for  a treafure  which  none  can  take  away. 

Having  now  both  ffated  the  faffs  to  which 
\'ou  referred,  and  conCdered  the  moll  material 
parts  of  your  peilormance,  1 have  only  to  fubjoin 
a few  obvious  rerleflions,  naturally  arifing  from 
a view  of  thofe  uncommon  occurrences;  partly 
with  regard  to  the  motives  of  thofe  who  were 
affive  therein  ; partly  to  their  manner  of  acling. 

With  regard  to  the  former,  'every  reafonable 
man,  wll  naturally  inquire,  on  what. motives 
could  any,  either  of  the  clergy  or  the  corporation, 
ever  think  of  oppofing  that  preaching,  by  which 
lo  many  notorioufly  vicious  men  have  been 
brought  to  an  eminently  virtuous  life  and  conver- 
lation  ? 

* You  fupply  us  yourfelf  w'ith  one  unexcepti- 
onable anfwer,  t Thoje  of  the  clergy  nith  whom 
I have  converjed,  freely  own,  they  have  not 
learning  fufficient  to  comprehend  your jeheme  oJ 
religion.  If  they  have  not,  I am  forry  for  them. 
My  fcheme  of  religion  is  this.  Love  is  the  ful- 
filling of  the  law.  From  the  true  love  of  God 

L> 

and  man,  direffly  flows  every  Chriffian  grace, 
everv  holy  and  happy  temper  : and  from 

ihefe  fpring  uniform  holinefs  of  converfation,  in 

conformity 


+ p.  30. 


[ 133  ] 

conformity  to  thofe  great  rules,  whether  ye  eat 
or  drink,  or  whatever  you  do,  do  all  to  the 
glory  of  God  ; and,  whatfoever  you  would  that 
men  Ihould  do  unto  you,  even  fo  do  unto  them. 
But  this  you  fay,  thoft  of  the  clergy  with  whom 
you  comer fe,  have  not  learning  enough  to  compre- 
head:  Confequently  their  ignorance,  or  not  un- 

derfiandingour  doftrine,  is  the  reafon  why  they 
oppofe  us. 

2.  Hearn  from  you,  that  ignorance  of  another 
kind,  is  a fecond  reafon  why  fome  of  the  clergy 
oppofe  us.  They  (like  youj  think  us  enemies  to 
the  church.  The  natural  confequence  is,  that  in 
proportion  to  their  zeal  for  the  church,  their 
zeal  againft  us  v/ill  be. 

3.  The  zeal  which  many  of  them  have  for 
orthodoxy,  or  right  opinions,  is  a third  reafon 
for  oppofing  us.  For  they  judge  us  heterodox 
in  feveral  points,  maintainers  of  ffrange  opini- 
ons. And  the  truth  is,  the  old  doftrines  of  the 
reformation  are  now  quite  new  in  the  world. 
Hence  thofe  who  revive  them  cannot  fail  to  be 
oppofed  by  thofe  of  the  clergy  who  know  them 
not. 

4.  Fourthly,  Their  honour  is  touched,  when 
others  pretend  to  know  what  they  do  not  know 
themfelv.es ; efpeclaily  when  unlearned  and 
(otherwife)  ignorant  men,  lay  claim  to  any  fuch 
knowlege.  What  is  the  tendency  of  all  this  (as 
youobferve  on  another  head)  hut  to  work  inmens 
minds  a mean  opinion  of  the  clergy?  But  who  can 

tamely 


[ m ] 

tamely  fuffer  this  ? None  but  thofe  who  have 
The  mind  that  was  in  Chriji  Jefus. 

5.  Again,  Will  not  fome  fay,  “ Mafter,  by 
thus  aBuig,  ihou  reproacheft  us  P”  By  preach- 
ing fixteen  or  eighteen  times  a week  ? And  by  a 
thoufand  other  things  of  the  fame  kind?  Is  not 

■ this,  in  effeft,  reproaching  us,  as  if  we  were 
lazy  and  indolent  ? As  if  we  had  not  a fufficient 
love  to  the  fouls  of  thofe  committed  to  our 
charge  ? 

6.  May  there  not  likewife  be  fome  (perhaps 
unobferved)  envy,  in  the  breaft  even  of  men 
that  fear  God  ? How  much  more  in  them  that  do 
not  ? When  they  hear  of  the  great  fuccefs  of 
thefe  preachers,  of  the  efteera  and  honour  that 
arc  paid  to  them  by  the  people,  and  the  ira- 
menfe  riches  which  they  acquire.  What  won- 
der if  this  occafions  a zeal  which  is  not  the  flame 
of  fervent  love? 

7.  Add  to  this,  a defire  in  fome  of  the  inferior 
clergy  of  pleafmg  their  fuperiors;  fuppofing  thefe 
(which  is  no  impofhble  fuppofition)  are  firll  in- 
fluenced by  any  of  thefe  rr*otives.  Add  the  im- 
prudence of  fome  that  hear  thofe  preachers,  and 
(perhaps)  needlefly  provoke  their  parochial  mi- 
niflers.  And  when  all  thefe  things  are  confi- 
dered,  none  need  be  at  a lofs  for  the  motives  on 
which  many  of  the  clergy  have  oppofed  us. 

* 8.  But  from  what  motives  can  any  of  the 
corporation  oppofe  us  ? I mufl  beg  the  gentlemerr 
of  this  body  to  obferve,  that  I dare  by  no  means 

lump 


[ ^35  ] 

lump  them  all  together,  as  their  awkward  defen- 
der has  done.  But  this  I may  fay  without  of- 
fence, there  are  fome  even  among  you  who  are 
not  fo  remarkably  loyal  as  others,  not  fo  emi- 
nently well-affefted  to  the  prefent  government. 
Now  thefe  cannot  but  obferve,  (gentlemen,  I 
fpeak  plain,  for  I am  to  deliver  my  own  foul  in 
the  fight  of  God]  that  wherever  we  preach,  many 
who  were  his  enemies  before,  became  zealous 
friends  to  his  raajefly.  The  inffances  glare  both 
in  England  and  Ireland.  Thofe  therefore  who 
are  not  fo  zealoully  his  friends,  have  a flrong 
motive  to  oppofe  us ; though  it  cannot  be  ex- 
pefted  they  Ihoiild  own  this  to  be  the  motive  on 
which  they  a6f. 

9.  Others  may  have  been  prejudiced  by  the 
artful  mifreprefentations  thefe  have  made,  or  by 
thofe  they  have  frequently  heard  from  the  pulpit. 
Indeed  this  has  been  the  grand  fountain  of  popu- 
lar prejudice.  In  every  part  both  of  England 
and  Ireland,  the  clergy,  where  they  were  inclined 
fo  to  do,  have  mold  effeffually  flirted  up  the 
people. 

10-  There  has  been  another  reafon  afligned  for 
the  oppofition  that  was  made  to  me  in  particular 
* at  Cvrke^  viz.  “ That  the  mayor  was  offended  at 
my  preaching  on  Hammond's  Marjh,  and  there- 
fore refolved  Ifhould  not  preach  at  all  : whereas, 
if  I had  not  preached  abroad,  he  would  have 
given  me  leave  to  preach  in  the  houfe.”  Would: 
Mr;  Mayor  have  given  me  leave  to  preach  in  my 


own 


[ 136  ] 

own  houfe  ? I retuin  him  mofl:  humble  thanks. 
But  Ihould  he  be  fo  courteous  as  to  make  me  the 
offer  even  now,  I fliould  not  accept  it  on  any 
fuch  terms.  Greater  men  than  he  have  endea- 
voured to  hinder  me  from  calling  fmners  to  re- 
pentance in  that  open  and  public  manner.  But 
hitherto  it  has  been  all  loft  labour.  They  have 
never  yet  been  able  to  prevail.  Nor  ever  will, 
till  they  can  conquer  king  George  and  his  armies. 
To  curje  them  is  not  enough. 

* 11.  Laftly,  Some  (I  hope  but  a few)  do  cor- 
dially believe,  that  “ private  vices  are  public 
benefits.”  I myfcli  heard  this  in  Corke,  when  I 
was  there  laft.  Thefe  confequently  think  us  the 
deflroyers  of  their  city,  by  fo  leffening  the  num- 
ber of  their  public  benefactors,  the  gluttons, 
the  drunkards,  the  dram-drinkers,  the  fabbath- 
breakers,  the  common-fweaiers,  the  cheats  of 
every  kind,  and  the  followers  of  that  antient  and 
honou'/able  trade,  adultery  and  fornication. 

12.  Thefe  are  the  undeniable  motives  to  this 
oppofitlon.  I come  now  to  the  manner  of  it. 

When  fome  gentlemen  inquired  of  one  of  the 
bifhops  in  England,  “ My  lord,  what  mufl  we 
do  to  flop  thefe  new  preachers  ?”  He  anfwered, 
“ If  they  preach  contrary  to  fcripture,  confute 
them  by  fcripture;  if  contrary  to  reafon,  confute 
them  by  reafon.  But  beware  you  ufe  no  other 
weapons  than  thefe,  either  in  oppofing  error,  or 
defending  the  truth.” 

Would  to  God  this  rule  had  been  follow’ed  at 

Corke. 


[ *37  ] 

Corkc.  But  how  little  has  it  been  thought  of 
tliere  ? The  oppofition  was  begun  with  lies  of  all 
kinds,-  frequently  delivered  in  the  name  of  God. 
So  that  never  was  any  thing  fo  ill  judged  as  for 
to  alk,  Does  Chrijliav.ity  encourage  its  prqfef- 
fors  to  make  ufe  of  lies,  inveBives,  or  loio,  mean 
and  abufive  fcurnhty,  to  carry  on  its  interef  ? No, 
fir,  it  does  not.  I difclaim  and  abhor  every 
weapon  of  this  kind.  But  with  thefe  have  the 
Methodiji  preachers  been  oppofed,  in  Corke  above 
any  other  place.  In  England,  in  all  Ireland, 
have  I neither  heard  nor  read  any  like  thofe 
grofs,  palpable  lies,  thofe  low,  Billingfgate  in~ 
veElives,  and  that  inexprefiibly  mean  ahufe  and 
bafe  fcurrility,  which  the  oppofers  of  Methodifm, 
fo  called,  have  continually  made  ufe  of,  and 
which  has  been  the  ftrength  of  their  caufe  from 
the  beginning. 

13.  Ifitbenotfo,  let  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord 
Bifhop  of  Corke  (for  he  too  has  openly  entered 
the  lifts  againfl  the  MethodiJlsJ  the  Rev.  Dr. 
Tifdale,  or  any  other  whom  his  lordfhip  fiiall  ap- 
point, meet  me  on  even  ground,  writing  as  a 
gentleman  to  a gentleman,  a fcholar  to  a fcholar, 
a clergyman  to  a clergyman.  Let  him  thus  fliew 
me  wherein  I have  preached  or  written  amifs, 
and  I will  Hand  reproved  before  all  the  world. 

14.  But  let  not  his  lordfliip,  or  any  other, 
continue  to  put  perfecution  in  the  place  of  rea- 
fon  ; either  private  perfecution,  flirring  up  huf- 
bands  to  threaten  or  beat  their  wives,  parents 

their 


t 13*  ] 

their  children,  mailers  their  fervants  ; gentlemerit 
to  ruin  their  tenants,  labourers  or  tradefmen,  by 
turning  them  out  of  their  farms  or  cottages,  em- 
ploying, or  baying  of  them  no  more,  becaufe 
they  worlhip  God  according  to  their  own  con- 
fcience ; or  open,  barefaced,  noonday,  Ccrke- 
perfe.cutiorL,  breaking  open  the  houfes  of  his 
majelly’s  protcHant  fubjefts,  deflroying  their 
goods,  fpoiliirg  or  tearing  the  very  cloathsfrom 
their  backs  ; flriking,  bruifmg,  wounding,  mur- 
dering them  in  the  ftreets;.  dragging  them  through 
the  mire,  without  any  regard  to  age  or  fex  ; not 
fparing  even  thofe  of  tender  years;  no  nor  wo- 
men, though  great  with  child  ; but  with  more 
than  Pagan  or  Mahometan  barbarity,  deflroying. 
infants  that  were  yet  unborn. 

15.  Ought  thefe  things  fo  to  be  ? Are  they 
right  before  God  or  man  ? Are  they  to  the  ho- 
nour of  our  nation  ? I appeal  unto  Cajar  ; unto 
his  gracious  majelly  king  George,  and  to  the  go- 
vernors under  him  both  in  England  and  Ireland, 
I appeal  to  all  true,  difintereded  lovers  of  this 
their  native  country.  Is  this  the  way  to  make  It 
a flourifhing  nation  ? Happy  at  home,  amiable 
and  honourable  abroad?  Men  o{  Ireland  judge  \ 
Nay,  and  is  there  not  fome  weight  in  that  addi- 
tional confideration,  that  this  is  not  a concern 
of  a private  nature,  rather  is  it  not  a common 
caufe  ? 

If  the  dams  are  once  broken  down,  if  you 
tamely  give  up  the  fundamental  laws  of  your 

countr}’, 


[ ^39  ] 

country,  if  thefe  are  openly  'violated  in  the  cafe 
of  your  fellow-fubjefls,  hew  foon  may  the  Cafe 
be  your  own.  For  what  protection  then  have 
any  of  you  left,  for  either  your  liberty  or  proper- 
ty ? What  fecurity  for  either  your  goods  or  lives, 
if  a riotous  mob  is  to  be  both  judge,  jury,  and 
executioner  ? 

i6.  Protejlants,  what  is  become  of  chat  liber^ 
of  confcience  for  which  your  forefathers  fpent 
their  blood  ? Is  it  not  an  empty  fliadow,  a mere, 
unmeaning  name,  if  thefe  things  are  fuflfered 
among  you  ? Romans,  fuch  of  you  as  are  calm 
and  candid  men,  do  you  approve  of  thefe  pro^ 
ceedings  ? I cannot  think  you  yourfelves  would 
ufe  fuch  methods  of  convincing  us,  if  we  think 
amifs.  Chr/Jiians  of  all  denominations,  can  you 
reconcile  this  to  our  royal  law,  Thou  Jhalt 
love  thy  neighbour  asthyfelf?  O tell  it  not  in  Gath  I 
Let  it  not  be  riameJ  among  thofe  who  are  ene- 
mies to  the  Chriftian  caufe ! Left  that  worthy 
name  whereby  we  are  called,  be  ftill  more  blaf- 
pheraed  among  the  Heathen ! 


A LETTER 


[ HO  3 


LETTER 


To  the  Reverend  Doctor 

CONYERS  MIDDLETON, 


Occafioned  by  his  late  FREE  ENQUIRY. 


January  4,  1748-9. 

Reverend  Sir, 

1.  TN  your  late  enquiry,  you  endeavour  to 
•A  prove,  firfi,  That  there  were  no  miracles 
wrought  in  tjie  primitive  church  ; fecondly,  That 
all  the  primitive  fathers  were  fools  or  knaves,  and 
mofl  of  them  both  one  and  the  other.  And  it  is 
eafy  to  obferve,  the  whole  tenor  of  your  argu- 
ment tends  to  prove  ; thirdly,  That  no  miracles 

were 


[ ] 

were  wTought  by  Chrijl  or  his  apoftles ; and 
fourthly,  That  thofe  too  were  fools  or  knaves, < 
or  both. 

2.  I am  not  agreed  with  you  on  any  of  thefe 
heads.  My  reafons  I .fhall  lay  before  you,  in  as 
free  a manner  (though  not  in  fo  fmooth  or  la- 
boured language)  as  you  have  laid  yours  before 
the  world. 

3.  But  I have  neither  inclination  nor  leifure 
to  follow  you  ftep  by  hep  through  three  hun- 
dred and  feventy^-three  quarto  pages.  I fliall 
therefore  fet  afide  all  I find  in  your  wgrk  which 
does  not  touch  the  merits  of  the  caufe  : and  like- 
wife  conlraft  the  queflion  Itfelf  to  the  three  firft 
centuries.  For  I have  no  more  to  do  with  the 
writers  or  miracles  of  the  fourth,  than  with  thofe 
of  the  fourteenth  century. 

4.  You  will  naturally  afk,  “ Why  do  ymu  flop 
there  ? What  reafon  can  you  give  for  this  ? If 
you  allow  miracles  before  the  empire  became 
Chriftian,  why  not  afterwards  too  ?”  I anfwer, 
becaufe  after  the  empire  became  Ckrijlian  (they 
are  your  own  words)  a general  corruption  both  of 

faith  and  morals  infeBed  the  Chrijiian  church  : 
which  by  that  revolution,  as  St.  Jerom  /ays,  “ 
as  much  of  her  virtue,  as  it  had  gained  of  wealth 
and  power And  this  very  reafon  St.  Chry- 
fofom  himfelf  gave  In  the  words  you  have  after- 
wards cited;  “ There  are  fame  who  cfk.  Why  are 

not 

I>r.  Middlcttn'i  words  are  generally  printed  in  It^ic, 

+ Page  123. 


t M-2  ] 

^\ot  miracles  performed  Jim?  Why  are  there  na 
perfons  who  raife  the  dead,  and  cure  dfeajes  ?”  To 
which  he  replies,  “ That  it  was  owing  to  the  want 
ofjaith,  and  virtue,  and  piety  in  thofe  limes." 

1,  You  begin  your  pre/ace  byobferving,  that 
the  enquiry  was  intended  to  have  been  publfhed 
-fome  time  ago;  but  upon  refleftion,  you  re- 
folved  to  give  out  frjl,  fome  fketch  of  what  you 
was  projetiing  and  accordingly,  publijked  the 
introdutlory  difcourje  by  itfdf,  though  forefeeing 
it  would  encounter  all  the  oppo/ilion,  that  prejudice, 
bigotry,  and  fuperjlition  are  ever  prepared  to  give 
to  all  enquiries  ± of  this  nature.  But  it  svas  your 
■comfort,  that  this  would  excite  candid  enquirers  to 
weigh  the  merit  and  confequences  of  it.ij 

2.  The  confequences  of  it  are  tolerably  plain, 
even  to  free  the  good  people  of  England  from 
all  that  prejudice,  bigotry,  and  fuperjlition,  vul- 
garly called  Chriftianity.  But  it  is  not  fo  plain, 
That  this  is  the J'ole  expedient  which  can  feeure  the 
proiefant  religion  agairjl  the  efforts  oj  Rome.|| 
It  may  be  doubted,  whether  deifm  is  the  J'ole 
expedient  to  feeure  us  againft  popery’.  For  fome 
are  of  or-lnion,  there  are  perfons  in  the  world 
•who  are  neither  Deids  nor  Papifls. 

9 You  open  the  caufe  artfully  enough,  by 
7 quotation  from  Mr.  Eocke.^  But  we  are 
agreed  to  build  our  faith  on  no  man’s  au- 
thority. His  reafons  will  be  confideied  in  their 
place. 

Thofe 

Preface,  page  i.  J Page  2.  ^ Page  3.  ||  Ibid.  1 Page 4. 


C M3  ] 


Thofe  who  have  viritten  againjl  his  and  your 
opinion,  you  fay,  have  Jhewn great  eagernejs,  but 
little  knowledge  of  the  quefion  : urged  by  the  hopes 
of  honours,  and  prepared  to  fght  for  every  efablifh- 
ment,  that  offers  fuck  pay  to  its  dfenders\,”  I 
have  not  read  one  of  tbefe : yet  I would  fain 
believe,  that  neither  the  hope  of  honour,  nor 
the  defire  of  pay,  was  the  foie  or  indeed  the 
main  motive  that  urged  either  them  or  you  to 
engage  in  writing. 

But  I grant, , they  are  overfeen,  if  they  argue 
againftyou,  by  ching  the  tef  monies  f the  antient 
fathersX ; feeing  they  might  eafily  perceive  you 
pay  no  more  regard  to  thefe,  than  to  the  evan- 
gelifts  or  apofUes.  Neither  do  1 commend  them 
if  they  infinuale  jealoufies  oj  confequenees  danger- 
ous to  ChrijHanity  §.  Why  they  fliould  infinuale 
thefe,  I cannot  conceive  : I need  not  infinuafe, 
that  the  fun  Ihines  at  noon-day.  You  have 
opened  too  great  a glare  to  the  public\,  to  leave 
them  any  room  for  fuch  infinuation.  Though 
(to  fave  appearances)  you  gravely  declare  ftill. 
Were  7ny  argument  aUowed  to  be  true,  the  credit 
of  the  gofpel-miracles  could  not  in  any  degree  be 
faaken  by  it  ^1. 

4.  So  far  is  flourlfh.  Now  we  come  to  the 
point.  The  prefent  quefion,  you  fay,  depends  on 
•the  joint  credibility  of  the  faEls,  and  of  the  wit- 
neffes  who  attejl  them,  efpecially  on  the  former. 
For  if  the facts  be  incredible,  no  tefimony  can  alter 

the 

i p.  -6. 


f p.  5. 


t p.  6. 


^ ibid.  II  p.  7. 


C ] 

thi  nature  of  things^.  All  this  is  moft  true. 
You  go  on.  The  credibility  of  facts  lies  open  to 
the  trial  of  our  reafon  and  fenfes.  But  the  credi- 
bility oj  witnffts  depends  on  a variety  of  principles 
wholly  concealed  from  us.  And  though  in  many 
cafes  it  may  reafonably  be  prefumed,  yet  in  none  can 
it  be  certainly  known  it.  Sir,  will  you  retraft  this 
or  defend  it  ? If  you  defend,  and  can  prove,  as 
well  as  alTert  it,  then  farewell  the  credit  of  all 
hiftory,  not  only  facred  but  profane.  If  the 
credibility  oJ  xvitniffes  (of  all  witneffes  ; for  you 
make  no  dilfinflion)  depends,  as  you  peremtorily 
affirm,  on  a variety  of  principles  rc/io/Zy  concealed 
from  us  ; and  confequently,  though  it  may  be 
prefumed  in  many  cafes,  vet  can  be  certainly 
known  in  none  : then  it  is  plain,  all  the  hiftory 
of  the  bible  is  utterly  precarious  and  uncertain  : 
then  I may  indeed  prefume,  but  cannot  certainly 
know,  that  jfefus  of  Nazareth  ever  was  born  ; 
much  lefs  that  he  healed  the  Tick,  and  raifed  either 
Lazarus  or  himfelffrom  the  dead.  Now,  Sir,  go 
and  declare  again,  how  careful  you  are,  for  the 
credit  of  the  gofpel-miracles  ! 

5.  But  ior  lear  any  (confidering  how  frank  and 
open  your  nature  is,  and  how  warmly  difpojed  to 
fpeak  what  you  take  tobeirue^)  ffiould  fancy  you 
meant  what  you  faid  in  this  declaration,  you  take 
care  to  inform  them  foon  after:  The  whole  which 
the  vnt  of  man  can  pojfbly  difcover,  either  of  \tlie 

ways 


+ p.  9. 


p.  10. 


h P-  7- 


[ H5  J 

ways  or  will  oj  the  Creator,  mujl  be  acquired  by 
attending  ferioujly  (To  what  ? To  the  JewiJh  or 
Chrijiian  revelation  ? No  : but)  to  that  reifelation 
which  he  made  of  himfelf from  the  beginning,  in 
the  beautiful fabric  of  this  vifible  world.^ 

6.  I believe  your  opponents  will  not  hereafter 
urge  you,  either  with  that  paf age  from  St.  Mark, 
or  any  other  from  fcripture.  At  leaft,  I will  not ; 
unlefs  I forget  myfelf  ; as  I obferve  you  have 
donejufl;  now.  For  you  faid  but  now,  before  we 
proceed  to  exaymne  tejlimonies  for  the  decifion  of 
this  difpule,  our firjl  care fiould  be,  to  inform  our- 
felves  of  the  nature  of  thofe  miraculous  powers, 
■which  are  the  fubieEl  ojit,  as  they  are  reprefented  to 
us  m the  hifiory  of  the  gofpel\.  Very  true  ; 
This  Jhould  be  our  frf  care.  I was  therefore  all 
attention  to  hear  your  account  of  the  nature  of 
thofe  powers,  as  they  are  reprefented  to  us  in  the 
gojpel.  But  alas ! You  fay  not  a word  more 
about  it  ; but  flip  away  to  thofe  zealous  cham- 
pions, who  have  attempted  (bold  men  as  they  are) 
to  refute  the  introduSory  difeourf  f. 

Perhaps  you  will  fay,  “ Yes,  I repeat  that 
text  from  St.  Mark."  You  do  ; yet  not  deferib- 
inv  the  nature  of  thofe  powers  ; but  only  to  open 
the  way  to  one  of  your  antagonifis  t;  of  whom 
you  yourfelf  affirm,  that  not  one  of  them  feems  to 
have  fpent  a thought  in  conf  dering  thofe  powers  as 
they  are  fet  forth  in  the  New  Te.fament\.  Con* 
fequently,  the  bare  repeating  that  text,  does  not 
VoL.'  XVIII.  G prove 

^ p.  22.  II  p.  10.  I p.  11.  + p.'l2,  I p.  11. 


C ] 


prove  you  (any  more  than  them)  to  have 
one  thought  upon  the  ful^eB. 

7.  From  this  antagonift  you  ramble  away  to 
another^;  after  a long  citation  from  whom,  you 
fiibjoin,  It  being  agreed  then,  that  in  the  original 
promije,  there  is  no  intimation  of  any  particular 
period,  to  which  their  continuance  was  limited\. — 
Sir,  you  have  lolt  you  r way.  We  have  as  yet 
nothing  to  do  with  their  continuance.  For  till 
we  have  learned from  thofe  facred  records  (I  ufe 
your  own  words)  what  they  were,  and  in  what 
manner  exerted  by  the  apojlles,  we  cannot  form  a 
proper  judgement  of  thofe  evidences  which  are 
brought  either  to  confirm,  or  confute  their  conti- 
nuance in  the  church  : and  muf  confequently  dif 
pute  at  random,  as  chance  or  prejudice  may  prompt 
us,  about  things  unknown  to  ar.H 

Now,  Sir,  if  this  be  true  (as  without  doubt  it 
is)  then  it  neceflarily  follows,  that  feeing,  from 
the  beginning  of  your  book  to  the  end,  you 
fpend  not  one  page  to  inform  either  vourfelf  or 
your  readers,  concerning  the  nature  of  thefe  mi- 
raculous powers,  as  they  are  reprefented  to  us  in 
the  hi/lory  of  the gofpel:  you  difpute  throughout 
the  whole  at  random,  as  chance  or  prejudice 
prompts  you,  about  things  unknown  to  you. 

8.  You  t reply  to  the  adverfaries  of  your fcheme, 
I may  let  alone  for  the  prefent  ; and  the  rather, 
becaufe  the  arguments  ufed  therein,  will  occur 
ao^aln  and  again.  Onlv'  I would  here  -take  no- 

tice 

13-  Sp-  M-  5p.  15  — 27-  T p.  iJ. 


C H7  ] 

tice  of  one  adertion,  that  the  miraculous  powers 
conferred  on  the  apoftles  themfelves  were  impart^ 
ed juji  at  the  ?noment  of  the'ir  exertion^  and  with- 
drawn again  as  foon  as  thofe  particular  occaftons 
were fervedf  You  fltould  not  have  alTerted  this, 
he  it  true  or  falfe,  without  fome  ftronger  proof. 
This,  I fay,  is  evident\,  is  not  a fufficient  proof ; 
nor,  A treatife  is  prepared  on  that  fuhjed\.  Nei- 
ther is  it  proved  by  that  comment  of  \Groiius  on 
our  Lord’s  promife,  which  literally  tranflated 
runs  thus : To  extery  believer  there  was  then  given 
Join:  wonderful  power,  which  was  to  exert  if  elf, 
not  indeed  always  but  when  there  zuas  occafon. 

9.  But  waving  this  ; I grant  the  fngle  point  in 
difpute,  is.  Whether  the  tefimony  of  the  fathers, 
he  a fufficient  ground  to  believe,  that  miraculous 
gifts  fuhfifed  at  all,  after  the  days  of  the  apofles\? 
But  with  this  you  interweave  another  qtteflion, 
Whether  the  fathers  were  not  all  fools  or  knaves  t* 
In  treating  of  which  you  hrongly  intimate;  lirft. 
That  fuch  gifts  did  never  fubfid,  and  fecondly, 
That  the  apoftles  were  equally  wife  and  good, 
with  the  wonder-workers  (your  favourite  term) 
that  followed  them. 

When  therefore  you  add,  My  opinion  is  this, 
that  cfter  our  Lordds  afcenfion,-  the  extraordinary 
gifts  he  had pronifed  were  poured  out  on  the  apof 
G 2 ties, 

t p.  23.  ^ II  ibid.  § p.  24. 

II  Grctius  in  Mar.  xvi.  17.  Non  omnibus  omnia — ita  tamen  cui- 
Kbet  credent!  tunc  data  fit  admirabelis  farultas,  qute  fe,  non  fem- 
per  quidem,  fed  data  pccafione  explicaret. 

+ p.  27, 


[ >48  ] 

ties,  and  the  other  primary  injlruments  of  planting 
the  go fp  el ; in  order  to  enable  them  to  over-rule  the 
inveterate  prejudices  both  oj  the  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles, and  to  bear  up  againji  the  difcouragingjhocks 
of  popular  rage  and perjecution  J;  I look  upon  all 
this  to  be  mere  grimace.  You  believe  not  one 
word  of  what  you  fay.  You  cannot  polTibly,  if 
you  believe  what  you  faid  before.  For  who  can 
believe  both  the'  fide?,  of  a contradiclion  ? 

lo.  However  I will  fiippofe  vou  do  believe  if, 
and  will  argue  with  you  from  your  own  words. 
But  firft  let  us  have  a few  more  of  them^.  In 
procefs  of  time,  as  miraculous  powers  began  to  he 
lefs  and  lefs  wanted,  fo  they  began  gradually  to  de- 
cline, till  they  were  finally  withdrawn'^.  And  this 
may  probably  be-thought  to  have  happened  uhile 
fiome  of  the  apofjes  zeere  Jhll  living. 

Thefe  were  given,  you  fay,  to  the  firll  plan- 
ters of  the  gofpel,  in  order  to  enable  them  lo  over- 
rule the  inveterate  prejudices  both  o/Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles, and  to  bear  up  againji jhe  Jhocks  of  perjecu- 
tion. Thus  far  we  are  agreed.  They  were  given 
for  ihefe  ends.  But  if  you  allow  this,  you  can- 
not fuppofe,  confiftently  with  yourfelf,  that  they 
were  withdrawn  till  thefe  ends  were  fully  an- 
fwered.  So  long  therefore  as  thofe  prejudices 
fubfided,  and  Chriftians  vvere  expofed  to  the 
fliocks  of  perfecution,  you  cannot  deny  but 
there  was  the  fame  occafion  for  thofe  powers  to 
be  continued,  as  there  was  for  their  being  given 

at 

f p.  28.  S p.  28.  H p.  29. 


C H9  1 

at  fir  ft.  And  this,  you  fay,  is  5 <2  pojlulatum, 
which  all  people  will  grant,  that  they  continued  as 
long  as  theyzoerenecejfary-to  the  church. 

11.  Now  did  thofe  prejudices  ceafe,  or  was 
perfecution  at  an  end,  while  fome  of  the  apoftles 
were  ftill  living  ? You  have  yourfelf  abundantly 
fhewn  they  did  not.  You  know,  there  was  as 
fharp  perfecution  in  the  third  century,  as  there 
was  in  the  firft,  while  all  the  apoftles  were 
living.  And  with  regard  to  prejudices,  you  have 
induftrioufly  remarked,  that  t the  principal  wri- 
ters 3/"  Rome,  who  make  any  mention  of  the  Chrif- 
tians,  about  the  time  of  Trxy&xx,  /peak  of  them  as  a 
fet  of  defpicable,  fubborn,  and  even  wicked  enthu- 
fajls  : That  i Suetonius  calls  them  “ a race  of 
men  of  a new  and  mifchievous  fuperfition  And 
that  § Tacitus,  defcribing  the  horrible  tortures 
which  they  fufered  under  Nero,  fays,  “ They  were 
detefed for  their fagitious  praBices  ; pojfefed  with 
an  abominable  fuperflitiony  and  condemned  not  fo 
much  for  their  fuppofed  crime  of  firing  the  city,  as 
from  the  hatred  of  all  mankind.” 

And  II  their  condition,  you  fay,  continued  muck 
the  fame,  till  they  were  efiablijhed  by  the  civiTpower  : 
during  all  which  time  they  were  confiantly  infult- 
ed  and caluminatedby  their  Heathen  adverfaries,  as 
a fiupid,  credulous,  impious feB,  the  very ficum  of 
mankind.  In  a word,  both  with  regard  to  preju- 
dice and  perfecution,  I read  in  your  following 
page,  5 The  Heathen  magifirates  would  not  give 

G 3 themfdves 

Sp.  11.  + p.  193.  t p.  194-  § p.  195-  II  P-»95- 

5 p.  196, 


[ 150  ] 

themjelves  the  trouble,  to  make  the  hajl  enq^uiry  into 
their  manners  or  doBrines ; but  condemned  them  for 
the  mere  name,  xvithout  examination  or  trial : treat- 
ing a Chrijlian  of  courfe  as  guilty  of  every  crime, 
as  an  enemy  of  the  gods,  emperors,  laws,  and  of 
nature  itfelf. 

12.  If  then  the  end  of  thofe  miraculous  powers 
%vas,  To  overcome  inveterate  prejudices,  and  to  ena- 
ble the  Chrifians  to  hear  up  agahfl  the Jhocks  of 
perfecution ; how  can  you  poflibly  conceive  that 
thofe  powers  Ihould  ceafe,  while  fome  of  the 
apoftles  were  living?  With  what  colour  can  you 
affert,  that  they  were  lefs  wanted  for  thefe  ends, 
in  the  fecond  and  third,  than  in  the  apoftoJic  age  ? 
With  what  fhadow  of  reafon  can  you  maintain, 
that  (if  they  ever  fubfifted  at  all)  they  were  final- 
ly withdrawn,  before  Chriftianity  was  eftablilhed 
by  the  civil  power  ? Then  indeed  thefe  ends 
did  manifeflly  ceafe ; perfecution  was  at  an  end  ; 
and  the  inveterate  prejudices  which  fo  long  ob- 
tained, were  in  great  ineafure  rooted  up;  ano- 
ther plain  reafon  why  the  powers  which  were  to 
balance  thefe,  Jbould  remain  in  the  church  fo 
long,  and  no  longer. 

13.  You  go  on  to  acquaint  us  with  the  excel- 
lencies of  your  performance.t  The  reader,  you 
fay,  will  find  in  thefe fheets,  none  of  thofe  arts, 
which  are  commonly  employed  by  difputants  to  per- 
plex a good  caiife,  or  to  paliate  a bad  one  : no  fub- 
tle  refinements,  forced  confiruBions,  or  evafive  dif 

tinBions, 


T p.  31. 


[ 151  ] 

lin^ions,  but  plain  reafoning  grounded  on  plain 
fads,  and  publijhed  with  an  honejl  and  difnterfl^ 
ed  view,  to  free  the  minds  of  men,  from  an  invet-e-^ 
rateimpqfure,  1 havejhewn  that  the  antient father s, 
by  whom  that  delufion  was  impofed,,  were  extremely 
credulous  and fuperfitious  : pfff  with  Jlrong  pre- 
judices, and fcrupling  no  art  or  means,  by  which 
they  might  propagate  the  fame.  Surely,  Sir,  you 
add  the  latter  part  of  this  paragraph,  on  purpofe 
to  confute  the  former  : for  juft  here  you  ufe  one 
of  the  unfaireft  arts,  which  the  moft  difhoneft 
difputant  can  employ:  in  endeavouring  to  fore- 
ftall  the  judgment  of  the  reader,  and  to  prejudice 
him  againft  thofe  men,  on  whom  he  ought  not 
to  pafs  any  fentence,  before  he  has  heard  the,  evi- 
dence. 

1.  In  the  beginning  of  your  introdiidory  dif- 
courfe,  you  declare  the  reafons  which  moved  you 
to  publifli  it,  One  of  thefe,  you  fay,  was,  the 
late  increafe  of  popery  in  this  kingdom  ; chiefly 
occafioned,  as  you  fuppofe,  by  the  confident 
aflertions  of  the  Romijh  emiflaries,  that  there 
has  been  a fucceflion  of  miracles  in  their  church, 
from  the  apoftolic  to  the  prefent  age.  To 
obviate  this  plea,  you  would  § fettle  fame  rule  of 
dijcerning  the  true  from  the  falfe  fo  as  to  give  a 
reafon for  admitting  the  miracles  of  one  age,  and 
rejeding  thofe  of  another. 

2.  This  has  a pleafing  found,  and  is  extreme- 

G 4 ly 

+ p.  S P-  44* 


r ] 

}y  well  imagined  to  prejudice  a proteftant  reader 
in  your  favour.  You  then  flide  with  great  art 
into  your  fubjeft,  [j  claim  of  a miraculous 
power,  now  peculiar  to  the  church  uj  was 

ajferted  in  all  Chrifian  countries  till  the  reforma- 
tion. “ But  then  + the  cheat  was  deteBed : Nay, 
and  men  began  to  fufpeB,  that  the  church  had 
long  been  governed  by  the  fame  arts.  Far,  it  was 
eafy  to  trace  them  up  to  the  primitive  church, 
tho’  not  to  fx  the  time  when  the  cheat  began ; to 
flew,  how  long  after  the  days  of  the  apoflts,  the 
miraculous  gifts  continued  in  the  church.  How- 
ever it  is  commonly  believed,  that  they  conti- 
nued ’till  Chrillianity  was  the  eftablifhed  religion. 
\ Some  indeed  extend  them  to  the  fourth  and 
fifth  centuries  : but  ||  thefe,  you  fay,  betray  the 
proteftant  caufe.  For  in  the  third,  fourth,  and 
fflh,  the  chif  corruptions  of  popery  were  intro- 
duced, at  leaf  the  feeds  of  them  [own.  1 By  thefe 
I mean,  monkery  ; the  worfiip  of  reliques  ; invoca- 
tion of  faints  ; prayers  for  the  dead ; the  fuperfi- 
tious  ufe  of  images  ; of  the  facr  aments  \ of  the  fgn 
of  the  crofs,  and  of  the  confer  at  ed  oil. 

3.  I have  nothing  to  do  with  the  fourth  or 
fifth  century.  But  to  what  you  alledge  in  fup- 
port  of  this  charge,  fo  far  as  it  relates  to  the 
third  century,  I have  a few  things  to  reply. 

And  firft,  you  quote  not  one  line  from  any  fa- 
ther in  the  third  century,  in  favour  of  monkery, 

the 

Uibid,  + p.  45.  t p.  46.  ^p.50‘  Blip*  o'"  - P-  5®* 


[ 153  ] 

the  worjhip  of  r cliques,  the  invocation  of  faints,  or 
the  fuperjiitious  ufe  either  of  images,  or  conjecrat- 
edoiL  How  is  this,  Sir  ? You  brought  eight  ac- 
cufations  at  once  againft  the  fathers  of  the  third, 
as  well  as  the  following  centuries  : and  as  to  five 
of  the  eight,  when  you  call  for  the  proof,  you 
have  not  one  word  to  fay  ! As  to  the  fixth||.  In 
the  facrjiment  of  the  Eucharift,  fever al  ahvfes  were 
introduced.  You  infiance,  firfi,  in  mixing  the 
wine  with  water.  But  how  does  it  appear,  that 
this  was  any  abufe  at  all  ? Or,  that  f Irencats  de- 
clared it  to  have  been  taught  as  well  as  praBifed  by 
our  Saviour  ? The  words  you  quote  to  prove  this, 
do  not  prove  it  at  all  ; they  fimply  relate  a matter 
offafl; : i Taking  the  bread  he  confejl  it  to  be  his 
body,  and  the  mixt  cup,  he  affirmed  it  was  his  blood. 
You  cannot  be  ignorant  of  this  faff,  that  the  cup 
ufed  after  the  pafchal  fupper,  was  always  mixt 
with  water.  But  Cyprian  declared,  this  mixture 
to  have  been  enjoined  to  himfelf  by  a divine  revela- 
tion. If  he  did,  that  will  not  prove  it  to  be  an 
abufe  : fo  that  you  are  wide  of  the  point  ftill. 
You  infiance  next  in  their  fending  the  bread  to 
the  fick  ; which  (as  well  as  the  mixtute)  is  men- 
tioned by  Juflin  Martyr.  This  fa£l  likewife  we 
allow  : but  you  have  not  proved  it  to  be  an  abufe. 

I grant,  that  near  an  hundred  years  after,  fome 
began  to  have  a fuperfiitious  regard  for  this  bread. 

G g But, 

tip.  57.  II  ibid.  +p.  58. 

Accipienspancm,  fuum  corpus  cflc  confilebatur  ; & tempera?: 
njcntum  calicis,  fuum  fanguinena  confirmavit. 


[ *54  ] 

But,  that  in  Tertullian' s days  it  was  carried  home 
and  locked  up  as  a divine  treafure,  I call  upon 
you  to  prove  : as  alfo,  ^ that  infant-commu- 
nion was  an  abufe  ; or  the  flyling  it  the Jacrijice 
* oj  the  body  of  Chrift.  I believe  the  offering  it 
up  for  the  martyrs  was  an  abufe-,  and  that  this 
with  the  fuperjhlious  ufe  of  the  jign  of  the  crofs 
Were,  if  not  the  earlieft  of  all,  yet  as  early  as 
any  which  crept  into  the  Chriftian  church. 

4.  ’Tis  certain  \ praying  for  the  dead  was  com- 
mon in  the fecond  century  : you  might  have  faid, 
and  in  the  firft  alfo  ; feeing  that  petition  Thy 
kingdom  come,  manifellly  concerns  the  faints  in 
paradife,  as  well  as  thofe  upon  earth.  But ’tis 
far  from  certain,  that  the  pur pofe  of  this  was,  to 
procure  relief  and  refrefiment  to  the  departed  fouls 
in  fome  intermediate  fate  of  expiatory  pains or, 
that  this  v;as  the  general  opinion  of  thofe  times. 

g.  As  to  the  confecrated  oil,  you  feem  intire- 
ly  to  forget,  that  it  w’as  neither  St.  Jerom,  nor 
St.  Chryfoflom,  but  St.  James,  who  faid,  § Is  any 
fick  among  you  ? Let  him  fend for  the  elders  of  the 
church.  And  let  them  pray  over  him,  anointing 
him  with  oil,  in  ike  name  of  the  Lord.  And  the 
prayer  of  faith  fiall  five  the  fick,  and  the  Lord 
fiall  raif  him  up. 

The  fum  is  : you  have  charged  the  fathers  of 
the  third'  century  with  eight  of  the  chief  corrup- 
tions of  popery  ; 1.  Monkery,  2.  The  worDiip  of 
Tellques,  3.  Invocation  of  faints,  4.  The  fuper- 

ftitious 

S?-59^  +p.  60.  $p.  6,1.  ^e.  5.  14,  15. 


[ 155  ] 

ftitious  life  of  images,  5.  Of  the  confecrated  oil, 
6.  Of  the  facraments,  7.  Of  the  fign  of  the  crofs, 
8.  Praying  for  the  dead. 

And  what  is  all  this  heavy  charge  come  to  at 
laft?  Why  juft  thus  much:  fome  of  them,  in 
the  beginning  of  the  third  century,  did  fu- 
perftitioufly  ufe  the  fign  of  the  crofs  : and  others 
in  the  middle  of  that  century  offered  up  the  eu- 
charift  for  the  martyrs  on  their  annual  feftivals ; 
though  how  you  make  this,  the  JuperJiitious  ufe 
of  the  facramentSf  I know  not,  or  how  thefe 
come  to  be  the  chief  corruptions  of popery. 

Praying  thus  far  for  the  dead,  “ That  God 
would  fhortly  accomplifti  the  number  of  his  ele£f, 
and  haften  his  kingdom,”  and  anointing  the  fick 
with  oil,  you  will  not  eafily  prove,  to  be  any 
corruptions  at  all. 

As  to  monkery,  the  worffiip  ofreliques,  invo- 
cation of  faints,  and  the  fuperftitious  ufe  of 
images ; you  have  not  even  attempted  to  prove, 
that  thefe  fathers  were  guilty  : fo  that,  for  aught 
appears,  you  might  as  well  have  charged  them 
on  the  apoftles.  ||  Vet  it  is  no  more,  you  folemn^ 
]y  afllire  us,  than  what  faB  and  truth  oblige  you  to 
fay  \ When  I meet  with  any  of  thefe  afflirances 
for  the  time  to  come,  1 (hall  remember  to  ftand 
upon  my  guard. 

6.  In  the  following  pages  you  are  arguing 
againft  the  miracles  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  cen- 
tury. After  which  you  add,  S But  if  thfe  rnufi 
G 6 ht  - 

IJ.  p.  65.  5,p. 


[ 156  J 

he  rejeBed,  where  then  art  we  to  Jlop  ? And  to 
what  period  miiji  we  confine  ourf elves?  This  in- 
deed is  the  grand  difficulty,  and  what  has  puzzled 
all  the  other  doEiors,  who  have  conjidered  the  fame 
quejlion  before  me.  Sir,  your  memory  is  fhort. 
In  this  very  difcourfe  you  yourfelf  faid  juft  the 
contrary.  You  told  us  awhile  ago,  + that  not 
only  Dr.  Marjhall,  Mr.  Dodwell,  and  archbifliop 
Tillotfon,  but  the  generality  of  the  protejlant  doc- 
tors were  agreed,  to  what  period  they  ftiould  con- 
fine themfelves : believing,  \\i2X  miracles fuhfjled 
through  the  three  frjl  centuries,  and  ceafed  in  the 
beginning  of  the fourth. 

7.  However,  that  none  of  them  may  ever  be 
puzzled  any  more,  you  will  j;  lay  down  fame  ge- 
nerate principles,  which  may  lead  us  to  a more  ra- 
tionalfolution  of  the  matter,  than  any  that  has  hi- 
therto been  offered.  Here  again  I was  all  attention. 
And  what  did  the  mountain  bring  forth  ? What 
are  thefe  general  principles,  preceded  by  fo  fo- 
leran  a declaration,  and  laid  down  § for  thirteen 
pages  together?  -Why,  they  are  dwindled  down 
into  one,  That  the  forged  miracles  of  the  fourth 
century  taint  the  credit  of  all  the  later  miracles  1 
I fhould  defire  you  to  prove,  that  the  miracles  of 
the  fourth  century  were  all  forged,  but  that  it  is 
not  material  to  our  queftion. 

8.  But  you  endeavour  to  (hew  it  is.  + For 
that  furprifmg  confidence,  you  fay,  with  which 
the  fathers  of  the  fourth  age  have  affirmed  as  true 

what 

+ p.  46.  & feq,  J ibid.  § p.  71— f p,  84. 


[ ^b1  j 

uihat  they  themjelves  had  forged,  or  at  leaf  knew 
to  be  forged,  (a  little  more  proof  of  that)  makes  us 
ffped,  that  Jh  bold  a defiance  of  truth  could  not 
■become general  at  once,  but  muf  have  been  carried 
gradually  to  that  height  by  ciijlom  and  the  example 
of  former  times.  It  does  not  appear  that  it  did 
become  general  till  long  alter  the  fourth  century. 
And  as  this  fuppofition  is  not  fuHiciently  proved, 
the  inference  from  it  is  nothing  worth. 

g.  .You  fa}',  Secondly,  This  age,  in  which 
Chrif  lanity  was  ejlablijhed,  had  no  occafonfor  any 
miracles.  They  would  not  therefore  begin  to  forge 
miracles,  at  a tune  when  there  was  no  particular 
temptation  to  it.  Yes,  the  greateh  temptation  in 
the  world,  if  ihey  were  fuch  men  as  you  fuppofe. 
II  they  were  men  that  would  fcruple  no  art  or 
means  to  inlarge  their  own  credit  and  authority, 
they  would  natuially  befn  to  forge  miracles  at- 
that  time,  when  real  miracles  v, 'ere  no  more. 

10.  You  fay.  Thirdly,  § The  later  fathers  had 
equal  piety  with  the  earlier,  but  more  learning  and 
lefs  credulity.  If  thefe  then  be found  either  to  have 
forged  miracles  themjelves,  or  propagated  what 
they  knew  to  be  forged,  or  to  have  been  deluded  by 
the  forgeries  of  others,  it  muf  excite  the fame  fufpi- 
cion  of  their  predeceffors.  I anfwer,  i.  It  is  not 
plain  that  the  later  fathers  had  equal  piety  with 
the  earlier  ; nor  2.  That  they  had  lefs  credulity. 
It  feems  fome  of  them  had  much  much  more; 
witnefs  Hilarion’$  ||  camel,  and  + fmelling  a devil 

or 

f Ibid.  §p.  85.  II  Free  Inquiry,  p.  89.  -t  p.  90. 


[ J 

or  a firmer ; though  even  he  was  not  fo  qulck- 
fcented  as  St.  PachotJiius,  who  (as  many  believe 
to  this  day}  could  “ fmell  an  heretic  at  a mile’s 
diflance.”  But  if  3.  the  earlier  fathers  were  ho- 
lier than  the  later,  they  were  not  only  lefs  likely 
to  delude  others,  but  (even  on  Platons  fuppofition) 
to  be  deluded  themfelves.  For  they  would  have 
more  alfiftance  from  God. 

11.  But  you  fay,  Fourthly,  t The  earlier  ages 
of  the  church  were  not  purer  than  the  later.  Nay, 
in  fame  reJpeBs  they  were  worfe.  For  there  never 
was  any  age  in  which  Jo  many,  rank  herefies  were 
proj'ejl,  or  fo  many  fpurious  books  forged  and  pub- 
lijhed,  under  the  names  oj  Qhr'xli  and  his  apofiles  : 
:|:  fever  al  of  which  are  cited  by  the  mojl  eminent  fa- 
thers of  thofe  ages,  as  of  equal  authority  with  the 
fcriptures.  And  none  can  doubt  but  thofe  who 
would  forge,  or  make  ufe  of forged  books,  would 
make  ufe  of  forged  miracles. 

I anfwer,  1.  It  is  allowed,  that  before  the  end 
of  the  third  century  the  church  was  greatly  de- 
generated from  its  firfi  purity.  Yet  I doubt  not, 
2.  But  abundantly  more  rank  herefies  have  been 
profejl  in  many  later  ages.  But  they 
were  not  publicly  protefed  againlf,  and  therefore 
hillorians  did  not  record  them.  3.  You  cannot 
but  know  it  has  always  been  the  judgment  of 
learned  men,  (which  you  are  at  liberty  to  refute 
if  you  are  able}  that  the  far  greater  part  of  thofe 
fpurious  books  have  been  forged  by  heretics ; and 

that 

T Introd.  Difc.  p.  86.  | p.  87, 


[ ^59  ] 

that  many  more  were  compiled  by  weak,  weii« 
meaning  men,  from  what  had  been  orally  deli- 
vered down  from  the  apoftles.  But  4.  There 
have  been  in  the  church  from  the  beginning  men 
who  had  only  the  name  of  Chriftians.  And  thefe 
doubtlefs  were  capable  of  pious  frauds  (fo  called.) 
But  this  ought  not  to  be  charged  upon  the  whole 
body.  Add  to  this  5.  what  is  obferved  by  Mr. 
Daille  : “ I impute  a great  part  of  this  mifchicf 
to  thofe  men,  who,  before  the  invention  of  print- 
ing, were  the  tranferibers  and  copiers  out  of  ma- 
nuferipts.  We  may  well  prefume  that  thefe  men 
took  the  fame  liberty  in  forging,  as  Si.  Jerom 
complains  they  did  in  corrupting  books  ; efpeci- 
ally  fince  this  courfe  was  beneficial  to  them, 
which  the  other  v;as  not.”  Much  more  to  the 
fame  effefl;  we  have  in  his  treatife  Of  the  right 

ife  of  the  Fathers,  part  I.  chap.  iii. N.  B. 

Thefe  tranferibers  were  not  all  Chriflians,  no, 
not  in  name;  perhaps  few,  if  any  of  them,  in 
the  firft  century.  6.  By  what  evidences  do  you 
prove,  that  thefe  fpurious  books  are  frequently 
cited  by  the  moji  eminent  fathers,  as  not  only 
genuine,  but  of  equal  authority  with  the  ferip- 
tures  themfelves  ? Or,  laflly,  that  they  either 
forged*'  thefe  books  themfelves,  or  made  ufe  of 
what  they  knew  to  be  forged  ? Thefe  things  alfo 
you  are  not  to  take  for  granted,  but  to  prove, 
before  your  argument  can  be  of  force. 

12.  We  are  come  at  lafl  ioyo\xx general  + con- 

clufion. 


+ p.  91. 


[ ‘6°  ] 

tlufion.  There  is  nofufficient  reafon  to  believe,  that 
any  miraculous  powers  Jubfifled  in  any  age  of  the 
church  after  the  times  of  the  apofiles. 

But  pretended  miracles,  you  fay,  arofe  thus. 
J As  the  high  authority  of  the  apoflic  writings, 
excited  fame  of  the  mojl  learned  Chrifians  (prove 
that)  to  forge  books  under  their  names  ; fb  the 
great  fame  of  the  apojlolic  miracles,  would  na- 
turally excite  fame  of  the  mof  crafty,  when  the 
apojlles  were  dead,  to  attempt  Jome  juggling  tricks 
in  imitation  of  them.  And  when  thefe  artful  pre- 
tenders had  maintained  their  ground  through  the 
three  firjt  centuries,  the  leading  clergy  of  the fourth 
underjiood  their  interef  too  well  to  part  with  the 
old  plea  of  miraculous  gifts. 

Round  aflertions  indeed  ! But  furely,  Sir,  you 
do  not  think  that  reafonable  men  will  take  thefe 
for  proofs  ! You  are  here  advancing  a charge  of 
the  bjackeft  nature.  But  where  are  your  vouch- 
ers ? Wliere  are  the  witneffes  to  fupport  it? 
Hitherto  you  have  not  been  able  to  produce  one, 
through  a courfe  of  three  hundred  years  ; unlefs 
you  bring  in  thofe  Heathen,  of  v.’hofe  fenfelefs, 
fliamelefs  prejudices,  you  have  youifelf given  fo 
clear  an  account. 

“ But  you  defigned  to  produce  your  w'^tnefTes 
In  the  Free  Inquiry,  a year  or  two  after  the  intro- 
duQory  difcourfe  was  pubhflied.  So  you  con- 
demn them  firff,  and  try  them  afterwards;  you 
will  pafs  fentence  now,  and  hear  the  evidence 

by 


p.  92. 


r j 

!)y  and  by!  A genuine  fpecimen  of  that,  impar- 
tial regard  to  truth,  which  you  projefs  on  all  oc- 
cafions.” 

13.  Another  inftance  of  this  is  in  your  mar- 
ginal note.  The  primitive  ChrijHans  were  perpe- 
tually reproached  Jor  their  grq/s  credulity.  They 
were  ; but  by  whom  ? Why,  by  Jews  and  Hea- 
thens. Accordingly  the  two  wilnefl'es  you  pro- 
duce here,  are  Celfus  the  Jew,  and  Julian  the 
apoftate.  But  left  this  fliould  not  fuffice,  you 
make  them  confefs  the  charge,  f The  Jathers, 
your  words  are,  defend  thernfelves  by  faying,  that 
they  did  no  more  than  the  philofophers  had  always 
done:  that  Pythagoras’r  precepts  were  inculcated 
with  an  ipfe  dixit,  and  they  found  the  fame  method 
ufeful  wifi  the  vulgar.  And  is  this  their  whole 
defence  ? Do  the  very  men  to  whom  you  refer, 
Origen  and  Arnobius,  in  the  very  trafts  to  which 
you  refer,  give  no  other  anfwer,  than  this  argu- 
ment ad  hominem  ? Stand  this  as  another  ge- 
nuine proof  of  Dr.  Middletons,  candor  and  im- 
partiality ! 

14.  A further  proof  of  your  frank  and  open 
nature,  and  of  your  ^ contenting  yourf elf  with  the 
difcharge  of  your  own  confcience,  by  a free  declara- 
tion of  your  real  fentiments,  I find  in  the  very 
next  page.  Here  you  folemnly  declare,  § Chrif 
tianity  is  confirmed  by  the  evidence  offuch  miracles, 
as,  of  all  others  on  record,  are  the  leajl  liable  to 
exception,  and  cany  the  clearef  marks  of  their 

fincerity\ 

+ P-93-  rP-io.  §P-9i- 


[ i62  ] 

Jinurity  ; being  wrought  by  ChriR  and  his  apof- 
tles,  for  an  end  fo  great,  fo  important,  as  to  be 
highly  worthy  the  int erpojilion  of  the  Deify ; 
wrought  by  mean  and  fimple  men,  and  delivered  by 
eye-witnejfes,  whofe  characlers  exclude  the Jufpicion 
‘ fraud.  Sir,  do  you  believe  one  word  of 
what  you  fo  folemnly  declare  ? You  have  your- 
felf  declared  the  contrary.  But  if  you  do  not, 
where  fhall  we  have  you  ? Or  how  can  we  be- 
lieve you  another  time  ? How  fliall  we  know, 
I will  not  fay,  when  you  fpeak  truth,  but  when 
you  would  have  us  think  you  do?  By  what  cri- 
terion fliall  we  diflinguifh  between  what  is  fpoken 
in  your  real,  and  what  in  your  perfonated  cha- 
rafter  ? How  difeern  when  you  fpeak  as  Dr. 
Middleton,  and  when  as  the  public  librarian  ? 

ig.  You  go  on.  II  By  granting  the  Roraanifls 
but  a fingle  age  of  miracles  after  the  apojlles,  we 
flail  be  entangled  in  difficulties  whence  we  can  never 
extricate  ourfelves,  till  we  allow  the  fame  powers 
to  the  prefent  age.  I will  allow  them  however 
three  ages  of  miracles,  and  let  them  make  what 
advantage  of  it  they  can. 

You  proceed.  + If  the  fa  iptures  are  a com- 
pleat  rule  (I  reje£l  the  word fitjfcient,  becaufe  it 
is  ambiguous)  we  do  not  want  the  fathers  as  guides, 
or  if  clear,  as  interpreters.  An  efeem  for  them 
has  carried  many  into  dangerous  errors,  the  negleEl 
of  them  can  have  no  ill  confequences.  1 anfwer, 
1.  The  feriptures  are  a compleat  rule  of  faith  and 

praftice ; 


lip.  96.  Tp.97. 


[ 1^3  ] 

pra8:ice ; and  they  are  clear  in  all  necefTary 
points  And  yet  their  clearnefs  does  not  prove, 
that  they  need  not  be  explained  ; nor  their  com- 
pleatnefs,  that  they  need  not  be  iuforced,  2.  The 
efteeming  the  writings  of  theAree  fiirft  centuries, 
not  equally  with,  but  next  to  the  fcriptures, 
never  carried  any  man  yet  into  dangerous  errors, 
nor  probably  ever  will.  But  it  has  brought  many 
out  of  dangerous  errors,  and  particularly  out 
of  the  errors  of  poperv.  3.  The  negle£f,  in  your 
fenfe,  of  the  primitive  fathers,  that  is,  the  think- 
ing they  were  all  fools  and  knaves,  has  this  na- 
tural confequence  (which  I grant  is  no  ill  one, 
according  to  your  principles)  to  make  all  who 
are  not  real  Chriftians,  think  JeJus  of  Nazareth 
and  his  apoflles',  juft  as  honeft  and  wife  as 
them. 

16.  You  afterwards  endeavour  to  fhew  how 
the  church  of  England  came  to  have  fuch  an 
efteem  for  the  antient  fathers.  There  are  feveral 
particulars  in  this  account  which  are  liable  to  ex- 
ception. But  I let  them  pafs,  as  they  have  little 
connexion  with  the  point  in  queftion. 

17.  You  conclude  your  introduBory  dijeourje 
thus  : ± The  defign  of  the  prefent  treatife,  is  to  fix 
the  religion  of  the  protfiants  on  its  proper  bafis, 
that  is,  in  the  fixer  ed fcriptures.  Here  again  you 
fpeak.in  your  perfonated  charadfer;  asalfo  when 
you  § freely  own  the  primitive  writers  to  be  of  ufe 
in  attefhng  and  tranfinitting  to  us  the  genuine  books 

of 


:j:  p.  Ill,  §p.  112. 


r 

L 


164  ] 


of  the  holy  fcriplyres ! Books,  for  the  full  altefla- 
tion  as  well  as  fafe  tranfmiffion  whereof,  you 
have  cioubtlefs  tlie  deepeft  concern. 

18.  I cannot  difmifs  this  difcourfe  without  ob- 
ferving,  that  the  uncommon  artfulnefs  and  difin- 
genuity  which  glare  through  the  whole,  mufl 
needs  give  difguft  to  every  honefl  and  upright 
heart,  nor  is  it  any  credit  at  all  to  the  caufe  you 
have  efpoi’.fed.  Nay,  I am  perfuaded  there  are 
many  inthefe  kingdoms,  who,  though  they  think 
as  you  do  concerning  the  Chriftian  fyftem,  yet 
could  not  endure  the  thought  of  writing  againft 
it  in  the  manner  that  you  have  done  ; of  com- 
bating fraud  (if  it  were  fb)  with  fraud,  and  prac- 
tifing  the  very  thing  which  they  profeftto  expofe 
and  abhor. 

In  your  Free  Inquiry  itfelf  you  \ propoje, 

I.  To  draw  out  in  order  all  the  principal  tejh~ 
monies  which  relate  to  miraculous  gifts,  as  they 
are  found  in  the  writings  of  the  fathers,  from  the 
earlief  ages  after  the  apo/lles  ; whence  -we  fiall  fee 
at  one  view,  the  whole  e-cidence  by  which  they  ha-oe 
hitherto  been  fupported.  . 

II.  To  throw  together  all  vjhtch  thofe  fathers 
have  delivered,  concerning  the  perfons  faid  to  have 
been  endued  with  thofe  gifts. 

III.  :i;  To  Ulujlrate  the  particular  chara&ers 

and 

+ p,  2. 


+ Free  Inquiiy,  p.  i. 


r.  ] 

end  opinions  of  the  fathers  who  attfl  thofe 
miracles. 

IV.  To  review  all  the  fever al  kinds  of  miracles 
which  are  pretended  to  have  been  wrought,  and  to 
ohfrve  from  the  nature  of  each  how  far  they  may 
reafnably  be  fufpecled. 

V.  To  refute  fame  of  the  mof  plauftble  ohjeSicns, 
zuhich  have  been  hitherto  made. 

I was  in  hopes  you  would  have  given,  at  lead 
in  entering  upon  your  main  worlt,  what  you  pro- 
mi  fed  fo  long  ago,  an  account  of  the  § proper 
nature  and  condition  of  thofe  miraculous  powers, 
which  are  the  fubjedl  of  the  whole  difpute,  as  they 
are  reprefenled  to  us  in  (he  hijlory  of  the  gofpel. 
But  as  you  do  not  appear  to  have  any  thought  of 
doing  it  at  all,  you  will  give  me  leave  at  length 
to  do  it  for  you. 

The  original  promife  of  thefe  runs  thus: 
j[  Thefe  figns  fall  follow  than  that  believe.  In  my 
name  fall  they  caf  out  devils  ; they  fall  fpeak  with 
new  tongues  ; they  fall  take  up  frperits,  and  if  they 
drink  any  deadly  thing  it  fall  not  hurt  them. 
They  fall  lay  hands  on  the  Jick,  and  they  fall  reco- 
ver. 

A further  account  is  given  of  them  by  St. 
Peter,  on  the  very  day  v.;  hereon  that  promife 
was  fulfilled.  II  This  is  that  which  is  fpoken  of  by 

the 

^ 'Preface,  p.  10.  ||  Mark  xvi,  17,  18.  H Afts  ii. -i6, 17. 


[ >66  ] 

the  prophet  Joel,  And  it  Jkall  come  to  pafs  in  the 
laji  days,  faid  God,  your  Jons  and  your  daughters 
Jkall  prophejy,  and  your  young  men  JiallJee  vifions, 
and  your  old  men  Jiall  dream  dreams. 

The  account  given  by  St,  Paul  is  a little  fuller 
than  this : t There  are  diver Jiies  of  gifts, 
the  ufual  fcriptural  term  for  the  miraculous  gifts 
of  the  Holy  Ghoftj  but  the  fame  Spirit — For  to 
one  is  given  the  word  of  wifdom — to  another  the 
gifts  of  healing — to  another  the  working  of  (otherj 
miracles — to  another  prophecy — to  another  difcern- 
ment  of  fpirits — to  another  divers  kinds  oj  tongues 
— to  another  the  interpretation  of  tongues.  All 
thfe  worketh  that  one  and  the  Jame  Spirit,  dividing 
to  every  man  feverally  as  he  will. 

Hence  we  may  cbferve,  that  the  chief 
xapiafMiroi,  fpiiitual  gifts  conferred  on  the  apof- 
tolical  church,  were  i.  Calling  out  devils,  2. 
Speaking  with  new  tongues,  3.  Efcaping  dan- 
gers in  which  otherwife  they  mull  have  peridied. 
Healing  the  fick,  5.  Prophecy,  foretelling 
things  to  come,  6.  Vifions,  7.  Divine  dreams, 
and  8.  Difcerning  of  fpirits. 

Some  of  thefe  appear  to  have  been  chiefly 
ilefigned  for  the  conviflion  of  Jews  and  Heathens, 
as  the  cafting  out  devils,  and  fpeaking  with  new 
tongues ; fome  chiefly  for  the  benefit  of  their 
fellow  Chriflians,  as  healing  the  fick,  foretelling 
the  things  to  come,  and  the  difcernment  of  fpi- 
rils ; and  all,  in  order  to  enable  thofe  vvho  either 

wrought 


+ Cor.  xii.  8—11. 


C 167  ] 

wrought  or  faw  them,  to  run  with  patience  the 
r ace fet  before  them,  through  all  the  ftorms  of  per- 
fecution,  which  the  raoft  inveterate  prejudice, 
rage,  and  malice  could  raife  againfl;  them. 

I.  1.  You  are,  firft,  To  draw  out  in  order  all 
the  principal  tefimonies,  which  relate  to  miracu~ 
lous  gifts,  as  they  are  found  in  the  writings  of  the 
fathers  from  the  ear  lief  ages  after  the  apofles. 

You  begin  with  the  apollolic  fathers,  that  is, 
thofe  who  lived  and  converfed  with  the  apollles. 
There  are  feveral,  you  fay,  of  this  charaBer, 
whofe  writings  fill  remain  to  us,  St.  Barnabas,  St. 
Clemens,  St.  Ignatius,  St.  Poly  carp,  St.  Hennas. 
“ j;  Now  if  thofe  gifts  had  fubfifled  after  the  days 
of  the  apoflles,  thefe  muf  have  pofef  a largefiare 
^oj them.  But  if  any  of  them  had,  he  would  have 
mentioned  it  in  his  writings,  which  not  one  of 
them  has  done.” 

The  argument,  fully  propofed,  runs  thus : 

If  any  fuch  gifts  had  fubfifled  in  them,  or  in 
their  days,  they  mufl  have  mentioned  them  in 
their  circular  epiJHes  to  the  churches  (for  fo  their 
predeceffors,  the  apoflles  did  :)  but  they  did  not 
mention  any  fuch  gifts  therein. 

Sir,  Your  confequence  is  not  of  any  force. 
As  will  eafily  appear  by  a parallel  argument. 

If  fuch  gifts  had  fubfifled  in  St.  Peter,  or  in 
bis  days,  he  mull  have  mentioned  them  in  his 

circular 


t P'  8- 


- [ 168  ] 

circular  epijlles  to  the  churches.  But  he  does  not 
mention  any  fuch  gifts  therein.  Therefore  they 
did  not  fubfiftin  him,  or  in  his  days. 

Your  argument  therefore  proves  too  much| — 
nor  can  it  conclude  againft  an  apoftolic  father, 
without  concluding  againft  the  apoftle  too. 

If  therefore  the  apoflolic  fathers,  had  not  men- 
tioned any  miraculous  gifts,  in  their  circular  epij- 
tles  to  the  churches,  you  could  not  have  inferred 
that  they  polTeft  none  : fince  neither  does  he 
mention  them  in  his  circular  epiftles,  whom  you 
allow  to  have  pofteft  them. 

Of  all  the  apoftles  you  can  produce  but  one, 
St.  Paul,  who  makes  mention  of  thofe  gifts. 
And  that,  not  in  his  ciriular  ipijlles  to  the 
churches.  For  1 know  not  that  he  wrote  any 
fuch. 

1.  All  this  time  I have  been  arguing  on  your 
own  fuppofitions,  that  thefe  five  apoftolic  fathers, 
all  wrote  «Vc«/(27  epijlles  to  the  churches,  and  yet 
never  mentioned  thefe  gifts  therein.  But  neither 
of  thefe  fuppofitions  is  true.  For  i.  Her?nas 
wrote  no  epiftle  at  all  : 2.  Although  the  reft 
wrote  epiftles  to  particular  churches,  fCkmens  to 
the  Corinthians,  Ignatius  to  the  Romans,  &c.) 
)’et  not  one  of  them  wrote  any  circular  epiflle  to 
the  churches,  like  thofe  of  St.  James  and  St.  Peter 
(unlefs  we  allow  that  to  be  a genuine  epiftle, 
which  bears  the  name  of  St.  Barnabas. ) g*  ^oti 
own,  they  all  t /peak  of fpirituat  gifts,  as  abound- 


+ p-  3- 


[ ^^9  ] 

ing  among  the  Chrijlians  of  that  age : but  affert, 
Thefe  cannot  mean  any  thing  moie,  than  faith^ 
hope  and  charity.  You  affert — But  the  proof, 
Sir;  I want  the  proof.  Though  I am  but  one  of 
the  vulgar,  yet  I am  not  half  fo  credulous  as  you 
apprehend  the  firft  Chriflians  to  have  been.  Ipfe 
dixi  will  not  fatisfy  me  ; I want  plain,  clear,  logi- 
cal proof ; efpecially,  when  1 confider,  how 
much  you  build  upon  this  ; that  is  the  main 
foundation  whereon  your  hypothefis  Hands.  You 
yourfelfmuft  allow,  that  in  the  epiJUe  of  St.  Paul, 
fpirilual  gifts,  does  always 
mean  more  than  faith,  hope  and  charity ; that  it 
conftantly  means  miraculous  gifts.  How  then  do 
you  prove,  that  in  the  epiftles  of  St.  Ignatius,  it 
means  quite  another  thing  ? Not  miraculous  gifts, 
but  only  the  ordinary  gif ts  and  graces  of  the  go f- 
_pel?  I thought  + the  reader  was  to  fnd  no  evafvt 
diftinElions  in  thef olloouing fleets.  Prove  then  that 
this  dillintlion  is  not  evafive:  that  the  fame  words 
mean  abfolutely  different  things.  Till  this  is 
clearly  and  folidly  done,  realonable  men  muff 
believe  that  this  and  the  like  expreffions  mean 
the  fame  thing  in  the  writings  of  the  apollelica! 
fathers,  as  they  do  in  the  writings  of  the  apof- 
tles ; namely,  not  the  ordinary  graces  of  the  gof- 
pel,  but  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy 
Ghofl. 

3.  You  aim  indeed  at  a proof,  which  would 
be  home  to  the  point,  if  you  were  but  able  to 
VoL.  XVIII.  H make 

+ Preface,  p.  31. 


[ ^70  ] 

■■make  it  out.  Theft  fathers  ihemfelves  feem  ic 
dfclaim  all  gifts  of  a more  extraordinary  kind. 
Thus  Polycarp,  in  his  epijile  to  the  Philippiaris, 
Jdys,  “ neither  I,  nor  any  other  fuck  as  1 am,  can 
come  vp  to  the  uifdovi  of  theblefed  Paul.”  And  in 
the  fame  epifile  he  declares,  “ It  was  not  granted  to 
him  to  praPliJe  that.  Be  ye  angry,  and  fin  not.” 
St.  Ignatius  afo,  in  his  tpifle  to  the  Ephefians, 
fays,  “ § Thefe  things  I preferihe  to  you,  not  as 
if  / loere  fomebody  extraordinary.  For  though  I 
am  bound  for  his  name,  lam  not  yet  perfeB  in  Chrift 
Jefus.”  I think  verily,  thefe  extraordinary  proofs 
roay  ftand  without  any  reply. 

A.  Yet  you  courteoufly  add,  |]  If  from  the 
pajfages  rferred  to  above,  or  any  other,  it  fiould 
appear  probable  to  any,  thatthey  were favoured  on 
fame  occafons,  withfome  extraordinary  illumina- 
tions, vi/ions,  or  divine  imprtffons  ; I fall  not 
difpute  that  point,  but  remind  them  only  that  thefe 
gifts  were  granted  for  their  particular  comfort, 
and  do  not  therefore  in  any  manner  affcB,  or  relate 
to  the  quefion  now  before  us. 

I afk  pardon.  Sir.  Thefe  do  fo  deeply  affeff. 
To  nearly  relate  to  the  quellion  now  before  us, 
even  as  flated  by  5 yonrfelf,  that  in  allowing 
thefe,  you  give  up  the  fu'oflance  ofthe  quefiion. 
You  voui  fell  have  declared,  that  one  great  end 
of  the  extraordinary  gifts  conferred  on  the  apofiles 
was.  To  enable  them  to  bear  up  againjl  the  forks 
of  popular  rage  and  perfetdion.  Now  were  not 

extraordinary 

+ p.  7.  ^ p.  8.  II  p.  10.  1 Trefacc,  p.  2-?. 


[ 171  ] 

extraordinary  illuminations,  vijions  and  imprejjions^ 
if  given  at  all,  given  for  this  very  end  ? For  their 
particular  comfort,  as  you  now  word  it  ? There- 
fore in  allowing  thefe  to  the  apoitolic  fathers, 
yQ\s<A\o\v -extraordinary  gifts,  which  had  been  for- 
merly  granted  to  the  apoflles,  to  have fuhfjled 
in  the  church  after  the  days  of  the  apofles,  and  for 
the  fame  end  as  they  did  before. 

5.  Therefore  the  apojlolic  rvriters  have  not  left 
us  in  the  dark,  with  regard  to  our  prefent  argu- 
ment. And  confequently  your  triumph  comes 
too  foon  : t dlere  then  we  have  an  interval  of  half 
a century,  in  which  we  have  the frongeji  reafon  to 
prefume,  that  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  theapofo- 
lie  age  were  withdrawn.  No  ; not  if  all  the  apof- 
tolic  fathers  fpeak  pffpiritual  gifts,  as  abounding 
among  the  Chrifrians  of  that  age : not  if  extraordi- 
nary  illuminations,  vifons,  and  divine  imprefians 
■fill  fiibffed  among  them.  For  as  to  your  now 
putting  in,  as  exerted  openly  in  the  church  for  the 
conviBion  of  unbelievers,  I mu  ft  defire  you,  to 
put  it  out  again  ; it  comes  a great  deal  too  late. 
I’he  queftion  between  you  and  me  was  ftated 
without  it,  above  a hundred  pages  back.  Al- 
though if  it  be  admitted  it  will  do  you  no  fervice  ; 

' feeing  your  propofition  is  overthrov.m,  if  there 
were  miraculous  gifts  after  the  days  of  the  apofles, 
whether  they  were  openly  exerted  for  the  convic- 
tion of  unbelievers  or  not. 

I was  a little  furprifed,  that  you  ftiould  take 
H 2 your 


+ P.  9. 


[ 172  ] 

your  leave  of  the  apoflolic  fathers  fo  foon.  But 
-upon  looking  forward,  my  furprize  was  at  an 
end  ; I found  you  was  not  guilty  of  any  defign 
to  fpare  them  : but  only  delayed  your  remarks 
till  the  reader  fhould  be  prepared  for  what  might 
have  fliocked  him,  had  it  flood  in  iis_proper 
place. 

I do  not  find  indeed,  that  you  make  any  ob- 
jeftion  to  any  part  of  the  epillles  Ignatius  : no 
nor  of  the  catholic  epiftle,  which  is  infcribed  with 
the  name  of  Barnabas.  'This  clearly  convinces 
me,  you  have  not  read  it;  -lam  apt  to  think, 
not  one  page  of  it  ; feeing  if  you  had,  you  would 
never  have  let  flip  fuch  an  opportunity  of  ex- 
^pofing  one  that  was  called  an  apoflolic  father. 

7.  But  it  would  have  been  flrange,  if  you 
had  not  fomewhere  brought  in  the  famous 
phoenix  of  Clemens  Romanus.  And  yet  you  are 
very  merciful  upon  that  head,  barely  remarking 
concerning  it.  That  he  alledged  the  ridiculous 

Jlory  of  the  phoenix,  as  a type  and  proof  of  the  re- 
Jurretlion.  Whether  all  the  Heathen  writers  treat 
it  as  nothing  elfe  but  a mere  fable,  I know  not. 
But  that  it  is  fo  is  certain  ; and  confequently'  the 
argument  drawn  from  it  is  weak  and  inconclufive. 
Yet  it  will  not  hence  follow,  that  either  Clemens 
was  a wicked  man,  or  that  he  had  none  of  the 
extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit. 

8.  There  is  no  real  blemifh  to  be  found,  in 

the 


t P-  59- 


[ 173  ] 

the  whole  charafter  of  St.  Polycarp.  But  there  is 
one  circumflance  left  upon  record  concerning 
him,  which  has  the  appearance  of  weaknefs. 
And  with  this  you  do  not  fail  to  acquaint  your 
reader  at  a convenient  feafon  ; namely,  X vthat 
in  the  moji  antient  difpute,  concerning  the  time  of 
holding  Rajler,  St.  Polycarp  awafAnicetus  feverally 
alledged  apojlolic  tradition  for  their  different  prac- 
tice. And  ’tis  not  improbable,  that  both  alledged 
what  was  true  ; that  in  a point  of  fo little  impor- 
tance the  apoflles  varied  themfelves  ; fome  of 
them  obferving  it  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the 
moon,  and  others  not.  But  be  this  as  it  may 
it  can  be  no  poof,  either  that  Polycarp  was  not 
an  holy  man,  or  that  he  was  not  favoured  with 
the  extraordinary,  as  well  as  ordinary  gifts  of 
the  Spirit. 

9.  With  regard  to  the  narrative  of  hii  martyr- 
dom you  affirm,  § it  is  one  of  the  moJl  authentic 
pieces  in  all  primitive  antiquity.  I will  not  vouch 
for  its  authenticity  : nor  therefore  for  the  ftory 
of  the  dove,  the  flame  forming  an  arch,  the  fra- 
grant fmell,  or  the  revelation  to  Pionius.  But 
your  attempt  to  account  for  thefe  things,  is  truly 
curious.  You  fay,  An  \ arch  of fame  round  his 
body  IS  an  appearance  which  might  eafly  happen, 
from  the  common  eJfeBs  of  wind.  And  the  dovefaid 
to  fly  out  of  him,  might  be  conveyed  into  the  wood 
which  was  prepared  to  confume  him.  How  much 
more  naturally  may  we  account  for  both,  by 
H 3 fuppofing 

§ P-  124-  II  p-  229. 


J p.  60. 


[ ^74  3 

fuppofing  the  whole  to  be  a modern  fiftron, 
wrote  on  occafion  of  that  account  mentioned  by 
Eufebius,  but  loft  many  ages  ago  ? But  whatever 
may  be  thought  of  this  account  of  his  death, 
neither  does  this  affedl  the  queftion,  Whether 
during  his  life  he  was  endued  with  the  miraculous 
gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft. 

lo.  There  is  one  of  thofe  whom  you  ft  vie 
apoftolic  fathers  yet  behind,  of  whom  you  talk 
full  as  familiarly  as  of  the  reft.  I mean,  Hermas  : ■ 
to  whom  you  fay,  \ fome  impute  the  fraud  of  forg- 
ing the  Sibylline  books.  It  would  not  have  been 
amifs,  if  you  had  told  us,  which  of  the  antients, 
whether  Clirlftian,  Jew,  or  Heathen,  ever  accuf- 
ed  him  of  this.  If  none  ever  did,  fome  will  be 
apt  to  think,  ’tis  giving  a perfon  but  hard  tnea- 
fure,  to  bring  an  accufation  againft  him  which 
never  was  heard  of,  till  ftxteen  hundred  years 
after  his  death.. 

But  I can  the  more  eafily  excufe  you,  becaufe 
he  is  a perfon  whom  you  are  wholly  unacquainted 
with.  Though  ’tis  much,  curiofity  did  not  lead 
you,  when  you  had  archbifhop  Wake’s  tranflation 
in  your  hand,  to  read  over  if  it  were  but  half  a 
dozen  pages  of  his  famous  fhepherd.  But  cha- 
rity obliges  me  to  believe  you  never  dM. 
Otherwife  I cannot  conceive  you  would  fo  pe- 
remptorily affirm,  of  him  and  the  reft  together, 
'There  ? is  not  the  leaf  claim  or  prcitnfwn,  in  all 

their 


U P-  37* 


I p.  3. 


C *75  ] 

their  fevered  pieces,  to  any  of  thefe  extraordinary 
gifts,  which  are  the  fubjeB  of  tins  inquiry,  I atij 
amazed!  Sir,  have  you  never  a friend  in  the 
world  ? If  you  was  yourfelf  ignorant  of  the  whole 
affair  ; would  no  one  inform  you,  that  all  the 
three  books  of  Hermas,  from  the  firft  page  to  the 
laft,  are  nothing  elfe  than  a recital  of  his  extraordi- 
nary  gifts,  his  vifions,  prophefies,  and  revela- 
tions ? 

Can  you  expeff  after  this,  that  any  man  in  his 
fenfes,  fliould  take  your  word  for  any  thing  under 
heaven  ? That  any  one  fliould  credit  any  thing 
which  you  affirm  ? Or  believe  you  any  farther 
than  he  can  fee  you  ? Jefus  whom  you  perfecute 
can  forgive  you  this  ; but  how  can  you  forgive 
yourfelf?  One  would  think,  you  fhould  be  crying 
out,  day  and  night,  “ The  Shepherd  of  Hermas 
will  not  let  me  fleep.” 

11.  You  proceed  to  the  teftimony  of  t JaJlin 
Martyr,  who  wrote  about  fifty  years  after  the 
apoflles.  He  fays,  (I  tranflate  his  words  literally) 
There  are  prophetic  gifts  among  us  even  until  new. 
You  may  fee  with  us  both  women  and  men,  having 
gifts  from  the  Spirit  of  God.  He  particularly 
infills  on  that  oi  caf  ing  out  devils,  as  what  every 
one  might  fee  with  his  own  eyes. 

% i Irenoeus,  who  wrote  fomewhat  later,  affirms. 
That  all  who  were  truly  dfciples  g/'Jefus,  wrought 
miracles  in  his  name-,  fome  caf  out  devils-,  others 
had  vifions,  or  the  knowledge  of  future  events-, 
H 4 others 

+ p. 10.  J p.  11  , 


C 176  ] 

ethers  healed  thefick. — § And  as  to  raifmg  the  dead, 
he  declares  it  have  been  frequently  performed  on 
necejfary  occafons,  by  gr  eat  fafing,  and  the  joint 
fupplication  of  the  church.  And  xce  hear  many, 
fays  he,  fpeahng  with  all  kinds  of  tongues,  and 
expounding  the  myjleries  of  God. 

II  Theophilus,  bifhop  of  Antioch,  who  lived  in 
the  fame  age,  fpeaks  of  calling  out  devils  as  then 
common  in  the  church. 

12.  ? Tertullian,  who  fourfhed  toward  the  end 
of  the  fecond  century,  challenges  the  Heathen  ma- 
gif  rates,  to  “ call  before  any  of  their  tribunals, 
any  perfon  pojfcjl  with  a devil.  And  if  the  evil 

fpiril,  when  commanded  by  any  Chrijlian,  did  not 
confejs  himfelf  to  be  a devil,  vdio  elfewhere  called 
himfef  a god,  theyfiould  take  the  life  of  that  Chrif 
iian.” 

+ Minutius  Ye\\x,  fuppofed  to  have  wrote  in  the 
beginning  of  the  third  century,  addreffing  himfef 
to  his  Heathen friend,  fays,  “ The  great  f part  of 
you  know  what  confejfions  the  Demons  make  con- 
cerning themfelves,  when  we  expel  them  out  of  the 
bodies  of  men." 

13.  i Ox\gen,  fomething younger  than  Minutius, 
declares,  that  there  remained  fill  the  manifef  indi- 
cations of  the  Holy  Spirit.  “ For  the  Chrfians, 
fays  he,  call  out  devils,  perform  many  cures,  fore- 
tel  things  to  come. — And  many  have  been  converted 
to  Chrfianity  by  vifons.  I have  feen  many  exam- 
ples of  this fort." 

In 

§ p,  12,  P ibi<3.  5 ibid,  d p.  13*  + P'  *4" 


[ 177  ] 

§ In  another  place  he  fays,  “ Signs  of  the  Holy 
Ghojl  were  Jhewn  at  the  beginning  of  the  teaching 
of  Jefus  : (not  as  you  tranflate  it,  miracles  began 
with  the  preaching  £/ Jefus;  that  is  quite  a diiTer- 
ent  thingj  more  were  fiewn  cfter  this  fcenfon, 
but  afterwards  fewer.  However  even  now  there 
are  Jlill  fome  remains  of  them  with  a few,  whofe 
fouls  are  cleanfed  by  the  word,  and  a ife  conform- 
able to  itl"  II  Again,  “ Some,  fays  he,  heal  the 
fcl.  I myfelf  have  feen  many  fo  healed,  of  lofs  of 
fenfes,  madnefs,  and  innumerable  other  evils,  which 
neither  men  nor  devils  can  cure.  II  And  this  is 
done,  not  by  magical  arts,  but  by  prayer,  and 
certain  plain  adjurations,  fuch  as  any  common 
ChriJHan  may  ufe ; for  generally  common  men  do 
things  of  this  kind.” 

14.  t Cyprian,  who  wrote  about  the  middle  of 
^ the  third  century,  fays,  “ Befde  the  vifons  of  the 
night,  even  in  the  day-time,  innocent  children  among 
ns  are  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit ; and  in  extafes 
fee,  and  hear,  and  fpeak  thofe  things  by  which 
God  IS  pleafed  to  admonifh  and infiruB  ns.  Elfe=-  - 
where  he  particularly  mentions  the  calling  out 
devils  ; “ Which,  fays  he,  J either  depart  immedi- 
ately, or  by  degrees,  according  to  the  faith  of  the 
patient,  or  the  grace  of  him  that  works  the  cure.” 

§§  Arnobius,  who  is  fuppofed  to  have  wrote  m - 
the  year  fChcili  303, /e//j  us,  “ ChnR  appears 
even  now  to  men  unpolluted,  and  eminently  holy, 

H _5  who-  . 

§P  ]l  ibid,  S p.  16;  ibid.  i p.  17, 

p. 


[ X7S  ] 

■who  love  him  : — Whofe  very  name  puls  evil  fplrits 
to  flight,  /b  ikes  the  prophets  dumb,  deprives  the 
flooth-flayers  oj  the  power  ofl anjwering,  and  flrifl- 
trates  the  uBs  of  arrogant  magicians^ 

II  Laftantius,  who  zurote  about  the  flame  time, 
Jpeaking  oJ  evil  flpints,  fays,  “ Being  adjured  by 
Chriflians,  they  retire  out  of  the  bodies  of  men 
— conflefls  themflelves  to  be  Damons,  and  tell  their- 
names,  even  the  flame  luhich  are  adored  in  the  tem- 
ples.” 

ig.  t TheJ'e,  you  fay,  are  the  principal  teflimc- 
nies  which  ajflert  miraculous  gifts  through  the  three 
frji  centuries ; which  might  be  flupported  by  many 
more  ofl  the  fame  kind,  from  the  flame  as  well  as. 
different  writers.  But  none  can  flruple  to  rijk  the 
fate  ofl  the  caufle  upon  thfle.  Thus  far  I do  not 
fcruple  it.  I do  not  doubt  but  the  teftimonies 
of  thefe  nine  witneffes,  added  to  the  evidence  o-f 
the  apodolic  fathers,  will  faiisfy  every  impartial 
man  with  regard  to  the  point  in  queflion.  Yet  I 
fee  no  caufe,  if  there  are  nine  witneffes  more,  to 
give  up  their  evider.ce  ; feeing  you  may  poflibly 
raife  objeftions  againll  thefe  which  the  others 
are  unconcerned  in. 

If  then  you  fl-iould  invalidate  what  I have  to 
reply  in  behalf  of  the  witneffes  now  produced, 
you  will  have  done  but  half  your  work  ; I fliall 
afterwards  require  a fair  bearing  for  the  others 
alfo. 

i6.  1 You  clofe  this  head  with  remarking, 
1.  That  the  fllence  of  all  the  apoflolic  writers  on  the 
flubjeB  ofl  thefe  gifts,  nmfl  dflpoflc  us  to  conclude 

(Dj 


5p.  i8,  + p.  rg.  f ibid, 


[ 179  ] 

they  were  then  withdrawn.  O,  Sir,  mention  this 
no  more.  I intreat  you  never  name  their  filence 
again.  They  fpeak  loud  enough  to  (hame  you 
as  long  as  you  live.  You  cannot  therefore  talk 
with  any  grace  of  the  pretended  revival  of  them, . 
after  a cffation  of  forty  or  fifty  years  ; or  draw 
conclufions  from  that  which  never  was. 

Your  fecond  remark  is  perfeftly  new:  I dare 
fay  none  ever  oblerved  before  yourfelf,  that  this 
particular  circumllance  of  the  primitive  Chrilli- 
ans,  carried  with  it  an  air  of  impofure,  namely, 
their  § challenging  all  the  world  to  come  and  fee  . 
the  miracles  which  they  wrought ! To  complcat 
the  argument  you  fhould  have  added,  And 
their  flaking  their  lives  upon  the  performance  of 
tliem. 

17.  I doubt  you  have  not  gone  one  hep-for- 
ward yet.  You  have  indeed  advanced  many- 
bold  affertions  t but  you  have  not  fairly  proved 
one  Tingle  conclufion  with  regard  to  the  point  in  . 
hand. 

But  a natural  effeTl  of  your  lively  imagination 
is,  that  from  this  time  you  argue  more, and  more 
weakly  ; inafmuch,  as  the  farther  you  go,  the 
more  things  you  imagine  (and  only  imagine) 
yourfelf  to  have  proved  Confequently  as  you  , 
gather  up  m.Qre  miflakes  every  hep  you  takcj 
every  page  is  more  precarious  than,  the, former.  . 

II,  1.  The  fecond  thing  you  propofed  was, .. 

H 6 ■ Ta, 

^ P-;.  21- 


[ i8o  ] 

II  To  throw  together  all  which  thofe  fathers  have 
delivered  concerning  the  perfons  Jaid  to  have 
been  endued  with  the  extraordinary  gifts  of  the 
Spirit. 

Now  whenever  we  think  or  /peak  with  reverence, 
fay  you,  oj  thofe  primitive  times,  it  is  always  with 
regard  to  thefe  very  fathers,  whcf  tejlimonies  I 
have  been  colleBing.  And  they  were  indeed  the 
chief  perfons  and  champions  of  the  Chrijiian  cauf, 
the  pafors,  bfiops,  and  martyrs  of  the  primitive 
church ; namely,  Jufin  Martyr,  Ireneceus,  Theo- 
philus,  Tertullian,  Minutius  Felix,  Origen,  Cyprian, 
Arnobius,  LaElantius.  Sir,  you  ftumble  at  the 
threfhold.  A common  diftionary  may  inform 
you  that  thefe  were  not  all,  either  pallors,  bi- 
Ihops,  or  martyrs. 

2,  You  go  on  as  you  fet  out.  Yet  ? none  of 
thefe  have  any  where  affirmed,  that  they  ihemfelves 
were  endued  with  any  power  of  working  miracles. 
You  fhould  fay,  with  any  of  thofe  extraordinary 
gifts  promifedby  our  Lord,  and  conferred  on  his 
apoftles. 

No  ! Have  none  of  thefe  any  where  ajfrmed, 
that  they  themflves  were  endued  with  any  extra- 
ordinary gifts  ? What  think  }0U  of  the  very  firft 
of  them,  fufin  Martyr  ? Either  you  are  quite 
millaken  in  the  account  you  give  of  him  + elfe- 
where,  or  he  affirmed  this  of  hiinflf  over  and 
over.  And  as  to  Cyprian,  you  will  by  and  by 
fpend  feveral  pages  together,  on  the  extra- 
ordinary 

[p.  21.  Sp.  22,  +p.  27,30,  p.  101. 


L j 

ordinary  gifts  he  affirmed  himfdf  to  be  endued 
with. 

But  fuppofe  they  had  not  any  where  affirmed 
this  of  tkemfelves,  what  would  you  infer  there- 
from ? That  they  were  not  endued  with  any  ex- 
traordinary gifts  ? Then  by  the  very  fame  method 
of  arguing,  you  might  prove  that  neither  St. 
Peter,  nor  James,  nor  John,  were  indued  with 
any  fuch.  For  neither  do  they  any  v>here  affirm 
this  of  themjelves  in  any  of  the  writings  which 
they  left  behind  them. 

3.  Your  argument  concerning  the  apofloKc 
fathers  is  juft  as  conclufive  as  this.  For  if  you 
fay,  “ The  writers  following  the  apoftolic  fathers, 
do  not  affirm  them  to  have  had  any  miraculous- 
gifts  ; therefore  they  had  none  by  a parity  of 
reafon,  you  muft  fay,  “ The  writers  following 
the  apoftles  do  not  affirm  them  to  have  had  any 
miraculous  gifts ; therefore  the  apoftles  had 
none.” 

4.  Your  next  argument  againft  the  exiftence  of 
thofe  gifts  is,  “ That  the  fathers  do  not  tell  us 
the  names  of  them  which  had  them.”  This  is 
not  altogether  true.  The  names  of  Jiffiin  Afar- 
tyr  and  Cyprian  are  pretty  well  known ; as  is, 
among  the  learned,  that  of  f Dionyfius,  biffiop  of 
Alexandria,  But  what  if  they  did  not?  Suppof- 
ing  miraculous  powers  were  openly  exerted  in  the 
church-,  and  tliatnotonly  they  themfelves,  but  every 
oneelfe  might  fee  this  whenever  they  pleafed  : if  any 

Heathen 


+ p,  1d6,  2J2, 


C ] 

Heathen  might  come  and fee  whenever  he  pleafed, 
what  could  a reafonable  man  defire  more  ? What 
(lid  it  fignify  to  him  to  know  the  names  of  thofe 
whom  he  heard  prophefying,  or  faw  working 
miracles  ? Though  without  doubt,  whoever  faw 
the  miracles  wrought,  m.ight  eafily  learn  the 
‘names  of  thofe  that  wrought  them, ; which  ne- 
verthelefs  the  Chriflians  had  no  need  to  publifh 
abroad-,  to  expofethem  fo  much  the  more  to  the 
rage- and  malice  of  their  pei  fecutors. 

6.  Your  third  argument  is,  + The  Chriflian 
workers  of  miracles  were  always  charged  with  im> 
pofure  hy  tlmr  adverjaries.  Lucian  tells  us, 
“ Whenever  any  crafty  juggler  went  to  the  Chrif 
iians,  he  grew  rich  invnediately.”  And  Celfus 
reprejenls  the  Chrifian  zconder-workers  as  mere 
vagabonds  and  common  cheats,  who  rambled  about 
to  fairs  and  markets. 

And  is  it  anv  wonder,  that  either  a Jew  or  a 
Heathen  fltould  reprefeiit  them  thus?  Sir,  I do 
not  blame  you  for  not  believing  the  Chriflian 
fyftem,  but  for  betrat'ing  fo  grofs  a partiality: 
lor  gleaning  up  every  ferap  of  Heathen  fcandal, 
and  palming  it  upon  us-  as  unqueftionable  evi. 
dence’;  and  for  not  tranllating  even  thefe  mifer- 
able  fragments  with  anv  accuraev  or  faithfulnefs. 
Inflead  of  giving  us  the  text,  bad  as  it  is,  you 
commonly  fubftitute  a paraphrafe  vet  worfe. 
And  this  the  unlearned  reader  naturally  fuppofes 
to  he  a faithful  tranflation.  It  is  no  credit  to  , 

your. 


+ ?•  23^; 


[ 1^3  ] 

your  caufe  if  it  needs  fuch  fupports.  And  this 
is  no  credit  to  you  if  it  does  not. 

To  that  of  Luciun  and  Celfus,  you  add  the  evi- 
dence of  Cczciliiis  too,  who  calls,  fay  you,  ihefe 
workers  of  miracles,  a lurking  nation,  fluinning 
the  lights  Then  they  were  flrangely  altered  all 
on  a fudden.  For  you  + told  us,  that  jull  before 
they  were  proving  themfelves  cheats  by  a wddely 
different  method  ; by  calling  out  both  upon  magi- 
Jirates-.  and. people,  and  challenging  all  the  xjcorld  to 
come  and  Jes  what  they  did ! 

I was  not  aware,  that  you  had  yet  begun  7o 
throw  together  all  which  the  fathers  have  delivered, 
concerning  the  pcrjons  faid  to  have  been  endued 
with  tlijfe  extraordinary  gifts.  And,  it  feems,, 
you  have  made  an  end  of  it  ! And  accordingly 
you  proceed  to  fum  up  the  evidence^  to  obferve: 
upon  the  whole,  :|;  From  ihefe  char  abler  s of  the  pri- 
mitive wonder-woi  kers,  as  given  both  by  friends. 
a,nd  enemies,  we  may  fairly  conclude  that  the  gif^ 
of  thfe  ages  were  generally  engrofj'ed  by  private 
Chrijlians,  who  travelled  about  from  city  to  city,  to 
afijl  the  ordinary  preaching,  in  the  converfun  of 
Pagans,  by  the  extraordinary  miracles  they  pretend- 
ed to  perform. 

CharaBers  given  both  b^  friends  and  enemies  ! 
Pray,  Sir,  what  friends  have  you  cited  for  this 
charadler  ? Or  what  enemies,  except  only  Celfas 
the  fezv  ? (And  you  are  a miferable  inrerpreter 
for  him.)  So  from  the  fmgle  teftimony  of  fuch  a 

witnefs. 


I p.  aoL 


+ P-  21- 


[ '84  ] 

witnefs,  you  lay  it  down  as  an  oracular  truth, 
that  all  the  miracle-workers  of  the  firft  three  ages, 
were  vagabonds  and  common  cheats,  rambling 
about  from  city  to  city,  to  affift  in  converting 
Heathens,  by  tricks  and  impohure  ! And  this 
you  ingenuoufly  call,  Throzving  together  all xihich 
the fathers  have  delivered  concerning  them  ! 

9.  But  to  compleat  all,  + Here  again,  fay  you, 
we  fee  a difpenfation  of  things  afcribtd  to  God, 
quite  different  from  that  which  we  meet  with  in  the 
New  Tcjlariunt.  JVe  fee  a difpenfation  ! Where  ? 
Not  in  the  primitive  church.  Not  in  the  writ- 
ings of  one  Tingle  Chriftian  ; not  of  one  Heathen  ; 
and  only  of  one  few:  (for  poor  Celfus  had  not 
a fecond  ; though  he  multiplies  under  your  form- 
ing hand,  into  a cloud  of  witnelTes.)  He  alone 
afcribes  this  to  the  antient  Chriftians,  which  you 
in  their  name  afcribe  to  God.  With  die  fame 
regard  to  truth  you  go  on.  7n  thofe  days  the 
poxcer  of  working  miracles  (you  flrould  fay.  The 
extraordinary  gifts J was  commmilted  to  none  but 
thofe  uho  pre/icled  in  the  church  of  Chriff.  Ipfe 
dixit,  for  that.  But  I cannot  take  your  word  : 
efpecially  when  the  apoflles  and  evangclifts  fay 
Gtherwife.  But  upon  the  pretended  revival  of 
thofe  powers — Sir,  we  do  not  pretend  the  revival 
of  them;  feeing  we  fhall  believe  they  never  were 

intermitted,  till  you  can  prove  the  contrary 

We  find  the  adminifiration  of  them  committed,  not 
to  thofe  zvho  had  the  government  of  the  church  ; 

not 


+ p.  24. 


r ^85  ] 

vot  to  the  bijhops,  the  martyrs,  or  the  principal 
champions  of  the  Chriftian  caufe,  but  to  boys,  'to 
women,  and  above  all,  to  “ private  and  ohfcure 
laymen  not  only  of  an  inferior,  but  fomdimes  al- 
fo  of  a bad  chara&er. 

Surely,  Sir,  you  talk  in  your  fleep.  You  could 
never  talk  thus,  if  you  had  your  eyes  open,  and 
your  underftanding  about  you.  JFe  fnd  the  ad- 
7ninif  ration  of  them  committed,  not  to  tlwfe  who 
had  the  government  of  the  church.  No  ! I thought 
Cyprian  had  had  the  government  of  the  church  at 
Carthage,  and  Dionyfus  at  Alexandria  ! — N^ot  to 
the  bijhops.  Who  were  thefe  then,  that  were 
mentioned  Jail  ? Bifhops,  or  no  bilhops  ? — Not 
to  the  martyrs.  Well,  if  Cyprian  was  neither  bi- 
fhop  nor  martyr,  I hope  you  will  allow  fufins 
claim.  Not  to  the  principal  champions  of  the 
Chriflian  caufe- — And  yet  you  told  us  three  pages 
fince,  that  thefe  very  fathers  were  the  chief  cham- 
pions of  the  Chriflian  caufe  in  thofe  days  P — But  to 
boys,  and  to  women.  I anfwer.  This  is  that  which 
wasfpokenofbythe  prophet  ]oe\.  It  fiall  come  to 
pafs,  that  I will  pour  out  my  Spirit,  faith  the  Lord, 
and  your  fans  and  your  daughters  fiall  prophefy  ! 

■ A circumfiance  which  turns  this  argument  full 
againfl:  you,  till  you  openly  avow  you  do  not  be- 
lieve thofe  prophecies.  And  above  all  to  private 
and  obfcure  laymen,  not  only  of  an  inferior,  but  fome- 
times  of  abaci  chara&er,  I anfwer,  1.  You  cite 
only  one  ante-nicene  writer,  to  prove  them  com- 
mitted to  private  and  obfcure  laymen.  And  he 

fays 


[ i85  ] 

fays  this  and  no  more,  generally  i private  men  da  - 
thirigs  of  this  kind..  By  what  rule  of  grammar 
}’ou  conflrue  IhZrai  private  and  ohfure  laymen,  I 
hnow  not.  2.  To  prove were  fometimes  men 
of  a bad  char  aBcr,  you  quote  alfo  but  one  ante- 
Tiicene  father.  (For  I prefumeyou  will  notaffert 
the  genuinenefs  of  the  (fo  called)  apojlolical  con- 
Jlitutions.)  And  that  one  is,  in  effeft,  none  at 
all.  It  is  Tertulhan,  who  in  his  prfcripticn  a- 
gainji  heretics,  fays,  J They  will  add  many  things 
of  the  authority  (or  power ) of  every  heretical 
preacher:  that  they  raifed  the  dead,  healed  the fck, 

foretold  things  to  come. They  vUl  ada  But 

did  Tertullian  believe  them  ? There  is  no  fha- 
dow  of  reafon  to  think  he  did.  And  if  not, 
what  is  all  this  to  the  purpofe  ? No  more  than 
the  tales  of  later  ages  which  you  add,  concerning 
the  miracles  wrought  by  hones  and  rchques. 

to.  II  Thefe  things,  you  add,  are  fo  jirange, 
as  to  givejifl  reafon  to fufpcEl,  that  there  was  fame 
original  fraud  in  the  cafe,  and  that  thofe  f rolling 
zvonder-zvorkers,  by  a dexterity  of  jagghng,  irnpofed 
upon  the  pious  fathers,  whofe  frcng  prejudices 
and  ardent  zeal  for  the  inter ejl  of  Chrijhanity, 
would  difrofe  them  to  embrace,  without  examna-  • 
tion,  whatever  fenned  to  promote  fo  good  a cauf.  ' 

You 

IrrlTraci/  rl  roi^av 

Origcn.  Cent.  Celf.  1.  vii, 

+ Adjicient  imilta  da  autovitate  cujufque  doftoiis  hxrctici,  iU 
kis  inoituos  fufcitafTe,  dcbiles  reformafTe,  &c,_ 

I P-  25- 


[ J 

You  now  fpeak  torerably  plain,  and  would  be 
much  difappointed  if  thofe,  who  have  no  ftrong 
prejudices  lor  Chriftianity,  did  not  apply  what 
you  fay  of  thefe  llrolling  wonder-workers  to  the 
apo flies,  as  well  as  their  fucceffors. 

11.  A very  flaort  anfwer  wdll  fuffice.  Thejc  things 
are  Jo  Jirange.  They  are  more  Orange  than  true. 
You  have  not  proved  one  jot  or  title  of  them  vet. 
Therefore  the  confequences  you  draw  muft  lall 
to  the  ground  ’till  you  find  them  forae  better 
fupport. 

12.  Nay,  but  i it  is  certain  and' notorious,  you. 
fay,  that  this  was  really  the  cafe  in  Jbme  injlances  i 
that  is,  that  Jlroliiag,  juggling,  wonder-workers 
impofed  upon  the  pious  fathers.  Sir,  I muft  come 
in  again  with  my  cuckoo’s  note,  the  proof  i’ 
Where  is  the  proof?  Till  this  is  produced  I 
cannot  allow  that  this  is  certain  and  notorious, 
even  in  one  individual  inftance. 

* 13.  Let  us  now  ftand  ftili  and-obferve,  w'hat 
it  is  you  have  made  out,  under  this  fecond  head. 

' What  you  propofed  w^as.  To  throw  together  alt 
which  the  primitive  fathers  had  delivered,  concern- 
ing the  perfons  faid  to  he  then  endued  with-  the 
extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit.  And  how  have 
you  executed  what  you  propofed  ? You  have 
thrown  together  a quotation  from  a Jew,  two 
from  Heathens,  three  quarters  of  a line  from 
Origen!  and  three  lines  from  Tertullian  ! (nothing 

U 


t p.  z6\ 


[ ^88  ] 

at  all,  it  is  true,  to  the  point  in  qucllion.  But  that 
you  could  not  help.) 

14.  And  this  it  feems,  is  ^ all  you  have  been 
able  to  draw,  from  any  of  the  primitive  writer St 
concerning  the  perfons  who  wa  e endued  with  the 
extraordinary  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghojl  ! 

* Permit  me,  Sir,  to  apply  to  you,  what  was 
fpoken  on  another  occafion.  Sir,  the  well  is  deep, 
and  thou  hajl  nothing  to  ; neither  fulScient  j 

fkill,  nor  induftry  and  application.  Befides,.  ■ 
you  are  refolved  to  draw  out  of  the  well,  what  ‘ 
was  never  in  it,  and  muft  of  courfe  lofe  all  your 
labour. 

III.  1.  You  are.  Thirdly,  to  fiew  the  par- 
ticidar  charaElers  and  opinions  of  thefe  fathers  who 
attejl  thefe  gifts. 

Suffer  me  to  remind  you,  that  you  mentioned 
nine  of  thefe,  Jiifin,  Irenceus,  Theophilus,  Ter» 
tidlian,  Miniutius  Felix,  Origen,  Cyprian,  Atnobius 
and  LanElantius.  You  are  therefore  now  to  fhew 
what  were  the  particular  characlers  and  opinions 
of  thefe  fathers. 

Indeed  I Ihould  think,  their  opinions  had  fome 
fmall  relation  to  the  quefticn.  But  fince  you 
think  otherwife,  lam  prepared  to  heart  ou. 

You  premife,  ||  That  an  unexceptionable  wttnefs 
Aat'e  both  judgment  and  honefly  : and  then  1 
paffing  over  the  apoftolic  fathers  (as  fuppofing 

them 


§ p.  21. 


11  ?•  2^* 


[ 1%  ] 

tlieTn  on  your  fide)  endeavour  to  fliew,  that  thefe 
other  fathers  had  neither. 

2.  You  begin  with  f JuJlin  Martyr,  who,  you 
fay,  frequently  cfiriJis,  that  the  miraculous  gift  of 
expounding  the  holy  fcriptures,  or  the  myfleries  of 
Cod,  was  granted  to  himf elf,  by  the f pedal  grace  of 
'Cod.  Upon  w'hich  I obferve,  i.  It  has  not  yet  been 

agreed  among  learned  men,  that  declaring  the  my- 
f erics  of  God,  is  the  fame  thing  with  expounding 
the  holy  fcriptures.  2.  It  is  not  clear,  that  JuJlin 
does  affirm,  his  being  endued  either  v/ith  one  or 
the  other.  At  lead,  not  from  the  paffages  which 
you  cite.  The  firft,  literally  tranflated,  runs  thus  : 
§ He  hath  revealed  to  us  whatfoever  things  rue 
have  underfood  by  !us  grace  from  the  fcriptures 
alfo  : the  other,  \ 1 have  not  any  fiich  power  •,  but 
God  has  given  me  the  grace  to  underjland  his  fcrip- 
tures, Now  Sir,  by  which  of  thefe  does  it  ap- 
pear, Jufin  affirms  he  had  xhc  miraculous 
gift  oi  expounding  the  fcriptures  ? 

3.  However  you  will  affirm  it,  were  it  only  to 
have  the  pleafure  of  confuting  it.  In  order  to 
which  you  recite  three  paffages  from  his  writings, 
wherein  he  interprets  fcripture  weakly  enough  ; 
and  then  add  (after  a drained  compliment  taDr. 
Crabe,  and  a mingled  tianflation  of  one  of  his  re. 

marks) 

-I-  p.  27. 

^ ' Amxa7\utl/S!i  s»  rij/tiy  TrdUci ' oaa  »t)  izTro  rZv 
oia  rnc  avTii  nsor.xaj.i,€ii . Dial.  par.  2. 

X OCSi  Toissilsj  tij  Er*!'}  aKha. 

vccf  IS067;  fiot  ii;  TO  ov'AiiUi  T«?  ypaipa;  uvtS.  ib. 


[ 190  ] 

maiks)  § His  works  are  but  little  dfe  than  a wretch-- 
ed  colleBion  of  interpretations  of  the  fame  kind. 
Yet  this. pious  folher  injifts,  that  they  were  all  fug- 
gefed  to  him  from  heaven.  No;  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other.  Neither  do  interpretations  of  fcrip- 
ture  fgood  or  bad)  make  the  tenth  part  of  his 
writings;  nor  does  he  infill,  that  a// thofe  which 
are  found  therein,  were  fuggejled  to  him  frotn  hea- 
ven, This  does  not  follow  from  any  paffage  you 
have  cited  yet  : nor  from  his  faying  in  a particu- 
lar cafe.  Do  you  think  I could  have  underfood  theft 
things  in  the  Jcriptures,  if  I had  not  by  the  will  of 
Gad  received  the  grace  to  underfand  them  ? 

4.  However,  now  you  clap  \our  wings. 
I JFhat  credit,  fay  you,  can  be  due  to  this  father., 
in  the  report  of  other  peoples  gifts,  who  was  fo  grof 
ly  deceived,  or  willing  at  leaf  to  deceive  others,  in 
this  confdent  attefation  f his  own  ? The  anfwer 
is  plain  and  obvious.  It  is  not  clear,  that  he  at- 
tells  his  own  at  all.  Confequeiuly,  as  yet  his 
credit  is  unble mi fhed. 

“ But  he  did  not  underlland  Hebrew,  and 
gave  a wrong  derivation  of  the  Hebrew  word, 
Satan.”  Allowing  this,  that  he  was  no  good  ety- 
mologlft,  his  credit  as  a witnefs  may  be  as  good 
as  ever. 

5.  But  to  blall  his  credit  for  ever,  you  will 
now  reckon  up  all  the  herefies  which  he  held. 
And  firll,  t He  believed  the  doctrine  of  the  ^lillen- 

nium; 


S P-  30-  t p>  30- 


+ p.  3*. 


[ <9>  3 

r.ium  ; or,  “ That  all  the faints  Jhould  be  raifed  in 
4-hefefi,  and  reign  with  Chrift,  in  the  enjoyment 
ef  all  fenfuatl pleaf lire s,  for  a thouJa,nd years  be- 
fore the  general  refurredionT  Tliefe  you  mark 
as  though  they  were  Juftins  words.  I take 
knowledge  you  hold,  no  faith  is  to  be  kept  with 
heretics ; and  that  all  means  are  fair  which  con- 
duce to  fo  good  an  end,  as  driving  the  Chriftian 
herefy  out  of  the  world. 

It  is  by  this  principle  only  that  I can  account 
■for  your  adding,  Which  dodrine  [that  of  their  en- 
joying all  fenfual  pleafures]  he  deduEls  from  the 
iefimony  of  the  prophets  : and  of  St.  John  the  apof 
tie:  and  was  followed  in  it  by  the  father  .s  of  the  ft- 
■ cond  and  third  centuries. 

The  doftrine  (as  you  very  well  know)  which 
jfuflin  deduced  from  the  prophets  and  the  apofles, 
■and  in  which  he  was  \indo\ihtQd\y  followed  by  the 
fathers  of  the  fecond  and  third  centuries,  is  this  ; 

The  fouls  of  them  who  have  been  martyrc4 
for  the  witnefs  of  Jefus,  and  for  the  word  of 
! ■'God,  and  -who  have  not  worfhipped  the  beaft, 
'neither  received  his  mark,  fliall  live  and  reign 
I with  Chrifl  a thoufand  years. 

But  the  reft  of  the  dead  fhall  not  live  again, 
I until  tiie  thoufand  years  are  finiflied. 

' Now  to  fay,  they  believed  this,  is  neither  more 
jl  ■ nor  iefs,  than  to  lay,  they  believed  the  bible. 

I 6.  The  fecond  herefy  you  charge  him  with 
4s  the  believing,  “ i that  thofe  x)f  God 
j • mentioned. 


p.  3?., 


[ 192  ] 

irietulonecl,  Gen,  vl.  4.  of  whom  it  is  there  faid, 
7/iey  came  in  unto  the  daughters  of  men,  and  they 
bare  children  to  them  -\  were  evil  angels.”  And 
I allow,  he  too  lightly  received  this  on  the  tefU- 
monv  of  the  Jewijh  commentators.  But  this  only 
proves,  that  he  was  fallible  man:  not  that  he 
was  a knave ; or  that  he  had  not  eyes  and 
ears. 

7.  Yon  charge  him  thirdly,  treating  the  ^ 
Jpurious  hooks,  publijhed  under  the  names  of  the 
Sibyl  and  Hyftafpes,  with  the  fame  reverence  as 
the  prophetic  fcripture.  His  words  are,  By  the 
poiver  of  evil  [pints,  it  was  made  death,  to  read 
the  books  of  Hyftafpes,  or  of  the  Sibyl,  or  of  the 
prophets.  Vvfell:  how  does  this  prove,  that  he 
treated  thofe  books  with  the  fame  reverence  as  the 
propheitc feriptures  ? 

^ But  it  is  cert-ain,  you  fay,  that  fiom  this 
example  and  authority  of  Juftin,  they  were  held 
in  the  higheji  veneration,  by  the fathers  and  rulers 
of  the  church,  through  all futeeding  ages, 

I do  not  conceive,  it  is  certain,  1 wait  your  I 
proof,  firft,  of  the  fa£t : next,  of  the  reafcii  you 
affign  for  it.  The  faft  itfelf,  that  thefe  books  were, 
held  in  the  highef  veneration,  by  the  fathers  and 
riders  through  allficceeding  ages,  is  in  no  wife  l 
proved  by  that  fingle  quotation  from  ||  Clemens 
Akxandrinus,  wherein  he  urges  the  Heathens 
-with  the  teftimonies  of  their  own  authors,  of  . 

the  ji 

4 P-  23-  S P-  ibid.  t!  P-  34- 


C m ] 

the-  Sz^y/,  and  of  Hyjlafp&s.  We  cannot  infer 
from  hence,  that  -he  himfelf  held  them  in  the  highejl 
veneration  : much  lefs,  that  all  the  fathers  did. 
And  as  to  the  reafon  you  affignfor  that  venera- 
tion, the  example  and  authority  of  JuJlin,  you 
cite  no  writer  of  any  kind,  good  or  bad.  So 
he  that  will  believe  it  may. 

'Q>\xxfome  you  tell  us,  impute  the  forging  of  thefe 
hooks  to  Be  pleafed  to  tell  us  likewife, 

who  thofe  are  ; and  what  grounds  they  alledge 
for  that  imputation.  Till  then  it  can  be  of  no 
fignification. 

8.  You  charge  him,  fourthly,  “ f With  be- 
lieving that  filly  ftory,  concerning  the  feptuagint 
verfion  of  the  0/d  Tefa?nent : with  faying,  that  he 
himfelf,  when  at  Alexandria,  faw  the  remains  of 
the  cells  in  which  the  tranfiators  were  Ihut  up:  and 
with  making  a confideiable  miftake  in  the  chro- 
nology relating  thereto.”  And  if  all  this  be 
allowed,  and  ov'er  and  above,  that  he  “ frequent- 
ly cites  apocryphal  books,  and  cites  the  feripture 
by  memory  :”  what  have  you  gained  toward 
the  proof  of  your  grand  concliifion,  that  *•  he 
was  either  too  , great  a fool,  or  too  great  a knave, 
to  be  believed  touching  a plain  matter  of  faff  ?” 

_ g.  You  feem  fenfibleof  this,  and  therefore  add 
fifthly,  + It  will  be  faid  perhaps,  that  thefe  in- 
fances  fiew  a weaknefs  of  judgment,  but  do  not 
touch  the  credit  of  Jufin  as  a xoitnefs  of  fuel.  But 
can  you  ferape  up  nothin^  from  all  the  dunshifis 

VoL.  XVIII.  I of 

^ P-  37.  + P-  29. 


[ m ] 

of  antiquity  that  does?  I dare  fay,  you  will  do 
your  utmoft.  And,  firft,  you  reply.  The  want 
of  judgment  alone  may,  in  feme  cafes,  dif qualify 
a man  frorn  being  a good  witnefs.  Thus  jfuJHn 
himfelf  was  impofed  upon  by  thofe  of  Alexandria, 
who fiewed  him  fome  old  ruins  under  the  name  of 
cells.  And  fo  he  was  by  thofe  who  told  him,  i|  there 
was'  a fatue  at  Rome,  infcribcd  Simoni  Deo 
Sandio  ; whereas  it  was  really  infcribed,  SemonI 
Sanco  Deo  ; to  an  old  deity  of  the  Sabines  1i. 
Now,  fay  you,  if  he  was  deceived  in fuch  obvious 
fadls,  how  much  the  more  eafily  would  he  be  deceiv~ 
ed  by  fubtle  and  crafty  impojlors  ? Far  lefs  eafily. 
A man  of  good  judgment  may  be  deceived  in 
the  infcriptions  of  ftatues  and  points  of  antient 
hiftory.  But  if  he  has  only  eyes  and  ears,  and 
a fmall  degree  of  common  fenfe,  he  cannot  be 
deceived  in  fa£fs  where  he  is  both  an  eye  and 
ear-witnefs. 

lo.  For  a parting  blow,  you  endeavour  to 
prove,  fixthly,  that  Jufin  was  a knave  as  well 
as  a fool.  To  this  end  you  remark,  “ That  he 
charges  the  Jews  with  erazing  three  palfages  out 
of  the  Greek  bible  ; one  whereof  Hands  there 
Hill,  and  the  other  two  were  not  expunged  by 
fome  Jew,  but  added  by  fome  Chrillian.  Nay, 
that  able  critic  and  divine  ]6hn  Croius  [you  know 
when  to  bellow  honourable  appellations]  fays, 
forged  and  publifhed  this  paffage,  for  the 
confiT motion  of  the  Chrifian  aodh  me,  as  well  as  the 

peatf 


11  P'  40. 


5 p.  41. 


i ^95  ] 

greatejl  part  of  the  fibylline  oracles,  and  the  fen- 
■tences  o/Mercurius. 

With  far  greater  probability  thd^n  fohn  Croius 
afferts,  that  jfuf  in  forged  thefe  paffages,  a man 
of  candor  would  hope  that  he  read  them  in  his 
copy  (though  incorreft)  of  the  Greek,  bible.  And 
till  you  difprove  this,  or  prove  the  affertion  of 
Croius,  you  are  got  not  a jot  farther 'ftill.  But 
notwithftanding  you  have,  taken  true  pains  to 
blacken  him,  both  with  regard  to  his  morals  and- 
underftanding,  he  may  ftill  be  an  honeft  man, 
and  an  unexceptionable  witnefs,  as  to  plain  fa£ls 
done  before  his  face. 

11.  You  fall  upon  i Irenceus  next,  and  careful- 
ly enumerate  all  the  miftakes  in  his  writings.  As 
firft,  that  he  held  the  doftrine  of  the  millennium, 
and  related  a weak  fancy  of  Papias  concerning  it. 
Secondly,  that  he  believed  our  Saviour  to  have 
lived  fifty  years.  Thirdly.,  that  he  believed 
Enoch  and  Elias  were  tranflated,  and  St.  Paul 
caught  lip  to  that  very  paradife  from  which 
Adam  was  expelled  ; (fo  he  might,  and  all  the 
later  fathers  with  him,  without  being  either  the 
better  or  the  worfe.j  Fourthly,  that  he  believ- 
ed the  ftory  concerning  the  feptuagint  verfion  : 
nay,  and  that  the  fcriptures  were  defrayed  in  the 
Babylonifi,  captivity,  but  reftored  again  after  fe- 
venty  years  by  Efdras,  infpired  for  that  purpofe. 
In  this  alfo  [ you  fay,  but  do  not  prove  j he  was 
followed  by  all  the  principal  fathers  that  fucceeded 
I 2 him ; 

t .P*  44- 


[ 3 

him  ; although  there  is  no  better  foundation for 
it,  than  that  fabulous  relation  in  the  fecond  book 
cf  EJdras.  You  add,  fifthly,  that  “ he  believ- 
ed the  fons  of  God,  who  came  in  to  the  daugh- 
ters of  men,  were  evil  angels  And  all  the 
early  fathers,  you  are  very  ready  to  believe,  were 
drawn  into  the  fame  errors,  by  the  authority  of  the 
apocryphal  book  of  Enoch,  cited  by  St.  Jude. 

12.  It  is  not  only  out  of  your  ^ood  will  to  St. 
Jude,  or  Irenceus,  you  gather  up  thefe  fragments 
of  error,  that  nothing  be  loft,  but  alfo  to  the 
whole  body  of  the  ant  lent  Chriftians.  Por  all  I 
thoje  abfur dities,  you  Jay,  were  taught  by  the  I 

f athers  of  thofe  ages,  (naturally  implying,  by  all  | 

the  fathers  ) as  dotlrines  of  the  univerfal  church  j 
derivedimmediately  from  the  apojlles  \ and  thought  I 
fo  necejjary,  that  thofe  who  held  the  contrary,  were 
hardly  confidered  as  real  Chriflians.  Here  I muft  I 
beg  you  to  prove  as  well  as  affert,  i.  That  all  i 
thefe  abfurdities  of  the  millennium  in  the  grolTeft  . ! 
fenfe  of  it,  of  the  age  of  Chrift,  of  paradife,  of  { 
the  deftru6lion  of  the  fcriptures,  of  the  feptua- 
gint  verfion,  and.of  evil  angels  mixingwith  women  j 
were  taught  by  all  the  fathers  of  thofe  ages  ; 2.  j 
'f'hat  all  thofe  fathers  taught  thefe  as  doftrines  of  i 
the  univerfal  church,  derived  immediately  from  ' 
the  apollles  ; and  3.  That  they  all  denied  thofe  [. 
to  be  real  Chriftians,  who  held  the  contrary. 

33.  You  ne.xt  cite  two  far-fetched  interpreta- 
tions of  fcripture,  and  a weak  having  out  of  the 
writings  of  Irenceus.  But  all  three  prove  no 

more, 


[ 197  3 

more,  than  that  in  thefe  inftances  he  did  nof 
fpeakwith  flriftnefs  of  judgment ; not,  that  he 
was-  incapable  of  knowing  what  he  faw  with  his 
own  eyes,  or  of  truly  relatingit  to  others. 

Before  we  proceed  to  what  with  equal  good  hu- 
mour and  impartiality  you  remark  concerning  the 
reft  of  thefe  fathers,  it  wdll  be  proper  to  confider 
what  more  is  interf^erftd  concerning  thefe  in  the 
Jequel  of  this  arguments 

14.  And,  firft,  you  fay,  “ f'  JvJiin  ufed  an 
inconclufive  argument  for  the  exiftence  of  the 
fouls  of  men  after  death.”  It  is  poffible  he 
might,  but  whether  it  was  concluftve  or  no,  this 
does  not  alFe£l  his  moral  charafter. 

You  fay,  fecondly,  j;  It  was  the  common  opi- 
nion of  all  the fathers,  taken  from  the  authority  of 
jfujlin  Martyr,  that  the  damons  wanted  the fumes 
of  the  facrfces  to  frengthen  them  for  the  enjoy- 
ment of  their  luffulpleafures. 

Sir,  no  man  of  reafon  will  believe  this  con- 
cerning one  of  the  fathers,  upon  your  bare  alfer- 
tion.  I mull  therefore  defire  you  to  prove  by 
more  than  a fcrap  of  a fentence,  1.  That  Jufin 
himfelf  held  this  opinion  ; 2.  That  he  invented 
it ; 3.  That  it  was  the  common  opinion  of  all 
the  fathers,  and  4.  That  they  all  took  it  on  his 
authority. 

15.  You  affirm,  thirdly,  § He  fays,  that  all 
deuils  yield  and  fuhmit  to  the  name  of  Jefus  : as 

I 3 alfo 

+ P.69.  ‘ § p.  85. 


+ p.  67. 


[ ] 

alfo  to  the  ‘name  of  ike  God  of  Abraham,  IJaac,  and 
Jacob.  Very  likely  he  may. 

Laftly,  you  cite  a paflage  from  him,  concern- 
ing the  Spirit  of  God  influencing  the  minds  of 
holy  men.  But  neither  does  this  in  any  mea- 
fure  affeft  his  credit  as  a w itnefs  of  fa£l.  Confe- 
quently,  after  a//that  you  have  been  able  to  draw, 
either  from  himfelf,  or  any  oj  the  primitive  wri- 
ters, here  is  one  witnefs  of  unqueltionable  credit, 
touching  the  miracles  wrought  in  the  primitive 
church,  touching  the  fubfiflence  of  the  extraor-  ; 
dinary  gifts  after  the  days  of  the  apoflles.  | 

i6.  But  let  us  come  once  more  to  Ireiueus ; 
for  you  have  not  done  with  him  yet.  [j  Forgery,  ' 
you  fay,  has  been  aElually  charged  upon  Jufin, 

[by  John  Croius  and  Dr.  Middleton  J and  may  with 
equal  reafon  be  charged  on  Irenaus.  For  what 
other  account  can  be  given  of  his  frequent  appeals 
to  apojiolical tradition,  for  the fupport  of  fo  many  \ 
incredible  dodrines  ? Why,  this  very  natural  one,  | 
that  in  non  eflential  points  he  too  eafily  followed  '! 
the  authority  of  Papias,  a weak  man,  who  on 
flight  grounds  believed  many  trifling  things  to  ! 
have  been  faid  or  done  by  the  apoflles.  And  |! 

allowing  all  this,  yet  it  does  not  give  us  fo  ? la-  ' 

mentable  an  idea  of  thofe  primitive  ages  and  primi-  j 

tive  champions  of  the  Chrifian  caufe. 

The  fame  account  may  be  given  of  his  miftake 
+ concerning  the  age  of  our  Lord.  There  is 
therefore  as  yet  neither  reafon  nor  any  plaufible 

pretence 

lip.  in.  Sp‘  59*  + ibid. 


[ 199  ] 

pretence  for  laying  forgery  to  his  charge.  And 
confequently,  thus  far  his  credit  as  a witnefs 
Ifands  clear  and  unimpeached. 

But  you  fay,  fecondly,  :|;  He  was  a zealous 
ajferter  of  tradition.  He  might  be  fo,  and  yet 
he  an  honeft  man  : and  that,  whether  he  was 
miftaken  or  no,  in  § fuppofing  Papias  to  have 
been  a difciple  oi  John  the  apoftle. 

You  fay,  thirdly.  He  fuppofed  ||  that  the  dif 
ciples  of  Svnon  Magus,  as  well  as  oj  Carpocrates, 
ufed  magical  arts  : that  H the  dead  were  Jrequently 
raifedin  his  time  : that  t the  Jews  by  the  name  of 
God  cajl  out  devils  r and  that  many  had  even  then 
the  gift  of  tongues,  although  he  had  it  not  himfelf. 
This  is  the  whole  of  your  charge  againft  Irenceus, 
when  fummed  up  and  laid  together.  And  now 
let  any  reafonable  perfon  judge,  whether  all  this 
gives  us  the  lead;  caufe  to  queftion,  either  his 
having  fenfe  enough  to  difcern  a plain  matter  of 
faft,  or  honefty  enough  to  relate  it.  Here  then 
is  one  more  credible  witnefs  of  miraculous  gifts 
after  the  days  of  the  apoftles. 

i8.  What  you  advance  concerning  the  hiftory 
of  tradition,  I am  neither  concerned  to  defend 
nor  to  confute.  Only  I muft  obferve,  you  forgat 
yourfelf  again  where  you  fay,  the  fable  of  the 
Millennium,  of  the  old  age  of  Chrih,  with  many 
more,  were  all  embraced  by  the  earliefi  fathers. 
For  modefty’s  fake.  Sir,  think  a little  before  you 
I 4 fpeak, 

p.  6i.  ^ p.  64.  II  p.  68.  5 p,  72,  +p.  85. 

tt  P*  S4. 


[ zoo  J 

fpeak,  and  remember  you  yourfelf  informed  us, 
that  one  of  thefe  was  never  embraced  at  all,  but 
by  one  fingle  father  only. 

19.  § I cannot,  you  fay,  difmifs  this  article, 
zuithout  taking  notice,  that  witchcrc^t  was  nniver- 
fally  believed  through  all  ages  of  the  primitive 
church.  This  you  fhew  by  citations  from  feveral 
of  the  fathers  : who  likewife  believed,  as  you  iir* 
form  us,  that  j|  evil  Jpints  had  power  frequently  to 
affliB  either  the  bodies  or  minds  of  men  : that  tbcv 
aBed  the  parts  f the  Heathen  gods,  and  ajfumed 
the  forms  of  thofe  who  were  called  from  the  dead. 
Noio  this  opinion,  fay  you,  is  not  only  a proof 
of  the  grojfef  credulity,  but  of  that  fpecies  of  if, 
which,  of  all  others,  lays  a man  mqjl  open  to  im~ 
pofure. 

* And  yet  this  opinion,  as  you  know  full  well, 
has  its  foundation  not  only  in  the  hiftories  of  all 
ages,  and  all  nations  throughout  the  habitable 
world,  even  where  Chriftianity  never  obtained; 
but  particularly  in  fcripture ; in  abundance  of 
paffages  both  of  the  Old  and  New  Teftament:  as 
where  the  Ifraeliies  were  f exprefly  commanded 
not  to  fuffer  a witch  to  live-,  t where  St.  Paid 
numbers  witchcraft  with  the  works  of  the  fefh, 
and  ranks  it  with  adultery  and  idolatry : and 

where  St.  John  declares,  without  areforcerers, 
and  whoremongers,  and  murderers. 

That  the  \\  gods  of  the  Heathens  are  devils,  is 

declared 

^p.  66.  11  P'70,  + Gal.  V.  19, 20.  ^Rev. 

xxiii  *5.  Ml  Cor, 


[ 201  ] 

declared  in  terms,  by  one  of  thofe  who  are  filled 
infpired  writers.  And  many  conceive,  that  ano- 
ther of  them  gives  us  a |[  plain  inftance  of  their 
ajfuming  the  form  of  thofe  who  were  called from  the 
dead. 

Of  the  power  of  evil  fpirits  to  afflift  the  minds 
of  men,  none  can  doubt  who  believe  there  are 
any  fuch  beings.  And  of  their  power  to  afldift  * 
the  body  we  have  abundant  proof  both  in  the 
hiftory  of  Job,  and  that  of  the  gofpel  demo-, 
niacs. 

I do  not  mean-.  Sir,  .to  accufe  of  believing 
thefe  things : you  have  fliewn,  that  you  are  guilt- 
lefs.in  this  matter  ; and  that  you  pay  no  . more 
regard  to  that  antiquated  book,  the  bible,  than 
you  do  to  the  fecond  book  of  Efdras.  But,  alasL 
The  fathers  were  not  .fo  far  enlightened.  And  , 
becaufe..  they;  were  bigotted  to  that  old  book,  . 
they  - of  confequence  held  for  truth,  what  you 
alTtire  us  was  mere  delufion  and  impofiure. 

20.  Now  to  apply.  5 A tnind^  yo\x,  f^ay,Jb  ■ 
totally  poffef  by  fuperfitious  fancies,  could  not  ■ 
even  fufpeB.  the  pretenfions  oj  thofe  vagrant  jug- 
glers, who  in  thofe  primitive  ages  were  fo  numerous 
and  fo  indufriovfy.  employed,  in  deluding  their 
fellow  creatures.  Both-  Heathens.,,  Jews,  and 
Chrifians  are  all  allowed  to  have  had  fuch  impofors 
among  them.  By  whom,  Sir,  is  this  allowed  of 
the  Ghriftians'?  By  whom,  but  Celfus,  was  it 
ever  affirmed  of  them  ? Who  informed  you  of 
1 5 theix..r 

D 1 Sam.xxvlii.  13,  14.  Sp.  71. 


[ 202  ] 

their  growing  fo  numerous?  And  ufing  fuch  in- 
dujiry  in  their  employment  ? To  fpeak  the  plain 
truth,  your  mind  appears  to  be  fo  totally  pojf'ejl  by 
thefe  vagrant  jugglers,  that  you  cannot  fay  one 
word  about  the  primitive  church,  but  they  imme- 
diately hart  up  before  you;  though  there  is  no 
more  proof  of  their  ever  exifling,  than  of  a 
witch’s  failing  in  an  egg  (hell. 

21.  You  conclude  this  head;  \ When  pious 
Chriflians  are  arrived  to  this  pitch  of  credulity,  as 
to  believe  that  evil  Jpirits,  or  evil  men  can  work 
miracles  in  oppofition  to  the  gofpel-,  their  very  piety 
will  oblige  them  to  admit  as  miraculous,  whatever 
is  pretended  to  be  wrought  in  defence  of  it.  Once 
more  you  have  fpoken  out : you  have  {hewn 
without  difguife,  what  you  think  of  St.  Paul  and 
the  i lying  miracles,  which  he  (poor  man!)  be- 
lieved evil  fpirits  or  evil  men  could  work  in  op- 
pofition to  the  gofpel  ; and  of  St.  John,  talking 
fo  idly  of  him  who  § doeth  great  wonders,  and  de- 
ceiveth  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  (even  though 
they  were  not  Chriftians)  by  means  f thofe  mira- 
cles which  he  hath  power  to  do. 

22.  You  have  now  finlfhed  the  third  thing  you 
propofed,  which  was,  To  fiew  the  particular  cha- 
raElers  of  the  fever  al  fathers,  who  attef  that  they 
were  eye  and  ear-wltneffes  of  the  extraordinary 
gifts  in  the  primitive  church. 

You  named  nine  of  thele,  Jufdn  Martyr, 
Jrenaeus,  Theophilus,  Tertullian,  Minutius  Felix, 

Orig,cn, 

§ Rev.  xiii.  33^,  ia. 


+ p.  71.  f 2 TheflT.  ii.  g. 


[ 203  ] 

Origen,  Cyprian,  Arnobius,  and  LanBantius ; at 
the  fame  time  obferving,  that  many  other  writers 
atteft  the  fame  thing. 

But  let  the  others  Hand  by.  Are  thefe  good 
men  and  true  ? That  is  the  prefeht  queftion. 

You  fay,  No.  And  to  prove  that  thel'e  nine 
are  knaves,  bring  feveral  charges  againft  two  of 
them. 

Thefe  have  been  anfvvered  at  large  ; fome  of 
them  proved  to  be  falfe  ; fome,  though  true,  yet 
not  invalidating  their  evidence. 

But  fuppofing  we  wave  the  evidence  of  thefe 
two,  here  are  feven  more  Hill  to  come. 

Oh  1 but  you  fay,  “ If  there  were  twice  feven,  , 
they  only,  repeat  the  words  which  thofe  have 
taught  them.” 

You Jay,  But  how  often  muft  you  be  reminded, 
that  faying  and  proving  are  two  things  ? I grant,  . 
in  three  or  four  opinions,  fome  (though  not  allj 
of  thefe  were  miftaken  as  well  as  thofe  two.  But 
this  by  no  means  proves,  that  they  were  ai! 
knaves  together;  or  that  if  JuJlin  Martyr  or  Ire-  . 
noeus  fpeaks  wrong,  I am  therefore  to  give  no 
credit  to  the  evidence  of  Theophilus  or  Minutius  ■ 
Felix. 

23.  You  have  therefore  made  a more  lame 
piece  of  work  on  this  head,  (if  pofifible)  than  on 
the  preceding.  You  have  promifed  great  things,  . 
and  performed  jufl  nothing.  You  have  left 
above  three  parts  in  four  of  your  work  intirely 
I 6 untouched  ;.  . 


[ 204  3 

uritouched ; as  thefe  two  are  not  a fourth  part 
even  of  the  writers  you  have  named,  as  attefling 
the  continuance  of  the  extraordinary  gifts  after 
the  age  of  the  apoffles. 

* But  you  have  taught  that  trick  at  leafl  to 
yoxxx  vagrant  jugglei s,  to  fupply  the  defe£f  of  all 
other  arguments.  At  every  dead  lift  you  are  fure 
to  play  upon  us  thefe  dear  creatures  of  your  own 
imagination.  They  are  the  very  flrength  of  your 
battle,  the  tenth  legion.  Yet  if  a man  imperti- 
nently calls  for  proof  of  their  exiffence,  if  he 
comes  clofe  and  engages  hand  to.  hand,  they  im- 
mediately vanifli  away. 

IV.  You  are,  in  the  fourth  place,  to  |[  review 
all  the  fever al  kinds  of  miraculous  gifts  which  art 
pretended  to  have  been  given  ; and  to  obfrve  from 
the  nature  of  each,  how  far  they  may  reafonably  be 
fufpeaed. 

Thefe,  you  fay,  are  t . The  power  of  raijing  the 
dead,  2.  Of  healing  thefick,  3.  Of  cafing  out  devils, 
4*  p'''ophefying,  5.  Of  feeing  vifions,  6.  Of 
dfcovering  the  fecrtts  of  men,  7.  Of  expounding  the 
fcriptures,  8.  Of  [peaking  with  tongues. 

1 had  rather  have  had  an  account  of  the  mir-acu- 
lous  powers  as  they  are  reprefenied  to  m in  the 
hijlory  of  the  gofpel.  But  that  account  you  are 
not  inclined  to  give.  So  we  will  make  the  belt 
of  what  we  have. 

Sea.  I. 

li  P-  72- 


[ £05  ] 

Se£t.  I.  1.  And,  firft,  As  to  raifing  the  deaSi 
Irenaeus  affirms,  This  was  frequently  perf or  ined  on 
necejfary  occafions  ; when  by  great fajlings  and  the 
joint  f application  of  the  church,  the  fpirit  of  the 
dead  perfon  returned  into  him,  and  the  man  was  ' 
given  back  to'the  prayers  of  the  fmnts. 

' * 2.  But  you  objeft,  t There  it  not  aninfance. 
of  this  to  be  found  in  the  three frfl  centuries.  I pre- 
fume  you  mean,  no  Heathen  hiftorian  has  men-> 
tioned  it  (for  Chriftian  hifloriaas  were  not.)  I 
anfwer,  i,  ’Xis  not  probable  a Heathen  hifiioriau 
would  have  related  fuch  a fa£f,  had  he  known  it, 
2,  ’Tis  equally  improbable,  he  ffiould  know  it  t 
feeing  the  Chriflians  knew  with  whom  they  had 
to  do:  - and  that,  had  fuch  an  inflance  been 
made  public,  they,  would  not  long  have  enjoyed 
him  who  had,  been  given  back  to aheir  prayers. 
They  could  not  but  remember  what  had  been  be- 
fore ; when  the  Jews  faught  Lazarus  alfo  to  kill 
him  ; a very  obvious  reafon  why  a miracle  of  this* 
particular  kind  ought  not  to  have  been  publiffied 
abroad  t efpecially,  confidering,  thirdly.  That  it- 
was  not  defigned  for  the  converfion-of  the  Hea- 
thens buton  occafions  neceffary  for  the  good  of> 
the  church,  of  the  Chriftian  community.  Lallly, 

It  was  a miracle  proper  above  all  others,  to  fup-. 
port  and  confirm  the  Chrifliansj  who  were  daily 
tortured  and  fkin,  but  fuftained  by  the  hope  of 
obtaining  a better  refurredtion. 

3.  You  objedf,  fecondly,  %The  Heathens  con^ 

flantly 

+ p.  72.  f-p.  73* 


[ 2d6  J 

Jiantly  ajirmed  the  thing  itfelf  to  he  impojfible. 
They  did  fo.  But  is  it  a thing  incredible  with 
you,  that  God  fhould  raife  the  dead  ? 

4.  You  obje£l:,  thirdly,  That  when 
an  eminent  Heathen,  fcaice  forty  years  after  this, 
faid  to  Theophilus  bifiop  of  Antioch,  “ Shew  me 
but  one  raifed from  the  dead,  that  I may  fee  and 
believe  Theophilus  could  not.  Suppofing  he 
could  not,  I do  not  fee  that  this^  contradicts  the 
tefliir.ony  of  Irenceus ; for  he  does  not  affirm 
(though  you  ]|  fay,  he  does)  that  this  was  perform~ 
ed,  as  it  mere,  in  every  parifz,  or  place  mhere 
there  mas  a Chrifian  church.  He  does  not  af- 
firm, that  it  was  performed  at  ; probably,, 

not  in  any  church,  unlefs  where  a concurrence 
of  important  circumftances  required  it.  Ivluch 
Icfs  does  he  affirm,  that  the  perfons  raifed  in 
France,  would  be  alive  forty  years  after.  There- 
fore although  it  be  granted,  1.  That  the  hiftorians 
of  that  age  are  filent,  2.  That  the  Heathens  faid, 
the  thing  was  impoffible,  and,  3-.  That  Theophi- 
lus  did  notanfwer  the  challenge  of  the  Heathen 
Autolycus : all  this  will  not  invalidate  in  any  de- 
gree, the  exprefs  tefiimonyof  Irenceus,  or  prove, 
that  none  have  been  raifed  from  the  dead,  fince 
the  days  of  the  apoftles. 

Seft.  II.'  1.  f The  next  gft  is,  that  of  healing 
the  fick  ; often  performed  by  anointing  than  mitk 
oil : in  favour  of  which,  as  you  obferve,  the  an- 

iient 

St- 73-  II  P-  72.  S P-  75- 


[ 207.  ] 

tient  teftlmonies  are  more  full  and  exprefs.  But 
\ this,  you  fay,  might  h,e  accounted  for  without  a 
miracle,  hy  the  natural  efficacy  of  the  oil  itflf  I 
doubt  not.  Be  pleal'ed  to  try,  bow  many  you 
can  cure  thus,  that  are  blind,  deaf,  dumb,  or 
paralytic  : and  experience,  if  not  pbilofophy,. 
will  teach  you,  that  oil  has  no  fuch  natural  effica- 
cy as  this. 

2.  Of  this  you  feem  not  infenfible  already, 
and  therefore  fly  away  to  your  favourite  fuppofl-. 
tion,  that  “ they  were  not  cured  at  all  : that  the 
whole  matter  was  a clieat  from  the  beginning  to 
the  end.”  But  by  what  arguments  do  you  evince 
this  ? The  firft  is,  The  Heathens  pretended  to  do 
the  fame.  Nay,  and  managed  the  impoflure  with 
fo  much  art,  that  the  Chrifians  could  neither  deny, 
nor  deteS  it : but  inffled  alvjays,.  that  it  teas  per- 
formed by  demons,  or  evil  fpirits.  But  flill  the 
Heathens  maintained,.  The  cures  were  wrought  by 
their  gods,,  by  ^fculapius  in  particular.  And 
where  is  the  difference  ? Seeing,  as  was  - obferv- 
ed  before,  the  gods  of  the  Heathens  mere  but  devils. 

3.  But,  you  fay,  § Although  public  monuments 
were  erehled  in  proof  and  memory  of  theje  cures,^ 
at  the  time  when  they  were  performed,  yet  it  is  cer- 
tain all  thofe  Heathen  miracles  toere  pure  forgeries- 
How  is  it  certain  ? If  you  can  fwallow  this  with, 
out  good  proof,  you  are  far  more  credulous  than 
I.  I cannot  believe,  that  the  whole  body  of  the 
Heathens,  for  fo  many  generations,  were  utter* 

’y 

i p..  76.  ibid.  § p.  79. 


[ 2o8  ] 

ly  deftitute  of  common  fenfe,  any  more  than  of 
common  honefty.  Why  fhould  you  fix  fuch  a, 
charge  on  whole  cities  and  countries  ? You  could 
have  done  no  more,  if  they  had  been  Chriftians! 

4.  But  + difeafn  thought  fatal  and  difperate, 
are  oft  fur prizingly  healed  of  themfelves.  And 
therefore  wt  cannot  pay  any  great  regard  to  fuch 
forks,  unlefs  we  knew  more  precifely  in  this  cafe 
thoreal  bounds  between  nature  and  miracle.  Sir, 
I.underfland  you  well..  The  drift  of  the  argu- 
ment is  eafily  feen.  It  points  at  the  Mailer  as 
well  as  his  fervants  ; and:  tends  to.  pjrove,  .that, 
after  all  this-talk  about  miraculous,  cures,  we  are 
not  fure  there  were  ever  any  in  the  world.  But 
it  will  do  no  harm.  For  although  we  grant,  i.. 
'!fhat  fome  recover,  even  in  feemingly  defperate 
cafes,  and,  2.  That  we  do  not  know  in  any  cafe, 
the  precifs-bounds  between  nature  and  miracle  : 
yet  it  does  not  follow,  therefore  I cannot  be  af- 
fured,  there  ever  tvas-a  miracle  of  healing  in  the 
world.  To  explain  this  by  inllance.  . I do  not 
precifely  know,  how  far  nature  may  go,  in  healr 
ing,  that  is,  relloring  fight  to  the  blind.  Yet  this 
lalfuredly  know,  that  if  a man  born  blind,  is  re? 
llored  to  fight  by  a word,  this  .is  not  nature,  but 
miracle.  And  to  fuch  a (lory,  well  attelled,  all 
reafonable  men  will  pay  the  higbell  regard. 

g.  The  fum  of  what  you  have  advanced  on 
this  head,  is,  1.  That  the  Heathens  themfelves 
li^d  miraculous  cures  among  them  ; 2.  That 

oil 


T p.  79. 


[ 209  1 

oil  m3y  ctJie  fome  clifeafes  by  its  natural  efficacy, 
and,  3.  That  we  do  not  know  the  precil'e  bounds 
of  nature.  All  this  I allow.  But  all  tiiis  will 
not  prove  that  no  miraculous  cures  were  per-, 
formed,  either  by  our  Lord  and  his  apolHes,  or 
by  thofe  who  lived  in  the  three  fucceeding  cen- 
turies. 

Se£l.  III.  1.  The  third  of  the  miraculous 
powers  faid  to  have  been  in  the  primitive  church, 
is  that  of  calling  out  devils.  The  tellimonies 
concerning  this  are  out  of  number,  and  as  plain 
as  words  can  make  them.  To  fhew  therefore, 
that  all  thefe  fignify  nothing,  and  that  there 
were  never  any  devils  call  out  at  all  (neither  by 
the  apoftles,  nor  fince  the  apoftles,  for  the  argu- 
ment proves  both  or  neither)  is  atafk  worthy  of 
you.  And  (to  give  you  your  juft  praife)  you  have 
here  put  forth  all  your  ftrength. 

2.  And  yet  I cannot  but  apprehend,  there  was 
a much  fhorter  way.  Would  it  not  have  heeii 
readier  to  overthrow  all  thofe  tellimonies  at  a 
ftroke,  by  proving,  there  never  was  any  devil 
in  the  world  ? Then  the  whole  affair  of  calling 
him  out  had  been  at  an  end. 

But  It  is  in  condefcenfion  to  the  weaknefs  and 
prejudices  of  mankind,  that  you  go  lefs  out  of 
the  common  road,  and  only  obferve,  “ That 
thofe  who  were  faid  to  be  poffeft  of  the  devil, 
may  have  been  ill  of  the  falling  Ccknefs.”  Aud 

their. 


[ 2 10  J 

their  fymptoins,  you  fay,  + Jean  io  be  nothing  elfe 
but  the  ordinary  fymptoms  of  an  epilepfy. 

Ifit  be  afked,  but  were  \the/peeches  and  ccnf ef- 
forts of  the  devils,  and  their  anfwering  to  all  quef- 
tions,  nothing  but  the  ordinary  Jyniptoms  of  an 
epilepfy?  You  take  in  a fecond  hypothefis,  and 
account  for  thefe  the  arts  of  impofture  and  con- 

trivance, between  the  perjons  concerned  in  the 
ad.. 

But  is  not  this  fomething  extraordinary,  that- 
men  in  epileptic  fits,  fhould  be  capable  of  fo. 
much  art  and  contrivance  ? To  get  over  this 
difficulty,  we  are  to  fuppofe  that  art  and  contriv- 
ance were  the  main  ingredients  ; fo  that  we  are 
to  add  only  quantum  fuficet  of  the  epilepfy,  and 
fometimes  to  leave  it  out  of  the  compofi- 
tion. 

But  the  proof.  Sir,  where  is  the  proof  ? I want 
a little  of  that  too.  Inflead  of  this  we  have  only 
another  fuppofition,  § That  all  the  fathers  were 
either  induced  by  their  prejudices,  to  give  too  hafty 
credit  to  thefe  pretended  poffejjions,  or  carried  away 
by  their  zeal  to  fupport  a delufon,  which  was 
ufeful  to  theChrijiiancaufe. 

I grant,  they  were  prejudiced  in  favour  of  the 
bible.  But  yet  we  cannot  fairly  conclude  from 
hence,  either  that  they  were  one  and  all  continu- 
ally deceived  by  merely  pretended  pofTeffions  t 
or,  that  they  would  all  lie  fejr  God,  a thing  abfor 
lutely  forbidden  in  that  book. 

3-  But 

p.  8i.  f p.  82,  § p.  Si. 


[ 2II  ] 

3>  But  II  leaders  of  feBs,  you,  fay,  whatever 
principles  they  pretend  to,  have ftldom  fcrupled  to 
ufe  a cormnodious  lie.  I obferve  you  are  quite 
impartial  here.  You  make  no  exception  of 
age  or  nation.  ’Tis  all  one  to  you,  whether 
your  reader  applies  this  to  the  fon  of  Abdalla,  or 
the  fon  of  Mary.  And  yet,  Sir,  I cannot  but 
think  there  was  a difference.  I fancy  the  Jew 
was  an  honcfler  man  than  the  Arabian  : and  tho’ 
Mahomet  ufed  many  a commodious  lie,  yet  Jefus 
of  Nazareth  did  not. 

4.  However,  ? Not  one  of  thefe fathers  made 
any  Jcruple  of  ufing  the  hyperbolical flyle,  (that  is,  in 
plain  Englifi,  of  lying)  as  an  eminent  writer  of  ec- 
clefajlical  hijlory  declares.  You  fhould  have  faid 
an  impartial  writer.  For  who  would  fcruple  that 
charafter  to  Mr.  Le  Clerc?  And  yet  I cannot  take 
either  his  or  your  bare  word  for  this.  Be  pleafed 
to  produce  a little  proof.  Hitherto  you  have 
proved  abfolutely  nothing  on  the  head,  but  (aa 
your  manner  is)  taken  all  for  granted. 

5.  You  next  relate  that  famous  ftory  from 
Tertullian.  + A woman  went  to  the  theatre 
and  returned pojjefi  with  a devil.  When  the  unclean 

J'pirit  was  (fked,  how  he  dared  to  ajfauli  a Chrif- 
tian  ? He  anfwered,  I found  her  on  my  own  ground. 
After  relating  another  (which  you  endeavour  to 
account  for  naturally)  you  intimate,  that  this  was 
a mere  lie  of  Tertullian  s,.  But  how  is  that 
proved  ? Why,  Tertullian  was  an  utter  enemy  to 

plays. 

II  p.  83.  5 ibid.  T p. 


C 212  7 

plays  and  public  Jhozvsin  the  theatre.  He  was  fa. 
■But  can  we  infer  from  thence,  that  he  was  ar> 
utter  enemy  to  common  honefty  ? 

6-  You  add,  ^ The  Jalhers  theinjelves  own, 
that  even  the  Jews,  yea  and  the  Heathens,  cajl  out 
devils.  Now  it  will  be  granted, \ that  Jewiflj 
and  Heathen  exorcifls  were  mere  cheats  and, 
impojiors.  But  the  fathers  believed,  they  really 
caft  them  out.  Now  if  they  could  take  their  tricks 
for  the  effeSs  of  a fupernatural power,  well  might 
they  be  deceived  by  their  own  impojiors.  Or,  f 
they  anight  think  it  convenient  to  oppofe  one  cheat  to. 
another. 

Deceived,  fay  you,  by, their  impojiors?  Why  If 
thought  they  were  the  very  men  who  fet  them  to 
work ! Who  oppofed  one  cheat  to  another.  Apt 
fcholars,  who  a£fed  their  part  fo  well,  as  even  to 
deceive  their  mailers ! But  whatever  the  Heathen 
were,  we  cannot  grant,  that  all  the  JewiJh  exor- 
cijis  were  impojors.  Whether  the  Heathens  caft 
out  devils  or  not,  ’tis  fure  the  Jons  of  Cnejfews  ccjl 
them  out.  I mean,  upon  fiippofition,  that  Jfus 
of  Nazareth  call  them  out which  is  a point  not 
here  to  be  difputed. 

7.  But  tV  is  very  hard  to  believe  what  Oihgtw 
declares,  that  the  devils  ifed  to  pojfejs  and  dejiroy 
cattle.  You  might  have  faid,  w'hat  Matthew  and 
Mark  declare,  concerning  the  herd  of  fwine. 
And  yet  we  fhall  find  you  by  and  by  believing 
far  harder  things  than  this. 

Before 

§ p.  84.  11  p.  87.  t p.  88. 


C 213  ] 

.Before  you  fobjoined  the  filly  ftory  of  HUarion  ' 
and  his  camel,  you  fliould  in  candor  have  inform- 
ed your  reader,  that  it  Is  difputed,  whether  the 
life  of  HUarion  was  wrote  by  St.  Jero7n  or 
no  ? But  be  it  as  it  may,  I have  no  concern  with 
either.  For  they  did  not  live  within  the  three 
firfi  ages. 

8.  I know  not  what  you  have  proved  hither- 
to, though  -you  have  ajfirincd  many  things, 
and  intimated  more.  But  now  we  come  to  the 
ftrength  of  the  caufe,  contained  in  your  five  ob- 
fervations. 

t Youobferve,^;^,  “ That  all  the  primitive  ac~ 
eounts  of  cafing  out  devils,  though  given  by  dif- 
fer ent  fathers,  and  in  different  ages,  yet  exaffly 
agree  with  regard  to  all  the  main  circumftances.” 
And  this,  you  apprehend  to  be  a mark  of  impof- 
ture.  It  looks,  you  fay,  as  f they  copied from 
each  other  ! Now  a vulgar-reader  would  have  ima- 
;gined,  that  any  fingle  account  of  this  kind  mull; 
be  rendered  much  more  (not  lefs)  credible,  by 
parallel  accounts  of  what  many  had  feverally 
feen,  at  different  times,  and  in  different  places. 

9.  You  obferve,  feccndly,  J That  the  perfons 
thus  poffef,  were  called,  'sfyxr^tf/Udei,  ventriloquijls ; 
(fome  of  them  were)  becaufe  they  were  generally 
believed  to  fpeak  out  of  the  belly.  Nozu  \ there  are 
at  this  day,  you  fay,  thofe  who  by  art  and praEice 
can  [peak  in  the  fame,  manner.  If 
■idiat  there  were  artifh  of  this  kind  among  the  antient 

Chriflians, 

\ t p.  92.  :|:  ibid.  ^ p.  92. 


C 214  ] 

Ckryiians,  how  eajily,  by  a correjpondence  between 
the  ventriloquifl  and  the  exordj},  ?7iight  they  delude 
the  mojl fenfible  of  thnr  audience  ? 

But  what  dill  the  ventriloquifl  do  with  his  epi- 
lepjy  in  the  mean  time  ? You  muft  not  let  it  go. 
Becaufe  many  of  the  circumhances  wherein  all 
thefe  accounts  agree,  cannot  be  tolerably  account- 
e-d  for  without  it.  And  yet  how  tvill  you  make 
thefe  two  agree  ? 'Tis  a point  worthy  your  feri- 
ous  confideralion. 

But  cheats  doubtlefs  they  were,  account  for 
it  who  can.  Yet  it  is  flrange,  none  of  the 
Heathens  hiould  find  them  out : that  the  impof- 
ture  firould  remain  quite  undifcovered  till  four- 
teen hundred  years  after  the  impoftors  were  dead! 
He  muft  have  a very  large  faith,  who  can  be- 
lieve this;  who  can  fuppofe,  that  not  one  of  all 
thofe  impoflors,  firould  either  through  inadver- 
tence, or  in  the  midft  of  tortures  and  death,  have 
once  intimated  any  fuch  thing. 

10.  You  obferve,  thirdly,  + That  many  demo- 
niacs could  not  be  cured  by  all  the  power  of  the 
exorcifls,  and  that  the  cures  which  were  pretend- 
ed to  be  -wrought  on  ary,  were  but  temporary ; were 
but  the  ccfation  of  aparticularft,  or  aecefs  of  the 
^iflemper.  This,  you  fay,  is  evident  from  the  tef- 
iimony  of  antiquity  it fef,  and  may  be  clearly  colle&- 
ed  from  the  method  of  treating  them  in  the  antient 
church. 

-Sir,  you  are  the  moft  obliging  difputant  in  the 

world  t 


f p.  gs. 


: [ 215  ] 

I ■world  : for  you  continually  anfwer  your  own  ar- 
j guments.  Your  laft  obfervation  confuted  all  that 
I you  had  advanced  before.  And  now  you  are  fo 
kind  as  to  confute  that.  For  if,  after  all,  thefe 
demoniacs  were  real  epileptics,  and  that  in  fo 
I high  a degree  as  to  be  wholly  incredible,  what 
becomes  of  their  art  and  praftice  ? And  of  the 
I very  good  correfpondence  between  the  ventrilo- 
j quill  and  the  exorcifl;  ? 

Having  allowed  you  your  fuppofitlon  juft  fo 
long,  as  may  fuffice  to  confute  yourfell,  I muft 
i now  obferve,  It  is  not  true.  For  all  that  is  evi- 
dent from  the  tejiimony  of  antiquity  is  this  : that 
although  many  demoniacs  were  wholly  deliver- 
I ed,  yet  fome  who  were  not,  particularly  in  the 
third  century  ; but  continued  months  or  years, 
with  only  intervals  of  eafe,  before  they  were  in- 
: tirely  fet  at  liberty. 

, 11.  You  obferve,  fourthly,  J That  great  num- 

' hers  of  deynoniacs  fiibfijied  in  thofe  early  ages, 

I whofe  chief  habitation  was  in  a part  of  the  church, 
where,  as  in  a kind  of  hojpital,  they  were  under  the 
care  oj  the  exorcijls. — § Which  will  account  for  the 
■confidence  of  thofe  challenges  made  to  the  Heathens 
’by  the  Chrifians,  to  come  and  fee  how  they  could 
’drive  the  devils  out  of  them,  while  they  kept  fuck 
numbers  of  them  in  confant  pay  : always  ready for 
the flow ; tried  and  di/ciplined  by  your  exorcifls  to 
groan  and  howl,  and  give  proper  anfwers  to  all 
queftions. 

• So 


+ p,  94.  ^ p.  95. 


[ ^‘6  ] 

So  now  ike  correjpondence  hetwem  the  ve^‘ 
Priloquifl  and  the  exorcijl  is  grown  more  clore 
than  ever!  But  the  misfortune  is,  this  obferva- 
tion  likewife  wholly  overthrows  that  whieh 
went  before  it.  For  if  all  the  groaning  and  howl- 
ing and  other  fymptoms,  were  no  more  than 
what  they  t were  difciplined  to  by  their  exorcijis ; 
then  it  cannot  be,  that  many  if  oj them  could  not 
pnjfibly  be  cured  by  all  the  pozver  oJ  ihofe  exorcijis. 
What ! could  they  not  pojjibly  be  taught  to  know 
their  mailers  ? And  when  to  end  as  well  as  when 
to  begin  the  Ihow  ? One  would  think,  that  the 
cures  wrought  upon  thefe  might  have  been  more 
than  temporary.  Nay,  it  is  lurprifing,  that  while 
they  had  fiich  numbers  of  them  they  fhould  ever 
fufier  the  fame  perfon  to Jhew  twice. 

12.  You  obferve,  filihly,  § That  whereas  this 
pozver  oJ  cajiing  out  devils,  had  hitherto  been  in  the 
hands  only  of  the  meaner  part  of  the  laity  : (that 
wants  proof)  it  was,  about  the  year  put  under 
the  direclion  of  the  clergy ; it  being  then  decreed  by 
the  councilof\u^oA\ct^,  that  nonefiould  be  exorcijis 
but  thofe  appointed  (or  ordained)  by  the  bjhop. 
But  no  fooner  was  this  done,  even  by  thofe  who  fa- 
voured and  d fired  to  fupport  it,  than  the  gift  itfelf 
gradually  decreafed  and  expired. 

You  here  overthrow  not  only  your  immedi- 
ately  preceding  obfervation  (as  ufual)  but  likewife 
what  you  have  obferved  elfewhere,  ||  That  the 
exorcijis  began  to  be  ordained  about  the  middle  of 

the 

+ P-  95-  t P-  92-  § P-  95-  II  P- 


llu  third  century'’  If  fo,  what  neetl  of  decreeing 
: ' . it  now,  above  an  hundred  years  after  ? Again,  if 

i the  exorcills  were  ordained  an  hundred  years 
' t • ^ 

l;,  before  this  council  fat,  what  cliange  was  made  by 

l■f  the  decree  of  the  council  ? Or  how  came  the 
t power  of  cafling  out  devils  to  ceafe  upon  it  ? 

1 You  fay,  the  bilhops  JHll Javoured  and  dejired  to 
I'l  fubport  it.  Why  then  did  they  not  fupport  it? 
It  mufl;  have  been  they  (not  the  poor  exorcills, 
r who  were  but  a degree  above  fextons)  who  had 
hitherto  kept  Jiich  numbers  of  them  in  pay.  What 
^ was  become  of  them  now  ? Were  ail  the  groan- 
i i ers  and  howlers  dead  ? And  no  more  to  be  pro- 
Li  cured  for  money?  Or  rather,  did  , not  the  bi- 
ll^-flroj  s,  think  you,  grow  covetous  as  they  grew 
rich,  and  fo  kept  fewer  and  fewer  of  them  in  pay, 
id  till  at  length  the  whole  bufinefs  dropped  ? 
t'f  13.  Thefe  are  your  laboured  objeftions  againfl 
the  great  prornife  of  our  Lord,  Li  my  name Jha'il 


they  cajl  out  devils  : whereb)’  (to  make  fure  \yorkj 
you  flrike  at  him  and  his  apollles,  jull  as  much 
as  ^t  the  primitive  fathers.  But  by  a ftrange  jumble 


of  ideas  in  your  head,  you  would  prove  fo  much 
drat  you  prove  nothing.  By  attempting  to  fhew, 
all  who  claimed  this  power  to  be  at  once  both  fools 
and  knaves,  you  have  fpoiled  your  whole  caufe, 
and,  in  the  event,  neither  fliewn  them  to  be  one 
, nor  the  other;  as  the  one  half  of  your  argument 
all  along  jufl  ferves  to  overthrow  th>.*  other.  So 
Vo L.  XVIII.  K that 


[ ] 

that  after  all,  the  antient  teftimonies  touching  this 
gift,  remain  firm  and  unldiaken. 

Se£l:.  IV.  1.  You  told  us  above,  ? That  the 
fourth  miraculous  gift  was  that  of  prophefying, 
the  fifth  cA feeing  vifions,  the  fixth  of  difeovering 
the  feerds  of  men.  But  here  you  jumble  them  all 
te,gether,  telling  us,  t The  next  miraculous  gft  is 
that  of  prophetic  vfions,  and  extatic  trances  ( exta- 
tic  extafes  you  might  have  faidj  and  the  difeovery 
of  mens  hearts.  But  why  do  you  thrufi  all  three 
into  one?  Becaufe,  you  fay,  thefe  feemtobethe 
fruit  of  onefpirit.  Moll  certalnlv  they  are,  whe- 
ther it  was  the  fpiritof  truth,  or  (as  you  fuppofe) 
the  fpirit  of  delufion. 

2.  However  it  is  the  fecond  of  thefe  on  which 
you  chiefly  dwell,  (the  fifth  of  thofe  you  before 
enumerated)  taking  but  little  notice  of  the  fourth, 
foretelling  things  to  come,  and  none  at  all  of  the 
fixth,  difeovering  the fecrets  of  men.  The  teflimo- 
nies  therefore  for  thefe  remain  in  full  force,  as 
YOU  do  not  even  attempt  to  invalidate  them. 
With  regard  to  vifions  or  extafes,  you  obferve 
lirfl.  That  Tertidhan  calls  extafy,  :j;  a temporary 
hfs  of  fenjts.  It  was  fo,  of  the  outward  fenfes 
which  were  then  locked  up.  You  obferve,  fe- 
condly,  That  .StrtYaj  (a  very  primitive  writer,  who 
lived  between  eight  and  nine  hundred  years  after 
Terlulhan ) fays,  That  of  all  the  kinds  of  madnefs, 
that  of  the  poets  and  prophets  mas  alone  fo  be  wificd 

for. 


5 p.  72- 


+ p.  96- 


t P-  97- 


[ 219  3 

fw.  I am  at  a lofs  to  know  what  this  is  brought 
to  prove.  The  queftion  is,  were  there  vifions  in 
the  primitive  church  ? You  obferve,  thirdly. 
That  Philo  the  Jew  fays,  (I  literally  tranflate  his 
words,  which  you  do  not,  for  it  would  not  an- 
fwer  your  purpofe)  \ When  divine  light  Jhines,  the 
human  Jets ; but  when  that  Jets,  this  rifes.  This 
ufts  to  befall  the  prophets.  Well,  Sir,  and  what  is 
this  to  the  quedion  ? Why,yrn/72  thej'e  tef  monies, 
you  fay,  we  may  collebl,  that  the  vijion  or  extafy 
of  the  primitive  church  was  of  the  fame  kind  with 
that  of  the  Delphic  Pythia,  or  the  Cumcean  Sibyl. 

Well  eolledfed  indeed  I But  I defire  a little 
better  teftimony,  than  either  that  of  Philo  the 
Jew,  or  Suidas,  a Lexicographer  of  the  eleventh 
century,  before  I believe  this.  How  little  Ter- 
tullian  is  to  be  regarded  on  this  head  you  yourfelf 
fhew  in  the  very  next  page. 

3.  You  fay,  fourthly,  Montanus  and  his  cffnci- 
ates  were  the  authors  of  thej'e  trounces.  They  ff 
rafed  this Jpirit  of  enthufiajm  in  the  church,  and 
acquired  great  credit  by  their  vijions  and  extajies. 
Sir,  you  forget ; they  did  not  rafe  this  /pm it, 
but  rather  and  St.  Peter-,  according  to  whofe 
words,  young  men faw  vifons,  before  Montanus 

was  born. 

You  obferve,  fifthly.  How  ||  Tertullian  was 
impofed  upon  by  the  craft  of  extatic  vifionaries, 
and  then  fall  upon  Cyprian  with  all  your 
K 2 might  : 

^ p.  98.  lip. 99- 


•[  220  ] 

might : your  objeftions  to  whom  \ve  fliall  not 
confider. 

And,  firfi,  you  lay  it  down  as  a poftiilatum, 
that  he  was  fond  of  power  and  epifcopal  authority. 

I cannot  grant  this,  Sir,  I inufl  have  fome  proof. 
Elfe  this,  and  all  you  infer  from  it,  will  go  for 
nothing. 

You  fay,  fecondly^  In  all  quefionabie  points  of 
doclrine  or  di/cipline,  which  he  had  a mind  to  intro- 
duce into  the  Chrijlian  worjhip,  ue  find  him  con- 
fantly  appealing  to  the  tejhmony  oj  vijions  and 
divine  revelations.  Thus  he  fays  to  Coecilius, 
that  he  was  divinely  admonijhed  to  mix  water 
with  wine. in  the  facrament,  in  order  to  render  it 
efeBual. 

You  fet  out  unhappily  enough.  For  this  can 
never  be  a proof  of  Cyprian's  appealing  to  vifions 
and  revelations  in  order  to  introduce  quefionabie 
points  oi  iloEtr'ino  or  d\{c\  fine  into  the  Ckrfian 
worfiip.:  becaufe  this  point  was  unqueflionable, 
and  could  not  then  be  introduced  into  the  Chrfian 
worfiip,  having  had  a conftant  place  therein  (as 
f vou  yourfelf  have  fhewedj  at  leaf!;  from  the 
time  oi  j! fin  Martyr. 

Indeed,  neither  fufin  nor  Cyprian  ufe  thofe 
words,  hi  order  to  render  it  efeclual.  They  are  an 
ingenious  and  honcll  addition  of  your  own,  in 
order  to  make  fomeihing  out  of  nothing. 

1 obfeive  you  take  much  the  fame  libertv 
.in  your  next  quotation  from  Cyprian,  t He 

threatens, 

+ p.  102. 


S Iiitrod.  Dilc.  p . 57. 


C 221.  ] 

ih-eatens,  you  fay,  to  execute,  “ What  he  was  or- 
dered to  do  again/}  them  in  a vifion."  Here  alfo 
the  laft  words,  in  a vifion,  are  an  improvement 
upon  the  text.  Cyprians  words  are,  ^ I zvill  ufe 
that  admonition  which  the  Lord  commands  me  to 
ufe.  But  neither  was  this  in  order  to  introduce 
any  qufionable point,  either  of  dodlrine  or  difci- 
pline;  no  more  than  his  ufng  the  fame  threat  to 
Pupianus,  who  had  fpoken  ill  of  him  and  left  his 
communion. 

6.  You  go  on.  He  fays  likewife,  he  was  admo- 
nified  of  God,  to  ordain  one  Numidicus,  § a con- 
fef  or,  II  viho  had  been  left  for  dead,  haf  burnt 
and  buried  inf  ones.  True,  but  what  quefionable 
point  of  doElrine  or  difcipline  did  he  introduce 
hereby  ? Or  by  ordaining  Celerinus : who  was 
over-ruled  and  compelled  by  a divine  vifion  to  ac- 
cept that  office.  So  you  affirm  Cyprian  fays.  But 
Cyprian  fays  it  not ; at  leaf!,  not  in  thofe  words 
which  you  cite  in  the  margin ; wdiich  literally 
tranflated,  run  thus,  I recommend  to  you  Celerinus, 
joined  to  our  clergy,  5 not  by  human  fuffier age,  but 
by  the  divine  favour. 

In  another  letter,  fpeaking  of  Aurelius,  whom  he 
had  ordained  a reader,  he  fays  to  his  clergy  and 
people,  “ In  ordaining  clergy,  my  dearef  brethren, 
I ufe  to  confidt  you  firf — But  there  is  no  need  to 
K 3 ivait 

J Utar  ea  admonidone,  qua  me  Dominus  ud  jubet.  Epitl.  g, 

S P-  i°3-  II  P- 

5 Non  huraana  fuffragadone,  fed  divina  dignadone,  conjunftum. 

Epift.  34. 


[ 222  ] 

wait  for  human  tef  monies,  when  the  divine fufer- 
age  has  been  already  fignified. 

An  iinpartial  man  would  wonder  what  you 
could  infer  from  tliefe  five  pafTages  put  together. 
Why,  by  the  help  of  a fhort  poflulatum,  “ He 
was  fond  of  power,”  (you  have  as  much  ground 
to  fay,  “ He  was  fond  of  bloodfiied  f)  you  will 
make  it  plain,  “ This  was  all  a trick  to  enlarge 
his  epifcopal  authority.”  But  as  that  poll i^latum 
is  not  allowed,  you  have  all  your  work  to  begin 
again. 

7.  Hitherto  then  the  chara61er  of  Cyprian  is 
unhurt;  but  now  you  are  refolved  to  blow  it  up 
at  once.  So  you  proceed,  t The  mojl  memorable 
eJfeEl  of  any  of  his  vifions,  was  his  fight  from  his 
church  in  the  time  of  perfecution.  % He  ajirms, 
that  he  was  commanded  to  retire  by  a fpecial  reve- 
lation from  heaven.  Yet  this  plea  was  a mere 
fiElion,  contrived  to  quiet  the  fcandal  which  was 
raifed  by  his  fight : and  is  confuted  by  himfelf 
where  he  declares,  it  was  the  advice  of  Terlullus 
V)hich  prevailed  with  him  to  withdraw. 

You  here  charge  Cyprian  with  confuting  him- 
felf, in  faying.  He  withdrew  by  the  advice  of  Ter- 
tullus  ; whereas  he  before  affrmed,  that  he  was 
commanded  to  retire  by  a fpecial  revelation  from 
heaven.  Indeed  he  had  not ; there  is  no  necef- 
fity  at  all  for  putting  this  conflruftion  upon  thofe 
words,  The  Lord  who  commanded  me  to  retire ; 
which  may  without  any  force  be  underftood  of 

the 

+ p.  104.  t p.  lOi. 


[ 223  ] 

the  written  command,  t When  they  perjecute  you 
in  this  city,Jlee  ye  into  another.  It  is  not  therefore 
clear,  that  this  plea  of fpecial  revelation  was. ever 
advanced.  And  if  it  was  advanced,  it  flil!  re- 
mains to  be  proved,  that  it  was  nothing  elft  but  a 
mere  fiBion. 

8.  Your  citing  his  editor  liere,  obliges  me  to 
add  a remark,  for  which  you  give  continual  oc- 
cafion..  If  either  Rigalt,  Mr.  Dodwelt,  Dr.  Grahe, 
Mr.  Thirlby,  or  any  editor  of  any  of  the  fathers, 
ever  drops  an  exprelTion  to  the  difadvantage  of  the 
author  whom  he  publiflies  or  iiluflrates,  this  you 
account  fo  much  treafure,  and  will  furely  find  a 
time  to  expofe  it  to  public  vievv.  And  all  thefe 
palTages  you  recite  as  demonllration.  Thefe  are 
doubtlefs  mere  oracles  : although  when  the  fame 
perfon  fpeaks  in  favour  of  the  father,  his  autho- 
rity is  npt  worth  a flraw.  But  you  have  :j;  none 
of  thofe  arts  which  are  commonly  employed  by  dif 
putants  to  palliate  a bad  caufe  ! 

g.  What  you  relate  of  Diony/ius,  bifltop  of 
Alexandria,  you  have  not  from  himfelf,  but  only 
from  one  who  lived  near  an  hundred  years  after 
Diomfius  was  dead.  Therefore  he  is  not  at  ail 
accountable  for  it : as  neither  am  I for  any  viGon 
of  St.  Jerom.  But  I am  concerned  in  the  confe- 
quence  you  draw'  from  it:  “ If  this  was  a fiftion, 
fo  w'ere  Cyprians  too.”  That  will  not  follow. 
Many  objettions  may  lie  againll  the  one,  which 
have  no  place  with  regard  to  the  other. 

K4 

+ Afatt,  X.  23,  J Pref.  [ . ]i. 


to.  You 


[ 224  I 

10.  You  now  bring  forth  your  grand  difcovcry, 
that  f all  the  viftons  of  thofc  days  zi'ere  conluved, 
er  authorized  at  leajl,  by  the  leading  men  oj the 
church.  For  they  were  all  applied,  either,  i.  To 
excufe  the.  conducl  of  particular  perjons,  in  fame 
injlances  of  it  liable  to  cenfure,  or,  To  enforce 
fame  do&rine  or  difcipline  preffed  by  fome,  but  not 
relifhed  by  others,  or,  3.  To  confirm  things  not  only 
frivolous,  but  fometimes  even  fuperjhiieus  and 
hurtful. 

Well,  Sir,  here  is  the  propofition.  But  where 
is  tire  proof?  I hope  we  fhall  have  it  in  your 
next  Free  Inquiry  : and  that  you  will  then  give 
ns  a few  inftances  of  fuch  applications,  from  the 
writers  of  the  three  firft  centuries. 

11.  Being  not  difpofed  to  do  this  at  prefent, 
you  fall  again  upon  the  poor  heretic  Montanus  : 
who  Xfcjl gave  a vogue  (as  you  phrafe  it)  to  vifi- 
ons  and  exlafies  in  the  Chriflian  church.  So  you 
told  us  before.  But  w’e  cannot  believe  it  yet  j 
becaufe  Peter  and  Paul  tell  us  the  contrary. 

Indeed  you  do  not  now  mention  Montanus, 
becaufe  it  is  any  thing  to  the  queftion,  but  only 
to  make  way  for  ohjerving,  that  thofe  who  wrote 
againft  him,  employed  fuch  arguments  againjl  his 
prophecy,  as  fiake  the  credit  of  all  prophecy.  For 
Epiphanius  makes  this  the  very  criterion  between  a 
true  and  a falfe  prophet,  “ That  the  true  had  no  ex- 
tafes,  confantly  retained  his  fenfes,  and  with  firm- 
nfs  of  mind  apprehended  and  uttered  the  divine 

oraclesP 

+ p,  109,  :{:  p,  110. 


C 225  ] 


oracles."  Sir,  have  you  not  mlftook  ? Have  you 
not  tranfcribed  one  fentence  in  the  margin,  and 
tranflated  another  ? That  fentence  which  ftands 
in  your  margin  is  this.  When  there  was  need,  the 
faints  of  God  among  the  prophets  prophefied  all 
things  with  the  true  fpirit,  and  with  a found  un- 
dejianding  and  reafonable  mind.  Now  it  is  diffi- 
cult to  find  out  how  this  comes  to  f lake  the  credit 
of  all  prophecy. 

12.  Why  thus.  + Before  the  Montanlfls  had 
brought  thofe  extafes  into  difgrace,  the  prophecy  of 
the  orthodox  too  was  exerted  in  extajy.  And  fo 
were  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Tef  ament,  according 
to  the  current  opinion  of  earlier  days. 

That  this  was  then  the  current  opinion,  you 
bring  three  citations  to  prove.  But  if  you  could 
cite  three  fathers  more  during  the  three  firft  cen- 
turies, exprefy  cffinning,  that  the  prophets  were  all 
out  of  their  fenfes,  I would  not  take  their  word. 
For  though  I take  mofi;  of  the  fathers  to  have  been 
wife  and  good  men,  yet  I know  none  of  them 
were  infallible.  But  do  even  ihefe  three  affirm 
it  ? No  : not  one  of  them,  at  leaft  in  the  words- 
you  have  cited.  From  Athenagoras  you  cite  only 
part  of  a fentence,  which  tranflated  as  literally- 
as  it  will  well  bear  runs  thus.  Who  in  an 
extafy  of  their  own  thoughts,  being  moved  by  the-, 
divine  Spirit, fpoke  the  things  vnth  which  they  were, 
infpired^  even  as  a piper  breathes  into  a pipe.: 
Does  Athenagoras  exprefy  affirm  in  tliefe  words,. 

K 5 that. 

+ p.  Ill, 


[ 226  j 

that  the  prophets  were  tranfporttd  out  oj  their 
j'enfes  ? I hope,  Sir,  you  do  not  underftand 
Greek.  If  To,  you  flievv  here  only  a little  harmlefs 
ignorance. 

ig.  From  JuJlin  Martyr  alfo  you  cite  but  part 
of  a fentence.  He  fpeaks  (very  nearly)  thus  : 

That  the  Spirit  cf  God  defcending  from  heaven, 
and  ufing  righteous  men,  as  the  quill  jlrikes  the 
harp  or  lyre,  may  reveal  unto  us  the  knowledge  of 
divine  and  heavenly  things.  And  does  JuJlin  ex- 
prefy  afprm  in  thefe  words,  that  all  the  prophets 
were  tranfported  out  of  their  fenfes? 

Tertullian  % words  are,  A man  being  in  the  fpirit, 
efpecially  when  he  beholds  the  glory  of  CroA,  t muf 
needs  loft  JenJ'e.  Now  as  it  is  not  plain,  that  he 
means  hereby  lofe  his  underftanding,  (it  being 
at  leaft  equally  probable,  that  he  intends  no  more 
than  lofing  for  the  time  the  ufe  of  his  outward 
fenfes)  neither  can  it  be  faid,  that  Tertullian  ex- 
prclly  affirms,  The  prophets  were  all  out  of  their 
fenfes.  Therefore  you  have  not  fo  much  as  one 
father  to  vouch  for  what  you  fay  was  the  current 
opinion  in  thofe  days. 

14.  I doubt  not  but  all  men  of  learning  will 
obferve  a circumflance,  which  holds  throughout 
all  your  quotations.  The  ftrength  of  your  argu- 
ment conflanilv  lies  in  a loofe  and  paraphraftical 
manner  of  tranllating.  The  flrength  of  mine  lies 
in  tranflating  all  in  the  moll  clofe  and  literal 
manner  ; fo  that  clofenefs  of  tranllation  llrength- 

cns 


4 N'ecefTe  eft,  CKcidat  fcnfu. 


[ 227  ] 

ens  mine  in  the  fame  proportion  as  it  weakens 
your  arguments  : a plain  proof  of  what  you  elle- 
where  obferve,  that  you  ufe  no  f fubtle  refinements 
or  forced  conJlruElions. 

15.  But  to  return  to  Cyprian.  I it  cannot  for- 
bear, you  fay,  relating  two  or  three  more  of  Ins 
wonderful Jiories.  The  firf  is,  § A man  who  had 
denied  Chrih,  was  prefently  fruck  dumb  : the  fe- 
cond,  A woman  who  had  done fo,  was feized  by  an 
unclean  fpirit,  and  foon  after  died  in  great  anguifn  : 
the  third,  of  which  he  Jays  he  was  an  eye-witnefs, 
is  this  : the  Heathen  magif  rates  gave  to  a Chrifian 
infant,  part  of  what  had  been  offered  to  an  idol. 
When  the  deacon  forced  the  confer  ated  wine  on  this 
child,  it  zuas  immediately  feized  with  convidfons 
and  vomiting  : as  was  a woman  who  had  apofa- 
tized,  upon  taking  the  confecrated  elements.  The 
other  two  relations  Cyprian  does  not  affirm  of  his 
own  perfonal  knowledge. 

II  Now  what  can  we  think,  fay  you,  of  thefe 
f range  fortes,  but  that  they  were  partly  forged, 
partly  drefl  up  in  this  tragicalform,  to  fupport  the 
difeipline  of  the  xhurch,  in  thefe  times  of  danger 
and  trial? 

Why,'  many  will  think,  that  fome  of  them  are 
true,  even  in  the  manner  they  are  related  : and 
that  if  any  of  them  are  not,  Cyprian  thought  they 
were,  and  related  them  in  the  fmcerity  of  hfs 
heart.  Nay,  perhaps  fome  will  think,  that  the 
wifdom  of  God  might,  in  ihofe  times  oj  danger 
K 6 and 

t Preface,  p.  31.  11s.  ^ p.  113.  Up  115. 


[ 228  ] 

and  trial,  work  things  of  this  kind,  for  that  very 
end-,  to  fupport  the  difcipline  of  the.  church.  And' 
till  you  flievi?  the  fallhood,  or  at  leaft  the  im- 
probability of  this,  Cyprian's  characler  flands  un- 
tainted : not  only  as  a man  of  fenfe  (which  you 
yourfelf  allow)  but  likewife  of  eminent  integrity : 
and  confequently,  it  is  beyond  difpute,  that  hi- 
fons,  the  fifth  miraculous  gift,  remained  in  the. 
church  after  the  days  of  the  apofiles. 

Se6f.  V.  1.  The  fixth  of  the  miraculous  gifts 
which  you  enumerated  above,  namely,  the  dij- 
cern  merit  of  fpirits,  you  jufl;  name,  and  then  in- 
tirely  pafs  over.  ? The  feventh  is,  that  of  ex- 
pounding the  fcnptwres.  You  tack  to  it,  or  the 
myferies  of  God.  But  inafmuch  as  it  is  not  vet 
agreed  (as  it  was  intimated  above)  whether  this  be 
the  fame  gift,  it  may  juft  as  well  be  left  our. 

2.  Now  as  to  this,  you  fay.  There  is  no  trace 
cf  it  to  be  found,  fince  the  days  of  the  apofles.  For 
even  in  the  fceond  and  third  centuries,  a mof  fenfe- 
lefs  and  extravagant  method  oj  expounding  them 
prevailed.  For  which  when  we  ctnfure  any  parti- 
cular father,  his  apotogifs  with  one  voice  alledge, 
“ This  is  to  be  charged  to  the  age  wherein  he  lived, 
which  could  not  relifi  or  endure  any  better." 

I doubt  much,  whether  you  can  produce  one 
finglc  apologift  for  any  ridiculous  comment  on fa- 
cred  writ,  who  any  where  alledges,  that  the  fe- 
cpnd  or  third  century  could  not  relifi  or  endure  any 

better. 


5 p.  1 15. 


[ 229-  ] 

hdier.  But  If  they  were  all  to  fay  this  with  one 
voice,  yet  no  l eafonable  man  could  believe  them-. 
For  it  is  notorioufly  contrary  to  matter  of  faft. 
It  may  be  allowed,  that  fome  of  thefe  fathers, 
being  afraid  of  too  literal  a way  of  expounding- 
the  fcriptures,  leaned  fometimes  to  the  other- 
extreme.  Yet  nothing  can  be"  more  unjuft  thait 
to  infer  from  hence.  That  the  age  in  which  they 
lived,  could  not  rehjh  or  endure  any  but  fenfelej's, 
extr avagant  enthujiajlic,  ridiculous  comments  on Ja- 
cred  writ. 

Will  you  fay,  that  all  the  comments  on  fcrip- 
ture,  ft, ill  to  be  found,  in  the  writings  of  Ignatius,^ 
Polycarp,  Athenagoras,  or  even  of  Origen  and 
Clemens  Atexandrinus,  are- fenfelefs  and  extrava- 
gant ? If  not,  this  charge  muft  fall  to  the  ground  : 
it  being  manifeft,  that  even  the  age  in  which  they 
lived,  could  both  endure  and  relifa,  found,  fenfi- 
ble,  rational  (and  yet  fpiritual}  comments  on  holy 
writ. 

Yet  this  extravagant  charge  you  have  repeated 
over  and  over  in  various  parts  of  your  work  : 
thrufting  it  upon  your  reader  in  feafon  and  out 
of  feafon.  How  fairly,  let  all  candid  men 
judge. 

3,  Touching  the  miraculous  gifts  of  expounding 
fcripture  you  fay,  JuJlin  Martyr  t affams,  it  was 
conferred  on  him  by  the  /pedal  grace  oj  God.  I can* 
not  find,  where  he  affirms  this.  Not  in  the  words 
you  cite,  which  literally  tranflaLed  (as  was 

obferved". 


+ p.  ti7. 


[ 230  J 


obferved  before)  run  thus:  He  hath  revealed  to 
us  what foever  things  we  have  underjlood  by  his  grace 
from  the  fcr  iptures  alfo.  You  feem  confcious, 
thefe  words  do  not  proye  the  point,  and  there- 
fore eke  them  out  with  thofe  of  Monfieur  Tilie- 
mont.  But  his  own  words,  and  no  other  will 
fatisfy  me.  I cannot  believe  it,  unlefs  from  his 
owm  mouth. 

4.  Meantime  I cannot  but  obferve  an  odd 
circumftance,  that  you  are  here,  in  the  abun- 
dance of  your  flrength,  confuting  a propofuion 
which  (whether  it  be  true  or  falfe)  not  one  of 
your  antagonilfs  affirms.  You  are  labourning  to 
prove,  “ There  was  not  In  the  primitive  church 
any  fuch  miraculous  gift  as  that  of  expounding 
the  fcriptures.”  Pray,  Sir,  who  fays,  there 
was  ? Not  JuJhn  Martyr  : not  one  among  all 
thofe  fathers,  whom  you  have  quoted  as  witnef- 
fes  of  the  miraculous  gifts,  from  the  tenth  to  the 
eighteenth  page  of  your  inquiry.  If  you  think 
they  do,  I am  ready  to  follow  you.  Hep  by  Hep, 
through  every  quotalon  you  have  made. 

g.  No,  nor  is  this  mentioned  in  any  enumera- 
tion of  the  miraculous  gifts,  which  I can  find  in 
the  holy  fcriptures.  Prophecy  indeed  is  mentioned 
more  than  once,  by  the  apoflles,  as  w’ell  as  the 
fathers.  But  the  context  fliews,  where  it  is 
promifed  as  a miraculous  gift,  it  means  the 
foretelling  things  to  come.  All  therefore  which 
you  fay  on  this  head,  is  a mere  ignoratio  elenchi, 
a miftake  of  the  quefilon  to  be  proved. 


Sea 


C 231  J 


Seel.  VI.  1.  T The  eighth  and  laft  of  the  miracu- 
lous gifts  you  enumerated,  was,  the  gift  of 
tongues.  And  this,  ’tis  lure,  was  claimed  by 
the  primitive  Chriftians  ; for  IrencEus  fays  ex- 
prefly, We  htar  many  in  the  church,  /peaking  uilh 
all  kinds  of  tongues.  And  yet,  you  fay’,  this 
was  granted  only  on  certain  fpecial  occafions,  and 
then  withdrawn  again  from  the  apcftles  them/elves  : 
fo  that  in  the  ordinary  courfe  of  their  minftry  they 
were  generally  deftitute  of  it.  This,  you  fay  I 
have  fieion  elfewhere.  I prefume,  in  fome 
treatife  which  I have  not  feen. 

2.  But  Irenceus,  who  declares,  that  many  had 
this  gift  in  his  days,  yet  owns,  he  had  it  not  himfelf 
This  is  only  a proof  that  the  cafe  was  then  the 
fame,  as  when  St.  Paul  obferved  long  before,  i 
Are  all  workers  of  miracles?  Have  all  the  gifts 
of  healing  ? Do  all /peak  with  tongues  ? No  not 
even  when  thofe  gifts  were  flted  abroad  in  the 
moll  abundant  lhanner. 

3.  § But  no  other  father  has  made  the  leaf 
claim  to  it.  Perhaps  none  of  thofe  whofe  writ- 
ings are  now  extant  ; at  leaf!,  not  in  thofe  writ- 
ings which  are  extant.  But  what  are  thefe  in 
comparifon  of  thofe  which  are  loft  ? i^^nd  how 
many  were  burning  and  fhining  lights,  within 
three  hundred  years  after  Chriji,  who  wrote  no 
account  ofthemfelves  at  all  ; at  leaft  none  which 
has  come  to  our  hands?  But  who  are  they'^  that 
11  /peak  of  it  as  a.  gift  peculiar  to  the  time  of  the 

apofles  ? 

t p.  tig.  +1  Cor.  xii.  29,  30.  ^ p.  120.  1|  ibid. 


[ 232  ] 

apq/tles  9 You  fay,  There  is  not  a fingle father  who 
ventures  to /peak  ojit  in  any  other  manner.  Well, 
bring  but  fix  Antenicene  fathers,  who  fpeak  of 
it  in  this  manner,  and  I will  give  up  the  whole 
point. 

+ 4.  But  you  fay,  yfter  the  apofohc  times,  there 
is  not  in  all  hijlory  one  inflance,  even  Jo  much  as 
mentioned,  of  any  particular  perfon  who  ever  exer- 
cifed  this  gift.  You  mufl;  mean,  either  that  the 
Heathens  have  mentioned  no  inflance  of  this 
kind,  (which  is  not  at  all  furprizing)  or  that  Tre- 
nails does  not  mention  the  names  of thofe  many 
perfons  who  in  this  time  exercifed  this  gift.  And 
this  alfo  may  be  allowed  without  affefting  in  any 
wife  the  credibility  of  his  teflimony  concerning 
them. 

5.  I mufl  take  notice  here  of  another  of  your' 
poflulatums,  which  leads  you  into  many  miflakes. 
V/ith  regard  to  paft  ages,  you  continually  take 
this  for  granted.  What  is  not  recorded  was  not 
done.  But  this  is  by  no  means  a felf-evident 
axiom.  Nay,  poffibly  it  is  not  true.  For  there 
may  be  many  reafons  in  the  depth  of  the  wifdoin 
of  God,  for  his  doing  many  things  at  various 
times  and  places,  either  by  his  natural  or  fuper-  j 
natural  power,  which  were  never  recorded  at  all.  | 
And  abundantly  more  were  recorded  once,  and  | 
that  with  the  fulleft  evidence,  whereof  neverthe-  i 
lefs  we  find  no  certain  evidence  now,  at  the  dif-  j 
‘ance  of  fourteen  hundred  years. 


+ p.  120..- 


6.  Perhaps 


[ 2-33  1 

6.  Perhaps  this  may  obtain  in  the  very  cafe 
before  us.  Many  may  have  fpoken  with  new 
tongues,  of  whom  this  is  not  recorded : at  leafh 

• the  records  are  loft,  in  a courfe  of  fo  many 
hundred  years.  Nay,  it  is  not  only  pofhble  that  it 
may  be  fo,  but  it  is  abfolutely  certain  that  it  is  fo. 
And  you  yourfelf  muft  acknowledge  it.  For 
acknowledge,  that  the  apoflies,  when  in  flrange 
countries,  fpoke  with  flrange  tongues  : that  St.- 
John,  for  inflance.  when  in  Afia  Minor,  St.  Pe~ 
ter,  when  in  Italy  (if  he  was  really  there)  and  the 
other  apoflies,  when  in  other  countries,  in  Par- 
thia.  Media,  Phrygia,  Pamphylia,  fpoke  each  to 
the  natives  of  each  in  their  own  tongues,  the 
wonderful  works  of  God.  And  yet  there  Is  no 
authentic  record  of  this  ; There  is  not  in  all  hif< 
tory,  one  well-attejied  injlance  of  any  particular 
apofles  exer cifng  this  gift  in  any  country  whatfcm 
ever.  Now,  Sir,  if  your  axiom  were  allowed, 
what  would  be  the  confequence  ? Even  that  the 
apoflies  therafelves  no  more  fpoke  with  tongues 
than  any  of  their  fucceffors. 

7.  I need  therefore  take  no  trouble  about  your 
fubfequent  reafonings,  feeing  they  are  built  on 
fuch  a foundation.  Only  I mufl  obferve  an  hif- 
torical  miflake  which  occurs  toward  the  bottom 
of  your  next  page.  Since  the  reformation,  you 
fay,  + this  gift  has  never  once  been  heard  of,  or 
pretended  to  by  the  Romanifls  themfelves.  But  has 
it  been  pretended  to  (whether  juflly  or.  not)  by  no 

otherSj, 


■t  5 12.?. 


[ 234  ] 


others,  though  not  by  the  Rotnanijls  ? Has  it 
never  once  been  heard  ^fince  that  time  ? Sir,  your 
memory  fails  you  again.  It  has  undoubtedly  been 
pretended  to,  and  that  at  no  great  diftance  either  , 
from  our  time  or  country.  It  has  been  heard  of 
more  than  once,  no  farther  off  than  the  valleys  of 
Dauphmy.  Nor  is  it  yet  fifty  years  ago,  fince  the 
Protejiant  inhabitants  of  ihofe  valleys  fo  loudly' 
pretended  to  2lc\A  other  miraculous  powers,  as 
to  give  much  diflurbance  to  Pans  itfelf.  And 
how  did  the  king  of  fra/zce  confute  that  pretence, 
and  prevent  its  being  heard  any  more?  Not  by 
the  pen  of  his  fcholars,  but  by  (a  truly' Heathen 
wav)  the  fwords  and  bayonets  of  his  dragoons. 

8.  Youclofe  this  head  with  a very  extraordi- 
nary thought.  The  gift  of  tongues  may,  you  fay, 
he  confidered,  as  a proper  tef  or  criterion  for  de- 
termining the  miraculous  pretenfons  of  alt  churches. 
If  among  their  extraordinary  gifts  they  cannot  f'.eio 
us  this,  they  have  none  to  fhew  zuhich  are  genuine. 

Now  I really  thought,  it  had  been  otherwife. 
I thought  it  had  been  an  adjudged  rule  in  the  cafe. 
All  thefe  vcorketh  one  and  the felffarne  fpirit,  divid- 
ing to  every  man  fever  ally  as  he  zi'iH.  And  as  to 
every  man,  fo  to  every  church,  every  collective 
body  of  men.  But  if  this  be  fo,  then  yours  is 
no  proper  teft,  for  determining  the  pretenfions  of 
all  churches : feeing  he  who  worketh  as  he  will, 
may  (with  your  good  leave)  give  the  gift  of 
tongues,  where  he  gives  no  ’other  ; and  may  fee 

abundant 


+ P- 


[ 235  ] 

abundant  reafons  fo  to  do,  whether  you  and  I fea 
them  or  not.  For  perhaps  we  have  not  always 
known  the  mind  of  the  Lord  ; not  being  of  the 
number  of  his  counfellors  On  the  other  hand, 
he  may  fee  good  to  give  many  other  gifts,  where 
it  is  not  his  will  to  bellow  this.  Particularly  where 
it  would  be  of  no  ufe  : as  in  a church  where  all 
are  of  one  mind,  and  all  fpeakthe  fame  language. 

9.  You  have  now  finifhed  (after  a fafhion) 
what  you  propofed  to  do  in  the  fourth  place, 
which  was,  To  review  all  the  feveral  kinds  of  mira- 
culous gifts,  which  are  pretended  to  have  been  in 
the  primitive  church.  Indeed,  you  have  dropped 
one  or  two  of  them  by  the  way  ; againll  the  reft 
you  have  brought  forth  your  ftrong  reafons.  Thofe 
reafons  have  been  coolly  examined.  And  now 
let  every  impartial  man,  every  perfon  of  true 
and  unbialfed  reafon,  calmly  confider  and  judge, 
whether  you  have  made  out  one  point  of  all 
that  you  took  in  hand  ? And  whether  fome  mira- 
cles of  each  kind  may  not  have  been  wrought 
in  the  antient  church,  for  any  thing  you  have 
advanced  to  the  contrary  ? 

10.  From  the  127th  to  the  158th  page,  you 
relate  miracles  faid  to  be  wrought  in  the  fourth 
century.  I have  no  concern  with  thefe;  but 
I mull  weigh  an  argument  which  you  intermix 
therewith  again  and  again.  It  is  in  fubllance 
this;  “If  we  cannot  believe  the  miracles  attelled 
by  the  later  fathers,  then  we  ought  not  to  believe 
thofe  which  are  attelled  by  the  earlieft  writers  of 


[ 230  J 

the  church."  I anfweriheconfequence  is  notgood;^ 
becaufe  the  cafe  is  not  the  fame  with  the  one  and' 
W'lih  the  other.  Several  objeftions,  which  do=nof 
hold  with  regard  to  the  earlier,  may  lie  againftthe'  | 
later  miracles  ; f drawn  either  from  the  improba- 
bility of  the  fa6ls  themfelves,  fuch  as  we  have  no‘ 
precedent  of  in  holy  writ  ; from  the  incompe- 
tency of  the  inflruments  fa  id  to  perform  them, 
fuch  as  bones,  reliques,  or  departed  faints  ; or 
from  the  grofs  credulity  of  a prejudiced,  or  the 
diflionefy  of  aninterefed  relator: 

11.  One  of  thefe  objeftions  holds  againfl  moff 
of  the  later  (though  not  the  earlier)  miracles. 
And  if  only  one  holds,  it  is  enough  ; it  is  ground 
fufRcient  for  making;  the  difference.  If  therefore 
it  was  true,  that  there  was  y not  a fingle  father 
of  the  fourth  age,  who  was  not  eijully  pious  with 
the  belt  of  the  more  aniisnt,  hill  we  might 
confifiently  rejeft  moft  of  the  miracles  of  the 
fourth,  while  we  allowed  thofe  of  the  preceding 
ages  ; both  becaufe  of  the  far  greater  improbabi- 
lity of  the  faft^  themfelves,  and  becaufe  of  the  in-  i 
competency  of  the  inftruments.  ! 

But  it  is  not  true,  the  father  s of  the  fourth 

age,  u'hom you  mention,  were  equally  pious  wiltl  ! 
t-he  heft  of  the  preceding  ages.  Nay,  according  f 
to  your  account,  (which  I fliall  not  now  conteft)  ! 
they  were  not  pious  at  all.  For  you  fay,  “ They  j 
were  wilful,  habitual  liars.”  And  if  fo,  they 
bad  not  a grain  of  piety.  Now  that  the  earlier  : 

fathers 


+ p.  145-  +P-159- 


[ 237  ■] 


■Jalhers  were  not  fuch,  has  been  fliewn  at  larg?;; 
(though  indeed  you  complimented  them  with 
the  fame  chara£ter.)  Confetjuentiy,  whether 
ihefe  later  fathers  are  to  be  believed  or  no,  we 
may  fafely  believe  the  former  : who  dared  not 
to  do  evil  that  good  might  come,  or  tojie  either 
for  God  or  man. 

12.  I had  not  intended.to  fay  anything  more, 
concerning  any  of  the  miracles  -of  the  later  ages. 
But  your  way  of  accounting  for  one,  faid  to  have 
been  wroujiht  in  the  filth,  is  fo  extremely  curi- 
ous  that  I cannot  pafs  it  by. 

The  dory,  it  teems,  isthis:  \ Hunneric,  an 
Arian  prince,  in  his  perfecution  of  the  orthodox  - 
in  Afric,  ordered  the  tougues  of  a certain  fociety 
of  them  to  be  cut  out  by  the  roots.  But  bv  a 
furprifing  inllance  of  God’s  good  providence, 
they  were  enabled  to  fpeak  articulately -and  dif- 
linftly,  without  their  tongues.  And  fo  contintting 
I to-  make  open  profefllon  of  the  fame  doflrine, 
they  became  not  only  preachers,  but  living  wit- 
nefles  of  its  truth.”  ■ 

Do  not  iniftake  me.  Sir.  I have  no  defign  at 
all  to  vouch  for  the  truth  of  this  miracle.  I leave 
it  juft  as  rfindit.  But  what  I atn  concerned  w'ith 
is,  your  manner  of  accounting  for  it. 

13.  And  firft,  you  fay,  ^ It  may  not  improbably 
\heJkppoftd,  that  though  thdr  tongues  were  ordered 
to  be  cut  to  the  rvols,  yet  the  fentence  might  not  be 
\fn  fi nelly  executed,  as  hot  to  leave  in fome  bj  them 
'■  Jack 


f p.  182. 


§ P-  183. 


[ ^38  ] 

I 

fuch  a Jhare  of  that  organ  as  was fufficiait,  in  a N 
tolerable  degree,  for  the  ufe  offpeech. 

So  you  think,  Sir,  if  only  an  inch  of  a man’s 
tongue  were  to  be  neatly  taken  off,  he  would  be 
able  to  talk  tolerably  well,  as  foon  as  the  opera-  | 
tion  was  over.  I 

But  the  rnoft  marvellous  part  is  ftill  behind.  | 
For  you  add,  To  come  more  clofe  to  the  point, 
f we fwuld  allow  that  the  tongues  of  thefe  conff- 
fors  were  cut  away  to  the  very  roots  , what  will  the  . 
learned  dotlor'  fay,  if  this  boajled  miracle  fiould 
be  found  at  I of  to  be  no  miracle  at  all? 

Say  ? Why,  that  you  have  more  ikill  than  all 
jirolling  wonder-worker s tit  firfl:  cen- 

turies put  together. 

But  to  the  point,  Let  us  fee  how  you  will  i 
fet  about  it.  Why  thus  : The  § tongue  (as  you  , 
juftly,  tho’  keenly  obferve)  has  generally  been  j 
confidered  as  abfolutely  neceffary  to  (he  ife  of  Jpeech. 

So  that  to  hear  men  talk  without  it,  might  cafilypafs 
for  a miracle  in  that  credulous  age.  Yet  there  was  t 
always  room  to  doubt,  whether  there  was  any  thing  } 
miraculous  in  it  or  not.  But  we  have  an  inftance  . 
in  the prefent  century,  which  clears  up  all  our 
doubts,  and  entirely  decides  the  quefion.  J mean, 
the  cafe  of  a girl  born  without  a tongue,  who  talked 
as  eafily  and  diJlinBly  as  if  fie  had  had  one ; an 
account  of  which  is  given  in  the  memoirs  of  the 
academy  offciences  at  Paris. 

14.  And  , 

J p.  J84.  § ibid. 


C 239  ] 

14.  And  can  you  really  believe  this?  That  a 
girl  /poke  diJlmBly  and  eafily  without  any  tongue 
at  all?  And  after  avowing  this  belief,  do  you 
gravely  talk  of  other  mens  credulity  ? 1 wonder 
that  fuch  a volunteer  in  faith  fhould  flagger  at 
any  thing.  Doubtlefs,  were  it  related  as  natural 
only,  not  miraculous,  you  could  believe,  that  a 
man  might  fee  without  eyes, 

I * Surely  there  is  fomething  very  peculiar  in 
i this  ; fomething  extraordinary,  though  not  mira- 
culous; that  a man,  who  is  too  wife  to  believe 
the  bible,  fhould  believe  every  thing  but  the  bi- 
■ ble  ! Should  fwallow'  any  tale,  fo  God  be  out  of 
the  queflion,  though  ever  fo  improbable,  ever  fo 
iinpofifible. 

13.  + / have  now,  you  fay,  thrown  together  all 
which  I had  colleEled  for  the  fupport  of  my  argii- 
,ment:  a :j:  lame  recapitulation  of  which  you  add 
with  an  air  of  triumph  and  fatisfaffion,  § / wijh 
the  fathers,  the  ablef  advocates  which  popery  itfcf 
can  afford : proteflantifm,  lam  fare,  can fup- 

ply  none  whom  they  would  chufe  to  retain  in  their 
caife : none  who  can  def  end  them  without  contra- 
diBing  their  own  profefjion,  and  difgracing  their 
'own  charaBer  •,  or  produce  any  thing,  but  what 
deferves  to  he  laughed  at,  rather  than  anfwered. 

Might  it  not  be  well.  Sir,  not  to  be  quite  fo 
I Jure  yet  ? You  may  not  always  have  the  laugh  on 
! your  fide.  You  are  not  yet  infallibly  affured, 
but  that  even  protejlantifm  may  produce  fome- 
thing 


+ p.iB;.  |p,  188, 


S p- 189. 


-[  .240  .] 


tiling  woi  th  an  anfvver.  There  may  be  fome proief- 
tants,  for  aught  you  know,  who  have  a few  grains 
of  common  fenfe  left,  and  may  find  a way  to  dc'- 
Jend,  at  leaft  the  Antenicene Jalkers,  without  dif- 
gracing  their  own  charaEier.  Even  fuch  an  one 
as  I have  faintly  attempted  this:  although  I nei- 
ther have,  nor  e.\pe£l  to  have  any  preferment ; 
not  even  to  be  a Lambeth  chaplain : — which  if 
Dr.  Middleton  is  not,  it  is  not  his  own  fault. 

V.  1.  The  laid  thing  you  propofed  was,  To 
refute  fome  oj  the  mojl  plan/wle  ohjcBions  which 
have  been  hitherto  made.  To  what  you  have 
offered  on  this  head,  I mull  hhewife  attempt  a 
fnort  reply. 

You  lay,  t /t  is  objected,  fir f.  That  by  the  cha~ 
raEltr  1 have  given  of  the  fathers,  the  authority  of 
the  hooks  of  the  New  Tejt  ament,  which  zuae  tranf 
mitled  to  ais  through  their  hands,  will  be  rendered 
precarious  and  uncertain. 

Aider  a feint  of  confuting  it,  you  frankly  ac- 
knowledge the  whole  of  this  objetlion.  j I may 
venture,  ) ou  fay,  to  declare,  that  ij  this  objection  be 
true,  it  cannot  huit  my  argument.  Tor  if  it  be  na- 
tural and  neceffaty,  that  the  craft  and  credulity  of 
witnejfes  fhould  always  detract  from  the  credit  of 
their  tejiimony  \ then  who  can  help  it?  And  if 
this  charge  be  proved  on  the  fathers,  it  mtfl  be 
admitted,  how  Jar  Jvever  the  confiiuences  may 
reach. 

» If 


+ ,p.  190. 


fP'  >92. 


[ 2-41  ] 

It  It  be  proved” — Very  true.  If  that  charge 
againft  the  fathers  were  really  and  fubftantially 
.proved,  the  authority  of  the  New  Teftament 
would  be  at  an  end,  fo  far  as  it  depends  on  one 
kind  of  evidence.  But  that  charge  is  not  proved. 
Therefore  even  the  traditional  authority  of  the 
New  Teftament  is  as  firm  as  ever. 

2.  It  is  objeffed,  you  fay,  fecondly,  ^ “ That  all 
Jiifpicion  of fraud  in  the  cafe  of  the  primitive  mi- 
racles, is  excluded  by  that  public  appeal  and  chal- 
lenge which  the  Chriflian  apologifts  make  to  their 
enemies  the  Heathens,  to  come  and  fee  with  their 
own  eyes  the  reality  of  the  Jacls  which  they  attef." 

You  anfwer.  This  objeBion  has  no  real  weight 
with  any  who  are  acquainted  with  the  condition  of 
the  Chnjiians  in  tliofe  days.  You  then  inlarge  [j 
(as  it  feems,  with  a peculiar  pleafure)  on  the  ge- 
neral contempt  and  odium  they  lay  -under,  from 
the  firfl  appearance  of  Chrifiianity  in  the  world, 
till  it  was  eftablifhed  by  the  civil  power. 

IT  In  thefe  circumjlances  it  cannot  he  imagined, 
you  fay,  that  men  of  figure  and  fortune  would  pay 
any  attention  to  the  apologies  or  zvritings  of  a feB 
fo  utterly  -defpifed.  But,  Sir,  they  were  hated  as 
well  as  defpifed-;  and  that  by  the  great  vulgar  as 
well  as  the  fmall.  And  this  very  hatred  would  na- 
turally prompt  them  to  examine  the  ground  of 
the  challenges  daily  repeated  by  them  they  hated: 
were  it  only,  that  by  difcovering  the  fraud 
f which  they  wanted  neither  opportunity  nor  (kill 
VoL.  XVIII.  L to 

^ P-193-  .119-1941195.196.. 


t p,  197. 


[ 242  ] 

to  do,  had  there  been  any)  they  might  have  had  a 
better  pretence  for  throwing  the  Chriflians  to  the 
lions,  than  becaufe  the  Nile  did  not,  or  the  Tiber 
did  overflow. 

3.  You  add,  d Much  lejs  can  we  believe  that  the 
emperor  or  Jenate  oJ-B^omt  Jkould  take  any  notice 
of  thofe  apologies,  or  even  know  indeed  that  any 
JiicJi  were  addrejfed  to  them. 

Why,  Sir,  hy  your  account  you  would  make  us 
believe,  that  all  the  emperors  and  fenate  together 
were  as  fenjelejs,  Jliipid  a race  of  blockheads  and 
brutes,  as  even  the  Chriflians  themfelves. 

But  hold.  You  are  going  to  prove  it  too. 
For,  fay  you, fioidd  the  like  cafe  happen  now,  that 
any  Methodijl,  Moravian,  or  French  prophet, 
(right  fkilfully  put  \.ogtx\-\Qv)JhoiddpubliJh  an  apo- 
logy  Jor  his  brethren,  addref  to  the  kmg  and  par- 
liament ; IS  it  not  wholly  improbable,  that  the  go- 
vernment would  pay  any  regard  to  it?  You  fhould 
add  (to  make  the  parallel  compleat)  or  know  that 
any  fuch  was  addrejfed  to  them. 

No.  I conceive  the  improbability  fuppofed 
lies  wholly  on  the  other  fide.  Whatever  the  go- 
vernment of  Heathen  Rome  was,  (which  I pre- 
fume yoti:  will  not  depredate)  the  government  of 
England  is  remarkable  for  tendernefs  to  the  very 
meanefl  fubjefl.  It  is  therefore  not  improbable 
in  the  leaft,  that  an  addrefs  from  fome  thoufands 
of  thofe  fubjecls,  how  contemptible  foever  thev 
were  generally  efleemed,  would  not  be  totally 

difregarded 


+ p.  197' 


[ 243  ] 

^ifregai'cled  by  fuch  a government.  But  tliat  they 
fhould  not  know  that  any  fuch  had  been  addrejfed 
to  the?n,  is  not  only  improbable,  but  morally  ira- 
poflible. 

If  therefore  it  were  pofTible  for  the  Heathens  to 
1 1 have  a worfe  epinioh  of  the  antient  Chrifians  than 
ti  we,  you  fay,  have  of  our  modern fanatics,  ftill  it  is 
II ! utterly  incredible,  that  the  Roman  government 
i\  fhould  not  only  take  no  notice  oj  their  apologies, 
but  not  even  know  that  any  fuch  were  addrefl  to 
1^1'  them. 

i 4.  t “ But  the  publifhing  books  was  more 
I expenfive  then  than  it  is  now.  And  therefore  we 
; cannot  think  the  Chriftians  of  thofe  days  were 
j + able  to  provide  fuch  a number  of  them  as  was 
i fuficient  jor  the  information  of  the  public. 

Nay,  if  they  were  not  able  to  provide  them- 
j felves  food  and  raiment,  they  would  be  fure  to 
ij  provide  a fufficient  niHnber  of  thefe : fufficient 
,t  et  leaft  for  the  information  of  the  emperor  and 
! fenate,  to  whom  thofe  apologies  were  addreft. 
i And  how  great  a number,  do  you  fuppofe, 
t\  might  fuffice  for  them  ? How  many  hundred  or 
I'j  thoufand  copies  ? I apprehend  the  emperor 
I)  1 would  be  content  with  one.  And  one  more 
1;  I would  be  needful  for  the  fenate.  Now  I really 
doj  Relieve  the  Chriflians  of  thofe  days  were  able  to 

I • • ^ 

:f  i .^provide  both  thefe  copies.  Nay,  and  even  two 
y i -more;  if  it  fhould  have  fallen  out,  that  two  or 
i three  emperors  were  ou  the  throne:  even 
; I L 2 though 

+ p.  198.  Ip.  199* 

i 


I 


[ 2 44  ] 


though  we  fhould  fuppofe,  that  in  Tertullian% 
time  there  were  but  forty  thoufand  of  them  in  all 
Rotne. 

However,  you  plunge  on  : + Since  then  the 
Chiijlians  were  not  able  to  bear  the  expence  oj  copy- 
ing them  (whether  the  Heathens  were  dijpoftd  to 
buy  them  or  no,  is  at  prefent  out  of  the  queflion) 
there  is  great  reafon  to  believe^  that  their  apologies, 
how  gravely  foever  addrejfed  to  emperors  and fe- 
nates,  lay  unknown  Jor  many  years.  There  is  no 
great  reafon  to  believe  it  from  any  thing  you  have 
advanced  yet.  You  add,  ejpecially  when  the  publjjh- 
ing  oj  them  was  not  only  expen  five,  but  Jo  criminal 
al/o,  as  to  expofe  them  often  to  danger,  and  even  to 
capital  punijhment. 

In  very  deed.  Sir,  I am  fometimes  inclined  to 
fufpeft,  that  you  are  yourfelf  related  to  certain 
antient  fathers,  (notwithflanding  the  learned  quo- 
tations which  adorn  your  margin]  who  ufed  to  fav, 
Grcecum  eft  : non  potejl  legi.  You  lay  me  under 
an  almoll  invincible  temptation  to  think  fo  upon 
this  very  occafion.  For  what  could  induce  )ou, 
if  you  knew  what  he  faid,  to  place  at  the  bottom 
of  this  very  page,  a palfage  from  one  of  tbofe 
apologifts,  JuJlin  Martyr,  which  fo  clearly  con- 
futes your  own  argument  ? The  words  are,  Al- 
though 


t p.  199. 

if  Tuvins  ofiffSor®'  y.cHa.  Tat  ^tea-crtcotTut,  n 

l^cO^oyhtrut  to  oyof/a  t5  XprS,  x]  acriraO- 

uiSacy.ctjjisv • a<;  EilttfEO’SE  To7<rat 

TOK  hoycii;,  fc  GTAECV  Tt  JtiowrSs  t5  fotdsit. 

jigl.  Mart,  Apo!.  i.  p.  69. 


[ 245  ] 

though  death  he  determined  againji  thofe  who  teach, 
or  even  corifefs  the  name  of  Chrift,  we  both  embrace 
and  teach  it  every  vdiere.  And  if  you  alfo  receive 
thefe  words  as  enemies,  you  can  do  no  more  than  kill 
us.  Could  danger  then,  or  the  fear  of  capital 
punifhment  reftrain  thofe  Chriftians  from  prefent- 
ing  thefe  apologies?  No;  capital'  punifhment 
was  no  terror  to  them,  who  daily  offered  them- 
felves  to  the  flames : till  the  very  Heathen  but- 
chers themfelves  were  tired  with  flaughtering 
them. 

There  can  therefore  no  fhadow  of  doubt  re- 
main, with  any  cool  and  impartial  man,  but  that 
thefe  apologies  were  prefented  to  the  mofl  emi- 
nent Heathens,  to  the  magiftrates,  the  fenate, 
the  emperors.  Nor  confequenilv  is  there  the 
leafl  room  to  doubt  of  the  truth  of  the  fa£is  there- 
in afferted  : feeing  the  apologifts  conftantly  de- 
fied their  enemies,  to  come  and  fee  them  witktiuir 
own  eyes : a hazard  which  thofe  crafty  men  would 
never  have  run,  had  not  the  fafts  themfelves  been 
infallibly  certain.  This  objeQion  then  flands 
againfl:  you  in  full  force.  For  fuch  a public  ap- 
peal to  their  bitterefl  enemies  muff  exclude  all 
reafonable  fufpicion  of  fraud,  in  the  cafe  of  the 
primitive  miracles. 

6.  You  tell  us,  it  is  objefted,  thirdly,  | That 
no  fufpicion  of  fraud  can  reafonably  be  entertain' 
td  againft  thofe  who  expofed  themfelves  even  to  mar- 
L 3 ' tyrdom, 

t P-  »99‘ 


r 246  ] 

tyrdom,  in  confirmation  oj  the  truth  of  xokat  ihej 
taught. 

In  order  to  invalidate  this  objeftion,  you  aflert, 

^ That  fome  of  the  primitive  Chriftians  might 
expofe  themfelves'to  martyrdom,  out  of  mere  ob- 
ftinacy;  others,  § from  a defire  of  glory  ; others, 
II  from  a fear  of  reproach  ; but  the  moil  of  all, 
f from  the  hope  of  a higher  reward  in  heaven  ; 
efpecially,  as  they  believed,  t the  end  of  the 
world  was  near,  and  that  the  martyrs  felt  no 
pain  in  death.”  All  \\  which  topics,  you  fay, 
when  df played  with  art,  were  fuff.cient  to  inf  ante 
the  multitude  to  embrace  any  martyrdom. 

This  appears  very  plaufible  in  fpeculation. 
But  faft  and  experience  will  not  anfwer.  You 
are  an  eloquent  man,  and  are  able  to  difplay  any 
topic  you  pleafe,  with  art  enough.  Yet  if  you 
was  to  try,  with  all  that  art  and  eloquence,  to-  per- 
fuade  by  all  thefe  topics,  not  a whole  multi- 
tude, but  one  fimple  credulous  ploughman,  to  go 
and  be  (hot  through  the  head  ; I am  afraid,  you 
would  fcarce  prevail  with  him  after  all,  to  em- 
brace even  that  eafy  martyrdom.  And  it  might 
be  moie  difficult  ftill  to  find  a man,  who  either 
out  of  obftinacy,  fear  of  ffiame,  or  defire  of 
glory,  would  calmly  and  deliberately  offer  himfelf 
to  be  roafted  alive  in  Smitff  eld. 

7.  Have  you  confidered.  Sir,  how  the  cafe 
ffood  in  our  own  country,  fcarce  two  hundred 

years 

J p.  200.  § p.  201.  II  p.  208.  II  p.  202.  + p.  203. 

p,  204.  §§  p.  aoS. 


[ 247  ] 

years  ago  ? Not  a multitude  indeed,  and  yet  not 
a few,  of  our  own  countrymen  then  expired  in 
the  flames.  And  it  was  not  a general  perfuafion 
among  them,  that  martyrs  feel  no  pain  in 
death.  That  thefe  have  feeling,  as  well  as 

other  men,  plainly  appeared,  in  the  cafe  of  bi- 
fhop  Ridley,  crying  out,  “ I cannot  burn,  I 
cannot  burn,”  when  his  lower  parts  were  con- 
fumed.  Do  you  think  the  fear  of  fliame,  or  the 
defire  of  praife,  was  the  motive  on  which  thefe 
afied  ? Or  have  you  reafon  to  believe  it  was 
mere  obflinacy  that  hindered  them  from  accepting 
deliverance?  S'n,  fince  huma7i  nature,  has  always 
been  the fame,  Jo  that  our  experience  of  what  now 
pqffes  in  our  own  foul,  will  be  the  bejl  commait  on 
what  is  delivered  to  us  concer7iing  others,  let  me 
intreat  you,  to  make  the  cafe  your  own.  You 
mufl;  not  fay,  “ I am  not  one  of  the  ignorant 
vulgar  : I am  a man  of  fenfe  and  learning.”  So 
were  many  of  them  ; not  inferior  even  to  you, 
either  in  natural  or  acquired  endowments.  I aflc 
then,  would  any  of  thefe  motives  fuffice  to  in- 
duce you  to  burn  at  a flake  ? I befeech  you,  lay 
your  hand  on  your  heart,  and  anfwer  between 
God  and  your  own  foul,  what  motive  could  in- 
cite you  to  walk  into  a fire,  but  an  hope  full  of 
immortality  ? When  you  mention  this  motive, 
you  fpeak  to  the  point.  And  yet  even  with  re- 
gard to  this,  both  you  and  I fhould  find,  did  it 
come  to  a trial,  that  the  hope  of  a fool,  or  the 
hope  of  an  hypocrite,  would  fland  us  in  no  flead. 

L 4 We 


[ 2^8  ] 

We  fliouldfind  nothing  elfe  would  fuftain  us  in- 
ihat  hour,  but  a well-grounded  confidence  of  a 
better  refurreftion  : nothing  lefs  than  the  “ fted- 
iallly  looking  up  to  heaven,  and  beholding  the 
glory  which  fhall  be  revealed.” 

8.  “ But  Heretics,  you  fay,  have  been  mar- 
tyrs.” I will  anfwer  more  particularly,  when 
you  fpecify  who  ? and  when  ? It  may  fuffice  to 
fay  now,  whofoever  he  be,  that  rather  than  he 
■will  offend  God,  calmly  and  deliberately  chufes 
to  fuffer  death,  I cannot  lightly  fpeak  evil  of  him. 

But  Cyprian  fays,  “■  Some  who  had  fuffered 
tortues  iox  Chrijl,  yet  afterwards  fell  into  grofs, 
open  fin.”  It  may  be  fo  ; but  it  is  nothing  to 
the  queftion.  It  does  not  prove  in  the  leafi,  what 
you  brought  it  to  prove,  namely,  “ That  bad 
men  have  endured  martyrdom.’  Don’t  evade, 
Sir,  and  fay,  “ Yes,  torments  are  a kind  of 
of  martydom.”  True  ; but  not  the  martyrdom  of 
which  we  fpeak. 

g.  You  falve  all  at  laft,  by  declaring  gravely, 
+ //  ts  not  mj  defign  to  detract  in  any  manner  from 
the juf  praife  of  thofe  primitive  martyrs,  who 
fujiained  the  cauje  of  Chrift  at  the  expence  of  their 
lives.  No.  Who  could  ever  fuppofe  it  was  ? 
Who  could  imagine,  it  was  your  defign  to 
detraft  from  the  juf  praife  of  Juf  in,  Irenceus,  or 
Cyprian  ? You  only  defired  to  fliew’,  what  their 
juft  praife  was,  namely,  the  praife  of  pick-pock- 
ets, of  common  cheats  and  impoftors.  We 

underftani 


X p.  ua. 


[ ^^49  ] 

underfland  your  meaning  therefore,  when  you 
add,  It  is  reajhnable  to  behzve,  that  they  were  the 
beji  fort  of  Chrijiians,  and  the  chief  ornaments  of 
the  church  in  their  feveral  ages. 

10.  You  conclude.  My  view  is  to  fiew,  that  their 
martyrdom  does  not  add  any  weight  to  their  tejli- 
mony.  Whether  it  does  or  no,  § It  gives  the- 

frongef  proof  (as  you  yourfelf  affirm)  of  the f nee - 
rity  of  their  faith  : and  confequently  proves,  That 
no fafpicion  of  fraud  can  reafonably  be  entertained 
againjl  them.  But  this  (which  you  feem  to  have 
quite  forgot)  was  the  whole  of  the  obje£fion 
and  confequently  this  as  well  as  both  the  former 
objections,  remain  in  their  full  force. 

11.  It  has  been  objeffed,  fourthly,  you  fay. 
That  II  you  dejlroy  the  faith  and  credit  of  all  hif- 
tory.  But  this  objeflion,  you  affirm,  5 when  fe- 
rioufy  confdered,  will  appear  to  have  no  fenfe  at. 
all  in  it. 

That  we  will  try..  And  one  paflage,  home  to 
the  point,  is  as  good  as  a thoufand.  Now%  Sir> 
be  pleafed  to  look  back.  In  youp  preface,  page, 
the  ninth,  I read  thefe  words  t.  The  credibility  of 
falls  lies  open  to  the  trial  of  aitr  reafon  and fenfes. 
But  the  credibility  of  witneffes  depends  on  a variety, 
of  principles  wholly  concealed  from  us.  And  though., 
in  many  cafes.,  it  may  reafonably  be prefiimed , yet  in, 
none  can  it  certainly  be  known.. 

If  this  be  as  you  aflert  (I.  repeat  it  again)  then 
farewel  the  credit  of  all  hiHory:  Sir,  this  is-nct, 
L g~  tliSs^ 

i ^ ibid*'  BP',  1^4.  S p.  lie. 


[ 250  ] 

the  cant  of  zealots  : you  muft  not  efcape  fo  ; it  ts 
plain,  fober  reafon.  If  the  credibility  of  wilnejjes 
(of  all  witnelTes  ; for  you  make  no  diftinftion)  * 
depends,  as  you  peremptorily  affirm,  on  a varie- 
ty of  principles  wholly  concealed fr om  us,  and  con- 
fequently,  though  it  may  be  prefumed  im  many 
cafes,  yet  can  be  certainly  known  in  none  : then 
it  is  plain,  all  hiftory,  facred  or  profane,  is  ut- 
terly precarious  and  uncertain.  Then  I may  in- 
deed prefurae,  but  I cannot  certainly  know,  that 
Julius  Cafar  was  killed  in  the  fenate-houfe : then 
I cannot  certainly  know,  that  there  was  an  em- 
peror in  Germany,  called  Charles  the  fifth  : that 
Leo  the  tenth  ever  fat  in  the  fee  of  Rome,  or 
Lewis  the  fourteenth  on  the  throne  of  France. 
Now  let  any  man  of  common  underflanding 
s whether  this  objedion  has  any  fenfe  in 

it,  or  no. 

12.  Under  this  fame  head,  you  fall  again  upon 
the  cafe  of  witchcraft,  and  fay,  + There  is  not  in 
all  hijlory,  anyone  miraculous  faB,fo  authenti- 
cally attfted  as  the  exiftence  of  witches.  All  Chrif- 
tian  (yea,  and  all  Heathen)  nations  whatfoever, 
have  cunfented  in  the  belief  of  them.  Now  to  deny 
the  reality  offabis  fo folemnly  atiefed,  and fo  uni- 
ver fully  believed,  feems  to  give  the  lie  to  the  fenfe 
and  experience  of  all  Chriflendom  : to  the  wifeft 
and  beft  of  every  nation,  and  to  public  monuments 
fubfifting  to  our  own  times. 

What  obliges  you  then  to  deny  it  ? Your 
anfwer,  The  incredibility  of  the  thing.  O Sir, 

never 


+ p,  221, 


[ 251  ] 

never  ftrain  at  the  incredibility  of  this,  after  you 
have  fwallowed  an  hundred  people  talking  with- 
out tongues. 

13.  What  you  aim  at  in  this  alfo  is  plain,  as 
well  as  in  your  account  of  the  Abbe  de  Paris  : 
the  point  of  your  argument  is,  “ If  you  cannot 
believe  thefe,  then  you  ought  not  to  believe  the 
bible  ; The  incredibility  of  the-  things  related 
ought  to  over-rule  all  teftimovy  whatfoever A 

Your  argument,  at  length,  would  run  thus : 

“ If  things  be  incredible  in  themfelves,  then 
this  incredibility  ought  to  oven-rule  all  telliraony 
concerning  them. 

But  the  gofpel-miracles  are  incredible  in  them- 
felves.” Sir,  that  propofition  I deny.  You  have 
not  proved  it  yet.  You  have  only  now  and  then, 
as  it  were  by  the  by,  made  an  attempt  to  prove 
it.  And  till  this  is  done,  you  have  done  nothing, 
with  all  the  pother  that  you  have  made. 

14.  You  referve  the  home  ftroke  for  the  lafl. 

:};  There  is  hardly  a ynirade faid  to  he  wjought  in 
the  primitive  times,  but  what  is  faid  to  be  perform- 
ed in  our  days.  But  all  thefe  modern  pretenfons, 
w.e  afcrihe  to  their  true  cauje,  the  craft  of  a few,  . 
playing  upon  the  credulity  of  the  many,  for  private 
interef.  When  therejcre  we  read  of  the  fame 
things  done  by  the  antients,  and for  the  fame  ends,  . 
of  acquiring  wealth,  credit,  or  power : hozo  can 
zue  pojjibly  hefitate  to  impute  them  to  ike  fame  cauje 

and  impoflure  ? 

L 6 The=,- 

■*  ? p. 


of  fraud 


[ 2^2  ] 

The  reafon  of  our  hefitatlon  is  this.  They 
did  not  anfwer  the  fame  ends.  The  modern  cler- 
gy of  Ronie.  do  acquire  credit  and  wealth  by 
their  pretended  miracles.  But  the  antient  cler- 
gy acquired  nothing  by  their  miracles,  but  to  be 
(fflided,  dejlilute^  torinented.  The  one  gain  all 
things  thereby  ; the  others  loll  all  things.  And 
this,  we  think,  makes  fome  difference,  t Even 
unto  this  prejent  hour,  fays  one  of  them  (writing 
to  thofe  who  could  eafily  confute  him,  if  he 
fpoke  not  the  truth]  we  both  hunger  and  thirjl,  and 
are  naked,  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  certain 
dwelling  place — Being  reviled,  we  blejs  ; being per- 
fcuted,  we Juffer  it  ; being  dfamed,  we  intreat,^ 
W f are  become  as  the  filth  of  the  world,  as  the  off- 
Jcouring  of  all  things  unto  this  day. — Now,  Siiv 
whatever  be  thought  of  the  others,  we  appre- 
hend fuch  clergy  as  thefe,  labouring  thus,  unto- 
the  death,  for  fuch  credit  and  wealth,  are^ot 
chargeable  with  fraud  and  impoffure., 

VI.  I have  now  finlfiied  what  I had  to  fay. 
with  regard  to  your  book.  Yet  I think  humani- 
ty requires  me  to  add  a few  words  concerning 
fome  points  frequently  touched  upon  therein, 
which  perhaps  you  do  not  fo  clearly  underftand. 

We  have  been  long  difputing  about  Chrijiians, 
about  Chri/lianity,  and  the  evidence  whereby  it  is 
fuppoxted.  But  what  do  thefe  terms  mean  ? 
Who  is  a Chriftian  indeed  ? What  is  real,  ge-. 


t 1 Cor. 


[ 253  ] 

nuine  Chriftianity  ? And  what  is  the  fureft  and 
moll  accelTible  evidence  (if  I may  fo  fpeak) 
whereby  I may  know,  that  it  is  of  God  ? May 
the  God  of  the  Chiiflians  enable  me  to  fpeak  on 
thefe  heads,  in  a manner  fuitable  to  the  impor- 
tance of  them  f 

Se£l.  I.  1.  I would  confider,  firfl,  Who  is  a 
Chriftian  indeed  ? What  does  that  terra  proper- 
ly imply  ? It  has  been  fo  long  abufed,  I fear,  not 
only  to  mean  nothing  at  all,  but,  what  was  far 
worfe  than  nothing,  to  be  a cloak  for  the  vileft 
hypocrify,  for  the  grolfell  abominations  and  im- 
moralities of  every  kind,  that  it  is  high  time  to 
refcue  it  out  of  the  hands  of  wretches  that  are  a 
reproach  to  human  nature  : to  fhew  determ.inate- 
ly,  what  manner  of  man  he  is,  to  whom  this 
name  of  right  belongs. 

• 2.  AKlhriflian  cannot  think  of  the  author  of  his 
being,  without  abafing  himfelf  before  him  : with- 
out a deep  fenfe  of  the  dillance  between  a worm 
of  earth,  and  him  that  fitteth  on  the  circle  of  the 
heavens.  In  his  prefence  he  links  into  the  dull, 
knowing  himfelf  to  be  lefs  than  nothing  in  his 
eye  : and  being  confcious,  in  a manner  words 
cannot  exprefs,  of  his  own  llttlenefs,  ignorance, 
foolilhnefs.  So  that  he  can  only  cry  out,  from 
the  fulnefs  of  his  heart,  “ O God ! What  is  man ! 
What  am  I !” 

3.  He  has  a continual  fenfe  of  his  dependence 
CIV  the  parent  of  good,  for  his  being,  and  all- 

the 


[ 254  ] 

the  bleffings  that  attend  it.  To  him  he  refers 
every  natural,  and  every  moral  endowment: 
with  all  that  is  commonly  afcribed  either  to 
fortune,  or  to  the  wifdom,  courage  or  merit  of 
the  poffelfor.  And  hence  he  acquiefces  inwhat- 
foever  appears  to  be  his  will,  not  only  with  pa- 
tience, but  with  thankfulnefs.  He  willingly 
refigns  all  he  is,  all  he  has,  to  his  wife  and  gra- 
cious difpofal.  The  ruling  temper  of  his  heart, 
is  themofl  abfolute  fubmidion,  and  the  tendered 
gratitude  to  his  fovereign  benefaftor.  And  this 
grateful  love  creates  filial  fear  : an  awful  rever- 
ence toward  him,  and  an  earneft  care  not  to 
give  place  to  any  difpofition,  not  to  admit  an 
affion,  word  or  thought,  which  might  in  any 
degree  difpleafe  that  indulgent  power  to  whom, 
he  owes  his  life,  breath  and  all  things. 

4.  And  as  he  has  the  ftrongeft  affe61ion  for  the 
fountain  of  all  good,  fo  he  has  the  firmeft  con- 
fidence in  him  : a confidence  which  neither- 
pleafure  nor  pain,  neither  life  nor  death  can  lhake. 
But  yet  this,  far  from  creating  floth  or  indolence, 
pufiies  him  on  to  the  moll  vigorous  indullry. 
It  caufes  Ijim  to  put  forth  all  his  llrength,  in 
obeying  him  in  whom  be  confides.  So  that  he 
is  never  faint  in  his  mind,  never  weary  of  doing 
whatever  he  believes  to  be  his  will.  And  as  he 
knows,  the  moll  acceptable  worlhip  of  God,  is 
to  imitate  him  he  worflrips,  fo  he  is  continually 
labouring  to  iranfcribe  into  himfelf  all  his  imit- 
able  perfeblions;  in  particular,  hisjultice,  mercy, 

and 


[ 255  ] 

and  truth,  fo  emimently  difplayed  in  all  hb 
creatures. 

5.  Above  all,  remembering  that  God  is  love, 
he  is  conformed  to  the  fame  likenefs.  He  b full 
of  love  to  his  neighbour  : of  univerfal  love  ; not 
confined  to  one  fe£f  or  party  ; not  reftrained  to 
thofe  who  agree  with  him  in  opinions,  in  out- 
ward modes  of  worfhip  or  to  thofe  who  are 
allied  to  him  by  blood,  or  recommended  by 
nearnefs  of  place.  Neither  does  he  love  thofe 
only  that  love  him  or  that  are  endeared  to  him 
by  intimacy  of  acquaintance.  But  his  love  re- 
fembles  that  of  him,  whofe  mercy  is  over  all  his 
works.  It  foars  above  all  thefe  fcanty  bounds, 
embracing  neighbours  and  ftrangers,  friends 
and  enemies  : yea,  not  only  the  good  and  gentle, 
but  alfo  the  froward  ; the  eVil  and  unthankful. 
For  he  loves  every  foul  that  God  has  made  ; 
every  child  of  man,  of  whatever  place  or  nation. 
And  yet  this  univerfal  benevolence  does  in  no 
wife  interfere  with  a peculiar  regard  for  his  rela- 
tions, friends,  and  benefabfors  ; a fervent  love 
for  his  country  ; and  the  moft  endeared  affeftion 
to  all  men  of  integrity,  of  clear  and  generous  vir* 
tue. 

* 6.  His  love  to  thefe,  fo  to  all  mankind,  is  in 
kfelf  generous  and  difinterehed  ; fprlnging  from 
no  view  of  advantage  to  himfelf,  from  no  regard 
to  profit  or  praife  : no,  nor  even  the  pleafure  of 
loving.  This  is  the  daughter,  not  the  parent  of 
his  affetiion.  By  experience  he  knows,  that 

focial 


[ 256  ] 

focial  love  fifit  mean  the  love  of  our  neighbour) 
is  abfolutely  different  from  felf-love,  even  of  the 
moft  allowable  kind.  Juft  as  different  as  the 
objeifts  at  which  they  point.  And  yet  it  is  fure, 
that,  if  they  are  under  due  regulations,  each  will 
give  additional  force  to  the  other,  till  they  mix 
together  never  to  be  divided. 

7.  And  this  univerfal,  difinterefted  love,  is 
produfUve  of  all  right  affefUons.  It  is  fruitful 
of  gentlenefs,  tendernefs,  fw^eetnefs ; of  humanity, 
courtefy,  and  affability.  It  makes  a Chriftian 
rejoice  in  the  virtues  of  all,  and  bear  a part  in 
their  happinefs  ; at  the  fame  time  that  he  fympa- 
thizes  v\ith  their  pains,  and  compalhonates  their 
infirmities.  It  creates  modefty,  condefcenfion, 
prudence,  together  with  calmnefs  and  even- 
iiefs  of  temper.  It  is  the  parent  of  generofity, 
opennefs,  and  franknefs  void  of  jealoufy  and 
fufpicion.  It  begets  candor,  and  willingnefs 
to  believe  and  hope  whatever  is  kind  and  friend- 
ly of  every  man  ; and  invincible  patience,  never 
overcome  of  evil,  but  overcoming  evil  with 
good. 

8.  The  fame  love  conftrains  him  to  convcrfe, 
not  only  with  a ftri£l  regard  to  truth,  but  with 
artlefs  fincerity  and  genuine  fimplicity,  as  one 
in  whom  there  is  no  guile.  And  not  content 
with  abftaining  from  all  fuch  expreffions  as  ate 
contrary  to  juflice  or  truth,  he  endeavours  to 
refrain  from  every  unloving  word  either  to  a 
prefent  or  of  an  abfent  perfon  : in  all  his  converfa- 

ticik:- 


[ 257  } 

don  aiming  at  this,  either  to  improve  himfeif  iii 
knowledge  or  virtue,  or  to  make  tbofe  with 
whom  he  converfes  fome  way  wifer,.  or  better^ 
or  happier  than  they  were  before. 

9.  The  fame  love  is  productive  of  all  right 
actions.  It  leads  him  into  an  earnefl  and  heady 
difcharge  of  all  focial  offices,  of  whatever  is 
due  to  relations  of  every  kind  ; to  his  friends,  to 
his  country,  and  to  any  particular  community 
whereof  he  is  a member.  It  prevents  bis  wil- 
lingly hurting  or  grieving  any  man.  It  guides 
him  into  an  uniform  pracHce  of  juftice  and 
mercy,  equally  extenfive  with  the  principle 
whence  it  flows.  It  conflrains  him  to  do 
all  poffible  good,  of  every  poffible  kind,  to  all 
men  : and  makes  him  invariably  refolved,  in 
every  circumllance  of  life,  to  do  that,  and 
that  only,  to  others  which  fuppofing  he  were 
himfeif  inthe  fame  fituation,  he  would  defire  they 
fhoiild  do  to  him. 

10.  And  as  he  is  eafy  to  others  fo  he  is  eafy 
in  himfeif.  He  is  free  from  the  painful  fwell- 
ings  of  pride,  from  the  flames  of  anger,  from 
the  impetuous  guffs  of  irregular  felf-will.  He 
is  no  longer  tortured  with  envy  or  malice,  or  with 
unreafonable  and  hurtful  defire.  He  is  no  more 
enflaved  to  the  pleafures  of  fenfe,  but  has  the 
.full  power  both  over  his  mind  and  body,  in  a 
continued  chearful  courfe  of  fobriety,  of  temper- 
ance and  chaflity.  He  knows  how  to  ufe  all 
things  in  their  place,  and  yet  is  fuperior  to  them 


r 


[ 25^  ] ; 

all.  He  (lands  above thofe  low  pleafures  ofima- 
gination,  which  captivate  vulgar  minds,  whether  1 
arifing  from  what  mortals  term  greatnefs,  or  no- 
velty,  or  beauty.  All  thefe  too  he  can  tafte,. 
and  Hill  look  upward  ; Hill  afpire  to  nobler  enjoy- 
ments. Neither  is  he  a flave  t*o  fame  : popular  j 
breath  affefls  not  him  : he  Hands  Heady,  and 
collefted  in  himfelf. 

11.  And  he  who  feeks  no  praife,  cannot  fear 
difpraife.  Cenfure  gives  him  no  uneafmefs;  ^ 
being  confcious  to  himfelf,  that  he  w'ould  not 
willingly  offend,  and  that  he  has  the  approbation  j 
of  the  Lord  of  all.  He  cannot  fear  want,  know- 
ing in  whofe  hand  is  the  earth  and  the  fulnefs  ^ 
thereof,  and  that  it  is  impoffible  for  him  to  with- 
hold from  one  that  fears  him  any  manner  of  thing  ; 
that  is  good.  He  cannot  fear  pain,  knowing 
it  will  never  be  fent,  unlefs  it  be  for  his  real  ad- 
vantage; and  that  then  his  Hrength  will  be  propor- 
tioned to  it  as  it  has  always  been  in  times  pafl.  , 
He  cannot  fear  death  ; being  able  to  truH  him  1 
he  loves  with  his  foul  as  well  as  his  body  : yea, 
glad  to  leave  the  corruptible  body  in  the  duff, 
till  it  is  raifed  incorruptible  and  immortal. 

So  that  in  honour  or  Hiame,  in  abundance  or 
want,  in  cafe  or  pain,  in  life  or  in  death,  always 
and  in  all  things  he  has  learned  to  be  content,  to 
be  eafy,  thankful,  happy. 

* 12.  He  is  happy  in  knowing  there  is  a 
God,  an  intelligent  caufe  and  Lord  of  all,  and  ' 

that  he  is  not  the  produce  either  of  blind  chance  ^ 

or  1 


[ 259  ] 

or  inexorable  neceffity.  He  is  happy  in  the  full 
afTurance  he  has  that  this  Creator  and  end  of  all 
things  is  a being  of  boundlefs  wifdom,  of  infinite 
power  to  execute  all  the  defigns  of  his  wifdom, 
and  of  no  lefs  infinite  goodnefs,  to  dire£l  all 
his  power  to  the  advantage  of  all  his  creatures. 
Nay,  even  the  confideration  of  his  immutable 
juflice,  rendering  to  all  their  due,  of  his  unfpot- 
ted  holinefs,  of  his  all-fufficiency  in  himfelf,  and 
of  that  immenfe  ocean  of  all  perfeffions,  which 
center  in  God  from  eternity  to  eternity,  is  a con- 
tinual addition  to  the  happinefs  of  a Chrilfian. 

13.  A farther  addition  is  made  thereto,  while, 
in  contemplating  even  the  things  that  furround 
him,  that  thought  llrikes  warmly  upon  his  heart, 

“ Thefe  are  thy  glorious  works,  parent  of  good 

While  he  takes  knowledge  of  the  invifible  things, 
of  God,  even  his  eternal  power  and  wifdom  in 
the  things  that  are  feen,  the  heavens,  the  earth, 
the  fowls  of  the  air,  the  lillies  of  the  field.  How 
much  more,  while,  rejoicing  in  the  conflant 
care  which  he  ftill  takes  of  the  work  of  his  own 
hand,  he  breaks  out,  in  a tranfport  of  love  and 
praife,  “ O Lord,  our  governor ! How  excellent 
is  thy  name  in  all  the  earth  ! Thou  that  hall  fet 
thy  glory  above  the  heavens!”  While  he,  as  it 
were,  fees  the  Lord  fitting  upon  his  throne,  and 
ruling  all  things  well  : while  he  obferves  the  ge- 
neral providence  of  God  co- extended  with  his 

whole 


[ 26o  ] 

whole  creation,  and  furveyy  all  the  efTe£ls  of 
it  in  the  heavens  and  earth,  as  a well-pleaf- 
ed  fpeftator ; while  he  fees  the  wifdom  and 
goodnefs  of  his  general  government  defcend- 
ing  to  every  particular;  fo  prefiding  over  the 
whole  iiniverfe,  as  over  a fingle  perfon,  fo  watch- 
ing over  every  fingle  perfon,  as  il  he  were  the 
whole  univerfe  r hcrw  does  he  exult,  when  he  re- 
views the  various  traces  of  the  almighty  goodnefs, 
in  what  has  befallen  himfelf  in  the  feveral  cir- 
cumftances  and  changes  of  his  own  life  1 All 
which,  he  now  fees,  have  been  allotted  to  him, 
and  dealt  out  in  number,  weight,  and  mea- 
fure»  With  what  triumph  of  foul,  in  furvey- 
ing  either  the  general  or  particular  providence 
of  God,  does  he  obferve  every  line  pointing 
out  an  hereafter,  every  fcene  opening  into  eter- 
nity 1 

14.  He  is  peculiarly  and  inexprefTibly  happy, 
in  the  clearefl  and  fullefl  conviflion,  “ This  all- 
powerful,  all-wife,  all-gracious  Being,  this  Gover- 
nor of  all,  loves  me.  This  lover  of  my  foul  is 
always  with  me,  is  never  abfent,  no  not  for  a 
moment.  And  I love  him ; there  is  none  in 
heaven  but  thee,  none  on  earth  that  I defire  be- 
fide  thee  ! And  he  has  given  me  to  refemble  him- 
felf, he  has  flamped  his  image  on  my  heart.  And 
I live  unto  him  ; I do  only  his  will;  I glorify 
him  with  my  body  and  my  fpirlt.  And  it  will 
r.ot  be  long  before  I lhall  die  unto  him  ; I lhall 

die 


C 261  ] 

•die  into  the  arms  of  God.  And  then  farewel  fin 
and  pain  ; then  it  only  remains,  that  1 fliould  live 
with  him  for  ever.” 

15.  This  is  the  plain,  naked  portraiture  of  a 
Chriftian.  But  be  not  prejudiced  againll  him  for 
his  name.  Forgive  his  particularities  of  opinion, 
and  (what  you  think)  fuperftitious  modes  oi  wor- 
-fhip.  Thefe  are  circumftances  but  of  ^fmall  con- 
cern ; and  do  not  enter  into  the  elfence  of  his 
charafter.  Cover  them  with  a veil  of  love,  and 
look  at  the  fubftance  ; his  tempers,  his  holinefs, 
his  happinefs. 

Can  calm  reafon  conceive  either  a more  amia- 
ble or  a more  defirable  cbaraffer  ? 

Is  it  your  orvn  ? Away  w'ith  names  i Away 
with  opinions  ! I care  not  what  you  are  called.  I 
afk  not  (it  does  not  deferve  a thought)  what  opi- 
nion you  are  of  ; fo  you  are  confcious  to  your- 
felf,  tliat  you  are  the  man,  whom  I have  been 
(however  faintly)  defcribing. 

Do  not  you  know,  you  ought  to  be  fuch  ? Is 
the  Governor  -of  the  world  well  pleafed  that  you 
are  not  ? 

Do  you  (at  leaft)  defire  it  ? I would  to  God 
that  defire  may  penetrate  your  inmolf  foul ; and 
that  you  may  have  no  reft  in  your  fpjrit,  till  you 
are  not  only  almoft,  but  altogether  a Chriftian  ! 

Se£f.  II,  1.  The  fecond  point  to  be  confidered 
•is.  What  is  real,  genuine  Chriftianity  ? Whe- 
ther 


[ 262  ] 

iher  we  fpeak  of  it  as  a principle  in  the  foul,  or 
as  a fcheme  or  fyftem  of  doftrine. 

Chrilfianity,  taken  in  the  latter  fenfe,  is,  that 
fyftem  of  doftrine,  which  defcnbes  the  charac- 
ter above  recited,  which  promifes,  it  (hall  be  mine, 
(provided  I will  not  reft  till  I attain)  and  which 
tells  me  how  I maj  attain  it, 

2.  Firft,  It  dejcribes  this  charafter  in  all  its 
parts,  and  that  in  the  moft  lively  and  affecting 
manner.  The  main  lines  of  this  picture  are  beau- 
tifully drawn  in  many  paffages  of  the  Old  Tefta- 
inent.  Thefe  are  filled  up  in  the  New,  retouched 
and  finiflieJ  with  all  the  art  of  God. 

The  fame  we  have  in  minature  more  than 
once;  particularly  in  the  thiiteenth  chapter  of 
the  former  epiflle  to  the  Corinthians,  and  in  that 
difeourfe  w’hich  St.  Matthew  records,  as  delivered 
by  our  Lord,  at  his  entrance  upon  his  public 
miniftry. 

3.  Secondly,  Chriftianity  prompts  ihxs  charac- 
ter fhall  be  mine,  if  I will  not  reft  till  I attain  it. 
This  is  promifed  both  in  the  Old  Teftament  and 
New.  Indeed  the  New  is,  in  efTeft,  all  a promife; 
feeing  every  defeription  of  the  fervants  of  God 
mentioned  therein,  has  the  nature  ofa  command  ; 
in  confequence  of  thofe  general  injunftions, 
t Be  ye  Jollowers  of  me,  as  I am  of  Chrijl : 
1 Be  ye  followers  of  them,  who  through  faith  and 
patience  inheritihe promifes.- KviHs  every  command 
has  the  force  of  a promife,  in  virtue  of  thofe  ge- 
neral 


t 1 Cor.  xi.  1 . 


Heb.  vi.  12, 


t 263  ] 

^lerai  promifes;  § A new  heart  will  / give  you, 
and  I will  put  my  Spirit  within  you,  and  cauje  you 
to  wall  in  my  Jialutes,  and  ye  Jliall  keep  my  judg- 
ments and  do  them.  ||  This  is  the  covenant  that  I 
will mq,ke  after  thoje  days,  faith  the  Lord,  / will 
put  my  laws  into  their  minds  and  write  them  in 
their  hearts.  Accordingly,  when  ills  faid,  Thou 
fialt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  foul,  and  with  all  thy  mind-,  it  is 
not  only  a direftion  what  I fhall  do,  but  a pro- 
mife  of  what  God  will  do  in  me  ; exa£tly  equi- 
valent with  what  is  written  elfewhere,  f The 
Lord  thy  God  will  circumefe  thy  heart  and  the 
heart  of  thy  feed  (alluding  to  the  cuhom  then  in 
ufej  to  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart  and 
with  all  thy  foul. 

4.  This  being  obferved,  it  will  readily  appear 
to  every  ferious  perfon,  who  reads  the  New  Tef- 
tanient  with  care,  which  the  importance  of  the 
■fubjedl  demands,  that  every  particular  branch  of 
the  preceding  charadfer  is  manifeffly  promifed 
therein  ; either  explicitly,  under  the  very  form 
■©fapromife,  or  virtually,  under  that  of  deferip- 
tion  or  command. 

5.  Chriftianity  tells  me,  in  the  third  place, 
how  I may  attain  the  promife,  namely,  by 
faith. 

But  what  is  faith  ? Not  an  opinion,  no  more 
than  it  is  a form  of  words  ; not  any'  number  of 
opinions  put  together,  be  they  ever  fo  true.  A 

ffrinff 

O 

S Deut.  XXX.  6. 


^Szek.  xxxvi.  z6,  7.7.  Heb.  viii.  to. 


[ 264  ] 

firing  of  opinions  is  no  more  Chriftian  faith,  than. 
^ firing  of  beads  is  Chriflian  hoHnefs. 

It  is  not  an  affent  to  any  opinion,  or  any  num- 
ber of  opinions.  A man  may  affent  to  three,  or 
three  and  twenty  creeds : he  may  affent  to  all 
the  Old  and  New  Teflament  (at  leafl,  as  far  as 
he  underflands  them]  and  yet  have  no  Chriflian 
faith  at  all. 

* 6.  The  faith  by  which  the  promife  is  attained 
is  reprefented  by  Chrlfiianity,  as  a power  wrought 
by  the  Almighty  in  an  immortal  fpirit,  inhabiting 
an  houfe  of  clay,  to  fee  through  that  veil  into  the 
world  of  tpirits,  into  things  invifibleand  eternal  : 
a power  to  difeern  thofe  things  which  with  eyes 
of  flefh  and  blood  no  man  hath  feen  or  can  fee  ; 
■either  by  reafon  of  their  nature,  which  (though 
they  fvirround  us  on  evert’  ftdej  is  not  perceivable 
by  thefe  grofs  fenfes  ; or  by  reafon  of  their  dif- 
tance,  as  being  yet  afar  off  in  the  bafom  of  eter- 
nity. 

7.  This  is  Chriflian  faith  in  the  general  notion 
cf  it.  In  Its  more  particular  notion  it  is,  a divine 
■evidence  or  conviftion  wrought  in  the  heart,  that 
■God  is  reconciled  to  rnt  through  his  Son:  infe- 
parably  joined  with  a confidence  in  him,  as  a gra- 
cious, reconciled  father,  as  for  all  things,  fo  efpe- 
cially  for  all  thofe  good  things  which  are  invifible 
and  eternal. 

* To  believe  (in  the  Chriflian  fenfe)  is  then  to 
vvalk  in  the  light  of  eternity  ; and  to  haye  a clear 

ft  chi 

O 


[ 2^5  .1 

of,  and  confidence  in  the  Moft  High,  re- 
conciled to  me  through  the  Son  of  his  love. 

* 8.  Now  how  highly  defirable  is  fuch  a faith, 
were  it  only  on  its  own  account  ? For  how  little 
does  the  wifeft  of  men  know  of  any  thing  more 
than  he  can  fee  with  his  eyes  ? What  clouds  and 
darknefs  cover  the  whole  fcene  of  things  invifi- 
ble  and  eternal  ? What  does  he  know  even  of 
hirafelf  as  to  his  invifible  part  ? What  of  his 
future  manner  of  exiflence  ? How  melancholy 
account  does  the  prying,  learned  philofopher, 
(perhaps  the  wifeft  and  beft  of  all  Heathens)  the 
great,  the  venerable  Marcus  Antoninus  give  of 
thefe  things  ? What  was  the  refult  of  all  his  feri- 
j ous  refearches  ? Of  his  high  and  deep  contem- 
j plations  ? “ Either  difiipation  (of  the  foul  as 
i well  as  the  body,  into  common,  unthinking  mafs) 
ji  or  re-abforption  into  the  univerfal  fire,  the  un- 
1 intelligent  fource  of  all  things:  or,  fome  un- 

[ known!  manner  of  confcious  exiftence,  after  the 
body  finks  to  rife  no  more.”  One  of  thefe  three 
I he  fuppofed  muft  fucceed  death,  but  which  he 
I had  no  light  to  determine.  Poor  Antoninus  \ 
I With  all  his  wealth,  his  honour,  his  power  ! 

I With  all  his  wifdom  and  philofophy! 

“ What  points  of  knowledge  did  he  gain  f 
That  lif  e is  [acred  all — and  vain  ! 

Sacred  how  hifh?  And  vain  how  low? 

He  could  not  ■tell — But  died  to  knowT 

Vo  L.  XVIII.  M g.  Fie 


I 


[ 266  ] 

*■  g.  He  died  to  know ! And  fo  muft  you, 
-unlefs  you  are  now  a partaker  of  Chriflian  faith. 
-O  conGderthis.  Nay,  and  confider  not  only  how 
little  you  know  of  the  im-menfity  of  the  things 
that  are  beyond  fenfe  and  time,  but  how  uncer- 
tainly do  you  know  even  that  little?  How  faintly 
’ glimmering  a light  is  that  you  have?  Can  you 
properly  be  faid  to  know  any  of  thefe  things  ? Is 
that  knowledge  any  more  than  bare  conjeflure  ? 
And  the  reafon  is  plain.  You  have  no  fenfes 
fuitable  to  invifible  or  eternal  ob^efls.  What 
defiderala  then,  efpecially  to  the  rational,  the  re- 
flefling  part  of  mankjnd  are  thefe  ? A more  ex- 
tenfive  knowledge  of  things  invifible  and  eternal; 
a greater  certainty  in  whatever  knowledge  of 
them  we  have;  and,  in  order  to  both,  faculties 
capable  of  difcerning  things  invifible. 

* 10.  Is  it  trot  fo  ? Let  impartial  reafon  fpeak. 
Does  not  every  thinking  man  want  a window, 
not  fo  much  in  his  neighbour’s,  as  in  his  own 
breaft  ? He  wants  an  opening  there,  of  whatever 
kind,  that  might  let  in  light  from  eternity.  He 
is  pained  to  be  thus  feeling  after  God  fo  darkly, 
fo  uncertainly;  to  know  fo  little  of  God,  and 
indeed  fo  little  of  any  beGde  material  objc6is.  He 
is  concerned,  that  he  muft  fee  even  that  little, 
not  direflly,  but  in  the  dim,  fullied  glafs  of  fenfe; 
and  confequeiuly  fo  imperfeftly  and  obfeurely, 
that  it  Is  all  a mere  cznigma  ftili. 

* 11.  Now  thefe  very  defiderala  faith  fupplies. 
It  gives  a more  extenGve  knowledge  of  things 

invifible. 


[ 267  ] 

invlfible,  Qiewing  what  eye  had  not  feen,  nor  ear 
dieard,  neither  could  it  before  enter  into  our 
-heart  to  conceive.  And  all  thefe  it  fhews  in  the 
cleareft  light,  with  the  fulleft  certainty  and  evi- 
dence. For  it  does  not  leave  us  to  receive  our 
notice  of  them  by  mere  reflefHon  from  the  dull 
glafs  of  fenfe  ; but  refolves  a thoufand  asnigmas 
of  the  liigheft  concern  by  giving  faculties  fuited 
to  things  invifible.  Oh  1 Who  would  not  wilh 
for  fuch  a faith,  were  it  only  on  thefe  accounts  ? 
How  much  more,  if  by  this  I may  receive  the 
tpromife,  I may  attain  all  that  holinefs  and  happi- 
•nefs  ? 

12.  So  Clirlftianity  tells  me;  and  fo  I find  it, 
may  every  real  Cln-illian  fay.  I now  am  affured 
'that  thefe  things  are  fo;  I experience  them  in 
my  own  breafl.  What  Chnllianity  (confidered 
as  a doftrine)  promifed  is  accomplifhed  in  my 
foul.  And  Chriftianity,  conficlered  as  an  inward 
'principle,  is  the  completion  of  all  thofe  promifes. 
It  is  holinefs  and  happinefs,  the  jmage  of  God 
impreft  on  a created  fpirit  ; a fountain  of  peace 
■and  love  fpringing  up  into  everlafting  life. 

I 

I Se£i:.  III.  1.  And  this  I conceive  to  be  the 
I firongefi  evidence  of  the  trutli  of  Chriftianity. 
I I do  not  undervalue  traditional  evidence.  Let  it 
I have  its  place  and  its  due  honour.  It  is  highly 
iferviceable  in  its  kind,  and  in  its  degree.  And 
I “yet  I cannot  fee  it  on  a level  with  this. 

M It  is  generally  fuppofed,  that  traditional  evi- 
1 Me  dence 


[ 268  ] 

dence  is  weakened  by  length  of  time ; as  it  muft 
neceflarily  pafs  through  fo  many  hands,  in  a con- 
tinued fuccefhon  of  ages.  But  no  length  of  time 
can  poITibly  afFe£l  the  ftrength  of  this  internal 
evidence.  It  is  equally  ftrong,  equally  new, 
through  the  courfe  of  feventeen  hundred  years. 

It  paffes  now,  even  as  it  has  done  from  the  be- 
ginning, direftly  from  God  into  the  believing 
foul.  Do  you  fuppofe  time  will  ever  dry  up  this 
flream  ? O no.  It  fhall  never  be  cut  off'. 

Labitur  & labetur  in  omne  volubilis  aroum. 

2.  Traditional  evidence  is  of  an  extremely 
complicated  nature,  neceffarily  including  fo  many 
and  fo  various  confideratlons,  that  only  men  of 
a ftrong  and  clear  underftanding  can  be  fenfible  of 
its  full  force.  On  the  contrary,  how  plain  and 
fimple  is  this?  And  how  level  to  the  loweft  capa- 
city ? Is  not  this  the  fum  ? “ One  thing  I know : 

I was  blind,  but  nosv  I fee.”  An  argument  fo 
plain,  that  a peafant,  a woman,  a child  may  feel  I 
all  its  force. 

* 3.  The  traditional  evidence  of  Chriftianity 
ftands  as  it  were  a great  way  off ; and  therefore 
although  it  fpeaks  loud  and  clear,  yet  makes  a lefs  .» 
lively  imprellion.  It  gives  us  an  account  of  what  i| 
was  tranlafted  longogo,  in  far  diftant  times  as  well  j 
as  places.  Whereas  the  inward  evidence  is  inti-  1 
mately  prefent  to  all  perfons,  at  all  times,  and  in  i 
all  places.  It  is  nigh  thee,  in  thy  mouth,  and  in  ; 

thy  I 


I 


[ ] 

thy  heart,  if  thou  believeft.  in  the  Lord  JifiS 
Chriji.  This  then  is  the  record^  this  is  the  evi- 
dence, emphatically  fo  . called.  That  GoA.  hath 
given  unto  us  eternal  life^  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son. 

* 4.  If  then  it  wer^  poffible  (which  I conceive 
it  is  not)  to  fhake- the  traditional  evidence,  of 
Chriftianity,.  flill  he  that  has  the  internal  evi- 
dence(and  every  true  believer  hath  the  witnefsor 
evidenceinhimfelfjwould  hand  firm  andunfhaken. 
Still  he  could,  fay  to  tbofe  who  were  flriking  at 
the  external  evidence,  “ Beat  on  the  fack  of 
Anaxagoras.’^  But  you  can  no  more  hurt  ?ny 
evidence  of  Ghriftianity,  than  the  tyrant  could 
hurt  the  fpirit  of  that  wife  man. 

5.  I have  fometimes  been  almoft  inclined  to 
believe,  that  the  wifdom  of  God  has,  in  moft  later 
ages,  permitted  the  external  evidence  of  Chrif- 
tianity  to  he  m.ore  or  lefs  clogged  and  incum- 
bered for  this  very  end,  that  men  (of  refleflion 
efpecially)  might  not  altogether  reft  there,  but  be 
conftrained  to  look  into  themfelves  alfo,  and  at- 
tend to  the  light  fhining  in  their  hearts. 

Nay,  it  feems  (if  it  be  allowed  for  us  to  pry  fo 
far  into  the  reafons  of  the  divine  difpenfations) 
that  particularly  in  this  age,  God  fuffers  all  kind 
of  objeftions  to  be  raifed  againft  the  traditional 
evidence  of  Chriftianity,  that  men  of  underftand-- 
ing,  though  unwilling  to  give  it  up,  yet,  at  the 
fame  time  they  defend  this  evidence,  may  not 
reft  the  whole  ftrength  of  their  caufe  thereon,  but 
feek  a deeper  and  firmer  fupport  for  it. 

M3  « 6.  With- 


[ 270  ] 

* 6.  Without  this,  I cannot  but  doubt,  wlieth^ 
they  can  long  maintain  rheir  caufe  ; whether,  if 
they  do  not  obey  the  loud  call  of  God,  and  lay  far 
more  flrefs  than  they  have  hitheito  done,  on  this 
internal  evidence  of  Chriflianity,  they  will  not, 
one- after  another,  give  up  the  external,  and  (in 
heart  at  lead)  go  over  to  thofe  whom  they  are 
now  contending  with  ; fo  that  in  a century  or 
two  the  people  of  England  will  be  fairly  divided 
into  real  Deifls  and  real  Chriflians. 

And  I apprehend  this  would  be  no  lofs  at  all, 
but  rather  an  advantage  to  the  Chtiflfan  caufe;  nay, 
perhaps  it  would  be  the  fpeedieft,  yea,  the  only 
effeftual  way  of  bringing  all  reafonable  Deifls  to 
be  Chriflians. 

* 7.  May  I be  permitted  to  fpeak  freely  ? May 
I,  without  offence,  afk  ol  you  that  are  called 
Gbriftians,  what  real  lofs  would  you  fuftain  in. 
giving  up  your  prefent  opinion,  that  the  Chrif- 
tian  fyflem  is  of  God  ? Though  you  bear  the 
name,  you  are  not  Chriflians ; you  have  neither 
Chriflian  faith  nor  love.  You  have  no  divine 
evidence  of  things  unfeen  ; you  have  not  en- 
tered into  the  holieft  by  the  blood  of  JeJiis. 
You  do  not  love  God  with  all  your  heart ; nei- 
ther do  you  love  your  neighbour  as  yourfelf. 
You  are  neither  happy  nor  holy.  You  have  not 
learned  in  every  Hate  therewith  to  be  content  ; 
to  rejoice  evermore,  even  in  want,  pain,  death; 
and  In  every'  thing  to  give  thanks.  You  are  not 
holy  in  heart ; fuperior  to  pride,  to  anger,  to 

fooliflt 


[ 27T  3 

foolifli  defires.  Neither  are  you  holy  in  life : 
you  do  not  walk  as  Chrijl  alfo  walked.  Does  not 
the  main  o^your  Chriftianjty  lie  in  your  opinion? 
Decked  with  a few  outward  obfervances  ? For  as 
to  morality,  even  honeft  Heathen  morality,  (O 
let  me  utter  a melancholy  truth)  many  of  thofe 
whom  you  ftile  Delfts,  there  is  reafon  to  fear  have 
far  more  of  it  than  you. 

* 8.  Go  on  gentlemen  and  profper.  Shame 
thefe  nominal  Chriftians  out  of  that  poor  fuper- 
ftition  which  they  call  Chriftianity.  Reafon, 
rally,  laugh  them  out  of  their  dead,  empty  forms, 
void  of  fpirit,  of  faith,  of  love.  Convince  them, 
that  fuch  mean  pageantry  (for  fuch  it  manifeftly 
is,  if  there  is-  nothing  in  the  heart  correfpondent 
with  the  outward  fliew)  is  abfolutely  unworthy, 
you  need  not  fay  of  God,  but  even  of  any  man 
that  is  endued  with  common  underftanding. 
Shew  them,  that  while  they  are  endeavouring  to 
pleafe  God  thus,  they  are  only  beating  the  air. 
Know  your  time ; prefs  on  ; pufh  your  viftories, 
till  you  have  conquered  all  that  know  not  God. 
And  then  He,  whom  neither  they  nor  you  know 
now,  fhall  rife  and  gird  himfelf  with  ftrength,  and 
go  forth  in  his  almighty  love,  and  fweetly  con- 
quer you  all  together. 

* 9.  O that  the  time  were  come  1 How  do  I 
long  for  you  to  be  partakers  of  the  exceeding  great 
and  precious  promife!  How  am  I pained  when 
I hear  any  of  you  uling  thofe  filly  terms,  which 
the  men  of  form  have  taught  you,  calling  the 

M 4 meatioii 


[ *72  ] 

mention  of  the  only  thing  you  want,  Cant!  The 
deepeft  wifdom,  the  higheft  happinefs,  Enthu- 
Jiafml  What  ignorance  is  this  ? How  extremely 
defpicable  would  it  make  you  in  the  eyes  of  any 
but  a Chriftian  ? But  he  cannot  defpife  you,  who 
loves  you  as  his  own  foul,  who  is  ready  to  lay 
down  his  life  for  your  fake. 

10.  Perhaps  you  will  fay,  “ But  this  internal 
evidence  of  Chriflianity  affefls  only  thofe  in 
whom  the  promife  is  fulfilled.  It  is  no  evidence 
to  me''  There  is  truth  in  this  objeflion.  It  does 
affe£l  them  chiefly  ; but  it  does  not  affect  them 
only.  It  cannot,  in  the  nature  of  things,  be  fo 
ftrong  an  evidence  to  others  as  it  is  to  them.  And  , 
yet  it  may  bring  a degree  of  evidence,  it  may  re- 
fle£l  fome  light  on  you  alfo. 

For,  firft.  You  fee  the  beauty  and  lovelinefs  of 
Chriflianity,  when  it  is  rightly  underflood.  And 
you  are  fure  there  is  nothing  to  be  defired  in 
comparifon  of  it. 

Secondly,  You  know  the  feripture  promifes 
this,  and  fays.  It  is  attained  by  faith,  and  by  no 
other  way. 

Thirdly,  You  fee  clearly  how  defirable  Chrif- 
tian  faith  is,  even  on  account  of  its  own  intrinfic 
value. 

Fourthly,  You  are  a witnefs,  that  the  holinefs 
and  happinefs  above  deferibed  can  be  attained  no 
other  way.  The  more  you  have  laboured  after 
virtue  and  happinefs,  the  more  convinced  you  are 
of  this.  Thus  far  then  you  need  not  lean  upon 

other 


C 273  ] 

other  men  : thus  far  you  have  perfonal  experi- 
ence. 

Fifthly,  What  reafonable  alTurance  can  you 
have  of  things  whereof  you  have  not  perfonal 
experience  ? Suppofe  the  quellion  were.  Can 
the  blind  be  reftored  to  fight  ? This  you  have  not 
yourfelf  experienced.  How  then  will  you  know 
thatfuch  a thing  ever  was?  Can  there  be  an  eafier 
or  furcr  way  than  to  talk  with  one  or  fome  num- 
ber of  men  who  were  blind,  but  are  now  refiored 
to  fight  ? They  cannot  be  deceived  as  to  the  faft 
in  quellion,  the  nature  of  the  thing  leaves  no 
room  for  this.  And  if  they  are  honell  men 
(which  you  may  learn  from  other  circumllances) 
they  will  not  deceive  you. 

* Now  transfer  this  to  the  cafe  before  us ; and 
thofe  who  were  blind,  but  now  fee  ; thofe  who 
were  Tick  many  years,  but  now  are  healed  ; thofe  _ 
who  were  miferable,  but  now  are  happy,  will 
afford alfo  a very  llrong  evidence  of  the  truth 
of  Chrillianity  ; as  llrong  as  can  be  in  the  nature 
of  things,  till  you  experience  it  in  your  own  foul. 
And  this,  though' it  be  allowed  they  are  but  plain 
men,  and,  in  general,  of  weak  underllanding ; 
nay,  though  fome  of  them  Ihould  be  miilakcn  in 
other  points,  and  hold  opinions  which  cannot  be 
defended. 

II.  All  this  may  be  allowed  concerning  the 
primitive  fathers : I mean  particularly  Clemens  ■ 
Rdmanus,  Jgnatius,  Polycarp,  Jujlin  Martyr,  , 
Irinceus,  Origett,  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  Cyprian', 

M 5 


C 274  3 

to  whom  I would  add  Macarius  and  Ephraim 
Syrus. 

I allow  that  fome  of  thefe  had  not  ftrong  na- 
lural  fenfe,  that  few  of  them  had  much  learning, 
and  none  the  aflillances  which  our  age  enjoys,  in 
fome  refpefts  above  all  that  went  before. 

Hence  I doubt  not  but  whoever  will  be  at  the 
pains  of  reading  over  their  writing  for  that  poor 
end,  will  find  many  miftakes,  many  weak  fuppo- 
fitions,  and  many  ill-drawn  conclufions. 

* 12.  And  yet  I exceedingly  reverence  them 
as  well  as  their  writings,  and  efteem  them  very 
highly  in  love.  I reverence  them  becaufe  they 
were  Chriftians,  fuch  Chriftians  as  are  above  de- 
fcribed.  And  I reverence  their  writings,  becaufe 
they  defcribe  true  genuine  Chriflianity  ; and  di- 
Te6):  us  to  the  flrongeft  evidence  of  the  Chriftian 
doftrine. 

Indeed  in  addrefiing  the  Heathens  of  thofe 
times  they  intermix  other  arguments;  particularly, 
that  drawn  from  the  numerous  miracles,  which 
were  then  performed  in  the  church  ; which  they 
needed  only  to  open  their  eyes  and  fee  daily 
wrought  in  the  face  of  the  fun. 

But  ftill  they  never  relinquifli  this ; “ What 
the  fcripture  promifes  I fnjoy.  Come  and  fee 
what  Chriflianity  has  done  here ; and  acknow- 
ledge it  is  of  God.” 

* I reverence  thefe  antient  Chriftians  (with  all 
their  failings)  the  more,  becaufe  I fee  fo  few 
Chriftians  now  ; becaufe  I read  fo  little  in  the 

writings 


C 275  j 

writings  of  later  times,  and  hear  fo  little  of  ge- 
nuine Chrillianity  ; and  becaufe  moft  of  the  mo- 
dern Chriftians  (fo  called)  not  content  with  being 
wholly  Ignorant  of  it,  are  deeply  prejudiced 
againft  it,  calling  it  enthuiiafm,  and  1 know  not 
what. 

That  the  God  of  power  and  love  may  make 
both  them,  and  you,  and  me,  fuch  Chriftians  as 
thofe  fathers  were,  is  the  earneft  prayer  of. 

Rev.  Sir,  your  real  friend  and fervanU, 
fan.  24,  1748-g. 


MS. 


ALETimx 


[ 276  ] 


A 

letter 

TO  THE  RIGHT  REVEREND 

The  Lord  Bifhop  of  Glocester. 

Occafioned  by  his  traft  on  the 

OFFICE  and  OPERATIONS 

OF  THE 

HOLY  SPIRIT. 


My  Lord, 

Your  lordlhlp  weil  obferves,  “ to  employ 
buffoonery  in  the  fervice  of  religion  is  to 
violate  the  majefty  of  truth,  and  to  deprive  it  of 
a fair  hearing.  To  examine,  men  muft  be 
Jerious\”  I will  endeavour  to  be  fo,  in  all  the 

following 


d Preface,  p.  13, 


[ 27;  3 

following  pages.  And  the  rather,  not  only 
becaufe  I am  writing  to  a perfon  who  is  fo  far, 
and  in  fo  many  refpefis,  my  fuperior,  but  alfo 
becaufe  of  the  importance  of  the  fubjeft.  For  is 
the  queftion  only,  What  I am  ? A madman,  or 
a man  in  his  fenfes  ? A knave,  or  an  honeft  man  ? 
No  : this  is  only  brought  in  by  way  of  illuftra- 
tion.  The  queftion  is,  ofthe  office  and  opera- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit  ; with  which  the  doHrine 
of  the  New-Birth,  and  indeed  the  whole  of  real 
religion  is  connefled.  On  a fubjeft  of  fo  deep 
concern,  I defire  to  be  ferious  as  death.  But,  at 
the  fame  time,  your  Lordffiip  will  permit  me, 
to  ufe  great  plainnefs.  And  this  I am  the  more, 
emboldened  to  do,  becaufe  by  naming  my  name 
your  Lordffiip,  as  it  were,  condefcends  to  meet 
•me  on  even  ground. 

I ffiall  confider,  firft,  what  your  Lordffiip 
advances  concerning  me  ; , and  then  what  is  ad- 
vanced concerning  the  operations  ofthe  Holy, 
Spirit. 

I.  Firft,  concerning  me.  It  is  true,  I am  . 
here  dealing  in  crambe  repetita  : reciting  objec- 
tions which  have  been  urged  and  anfwered  an 
hundred  times.  But  as  your  Lordffiip  is  pleafed 
to  repeat  them  again,  I ajn  obliged  to  repeat  the 
anfwers.  . 

' Your  Lordffiip  begins  j:,  “ If  the  Jalfe prophet 
pretend  to  fome  extraordinary  of  the 

fpiritj 


tp-  II?.. 


[ 278  ] 

fpirit,  we  are  direfted  to  try  that  fpirit  by  James 
chap.  iii.  17.”  I anfwer,  i.  (as  I have  done 
many  times  before)  I do  not  pretend  to  any 
extraordinary  meafure  of  the  fpirit.  I pretend  to 
no  other  meafure  of  it  than  may  be  claimed  by 
every  Chriftian  minifter.  2.  Where  are  we 
direfted  to  try  prophets  by  this  text  ? How  does 
it  appear,  that  it  was  given  for  any  fuch  purpofe  ? 
It  is  certain,  we  may  try  Chrijlians  hereby,  whe- 
ther they  are  real  or  pretended  ones.  But  I 
know  not  that  either  St.  James  or  any  other 
infpired  writer,  gives  us  the  leafl:  h.\ni  oUrying 
prophets  thereby. 

Your  lordfliip  adds,  “ In  this  rule  or  direftion 
for  the  trial  of  fpirits^  the  marks  are  to  be  appli- 
ed only  negatively.  The  man  in  whom  they  are 
not  found,  hath  not  the  zinfdom  from  above.  But 
we  are  not  to  conclude,  that  he  has  it,  in  whom 
any  or  all  of  them  are  foundt.”  We  are  not  to 
conclude,  that  he  is  a prophet:  for  the  apoftle 
fays  nothing  about  prophets.  But  may  we  not 
conclude,  the  man  in  whom  all  thefe  are  found, 
has  the  wifdom  from  above  ? Surely  we  may  : for 
thefe  are  the  effential  parts  of  that  wifdom.  And 
Gan  he  have  all  the  parts,  and  not  have  the  whole  ? 

Is  not  this  enough  to  fhew,  that  the  apoftle  is 
here  giving  “ a fet  of  marks,  not  to  deteft  impof- 
torfrophetsl'  but  impofor-Chrifians?  Thofe 
that  impofe  either  upon  themfelves  or  others,  as 
if  they  were  Chriftians,  when  they  are  not  ? 


■t  p.  ii8< 


[ 279  3 

In  what  follows,  I fhall  fimply  confider  the  ar>- 
gument,  without  direftly  addreffing  your  lordlhipa. 

“ Apply  thefe  marks  to  the  features  of  modern 
fanatics,  efpecially  Mr.  John  Wefey.  He  has 
laid  claim  to  almofl  every  apofolic  gift,  in  as full 
and  ample  a manner  as  they  were  poffelfed  of 
old^.’’ 

The  miraculous  gifts  bellowed  upon  the  apof- 
tles  are  enumerated  in  two  places.  Firll,  Mark 
xvi.  17,  18.  In  my  name  they  Jhall  ccjl  out  de- 
vils : they  fall /peak  with  new  tongues : they  Jhall 
take  up  ferpents : if  they  drink  any  deadly  things 
it Jhall  not  hurt  them  : they Jhall  lay  hands  on  the 
fck,  and  they  Jhall  recover.  Second,  i.Cor.xn. 
8,  9,  10.  To  one  is  given  the  word  of  wifdom,  to 
another  the  word  of  knowledge,  to  another  faith,  to 
another  the  gifts  of  healing,  to  another  the  working, 
of  7niracles,  to  another  prophecy,  to  another  the 
difcernment  of  fpirits,  to  another  tongues,  to  ano- 
ther the  interpretation  of  tongues. 

Do  “ I lay  claim  to  almofl  every  one  of  thefe^ 
in  as  full  and  a?nple  a manner  as  they  were  pof- 
felTed  of  old  ?” 

Five  of  them  are  enumerated  in  the  former  ca- 
talogue  : to  three  of  which,  fpeaking  with  new 
tongues,  taking  up  ferpents,  drinking  deadly  things, 
it  is  not  even  pretended,  I lay  any  claim  at  all. 
In  the  latter,  nine  are  enumerated.  And  as  to 
feven  of  thefe,  none  has  yet  feen  good  to  call 
me  in  queftion  : miraculous  wifdom,  or  knowledge.^ 

or 


+ p.  119. 


[ 28o  ] 

m faith,  prophecy,  difcernment  of  fpirits,  ftrange 
tongues,  and  the  interpretation  of  tongues.  What 
becomes  then  of  the  affertion,  that  I lay  claim  to 
ahrwf  every  one  of  them,  in  the  moft full  and 
ample  manner  ? 

Do  I lay  claim  to  any  one  of  them  ? To  prove, 
that  I do,  my  own  words  are  produced,  extrafted 
from.an  account  of  the  occurrences  of  about  fix* 
teen  years. 

I fliall  fet  them  down,  naked  and  unadorned. 
1.  May  13,  1740.  “ The  devil  ftirred  up  his 

fervants  to  make  all  ihe  noife  they  could.  2. 
j\Iay  3,  1741.  I explained  to  a vaft  multitude  of 
people,  luhat  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but 
to  do jufly,  to  love  mercy  and  to  walk  humbly  with 
thy  God.  The  devil’s  children  fought  valiantly 
for  their  mafter,  that  his  kingdom  fhould  not  be 
defiroyed.  And  many  Hones  fell  on  my  right 
hand  and  my  left.  3.  April  3,  1740.  Some  or 
other  of  the  children  of  Belial,  had  laboured  to 
difturb  us  feveral  nights  before.  Now  all  the 
ftreet  was  filled  with  people,  flvouting,  curfing, 
fwearing,  and  ready  to  fwaliow  the  ground 
with  rage  5.  4.  fune  27,  1747.  I found  only 

one  perfon  among  them,  who  knew  the  love  of 
God,  before  my  brother  came.  No  wonder  the 
devil  was  fo  Hill  : for  his  goods  were  in  peace. 
5.  April  29,  1753-  I preached  at  Durham  to  a 
quiet,  ftupid  congregation  t.  6.  May  9,  1730. 
l^was  a little  fuprized,  at  fome  who  were  buffet- 
ed 

? p.  120.  + p.  I2». 


[ 28i  ] 

ed  of  Satan  in  an  unufual  manner,  by  fuch  a fpirlt 
of  laughter,  as  they  could  in  no  wife  refill.  I 
could  fcarce  have  believed  the  account  they 
gave  me  had  I not  known  the  fame  thing  tenor 
eleven  years  ago,  “ when  both  my  brother  and 
I were  feized  in  the  fame  manner.”  (It  any  man 
calls  this  hyllerics,  I am  not  concerned  ; I think 
and  let  think.)  7.  May  21,  1740.  In  the  even- 
ing, fuch  a fpirit  of  laughter  was  among  us,  that 
many  were  much  offended.  But  the  attention 

of  all  was  foon  fixt  on  poor  L 5 , whom 

we  all  knew  to  be  no  dilfembler.  One  fo  vio- 
lently and  varioufly  torn  of  the  evil  one,  did  I 
never  fee  before.  Sometimes  fhe  laughed  till 
almoll  ftrangled  ; then  broke  out  into  curfing  and 
blafpheming.  At  lall  fhe  faintly  called  on  Chrill 
to  help  her.  And  the  violence  of  her  pangs 
ceafed.”  (Let  any  who  pleafe  impute  this  like- 
wife  to  hyllerics.  Only  permit  me  to  , think 
otherwife.)  8.  “ May  17,  1740.  I found  more 
and  more  undeniable  proofs,  that  we  have  need 
to  watch  and  pray  every  moment.  Outward 
trials  indeed  were  now  removed.  But  fo  much 
the  more  did  inward  trials  abound ; and  y-  one- 
member fuffered,  all  the  members  fuffered  with  it. 
So  llrange  a fympathy  did  I never  obferve  before 
whatever  confiderable  temptation  fell  on  any  one, 
unaccountably  fpreadlng  itfelf  to  the  reft  ; fo 
that  exceeding  few  were  able  to  efcape  itt” 

I know  not  what  tbefe  eight  quotations  prove, 

but 


+ p.  J82,  123. 


[ 2S2  ] 

but  tliat  I believe  the  devil,  ftill  varioully  tempts 
and  troubles  good  men  while  he  -xorks  with 
energy  in  the  children  of  difobedience.  Certainly 
they  do  not  prove  that  I lay  claim  to  any  of  the 
preceding  gifts.  Let  us  fee  whither  any  more 
is  proved,  by  the  ten  next  quotations,  i.  “ So 
many  living  witneffes  hath  God  given,  that 
his  hand  is  ftill  ftretched  out  to  heal,”  (namely, 
the  fouls  of  fmners  as  the  whole  paragraph  fixes 
the  fenfe,)  “ and  that  figns  and  wonders  are 
even  now  wrought +,”  namely  in  the  conver- 
Con  of  the  greateft  finners.  2.  “ Among  the 
poor  colliers  of  Placey,  Jo.  Lane,  then  nine 
or  ten  years  old,  was  one  of  the  firil  that  found 
peace  with  God  :f.-  3.  Mrs.  Nozuers  faid,  her 
little  fon  appeared  to  have  a continual  fear  of 
God,  and  an  awful  fenfe  of  his  prefence — —A 
few  days  fince  (fhe  faid)  he  broke  out  into  prayers 
aloud,  and  faid,  “ I fhall  go  to  heaven  foon.”~ 
This  child  (when  he  began  to  have  the  fear  of 
God)  was  (as.  his  parents  faid)  juft  three  years 
old.  4.  I did  receive  that  “ account  of  the  young 
woman  of  Manchejler  from  her  own  mouth.” 
But  I pafs  no  judgment  on  it,  good  or  bad : 
nor  5.  On  “ the  trance,  §”  (as  her  mother 
called  it)  of  S.  T.  neither  denying,  nor  affirm- 
ing the  truth  of  it.  6.  “ You  deny  that  God 
does  work  thofe  effefls  ; at  leaft  that  he  works 
them  in  this  manner : I affirm  both.  I have 
feen  very  many  perfons  changed  in  a moment, 

from. 


t p.  1241  f itidi 


§ p.  126» 


[ 283  1 

irom  the  fpirit  of  fear,  horror,  defpair,  to  the- 

fpirit  of  love  joy  and  praife. In  feveral  of 

them  this  change  was  wrought  in  a dream,  or 
during  a ftrong  reprefenlation  to  their  mind,  of 
Chrifl:  either  on  the  crofs,  or  in  glory 

“ But  here  the  fymptoms  of  grace  and  of 
perdition  are  interwoven  and  confounded  with 
one  another  5.”  No.  Tho’  light  followed 
darknefs  yet  they  were  not  interwoven,  much 
lefs  confounded  with  each  other.  /.  “ But 
fome  imputed  the  work  to  the  force ’of  imagina- 
tion, or  even  to  the  delufion  of  the  devilt.’* 
They  did  fo  ; which  made  me  fay,  8.  “ I fear 
we  have  grieved  the  fpirit  of  the  jealous  God» 
by  queftioning  his  work  j;.”  9.  “ Yet  he  fays 
himfelf,  thefe  fymptoms  I can  no  more  impute 
to  any  natural  caufe,  than  to  the  Spirit  God.  I 
make  no  doubt,  it  was  Satan  tearing  them,  aa 
they  were  coming  § to  Chrifl.”  But  theft  fymp^ 
toms,  and  the  work  mentioned  before,  are  wholly 
different  things.  The  work  fpoken  of  is  the  con- 
verfion  of  finners  to  God  : thefe  fymptoms  are 
cries,  and  bodily  pain.  The  very  next  inflance 
makes  this  plain.  10.  “ I vifited  a poor  old 
woman.  Her  trials  had  been  uncommon:  in- 
expreflible  agonies  of  mind,  joined  with  all  forts 
of  bodily  pain  : not,  it  feemed,  from  any  natural 
caufe,  but  the  direft  operation  1||1  of  Satan.” 

Neither 

|]  p,  127,.  S p,  128,  f IbiJ.  f ibid.  t§  P» 
lilt  P*  130s 


[ 284  ] 

Neither  do  anyofthofe  quotations  prove,  that 
I lay  claim  to  any  iniraclous  gx^x. 

“ Such  was  the  evangelic  ftate  of  things, 
when  Mr.  IF.  firft  entered  on  this  miniftiy  : 
who  feeing  himfelf  furrounded  with  fubjefls,  fo 
harmonioiifly  difpofed,  thus  triumphantly  exults.” 

■ To  illuftrate  this,  let  us  add  the  date. 

“ Such  was  the  evangelic  flate  of  things,  yJug. 
9>  ^73^'  (On  that  day,  I preached  that  fermon  ;) 
W’hen  Mr.  W.  JirJl  entered  on  this  minijlry." 
Nay,  that  was  in  the  year  1738.  So  I trium- 
phed, hecaufe  I faw  what  would  he  twelve  years 
after  ! 

Let  us  fee  what  the  ten  next  quotations 
prove.  1.  “ In  applying  thefe  words,  / came 
not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  [inner s to  repentance, 
my  foul  was  fo  enlarged,  that  methought  I could 
have  cried  out,  (in  another  fenfe  than  poor,  vain 
Archimedes ) Give  me  where  to  hand  and  I will 
fhake  thej  earth.”  I meant  neither  more  nor 
lefs,  though  I will  not  juftify  the  ufe  of  fo  ftrong 
an  exprefhon)  than  I was  fo  deeply  penetrated 
with  a fenfe  of  the  love  of  God  tofinners,  that 
it  feemed,  if  I could  have  declared  it  to  all  the 
world,  they  could  not  hut  he  moved  thereby. 

“ Here  then  was  a feene  well  prepared  for  a 
good  a£l;or,  and  excellently  Jitted,  up  for  the  part 
he  was  to  + play.”  But  how  came  fo  good  an 
a£l;or  to  begin  playing  the  part,  twelve  years  be- 
fore the  feene  was  fitted  up  ? 

“ He 

t ?•  ‘30*  + P- 


[ 285  ] 

“ He  fets  out  with  declaring  his  miffion.  s. 

I cried  aloud,  All  things  are  ready  : come  ye  to  the 
marriage.  I then  delivered  my  melTage.”  And 
does  not  every  minifter  do  the  fame  whenever  he 
preaches  ? 

But  how  is  this  ? “ He  fets  out  with  declaring 
his  miffion  ?”  Nay,  but  this  was  ten  years  after 
my  fetting  out  ! 

3.  “ My  heart  was  not  wholly  refigned.  Yet 
I know  he  heard  my  voiced.  4.  The  longer  I 
fpoke  the  more  ftrength  I had:  till  at  twelve,  I 
was  as  one  refreffied  with  wine  t.  5.  I explain- 
ed the  nature  of  inward  reJigicii,  words  flowing 
upon  me  fafter  than  I could  lpeak§.  6.  I intend- 
ed to  have  given  an  exhortation  to  the  fociety. 
But  as  foou  as  we  met,  the  Spirit  of  fupplication 
fell  upon  us,  (on  the  congregation  as  well  as  me) 
fo  that  I could  hardly  do  any  thing  but  pray  and 
give  I thanks.’’  I believe  every  true  Chriflian 
may  experience  all  that  is  contained  in  thefe  three 
inflances.  7.  “ The  fphit  of  prayer  was  fo  pour- 
ed upon  us  all,  that  we  could  only  fpeak  to  God5. 
;8.  Many  were  feated  on  a wall,  which  in  the 
middle  of  the  fermon  fell  down  ; but  not  one 
was  huit  atill.  Nor  was  there  any  interruption, 
either  of  my  fpeakrng,  or  of  the  attention  of  the 
hearerstt.  9.  The  mob  had  jufl  broke  open  the 
doors,  and  while  they  bund  in  at  one  door,  we 
walked  out  at  the  other.  Nor  did  one  man 
take  airy  notice  of  us,  though  we  were  within  five 

yards' 

■i- p.  133.  d p.  133.  3 ibid.  1[  ibid.  5 ibid.  ++  p,  134. 


[ 286  ] 

yards  of  + each  other.”  The  fa£l  was  juft  fo.  I 
do  not  attempt  to  account  for  it;  becaufe  I can- 
not. lo.  “ The  next  miracle  was  on  his  friends.” 
They  were  no  friends  of  mine.  1 had  feen  few 
of  them  before  in  my  life.  Neither  do  I fay  or 
think  it  was  any  miracle  at  all,  that  they  were 
all  “ filent  while  I fpake;”  or  that  “ the  mo- 
ment I had  done,  the  chain  fell  off,  and  they  all 
began  talking  at  once.” 

Do  any,  or  all  of  thefe  quotations  prove,  that 
I “ lay  claim  to  almofl  every  miraculous  gift  ?” 

Will  the  eight  following  quotations  prove  any 
more?  i.  “ Some  heard  perfectly  well  on  the 
fide  of  the  oppofite  hill,  which  was  feven-fcore 
yards  from  the  place  where  j:  1 flood.”  I believe 
they  did,  as  it  was  a calm  day,  and  the  hill  rofe 
gradually  like  a theatre.  2.  “ What  I here  aver 
is  the  naked  fa£l.  Let  every  one  account  for  it 
.as  he  fees  good.  My  horfe  w'as  exceeding  lame. 
And  my  head  ached  much.  I thought,  cannot 
God  heal  man  or  heaft,  by  means,  or  wdthout  ? 
Immediately  my  wearinefs  and  head-ache  ceafed, 
and  my  horfe’s  lamenefs  in  the  fame  inftanijl.”  It 
was  fo  : and  I believe  thoufands  of  ferious  Chrif- 
tians,  have  found  as  plain  anfwers  to  prayer  as 
this.  3.  William  Kirkman'‘‘i  ^ cafe  proves  only, 
that  God  does  what  pleafes  him  ; not  that  I make 
myfelf  either  “ a great  faint,  or  a gieat  phyfi- 
-cian.”  4.  “ R.  A.  was  freed  at  once,  w’iihout 
any  human  means,  from  a dlflemper  naturally  in- 

cura- 

+ P-  ‘35-  f ibid,  U p- *3®'  '^P'*37- 


t 287  ] 

curable:|:.”  He  was'  but  it  was  before  I knew 
him.  So  what  is  that  to  me  ? 5.  I found  Mr, 
Lunell  in  a violent  fever.  He  revived  the  mo- 
ment he  faw  me,  and  began  to  recover  from  that 
time.  Perhaps  for  this  alfo  was  I fent.^”  I mean, 
perhaps  this  was  one  end,  for  which  the  provi- 
dence of  God  brought  me  thither  at  that  time.  6, 

■“  In  the  evening -I  called  upon  Ann  Calcut.  She 
had  been  fpeechlefs  for  fome  time.  But  almoft 
as  foon  as  we  began  to  pray,  God  reftored  her 
fpeech.  And  from  that  hour  the  fever  left  her. 
,7.  I vifited  feveral  ill  of  the  fpotted  fever, 
which  had  been  extremely  mortal.  But  God 
had  faid,  Hitherio  Jhalt  thou  come.  I believe 
there  was  not  one  with  whom  we  were,  but  he 
recovered!.  8.  Mr.  Meyrick  had  been  fpeech- 
lefs  and  fenfelefs  for  fome  time.  A few  of  us 
joined  in  prayer.  Before  we  had  done,  his  fenfe 
and  his  fpeech  returned.  Others  may  account 
for  this  by  natural  caufes.  I believe  this  is  the 
power  of  Godl.” 

But  what  does  all  this  prove  ? Not  that  I 
claim  any  gift  above  other  ' men  ; but  only  that  I 
believe  God  now  hears  and  anfwers  prayer,  even 
beyond  the  ordinary  courfe  of  nature.  Other- 
wife  the  clerk  was  in  the  right,  who  (in  order  to 
prevent  the  fanaticifm  of  his  retfor)  told  him, 

•'  Sir,  you  fhould  not  pray  for  fair  weather  yet  ; 
for  the  moon  does  not  change  till  Saturday.  ’ 

While  the  two  accountsf,  which  are  next  re- 
cited, 

1 46. 


* p.  138.  § ibid.  -II  -p.  139.  1 ibid.  t p.  14^ 


[ 288  j 

cited,  lay  before  me,  a venerable  old  clerg\’maa 
■calling  upon  me,  I alked  him,  “ Sir,  would  you 
advife  me  to  publifh  thefe  flrange  relations,  or 
not  ?”  He  anfwered,  “ Are  you  fuie  of  the  faffs  ?’’ 
I replied,  “ As  fure  as  that  I am  alive.”  “ Then 
“ faid  he,  publilh  them  in  God’s  name,  and  be 
“ not  careful  about  the  event.” 

The  fhort  of  the  cafe  is  this.  Two  young  wo- 
men were  tormented  of  the  devil,  in  an  uncom- 
mon manner.  Several  ferious  perfons  defired 
my  brother  and  me  to  pray  with  them.  We  (with 
many  others)  did,  and  they  were  delivered.  But 
where  mean  lime  were  “ the  exorcifms  in  form, 
according  to  the  Roman  faihion  ?”  I never  ufed 
them.  I never  faw  them.  I know  nothing  about 
tliem. 

“ Such  were  the  bleffings  which  Mr.  TV.  dij'- 
irihutt^d  among  his  friends.  For  his  enemies  he 
had  in  {lore,  k\\c. judgments  of  heavent.”  Did  I 
then  ever  dijlribule  or  profefs  to  diflribute  thefe  ? 
Do  I claim  any  fuch  power  ? This  is  the  prefent 
quell  ion.  Let  us  calmly  confider  the  eight  quo- 
tations brought  to  prove  it. 

t.  “ I preached  at  Idailajlon,  late  a den  of 
lions.  But  the  ficrccll  of  them  God  has  called 
away,  by  a train  of  ftirprizing  + llrokes.”  But 
not  by  me.  I was  not  there.  2.  I preached  at 
R.  late  a place  of  furious  riot  and  perfecution  ; 
but  quiet  and  calm,  fince  the  bitter  re8or  is  gone 
to  give  an  account  of  himfeif  to  God  §.  3. 

Hence 

f p.  144.  + ibid.  ^ p.  145. 


C 289  ] 

Hence  we  rode  to  T n,  where  the  mlnifter 

was  {lowly  recovering  from,a  violent  fit  of  the 
palfy  with  which  he  was  {truck  immediately  after 
he  had  been  preaching  a virulent  fermon  X againft 

the  Methodijis.  4.  The  cafe  |]  of  Mr.  W n 

was  dreadful  indeed,  and  too  notorious  to  be 
denied.  5.  One  of  the  chief  of  thofe  who  came 
to  make  the  dilturbance  on  the  firft  inftant  hanged 
himfelf  6.  I was  quite  furprized  when  I 
heard  Mr.  R.  preach : that  foft,  fmooth,  tune- 
ful voice,  which  he  fo  often  employed  to  blaf- 
pheme  the  work  of  God,  was  loft,  without 
hope  of  recovery  S.  7.  Mr.  C.  fpoke  fo  much 
in  favour  of  the  rioters,  that  they  were  all  dif- 
charged.  A few  days  after,  walking  over  the 
fame  field,  he  dropt  down,  and  fpoke  no 
more.i” 

And  what  is  the  utmoft  that  can  be  inferred 
from  all  thefe  paffages  ? That  I believe  thefe 
things  to  have  been' judgments.  What  if  I did  ? 
To  believe  things  are  judgments  is  one  thing  ; to 
claim  ■&  power  of  infiifHng  judgments,  is-another. 
If  indeed  I believe  things  to  be  judgments  which 
are  not,  I am  to  blame.  But  ftill  this  is  not 
claiming  any  miraculous  gift. 

But  “ yoti  cite  one  who  forbid  your  fpeak- 
ing  to  fome  dying  criminals,  to  anfwer  for  their 
fouls  at  the  judgment-feat  of  Chrift  1 do  : 

but  be  this  right  or  wrong,  it  is  not  “ claiming 
a power  to  inJliB judgments." 

Vgl.  XVTII.  N » You 

$p.  145.  II  ibid.  § p.  146.  Sibid.  +p.  147'  ibid. 


[ 290  ] 

Yes  it  is  : for  thefe  judgments  are  fulminat- 
ed with  the  air  of  one  who  had  the  divine 
vengeance  at  his  difpofalt  I think  not:  and 
I believe  all  impartial  men  will  be  of  the  fame 
mind. 

“ Thefe  are  fome  of  the  extraordinary  gifts 
which  Mr.  W,  j:  claims.”  I claim  no  extra- 
ordinary  gft  at  all.  Nor  has  any  thing  to  the 
contrary  been  proved  yet,  fo  much  as  in  a fingle 
inftance. 

“ We  come  now  to  the  application  of  this 
fovereign  tell,  James  iii.  17.”  But  let  us  fee 
that  we  underlland  it  firfl.  I beg  leave  to  con- 
fider  the  whole.  Who  is  a vife  and  Inozi'ing  man 
among  you  ? Let  him  ficw  his  leifdom,  as  well 
as  his  faith,  by  his  u orks  not  by  words  onlv.  But 
if  ye  have  bitter  zeal  and f life  in  your  heart,  da 
not  glory  and  he  againji  the  truth  : as  if  any  fuch 
zeal,  any  thing  contrary  to  love,  could  confift 
with  true  wifdom.  This  xiifdom  defeendeth  not 
from  above,  but  is  earthly, JenJual,  devilifi.  For 
zohere  bitter  zeal  and  frife  are,  ,there  is  eonfujion 
and  every  evil  work.  But  the  wifdom  whkh  is 
from  above  (which  every  one  that  hath  is  a 
real  Chrillian,  and  he  only)  is  firf  pure,  free 
from  all  that  is  earthly,  fenfual,  devilifli  ; then 
peaceable,  hen\gn,  loving,  making  peace ; 
fofr,  mild,  yielding,  not  morofe,  or  four  ; eafy 
to  he  intreated,  to  be  perfuaded  or  convinced,  not 
llubborn,  felf-vvilled,  or  felf-conceited  ; full  oj 

mercy. 


+ p.  ti7- 


p.  »i9. 


{ 291  ] 

mercy,  of  tendernefs  and  compafiion  ; and  goo i 
fruits,  both  In  the  heart  and  life.  Two  of  thefe 
are  immediately  fpecified,  wiihout  partiality, 
loving  and  doing  good  to  all,  without  refpeft  of 
perfons,  and  without  hypocrfy,  fmcere,  frank, 
cjpen.  ^ 

I defire  to  be  tried  by  this  tefl.  I try  myfelf 
by  it  continually  : not  indeed  whether  I am  a 
pjrophit  (lor  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  this)  hut 
whether  I am  a Chrijlian, 

I.  The  prefent  quellion  then  is,  (not  what  is 
•Mr.  Latu,  or  what  are  the  Moravians,  but)  what 
is  John  Wefey  ? And  i.  Is  \\t part  or  not  ? “ Not 
pure  : for  he  feparates  reafon  from  gracef.”  A 
wonderful  proof!  But  I deny  the  faff.  I never 
did  feparate  reafon  from  grace.  “ Yes  -you  do. 
For  your  own  words  are,  the  points  we  chiefly 
infilled  on  were  four.  i.  That  orthodoxy  or  right 
■opinion,  is  at  bell  but  a very  llender  part  of  re- 
ligion ; if  it  can  be  allowed  to  be  any  part  of  k 
atall+.” 

Alter  premifuig,  that  it  is  our  boun  len  duty  to 
labour  alter  a right  judgment  in  all  things,  as  a 
■ wrong  judgment  naturally  leads  to  wron-g  pracfice  :• 
I fay  again,  right  opinion  is  at  bell  but  a very 
fender  part  of  religion  (which  properly  and  di- 
reftly  confills  in  right  tempers,  words  and  aftions,) 
and  frequently  it  is  no  part  of  religion.  For  it 
may  be,  where  there  is  no  religion  at  all  ; in  men 
N 2 cf 


f p.  ii6. 


Fp-  157. 


C 292  ] 

of  the  moft  abandoned  lives : yea,  in  the  devil 
hirafelf. 

And  yet  this  does  not  prove,  that  I “ feparate 
reafon  from  grace,”  that  I “ difcard  reafon  from 
the  fervice  of  religion.”  I do  continually  “ em- 
ploy it  to  diflinguifh  between  right  and  wrong 
opinions.”  I never  affirmed,  “ this  diftinftion  to 
be  of  little  confequence,”  or  denied  “ the  gof- 
pel  to  be  a reasonable  fervict\." 

But  “ the  apofile  Paul  confidered  right  opi- 
nion, as  a full  third  part  at  lead  of  religion.  For 
he  fays,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodnefs, 
and  righteoufnefs,  and  truth.  By  goodnefs  is 
meant  the  condu6l  of  particulars  to  the  whole, 
and  confifts  in  habits  and  focial  virtue,  and  this 
refers  to  Chriflian  praElice.  By  righteoufnefs  is’ 
meant  the  conduft  of  the  whole  to  paiticulars, 
and  confids  in  the  gentle  ufe  of  church  authority. 
And  this  refers  to  Chrifian  difciphne.  By  truth 
is  meant  the  conduff  of  the  whole,  and  of  parti- 
culars to  one  another,  and  confid  in  orthodoxy  ox 
right  opinion ; and  this  refers  to  Chrijlian  doc- 
trine\." 

My  objeftions  to  this  account  are,  1.  It  con- 
tradifts  St.  2.  It  contradifts  itfelf. 

Firft,  It  contradifls  St.  Paul,  It  fixes  a mean- 
ing upon  his  words,  foreign  both  to  the  text  and 
context.  The  plain  fenfe  of  the  text  taken  in 
connexion  with  the  context,  is  no  other  than  this. 
Jhefruit  \ of  the  Spirit  (rather,  of  the  light,  which 

Bengelius 

^ Eph.  V.  9. 


+ p.  158.  t p.  159. 


C 293  ] 

proves  to  be  the  true  reading,  oppofite 
to  the  unjridtjul  works  of  darknefs,  mentioned, 
ver.  11.)  it  confifts  kindnej 5,  ten- 

der-heartednefs  ; (chap.  iv.  32.}  oppofite  to  bitter- 
ly nefs,  wrath,  a7iger,  clamour,  evil-Jpeahng,  (ver. 
I 2)'^’)in  allrighteoujnefs,  rendering  unto  all  their 
? dues ; oppofite  to  Jlealhig,  (ver.  28.)  and  in  all 
truth,  veracity,  fincerity ; oppofite  to  lying  (ver. 

^ Secondly,  That  interpretation  contradifts  it- 
felf ; and  that  in  every  article.  For  1.  If  by 
goodnefs  be  meant  the  conduft  of  particulars  to 
. the  whole,'  then  it  does  notconfift  in  habits  olfo- 
■ ‘ cial virtue.  For^rm/ nzV/we  regulates  the  conduft 
of  particulars,  not  fo  properly  to  the  whole  as  to 
each  other.  2.  If  by  righteoufnefs  be  meant  the 
j conduft  of  the  whole  to  particulars,  then  it  can- 
[ not  confift  in  the  gentlenefs  of  church-authority  ; 
unlefs  church  governors  are  the  whole  church,  or 
the  parliament,  the  whole  nation.  3.  If  by 
I ' truth  be  meant,  the  conduft  of  the  whole,  and 
! of  particulars  to  one  another,  then  it  cannot 
poflibly  confift  in  orthodoxy  or  right  opinion, 
i For  opinion,  right  or  wrong,  is  not  conduft. 

They  differ  toto  genere.  If  then  it  be  orthodoxy, 

I it  is  not  “ the  condudl  of  the  governors  and  go- 
^ verned  toward  each  other”.  liht  xh&it  condudl 
I ' toward  each  other,  it  is  not  orthodoxy. 

Although  therefore  it  be  allowed,  that  right 
opinions  are  a great  help,  and  wrong  opinions  a 
great  hindrance  to  religion,  yet  till  ftronger 
N 3 proof 


I 


[ 294  ] 

proof  be  broiiglit  againft  It,  that  propofiuon 
remains  unOiaken,  “ right  opinions  are  a 
flencler  part  of  leligion,  if  any  part  of  it  at 
alf  f.” 

(As  to  the  affair  of  Abbe  Paris  whoever  will 
read  over  with  calmnefs  and  impartiality  but 
one  volume  of  monfieur  Montgeron,  will  then 
be  a competent  judge.  Mean  time  I would 
juft  obferve  that  if  thefe  miracles  were  real, 
they  ftrike  at  the  root  oi  the  whole  papal 
authority  ; as  having  been  wrought  in  dire£l 
oppofition  to  the  famous  Bull  Unigenitus  ;j;.) 

Yet  I do  not  fay,  “ Errors  in  lalth  have  little 
to  do  with  religion  •”  or  that  they  “ are  no  let 
or  Impediment  to  the  Holy  Spirit  But  ftill 
it  is  true,  that  “ God  (generally  fpeaking)  begins 
his  work  ||  at  the  heart.”  IMen  ufually  feel  dejires 
to  pleafe  God,  before  they  know  bow  to  pleafe 
him.  Their  heart  fays,  “ What  muft  I do  to  be 
faved  Before  they  uade^/a/id  the  wayoffalva- 
tion. 

But  fee  “ the  charafler  he  gives  his  own 
faints  !”  The  more  I converfe  with  this  people 
the  more.I  am  amazed.  That  God  hath  wrought 
a great  work  is  manifeft,  (by  faving  many  fmners 
from  their  fins.)  And  yet  the  “ main  of  them 
are  not  able  to  give  a rational  account  of  the 
plainft  principles  of  religloiT”  They  were  not 
able  then,  as  there  had  not  been  time  to  inftruEc 
them.  But  the  cafe  is  far  different  aaza. 

Again, 

+ p.  160.  i p.  161.  § p.  162.  (jibid. 


r 295  j 

Again,  Did  I “ give  this  chara£ler”  even 
then,  of  the- people  called  Mtthodi/ls,  in  general? 
No,  but  of  the  people  of  a particular  town  in 
Ireland,  where  nine  in  ten  of  the  inhabitants  are 
Romanifts^ 

“■  Nor  is  the  obfervation  confined  to  the  peo- 
ple. He  had  made  a profelyte  of  Mr.  D.  vicar  of 
And  to  fhew  he  was  no  difcredit  to  his 
mafler,  he- gives  him  this  charafler.  “ He  feemed. 
to  flagger  at  nothing,  though  as  yet  his  under- 
flanding  is  not  opened.”+ 

Mr.  D.  was  never  a profelyte  of  mine  ; nor 
did  r ever  fee  him  before  or  fince.  I endeavoured 
to  fhew  him,  that  -we  are  jujlified  by Jaith.  And 
he  did  not  objefl though  neither  did  he  under- 
Jland. 

“ But  in  the  firfl  propagation  of  religion, 
God  began  with  iinderjlanding,  and  rational  eon- 
vifilion  won  the  heart^X  Frequently,  but  not 
always.  The  jailor’s  heart  was  touched  firfl, 
then  he  underjlood  what  he  7nujl  do  to  be  Javed. 
In  this  refpefl  then  there  is  nothing  new  in  the 
prefent  work  of  God.  So  the  lively  flory  from 
Moliere  is  juft  nothing  to  the  purpofe. 

In  drawing  the  parallel  between  the  work  God 
has  wrought  in  England  and  in  America,  I do  not 
fo  much  as  “ irifinuate,  § that  the  underftandlng 
has  nothing  to  do  in  the  work.”  Whoever  is 
engaged  therein  will  find  full  employment  for 
all  the  underftanding  which  God  has  given  him. 

N 4 “ On 

T p.  iS2.  p.  163.  §p.  163. 


[ =9S  ] 

“ On  the  whole  therefore  we  conclude,  that 
wifdom  which  diverts  the  Chrirtian  faith  of  its 
tTUth,  and  the  tert  of  it,  reajon-  — —and  refolves 
all  religion  into  fpiritual  m)JHcif?n  and  extatic 
raptures,  cannot  be  the  wifdom  from  above, 
whofe  charafterirtic  \s  purity.”  || 

Perhaps  fo,  but  1 do  not  “ divert  faith,  either 
of  truth  or  reafon  ; much  iefs  do  I refolve  all  into 
fpiritual  7nyjlicifm  and  extatic  raptures.”  There- 
fore fuppofe  purity  here  meant  found  doclrine, 
(which  it  no  more  means  than  it  does  a. found 
conrtitution)  rtill  it  touches  not  me,  who  for  any 
thing  that  has  yet  been  faid,  may  teach  the 
foundeft:  doclrine  in  the  world. 

2.  “ Our  next  bufinefs  is  to  apply  the  other 
marks  to  theie  pretending JeHaries.  The  firrt  of 
thefe  purity,  refpefts  the  nature  of  the  wifdom 
from  above,  or  in  other  words,  f the  doBrine 
taught.”  Not  in  the  leart.  It  has  no  more  to  do 
with  doElrine,  than  the  whole  text  has  with  pro- 
phets, “ All  the  rert  concern  the  manner  of 
teaching.”  Neither  can  this  be  allowed.  They 
no  farther  concern  either  teaching  or  teachers, 
than  they  concern  all  mankind. 

But  to  proceed.  “ Methodifm  fignifies  only 
the  manner  of  preaching-,  not  either  an  old  or  a 
7iew  religion  ; it  is  the  manner  in  which  Mr.  W. 
and  his  followers  attempt  to  propagate  the  plain 
old  religion.”^  And  is  not  this  found  doElrine  ? 
Is  this fpiritual  myjiicifm  and  extatic  raptures  P 

“ Of 

Jjp,  »66,  I p.  167.  t p.  i68. 


C 297  J 

“ or  all  men,  Mr.  TV.  fiiould  bell  know 
meaning  of  the  term ; fmce  it  was  not  a }zid~ 
name  impofed  on  the  fe£l  by  its  enemies,  but  an 
appellation  of  honour  bellowed  upon  it  by  them- 
felves.”  In  anfwer  to  this,  I need  only  tran- 
fcribe  what  was  publilhed  twenty  years  ago.:|: 

“ Since  the  name  firll  came  abroad  into  the 
world,  many  have  been  at  a lofs  to  know  what  a 
Methodiji  is  ; what  are  the  principles  and  praElice 
ofthofewho  are  commonly  called  by  that  name; 
and  what  are  the  dijlmguifiing  marks  ol  the  fe£i, 
which  is  every  where  Jpoken  againjl. 

“ And  it  being  generally  believed  that  I was 
able  to  give  the  clearell  account  of  thefe  things 
(as  having  been  one  of  the  firll  to  whom  the 
name  was  given,  and  the  perfon  by  whom  the 
reft  were  fuppofed  to  be  direbled)  I have  been 
called  upon  in  all  manner  of  ways,  and  with  the 
utmoft  earneftnefs  fo  to  do.  I yield  at  laft  to 
the  continued  importunity,  both  of  friends  and 
enemies ; and  do  now  give  the  cleareft  account 
I can,  in  the  prefence  of  the  Lord,  the  Judge  of 
heaven  and  earth,  , of  the  and  prailice 

whereby  thofe  who  are  called  Methodiji s dif-- 
tinguifhed  from. other  men. 

“ I fay  thoje  who  are  called  Methodijls  ; for  let  it : 
be  well  obferved,  that  this  is  not  a name  which  ■ 
they  take  upon  themfelves,.  but  one.  fixed  on  them 
by  way  of  reproach,  without  their  approbation  , 
or  confent.  It  was  firll  given  to  three  or  four.- 
N 5 young. > 

:};  Pfefase  to  “ thecharafter  of  a Mtthoiip,’*. 


[ ^98  ] 

young  men  at  Oxford,  by  a fludent  of  Chrifs 
Church  ; either  in  allufion  to  the  antient  feft  of 
phyficians  fo  called,  (from  theirt  eaching,  that 
almoft  all  difeafes  might  be  cured  by  a fpeeific 
method  of  diet  and  exercfe)  or  from  their  ob- 
ferving  a more  regular  method  of  ftudy  and  beha- 
viour than  was  ufual  with  thofe  of  their  age  and 
Ifation.” 

I need  only  add,  that  this  nick-name  was  rra- 
pofed  upon  us  before  this  manner  oj  preaching 
had  a being.  Yea,  at  a time  when  I thought  it 
as  lawful  to  cut  a throat,  as  to  preach  out  of  a 
church. 

“ Why  then  will  Air.  W.  fo  grofsly  mifre- 
prefent  his  adverfaries,  as  to  fay,  that'when  they 
fpeak  againft  Methodifn,  they  fpeak  againll  the 
plain,  old  dotlrine  of  the  church  of  England?”^ 
This  is  no  mifreprefentation.  Many  of  our  ad- 
verfaries, all  over  the  kingdom,  fpeak  againft  us, 
eo  nomine,  for  preaching  ihefe  dod.iines,juJlifica~ 
tionby Jaith  in  particular. 

However,  “ a fanatic  manner  of  preachingj 
though  it  were  the  doctrine  of  an  apoftle,  may 
do  more  harm  to  fociety  at  leaft,  than  reviving 
old  herelies,  or  inventing  nroo.  It  tends  to  be- 
' wilder  the  imaginations  of  fome,  to  inflame  the 
paftions  of  others,  and  to  fpread  diforder  and 
confufion  through  the  whole  community."l| 
1 would  gladly  have  the  term  defined.  What  is 
“ a fanatic  manner  of  preaching  ?”  Is  it  field- 

preaching  ? 


^ibid.  Hp-i6g. 


C 299  ] 

preaching?  But  this  has  no  Tuch  effe6V, . even . 
among  the  w’ildeft  of  men.  Tliis  has  not  “ be« 
wildered  the  imagination,”  even  of  the  Kings- 
wood  colliers,  or  “ inflamed  their  paflions.”  It- 
has  not  fpread  diforder  or  confufion  among  them, 
but  juft  the  contrary..  From  the.  time  it  was. 
heard  in  that  chaos, 

Confufion  heard  the  voice,  and  wild  uproar 

Stood  rul’d,  and  order  from  diforder  fprung, . 

“ But  St.  James,  who  delivers  the  teft  for* 
the  trial  of  thefe  mens  pretenfions,” — (the  fame  • 
miftake  ftillj  “ unqueflionably  thought  *a  fanatic 
fpirit  did  more  mifchief  in  the  mode  of  teach- 
ing, than  in  the  matter  taught  ; finre  of  fix 
marks,  one  only  concerns  doBtine,  all  the  reft 
the  manners  of  the  teacher.”?  Nay,  all  fix. 
concern  doBrine  as  much  as  one.  The  truth  is, . 
they  have  nothing  to  do  either  with  doBrine  or 
manner. 

“ From  St.  Paul’s  words.  Be  injlant,  in  feafon, . 
out  of  feajon,  he  infers  more  than  they  will  bear  ; 
and  mifapplies  them  into  the  bargain. ”t  Whetis 
and  where  ? I do  not  remember  applying  them; 
at  all. 

“ When-  feafonahle.  times  are  appointed  for- 
holy  offices  to  fly  to  unfeafonable,  is  fa£l;ious.”j:'; 
But  it  is  not  clear,  that  five  in  the  morning  and. 

N 6 feverti 

f.p.  170.  tp.  171.  I p.  172. 


[ 300  ] 

feven  in  the  evening  (our  ufual  times)  are  unfea- 
Jonable. 

We  come  now  dlreftly  to  the  fecond  article. 
“ The  wifdom  Jrom  above  is  peaceable.  But  the 
propagation  of  Methodifm  has  occafioned  many 
and  great  violations  of  peace.t  In  order  to  know 
where  the  blame  hereof  lies,  let  us  inquire  into 
the  temper  which  -makes  for  peace.  For  we  may 
be  aflured  the  fault  lies  not  there,  where  fuch  a 
temper  is  found.”  Thus  far  we  are  quite  agreed, 
“ Now  the  temper  which  makes  for  peace  is 
prudence.''  This  is  one  of  the  tempers  which 
make  for  peace ; others  are  kindnefs,  meeknefs, 
patience.  “ This  our  Lord  recommended  by 
his  own  example. But  this  Mr.  W.  calls  the 
myjlery  of  iniquity,  and  the  offspring  of  hell."i^ 
No,  not  this ; not  the  prudence  which  our  Lord 
recommends.  I call  that  fo,  and  that  only,  which 
the  world,  the  men  who  know  not  God,  flile 
Chrjjiian  prudence.  By  this  I mean  fubtilty, 
craft,  diflimulation  ; ftudy  to  pleafe  man  rather 
than  God  ; the  art  of  trimming  between  God 
and  the  world,  of  ferving  God  and  mammon. 
Will  any  feriousman  defend  this  ? And  this  only 
do  I condemn. 

But  you  “ fay,  good  fort  of  men,  as  they  are 
called,  are  the  bane  of  all  religion."^  And  I think 
fo.  By  this  of  men,  I mean,  perfons 

who  have  a liking  to,  but  no  fnfe  of  religion  : 

no 

P*  *73*  t P>  >74 >77-  ^ p.  178.  Ip- 

179,  180. 


[ 301  ] 

no  real  fear  or  love  of  God  ; no  truly  Chrif- 
tian  tempers.  “ Thefe  fteal  away  the  little  zeal 
he  has,  that  is,  perfuade  him  to  be  peaceable.” 
No  ; perfuade  me  to  be  like  ihemfelves  ; without 
love  either  to  God  or  man. 

“ Again,  fpeaking  of  one,  he  fays.  Indulging 
himfelf  in  harmlejs  company,"  (Vulgarly  fo  call- 
ed.) “ He  firft  made  Ihipwreck  of  his  zeal,  then 
faith.  In  this  I think  he  is  right.  The 
zeal  and  faith  of  a fanatic  are  fuch  exafl  tallies, 
that  neither  can  exift  alone.  They  came  into 
the  world  together,  to  diflurb  fociety  and  diflio- 
nour  religion.” 

By  zeal  I mean  the  flame  of  love,  or  fervent 
love  to  God  and  man  : by  faith  the  fubflance 
or  confidence  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence 
of  things  not  feen.  Is  this  the  zeal  and  faith  of 
a fanatic?  Then  St.  Paul  was  the  greatefl  fanatic 
on  earth.  Did  thefe  come  into  the  world  to 
difurb  fociety  and  difhonour  religion  ? 

' “ On  the  whole  we  find  Mr.  W.  by  his  own 
corfejfon,  intirely  deftitute  of  prudence.^  There- 
fore it  muft  be  afcribed  to  the  want  of  this,  if  his 
preaching  be  attended  with  tumult  and  diforder.”" 
By  his  own  confejfion  P Surely  no.  This  I con- 
fefs,  and  this  only:  what  is  falfely  called  pru- 
dence, I abhor  : but  true  prudence  I love  and  ad- 
mire. 

However,  “ you  fet  at  nought  the  difcipline' 
ef  the  church,  by  invading  the  province  of  the 

parochial 

+ p.  181, 


C 302  ] 

parochial  minifter.”t  Nay,  if  ever  I preach  at' 
all,  it  mufl;  be  in  the  province  of  fome  parochial 
minifler  “ by  affembling  in  undue  places,  and 
at  unfit  limes.”  I know  of  no  times  unfit  for 
thofe  who  alTemble.  And  I believe  Hannam 
Mount  and  Rofegreen  were  the  moft  proper  places 
LHider  heaven,  for  preaching  to  the  colliers  in 
Kingswood:  “ hy fcurrilous  invecHves  againft  the- 
governors  and  pallors  of  the  national  church.” 
This  is  an  entire  miftake.  I dare  not  make  any 
fcurrilous ‘inveQivts  againft  any  man.  “ Infolcn- 
cies  of  this  nature  provoke  warm  men  to  tumult.” 
But  thefe  infolenaes  do  notexift.  So  that  what- 
ever tumult  either  warm  or  cool  men  raife,  I am 
not  chargeable  therewith. 

“To  know  the  true  charatler  of  MethodifmR 
The  prefent  point  is,  to  know  the  true  charaBer 
of  John  Wefey.  Now  in  order  to  know  this,  we 
treed  not  inquire  what  others  were,  before  he 
was  born.  All  therefore  that  follows,  i of  old. 
Freci/ians,  Puritans  and  Independents,  may  ftand 
juft  as  it  is.  ' ' 

But  “ Mr.  U\  zvanted  to  be  perfecuted.''^ 
As  this  is  averred  over  and  over,  I will  explain 
mvfelfupon  it,  once  for  all.  I.  never  defired,  or 
’ iLHinted  to  be  perfecuted.. 

Lives  there  who  loves  his  pain? 

Hove,  and  defire  to  live  peaceably  zvitk  alhnen,. 

“ But. 

p.  182.  + ^P.I^T. 


[ 303  ] 

“ But  perfecutlon  would  not  come  at  his  call." 
However  it  came  uncalled  : and  more  than  once 
or  twice,  it  was  not  “ mock' p'erjecutioji”  It  was 
notoniv  (hs.  huzzas  of  the  mob  : fliowers  of  Hones 
are  fomething  more  than  huzzas.  And  whofo- 
ever  faw  the  mob  either  at  Waljalox  Cork  (to  in- 
llance  in  no  more)  faw  that  they  were  not  “ in 
jell,”  but  in  great  earneH,  eagerly  athirff,  notfoCi 
Jporl,  (as  you  fuppofe)  but  for  blood. 

But  though  I do  not  defire  perfecutlon,  I ex- 
ptEl  it.  I muH,  if  I believe  St.  Paul : all  that' 
will  live  godly  in  Chnjl  JeJus,  Jhall  fuffer  perfecur 
tion  either  fooner  or  later,  more  or.  Icfs,  ac- 
cording to  the  wife  providence  of  God.  But  I‘. 
believe,  all  things  work  together  for  good, 

to  them  that  love  God.  And  from  a convifllon  of 
this,  they  may  even  rejoice,  when  they  are  per-^- 
Jecutedfor  rightecuj nefs  fake. 

Yet  as  I feldom  “ complain  of  ill  treatment,” 
fo  I am  never  “ dijfatisjied  with  good.j:.”  But; 
I often  wonder  at  it.  And  I once  expreJOTed  my, 
wonder,  nearly  in  the  words  of  the  o\i  Athenian, 
“ What  have  we  done,  that  the  world  fhpuld  be 
fp  civil  to  us  ?” 

You  conclude  the  head,  “ As- he  who  perfe-- 
cutes,  is  but  the  tool  of  him  that  invites  perfe-. 
Gution,”  (I  know  not  who  does)  “ the  crime  final- 
ly comes  home  to  him  who  fet  the  rioter  afe 

work.^” 

§p.  194... 


-f-  E Tim.  iii.  ij. 


f p.  188. 


C 304  ] 

work.”  And  is  this  all  the  proof,  that  I am 
not  peaceable?  Then  let  all  men  judge,  if  the 
charge  is  made  good. 

3.  “ The  next  mark  of  the  celefiial  wifdom  is, 
it  is  gentle  and  eafy  to  be  entreated ; compliant 
and  even  obfequious  to  all  men.”  And  how  does 
it  appear,  that  I am  wanting  in  this  ? Why,  he 
is  “ a fevere  condemner  of  his  fellow  citizens, 
and  a fevere  exaftor  of  conformity  to  his  own 
obfervances.”  Now  the  proof.  1 . “ He  tells 
us  this  in  the  very  appellation  he  aflumes  +.” 
Nay,  I never  ajfumed  it  at  all.  2.  But  “ you 
fay,  ufelefs  converfalion  is  an  abofnination  to  the 
Lord.  And  what  is  this,  but  to  withfland  St. 
Paul  Xo  the  face?”  Whv,  did  St.  Pij^/joinin, 
or  commend  ufelefs  converfatiori  ? I rather  think, 
he  reproves  it.  He  condemns  as 
putrid,  finking  conveifation,  all  that  is  not 
good,  all  that  is  not  to  the  ufe  of  edifying,  and 
meet  to  minifer  grace  to  the  hearers  3.  Mr. 
W.  “ refolved,  never  to  laugh,  nor  tafpeak 
a tittle  of  worldly  things  §” — “ iho’  others  may, 
nav  muft.”  Pray  add  that,  with  the  reafon  of  my 
fo  refolving,  namely,  that  I expefted  to  die 
in  a few  days.  If  I expefted  it  now,  probably, 

I (hould  refume  the  refolution.  But  be  it  as  it 
may,  this  proves  nothing  againft  my  being  both 
gentle  and  eafy  to  be  intrealed.  4.  “ He  fays 

Mr,  Q was  a clumfy,  overgrown,  hardfaced 

man  ||.”  So  he  was.  And  this  was  the  heft  of 
him.  I fpare  him  much  in  faying  no  more.  But 

he 

4 p.  jg2,  Ephef,  iv.  29.  § p.  193.  j)  p.  rSi, 


C 305  ] 

he  is  gone.  Let  his  afhes  reft.  5.  “ I heard  a 
moft  miferable  fermon,  full  of  dull,  fenfelefs, 
improbable  lies.”  It  was  fo,  from  the  begin- 
ning to  the  end.  I have  feldom  heard  the  like. 
6.  “ The  perfecution  at  St.  Ives'’  (which  ended 
before  I cam'e  ; what  I faw  I do  not  term  perfecii- 
tionf''  was  owing  to  the  indefatigable  labours  of 
Mr.  U.  and  Mr.  5.  gentlemen  worthy  to  be  had 
in  everlafting  rembrance.  + Here  he  tells  us, 
it  is  his  purpofe  to  gibbet  up  the  names  of  his 
two  great  perfecutors  to  everlafting  infamy.” 
Thefe  gentlemen  had  occafioned  feveral  innocent 
people,  to  be  turned  out  of  their  livelihood ; 
and  others  to  be  outraged  in  the  moft  fhock- 
ing  manner,  and  beat  only  not  to  death.  My 
purpofe  is,  by  fetting  down  their  names,  to 
make  others  afraid  fo  to  offend.  Yet  I fay  ftill, 
“ God  forbid  that  I fliould  rail,  either  at  a Turk, 
infidel  or  heretic.”  But  I will  bring  to  light  the 
aftions  of  fuch  Chriftians,  to  be  a warning  to 
others.  And  all  this  I judge  to  be  perfeftly  con- 
fiftent  with  “ the  fpirit  of  meeknefs  j;.” 

4,  “ The  fourth  mark  is,  Full  of  mercy  and 
good  fruits.  Let  us  enquire  into  the  mercy  and 
good fruits  of  Mr.  W.^' 

1.  And  firft,  “ He  has  no  mercy  on  his  op- 
pofers.  They  pafs  with  him  under  no  other  ti- 
tle, than  that  of  the  devil’s  Jervants,  and  the  de- 
vil’s children^.’’  This  is  far  from  true.  Many  have 
oppofed,  and  do  oppofe  me  ftill,  whom  I believe 

to 

+ p.  195.  ^ p.  196.  S P-  198-  11  ibid* 


[ 3o6  ] 


to  be  the  children  and  fervants  of  God.  “ We 
have  feen  him  difpatching  the  principal  of  thefe 
children  of  the  devil,  without  mercy,  to  their 
father  No,  not  one.  This  has  been  affirm- 
td  over  and  over,  but  never  proved  yet.  I 
“ fling  about  no  e.xtermitiating  judgments  of 
God  I “ call  down  no  fire  from  heaven.” 
“ But  it  would  be  for  the  credit  of  thefe  new- 
todiftinguifh  between  rage  and  zeal.”  That 
is  eafily  done.  Rage  is  furious  fire  from  hell 
zeal  is  loving  fire  from  heaven.  2.  “ If  what 
has  been  faid  above  does  not  fuffice,  turn  agaia 
to  Mr.  JV.’s  journals.  Mr.  S.  while  he  w'as 
fpeaking  to  the  fociety  againfi  my  brother,  and 
me,  was  flruck  raving  mad+.”  He  was  fo,  be- 
fore an  hundred  witneffes  ; though  I w»as  the  laji- 
to  believe  it.  “ But  it  feems,  God  is  at  length 
intreated  for  him,  and  has  reftored  him  to 
found  mind.”  And  is  my  relating  this  fuel,  an 
inflance  of  “ dooming  men  \.o  perdition?”  3. 
“ John  Haydon  cried  aloud.  Let  the  world  fee 
the  judgment  of  God  .j:”  He  did.  But  let  John, 
Haydon  look  to  that.  It  was  he  faid  fo,  not  I. 
4.  “ I was  informed  of  an  awful  providence^  A 
poor  wretch,  who  was  here  the  lafl,  w'eek,  curb- 
ing  and  blafpheming,  and  labouring  with  all  his 
might  to  hinder  the  word  of  God,  had  afterwards 
boafled,  he  would  come  again  on  Sunday,  and 
no  man  fhould  flop  his  mouth  then.  But  on 
Friday  God  laid  his  hand  upon  him,  and  on  Sun- 
day. 


h E. 199* 


•f  p.  200. 


Jp.  201, 


[ 3®7  I 

day  he  was  buried  And  was  not  this  an  awful 
providence?  But  tet  1 do  not  “ doom  even 
him  to  perdition.”  5.  “ I faw  a poor  man,  once 
joined  with  us,  who  wanted  nothing  in  this  world. 
A day  or  two  before  he  hanged  himfelf,  but  was 
cut  down  before  he  was  dead.  He  lias  been  cry- 
ing out  ever  fmce,  “ God  had  left  him,  becaufe 
he  had  left  the  children  of  God.”  This  w'as  his 
alfertion,  not  mine.  I neither  affirm,  nor  deny 
it.  6.  The  true,  account  of  Lucy  Godjliall  is 
this.  “ I buried  the  body  of  Lucy  GodJhalL 
After  prefling  toward  the  mark  for  more  than 
two  years,  fince  fhe  had  known  the  pardoning 
love  of  God  ; fhe  was  for  fome  time^  weary  and 
faint  in  her  mind,  till  I put  her  out  of  the  bands. 
God  bleffed  this  greatly  to  her  foul,  fo  that  in  a 
fhort  time  flie  was  admitted  again.  Soon  after, 
being  at  home,  flie  felt  the  love  of  God  in  an  un- 
ufual  manner  poured  into  her  heart.  She  fell 
down  upon  her  knees,  and  delivered  up  her  foul 
and  body  into  the  hands  of  God.  In  the  inftant 
the  ufe  of  all  her  limbs  was  taken  away,  and  fhe 
was  in  a burning  fever.  For  three  days  fhe  migh- 
tily praifed  God,  and  rejoiced  in  him  all  the  day 
long.  She  then  cried  out,  Now  Satan  hath  de- 
fired  to  have  me,  that  he  may  lift  me  as  wheat. 
Immediately  darknefsand  heavinefs  fell  upon  her, 
which  continued  till  Saturday  the  fourth  inftant. 
On  Sunday  the  light  flione  again  upon  her  heart. 
About  ten  in  the  evening,  one  faid  to  her,  “ Je- 

fus 


? p.  202^ 


[ 3o8  ] 

ins  is  ready  to  receive  your  foul.  She  laid,  Amen! 
Amen!  clofed  her  and  eyes,  and  died+.”  Is  this 
brought  as  a pro'of  of  ray  inexorablenefs  ! Or  of 
my  “ dooming  men  to  perdition  ?’’ 

7.  “ I found  Nicholas  Palmer  in  great  weak- 
nefs  of  body,  and  heavinefs  of  fpirit.  Wewref- 
tled  with  God  in  his  behalf  ; and  our  labour  was 
not  in  vain.  His  foul  was  comforted  ; and  a few 
hours  after  he  quietly  fell  alleep.”  A fl range 
proof  this  likewife,  either  of  inexorablenejs,  or 
of  “ dooming  men  to  perdition  !”  Therefore 
this  charge  too  Hands  totally  unfupported.  Heie 
is  no  proof  of  my  unmercif  ulnejs  yet. 

“ Good  fruits  come  ne.xt  to  be  confidered, 
which  Mr.  Wefey\  idea  of  true  religion  does  not 
promife.  He  faith  ;i;,”  (I  will  repeat  the  words 
a little  at  large,  that  their  true  fenfe  may  more 
clearly  appear:)  “ in  explaining  thofe  w’ords, 
the  kingdom  of  God,  or  true  religion,  is  not  meals 
and  drinks,  I was  led  to  fhew,  that  religion  does 
not  properly  confjl  in  harmlelfnefs,  ufing  the 
means  of  grace,  and  doing  good,  that  is  helping 
our  neighbours,  chiefly  by  giving  alms : but  that 
a man  might  both  be  harmlefs,  ufe  the  means  of 
grace,  and  do  much  good,  and  yet  have  no  true 
religion  at  all.”  He  may  fo.  Yet  whoever  has 
true  religion,  muftbe  zealous  of  good  works.  And 
zeal  for  all  good  works,  is,  according  to  my  idea, 
an  elfential  ingredient  of  true  religion. 

“ Spiritual 

+ Journal  iv.  p.  71.  f p.  203. 


[ 309  ] 

Spiritual  cures  are  all  the  good  fruits  he 
pretends  tot.”  Not  quite  all,  fays  WiUia?n  Kirk- 
man,  with  fome  others.  A few  of  his  fpiri- 
tual  cures  we  will  fet  in  a fair  light.  The  firft 
time  I preached  at  Swalwdl,”  (chiefly  to  colliers 
and  workers  in  the  iron  workj  “ none  feemed 
to  be  much  convinced,  on\y  funned  I mean 
amazed  at  what  they  heard,  though  they  were 
the  firfl;  principles  of  religion.  “ But  he  brings 
them  to  their  fenfes  with  a vengeance.”  No, 
not  them,  Thefe  v/ere  different  perfons.  Are 
they  lumped  together,  in  order  to  fet  things  in 
a fair  light?  The  whole  paragraph  runs  thus, 
:j;  “ I carefully'  examined  thole  who  had  lately 
cried  out  in  the  congregation.  Some  of  thefe, 
1 found,  could  give  no  account  at  all,  how  or 
wherefore  they  had  done  fo  : only'  that  of  a fud- 
den,  they  dropped  down,  they  knew  not  how  : 
and  what  they  afterward  faid  or  did,  they  knew 
not.  Others  could  juff  remember,  they  were  in 
fear,  but  could  not  tell  what  they  were  in  fear 
of.  Several  faid  they  were  afraid  of  the  devil : 
and  this  was  all  they  knew.  But  a few  gave  a 
more  intelligible  account  of  the  piercing  fenfe 
they  then  had  of  their  fins,  both  inward  and 
outward,  which  were  fet  in  array  againft  them, 
round  about  -;  Of  the  dread  they  were  in  of  the 
wrath  of  God,  and  the  punifliment  they  had 
deferved,  into  which  they  feemed  to  be  juft  fall- 
ing, without  any  way'  to  efcape.  One  of  them 

told 

* Fourth  Journal,  p.  S2. 


f p.  204,  205. 


[ 3^0  ] 

'tokl  me,  “ I was  as  if  I was  juft  falling  down 
from  the  higheft  place  I had  ever  feen.  I thought 
the  devil  was  pufhing  me  off,  and  that  God 
had  forfaken  me.”  Another  faid,  “ I felt  the 
very  fire  of  hell  already  kindled  in  my  breaft; 
and  all  my  body  was  in  as  much  pain,  as  if  I 
had  been  in  a burning  fierv'  furnace.”  What 
wifdom  IS  this  which  rebuketh  thefe,  that  they 
Jhould  hold  their  peace  ? Nav,  let  fuch  an.  one  cry 
Jef us  of  Nazereth,  till  he  idhth,  thy  faith  hath 
made  thee  whole 

Now  follow  the  proofs  of  my  driving  men  mad, 
1.  “ Another  of  Dr.  Monro's  patients  came  to 
aik  ray  advice.  I found  no  reafon  to  believe  fhe 
bad  been  any  oiherwife  mad,  than  every  one  is, 
•that  is  deeply  convinced  of  fn  kf  -Let  titis  prove 
all  that  it  can  prove,  e.  “ A middle  aged  woman 
was  really  diflracled  f before  1 ever  faw 

her,  or  fhe  me.  3.  “ I could  not  but  be  under 
fome  concern  with  regard  to  one  or  two  perfons, 
who  w'ere  tormented  in  an  unaccountable  man- 
ner, and  feemed  to  be  indeed  lunatic,  as  well 
as  fore  vexed.”  True  ; for  a time.  But  the  de- 
liverance of  one  of  them  is  related  in  the  very 
next  paragraph.  4.  *'  Two  or  three  are  gone 
quite  dijlraClcd'.  that  is,  they  mourn  and  re- 
fufe.  to  be  comforted  till  they  have  redemption  j|.” 
“ I defiled  one  tovifit  Mrs.  f?.  in  Bedlam,  put 
in  by  her  hufband  as  a madwoman.”  But  fhe 
-never  was  mad  in  any  degree,  as  he  himfell  af- 
terwards 


§ P 208.  [1  p.  209. 


[ 3*1  ] 

terv/ards  acknowledged.  6.  “ One  was  fo  deep- 
]y  convinced  of  her  ungodlinefs,  that  flie  cried 
out  day  and  night,  ' Lord,  J'ave,  or  I perifJi  ! Alt 
the  neighbours  agreed  fhe  was  ftcirk  mad.”  But 
I did  not  make  her  fo.  For  this  was  before  flie 
ever  faw  my  face.  Now  let  every  one  judge, 
whether  here  is  yet  a fingle  proof,  that  I drive 
men  mad. 

“ The  time  when  this  fpiritual  madnefs  was 
at  its  height,  he  calls  a glorious  I call 

that  a glorious  time  when  many  notorious  fm- 
ners  are  converted  to  God  ; (whether  with  any 
outward  f)mptoms  or  none;  for  thofe  are  jio 
way  effential  ;)  and  when  many  are  in  the  tri^ 
umph  oj Jailh,  greatly  rejoicing  in  God  their  Sa- 
viour, 

“ But  though  Mr.  W^lcy  does  fo  well  in 
turning  fools  into  madmen,  yet  his  craftfmafler 
i-s  certainly  one  Mr.  Hlieatley,  oI  whom  he  gives 
this  extraordinary  account.ij 

“ A poor  woman  (on  IVed.  17th  Sept.  1740) 
faid,  it  was  four  years  (namely,  in  Sept.  1736,' 
above  a year  before  I left  Georgia J fince  her  fon, 
by  hearing  a fermon  of  Mr.  \Vkeatley\,  fell 
into  great  uneafmefs.  She  thought  he  w'as  ill, 
and  would  have  fent  for  a phyficiam  But  he 
faid,  “ No,  no  ; fend  for  Mr.  Wheatley^’  Hc' 
was  fent  for,  and  came  ; and  after  afking  a few 
queflions,  told  her,  “ The  boy  is  mad.  Get  a 
coach,  and  carry  him  to  Dr.  Monro.  Ufe  my 

narae» 


f p.  210. 


§ p.  211. 


[ 3^2  -} 

name.  I have  fent  feveral  fuch  to  him.  Who 
this  Mr.  W'hiatly  is,  I know  not.”  He  was  lec- 
turer at  Spittlejidds  church.  The  event  was,  af- 
ter the  apothecary  had  half  murdered  him  he 
was  dlfcharged,  and  the  lad  foon  recovered  his 
flrength.  His  fenfes  he  never  had  loft.  The 
fuppofing  this,  was  a blunder  from  the  begin- 
ning. 

“ Thefe  arc  the  exploits  which  Mr.  W.  calls 
blejjings  Jrom  God.”||  (Certainly  I do,  both 
rtpenianct  faith)  “ And  which  therefore  we 
may  call  the  good  fruits  of  his  miniftry.”  (May 
God  increafe  them  an  hundred  fold  !j  “ What 
the  apoftle  calls  good  fruits,  namely,  doing  much 
good,  Mr.  JV.  tells  us,  belongs  not  to  true  reli- 
giond  1 never  told  any  man  fo  yet.  I tell  all 
men  juft  the  contrary. 

I may  then  fafely  leave  all  mankind  to  judge, 
whether  a fmgle  article  of  the  charge  againft  me 
has  yet  been  made  good.  So  much  for  the  firft 
charge,  that  I am  a madman.  Now  for  the  fecond, 
that  I am  a knave. 

g.  The  proof  is  fliort  : “ Every  enthufiaft, 
is  a knave:  but  he  is  an  enthufiaft.  Therefore  he 
is  a knave.”  I deny  both  the  firft  and  fecond 
propofition.  Nay,  the  firft  is  proved  thus.  “ En- 
thufiafm  muft  always  be  accompanied  with 
craft  and  knavery.”?  It  often  is  fo,  but  not  al- 
tvays  ; for  there  may  be  honeji  enthufiajis.  There- 
fore the  whole  account  of  that  odd  combination 

which 

It  p.  £12.  ip.E'-a- 


[ 313  ] 

which  follows^  is  ingenious,  but  proves  no* 
thing. 

Yet  I muft  touch  upon  one  or  two  parts  of  it. 
“ An  enthufian;  thinks  he  is  difpenfed  with  ia 
breaking,  nay,  that  he  is  authorized  to  break,  the 
oommon  laws  of  morality.”  -Does  every  enthu* 
fiaft  ? Then  I am  none  : for  I never  thought  any 
fuch  thing.  I believe  no  man  living  is  authorized 
to  break,  or  difpenfed  with  in  breaking  any  law 
of  morality.  I know,  whoever  (habitually)  breaks 
one  of  the  Icafi  of  thefe,  Jliall  be  called  leajl  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

“ Can  any  but  an  enthufiall  believe,  that  he 
rnay  ufe  guile  to  promote  the  glory  of  God  ?” 
Yes,  ten  thoufand  that  are  no  enthufiafls,  firmly 
believe  this.  How  few  do  we  find  that  do  not 
believe  it?  That  do  not  plead  iov  officious  lies? 
How  few  will  fubfcribe  to  St.  Augujlinis  decla- 
ration (to  which  I affent  with  my  whole  heart) 

I would  not  tell  a wilful  lie,  to  fave  the  fouls 
of  the  whole  world.” 

But  to  return.  “ 'Die  wifdom  Jro?n  above  is 
without  partiality  and  without  hypocrify.  Partia- 
lity confills  in  difpenfing  an  unequal  meafure  in 
our  tranfaftions  with  others  : hypocrify,  in  attempt- 
ing to  cover  that  unequal  meafure  by  prevarica- 
tion and  falfe  pretences.” 

The  former  of  thefe  definitions  is  not  clear; 
the  latter,  neither  clear,  nor  adequate  to  the  de- 
fined. 

VoL.  xvm.  O 

t-  J).  214 — 2i8, 


But 


[ 3M  ] 

But  let  this  pafs.  My  partiality  is  now  the 
point.  What  are  the  proofs  of  It?  i.  “ His 
followers  are  always  the  children  of  God,  his 
oppofers  the  children  of  the  devil  t.”  Neither 
fo,  nor  fo,  I never  affirmed  either  one  or 
the  other  univerfally.  That  forae  of  the  former 
are  children  of  God,  and  fome  of  tlve  latter  chil- 
dren of  the  devil,  I believe.  But  what  will  this 
prove  ? 

“ His  followers  are  direfted  by  inward  feelings, 
the  impulfes  of  an  inflamed  fancy  (no  more 
than  they  are  directed  by  the  Alcoran)  “ his 
oppofers,  by  the  fcripture.”  What  while  they 
ate  curfing,  fwearing,  blafpheining  ; beating 
and  maiming  men  that  have  done  them  no  wrong, 
and  treating  women  in  a manner  too  fhocking 
to  be  repeated?  2.  The  next  proof  is  very  ex- 
traordinary. My  words  are,  “ I was  with  two 
perfons,  who  I doubt,  are  properly  enthufiaffs  : 
for  firff,  they  think  to  attain  the  end  without  the 
means,  which  is  enthufiafm  properly  fo  called. 
Again,  they  think  themfelves  infpired  of  God, 
and  are  not.  But  falfe,  imaginary  infpiration  is 
enthufiafm.  That  theirs  is  only  imaginary  infpi- 
ration  appears  hence,  it  contradicts  the  law  and 
the  tefimony 

Now’,  by  what  art  of  man  can  this  be  made 
a proof  of  n.y  partiality  ? Why  thus:  “ Thefe 
ai  e wife  words.  But  what  do  they  amount  to  ? 
Only  to  this  : that  thefe  two  perfons  would  not 
take  out  their  patents  of  infpiration  from  Iris 

office."' 


p.  22c. 


p.  22U 


C 3^5  ] 

office.”  But  what  proof  is  there  of  this  round 
afiertion  ? Truly,  none  at  all. 

Full  as  extraordinary  is  the  third  proof  ofmy 
partiality.  “ Mifs  Gr  — told  Mrs.  Sp — , Mr. 
Wejley  wasapapift.  Upon  this  Mifs  Gr.  is  an- 
athematized. And  _vve  are  told,  that  in  confe-- 
quence,  (he  had  lately  been  raving  mad  and  as 
fuch  was  tied  down  in  her  bed.  Yctalltheje 
circumftances  of  madnefs  have  befallen  his  fa- 
vourite faints,  whom  he  has  vindicated  from 
the  opprobriumh.” 

The  palTage  in  my  journal  Hands  thus.  “ Mrs. 
Spa — told  me,  two  or  three  nights  fince,  Mifs 
Gr.  met  me, .and  faid,  I affure  you,  Mr.  W^ey 
is  a papift.  Perhaps  I need  obferve  no  more 
upon  this,  than  that  Mifs  Gr . had  lately  been  rav- 
ing mad,  in  confequence  of  a fever  ; (not  of  an 
anathema  which  never  had  any  being)  that  as  fuch 
file  was  tied  down  in  her  bed ; and  as  foon  as 
fhe  was  fuffered  to  go  abroad,  went  to  Mr.  IVhite- 
feld,  to  inquire  of  him,  whether  Jhe  was  not  a 
papift  ? But  he  quickly  perceived,  fhe  was  only  a 
luntic,  the  nature  of  her  diforder  foon  betraying 
itfelfi”  Certainly  then  my  allowing  her  to  be 
mad  is  no  proof  of  my  partiality.  I will  allow 
every  one  to  be  fo,  who  is  attended  with  “ all 
thefe  circumflances  of  madnefs.” 

4.  “ He  pronounces  fentence  of  enthufiafm 
upon  another,  and  tells  us  wherefore,  without 
any  difguife.  Here  I took  leave  of  a poor  mad, 
original  enthufiaft,  who  had  been  feattering  lies 


in 


C 316  3 

4n  every  <juarter.”  It  was  the  famous  John  Adams ^ 
fince  confined  at  Box,  whofe  capital  lie,  the 
•fource  of  the  reft  was,  that  he  was  a prophet, 
greater  than  Mojes,  or  any  of  the  apoftles.  And 
'is  the  pronouncing  him  a madman,  a proof  of  my 
'partiality  ? 

5,  “ I had  much  converfatlon  with  Mr. 
Simpfon,  an  original  enthujiajl.  I defire  d him 
in  the  evening  to  give  an  exhortaion.  He  did 
fo,  and  fpoke  many  good  things,  in  a manner 
peculiar  to  himfelf,”  (without  order  or  connexion, 
head  or  tail  ; and  in  a language  very  near  as 
myftical  as  that  of  Jacob  Behmen.)  “ When  he 
had  done,  I fummed  up  what  he  had  faid,  me- 
thodizing and  explaining  it.  O what  pity  it  is, 
this  well-meaning  man  fliould  ever  fpeak  without 
an  interpreter  t !” 

Let  this  paftage  likewife  ftand  as  it  is,  and  who 
can  guefs  how  it  is  to  prove  my  partiality 
But  by  a flight  of  hand,  the  thing  is  done. 
“ How  differently  does  Mr.  Wejley  treat  thefe 
two  enthufiafts?  The  firftis  accufed  of  fpreading 
lies  of  his  mafer  (No,  he  never  was  any 
difciple  of  mine.)  “ On  which  Mr.  W.  took  his 
leave  of  him  ; a gentle  expreffion,  to  fignify  the 
thrufting  him  out  head  and  ihoulders,  from  the 
fociety  of  faints.”  It  fignifies  neither  more  nor 
lefs,  than  that  I went  out  of  the  room  and  left 
him.  “ The'other’s  enthufiafm  is  made  to  con- 
fift  only  in  want  of  tnethod."  No.  His  enthu- 
fiafm 


+ p.  3?^ 


[ a^7  ] 

fiafrn  did  not  conjiflin  this.  It  was  the  caufe  of 
it.  But  he- was  quite  another  man  than 
Adams  and  I .believe,  a right  honeft  man. 

6.  I.was  both  furprized  and  grieved  at  a 
genuine, inftance  of  enthufiafm.  I.  5.  who  had 
received 'a  fenfe  of  the  love  of  God  a few- days 
before,',  came  riding  though  the  town,- hollowing 
and  fhouting  and  driving  all  the  people  before 
him,  telling,  them,  “ God  had  told,  him,  he 
fliould  be  a king,  and  fliould  tread  all  his  enemies 
under  his-  feet.”  I fent  him  home  immediately 
to  his  work,  and  advifed . him  .to  cr)’'  day  and 
night  to  God  that  he  might  be  lowly  in  heart, 
left  Satan  fhould  , again  , axL  advantage  over 
him.'' 

What  this  prove.s,  or  is  intended  to  prove, 
I cannot  tell.  Certainly,  neither  this,  nor  any 
of.  the  preceding  palTages,  prove  the  point  now 
in  queftion,  my  partialitj.  So  this  likewife  is 
wholly  unproved  ftill. 

“ We  fliall  end,  where  every  fantic  leader 
ends,  with  his  hypocrify  t.”  Five  arguments  are 
brought  in  proof  of  this.  I fhall  take  them  in 
their  order,  i.  “ After  having  heaped  up  mi- 
racles one  upon  another,  he  fneaks  away  under 
the  proteftion  of  a puny  wonder.  About  five  I 
began  near  the  Keelmen’s  hofpital  many  thou- 
fands  ftanding  round.  The  wind  was  high  juft 
before,  but  fcarce  a breath  was  felt  all  the  time 
we  affembled  before  God.  I praife  God  for  this 
O 3 alfo- 

+ p.  227. 


[ ] 


alfo.  Is  it  enthufiafm,  to  fee  God  iv  every  benefit 
we  receive  ? It  is  not  ; the  enthufiafm  confifts  in 
believing  thofe  benefits  to  be  conferred,  through 
a change  in  the  eflablifhed  courfe  of  nature.  But 
here  he  infnuates,  that  he  meant  no  more  by 
hismiracles,  then  the  feeing  God  in  every  benefit 
we  receive  t.”  That  fudden  and  total  ceafing 
of  the  wind,  I impute  to  the  particular  provi- 
dence of  God.  This  I mean  hy  feeing  God  therein. 
But  this  I knew  many  would  count  enthufiafm. 
In  guarding  againft  it,  I had  an  eye  to  that  fingle 
incident,  and  no  other.  Nor  did  I infinuate 
any  thing  more  than  I exprelTed,  in  as  plain  a 
manner  as  I could. 

A little  digrelTion  follows.  “ A friend  of  his 
advifes,  not  to  eftablifii  the  power  of  working  mi- 
racles, as  the  great  criterion  of  a divine  milTion : 
feeing  the  agreement  of  doflrines  with  fcripture, 
is  the  only  infallible  rule;|:.'’  “ But  Chrift  him- 

felf  eftablifhes  the  power  of  working  miracles, 
as  the  great  criterion  of  a divine  mifTion§.”  True, 
of  a miflion  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world  : to 
put  a period  to  the  Jewifh,  and  introduce  the 
Chriflian  difpenfation.  And  whoever  pretends 
to  fuch  a mijfion  will  Hand  in  fuch  need  of fuck 
credentials. 

2.  “ He  Ihifts  and  doubles  no  lefs”  (neither 
lefs,  nor  more)  “ as  to  the  extafies  of  his  faints. 
Sometimes  they  are  of  God,  fometimes  of  the 
devil  ; but  he  is  conftant  in  this,  that  natural 


§ p;  z3». 


i p.  £28,  229, 


t p.  230* 


C 3^9  ] 

caiijes  hd,ve  no  hand  in  them.”  This  is  not  true. 
In  what  are  here  termed  extafies,  ftrong  joy  or 
grief,  attended  with  various  bodily  fymptoms,  I 
Itave  openly  affirmed  again  and  again,  that  na- 
tural caufts  have  a part.  Nor  did  I ever  ffiift  or 
double  on  the  head.  I have  Ileadily  and  uniform- 
ly maintained,  that  if  the  mind  be  affefted  to  fuch 
a degree,  the  body  muft  be  affeffed  by  the  laws 
of  the  vital  union.  The  mind  I believe  wms,  in 
many  of  thofe  cafes,  affefled  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  in  others  by  the  devil,  and  in  feme  by 
both  : and  in  confequence  of  this,  the  body  was 
affefled  alfo.  3.  “ Mr.  W.  fays,  I fear  we  have 
grieved  the  Spirit  of  the  jealous  God,  by  quef- 
tioning  his  work,  and  by  blafpheming  it,  by  im- 
puting it  to  nature,  or  even  to  the  devilf.”  True; 
by  imputing  the  conviftion  and  converfion  of 
fmners,  which  is  the  work  of  God  alone,  (be- 
caufe  of  thefe  unufual  circumftances  attending  it) 
either  to  nature  or  to  the  devil.  This  is  flat  and 
plain.  No  prevarication  yet.  Let  us  attend  to 
the  next  proof  of  it.  “ Innumerable  cautions 
were  given  me,  not  to  regard  vifions  or  dreams, 
or  to  fancy  people  had  remiffion  of  fins,  becaufe 
of  their  cries,  or  tears,  or  outward  profeffions. 
The  fum  of  ray  anfwer  was,  you  deny  that  God 
does  now  work  thefe  e£fe6ls;  at  leaft,  that  he 
works  them  in  this  manner.  I affirm  both. — I 
have  feen  very  many  perfons  changed  in  a mo- 
ment from  a fpirit  of  fear,  horror,  defpair,  to  a 
O 4 fpirit 

p*  23®)  233* 


■[  320  ] 

fpirit  of  Jove,  joy,  peace— WTiat  I liave  to  fay 
touching  vifions  and  dreams  is  this.  I know  fe- 
veral  perfons  in  whom  this  great  change  was 
wrought  in  a dream,  or  during  a ftrong  reprefen- 
tation  to  the  eye  of  their  mind,  of  Chrift  either 
on  the  crofs,  or  in  glory.  This  is  the  faft.  Let 
anyjudge  of  it  as  they  pleafe.  And  that  fuch  a 
change  was  then  wrought,  appears  (not  from  their 
/hedding  tears  only,  or  falling  into  fits,  or  crying 
out : thefe  are  not  the  fruits,  as  you  feem  to  fup- 
pofe,  whereby  I judge,  but)  from  the  whole  te- 
nor of  their  life,  till  then  many  ways  wicked, 
from  that  time  holy  and  juft  and  good.”  “ Nay, 
lie  isfo  convinced  of  its  being  the  work  of  God, 
horrid  blafpkemies  which  enfued,  he  af- 
cribes  to  tire  abundance  of  joy  which  God  had 
given  to'  a poor,  mad  womant.”  Do  I afcribe 
ihoh  blafphemies  to  htxjoy  in  God?  No;  but  to 
her  pride.  My  words  are.  “ I met  with  one, 
who  having  been  If^ted  up  with  the  abundance  of 
joy  which  God  had  given  her,  had  fallen  into 
fuch  blafphemies  and  vain  imaginations,  as  are 
not  common  to  men.  In  the  afternoon  I found 
another  inftance,  nearly  I fear  of  the  fame  kind  : 
one  who  fet  her  private  revelations,  fo  called,  on 
the  felf-fame  foot  with  the  written  wordi.” 

But  how  is  this  to  ^xovt  prevarication  ? “ Why, 
on  a fudden,  he  direBly  revokes  all  he  had  advanc- 
ed. He  fays,  “ I told  them,  they  were  not  to 
judge  of  the  Spirit  whereby  any  one  fpoke,  ei- 
ther 


f E>.  234. 


J p.  2^6. 


C 321  J 

tlier  by  appearayices,  or  by  common  report,  or  by 
their  own  inward  feelings.  No,  nor  by  any 
dreams,  vifions,  or  revelations,  fuppofed  to  be 
made  to  the  foul,  any  more  than  by  their  tears, 
or  any  involuntary  ejfeBs  wrought  upon  their  bo- 
dies. I warned  them,  that_^all  thefe  things  were 
in  themfelves  of  a doultful,  difputahle  nature. 
They  might  be  from  God,  or  they  might  not ; and 
were  therefore  not  fimply  to  be  relied  on,  any 
more  than  fimply  to  be  condemned,  but  to  be 
tried  by  a farther  rule,  to  be  brought  to  the  only 
-certain  teft,  the  law  and  the  tef  imony.^'  “ Now 
is  not  this  a formal  recantation  of  what  he  had 
faid  jurt  abovet  ?”  Nothing  lefs,  as  I will  fliew 
in  two  minutes,  to  every  calm,  impartial  man» 
What  I fay  now,  I have  faid  any  time  this  thirty 
years ; I have  never  varied  therefrom  for  an  hour. 
“ Every  thing  difputahle  is  to  be  brought  to  the 
only  certain  tfl,  the  law  and  the  tfiimony.”  “ But 
did  not  you  talk  juh  now  oi  vifons  and  dreams?” 
Yes  ; but  not  as  of  a tefi  of  any  thing  ; unlefs  only 
as  a channel  thro’  which  God  is  fometimes  pleaf- 
ed  to  convey  love,  joy,  peace,  longfuffering,  gen- 
tlenefs,  goodnefs,  fidelity,  meeknefs,  temperance,  the 
indifputable  fruit  of  his  Spirit.  And  thefe  we 
may  obferve,  wherever  they  e.xift,  muft  be  in- 
wardly felt.  Now  where  is  the  prevarication  ? 
Where  the  formal  recantation  ? They  are  vanith-- 
ed  into  air. 

But  here  is  more  proof:  “ At  length  he  gives 
O 5 up., 

335-»  . 


[ 322  ] 

up  all  thefe  divine  agitations  to  the  devil  f. 
I enquired,  fays  he,  into  the  cafe  of  thofe  who 
had  lately  cried  out  aloud  during  the  preaching. 
I found  this  had  come  upon  every  one  of  them 
in  a moment,  without  any  previous  notice.  In 
that  moment  they  dropt  down,  loft  all  their 
ftrength,  and  were  feized  with  violent  pain. 
Some  faid  they  felt  as  if  a fword  were  running 
through  them ; others  as  if  their  whole  body 
was  tearing  in  pieces.  Thefe  fymptoris  I can  no 
more  impute  to  any  natural  caufe,  than  to  the 
Spirit  of  God,  I make  no  doubt  but  it  was  Sa- 
tan tearing  them  as  they  were  coming  to 
Chrift  +.” 

“ Now  thefe  were  the  very  fymptoms  which  he 
had  before  afcribed  to  the  Spirit  of  God."  Never 
in  my  life.  Indeed  forae  of  them  I never  met 
with  before.  Thofe  outward  f)7nptoms  which  1 
had  met  with  before,  bodily  agitations  in  parti- 
cular, I did  not  afcribe  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  but 
to  the  natural  union  of  the  foul  and  body.  And 
thofe  fymptoms  which  I now  afcribe  to  the  devil, 
I never  afcribed  to  any  other  caufe.  The  fecond 
proof  of  my  prevarication  or  hypocrify  is  there- 
fore juft  as  conclufive  as  the  firft. 

3.  Now  for  the  third.  “ Mr.  JV.  before  fpoke 
contemptuoufly  of  orthodoxy,  to  take  in  the  fec- 
taries.  But  when  he  would  take  oflF  churchmen, 
then  orthodo.xy  is  the  unum  neceJfariumT  Did  I 
ever  fay  fo  ? No  more  than  (in  the  other  ex- 

trsrael 

j> 


i p. 


t P*  *37* 


[ 323  ] 

treme)  /peak  contemptuoujly  of  it.  “ Yes,  you 
fay,  I defcribed  the  plain,  old  religion  of  the 
church  of  England,  which  is  now  almoft  every 
where  fpoken  againff,  under  the  new  name  of 
Mdkodijl.”  Very  well  : and  what  fhadow  of 
prevarication  is  here  ? May  I not  ftill  declare  the 
plain,  old  religion  of  the  church  of  England,  and 
yet  very  confidently  aver,  that  right  opinion  is  a 
very  flender  part  of  it  ? 

4.  The  next  palTage,  I am  forry  to  fay,  is  nei- 
ther related  with  fenoufnefs  nor  truth.  “ We 
have  feen  him  inviting  perlecution.”  Never: 
though  I “ rejoiced”  in  the  indance  alledged,  at 
having  an  opportunity  of  calling  a multitude  of 
the  mod  abandoned  finners  to  repentance. 

What  is  peculiarly  unfair  is,  the  lame,  falfe 
account  is  palmed  upon  me,  by  “ fo  he  himfelf 
tells  the  dory.”  I mud  therefore  tell  the  dory 
once  more,  in  as  few  wmrds  as  I cam 

Sunday,  ^dug.  7,  1-737,  I repelled  Mrs.  JFl 
from  the  communion.  Tiiejday  g,  I was  re- 
quired by  Mr.  Bailiff  Parker  to  appear  at  the 
next  court.  Thurf  11,  Elv.  Cavjion,  her  uncle, 
faid  to  me,  “ Give  your  reafons  for  repelling  Iter 
before  the  whole  congregation.”  I anfwered,-. 
“ Sir,  if  you  infid  upon  it,  I will.”  But  I heard 
no  more  of  it.  Afterward  he  faid  (but  not  to 
me)  “ Mr.  W.  had  repelled  out  of  revenge,, 

becaufehe  had  made  propofals  of  marriage  to  her 
which  fhe  rejeffed.”  Tuefday  16,  Mrs.  IV'. 
made  affidavit  of  it.  Thurjday,  Sept.  1,  a grand 
O 6 iur/.^ 


[ 3^4  ] 

jury,  prepared  by  Mr.  Caujion,  found,  that  “ John 
W'ejley  had  broken  the  laws  of  the  realm,  by 
fpeaking  and  writing  to  Mrs.  W.  againfl  her  buf- 
band’s  confent,  and  by  repelling  her  from  the 
jommunion.’' 

Friday  2,  was  the  third  court  day  at  which 
I appeared  fince  my  being  required  fo  to  do  by 
Mr.  Parker.  I moved  for  an  immediate  hear- 
ing; but  was  put  off  till  the  next  court  day.  On 
the  next  court  day  I appeared  again,  as  alfo  at 
the  two  courts  following;  but  could  not  be  heard. 
Thurf.  Nov.  3,  I appeared  in  court  again  ; and 
yet  again  on  Tuef.  Nov.  22,  on  which  day  Mr. 
C.  defired  to  fpeak  with  me,  and  read  me  an 
affidavit,  in  which  it  was  affirmed,  that  I “ abufed' 
Mr.  C.  in  his  own  houfe,  calling  him  liar,  vil- 
lain, and  fo  on,”  It  was  likewife  repeated,  that. 
1 had  been  reprimanded  at  the  lad  court,  by  Mr. 
C.  as  an  enemy  to  and  hinderer  of  the  public 
peace. 

“ My  friends  agreed  with  me,  that  the  time 
we  looked  for,  was  now  come..  And  the  next 
morning,  calling  on  Mr,  C.  I told  him,  “ 1 de- 
figned  to  fel  out  for  immediately.” 

Friday,  Deee??u  2,  I propofed  to  fet  out  for 
Carolina  about  noon.  But  about  ten,  the  magif- 
trates  fent  for  me,  and  told  me,  “ I mud  not  go 
out  of  the  province  ; for  I had  not  anfwered  the 
allegations  laid  againd  me.”  I replied,  “ I have 
appeared  at  fix  or  feven  courts,  in  order  to  anfwer 
ffiem.  But  l.was  not  fuffered  fo  to  do.’’  After 

a. few- 


[ 325  J 

a- few  more  words,  I faid,  “ You  ufe  me  very  iH, 
And  fo  you  do  the  truftees.  You  know  your 
bufinefs,  and  I know  mine.” 

In  the  afternoon,  tliey  publifhed  an  order,_ 
forbidding  any  to  affift  me  in  going  out  of  the 
province.  But  I knew,  I had  no  more  bufinefs 
there.  So  foon  as  evening  prayer  was  over, 
the  tide  then  ferving,  T took  boat  at  the  Bluff  for 
Carolina. 

This  is  the  piain  account  of  the  matter.  I. 
need  ordy  .add  a remark  or  two  on  the  pleafantiy 
of  my  cenfiirer..  “ He  had  recourfe  as  ufual,  to 
his  revelations.  I confulted  my  friends,  whether 
God  did  not  call  me  to  Englandf.”  Not  by  reve- 
lations : thefe  were  out  of  the  queffion ; but  by 
Hear,  flrong  reafons.  “ The  magiffrate  foon- 
quickened  his  pace,  by  declaring  him  an  enemy  to 
the  public  peace,”  No;  that  fenfelefs  affert ion ■. 
of  Mr.  C.  made  me  go  neither  fooner  nor  later, 
“ The  reader  has  feen  him  long  languijh  for  per-- 
fecution.”  What,  before  November  1737  ? I ne-. 
v-er  languijlied  ior  it  either  before  or  fince.  But 
lyubmit  to  what  pleafes  God.  “ To  hide  pol- 
ironery  in  a bravado,  he  gave  public, notice  of  his 
apoftolical  intention  Kind  and  civil!  I may 
be  excufed  from  taking  notice  of  what  follows. 
It  is  equally  ferious  and  genteel; 

“ Had  his  lo7igings  iox  perfecution  been  with- 
out hypocrify."  The  fame  miftake  throughout, 
I.  never  - ox  prefejfed  to  long  for  it  at  all. 

But. 

■f  p.  2^2.  ip.  243,, 


[ 3^6  ] 

But  If  I profejjed  it  ever  fmce  I returned  from 
Georgia,  what  was  done  before  I returned  could 
not  prove  projejjion  to  he  kypocrify.  So  all 
this  ribaldry  ferves  no  end  ; only  to  throw  much 
dirt,  if  haply  fome  may  flick. 

Meantime,  how  many  untruths  are  here  in 
one  page  t ? i.  “ He  made  the  path  doubly 
perplexed  for  his  followers.  2.  He  left  them  to 
arfwer  for  his  crimes.  3.  He  longed  for  perfe- 
cution.  4.  He  went  as  far  as  Georgia  for  it.  5. 
The  truth  of  his  miflion  was  quejhoned  by  the  ma~ 
gijlrate,  and  6.  decried  by  the  people,  7.  for  his 
falfe  morals.  8.  The  gofpcl  was  wounded  through 
the  fides  of  its  mifjionary.  g.  Thefirft 

Chriftian  preachers  offered  up  themfelves:  (fo 
did  I.)  Inflead  of  this,  our  paltry  mimic" — Bona 
verba ! Surely  a writer  fliculd  reverence  himfelf 
how  much  foever  he  dfpifes  his  opponent.  So 
upon  the  whole,  this  proof  of  my  hypocrify  is  as 
lame  as  the  three  former. 

5.  “ We  have  feen  above,  how  he  fets  all 
prudence  at  defiance.”  None  hwi  falfe  prudence. 
“ But  he  ufes  a different  language  when  his  rivals 
are  to  be  reflrained.”  No  ; always  the  fame, 
both  with  regard  iofalf  prudence  and  true. 

“ But  take  the  affair  from  the  beginning.  He 
began  to  fufpeft  rivals  in  the  year  thirty-nine  : 
for  he  fays,  “ Remembering  how  many  that  came 
after  me  were  preferred  before  me.”  The  very 
next  words  fhew  in  what  fenfe.  They  had  at- 
tained 


+ p.  2^41 


[ 3^7  ] 

fained  unto  the  law  of  righteoufnefs : I had  not. 
But  what  has  this  to  do  with  rivals? 

However,  go  on.  “ At  this  time  (Bee.  8, 
1739)  his  opening  the  bible  afforded  him  but 
fmall  relief.  He  funk  fo  far  in  his  defpondency, 
as  fo  doubt  if  God  would  not  lay  him  afide,  and 
fend  other  labourers  into  his  harveft.”  But  this 
was  another  time.  It  was  June.  22.  And  the  oc- 
cafion  of  the  doubt  is  exprefly  mentioned.  “ I 
preached,  but  had  no  life  or  fpirit  in  me,  and 
was  much'  in  doubt,”  on  that  account.  Not  on 
account  of  Mr.  Whitefeld.  He  did  not  “ now 
begin  to  fet  up  for  himfelf.”  We  were  in  full 
union  ; nor  was  there  the  leaf!  fhadow  of  rivalry 
or  contention  between  us.  1 flill  fincerely 
“ praife  God  for  his  wifdom,  in  giving  different 
talents  to  different  preachers  t,”  and  particularly 
for  his  giving  Mr.  Wh.  the  talents,  which  I have 
not. 

6.  What  farther  proof  of  hypocrify?  Why, 
“ he  had  given  innumerable  flirts  of  contempt  in 
his  Journals  againf  human  learning  Where  ? 
I do  not  know.  Let  the  paffages  be  cited  : elfe 
let  me  fpeak  for  it  ever  fo  much,  it  will  prove 
nothing.  “ At  laft  he  was  forced  to  have  re- 
eourfe  to  what  he  had  fo  much  fcorned,  I mean, 
prudence  All  a miftake.  I hope  never  to 
have  recourfe  to  falfe  prudence : and  true  pru-‘ 
dence  I never  fcorned. 

“ He  might  have  met  Mr.  Wk.  half  way  t bui 
he  was  too  formidable  a rival  ||.  With  a lefs 

formidable 

t P<  i p.  252,  253.  § 255.  11  ibid. 


formidable  one  he  purfiies  this  way.  I laboured 
fays  he,  to  convince  Mr.  Gr”  (my  alTiftam,  not 
rival)  “ that  he  had  not  done  well,  in  confuting, 
as  he  termed  it,  the  ferraon  I preached  the  Sun- 
day before.  I aiked,  will  you  meet  me  half  way  ? 
(the  words  following  put  my  meaning  beyond  all 
difpute.)  I will  never  publicly  preach  againjl 
you.  Will  not  you,  againft  Here  we  fee  a 
lair  invitation  to  Mr.  Gr.  to  play  the  hypocrite 
with  him,”  Not  in  the  leaft.  Each  might  fimp- 
ly  deliver  his  own  fentimems,  without  preaching 
againjl  the  other.  “ We  conclude  that  Mr.  JVeJl 
ley,  amidft  his  W'armeft  exclamations  againft  all 
prudence,  had  ftill  a fuccedaneum,  which  he  in- 
deed calls  prudence.  But  its  true  name  is  craft.''\ 

* Crajl  is  an  elTential  part  of  worldly  prudence. 
This  I deteft  and  abhor.  And  let  him  prove 
it  upon  me  that  can.  But  it  mull  be  by  better 
arguments  then  the  foregoing.'  Tridy  Chrijlian 
prudence,  fuch  as  was  recommended  by  our  Lord, 
and  praflifed  by  him  and  his  apcftles,  I reverence 
and  defire  to  learn,  being  convinced  of  its  abun- 
dant ufefulnefs. 

I know  nothing  material  in  the  argument 
which  I have  left  untouched.  And  I mull  now 
refer  it  to  all  the  world,  whether,  for  all  that  has 
been  brought  to  the  contrary,  I may  not  Hill  have 
a meafure  of  the  wifdom  from  above,  which  is  firjl 


[ 3^9  ] 

full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits  \ u ithout  partia- 
lity and  without  hypocrify. 

I have  fpoke  abundantly  more  concerning  my- 
felf  than  I intended  or  expefted.  Yet  I muft  beg 
leave  to  add  a few  words  more.  How  far  I am 
from  being  an  enemy  to  prudence,  I hope  appears 
already.  It  remains  to  enquire,  whether  I am  an 
enemy  to  reafon  or  natural  religion  ? 

“ As  to  the  firft,  he  frankly  tells  us,  The  father 
of  lies  was  the  father  of  reafonings  alfo.  For  he 
fays,  I obferved  more  and  more  the  advantage 
Satan  had  gained  over  us.  Alany  were  thrown 
into  idle  reafonings.”%  Yes,  and  they  were  hurt 
thereby.  But  reafon  is  good,  though  idle  rea- 
fonings are  evil.  Nor  does  it  follow,  that  I am 
an  enemy  to  the  one,  becaufe  I condemn  the 
other. 

“ However  you  are  an  enemy  to  natural 
religion.  For  you  fay,  A Frenchman  gave  us  a 
full  account  of  the  Chicafaws.  They  do  nothing 
but  eat,  and  drink,  and  fmoak,  from  morning  till 
night,  and  almoft  from  night  till  morning.  For 
they  rife  at  any  hour  of  the  night  when  they 
awake,  and  after  eating  and  drinking  as  much 
as  they  can,  go  to  fleep  again.  Hence  we  could 
not  but  remark,  what  is  the  religion  of  nature, 
properly  fo  called,  or  that  religion  which  flows 
from  natural  reafon,  unaffifted  by  revelation."^ 
I believe  this  difpute  may  be  cut  fhort  by  only 
defining  the  term.  What  does  your  lordfhip 

mean 


Jp.  28g.  + p,  ago] 


[ 330  ] 

mean  by  natural  religion  ? KJyjlem  of  principles? 
But  I mean  by  it,  in  this  place,  mens  natural  man- 
ners. Thefe  certainly  “ flow  from  their  natural 
pa/Jions  and  appetites, with  that  degree  of  reafon 
which  they  have.  And  this,  in  other  iiiftances, 
is  not  contemptible;  though  it  is  not  fufficienfc 
to  teach  them  true  religion. 

II.  I proceed  to  confider,  in  the  fecond  place, 
what  is  advanced  concerning  the  operations  of 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

“ Our  bleffed  Redeemer  promifed  to  fend 
among  his  followers  the  Holy  Ghofl,  called  the 
Spirit  of  Truth  and  the  Comforter,  which  fliould 
co-operate  with  man,  in  efablifiing  his  faith  and 
in  perfeBing  his  obedience-,  or  in  other  words, 
fhould  fantlify  him  to  redemption’'^ 

Accordingly,  “ the  fanBif  cation  and  redemp- 
tion of  the  world,  man  cannot  fruftrate  nor  ren- 
der ineffeftual.  For  it  is  not  in  his  power  to 
make  that  to  be  undone,  which  is  once  done  and 
perfeBed.”^ 

I do  not  comprehend.  Is  all  the  world  fanBt- 
fied?  Is  not  to  be  fanBifed  the  fame  as  to  be  made 
holy  ? Is  cll  the  world  holy  ? And  “ can  no  man 
fruftrate”  his  own  fanBif  cation  ?” 

“ The  Holy  Ghoft  eftabliflies  our  faith  and 
perfe£fs  our  obedience,  by  inlightning  the  under- 
funding, and  reBifyingthe  will.”^ 

“ In  the  former  refpeft,  i.  He  gave  the  gift  of 

tongues  at  the  day  of  PentecofB 

° “ Indeed 

J p.  3.  '^P-337>  8 P-3- 


[ 331  ] 

“ Indeed  enthujiafts  in  their  extafies  have 
talked  very  fluently  in  languages  they  had  a very 
imperfeft  knowledge  of  in  their  fobei  intervals.” 
I can  no  more  believe  this  on  the  credit  of 
Lord  Shaflejbury  and  a Popijli  exorcift,  than  I 
can  believe  the  tale  of  “ an  hundred  people 
talking  zvithout  tongues f on  the  credit  of  Dr. 
Middleton. 

“ The  other  gifts  of  the  Spirit  St.  Paul  reckons 
up  thus.  To  one  is  given  the  word  of  zoifdom,  to 
another  the  zvord  of  knozvledge,  to  another  the  gifts 
of  healing,  to  another  work  ing  of  miracles,  to  ano- 
ther prophecy,  to  another  the  difcerning  offpirits.”\ 
But  why  are  the  other  three  left  out  ? Faith, 
divers  kinds  oj  tongues,  and  the  interpretation  of 
tongues  ? 

I believe  the  word  of  wifdom  means,  light  to 
explain  the  manifold  wifdom  of  God  in  the 
grand  fcheme  of  gofpel-falvation  ; the  word  of 
knowledge,  a power  of  explaining  the  Old  Tefta- 
ment  types  and  prophecies.  Faith  may  mean 
an  extraordinary  truft  in  God,  under  the  moft 
difficult  and  dangerous  circumftances  ; the  gifts  of 
healing,  a miraculous  power  of  curing  difeafes  : 
the  difcerning  of  fpirits,  a fupernatural  difcern- 
ment,  whether  men  were  upright  or  not?  Whe- 
ther they  were  qualified  for  offices  in  the  church? 
And  whether  they  who  profeft  to  fpeak  by  in- 
fpiration,  really  did  fo  or  not  ? 

But  “ the  richeft  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  is 

tliQ 


1 p.  23. 


[ 332  ] 

the  infpiralion  offer ipture.”\  Herein  the  promife, 
that  the  Comforter  fhould  abide  with  us for  ever^  is 
eminently  fulfilled.  For  though  his  ordinary  in- 
fluence occafionally  affifls  the  faithful  of  all  ages, 
yet  his  confant  abode  and  fupreme  illumination  is 
in  the  feriptures  of  the  New  Teftament.:|;  I 
mean,  he  is  there  only  as  the  illuminator  of  the 
underfandingr 

But  does  this  agree  with  the  following  words  ? 
“ Nature  is  not  able  to  keep  a mean.  Idrnigrace 
is  able  : for  the  Spirit  helpeth  our  infirmities.  We 
mu  ft  apply  to  the  guide  of  truth,  to  prevent  our 
being  carried  about  with  divers  and  f range  doc- 
trinesM'  Is  he  not  then  every  where  to  illumi- 
nate the  underjlanding,  as  well  as  to  rcBify  the 
will?  And  indeed,  do  we  not  need  the  one,  as 
continually  as  the  other  ? 

“ But  how  did  he  infpire  the  feripture  ? He 
fo  direfted  the  writers,  that  no  confiderable  error 
fliould  fall  from  them§.”  Nay,  will  not  the  al- . 
lowing,  there  is  any  error  in  feripture,  fhake  the 
authority  of  the  whole  ? 

Again,  what  is  the  difference  between  the  im- 
mediate and  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spi- 

rit ? I know,  Milton  fpeaks  of  “ virtual  or  imme- 
diate touch.”  But  moft  incline  to  think,  virtual 
touch  is  no  touch  at  all. 

“ Were  the  ftyle  of  the  New  Teftament  utter- 
ly rude  and  barbarous,  and  abounding  with  every 

fault. 


i p.  30.  $ p.  39, 


+ p.  340- 


[ 333  ] 


fault  that  can  poffibly  deform  a language:  this  is 
fo  far  from  proving  fuch  language  not  divinely 
infpired,  that  it  is  one  cerrain  maik  of  this  ori- 
ginalj.” 

A vehement  paradox  this^  But  it  is  not  prov- 
ed yet,  and  probably  never  wilK 

“ The  labours  ofthofe  who  have  attempted  to 
defend  the  purity  of  fcripture-greek,  have'bcen 
very  idly  employed||.” 

Others  think,  they  have  been  very  wifely  em- 
ployed, and  that  they  have  abundantly  proved 
their  point. 

Having  now  " confidered  the  operations  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  guide  of  truth,  who  clears 
and  enlightens  the  underftanding,  I proceed  to 
confider  him  as  the  Coirforter,  who  purifies  and 
fupports  the  will.t” 

“ Sacred  antiquity  is  full  in  its  accounts  of  the 
fudden  and  change  made  by  the  Holy  Spi- 
rit in  the  difpofitions  and  manners  of  thofe  whom 
it  had  inlightened  : inflarttaneoufiy  effacing  their 
evil  habits,  and  familiarizing  them  to  the  per- 
form.ance  of  every  good  aftion^.” 

“ No  natural  caufe  could  effeH  this.  Neither 
fanaticifm  nor  fuperfilion,  nor  both  of  them,  will 
account  for  fo  fudden  and  lafiing  a converfion.*’ 

“ Supcrfition  never  effe£ls  any  confiderable 
change  in  the  manners.  Its  utmofl  force  is  juft 
enough,  to  make  us  exa£l  in  the  ceremonious  of- 
fices 

f P 55-  ^ P-  66.  + p.  89.  § P-  90- 


[ 334  ] 


fices  of  religion,  or  to  caufe  fome  a£ls  of  peni- 
tence,  as  death  approaches:|:.” 

“ Fanaticijm  indeed  a£ls  with  greater  violence, 
and  by  influencing  the  will,  frequently  forces  the 
manners  from  their  bent,  and  fometimes  effaces 
the  flrongeft  impreflions  of  cuflom  and  nature. 
But  this  fervor,  though  violent,  is  rarely  lajling  : 
never  fo  long,  as  to  eftablifh  the  new  fyjlem  into 
an  habit.  So  that  when  its  rage  fubfides,  as  it 
very  foon  does,  (but  where  it  drives  into  down- 
right madnefs)  the  bias  on  the  will  keeps  abating, 
till  all  the  former  habitudes  recover  their  relax- 
ed tone§.” 

Never  were  refleflions  morejufl  than  thefe. 
And  whoever  applies  them  to  the  matters  of  faff, 
which  daily  occur  all  over  England,  and  particu- 
larly in  London,  will  eafily  difcern,  that  the 
changes  now  wrought,  cannot  be  accounted  for 
by  natural  canjes  ; not  by  JhperJlition  ; for  the 
manners  are  changed  ; the  whole  life  and  con- 
verfation  : not  by  fanaticijm  ; for  thefe  changes 
are  fo  “ lafling,  as  to  eftablifh  the  new  fyflem  into 
a habit  not  by  mere  reafon  ; for  they  are 
fudden ; therefore,  they  can  only  be  wrought  by 
the  Holy  Spirit. 

As  to  Savanarola's  being  a fanatic,  or  affum- 
ing  the  perfon  of  a prophet,  I cannot  take  a 
popifi  hiftorian’s  word.  And  what  a man  fays 
on  the  rack  proves  nothing  ; no  more  than  his 

dying 

ip.  90.  I p.  gi.  ^ p.  92. 


[ 335  ] 


dying  filent.  Probably  this  might  arife  from 
(name  and  confcioufnefs  of  having  accufed  him- 
felf  falfelv  under  the  torture. 

“ But  how  does  the  fpirit  as  comforter  abide 
with  us  for  ever  ? He  abides  with  the  church  for 
ever;  as  well  perfonally  in  his  office  of  comforter, 
as  virtually  in  his  office  of  enlightener 

Does  he  not  then  abide  with  the  church  per- 
fonally, in  both  thefe  refpeHs  ? What  is  meant 
by  abiding  virtually  ? And  what  is  the  differ- 
ence between  abiding  virtually,  and  abiding  per- 
fonally ? 

“ The  queflion  will  be,  Does  he  dill  exercife 
his  office,  in  the  fame  extraordinary  mcinner -ism 
the  apoftles  days 

I know  none  that  affirms  it.'  “ St.  Paul  has 
determined  this  qu^flion.  Charity,  fays  he,  never 
faileth.  But  whether  there  be  prophecies,  they  fall 
fail,  whether  there  be  tongues,  they  fall  ceafe,  whe- 
ther there  be  knowledge,  it  fall  vanf  away  f - 
The  common  opinion  is,  that  this  refpefls 
another  life,  as  he  inforces  his  argument  by  this 
obfervatlon.  Now  we  fee  through  a glafs  darkly’’ : 
hut  then  face  to  face.  Now  we  knotu.  in  part  : but 
then  fall  we  know,  even  as  alfo  weAre  known  f 
“ But  the  apoflle  means,  charity  is  to  accom- 
pany the  church  in.  all  its  fages : whereas 
prophecy  and  all  the  reft  are;  only  beftowed 
during  its  infant  fate,  to  fupport  it  againft  the 
delufions  and  powers  of  darknefs  j|.” 

“ The 

X Cor,  xiii.  8,  &c.  ^ p,  99.  |(  p.  100. 


[ 336  ] 


'*  T)^Q  Cori7i(hians  abounded  In  tbefe  but 
were  wanting  in  charity.  And  this  the  apoftle 
here  expofes  by  proving  charity  to  be  fuperior  to 
them  all,  both  in  its  qualities  and  duration. 
The  three  firfl:  verfes  declare  that  the  other  gifts 
are  ufelefs  without  charity.  The  next  four 
fpecify  the  qualities  of  charity  ; the  remaining  fix 
declare  its  continuance  t.  Charity  never  Jaileth  : 
but  whether  there  be  prophecies,  they  Jhall  Jail, 
whether  there  be  tongues,  they  Jhall  ccaj'e,  whether' 
there  be  knowledge,  it  Jhall  vanijh  away.  In 
the  next  verfe  he  gives  the  reafon.  For  wehnom 
■in  part,  and  we  propJieJy  in  part-,  but  when  that 
which  is  perJeEl  is  cone,  then  that  which  is  in  part 
Jhall  be  done  away.  i.  e.  when  that  Chrijlian  IJe, 
the  lines  of  which  are  marked  out  by  the  gofpel, 
fhall  arrive  to  its  full  vigor  and  maturity then 
the  temporary  aids,  given  to  fubdue  prejudice-, 
and  to  fupport  the  tveak,  fhall,  like  Icaffolding, 
be  removed.”  In  other  words,  when  that  CkriJ- 
iian  lije,  wherein  the  apofiles  and  firfl  Chrijians 
were  but  injants,  flrall  arrive  to  its Jull  vigor  and 
maturity  in  their  fucceffors,  then  miracles  fltalJ 
ceafe.”  But  I fear  that  time  is  not  yet  come. 

1 doubt  none  that  are  now  alive,  enjoy  more  of 
vigor  and  maturity  of  the  Chrillian  life,  than  the 
very  firfl  Chri Rians  did. 

“ To  (hew  that  the  lofs  of  thefe  will  not  be 
regretted,  when  the  church  has  advanced  from  a 
Hate  of  injancy  to  manhood,^'  (alas  the  day! 

Were 


+ p.  IO»i 


C 337  ] 


Were  the  apojlks  but  infants  to  us  ?)  “ he  Illuf- 
trates  the  cafe  by  an  elegant  fimiiitude.  When  I 

zuas  a child  I fpakt  as  a child^ but  when  I be~ 

came  a rrian^  I put  away  childijh  things.  His  next 
remark,  concerning  the  defefts  of  human  know- 
ledge, is  only  an  occafional  anfwer  to  an  objec- 
tion. And  the  laft  verfe  (hews,  that  the  fupe- 
rior  duration  of  charity  refers  to  the  prefent  life 
only.  Now  abideth  faith,  hope,  charity,  theje 
three  : but  the  greatef  of  thefe  is  chanty.  That  is,, 
you  may  perhaps  objeft,  faith  and  hope  will 
likewife  remain  in  the  church,  when*  prophecy, 
tongues  and  knowledge  are  ceafed  ; they  will  fo  ; 
but  flili  charity  is  the  greateft,  becaufe  of  its  ex- 
cellent qualitiesf,” 

“ The  laft  verfe  fhews !”  Is  not  this  begging 
the  queftion  ? How  forced  is  all  this  ? The  plain 
natural  meaning  of  the  paffage  is,  love{f\^  abfo- 
lute  necefhty,  and  the  nature  of  which  is  (hewn 
in  the  foregoing  vei fes)  has  another  commenda- 
tion,' it  never faileih  ; it  accorrjpap.ies  and  adorns 
us  to  eternity.  But  whether  there  be  prophecies, 
they  fiall Jail,  when  all  things  are  fuHilled,  and 
God  is  all  in  all;  whether  there  be  tongues,  they 
Jhall  ceafe.  One  language  lhall  prevail  among 
all  the  inhabitants  of  heaven^  while  the  low,  im- 
perfeft  languages  of  earth  are  forgotten.  The 
■knowledge  likewife  we  new  fo  eagerly  purfue, 
fiall  then  vanfi  awa\^  As  ftar-Iight  is  loft  in 
that  ol  the  mid-day  fun,  fo  our  prefent  knowledge 
VoL.  XVIII.  P ia 


f p.  107. 


I 338  ] 

•in  the  light  of  eternity.  For  we  know  in  part,  and 
we  prophejy  in  part.  We  have  here  but  fhort, 
narrow,  imperfeft  conceptions,  even  of  the 
things  round  about  us,  and  much  more  of  the 
deep  things  of  God.  And  even  the  prophecies 
which  men  deliver  from  God,  are  far  from  tak- 
dng  in  the  whole  of  future  events.  But  when  that 
U'hich  is  perfeEl  is  come,  at  death,  and  in  the  lafl; 
day,  that  whtchis  in  part  Jhall  be  done  away.  Both 
that  low,  imperfeft,  glimmering  light,  which  is 
all  the  knowledge  we  can  now  attain  to  : and 
thefe  flow  and  unfatisfafiory  methods  of  attain- 
ing, as  well  as  of  imparting  it  to  others.  U'hcn  I 
was  a child,  I talked  as  a child,  I underjlocd  as  a 
child,  I reajoned  as  a child.  As  if  he  had  faid. 
In  our  prefent  flate,  we  are  mere  infants,  com- 
pared to  what  we  Ihall  he  hereafter  : hut  when  I 
became  a man,  I put  away  childijh  things  : and  a 
proportionable  change  fhall  we  all  find,  when 
we  launch  into  eternity.  Now  we  fee,  even  the 
things  which  furround  us,  by  means  of  a glafs  or 
mirror,  in  a dim,  faint,  obfcure  manner,  fo  that 
every  thing  is  a kind  of  riddle  to  us ; but  then 
we  fiall  fee,  not  a faint  refleftion,  but  the  objefts 
themfelves.y^o?  to  face,  direaiy  and  diftinaiy. 
Now  I know  but  in  part.  Even  when  God  re- 
veals things  to  me,  great  part  of  them  Is  ftill  kept 
under  the  veil ; hut  then  fall  I know,  even  as  1 
alfu  am  known : in  a clear,  full,  comprehenfive 
manner,  in  fome  meafure  like  God,  who  pene- 
trates the  center  of  every  objeft,  and  fees  at  one 

• glance 


C 339  ] 

glance  through  my  foul,  and  all  things.  And  now^ 
during  the  pvefeut  life,  abide  thefe  three^faith^ 
hope,  love:  but  the  greatejl  of  th^e,  in  its  dura- 
tion, as^well  as  the  excellence  of  its  nature,  is 
love.  Faith,  hope,  love,  are  the  fum  of  perfec- 
tion on  earth  : love  alone  is  the  fum  of  perfe£lion 
in  heaven. 

“ It  appears  then,  that  the  miraculous  powers 
of  the  church,  were  to  ceafe  upon  its  perfed.  ef~ 
tablfnnent\ Nothing  like  it  appears  from  this 
fcripture.  But  fuppofing  it  did,  is  ChriHianity 
perJeElly  flablijhed  }'et  ? Even  nominal  Chriflia- 
nity  ? Mr.  Brerezocod  took  large  pains  to  be  fully 
informed.  And,  according  to  his  account,  five 
parts  in  fix  of  the  knoxvn  world,  are  Mahometans 
or  Pagans  te  this  day.  If  fo,  Chriftianity  is  yet 
far  from  being  perfcttly  efabtfhed,  either  in  Eu- 
rope, Afa,  rfrica,  or  America. 

“Having  now  eftabiiflied  the  fa61,  fwonderfully 
eftabliOied  !)  we  may  enquire  the  ftnefs  of  it. 
There  were  two  caufes  of  the  extraordiirary  ope- 
rations of  the  Holy  Spirit,  one  to  manifeft  his 
million,  (and,  this  was  done  once  for  all)  the 
other  to  comfort  and  infiruFt  the  church  i.’^ 

“ At  his  firfl  defeent  on  the  apolfles,  he 
found  their  minds  rude  and  uninformed,  ftrang- 
ers  to  all  heavenly  knowledge,  and  utterly 
averfe  to  the  gofpel.  He  illuminated  their  minds 
with  all  neceffary  truth.  Y or  a ride  off ailk  not 
being  yet  compofed,’^  (No  ! Had  they  not 

P 2 law 

i fK  107. 


$ p.  110, 


[ 34°  ] 

taw  and  the  prophets?)  “ iomt  extraordinary  in- 
Jujion  of  his  virtue  was  ftill  necfleary.  But  w’hen 
this  rule  was  perfected,  part  of  this  office  was 
transferred  upon  the  [acred  canon : and  his  in- 
lightning  grace  was  not  to  be  expefted  in  fuch 
abundant  meafure,  as  to  make  the  recipients  z«- 
Jallible  guides  f.” 

Certainly  it  was  not.  If  this  is  all  that  is 
intended,  no  one  will  gainfay. 

“ Yet  modern  fanatics  pretend  to  as  high  a 
degree  oi  divine  communications,  as  if  no  fuch 
rule  were  in  being  (I  do  not:)  “ or  at  leaf!,  as 
if  that  rule,  needed  the  further  affifance  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  explain  his  own  meaning.”  This 
is  quite  another  thing.  I do  firmly  believe,  (and 
what  ferious  man  does  not  ?J  Omnisjcriptura 
legi  debet  eo  fpiritu  quo  fcripta  e/l : we  need  the 
fame  Spirit  to  underfund  the  fcripture,  which 
enabled  the  holy  men  of  old  to  write  it. 

“ Again,  the  whole  flrength  of  human  pre- 
judices wzs  then  fet  in  oppofiiion  to  the  go fp el 
to  overcome  the  obflinacy'  and  violence  of 
which,  nothing  lefs  than  the  power  of  the  Holy 
O ne  was  fnfficient  ' At  prefent,  whatever 
prejudices  mdiy  remain,  it  draws  the  other  way 
What,  toward  holinefs  ? Toward  temperance 
and  chaftity  ? Toward  jullice,  mercy,  and  truth? 
Quite  the  reverfe.  And  to  overcome  the  ob- 
flinacy  and  violence  of  the  heart-prejudices  which 
ilill  lie  againft  thefe,  the  power  of  the  Holy  One 

ii 


+ p . 112. 


f p-  ‘la- 


[ 34-1  ] 

is  as  necefTary  now,  as  ever  it  was  from  the  be- 
ginning oi  the  world. 

“ A further  reafon  for  the  ceafinsj  of  miracles 
is,  the  peace  and  fecurity  of  the  church.  The 
prof^ion  of  the  Chriftian  faith,  is  now  attended- 
with  eafe  and  honour.”  “ The  profejfionj” 
true:  but  not  the  thing,  as  all  that  zuill 

live  godly  in  Chrijl  Jefus  experience. 

“ But  if  miracles  are  not  ceafed,  why  do 
you  not  prove  your  million  thereby  ?”  As  your 
Lordfhip  has  frequently  fpoke  to  this  effecf,  I 
will  now  give  a clear  anfwer.  And  I purpofely 
do  it,  in  the  fame  words,  which  I publilhed 
many  years  fince. 

1.  “ I have  in  home  meafure  explained  my- 
felf  on  the  head  of  miracles,  in  the  third  part  of 
the  Father  Appeal.  But  fince  you  repeat  the 
demand,  (though  without  taking  any  notice  of 
the  arguments  there  advanced)  I will  endeavour 
once  more  to  give  you  a diHinff,  full,  and  de- 
terminate an-fwer.  And  i.  I acknowledge  that  I 
have  feen  with  my  eyes,  and  heard  with  my 
ears,  feveral  things,  which,  to  the  beft  of  my 
judgment,  cannot  be  accounted  for,  by  the  or- 
dinary courfe  of  natural  caufes,  and  which,  I 
therefore  believe,  ought  to  be  aferibed  to  tlie  ex- 
traordinary interpojition  of  God.  If  an\-  man 
chufe  to  -ftile  thefe  miracles,  I reclaim  not.  I 
have  weighed  the  preceding  and  following  cir- 
cumflances.  I have  ftrove  to  account  for  them 

P3 


m 


[ 342  ] 

in  a natural  way  but  could  not,  without  dbiag 
•violence  to  my  reafon.  Not  to  go  far  back,  1 
am  clearly  perfuaded,  that  the  fudden  deliver- 
ance of  John  Haydon  was  one  inftance  of 
of  this  hind,  and  my  ow'n  recovery  on  May  the 
loth,  another.  I cannot  account  for  either 
of  thefe  in  a noAural  way.  Therefore  I believe 
they  were  both JupernaturaL 

I Muft,  fecondly,  obferve,  that  the  truth  of 
thefe  faffs  is  fupported  by  the  fam.e  kind  of  proof 
as  that  of  all  other  faffs  is  %vont  to  be,  namely, 
the  teffimony  of  competent  witneffes.  And 
that  the  teffimony  here,  is  irr  as  high  a 
degree  as  .any  reafonable  man  can  defiie, 
Thofe  witneffes  were  man'v  in  number : they 
could  not  be  deceived  themfelves;  for  the  faff 
in  queflion  they  faw  with  their  own  eyes,  and 
heard  with  their  own  eais.  Nor  is  it  credible, 
that  fo  many  of  them  would  combine  together 
with  a view  of  deceiving  others  ; the  greater 
part  being  men  who  feared  God,  as  appeared 
by  the  general  tenor  of  their  lives.  Thus,  in 
the  cafe  of  Jo.  Haydon.  This  thing  was  not  con- 
trived and  executed  in  a corner,  and  in  the 
prefence  of  his  own  family  only,  or  three  or 
four  perfons  prepared  for  the  purpofe.  No  : 
it  was  in  an  open  flreet  in  the  city  of  Rriflol,  at 
one  or  two  in  the  afternoon.  And  the  doors 
being  open  from  the  beginning,  not  only  many 
of  the  neighbours,  from  every  fide,  but  feveral 
others  (indeed  whofoever  defired  it}  went  in 

till 


[ 343  ] 

lilPthe  houfe  could  contain  no  more.  Nor  yet 
does  the  account  of  my  own  illnefs  and  recovery 
you  fuppofe,  on  my  bare  word-.  There 
were  many  witnefles,  both  of  my  diforder,  on 
Friday  and  Saturday,  and  my  lying  down  moil 
part  of  Sunday,  (a  thing  they  were  well  fatisfied 
could  not  be  the  efFefl  of  a flight  indifpofitionj 
and  all  who  faw-me  that  evening,  plainly  difeern- 
ed  (what  I could  not  wholly  conceal)  that  I was 
in  pain  : about  two  hundred  of  whom  were 

prefent,  when  I was  feized  with  the  cough, 
which  cut  me  fliort,  fo  that  I could  fpeak  no 
more  ; till  I cried  aloud,  “ Lord,  increafe  my 
faith  : Lord,  confirm  the  word  of  thy  grace.” 
The  fame  perfons  Taw  and  heard,  that  at  the 
inftant  I changed  my  pofture,  and  broke  out 
into  thankfgiving  : that  quickly  after  I flood 

upright,  (which  I could  not  before)  and  fhewed 
no  fign  either  of  ficknefs  or  pain. 

Yeti  mufldefire  you  well  to  obferve,  thirdly, 
that  my  will,  or  choice,  or  defire,  had  no  place 
either  in  this  or  any  cafe  of  this  kind,  that  has 
ever  fallen  under  my  notice.  Five  minutes 
before  I had  no  thought  of  this.  I expefted 
nothing  lefs.  I w'as  willing  to  wait  for  a gradual 
recovery  in  the  ordinary’  ufe  of  outward 
means.  I did  not  look  for  any  other  cure, 
till  the  moment  before  I found  it.  And  it  is 
my  belief,  that  the  cafe  was  alawys  the  fame 
with  regard  to  the  mofl  real  and  undoubted  mira- 
cles, I believe  God  never  interpofed  hismira- 
P 4 culous 


[ 344  ] 

ciiloas  power  but  according  to  his  own  fovcreigTi' 
will;  not  according  to  the  will  of  man ; neither 
of  him  by  w' horn  he  wrought,  iior,  of  any  other 
man  whatfoever.  The  wifdom,  as  well  as  the 
power  are  his ; nor  can  1 find  that  ever,  from 
the  beginnirrg  of  the  world,  he  lodged  this  power 
in  any  mere  man,  to  be  ufed  whenever  that 
man  faw  good.  Suppofe  therefore,  there  w'as 
a man  now  upon  earth,  who  did  work  rea/ 
undoubted  miracles  ; I would  afk,  by  whofe 
power  doth  he  work  thefe  ? And  at  whofe 
pleafure  ? His  own,  or  God^s  ? Not  his  own ; 
but  God’s.  But  if  fo,  then  your  demand  is 
made  not  on  man,  but  on  God.  I cannot  fay  it 
is  modefl,  thus  to  challenge  God ; or  w’ell- 
fuiting  the  relation  of  a creature  to  his  Crea- 
tor. 

2.  However,  I cannot  but  think,  there  have 
been  already  fo  many  interpofitions  of  divine 
power,  as  will  fhortly  leave  you  without  excufe, 
if  you  either  deny  or  defpife  them.  We  defire 
no  favour  i but  the  juftice  that  diligent  enquiry 
may  be  made  concerning  them.  We  are  ready 
to  name  the  perfons  on  whom  the  power  tvas 
fhewn  which  belongeth  to  none  but  God ; (not 
one  or  two,  or  ten  or  twelve  only)  to  point  out 
their  places  of  abode  : and  we  engage  they  fhall 
anfwer  every  pertinent  queftion  fairly  and  di- 
reftly;  and,  if  required,  fliall  give  all  their  an- 
fwers  upon  oath,  before  any  who  are  impowered 


[ 345  3 

to  receive  them.  It  is  our  particular  reque'ft, 
that  the  circumflances  which  went  before,  which 
accompanied,  and  which  followed  after  the  faffs 
under  confideration,  may  be  thoroughly  examin- 
ed, and  punffually  noted  down.  Let  but  this  be 
done  (and  is  it  not  highly  needful  it  fhould  ? At 
leaft  by  thofe  who  would  form  an  exaft  judg- 
ment ?)  and  we  have  no  fear,  that  any  reafon- 
able  man  Ihould  fcruple  to  fa)’.  This  hath  God- 
wrought. 

As  there  have  been  already  fo  many  inflances- 
of  this  kind  far  beyond  what  we  dared  to  alk  or 
think,  I cannot  take  upon  me  to  fay,  whether 
or  no  it  will  pleafe  God  to  add  to  their  number. 

I have  not  herein  known,  the  mind  of  the  Lord, 
neither  am  I his  counfellor.  He  may,  or  he  may- 
not ; I cannot  affirm  or  deny.  I have  no  lights 
and  I have  no  defire  either  way.  It  is  the  Lord : 
let  him  do  what  feemeth  him  good.  I defire  only 
to  be  as  clay  in  his  hand. 

3.  “ But  what  if  there  were  now  to  be  wrought 
ever  fo  many  real  and  undoubted -miracles  ?”  (I. 

fuppofe  you  mean  b)'  undoubted,  fuch  as  being 
fufficiently  attefted,  ought  not  io  be  doubted  of.) 

“ Why,  this,  )’ou  fay,  would  put  the  conh  overfy 
on  a Jhort  foot,  andbe  an  ^ ejf  eclual  proof  of  the 
truth  of  your  pietences.”  By  no  means.  As 
common  as  this  affertion  is,  there  is  none  upon 
earth  more  falfe.  Suppofe  a teacher  was  now^ 
on  this  very  day,  to  work  real  and  undoubted 

P mnoi-  ' 


[ 34^  J 

miracles,  this  would  extremely  little  JJiorten  tie 
controverfy  between  him  and  the  greatefl  part  of 
his  oppofers  : for  all  this  would  not  force  them 
to  believe  ; but  many  would  ftill  Hand  juft  where 
they  did  before ; feeing  men  may  harden  their 
hearts  againft  miracles  as  well  as  againft  argu- 
ments. 

So  men  have  done  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world,  even  againft  fuch  fignal,  glorious  mira- 
cles, againft  fuch  imerpofitions  of  the  power  of 
God,  as  may  not  be  again  till  the  confummation 
of  all  things.  Permit  me  to  remind  you  only  of 
a few  inftances:  and  to  obferve,  that  the  argu- 
ment holds  a fortiori ; for  who  will  ever  be  em- 
powered of  God  again  to  work  fuch  miracles  as 
ihefe  were  ? Did  Pharaoh  look  on  all  that  Mofes 
and  Aarori  wroirght  as  an  efeHual  proof  of  the 
truth  of  their  pretences?  Even  when  the  Lord 
made  the  fea  to  be  dry  land,  and  the  waters  were 
divided : when  the  children  of  Ifrael  went  into  the 
Tiiidjl  of  the  fea,  and  the  waters  were  a wall  on  the 
right  and  on  the  left  9 Exod.  xiv.  21,  22.  Nay  - 

The  wounded  dragon  rag’d  in  vain 
And  fierce,  theutmoft  plagues  to  brave, 

Madly  he  dar’d  the  parting  main. 

And  funk  beneath  the  o’erwhelmlng  wave. 

Was  all  this  an  effe8.ual  proof  of  the  truth  of  their 
pretences,  to  the  J/raelites  therafelves  ? It  was 
3Rot ; they  were  ftill  difoledient  at  the  fea,  even  at 

tht 


C 347  J 

the  Red  Sea?  Was  the  giving  them  day  by  day 
bread from  heaven,  an  effeBual proof  to  thofe  tzvo 
hundred  and_ffly  of  the  princes  of  the  affemhly, 
famous  in  the  congregation,  men  of  renown,  who 
ith  Dathan  and  Abiram,  JVilt  thou  put  out 
the  eyes  of  thefe  men  ? We  will  not  come  up.  Numb, 
xvi.  14.  Nay,  when  the  ground  clave  afander- 
that  was  under  them,  and  the  earth  opened  her 
mouth  and  fwallowed  them  up!  (ver.  32.]  Nei« 
ther  was  this  an  effeClual  proof  to  thofe  who  faw 
it  with  their  eyes,  and  heard  the  cries  of  thofe 
who  went  down  into  the  pit : but  the  very  next 
day,  they  murmured  againjl  Mofes,  and  againjl 
Aaron,  faying,  Ye  have  killed  the  people  of  the 
Lord,  (ver.  41.)  Was  not  the  cafe  generally  the 
fame  with  regard  to  ;he  prophets  that  followed  ? 
Several  of  whom  fopped  the  mouths  of  lions,, 
quenched  the  violence  qffre,  and  did  many  other 
mighty  works : yet  their  own  people  received 
them  not.  Yet  they  were Jloned,  they  were  fawn  ■ 
afunder,  they  werfU  n with  the fword ; they  were 
dejlitute,  afflibled-, ..  a-nented!  Utterly  contrary 
to  the  commonly ‘-v  .eived  fuppofition,  “ That 
the  working  rea/,  undoubted  miracles,  miift  bring 
all  controverfy  to  an  end,  and  convince  every, 
gainfayer.” 

Let  us  come  nearer  yet.  How  flood  the  cafe 
between  our  Lord  himfelf  and  his  oppofers  ? 
Did  he  not  work  real  and  undoubted,  miracles? 
And  what  was  the  eflfeft  ? Still  when  he  came  to 
his  ozon^  his  own  received  him  Still  he  was 


[ 348  ] 

defpifed  and  rejeBed  of  men.  Still  it  was  a chal- 
lenge not  to  be  anfwered,  Have  any  of  the  rulers, 

or  of  the  Pharfees,  believed  on  him  ? After 

this,  how  can  you  imagine,  that  whoever  works 
miracles  muft  convince  all  men  oi  the  truth  of  his 
pretences  f 

I would  juft  remind  you  of  only  one  inftance 
more.  There fat  a certain  man  at  Lyjlra,  impo~ 
tent  in  his  feet,  being  a cripple  from  his  mother's 
womb,  who  had  never  walked.  The  fame  heard 
Paul fpeak  ; v.'ho fedfafly  beholding  him,  and  per- 
ceiving he  had  faith  to  be  healed,  faid  with  a loud 
voice.  Stand  upright  on  thy  feet.  And  he  leaped 
and  walked.  — Here  was-  fo  undoubted  a miracle, 
that  the  people  lift  up  their  voices,  fo)ing.  The 
Gods  are  come  down  in  the  likenefs  of  men.  But  how 
long  were  even  thefe  convinced  of  the  truth  of 
his  pretences  ? Only  till  there  came  thither  certain 
Jews  from  Antioch  and  Iconium  ; and  then  they 
foned  him  fas  they  fuppofed)  to  death  ! ABs 
xiv.  1,  &c.  So  certain  it  is,  that  no  miracles 
whatever,  that  were  ever  yet  wrought  in  the 
world,  were  efeBual  to  pi ove  the  moft  glaring 
truth  to  thofe  who  hardened  their  hearts  againft 
it. 

4.  And  it  will  equally  hold  in  every  age  and 
nation.  If  they  hear  not  Mofes  and  the  prophets, 
neither  will  they  be  convinced  (of  what  they  defire 
not  to  believe)  though  one  lofe  from  the  dead. 
Without  a miracle,  without  one  rifing  from  the 
dead,  £»p  Tif  -S/AEf  rcmv,  f any  man  be  willing  to  do 


[ 349-  ] 

/]zV  will,  he  Jhall  know  of  the  clo&rine,  whether  it 
be  of  God.  But  if  he  is  not-  willing  to  do  his  will., 
he  will  never  want  an  excufe,,  a plaufible  reafon 
for  rejefting  it : yea,  though  ever  fo  many  mira- 
cles were  wrought  to  confirm  it.  For  let  ever  fo 
much  f gilt  come  into  the  world,  it  will  have  no 
eifetl:  (fuch  is  the  wife  and.  juft  will,  of  God)  on 
thofe  who  love  darknefs  rather  than  light.  It  will: 
not  convince  thofe  who  do  not  fimply  defire  to 
do  the  will  oj  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven, 
Thofe  who  mind  earthly  ^things,  who  (if  they 
do  not  continue  in  any  grofs  outw'ard  fin,  yet) 
love  pleafure  and  eafe  ; yet  feek  profit  or  power,, 
preferment  or.  reputation,.  Nothing  will  ever 
be  an  effefiiiial- proof  to  thefe,  of  the.  holy  and 
acceptable  will  of  God,  unlefs  firfl.  their  proud 
hearts  be-  humbled,  their  flubborn  wills  bowed 
down,  and  their  defires  brought,  at  leafl,  in 
feme  degree,  into  obedience  to  the  law  of 
Ghrifi. 

Hence,  although  it  Ihould  pleafe  God  to  work 
anew  all  the  wonders  that  ever  were  wrought 
on  earth,  dill  thefe  men,  however  vnfe  and prUf 
dent  they  may  he  in  things  relating  to  the  pre- 
fcnt  world,,  would  fight  againd  God.  and  all  his 
melfengers,  and  that  in  fpite  of  tliefe  miracles. 
Mean  w'hile  God  will  reveal  his  truth  unto  babes, 
unto  thofe  who  are  meek  and  lowly,  whofe  de- 
fires are  in  heaven,  who  want  to  know  nothing 
fane  Jefus  Chrifi  and  him  cruefed.——  ■ Thefe 

need- 


C 350  ] 

need  no  outward  miracles  to  fhew  them  his  will: 
they  have  a plain  rule,  the  written  word.  And 
the  anointing  which  they  have  received  of  him, 
abidcth  in  them,  and  teacheth  them  all  things, 
(1  John  ii.  27.)  Through  this  thev  are  enabled 
to  bring  all  doblrines  to  the  law  and  the  iejiimony. 
And  whatfoever  is  agreeable  to  this  they  receive, 
without  w'aiting  to  fee  it  attefled  by  miracles. 
As,  on  the  other  hand,  whatfoever  is  contrary  to 
this  they  rejeft:  nor  can  any'  miracles  move  them 
to  receive  it. 

5.  Yet  I do  not  know,  that  God  hath  any 
where  precluded  himfelf  from  thus  exerting  his 
fovereign  power,  from  working  miracles,  in  any 
kind  or  degree,  in  any  age,  to  the  end  of  the 
wot  Id.  I do  not  recolle61  any  fcripture  wherein 
we  are  taught  that  miracles  were  to  be  confined 
within  the  limits  either  of  the  apojiolic  or  the  Cy- 
ptianic  or  of  any  period  of  time,  longer  or 
ihorler,  even  till  the  rellitution  of  all  things.  I 
have  not  obferved,  either  in  the  Old  Teilament 
or  the  New,  any  intimation  at  all  of  this  kind.. 
Si.  Paul  indeed  fays  once,  concerning  two  of  the 
miraculous  gifts  of  the  Spirit  (fo  I think  that 
text  is  ufually  underftood)  wkether  there  be  pro- 
phecies, they  Jhall  fail ; whether  there  be  tongues, 
they  Jhall  ceafe  ; but  he  does  not  fay,  either  that 
thefe  or  any  other  miracles  fhall  ceafe,  till  faith 
and  hope  fiiall  ceafe  alfo ; till  they  fhall  all  be 
fwallowed  up  in  the  vilion  of  God,  and  love  be 
all  in  alh 

I pre* 


[ 35  J ] 

I prefurae  you  will  allow,  there  is  one  kind 
of  miracles  (loofely  fpeaking)  which  are  not 
ceafed  r namely,  lying  wonders^ 

diabolical  miracles,,  wrought  by  the  power  of 
evil  fpirlts.  Nor  can  you  eafily  conceive,  that 
thefe  will  ceafe,  as  long  as  the  father  of  lies  is- 
the  prince  of  this  world.  And  why  fhould  you 
think,  that  the  God  of  truth  is  lefs  aftive  than, 
him,  or  that  he  will  not  have  his  miracles  alfo  ? 
Only  not  as  man  wills,  neither  when  he  wills 
but  according  to  his  own  excellent  wifdom  and- 
goodnefs. 

6.  But  even  if  it  were  fuppofed,  that  God- 
does  now  work  beyond  the  operation  of  merely 
natural  caufes,  yet  what  impreffion  would  this- 
make  upon  in  the  difpofition  of  mind  you 
are  now  in  ? Suppofe  the  trial  was  repeated,  and 
made  again  to -morrow'.  One  informs  you  the 
next  day,  “ While  a clergyman  w'as  preaching 
yefterday,  where  I was,  a man  came  who  had 
been  long  ill  of  an  incurable  diftemper.  Prayer 
was  made  for  him.  And  he  was  reftored  to  per* 
fe£l  health.” 

Suppofe  now  that  this  was  a real  faft,  perhaps 
you  would  fcarce  have  patience  to  hear  the  ac- 
count of  it ; but  would  cut  it  fliort  in  the  midft,. 
with  “ Do  you  tell  this  as  hmeihlng  fapernatu- 
ral?  Then  miracles  are  not  ceafed.”  But  if 
you  fhould  venture  to  afk,  Where  was  this? 
And  who  was  the  perfon  who  prayed  ? And  it 
was  anfweredj  “ At  the  Foundery  near  Moorfelds  5 

the 


[ 352  } 

file  perfon  who  prayed  was  Ivlr.  Wejley."  What 
a damp  comes  at  once  ! What  a weight  falls  on 
your  mind  at  the  firft  fetting  out ! ’Tis  well  if 
you  have  any  heart  or  defire  to  move  one  flep 
farther.  Or  if  you  fhould,  what  a ftrong- addi- 
tional propenfity.  do  you  now  feel  to  deny  the 
faff  ? Arid  is  there  not  a ready  excufe  for  fo  do- 
ing ? “ O ! they,  who  tel!  the  ftory  are  his  own 
■people:  moft  of  whom,  we  may  be  fure,  will 
Jiiy  any  thing  lor  him,  and  the  rell  will  believe. 

any  thing.” But  if  you  at  length  allowed  the 

fafi:,  might  you  not  find  means  to  account  for  it 
b^  natural  caufes  ? “ Great  crowds,  violent  heats-, 
with  obftruftions  and. irregularities  of  the  blood 
and  fpirits,”  will  do  wonders. — If  you  could  not 
but  allow  it  was  more  than  natural,  might  not 
fome  plaufible  reafon  be  found,  for  ranking  it 
among  the  lying  wonders,  for  afcribing  it  to  the 
devil  rather,  than  God  ?.  And  if,  after  all,  you 
was  convdnced  it  was  the  finger  of  God,  muff 
you  not  Hill  bring  every  doftrine  advanced  to  the 
law  and  the  tejlimony,  the  only  fure  and  infalli- 
ble tell  of  all  ? — • What  then  is  the  ufe  of  this 
continual  demand,  “ Shew  us  a ftgn,  and  we  wilt 
believe?”  What  will  you  believer  I hope  no 
more  than  is  written  in  the  book  of  God.  And 
thus  far  you  might  venture  to  believe,  even  with- 
out a miracle. 

7.  Let  us  confider  this  point  a little  farther. 

“ What  is  it  you  would  have  us  prove  by  mira- 
cles? 


[ ] 

cFes  ? The  dofliines  we  preach  ?”  We  prove- 
thefe  by  fcripture  and  reafon  ; and  if  need  be^ 
by  antiquity.  What  elfe  is  it  then  we  are  to- 
prove  by  miracles?  At  length  we  have  a diflinft 
reply.  “ Wife  and  fober  men  will  not  otherwife- 
be  convinced  fA  e.  unlefs  you  prove  it  by  mira- 
cles) that  God  is,  by  the  means  of  fuch  teachers 
and  fuch  dodirines,  working  a great  and  ex,traor- 
dinarv  work  in  the  earth.” 

j 

So  then  the  determinate  point  which  you,  in 
their  name,  call  upon  us  to  prove  b-y  miracles, 
is  this  : “ That  God  is  by  theje  teachers,  working  a. 
great  and  extraordinary  work  in  the  earth." 

What  I mean  by  a great  and  extraor dinner y 
work,  is  the  bringing  multitudes  oi grofs,  notorious 
/inner  s,  in  a /lort  fpace,  to  the  fear  and  love  and 
/ervice  of  God,  to  an  entire  change  of  heart  and 
life. 

Now,  then,  let  us  take  a nearer  view  of  the 
propofition,  and  fee  which  part  of  it  W'e  are  to 
prove  by  miracles. 

Is  it,  1.  That  A.  B.  was  for  many  years  with- 
out God  in  the  world,  a common  fwearer,  a 
drunkard,  or  fabbath-breaker  ? 

Or,  2.  That  he  is  not  fo  now  ?■ 

Or,  3.  That  he  continued  fo  till  he  heard 
this  man  preach,  and  from  that  time  was  another 
man? 

Not  fo.  The  proper  way  to  prove  thefe  fa£fs, 
is  by  the  teflimony  of  competent  witnelfes.  And 

thefe 


[ doi  ] 

tliefe  witneffes  are  ready,  whenever  required,  to 
give  full  evidence  of  them. 

Or,  Would  you  have  us  prove  by  miracles, 

4.  That  this  was  not  done  by  our  own  power 
or  holinefs  ? 

That  God  only  is  able  to  raife  the  dead,  to 
quicken  thofe  who  are  dead  in  trefpaffes  and 
fins  ? 

Where  then  is  the  zuijdom  of  thofe  men  who. 
demand  miracles  in  proof  of  fuch  a propofition  ? 
One  branch  of  wliicb,  “ That  fuch  finners  are 
reformed  by  means  of  thefe  teachers, being  a 
plain  faff,  can  only  be  proved  by  teftimony,  as 
all  other  fafts  are  ; and  the  other,  “ That  this  is. 
a work  of  God,  and  a znort  than  ordinary  uork”' 
needs  no  proof,  as  carrying  its  own  evidence  to 
every  thinking  man. 

8.  To  fum  up  this.  No  truly  zvife  or  fober  man 
can  poffibly  defire  or  expefl  miracles,  to  prove, 
either.  1.  That  thefe  doclriiws  zvetxue  : thismuft 
be  decided  by  fcripture  and  reafon  ; or  2.  That 
fadls  are  true  : this  can  only  be  proved  by 
teftimony  : or  3.  That  to  change  finners  from 
darknefs  to  light,  is  ih&  zv or k oj  God  d\one]  only 
ufing  what  inftruments  he  pleafes : this  is  glaring- 
ly felf-evident : or,  4.  That  fuch  a change 
wrought  in  fo  many  notorious  finners,  within  fo 
fiort  a time  is  a great  and  extraordinary  work 
of  God.  What  then  is  it  remains  to  be  proved 
by  miracles  ? Perhaps  you  will  fay,  it  is  this. 
That  God  has  called,  or  fent  you  to  do  this.” 

Nay,. 


[ 355  ] 

Nay,  this  is  implied  in  the  3d  of  the  foregoing 
propofitior»s.  If  God  has  acfually  uftd  us  therein, 
if  his  work  hath  in  fa£f  profpered  in  our  hands, 
then  lie  hath  called  or  fent  us  to  do  this.  I intreat 
reafonable  men'  to  weigh  this  thoroughly,  whe- 
ther the faB  does  not  plainly  prove  the  call? 
Whether  he  who  thus  enables  us  to  fave  fouls 
alive,  docs  not  commiffion  us  fo  to  do?  Whether 
by  giving  us  tho power  to  pluck  thefe  brands  out 
of  the  burning,  he  does  not  authorife  us  to  exert 
it  P O that  it  were  poffible  for  you  to  confider 
calmly,  whether  the  fuccefs  of  the  gofpel  of  Jefus 
Chrift,  even  as  it  is  preached  by  us,  the  leaft  of 
his  fervants,  be  not  itfelf  a miracle,  never  to  be 
forgotten  ! One  which  cannot  be  denied,  as  be- 
ing vifible  at  this  day,  not  in  one,  but  an  hun- 
dred places : one  which  cannot  be  accounted  for 
by  the  ordinary  courfe  of  any  natural  caufes 
whatfoever  ; one  which  cannot  be  afcribed,  with 
any  colour  of  reafon,  to  diabolical  agency:  and 
laftly,  one  which  will  bear  the  infallible  teft,  the 
trial  of  the  written  wordt. 

But  “ why  do  you  talk  of  the  fuccefs  of  the 
gofpel  in  England,  which  was  a ChrijHan  country 
before  you  was  born  ?”  Was  it  indeed  ? Is  it  fo 
at  this  day  P I would  explain  myfelf  a little  on  this 
head  alfo. 

And  t.  None  can  deny  that  the  people  of 
England,  in  general,  are  called  Chriftians.  They 

arq 


t Second  letter  to  Dr,  Church,  p.  55, 


[ 3jS  J ■ 

TiVQ  culUd  ^o,  a few  only  excepted,  by  others,  as  I 
well  as  by  thenifelves.  But  I prefume  no  man  | 
will  fay  the  na7ne  makes  the  thing  ; that  men  are  i 
Chriftians,  barely  bccaufe  they  arc  called  fo.  It  ' 
Kiufl  be  allowed,  2,  1 hat  the  people  ol  England, 
generally  fpeaking,  have  been  ckrijlened,.  or  bap- 
tized : but  neilber  can  we  infer,.  “ Thefe  were 
once  baptized  ; therefore  they  are  Chr^hans  nowJ’ 

^t  is  3.  allowed.  That  many  of  thofe  v\’ho  were 
once  baptized,  and  are  called  Chrijhans  to  this 
day,  the  word  of  God,  zilend.  public  prayers, 
3nd  partake  of  the  Lord's  Jiipper.  But  neither 
does  this  prove^  that  they  are  Clvijlians.  For 
notwithHamhng  this,  fome  of  them  live  in  open 
fin  : and  others  (though  not  confeious  to  thera- 
fcl  ves  ol  hypocrijy,,  yetjjare  utter  Grangers  to  the 
religion  of  the  heart ; are  ftilJ  of  pride,  vanity,.co* 
vetoufnefs,  ambition;  of  hatred,  anger,  malice 
or  envy;  and  confequently,  are  no  more^^zVzVMfl/ 
Chrijlians  than  the  open  drunkard,  or  common 
fwearer. 

Now  thefe  being  removed,  where  are  the  ChriJ^ 
fians,  from  whom  we  may  properly  iexm  England 
a Chrijlian  country  f The  men  who  have  tlu  mind 
winch  was  in  Ckrijl,  and  who  walk  as  he  alfo  walk- 
ed? Whofe  inmofl  foul  is  renewed  after  the 
image  of  God ; and  who  are  outwardly  holy,  as 
he  who  hath  called  them  is  holy  ? There  are 
doubtlefs  a few  fuch  to  be  found.  To  deny  this, 
would  be  “ want  of  candor E But  how  few  ? 

How  tliinly  fcatte^ed  up  and  down  ? And  as  for 

a Chrijlian. 


. [ 35?  3 

^'ChriJUan  vifiblt  church,  or  a body  of  Chrlf- 
fiians,  vifibly  united  together,  where  is  this  to 
be  feen  ? 

Ye  different  fe£h,  who  all  declare, 

Lo  ! here  is  Chrift,  or  Chrift  is  there, 

Your  Wronger  proofs  divinely  give, 

And  Jhew  me  where  the  ChriJHans  live  ! 

And  what  ufe  is  it  of,  what  good  end  does  it 
ferve,  to  term  England  a Chrijlian  country  ? Ah 
though,  it  is  true,  mofl  of  the  natives  are  called 
ChrilHans,  have  been  baptized,  frequent  the  ar>- 
dinances  : and  although  here  and  there,  a real 
Chriftian  is  to  be  found,  as  a light Jhining  in  a 
dark  place.  Does  it  do  any  honour  to  our  great 
Mafter,  among  thofe  who  are  not  called  hy  his 
name  ? Does  it  recommend  ChriRianify  to  the 
Jews,  the  Mahometans,  or  the  avowed  Heathens? 
Surely  no  one  can  tonceive  it  does.  It  only  makes 
Chrjlianity  Etinh  in  their  nofiiils.  Does  it  aii- 
ffwer  any  good  end,  with  regard  to  thofe  who  are 
called  by  this  worthy  name?  I fear  not;  but  ra- 
ther, an  exceeding  bad  one.  For  does  it  not 
keep  multitudes  eafy  in  riaeir  Heathen  praElice  ? 
Does  it  not  make  or  keep,  Hill  greater  numbers, 
iatisfied  with  their  Heathen  tempers?  Does  it  not 
dire£I!y  tend  to  make  both  the  one  and  the  other 
imagine,  that  they  are  whaf  indeed  they  are  not  ? 
That  they  are  ChriJHans,  while  they  are  utterly 
without  Chrifl,  and  without  God  in  the  world  ? 

—To 


C 358  1 

■=“To  clofe  this  point.  If  men  are  not  Ckrifiimi, 
till  they  are  renewed  after  the  image  of  Chrift, 
and  if  the  people  of  England,  in  general,  are  not 
thus  renewed,  why  do  we  term  them  fo?  The 
God  oj  this  world  hathXoug  blinded  their  hearts. 
Let  us  do  nothing  to  increafe  that  blindnefs ; but 
rather  to  recover  them  from  that  Jlrong  delufion, 
that  they  may  no  longer  believe  a lie. 

Let  us  labour  to  convince  all  mankind,  that  to 
be  a real  Chrijlian  is,  to  love  the  Lord  our  God 
rvlth  all  our  heart,  and  to  ferve  him  with  all  our 
Ihength  ; to  love  our  neighbour  as  ourfelves, 
and  therefore  to  do  unto  every  man,  as  we  would 
he  fhouid  do  unto  us  f. 

To  change  one  of  thefc  Heathens  into  a real 
Chriftian,  and  to  continue  him  fuch,  all  .the 
■ordinary  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  ab- 
folutely  neceffary. 

“But  what  are  they?”  I fum  them  up  (as 
I did  in  the  Farther  Appeal  to  men  of  reafon  and 
religion J \n  the  words  of  as  learned  and  orthodox 
a divine  as  ever  England  bred. 

“ Sanftilicaiion  being  oppofed  to  our  cor- 
ruption, and  anfvvering  fully  to  the  latitude 
thereof,  whatfoever  holinefs  and  perfeftion  is 
wanting  in  our  nature,  mull  be  fupplied  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Wherefore,  we  being  by  nature 
totally  void  of  all  faving  truth,  and  under  an 
impolTibility  of  knowing  the  will  of  God;  this 
fpirit  farcheth  all  things,  yea,  even  the  deep 

things 

+ Sccoad  letter  to  Dr.  Chirck,  p.  6",  ^ ffj- 


f 359  3 

things  of  God,  and  revealelh  them  unto  the  Tons 
of  men  ; fo  that  thereby  the  darknefs  of  their 
underftanding  is  expelled  and  they  are  enlight- 
ened with  the  knowledge  of  God.  The  fame 
fpirit  which  reveaUth  the  objefl  of  faith,  gene- 
rally, to  the  univerfal  church,  doth  ^{o  illuminate, 
the  underflanding  of  fuch  as  believe ; that  they 
may  receive  the  truth.  For  faith  is  the  gift  of 
God,  not  only  in  the  objeft,  but  alfo  in  the 
aft.  And  this  gift,  is  a gift  of  the  Holy  Ghoft 

working  within  us. And  as  the  increafe 

of  perfeftion,  fo  the  original  of  faith  is  from  the 
Spirit  of  God,  by  internal  illumination  of  the  foul.” 
“ The  fecond  part  of  the  office  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  is  the  renewing  of  man,  in  all  the  parts 
and  faculties  of  his  foul.  For  our  natural  corrup- 
tion confifting  in  an  averfation  of  our  wills,  and 
a depravation  of  our  affeftions  ; an  inclination  of 
them  to  the  will  of  God,  is  wrought  within  us  by 
the  Spirit  of  God.” 

“ The  third  part  of  his  office  is,  to  lead,  di- 
reft,  and  govern  us,  in  our  aftions  and  conver- 
fations.  If  we  live  in  the  fpirit,  quickened  by 
his  renovation,  we  muft  alfo  walk  in  the  fpirit, 
following  his  direftion,  led  by  his  manuduftion. 
We  are  alfo  animated  and  afted  bv  the  Spirit  of 
God,  who  giveth  both  to  will  and  to  do,” 

“ And  f as  many  as  are  thus  led  by  the  Spirit 
(fGod,  are  the  fans  of  Moreover,  that  this 

direftion  may  prove  more  effeftual,  we  are  guid- 
ed 


t Ram,  viii.  141 


C s^o  ] 

ed  in  our  prayers  by  tbe  fame  fpirlt ; according 
to  the  promife,  / will  pour  upon  the  houfe  oJTi<t~ 
vid  and  upon  the  inhabitants  oj  Jerufalem,  the 
Jpirit  of  grace  and  fupplication,  (Zech.  xii.  lo.) 
Whereas  then,  this  is  the  confidence  we  have  in 
him,  that  if  we  ajk  any  thing  according  to  his  will 
he  hearelh  us : and  whereas  we  know  not  what 
we fiould  pray  for  as  we  ought,  the  Spirit  itfelf 
maketh  inter cejfion  for  us  with  groaning  that  cannot 
be  utter edf  And  he  that  fearcheth  the  heart  know- 
eth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  becaufe  he  mak- 
eth intercefion  for  the  faints  according  to  the  will 
c/  God.  From  which  interceflion  (made  for  all 
true  ChriftiaTis)  “ he  hath  the  {}  name  of  the 
'paraclete  given  him  by  Chrift ; who  faid,  1 will 
pray  the  Father,  and  he  will  give  you  another  para- 
clete. For,  if  any  man  Jin  we  have  a paraclete 
with  the  Father,  Jefus  Clirin  the  righteous,  faith 
St.John:  who  maketh  interceffion  for  us,  faith 
St.  Paul,  (Rom.  viii.  34.)  And  we  have  5 ano- 
■tker  paraclete,  faith  our  Saviour,  + which  alfo 
■rnaketh  intercef  iohjor  us,  faith  5/.  Paul.  A para- 
clete then,  in  the  notion  ef  the  feript-ures,  is  an 
interceffor.” 

“ It  is  alfo  tbe  office  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  to 
■afure  us  of  the  adoption  of  Jons,  to  create  in  us 
a fenfe  of  the  paternal  love  of  God  toward  us, 
'to  ffive  us  an  earned  of  our  everlading  inheri- 
tance. Fhe  love  of  God  is  feed  abroad  in  our 

hearts, 

FVei.  26.  ^Ver.  27.  |1  John  siv.  16.  26.  t johe 

xlv.  i6.  Rom.-viil.  27.  + Ver.  15, 16. 


[ ] 

9itarts,  by  Ike  Holy  Ghojl  which  is  given  unto  lit. 
For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  they 
are  the  fans  ^God.  And  becaufe  zue  are fans,  God 
hath fenl  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  our  hearts, 
crying,  Abba,  Father.  For  we  have  not  received 
the  fpirit  of  bondage  again  to  fear,  but  we  have 
received  the  fpirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry, 
Abba,  Father:  ike  Spirit  itfef  bearing  witnefs 
with  our  fpirit,  that  we  are  the  children  of  God. 
As  therefore  w'e  are  born  again  by  the  Spirit,  and 
receive  from  him  our  regeneration,  fo  we  are 
■alfo  by  the  fame  Spirit  ajfured  of  our  adoption. 
Becaufe  being fons,  we  are  alfo  heirs,  heirs  of  God, 
and joint  heirs  with  Chrifl,  by  the  fame  Spirit  we 
have  the  pledge,  or  rather  the  earnef  of  our  inhe- 
ritance. For  he  which  ejlablfheth  us  in  Chrifl,  and 
hath  anointed  us,  is  God ; who  hath  alfo  fealed  us, 
and  hath  given  us  the  ear-nefl  of  his  Spirit  in  our 
hearts ; fo  that  we  are  fealed  with  that  holy  Spirit 
of promife,  which  is  the  earnefi  of  our  inheritance. 
The  Spirit  of  God,  as  given  to  us  in  this  life, 
is  to  be  looked  upon  as  an  earned,  being  part  of 
that  reward  which  is  promifed,  and,  upon  per- 
formance of  the  covenant  which  God  hath  made 
with  us,  certainly  to  be  received.” 

It  now  refts  with  your  lordfliip  to  take  your 
choice ; either  to  condemn,  or  acquit  both  ; 
either  your  lordlhip  mull  condemn  bifhop  Psar- 
fon  for  an  enthufiafl,  or  you  muft  acquit  me  : for 
I have  his  exprefs  authoiiiy  on  my  fide,  concera- 
VoL.  XVIII.  Q ing 


[ 3^2  3 

ing  every  text,  which  I affirm  to  belong  to  all 
Chriftians. 

But  I have  greater  authority  than  his,  and 
fuch  as  I reverence,  only  lefs  than  the  oracles 
of  God.  •!  mean  that  of  our  own  church.  I 
fliall  clofe  this  bead,  by  fettingdown  what  occurs 
in  her  authentic  records,  concerning  either  our 
receiving  the  Holy  Ghojl^  ox  his  ordinary  operations 
in  all  true  Chriftians.  _ 

In  her  daily  fervice  fhe  teacheth  us  all  to 
bejeech  God  to  grant  v.s  his  Holy  Spirit,  that 
thoje  things  may  pleafe  him  xcliich  zee  do  at  this 
prej'mt,  and  that  the  rejl  of  our  Ife  may  be  pure 
and  holy : to  pray  for  our  Jbvereign  Lord  the  King, 
that  God  would  repknijh  him  with  the  grace  of 
his  Holy  Spirit ; for  all  the  roval  family,  that 
they  may  be  endued  loith  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  en- 
iiched  with  his  heavenly  grace-,  for  all  the  clergy 
and  people,  that  he  would  fend  down  upon  them 
the  helpful  Spirit  oj  his  grace ; for  the  catholic 
church,  that  it  may  be  guided  and' governed  by  his 
good  Spirit ; and  for  all  therein,  who,  at  any 
time,  male  their  common  fupplications  unto  him, 
that  the  fdlowfnp  or  communication  of  the  Holy 
Ghof  may  be  with  them  all  evermore. 

Her  ccllefts  are  full  of  petitions  to  the  fame 
elTefl.  “ t Gfant  that  we  may  daily  be  renewed 

by  the  Holy  Spirit. i Grant  that  in  all  our 

fulferings  here,  for  the  teftimony  of  thy  truth, 
we  may  by  faith  behold  the  glory  that  fhall  be 

revealed, 
J St.  Stephen’s  Day. 


+ Collefl  for  Chri(lnias-Day. 


[ 3^3  ] 

revealed,  and  bdng  Jilled  with  the  Holy  Gho/i, 
may  love  and  blefs  our  perfecutors.  § Send  thy 
Holy  Gholl,  and  pour  into  our  hearts  that  moll 
excellent  gift  of  charily,  t O Lord,  from  whom 
all  good  things  do  come,  grant  to  us  thy  humhle 
fervants,  that  hy  thy  holy  infpiration,  we  may  think 
thofe  things  that  are  good,  and  hy  thy  merciful' 
guidance  may  perform  the  fame.  We  hefeech 
thee,  leave  us  not  comfortlefs,  hut  fend  to  us  the 
Holy  Ghoft  to  comfort  us.  |[  Grant  us  hy  the 
fame  Spirit,  to  have  a right  judgment  in  all  things, 
and  evermore  to  rejoice  in  his  holy  comfort. 

Grant  us.  Lord,  we  hefeech  thee,  the  Spirit  to 
think  and  do  always  fuch  things  as  he  rightful. 
5 O God,  lorafmuch  as  without  thee  we  are 
not  able  to  pleafe  thee,  mercifully  grant  that 
thy  Holy  Spirit  may  in  all  things  direff  and  rule 
our  hearts.  +t  Cleanfe  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts 
by  the  inj'piration  of  thy  Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may 
perfeHly  love  thee,  and  worthily  magnify  thy 
holy  Name. 

“ Give  they  Holy  Spirit  to  this  infant  (or 

this  perfon)  that  he  may  be  born  again. Give 

thy  holy  Spirit  to  thefe  perfons  (N.  B.  already 
baptized)  that  they  may  continue  thy  fer- 
vants.” 

“ Almighty  God,  who  hall  vouchfafed  to 
Q 2 regenerate 

§ Quidquagefima  Sunday.  + Fifth  Sunday  after  Eafler, 

f Sunday  after  Afcenfion-day.  ||  Wliitfunday.  §§  Ninth 
Sunday  after  Trinity.  S Nineteenth  Sunday  after  Trinity 
+t  Communion  Office. 


[ 364  1 

regenerate  thefe  perfons  by  water  ani  the  Hofy 

Ghoft firenglhen  them  with  the  Holy  G.hoft,. 

the  Comforter,  and^  daily  iiicreafe  in  them  the 
manifold  gifts  of  thy  grace.”  oj  Con- 

^rmation. 

From  thefe  paffages  it  may  fufHciently  appear 
for  what  purpofes,  every  Chriflian,  according, 
to  the  doHrine  of  the  church  of  England 
now  receive  the  Holy  Ghcjl.  But  this  will  be  ftill 
more  clear  from  thofe  that  follow  ; wherein  we 
may  likewife  obferve,  a plain,  rational  fenfe  of 
God’s  revealing  himfelf  to  iis,  of  the  infpiration. 
of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and  of  a believer’s  Jeeling 
in  himfelf  \\-\t  mighty  walking  of  the  Spit  it  of 
Chrift. 

“ God  gave  them  c-f  old,,  grace  to  be  his 
children,  as  be  doth  us  now.  But  now  by  the 
coming,  of  our  Savour  Chrift,  we  have  received 
more  abundantly  the  Spirit  ^ God  '\r\  our  hearts.’' 
Horn,  on faith.  Part  2. 

“ He  died  to  deftroy  the  rule  of  the  devil  ir> 
in  us  and  he  rofe  again  to  fend  down  his  Holy 
Spirit  to  rule  in  our  hearts."  Horn,  on  the 
refurreBicn. 

“ We  have  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our  hearts,  as  a 
Jeal  and  pledge  of  our  everlafting  inheritance.” 

Ibid. 

“ The  Holy  Ghoft  fat  upon  each  of  them, 
like  as  it  had  been  cloven  tongues  of  fire,  to 
teach,  that  it  is  he  \}oa'Lgiveth  eloquence  and  utter- 
ance in  preaching  the  gofpel,  which  engendereth 

a burning 


[ 3«5  1 

a burning  zeal  towards  God’s  word,  and  giveth 
all  men  a tongue,  yea,  a fiery  tongue.  (N.  B. 
What  ever  occurs,  in  any  of  thejournals,  of 
God’s  “ giving  me  utterance,”  or  “ enabling 
me  to  fpeak  with  power  ” cannot  thetefore  be 
quoted  as  enthufiajm,  without  wounding  the 
church  thro’ my  fide.)  “ So  that  if  any  man  be  a 
dumb  Chriftian  not  profeffing  his  faith  openly, 
he  giveth  men  occafion  to  doubt,  left  he  have 
not  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  within  him. 
Hojn.  on  Whitfunday.  Part  L 

“ It  is  the  office  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  to  fanc- 
tify  ; which,  the  more  it  is  hid  from  our  under- 
ftanding,  “ (i.  e.  the  particular  manner  of  his 
working)  “ the  more  it  ought  to  move  all  men 
to  wonder  at  the  fecret  and  mighty  workings  of 
God’s  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  within  us.  For 
it  is  the  Floly  Ghoft  that  doth  quicken  the  minds 
of  men,  Jhrring  up  godly  motions  in  their  hearts. 
Neither  does  he  think  it  fufficient  inwardly  to 
work  the  new  birth  of  men,  unlefs  he  does 
alfo  dw'ell  and  abide  in  them.  Know.ye  not, 
faith  St.  Paul,  that  ye  are  the  temples  oJQodi,  and 
that  his  S-pirit  dwelletk  VI  you  ? Know  ye  not  that 
your  bodies  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  which 
is  within  you?  Again  he  faith.  Ye  are  not  in  the- 
JleJh,  but  in  the  Jpirit.  For  why  f The  Spint 
of  God  dwelletk  in  you.  To  this  agreeth  St.  fuhn\,. 
The  anointing  which  ye  have  received,  (he  mean- 
eth  the  Holy  Ghoft)  abidelh  in  you.  And  St. 

Q 3 Peter-. 

1 John  ii,  27,,. 


[ 365  ] 

Peter  faith  the  f^e  ; The  Spirit  of  Glory  and  of 
God  refeth  upon  you.  O what  comfort  is  this 
to  the  heart  of  a true  Chriftian,  to  think  thtt 
the  Holy  Ghoft  dwelleth  in  him  ! ^God  be  u.ttk 
us  as  the  apoflle  faith,  who  can  be  againftus?. 
He  giveth  patience  and  joyfulnefs  of  heart 
in  temptation  and  affliftion,  and  is  therefore 
worthily  called  + the  Comforter.  He  doth  in- 
flruft  the  hearts  of  the  fimple  in  the  knowledge 
of  God,  and  his  word  ; therefore  he  is  juftly 
termed  ;j;  the  Spirit  of  truth.  And,  N.  B,  where 
the  Holy  Ghoft  doth  inftruft,  and  teach,  there  is 
no  delay  at  all  in  learning.”  Ibid. 

I^From  this  paffage,  I learn,  i.  That  ever\’  true 
Ghriftian  now  receives  the  Holy  Gkof,  as  the  Para*' 
clete  or  Comjorter  promifed  by  our  Lord,  John, 
jciv.  13.  Secondly,  That  eveiy  ChrifHan  receives 
him,  as  the  Spirit  of  truth,  (promifed  John  xvi.] 
to  teach  him  alt  things.  And,  3.  Thatt/re  anoint* 
ing,  mentioned  in  the  firft-  epiftls  of  St.  John 
abides  in  every  ChrifHan  '] 

“ In  reading  of  God’s  word,  he  profiteth  moft, 
who  is  moft  injpired  with  the  Holy  Ghoft.”  Horn, 
on  reading  the fcriptme..  Part.  I. 

“ Human  and  worldly  wifdom  is  not  needful 
to  the  underftandin^  the  fcripture;  but  the  reve- 
lation of  the  Holy  Ghofl,  who  injpvreih  the  true 
meaning  unto  them,  who  with  humility,  and  di» 
tigence,  fearch  for  it.”  Ibid.  Part  II. 

“ Makfi. 


+ Jphn  xiv.,  16, 


J John  xvi.  13. 


[ 8«7  1 

“ Make  him  know  and  fed,  tliat  there  ia'  rra 
other  name  given  under  heaven,  unto  men» 
wher-eby  we  can  be  faved.” 

“ If  we  fed  our  confcience  at  peace  with  Godj 
through  remiffion  of  our  fins — al!  is  of  God.” 
Horn,  on  Rofration  week.  Part  IlL 

“ If  you  feel  fuch  a faith  in  you,  rejoice  in  it; 
and  let  it  be  daily  increafing  by  well  working.” 
Hem.  on  faith.^  Part  III. 

“ The  faithful  may  feel  wrought,  tranquillity 
of  confcience,  the  increafe  of  faith  and  hope, 
with  many  other  graces  of  God.”  Horn,  on  the 
facr ament.  Part.  I-. 

“ Godly  men  feel  inwardly  God’s  Koly  Spirit 
Inflaming  their  hearts  with  love.”  Horn,  on  cer- 
tain  places  of feripture.  Part  I. 

“ God  give  us  grace  to  know  thefe  things, 
and feel  them  in  our  hearts  !.  This  knowledge  and 
feeling  is  not  of  ourftdves.  Let  us  theref^ore  meek- 
ly call  upon  the  bountiful  Spirit,. the  Holy  Ghoft, 
to  infpire  us  with  his  prefence,  that.  we.  may  be 
able  to  hear,  the  goodnefs  of.  God,  to  our  falva- 
tion.  For  without  his  lively  infpiration,  we  can- 
not fo  much  as  fpeak  the  name  of  the  Mediator. 
No  man.  can  fay,  Jefus  is  the  Lord,  but  by  the 
Holy  GhoJL  Much  lefs  fhould  we  be  able  to  be- 
lieve and  know  thefe  great  myfteries  that  be 
opened  to  us  by  Chrilf.  But  we  have  received, . 
faith  St.  Paul,  not  the  fpirit  of  the  world,  but  tJie 
Spirit  which  is  of  God  ; for  this  purpofe,  that  we 
may  know  the  things  which  are  freely  given  to  us  of 

God. 


C 368  ] 

God.  In  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghoft  relletli 
all  ability  to  know  God,  and  to  fleaje  him.  It 
is  he  that purifieth  the  mind  by  his  fecret  work- 
ing, He  enlighteneth  the  heart  to  conceive  wor- 
thy thoughts  of  Almighty  God.  He  fitteth  on 
the  tongue  of  man,  to  llir  him  to  fpeak  his  ho- 
nour. He  only  minillereth  fpiritual  Jlrengtk  to 
the  powers  of  the  foul  zndi  body.  And  if  we  have 
any  gilt  whereby  tve  may  profit  our  neighbour, 
all  is  wrought  by  this  one  and  felf-fame  Spirit,’’ 
Horn,  for  Rogation-week,  Part  III, 

Every  propofition  which  I have  anv  where 
advanced  concerning  thofe  operations  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft,  which  I believe  are  common  toall  Chriftians 
in  ail  ages,  is  here  clearly  maintained  by  our  own 
church. 

Being  fully  convinced  of  this,  I could  not  well 
undei  ftand,  for  many  years,  how  it  was,  that  on 
the  mentioning  any  of  thefe  great  truths,  even 
among  men  of  education,  the  cry  immediately 
arofe,  “ An  enthufiaft,  an  enihufiaft.”  But  I 
now  plainly  perceive,  this  is  only  an  old  fallacy 
in  a new  fliape.  To  objeft  enlhufiafm  to  any 
perfon  or.  doftrinc,  is  but  a decent  method  of 
begging  the  queftion.  It  generally  fpares  theob- 
jeffor  the  trouble  of  reafoning,  and  is  a fhorter 
and  eafier  wav  of  carrying  his  caufe. 

For  inftance  : I aftert,  that  “ till  a man  receives 
the  Holy  Ghojl,  he  is  without  God  in  the  world  ; 
that  he  cannot  know  the  things  of  God,  unlefs 
God  reveal  them  unto  him  by  his  Spirit ; no, 

nor 


[ 3f9  1 

nor  have  even  one  holy  or  heavenly  temper^ 
without  the  infpiration  of  the  Holy  One.”  Now 
fhould  one  who  is  confcious  to  himfelf,  that  he 
has  experienced  none  of  thefe  things,  auempt  to 
confute  thefe  propofitions  either  from  fcripture  or 
antiquity,  it  might  prove  a difficult  talk.  What 
then  fhall  he  do  ? Why,  cry  out,  Enthiifiafm  ! 
Fanaticifm  !’’  and  the  work  is  done. 

“ But  is  it  not  mere  enthufafm  or  fanaticifm 
to  talk  of  the  New  Birth  ?”  So  one  might  ima- 
gine from  the  manner  in  which  your  Lordfhip 
talks  of  it.  “ The  Spirit  did  not  flop  till  it  had 
manifelled  itfelf  in  the  laft  effort  of  its  power, 
the  New  Birth  f.  The  New  Birth  began  in  ftorms: 
and  tempells,  in  cries  and  extacies,  in  tumults 
and  confufions  Perfons  who  had  no  fenfe  of 
religion,  that  is,  no  exfatic  feelings,  or  pains  of 
the  New  Birth  §.  W^bat  can  be  the  ilTue  of  the 
New  Birth,  attended  with  thofe  infernal  throes  [j  ? 
Why  fhould  he  elicit  fenfe  from  thefe  Gentiles, 
when  they  were  finally  to  be  deprived  of  it  in  ex- 
tacies and  New  Births^?  All  thefe  circumftances 
Mr.  W.  has  declared  to  be  confant  fymptoms  of 
the  New  Birth  +f 

So  the  New  Birth  is,  throughout  the  whole 
traft,  the  Handing  topic  ol  ridicule  I 

“ No,  not  the  New  Birth  itfelf,  but  your  en- 
thufiaftic,  ridiculous  account  of  it,”  What  is 

then 

tp.  126.  A P-  180,  |[p.  170. 

f p.  225,  ftp.  223. 


L 370  ] 

t-'ficn  iny  account  of  the  New  Birth  ? I gave  it 
fome  years  ago  in  ihefc  worris : 

‘ It  is  that  great  change  which  God  works  in 
the  foul,  wlien  he  brings  it  into  life:  when  he 
raifes  it  from  the  death  ol  lin  to  the  life  of  righ- 
teoufnefs.  It  is  the  change  wrought  in  the  whole 
foul  by  the  almighty*  Spirit  of  God,  when  he  is 
created  anew  in  Chrijl  Jefus,  when  it  is  renewed 
after  the  image  of  God,  in  rifiteoufnefs  and  true 
holinefs  : when  the  love  of  the  world  is  changed 
into  the  love  of  God,  pride  into  humility,  paf- 
fion  into  meeknefs ; hatred,  envy,  malice,  into 
a fincere,  tender,  difmterelled  love  to  all  man- 
kind. In  a word,  it  is  that  change  whereby  the 
earthly,  fenfual,  devilifJi  mind,  is  turned  into  the 
mind  which  was  in  Chriji  Jefush  (Vol.  IV.  o£ 
Sermons.) 

This  is  my  account  of  the  New  Birth.  What 
is  there  ridiculous  or  enthufiafio  in  it  ?' 

“ But  what  do  you  mean  by  thofe and- 
cries,  znA pains,  and  infernal  attending  the 

New  Birth  ?”  I will  tell  you  as  plainly  as  I can, 
in  the  very  fame  words  I ufed  toDr.  Church,  (after 
premifing,  that  fome  experience  much,  fome  very 
little  of  thefe  pains  and  throes.) 

When-  men  feel  in  themfelves  the  heavy 
burthen  of  fin,  fee  damnation  to  be  the  reward 
of  it,  behold  with  the  eye  of  their  mind  the  hor- 
tor  of  hell,  they  tremble,  they  quake,  and  are 
inwardly  touched  with  forrow’fulnefs  of  heart, 
and  cannot  but  accufe  themfelves,  and  open  their 

grief. 


C 37i  ] 

■■grief  unto  Almighty  God,  and  call  unto  him  for 
mercy.  This  being  done  ferioufly,  their  mind 
is  fo  occupied,  partly  with  forrow  and  heavinefs, 
partly  with  an  earneft  defire  to  be  delivered  from 
this  danger  of  hell  and  damnation,  that  all  de» 
fire  of  meat  and  drink  is  laid  apart,  and  loathing 
of  all  worldly  things  and  pleafures  comes  in  place, 
fo  that  nothing  then  liketh  them  more  than  to 
weep,  to  lament,  to  mourn,  and  both  with  words 
and  behaviour  of  bodvs  to  Ihew  themfelves  weary 
of  life. 

Now  permit  me  to  afk,  What  if  before  you 
had  obferved,  that  thefe  were  the  very  v/ords  of 
-our  own  church,  one  of  your  acquaintance  or 
parilhioners  had  come  and  told  you,  that  ever 
fince  he  heard  a ferraon  at  the  Foundery,  he  Jaw 
damnation  before  him,  and  beheld  with  the  eye  of 
his  mind  the  horror  oj  hell?  What  if  he  had  trem- 
bled and  quaked^  and  been  fo  taken  up,  partly  with 
forrow  and  heavinefs  far  tly  with  an  earneji  dejire  to 
be  delivered from  the  danger  oj  hell  and  damnation, 
as  to  weep,  to  lament,  to  mourn,  and  both  with 
words  and  behaviour,  to fieio  himjef  weary  fife  ? 
Would  you  have  fcrupled  to  fay,  “ Here  is  an- 
other deplorable  injiance  oJ  the  Methodijls  driving 
■men  to  difraBion.  tf” 

I have  now  finifhed,  as  my  time  permits, 
what  I had  to  fay,  either  concerning  myfelf,  or 
-on  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  In  doing 
this,  I have  ufed  great  plainnefs  of  fpeecb,  and 

yet 


‘t  Second- Letter  to  Dr.  Church, 


C 372  ] 


yet  I hope,  without  rudenefs.  If  any  thing  of 
that  kind  has  flipt  from  me,  I am  ready  to  retraft 
it.  I defire,  on  the  one  hand,  to  accept  no  mans 
perjbn-,  and  yet,  on  the  oth“r,  to  give  honour  to 
whom  honour  is  due. 

If  your  lordfhip  fhould  think  it  worth  your 
while  to  fpend  any  more  words  upon  me,  may 
I prefume  to  requeft  one  thing  of  your  lordfhip, 
to  be  more  ferious?  It  cannot  injure  your  lord- 
fhip’s  charafler,  or  your  caufe.  Truth  is  great, 
and  will  prevail. 

Wifhing  your  Lordfliip  all  temporal  and  fpiri- 
tual  bleffings,  I am, 


-Kov.  26, 
1762. 


Mv  Loro, 

y our  Lordjhip's  dutif>d  Son 


and  Servant, 


J O H N W E S L E Y. 


End  of  the  Eighteenth  Volume* 


THE 


CONTENTS 

Of  the  Eighteenth  Voluqje. 


Page 


A hriej account  of  the  trial  at  Glocefter.  — 3 

Modern  Chriftianity,  exemplified  at  Wednef- 
bury,  and  other  adjacent  places  in  StafFord- 
fhire.  — — — — 16 

The  cafe  of  ]o\\n  — - — 52 

A letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Baily,  g/'Corke.  99 
A letter  to  the  Rev.  Dr,  Conyers  Middleton, 
occcfioned  by  his  Free  Enquiry.  — 1^0 

A tetter  to  the  Right  Rev.  the  Lord  Bijhop  of 
Glocefter ; occafoned  by  his  traB  on  the 
effice  and  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  276 


r . • 


'’j'/ 


■-^WSfSBPwi®  ^.- 


* f IT 
W*  1 i*  i 


«".  T I/;  :i  7'  :,. 


• 1 


• il'L'iO  l\)^^''  .'i,  i ■ ll' 


y;u:i 

B • — .•oiir.jK.iD  . 

-'r  -iL  jV/  V.’AA 

-J'J-.TIli;'  ,•■.  . ,,,  \ 
ui  ' . - 


• • 


Date  Due 


Demco  293-5 

•*  . 

'V  ' > 


