Google


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.

Usage  guidelines

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.

About  Google  Book  Search

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I


J-


/


/


I-

I

.1
i

I
I

I


THE


MISSIONARY  GAZETTEER ;


(NMonunMe


A  GEOGRAPHICAL  AND  STATISTICAL  ACCOUNT


OP


THE   VARIOUS   STATIONS


or


CHURCH,   LONDON,   MORAVIAN,  WESLEYAN,  BAPTIST,

AND  AMERICAN,

Sfc.  Sfc,  SfC.

WITH  THEIR  PBOGREtS   JN

EVANGELIZATION  AND  CIVIUZATION.


BY   CHARLES   WILLIAMS.


LONIN)N  :

FREDERICK    WESTLEY    AND   A.   H.   DAVIS,

10,   gTATlONERS'-HALL-COURT,   AND   AVE-MARIA-LAKF,

(Bookseller*  to  the  London  JRsnonary  SocUty);

AND  SOLD  BT  JOHN  BOYD,    EDINBURGH  y   AND  ^BVILEY    AM1>

TTBMEIL,    DUBLIN.


THE  HEW  YORK    |

PUBLIC  LIBRARY  j

J

niiMM  FOUNDATIONS  (


'0.'Oi.tkir.rtl,..fti«^er,  7MPieet


Street.


>


PREFACE.


The  character  and  design  of  this  Volume  are  too
apparent  to  render  necessary  more  than  a  few  prefatory
words.  Although  it  partially  resembles  one  published
some  time  since  in  America,  its  plan  was  laid  several
years  before  it  was  known  that  any  similar  work  was
extant ;  and  a  large  part  of  it  was  prepared  before  that
referred  to  was  seen.  The  Editor,  however,  on  making
the  discovery,  availed  himself  of  its  aid,  as  well  as  of
the  assistance  afforded  by  other  Missionary  records  to
which  he  had  access;  but  his  principal  resources  have
been  found  in  the  Reports  of  the  various  Societies
whose  stations  he  has  described.  For  the  very  prompt
and  obliging  loan  of  those  published  by  the  Church,
the  London,  the  Moravian,  and  the  Baptist  Societies,  he
begs  to  offer  to  the  Rev.  Messrs.  Bickersteth,  Arundel,
Latrobe,  and  Dyer,  his  best  thanks.

That  he  wished  to  compress  much  information  into
a  comparatively  small  compass,  will  be  evident  on  an
inspection  of  the  work  ;  and  its  readers  may  be  assured
that  still  more  had  been  given,  but  for  one  of  two
reasons — his  not  being  able  to  obtain  it,  or  the  limits
assigned  him,  on  which  he  would  gladly  and  frequently
have  trespassed.  In  all  practicable  cases,  however  ^  Vv^
has  preferred  giving  the  original  statements  ot  T^Vtfe^Xo^'s.


IV


PREFACE.


and  Missionaries  to  any  which  he  might  have  abridged
from  them ;  lest,  on  the  one  hand,  they  should  suffer
from  misapprehension,  or,  on  the  other,  from  misrepre-
sentation.

Deeply  solicitous  that  any  future  Eidition  may  be
an  improvement  on  this,  he  will  be  much  obliged  by
any  suggestions  or  information  communicated  to  him
at  the  Publishers' :  and  he  has  only  to  add,  that  should
it  meet  the  kind  approval  of  the  religious  world  he  has
anxiously  sought  (by  an  amount  of  labour  of  which  he
leaves  others  to  speak),  and  should  life  and  health  be
a£brded,  he  designs  to  issue  a  series  of  volumes,  by  way
of  continuation, .  as  circumstances  may  require,  aflDbdng
to  each  a  succinct  history  of  one  of  those  ipqportant
Institutions,  whose  proceedings  will  thus  be  compre-
hensively and  periodically  recwded.

Newark,  May  18,  1828.


'  k


ESSAY*  ON  MISSIONS.


Curiosity  may  well  be  excited,  when  the  energies  of  i
multitude,  widely  differing  on  other  points,  are  confederated
for  the  acoomplishment  of  an  object;  especially  when,  in  the
hope  of  success,  they  submit  to  intense  toils  and  costly  sacri-
fices, through  a  long  succession  of  years.  Perhaps  this  com-
bination was  never  more  striking  than  in  the  history  of  Chris^^
tian  Missions:  in  whatever  light  they  are  regarded,  they  afford
much  to  stimulate  the  inquiries  both  of  philosophers  and  phi*
lanthropists,  while  a  candid  examination  of  their  claims  and
results  is  likely  to  exert  a  salutary  influence  on  the  mind  and
the  heart.  Of  no  trivial  importance  is  it^  therefore,  to  devise
and  employ  all  suitable  means  for  the  promotion  of  correct  views
and  feelings  on  tins  subject,  wherever  entertained;  as  well  as  for
the  communication  of  them  to  those  who,  from  various  circum-
stances, have  treated  it  with  inattention  or  indifference.  Under
this  conviction  the  present  volume  was  prepared,  to  which  it
has  been  deemed  desirable  to  prefix  the  following  observations.

It  ought,  however,  to  be  premised  that  the  genius  of  Mis-
sions is  of  no  recent  ongin ; — ^it  is  identical  with  the  spirit  of
Christianity ;  it  emanated  from  the  heart  of  **  the  great  Apostle
of  our  profession ;"  it  kindled  an  inextinguishable  zeal  in  the
bosoms  of  his  immediate  followers;  and,  through  the  subse-
quent periods  of  the  Christian  era,  it  put  forth  its  power,—
too  often,  indeed,  to  be  opposed  by  the  authority,  prejudices,
and  passions  of  men, — ^but  still  to  operate,  until,  towm*ds  the
close  of  the  eighteenth  century,  it  appeared  like  the  sun,  after
contending  witii  the  mists  and  vapours  of  the  dawn,  the  har-
binger of  a  state  of  transcendent  glory.

Whatever  diversities  have  arisen,  or  do  exist,  among  those  it
has  inspired,  and  whatever  considerations  may  sometimes  Ivan^
increased  its  ener^^  two  important  principles  appeax  \o\>^  W
wolved  in  all  ^  efforts  that  have  been  made  fox  libe  vrotV^^

b


Vlll


evangelization, — principles  which  must  continue  to  be  recog-
nized until  that  sublime  and  glorious  end  is  consummated.  One
is  a  deep  and  abiding  sense  of  the  appalling  evils  of  which
sin  is  the  source.  To  possess  this,  it  is  not  necessary  to  make
the  voyage  of  the  worid :  let  the  eye,  i|}uminated  by  the  light  of
heaven,  be  turned  within;  there  the  consequences  of  the  fall  wiW
be  awfully  apparent ;  and  it  is  only  for  it  to  glance  around
through  a  limited  sphere,  greatly  to  increase  the  vividness  of  its
affecting  perceptions.  For  as  the  chemist,  applying  a  test  to
any  metal  vrith  a  definite  result,  argues  that  the  same  result
may  be  predicated  of  any  quantity  of  that  metal  in  similar  cir-
cumstances ;  so,  from  the  specimens  of  human  nature  which  a
man  has  in  himself  and  his  neighbours,  he  may  as  satisfactorily
conclude  its  universal  character  and  tendency.  The  refutation
was,  therefore,  perfectly  easy  of  statements  made  by  politicians,
voyagers,  and  travellers,  who,  at  one  period,  and  that  not  for
distant,  were  accustomed  to  aver  that  numbers  were  living  in  an
uncorrupt  and  happy  state,  inheriting  customs  and  practising
rites  which  could  not  be  excelled,  and  rivalling,  in  the  simplicity
of  their  minds  and  the  loveliness  of  their  dispositions,  the  Ely-
sian  scenes  where  they  lived  and  expired.  If,  however,  on
this  ground,  such  details  were  regarded  as  false,  other  consi-
derations proved  the  baseness  of  their  authors.  Appalling  as
are  the  circumstances  of  mankind,  notwithstanding  the  posses-
sion of  divine  revelation,  and  the  existence  of  Christian  insti-
tutions, it  could  not  escape  observation,  that  of  these,  millions  were
destitute ;  and,  consequently,  that  among  them  the  most  gross  and
fearful  superstitions  abounded.  In  the  absence  of  the  beams
of  divine  truth,  darkness  covers  the  people,  and  innumerable
evils,  emerging  from  the  bottomless  pit,  invariably  revel  amidst
the  gloom.  The  wretchedness  of  idolaters  has  been  strikingly
portrayed  by  the  prophets  of  Jehovah ;  and  as  a  poet  familiar
with  their  state- gazed  upon  it,  he  exclaimed —

"  They  read  no  promise  that  inspires  belief;
They  seek  no  God  that  pities  their  complaints  ;
Hiey  find  no  balm  that  ^ves  the  heart  relief ;
They  know  no  fountain  when  the  spirit  faints.
O  could  I  picture  out  the  full  effect
Of  that  soul -withering  power,  idolatry,
I'd  write  a  page,  which  whoso  dared  to  read,
His  eye,  iasteud  of  tears,  in.crimsoa  dio^^s  &\ic»i\<\\A««^,^'


Nor  are  the  statements  of  others,  in  different  places,  at
variance  with  those  just  made.  Actual  and  faithful  surveys  of
the  heathen  world,  given  by  various  persons  and  through  suc-
cessive years,  are  aB  filled  with  objects  whose  hideous  features
mingle  horror  with  the  compassion  they  excite.  They  have
shown  us  the  inhabitants  of  the  Northern  and  Southern  Pacific,
removed  but  a  small  degree  from  the  most  abject  barbarism
devoted  to  the  grossest  idolatry,  and  guilty  of  detestable  and
fiendish  crimes ; — the  Chinese,  uniting  in  their  idolatry,  with
some  inconsiderable  variatioas,  that  of  ancient  Canaan,  Egypt,
Greece,  Rome,  Chaldea,  and  India,  and  polluting  all  the  rela-
tions of  life  by  abominable  offences ; — ^ihe  inhabitants  of  the
Indii^i  Ocean,  as  overwhelmed  in  frightful  superstitions,
worshipping  devils,  and,  in  some  cases,  eating  their  captives
alive ; — the  teeming  millions  of  Hindostan  enthralled  by  a
system  whose  rites  are  obscene  and  murderous,  whose  most
meritorious  acts  are  self-torture  and  suicide,  and  whose  heaven
is  utter  annihilation ; — the  people  of  Africa,  widely  scattered
and  variously  distinguished,  but  all  sunk  in  abject  ignorance  of
themsjelves  and  of  Christ,  and  perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge ; —
their  brethren  in  the  West  Indies,  living  where  Christianity,
if  80  it  may  be. called,  has  long  co-existed  with  Paganism,  but
not  for  the  slave,  and  consequently  leaving  multitudes  susceptible
of  the  kindliest  emotions  of  humanity,  and  of  the  infinitely
sublimer  feelings  of  piety,  to  a  thraldom  more  destructive  to  the
soul  thaa  even  the  fetter  and  the  lash  are  to  the  frame, — yea,
the  whole  unevangelized  population  of  the  earth,  as  involved  in
moral .  necessities  and  woes,  alike  defying  description  and
concep^on.

Deeply  affecting,  however,  as  the  present  condition  of  the
heathen  is,  unutterably  more  awful  is  their  state  with  regard  to
eternity.  It  is  conceded,  that  if  they  acted  up  to  the  dictates  of
conscience,  and  to  the  instructions  and  admonitions  of  the
natural  world,  in  the  absence  of  revelation,  hope  might  be
indulged  of  their  acceptance  with  God;  yet  no  proof  h&s
hitherto  been  afforded  that  any  one  of  them  has  done  this.
On  the  contrary,  it  is  apparent  that  where  they  haVe  not  the
Gospel  to  contemn,  they  violate  with  eagerness  the  laws
actually  possessed.  Of  them  it  may  be  said,  ^^  there  is  none
righteous,  no  not  one ;  there  is  none  that  understandeth ;  there
is  none  that  seeketh  after  God.      Their  throat  is  aw  o^^w


/


amulehre ;  with  their  tongue  they  have  used  deceit;  the  poison
of  asps  is  under  their  lips ;  their  feet  are  swift  to  shed  blood ;
and  even  knowing  the  judgment  of  GUmI,  that  they  which
commit  such  things  are  worthy  of  deaths  they  not  only  do  the
same,  but  have  pleasure  in  them  that  do  them/'  The  suppo-
sition thaty  dying  in  these  ciroumstances>  they  can  enter  heaven,
is  diametrically  opposed  to  the  clearest  testimony  of  Divine
revelation ;  andhence,  fearful  as  is  the  thought,  it  is  one  which
truth  compels  us  to  entertain,  that  multitudes  in  ^^  the  dark
places  of  the  earth"  are  daily  and  hourly  perishing  /  And
wherever  these  views  of  their  temporal  and  eternal  condition
are  united,  and  produce  their  proper  effect  upon  the  mind,  there
will  arise  one  of  the  elements  of  missionary  zeal>-— one  of  those
means  which,  still  ^plied,  will  render  its  flame  more  pure,  its
tight  more  brilliant,  and  its  heat  more  intense.

Another  powerful  motive  appears  in  the  conviction  thai
all  who  possess  the  Gospel  are  solemnly  bound  to  promote
its  diffusion.

Although  this  inestimable  donation  was  designed  to  enrich
its  immediate  possessor,  other  objects  were  contemplated  in  the
gift,  namely,  the  advantage  of  tiiose  with  whom  he  was  asso-
ciated, and  the  glory  of  tiie  Divine  Benefactor.  In  this  case,
the  rule  applies  with  the  greatest  possible  force^— '^  an  ability  to
do  good,  constitutes  an  obligation  to  its  performance.''  By
this  principle,  the  first  ambassadors  of  the  Cross  were  habitu-
ally impelled ;  while  the  command  was  obligatory — ^^  Cro  ye
into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every  oreature/'^
Hence,  when  Peter  and  John  were  commanded  by  the  San-*
hedrim  to  speak  no  more  in  the  name  of  Christ,  tney  rejdied^
'^  Whether  it  be  right  to  hearken  unto  you  more  Uian  unto
God,  judge  ye ;  for  we  cannot  but  speak  the  things  that  we
have  seen  and  heard."  Instead  of  imagining  that  be  had  laid
the  world  under  irredeemable  obligations,  Paul  esteemed  him-
self ^^  a  debtor  to  the  Greek  and  the  barbarian ;  both  ta  the
wise  and  to  tiie  unwise;"  beheld  "a woe"  hovering  over  him  if
he  preached  not  th^  Gospel;  and,  urged  by  an  irresistible
impulse,  he  proclaimed  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  ^  from  Jeru-
salem, and  round  unto  lUyricum."  The  churches  formed  by
such  men^coulfl  not  but  be  continued  vrith  their  spirit ;  the  exam-
ples on  which  they  gazed  must  have  exerted  a  mighty  iniuenoe,
while  the  injunctions  tiiey  received  to  ^^  hold  forSi  the  word  of
li^, "  and  to  shine  as  **  lights  in  the  worlds"  iavested  every


community,  and  all  its  members  respectively,  with  a  missionary
character.  Indeed,  wherever  the  difiusion  of  truth  is  not  an
object  of  intense  solicitude,  an  essential  quality  of  genuine
Christianity  is  wanting.  On  this;,  no  lapse  of  years  can  efiect
a  change  ; — in  every  age  it  must  be  precisely  the  same.  Beheld,
in  itself,  it  has  exhibited,  and  must  ever  discover,  its  Author's
perfection.  And  cruelty  is  no  less  inconsistent  with  huma-
nity, than  an  exclusive  and  selfish  possession  of  the  Grospel  is
with'  the  genius  of  true  piety.  The  compassion  for  soula;
which  it  invariably  breathes,  the  obedience  to  divine  commands
which  it  imperatively  requires,  the  zeal  for  Christ's  honour
which  it  always  enkindles,  and  the  rich  experience  it  affords  of
the  infinite  value  of  heavenly  blessings,  unite  to  induce  its
possessor  freely  to  give  what  he  has  freely  received.  A  neces-
sity is  thus  laid  on  every  believer  in  the  Son  of  God  to  culti-
vate a  missionary  spirit,  the  constituent  principles  of  which  are
produced  in  the  new  creation  of  his  soul,  and  for  whose  range
<<  a  world  lying  in  wickedness''  opens  an  extensive  and  deeply
necessitous  sphere.  As  the  beams  of  the  sun  were  not  designed
to  be  limited  to  the  orb  whence  they  emanate,  so  it  is  the  Divine
purpose,  that  he  whose  mind  has  become  the  depository  of  a
purer  light,  should  diffuse  around  him  the  rays  of  truth  and
holiness  to  the  utmost  extent  of  the  circle  in  which  he  is  ap-
pointed to  move.  It  is  true,  that  the  degree  of  ability,  and  the
opportunities  for  its  exercise,  are  alike  various;  but  still  there
is  an  impeachment  of  individual  piety,  an  accumulation  of
personal  guilt,  and  a  falling  short  of  the  beneficent  purposed  of
a  benevolent  God,  in  proportion  as  the  means  actually  pos-
sessed are  not  improved.

If,  then,  one  impetus  has  been  given  to  missionary  efforts  by
a  compassionate  view  of  the  miseries  of  men,  another  has  been
furnished  by  a  perception  of  the  claims  of  the  Divine  Being,
and  by  that  preparation  of  the  soul  for  its  observance,  which  is
the  noblest  of  his  works.  To  their  united  and  harmonious  ope-
ration, may  be  traced  the  sagacity  and  the  prudence  which
have  marked  out  various  fields  of  exertion,  appointed  suitable
labourers,  and  superintended  their  progress, — ^the  Rowing  elo-
quence which  has  aroused  the  torpid  from  their  slumbers,  and
inspired  the  active  with  unwonted  energy,— the  contributions,
including  the  splendid  donations^.of  the  rich  and  the  far  more
splendid  donations  of  the  poor,  pouted  into  the  tte^vxr^) — «:gl^

b  2


s3

^e  truly  heroic  exertiom  of  those  who,  baTiiig  given  iAem'*
selves  to  the  cause  of  the  Saviour,  refuse  no  offerings  de-
manded by  his  service.

Should  the  interrogation  arise.  How  have  these  principles
acted  f  by  what  means  has  the  accomplishment  of  the  end
proposed  been  sought  ?— it  is,  confessedly,  one  of  much  interest
and  importance.  In  reply,  it  may  be  said,  that  among  the
means  hitherto  adopted,  much  diversity  has  prevailed.  The
chief  and  invariable  instrument,  however,  is  the  preaching
of  the  Gospel,  A  large  number  of  those  engaged  in  the  dis-
pensation of  truth,  have  been  prepared  for  it  in  institutions
supported  in  this  and  other  countries  for  the  express  purpose ;
And  are  in  possession  of  all  the  advantages  accruing  from
enlightened  instruction  and  discipline.  Instances  have  alto
lately  occurred,  of  ministers  who,  after  labouring  in  their
native  land,  have  devoted  themselves  to  missionary  work
for  a  limited  period;  and  with  these  have  been  associated
many  native  converts,  who,  having  received  some  suitable  in-
struction, have  gone  forth  to  various  parts  with  th^  happiest
results.  The  mode  of  communication  generally  adopted  is,
of  course,  characterized  by  extreme  simplicity.  The  elaborate
sermon  is  ordinarily  set  aside  for  the  plainest  and  most  un«
adorned  statements ;  to  which  attention  is  frequently  excited  by
k  fact  of  recent  occurrence.  An  instance  of  the  familiar  and
apposite  manner  in  which  this  is  done,  appears  in  the  Diary  of
Nriputa,  a  converted  Hindoo : — "  I  went  to  Gola  ghat,  and
there  saw  a  pundit  at  worship,  with  a  number  of  small  stone
images  before  him.  I  asked  him  what  he  sold  tiiere.  *  What
do  you  want?'  replied  he.  <  Nothing  in  particular,'  answered
I,  ^  except  a  small  stone  to  make  a  weight  for  my  scales;  and
one  of  these  stones  you  have  here  will  just  answer.  *  Do  you
call  these  stones  ?'  said  he ;  ^  tliey  are  my  gods.  What  coun-
tryman are  you  ?'  *  Of  this  country,'  said  I ;  *  nor  can  I  be-
lieve what  you  say  concerning  these  stones ;  for  I  can  tell  you
better  things  out  of  this  book,  and  show  you  ivhere  to  find  the
true  €K>d,  who  is  a  spirit,  and  who  will  have  men  worship  him
in  spirit  and  in  truth.'  This  discourse  drew  a  crowd  of  people
together,  who  paid  much  attention  for  about  an  hour."

Although  it  will  be  absolutely  necessary,  for  a  time,  that
labourers  should  be  sent  forth  to  the  heathen  from  Christendom,
it  is  peculiarly  pleasing  to  have  proofs  of  talent,  intelligence.


\


and  zealy  from  among  die  natives  tfaeouelves ;  since  they  are
now  Yaluable  auxiliaries,  and  on  them  the  work  so  auspiciously
commenced  must  ultimately  devolve.  Already  many  foreign-
ers have  exjnredy  as  martyrs,  in  the  field.  The  torrid  zone,  in
which  a  large  part  of  it  appears,  is,  at  best,  but  ilUadaisted  to
the  physical  powers  of  Europeans.  A  short  term  of  labour  is
all  that  can,  ordinarily,  be  expected  from  them.  Into  their
toils,  therefore,  those  who  are  the  fruits  of  their  efforts  must
enter.  And  able  as  they  are,  constitutionally,  to  bear  the
climate,  they  possess  many  peculiar  advantages.  The  heathen
do  not  feel  the  same  degree  6f  suspicion  when  one  of  their  own
countrymen  addresses  them,  and  are,,  therefore,  less  reserved
in  their  communications  with  him.  A  native  teacher  •  is
better  acquainted  with  the  character  of  his  own  people,  with
tl^ir  habits,  uid  modes  of  thinking  and  reasoning,  as  well
as  with  their  idiomatic  phrases,  with  which,  though  very  ex-
pressive and  forcible,  an  European  must  find  it  a  long  and
difficult  process  to  become  familiar.  Natives,  too,  can  walk
in  the  heat  of  the  sun,  readily  procure  food,  and  gain  access  to
the  housee  and  hearts  of  the  people  through  avenues  which  are
barred  against  foreigners.  Missions,  moreover,  may  be  car-
ried on  with  such  instruments,  without  the  expenses  of  outfit
and  a  oosdy  voyage,  on  a  much  more  extensive  plan ;  while  the
interest  excited  in  the  bosoms  of  their  converts  will  naturally
induce  them  to  support  a  cause  to  which  they  are  so  largely
indebted.  The  provision  and  continuance  of  Colleges,  such  as
those  at  Serampore  and  Malacca,  in  which  they  may  obtain  an
accredited  introduction  to  their  work,  is,  undoubtedly,  of  vast
importance ; — to  them  the  best  attention  of  Directors  and  Mis-
sionaries will  doubtless  be  directed,  while  they  demand  the
warm  regard  and  liberal  contributions  of  the  whole  Christian
world.

Next  in  rank  to  the  means  just  adverted  to,  stands  the
Tranalaiion  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures,  In  addition  to  the
labours  of  Dr.  Morrison,  who  has  completed  a  version  of  the
Old  and  New  Testaments  in  the  Chinese  language ;  and  to  those
of  liie  Baptist  missionaries  at  Serampore,  in  accomplishing  the
same  stupendous  task,  besides  preparing  the  whole,  or  parts  of
the  Scriptures,  in  more  than  twen^  languages  of  India ; — other
devoted  men,  in  various  places,  have  enabled  the  heathen  to
read,  in  their  own  tongue,  <^  the  wonderful  works  of  Oo^''


To  <x)nteDd  that  these  tranaiations  were  perfect,  WQ<i]d  be  to
claim  for  them  what  is  not  due  to  the  far-famed  and  justly-
esteemed  Septuagint,  or  to  our  own.  amazing  and  admirable
Authorized  Version.  It  may,  however,  be  safely  asserted,  that
far  more  has  been  aooomplished  by  their  learned  and  indefoti-
gable  authors,  than  intelligent  and  even  sanguine  minds  could
have  ventured  to  anticipate.  Some  of  them,  indeed,  appear  to
begifled  with  transcendent  ability.  To  one  of  them  Sir  George
Staunton,  who  cannot  but  be  regarded  as  high  authority,  bears
the  following  honourable  tribute: — ^^I  cannot  say 'that  I  have
examined  Dr.  Morrison's  Translation  so  critically  as  to  be
able  to  give  a  positive  opinion  on  its  precise  degree  of  merit;
but  I  have  no  hesitation  in  saying,  that  I  conceive  his  qualifi-
cations for  the  execution  of  tiie  task  to  have  been  far  superior
to  those  of  any  other  person  whatever.  He  is,  unquestionably,
our  best  Chinese  scholar — he  had  made  himself  fully  acquainted
with  the  previous  labours  of  ^the  CathoUc  missionaries — he  was
in  constant  communication  with  intelligent  natives  in  the  pro-
gress of  the  work — and  his  general  zeal,  intelligence,  and  in-
tegrity, in  the  cause  to  which  he  has  devoted  himself,  are  too
well  known  to  need  any  confirmation  from  my  testimony."-
And  in  reference  to  the  Indian  versions,  it  should  be  remarked,
that  various  distinguished  persons,  particularly  Pundits,  have
united  in  acknowledging  that  they  are  executed  with  great  skill,
and  are  perfectly  intelligible  to  those  for  whom  they  are  re-
spectively designed,^ — a  circumstance  which  warranted  Mr.
Ward's  declaration — "  I  doubt  not  they  will  bear  to  be  com-
pared with  any  other  first  versions,  which,  at  any  time,  have
been  given  to  the  world."

But  valuable  and  useful  as  these  translations  are  in  them-
selves, who  can  estimate  their  importance  as '  a  foundation  for
future  and  improved  versions  ?  If  so  much  have  been  achieved
by  those  who  trod  the  terra  incognita  in  search  of  the  mine,
what  must  remain  for  them  to  whom  its  rich  and  ponderous
masses  have  been  pointed  out,  and  the  instruments  committed
by  which  it -may  be  most  successfully  worked  ?  Surely  it  is
only  to  invoke  the  continuance  of  the  same  energy  so  happily


*  The  reader  may  find  20  versions,  each  bearing  a  like  satisfactory
attestation,  in  the  "  Tenth  Memoir  of  Translatioiis  conducted  by  the
Serampore  Missionaries.''


XT

pat  forth,  to  secure  ftU  that  it  practtcablv-^l  that  ean  be
wished!

A  remarkable  and  interesting  coinoidenoe  appears  in  the
rise  of  an  institntion  for  the  universal  circulation  of  the  Scrip
turesy  at  the  very  time  in  which  translators  stood  in  need  of  such
aid*  Could  they  have  looked  for  assistance  only  to  the  funds
of  tbeir  respective  societies^  the  greater  part  of  what  they  have
done  must  have  remained  unaccomplished.  But,  providentially^
the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  arose  to  supply  their
necessities  with  a  kind  and  liberal  hand.

The  establishment  of  Schools  exhibits  another  means
of  promoting  the  welfare  of  the  heathen.  In  such  institutions
have  been  found  adults  of  every  age  and  rank^  including  kings
and  chieis ;  while  multitudes  of  children,  of  course  affording
greater  promise,  have  risen,  in  conseqaence  of  early  instruction,
from  the  debasement  of  ignorance  to  respectability  and  useful-
ness. Interesting  as  schools  are,  wherever  beheld,  those  for  .
females  are  peculiarly  gratifying.  The  influence  of  the  gentler
sex  on  such  as  are  rising  into  iSfe,  as  well  as  on  husbands  and
fathers,  renders  its  exertion  at  tl^  dictate  of  sound  intelligence
of  the  utmost  moment.  Heathenism  has,  however,  practically
and  boldly  denied  this ;  it  has  brought  dovm  woman  from  her
high  and  proper  rank,  to  the  grade  of  the  brute  creation;  and«
having  with  ruthless  power  jquenched  the  light  of  intellect^  has
dared  to  contend  that  it  never  gave  forth  its  beams.  What
was  wished,  was  first  afccompli^ied ;  and  then  the  fact,  thus
originating^  was  advanced  as  a  specimen  of  what  had  always
been,  and  must  prove  perpetual.  But  the  faUacy  has  be^
detected,  and  philanthropy  has  assailed  one  of  the  strongest
holds  of  superstition,  in  female  ignorance.  Even  in  India,  the
effi)rt  is  rapidly  increasing  in  popularity,  uid  the  good  already
accomplished  is  the  prelude  and  earnest  of  incalculably  more.

The  cause  of  education  has  been  greatly  promoted  in  distant
lands,  by  persons  who  have  given  it  particular  attention  in  this
country,  and  have  carried  with  them  the  best  plans  for  its  ad-
vancement The  increase  of  their  number  is  highly  desi-
rable. **  Those  of  an  age  to  receive  education  in  In£a,  greatly
exceed  ten  millions;  those  at  present  educated  by  Missionaries,
are  under  twenty  thousand,  nor  is  it  ever  likely  they  can  much
exceed  a  hundred  thousand.  Thus,  any  scheme  of  National
Education  is  totally  out  of  the  question ;  but  that  Yrbic\i  \!&  m-
possible^  in  the  way  it  is  conducted  at  present) \>ecome&  eos^  ^^


XVI


'execution  by  a  simple  change  of  plan.  There  is  a  large
demand  for  learning  in  India,  and  there  are  no  restrictions.
The  cheapest  and  best  schoolmaster  will  draw  to' himself  all  the
scholars;  and  it  is  only  furnishing  the  new  schoolmasters  with
better  modes  of  teaching,  to  enable  them  to  supplant  the  present
masters,  and  so  communicate  to  others,  not  only  the  instmctiGn
they  have  themselves  received,  but  the  very  mode  in  which
they  received  it."*

Schools  open  a  wide  field  for  translation  and  composition  in
the  languages  of  the  heathen,  by  producing  and  increasing  die
demand  for  elementary  and  other  books.  To  those  already
established,  much  aid  has  been  kindly  granted  by  the  School
Societies  of  this  countiy ;  and  their  fostering  care  will  be  needed
until  the  o&pring  shall  have  reached  a  state  of  vigorous
maturit}',  or  has  obtained  for  itself  adequate  means  of  support.

While  to  some  spots  it  was  not  necessary  for  Missionaries  to
carry  the  arts,  in  others  they  have  sought  the  civilization  as  well
as  the  evangeUzationof  the  heathen.  They  have  looked,  howetrer,
to  the  latter  as  the  cause,  and  to  the  former  as  the  effect;  they
therefore  sent  the  spade  and  the  plough,  the  axe  and  the  saw,
not  merely  as  the  instruments  of  the  mechanic,  but  as  the
attendants  of  the  Christian  minister ;  persuaded  that  men  in
becoming  Christians,  would  cease  to  be  savages.  Facts  esta-
blish and  illustrate  this  conviction.  Mr.  Nott,  tiie  oldest  of
the  original  missionaries  to  Tahiti  avers,  that  no  efibrts  conld
ever  induce  the  natives  to  learn  to  reiad  before  their  conver-
sion to  Christianity,  nor,  indeed,  to  relinquish  one  of.  tfaeir
wretched  customs;  but  no  sooner  did  the  grace  of  Crod  take
possession  of  their  hearts,  than  a  desire  for  civilization  arose,
and  religion  triumphed  over  the  shocking  dispositions  and  prac-
tices of  barbarism.  Nor  is  that  of  the  South  Sea  Islanders  a
solitary  case.  The  natives  of  Africa  are  equally  averse  to  every
kind  of  labour;  they  have  no  objection  to  a  long  journey,  bat
to  dig  for  half  an  hour  appears  intolerable  ;  and  some  of  thend,
now  in  difierent  circumstances,  have  acknowledged  that  it  was
not  till  they  felt  the  claims  of  another  world,  that  they  were  dis-
posed to  attach  importance  to  the  affairs  of  this.  The  colony  of
Liberia  too,  recently  recovered  from  the  wilderness,  and  which,
to  a  ^eat  extend  appears  morally  what  it  does  naturally,  exhibits

*  Douglas's  Hints  on  Missions.


XVll

the  powerful  influence  of  divine  truth  as  the  exclusive  cause
of  the  transformation  effected.  And  still  civilization  must  be
regarded  as  the  hand-maid  of  reli^on ;  artisans  of  piety  and
zeal  must  yet  be  sought  out ;  and^  in  some  instances,  settlers
or  colonists  should  accompany  the  ministers  of  the  Gospel.
Although  arts  may  not  primarily  meliorate  the  condition  of
men,  they  >Yill  refine  the  manners  and  promote  the  comfort  of  the
converted,  and,  by  furnishing  employment,  avert  the  evils  arising
fh)m  indolence.  The  mention  of  Tracts  which  have  been  dis-
tributed in  large  numbers  and  in  many  languages  must  close
this  recapitulation  of  instruments,  in  connexion  with  which
the  donations  of  the  Religious  Tract  Society  should  not  be
forgotten.

The  direction  and  superintendence  of  the  means  thus  hastily
enumerated,  has  been  the  pleasing,  but  arduous  and  responsible
duty  of  the  different  Boards  appointed  to  the  work ;  but  as  per-
sonal inspection  is  always  important,  and  often  peculiarly  de-
sirable, representatives  have,  in  some  instances,  been  appointed
to  visit  existing  stations,  and  to  form  6thers.  In  accordance
with  this  plan,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Latrobe  has  examined  the  set-
tlements of  the  United  Brethren  in  Africa;  the  Rev,  J.
Campbell  those  of  the  London  Missionary  Society,  in  two
visits  to  that  country ;  and  for  some  years,  the  Rev.  D.  Tyerman
and  G.  Bennet,  Esq.  have  been  occupied  in  inspecting  the
stations  of  tlie  same  Institution  in  various  parts  of  the  world.
•  In  reviewing  this  various  instrumentality,  the  remark  of  an
eminent  writer*  occurs : — "  The  talents  which  are  suited  to  one
age  and  station, would  be  altogether  unsuitable  to  another;  and
the  wisdom  displayed  by  Providence,  in  raising  up  persons
singularly  adapted  to  the  work  they  have  to  perform  for  the
benefit  of  mankind,  demands  our  particular  consideration."
Most  strikingly  is  this  attribute  exemplified  in  Christian  mis-
sions. One  has  an  admirable  talent  for  preaching  the  Gospel
to  the-  heathen,  another  has  a  valuable  tact  for  the  acquisition  of
languages,  a  third  can  print  with  accuracy  and  facili^,  a  fourth
it  familiar  with  many  useful  arts,  and  a  fiflh  has  much  skill  in
instructing  the  young ;  while  cases  are  not  wanting,  in  which
some  of  these  talents  are  happily  blended.  The  success  of  these
persons  will,  obviously,  depend,  in  a  great  measure,  oti\]tve%e\e<^-
UoD  of  an  appropriate  sphere  for  the  exercise  of  their  res^^ft^KS^


-.-^  r-      1


■"■.■'•    ''..*;     .- .-. ri>m?:i«::L£    ^:«ii:iiir'   "w^-3

-,r*   /:  f^,  r  vi.«:    ^  iiyi»»T3«r«i.  cut  Th*  mmi^s*  ji

f?'/-w  vif  ^fre^yjKrj^  MC  ■>¥  "3*  cioicesc:*  lac  prtwe  pctilioDs
w;  .^*.  ^A%rf  XTf^,  V>  **  v^  Grr*T  oc  »11  £coc-"'  Boadtiy  meeongs
*>//  p/rii  '*f  f^.'i  r^^ip^  tf^  aaa^  of  Chnsca&s^  ntalmoit  ereiy
\f>if\  'A  *}i^  HffU4i  hjUi^T^^s  *^  ^9nixs  spots  in  die  contments  of
Kufffy^y  .\iri^.%  A^fty  aikii  Amehca,  and  in  many  t«laiids  of  the
V!«  /*  ^«4  ^'^^  fl^^H^^phieally  demooscrated,  that  in  every
fK/iff  *^  ^^.  ff^if  M^  twenty  m  which  the  earth  perfonna  ite
4tytttM\  f*'.'4«AuUou  on  the  first  Monday  in  the  months  the  voice

•  M'Crie.


of  prayer  ascends  for  the  conversion  of  sinners  to  Grod.     By
this  hallowed  practice,  there  is  a  compliance  with  the  charge —
*^  Ye  lliat  make  mention  of  the  Lord,  keep  not  silence,  and
give  him  na  rest,  till  he  estabhsb,  and  till  he  make  Jerusalem
a  praise  in  the  earth ;"   and  wiUi  the  Saviour's  command —
^  The  harvest  trujy  is  great,  but  the  labourers  are  few ;  pray
ye,  therefore,  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  Uiat  he  would  send  forth
labourers  into  his  harvest."     In  vain  is  it  to  object,  that  such
petitions  are  unnecessary,  because  the  evangelization  of  the
world  is  matter  of  a  Divine  decree ;  since  the  means  are
decreed  as  well  as  thje  end,  and  one  of  them  is  prayer.  Ekjually
unavailipg  is  it  to  contend,  that  the  special  promise  of  the
,€oming  of  Christ's  kingdom  renders   supplication  nugatory;
^ince  the  promise  affords  not  only  an  argument  f<M'  prayer,  but
the  strongest  incentive  to  its  exercise.    Jehovah  promised  to
,  Israel  a  victory  over  Amalek ;  yet  it  was  only  as  this  hands  of
Moses  were  upheld  in  ardent  entreaty,  that  Joshua  prevailed
against  the  foe:  in  like  manner.  He  promised  to  them  the
Messiah ;  but  the  assurance,  so  far  from  inducing  a  spiritual
torpor,  urged  the  pious  Jews,  tike  Zacharias,  and  Simeon,  and
'Anna,  to  serve  God  with  fastings  and  prayers,  night  and  day.
JPrayer  is,  therefore,  and  must  continue  to  be,  indispensable.
When  Elijah  bowed  in  profound  and  importunate  devotion  on
Mount  Carmel,  the    li^e  cloud  arose  like  a  man's    hand;
Imd  as  he  pursued  the  holy  exercise,  that  cloud  einmnded,  and
was  augmented  by  others,   until  the  fece  of  Heaven  was
darkened,  and  there  was  the  sound  of  abundance  of  rain.    Just
so,  the  cloud  which  now  sheds  its  vivifying  and  refreshing  in-
fluence on  the  moral  world,  is  an  answer  to  the  prayers  of  early
saijits ;  while,  assuredly,  its  increase,  to  the  likening  of  the
desert  to  the  garden  of  the  .Lord,  must  be  attributed  to  Divine
condescension  to  petitions  now  ascending  from  the  Christian
church,  and  to  thos^  which  shall  arise  in  ages  yet  to  come»

In  the  preceding  remarks,  another  inquiry  has  been  partly
anticipated,  nnme\j--fFhat  are  the  result^  of  tnis^nfify
labour  ?  But  it  may  be  well,  though  the  limits  of  this  ]Bk»ay
will  not  aUow  them  all  to  be  stated,  to  answer  the  interrogation
a  little  more  fully.  And  here  it  may  be  remarked,  that  they
have  furnished  a  practical  refutation  of  objections  long  since
advanced,  and  sh'll  reiterated.  When  first  \3LT^<e^,  ^«9»^
riould  only  he  met  by  arguments;   but  now  ^ey  mvj  >q%


refuted,  by  incontestible  facts.  The  weapon,  indeed,  was  al-
ways powerfid ;  for  what  are  speculations  and  hypotheses,  op*
posed  to  reasonings  on  sound  and  immutable  principles  ?  Bui;
it9  acuteness  has  gradually  become  more  palpable ;  for  though
a  feeble  argument  may  be  regarded  by  him  who  uses  it  as  per-
fectly conclusive,  when  considered  abstractedly,  or  even  as
oppqsed  to  another,  yet  facts  must  strip  it  of  its  supposed  im-
portance and  force;  and  the  supporters  and  advocates  of  mis-
sions have  numerous  circumstances  to  narrate,  which  they  may
defy  their  adversaries  to  contravene  by  any  others  in  the  hlsi-
tory  of  the  world.

It  was  asked,  for  instance,  in  a  tone  indicative  of  contempt —
when  a  spirit  of  missionary  enterprize  was  first  breathed,
"  Where  will  you  find  agents  for  such  a  Quixotic  expedition  ?"
It  can  now  be  shewn  that  hundreds  have  been  found  in  this  and
other  lands^  among  whom  are  many  devoted  women ;  and  that
spots  unfavourable  to  human  nature,  so  far  from  repres^n^
compassionate  regard,  have  awakened,  and  still  do  excite,  a
heroic  enthusiasm  which  has  preferred  them  to  all  others.  Anjd
that  no  deficiency  in  this  respect  shall  arise,  may  be  fairly
inferred.  So  long  as  God  has  a  work  to  achieve,  and  is  heard
inquiring — ^^  Whom  shall  I  send  ?''  the  devoted  response  will
assuredly  be  returned — ^  Here  am  I ;  send  me."

It  was  said,  ^'  Such  purposes  cannot  be  accomplished  without
another  Pentecost ;  the  languages  of  the  heathen  must  be  known,
and  who  will  acquire  them  ?"  It  can  now  be  told  that  nearly
thirty  of  the  fifty  languages  of  India  have  been  attained  by  one
small  body  of  men )  and  that  of  these,  two  are  the  Chinese  and .
the  Sungskrit — ^unquestionably  the  most  difficult  languages  on
earth.  After  this,  the  obstacle  once  deemed  insuperable  seems
scarcely  formidable ;  the  path  has  not  only  been  opened  up,  bu|
its  ruggedness  is  diminished,  and  the  means  of  the  nineteentlj
century  rival  in  efifect  the  glorious  mirfu^le  of  the  first.

It  was  said,  '^  The  chain  of  caste  will  defy  your  power ;  the
heathen  will  never  break  this  to  follow  your  precepts."  .  It  oaii
now  be  proved  that  several  hundred  Hindoos,  who  were  not
before  outcasts,  have  given  up  all  earthly  connexions  and  pror
spects,  from  their  conviction  of  the  truth  of  Christi^ty ;  which
is,  of  itself,  the  most  solid  proof  that  can  be  given  of  the
reality  of  missionary  success,  and  the  certainty .  of  the  %xa^
tiiumpb  of  the  Gospel.  ,


^  It  was  said,  "^Supposing  the  Scriptures  were  trtUislated,
tiiey  will  do  no  good :  the  people  of  India  will  be  shoeked
by  their  accY>unts  of  sacrificing  onimals  which  they  have  been
abcnstomed  to  regard  as  sacred ;  and,  rejecting  the  Bible,  they
will' hold  their  Shasters  with  greater  tenacity."  Itcaniif^a^
be  demonstrated,  that  from  the  perusal  of  the  New  Testament
alone,  many  interesting  conversions  from  heathenism  have  ac-
taaUv  taken  place.  "  A  number  of  years  ago,''  says  Mr.  Ward,
of  ^rampore  in  1821,  '^  I  left  a  New  Testament  at  Ram-
krishnu-poor,  after  preaching  in  the  market-place.  To  the
perusal  of  this  book  is  to  be  traced  the  conversion  of  Sebuk*
nm,  now  an  excellent  and  successful  preacher — of  Krishnii-das^
who  died  happily  in  his  work  as  a  bold  and  zealous  preacher —
of  Jugunnat'h^  and  one  or  two  other  individuals.  Mr.  Chamber-
Iain,  some  yeai^  ago,  left  a  New  Testament  in  a  village ;  and,
by  reading  this  book,  a  very  respectable  young  man  of  the
writer  caste,  Tarachihid,'  and  his  brother  Muthoor,  embraced
the  Gospel.  Tarachund  is  one  of  our  best  Christian  Hindoo
poets ;  he  has  composed  more  than  a  hundred  of  the  hymns
ftmnd'  in  our  Bengalee  hymn-book,  and  a  pamphlet  placing
in  striking  contrast  Heath^sm  end  Christianity ;  and  Muthoor
is  employed  as  Persian  interpreter  in  the  Dutch  Court  of  Jus-
tice at  Chinsundi. '  I  have  seen  the  New  Testament  lying  by
Ihe  sick-bed  of  the  Christian  Hindoo,  as  his  best  companion  ;
and  the  truths  it  contains  have  been  the  comfort  of  the  afflicted,^
and  the  source  of  strong  consolations,  and  firm  hope  in  death,
td  many  a  dying  Hindoo."

It  was  said,  ^*  Differences  prevail  among  you :  some  are
Churchmen  and  others  Methodists — some  are  Baptists  and
others  Independents;'  the  heaven  wilt  not  know,  tiierefore,
iHnoh  of  you  to  regard.:  besides^  contentions  will  arise ;  and
the  polemical  battles  you  have  waged  here,  you  will  fight  over
again  in  other  lands."  It  can  now  be  shewn,  that  though  our
Missionary  Societies,  when  regarded  as  existing,  principally,  in
the  metroipolis,  may  seem  like  the  vessels  in  the  port  of  Lon-
don j  yet  beheld,  in  their  respective  spheres,  they,  resemble
those  vessels  scattered  over  the  surftuse  of  the  mighty  deep —
often  widely  separated,  and  never  in  danger  from  each  other's
course.  And  to  this  may  be  added  many  instances  of  Chris^
txaA  kindness  and  unanimity  from  those  spots  on  which  the


sepresentatives  of  difierent  Itiatitution^  bavd  labouied  te^thMy
or  where  they  have  been  occasioaally  associated ;  while  coft'*
troversy  among  them  is  utterly- miknown.

It  was  said,  **  Tlie  time  isnptcome^— -before  it  arrives  soiiif.<
of  the  Apocalyptic  >  visions  will  be  realized^  the  martyrs-  wi)l'
live  again  on  the  earth,  imd  the  splendid  artay  of  instrnm^ts
win  guarantee  the  glory  of  the  result"  And  should  the  object-,
tion  now  be  reiterated,  it  may  be  rejoined,  How  then  can  the
statements  already  made  be  met?  How  can  the  facts  mei^..
tioned  be  accouitted  for?  Let  these  be  reviewed,  and  1^
others,  yet  to  be  advanced,  be  connected  tvith  them ;  and  hfi
wh6  thus  cavils,  will  be  like  the  man  who  wodd  assert  that  th^
time  of  winter  had  not  eome,  when  the  eye  gased  on  froz^
rivers,  snow«clad  fields,  and  trees  without  li  leaf;  or  like  him
who  would  dedare  tiiat  the  time  of  harvest  bad  jb^  coine»  when
the  rich  and  golden  ears  waved  tnth  everybr^eze,  ahd<tlie
reapers  were  eagerly  thrusting  in  the  sickle,  while  others  w^
binding  tiie  heavy  sheates,  and  bearing,  them  off  to  the  ap
pointed  storehouse.  i     ..         ,

If  a  man  be  ignorant  of  what  has  been  achieved,  let  him
suspend  a  decision  for  which  he  is  totally  unprqMured; — ^if  ha
be  only  partially  informed,  let  him  seek  more  -copious  informal
tion,  lest  truth  or  ingenuousness  compel  .a  retraction,  by
no  means  honourable; — ^butif  he  have  listened  to  all/ that caa
be  said,  and  is  still  disposed  to  employ  the  objections  just  adf.
verted  to,  he  may  be  fairly  told  that  he  has  no  clear  pereeptjojoi.
of  the  force  of  evidence,  or  that  he  is  enthraHed  by  some  pa^-.
sion  or  prejudice,  which  misleads  his  judgment,  and  is  unworthy
his  character.  •  .    .1:    •

Another  important  series  of  results  appears  in  advdniag^-
which  may  he  denominated  collateral.  Among  jllies0,.n(>  i^
considerable  place  should  be  allotted  to  the  beneficial  re-actiojl
invariably  consequent  on  benevolent  exertion.  To  the  getM .
influence  of  a  missionary  spirit  must  be  ascribed  many  va-
luable means  which  are  now  employed  for  our  country's  benefits
In  blessing  others,  we  have  ourselves  been  blest  This  had
beeii  exemplified  in  a  most  remarkable  manner,  also,  by  the
spiritual  advantages  accruing  firom  missionaiy  exertions  to  many
of  our  countiymen  in  heathen  lands,  whose  conduct  has  too
often  furnished  a  formidable  barrier  to  success.  They  left  the.
shores  of  England  eontemners  of  CU>d ;  the  winds  which  wafted


XXIU

theih  over  the  bosom  of  liie  ocean  drank  in  their  imprecations;
nor  did  all  the  wonders  of  the  deep  awaken  a  desire  to  seek
Him  who  gave  the  sea  the  bounds  it  cannot  pass.  But  on  a
far  distant  siiore,  the  **  still  small  voice"  of  a  Christian  mis-
sionary met  their  ear ;  and  those  whom  the  storm  could  not
awe,  nor  the  lightning  illumine^  were  conscious  of  a  power  that
melted  their  hearts  into  penitence  and  inspired  them  with  faith :
they  joined  the  humble  mid  despised  band  of  Chnst^s  disciples ;
became  his  ^'  living  epistles,  known  and  read  of  all  men ;"  and,
m  some  cases,  the  preachers  of  his  Gro^l,-^the  heralds  of  his
cross.

But  not  to  dwell  on  these,  or  on  civilization,  ahready
alluded  to,  missionaries  have  formed  languages  which  were
never  before  reduced  to  a  written  system,  or  even  to  letters ; —
they  have  substituted,  for  the  caprice  and  will  of  chiefs>  gene-^
rally  the  most  muscular,  daring,  and  cruel,  and  the  will  of
priests,  the  most  superstitious  and  artful, — a  constitution  which
acknowledges  the  supremacy  of  the  law,  and  the  equality  of
every  man  in  its  view; — ^they  have  established  courts  of  judi-
cature, appointed  judges,  and  instituted  trial  by  jury ; — thus  pur-
suing measures  which  raise  the  political  and  ci^il  character  of
the  peepk,  tend  to  the  confirmation  of  the  acknowledged  but
limitetd  prerogatives  of  the  hereditary  family,  and  operate  to
the  protection  of  religion.  Thus,  aCs  Dr.  Philip,  of  Cape  Town,
bas  observed — ^'  To  such  of  our  friends  at  home,  if  there  be
any.  such,  who  are  seeking  for  signs,  and  think  little  is  done
except  they  continually  hear  of  marvellous  and  striking  con-
versions, I  must  be  allowed  to  hazard  a  remark,  for  the  accu^
racy  of  which  I  can  vouch,  so  far  as  my  observation  extends,—^
ihat  the  number  of  conversions  which  come  under  the  notice  of
missionaries  does  not  bear  a  greater  proportion  to  the  general
good  done  by  the  Missions,  than  the  conversions  and  deaths  re-
corded in  the  monthly  Magazines,  &c.  published  in  Eogland,
do  to  the  entire  sum  of  good  done  in  that  country  by  the  preach-
ing of  the  Grospel,  and  the  institutions  of  Christianity.  While
the  missionaries  are  complaining  that  they  have  so  few  striking
instances  of  the  power  of  Divine  grace  to  record  in  the  com-
munications to  their  respective  Societies,  it  is  highly  probable  that
their  influence  is  much  more  extensive,  and  the  change  carrying
on  by  them  much  greater  than  they  themselves  are  able  to  imagine.
In  those  countries  where  our  missionaries  have  gamedi  ^m^^^^

c2


Ascendancy,  there  is  scarcely  6ne  spot,  However  innch
impervious  to  their  all-pervading  light  and  heat  ■  Eivea  while
they  are  grossly  misrepresented  and  spoken  agsinsty  Mmyim
checking  the  undue  exercise  of  power ;  raising  the  vtandMBd-df
morals;  literally  proclaiming  ^  liberty  to  the  fea^dtes^^';alul
opening  the  pnson-doors  to  those  that  are  bound;  difiuaiog
abroad  the  light  of  science  and  literaturevundermihii^  th^fills^
systems  of  religion  with  which  they  have  to  contend;  jquUi^
plying  those  charitable  ihstitiilaons  which  have  for  their  objert
the  relief  of  sufiering  humanity;  vanquishing  infidelity  Inr  the
most  direct  and  pain^of  all  arguments, — ^by  living  exhibitions
of  the  truths  of  Christianity  $  chai^ging  the  face  of  oilr  cotoi&s;
iand  accelerating  the  approach  of  that  moral  revolution,  winch
will  soonei  or  later  usher  in  the  kingdom  of  the  woric^'  as  the
kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  his  Christ."  In  these  re8pieots,Missioii«
airy  Societies  have  done  much,  which  inust  rejoice  ev^  lover
of  his  race,  and  every  faithful  servant  of  the  Most  Hi^h^

But  such  i*esults  are  infinitely  transcended  by  the  actual  eon^
version  of  many  of  the  heathen  to  God,  T6  the  mind  familiar
with  missionary  records,  there  will  occur,  at  th6  mention  of  this^
the  case  of  Pomarre,*theBouth  Sea  Islander ;  of  Africanei^t  the
terror  of  the  wild  hordes  of  the  desert ;  of  the  Priests  of
Budhu};  of  the  Sultan  Katagenyll ;  of  Af a,$  the  Chinese -asf
sistant  of  Dr.  Morrison;  of  Johannes,**  t^e  Indian  of  the
Mahikander  nation ;  of  the  £2squimaux,tt  wfiom  his  ^soxmtty^
tnen   described  as  ^  the    tnan    whom  the  Saviour  took    to
himself;'  of  old  Simeon,^  the  Hottentot;  and  of  converted
Hindoos,  of  ti^hom  an  account  has  recently  been  given  ;-^
but,  perhaps,    there    Is   not   a  spot   on  wluch   missionaiy
labours  hate  been  long  pursued,  in  which  some  such  in*
stances  have  not  appeared.      Let  the  number   in   the   So^
bieties  of  Wesleyans,  whose  Inoral  and  religious  limitationfi
are  numerous,  be  added  to  that  of  communicants  on  the  prin*
ciples  bf  the  Church  of  England,  luid  let  this  estimate  be  ^
increased  by  that  of  those  in  the  churches  cf  CongregationaHsts
hnd  Baptists  of  this  country  and  America ;  and,  affcer  very  fiEiir

and  faithful  deduction,  a  multitude  ivill  appear  of  sincere  and

*

*  See  Tahiti  and  Eimeo.    f  See  Africanet*s  Ktaal.    {  See  Ceylooi*
Ij  See  kara^Si    §  See  Canton.    **  See  Greenland^    ff  See  Labrador^.

XX  See-Pacalt8doJi)«


devoted  cbnyerts  to  the  Christian  faith.  Ahd  if  there  be  joy
m.  the  preaenee  of  the  angels  of  Gk)d  over  ont  sinner  thftt
rspentethy  what  raptures  must  have  been  experienced  in  the
heavenly  world,  from  a  spectacle  which  ought  to  thrill  with
eestBtiD  delight  the  heart  of  every  Christian  contemplating  it  ini
oufs!'.'

Only  one  way  appears  of  evading.the  force  of  these  accumu-
lated  instances  of  good,  arising  from  missionary  efforts ;  it  is  by
that  old  but  most  disingenuous  method  sometimes  adopted,,  of
charging  on  the  authors  of  such  statements  an  interestedness
ud  partiality  sufficient  to  impeach  their  strict  veracity.  Such
a  charge^  however,  was  never  advanced  with  so  ill  a  grace  as
in:  reference  to  CHiristian  missionaries.  Let  the  conduct  they
hfive  pursued,  which  this  Volume  describes,  demand  its  proper
tcibnte  to  their  self-denial>  th&ir  meekness,  their  patience,  Iheir
peneveranoe — in  a  word,  tb  their  high  and  heavenly  heroism ;
ind  thou^  they  are  and  must  be  fallible,  the  insinuation  of
falfldbood  must  at  bnce  be  rejected  as  unfounded  as  it  is  base.
Without  pretending  that  they  have  attained  perfection,  that  all
are  alike,  or  even  that  some  have  not  fallen,  justice  declares
that  higher  excellencies  of  character  are  unknown  than  those
which  Missionaries  have  displayed.  To  their  testimony,
however,  another  may  be  added,  from  which,  it  is  apprehended,
there  can  be  no  appeal :  it  is  that  afforded  by  many  persons  of
distinction,  holding  various  and  important  official  stations,  who
have  given  their  countenance  and  support  to  missionary
labour.  Of  its  necessity  and  success,  as  well  as  of  the  exalted
virtues  of  its  agents,  they  have  frequeiitiy  avowed  their  personal
recognition;  and  to  set  aside  their  open  attestation,  is  to
plunge  into  the  grossest  scepticism.

-A  word,  in  Conclusion,  inust  be  addres^  to  the  friends  of
Missions.  On  tki^m  it  is  peculiarly  incumbent  to  learn
muck  from  past  experience.  Already  a  mass  of  valuable
information  has  been  obtained,  Which  was  antecedently  beyond
reach ;  and  every  fragment,  now  accessible,  should  be  highly
appreciated  and  safely  treasured  up.  To  the  philosophy  of
Missions,  little  attention  has  yet,  unhappily,  been  given ;  but
its  vast  importance  loudly  calls  for  more.  A  larger  induction
of  general  principles  will,  in  sotne  cases,  prevent  unnecessary
Expenditure^  and>  in  Others  it  will  secure  a  greater  product  than


xzn

without  it  could  have  been  realized.  One  distinguished  indi*
vidual*  has  studied  the  subject  of  Missions  for  this  purpose  |
and  on  the  cause  of  philanthropy  and  piety  he  will  confer  aa
invaluable  boon,  if  he  is  disposed  to  continue  the  effort,  and  to
complete  the  course  of  which  we  have  had  some  interesting
specimens.t  No  ordinary  pleasure  will  be  afforded  to  the
\Vriter  of  these  remarks,  if  this  and  succeeding  volumes  should
prove  in  any  degree  an  auxiliary  to  such  a  result ; — to  gather
the  stones  for  a  noble  edifice  is  no  mean  honour.

One  conclusion  has  forcibly  struck  him  in  the  exam-^
ination  he  has  pnrsued,-~-it  is  the  importance  of  gi^
stability  and  influence  to  what  has  been  effected,  in  pre-
ference  to  the  contemplation  of  new  measures.  This  ap^
plies  particularly  to  those  stations  which  may  be  regarded
as  a  centre  of  influence,  or  a  fulcrum  from  which  others
may  be  powerfully  moved.  For  we  have  not  to  do  merely  with
the  individual  case,  but  with  its  bearing  and  tendencies.  A
reference  must  be  had  to  its  relative  importance,  as  well  as  to
its  actual  necessities.  To  exhaust  our  means  on  an  isolate
spot  might  be  justified,  if  that  exclusively  demanded  assistance-)
but  when  the  claims  on  sympathy  are  so  numerous  and  press-
ing, they  must  at  least  piimanly  be  expended  on  those  places
which  warrant,  from  their  connexion  with  others,  an  expecta*
tion  of  the  greatest  amount  of  good.  When,  for  example,  a
dense  cloud  enveloped  the  Mission  to  Tahiti,  the  Directors  of
the  London  Society  were  asked — Why  continue  your  agents
there  ?  And  to  this  they  might  have  replied,  as,  perhaps,  they
did — "Because,  if  we  succeed,  who  shall  limit  the  bounds  of  our
triumph  ?  Look  at  the  islands  so  thickly  scattered  over  the  vast
Pacific,  and  comparatively  so  easy  of  access ;  and  who  will  assert
that  the  attractive  influence  of  the  Cross,  experienced  in  one,
shall  not  pass  to  ano^er,  and  another,  and  another,  until  all,
brethren  in  Adam,  are  brethren  in  Christ?"  On  the  same
principle,  the  Christian  Knowledge  Society  no  sooner  heard
Bishop  Heber  s  declaration—"  Here  is  the  strength  of  the
cause  in  India  !"$ — than,  instead  of  being  diverted  by  other
objects,  to  the  neglect  or  enfeebling  of  this,  they  appropriated
to  it  what  appeared  due  to  its  relative  importance  as  well  as
to  its  exigencies.     In  this  path  the  Directors  of  Missipnary

•  Dr.  Chalmers,    f  See  Orme's  Life  of  Urquhart.    J  See  Tatojore*


IDS  iHU  do:  wctU  to  tareadir  Let  them  geveitdly  follow  up
wbot  iBnej  hisve  begins  unleesy  m  any  case,  the  soandest  reasons
ahoald  xxt^  tiiem  to  paoae;  -implying  their  means  like  the  skil-
M  generali  who  ddes  not  disperse  bis  energies  far  and  wide^
but  Mugs  as  many  as  fiossible  to  bear  on  those  points  whrcby
if  gained,  will  commali^  for  Urn  other  ^phies.

In  all  the  movements  that  are  made,  there  should  be  also
c  eonsfani  reference  tbfrst  prinoipUa  ;  since  those  on  which
the  friends  of  MissioiiB  formerly  acted,  will  retain  all  their

t  force  iiQtil  the  foil  ^ory  of  the  millennium  beams  upon  the  world.
Then  ^y  will  the  6ry  of  human  misery  be  hushed, — then  only
will  the  charge  to  afford  relief  be  repealed;  As  the  flight  of  lime
hastens  on  ^t  period,  the  eye  may  glance  at  the  visions  of
prophecy,  and  at  the  success  already  obtained ;  Christians  in
America  may  be  stimulated  by  Christians  in  Britain,  and  the
latter  may  catch  the  ardent  zeal  of  their  Trans- Atlantic  friends;
but  in  none  of  these  things  should  the  mind  be  absorbed ;  the
reference  should  be  direct  and  unceasing  to  the  woes  of  man,
and  to  the  solemn  obligation  which  rests  on  every  possessor  of
tber  Gospel  to  promote  its  diffusion.  From  hence  two  valuable
results  will  arise ;  the  one  will  regard  the  means  employed,  and
the  other  the  spirit  in  which  they  are  used — ^the  one  will  secure
the  proclamalaon  of  the  truthy  and  the  other  the  continued  ex-
ercise of  that  devotion,  benevolence,  and  zeal,  which  alone  are
suited  to  its  dispensation  and  advancement.

Nor  should  it  ever  be  overlooked,  that  in  Missions  ahx^adj
and  Missions  at  home^  there  is  no  place  for  supremacy,  or
even  rivalry  ;  the  support  of  both  should  oe  cordial  and  con-
tenq^raneous.  While  Foreign  Missions  should  not  be  delayed
until  Home  Missions  are  unnecessary,  the  latter  should  not  be
sacrificed  to  regard  for  the  former.  Each  should  have  its  ap-
proprii^  claim  ;-'^it  cannot  be  withheld  from  one  without  injufy
to  uie  other.  To  allow  the  spirit  of  Foreign  Missions  to  lan-
goirii  or  evaporate,  is  to  avert  from  our  own  land  unnumbered
blessings^— since  here, .  it  is  true,  that  they  who  water  others,

.  shall  themselves  be  watered ;  and  to  suffer  that  spirit  to  with-

.  dritwour  sympathy  from  the  moral  and  spiritual  wants  of
those  inimediately  around  us,  is  to  have  tiieir  blood  required  at

[  our  hands,  and  to  weaken  the  cause  we  intend  to  promote.
The  principal  means  now  operating  in  heathen  lands  are  afforded
by  the  small  part  of  Britain  hitherto  evangelized  \  \e\.  \\\\&


xjcviii


work  proceed  more  extetisively>  and  the  means  will  be  proper*
tionably  increased.  Just  as  men  are  nnsolicitous  for  their  own
best  interests,  will  they  be  unconcerned  about  the  eternal  welfare
of  others;  but  in  every  accession  to  the  Christian  Church,  there
is  that  of  one,  who  will  gladly  offer  his  efforts,  his  contribu^
tions,  and  his  prayers,  that  the  Saviour  he  loves  may  be  uni^
versally  adored.  Well,  then,  may  we  present  -the  petitions
which  were  poured  forth  by  ancient  believers—^"  God  be  mer-
ciful unto  us,  and  bless  us;  and  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon
us,  that  thy  way  may  be  known  upon  eaiith,  thy  saving  health
among  all  people !  Let  God  bless  us,  and  all  the  ends  of  the
earth  shall  fear  him  !*'


r


ABBREVIATIONS  EMPLOYED  IN  THE  WORK.

L^  M, '  S.  or  L,  S,,  liondon  Missionary  Society.
C.  M.  S,f  Chyrcb  ditto.

fF.  M.  S.  or  fF.  S.,  Wedeyan     ditto.

B.  M,  S.,  Baptist  ditto.
S.  M.  S,y  Scottish  ditto.
AT.  M,  S.,  Netherlands  ditto.

U.  F.  M.  S.,  United  Foreign        ditto  (United  States).

A,  B,  C.  F,  M,,  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for  Foreign  Missions.

A,  B.  B.  F.  M,f  American  Baptist  Board  for  Foreign  Missions.

C.  M,  A,f  Calcutta  Missionary  Auxiliary.
If.  A,j  Missionary  Association.

M^  S.,  Missionary  Society.

A,  M.  S,,  Auxiliary  Missionary  Society.
U,  B,,  United  Brethren.

C,  K»  S.,  Christian  Knowledge  Society.

&P.  G,  F,  P,,  Society  for  Propagating  the  Gospel  in  Foreign  Parts.

B,  fy  F.  B.  S.y  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society.
B,  S.,  Bible  Society.

B.  A,,  Bible  Association.

A*  B.  S,,  Auxiliary  Bible  Society.

L,  •/•  S^  London  Jews'  Society.

E,  J.  S.,  Edinburgh      ditto.

r.  5.,  Tract  Society.

B*  F.  S,  S.,  British  and  Foreign  School  Society.

A,  S,,  Auxiliary  Society.


MISSIONARY  GAZETTEER.


ABU

ABUROW,  OR  ABORU,  a
lage  in  the  island  of  Harooka,
lich  the  Rev.  Mr.  Kam,  of  the
.  M,  S.  occasionally  visits.  Here
native  schoolmaster,  Nicholas
irhoinno,  collected  together  the
habitants,  and,  on  the  18th  of
inaary,  1822,  persuaded  them  to
andon  idolatry,  and  to  demolish
eir  idols.  He  was  equally  suc-
iwful  at  five  different  villages  in
e  same  island.  The  very  ashes  of
>Jects  esteemed  sacred  were  cast
to  the  sea.

ABYSSINIA,  an  empire  of
frica,  770  m.  long,  and  550
road;  hounded  on  the  N.  by
abia,  E.  by  the  Red  Sea,  S.  by
ingi  and  Alaba,  and  W.  by  Ni-
ritia  and  Darfur.  It  is  divided
ito  two  grand  districts,  Tigre  and
jnhara,  which  are  subdivided  into
)veral  provinces.  The  country  is
lountainous,  but  in  the  vales  the
lil  is  fertile.  The  rainy  season
mtinues  from  April  to  September,
his  is  succeeded,  without  interval,
r  a  cloudless  sky,  and  a  vertical
in;  but  cold  nights  constantly
Uow  these  scorching  days.  The
urth,  notwithstanding  these  days,
cold  to  the  soles  of  the  feet ;
irtly  owing  to  the  six  months'
tin,  when  no  sun  appears,  and
urtly  to  the  perpetual  equality  of
ights  and  days.  No  country  in  the
orld  produces  a  greater  variety  ofj


ABY

quadrupeds,  both  wild  and  tame\
Birds  are  also  numerous,  and  some
are  of  an  immense  size  and  beauty^
There  is  a  remarkable  coincidence
between  the  customs  in  the  court  of
ancient  Persia  and  those  of  Abys-
sinia. The  religion  of  the  coun^
is  a  mixture  of  Judaism  and  the
Christianity  of  the  Greek  church ;
and  the  language  bears  a  great  affi-
nity to  the  Arabic.  The  govern-
ment is  legally  a  despotism,  but  in
an  unsettled  state ;  for  the  power
of  the  neguz,  or  emperor,  is  very
weak,  and  the  ras,  or  prince  of  the
empire,  and  the  chiefs  of  the  pro-
vinces, are  generally  in  enmity  with
one  another.  The  people  are  of  a
dark  olive  complexion ;  their  dress  is
a  light  robe,  bound  with  a  sash,  and
the  head  is  covered  with  a  turban.
The  houses  are  of  a  conic  form,
meanly  built  of  clay,  and  covered
with  thatch ;  and  even  the  churches
are  of  a  round  form,  encircled  by  a  .
portico.  The  chief  rivers  are  the
Nile  and  the  Tacazze,  which  bate
their  sources  in  this  country.  Gondar
is  the  metropolis.

To  Abyssinia,  the  attention  of  the
C  M,  S,  was  called  some  years
&?<>>  l>y  ^c  circumstances  which
occurred  during  Mr.  Jowett's  visits
to  Egypt.  The  B,  ^  F,  B.  S.
has  since  availed  itself  of  all  the
means  at  its  disposal,  to  prepace  t^
Scriptures  for  Abyssml&,\M>t]^\u.\!tiA


ABY

Ethiopic,  as  the  ecclesiasticid  lan-
guage of  the  country,  and  in  the
Amharic,  as  the  chief  vernacular
dialect.  By  the  active  aid  of  its
learned  coadjutors,  the  four  Gos-
pels in  Amharic/  from  the  transla-
tion of  Abu  Rumi,  procured  for
the  Society  try  Mr.  Jowett,  in  Egypt,
were  speedily  printed  and  for-
warded to  Abyssinia.  The  Ethio-
pic  Scriptures  were  also  soon
under  preparation,  in  aid  of  which
the  Committee  of  the* 6'.  M,  S,
presented  to  the  J9.  ^  F.  B,  S,
some  Ethiopic  manuscripts,  pur-
chased by  Mr.  Jowett  at  Jeru-
9alem,  among  which  was  a  valu-
able copy  of  the  entire  New  Tes-
tament. Under  these  hopeful  cir-
cumstances a  mission  was  con-
templated. On  the  airival  from
BiLsle  of  five  Lutheran  clergymen
in  182S,  (the  Rev.  Messrs.  Gpbat,
Kugler,  Krus^,  Lieder,  and  Miil-
ler),  three  of  them  were  destined
to  this  service,  and  the  other  two
to  occupy  such  stations  in  the  Me-
diterranean,.  as  might  appear  most
eligible,  in  reference  to  a  con-
nexion with  Abyssinia.  Mr.  Koel-
ner,  a  German  printer,  who  accom-
panied tbem  to  this  country,  was
also  selected  as  an  assistant  in  their
important  work.  Mr.  Ueder  writes,
in  1826,  "In  February,  or  the  be-
ginning of  March,  I  intend  to  pro-
ceed to  Upper  Egypt,  taking  with
me  an  Arabic  servant,  a  treasure  of
40  or  50  Bibles,  100  New  Testa-r
ments,  and  a  considerable  number
of  Tracts  and  Arabic  Si)elling
Books.  I  think,  at  first,  to  live
two- or  three  months  at  Kene,  as
well  for  doing  good  to  niany  as  for
improving  my  knowledge  in  Ara-
bic.'^  .  The  ancient. qhurch  of  the
Copts,. who  form  the  largest  Chris-
tian community,  and. are  the  old  in-
.habitants  of  tht;  country^  wtllchiefly
.<^ngage  the  attention  of  those  who
are  occupied  ii^  the  Egyptinn
mission ;  and  as  their  number
in  Alexandria,  is  yerysn^aU.com-


ABY

pared  with  that  at  Cairo,  the  latter,
where  facilities  for  the  introduction
of  the  Scriptures  and  religious
publications  are  great,  is  suggested
as  the  proper  residence  of  the  mis-
sionaries. Of  the  Copti  and  Mus-
sulmans, Mr.Gobat  thus  spealcs: —
*'  The  Copts  arc  reserved.  Brother
Krus^  has  been  well  received  by
the  Patriarch.  I  hope  something
will  be  done  for  themj  thou^
nothing  encourages  the  hope  of
success,  but  the  promised  grace  of
God  and  the  misery  of  the  people.
It  will  be  very  difiicult  to  do  any
thing  for  the  Mussulmans,  until  the
mighty  arm  of  the  iiord  intodere
in  a  particular  manner.  The  fi)l<
lowing  fact  will  give  an  ideaof  Ihe
sentiments  of  the  most  tolerant
nation  of  the  Turkish  empire :— A
Tiurkish  woman,  being  divorced
from  her  husband,  lived  with  a
Greek  for  twoyears — whether  mar-
ried or  unmarried  is  not.knoi^n,
nor  is  it  known  whether  she  bad
been  baptized ;  but  she  had  made
the  mark,  of  the  cross  on  her  arm :
her  husband  (the  Greek)  had  a
Turkish  senont,  who,  being  dlsr
satisfied  with  his  master,  went,  four
weeks  ago,  to  the  father  of  the
woman,  who  is  a  man  of  some  con-
sequence ;  4he  father  went  imme-
diately with  some  soldiers  to  take
her  into  custody;  after  which  sJm
was  examined.  As  she  confessed
herself  to  be  a  Christoi,  she  was
condemned  to  be.  drowned  in  tha
Nile:  they  put  her  upon  an  ass,
and  conducted  her  tQ  the  Bqulac,
amidst  the  maledictions  of.  a  mul-
titude :  they  then  took  her  into  a
small  boat  on  the  stream,  and  strip-'
ping  off  her  clothes  and  qrna-
ments,.  (the  more>.briskly>  as  fhe
continued  to  say,  '  I  shall  die  a
Christian,')  tbey  bou^d  hear  arms
together  on  her  back,  and  east  her
Into  the  Nile,  where  she  expired.
Others  had,  in  the  viean  time,
made  a  great  fir^  Car  the  husband,
Mi  ho  had  been  condemned  tP  ba


XCft

tortif ';  bat  when  he  saw  It,  be  said
be  wdidd  not  die,  and  made  himself
«  Miissnlriaan  in  order  to  receive  the
IHtfdcm^  wMcfa  will  probably  min
his  soul  fbr  erer."  The  mission-
Bites  api^offnted  to  AbjFsrinia,  met
at  Gaho  with  a  yoonff  native  of
thatcMntrjr,  named  Glrgis,  ^o,
there  is  reason  to  hope,  wffl  greatly
flicflltftte  the  attainment  of  their
object.  A  Miriiomedan  Abyssinian,
^o'  bad  accompanied  Oii^^s,  was
also  admitted  into  their  family.  At
the  pablieation  of  the  last  Report,
th^  missionaries  bad  not  arrived  at
Abyssinia.

ACCRA,  or  ACRE,  a  British
Fort  on  the  coast  of  Gninea,  W.
Africa.     Ei  Ion.   1*  20',  N.  lat

In  the  early  part  of  18S8,  a
flotfridiinffsebool  was  patronized
here  by  2%e  African  Imtiiuiion,
consisting  of  58  boys,  many  of
whom  had  made  considerable  pro-
gress in  writing,  gprammar,  and
arithmetic.  The  teachers  per-
fafmed  Divine  service  in  the  hail
every  Sabbath.  The  progress  of
dvflisation  and  morality  is  also
very  pleasing.

AD  ANJQRfi,  or  AD  ANJOUR,
a  village  in  Hindoostan,  IT  m.  from
Tanjore.   E.  ton.  1^,  N.  lat.  10^.

In  1809  tiie  missionaries  at  7lm-
/iw,nnder  the  Society fcrPrmrtoHng
CfSnHian  Knowledge,htA\Bbo^ted
here  with  success,  and  stationed  a
Catechlst;  nine  families  had  re-
ceived baptism,  and,  being  assisted
by  several  Christian  families  in  the
Tlchkity,  they  erected  a  house  for
public  worship.

AFRICA,  one  of  the  fonr  grand
divisions  of  the  world;  bounded  on
the  N.  by  the  Mediterranean  Sea ;
E.  by  the  Isthmus  of  Suess,  the
Red  Sea,  and  the  Indian  Ocean ;  S.
bv  the  Southern  Ocean ;  and  W,  by
the  Atlantic  Ocean.  It  is  a  pe-
ninsula of  prodigious  extent,  and
Joined  to  A«ia  by  the  isthmus  of
Suez,  whjcb  is- M5  m.  over.     In


its  greatest  length,  Arom  themodt
northern  part  to  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  it  is  4600  m. ;  and  in  ibm
broadest  part,  from  Cape  Verd  to
Cape  Guardafiii,  it  is  8500.  Th«
greater  i>art  lies  within  the  torrid
zbne,  which  renders  the  heatalmoKl
insupportable  in  many  places;  but
the  coasts  in  general  are  very  fer-
tile, tiie  fruits  excellent,  and  the
plants  extraordinary.  There  are
more  wild  beasts  than  in  any  other
part  of  the  world ;  also  some  ani*
mals  peculiar  fo  this  country.  Be-
sides these,  there  are  crocodiles'^
ostriches,  camels,  and  many  other
animals  not  to  be  met  with  in
Europe.  There  are  several  deserts^
particularly  one  of  a  large  extent^
called  Sahara;  but  these  are  not
quite  wi&out  inhabitants.  There
are  many  large  rivers,  of  which  th6
principal  are  the  Nile,  Niger,  Zaire,
Seneged,  and  Gambia.-  The  most
considerable  mountains  are,  the
Atlas,  the  Mountains  of  the  Moon,-
and  the  Sierra  Leone.  The  inha
bitants  consist  of  Pagfans,  Maho-
medans,  and  Christians.  The  firsts
who  possess  the  greatest  part  of  the
country,  from  the  Tioplc  of  Cancef
to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  are  the
most  numerous,  and  are  generally
black.  The  MahomedisLns,  yKhti
are  tawney,  possess  Egypt  and  thef
coast  of  Baibary.  In  the  N.  of
Afifica  are  some  JdWs,  who  manage
all  the  little  trade  of  that  part  q(
the  country.  The  principal  divi-
sions of  Africa  a)re,  Barbary,
Egypt,  Sahara,  Nigritia,  Guinea,
Borhou,  Kassina,  Fexzan,  Tim-*
biictoo,  Nubta,  Ab^nia,  Abek,
Loango,  Congo,  Angola,  BengnieUi,
Mataman,  ZBngHebar,Moneemugi,
Caffraria,  and  the  country  of  the
Hottentots.  [See  Abyssinia,  j4/n»
enner*s  Kraal,  Albany,  Alemuidria,
Algm  Bay,  Batkwrst,  Bsiktmy,
Bananas,  Bo^veld,  BeihiMorpt
Bulhm,  Campbell,  Cc^fiaria,  Ctqm
CfAony,  Cape  Toum,  Cfuvrlottt^
Ekm,     Freetmon^     Geld    G<A&t>


AFJft

CUwceiier,  Crnadenthai,  (Sroene'
klw^y  Gfiqua  Town,  Hanicev,  Kent,
Khamiea  Berg,  Kisaey,  Latakoo,
Leicester,  Lipoid,  Liberia,  Ma'
guasse,  Namaqualand,  Paarl,  Pa-
ealtsdorp,  Pella,  Philippolis,  Plan'
taint.  Regent,  Sierra  Leone,  Stel-
lenbosch,  Steinkopff,  St,  Mary^e,
River  Gambia,  Tulbagk,  Theopolis,
fFellington,  Heater  loo,  York»^

AFRICANER'S  KRAAL,
called  also  Peace  Mountain  and
Jerusalem,  a  settlement  in  Great
Namaqualand,  S.  Africa,  a  little
N.  of  tiie  Orange  R.  550  m.  N.  of
Cape  Town,  late  the  residence  of
the  Chief  Ajfricaner,  who  was  long
known  as  a  most  sanguinary  free-
booter.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Campbell,  of
the  L.  M,  S»,  when  in  Africa,
wrote  to  him  a  conciliatory  letter,  to
induce  him,  if  possible,  to  live  in
peace  with  the  missionaries.  This
appeal  was,  happily,  successful;
and  a  mission  was  mrmed  among
his  people.  The  preaching  of  the
cross  was  subsequently  crowned
with  abundant  success.  The  chief
himself  was  heard  to  say,  shortly
after  the  commencement  of  Mr.
£bneT's  labours,  in  1815,  *'  I  am
glad  that  I  am  delivered.  I  have
long  enough  been  engaged  in  the
service  of  the  devil ;  but  now  I  am
freed  from  his  bondage,  Jesus
hath  delivered  me ;  him  therefore  I
will  serve,and  with  him  Twill  abide.''

'^  To  form  a  proper  estimate,''
says  Dr.  Philip,  soon  after,  **  of  the
change  effected  upon  Africaner,  his
former  character  and  circumstances
must  be  taken  into  consideration.
A  few  years  since,  he  was  such  a
terror  to  the  colony,  that  a  thou-
sand dollars  were  offered  to  any
man  who  would  shoot  him ;  and
when  Mr.  Campbell  crossed  Africa,
in  his  first  journey,  he  was  more
alarmed  wiUi  the  idea  of  meeting
Africaner,  than  with  all  the  other
dangers  to  which  he  was  exposed.
What  a  change  has   now  taken


APR

place !  The  persecutor  ii  tuned
into  the  warm  friend  of  miai|oii«
aries;  the  savage  has  laid  Midtf
his  barbarous  habits,  and  hat  be*
come  docile  and  gentle  as  a  child;
and  the  man  who  was  formerly  tiw
plunderer  and  terror  of  the  cqUh
nists,  is  now  a  friend  of  peace  aai
justice,  and  is  the  centre  of  union^
and  the  bond  of  harmony,  between
the  subjects  of  the  British  Govern-
ment and  the  savage  tribes  with
which  they  are  surrounded^  aori
even  among  those  tribes  tbem^
selves.  In  proof  of  the  latter  as*
sertion,  Mr.  Moffatt  states  that  hi
travelling  along  the  banks  of  the
Orange  R.  he  met  with  a  tribe  of
Bastard  Hottentots,  who  were  re-
moving from  the  place  of  their
former  abode.  Being  asked  why
they  were  desirous  of  a  new  sta^
tion,  they  replied,  that  it  wai  in
consequence  of  the  intended  re^
moval  of  Africaner  from  Na^
maqualand.  When  Mr.  Moffiitt
asked  why  that  circumstance,  if
true,  should  induce  them  to  chaogg
their  place  of  residence,  they  re-
plied, that  if  Africaner  removed,
they  could  not  live  in  that  part  oi
the  country ;  for  it  was  his  in-
fluence that  kept  all  the  tribes  in
peace ;  and  that  as  soon  as  he  was
gone,  they  would  begin  murdering
each  other.'*

In  1817,  Mr.  Ebner  had  baptized
about  40  converts  and  their  children^
and  about  400  attended  public  wor-
ship. A  school  was  also  prosperous.
Mr.  Robert  Moffatt  joined  Mr.  £•
in  the  early  part  of  1818,  and  they
both  left  the  station  to  the  care  of
Afrieaner  before  the  close  of  the
year,  who  efficiently  supplied  the
place  of  the  missionaries,  by  regiw
larly.  meeting  with  the  people  on
the  Sabbath,  and  expounding  to
them  the  Scriptores.  The  B,  fy  F.
B,  S,  forwarded  100  Bibles  and
100  Testaments  to  this  station,  io
the  Dutch  language,  which  wer^
usefully  distributed.


'  Stdctfthe  dentil  of  Africaner,  in
18Sf  y  Taridm  circumstances  have
pMventlNl  flie  continiiance  of  mis-
sioMaiy  labowfs,

AOIMEER,  or  AOMEBR,  an
extoiifliTb  piovfnee  of  HIndoostan
Mp»j  nso  m.  long  and  200  broad.
Tha  8.  W»  part  is  a  satulf  detert,
and  thinly  inhabited  j-Uui  central
pari  hWfy,  cdntalilihg  salt  lakes  and
8prfn((8  tiiat  produce  salt  sponta-
neoodj  $  and  the  8.  E.  part  moun-
tainotis^^Hh  ierttlevalleys  and  plains
inferrttnhig.  In  the  southern  part
of  Ibis  pvevince  are  several  Rajpoot
states;  goremed  by  rajahs  and  petty
chi^ffr.  The  Rajpoots  are  stout
and  hrtLV^,  ixrith  hoolsed  noses  and
Jewish  features ;  haughty  in  their
matmftn^  very  indolent,  much  ad-
didt^  to  the  use  of  opium,  and
extremely  attached  to  their  re-^
speetlTe  chiefs.

Agdmeer  the  capital  of  the  abo<ve
province,  is  situated  in  a  pleasant
vaSey,  and  Is  on  all  sides  surrounded-
by  mountains.  Its  circumference
is  6  hi.  It  is  guarded  by  walls,
totroips,  and  a  strong  fortress,  and
has  bees  lately  added  to  the  Brl-
tirth  tewltory.  E.  Ion.  76«  20',  N.
(at.  S6<»  24'.

The  prejudices  and  superstitions
of  the  pec^le  are  veiy  strong  and
inreterate,  which  may  be  conceived
from  the  following  circumstance : —

Here  is  the  tomb  of  a  Mahome-
dm  mint,  who  flourished  about  000
jsars  since,  tepated  one  of  the
greatest  that  ever  appeared  in  Hin-
doQstan,  whom  Hindoos  find  Mus-
iwlmans  worship,  and  by  whose
nam^  tiiey  swear.  The  Aumber
of  priests  who  subsist  on  the  con-
trllmtions  paid  at-  tlie  tomb  by  de->
votees  fVcRn  all  regions,  exceeds
1,100.

The  Rev.  Jabes  Carey,  from  the
E,  M,  S,  commenced  his  labours  in
1819,  and  engaged  in  establishing
scboets,  in  order  to  introdace  the
GospeL  The  Marquis  of  Hastings
«lgg«Mted  the  enterprise,  and  made


AGR

two  grants  for  the  object,  amount*
ing  to  10,000  rupees;  which  being
expended,  he  granted  300  rupees
montlily,  for  the  support  and  in-
crease of  the  schools.  No  accounts
of  Mr.  Carey's  labours  have  lately
been  received.

AGRA,  a  province  of  Hindoostan
Proper,  250  m.  long  and  180  broad  |
bounded  on  the  N.  by  Delhi,  £.  by
Oude  and  Allahabad,  S.  by  Malwah,.
and  W.  by  Agimeer.

The  capital  of  this  province  is  a
large  city,  the  air  of  which  is  es-
teemed very  healthy.  The  R*
Jumna  mnstbrongh  it  forfive  Icross:
The  emperor  Acber  founded  here
a  most  magnificent  city,  which  is
now,  for  the  most  part,  a  heap  of
ruins.  The  city  rises  from  the  R.
Jumna,  and  extends  in  a  vast  semi-
circle. The  fort,  in  which  is  in^.
eluded  the  imperial  palace,  which
occupied  above  1000  labom«rs  for
12  years,  and  cost  nearly  3,000,000
rupees,  is  of  great  extent.  This  city
was  talcen  by  Madhajee  Sindia,  and
continued  in  the  possession  of  the
Mahrattas  until  1803,  when  it  was
captured  by  tlie  British  army  under
General  Lake,  after  a  short  and
vigorous  siege.  It  has  ever  since
remained  in  the  possession^  6i  |he.
British  Government,  and  is  the  seat
of  a  civil  establishment,  for  the  col'
lectien  of  the-  revenue  and  the  ad-*
ministration  'of  justice.  100  m;
S.S.E.  Delhi,  E.  long.  TT*  66',  N.
lat  21^  I2f.  Population  ttbout40,000«

At  the  commencement  of  1811,-
the  BaptUi  missionaries  considered
it  expedient  to  fonn  a  regular  mis-
sion in  Hindoostan,  which  should
comprize  Agra  and  Potna,  at  which
Mt.  Moore  and  his  wife  had  been
for  some  time.  Accordingly,  on
the  21st  of  January,  Messrs.  Cham-
berlain and  Peaoooli,  with  their
families,  and  a  baptised  Hindoo
named  Ynindavun,  set  oiit  from
Serampore  to  occupy  tlie  new  sta<<
tion.

On  the  ITth  of  Msy  the  mVatoSL^
b2  &


AGR

ftiries  arririsd  at  Agrn,  where  they
were  kindly  received  by  the  person
to  whom  they  were  recommended^
and,  after  a  short  time,  a  serjeant
major  at  the  fort  accommodated
them  with  the  use  of  his  quarters,
for  the  celebration  of  Divine  service
on  the  Lord's  day,  and  on  Thurs-
day evenings.  Severe  afflictions^
however,  both  personal  and  do-
mestic, exercised  their  faith,  and
patience.  Early  in  1812,  the  mis-
sionaries were  prohibited,  by  a  mili-
tary order,  from  preaching  in  the
fort  f  and,  in  consequence  of  Mr.
C.  addressing  a  note  on  the  subject
to  the  commanding  officer,  a  com-
munication was  made  by  that  gen-
tleman to  Govemment,and  an  order
arrived  for  Mr.  C.  to  be  sent  down
to  the  presidency.  The  Agra  ma-
gistrate, however,  who  was  intrust-
ed with  the  execution  of  this  order,
behaved  with  the  utmost  kindness
and  urbanity,  ordering  the  persons
who  should  have  had  tiie  charge  of
him  to  attend  him  to  Calcutta,  a
distance  of  nearly  900  miles,  as  his
servants.  It  is  also  pleasing  to  add,
that  on  his  appearance  at  the  office
of  police,  nothing  more  was  said  to
him,  than  that  he  was  at  liberty.
Just  before  this  occurrence^  the
aspect  of  affiiirs  began  to  brighten.
*'  Four  men,"  observes  Mr.  Pea-
cock, <'  who  remained  at  this  sta-
tion, apparently  love  to  read  and
bear  the  pure  word  of  God :  and  one
of  them  has,  within  these  last  few
weeks,  offered  himself  as  a  candi-
date for  believer's  baptism."  This
person  was  baptized  Aug.  7, 1812.
Several  persons,  previously  votaries
of  pleasure,  exchanged  their  cards
and  backgammon  for  the  Bible  and
the  Hymn  Book,  instituted  family
prayer,  and  constantly  attended
public  worship ;  at  which  a  large
congregation  of  natives  ordinarily
assembled.  One  person  set  up  a
native  school  on  her  own  premises
and  at  her  own  expense,  and  con-
tribiited,  in  a  short  time,  660  rupees


AGR

to  the  mittion.  Mr.  PeaCoekodD*
tinued  at  Agra  till  the  year  1816|
and  many  who  were  brought  by  hto
instrumentality  and  that  of  his  loc
cessors,  from  the  paths  of  thv  de-
stroyer, are  stated  at  a  recent  pe»
riod  to  have  been  living  as  bmniliig;
and  shining  lights  in  l£it  dark  part
of  the  earth.

This  place  has  also  engaged  the
attention  of  the  C  M.  S,  In  No-
vember, 1812,  Abdool  Messeehi  »
converted  native  of  Delhi,  one  of
the  fruits  of  the  Rev.HenryMaxtyn*^
ministry,  accompanied  the  Rev*
Daniel  Corrie  to  Agpra,  with  the  de-
sign of  settling  there,  as  a  pnbUe
reader  and  catechist.  On  Jiis  ai^
rival  he  commenced  his  work  with
greai  zeal,  and  as  many  hundred
persons  had.  recently  flocked  to  the
neighbourhood,  in  consequence  of
a  scarcity  in  the  Mahratta  countiy}
occasioned  by  a  terrible  drought
he  went  among  them  distributiog
pice,  or  halfpence,  and  inviting
them  to  hear  the  Grospel,and  to  send
their  children  to  him  to  leam  to
read.  At  first  they  received  him  as
ah  angel  of  light ;  but  a  report
having  been  circulated,  that  he  was
an  Arabian,  who  wished  to  cany
off  their  children,'the  poor  natives,
for  several  days,  refused  to  receive
the  charity  he  offered  them,  or  to
hear  any  thing  from  bun.  In  the
course  of  a  week  or  twO|  however,
they  perceived  that  their  suspicions
were  unfounded;  and  his  public
services  were  attended  by  hundreds,
many  of  whom,on  hearing  an  expo-
sition of  the  decalogue,  cried  out
aloud,  "  These  are  true  words ;  and
the  curse  of  God  will  fall  upon  us,
if  we  obey  them  not."  Indeed,  the
congregations  soon  began  to  in-
crease rapidly,  and  comprised  many
respectable  persons,  both  Hindoos
and  Mahomedans.  A  school  was
also  opened  for  the  instruction  of
children ;  persons  visited  the  cate-
chist every  day  for  religious  con-
versation ;  and  a  venerable  old  Anan>

6


AOR

iriw  «taM  that  he  was  90  yean  of
age«  Bokiwwiedged  that  bis  soul
iMd  been  greatly  refreshed  by  the
tbinga  he  bad  heard.

The  10th  of  June,  1813,  U  no-
tieed  in  Abdool's  Journal,  as  <<  the
day  cm  which  the  doctrine  of  Christ
witnessed  a  triumph.''  "  For  three
weeks  past,''  says  he,  '*  a  faqueer
of  the  Jogi  tribe  has  come  fre-
quently to  our  morning  worship  in
thescbooL  On  Tuesday,  the  chap-
ter to  be  read  in  order  was  John  17.
The  subject  of  it,  and  our  Lord's
manner  towards  his  disciples,  ar-
rested the  attention  of  the  Jogi,  and
'the  tears  flowed  plentifully  down
his  cheeks*  To-day  he  brought  his
wife  and  child;  said  he  was  a  con-
vert to  Jesus,  without  reserve ;  and
began  of  himself  to  take  off  his
fii^eer's  dress.    He  first  took  the
bMds  from  his  neck;   broke  the
string  to  which  the  charm  given  him
by.  his  gproo  was  suspended ;  and
hnke  off  an  iron  ring  worn  round
his  waist,  and  to  which  an  iron  rod
■bout,  two  feet  long  was  attached.
He  then  put  on  some  old  clothes
i^ch  we  had  by  us,  and  said  he
wished  to    be  instructed   in    the
Go^iel,  and  to  get  some  employ-
ment.  A  rupee  being  given  to  pro-
cure food  for  the  family,  his  wife
went  and  bought  a  spinning-wheel,
i83ring,  she  would  spin  and  earn  a
livelihood;  and  the  whole  family
afterwards  eat  their  dinner  with  us
of  their  own  accord.    These  are
wonders  in  the  history  of  a  Hin-
doo."     Two  days  afterwards,    a
Mussulman  came  to  the  house,  and
asked  the  Jogi  if  he  had  really  be-
come a  Christian  ?    He* answered,
"Yes;  and  have  just  now  beeii
eating  beef  with  Abdool  Messeeh."
The  Mahomedan  then  turned  to  the
Jogi's  wife,  and  inquired  if  she
had    embraced   the    same   faith ;
aiUng,  at  the  same   time,    what
could  have  induced  her  to  renounce
her  former  religion  for  Christian-
ityf  She  replied,  that  by  the  grace


agr

of  Ood  she  had  become  a  Christian ;
and  though  she  had  not  yet  learned  '
much  of  Uie  Gospel,  and  being  but
a  rustic,  could  not  dispute  with  a
learned  man  like  him;  yet  what
she  had  heard  of  the  doctrine  of
Christ  had  brought  rest  and  peace
to  her  soul,  and  therefore  she  had
embraced  it.    In  July,  1814,  Ab-
dool visited  his  relatives  at  Luck-
now,  to  whom  be  published  the  glad
tidings  of  salvation;  and  on  the  11th
of  August  he  returned  to  Agra,  ac-
companied by  his  father  and  five
other  members  of  his  family,  with
several  other  persons,  one  of  whom,
an  aged  Molwee,  appeared  desirous
for  the  welfare  of  his  soul.    About
a  week  after  Abdool's  return,  the
Rev.  Mr.  Corrie  was  compelled  by
ill  health  to  quit  Agra,  in  order
to  visit  England ;  and  on  his  depar-
ture he  remarks,  that  **  during  the
preceding  16  months,  71  natives
had  received   baptism,    of  whom
about  60  were  adults,  about  half
Mahomedans,  and  the  other  half
Hindoos.    Of  these,  one  had  been
expelled;  6  had  apostatized;  4  had
gone  to  their  friends,  and  were,  it
was  hoped,  holding  fast  their  pro-
fession ;  and  others  were  occupying
different  stations  as  readers    and
catechists."    Soon  after  his  remo-
val, however,  the    infant  church
began  to  decline ;  but  Abdool,  not-
withstanding the  indolence  and  in-
attention of  some  of  the  teachers
in  the  schools,  and  the  removal  of
Mr.  Bowley  to  Chunar,  continued
to  bear  a  faithful  testimony  to  the
truth,  and  to  watch  over  his  flock
with'  unremitting   vigilance;    his
health,  however,  having  been  for
a  considerable  time  in  an  infirm
I  state,  he  visited  Calcutta  in  1820;
and,  in  the  month  of  October,  re**
ceived  Lutheran  ordination.

On  his  return  to  Agra,  the  in-
terest seems  to  have  revived :  many
nominal  Christians,  who,  it  was  be-
lieved, had  not  entered  a  place  of
worship  for  maivy  -yeax^)  \i^^«(»»

1


re^Iar' attendants  on  Sabbath  days,
as  did  many  persons  of  the  Arme-
nian and  Roman  Catholic  persua-
sions; while  a  few  Hindoos  and
Mussulmans  occasionally  visited
the  church*

The  «  Missionary  Register''  for
February,  1885,  says—"  Public
worship  is  carried  on  as  usual,
at  the  knttra;  and  the  venerable
Abdool  Messeeb,  notwithstanding
the  infirm  state  of  his  health,  has
recently  officiated  at  the  military
cantonmentjOn  Sunday  aftemoon,to
the  professing  Christians  connected
with  the  nathre  regiments.  An
addition  to  the  church,  of  seven
men  and  three  women,  has  been
lately  made  by  baptism.''

The  improved  state  of  feeling
at  this  station  is  evident  from  the
following  extractfrom  his  journal:—
"  Formerly,  the  people  of  this  city
were  much  oflSsuded  with  me,  and
said  very  evil  things  of  me ;  I  al-
ways showed  them  kindness,  and
often  attended  them  with  medicines
when  they  were  sick  ;  and,  by  the
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
many  of  them  received  healing  of
dangeroas  diseases  ;  often,  also,  I
endeavoured  to  heal  their  spiritual
sicknesses,  and  many  of  these  peo-
ple received  and  read  religious
bookft ;  and  it  is  become  e\ident  to
all,  that  Christians  love  all  mankind,
and  desire  no  evil  to  any  one.
Now,  in  the  place  of  enmity,  these
people  begin  to  show  kindness;
and,  moreover,  invite  me  to  their
liouses,  and  send  me  portions  from
their  friendly  entertainments;  for
instance,  to  day,  Meer  Seynd  Ali,
who  is  headman  to  the  Collector,
sent  me  a  friendly  note,  sa>ing^-
'*  The  daughter  of  me,  your  servant,
is  tooday  to  be  married :  you  will
joreatl}-  oblige  me  by  making  one  of
cHir  company."  I  sent  for  answer —
**  Sinc^  the  day  that  by  the  grace
of  God  I  was  honoured  with  bap-
tism, I  have  renounced  all  as-
vemblies  for  diuicinj^  and  music,


Air

and  I  dioald  be  ashamed,  with  UbiUT
white  beard,  and  broken  teeth>  ttf
show  myself  at  a  wedding  feast.'*'
He  sent,  in  reply — **I  have  reail''
in  the  blessed  Gospel,  that  the  Lord
Jesus  himself  honoured  a  weddinp
at  Cana  of  Galilee  with  His  pre-'
sence,  and  there  miracidouflljK
turned  water  into  wine :  if  joW
will  not  come,  we  shall  ali  con^'
elude  that  you  disobey  the  tradi<*'
tion  of  the  divine  Jesus^  If  yuQ
excuse  yourself  on  account  of  the'
dancing,  «fec.  I  will  prepare  a  sepa-'
rate  apartment  for  you,  and  will'
invite  some  aged  person,  like  your*
self,  to  keep  you  company."  I  was-'
rejoiced  on  hearing  this,  since  i^
appeared  these  peopl6  read  the  Gc»-'
pels.  In  the  evening,  after  wor-'
ship,  I  went  to  his  house :  they  hall^
prepared  a  separate  apartmeDt,*
where  several  aged  persons,  learned
in  religion,  and  wealthy,  were  eol--
lected,  all  of  whom  received  roe
with  respect;  and  we  continued  to
converse  on  religious  subjects,  In  a'-
very  friendly  manner,  till  midnight:  ■
from  their  conversation,  I  enter-
tained some  hope  respecting  them/
The  blessing  of  God  still  appears  to
attend  Abdool's  labours.  *

AITUTAKI,  one  of  the  Har-'
vey  Islands,  where  two  native*
preachers  have  been  placed  by  the'
L.  M.  S,  Among  its  inhabitants,;
who  have  embraced  Christianity,-
decency  and  order  are  now  eon^i-'
cuous.  They^  are  diligent  in  learn-'
ing,  and  many  of  them  can  reiuf
and  repeat  the  catechism  well ;  the'
numbcnr  baptized,  including  chil-
dren, is  615.  Family  and  private*
prayer  are  general,  and  Mr.  Boame*
observes,  that  no  congregation  in'
England  could  attend  with  more;
propriety  to  the  ordinances  of  reli-'
gion,  than  the  people  of  Aitdtiiki.'
A  chapel,  erected  in  1825,  hasbeew
completed.  Civilization  H  raaJdng*
rapid  progress.  The  houses  of  the;
principal  chiefs  are  substantial^
buildings^  .  The  number  of  'pia»-»


^  ALB

tared  dwelling^houset  U  nearly  160 f
many  of  them  furnished  with  gofas,
iftc.  4;c.

ALBANY,  a  newly-established
district  in  the  Eastern  part  of  Cape
'Gcdony,  South  Africa,  extending
from  Bosjesnans  River  to  the
Keiduunma.  The  extent  of  the
new  settlenlent  is  about  60  m.
by  30.  In  1820,  the  settlers
amonnted  to  15,000.  The  con-
dition of  grants  to  the  colonists  is,
that  they  cultivate  the  soil  with-
out riaves.  The  soil  is  productive,
and  the  climate  healthy.

The  Albany  mission  was  origi-
taally  commenced  by  the  fFesieyan
Society,  with  the    settlers    who
went  out  from    England,  in  the
hope  that  it  would  connect  itself
with    the    Hottentots,    and  ulti-
mately prepare  the  means  for  ex-
tending the  Gospel  among  the  Caf-
fre  tribes.    These  hopes  have  been
realised,  and  that  more  immediately
and  extensively  than  was  previously
anticipated.    Agents  have  likewise
been  raised  up  to  accompany  those
brethren,  who  have  planted  them-
selves among  the  savages  in  Caf-
firaria.     From  this  mission,  esta-
blished but  a  few  years,  the  follow-
ingitations  have  arisen:—  CfraAam's
Tbtm,  where  there  is  a  chapel  with
about  600  hearers ;  a  congregation
andsmall  society  of  Hottentots ;  and
an  Englifih  and  a  Hottentot  school.
Saienty  a  smaller  station,  with  a
chapel  alM>,  and  a  school.    /f^«-
ky-Mouni,  where  are  a  chapel,  a
society,  and  a  school.     At  Port
Francis,  Salem  HilU,  and  Clum-
ber,   societies    also    have     been
formed,  and  chapels  are  about  to
be  erected.     Somerset^  a  promising
new  station,  has  been  lately  visited,
sod  gives   access,  to  many  of  the
heathen  as  well  as  to  the  colonists.
These  are  regarded  as  highly  gra-
tifying prospects ;  for  the  increased
influence  of  pure  religion  among
the  colonists,  must  furnish,  to  a
large  extent,  suitable  agents  fori


ALE

the  conducting  oC  schools  and  infs'
sions  among  the  neighbouring
tribes  of  Pagan  Africans.  The
commercial  intercourse  of  this
colony  with  some  of  these  tribes
will  also  probably  become  exten^
sive,  and  will  co-operate,  with
means  of  religious  instruction^  to
bring  them  under  the  influence  of
Christianity ;  and  the  whole  seems
to  furnish  another  example  of  that
connexion  of  providential  events
with  the  purposes  of  Christ  as  to
the  salvation  of  the  Heathen,which,
in  the  present  day,  has  l>een  so
often  and  so  strongly  marked.  On
these  Christian  settlements,  as  they
advance  in  population,  and  are
brought  into  regular  intercouise
with  the  heathen  around  them,
the  care  of  extending  the  know-
ledge of  Christ  into  &e  *'  regions
beyond,''  will  .ultimately  chiefly
devolve,  and  the  Society  be  left  at
liberty  to  employ  its  efforts  in  be-
half of  tribes  more  distant.  Two
missionaries  are  employed  in  the
Albany  Mission.  i

ALEXANDRIA,  a  town  of
Eg3:pt,  now  much  decayed,  though
there  are  still  some  remains  of
ancient  splendour.  It  was  first
built  by  Alexander  the  Great,  and
was  several  miles  in  extent ;  but  at
present  it  consists  chiefly  of  one
long  street.  It  was  formerly  a
place  of  great  trade,  all  the  trea-
sures of  the  East  Indies  being  de-
posited here,  before  the  discovery
of  the  route  by  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope.  Alexandria  was  taken  by
the  French  invaders  under  Buona-
parte, in  1798,  and  taken  from
them  by  the  English,  in  1801.  It
surrendered  to  the  English  in  1807,
but  was  soon  after  evacuated.
Here  is  an  obelisk  called  Cleopa-
tra's Needle ;  also  Pompey's  Pillar,
and  the  ancient  Pharos,  now  a
castle  called  Pharillon.  Alexandria
is  seated  on  the  Mediterranean,
125  m,  W.  N.W.  Cairo,  E.  lou^
SO^IC,  N.  lat.3inV.


ALG

The  Intercourse  whlcb  has  tn  so
extraordlnBTy  and  unexpected  a
manner  sprung  up  between  this
roiintfy  and  E^pt,  has  brought
this  very  degraded  country  under
the  eye  of  those  who  are  deeply
Kolicitous  for  the  universal  spread
of  the  Gospel.  The  reviving  com-
merce of  Kgypt  has  already  led  to
the  residence  of  many  of  our  own
countrymen  at  its  principal  sea
port,  who  are  a»  jet  destitute,  for
the  most  part,  of  Christian  ordi-
nances, in  that  land  of  Mahome-
dan  darkness  and  almost  extinct
Christianity.  To  meet,  in  some
degree,  the  wants  of  the  people,
the  Rev.  Mr.  Macpherson  was  sent
out  to  Alexandria  in  1825,  by  the
IV.  M,  S.  He  was  for  some  time
prevented  from  any  regular  en-
gagement, by  the  prevalence  of
the  plague,  but  has  since  held  reli-
gious conversations,  in  different
languages,  with  various  persons,
And  has  hopes  of  the  conversion  of
a  respectable  Aby8sinianlady,whom
he  found  unacquainted  with  almost
ev^ry '  fontf  of  religion,  and  to
whom  he  has  administered  bap-
tism. He  has  for  some  time  regu-
larly preached  to  the  seamen  in  the
Port,  on  board  one  of  the  vessels.
In  a  lettter  recently  received,  Mr.
M.  says:— "On  the  Sabbath,  I
preach  at  the  Consular  Hall,  at  0
A.  M.  afloat  at  11  o'clock,  and  in
my  house  at  4  p.  m.  I  hope  soon
to  be  enabled  to  report  more  fa-
vourably of  Alexandria.  I  have
some  thoughts  of  soon  commenc-
ing preaching  in  Arabic.  My
teacher  informs  me  that  he  thinks
several  of  the  natives  might  be  in-
duced to  attend."

ALGOA  BAY,  a  settlement  of
Hottentots,  on  Zwartkopts  River  in
Cape  Colony,  South  Africa,  500
m.  E.  of  Cape  Town,  E.  Ion.  26^53',
S.  lat.  8.y  tftr.

.  Dr.  Vanderkemp  and  Mr.  James
Read  arrived  at  this  place  in  1802,
hotb  being  ctmnetied   with   the


ALO

L.  M.  S.  About  1<M>  HotteiiMtt
•ocompanied  then  from  Gtnf
Reynet,  under  the  escort  of  M^|o|
Sherlock,  soine  of  whom  m^
rated  from  them  on  the  way^  add
others  joined  them,  lo  that  then
were  about  80  on  their  arrlvMli
This  measure -was  the  eflbct  of  i
correspondence  betwixt  his  Sx-
cellency  General  Dnndaii  ih6
Governor  of  the  colony,  and  Dr«
Vanderkemp;  the  former  htfrlof
requested  the  latter  to  furnttn
him  with  a  plan  for  the  formattoH
to  a  Hottentot  village,  with  a  vie*
to  civilization.  The  plan  sug-
gested was  approved  by  llie  Gover-
nor, who  expressed  his  intenthn
of  supporting  it,  by  famishing  pro-
visions to  the  Hottentots  for  a  ica<
sonable  time,  and  sending  a  poit
of  the  materials  necessaty  for  the
construction  of  the  intended  tefXtt^
ment.  This  design  was  accoBH
plished,  so  far  as  related  to  tbi^
provisions,  which  were  sent  ia  tf
ship  appointed  for  that  purpose  ][
but  ihe  final  adjustment  of  tllb.
measure  was  postponed.

In  the  course  of  the  year  a  setf
tlement  was  formed  at  BotaV,
place,  about  8  m.  from  the  Bay,
and  its  aspect  was  very  encouraglnin
but,  unhappily,  some  violent  db-
eases,  supposed  to  be  occastonef
by  the  stagnated  watefs  of  the
neighbourhoNod,  began  to  maktf
their  appearance  among  the  peo-
ple. Dr.  Vanderkemp  himself  wal
afflicted;  by  which  his  public
labours  were  totally  sttspendsd,
and  his  patience  tried  by  a  con^
finement  to  his  bed  for  eleven'
months.  The  efforts  of  his  ooad^
jutor,  Mr.  Read,  were  continued,
with  no  small  difficulties  and  6b»
structions  of  a  local  natnre ;  on;
which  account  his  Excellency  Go-
vernor Dundas  favonred  the  Doctor
with  a  visit;  and  representing  lo
him  the  unhappy  posture  of  afmlrty
and  the  extreme  danger  to  whteh
the  missloiiaries  would  hO  ezposted,


ALQ

whem  tbe  English  ganuoii  should

t withdrawn  from  th*  neighbour-
;  Ibrt,  at  Algoa  Bpy,  strongly
recoimnended  it  to  him  to  desist,
(dt  the  present,  fnHu  the  prosecu-
'  tion  of  hisJbeneYoient  plan  in  that
qoarter,  and  to  retire  to  a  place  of
greater  safety.  The  Doctor,  how-
flver,  req»ectfially  replied,  -that  he
was  determined  to  remain  faithful
to  the  call  of  liis  God ;  and  should
his  life  be  made  a  sacrifice  in  con-
sequence of  abiding  with  the  peo-
ple, he  was  perfectly  ready  to  lose
it  for  the  sake  of  the  least  child
among  them.  Mr.  Read,  actuated
by  the  same  fortitude  of  spirit,
though  left  by  his, colleague  entirely
to  the  dictates  of  his  own  judgment,
made  the  same  resolution,  adding,
that  should  Dr.  Vanderkemp  have
thought  proper  to  withdraw  from
the  scene  of  danger,  it  was  his  own
determination  to  abide  with  the
people.  The  worthy  Govenior,
finding  his  prudential  admonitions
fruitless,  desisted,  and  could  further
manifest  his  beneFolence  only  by
presenting  tbem  with  a  very  liberal
supply  of  oxen  and  sheep,  with
other  useful  aiticles  for  their  sup-
port, and  for  their  assistance  in
agriculture;  and  by  empowering
them  inmiediately  to  take  posses-
sion of  the  fort,  as  a  place  of
safety.  This  latter  measure,  the
missionaries  thought  proper  to  de-
cline for  the  present;  reserving,
however,  the  right  of  availing
themselves  of  the  generous  oiTer,
ibould  future  circumstances  render
it  qecessar}-.

This  necessity,  alas !  'was  too
WUk  apparent ;  for  only  eight  days
bad  elapsed  after  the  departure  of
&e..  soldiers  from  the  garrison,
vben  the  missionaries  were  sud-
ii&oiy  assaulted  in  the  middle  of  a
Ml  night,  by  a  furious  banditti,
vfaqsQ  olject  seemed  to  be,  not  only
the  destruction  of  their  property,
Wt:  of '  their  lives  also.  The  as-
'  «iUiits  fired  their  mvsketf  at  tbem  I


ALG

not  less  than  fifty  times-^  yet,  hap'*
pily,  no  lives  were  lost.  In  this
awful  moment  of  danger,  the  Hot-
tentots who  were  with  the  Doctor
insisted  on  repelling  force  by  force,
and  accordingly  fired  twice,  and
twice  only,  and  at  random,  among
the  invading  party.  The  assault,
from  what  cause  they  could  not
then  guess,  immediately  ceased,
and  the  party  withdrew.  When  the
morning  arrived,  it  was  found  that
one  of  the  shots  had  penetrated  tlie
thigh  of  the  Hottentot  chief,  and
by  dividing  a  principal  artery,  oc-
casioned such  a  lo»  of  blood,  as
put  a  period  to  bis  life  in  a  few
minutes.  The  enemy,  however,
enraged  and  reinforced,  renewed
the  attack  in  the  following  night ;
but,  finding  the  settlement  in  a
better  state  of  defence,  judged  it
prudent  to  withdraw ;  after  which
the  missionaries  thought  themselves
called  by  Providence  to  retire
to  the  as^'lum  which  the  neigh-
bouring fort  affiirded,  and  in  which
they  were  preserved  in  safety  imm
the  violence  of  their  enemies.

When  his  Excellency  Governor
Jensens  had  taken  possession  of
the  Cape  for  the  Dutch  Republic,
he  paid  a  visit  to  Dr.  Vander-
kemp, and  expressed  his  opinion
that  the  missionaries  should  re-
move to  a  more  eligible  situation ;
and  having  himself  looked  out  ibr
a  suitable  spot,  recommended  their
immediate  removal  to  it.  With
this  advice  they  thought  it  their
duty  at  once  to  comply,  and
accordingly  removed  to  the  ap-
pointed place,  situated  ^-est^'ard
of  Algoa  Bay,  at  the  mouth  of  the
Zwartkoptg  Kiver,  and  gave  it  the
name  of  Bethel  Village.

In  the  midst  of  these  unfavour-
able and  threatening  circumstance^:,
the  work  of  Grod  was  proceeding :  a
goodly  number  of  the  poor  Hotten-
tots were  converted  from  the  error
of  their  wa}-6,  and  of  this  aOioxd-
ed  the  most  satisfactory  e>i\^e\ic<£.


ALL

In  one  year  more  than  200  were
baptized,  and  many  of  them  were
admitted  to  the  communion.  They
kept  eveiy  week  a  feast  of  charity,
resembling  the  Agaps  of  the  first
Christians,  which  they  always  con-
dnded  by  the  celebration  of  the
Lord's  Supper. — [See  Bethelsdorp]
•  ALLAB  AG,  capital  of  an  inde-
pendent Mahratta  Prince,  Hindoos-
tan,  about  20  m.  down  the  coast
from  Bombay,  and  9  N.  of  Rawa-
dunda.

The  American  Missionariet  at
Bombay  have  established  a  prosper-
ous school  here,  under  a  Jewish
teacher,  which  they  occasionally
visit.  In  1821  it  contained  about
40  scholars,  12  of  whom  were  from
Jewish  families.

ALLAHABAD,  a  province  of
Hindoostan  Proper,  200  m.  long
and  120  broad  ;  bounded  on  the  N.
by  Agra  and  Oude,  C.  by  Bahar,
S.  by  Guadiaua,  and  \V.  by  Mal-
wah  and  Agra.

The  Nerbudda,  which  rises  on
the  S.  E.  border  of  the  province,
flows  from  E.  to  W.  near  its  S.
side ;  and  the  Ganges,  which  is
here  joined  by  the  Jumna,  crosses
it  from  \V,  to  E.  near  its  N.  side.
The  S.  W.  part,  called  Bundelcund,
is  an  elevated  hilly  territory ;  but
in  other  parts  it  is  flat,  and  vety
productive.  It  was  ceded  to
Great  Britain  in  1708.  The  in-
habitants are  very  numerous,  and
mostly  Hindoos.  Its  cavalry  and
infantry  have  amounted  to  about
260,000,  and  its  revenue  to  more
than  three  millions  of  sicca  rupees.

Allahabeui,  the  capital  of  the
above  province,  has  a  magnificent
citadel.  It  was  founded  by  the  Em-
peror Acber,  who  intended  it  as  a
place  of  arms  ;  and  its  fortifications
are  now  impregnable  to  a  native
army.  It  stands  at  the  conflux  of
the  Jumna  with  the  Ganges,  which
i&the  largest  and  most  holy  prayaga
of  the  Hindoos ;  so  noted,  that  it
is  called  <'  the  king  of  won^pped


ALL

places,''  and  the  ^rritory,  tofttf
extent  of  40  m.  round,  is  deeiiied
holy  ground.  So  numerous  are  tiie
pilgrims  who  resort  hither  for  ab*
lution,  that  for  this  indulgence  an
annual  contribution  of  50,000
rupees  has  been  paid  into  the
vizier's  treasur}-.  It  is  4T0  m.
VV.  N.  W.  Calcutta.  E.  Ion.  81»  Sff,
N.  lat.  25«  8T.

At  this  place  human  tacrifleet
are  of  frequent  occurrence.  The
following  instance,  as  described  by
a  spectator  of  the  scene,  is  thus
given  by  Mr.  Ward:—"  Sixteen
females,  accompanied  by  as  many
priests,  went  in  boats  on  the  river
opposite  Allahabad,  and  proceeded
to  the  spot  where  the  Ganges  and
the  Jumna,  two  sacred  rivers,  untta
their  purifying  streams.  Each  vic-
tim had  a  large  earthen  pan  slang
over  her  shoulders.  She  descended
over  the  side  of  the  boat  into  the
river,  and  was  then  held  up  by  a
priest,  till  she  had  filled  the  pans
from  the  river,  when  the  priest  let
go  his  hold,  and  the  pans  dragged
her  to  the  bottom.  And  thus  died,
amidst  the  applauses  of  the  spec-
tators, and  assisted  by  the  priests  of
the  country,  sixteen  females,  as  a
single  oflering  to  the  demon  of
destruction.  They  died  under  the
firm  persuasion  that  this  was  the
direct  way  to  heaven.  The  priests
enjoyed  the  scene,  and  spoke  of  it
to  their  friends  as  a  pleasant  morn-
ing gambol.  We  have  here  no
weepers;  no  remonstrants;  no
youth  interposing  to  save  them  to
society.  They  go  down  to  the
bottom,  as  loose  stones  which  have
no  adhesion  to  the  quarry — as  crea-
tures for  which  society  has  no  use*
Nor  must  it  be  supposed  that  tills
is  a  solitary  instance ;  these  immo-
lations are  so  common,  that  they
excite  very  little  anxiety  indeed  at
Allahabad,  and  beyond  that  city
they  are  scarcely  mentioned."

When  the  Rev.  Messrs.  Cham*
berlain  and  Peacock,  with  their


ALL

iMiiliet^  and  a  baptised  Hindoo
named  Vmndavun,  set  out  from
Senmpore  to  occupy  a  new  station
at  AgrOj  the  news  of  their  going
•ppean  to  have  preceded  their  pro-
gyeai>  as  in  different  places  they
net  with  people  inquiring  for  the
aahlbs,  who  gave  away  the  new
Mkmaier ;  uid  in  consequence,  on
making  their  appearance  in  the
cHy  of  AUahabaid,  the  people  as-
•embled  in  great  numbers.  So
much  interest  was  awakened,  that
Mr.  C.  remarks,  <'  I  have  been  in
many  places  ^ere  the  word  of
Ood'has  excited  much  attention,
bat  nerer  saw  a  spirit  of  gpreater
Inqoiiy,  after  the  new  way,  than
was  discovered  at  Allahabad.  Hin-
doos and  Mussulman,  learned  and
onleamed,  all  seemed  eager  to  hear
the  word  of  salvation ;  and  even
after  we  had  left  the  city,  several
persons  followed  us,  in  quest  of
books,  to  a  distance  of  eight  or
nine  miles."

Mr.  Mackintosh  was  subse-
quently fixed  at  this  place,  and  in
1819,  assisted  by  two  native  bre-
thren, Seeta  Rama-  and  Nriputa,
llis  labours  appear  to  have  excited
eoosiderable  notice.  The  mis-
sionaries beheld  two  Mahratta
woman  immolate  themselves  here
in  the  manner  of  those  just  de-
scribed, after  attempting  in  vain  to
induce  them  to  forego  their  pur-
pose. Mr.  M.  had  also,  about  this
time,  an  interriew  with  a  *goroo,
or  teacher,  famed  for  his  austeri-
ties, who  diesired  to  see  him.  **  His
looks,"  says  he,  '<  were  grim  and
dreadful,  having  his  face  black-
ened; a  human  skull,  with  the
ipper  jaw  and  teeth  to  it,  hung
before  him,  suspended  by  an  iron
chain  round  his  neck ;  his  ancles
environed  with  a  heavy  chain  and
iNUgles  $  he  wore  no  clothes,  and
bis  naked  body  appeared  much
emaciated.  I  asked  him  what  was
the  object  of  his  worship :  he  said,
iour  thinjr*'— «/i>  water,  earth,  and  /


ALL

fire ;  and  that  he  should  mingle  in
these  four  elements  after  death.
*  Then,'  said  I, '  it  appears  >-ouhave
no  future  |>rQspects.  But  why  do
yon  go  through  such  penances,
when  you  lielieve  you  are  to  be
annihilated,  and  to  have  no  exist-
ence after  this  life?  Surely  you
are  taken  in  the  snares  of  Satan,
deceiving  your  own  soul,  and  feed-
ing upon  ambition,  that  men  may
fall  down  at  your  feet,  and  worship
you  as  a  God ;  and  because  this  flat-
ters you,  therefore  you  go  tluough
such  penances.'  He  told  me  that
he  had  been  in  this  state  for  twelve
years,  and  meant  to  continue  in  it
till  deadi  delivered  him  from  it.
When  I  came  up  to  him,  he  was
worshipping  fire.  I  advised  him  to
throw  away  these  delusions."

Mr.  M.  continued  to  labour  for
some  time  with  but  little  success ;  but
an  En^ish  friend,  in  token  of  grati-
tude for  the  benefit  derived  from  his
ministry,  generously  sent  him  2,000
rupees,  to  build  a  place  of  worship.
In  1825,  however,  the  prospect  ap-
peared brightening ;  a  church  was
formed,  consisting  of  0  meml)ers,
among  whom  were  two  or  three
pious  Europeans ;  and  five  Hindoo
youths  read  the  New  Testament
with  Mr.  M.  In  the  following
year,  the  church  over  which  he
presided  was  still  small.  Seeta-
ram,  who  was  long  of  great  as-
sistance to  him  in  his  work,  sub-
sequently went  to  Gorruckpore,
where  he  is  employed  as  a  native
doctor,  and  maintains  an  hononr-
able  profession.  Sectuldas,  another
Brabmun,  has  since  been  with  Mr.
M.,  and  has  given  proof  of  piety
and  zeal ;  and  an  interesting  young
man,  of  the  writer  caste,  who  had
relinquished  his  caste,  has  also
been  under  instruction  for  sevaral
months.  Others,  likewise,  have
come  to  Mr.  M.  in  the  year ;  and
it  is  evident  a  very  considerable
impresrion  is  produced  b^  b\&  Vou-
boun.

c  \^


ALL

In  addition  to  various  engage-
ments, he  preaches  the  Gospel  at
different  spots,  in  and  near  the  city,
and  also  at  the  numerous  Heathen
and  Mussulman  assemblies,  which
are  continually  occurring.  The
greatest  of  these  is  on  the  occasion
of  the  annual  bathing  at  the  junc-
tfon  of  the  Ganges  and  the  Jumna  j
and  there  Mr.  Smith  generally
comes  up  from  Benares  to  assist.
Many  pleasing  circumstances  have
lately  occurred  at  these  seasons ;
and  opportunities  have  been  enjoyed
of  sending  the  sacred  volume,  and
religious  tracts,  and  reports  of  the
promulgation  of  the  Gospel,  to
very  distant  parts  of  the  country.

To  Bandha,  a  town  in  Allaha-
bad, Amarint  Messeeh,  a  native
convert  from  Agra,  in  connexion
with  the  C\  M,  S.  came  in  1814,
attempting  to  diffuse  the  know-
ledge of  the  Gospel.  The  Rev.
Mr.,  with  Mrs.,  Greenwood  have
been  recentiy  appointed  to  this
station.

ALLEPIE,  a  large  town  on  the
Malabar  Coast,  about  40  m.  from
Cochin,  and  120  N.  of  Cape  Co-
morin,  is  the  chief  place  at  which
the  Company's  ships  call  to  take  in
pepper  and  spices ',  it  has  a  healthy
climate,  and  about  13,000  inhabi-
tants.

A  good  house  and  garden  having
been  granted  by  the  rannee  of
Travancore,  at  the  request  of  the
resident,  a  church  was  begun  in
181 6,  sufficiently  spacious  to  accom-
modate 700  or  800  persons ;  and  the
Rev.  Mr.  Norton  was  settled  there.
The  church  was  opened  on  the  18th
of  July,  1818,  and  greatly  attracted
the  attention  of  the  natives.  Mr.
Norton  preached  three  times  on
the  Sabbath,  and  established  a  lec-
ture on  Thursday  evenings,  for  the
more  immediate  benefit  of  all  who
understood  English.  At  this  time
48  children  were  in  the  schools,
and  24  in  the  Orphan  Asylum.  A
new  school  was  opened  in  the  pre-


ALL

vious  August,  built  in  the  Great
Bazaar,  about  a  mile  from  the  Mis-
sion-house, capable  of  containing
100  children.  Some  principal  na-
tives had  promised  to  use  their  in-
fluence in  filling  it  with  scholars  f
but  the  opposition  of  the  Roman
Catholics  (of  whom  there  are  great
numbers  in  the  town),  was  violent;
and  the  Roman  Syrians,  in  particu-
lar, seemed  to  have  succeeded  in
possessing  the  minds  of  the  people
with  unfounded  suspicions  and
fears.

In  1819,  the  English  congrega-
tion consisted  of  about  40  persons,
and  the  native  of  about  1 00,  of  all
ages,  Syrians,  converts  from  the
Romish  Church,  and  catechumens.
Occasional  auditors  of  all  persiya-
sions  also  attended.  The  schools
suflered  material  diminution  at  this
period,  in  consequence  of  the  dis-
turbance between  the  Syrians  and
the  Roman  Catholics  ;  most  of  the
Roman  children  having  been  with-
drawn. At  the  end  of  the  year
the  number  of  scholars  was  about
50,  but  subsequently  the  scholars
generally  returned.  A  school  was
also  established  in  the  suburbs  of
Allepie,  from  which  much  benefit
was  anticipated,  and  the  general
aspect  of  the  mission  was  encou-
raging. During  the  following  year
Mr.  N.  baptized  26  persons,  in-
cluding children,  and  distributed
122  Bibles  and  Testaments,  in  dif-
ferent languages,  and  18  copies
of  Genesis  in  Tamul,  with  130
Prayer  Books  and  Psalters  in  Eng-
lish or  Tamul.  The  schools  again
fell  off  on  the  arrival  of  an  Euro-
pean bishop ',  the  people  were
prohibited  sending  their  children,
on  pain  of  excommunication,  in
consequence  of  which  many  were
much  alarmed.  The  bishop  or-
dered ail  the  Bibles  and  Testa-
ments which  had  been  distributed,
to  be  delivered  to  him  at  Verapoly ;
but  many  were  courageous  enough
to  oppose  him  in  this,  and  to  allow


ALL

-Qielt  children  to  come  again.
About  100  persons,  however,  heard
the  Gospel.

In  1822,  the  2  schools  contained
109  children,  whose  progress  in
learning  was  satisfactory ;  and
an  occurrence  in  this  mission
evinced  the  happy  effects  of  the  pe-
rusal of  th^  sacred  Scriptures.  A
Hindoo  youth  belonging  to  the
school,  who  was  employed  by  Mr.
Norton  to  transcribe  portions  of  the
Gospels  in  the  vernacular  tongue,
became  impressed  with  a  convic-
tion of  the  truths  contained  in  them,
and  gradually  discontinued  the  ob-
servance of  the  idolatrous  rites  of
his  family.  He  was  removed  by
his  relations  into  the  interior  of
the  country,  in  order  to  detach
him  from  the  mission ;  and  violence
was  threatened,  to  induce  him  to
conform  to  the  citstomary  practices
of  his  caste.  Urged  by  this  treat-
ment, he  fled  from  the  country,
and  coming  into  the  Tinnevelly  dis-
trict, he  heard  of  the  mission  in  the
town  of  that  name,  and  sought  en-
trance into  the  seminary  there.  The
missionaries  at  Tinnevelly  wrote  to
Mr.  Norton,  to  ascertain  the  truth
of  as  much  of  the  youth's  account
of  himself  as  he  might  be  acquaint-
ed with;  and  he  w^s  enabled,  so
far,  to  confirm  its  accuracy.  The
youth  applied  himself  diligently  to
his  duties  in  the  Tinnevelly  semi-
nary, preparatory  to  baptism ;  and
the  missionaries  there  wrote  in
terms  of  entire  approbation  of  his
conduct.  A  Roman  Catholic,  who
joined  the  Protestant  Church,  suf-
fered, like  this  youth,  much  perse-
cution. *'  We  are  obliged,"  says
Mrs.  N.,  "  to  take  him  under  our
care,  or  they  would  confine  him  in
what  they  call  the  Black-hole.  The
bishop  sent  a  petition  to  the  British
resident,  requesting  him  to  make
Mr.  Norton  give  him  up.  The  resi-
dent sent  it  to  Mr.  Norton,  wish-
ing him  to  communicate  a  full
account  oftbe  case,  which  he  did  i.


ALL

and  the  young  man  begged  leave
to  write  to  him  also,  which  he  was
permitted  to  do.  Hp  told  the  re-
sident, that  he  had  been  in  our
school  more  than  four  years ;  that
he  had  thus  learnt  to  read  his  Bible ;
and  that  he  could  not  belong  to  a
church  which  would  deprive  him  of
the  only  book  that  would  teach  him
the  way  to  heaven.  Several  others
in  the  school  told  their  parents  that
they  could  not  give  up  reading  the
Scriptures. '^

In  1823,  the  number  of  the  Eng-
lish congregation  was  about  the
same  as  the  previous  year;  the  na-
tive congregation  had  experienced
a  small  increase  ;  and  the  state  of
the  schools  was  pleasing,  both  as
to  the  numbers  in  attendance  and
the  progress  of  the  scholars.  Mr.
Norton,  who  had  recently  lost  his
excellent  and  zealous  wife,  was
now  aided  in  his  work  by  a  native
reader  and  an  Indo-British  assist-
ant. The  native  reader  was  the
Hindoo  youth  of  whom  some  ac-
count has  been  given:  his  name
is  Sandappen ;  he  was  baptized  by
Mr.  Rhenius,  at  Palamcottah,  on
Christmas-day  1822 ;  and  was  mar-
ried, soon  after  his  return  to  Alle-
pie,  to  one  of  the  females  brought
up  in  the  mission-school.  The
assistant  was  brought  up  a  heathen,
and  was  baptized  by  Mr.  Norton
in  April  1823,  when  his  heathen
name  of  Appoo  was  exchanged  for
that  of  Daniel.  Mr.  Norton,  some
time  after,  married  a  lady  at  Colom-
bo :  and  a  Sunday-school  was  esta-
blished by  Mrs.  N.,  on  her  arrival  at
Aleppie,  which  was  attended  by
many  children,  with  a  good  prospect
of  usefulness  and  permanency.  In
the  followinpryear,  the  missionaries
were  joined  by  Mr.  James  Roberts.
AX  tills  period,  about  30  persons,
2  or  3  of  them  Europeans  and  the
rest  country-bom,  attended  the
English  services;  and  from  50  to
60  the  MalayaWm  axA  TwwsjX.
The  average  number  oi  c,oTKav>i\vi-

\5


AMB

dinto  was  14.  In  the  Sunday-
school  under  Mn.  NorUm's  care
there  were  40  acholars;  and  about
a  dozeir  young  persons  of  both  sexes
attended  her  cLBily  instruction.  Be-
sides these,  she  taught  9  or  10  native
girls.  The  Roman  Catholic  clergy
endearoured  to  prevent  the  attend-
ance of  the  children,  and  some  few
in  consequence  left ;  but  the  num-
ber was  soon  made  up  by  others.
The  average  number  attending  3
schools,  of  which  Mr.  Roberts  and
2  native  teachers  had  charge,  was
1124.

AMBOYNA,  an  island  in  the
Indian  Ocean,  the  Dutch  metro-
polis of  the  Moluccas.  It  is  56
miles  long ;  and  divided,  at  the  S.W.
end,  by  a  large  bay  into  two  limbs,
the  largest  called  Hetou,  and  the
other  Leytimor.  The  surface  is
beautiful ;  woody  hills  and  verdant
plains  being  interspersed  with  ham-
lets, and  enriched  by  cultivation.
The  chief  products  are  cloves,  the
tjrees  of  which  are  about  40  or  60
feet  high,  nutmegs,  sugar,  coflee,
and  many  delicious  fruits;  also,  a
peculiar  wood  that  is  used  for  beau-
tiful cabinet-work.  The  natives
are  generally  Mahomedans;  but
there  are  Protestants  among  them.
The  Englidi  and  Dutch  had  fac-
tories here  at  the  beginning  of  the
17th  century;  but  the  Dutch  ex-
pelled the  English,  and,  in  1622»
tortured  and  put  to  deatii  many  of
them.  The  island  was  taken  by
the  British  in  1T96,  restored  in
1 802,  and  again  taken  in  1810,  and
restored  in  1815.

An^wynOf  the  chief  town,  is
neatly  built,  and  stands  near  the
middle  of  the  bay,  on  the  smaller
limb,  defended  by  the  Fort  Victo-
ria. The  Dutch  are  tolerably
polished,  but  the  natives  are  rude
and  uncultivated.  The  houses  are
made  of  bamboo-canes  and  sago-
trees,  generally  oi^  story  high,  on
account  o{  frequent  earthquakes.
£.  ion.  128«  \5',  S.Ut.  3<»  W.


AMB

The  Rev.  Joseph  Kam,  hom  Ui#
Zr.  M,  <S.,  fixed  upon  this  island^  la
1814,  as  the  scen^  of  his  laboum*
Early  in  1816,  his  congregation  in
the  Dutch  church,  on  U^  Lord's
day,  amounted  in  general  to  800  on
1000  persons;  and  when  he  preacb^i
ed  in  the  Malay  language  he  had
usually  from  600  to  600  hearers.

Speaking  of  the  inh'abitants  of
Ambo3ma,  he  says,  <'  Tlie  great
body  of  Chrlstains  residing  here,  are
not  Europeans,  cnr  half-castes,  but
persons  whose  ancestors  have  rei*
sided  here  from  generation  to  geae*
ration.  Among  them,  I  will  venture
to  say  there  are  thousands  who  would
part  with  every  thing  they  possess  to
obtain  a  copy  of  the  Bible  in  their
own  tongue ;  and  if  they  hear  thai
^  I  am  to  preach  in  the  Malay  Ian*
guage,  which  is,  at  present,  more
my  business  than  preaching  in
Dutch,  many  collect  together  two
hours  before  the  service  eom-
menees.^'

■  '*  As  to  the  slaves,"  he  says,
*'  many  of  their  masters  did  not,  for*
merly,  af^inrove  of  their  coming  to
receive  instruction,  and  some  came
to  me  without  having  previously
obtained  permission;  but  now  se-
veral of  the  masters  request  me  ta
teach  their  slaves,  havii^  found,  by
experience,  that  those  who  are  re-»
ligiously  instructed  are  more  faith-
ful and  diHgent  than  others.'^

After  visiting  the  islands  of  Ban-
da,  Harooka,  Ceram,  Nalaliwu,
Saparuwa,  and  Nusalout,  Mr.  K»
returned  to  Ambojma,  where  the
work  of  the  Lord  continued  to  pros-
per, especially  among  the  heathen,
who  destroyeid  the  houses  formerly
erected  for  the  worship  of  devils,
and  put  away  from  them  every  ves-
tige of  idolatry.  Such,  indeed,  was
their  zeal  in  the  cause  of  divine
truth,  that  when  Mr.  Kam  inti-
mated his  intention  of  erecting  a
new  church  for  the  separate  use  of
the  slaves,  they  cheerfully  volun-
teered their  services  in  cutting  tin*


'AMB

ber  in  the  forests  for  the  purpose ;
and  thai  precluded  the  necessity  of
lilb  applying  to  the  Directors  for
pecuniary  a^istaoce.  Within  about
4years,  1200  heathens  andMahome-
diins  embraced  Christianity  in  the
extendva  field  of  his  labours.  The
communicants  were  about  2800;
and  the  scholars  2000.

From  a  letter,  written  by  Mr.
Kam,  after-  his  return  from  a  visit
he  paid  ib  Celebes  Sangir,  and
other  islands,  it  appears  that  this
zealous  and  laborious  missionary
had  baptized,  in  the  several  islands,
upwards  of  5000  children,  and  near-
ly £00  adults;  and  that  in  Am-
boyna  he  had  baptized,  chiefly  of
those  who  had  been  M ahomedans,
128  adults,  besides  children.

In  January  1821,  an  Auxiliary
Missionary  Society  was  formed  at
Ambqyna,  for  the  purpose  of  con-
tributing to  the  maintenance  and
support  of  several  missionaries  re-
cently sent  out  by  the  N.  S,,  and
also  with  a  view  to  assist  in  the
printing  of  school-books  and  reli-
gious traets,  a  second  printing-
presshaving  arrived,frora  the  Direc-
tors in  London,  in  the  course  of  the
preceding  year.

About  this  time,  a  place  was
erected  immediately  contiguous  to
Mr.  Kam's  dwelling* house,  for  ih%
initiatory  instructiop  of  such  con-
verts from  paganism  as  might  be
desirous  of  receiving  baptism ;  and,
daring  the  year,  that  solemn  rite
was  administered  to  30  persons,
who  had  abjured  heathenism  and
embraced  the  truths  of  Christianity.
Towards  the  close  of  December,
in  the  same  year,  Mr.  Kam  had  the
satisfaction  of  receiving  into  his
church  about  100  new  members,  of
whom  several  had  formerly  been
idolaters,  and  one  a  Mahomedan.
At  different  times  the  B,  Sr  F.  B.  S,
have  sent  to  the  disposal  of  Mr.
Kam  9000  Malay  Testaments,  the
distribution  of  which  has  been  ex-
tensiveiy  followed  by  the  renunci-


AMB

ation  of  idolatry.  The  Bible  baK
been  sold  by  auction  for  40  dollais.
An  Auxiliary  Bible  Society  Mras
formed  in  1815,  the  subscriptions  to
which  amounted  to  4000  dollars.

In  1824,  there  were  in  Mr.  Kam^s
school,  including  adults,  54  scholars.
During  the  twelve  months  immedi-
ately preceding  June  1824,  he  bap-
tized 107  persons,  of  both  sexes,
professed  converts  from  heathen-
ism. Four  Chinese,  2  men,  and  2
women,  to  whom  the  reading  of
Dr.  Morrison's  Chinese  version  of
the  Scriptures  had  been  made  use-
ful, were  also  baptized  by  Mr.  Kam,
and  admitted  into  Christian  fellow-
ship, as  the  first  fruits  of  his  mis-
sion among  that  people.  Seven
persons  were  employed  at  that
period  in  the  printing  establish-
ment. Mr.  K.  had  received  the
sum  of  8500  Java  rupees,  or  about
400/.,  from  the  sale  of  Malay  Bibles,
and  a  supply  of  Psalm-books  in  that
language  from  the  N,  S.

In  the  following  year,  there
were  18  young  men  in  Mr.  Kam '51
native  seminary,  under  preparatory
instruction  for  the  office  of  native
teacher.  The  first  voliune  of  the
"  Village  Sermons,"  in  Malay,  was
ready  for  circulation.  The  number
of  native  converts  from  Paganism
and  Mahomedanism,  who  were
candidates  for  baptism,  was  con-
siderable. His  Excellency  the
Governor  General,  who,  accom-
panied by  his  lady  and  his  Excel-
lency the  Governor  of  the  Mo-
luccas, had  inspected  Mr.  Kam's
missionary  establishment;  and  ex-
pressed himself  much  gratified,
particularly  with  his  chapel  and
printing  office ;  ordered  him  a
monthly  allowance  of  600  Java
rupees,  towards  defraying  his  tra-
velling expenses.  At  the  close  of
this  year  Mr.  Kam  performed
another  extensive  missionary  tour,
among  the  islands  of  the  Malayan
Archipelago ;  particulars  of  which
have  not  yet  come  V>  baiid.  X>wtvEv\t

c2  '\"l


AMU

fehtnsty  1986,  five  natife  tdHcliets
were  sent  from  Amboyna  to  seTeral
of  the  Molucca  Islands,  in  conse-
quence of  applications  previously
recelred  from  tiie  inhabitants.  Two
teachers,  natives  of  Banha,  have
also  been  sent  to  that  island,  in
compliance  with  their  own  earnest
desire  to  ins^tict  their  countrymen
in*  the  knowledge  of  the  Gospel.
Mr.  Kam's  Miday  translation  of
the  first  volume  of  the  '*  Village
Sermons  "  is  now  in  circulation.  ^

In  1814,  the  Rev.  Jabez  Carey,
from  the  B,  M,  S.  was  appointed
inspector  of  the  schools  in  this
island.  In  1815,  he  says,  '<  The
number  of  scholars  is  303.  On  the
I6th  of  January,  I  was  appointed
to  the  office  of  manager  of  the
poor  fund,  with  this  emolument
attached  to  it,  namely,  that  of  at-
tending to  the  wants  and  good  of
the  poor.  The  fund  was  a  very
rich  one,  and  will  be  so  yet,  if  the
English  government  should  return
the  loan  made  to  it  by  the  Dutch
government,  which  is  more  than
20,000  rix-dollars :  besides  which  I
have  in  hand  about  6000  rix-dollars.
Last  December  I  visited  the  neigh-
bouring islands  of  Saparooa  and
Harooka,"

On  June  the  6th,  a  lew  of  the
children  under  Mr,  Carey's  in-
spection, that  is  20  out  of  300,  were
examined  at  theGovemment-house,
in  presence  of  the  resident;  they
acquitted  themselves  well,  and  each
obtained  a  suit  of  clothes  from
government.

In  the  course  of  a  week  the
chiefs  bad  destroyed  five  idolatrous
temples,  with  every  thing  belonging
to  them,  at  Harooka.

A  few  years  after,  a  change  took
place  relative  to  the  government ;
but  the  conduct  of  Mr.  Carey  had
so  effectually  recommended  him,
that  the  new  government  requested
him  to  continue  his  employment
as  superintendent  of  schools.  A
valued   missionary,  Mr.  Ricketts^


AMS

UMl  tiw  ftril  fruits  of  the  Anffkiffti
mission.  Various  difficultios,  hew*
ever,  subsequently  arose  $  and  Hi
1818,  Mr.  Carey  left  the  islaiid  taA
arrived  at  Beng^.

In  1810,  Mr.  Finn,  from  the
AT.  M,  S,  joined  Mr.  Kam,  and
has  since  successfully  assisted  liim
in  his  labours.  Messr^  Feidinaiid
Bormeister,  Frederick  Mueller,
from  the  Basle  Seminary,  and  hbi
Akerslotfa,  from  Holland,  also  ar-
rived in  1821>  and  commenced  th^
study  of  the  language  preparatory
to  their  becoming  missionaries  ia
different  islands.

AMERICA,  one  of  the  ioar
grand  divisions  of  the  world,  and
by  much  the  largest,  is  bounded  on
all  sides  by  the  ocean.  It  took  its
name 'from  Americus  Vespucius,  li
Florentine,  who  having  accom-
panied Ojeda,  a  Spanish  navigator,
in  1497,  drew  up  an  amusing  his-
tory of  his  voyage,  in  which  it  wad
insinuated  that  the  glory  of  having
first  discovered  the  continent  of  ^e
New  WorW  belonged  to  him.  This
Vas  in  part  believed ;  the  country
began  to  be  called  after  the  name
of  its  supposed  first  discoverer ;  and
the  unaccountable  caprice  of  man^^
kind  has  perpetuated  the  error.
But  America  was  first  discovered/
in  1492,  by  Christoval  Ccdon,  a
Genoese,  better  known  by  the
name  of  Christopher  Columbus.
It  is  caUed  the  New  World  with
great  propriety  j  for  not  only  the
men,  but  the  birds  and  beasts,  differ
ia  some  respects  from  those  known
before^  It  has  likewise  a  great
number  of  trees  and  plants,  that
grew  nowhere  else  before  they
were  transmitted  to  other  places^'
All  the  men,  except  the  Esqui--
maux,  near  Greenland,  seem  to
have .  the  same  origin ;  for  they<
agree  in  every  particular,  from  the
Straits  of  Magellan  in  the  S.  to
Hudson's  Bay  in  the  N.  Their
skins,  unless  daubed  with  grease  or*
oil,  are  of  a  red  copper  colour,  and'

18


llwy  have  no  beards  rar  hafir  on  any  I
other  parti  of  their  bodies,  except
their  heads^  where  it  is  black,
straif^t,  and  coane.  Many  axe
the  conjectures  about  the  peopling
of  this  Tast  continent,  and  almost
te  nurioas  as  their  authors.  Ame-
rica is  so  long,  that  it  takes  in  the
torrid  sone,  the  two  temperate
nines,  and  part  of  the  northern
frigid  Eone.  A  continent  so  ex-
tensive must  naturally  be  Tarious  in
its  climate,  soil,  and  productions.
In  the  most  northern  and  most
southern  parts  the  countries  are
cold,  sterile,  and  desert ;  while  in
the  centre  are  found  the  richest
metals,  aiinerals,  precious  stones,
and  abundance  of  the  most  valua-
ble and  useful  commodities.  It  is
iiard  to  say  how  many  different
languages  there  are  in  America,  a
Tost  number  being  spoken  by  the
different  people  in  diflerent  parts ;
and,  as  to  religion,  there  is  no
giving  any  tolerable  account  of  it
in  general,  though  some  of  the
most  civilized  of  the  Aborigines
leem  to  have  worshipped  the  sun.
The  principal  motive  of  the
Spaniards,  in  sending  so  many  co-
lonists here,  was  the  thinit  of  gold ;
BJid,  indeed,  they  and  the  Portu-
I  gaese  are  possessed  of  all  those
parts  where  it  is  found  in  the
greatest  plenty.  This  vast  con-
tinent is  divided  into  North  and
South  America,  which  are  joined
hy  the  Isthmus  of  Panama.  It  has
lofty  and  immense  ranges  of  moun-
tains, such  as  the  Andes  and  Alle-
gany; and  the  most  stupendous
rirers,  such  as  the  Amazon,  Plata,
Orinoco,  Mississippi,  and  Missouri.
Besides  the  Aborigines,  who  in-
habit the  interior  parts,  and  the
United  States  of  America,  who
possess  many  of  the  finest  provinces,
the  different  European  powers  have
rich  and  flourishing  colonies  here.
In  North  America,  Britain  pos-
lesMs  New  Britain,  Canada,  Nova
Scotia^  and  New  Brunswick ',  Spain


AMfi

had  Mexico^  New  Mexico,  NeW
Albion,  and  California ;  and  Russia
has  some  settlements  on  Cook
Inlet.  In  South  America,  Spain
possessed  Caraccas,  New  Grenada^
Peru,  Chili,  and  Buenos  Ayres;
Portugal  Jiad  Brazil,  and  part  of
Guinea ;  and  France,  Britain,  and
Holland,  have  the  remainder  of
Guinea.  The  Spanish  Colonies
have  now  asserted  their  inde-
pendence, and  contain  Mexico,  in
South  America ;  Colombia,  in  the
N.;  Chili,  and  the  United  Pro-
vinces,  including  the  S.  of  Peru,
and  Buenos  Ayres.  Brazil  is  now
an  independent  empire ;  and  Pata-
gonia remains  in  the  possession  of
the  native  Indians.  [See  Canada,
New  Bntnmnck,  Newfoundland,
Nova  Scotia,  Netv  Fairjieid,  Ooeh-'
gelogyy  Paramariio,  lied  River,
and  lairing  Place*]

AMLAMGODDE,  or  AM^
LAMGOODY,  a  town  on  the
S.W.  Coast  of  Ceylon,  near  a
small  river  of  the  same  place.

The  Rev.  M'^m.  Read,  of  the  L,
M.  S.,  commenced  his  labours  here
in  180J  ;  and  subsequently  became
pastor  of  the  Dutch  Church,  and
superintendent  of  schools.  The
Wesleyan  missionaries,  at  Galle,
take  this  into  their  field  of  labour,
and  have  several  native  members
and  a  school.

AMSTERDAM,  a  city  of  the
Netherlands,  capital  of  Holland.
Next  to  London,  it  is  deemed  the
most  commercial  city  in  the  world,
and  contains  upwards  of  220,000
inhabitants.  The  walls  are  higli
and  well  fortified ;  and  the  bridge,
which  joins  the  rampart,  is  built
over  the  river  Amstel.  Towards
the  water  it  is  only  protected  by
a  double  range  of  great  piles,
strengthened  by  transverse  beams,
with  openings  to  admit  vessels  into
the  canals,  which  are  closed  by
booms  at  night.  But  its  chief  se-
curity consists  in  the  facility  of  in-
undating the  viciml^  \i^  m»iWi%  ^\


AMS

sluices.  Few  cities  have  their
public  buildings  so  fine,  numerous,
and  well  kept.  The  Exchange  is
one  of  the  principal  ornaments  of
the  city^  and  the  harbour  is  one  of
the  finest  in  Europe.  The  Stadt-
hoa^,  now  the  royal  palace,  has
long  been  celebrated  for  its  extent
and  durability ;  and  the  furniture
and  decorations  of  .the  interior  are
in  a  style  of  costly  magnificence.
The  streets  are  broad  and  well
paved,  and  most  of  them  have
canals,  with  rows  of  trees  on
each  side ;  but  there  are  no  spaci-
ous public  places,  nor  squares.  It
surrendered  to  the  king  of  Prussia,
in  1787,  when  that  prince  invaded
Holland,  in  favour  of  the  stadt*
holder;  it  received  the  French
troops  in  1795,  without  any  re-
sistance;  and,  in  1813,  it  was  the
first  place  that  declared  for  the
restoi'ation  of  the  House  of  Orange.
It  is  seated  at  the  conflux  of  the
Amstel  and  Wye,  70  m.  N.W.
of  Cleves,  and  80  N.  by  R.  of  Ant-
werp. E.  long.  4<»  40*,  N.  lat.
62925'.

The  Rev.  A.  S.  Thelwall,  agent
of  the  L,  J,  S.,  assisted  by  Mr.
C!bevallier,  has  been  assiduously
engaged  to  promote  Christianity
among  the  Jews,  and  to  excite
ai;nong  Christians  an  enlightened
interest  in  their  behalf,  with  con-
siderable success.  Much  good  has
also  been  effected  through  the  me-
dium of  a  Tract  Society ;  and  an
institution  has  been  formed  to  edu-
cate poor  Jewish  children.

Mr.  T.  who  is  now  in  Eng-
land, from  impaired  health,  has
lately  received  several  letters  from
his  friends  in  Holland,  which  tes-
tify that  the  work  of  the  Lord  is
still  going  on.

Towards  the  close  of  last  year,
he  heard  from  one  of  those
converted  Israelites  with  whom
he  had  enjoyed  much  Christian
ititercourse,  conveying  the  intel-
ligence, that,  within  two  mouths.


AMS

he  had  lost  five  of  his  nearest  r^*
latives — an  uncle,  a  fatiier,  a  hror
ther,  and  two  aunts.  Respecting
his  father,  he  mentions  several
things  which  give  reason  to  hope,
that,  during  the  latter  weeks  of  bte
life,  a  great  change  had  takoM
place  in  his  heart.  But  of  hfs
brother  he  gives  a  most  interesting
account.  He  was  taken  ill  only
three  weeks  after  the  fatherfs
death,  and  the  disease  came  on
so  rapidly,  that  he  had  a  very  early
presentiment  of  his  own  approach-
ing dissolution.  The  convictions
under  which  he  had  evidently  been
labouring  even  in  health,  now  be-
came a  source  of  sever*  internal
conflict.  For  a  time  his  mental
anguish  was  extreme.  On  one  oc-
casion he  said,  "  You,  my  dear
brother,  can  understand  me  ;  I  am
tormented  with  the  devil.  Our
dear  mother  does  not  believe  that
there  is  one.  There  was  a  tfane
when  I  did  not  believe  it  myself;
but  now  I  feel  that  he  tortures  my
soul.  I  have  desen-ed  it.  Oh  !  my
brother,  what  a  sinner  I  b«vQ
been  V  "  Then  it  was,"  says  the
writer  of  this  letter,  "  that  I  first  felt
freedom  and  boldness  in  speaking
to  him  of  our  Saviour,  in  telling
him  of  the  love  of  God  towards
such  sinners  as  humble  themselves
before  him,  and  in  exhorting  him
to  pray  to  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be
delivered  from  the  wicked  one4
He  soon  began  to  pray  most
earnestly,  and  seemed  to  be  com-
pletely overwhelmed  with  a  deep
sense  of  sin.  He  con fes.se(^ that  he
had  long  been  under  conviction.
On  the  seventh  day  of  his  illness,
after  a  violent  paroxysm  of  the
disease,  he  sunk  into  a  kind  of
torpor,  from  which,  in  a  fe^  hours,
he  raised  himself  up,  and,  in  the
full  possession  of  his  faculties,  to
the  surprise  of  all,  he  exclaimed,
*  Call  my  mother,  my  sister,  ami
my  friends ;  I  die  in  the  faith  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ — of  the  Triunv

20


•ASG

id-^the  true  Mesiat— the  King
tt»  worid.  He  is  revealed  to
S  In  him  Jews  and  Gentiles
».one.  Many  of  the  Jewish  na-
n  most  yet  come  to  him.  Pro-
iUb,  in  the  synagogue^  how  I
m  died.  Say  to  aU^  and  you
ddreasing  an  intimate  Jewish
send)  listen  to  niy  voice,  and  say
ii  to  my  other  friends,  that  they
mt  come  to  him.^  After  this  he
pin  ezpreawd  his  deep  conviction
hia  own  sinfulness.  The  disease
tunied  upon  him  with  increased
migtb,  uid  he  became  delirious
lariy  to  the  time  of  his  departure,
Uch  took  place  on  the  following
oming.  In  the  intervals  of  com-
■nre,  he  declared  his  perfect
lowledge  of  what  he  had  said,
id  bis  firm  acquiescence  in  the
fattiples  he  had  then  avowed.  In
it  way  he  died.  Was  '  not  this
bnmd  plucked  from  the  bum-

■fr*  Thelwall  also  received,  about
e  lame  time,  a  letter  from  another
nirish  convert,  giving  a  very  af-
efthig  account  of  the  death  of  his
Dtiier-in-law,  after  two  years'
flsistent  precession  of  Christi-
Ity.  Mr.  Thelwall  had  been
BMnt  at  her  baptism,  at  the  age
d6years.-

ANGUILLA,  OR  SNAKE
ILAND,  the  most  northerly  of
e  Caribbee  Islands  possessed  by
paat  Britain  in  the  West  Indies,
talras  its  name  from  its  winding
lore,  and  is  60  m.  N.W.  of  St,
iiistoi^r's.  W.  Ion.  dS^  W,
.  lat.  180  IS'.

l*his  station  has  been  partially
copied,  for  many  years,  by  the
Wityart#,  and  a  prosperous  so-
9ty  raised  up.  I^  numbers  at
eaeat  are— 49  Whites,  67  Free
)1.  aid  Black,  and  120  slaves.
QftalS86.

ANNAMABOE,  a  large  popu-
Hi  fortified  town  on  the  Gold
oast  of  Africa.  In  18S2,  it  was
inezed  to  the  general  govern'  <


ANT

ment  of  Sierra  Leone,  since  whifyb
time  successful  measures  have  been
taken  by  the  African  InaHiuikn
to  establish  schools.  The.  natives
evince  a  veiy  anxious  wish  for  the
instruction  of  their  children  in  the
English  language  and  in  the  Chris-
tian religion.  E.  long.  1^  i6',
N.  lat.  6^  20'.

ANTIGUA,  one  of  the  Caribbee
Islands,  ]  6  miles  long  and  12  broad,
and  60  £.  by  S.  of  St  Christopher.
It  has  several  good  ports ;  and  in
that  called  the  English  Harbour,
on  the  S.B.  side,  are  a  royal  navy
yard  and  arsenal.  It  is  destitute  of
fresh  water,  and  the  inhabitants
save  rain  water  in  cisterns.  It
was  taken  by  the  French  in  1782,
but  restored  in  1783.  Population,
in  1817,  36,739,  of  whom  31,462
were  slavey  the  rest  Whites  and
free  people.

Antig^  is  the  seat  of  Gdrem-
ment  for  the  Leeward  Islands.  Its
legislature  is  composed  of  the  com-
mander-in-chief, a  council  of  IS
members,  and  an  assembly  of  26.
This  legislature  presented  to  the
sister  islands  the  first  example  of
the  melioration  of  the  criminal  law
respecting  negro  slaves^  by  giving
the  accused  the  benefit  of  a  trial  by
jury,  and  allowing,  in  cases  of  capi-
tal conviction,  4  days  between  the
time  of  sentence  and  the  execu-
tion.  The  military  generally  con-
sists of  2  regiments  of  infanti^,  and
2  of  foot  militia,  besides  the  force
raised  in  the  island.  The  capital
is  St.  John's.  It  lies  in  W.  Ion.
62®  9',  N,  lat.  17®  4'.

In  January,  1760,  Samuel  Islet,
one  of  the  United  Brethren,  set
sail  for  Antigua.  Countenanced
by  the  governor  and  some  pro-
prietors, he  commenced  his  la-
bours; but  heavy  trials  awaited
him,  which  soon  beclouded  his
prospects.

In  the  year  1761,  however,  a
piece  of  ground  was  pYncVaaedi  Vs\
the  town  of  St.  John's,  lot  W\«v  \Na-


ANT

l^ose  of  a  missionary  establishment,
and  a  place  of  worship  was  erected
for  the  accommodation  of  the
fiepjoes.

Three  years  after,  Samuel  Isles
was  removed  by  death  from  the
scene  of  his  labours ;  and  for  aliout
five  years  the  mission  continued  in
a  very  languishing  state ;  but  at
4,he  expiration  of  that  time,  a  mis-
sionarj',  named  BroWn,  arrived,
and  his  labours  were  so  abundantly
blessed,  that  it  soon  became  neces-
sary' to  enlarge  the  church ;  and  on
that  occasion  the  zeal  of  the  con-
verted negroes  was  most  pleasingly
demonstrated.  On  coming  to  the
evening  meeting,  each  individual
brought  a  few  stones  and  other
materials  with  him  ;  the  different
departments  of  the  worlc  were
divided  among  such  as  were  masons
and  carpenters;  and  those  who
could  not  assist  in  enlarging  the
edifice,  provided  refreshments  for
the  builders ;  so  that  the  requisite
alteration  was  completed  by  the
voluntary  labour  of  these  poor
slaves,  after  the  completion  of  iheir
respective  daily  tasks.

In  the  midst  of  calamities,  which
subsequently  arose,  the  work  con-
tinued to  go  forward ;  and,  imme-
diately after  the  hurricane  of
1772,  a  new  awakening  appeared
among  the  slaves,  and  spread  in
all  directions.  A  desire  for  re-
ligious instruction  was,  of  course,
augmented ;  and,  in  1775,  the
number  of  persons  who  attended
public  worship  amounted  to  2000,
and  from  10  to  20  were  baptized
almost  every  month.  A  new  and
more  spacious  church  was,  there-
fore, erected  in  St.  John's,  in  1773;
and,  in  the  following  year,  a  piece
of  ground  was  purchased  at  Bailey
Hilly  near  the  town  of  Falmouth,
for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  second
establishment,  for  the  accommoda-
tion of  those  negroes  who  lived  at
a  considerable  distance  from  the
lorwBT  station.


ANT

From  this  place,  which  pre
inconvenient,  owing  to  the  ste
ness  of  the  ascent,  the  bretb
removed,  in  1782,  to  a  more  el
ble  spot,  which  they  designi
Gr(ice  Hill;  and,  though  the
ternal  circumstances  of  the  mis
were  rather  diilicult,  the  Chri?
slaves  being  exposed  to  fam
sickness,  persecutions,  -and  dej
dations,  and  the  island  beinii^
by  the  French, — the  cause  of  Di^
truth  remained  firm  and  imrac
able  ;  and,  after  the  restoratioi
peace  in  1783,  60  adults  were
ceived  into  the  church  of  St.  Job
by  the  rite  of  baptism,  in  one  d
and,  in  the  course  of  12  mon
the  congregations  in  that  town
at  Grace  Hill  were  augmented
the  accession  of  more  than
persons.  The  missionaries  ;
preached,  at  stated  times,  in
f^rent  plantations ;  and  one  of
native  assistants  actually  bull
chapel  at  his  own  expense,  si
ciently  capacious  to  accommoi
400  hearers.

Many  of  the  planters  were  i
convinced  of  the  beneficial  e&
of  the  Gospel  on  their  slaves,
others  became  violent  persecu
of  the  truth.

The  word  of  the  Lord,  howe
continued  to  run,  and  was  gloriJ
The  two  congregations,  in  1'
consisted  of  more  than  6,000  m
bers ;  and  so  many  new  doors  \
opened  to  the  Gospel,  that  the  i
sionaries  were  exceedingly  the
ful  when  they  found  zealous
useful  assistants  in  many  of  t
converts,  to  visit  the  sick,  give
vice  and  reproof  if  needed,  an
report  to  the  missionaries  the  s
of  the  congregation.

Although  indisposition  compe
Mr.  Brown  to  retire  in  179(
suitable  successor  was  found
the  Rev.  H.  C.  Tschirpe ;  and
cause  was  so  prosperous,  that  a  t
settlement  was  formed,  and  na
Grace  Bo}/*
\  '^


ANT

In  1810>  tbe  missionaries  com*
teaced  a  Sunday-school,  on  the
^ancasterian  plan  of  instruction,
.t  St.  John's  ;  and  though  at  first
hey  had  hut  80  scholars,  that  num-
ler  was  soon  increased  to  "200;  and
he  progress  not  only  of  the  chil-
irenji  but  of  their  parents,  \(^ho  ap-
leaied  equally  anxious  for  tuition,
lotb  surprised  and  delighted  the
eachers.  A  school  was  also  opened
m  one  of  the  plantations  near
Srace  Hill,  where  the  scholars
vere  instructed  one  day  in  every
reek.

In  181 T,  the  brethren  were  en-
miraged  to  form  a  fourth  settle-.
Dent,  by  the  solicitation  of  the^
Colonial  Government ;  which,  with
he  most  praiseworthy  liberality,
ncsented  them  with  ten  acres  of
aod  for  tbis  purpose,  together  with
1000/.  •  currency  towards  building  a
ifaurch  and  dwelling-houses,  and  a
liaot  of  300/.  per  annum  for  the
upport  of  the  missionaries.  The
troprietors  of  the  adjacent  planta-
ItfPA,  also,  aware  of  the  benefit
rhich  their  negroes  would  receive
rom  religious  instruction,  contri-
(uted  a  handsome  sum  towards  the
irection  of  the  necessar}-  buildings.
rhe  difficulty  of  procuring  stones
TU  for  some  time  a  considerabe
indfance  to  the  work;  but  at
engtb  a'  quarry-  was  opened,  about
hree  quarters  of  a  mile  from  the
pot,  and  the  missionaries  obtained
ach  kind  assistance  from  the  ma-
nUy  carpenters,  and  labourers,
doD/a^ing  to  their  neighbours,  that
heir  church  (a  substantial  well-
Dilt  edifice,  64  feet  by  30  in  the
lear)  was  solemnly  consecrated  on
be  6th  of  December,  1818.

To  this  new  settlement,  which
lie  brethren  named  Newfieldf  two.
then  were  subsequently  added,  in,
be  year  1822;  one  at  Cedar  Hall,
■d  the  other  at  Mountjoy :  and  it
I  peculiarly  pleasing  to  add,  that  in
•di  of  these  stations  large  con-
jvegations  were   collected,  many  I


ANT

were  joined  to  the  church  by  bajN^
tism,  and  the  word  of  God  appear*
to  have  been  followed  with  an
abundant  blessing.

On  the  nth  of  July,  1823,  the
United  Brethren  celebrated  the
fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  opening
of  their  church  at  St.  John's;  when
it  appeared  that  there  had  been
baptized  and  received  into  the  con-
gregation at  that  town,  16,099  ne-
groes, young  and  old ;  and  that  35
male,  and  as  many  female,  mis-
sionaries had  been  employed  in  tl^e
important  service  of  making  known
to  their  benighted  fellow-creatures
the  way  of  salvation.  And  it  was
stated  by  the  Rev.  C.  F.  Richter,
that,  between  Easter  1822  and
Easter  1823,  408  adult  negroes
bad  been  baptized  or  received  into
the  congregation  at  St.  John's;
104  at  Grace  Hill ;  40  at  Grace
Bay;  115  at  Newfield;  and  89  at
Cedar  Hall ;  forming  a  total  of  765
in  the  year ;  and  during  the  same
period,  482  were  admitted,  in  the
different  settlements,  to  the  Holy
Communion.

On  the  26th  Sept.  1825,  the  de-
voted missionary,  Richter,  after
30  years'  labour  in  Antigua,  was
unexpectedly  removed  to  his  re-
ward. In  announcing  his  peaceful
removal.  Brother  Shill  says: —
**  When  we  lately  spoke  with  the
individuals  belonging  to  the  class  of
new  people,  about  1400  negroes
called  upon  us.  At  such  a  time,
we  are,  as  you  may  suppose,  ot^cu-
pied  from  morning  till  night."

In  a  letter,  dated  Feb.  J  827,  he
says: — "  I  subjoin  an  accurate
statement  of  tbe  congregation  at
St.  John's.  The  total  number  of
the  people  under  our  care  appears
somewhat  less  than  at  the  close  of
1825.  This  is  owing  to  our  having
struck  off  our  lists  the  names  of
such  as  had  ceased  to  come  regu-
larly to  church,  or  to  speak  with,
us  individually,  accoidm^  \.o  \ii^  '
rule  prescribed.    In  ^e  ^'e«t  l^^i^.


ANT

there  have  been  baptised  72  adults,
and  134  children ;  received  into  the
congregation^  160 ;  re-admitted  51 ;
admitted  to  the  holy  communion^
1T2 ;  departed  this  life,  143  adults,
42  chil(bren ;  excluded,  173  persons.
Our  present  numbers  are  as  follow :
9360  communicants;  1352  baptized
and  candidates  for  communion;
children  under  twelve  years  of  age,
aboutlOOO:  in aU  4712;  tovdiich,
if  we  add  the  new  people,  and
those  who  are  for  the  time  excluded
from  the  privileges  of  the  church,
amounting  together  to  1696,  tho
total  wiU  be  6408.

In  the  year  1760,  Nathaniel  Gil-
bert, esq.  who  had  experienced  the
saving  power  of  the  Gospel  in  Eng-
land, 1>ecame  a  resident  of  tliis
Island ;  and  whilst  deploring  the
spiritual  condition  of  the  persons
by  whom  he  was  surrounded,  he
felt  an  earnest  desire  for  their  wel-
fare. His  first  efforts  were  con-
fined to  a  few  individuals,  whom  he
Invited  to  assemble  in  hisown  house
on  the  Sabbath-day;  but  finding
that  his  exertions  were  evidently
blessed  of  God,  he  went  forth
boldly,  and  preached  the  Gospel  to
the  poor  benighted  negroes,  not-
withstanding the  situation  he  held
as  speaker  of  the  House  of  As-
sembly.

Mr.  Gilbert  continued  to  labour,
without  any  abatement  of  ardour,
or  any  diminution  of  success,  till
the  period  of  his  decease ;  but  as  he
had  no  means  of  appointing  a  suc-
cessor in  his  spiritual  office,  his  be-
reaved flock  were  left  as  sheep
without  a  shepherd  for  nearly  20
years.  In  1778,  however,  Mr,
John  Baxter,  a  member  of  the
Wesleyan  connexion  in  England,
removed  to  Antigua,  for  the  pur-
pose of  working  as  a  shipwright  in
the  service  of  Government;  and
shortly  after  his  arrival  took  upon
ttimself,  in  the  interval^  of  his  em-
pl6yment,  the  care  of  tibe  remains
o!  Mr.  GJibert's  Society.


ANT

Through  the  superintendenes  o
Mr.  Baxter,  the  asristance  «f  Ittri
Gilbert,  and  the  subordinate  Initn
mentality  of  an  okl  Irish  emigrael
who  had  been  provkientially  leii-ii
the  island  towardsitbe  cloM  of  1783
things  went  on  prosperonsty ;  - «
that  these  individuals  had  onde:
their  care  upwards  of  1000.  mem
hers,  chiefly  blacks,  who  appeiam
to  be  earnestly  stretching  -  faiA
their  hands  towards  God.  Maaj
new  places  were  opened,  andie-
quests  were  made  for  preaching
with  which  Mr.  Baxter  could  no
possibly  comply.

In  the  month  of  January,  17S7
Dr.  Coke,  after  mature  deUbera<
tion,  resolved  that  Mr.  Warrener
one  of  the  missionaries  originaUj
appointed  to  Nova  Scotia,  shodi
remain  in  Antigua ;  and  Mr.  Bax<
ter  avowed  his  determination  o
resigning  the  lucrative  situatioi
which  he  held  as  under  storekeepe;
in  English  Harl>our,  for  the  express
purpose  of  devoting  himself  unre<
servedly  to  the  work  of  the  ministry

Two  years  afterwards  it  appeare<
that  Mr.  Warrener,  during  tfai
comparatively  short  period  of  hi
residence  on  the  island,  had  beei
made  the  instrument  of  adding
1000  members  to  the  Society,  wh<
were  dwelling  together  In  the  spi
rit  of  love.

In  April,  1816,  the  island  of  An
tigua  was  placed  under  martial  low
in  consequence  of  an  insurrectioi
which  had  recentl}^  broken  out  ij
Barbadoes.  Mr.  Woolley,  one  o
the  Wesleyan  missionaries,  oi
hearing  that  the  militia  of  th
colony  .was  called  out,  went,  t
company  with  his  colleagues,  t
the  president,  and  offered  tbei
services  in  any  way  that  might  b
deemed  beneficial  to  the  gqirem
ment.  <<  His  honour,"  says  Mi
Woolley,  <'  thanked  me  for  tin
ofier,  and  observed  that  we  coul
render  more  important  service  thai
that  of  bodily  exercise.    I  aamrei


ANT

him,  In  retom,  that  nothing  on  onr
part  ihould  be  wanting  to  do  a¥ray
any  bad  imprenions  which  the  pre-
nnt  painful  report  mig^t  have  pro-
-  daeed.  It  is  not  more  strange  than
tfoeythat  some  persons  think  religion
seditions^  and  that  the  implantation
of  religions  principles  in  the  minds
of  the  negroes  is  calculated  to
bring  about  revolt.  The  subjects
of  such  sentiments,  however,  are
ignorant  of  the  nature  of  religion,
uid  utter  strangers  to  its  influence.
A  gentleman,  who  entertained
tiiete  ideas,  assembled  his  negroes,
and  told  them  what  had  happened  at
Barbadoes ;  when,  to  his  astonish-
ment, they  observed,  '  Massa,  dem
no  have  religion  den.'  I  have  been
at  some  pains  to  discover  whether
any  of  our  people's  minds  have  re-
ceived an  unfavourable  bias  from  the
alarming  reports  in  circulation ;
and  am  happy  ii;  lieing  able  to  state,
tiiat  I  found  in  them  no  disposition
even  to  murmur  at  their  situation,
much  less  to  rebel.  One  well-in-
foHued  man,  of  whom  I  inquired,
took  up  a  book,  and  said,  <  Sir,
with  this  book  in  your  hand,  you
will  do  more  to  prevent  rebellion,
than  all  the  King's  men.' "
^  The  latter  part  of  1818  was  un-
uinally  sickly ;  and  early  in  the  en-
i  suing  year  Mr.  WooUey  was  com-
pelled, by  indisposition,  to  go  to
Bermuda ;  while  Mr.  Jones,  a  pro-
I  mislng  missionary,  was  removed
I     by  death.

'        In  1820,  a  hurricane  occurred  in
I     Antigua,  which,  though  it  did  but
I     little    comparative    injury  in    the
island,  carried  away  the  two  Wes-
leyan  school-rooms  in  the  town  of
Pjirfaam.      Indeed,    as  they  were
I    only  what  is  termed  wattled  bnild-
I     ingi,  they  could  not  be  expected  to
>     i^st  a  strong  wind.     The  com-
mittee, therefore,  resolved  to  exert
themiBlves  in  order  to  raise  a  dura-
Ue  edifice,   60  feet  in  length  by
26  in  breadth.    It  was  accordingly  ,
taamencedf  and  a  subscription  was  I


ANT

opened  to  defray  the  expense  of  its
erection.  "  Some  of  the  respect-
able inhabitants,"  says  one  ot  the
missionaries,  "  came  forward  on
this  occasion  in  the  most  handsome
manner ;  but  from  others  we  receiv-
ed hard  words,  and  stem  repulses."

In  February,  1821,  a  missio-
nary society  was  formed  in  St.
John's ;  when  a  very  lively  Interest
was  excited,  and  the  subscriptions
and  collections  amounted  to  about
93/.  currency,  exclusive  of  a  quantity
of  trinkets  thrown  into  the  boxes.
Previous  to  the  close  of  the  year,
the  hearts  of  the  brethren  at  An-
tigua were  gladdened  by  the  con-
version of  a  Mahomedan  negro,
who  was  publicly  baptized  by  Mr.
Whitehouse,  renouncing  all  the
delusions  of  the  false  prophet.

On  the  23d  of  September,  1822,
a  new  place  of  worship,  called  Zion
Chapel,  was  opened  at  Zion-hili,
the  estate  of  the  Hon.  J.  D.
Taylor;  and  on  the  1st  of  Decem-
ber, in  the  same  year,  Mr.  White-
house  laid  the  foundation-stone  of
another  chapel  in  Willoughby  Bay,
in  which  ceremony  the  Moravian
missionary  assisted ;  while  the  ne-
groes connected  with  his  congpre-
gation  at  Newfield  brought  several
loads  of  stones  in  carts,  and  many
of  them  were  ready  squared.

From  the  last  report  of  the  An-
tigua district,  the  following  parti-
culars are  talcen : —

St.  %Tohn^8  Division, — ^Although
the  number  of  members  is  not  aug-
menting, yet  more  stability  and
harmony  prevail  than  at  any  pre-
vious period.  The  services  in  the
chapels,  and  catechetical  exercises
on  the  estates,  are  both  abundantly
attended.

Barbuda, — In  answer  to  their  ap-
plication, the  missionaries  were  in-
formed by  the  gentleman  who  has
the  care  of  the  island,thnt  the  bishop,
who  had  taken  it  under  his  charge,
had  appointed  a  catechist  \o  te&\^«
upon  it;  and  would himseVi,^^\X:A\
i>  ^0


ANT

fdth  hit  clergy,  regularly  viMt  it.
•Tlie  people  aepm  exceedingly  dis-
Mtisfied  with  tbis  arrangementy  as
they  bare  only  been^  allowed  once,
during  this  year,  to  «i\joy  the  ordi-
nances of  religion.  They  have  in-
deed been  prohibited  assembling,
as  formerly,  in  the  chapel,  which
was  erected  chiefly  by  the  industry
of 'Mr.  Jeffry,  who  was  recenjtly
taken  away  from  his  little  flock,
after  having  laboured,  with  aflec-
tion  and  fidelity,  for  several  years :
however,  they  continue  to  meet  in
their  own  houses — it  is  hoped,  to
their  comfort  and  edification.

English  Harbour. — The  people
here  walk  worthy  their  ''high
vocation, "  and  some  have  recently
been  impressed  with  a  sense  of  their
lost  condition.

fFtlioughby  Bay. — Here  is  a
commodious  chapel,  capable  of  con-
taining several  hundred  people.
The  congregatk>ns  are  composed
principally  of  slaves :  a  number  of
these  really  fear  and  love  God,  but
tome  have  turned  to  sin  and  folly.

Parham  Division. -^  A  consistent
enforcement  of  discipline  has  caused
a  diminution,  during  the  year,  in  this
(^strict;  ameasure  which  will,doubt^
leys,  be  ultimately  advantageous.

At  Parham  the  attendance  has
continued  moderately  good.  A  de-
crease here  is  probably  owing,  in
part,  to  the  unusually  long  conti-
nuance of  the  crop,  toge^er  with
the  excessivewetness  of  the  weather.
Many,  however,  appear  to  have
made  real  improvement  in  know-
ledge and  love.

At  Zi^n  Hill  a  considerable  de-
crease in  the  society  has  taken
place.  Several  proprietors,  and
other  respectable  individuals  in  that
neighbourhood,  entertaining  a  pre-
dilection for  the  church,  have  used
their  influence  over  the  negroes  to
induce  their  attendance  there.
Fiom  one  estate,  formerly  visited,
the  missionaries  have  also,  on  the
principle,    been   excluded.


ANT

Still  some  are ''  growing  in  gptiea.  **
One  circumstance,  both  v^th  re-
spect to  the  Parham  and  Zioa  HItf
Society,  is  worthy  of  remark, — that
amidst  the  unusual  prevalency  of
the  favourite  amusement  of  dano-
ing,  only  four  or  five  have  been
excluded  for  indulging  in  tha^  to
them,  demoralijdng  entertainment.
Number  in  society — Whites,  88;
free-coloured,  481 ;  slaves,  3004  f
total,  3575.  Si.  John's  School  ii
attended  by  2(53  chUdren;  thePlwv
ham  Branch  School  by  about  190l;
and  the  school  at  the  Poini  by  1 14.
Several  have  lately  been  admitked
members  of  the  society.

Mr.  Wm.  Dawee,  a  membec  ol
the  committee  of  the  C  M.  S.,
being  about  to  settle  in  Antigua  in
1814,  was,  at  his  own  request,  ac-
credited as  a  grratuitous  oateohist
and  correspondent.  In  1817,  Mr.
Charles  Thwaites,  who  was  ac-
companied by  his  wife,  waa  also
appointed  superintendentof  schools,
and  assistant  catechist.  At  this
time  there  were  three  stationa —
English  Harbour,  Bethesda,  and
the  Hope ;  and  the  work  was  aided
by  Wm.  Anderson  and  his  wilie,
resident  teachers  of  colour.  Be*
tween  that  period  and  i8S3»  the
number  of  schools,  was  increased
to  ten  \  containing  774  boys,.  10S9
girls,  and  133  aduUs.  These
means  had,  under  the  Divine  bless-
ing, many  happy  eflfects, .  Allud-
ing to  one  of  the  estates,  Mr.
Thwaites  says,  '<  We  have  among
us  several  young  men  and,  women,
who  grew  up  in  the  school,  and
maintain  unblemished  characters.
What  a  contrast  to  past  times,  when
it  seemed  as  though  slavery  and
unchastity  were  inseparable  !  We
have  gone  to  Lynches  on  Sunday
evenings,  in  time .  past,  when  our
ears  have  been  ^uted  with  the
sound  of  the  fiddle  and  the  dance ;
but  .now  the  fiddle  is. no  longer
heard — ^the  dance  is  abolished— and
hymns  and  spiritual  tongs  are  often


ANT

reaoondhig  from  tiie  little  ones.
Tlili  improvement  of  the  children
hM  bad  an  effect  on  the  eider
atevte ;  not  only  are  the  fiddle  and
dance  abolished  on  Sanda}'s,  but
tiwy  crowd  the  bouse  of  prayer,
and  are  thankful  for  the  care  talcen
of  their  little  ones.  Some  of  these
plow  parenti  express  themselves  in
a  ^veiy  affecting  manner,  in  gprati-
'  tude  to  God,  and  in  praying  for
Uetsings  on  the  teachers.^'  Other
agenti  have  been  sent  to  the  aid  of
these  successful  instructors.  From
the  Report  for  1835-6,  it  appears
that  here  were  16  sdraob ;  contain-
ing, of  coloured  people,  15  men,
8  women,  88  boys,  and  77  g^rls ;
and  of  Blacks,  96  men,  65  women,
eSl  boys,  71J  girls;  total,  1682.
Since  then,  however,  the  number
of  children  in  attendance  has  been
much  diminished.

ANTRIM,  a  maritime  county  in
Ulater,  Ireland.  Population,  in
ISily  269,866.  This  county  is
ranch  encumbered  with  bogs  and
BorAsses,  though  it  enjoys  a  tole-
nble  air.  It  has  a  great  natural
cvtioaity  on  the  N.  coast,  called
the  Giants'  Cauwway,  which  pro-
jeets  600  feet  into  the  sea.  It  is
formed  of  above  3000  perpendicu-
lar pillars  of  basaltes,  standing  in
^mutmci  with  each  other,  and  ex-
kftbding  a  sort  of  polygon  pave-
■ent.  somewhat  resembling  the
appearance  of  a  solid  honeycomb.
In  1821,-  the  ^.  M.  S.  appointed
Mr.  Robert  Bailey  to  labour  here,
igid  preach  in  the  Irish  language.
The  B,  4r  X  S.  S.  exerts  also  a
taiy  salutary  influence.

ARCOT,  a  city  of  Hindoostan,
the  nominal  capital  of  the  Carna-
tie.  In  the  vicinity  are  celebrated
tenples,  visited  by  numerous  pil-
griins :  T3  m.  from  Madras.  E.  long.
1f»20',N.Ut.  120  62'.

The  missionaries  at  Bellary,  con-
leeted  with  the  L,  S.,  have  been
«wful  to  the  inhabitants^  by  the
diftiJbiitioff  afinctg,  /


ARK

ARKANSAS,  a  country  of  tho
United  States,  bounded,  N.  by  the
state  and  territory  of  Missouri ;  £•
by  the  Missiagippi ;  S.  by  Louisi-
ana and  Red  K.  which  separati^s
it  from  the  Spanish  dominions;
W.  by  the  Spanish  dominions^
The  northern  boundary  on  the  Mia*
sissippi  is  in  lat.  36°  N.

The  territory  is  very  extensive,
and  abounds  with  excellent  land*
For  navigable  ttreanu  it  is  almost
unrivalled.  On  the  east  is  the  Mis-
sissippi, into  which  St.  Francis^
White,  Arkansas,  and  Red  Rivers
empty  themselves ;  the  three  first  are
almost  entirely  in  the  territory,  and
the  greatest  part  of  the  last  are  on
the  southern  boundary.  St.  Francis
is  navigable  about  300  m. ;  White
R.  about  700,  and  receives  four
tributaries,  navigable  from  20  to
70  miles;  Arkansas,  about  1500,
with  not  less  than  nine  tributary
streams,  navigable  from  15  to  150
m.  The  Grand  and  Verdigris
Rivers^  which  are  about  as  large  as
the  Connecticut,  fiow  into  the
Arkansas  from  the  N.  in  less
than  half  a  mile  of  each  other.
About  thirty  miles  below,  on  the
same  side,  the  Illinois,  on  which  is
the  missionary  station,  Aoi^A^;  so
called  in  affectionate  remembrance
of  the  late  President  of  Vale  Col-
lege, who  was  a  distinguished  and
active  member  of  the  Board,  and
the  first  who  died  after  its  incor-
poration.

This  body  sent  hither,  in  1820,
the  Rev.  Messrs.  Alfred  Finney,
^Cephas  Wasbburn,  and  Asa  Hil)-
brook,  as  missionaries ;  Mr^.  James
Orr,  as  a  mechanic ;  and  Mr.  Jacob
Hitchcock,  and  Miss  Ellen  Stet-
son, as  teachers.  These  persons
have  laboured  under  numerous  dis-
couragements— from  sickness,  the
wars  between  the  Cherokees  and
the  Osages,  and  the  degraded  state
and  violent  prejudices  of  those
whose  good  they  «iee>L.  T^Vt
pnM|>ecis,  hov;e\er»  YxaNe  \)ec»Qi<(&ft

^1


ARR

encouraging.  Houses  have  been
erected  for  the  mission  family,  two
for  schools,  a  saw-mill  and  grist-
mill, together  with  other  buildings ;
and  an  extensive  plantation  has
l^en  cleared  and  fenced.  A  church
was  organized  April  13,  1822 ;  and,
on  the  first  day  of  the  same  year,  a
school  was  opened,  which,  in  the
May  following,  contained  60  pu-
pils. In  Octobeic  1823,  the  num-
ber of  Cherokee  children  in  the
family,  who  were  enjoying  the  pri-
vilege of  literary,  moral,  and  reli-
gious instruction,  was  60-^24  males
and  26  females,  who  were  making
very  encouraging  progress.  The
ifiissionaries  have  gained  the  con-
fidence of  the  Cherokees,  and  might
greatly  enlarge  their  school,  if
their  resources  would  permit.  A
majority  feel  that  this  institution  is
the  glory  of  their  tribe ;  and  so  far
as  this  feeling  obtains,  it  is  accom-
panied by  a  desire  to'  act  worthy  of
the  efforts  which  are  mode  to  en-
lighten and  reform  them.  The
missionaries  preach  on  the  Sabbath
to  a  small  congregation,  who  un-
derstand Engli^.  About  3  m.  be-
low this,  the  Canadian^  as  large  as
Grand  R.,  enters  from  the  S.

All  the  tributaries  of  the  Arkan-
sas, on  the  N.,  are  beautiful,  clear,
gravelly  bottomed,  streams  ;  while
all  on  the  S.  are  of  a  clayey  hot- '
tpm.  All  the  streams  are  lined  on
either  side  by  the  first  quality  of
bottom  land.  For  some  distance
the  soil  is  alluvial,  of  exhaustless
fertility,  and  well  adapted  to  the
gi{owth  of  Indian  corn,  cotton,  and
tobacco.  These  bottoms,  in  a  state
of  nature,  are  impenetrable  cane
brakes ;  the  cane  growing  from
1  to  2  inches  in  diameter,  and  from
15  to  25  feet  high.  Under  this,
in  the  eastern  part  of  the  terri-
tory, is  a  prodigious  g^wth  of
rushes,  which,  with  the  cane,  af-
ford ample  sustenance  for  immense
herds  of  cattle  in  the  winter ;  while
tbe  forests  on  the  npiand^  coveied


ARK

with  a  luxuriant  growth  of  gtafl^
and  the  immense  prairies,  yield  aa
exhaustless  supply  for  summer.  Thtf
face  of  the  country,  100  m.  from
the  Mississippi^  is  almost  uniform-
ly level.  To  the  W.of  this,  1ti0
country  rises,  and  is  beautifidly
variegated  with  hills  and  valleyBy
which  usually  afford  a  considerable
stream  of  water.  The  hills  are  not
formidable,  till  you  approach  th«
Shining  or  Rocky  Mountains.  The
indigenous  vegetables  are  nume-
rous, and  many  of  them  valuable  for
their  medical  properties.  Botanisfg
have  discovered  not  less  than  100
plants,  not  found  elsewhere  in  the
United  States,  and  not  less  than
50  nondescripts.

Salt  spring's  and  licks  are  very
numerous  and  valuable,  some  of
which  are  occupied  by  extensive
salt  works.  The  Indians  are  fre-
quently seen  with  cubic  bodies  of
salt,  from  6  to  12  inches,  which
they  say  they  broke  off  from  ft
mountain.

The  climate  is  mild.  AfMir
leaving  the  low  country  on  the  £.,
the  whole  tetritory  may  be  called
healthy.

The  White  poputaOim,  in  1820^
amounted  to  nearly  15,000.  In
1823,  it  was  estimated  at  about
20,000.  A  considerable '  part  of
this  population  are  French,  or,  as
they  are  called,  Creoles — being
generally  mixed  blood,  French  tjSk
Indian,  of  almost  every  tribe  in
North  America.  These,  generalfy,
are  a  miserable  race  of  beings.

The  greatest  part  of  the  popula-
tion are  emigrants  from  different
states  in  the  Union,  mostly  from
Tennessee  and  Kentucky.

There  are  very  few  schools  or
religious  institutions ;  and  the  state'
of  morals  is  deplorable,  with  a  few-
honourable  exceptions.  Here  is
a  wide  field  for  missionary  enter*
prize.  The  number  of  professed'
Christians  is  very  small.  In  tbig
territory  are  many  tribes  of  Indiansy


ARK

concernijig  tome^of  which  little  it

klKMTll.

Thm  Quampawt  live  on  the  banks
of  the  Ariuinsas,  between  the  Post
And  Littie  Rock,  estimated  not  to
exceed  500  souls.  They  are  said
to  have  originaUy  belonged  to  the
Oiages  of  Missouri.  Their  Ian-*
guage  is  radically  the  same.  They
are  Yeiy  frien(Uy-  to  the  Whites  in
their  neighbourhood;  manifest  a
dlqjKMition  to  receive  instruction  ;
and  are  veir  anxious  for  the  esta-
Uisbmentof  a  mission  among  them.
iBtemperance  and  ■  uncleanuess
nost  shocldngly  prevail;  and,  by
these,  vast  niultitiides  are  falling
sacrifices  to  death  every  year.
It  ia  vastly  fanportant  that  some
•missionary  society  should  imme-
iliately  embrace  them  within  the
ottjects  of  its  benevolent  efibrts,
as  the  only  means  of  arresting  their
rspid  progress  to  entire  extermi-
nation.

The  CAerokeeMy  the  next  tribe
on  the  river,  are  a  branch  of  the
tribe  of  the  same  name,  E.  of  the
Mississippi.  The  first  emigrants
were  a  few  malcontents,  who  left
their  tribe  soon  after  the  rev<riu-
tionary  war.  ^bout  30  years  ago,
th^  were  reinforced  by  a  company
of  about  26  men,  with  their  wives
and.  children,  who  fled  from  the
hand  of  justice.  From  that  time,
this  country  afibrded  a  refuge  to
Mich  as  were  exposed  to  the  penal
lavs  of  the  tribe>  and  to  such  as
were,  on.any  account,  discontented
with  their  situation.  In  this  way
the  number  became  so  great  as  to
attract  the  attention  of  govern-
ment ;  and,  in  1813,  an  agent  was
appointed  to  the  superintendence,  in
the  same  manner  as  in  the  old
natioii.  The  emigration,  in  1817,
which  excited  so  much  interest  in
the  Christian  community,  raised  the
number  here  to  the  present  estima-
tion of  5000.  The  corrupting  in-
fluence of  the  Whites,  with  other
eainesy  has  pioduced  a  most  dis-


ARK

tressing  state  of  moral  degradatioR
among  them.  The  young  and
middle  aged  are  almost  universally
destitute  of  any  religious  principle,
or  moral  restraint.  Among  the
oldest  are  remnants  of  their  old
system  of  religious  belief.  [See
Ckerokees.]

The  Osages,  the  next  tribe  up
the  river,  are  in  an  untutored,  sa-
vage state.  Their  mode  of  life  pre-
sents very  great  obstacles  to  the
success  of  missions,  on  the  pl8n
hitherto  pursued.

About  half  the  year  they  forsake
their  villages,  and  wander  in  pur-
suit of  game,  with  their  women ,
and  children.  Until  they  can  be
persuaded  to  abandon  this  course  of
life,  few  children  can  be  retained
in  tiie  schools  during  the  season  of
their  excursions.  When  stationary,
they  occupy  several  villages;  the
principal  of  which  contains  about
300  lodges,  or  huts,  and  about
3000  souls.  The  lodges,  irregularly
arranged,  cover  a  surface-  of  about
half  a  mile  square.  They  are  con-
structed of  posts,  mattings,  bark,
and  skins,  with  neither  floors  nor
chimneys.  The  fire  is  built  on  the
ground,  in  the  centre  of  the  lodge,
and  the  family  and  guests  sit  around
in  a  circle,  upon  skins  or  mats.  As
in  all  uncivilked  and  pagan  coun-
tries, the  women  perform  the  drud-
gery of  the  nation,  while  the  men
resort  to  the  chase  or  the  battle,  or^
consume  their  time  in  vain  amuse-
ments. Their  religion  difiers  from
all  the  tribes  to  the  east  of  them.
They  are  idolaters  and  pol>'theists^
having  four  primary  deities,  viz.
the  sun,  moon,  earth,  and  thunder.
In  addition  to  these,  they  have  a
great  multitude  of  inferior  gods.
They  are  apparently  very  conscien-
tious and  devout  in  their  religious
rites  and  worship, — always  rising,
while  it  is  yet  dark,  to  attend  to  their
morning  devotions.  All  the  pur-
suits of  war  and  peace,  hunting
end  stea&ingythey  mak«  snb>^ecVb  &

d2  %«


ARK

prajer  ind  tbankscivinff.  Tb«T
are  iriendlT  to  the  W^te»,  bat
h(Kt!le  to  o!her  IiMfiait*.  Amon?
thU  tribe  k  «  misnonarr  «tation.

■

rommenced  in  1S20.  bv  tbe  ('.
F.  M.  S..  called  tbe  I'Miin.

It  i«  situated  on  tbe  W.  side  of
tbe  Grand  R.,  about  25  m.  N.
of  it5  entrance  into  tbe  Arkansa^^
and  TOO  above  tbe  sanction  of  tbe
Afkan5a5  and  tbe  Mi^isifippi.  Tbe  ,
buildings  are  erected  on  a  inoderate  i
eminence,  about  a  mile  from  tbe
R.  Tbe  situation  is  pleasant,  tbe
soil  fertile,  and  tbe  air  and  climate
more  salubrious  tban  in  most  places
under  tbe  same  latitude.  Tbe
tract  of  land  ceded  to  tbe  mission
by  the  Indian  cbiefs,  embraces  a
prairie  of  about  4  square  m.  in  ex-
tent. Coal  and  Mlt  are  found  in
tbe  \icinitv.  W.  ion«r.  fn*  SC,  j
N.  lat.  35«  aC  "  j

Tbe  foUowinflf  pensons  left  tbe
citv  of  New  York  in  April,  1S20  :—
The  Rev.  W.  F.Vail,  bis  wife,  and  4
cbildren ;  Rev.  Epapbras  C bap-
man,  and  bis  wife ;  Dr.  Marcus  Pal-
mer ;  Abraham  Redfield;  W.  C.
Requa;  Alexander  Woodruff;
Stephen  Spanlding;  Eliza  Clearer;
Mary  Foster ;  Clarissa  Jobnstone  ;
Susan  Lines:  and  DoUv  £.  Hovt.

^  •  •

Tbe  two  latter  died  on  tbe  jour-
ney. Suitable  buildings  and  mills
have  been  erected,  a  small  school
maintained,  and  tbe  farm  is  be-
coming productive  in  cotton,  grain,
and  vegetables  for  tbe  support' of
the  family.  Different  members  of
the  mission  are  skilled  in  various
mechanic  arts.  In  1822,  tbe  pro-
perty belonginp:  to  this  establish-
ment was  estimated  at  about  24,000
dollars.  The  mission  already
exerts  a  favourable  influence  on
the  Osages,  many  of  whom  have
abandoned  the  chase,  and  cultivate
the  soil  Owing  to  their  roving
habits,  and  the  disturbed  state  of
the  tribe  since  the  mission  was
established,  the  progress  has  been
slow;  but  enough  has  been  done


ARO

toraiw  a  cheeiiiiy  hope  of  nKi'
mate  succeff.  ln~  the  latter  pert
of  1  ^24.  tbe  foUoving  penOBS  wen
at  this  station :— the  Rev.  W.  F;
Vail.  Dr.  Palmer,  Messnk  F.  Fnl^
ler.  Redfield.  Spaulding,  Wood-
ruff, and  Requa.  The  icbool  io-:
cluiJed21  Osage  children,  who  Iht
in  the  tamihr.

Hop^jield,  a  new  ittCtian,  dboot
4  m.  from  Union,  was  commenced
Dec.  1^23,  by  the  Rev.  E.  Chap-
man, and  Mr.  W.  C.  Reqna  ai  an
a^istant.  Here  are  11  Indian  fifr*
millet,  each  occupying  a  log  build-
ing, and  cultivating  a  small  ham.
AU  axe  attentive  to  leligioos  in*
struction,  and  are  acquiring  tiie
habits  and  customs  of  ciTilized  liie»

To  the  W.  of  these  are  nnme*
roiis  other  tribety  of  whom  retj
little  is  known,  except  by  the  re*
ports  of  explorers  and  hunters.  By
these  they  are  represented  ns  pa-
cific, and  desirous  of  the  protec*
tion  of  the  United  States,  and  of
being  embraced  in  the  eIRirti
making  for  Indian  improvement.
The}-  ought  to  excite  the  imme-
diate attention  of  the  Cfariitian
public,  before  they  become  conta*
minated  by  the  example  of  un-
principled white  men.  They
are  wandering  tribes,  and  mis-
sionaries should  go  prepared  to
follow  them,  till  they  are  per-
suaded to  settle  down  in  fixed  habi*
tations,  and  to  seek  the  comforts  of
civilization,  and  the  blessings  of
the  Gospel.

ARLAVERTTY,  a  tillage  in
Mallogum,  in  the  island  of  Ceyloni
in  which  the  American  mission-
aries have  estaUished  a  school.

AROO,  five  islands  in  the  In-
dian Ocean,  to  the  S.  and  W.  of
New  Guinea,  extending  from  6®  SO'
to  7^  O'  S.  lat.,  with  'narrow  chan-
nels between  them.  Popolation
between  19,000  and  20,000  aonli.

Tlie  inhabitants  being  yery  deslr^
ous  to  receive  Christian  instruction,
Mr«  Kam,  of  the  L,  S.,  sent  them

30


AM,  .

n  natlTe  teacher^  who  had  been  pre^
yhmsly  prepered  for  Ihe  employ-
iiient>  at  tbe  seminary  which  he
bad  erected  for  the  purpose,  in
Amboyna.

ARRACAN,  a  province  in  the
W.  part  of  thd  Burmau  empire,
8.E.  of  Bengal,  on  the  eastern
coast  of  the  sea  of  Bengal,  between
Rangoon  and  Chittagong.  Length
600  m.;  Inreadth  from  20  to  200.
Population  between  2  and  3  mil-
Uonsw  The  country  is  fertile,  and
the  mountains  are  covered  with
perpetual  verdure.

The  inhabitants  are  idolaters,
and  worship  images  made  of  clay.
Arracan  was  formerly  an  inde-
pendent kingdom,  but  surrendered
to  the  Burman  empire  in  1783 ;
since  which  time  it  has  been  sub-
ject to-  a  viceroy,  appointed  by  the
Burman  government.

Arraean,  the  principal  city,  is
situated  on  a  river  of  the  same
name,  in  £.  long.  03^  25',  N.  lat.
MP  4&,  It  is  said  to  be  15  m.
In  circumference,  and  to  contain
100,000  inhabitants^

Land  has  been  granted  to  the
Bapf,  S.  for  the  establishment  of  a
mission  at  Akyab,  an  island  of
this  province,  which  is  eligibly
dtuated  at  the  mouth  of  the  Arra-
can R.  The  whole  number  of  na-
tive members  of  the  church  in  full
communion,  according  to  the  last
report,  is  7 1 ;  but  of  these  not
i|uite  one-half  are  fixed  in  the
Christian  colony.  About  20  still
remain  at  the  old  stations,  and
14  are  in  the  town  of  Arracan.
There  are  also  about  30  members
at  a  place  called  Kaptai,  under  the
government  of  an  independent
chief,  who  being  exceedingly  ini-
■ilcai  to  the  Gospel,  has  for  several
jmn  effectually  prevented  all  in-
tercourse between  these  people
nd  the  brethren.  The  enmity  of
the  human  heart  has  displayed  itself
here  as  in  other  places ;  yet  Mr.
^■khasfoUBd  ataikneasof  in^tuiiy


ARA

and  an  earnest  attention,  which
are  exceedingly  encouraging.  Thtf
Arracanese  are  essentially  the
same  as  the  Burmans,  and  have  no
caste  ;  and,  compared  with  the
Hindoos,  have  but  a  limited  num*
ber  of  objects  of  idolatrous  worship*

Besides  the  native  Christians,  a
number  of  heathen  Arracanese  have
been  admitted  into  the  colony  as
residents.  They,  however,  com-
ply with  such  reguUtions  as  Mr.
Fink  sees  fit  to  appoint,  and  they
have  tbe  Gospel  regularly  preached
to  them,  and  their  children  will
receive  a  Christian  education  in
the  school.  Tuesdays  and  Satur-
days have  been  fixed  as  market  days )
the  shops  are  open  on  the  a&et
days  of  the  week,  with  the  excep*
tion  of  the  Sabbath,  when  there
is  a  cessation  of  all  public  busi*>
ness.

Meearung,  one  of  the  preachers,
is  stationed  in  the  colony,  and
both  conducts  public  worship  and
teaches  the  school,  which  is  held
in  the  chapel  erected  by  the  people
themselves.  The  other  preachers
are  disposable  for  the  general  dif*
fusion  of  the  Gospel ;  and  one  of
them,  by  rotation,  is  usually  in
the  town  of  Arracan.  As  the
country  is  much  intersected  by
rivers  and  creeks,  Mr.  Fink  has
purchased  and  fitted  up  a  small  boat
in  which  the  brethren 'can  convey
themselves  to  a  number  of  im-
portant places  at  considerable  dis-
tances from  their  home  ;  and  hi-
therto they  have  met  with  no  unkind
treatment  from  their  countrymen,
when  thus  engaged^  These  four
brethren  are  supported  by  the
contributions  of  two  associations  of
young  gentiemen  in  Glasgow,  who
unitedly  send  them  40/.  per  annum
for  that  purpose*

In  providing  copies  of  the  Scrip-
tures, or  rather  parts  of  them,  and
tracts,  the  missionaries  enjoyed  the
co-operation  of  some  of  their  Ame*
rican  brethreB)  coBuected  ^nVWiVea


ARR

Bunnan  mission,  particularly  from
tbe  Rev.  6.  H.  Hough.

There  is  also  a  town  of  Arracan,
called  Coa:*9  BazaoTf  containing  a
population  of  30,000,  where  the
llurman  language  is  spoken,  which
has  attracted  benevolent  regard.
.This  town  is  about  40  m.  within
the  British  territories,  which  are
separated  from  the  Burman  empire
by  the  Gnat  R.  It  is  well  calcu-
lated for  a  station,  both  for  preach-
ing and  the  extensive  distribution
of  tracts.  To  this  place,  there-
fore, the  Rev.  James  Colman,  from
the  Jmerioan  Baptist  Board  fw
Foreign  Migtians,  removed,  in
1821,  from  Chittagong,  and  com-
menced his  labours  with  favourable
prospects,  but  was  suddenly  re-
moved by  death  in  less  than  8
inoAthfi.  Occasionally,  efforts  have
been  made  in  this  important  spot,
and  several  persons  have  joined  the
church  at  Chittagong.

ARRQWACKS,  a   wandering
tribe  of  Indians,  scattered  over  a ,
great  extent  of  territory  in  Guiana,
South  America.    They  are  humane
and  friendly.

The  United  Brethren  sent  2
mijtsionaries  to  Berbice,  a  Dutch
settlement  near  Surinam,  in  1738,
who  laboured  among  the  Pagan
iobabitants  around  them  for  several
years,  but  with  little  success..

In  the  mean  time  they  became
acquainted  with  the  Arrowack  lan-
guage ;  and,  from  1748  to  1757,
they  baptized  about  400,  and  suc-
ceeded in  introducing  among  them
the  habits  of  civilized  life.  In
17£9,  a  church  was  erected  to  ac-
<;ommodate  the  increasing  congre-
gation of  Lewis  C.  Dehne,  at  Hope
or  Hoop;  and,  though  many  dis-
couragements still  attended  the
labours  of  the  brethren,  yet  they
were  permitted  to  reap  some  fruit.
In  1780,  the  number  of  baptized
persons  was  83 ;  in  1800  it  had  in-
t-reased  to  169.  Aft^rwiurds  they
■removed  to  the  R.  Neukeer.


AST

Another  statfMi  was  formed  at
an  early  period,  named  PUgerkut,
in  the  neighbourhood  of  whidi
most  of  the  baptized  pfirsons  lived*
Amidst  many  trials,  the  brethreo
persevered  at  this  place  till  1793,
when  the  negroes  rose  in  rebeliioa
against  their  masters,  murdered
many  of  the  white  people,  boQit
the  settlement  at  Pilgerhut,  aiod
laid  waste  almost  the  whole  conn- .
try.  By  this  fire  an  Arrowack
Grammar  and  Lexic^on,  and  .soaat
translated  portions  of  the  Scrip-
tures, prepared  by  one  of  the  mis-
sionaries, were  consumed.

A  third  station,  named  Skartm^
was  also  occupied  for  many  yean,
but  was  relinquished  from  the  oc-
currence of  uncontrollable  cirr
cumstances.  It  is  pleasing  to  add
a  quotation  from  a  letter  written
by  one  of  th^  missionaries  at  Surl-
nam>  dated  Feb.  12,  1823  :-—

''  Now  and  then  I  see  and  con?
verse  with  the^Arrowacks,  A  com-
pany of  these  people  were  here  not
long  ago,  some  of  whom  told  me
that  tiiey  could  not  forget  what
they  hod  formerly  beard  of  J^us
Christ  our  Saviour.''

ASBURV,  a  missionary  station  in
Georgia,  among  the  Creek  Indians^
recently  established  by  the  H.  &
Carolina  Conference*

The  missionaries,  Messrs.  JVmi
Capers,  Isaac  Stnith,  and  Andrew
Gainmily  have  encountered  much
opposition  from  the  Big  Warrior ;
but  the  difficulties  have  Qonsidera-
bly  subsided,  and  the  prospects  of
the  mission  are  brightening.  lu
1822,  a  hope  was  entertained  that
100  scholars  would  soon  be  ob-
tauied  in  the  school.

ASSOONDY,  a  village  near
Bellary,  Hindoostan,  where  a
flourisliing  school  was  established
in  1817,  by  the  missionaries  of  the
/r.  S,  at  that  station,  with  funds
obtained  by  contributions  from
Madras.

ASTRACHAN,    or   ASTRA-

32


AST


2  AS,  a  province  of  Asiatic  Rnssia,
in  the  government  of  Caucasia.  It
borders  on  the  Caspian  sea^  on  the
ride  of  which  are  long  marshes
tkat  produce  a  vast  quantity  of  salt.
Rain  seldom  falls  in  the  province^
biit  it  ift  crossed  by  the  Volga,
which  overflows  annually;  and
iriien  the  water  retires,  the  grass
grows  in  less  than  a  month.

Aairaehany  a  city,  capital  of  the
piovince,  is  a  place  of  very  great  and
extensive  trade,  surrounded  by  a
vail  3  m.  in  leng^.    It  contains

4  monasteries,  2d  Russian  churches,

5  Armenian,  1  Lutheran,  and  1
Roman  Catholic  monastery,  with  a
ehorch.  Population  70,000.  E.
long.  47®  50',  N.  lat.  4e»  22'.

■  The  .Rev.  Messrs.  fVm^  Glen,
Mn  DieA-son,  John  Mitchell,  and
Maefherton  Selbp,  from  the  Scotch
M.  S,,  commenced  their  labours
here  in  1814.  The  orig^al  design
of  this  mission  was  to  print  and
distribnte  tracts,  and  portions  of  the
Scriptores,  .in  various  languages.
Hi  rifuation  is  peculiarly  favoura-
ble for  this  purpose,  being  the  mart
for.  Persian  and  numerous  other
merchants,  who  assist  in  extensively
drcnlating  these  publications.
From  1815  to  1822,  the  missiona-
ries distributed  about  40,000  copies
of  tracts,  Testaments,  and  portions
of  the  Scriptures,  in  the  following
Uoigoages  and  dialects,  viz.  Hebrew,
Tartar,  Turlcish,  Persian,  Arme-
nian, Calmuc,  Jagatai  Tartar,
Orenberg  Tartar,  and  Turkish
rartar.  Thus,  truth  has  been  dis-
leminated,  and  the  fruit  begins  to
i|^ar.

Several  of  the  missionaries,
twving  acquired  a  knowledge  of
tfflbrent  languages,  commenced
itinerant  preaching  in  the  suburbs
ind  vicinity,  where  are  about
16,000  Tartar  Mahomedans,  many
of  whom  heard  with  attention,  and
winant  strong  hopes  of  the  ulti-
nate  prevalence  of  truth.  A  con-  .
lii^ittnble population  of  Jews,  on  the  I


ATU

W.  and  E.  of  the  Caspian,  has  also
excited  the  regard  of  the  missiona^
ries,  and  the  L,  J.  S.  has  favoured
their  designs  by  placing  a  quantity
of  suitable  boolcs  at  their  disposal*
The  Russian  B,  S,  has  also  afiforded
important  aid,  by  printing  tlie
Scriptures  in  the  different  Tartar
dialects.  In  1 8 15,  an  auxiliary^.  S,
was  formed  at  Astrachan,  which
has  been  efficient  in  disseminating
the  Scriptures  among  Persians  and
Tartars,  who  have  been  eager  to
receive  them.  A  seminary  has
been  erected  for  the  education  of
native  youths,  to  become  teachers
of  their  countrymen  ;  which  is  also
designed  to  embrace  the  children
of  ihe  missionaries,  and  to  qualify
them  to  talce  the  place  of  their
fathers  in  future  years.  Much  en-
couragement has  recently  been
affi)rded  by  the  conversion  of
a  Persian  Mahomedan  priest,  wlio  is
influential  and  zealous  in  making
Imown  the  way  of  salvation.

The  United  Brethren  have  made
attempts  here,  but  the  results  have
not  been  great.  A  few  years  since,
the  //.  5.  also  sent  a  missionary  hither
in  order  to  instruct  the  neigh-
bouring Calmucs ;  but  he  found  it
expedient  to  return  to  Sarepta.

ATCHAVELLY,  a  viUage  in
Ceylon,  between  Point  Pedro  and
Jaffhapatam.  In  1816,  the  fVes-
leyan  Missionaries  at  Point  Pedro,
with  permission  from  the  local
government.  Occupied  the  ancient
place  of  worlriiip,  and  established
schools.  Here  they  found  some
reliques  of  piety,  among  hosts  of
mosques,  pagodas,  and  images.

ATUI,  one  of  the  Harvey
Islands,  where  the  L,  M.  S,  has
two  native  teachers,  but  which  has
made,  of  these  islands,  the  least  .
progress.  The  king  and  a  few  of
his  people  attend  to  instruction,
and  l)ehave  kindly  to  their  teachers,
and  it  is  hoped  the  rest  will  be  led
to  imitate  their  example.  T\k«
chapel  here  is  a  goodbiix\i^iv^>  ^^"^^


AUS

pjBB   of  the  teachers  is  building
himself  a  commodious  Aoute»

AUSTRALASIA,  a  name  now
applied  to  the  circuit  that  includes
those  islands  lying  S.  of  the  con-
tinent of  Asia ;  as  Terra  Australis,
New  Guinea,  New  Britain,  New
Ireland,  New  Caledonia,  New
Zealand,  and  those  of  Solomon,
Aroo,  New  Hebrides,  «&c.  [See
Aroo,  New  South  Waies,  New  Zea-
Itmdy  and  Van  Dieman*a  Land,]


B.

BADDAGAMME,  a  vUlage  in
the  S.W.  part  of  Ceylon,  about  12
m.  from  Galie,  on  the  R.
Gtndrah,  one  of  the  largest  in  the
island.  Population,  in  1802,  1,644  ;
thai  houses  are  built  of  mud  and
sticks.  Villages  of  the  same  kind
are  extensive  in  the  neighbour-
hood. The  situation  is  healthy,
and  affords  the  missionaries  easy
access  to  the  natives.

Here  is  a  station  of  the  C,  M,  S.
The  Rev.  Mr.  Mayor  having  ob-
tained a  tract  of  land  from  the
government,  erected  a  comfortable
house  on  an  eminence,  which  com-
mands a  delightful  prospect  of  a
winding  river,  a  fertile  valley,  well-
cultivated  fields,  and  distant  moun-
tains. Here,  on  the  Lord's  day,
he  had  sometimes  an  opportunity
of  addressing  about  100  children,
besides  adults ;  and  the  latter  ap-
peared to  be  graduatiy  losing  their
confidence  in  their  heathen  super-
stitions. Some  of  tbem,  indeed,
ingenuously  confessed,  that  the
doctrines  of  Christianity  were  more
reasonable,  and  better  adapted  to
the  wants  of  man,  than  the  religion
of  Budhu.  The  priests,  however,
were  so  well  convinced  that  it  was
their  own  interest  to  uphold  the
ancient  S3rstem  of  delusion,  that
they  were  almost  invariably  found,
upon  all  occasions,  to  resist  every
Migument  adduced  ia.  support  of


BAH

the  truth.  This  branch  of  the
mission  was  afterwards  strength-
ened by  the  labours  of  Mr.  WaH,
who  removed  hither  from  Nelleity
as  the  climate  at  the  latter  place  wM
found  unsuitable  to  his  constitution
On  the  14th  of  Feliniaiy>
18S1,  the  foundation-stone  of  t
church  was  laid ;  the  stones  fiir
which  were  blasted  from  a  rock^
at  the  expense  of  TOO  povnds
of  powder.  A  great,  number  of
natives  were  present  at  the  servtee.
About  four  months  afterwaMh^
Mr.  Ward  was  requested  to  visit  a
young  woman  on  her  dying  bed,
who  said,  that  she  had  heard  of
Jesus  Christ,  at  Baddagamme,  and
that  she  trusted  in  him  alone  far
the  salvation  of  her  90ul.  The
missionaries  at  present  here,  are
the  Rev.  Robert  Mayor  and  the
Rev.  J.  C.  TrimneU,  with  Mn.
Mayor  and  Mrs.  Trimnril.  Tfa*
exercise  <^  their  ministry  seemi
attended  with  but  little  encourage*
ment.  Twelve  natives,  connected
with  this  station,  embraced  the  op-
portunity afibrded  them,  by  tM
bishop  holding  a  confirmation,  of
making  a  public  profession  of  their
faith  in  Christ,  and  of  their  deter-
mination to  devote  themselves  to
his  service.  The  schools,  which
are  6  in  number,  have  recentiy
suffered  from  the  prevalence  of
disease.  In  these  some  pleasfaig
instances  of  usefulness  have  oc-
curred. A  Sunday-school  has  been
established  for  adults,  and  the  con-
duct of  ail  the  boys  (16)  in  the
boarding-school  is  such  as  to  de-
serve commendation.

.BAHAMA,  OR  LUCAYO
ISLANDS,  in  the  Atlantic  Oceaa,
extending  along  the  coast  of  Flo-
rida to  Cuba,  on  two  sand  banks,
called  the  Little  and  Great  Bank  of
Bahama ;  the  former  lying  N.  «l
the  latter.

The  islands  are  near  500  in
number;  some  of  them  mere  rocks,
bat  12  axe  luoo  and  fertile.    Pew


(I


BAH

•f  them  are  inhabited,  and  they  are
nbject  to  the  Engliih.  The  ialandi
vUeh  give  name  to  the  whole  are
Bahama  and  Lucayo,  both  of  them
on  the  S.  part  of  the  Littte  Bank,
vhich.is  aeparated  from  the  Great
Bank  Vy  ^  passage  called  Provi-
tece  Channel.  One  of  these  islands
was  the  first  land  of  the  New
Vorld  descried  by  Columbus  in
ItfSy  on  which  he  landed,  and
oBed  it  San  Salvador.  The  Ba-
kmas  were  not  known  to  the
BngUsh  tiU  16d7,  when  Captain
Scjle  being  driven  anaong  them  in
Us  passage  to  Carolina,  gave  his
Mme  to  one  of  them ;  and,  after-
vaids,  being  a  second  time  driven
QpoQ  it,  called  it  Providence.

About  the  middle  of  the  year
1892,  a  small  society  of  the  Wet-
Ujfon  order  was  formed  in  the
Miittem  part  of  the  island  of  Pro-
tkUmce,  ttirough  the  instrumenta-
lity of  Mr.  Wm.  Turton,  a  native
of  the  West  Indies,  who  had  been
labouring  there  about  a  year  in  the
■idst  of  much  opposition,  and  had
•Kceeded  in  erecting  a  chapel.
A  refimnation  was,  however,  visible
|n  many.  But  while  the  work
thw  prospered  in  the  country,
Iwigfuor  and  indifference  prevailed
thioaghout  the  town.  The  esta-
blished ministers  opposed  the  mis-
llMiy  and  the  occasional  indisposi-
tioa  of  Mr.  Turton  tended  to  favour
their  proceedings ;  for,  though  he
was  m>t  compelled  to  omit  the
duties  of  his  station,  he  felt  him-
salf  inadequate  to  those  exertions
which  were  necessary  to  defeat  the
pnposes  of  his  foes. '  Still  he  per-
severed in  a  course  which  he  con-
iklered  blessed  of  God,  and  at  the
■lid  of  1804  Mr.  Rutledge  was  sent
•at  to  his  assistance.

The  brethren  now  laboured  to-
Mtfaer  in  harmony,  and  extended
weir  q)here  of  action  to  Eieuihera,
vUck  had  formerly  been  the  scene
If  evary  qiecies  of  wickedness ;  but
iivliicli  1ii0  kihabitmtM  gladly  le^  j


BAH

ceived  the  word,  and  ezhibitad  a
reformation  in  conduct.

In  1811,  Mr.  Dowton  arrived,
and,  with  his  colleagues,  ezteaded
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  to
Harbour  isiand,  ^baca  or  Green
Turtle  Qua^,  and  other  places  ;
and  so  considerably  did  the  caiose
increase  at  Providence  Island  ia  a
few  years,  that  in  tbe  town  of
Nassau  it  became  necessary  to
have  two  chapels  open  at  the  aame
time  ever>'  Sabbath,  which  were
attended  t^  multitudes.

In  1 81 6,  all  meetings  for  wofship,
earlier  than  sunrise  and  later  than
sunset,  were  prohibited,  under  a
severe  penalty,  by  an  edict  of  tbe
legislature.  This  measure  was
deeply  afflictive  to  the  poor  slaves,
who  were  thus  deprived  of  their  re*
ligious  privileges  during  the  week.
**  One  black  man,''  sajrs  Mr.  Jlut-
ledge,  *<  of  distinguished  piety,  said,
with  flowing  tears,  '  They  might
as  well  take  away  my  life,  as  de-
prive me  of  our  meetings.'  And
it  was  deeply  affecting  to  see
his  venerable  sable  face,  skirted
with  grey  locks,  turned  towavds
heaven,  while  in  the  simplicity
of  his  heart,  he  exclaimed,  '  Lord
God !  how*  is  it,  that  men  eaa  be
suffered  to  dance  together,  to  ph^
at  cards  together,  and  to  g^t  drank
together,  but  thy  peaceable  people
cannot  get  leave  to  wondiip  thee
together  ?' "

Formerly  the  negroes  had  been
in  the  habit  of  rising  an  hour  be-
fore day,  every  Sabbath  morning,
that  they  might  spend  that  tiiM
together  in  their  chapel  in  jpnyetj;
but,  by  the  new  act,  they  were  de-
prived of  this  privilege.

After  the  restrictions  had  re*
mained  in  force  about  four  3^ean,
they  were  happily  removed;  and
one  of  tbe  chapels  in  Nassau  being
opened  for  divine  worship  by  candle-
light, the  congregations  on  tbe
week  eveningKWAie  ioou^ei^  c^i^
siderable*


BAH

In  a  leUer,  dated  Nov.  4th»  1824,
Mr.  Turtle  gives  an  affecting  ac-
count of  a  hurricane  which  had
recently  occurred,  and  which  had
brought  on  many  heavy  calamities.
At  Tarpum  Bay,  the  chapel  and
dwelling-house  were  dashed  to
pieces ;  but  though,  in  other  cases,
the  mission  buildings  were  con-
siderably shattered,  they  were  after-
wards repaired.  ''  With  regard  to
the  horror  of  the  scene,''  says  Mr.
T.,  "  I  certainly  never  beheld  any
thing  like  it  before — houses  falling
— mins  flying  about  in  all  direc-
tions— husbands  dragging  their
wives  from  one  house  to  another
for  shelter,  and  mothers  lamenting
for  their  children,  supposed  to  be
dashed  in  pieces!''  The  Report
of  182^  communicates  the  follow-
ing intelligence : —

NetD  Providence  Circuit. — We
have  two  schools,  one  at  the  £.
and  the  other  at  the  W.  end  of  the
town ;  the  attention  of  both  teachers
and  children,  with  visible  improve-
ment as  the  consequence,  has  been
pleasingly  increased  in  the  past
year.  West  school : — boys,  85  ;
girls,  110;  total  175.  East  school:
—boys,  82;  girls,  101;  totall83.

EUtuthera  Circuit — Rocksound,
— ^This  school  has  recently  im-
proved, though  rather  fluctuating.
Through  the  course  of  the  year
about  20  adult  blacks  have  attended
cm  the  Sabbath  for  instruction,  as
also  on  some  of  the  week  evenings ;
but  since  the  late  gale,  they  have
not  been  so  regular.  Number : —
White  boys,  30  ;  White  girls,  35  ;
Blacks,  12.

J'arpum  Bay, — Attendance  ir-
regular, since  the  destruction  of  the
clmpel.

Savannah  Sound.-r-The  most
prosperous  school  on  the  circuit.
Number: — Boys,  16;  girls,  22;
men,  16  ;  women  14.

Palmetto  Point* — This  school
is  doing  well.  Adults,  8 ;  girls,  14 ;
bqysj  22.


BAH

Harbour  hbrnd.  This  1011001  tai
recently  improved.    Numbery  80.

Covt. — The  school  here  hatban
much  neglected.    Children^  30.

jB/v^.— Number  about  86.

CWren/.— Number  80.      .

Turks  Island  Circuit  school  Is
conducted  with  good  order.  Nun*
her,  80.

.From  the  last  accounts,  it  ap-
pears that  the  state  of  the  ini«i«i
at  New  Providence  is  not  vny
gratifying.  A  nominal  reductlDn
had  been  marked  in  the  society,  of
at  least  100,  from  remo^-als  and
other  circumstances ;  but  7S  mem-
bers were  added,  of  which  neaily
the  half  were  whites.  The  schools
here  were  in  a  fluctuating  statQ.
Good,  however,  had  been  done ;  and
by  improving  the  place  of  the
schools,  more  was  anticipated.

.fi^Mera.— The  work  of  God
throughout  this  circuit  is  not  pros-
perous, which  is  principally  owing
to  an  illegal  importation  of  article
brought  by  the  Americans,  who
take  the  hats,  dec.  of  this  island  in
exchange  for  the  produce  they
bring  hither.  The  missionaries
will  not  countenance  smuggling,
and  their  congpregations  are  wsoSx
in  consequence.  The  schools,  on
this  account,suffer  much  from  the
want  of  efficient  teachers  and
proper  books ;  the  attendance  gpiven
both  by  teachers  and  scholars  is
very  irregular,  which  is  more  espe-
cially the  case  at  Book  Sound  and
Tarpum  Bay,  At  Savannah  Sound
and  Palmetto  Point  |he  attend-
ance is  more  punctual  and  regular.
Harbour  Island  and  Abacun*-
The  members  of  this  society  have,
in  general,  been  very  teachable.
Schools: — Station  Island. — ^This
school  is  a  little  more  orderly  than  in
the  preceding  year.  Cove  Harbour.
— Because  of  the  shattered  state  of
the  chapel,  occasioned  by  the  late
hurricane,  this  school  had  nearly
fallen  through  in  the  beginning  oif
the  year  \  but  since  the  chapel  has


r


BAL

-been  roofed,  it  has  been  revived.
JHh|^ — Several  children  have  made
conriderable  progress.  Cwrrent
and  SpanM  fFetU  schools  have
been  given  up ;  the  children  hav-
ing no  place  to  meet  in  dnce  the
bunicane.

BALASORE,  a  town  of  Hin-
doostan,  in  Orissa,  and  a  place  of
considerable  trade.  Tbe  town,
with  this  part  of  the  district  of
Ifohurbunge,  was  ceded  by  the
Mahrattas  to  the  British,  in  1803.
It  is  situated  on  the  Gongahar,
Sn.  from  its  mouth,  in  the  bay  of
Bengal,  and  120  m.  S.  W.  of  Cal-
cutta. Long.  80^  6&  £.,  iat.  2P
18' N.  This  place  derives  pecu-
liar interest  from  its  proximity  to
the  temple  of  Juggernaut,  to  which
many  thousand  devotees  annually
resort.

The  idol  itself  is  a  large  block
ef  wood,  having  a  frightful  visage
painted  black,  with  a  very  wide
■RMith,  of  a  bloody  colour.  His
juVDs  are  of  gold,  and  he  is  dressed
in  gorgeoos  apparel.  A  numerous
retinue  of  priests  and  other  servants
are  always  in  attendance  upon  his
tenple,  to  receive  the  offerings
Bade  to  the  idol,  and  superintend
the  performance  of  his  worship.

Multitudes  of  persons  assemble
from  all  parts  of  India  to  pay  ho-
noar  to  this  odious  deity.  Of  their
number  no  accurate  calculation
can  be  made.  The  natites  them-
selves, when  talking  on  this  sub-
ject, usually  say  that  a  lack  of
people  (100,000)  would  not  be
missed.  And  so  mad  are  they  upon
their  idols,  that  thousands  of  lives
are  annually  lost,  by  the  fatigues
and  privations  to  which  they  are
exposed  in  the  long  journeys  un-
dertaken for  this  purpose.  Several
yean  ag^.  Dr.  Carey  computed  the
number  sacrificed  in  this  way  alone,
•t  (mt  hundred  and  tvoentjf  thou-
umdl

Bat  the  worriiip  of  Juggernaut
ii,  Id  a  ioore  dire^  aad  erideot


BAL

manner,  a  systiem  of  cruelty  and
blood.  Dr.  Buchanan  thus  de-
scribes the  dreadful  scene : — "  After
the  tower  had  proceeded  some  way,
a  pilgrim  announced  that  he  was
ready  to  offer  himself  a  sacrifice  to
the  idol.  He  laid  himself  down  in
the  road,  before  the  tower,  as  it
was  moving  along,  lying  on  his
face,  with  his  arms  stretched  for-
wards. The  multitude  passed  round
him,  leaving  the  space  clear,  and
he  was  cnuhed  to  death  by  the
wheels  of  the  tower.  A  shout  of
joy  was  raised  to  the  god.  He  is
said  to  gmilef  when  the  libation  of
blood  is  made.  The  people  throw
cowries,  or  small  money,  on  the
body  of  the  victim,  in  approbation
of  the  deed.  He  was  left  to  view
a  considerable  time  ;  and  was  then
carried  to  a  place  a  little  way  out
of  the  town,  called  by  tbe  English
Golgotha,  where  the  dead  bodies
are  usually  cast  forth,  and  where
dogs  and  vultures  are  ever  seen.
There  I  have  just  been  viewing
his  remains."

He  then  says — ''I  beheld  another
distressing  scene  at  the  Place  of
Sculls — a  poor  woman  lying  dead,
or  nearly  dead ;  arid  her  two  chil-
dren by  her,  looking  at  the  dogs
and  vultures  which  wei^  near.  The
people  passed  by  without  noticing
the  children.  I  asked' them  where
was  their  home.  They  said, '  they
had  no  home,  but  where  their
mother  was.'  Oh,  there  is  no  pity
at  Juggernaut ;  no  mercy,  no  ten-
derness of  heart,  in  Moloch's  king-
dom !"

Mr.  John  Peter,  of  the  B,  JRf.  S.,
a  zealous  and  eloquent  Bengalee
preacher,  formerly  a  member  of  the
Armenian  church,  arrived  at  Bala-
sore  in  1810 ;  he  met  with  a  very
friendly  reception  from  the  Euro-
pean inhabitants,  and,  in  a  short
time,  baptized  a  number  of  English
soldiers.  His  labours,  together
with  those  o{KTisinoI>Qfis,«Lii«.\.V^
J  a^istant,  were  successlxiVVy  «^\Atv^«


BAL

ed  to  various  villages,  from  Bala-
sore  to  Cuttack,  a  dSrtance  of  about
100  m.

£arly  in  February,18]2,  Mr.Peter
had  an  opportunity  of  introducinpf
the  New  Testament^  in  the  Ori^
language,  into  the  temple  of  Jug-
geraaiU.  He  accordingly  distri-
buted several  copies  among  the
principal  persons  belonging  to  that
place,  and  gave  one  of  them  into
the  hands  of  one  of  the  purichas,
or  principal  ministers  of  the  idol ;
accompanying  his  gift  with  an  ar-
dent prayer,  that  the  intense  dark-
ness of  superstition  might  be  spee-
dily dispersed  by  the  glorious  light
of  Divine  revelation.  In  the  autumn
of  the  same  year,  he,  and  his  friend,.
Kristno  Dass,  went  to  a  place  called
Poorooha-pota.  ''  It  being  the  last
day  of  the  festival  of  Juggernaut,^
says  Mr.  Peter,  '*  more  than  a
thousand  persons  were  assembled,
and  three  cars  of  the  god  were
dragged  along.  In  the  midst  of
the  crowd  T  stood  upon  a  chair,  and
preached  the  everlasting  Gospel.
The  people,  almost  to  a  man,  left
the  cars,  and,  surrounding  me,
heard  the  word  with  attention.
We  sang  three  h^mns ;  preached
and  prayed  twice  ;  and  distributed
15  Orissa  New  Testaments  and
Psalters,  besides  many  tracts.  One
Oriya  was  idsulted  by  his  country-
men for  accepting  a  Testament:
their  derision,  however,  made  no
impression  on  him ;  he  received
the  book,  and  went  his  way.  On
this  occasion  several  military  of-
ficers, vrith  their  ladies,  were  pre-
sent upon  elephants.''

In  the  year  1813,  Kristno  Dass
was  removed  by  death.

In  January,  1814,  great  astonish-
ment was  excited  in  Balasore,  by
the  conversion  of  a*  Brahmin  of
high  Tank,  named  Jugunat'ha
Mookhoojya.  This  man,  who  was  of
a  rich  family,  and  well  versed  both
in  the  Orissa  and  Bengalee  lan-
guageg,  was  so    thoroughly  con«


BAL

vinced  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospd,
that  be  renounced  his  caste — throw
away  his  poita,  or  sacred  thread —
and  ate  publicly  with  Mr.  Peter;  to
whom  he  expressed  an  earnest  desire
for  baptism.  One  evening,  whilst
the;  missionar}'  was  reading  and
explaining  to  him  part  of  the  Ben-
galee Testament,  he  expressed  his
joy  that  Christ  was  able  to  dlt*'
possess  Satan  even  of  bis  stroi^
holds,  and  observed :  <'  The  debtas
are  evil  spirits,  and  the  followeiB  of
Jesus  have  power  from  him  to
overcome  the  devil  and  all  his
temptations.  I  am  growing  fear-
less of  the  power  oi- debtas,  and  all
persecutors.  J  know  t-hat  God
alone  has  the  power  to  kill,  and  to
give  life ;  and  that  without  his  per-
mission neither  good  nor  evil  can
befall:  me.  If  he  be  my  Redeemer,
therefore,  I  will  not  fear  what  man
can  do.  Should  the  people  of  my
caste  kill  me,  1  will  not  fear ;  since
I  hope  that  heaven  is  secured  to
me  by  Jesus,  the  Son  of  Godw
From  this  time  may  I  appear  be-
fore all  men  a  decided  follower  of
Christ !  I  hope  the  Lord  wiQ  re-
ceive me,  and  keep  me  for  ever,  as
his  own  child :  for  though  I  am  the
greatest  of  sinners,  I  bless  the
Almighty,  and  will  thank  him  for
ever,  that  he  has  brought  me  out
of  darkness  into  his  marvellous
light!'*

The  statement  he  afterwards
made  being  perfectly  satisfactory,
he  was  baptized  in  March.  After
the  service,  an  Oriya,  named  Klioe-
alee,  told  his  countrymen,  both
near  the  tank  where  the  baptismal
rite  was  administered,  and  on  his
way  home,  that  their  shasters  were
all  false ;  but  that  the  shaster  of
Jesus  was  certainly  tnie.

In  1816,  Mr.  Peter  wrote:—
*\  Since  my  arrival  at  Balasore,  34
persons,  natives  and  Europeans,
have  been  baptized ;  some  of  whom
have  been  token  to  heaven,  and
othen    aie    t«illd&xi%   «1  ^vaxloiip


BAM

pieces. '^  At  the  commencement
of  1817,  however,  the  province  of
Orissa  was  thrown  into  a  state  of
great  alarm  by  the  approach  of  the
nndarees ;  which,  together  with  a
veiy  indiiierent  state  of  health,
compelled  Mr.  Peter  to  remove  to
Calcutta;  since  which  time  the
nission  has  been  suspended..

BAMBEY,  a  setUement  on  the
R.  Sarameca,  in  the  centre  of  se-
fuil  villages  of  free  negroes  in
Sorinam,  South  America ;  who  fled
tGi'  this  retreat  from  the  excessive
Craelly  of  their  masters.  As  might
be  expected,  they  are  extremely
ignorant  and  superstitious;  and
werish  the  most  profound  reve-
KRce  for  their  idoU,  which  chiefly
OKisist  of  wooden  images,  large
frees,  heaps  of  sand,  stones,  cro-
codiles, dec,  ^

Mr.  Leufie  C,  Delme,  one  of  the
Dmted  Brethren,  accompanied  by
twQ  others,  came  here  in  1765,  in
eonsequence  of  an  application  from
tbe  government  of  Surinam,  who
hoped  to  put  a  period  to  the  cruel-
ties and  depredations  of  these  ne-
ttles, by  the  introduction  of  the
Goqiel.  At  first  the  prospects  of
the  mission  were  encouraging ;  but
inch  were  the  prejudices  and  blind-
oesB  of  the  negroes,  that  the  mis-
sionaries found  it  unavailing  to  at-
tempt more  than  the  instruction  of
their  chilSren.  From  ihe  com-
mencement of  the  mission  to
1707,  a  (period  of  32  years,  only
49  were  baptized ;  and  during  the
«me  time,  19  missionaries  out  of
18,  who  entered  this  unpromising
ield  of  labour,  followed  each  other
Id  the  grave  in  quick  succession
hi  this  unhealthy  clime.

In  1810,  a  refractory  spirit  began
to  appear  among  many  of  the  ne-
l^roes,  who  were  alike  excited
against  the  brethren  and  the  Colo-
nkl  government;  and  about  three
years  afterwards,  the  mission  was
relinquished,  as  its  general  aspect
became  more  and  more  discouiag-  \


BAN

ing,  while  its  expense  was  exceed-
ingly burdeujiome.

BANANAS,  some  islands  which
lie  off  the  coast  of  West  Africa,
opened  a  new  sphere  of  usefulness
to  tiie  C.  AT.  S,  In  1883,  <'  The
superintendent,  Mr.  F.  Campbell,
having  erected  a  house  for  holding
Divine  worship,"  says  the  Rev.
Mr.  Beckley,  **  entreated  .me,  on
behalf  of  the  people,  to  visit  the
Bananas,  for  the  purpose  of  ex-
horting them  once  or  twice  a-
week.'^  Soon  after,  he  speaks  of
the  prospects  there  being  most  en-
couraging. "  1  have  been  enabled,"
he  adds,  '<  to  keep  service,  with  few
exceptions,  once  a  week  during
the  past  quarter;  when  between
60  and  70  assembled,  who,  from
outward  appearance,  seem  desirous
of  obtaining  inward  and  spiritual
grace."  These  hopes,  however,,
were  not  realized  to  the  full  ex-
tent; but  circumstances  of  recent
occurrence  promise  more  success.
The  Rev.  Mr.  Gerber  visits  this
station  as  often  as  his  other  duties
permit.  At  Midsummer,  1826,
there  were  72  boys  in  a  school
which  had  been  established ;  but,
being  almost  wholly  kept  at  work,
they  made  little  improvement.
31  school-girls  were  removed  to
York,  another  station.

BANDA,  or  LANTOR,  chief
of  a  gnroup  of  10  small  islands,  be-
longing to  the  Dutch,  called  Banda,
or  Spice  Islands,  in  the  £asterii
Pacific  Ocean,  125  m.  S.E.  of
Amboyna.  The  whole  contain
about  6000  inhabitants.  Cloves,
nutmegs,  and  mace,  are  the  princi-
pal productions.

Every  European  planter  employs
from  60  to  100  slaves.  There  are
a  few  nominal  Christians  here,
who  are  anxious  to  receive  the
Scriptures,  and  to  enjoy  Christian
privileges.  Banda  is  in  E.  long,
120^  58',  S.  lat.  4°  36'.

Mr,    Kam,   of    Atol\»ytv«i,  Ywe.
visited  this  island,  wid  Yjetftti  Vcv-


BAN

stnimeiital  of  much  good.  The
Netherlands  M.  S,  bos  also  ap-
pointed three  missionaries  to  labour
in  this  long  neglected  field.

BANGALORE,  a  town  and  mili-
tary station  in  Mysore,  Hindoostan,
in  the  centre  of  the  Peninsula,  74
m.  N.E.  of  Seringapatam,  and  215
W.  of  Madras;  a  place  of  great
political  importance,  strongly  for-
tified, and  from  situation  the  bul-
wark of  the  Mysore  country  to-
wards Arcot.  Silk  and  woollen
cloths  are  the  principal  manufac-
tures, and  all  sorts  of  English
vegetables  grow  plentifuUy.  It  is
healthy,  being  elerated  above  the
level  of  the  sea  at  Madras,  2(K)0
feet.  In  the  Pettah,  or  Natbe
Town,  are  about  S0,000  people,
who  speak  the  Canarese  language.
The  cantonments  of  tbe  troops,
about  a  mile  distant,  forming  a
neat  village,  with  the  bazaars  and
huts  built  by  the  followers  of  tbe
army,  make  a  town  as  large  and
populous  as  the  Pettah.  These,
with  the  exception  of  about  2000
English  troops,  speak  the  Tamul.
The  native  inhabitants  are  mostly
Hindoos;  but  loosely  attached  to
their  religion.

The  importance  of  the  station  is
increased,  by  its  vicinit}'  to  Serin-
gapatamj  and  its  connexion  with
many  other  populous  towns ;  and
by  its  being  tbe  central  mtul  for
merchandize  in  this  part  of  India.
E.  long.  71®,  N.  lat.  IS®.

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Andre%o
Forbes  and  Stephen  Laidlery  from
the  L,  M.  S.y  commenced  their
labours  here  in  1820.  The  mis-
sionaries were  for  some  time  en-
gaged in  the  study  of  the  language,
and  other  preparatory  measures.
A  chapel  was  built,  principally  by
the  zeal  and  liberality  of  Major
Mackworth,  who  subscribed  100
pagodas  to  tbe  building,  procured
a  grant  of  timber  for  the  seats,
drew  the  plan  of  the  chapel,  and
also   su|)erintended    its   erection.


BAN

The  commanding  officer  bad  pre-
viously made  a  grant  of  land.

Mr.  Laidler  brought  with  him
from  Madras,  in  the  capacity
of  servant,  a  native  who  bad .
received  Christian  instruction
under  the  Danish  missionaries
at  Tranquebar,  who  understand!
the  Canara  as  well  as  -  the  Ta-
mul. Twice  a  week  he  visited
a  neighbouring  village,  to  read
the  Scriptures,  and  to  give  an  ex*
hortation.  When,  on  his  first
embracing  Christianity,  be'  wfM
baptized  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Spring,
he  received  the  name  of  Samuel;
and,  on  account  of  his  piety,  his
disinterestedness,  the  mildness  of
his  disposition,  and  his  being  an  at-
tentive observer  of  the  providence
of  God,  Mr.  Laidler  subsequently
added^hat  of  Flavel.  Some  trans-'
latiotts  and  schools  were  com-
menced. Congregationt'for  Eng-
lish worship  on  the  Sabbaitb  even-
ings nearly  filled  tbe  chapel.  A
Christian  church  was  formed  In
April  1821,  when  31  member^
chiefly  soldiers,  were  admitted  to'
communion,  some  of  whom  had
previously  renounced  popery ;  and
a  small  society  was  instituted
among  the  soldiers,  for  the  joint
support  of  the  Missionary ,  JSible,
and  JVact  Societies.  In  the  course
of  the  next  year,  a  friend  of  the
mission  opened  a  house  in  the
bazaar,  both  as  a  chapel  and  a  depo-
sitoiy  for  the  sale  of  tbe  Scriptures,
religious  books,  tracts,  ^c.  in  the
vernacular  languages.  Here  the
natives  call,  read,  inquire,  and*
converse,  on  the  subjects  of  the
books  on  sale ;  from  which  much
good  is  anticipated.  In  1828,
the  missionaries  were  joined  by
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Chambers;  and,
in  addition  to  pursuing  the  works
already  commenced,  a  semiiiaiy
was  opened  for  preparing  native
youths,  of  pious  character  and  pro-
mising talents,  for  preaching  the
Grospel  to  their  countrymen.    Six


BAN

students  were  at  that  time  going
tbiougii  a  coune  of  theolog^ical
stadyn  under  the  direction  of  Mr.'
Laiiller.  They  were  named  Isaac,
Jodiua,  Peter,  Shadrach,  Jacob,
and  Moses.  Isaac  and  Joshua  had
been  for  some  considerable '  time
engaged  in  addressing  their  coun-
ti]men.  Peter  read  English  well,
■nd  VBS  learning  Greek  and  Latin.
Shadnch  iuul  nisule  good  proficiency
ia  Tamul.  Jacob  and  Moses,  the
junior  pupils,  had  made,  conipara-
tlfelj)  little  progress.

On  the  arth  of  June,  1824,  Mr.
nnd  Mn.  Campbell  joined  those
who  had  been  thus  successfully
labouring.  Of  the  first  native
serfice  at  which  he  was  present,
Mr.  C.  g^?es  the  following  account :
—^*  I  went  to  see  the  native  service
conducted  by  Samuel  Flavel.  It  is
np  smell  matter  to  hear  a  converted
lietthen  address  his  countrymen
with  so  much  fluency  and  eamest-
neas  as  was  then  done.  It  is  a
great  matter  to  see  the  heathen
listening  with  attention  to  the
word  of  life,  and  to  witness  two
from  among  them  receiving  the
Qidinance  of  baptism,  as  followers
of  Christ,  as  was  then  dona.  But
it  ii  a  greater  matter  still,  to  sit
down  to  the  table  of  the  Lord,
and  commemorate  his  death  with
twenty  who  were  once  idolateni,
now  no  longer  heirs  of  wrath,  but
diildren  of  the  living  God,  and  see
them  give  evidence  of  tlieir  con-
venion  to  Christ,  as  I  then  did.
Long  shall  I  remember  the  feelings
I  then  experienced,  and  wish  that
thoae  who  pray  for  the  cause,  and
wpport  its  interests  at  home,  conid
witness  such  a  scene.  Nor  does
Samuel  labour  aloue ;  two  other
youths,  endued,  I  trust,  with  fer-
Tent  piety,  labour  assiduouiily,  as
far  as  their  ability  extends;  and
siKwld  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  give
nece«  to  our  plans,  there  will,
I  hope,  soon  go  forth  a  host  of
wanrjorw  to  Sght  ibe  battles  of  the


BAN

j  Lord,  and  to  warn  tlieir  countiy-
'  men  of  the  danger  and  destruction
to  which  they  are  exposed.

Mr.  Chambers,  unable  to  bear
the  climate,  even  at  this  comi>ara«
tively  salubrious  station,  was  re-
commended to  return  to  Europe.  -
He,  however,  died  at  sea,  on  the
7th  of  Januaiy,  1826,  the  day  after
his  embarkation ;  but  Mn.  C.  and
her  two  children  arrived  safely  in
this  country.  From  the  last  re-
port the  following  i)articulars  are
taken : —

Native  Seminary. — The  number
of  students  in  this  institution  is
13  some  of  whom  occasionally
engage  in  preaching  the  Gospel
to  their  countrymen.

The  progpress  made  by  the  stu-
dents in  the  native  languages,  viz.
Sanscrit,  Tamil,  Canarese,  Te-
locMTOo,  and  Hiudoostanee,  is  very
satisfactory.  They  have  also  made
considerable  proficiency  in  Eng-
lish. Their  answers  to  questioas
in  theology,  at  a  late  examination,
evince  their  acquaintance  with  the
Scriptures,  and  their  aptitude  in
referring  to  proofs.  Generally
speaking,  there  is  apparently  among,
them  a  steady  advance  in  know-
ledge, and  a  consistent  Christiar^
deportment.  Of  the  students  in
tlie  Canarese  department,  3  are.
under  the  tuition  of  Mr.  C&mpbellw
Theamount  of  subscriptions  inlndia,
towards  the  enlargement  of  thifi
institution,  is  4500  rupees,  of
which  upwards  of  2000  rupees
were  subscribed  by  respectable  in-
dividuals at  Bombay,  on  the  appli-
cation of  Mr.  Massie,  when  on  his
visit  to  that  Presidency.  The
Committee  of  the  Madras  B.  if.
had  presented  to  the  missionaries^
here  100  volumes,  being  separate
portions  of  the  Old  and  New  Tes-
taments, in  Tamil,  Canarese,  Te-
loogoo,  Illndoostanee,  and  Portu-
guese. The  native  students,  w\tl\
avidity,  purchased,  at  a  leOivice^
price,  the  copies  in  Tam\\,  lot  Wck

k2  W


BAN

use  of  the  memben  of  their  re-'
spective  families.  On 'this  occa-
sion, his  excellency,  the  late  Go-
vernor Elphinstone,  made  a  hand-
some donation'  to  the  object.

Saiwe  ScAoois, — Of  these  schools
there  are  three,  two  for  boys,  and
one  for  g^rls.  One  of  the  boys'
schools  is  under  the  superinten-
dence of  Mr.  Laidler.  The
scholars,  in  number  upwards  of  20,
aie  instructed  in  the  several  lan-
IB^uages  taught  in  the  seminary,  the
Sanscrit  excepted.

In  the  other  boys'  school,  in
which  Canarese  is  chiefly  taught,
are  10  scholars.  This  school  is
superintended  by  Mr.  Campbell,
who  speaks  of  their  talents,  applica-
tion, and  progress,  in  very  favour-
able terms.  Moral  and  religious
instruction  is  constantly  imparted ;
and  four  of  the  boys  appear  to  have
received  the  truth  in  t/ie  love  of  it.
While  they  fearlessly  protest  against
idolatry,  they  evince  much  of  the
meelc  spirit  of  Christianity.

The  native  girls'  school,  under
the  superintendence  of  Mrs.  Laid-
ler, succeeds  as  well  as  could  rea-
sonably have  been  expected.

Preaching  in  the  Native  Lan-
fuage, — The  native  services  at  the
Mission  Chapel,  and  in  the  Fort,
are  continued  as  usual,  and  are  both
well  attended.    ■

Mr.  Campbell's  Canarese  con-
gregation has  had  many  difficulties
to  contend  with,  and  is  somewhat
reduced  in  number ;  bjit  some  of  its
members  afibrd  pleasing  evidence  of
attention,  seriousness,  and  thirst  for
divine  knowledge.  Generally  speak-
ing, the  females  manifest  indilfe-
renee  to  religion.  The  native
teacher,  David,  assists  Mr.  Camp-
bell in  his  Canarese  services.

About  50  poor  natives,  who' as-
semble from  time  to  time  for  the
purpose  of  receiving  religious  in-
struction, are  addressed,  on  those
occasions,  by  one  or  other  of  the
Mtadenis,


BAN

The  number  of  adults  baptize^
from  the  Ist  of  January  to  Augml^'
1826,  was  17,  viz.  3  heathens,  tni'
14  Romiin  Catholics.  The  number
of  Hindoos  received  into  choitll-
fellowship,  during  the  same  period^
was  13.  The  total  number  ad-
mitted to^  communion,  since  the
formation  of  the  church  in  18i^
is  72.  The  number  of  commu-
nicants, in  Augusrt  last,  was  41;

Itinerancies,  fye, — The  nathe
teachers  continue  to  itinerate  wlthfai
a  circuit  of  between  30  and  40
miles.  While  on  these  tours,  they
enter,  as  opportunities  occur,  into
religious  conversation  with  the
natives,  who,  in  general,  listen  with
attention.  During  one  of  them,
performed  in  October,  1826,  they
visite^  36  villages,  and  convemd
with  nearly  1200  people,  of  whom
some  asked  the  teachers  many
questions — others  entered  into  dis-
putations with  them — some  said,
"  Well,  if  we  believe  the  thin^
yo\k  declare  unto  us,  when  shall  we
hear  more  ?  who  will  again  come
and  teach  us  ?"  While  others  ap*
peared  considerably  affected  with
what  they  heard,  and  expressed  a
desire  to  be  baptized.

Two  of  the  native  teachers,
during  the  past  year,  have  itinerated
for  several  months  between  Serin-
gapatam  and  Mysore.  The  teacher,
Isaac  David,  with  one  of  the  stu-
dents, who  acted  in  the  capacity  of
reader  of  the  Scriptures,  has  been
sent  to  Cannanore,  on  the  Malabar
coast,  in  pursuance  of  a  request
transmitted  to  the  missionaries  by
an  European  gentleman  and  some
of  the  natives  resident  there.  The
teacher  was  ordained  on  the  ]  3th  of
Ma}',  1826,  and,  with  his  compa-
nion, proceeded  to  Cannanore  in
July  following.

With  regard  to  the  native  teach-
ers whahave  been  reared  under  the
wing  of  this  mission,  the  missloii*
aries  observe,  genenUly,  that  they
have  beeuNeiy  voeCuI  In  their  work.


BAN

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Reeve  and  family  em-
barked on  the  11th  of  April  last,  on
their  return  to  India.  Mr.  R.  had
been  appointed  to  Bangalore,  its
cUnate  being  more  likely  to  suit  the
hjBdth  of  Mrs.  Reeve  than  that  of
Bellai>',where  heformerly  laboured.

B  ANKOT£,  a  town  of  Hindoo-
stan,  60  m.  S.  Bombay,  possessed  by
tlie  English,  including  its  depen-
dent viliages,  contains  about  1700
inbabitanU.  The  language  and
{teople  are  similar  to  those  in  Bom-
bay.

/fetf.  Samuel  Newell,  from  the
A.  B,  of  Commissioners/or  Foreign
MiuionSf  late  missionary*  at  Bom-
bay, made  several  visits  to  this  place
and  its  vicinity,  where  he  found  the
people  attentive  and  inquisitive,  and
among  them  he  sowed  much  pre-
cknu  seed.  Besides  other  labours
for  their  good,  at  one  time  lie  dis-
tributed 300  books ;  at  another,  30
copies  of  the  Acts ;  50  of  St.  Mat-
thew's Gospel,  and  200  tracts.

BARB ADOES,  the  easternmost
of  the  Caribbe  islands,  25  m.  long
and  12  broad.  The  exports  are
sugar, rum, cotton,  and  ginger;  and
it  has  most  of  the  fruits  common  to
the  climate.  The  sugar  exported
hence  is  finer  than  that  of  any  other
^bntation :  and  it  has  a  production
called  Barbadoes  tar,  which  exudes
from  crevices  in  the  clay  hills  on  the
E.  coast,  and  is  collected  on  the
surface  of  water  in  holes  dug  for
the  purpose.  This  island  always
belonged  to  the  British,  who  colo-
nized it  in  1624  ;  and  it  remained
private  property  till  settled  to  the
crown  in  1663.  It  has  suffered
much  from  hurricanes ;  particularly
from  one  in  1780,  when  4326  of
the  inhabitants  lost  their  lives.  The
capital  is  Bridgetown.

In  1765,  two  of  the  United  Bre-
thren were  sent  to  this  island  to
commence  a  mission.  One  of  them,
however,  died  soon  after  his  arrival :
hit  companion,  seduced  by  the  love
uf  the  worlds  neglected  and  hnaUy


BAR

abandoned  the  cauee;  and  a  third,
who  was  sent  to  fill  up  the  place  of
the  first,  followed  him  shoitly  after
to  ihs  tomb.  In  May,  1767,  Mr.
Benjamin  Bruckshaw  arrived,  and
his  design  being  approved  by  the
president  of  the  council  and  the  re-
sident clergy,  he  began  immediately
to  preach  to  the  negroes  at  Bridge-
town, with  the  consent  of  many  of
the  planters,  who  not  only  permit-
ted their  slaves  to  hear  the  Gospel,
but  occasionally  encouraged  the
missionary  by  their  own  attendance.

In  the  month  of  August,  Mr.
Bennetcame  from  North  America.
He  was  soon  joined  by  otherlabour-
ers ;  and  as  the  hearers  were  conti-
nually increasing,  they  purchased
and  fitted  up  a  'building,  both  as  a
place  of  worship  and  a  dwelling-
house.  Here  6  negroes  were  bap-
tized, and  several  of  the  planters
invited  the  missionaries  to  preach
on  their  own  estates.  A  variety  of
difficulties,  unhappily,  afterwards
arose ;  the  slaves  absented  them-
selves from  the  chapel,  pecuniary
wants  embarrassed  the  mission,  and
after  the  removal  of  Mr.  Bruck-
shaw to  Antigua,  in  1771,  and  the
death  of  Mr.  Bennet,  the  following
year,  a  spirit  of  dissension  was  ex-
cited among  the  remaining  mis-
sionaries, and,  at  length,  only  one
was  left  on  the  island.

In  1773,  some  success  appeared
to  attend  the  zealous  labours  of
Mr.  Augerman  ;'  but  scarcely  two
years  had  elapsed,  when  he  was  re-
moved by  the  hand  of  death,  and
though  his  successors  continued  the
work,  no  change  of  importance  oc-
curred for  several  years.  Verj- few
negroes,  except  those  who  had  for-
merly been  baptized,  and  whose
number  did  not  exceed  20,  attended
the  ministrations  of  the  missioiuiries;
and  even  those  who  assented  to  the
truth,  afforded  melancholy  proof
that  they  were  not  under  its  power.
The  planters,  also,  with  a  few
exceptions,  were  nas?  a.NCtsfc\o^%

4^


BAH

inslniction  of  their  slaves ;  and>  in
1780,  a  tremendous  hurricane  in-
volved the  missionaries  and  their
bearers  in  the  most  serious  difficul-
ties. In  1790,  however,  circum^
stances  appeared  more  favourable
than  before ;  the  congregations  in-
creased, and  sometimes  amounted
to  150;  the  deportment  of  the
negroes  became  more  consistent:
several,  having  given  satisfactory
evidence  of  conversion,  were  bap-
tized, the  proprietors  of  different
plantations  were  gradually  induced
to  lay  aside  their  prejudices,  and
the  local  government  treated  the
missionaries  with  kindness  and  re-
spect. As  their  situation' was  on-
healthy  and  incon^'enient,  they
purchased  a  small  estate,  in  1794,
consisting  of  a  spacious  house  and
four  acres  of  land,  very  eligibly
si,tuated,  to  which  they  gave  the
name  of  SAaron.

In  the  month  of  November,  1708,
Mr.  James  Waller  and  his  wife,
together  with  an  unmarried  sister,
named  Mary  Grant,  embarked  at
Bristol,  and,  after  encountering  im-
minent perils,  reached  Barbadoes.

Towards  the  close  of  1817,  the
congregation  consisted  of  214  mem-
bers, of  whom  68  had  been  admit-
ted to  partake  of  the  "Lord's  Supper.
The  whole  number  of  negroes  bap-
tized from  the  commencement  of
the  mission,  did  not  exceed  830
adult<i,  and  160  children.  Through
subsequent  years,  the  work  pro-
ceeded, notwithstanding  many  trials
arising  from  the  want  of  labourers,
and  from  the  sickness  and  death  of
those  who  entered  the  field.  In
August,  1825,  Mr.  Bnimner  an-
nounces, that  more  interest  had
recently  been  excited  among  the
ehildren,  and  says — "  We  have  hi-
therto met  with  no  hindrance  in  the
prosecution  of  our  great  object —
the  instruction  of  the  negroes ;  on
the  contrary,  several  places  have
been  offered  to  me,  where  I  may
make  known  the  glad  tidings  of


BAR

salvation ;  but  at  present,  I  find  K
Impossible  to  visit  them.    piflBcol-'
ties  enough,  indeed,  exist  in  the
very  structure  of  society,  and  the'
usages  which  prevail  among  tiie
negroes  in  these  islands.    AmoBg
these  I  may  specify  the  Sundsj-
markets,  and  the  dancing  and  re-
velry  in  ^hich    too    many  are'
engaged  from  Saturday  evening  to
Sunday  night,  and  which  preclude «
attention  to  more  serious  conceme.
Here  the  mimionary  stands  in  ee-
peciol  need  of  the  guidance  of  the*
Holy  Spirit,  that  he  may  fulfil  the
aim  of  his  important  and  blened
calling."

A  short  time  after,  he  wrote  :-^ '
"  Eveiy  successive  Sunday  we  have
the  pleasure  to  see  an  increase  In
the  number  of  our  hearers ;  and
the  attendance  at  the  evening  meet-
ing is  much  greater  than  ever  I
could  have  expected.  When  wa
la«t  spoke  with  the  new  people  be-
longing to  our  small  flock,  no  leal
than  24  negroes  came,  for  the  first
time,  and  most  of  them  appeared
to  be  truly  concerned  for  their  sal-
vation. On  Sunday  next  5  women
"will  be  added  to  the  church  by  holy
baptism."

At  the  commencement  of  ISfT,
he  says — "  In  the  year  1826,  there
have  been  baptized  at  Sharon,  S8
adults,  and  14  children ;  8  persons
have  been  received  into  the  con-
gregation, and  9  re-admitted ;  SS
admitted  to  the  holy  communion ;
14  adults,  and  6  children^  have  de-
parted this  life ;  and  8  have  been
excluded.  At  the  close  of  the  year^
the  congregation  comusted  of  79
communicants,  78  baptized  adults,
and  33  baptized  children.  If  to
these  are  added  86  candidates  for
baptism,  and  188  new  people,  <ft:c.,'
the  total  of  individuals  under  our
care,  will  be  464."

'*  Our  Saviour,"  he  subsequently
remarks,  '*  continnes  to  bless  our
feeble  testimony  of  his  love  to  sin-
ners.   On  our  last  prayer-day,  ouf


BAR

■ch  was  filled  with  very  atten-
hparers ;  6  adults  were  baptized,
IS  of  the  new  people  added  to
eloM  of  candidates  for  baptism,
rious  to  ttiis  solemnity,  we  had
'ersed  indiriduaUy  with  270
lidates  for  baptism,  and  new
lie :  of  the  latter  class,  about
same  to  us  for  the  first  time.
the  same  day,  at  Mount  Tabor,
adult  was  baptized,  and  one
Ived  into  the  congregation  ;
7  were  admitted  into  the  class
uididates  for  baptism  or  recep-
•

.  ftivourable  opportunity  for  the
Dolgation  of  the  Gospel  appear-
in  Dec.  1788,  Mr.  Pearce,  of
W*  M,  6.,  commenced  his  la-
n;  but  a  spirit  of  persecution
I  arose  among  persons  of  rank
influence,  who  resolved,  if  pos-
i,  to  prevent  his  progress.
Mwere  encouraged  to  disturb
interrupt  public  worship ;  and,
!>e  close  of  one  of  the  weekly
arei,  the  most  disgraceful  up-
;. and  confusion  occurred.  Mr.
rce,  of  course,  applied  for  re-
• ;  but,  though  the  magistrate
iiam  he  applied  appear^  very
plant  at  such  a  breach  of  the
:^,  on  the  case  being  proved,
some  to  the  extraordinary  de-
»n,  that,  ''  as  the  oiience  was
Initted  against  Almighty  God,
VI  not  within  his  jurisdiction
mish  it."  It  was  now  for  some
I  impracticable  to  preach  at
t ;  and  when,  after  the  lapse  of
rel  months,  it  was  attempted,
Hune  hostility  was  manifested,
evening  the  preacher  was
;ed  to  dismiss  the  congrega-
The  rioters  being  after-
li  joined  by  about  a  hundred
r  persons,  endeavoured  to  break
.  the  chapel  doors  \  and,  failing
lia,  they  demolished  the  win-
I  above.  Mr.  Pearce  now  ven-
1  among  them ;  but  they  no
ar  saw  him,  than  several  of
I  attempted  to  sttike  him,  and  j


BAR

followed  him  to  his  hooae,  which
they  surrounded  for  some  time,  witip
the  most  menacing  words  amd
gestores ;  but  he,  providentially^
escaped  unhurt;  and  the  mob  at
length  retired,  without  execiftinj^
their  threats.

Mr.  Pearce  resolved  once  more
to  seek  justice — and  he  was  suc-
cessful. Warrants  were  issued  by
one  of  the  magistrates,  with  the
utmost  readiness.  The  aiTiEdr  was
brought  to  a  hearing  in  the  Town
Hall,  and  five  of  the  rioters  (who
had  previously  attempted  to  com-
promise the  business)  pleaded
guilty.  They  were,  therefore,  dis-
missed, after  a  severe  reprimand
from  the  bench,  on  condition  of
their  pacing  all  the  expenses  of
the  day,  tc^ther  with  half  the
sum  which  Mr.  Pearce  had  given
to  those  he  had  consulted.  This
they  did,  expressing  their  sorrow
for  the  offence,  and -promising  not
to  disturb  the  congregation  any
more.  Such  a  deciilon  prodoced
a  sensible  impresston,  and  mate^
rially  tended  to  dissipate  existing
prejudices.  Accordingly  the  mi^
sionary  was  invited  to  visit  a  planter
in  a  distent  part  of  the  island ;  and
the  sermons  he  preached  served
also  to  dispel  the  unfounded  calum^
nies  which  had  been  so  industriously
circulated.  But  some  of  the  rioters,
in  his  absence,  assailed  his  house
with  stones,  and  severely  hurt  Mrs.
Pearce.  As  the  delinquents  were
unknown,  nothing  remained  but  to
bear  the  injury  with  patience,  and
to  watch  the  return  of  those  who
had  inflicted  it.

In  1791,  Mr.  Lumb  succeeded
Mr.  Pearce,  but  his  labours  were
attended  with  very  little  success;
though  permitted  to  attend  26
estetes  in  the  country,  which  he
regularly  visited  once  a  fortoight.
''The  negroes,  in  general,"  he
says,  f*  are  as  much  aaiamed  of  re-
ligion as  the  whites*)  and  WLcYi  %^
j>Iace  for  holding  dkf  Uie  ^V&^  N>^


BAR

eontempt,  I  never  saw  before."
And,  in  1797,  the  regular  congre-
gations  saldom  consisted  of  more
than  40  persons,  most  of  whom
were  whites,  and  30  bf  them  mem-
bers of  the  Society.  In  the  country
places,  they  seldom  amounted  to
more  than  H)  or  12 ;  and  through
the  whole  island,  exclusively  of
Bridgetown,  the  members  of  the
society  did  not  exceed  21 .

In  March,  1801,  however,  Mr.
Hawkshaw,  who  was  proceeding
to  another  place,  in  company  with
some  other  ministers,  come  to  an
anchor  at 'Bridgetown,  and  went  on
shore,  expecting  to  spend  a  few
hours  with  the  missionary ;  but,  to
his  great  surprise,  he  found  that  the
preacher  had  locked  up  the  chapel,
sent  the  key  into  the  country,  and
retired,  about  three  weeks  before,
either  to  Antigua  or  St.  Christo-
pher's. Several  of  the  people,  who
were  lamenting  the  loss  of  their
privileges,  earnestly  entreated  Mi,
iiawkriiaw  to  remain,  and  he  com-
plied with  their  request.  His  la-
bours were  attended  with  consider-
able success.  The  chapel,  which
he  found  in  a  very  dilapidated  state,
was  repaired,  and  rendered  more
commodious,  during  his  stay ;  and
though  he  was  sometimes  inter-
rupted in  divine  worship,  the  de-
cisive measures  adopted  procured
a  restoration  of  tranquillity.  Owing
to  his  removal  to  Grenada,  the  in-
terest again  sunk  into  a  low  state ;
but  it  was  revived  by  Mr.  Bradnock,
who  reached  Barbadoes,  March
2l8t,  3804;  and  who,  encouraged
and  protected  by  the  civil  authori-
ties, re-&<;tablished  the  evening  ser-
vice, which,  for  a  considerable
time,  had  been  given  up.  New
spheres  opened  in  the  country,
while  divisions  which  had  existed
in  the  church  at  Bridgetown  were
healed,  bacluliders  were  reclaimed,
and  members  gradually  increased.
In  1805,  Mr.  Bradnock  was  suc-
eeeded  by  Mr,  Richard  Pattison,


BAR

who,  mourning  over  the  state  of
feeling  discqvered,  returned;  aad
Mr.  Robinson,  his  succeasor,  1»*
tfoured  with  zeal  and  fidelity  tU
July,  180T,  when  his  life  was  sud-
denly terminated.

In  1811,  the  society  was  com*
posed  of  30  persons,  11  of  wfaoi^
were  whites,  IS  were  free  penoni,
and  6  were  slaves.

In  the  spring  of  1810,  an  insiir>
rection  broke  out  among  the  ,ink
groes  on  some  of  the  plantation^
but  it  was  soon  terminated  1^  •
military  force.  This  circumstancfe
was  charged  on  missions,  althonghy
out  of  a  population  of  71,215  ne^
groes,  there  were  not  more  than  8i
belonging  to  the  society;  and  In
the  report  of  the  committee  ap-
pointed by  the  House  of  Assembly
to  inquire  into  it,  the  mischief  k
traced  to  other  causes.

In  1818,  the  mission  was  re^
commenced;  and,  in  the  ensuiiig
year,  a  new  and  commodious  cha-
pel was  erected  ;  towards  it  several
of  the  principal  inhabitants  con-
tributed liberally ;  it  was.  licensAd
by  the  governor's  special  ailtlxnrity
— prejudice  appeared  to  be  giving
way — and  hope  animated  the  bor
soms  of  the  labourers.

In  1820,  Messrs.  Shrewsbmy
and  Larcum  thus  wrote: — '<  Our
prospects  at  present  cannot  Vi
deemed  flatterinfff  but  they  ate
certainly  btightetung,  as  there  is
more  likelihood  of  prosperity  thai
was  ever  previously- known  in  Bar*
badoes.  On  Sunday  evenings  our
chapel  is  thronged,  and  multitude!
crowd  about  the  door  to  squeetft
in,  when  there  is  the  least  open^
ing.  Besides  our  labours  in  Bridge^
town,  we  have  three  estates  in  the
country,  at  which  we  preach  on<e
a  fortnight.  The  proprietors  (one.
of  whom  is  a  member  of  the  Houst
of  Assembly),  are  firm  friends  to
the  missionaries,  and  have  promised
to  use  all  their  influence  with  crther
gentlemen  of  the  colony  to  pennll


BAR

IS  to  instrnct  their  negroes."  More
iocouraging  still  did  the  aspect  of
he  mlvion  become ;  crowds  flocked
o  hetfr  the  Gospel — members  were
idded  to  the  society,  and  an  auxi-
iaty  society  was  established,  which,
t  was  expected,  would  make  an  an-
roai  remittance  of  not  less  than  50/.
sterling.  But  a  fearful  storm  soon
uose  ;  Mr.  I^rewsbury  was  abused
U  a  TUlain  in  the  streets,  and  vio-
leatly  molested  by  the  press.  On
Oct.  6ih,  1822,  the  congregation
m  insulted,  and  the  chapel  was
walled  by  violence ;  and  so  strong
vas  the  feeling  in  favour  of  the  de-
linquents, that  no  hopes  of  their
punishment  could  be  entertained.
On  the  following  Sabbath  the  as-
nuilt  was  renewed,  and  the  most
Ireadfnl  opposition  contemplated ;
in  theimidst  of  which  the  mission-
uy  preached  with  considerable  en-
largement and  freedom,  from  1
Cat.  K  22,  24,  and  thus  closed  his
ministry'  in  Barbadoes.  On  the
19th,  there  was  no  service  in  the
chapel,  in  consequence  of  the  go-
remor  refusing  to  interpose  on  be-
Mf  of  Mr.  S. ;  and  a  multitude,
previously  organized,  completely
demoliriied  the  building,  without
the  least  attempt  being  made  to
check  them,  either  by  the  civil  or
military  authorities.  Providen-
tially, Mr.  S.  and  his  wife  escaped
to  St.  Vincent's  in  safety.  The
gofemor  now  issued  a  proclama-
tion, offering  a  reward  of  100/.  for
the  conviction  of  the  offenders.
Such,  however,  was  the  unparallel-
ed effrontery  of  the  rioters,  that
they  immediately  printed  and
circulated  a  counter'prociamation,
threatening  that  any  person  who
came  forward  to  impeach  one  of
them,^ould  receive  merited  punish-
ment^ observing  that  no  conviction
could  be  obtained  while  the  parties
were  firm  to  themselves,  and  stat-
ing that  the  chapel  was  destroyed,
n^  by  the  rabble  of  the  community^
but  that  ibe  majority  of  the  persons


BAIt

assembled  were  of  ihe  firgt  respec*
tabili'ty!  After  Mr.  S.^  departure,
the  people  continued  to  meet,
though  they  were  threatened  with
similar  acts  of  violence — but  these
were  happily  averted.

The  re-establishment  of  the  mis-
sion was  confided  to  Mr.,  Rayner
in  1825 ;  but,  after  a  correspon-
dence with  the  governor,  im-
portant considerations  prevented
his  landing.  In  1826,  however,  he
returned  to  fulfil  the  trust  com-
mitted to  him :  the  mission-house
in  BridgetoT^Ti  is  rebuilt ;  and  the
measures  of  the  legislature,  it  is
hoped,  will  prevent  the  recurrence
of  scenes  which  his  predecessor
was  called  to  witness.

In  the  early  part  of  last  centur>',
col.  Codrington  bequeathed  two
estates  to  the  Societjf  for  Prapagat'
ing  the  Gospel  in  Foreign  Parts,
to  provide  for  the  religious  instruc-
tion of  the  negroes  in  this  and  the
other  Caribbe  islands,  and  for
erecting  and  endowing  a  college
at  Bridgetown,  especially  requiring
the  religious  instruction  of  the
slaves  on  these  estates.  The  so-
ciety faithfully  complied  with  these
conditions,  and  the  result  has  been
auspicious.  The  negroes  on  these
estates  were  quiet  during  the
dreadful  insurrection  in  1816,  in
which  about  1000  negroes  were
massacred,  either  as  actual  in*-
surgents,  or  on  unfounded  suspi-
cion. This  circumstanj^  has
greatly  abated  the  bitter  preju-
dices which  usually  prevailed  here
against  the  religious  instruction  of
the  slaves,  and  has  convinced  many
planters,  that  no  such  event  would
have  occurred  if  their  slaves  had
been  diligently  instructed,  and
brought  under  the  influence  of  the
Gospel.  ThQ  college  has  been
built;  but  it  is  said  not  to  have
answered  the  designs  of  its  bene-
volent founder.  The  annual  re-
ceipts, on  account  o{\\i«se«^^es
amounted,  from  Jaa.^^^h,  \%\^)\o


BAR

Jan.  31st,  1820,  to  nearly  20,000
dollars,  and  the  pa}inents  to  about
15,732  dollars.  In  1817,  an  auxiliary
B,  S.  was  formed,  which  has  been
the  means  of  diffusing  much  light
among  the  slaves.  Many  are
anxious  to  receive  the  Scriptures,
and  many  more  are  learning  to
read  in  order  to  pos^ss  them.  In
1822,  an  auxiliary  /f^.  M,  S,  was
formed.

The  C  Hf,  S,  has  had  for  some
years  a  school  in  Barbadoes,  which
the  lord  bishop  has  recently  taken
under  his  own  charge ;  it  con-
tained, in  1825,  114  boys  and  44
girls,  making  a  total  of  158  scholars ;
of  whom  81  were  slaves,  and  77
free ;  6  of  them  were  admitted
to  confirmation.

BARBUDA,  or  BERBUDA,
one  of  the  British  Caribbe  islands
in  the  West  Indies.  Length  20  m.,
breadth  12.  It  belongs  to  the  heirs
of  col.  Codrington,  who  obtained
a  grant  of  it  for  his  important  ser-
vices to  the  crown  of  England,  in
the  West  Indies,  and  is  .said  to  yield
about  £5000  a  year.  At  his  death,
in  1710,  he  bequeathed  a  large
part  of  tiie  island  to  the  Societjf/ar
Propagating  the  Gospel^  for  the
instruction  of  the  negroes  in  this
and  the  neighbouring  islands  in  the
Christian  religion,  and  for  erecting
and  endowing  a  college  in  Barba-
does. The  fVtsleynn  Missionaries
have  laboured  here  with  some  suc-
cess. Population,  1500.  W.  long.
62<>,  N.  lat.  n^'  50'.

BAREILLY,  a  large,  populous,
and  flourishing  city  in  the  province
of  Delhi,  Hindoostan,  ceded  to  the
British  in  1802,  and  is  the  seat  of
their  judicial  establishment  for  the
district  of  Bareilly.  Under  the
fostering  hand  of  the  British  Go-
vernment, in  one  year,  1820-1,
more  than  2270  houses  were  built
in  the  city,  and  the  country  around
is  proportionably  increasing  in
population  and  agriculture.  The
tf/^/jr  about  bOO  m.  N.W.  of  Cal-


BAR

cutta,  150  N.W.  of  Lncknow,  and
140  E.  of  Delhi.  £.  long.  80*,
N.  lat.  28".

The  C.  M,  S,  took  thU  into
their  field  of  labour  in  1818,  by  the
appointment  of  Fuez  ■  Mtsteek^
native  reader  and  caieehist,  win
was  born  at  Mooradabad,  and  was
about  45  years  of  age.  At  the  age
of  18,  being  disgusted  with  the
idolatry  of  the  Hindoos,  be  became
a  Mabomedan,  and,  till  about  the
year  1817,  lived  after  the  strictest
manner  of  that  people,  becoming
a  Fakeer,  and  gaining  many  disci-
ples by  his  austerities  and  reputed
sanctity,  when  he  obtained  of  •
lady,  at  Bareilly,  a  cop^  of  Mar-
ty n's  Hindoostanee  Testament,
which  was  the  means  6f  his  con-
version to  the  Christian  faith.  He
afterwards  removed  to  Delhi.

BARKEL,  a  town  in  the  Ne-
therlands.    The  Netherlands  M,

5,  has  a  seminary  here  to  pvepan
missionaries  for  their  future  laboon,
containing  Id  students.

BARRACKPORE,  a  town  hi
Bengal,  Hindoostan,  on  the  E.  sidi
of  the  Hoogly  R.,  16  m.  above  Cal-
cutta, and  nearly  opposite  Seran-
pore.  It  is  the  country  seat  of  the
governor-general,  and  a  militaiy
station.

In  1814,  the  Baptist  Missimuari€»
at  Serampore,  in  compliance  witii
the  earnest  solicitations  of  several
non-commissioned  offiaers,  intro-
duced the  Gospel  here,  by  occa-
sionally preaching  at  their  houses.
Though  preaching  has  been  irre-
gularly maintained,  yet  their,  la-
bours have  been  greatly  blessed^
and  several  of  their  countrymen
and  natives  have  been  added  to  the
church  at  Serami)ore.  In  18S1,
the  Marchioness  of  Hastings  esta-
blished a  school  here,  with  due
provision  for  its  support,  and  cqro-
mitted  it  to  the  care  of  the  C  A.

6,  which  has  a  depdt  of  books  and
tracts  which  are  usefully  diatri-
buted.


■3


I


BAR

'  BARRIPORE,  a  town  of  Ben-
gal, Hindoostan,  16  m.  S.E.  of
Calcutta.

For  several  years  the  C  K,  S.
has  supported  a  large  school  here,
for  which  a  school-house  has  heen
racentlj  erected.

BARTHOLOMEW,  ST.,  one
of  the  Caribbe  islands,  24  m.  in
efat:ait,  and  26  N.  of  St.  Christo-
pher: The  French  ceded  it  to  the
Swedes  in  1785,  and  it  is  the  only
spot  in  the  W^  Indies  possessed
1^  them.  The  chief  exports  are
cotton,  drugs,  and  lignum  Yitae;
and  it  has  a  good  harbour,  called
Gnstavia.  W.  long.  &a9  40^,  N.  lat.
IT«4<r.

This  was  one  of  the  first  stations
of  the  /f^.  M.  S.  The  Rev.  Mr.
Dace  laboured  here  ten  years,  and
was  called  to  his  reward  in  1816.
Hie  governor,  and  most  of  the  re-
spectable persons  on  the  island,  at-
tended his  funeral.  In  every  place
in  which  he  was  engaged  in  the
West  Indies,  Mr.  Dace  was  deserv-
edly esteemed.  A  few  days  after  his
death,  a  dreadful  hurricane  com-
pletely destroyed  the  mission  chapel
ami  dwelling-house^a  loss  which,
it  was  hoped;^  woula  in  great  part
be  repaired  by  the  exertions  of  the
friends  of  the  mission  there.  The
following  is  an  extract  of  a  letter
from  Mr.  Hirst,  who  went  over
from  St.  Martin's  to  perform  the
faneral  ceremony  over  Mr.  Dace's
mnains.

"  The  morning  after  the  gale  I
waited  on  his  excellency  the  go-
vernor, who  expressed  his  regret
at  our  loss,  but  said, '  As  your  old
chapel  was  in  a  bad  situation,  if
you  And  a  vacant  plot  more  eligibly
ritnated,  belonging  to  the  king,  I
wlU  give  it  you.'  This  we  were
not  able  to  do,  and  have  been
obliged  to  purchase.  The  situation
ilin  the  centre  of  the  town,  and

IMO  dollars  have  been  already
udMcrlbed :  his  excellency  gave  30

doUarsr  and  S  gentlemen  100  each,  j


BAS

Another,  who  had  sufiered  much
by  the  gale,  gave  25 ;  and  I
doubt  not  but  2000  dollars  will  be
raised  for  the  new  building.  His
excellency  says  that  he  wiU  repre-
sent the  loss  we  have  sustained  to
his  majesty,  the  king  of  Sweden,
and  doubts  not  but  some  grant  will
be  made  to  us."

In  the  following  year  it  is  stated,
that  though  the  congregation,  since
the  destruction  of  Sie  chapel,  was
without  a  convenient  place  to  meet
in,  yet  the  people  were  attentive  to
religious  services  in  private  houses ;
and,  by  the  exertions  of  the  leaders,
the  society  was  kept  together  and
was  prospering.  In  1823,  the  mis-
sion sufiered  materially  from  local
and  unavoidable  circumstances,
which  were  not  only  felt  by  the
members  of  the  society  in  parti-
cular, but  by  the  community  at
large.  The  stagnation  of  tnu^e
obliged  nearly  100  members  to
leave  the  island,  to  seek  support
for  themselves  and  their  owners
elsewhere.  Notwithstanding  these
difficulties,  the  society  increased,
until  the  alarms  arising  out  of  the
afiair  at  Demarara  caused  some  re-
strictions to  be  imposed.  Latterly,
however,  the  cause  of  God  haA
prospered.  The  number  in  the  so-
ciety, by  the  last  report,  was  255.
And  in  the  school  were  152  children,
whose  progress  was  encouraging.

BASEL,  the  largest  town  in
Switzerland,  on  the  Rhine,  favour-
ably situated  for  commerce,  con-
taining about  15,000  inhabitants.
It  has  an  university,  foXmded  by
Pope  Pius  II.,  about  the  year
1460.  E.  long.  7«  30',  N.  lat.
47«  35'.

A  seminary  was  established  here
in  1815,  for  the  education  of  mis«
sionaries  to  the  heathen.  Its
origin  and  progress  were  thus  de-
scribed, in  1822,  by  the  Rev.  Mr.
Blumhardt,  the  inspector : —

*'  It  was  in  the  last  caVatoWAxa
war,  in  the  year  \^\5,  WiaX.  \^«

F  6^


•pirit  of  missioiis  stiack  its  first
Toots  in  t^e  hearts  of  some  Chris-
tian friends,  at  Basel,  in  Switzer-
land. In  this  eventful  year,  a  Rus-
sian army  encamped  on  one  side  of
oar  town ;  and,  on  the  other  side,
^e  fortress  of  Huningen  began  to
pour  out  a  dreadful  torrent  of
bombs  against  our  dwellings.  In
these  sorrowful  moments,  the
Lord  of  the  elements  sent  a  veiy
riolent  £.  wind,  which  had  a  won-
derful effect  on  the  fire  of  the
enemy.  The  bombs  were  ex-
hausted in  the  air  before  they  could
reach  our  homes,  without  Injury  to
any  life  of  the  inhabitants.  Wliile
the  fire  of  the  fortress  was,  in  this
remarkable  manner,  quenched  by
the  wind  of  God,  a  holy  flame  of
missionary  zeal  was  kindled  in  the
hearts  of  some  Christian  friends.
They  resolved  to  establish  a  mis-
sionary seminary,  as  a  monument
of  this  remarkable  salvation  of  the
town ;  and  to  train  up  a  number  of
pious  teachers  for  the  instruction
of  the  heathen  Mahomedan  tribes,
who  were  sent  from  the  interior  of
Asia  to  be  our  deliverers.

**  In  the  1st  year,  1816,  we  had
only  a  few  rooms,  inhabited  by  a
small  number  of  missionary  scho-
lars; in  the  6th  year  the  blessing  of
God  enabled  our  committee  to  build
a  missionary  college.  In  the  1st
year  we  had  an  income  of  little
more  than  601. ;  in  the  6th  year
the  blessing  of  our  Lord  increased
it  to  about  5000/.  In  the  1st  year
our  society  consisted  only  of  a
small  number  of  Christian  friends,
at  Basel;  by  the  6th  year  more
than  40  auxiliary  societies  had
been  established  in  Switzerland,  in
Germany,  and  among  the  Pro-
testants of  France."

The  term  of  study  is  four  years,
during  which  time  particular  at-
tention is  given  to  philology,
comprehending  the  English,  Latin,
GreeJc,  Hebrew,  and  Arabic  lan-
ffuagcB}  other  sciences  are  em-


BAT

braced,  and  also  a  s^istematic  coune
of  theology*.  The  students  enjoj
privileges  in  the  university.  About
\6  students  may  be  annually  ad-
mitted, and  the  hope  is  indulged,
that  the  increasing  liberality  m  iti
friends  will  provide  for  a  mucli
greater  number.  The  government
has  approved  of  the  design,  and
afibrded  the  institution  its  favooi
and  protection.

BASSEIN,  a  large  town  on  the
W.  coast  of  Hindoostan,  30  m.  N.
of  Bombay,  on- an  idand  separated
by  a  narrow  strait  from  the  island
of  Salsette.  It  was  taken  by  fbe
British  in  1780,  but  restored  to  the
Mahrattas  in  1783;  and  here,  ill
1802,  was  signed  the  celebrated
treaty  between  the  Peishwa  and
the  British,  which  annihilated  the
Mahrattas  as  a  federal  empire.
This  town  is  ancient,  and  was  a
place  of  great  importance  when  the
Portuguese  power  was  at  its  zenith.
The  fort,  which  is  larger  than  that
at  Bombay,  was  formerly  fiUed
with  houses  and  inhabitants,  and
contains  the  splendid  ruins  of  18
churches.  Many  monuments  of
national  wealth  and  power  are  stUI
remaining.  The  inside  of  St
Paul's  church,  the  roof  of  which
is  fallen  in,  was  completely  over*
laid  with  gold.  The  idol,  Huns^
munt,  set  up  in  the  gateway  of
these  churches  by  the  Mahratta
power,  reminds  the  beholder  that
absolute  heathenism  has  long  super-
seded Roman  Catholic  superstition.

The  American  migtionaries,  at
Tannah  and  Bombay,  have  fre-
quently visited  this  place,  and  dis-
^ibuted  books  and  tracts ;  and,  in
1819,  they  opened  a  flourishing
school  of  about  30  boys,  taught  by
a  Brahmun.

BAT  A  VIA,  a  city  and  seaport
of  Java,  capital  of  the  island,  and
of  all  the  Dutch  settlements  in  the
East  Indies.  It  is  in  the  form  of
a  parallelogram,  4200  feet  long
and  3000  broad;   and  the  streets


BAT

cross  each  other  at  right  ang^les.
The  public  edifices  consigt  of  the
great  church,  a  Lutheran  and  Por-
tuguese church,  a  mosque,  a  Chi-
nese temple,  tiie  stadthouse,  the
ipenhouse,  the  infirmary,  andlhe
chamber  of  orphans.  I'he  fort  is
built  of  coral  rock,  brought  from
Mine  of  the  adjoining  islands,  and
has  a  fortification  of  brick.  A  part
of  the  town  wall  is  built  of  dense
lava,  from  the  mountains  in  the
centre  of  Jara.  No  stone  of  any
Jdnd  is  to  be  found  for  many  miles
beyond  this  city;  but  marble  and
granite  are  brought  here  from
China.  The  harbour  is  excellent ;
tnd  there  are  canals  in  the  prin-
cipal streets,  planted  on  each  side
with  trees.  Batavia  contains  a  pro-
digious number  of  inhabitants,  of
nurious  countries ;  and  all  the  goods
brought  from  other  parts  of  the  East
fauUes  are  laid  up  here,  till  they
ne  exported  to  their  places  of  des-
tination. The  city  surrendered  to
•  British  force  in  1811.  It  is
dtuate  on  the  R.  Jacatra,  amid
nramps  and  stagnant  pools,  which,
with  the  fog^  and  climate,  render
tlie  air  unwholesome  to  Europeans.
it- once  contained  about  ltfO,OOa
iahtbitants,  which  do  not  now
nonnt  to  48,000.  E.  long.  106^
SXi  S.  lat  "Oo  8'.

In  181 3>  the  B,  M.  S.  com-
■eneed  a  mission  at  Batavia,  by
Beans  of  their  ag^nt,  Rev.  Mr.  Ro-
Unna.  His  personal  afflictions  were
great ;  but  he  says,  in  a  letter  dated
April  5th,  1815— «  Last  Monday
erenfng  I  preached  in  a  new  place,
where  I  had  about  60  hearers.  I
now  preach  in  Malay  4  times  a-
veek."  He  mentions  also  a  very
inteiesting  instance  of  usefulness.
Towards  the  end  of  that  year  he
ted  finished  the  rough  copy  of  St.
Matthew's  Gospel,  in  the  Malay
Ingoag^e,  and  proceeded  to  revise
ft  for  the  press.  In  July,  1816,  he
ktptized  4  persons,  viz.  S  soldiers,
fid  8  inhabitants  of  Batavia.    In


BAT

1880,  he  says,  ''  We  have  now  4
members  who  have  been  baptized
in  Java ;  and  we  have,  besides  them,
5  men  of  hopeful  piety,  who  pray
in  turn  at  our  prayer  meetings.
There  are  also  a  few  women  who
seem  to  be  pious ;  and  2  persons,
if  no  more,  appear  to  have  died
in  the  Lord ;  to  say  nothing  of  a
Chinese,  who  says  *  he  will  die  at
the  feet  of  Jesus:'  add  these  to-  ^
gether,  and  you  will  find  them
more  than  10 — the  number  for
which  Sodom  might  have  been
saved."  Mr.  Robinson's  labouit
were  subsequently  impeded,  by  r6«
strictions  which  greatly  diminished
his  hopes  of  future  usefulness.

After  an  unsuccessful  applica-
tion for  their  removal,  to  the  king
of  the  Netherlands,  and  after  a
patient  struggling  with  them,  Mr.
Robinson  deemed  it  expedient  to
remove  to  Bencoolen.  The  sta^
tion  was  not,  however,  neglected.
Mr.  Diering,  one  of  the  penona
alluded  to  as  baptized,  who  was  very
useful  to  Mr.  Robinson,  was  actively
employed,  after  his  departure,  in
doing  good.  Twice  on  the  Sab-
bath, and  once  during  the  week,
he  eng^ed  in  expounding  the
Scriptures  to  his  ignorant  neigh-
bours; and  appeared  desirous  to
employ  every  means  in  his  power
to  promote  the  cause  of  the  Gospel
in  that  city ;  but  in  October,  1825,
he  was  removed,  after  a  short  illness.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Supper,  of  the  L.
M,  S.,  arrived  at  Batavia  on  the
26th  of  May,  1814,  and  at  the
request  of  Dr.  Ross,  the  venerable
Dutch  minister  of  the  city,  became
his  colleague.  In  a  letter  dated
November,  1814,  Mr.  Supper  speaks
of  an  increase  in  his  congregation,
and  states  that  several  persons  had
appeared  to  be  convinced  of  their
sins  under  the  ministry  of  the  word,
but  they  had  encountered  much
opposition  from  their  gay  connex-
ions; and  many  ot\\eTa'<^eieQ?S!6fi^^
with  the  faithfuVnen  ol  \)ti«  ^^&p

5\


BAT

courses  which  had  been  delivered
ill  the  church.

In  another  letter,  dated  August
12,  1810,  and  addressed  to  the
Rev.  Dr.  Steinkopff,  Mr.  Supper
mys — "  The  German,  French,
Dutch,  and  Englisli  Bibles  and  Tes-
taments, lis  well  as  the  Portuguese
New  Testaments,  which,  through
your  goodness,  I  carried  out  with
me,  or  received  from  you  after-
wards, have  almost  all  been  ex-
pended ;  and  I  can  assure  you,  that
they  have  fallen  into  hands  where
they  are  daily  matle  use  of.  The
Chinese  New  Te^itament,  which
tlie  zealous  missionar}',  Mr.  Milne,
distributed  among  the  Chinese,  and
those  which  I  had  the  means  of
distributing,  have  been  visibly  at-
tended with  blessed  efiects.  I
mention  only  a  few  instances. — A
member  of  my  Portuguese  congre-
gation came  to  me  last  week,  and
said — '  I  am  acquainted  with  some
Chinese  who  generally  come  to  me
twice  a-week,  when  the  word  of
God  is  the  theme  of  our  conversa-
tion :  they  have  read  the  Chinese
New  Testament,  and  find  the  con-
tents of  it  of  far  greater  excellence
than  those  of  any  other  book  they
have  ever  read,  but  yet  they  do
not  understand  every  thing  that  is
said  in  it,  and  consequently  apply
to  me  1o  explain  and  clear  up  some
passages  which  they  cannot  com-
prehend ;  I  then  give  them  such
illustrations  on  the  subject  as  I  have
remembered  from  your  discourses.
This  Portuguese  is  one  of  my  pu-
pils^ and,  thanks  be  to  God !  I
may  truly  say,  that  he  is  my  crown,
and  the  first- fruit  of  my  labours
among  the  nominal  Christians  here.
The  Chinese  have  already  turned
their  idols  out  of  their  houses,  and
are  desirous  of  becoming  Christians.

"  Another  of  my  Portuguese
pupils,  u  man  of  58,  came  to  me  a
few  days  ago,  und  told  me  that  a
certain  Chinese,  who  had  read  the
New  Testament    in   his   mother


BAT

tongue,  visits  him  three  timet  •-
week,  to  converse  about  the  doc-
trines of  Christianity ;  he  seems  to
love  Jesus  Christ  better  than  Con-
fucius, and  expressed  a  wish  for  a
few  more  books  in  the  Chinese
language.  He  likewise  turned  hii
paper  idols  out  of  his  house,  and  is
ardently  desirous  of  becoming  a
Christian.

"  I  was  lately  on  a  visit  to  a  cer-
tain gentleman,  where  one  of  the
richest  Chines^e  in  this  country  was
also  a  guest.  He  spoke  to  me  hi
Dutch,  and  said — <  I  have  read  Mr.
Morrison's  New  Testament  wifli
pleasure.  It  is  very  fine,  and  it.
would  be  well  if  every  one  led  sneh
a  life  as  Jesus  Christ  has  taught
people  to  lead.'  I  cannot  describe
to  you,  what  effect  these  words^
spoken  by  the  mouth  of  a  Chineiey
had  upon  me.  I  commenced  a
discourse  with  him  about  bis  idob,
and  said — *  You  believe,  according
to  the  doctrines  of  Confucius,  that
there  is  but  one  God,  who  made
heaven,  the  earth,  man,  and  eveiy
living  creature.'  *  Yes,' he  replied;
'  but  God  is  so  far  above  us,  thatwe
dare  not  address  ourselves  to  hinii
without  the  intervention  of  the
demi-gods.'  I  then  said,  'As  God
is  the  Creator  of  mankind,  should
we  not  caU  him  our  common
Father?'  *  Yes,  certainly,'  was
his  reply.  <  Well;  if  this  be  ad-
mitted, are  not  children  obliged  to
place  confidence  in  their  father?'
*  Most  assuredly. '  <  In  what  consists
this  confidence  and  trust?'  No
answer.  '  Are  not  you  the  father
of  five  sons  ?'  '  Yes.'  *  Now,  what
would  you  think  or  do,  if  three  of
your  sons  took  it  in  their  heads  to
paint  images  upon  paper,  or  carve
them  upon  wood;  and,  when
finished,  pay  them  all  the  venera*
tion,  and  put  that  confidence  In
them,  which  is  justly  due  to  yon  as
their  father?  Would  you  quietly
submit  to  such  conduct  in  your
sons?'     <  No,  I  ^Quld  certainly


Bat

chastise  thenii  and  place  them  in  a
madhouse,  as  lalxiarine  under  a  fit
of  insanity.'    <  But,  if  they  stated,
by  way  of  exculpation,  that  from
the  g^at  veneration  they  had  for
you,  as  their  father,  they  could
not  venture  to  approach  you  but
fhiough  the  intercession  ot  images
vhich  they  themselves  had  made,
what  would  you  say  then  ?'    '  1
should  answer — I  have  chastised  you
for  your  want  of  confidence  in  me,
and  on  account  of  your  conduct  in
preparing  images,  and  paying  them
the  respect  whidi  is  alone  due  to
ne:    they  being  unable  to  hear,
move,  or  help  uemselves,  I  pro-
nounce you   to   be  out  of  your
senses.'     *  But,'  said  I,  *  do  you
act  more  wisely  on  this  supposition,
than   your  children   would   have
acted,  when  you  worship  the  idols
in  your  temples,    and  pay   every
honour  to  them  in  your  houses,
which  is  only  due  to  your  heavenly
Father?'    '  Ah,'  replied  the  Chi.
nese,  '  we  have  never  directed  our
views  so  far  ;   but  I  am  convinced,
that  our  idolatry   can    never  be
pleasing  to  the  only  and  true  God,
and  that  by  so  doing  we  provoke
his  vengeance  upon  us.'

'^  The  conversation  being  ended,
he  went  home,  seemingly  dissatis-
fied with  himself;  and  on  his  arrival
there,  tore  all  the  painted  images
fhm  the  waUs,  and  threw  them  into
tke  fire.  He  has  never  since  fre-
quented the  Chinese  temples ;  and
contents  himself  with  reading  the
Xew  Testament,  and  other  reli-
^us  writings  with  which  I  supply
Urn  from  time  to  time.  Is  it  un-
likely that  this  Chinese  is  far  from
the  kingdom  of  God  ?  Are  not  the
|[|race  of  God  and  the  power  of  the
Holy  Spirit  able  to  convert  even  the
Chinese  to  the  true  Christian  faith  ?
Many  of  the  Europeans  here  are
inclined  to  doubt  this,  and  there-
ftm  look  upon  my  labour  as  an  un-
necessary waste  of  time ;  but  their
seemingly  repulsive  doubts  animate  j


BAT

me  to  greater  zeal,  and  strengthen
my  faith  and. hope  that  God  will
convince  such  unbelievers,  by  the
evidence  of  facts,  that  the  labours
of  his  servants  among  the  Chinese
will  not  be  '  in  vain  in  the  Lord.'
'*  You  will  rejoice  with  me  when
I  tell  you,  that  the  hord  has  sig-
nally blessed  the  labours  of  my
catechumens.    Four  of  them  have
solemnly  made  a  confession  of  their
faith,  and  have  been  accepted  as
members  of  our  community ;    as
their  conduct  is  a  sure  testimony
of  the  true  Christian  life  they  lead ;
and  tbey  continue  to  give  proofs
that  they  act  under  the  influence
of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  Gospel
of  our  Lord   Jesus   Christ,    the
power  of  which  unto  salvatioo  they
have   already   an   experience  of.
One  of  my  catechists  reads  the  Holy
Scriptures  with  some  Mahomme-
dans  three  times  a-week,  converses
with  them  upon  what  they  have
read,  and  they  join  in  prayer  in  his
house  afterwards.     Some  of  the
priests  have  applied  to  me,  through
this  my  beloved  pupil,  for  an  Arabic
Bible,  which,  after  repeated  re-
quests, I  shall  send  them."

Mr.  Supper  was,  in  the  course
of  the  same  year,  summoned  from
the  scene  of  his  labours  to  the
mansions  of  eternal  rest.  And
from  the  period  of  his  decease,  the
L.M.S,  had  no  missionary  in  Java,
until  the  summer  of  1819,  when
Mr.  John  Slater,  who  had  been  for
a  considerable  time  occupied  with
the  study  of  the  Chinese  language
at  Canton  and  Malacca,  arrived
there,  and  shortly  after  took  under
his  instruction  four  Chinese  chil-
dren, as  the  commencement  of  a
school,  designed  to  be  conducted,
as  far  as  circumstances  would  per-
mit, on  the  Lancasterian  plan.  He
also  employed  himself  sedulously
in  circtdating  copies  of  the  New
Testament  and  religious  tracts
among  the  heathen^  and,  with  the
assistance  of  a  naUvQ  \;ea)a\^eT,^«-
F  2  5^


BAT

voted  a  considerable  portion  of  his
time  to  the  study  of  the  Chinese
language.  But  a  few  months
only  had  elajxsed,  when  his  labours
were  suspended  by  a  calamity  at
once  alarming  and  destructive.  On
the  2d  of  October,  1819,  his  house
was  burnt  down ;  when  his  Chinese
boolcs,  with  various  articles  of  fur-
niture, were  consumed.  This  cala-
mit}',  however,  was  considerably
alleviated  by  the  kindness  of  several
friends,  and  particularly  by  that  of
one  family,  with  whom  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Slater  found  an  hospitable  asy-
lum for  several  weeks.

After  this  accident,  a  piece  of
ground  was  purchased,  on  account
of  the  society,  for  a  mission-house
and  garden;  and,  by  the  liberal
subscriptions  of  such  of  the  inha-
bitants as  appeared  to  take  an  in-
terest in  his  object,  Mr.  Slater
was  enabled  to  build  a  convenient
habitation,  capable  of  accommo-
dating 2  or  3  missionaries,  besides
his  own  family.  On  the  adjoining
premises,  a  school  was  afterwards
erected,  and  opened  with  26  pupils.

Of  the  various  idolatrous  cere-
monies which  were  performed  in
this  place,  at  the  time  of  his  visit,
Mr.  Slater  has  given  the  following
description : —

*'  Within  the  temple  yard,  \diich
prevents  the  idol  from  being  seen
from  without,  is  an  elevated  stage,
on  which  the  Chinese  players  per-
form their  exploits,  to  the  astonish-
ment of  the  crowd  below.  On
passing  this,  the  attention  is  excited
by  the  gaudy  appearance  of  golden
ornaments,  and  vurious  coloured
paper  cut  in  shreds ;  but  principally
by  the  quantity  of  painted  candles
burning  in  front  of  the  idols,  the
smoke  of  which,  together  with  the
incense,  is  intolerable  at  first  en-
tering. The  candles  are  about  100
in  number,  and  of  various  sizes,
from  1  foot  to  3  feet  in  height,  and
measuring  from  2  to  6  inches  in
circumference.     These  are   kept


BAT

burning  during  the  whole  tinM  of
worship;  but,  as  every  worihi|ipv
brings  2  candles,  they  are  coDttandly  '
changing  them,  so  that  I  suppon
the  entire  number  is  changsd  evoy
20  minutes.  Two  men  are  esK
ployed  to  keep  a  few  placet  vacui^
that  no  one  may  be  prevented  iraa
placing  his  candles,  and  that  the
worship  may  go  on  without  intei^
ruption.  The  candlea  which  aie
removed  are  for  the  benefit  of  the
temple,  and  they  must  amount  to  a
considerable  sum,  as  the  smallest
of  them  cost  about  2  dollars  fr>piece.

**  On  entering  the  iemple,  every
worshipper  presents  his  lights,  and
receives  sixsprigs  of  incense.  Three-
of  them,  after  bowing  to  the  ima-
ginary deity,  as  an  intimation  that
he  is  about  to  worship,  he  places
close  to  the  image,  and  the  other
at  a  short  distance ;  then  retiring
to  a  cushion  in  front  of  the  idol,  te
pays  his  homage,  which  contiiti.in
Imeeling  down,  and  bowing  the
head  thrice  to  the  ground,  and  this  ii
repeated  three  times.  He  then  goes
on  to  a  large  table  on  the  left  dde
of  the  idol,  where  there  are  perMms
to  enrol  his  name  and  receive  his
contribution;  and  here  the  devo-.
tees  appear  anxious  to  exceed  each  '
other  in  the  sums  which  they  give
toward  the  support  of  this  abomSi^
ble  worship.

**  During  all  this  time,  one'^esn
are  stunned  by  a  large  drum,  and  a
gong,  used  to  rouse  the  idol ;  and
these  are  beaten  with  increased
vehemence  wiien  any  person  of
note  comes  to  worship.  Several  fe--
males,  most  richly  dressed,  brought
offerings  of  fruit  and  sweetmeats.
These,  I  am  informed,  were  the
wives  of  the  rich  Chinese,  who
were  glad  to  embrace  such  an  op-
portunity of  appearing  abroad ;  as
probably  they  had  not  seen  any  man,
nor  been  seen  by  any,  but  their  own
husbands,  since  they  visited  this
temple,  on  a  similar  occasion,  in
the  preceding  year.

64


BAT

^  Another  part  of  the  scene  te
perfomied  by  about  a  dozen  cooks,
chopping  up  pork  for  dinner ;  and  I
had  many  pressing  iuTitations  to  sit
down,  and  dine  ^th  the  worship-
pen,  many  of  whom  appeared  as-
tonisbed  at  my  refusal ;  as  on  other
occasions,  whilst  distributing  tracts
fimn  house  to  house,  I  readily  ate
md  drank  with  them,  for  the  sake
of  an  opportunity  to  discourse  with
them    respecting   Christ  and   his
Goqiel.    In  the  temple  yard  there
we   as   many  gaming-tables    as
eoold  be  conveniently  placed,''

On  the  7th  of  January,  1822,
Mr.  Medburst  and  his  family  ar-
riicd  at  Batada,  where  they  were
nMived  with  great  cordiality  by
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Slater ;  and  shortly
•fter  their  arrival,  a  dwelling-house
VIS  bunt  for  them  on  the  mission
pranises.  The  contiguous  land  be-
longing to  the  society,  was  also
braoght  from  the  wildness  of  nature
to  resemble  the  cultivated  grounds
iatfae  neighbourhood.

Mr.  Medburst  now  commenced
pleaching  in  Chinese  4  times  a-
veek :  on  the  Sabbath  morning,  at
T  o'clock,  in  the  mission  chapel;
OB  Tuesday  evening,  at  a  dwelling-
houe  in  Batavia;  and  on  the
onnings  of  Thursday  and  Friday,
it  S  ouer  places.  It  seldom  hap-
pened, however,  that  either  of  the
eoogregations  exceeded  30  persons ;
nd  the  only  apparent  effect  pro-
iaeedy  at  this  time,  by  the  public
dq[»en8Btion  of  the  truth,  consisted
ii  the  temporary  conviction  of  gain-
■jers,  and  in  the  extended  con-
eeorions  of  the  heathen  to  the
VBncifj,  consistency,  and  conse-
fient  obligations,  of  what  was  ad-
Mnced  on  moral  and  religious
■bjects.

Towards  the  autumn  of  this
npur,  the  health  of  Mr.  Slater  was
B  mach  impaired  as  to  render  it
McessaiT  that  he  should  take  a
nyage  for  its  recovery.  This  he
accordingly,  did,  with  the  desired


BAT

effect;  but  as  he  afterwards
thought  proper  to  dissolve  his  con^
nexion  with  the  society,  the  entire
weight  of  the  mission  at  Batavia
was  thrown  upon  Mr.  Medhurstr
That  valuable  missionary,  however,
continued  to  labour  with  unremit-
ting assiduity  and  unabated  zeal  in
the  cause  of  his  divine  Master;
and  during  the  year  1823,  he  esta^
blished  a  printing-office,  which  will,
no  doubt,  prove  of  essential  benefit
to  the  mission  at  this  station.  The
necessary  supply  of  paper  and  print-
ing materials  was  obtained  from
Canton,  through  the  kind  interven-
tion of  Dr. Morrison;  and  type-
cutters  were  procured  from  Singa-
pore.

The  report  of  1825  speaks  favour-
ably of  2  Chinese  schools — one  at
Batavia  and  one  atTanabang — and
also  of  a  third  school  in  the  town,
not  entirely  under  the  direction  of
the  mission.  Worship  in  Chinese
and  Malay  was  also  statedly  per-
formed. In  the  Malayan  service,  .
Mr.  Medburst  received  the  friendly
assistance  of  Mr.  Diering.  Each
person  in  the  congregation  had  a
copy  of  the  Scriptures  before  him,,
to  refer  to  during  the  sermon^  A
bungalow  chapel  had  been  built
by  an  European  gentleman  at  Ba-
tavia, in  one  of  the  native  Kam-
pongs,  chiefly  inhabited  by  natives
of  tiie  island  of  Bait,  originally
heathens,  but  recent  converts  to
Mahommedanism.  The  people  had
attended  more  than  12  months,  and
the  cong^gation  was  increasing.
Mr.  M.  statedly  visited  2  villages
inhabited  by  Malays  professing  the
Christian  religion:  one  of  them,
called  Depok,  situated  about  20  m.
to  the  S. ;  the  other  named  Tugot,
situated  about  12  m.  E.  of  Batavia.
Attendance  on  an  average  30 ;
sometimes  (rom  60  to  60.  No  small
encouragement  attended  the  Eng-
lish preaching.  Mr.  M.  speaks  of
the  regular  attendance  of  the  con-
gregation, the  maiked  setxcrasne^sk

55


BAT

•f  a  considerable  part  of  it,  and  of
clearer  and  more  enlarged  views
which  many  had  acquired  of  di\'ine
truth.  A  dispensary  had  been
opened  for  the  purpose  of  gratui-
tously supplying  medicines,  and
communicating  religious  instruction
to  the  Chinese.  Several  works  had
been  prepared  and  printed.  Up  to
Jan.  1,  \H25,  the  number  of  books
and  tracts  printed  exceeded  60,000.
In  distributing  tracts,  Mr.  M.  had
also  been  active.  **  I  sometimes,^'
says  he,  "  go,  with  a  few  tracts  in
my  hand,  into  the  market-place,
where  I  sit  down  and  read  to  those
persons  who  may  be  about  me;
when  immediately  more  gather
round,  and  listen  or  look  on,  to
whom  I  enlarge  on  the  subject  of
the  tract,  and  endeavour  to  press  it
home  on  their  minds.  At  the  con-
clusion, I  present  them  with  a  few
copies  thus  explained^  and  always
find  tliem  well  received.  Even  the
Malays,  who  on  common  occasions
will  not  receive  our  books,  when
they  hear  them  read,  and  perceive
that  their  general  tendency  is  to
benefit  mankind,  solicit  them  as  a
favour."

The  present  state  of  the  mission
is  thus  described  in  the  last  re-
port:—

Chinese  Sc/iools. — The  number
of  these  is  4 ;  3  in  the  Fokeen,  and
1  in  the  Canton  dialect.  Pleasing
evidence  is  from  time  to  time  af-
forded of  the  improvement  of  the
children  in  Christian  knowledge,
while  the  ideas  they  imbibe  of  Sie
folly  of  idolatry,  Mr.  Medhurst
thinks,  might  reasonably  be  ex-
pected to  prepare  their  minds  for  a
more  candid  attention  to  the  truth,
and  a  more  ready  reception  of  it,  at
a  future  period  of  life.  He  has  com-
menced, for  the  benefit  of  the  ad-
herents to  the  mission,  an  English
school,  which  is  under  his  own
immediate  superintendence.
.  Native  Preaching.  —  The  Chi-
neve  and  Malay  services,  on  the


BAT

Sabbath,  are  continued.  The  Chi-
nese service  is  seldom  attended  \ff
any  except  by  the  teachers  .and
children  belonging  to  the  schoolil
but  Mr.  Medhni^  consider*  tiw
non-attendance  of  others  as  attri-
butable to  the  indifference  felt  bf
the  Chinese  to  all  religion,  rather
than  a  bigoted  attachment  to  theb
own.  Mr.  Medhurst  still  preachai
every  Friday  evening  in  Malayaiv
and  with  more  encouragement  than
formerly.  Every  Wednesday  after*
noon  he  delivers  an  exhortation  to
the  patients  in  the  native  hospital;
and  every  Thursday  evening  ex-
pounds the  Scriptures  to  a  few  per-
sons, who  formerly  enjoyed  the
labours  of  Mt.  Robinson,  Baptist
missionary,  and  of  the  late  Mr«
Diering.

The  Canton  and  Fokeen  collo-
quial dialects  having  now  become
comparatively  familiar  to  Mr.  Med-
hurst, he  feels  little  difficulty  in  ad-
dressing the  people.  In  the  evenings
he  goes  from  house  to  house,  Jcon-
versing  with  all  who  manlf^  any
disposition  to  listen  to  him.  At
places  of  public  resort  he  usually
procures  auditors,  but  is  seldom
able  to  collect  half  a  dozen  together
at  one  time.  What,  therefore,  he
cannot  effect  by  preaching  to  laige
assemblies,  he  endeavours  to  make
up  by  the  frequency  of  his  addreMes
to  numerous  small  auditories.

English  Ckmgrisgation.  —  Mr.
Medhurst's  English  congregation
has  been  still  farther^ reduceid,  by
the  departure  of  European  residente
from  Batavia,  chiefly  in  conse-
quence of  the  war  which  has  lately
prevailed  in  Java.  Among  the  re-
spectable Europeans  who  formerly
attended  the  English  services  at  the
mission  chapel,  and  have  been  re-
moved by  death,  was  the  late  Geoige
Livett,  Esq.,  who  has  been  for
many  years  a  steady  friend  and  sup-
porter of  the  mission.

Printing  Establishment, — ^Dur-
ing the  past  year,.  Mr.  .Medhurst

6tt


BAT

hai  printed  a  new  tract,  in  Chi-
neiey  On  the  Redemption  by  Jenu
Ckriet;  a  Dialog  ite  between  an
BngUshman  and  a  Ckinaman,  and
a  R^fy  to  a  printed  handbill  of
oCkineee;  which  handbill  main-
tains  the  absurd  proposition,  that
beoaote  *  European  governments,
and  natives  of  Europe,  in  certain
alleged  particulars,  violate  the
principles  of  justice,  <fec.,  therefore
the  Christian  religion  is  to  be  re-
fined. Accordingly,  the  drift  of  the
latter  two  tracts  is  to  show  that
not  Europeans,  as  such,  but  those
onlj  who,  in  character,  resembled
Jems  Christ,  are  really  Chris-
tlana.

The  naission  books  circulated
anKmg  the  heathen  in  Batavia  are
frequently  read,  and  form  the  sub-
jects of  conversation  and  discussion
aoMing  them  when  the  missionary
k  not  present.  From  these  facts
Mr.  Medhurst  derives  a  measure
of  enoooragement,  hoping  that  the
leaven  has  at  length  begun  *to
w6tkf  which,  in  process  of  time,
viU  leaven  the  whole  lump.

The  Chinese  Magazine,  edited
md  pablished  by  Mr.  Medhurst,
continues  to  be  acceptable  to  that
pan  of  the  public  in  Batavia,  <&c.
lor  whom  it  is  designed.

BATHUnST,  a  new,  flourish-
iag,  and  healthy  British  settlement
in  W»  Africa,  on  the  island  St.Mary,
It  the  moutii  of  the  Gambia,  be-
tween IB^  and  14^  N.  lat.  By
neans  of  this  settlement  a  very
praqierous  commercial  trade  has
keen  Introduced  up  the  Gambia,
«Uch  is  designed  to  suppress  the
dare  trade.  The  river  is  navigable
■ore  than  500  m. ;  and,  in  point  of
commercial  importance,  this  place
k  expected  to  become  the  first  Bri-
tidi  establishment  on  the  coast,  as
it  affords  the  best  intercourse  with
the  interior.  Population  upwards
of  iOOO,  almost  entirely  Jaloofs  and
Mandingoes.  They  are  friendly,
and  many  are  desirous  for  religious  I


BAT

instruction.     They  are   Mahom*
medans.

Rev.  R,Hughe8,  from  the  C,M,S^
arrived  here  in  March  1821,  as
chaplain  to  the  garrison  and  super-
intendent of  schools,  but  died  in
August  following.  Previous  to  this,
schools  had  been  established.

Rev.  John  Norton  and  others  soon
succeeded  Mr.  Hughes.  In  182^,
there  were  in  the  schools  43  boys
and  23  girls.  There  were  also  16
communicants.  The  congregations
were  somewhat  improved,  and  the
people  were  becoming  more  quiet
and  industrious.

The  fFesleyan  miesionaries  have
been  stationed  here  with  the  view
of  extending  their  labours  among
the  numerous  tribes  on  the  banks
of  the  Gambia,  and  into  the  inte-
rior. The  native  school  under  theii
care  is  promising,  and  will  doubt-
less produce  ultimate  fruits  Among
the  adult  natives,  there  have  been
some  encouraging  symptoms.  Num-
ber in  society,  25.  The  obstacles  to
rapid  success,  however,  appear  tot
be  numerous.    '

.BATTICALOE,  a  small  island,
about  31  or  32  m.  in  circuit,  <hi
the  £.  coast  of  Ceylon ;  60  m.  N.
Mature.  E.  long.  82®,  N.  lat.  tffi
45'.  Here  is  a  fort  {  a  few  English
families,  and  a  small  village  of-
Mahommedans  and  Hindoos,  are
dupes  to  the  vilest  superstitions.
They  mostly  speak  Tamul.  I'he
heathen  population  is  numerous  OO:
the  adjacent  shores,  but  they  axe
remote  and  secluded  from  any  other
missionary  station,  the  intermedi-
ate country  being  wild  and  dan-
gerous.

Rev.  Mr.  Ault,  of  the  fF,  Jfcf,
S,y  commenced  a  mission  here  in
1 824,  and  rested  from  1^  very  active
and  successful  labours  in  the  follow-
ing year ;  yet,  in  this  short  space,
he  had  nearly  prepared  an  exten-
sive circuit.  At  this  time,  he  was
the  only  missionary,  ftom  JoStvol
on  ihe  N.  to  Matura  on  tVie^.  >  ^

51


BAT

distance  of  830  miles.  He  acquired
the  Tamul,  and  preached  often  and
extensively  to  large  and  attentive
congregations,  besides  superintend-
ing several  schools  of  about  140
scholars ;  into  which  he  introduced
portions  of  the  Gospel,  copied  by
the  scholars  upon  their  olas,  for
school-books,  instead  of  the  books
and  vain  songs  of  the  heathen.  He
began  to  see  precious  fruits  of  his
labours.  After  his  death,  the  mis-
sion was  only  partially  supplied,  till
about  1821,  when  Mr.  Roberts,
having  previously  acquired  a  know-
ledfife  of  the  I'amul  at  Jaffna,  re-
sumed it.

The  report  of  1826  furnishes
the  following  particulars  of  this
station : —

English  School,  Miation  Pre-
mises, contains  23  children,  who
attend  pretty  regularly.  Nearly  all
the  boys  are  natives,  and  find  Eng-
lish difficult  to  acquire ;  but  seve-
ral read  the  New  Testament,  and
^  Write  tolerably  well.  Two  or  three
are  ready  at  translating  sentences
from  English  into  Tamul,  and  it  is
hoped  may  ultimately  be  useful  as
teachers  and  interpreters.

Native  School,  Mission  PremtseSf
contains  40  children.  Many
boys  read  with  propriety,  and  un-
derstand the  catechisms.

Native  School,  Kottikollam,-^
The  village  contains  about  200  in-
habitants ;  23  names  are  on  the
school-list.  This  school  is  in  very
good  order;  several  boys  can  re-
peat the  whole  translation  of  the
Catechism.  The  people  attend
service  with  apparent  interest.

I'allierravpo  School  contains  20
children.

Navacuddy  School  contains  40
children,  and  has  always  been  well
attended.  The  village  has  nearly
1000  people.

Kattancitddierroppo  School  con-
tains 40  children,  20  of  whom  are
of  Mahommedan  parents.  Popu-
iatioa  of  tbe  viUage  nearly  3000.


BAT

B ATTICOTTA,  b  parish  in  tt0
district  of  Jaffiia,  on  the  northcM
extremity  of  the  island  of  CeyloH)
6  m.  N.W.  Jaffhapatam  ;  2  N.lf*
Manepy,  and  3  S.E.  Panditerlpdij
Previous  to  the  desolating  siclmoi^
in  1819,  the  parish  contained  130D
families.  E.lon.  S(fi  15',  N.bi
9045'.

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Bet^amin  C
Meigs,  and  Richards,  from  fhB
American  Board  of  Qanmissimtrii^
for  Foreign  Missions,  commeBMl
labouring  hei^  in  1817.  Gaknti
Tissera  is  the  native  preacher.

Having  gained  permisrion  of
government  to  occupy  the  glebe
lands  at  this  place,  the  miarioi*
aries  commenced  repairing  flie
buildings  in  1816,  and  removed
their  families  here  in  June,  1817.

The  mission  premises  cantata
nearly  4  acres  of  land,  on  which  thtf
missionaries  fdund  the  foUowing
appurtenances ;  achurch,  dwelling*
house,  5  other  small  bulldingi^  9
yards,  a  garden,  4  wells,  1 1  man^
gosa  trees,  and  6\  palmyra  tre^
all  belonging  to  the  government  trf
Ceylon.

The  church  is  171  feet  long  and
65  wide;  the  walls,  4  feet  thiek,
are  chiefly  of  coral  stones.  Frbfli
one  end  to  the  other  are  20  maa^
pillars,  10  feet  in  circumference,  Is
two  rowSf  supporting  18  fine  ardlHi
which  are  so  much  higher  than  tiw
walls  as  to  support  the  roof.  It
was  built  by  the  Portuguese  in  tli0
16th  century,  and  repaired  by  the
Dutch  in  1678.  Since  the  Englidi
took  possession  of  the  island,  ia
1795-6,  all  the  buildings  had  been
rapidly  decaying,  till  the  mission'
aries  made  the  repairs.  The  ra^
vages  of  time  had  nearly  demo-
lished all  that  pertained  to  them  of
wood.

The  church  and  dwelling'houi$f
according  to  the  custom  of  thd
country,  are  one  story  high.  The
latter  is  100  feet  long,  and  42  wide ;
the  >«ralU  of  coial  stones,  the  flooit


i

i


J0
.1


4


BAT

I9  and,  in  the  time  of  the
was  tiie  country  seat  of  the
ifficer  in  command  at  Jaffiia.
t  is  the  church,  about  20
tant.  At  the  back  of  the
re  the  yards,  enclosed  by  a
out  8  feet  high.  Through
ihese  is  an  entrance  into  iSie
which  contains  nearly  two
mclosed  by  a  ttne  waU  of
fmesy  laid  in  mortar,  9  feet
In  this  are  3  wells  to  water
i  dry  season,  and  the  pal-
rees,  the  fruit  of  which
tes  the  principal  food  of  the
during  half  the  year ;  the
re  used  to  cover  the  roofs  of
;s,  and,  instead  of  paper,  for
,  The  mangosa  trees  are
t  of  the  house ;  from  the
aluable  oil  is  expressed,  and
iks  of  these,  and  the  pal-
re  valuable  for  timber,
first  object  of  the  mission-
is  to  learn  the  Tamul  lan-
and  establish  schools.  In
year  they  acquired  the  lan-
so  as  to  preach  without  in-
is,  both  in  the  mission-
and  in  the  neighbouring
u  The  boarding-school,  at
ion,  was  commenced  July
818,  with  5  boys.  Owing
prejudices  of  the  natives
uieir  children  eating  on  the
land,  a  small  house  was
on  an  adjoining  acre  of
Anging  to  a  heathen.  In
be  school  consisted  of  22
7  of  whom  had  received
names,  according  to  the
of  their  benefactors  ;  se<
whom  are  hopefully  pious,
ider  important  aid  to  the
>  At  the  same  time  Were
3  of  whom  were  named.
,  Mr.  Meigs  superintended
Is  iu  this  and  neighbouring
I,  containing  300  children,
>re  instructed  in  the  prin-
)f  the  Christian  religion,
shards  was  eminently  use-
9  t^  A  missionary  and phy^r  \


BEB

cian,  till  4821,  when  he  remored
to  TilUpally,  and  died,  August  H
1822.  Mr.  Woodward  succeeded
him  at  this  station.    See  Jaffina,

BAY  OF  KENTY,  a  bay  on
the  northern  shore  of  lake  Ontario,
Upper  Canada^  inhabited  by  the
Mohawks.

Messrs.  John  JJill  and  John
Green,  schoobnasterB  from  the  &»-
ciety^or propagating  the  Gospelin
foreign  Paris,  labour  here.

This  place  is  occasionally  visited
by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Stewart,  of  King-
ston, who  superintends  the  school,
and  performs  other  missionary  la-
bours. The  Mohawks  are  verv  de-
sirous of  instruction.  The  pupils
make  encouraging  progress,  and-  a
permanent  mission  is  intended.    .

B££RBHOOM,  a  district  in
Bengal,  Hindoostan,  N.W.  of  Cal-
cutta; 80  m.  long  and  30  wide,  bor-
dering on  Monghyr  N.  and  Burdwan
S.  About  60  m.  from  Cutwa.  Al-
though this  place  had  been  visited
for  some  years,  as  opportunity
offered,  by  the  Baptist  missionarieS|
it  was  not,  till  1823,  made  a  se-
parate station.  At  that  period,
Mr.  Hampton,  who  was  baptized
some  years  before  by  Mr.  Sutton,
and  had  for  some  time  been  exert-
ing himself  very 'successfully  among
his  heathen  neighbours  at  Tum-
look,  near  the  Sunderbunds,  was
appointed  to  it.  Animated  by
Christian  zeal,  he  resigned  his  se-
cular engagements,  and  devoted
himself  entirely  to  missionary  la-
bour. The  village  in  which  he
fixed  his  residence  is  called  Seuri>
and  he  had  soon  the  pleasure  of  re-
ceiving several  new  members  into
the  church.  His  sphere  of  action
being  very  extensive,  a  number  of
itinerants  were  employed  under  his
superintendence.  Mr.  Hampton
afterwards  resigned  his  connexion
with  the  society,  but  a  pious  friend
on  the  spot  exerted  himself,  in
consequence,  so  zeaLo\]&Vy,  \h»X
the  deficiency  was  aoaiceiVy  i^V>

59


BEL

until  Mr.  WilUamsoii  arrived
from  Sertunpore,  who  entered
on  his  work,  in  1S26,  with  great
energy.  Ue  had  four  native  as-
sistants. The  church  consisted,  at
the  date  of  his  last  letters,  of  37
members,  nearly  all  of  whom  are
converts  from  heathenism.  In  his
endeavours  to  instruct  the  female
part  of  his  floclc,  only  one  of  whom
was  found  able  to  read,  Mrs.  W.
takes  an  active  part,  and  the  pro-
gress already  made  is  highly  en-
couraging.

BELGAUM,  a  populous  town
and  military  station  between  Bom-
bay and  Beliary,  and200m.N.W.
of  the  latter  place.  The  Canara
is  chiefly  spoken  here,  arid  in  the
extensive  country  between  this  and
Bellary;  and  the  Mahratta  between
this  and  Bombay.

Rev.  Joseph  Toy^,  of  the  L.  M.
S,,  accompanied  by  the  native
teacher,  Ryndass,  proceeded,  in
September,  1820,  from  Bellary  to
Belgaum,  for  the  purpose  of  com-
mencing a  new  mission.  They
were  very  kindly  received  by  ge-
neral Pritzler,  as  well  as  by  several
other  respectid)le  Europeans,  whose
solicitations,  with  those  of  the
general,  had,  amongst  other  causes,
induced  Mr.  Taylor  to  remove  to
Belgaum.  On  his  arrival,  Mr.
Taylor  conducted  public  worship,
on  the  Sabbath  mornings,  at
general  Pritzler's  house ;  on
which  occasion,  a  considerable
proportion  of  the  military  offi-
cers stationed  at  Belgaum  at-
tended. On  the  Sabbath  even-
ings he  also  preached  to  the  sol-
diers in  the  camp.  In  1821,  Mr.
Taylor  had  succeeded  in  the  for-
mation of  two  native  schools ;  one
of  which  is  situated  in  Belgaum,
and  the  other  in  the  neighbouring
town  of  Shawpore.  The  number
of  boys  under  instruction  was  about
120. ,  At  Shawpore,  by  the  kind-
ness of  Dr.  Millar,  of  his  Majesty's
^Sd  regiment,  Mr,  Taylor  had  been


BEL

enabled  to  provide   a  coii?eiiieBt
school-house.    Besides  elemeiitaiy
books,  Dr.Watts's  Pint  Catechtaii
and  a  larger  Catechism    used  ft
Bellary,  together   with  ScriptoB
tracts,    &c.  had  been  introdooad
into  Uie  schools.     The  chibbpn
not  only   committed   to  maaoff
large  portions  of  the  Scriptoiai^
Catechisms,  (fee,  but  endeavound
to  understand  what  they  leamd.
Mr.  Taylor  devoted  twro  efeni^p
in    each    week  to   convenattaM
with  the  heathen.    These,  meet-
ings, which  were  held  in  the  school-
house    at    Shawpore,    and   eoi-
ducted  in  the  Canara   langfugei
were  occasionally  well  attended.
On  the  Sabbath,  Mr.  Taylor  eiB-
ducted   three   public    servicei  la
English ;  two  of  them  in  the  caapi
and  one  at  the  commanding  offieer^
quarters.     A  temporary  building,
capable  of  holding  from  ^60  to  300
persons,  had  been  erected  in  the
camp,  where  divine  worship  fW
regularly  performed;  and,  on  tin
Sunday  morning,  all  the  soUUeQi  ■
then  ofiPduty,  were  marched  dovit
The  rest,  together  with  voiunUerif
attended  the  camp  service  in  flie
evening.    The  service  at  the  cov-
manding  officer's  quarters  was  at-
tended by  all  the  staff  officers,  ani
others  residing  in  the  fort,  and  alio
by  the  soldiers  of  the  103^  artil-
ler>'.  On  Wednesday  eveninga,  Mr.
Taylor  held  a  service  in  th^  camp ;
and,  on  Friday  evenings,  at  his  own
house,  in  the  fort.    All  the  soldlen
who  assembled  for  worship  on  theie
occasions,    attended    voluntarily.
— Mr.  Taylor  was  encouraged  to
hope  that  the  above-mentipned  aer-
vices,  which  he  described,  particn-
larly  those  in  the  fort,  as  truly  ani-
mating,   had    not .  been   in  vain.
Some  of  his  hearers  acknowledged
the  benefit  derived  from  his  pabUc
ministry,  and  confirmed   this  ac-
knowledgment ;  while  they  adorn-
ed their  profession  by  a  holy  con-
venaUoiv  and  co\is&!i^^l  Ufe«
\  ^


BEL

On  the  application  of  General
Pritzler,  the  Madras  goyemment
granted  Mr.  Taylor  a  liberal  al-
lowance  for   his   services  in  the
canp  $  which  he  generously  devoted
to  the'  mission.     A  society^  deno-
ndnated  the  Belgaum  j^ssociation,
bad  been  formea,  as  an  auxiliary
kiihe Bible,  MUnonary,  and  TVact
SteieHes.    And  the  circulation  of
the  Scriptures  and  religious  tracts
had  been  promoted,  in   five  lan-

gMg»».

Mr.  Hands,  who,  during  the  year
IMS,  had  an  opportunity  of  wit-
■esslng  the  progress  of  the  mission,
wrote  as  follows : —

**  I  was  exceedingly  gratified  by
my  visit  to  Belgaum.  Dearbrothef
Tf^or  has  shown   himself  to  h6
*  a  workman  that  needs  not  to  be
Mhaned.'     His    public    services,
both  in  the  camp  and  in  the  fort,
ate  well  attended ;  and  the  great
Head  of  the  Church  has  honoured
bim  wi&  very  considerable  success.
There  are  several  humble,  devout
soldiers,    now     members   of  his
dmrch,  who  consider  him  as  their
ipfritaal  father ;    and,    during  my
journey  last  year,  I  met  with  several
stBang^ore,  Cananore,  <fec.,  who
Uemd  God  for  the  benefit  they
bid  received  from  his  labours.  His
oiertions  among  the  natives  have
alio  been  blessed ;  one,  a  brahmin
■t  Belgaum,  has,  I  trust,  received
tile  truth  in  love,  and  become  a
dncere  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ.    I
■wmnch  oi  this  brahmin  while  at
Belganm,  and  he  afterwards  ac-
eompanied  us  part  of  the  way  to
Bdlary.    I  was  so  well  satisfied  of
tbedncerity  of  his  profession,  that
I  advised  Mr.  Taylor  to  baptize
him  mi  his  arrival  at  home,  which
I  Imagine  he  has  done.    There  are
abo  8  few  other  natives  at  this  sta-
tion, of  whom  I  hope  weU.

*'  His  English  and  native  schools
aflbvded  me  much  satisfaction,  par-
tlealarly  the  native  school  at  SImw-
pom,  A  number  o/ebUdren  there,


BEL

replied  to  several  important  and  un-
expected questions,  in  a  manner
tiiat  almost  surprised  me,  and  would
have  done  credit  to  a  school  in
England.  Some  of  them  have  had
their  minds  so  far  affected  by  what
they  have  learned  of  Christianity,
that  they  have  refused  to  offer  the
usual  worship  to  the  household  gods
of  their  parents,  and  have  endea-
voured to  show  them  the  sin  and
folly  of  worshipping  such  gods.
Rjrndass  continues  as  a  catechist
wi&  Mr.  Taylor,  and  has,  I  think,
considerably  improved  since  he  has
been  with  him.  Mr.  Taylor  was
anticipating  a  removal  from  the
fort  to  a  house  well  adapted  for  the
mission,  in  the  centre  of  the  native
town."

Through  succeeding  years,  the
mission  was  blessed  with  prosperity ;
and,  in  Nov.  1825,  two  brahmins
and  a  rajpoot,  the  first  fruits  of  the
mission  at  Belgaum,  were  baptized
at  Bombay,  after  a  satisfactory
avowal  of  their  faith  in  Christianity,
in  the  presence  of  about  300  na-
tives. Various  reasons  induced  Mr.
Taylor  to  fix  on  Bombay  as  the
place  where  the  rite  should  be  ad-
ministered. Rev.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lil-
lie  arrived  safe  at  Belgaum,  on  the
19th  of  November,  1826.  The
following  are  the  last  accounts  of
this  station  : —

Native  Schools, — The  school  at
Shawpore  has  been  suspended,  and
a  considerable  reduction  in  the  num-
ber of  the  scholars  in  the  other
schools  has  also  taken  place,  in
consequence  of  the  baptism  of  tho
two  brahmins  and  a  rajpoot,  at
Bombay,  in  1825.  The  number  of
native  schools,  in  connexion  with
the  station,  is  still  6 ;  another  school
having  been  opened  during  the  past
year.  The  progress  made  by  many
of  the  boys  is,  on  the  whole,  very
satisfactory.

Native  tPorsMp,  SfC, — W^Aft^^V^
regret  to  state,  that  ^eri«c\i\\oT»,
directed  Bgalnst  the  Via.\^\ize<i  vkv\


B£L

their  connexions,  induced  one  of
the  brahmins  just  mentioned,  and
the  rajpoot,  to  surrender  them-
selves to  the  wiil  of  their  respec-
tive families.  The  brahmin,  we
are,  however,  happy  to  state,  has
since  rejoined  the  mission.  The
other  brahmin,  who  remained  firm
under  persecution,  has  removed  to
Bombay  to  labour  in  connexion
with  the  American  mission  at  that
presidency.

In  consequence  of  the  opposition
manifested  at  Shawpore  against  the
baptized  brahmins,  it  has  been
judged  expedient  for  the  present  to
discontinue  the  native  service  at
that  out-station y  and,  instead  there-
of, to  commence  one  at  Belgaum.

Distribution  of  the  ScriptureSy
fye. — During  the  past  year,  many
tracts  have  been  distributed,  and  a
few  copies  of  portions  of  the  Scrip-
tures; the  latter  chiefly  among
Roman  Catholics*  and  some  Pro-
testants, who  were  urgent  in  their
applications  for  copies.  »

The  poor  people  in  the  chari-
table asylum,  superintended  by.  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Taylor,  are  now  favoured,
daily,  with  the  means  of  religious
instruction.  One  of  the  school-
masters attends  the  alms-house,  and
reads  a  portion  of  the  Scriptures,  a
catechism  or  tract,  and  an  evening
prayer.  Many  of  the  poor  people
express  their  thanks  for  tbe  kind-
ness and  attention  thus  diown  to
them.

Mr.  Taylor  has  projected  a  cir-
culating library,  in  connexion  with
the  mission,  for  the  use  of  the  mili-
tary stationed  at  Belgaum,  and
others.

Belgaum  Association*— The  re-
ceipts of  this  institution,  for  the
year  ending  30th  of  April,  1826,
amounted  to  rupees,  959.  12 .;  of
which  the  sum  of  420  rupees  has
been  voted  to  the  parent  society.

BELLARY,  a  town  situated  in
the  most  northern  part  of  the  pro-
riace  of  Mysore,  and  aorroanded


BEIi

by  numerous  populous  towni  snd
villages.  Here  the  Re?.  J«  Haadiy
from  the  L.  M,  <SL,  arrived  in  April*
1810,  and  was  treated  witb  grett
respect  by  the  European  leslSnliy
among  whom  he  soon  began  to  ce-
lebrate divine  service.  He  hady  at
first,  some  great  difficulties  to  con-
tend with,  in. acquiring  the  Canan
language,  which  is  spoken  from  the
borders  of  the  Mahratta  neariy  to
the  bottom  of  the  Mysore.  He
applied  himself,  however,  so  pa-
tiently and  perseveriagly  to  this
study,  that  he  not  only  soon  col-
lected several  thousands  of  wtwds,
which  he  formed  into  a  vocabolaiyi
but  also  began  preparing  a  gram-
mar, with  the  assistance  Of  Us
mooushee,  who  appeared  to  be  a
very  learned  man.  The  brahmins
in  this  place  are  said  to  be  com-
paratively few  in  number.  Some
of  ttiese  visited  the  missionary  in  a
friendly  manner;  a  consideraUe
number  of  country  poor,  or  ''  half-
caste"  persons,  attended  his  minli-
tej ;  and,  in  some  instances,  his  la*
hours  appear  to  have  been  suc-
cessful. One  man,  in  particqlaiy
informed  him  that  he  had  been  con-
strained to  commence  family  wor-
ship, both  morning  and  evening.

Many  pleasing  ctrcumstraces
subsequently  transpired.  Mr.  Hands
preached  thrice  every  Lord's  day  to
his  countrymen,  and  the  Portuguese
half-caste,  with  much  encourage*
ment.  The  principal  people  treat-
ed him  with  great  kind^fass ;  and
several  of  the  natives,  on  certain
festival  days,  brought  him  an  abun-
dance of  fruit.  His  residence  had
been  a  pagoda,  and  sevenl  huge
gods  of  stone  lay  about  his  pre-
mises. In  the  spring  of  1812,  with
the  assistance  of  a  young  friend
from  Madras,  he  opened  a  native
school,  which  was  soon  attended
by  60  children.  Here  he  preached
the  Gospel  twice  a  week.  Upwards
of  20  soldiers  belonging  to  one
regiment  weia  broogbt  to  a  saring


BBL

•eqasintance  with  divine  things,
nndor  hln  ministry,  and,  with  some
trthen,  were  formed  into  a  society.

Jb  1816,  Mr.  Hands  was  joined
fajthe  Rev.  Wm.  Reeve,  by  which
tfane  many  schocds  had  been  esta*
bUAed.

lathe  monlh  of  March,  1817,
Menrs.  Hands  and  Reeve  took  a
jonmey  to  visit  the  spot  once  oc-
cupied by  the  famoos  city  of  Bis-
JMgnr.  From  the  top  of  a  pagoda,
on  a  high  mountain,  and  with  the
aid  of  a  good  telescope,  they  had  a
fine  view  of  the  extensive  scene
of  desolation,  comprising  the  ruins
of  palaces^  pagodas,  and  other  pub-
lie  buildings;  the  architecture  of
whi6h  appealed  to  have  been  of  a
veiy  superior  kind.  It  is  said,  if
all  the  buildings  which  now  remain
ware  placed  close  together,  they
would  occupy  a  greater  extent  of
ground  than  that  on  which  the  city
of  London  stands.

Here  they  met  with  many  people
who  had  visited  the  mission-house
at  Bdlaiy,  for  the  puipose  of  re-
ceiving religious  instmction.  They
paid  a  visit  to  tiie  aged  rajah  of
Anagoody,  who  seemed  to  be  about
90  yeus  of  age,  and  was  undeiw
going  a  severe  course  of  penance,
to  propitiate  his  deity,  whom  he
conceived  to  be  ang^  with  him.
They  found  him  at  a  short  distance
from  the  city,  performing  his  devo-
tions in  one  of  his  pagodas,  sur-
rounded by  servants,  miulcians,  and
brahmins,  in  abundance.  He  had
ahceady  fasted  tUn^  days,  besides
imdergoing  other  mortifications;
and  from  what  they  saw  and  heard,
tiiey  considered  him  as  a  complete
devotee.  Mr.  Hands  spoke  to  him
for  a  considerable  time  on  the  in-
efficiency of  his  penances  to  obtain
the  favour  of  heaven ;  but  he  seemed
to  hear  with  reluctance  what  was
advanced  against  his  infatuating
idolatry.

At  Bisnagmr,  on  the  last  day  of
tiw  annua]  legtival,  the  miMtioaaries


BEL

beheld  a  grand  religious  proces*
sion,  in  which  two  ponderous  cars
of  the  idob  were  dragged  along  by
the  multitude.  *'  I  counted  nearly
1000  people,"  says  Mr.  Reeve,
**  who  were  drawing  one  of  them,
and,  on  measuringone  of  the  wheels,
I  found  it  to  be  14  feet  in  diameter.
The  height  of  the  car,  including  its
trappings  and  ornaments,  ■  was,  J
suppose,  not  less  than  200  feet ;  so
that  it  was  very  fatiguing  work  to
make  it  move  at  aU.  Indeed,  I
believe,  that  if  the  peons  and  sol-
diers had  not  come  with  their
swords  and  spears,  the  poor  god
would  have  been  forsaken,  and  left
in  the  road."

After  their  return  to  Bellary,
they  had  the  satisfaction  of  adding
to  their  little  church  10  persons  $
and  they  were  particularly  gratified
with  the  experience  of  one  indivi*>
dual,  who  stated  that  he  was  the
son  of  an  aged  Moravian  mission-
ary, still  labouring  in  the  West  In-
dies. He  had  run  away  from  a
boarding-school,  and  enlisted  for  a
scddier ;  in  these  circumstances  he
was  brought  to  India,  and,  under  a
sermon  at  Bellary,  he  was  convert-
ed to  God.

In  the  course  of  the  summer,.
Mr.  Hands  was  induced,  by  the  un-
favourable state  of  his  health,  to
take  a  journey  to  Madras,  which
was  very  beneficial;  but,  on  his
return,  he  found  that  of  his  beloved
wife  on  the  decline.  She  languished
until  the  1st  of  Aug.  1818,  when
her  disembodied  spirit  entered  "  the
house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal
in  the  heavens."  She  was  one  of
the  oldest  missionaries  connected
with  the  L.  M,  S.  in  India ;  having
been  employed  in  the  work  12
years — first  as  the  wife  of  the  ex-
cellent Mr.  Des  Granges,  and  after-
wards as  the  beloved  partner  of  Mr.
Hands.

In  January,  1819,  a  juvenile
Bible  S,  was  formed  «t  B«\\.«r3>
principally  tbxouR\i  \)i\e  i«i«\  ^V^^


BEL

master  of  the  cbarity-scbool,  and
the  activity  of  one  of  the  scholars,
who  was  formerly  notorious  for  his
M'jclcedness  and  audacity.  The
attendance  also  at  the  mission  cha-
pel became  so  numerous,  that  an
enlargement  was  considered  in-
dispensable. The  expense  of  this,
together  with  additional  seats  and
lamps,  was  computed  at  £60 ;  but
the  pious  soldiers,  and  other  friends,
who  were  in  the  habit  of  attending
on  the  means  of  gprace,  felt  so
deeply  interested  in  the  object,  that
they  collected  nearly  the  whole
sum  in  the  coarse  of  24  hours.

On  the  2d  of  March,  the  mis-
sionaries received  a  visit  from  the
rajah  of  Harponally,  who  had  ar-
rived at  Bellary  on  the  preceding
evening,  seated  upon  a  very  large
elephant,  and  followed  by  three
others,amidst  an  immei|se  concourse
of  people.  "  He  came  to  us,"  says
Mr.  Reeve,  **  with  all  the  pomp
and4)arade  of  oriental  princes,  and
our  garden  was  almost  filled  .with
his  splendid  retinue.  He  showed
no  disposition  to  enter  into  any  par-
ticular conversation,  but  expressed
himself  highly  gratified  with  the
attention  which  had  been  shown  to
him."

At  the  close  of  IS  19,  Mr.  Reeve
c)bserves — **  During  the  progress  of
this  year,  the  Gospel  has  been  car-
ried several  hundred  miles  through
the  dark  villages,  and  several  thou-
sands of  tracts  have  been  distributed.
The  translation  and  revision  of  the
Scriptures  in  Canara,  have  also
been  proceeding.  A  new  edition
of  Dr.  Watts's  First  Catechism,  in
that  language,  with  numerous  im-
provements and  corrections,  has
been  prepared  for  the  press.  A
copy  of  the  same  has  also  been
prepared  in  the  Tamul.  The  pro-
gress of  the  native  schools  has  been
ifavourable,  and  several  hundreds  of
the  pupils  know  perfectly  the  First
Catechism,  and  the  greater  part  of
our  Lord's  Sermon  on  the  Mount.


BEL

Towardi  the  latter  end  of  the
following  year,  Mr.  Hands  deter-
mined to  commence  a  miattoiiaiy
tour  through  the  Balaghaut  ceded
districtti,  and  Mysore^  to  Seringi^
patam ;  and,  on  the  14th  of  Merchi

1822,  returned  to  Bellaiy  with
Mrs.  Hands,  having  been  manled
during  his  absence.  On  their
journey  Mrs.  Hands  became  veri-;
ously  indisposed;  and,  after  hat
arrival  at  her  husband's  reridencei
she  grew  much  worse,  and  gia*
dually  declined,  tiU  the  251fa  of
May,  when  she  bade  an  everloftiBg
farewell  to  the  partner  of  hera^
fections — ^to  the  mission — uid  to
the  world.

From  the  report  of  IH^,  tt
seems  that  the  number  of  schoois
was  16,  and  the  number  of  scholan
about  500.  An  evening  school  had
been  opened.  The  Canareae  and
Tamilese  services  were  continue^
and  not  without  encouragement
One  of  the  bapthsed  had  died  ap-
parently very  happy.  The  ennttif
formerly  manifested  against  tlie
converts  had,  in  a  great  degree^
subsided,  and  intercourse  had  been
restored  between  them  and  their
relations.  Instances  of  conventon
occurred,  from  time  to  time,  froni
the  English  services ;  and  the  im-
proved example  of  many  European^
including  civil  and  militery  officei%
in  the  E.  I.  Company's  service,  had
made  a  favourable  impression  on
the  natives.  The  translations  of
the  Scriptures,  and  other  works,
were  advancing:  6000  tracts  had
been  distributed  during  the  year,
in  many  places,  besides  large  sup-
plies being  sent  to  Seringapatan
and  Canaanore.  The  number  of
tracts  issued  by  the  Bellary  T.  &
from  its  establishment  in  1817,  was
26,734.  The  contributions  of  the
Bellary  ^.  3f.  S.,  for  the    year

1823,  amounted  to  rupees,  627. 13.
In  consequence  of  the  removal  of
some  of  his  coadjutors,  and  of  Mr.
Reeve's  visit    to   England,   Mr.


BBL

■iid^laboiived  forioaie  time  ikNie,
it  focciuifiilly.  The  new  cliapel
H  opened  in  October  1824.  Its
tal  coit  was  more  than  7000  ru-
1^  or  abont  £700  sterling.  This
ht,  through  the  llbenUity  of
lends  in  India,  was,  however,  soon
loidated.  The  Rer.  Mr.  and  Mrs.
^ynon  reached  Bellary  at  the
Qse  of  l%26,  and  Rev.  Mr.  and
In.  Pain  arrived  in  the  course  of
IB  following  year.  The  foUow-
ig  statement  will  convey  an  idea
'  the  state  of  the  mission  in  1826.
Naiwe  Schooii. — These  schools
id  been  again  increased  to  30;
le  number  of  boys  under  instruc-
on  was  864.  Portions  of  the
siptoreshad  been  introduced  as
lading  books  into  all  the  schools ;
id  as  the  boys  usually  made  known
)  their  parents  what  they  leamedi
och  scripture  knowledge  was  thus
directly  communicated  among  the
[flit  heathen.  At  most  of  the
hools  established  at  the  villages
,  the  surrounding  country,  the  vil-
gUBi,  when  at  leisure,  attended
>  Improve  themselves  in  knowledge
■nt  down  among  the  scholunn-
wd  in  the  religious  books  taught
,  the  schools;  and  When  the  su-
Sintendent,  on  his  inspecting
sm,  visited  them,  they  asked  for
qdanations  of  such  passages  as
ij  had  not  been  able  fuJLly  to
ideistand.

The  schools,  generally  speaking,
mnected  with  this  station,  as  at
aiqr  other  stations  in  the  East,
liEned  greatly  from  the  want  of
briftian  schoolmasters.
A  new  school  had  been  lately
len^  in  the  Pettah  of  Bellary,
id  a  spot  of  ground  purchased  for
school-house,  for  the  erection  of
hich  funds  nearly  sufficient  to
iftay  the  whole  expense  had  been
benlly  supplied  by  friends  at
ieUaiy.

Ckarity  School.— This  institn-
on  continued  to  be  liberally  sup-
vtedf  and  to  be  attended  with


BEL

useful  results.  The  number  of
scholais,  on  the  31st  of  December,
1826,  was  44 ;  of  whom  28  were
boys,  and  the  rest  girls.  The  re*
ceipts  for  the  year  then  terminating,
amounted  to  1258  rupees.

Service*  in  the  Native  Lan-
guages,— These  services  had  been
increased  to  6.  Those  in  Canurese
were  performed  by  Mr.  Hands,
those  in  Tamil  by  Mr.  Walton.  The
number  who  attended  the  Conarese
service  on  Sabbath  momings,  was
more  than  100,  but  they  consisted
chiefly  of  boys  belonging  to  the
schools,  and  their  masters.  The
largest  attendance  of  natives  here
was  at  the  Canarese  service  in  the
Pettah  on  Wednesday  evenings.
Two  more  native  converts,  making
9,  one  a  Gooroo,  and  the  other  of  the
merchant  caste,  had  been  proposed
for  baptism.  Many  privately  ex-
pressed their  conviction  of  the  folly
of  worshipping  idols,  and  of  thu
truth  of  Christianity,  who  were  de-
terred by  fear  of  persecution  from
openly  avowing  it.

/worship  in  EngUeh, —  Many
pious  individuals  belonging  to  the
military  had  removed  to  othei
stations,  but  their  place  in  the  mis-
sion ohapel  had  been  filled  up  by
others;  so  that  in  general,  on  tiiu
Sabbalh  evenings,  there  was  a  very
respectable  congregation.  The  In-
crease of  piety  among  the  Euro-
peans, at  this  and  other  stations,  iii
this  part  of  the  world,  the  mis-
sionaries considered  a  source  of  en-
couragement ;  since  one  of  the  rea-
sons which  the  natives  assigned  for
their  rejection  of  Christianity  was,
the  immoral  lives  of  many  of  thosi^
«  who  professed  and  called  them-
selves Christians."

The    Sabbath-evening    school,
,  which  had  been  discontinued  from
the  want  of  proper  superintend-
ence,  had,   since  Mr.  Pain's  ar-
rival, been  re-commenced.

Translation  of  the  Scriptvarti.-*
The  Canuese  vexsum  ol\Scke^\\^

G  2  «5


BEL

was  finished  on  the  18th  of  Sep-
tember, 1826.  The  Canarese  New
Testament  was  under  revision  for
a  second  edition.

Printing  EstabUskment, — The
printing  of  the  Pentateuch,  in
Canarese,  was  advanced,  in  the
beginning  of  December,  1826,  as
f^  as  the  I6th  chapter  of  Numbers.

Distribution  of  Tracts.— The
number  of  tracts,  in  various  lan-
guages, put  into  circuhition  by
the  B.  T.  S,  during  1826,  amounted
to  upwards  of  20,000.

BELTOLLAH,  a  town  in
Bengal  Hindoostan.  In  1821,  the
C  A.  S,  established  5  Bengalee
schools  in  this  vicinity ;  and  a  cen-
tral English  school  at  this  place
under  the  superintendence  of  Mr.
Pan  Gricken,

BENARES,  a  large  district  of
Hindoostan,  in  the  E.  part  of  the
province  of  Allahabad.  It  contains
the  circars  of  Benares,  Juanpoor,
and  Mirzapoor,  and  was  ceded  to
the  English  in  1775.  The  manu-
factures of  this  district  are  nume-
rous, and  the  chief  articles  of  pro-
duce are  barley,  peas,  wheat,  sugar,
salt,  indigo,  and  opium.

Benares,  a  famous  city,  is  the
capital  of  the  above  district,  and
may  be  called  the  Athens  of  the
Hindoos.  It  is  celebrated  as  the
ancient  seat  of  brahminical  learn-
ing, and  is  built  on  the  left  bank  of
the  Ganges.  Its  ancient  name  is
Casi  (the  Splendid)  which  the  Hin-
doos still  retain  ;  and  it  is  so  holy,
that  many  distant  rajahs  have  dele-
gates residing  here,  who  perform
for  them  the  requisite  sacrifices  and
ablutions.  The  shasters  affirm,  and
the  natives  suppose,  that  whoever
dies  here  will  be  saved.  Several
Hindoo  temples  embellish  the  high
banks  of  the  river,  and  many  other
public  and  private  buildings  are
magnificent.  The  streets  are  ex-
tremely narrow ;  the  houses  high,
with  terraces  on  the  summit,  and
some  of  them  inhabited  by  different


\


BEN

families;  but- the  more  weal%
Gentoos  live  in  detached  hoam
with  an  open  court,  siurrounded  \if
a  wall.  The  number  of  itone  ad
brick  houses,  from  1  to  6  storieiy-ii
upwards  of  18,000  $  and  of  mvt
houses,  above  16,000.  The  po^
manent  inhabitants,  in  1803,  ei-
ceeded  582,000;  and  duiing  tli»
festivals,  the  concourse  is  b^fond
all  calculation.  Nearly  in  the  eea-
tre  of  the  city  is  a  consideiikto
Mahomedan  mosque,  built  by  As-
rengzebe,  who  destroyed  a  magni-
ficent Hindoo  temple  in  cnder  to
make  room  for  it;  and  £rom  tiie
top  of  the  minais  there  is  an  ex-
tensive view  of  the  town  and  ad-
jacent country,  and  of  the  none-
rous  Hindoo  temples  scattered  ovor
the  city,  and  the  surrounding
plahis.  The  rajah  of  Benares  re-
sides at  Ramnagur,  about  6  m.  from
the  city,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
R.  Benares  is  136  m.  W.  byS.
Patna,  and  460  W.  N.  W.  Calcutta.
£.  long.  83<>  lO',  N.  lat.  260  SO*.

Some  years  since,  a  Hindoo  Cot-
lege  was  founded  here  by  a  late  En§»
uSi  resident,Mr.  Duncan,  to  encou-
rage learning  among  the  brahmiii%
which  has  recently  revived,  and  is
becoming  a  very  important  instttn-
tion.  The  government  allows  20,000
rupees,or  1 1,100  dollars^annuaUyfiir
its  support.  The  course  of  gbady  if
12  years,  and  students  are  admitted
from  12  to  18  years  of  age.  Tlie
first  annual  examination  was  held
in  1820.  In  1822,  the  number  of
students  was  172,  more  than  100  of
whom  received  no  support  from  the
funds.

The  C.  K,  S.  has  a  valoable
depdt  of  books  in  this  city.

The  Rev.W.  Smith  was  appoint-
ed to  Benares  by  the  Baptist  M,  S,
in  1816,  and  pursued  his  work  with
much  constancy  and  vigour.  Se-
veral Hindoos  were  reclaimed  by
his  instrumentality,  and  baptised
in  the  name  of  Jesus;  among  the
rest,  a  brahmin  of  the  name  of


BEN

lUm-dassy  whoie  rabMquent  ccm-
ctn  on  behalf  of  his  deluded  coiin-
Jbyman  wu  described  as  happily  at-
:tMtiiig  the  siucerily  of  his  profes-
-iIqd.    The  powerful  interest  excite
:  bj  the  first  introduction  of  the  Gos-
pel into  this  famous  city  appeared,
in  after  years,  not  to  have  wholly
:  subsided.  Crowds  of  attentive  Hin-
.  does  were  said  to  hear  the  word ;
-and  many  instances  occurred   in
which    evident   impressions  were
made.    On  one  occasion,  a  brah-
Ininy  after  listening^  to  the  Gospel,
exclaimed,  "  I  will  leave  all  my
friends  to  be  instructed  in  the  know-
ledge of .  Christ ;''  throwing  away,
at  tiie  same  time,  a  god  of  stone
which  he  had  been  used  to  worship.
Another  ventured  to  predict — **  In
■80  years  hence    the  worship    of
Gunga  will  vanish,  the  chains  of
the  caste  will  be  dissolved,  and  all
will  have 'the  true  knowledge  of
God  and  become  Christians;''  while
•a  third  invited  Shiva,  Chunda,  and
Lnkshnmna,  "Ithe  native  itinerants
agisting  Mr.  Smith,  to  dine  with
him.     They  accepted  his  invita-
tkm,  and  had  a  long  conversation
with  him  respecting  the  Gospel ;  in
the  course  of  which  he  commended
them  for  the  part  they  had  taken
in  embracing  Christianity.    In  the
establishment  of  schools,  Mr.  Smith
had  been  greatly  encouraged  by  a
lich  native,  resident  on  the  spot,
who  subscril)ed  very  liberally  to-
wards their  support.   These  schools
were  in  a  flourishing  state,  and
Ifae  boys  were  said    to  read  the
Scriptures  with  delight.    Instances
of  disappointment,  however,   oc-
eiined  here  as  well  as  elsewhere.
Several  persons,  who  gladly  received
the  word,  and  seemed  for  a  while
disposed  to  make  any  sacrifices  for
the   sake    of  the    Gospel,    were
intimidated  by  the  threats  and  in-
iidts  of  their  former  companions,
•ad  desisted  from  further  attend-
ance.   In  1824,  the  church  con-
slrted  of  18  members,  among  whom


BEN

several  brahmins  were  inclnded.
Ram-dass,  a  native  itinerant^  was
associated  with  Mr.  S.  in  his  la-
bours; and  so  much  was  he  re-
spected by  the  European  inhabitants
of  the  city,  that  they  subscribed,
ahnost  witiiout  solicitation,  1000
rupees  to  assist  him  in  erecting  a  *
small  place  of  worship.

Mr.  Smith  wrote,  in  1825— «  The
work  of  the  Lord  is    prospering
here.    I  find  the  heathen  very  at-
tentive to  the  Gospel:  last  montib
I  baptized  Mr.  S.  a  serious  yonng
man ;  and  4  persons  gave  in  their
names  as  candidates  for  the  ordi-
nance— a  Heathen,  a  Mussulman,
and  2  Roman  Catholics.  The  good
people  here  (referring  to  missionary
brethren  from  other  societies)  aU
live  in  union,  which  is  a  great  ble»-
ing.     At  the    assemblies  of  the
heathen,  we    all    meet   together,
reading,   singing,    speaking,    and
giving  away  boolcs  to  those  who
apply  for  them,  or  are  able  to  read
them."    Voluntary  drownings,  he
remarks  elsewhere,  are  less  fre-
quent than  formerly ;  and  it  would
appear,  from  an  anecdote  in  Mr.
Smithes  journal,  that  even  in  this
holy   city,  and    among  brahmins
too,'  idols  are  falling  into  disrepute.
"  I  asked  a  brahmin,''  says  he,
<*  why  they  took  no  notice  of  some
stone  gods  lying  under  a  wall.  *  We
worshipped   them  several  years,'
answered  the  brahmin ;  ^  but  no\
deriving  any  benefit,  we  laid  them
aside,  knowing  they  are  but  stones,
and  are  not  able  to  do  good  or
evil.' "

The  Rev.  Mr.  Corrie,  having
been  appointed  to  the  chaplaincy
at  Cawnpore,  left  Calcutta  towards
the  end  of  November  1817,  ac-
companied by  Mr.  Adlingtoft,  a
native  youth,  who  had  been  under
the  Rev.  Messrs.  Greenwood  and
Robertson,  of  the  C,  M,  S,,  and  the
recently  baptized  Fuez  Messeeh.
They  were  much  aided  in  their
efforts  by  a  libeial  \i«^v«,  ivj


BEN

Narein  Ghossaul,  giring  a  large
honsd  in  the  city  for  a  school^,  and
endcr^ng  it  with  800  rupees  per
month  (about  800/.  per  annum).
The  school  was  opened  on  the  17th
of  Jvly,  1818,  and  tn  Norember,
116  scholars  had  been  admitted,
and  the  school  was  becoming  very
popular  among  the  natives.

The  Rev.  Benedict  La  Roche,
and  the  Rev.  John  Perowne,  were
afterwards  appointed  to  this  sta-
tion. They  were  accompanied  by
Mr.  Thomaa  Brown,  who  had
diligently  prepared  himself  to  con-
duct all  the  departments  of  a  print-
ing and  stereotyping  establishment,
and  who  carried  out  with  him  a
printing-press,  and  founts  of  Eng-
lish, Arabic,  and  Persian  types.
It  became,  however,  soon  apparent,
that  the  monthly  allowance,  grant-
ed by  the  founder,  was  greatly  ex-
ceeded by  the  necessary  expenses
of  the  establishment.  Jay  Narain,
therefore,  formally  applied  to  the
governor-general  in  council  for
pecuniary  assistance;  accompany-
ing his  letters  by  a  statement. of
the  monthly  disbursements,  from
which  it  appeared,  that  a  surplus
of  S52  sicca  rupees  (nearly  400/.
sterling)  above  the  sum  allowed
by  himself,  was  necessary.  In
order  to  carry  on  the  school  with
eHiset.  It  is  most  gratifying  to
add,  that  the  application  was  gra-
ciou^y  received  by  the  governor-
general  in  council;  and  that  the
proper  directions  were  issued  to  his
agent  at  Benares,  for  t&e  regular
monthly  payment  of  the  above-
mentioned  excess.

From  Mr.  Adliagton's  first  re-
port, it  appears  that  the  attendance,
on  an  average,  was  about  121 ;  of
these,  63  were  acquiring  the  Eng-
lish, 82  the  Persian,  11  the  Hindee
and  Sanscrit,  and  15  the  Bengalee.
Divine  worship  was  generally  held
in  a  bungalow,  which  had  been
purchased,  three  times  on  the  Sab-
bath, f.  e,  morning  and  evening  in


BEN

English,  and  in  Hindooitaiiee  Iq,
the  afternoon,  whan  from  6  to  IV;
usually  attended  at  each  aenieei'^
A  school  was  also  established  af'
Secrole,  a  station  of  the  mUttaiy.'
close  to  Benares,  which  was  •n^';
ported  by  the  residents  in  ^"
neighbourhood.

In  1821,  Rev,  Mr.  and  Mn«  Mm*
ris  arrived  at  this  station,  and  found
the  schools  in  a  prosperous  state.  ■
About  Christmas,  the  founder  of
the  school,  in  addition  to  thQ
liberal  monthly  allowance  for  nSy
sistence  to  poor  scholars,  added  a
suit  of  clothes  to  each.  That  b&i
nevolent  individual  soon  closed  Uf
mortal  career.  Unhappily,  the
legal  transfer  of  property,  hi-
tended  to  have  been  assigned  Ij
him  to  the  support  of  the  schqoli^
was  never  enacted ;  but  his  sob,
Kolly  Shunker  Ghossaul,  declared
his  purpose  of  securing  .to  the  so-
ciety the  monthly  payment  a*;
signed  by  his  father. .  Through  the  .
kindness  of  his  excellency  the
commander-in-chief,  a  soitabla^
person  from  H.  M.'s  17th  legi- '
ment  was  obtained  as  schoolmastei:
Mr.  Stewart,  who  had  been  browht
to  the  notice  of  the  correspondug
committee  by  lieut.  Peevor>  iNh
fore  his  departure  for  England^
took  possession  of  the  upper  ftoiy-
of  the  house  in  Benares,  which  irM
fitted  up  for  his  reception  hi
March,  1823.

Mr.  Adlington,  having  recruited
his  strength  by  a  visit  to  Calcutta,
where  he  married,  devoted  bif
time  to  the  city  school;  leaving
Mr.  Morris  more  at  leisure  to  ac-
quire the  language,  and  to  give  his
time  to  more  immediate  miuionaiy
labours.  A  schoolmistresi  waa
also  obtained  from  Chunar,  and  a
few  gills  were  learning  to  rea^
knit,  and  sew.  '  A  few  other  giiU
were  in  a  second  school.  Both
were  supported  by  ladies  at  the
station.

In  1823,  several  of  the   elder

69


4


1


BEN

bcqn  were  aficiistomed  to  go,  on
fiimday  mornings,  as  far  as  Secrole,
hk  order  to  read  and  to  give  in-
ftructions  in  the  Old  Testament.
A  chapel  was  also  huilt  there  for
tte  Qse  of  the  native  Christians,
-dioat  half  the  expense  of  which
'was  borne  by  friends  at  and  near
Benares.  It  was  opened  in  May ;
when  the  chaplain,  the  Rev.  Mr.
Ftaser,  baptized  a  man  descended
from  Christian  parents,  and  a
Hindoo  woman,  who  had  been  pre-
TloQsly  under  a  course  of  instruc-
tlon.  About  60  native  Christians
Mially  assembled ;  and,  occasion-
tily,  the  chapel  was  attended  by  a
kw  Hindoos  and  Mahomedans.

"  On  Sunday,  the  18th  of  April,
1824J"  says  Mr.  Morris,  "  I  preach-
ed my  first  sermon  in  Hindoostanee,
at  the  new  chapel.  I  had  long
«go,.as  opportunity  offered,  endea-
Toored  to  converse  with  the
heathen,  and  hope  now  to  be  able
to  do  so  frequently.''  The  bishop
of  Calcutta  passed  Sunday,  5th
of  September,  at  this  station.  At
•n  early  hour,  his  lordship  attended
the  mission  chapel,  when  Mr.
Monis  read  and  preached  in  Hin-
doostanee, in  which  tongue  the
bishop  pronounced  the  blessing.
On  tiie  same  day,  the  company's
chorch  was  consecrated,  a  con-
flrmatlon  was  held,  and  the  Lord's
Sapper  was  administered :  in  the
evening  the  bishop  preached  in
English.  On  this  occasion^,  14
native  Christians  were  confirmed,
and  were  admitted  to  the  Lord's
table;  the  bishop  ofiiciating,  as
respected  them,  in  Hindoostanee.
Archdeacon  Corrie  gives  the  fol-
kndng  account  of  his  lordship's
Hiit  to  the  society's  school,  in  the
dty,  on  the  following  Wednesday : —
"The  classes  examined,  exhibit-
ed good  proficiency  in  Christian
knowledge,  in  translating  the  His-
torjof  England  into  Hindoostanee,
iDd  in    English  grammar:    they


/


BEN

have  proceeded  beyond  the  Rule
of  Three ;  and  a  few  showed  con-
siderable knowledge  of  geognh*
phy.'^  The  day  after,  Mr.  Corrla
saw  the  first  classes  of  four  schooU
established  in  the  suburbs  of  Be-
nares, by  Mr.  Morris.  They  had
been  too  recently  formed  to  show
much  progress,  though  some  of  the
boys  read  pretty  well.  They  all
read  the  Hindee  Gospels;  which
they  were  brought  to  do  with  some
difficulty,  owing  to  the  lower  castes
being  forbidden  by  the  brahmins
to  read  the  Sanscrit  character.
<<  We  also  examined,"  says  Mr.
Corrie,  "  a  school  of  eleven  Chris-
tian girls,  superintended  by  Mrs.
Morris,  who  read  only  their  native
tongue.  Even  the  Christians  were
brought  to  send  their  children  to
school  with  some  difficulty;  but
they  now  begin  to  be  pleased  with
their  improved  conduct.  Mrs.
Fraser  overlooks  another  scho<ri  for
girls,  who  are  destitute  children  of
European  fathers.  In  this,  I  be-
lieve, are  17  scholars,  and  they
are  taught  English."

The  following  are  the  cirenm*
stances  of  the  mission  last  pub*
lished: — Mr.  Adlington,  admitted
some  time  before  to  deacon's
orders,  exercises  his  ministry  at
Secrole :  from  40  to  60  attend.
A  monthly  prayer  meeting  is  mnin-
tained.  Nine  adults  have  been
baptized  at  this  station,  who  were
brought  to  the  knowledge  of  the
truth  by  the  instrumentality  of  the
society's  missionaries.  The  at-
tendance at  the  chapel  is  unproved,
and  the  behaviour  of  the  congror
gation  is  orderly.  The  two  -giris'
schools  continue  in  opemtioii.
Jay  Narain's  charity  school  is  in
excellent  order:  131  boys  are  in
attendance.  Two  youths,  edu-
cated in  this  school,  were  eng^aged
in  January  last,  as  assistant  Eng-
lish teachers  in  the  Cawnpore  free
schools:  they  give  great  satUfa.o^


BEN

tkm ;  and  their  niccea  in  obtain-
ing rach  a  comfortable  tituation,
has  bad  a  good  eflfect  in  recom-
mending the  schools  to  the  natives.
Six  youtlis,  educated  in  the  school,
have,  during  the  last  year,  been
appointed  monitors,  with  an  allow-
ance sufficient  to  allure  them  to
accept  the  situation.  Six  schools
have  been  established  in  different
parts  of  the  city,  containing  about
140  bo3rs:  in  these,  after  the  ftrst
books,  the  Gospels  are  read.  The
streets  being  mostly  very  narrow,
the  boys  assemble  in  long  veran-
dahs; and  sometimes  a  hundred
persons,  or  upwards,  will  crowd
around  while  the  boys  are  ez-
EAined  in  the  previous  week's
exercise,  and  thus  their  knowledge
is  diffused.  The  Eng^lidi  school  has
been  honoured  by  several  delight-
ful instances  of  usefulness.  The
Rev.  T.  Morris,  since  his  recovery
from  serious  illness,  has  removed
to  Cawnpore.  Mr.  R.  Stewart  con-
ducts the  school,  and  is  assisted
by  a  native,  Noor  Messeeh.  Mrs.
Adllngton  superintends  the  Chris-
tian native  female  school.  Fuez
Messeeh  has  removed  to  Agra.
On  the  6th  of  Aug.  1820,  Rev.  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Adam  arrived  at  Benares
as  the  agents  of  the  L.  M,  S.
Although  chiefly  employed  in  the
study  of  the  Hindoostanee,  Mr.
Adam  preached  to  a  company  of
English  artillery-men,  on  the  Sab-
iMith  and  Wednesday  evenings,  in
ills  own  dwelling  at  Secrole,  and
entered  on  compiling,  for  the  use
of  the  natives,  a  "  Life  of  Christ;"
in  which  it  was  his  intention  to
.  contrast  the  dignity  and  pifrity  of
our  Lord's  character^  with  ihe  op-
posite qualities,  as  found  in  the
Hindoo  mythology.

In  the  month  of  May,  18S1,  Mr.
Adam  opened  a  native  school.  He
also  availed  himself  of  favourable
opportunities  for  the  distribution  of
religious  tracts;  and  particularly.


\


BKH

at  tbci  great  public  IsativiliywM
the  resort  of  Hindooi  to  Beaail
from  the  varioos  parti  of  IiuU%  i
immense.  >

In  1883,  there  wme  two  mMm
schools  within  the  oitj;  oae^H,
the  Kashepoor  distriety  contatalM'
35 ;  and  the  other  in  that  «ri|
Habeebpoor,  containing  SO  hofk
In  the  school,  situated  In  thecn^
tonment,  established  In  1881»  M
attendance  was  about  SO.  In  lift
school  is  a  class  In  which  fti
Scriptures  are  read.

A  commodious  chapel  wis  bvBl
by  subscription  in  1834^  cUife
through  the  exertions  of  penoB
holding  inferior  statioQi  in  tti
army,  who  formerly  attended  Bfi*
Adam's  ministry  at  his  piMi
house,  in  which  he  preached  tM
Sabbath  and  Toeaday  evenioia
Concerning  this  station^  Bfr.  At
forcibly  saj's : —  •

<<  Benares  exhibits,  In  iiill  opf
ration,  some  of  the  wont  priuds
pies  of  Hindoo  superstltfcxn.  Thk
Gospel  offers  its  invaluable  Uei»^
ings  to  the  '  poor  in  spirit;'  bit
these  people  fancy  themseM
<  rich,  and  increased  in  gtiodi^  Mi
having  need  of  nothing.'  Tkfk
Saviour  is  a  Saviour  to  tuenvl*
feel  themselves  lost;  but  1tH$
fancy  themselves  already  at  tin
*  gate  of  heaven,'  and  certain  of
obtaining  an  easy  admiaslon  through
it.  Add  to  this,  the  awful  wlekfld^
ness  of  their  lives,  occaakmid  or
fostered  by  the  local  mpentitkHib
and  it  will  easily  be  perceived  tint
Benares  presents  many  and  pae^
liar  obstacles,  both  to  the  nil*
sionary  exertions  and  to  the  ie»
ception  of  the  Saviour.  Amid  mA
a  population,  it  is  a  great  Uesring
to  dwell  in  peace  and  safely,  and  ti
do  any  thing  that  may  lead,  ^ttaafjk
the  effects  may  be  remote^  to  tiff
important  and  happy  object  m
have  in  view."

In  1826,  Mr.  Jamet  RoberlMi

no


:


BEN

•Rived  at  Benares,  to  assist  in  tbe
wnk  of  the  misiioD.

Tbe  Dative  scbooLs,  S  in  number,
Qontaining  170  boys,  and  in  all  of
irhieb  Cbristian  books  were  taugbt,
me  going  on  well.  Some  of  tbe
lo^  committed  a  catechism,  pre-
pned  by  Mr.  Adam,  to  memory  ;
■sd  a  considerable  number  made
fWigresB  in  reading,  an^it  is  hoped
tliO,  in  the  understanding  of  the
9eiiptures  and  other  useful  books.
Jk  pundit  was  engaged,  at  a  mode-
reto  stipend,  to  visit  the  schools
daily,  and  to-prepare  suitable  school
^oks.

Mr.  Adam  prepared  a  Hindawee
tnnslation  of  Scripture  Lessons,
tor  the  nse  of  the  schools.  Such  a
vork,  as  a  school-book  containing
nitable  selections  from  the  sacred
fOlnmej  he  considered  as  peculiarly
adapted  to  native  schools  similarly
circumstanced  with  those  at  Be-
nares, from  which,  on  account  of
ttie  great  poverty  of  their  parents,
the  children  were  taken  away  at  a
veiy  early  age.

A  Hindoostanee  service  was  oc-
carionally  held  at  the  mission
chapely  which  was  sometimes  per-
formed by  Mr.  Smith,  the  Baptist
■iodonaiy,  in  conformity  to  a  sti-
pulation in  the  grant  of  the  chapel
to  the  society,  which  provided  that
it  should  be  open,  according  to  the
wiginal  plan,  to  the  occasional
laboun  of  evangelical  ministers
of  different  denominations.  In
Bonformity  with  this  stipulation,
ipplication  was  made  to  Mr.  Adam
for  the  occasional  use  of  the  chapel
for  the  purpose  mentioned ;  which
he  cheerfully  granted.  Though
m>peamnces,  in  reference  to  the
conversions  from  among  the  na-
lifes,  were  not  such  as  might  be
wished,  there  was  still,  Mr.  Adam
thought,  no  cause  to  despair  of
lucoess ;  but,  on  the  contrary,
much  to  inspire  hope  and  impel  to
naloos  exertion.

Serri««r  in  Engitib  were  per-


BEN

formed  at  the  missiop  chapel  every
Sunday  and  Wednesday  evening,
Yhe  number  of  the  congregation
fluctuated  considerably ;  but,  after*
wards,  much  increased  by  the  at«
tendance  of  many  seriously-dispoaed
men  belonging  to  a  company  of
British  artilleiy,  stationed  there*
It  is  pleasing  to  add,  that  good  was
done  by  tbesis  services.

Mr.  Adam  printed  1000  copies
of  his  tract  on  the  <'  Ten  Com*
mandments,"  and  500  of  his  Cate-
chism. Beside  the  Hindawee
translation  of  Scripture  Lessons
already  noticed,  he  had,  in  prepa-
ration, a  tract  under  the  following
iiHie— -Jesus,  the  Deliverer  Jrom
the  fVrath  of  God,  A  considerable
number  of  tracts  are,  from  time  to
time,  distributed  by  Mr.  Adam  and
the  teachers  in  the  native  schools,
especially  at  the  melas,  held  in  and
round  Benares.

BENCOOLEN,  a  sea-port  town
and  fort,  on  the  S.W.  coast  of  the
island  of  Suniatra,  about  2  m.  in
compass,  where  the  English  have  a
settlement  and  factory.  The  town
stands  upon  a  morass,  and  ts  un-
healthy. It  is  chiefly  inhabited  by
native  Malays,  whp  build  their
houses  on  pillars  of  bamboo  wood*
There  are  also  some  English,  Por-
tuguese, and  Chinese ;  but  few  of
this  class  survived  the  effects  of  the
climate,  till  fort  Marlborough  was
built  on  a  dry  and  elevated  situa-
tion, about  3  m.  distant,  where
these  inhabitants  repair  during  the
rage  of  disease.  The  principal
establishment  of  the  East  India
Company  on  the  island,  is  at  this
place.'  E.  long.  \W,  N.  lat.
3®  49*

Mr.  Nath.  Ward,  of  the  B,
M,  S.,  proceeded  hither  from
Bengal  in  1818,  and  was  fol-
lowed by  Mr.  Robinson.  Here
they  found  the  press  a  veiy  use-
ful auxiliary,  and  formed  schools
under  the  immedi^to  «anc^XQi1i  qI
the  government.    A  gcea\  tLxns^x

n\


BEN

of  Malay  tracts  were  printed  and
circulated.  In  1823,  it  was  re-
ported, that  the  progress  of  the
schools  was  satisfactory — ^that  123
pupils  were  in  regular  attendance —
that  progress  in  Christian  instruc-
tion was  visible  in  many — and  that
6  neighbouring  villages -had  peti-
tioned for  the  establishment  of
schools.  The  richest  blessings  Idso
seemed  to  ha?e  followed  the  la-
bours of  the  missionaries,  warrant-
ing the  hope,  that  the  spirit  of  God
had  commenced  a  work,  where,  for
ages,  all  had  been  apathy  and
death.  In  1825,  illness  obliged  Mr.
Robinson  to  remove,  but  Mr.  Ward
remained  for  a  time ;  since  which
he  has  retired  to  Padang.

BENGAL,  a  province  of  Hin-
doostan,  on  each  side  of  the  Ganges ;
bounded  N.  by  Bootan;  W.  by
Bahar  and  Orissa;  S.  by  the  bay
of  Bengal ;  and  E.  by  the  Burman
empire  and  Assam ;  400  m.  long
and  300  broad ;  between  86^  and  02°
E Jong.,  and  2V  and  87<>N.  lat.  The
coast  between  the  Hoogly  and  the
Ganges,  180  m.,  is  a  dreary  inhos-
pitable shore,  which  sands  and
whirlpools  render  inaccessible  to
ships  of  burden.  Bengal  consists  of
one  vast  plain,  of  the  most  fertile
soil,  which,  in  common  with  other
parts  of  Hindoostan,  annually  yields
8,  and  in  some  parts  even  3,  crops.
The  rainy  season  continues  from
June  to  September,  bat  the  inun-
dations from  the  Ganges  and  Bur-
bampooter  continue  only  about  a
month  in  the  latter  part  of  July  and
beginning  of  August.  After  the
waters  subside,  diseases  rage,  espe-
cially- among  those  who  are  not
accustomed  to  the  climate.

The  presidency  of  Bengal  in-
cludes "teveral  provinces,  and  yields
an 'immense  revenue  to  the  British,
who  gained  possession  in  1165,  The
population  is  estimated  at  more  than
^,000,000 ;  within  the  presidency
ftre  about  40,000,000.  It  is  peopled
^f  farioug  nations,  hut  the  principal


BER

are  the  Moguls,  or  Moors,  and  flie
Hindoos,  or  Bengalese.  The  BeH-
galese  and  Moors  have  each  a  ^
tinct  language.  The  former  «n
idolaters;  they  generally  live  in
huts  built  of  mud- and  straw,  seldoil
use  chairs  or  tables,  but  lit  on  tib
,  ground,  and  eat  with  the  ftngen.

Among  their  horrid  superrtitton,
is  that  of  burning  widows  on  tte
funeral  piles  of  their  deceasMl  hw-
bands,  of  ^om  between  8  and  000
are  annually  sacrificed  in  the  pierf-
dency  of  Bengal  alone.

The  Moors,  originally  nativeB  of
Tartary,  are  descendants  of  thon
who  subjugated  the  empire  of  HiB-
dopstan  2  or  3  centuries  ago,  and
are  Mahomedans.  There  are  abo
many  English,  Dutch,  French,  md
Danes,  who  come  here  for  the  pn>
pose  of  commerce ;  of  these,  Eng-
lish are  the  most  numerons,  and
their  chief  settlement  is  at  Cal-
cutta.

[See  Barraekporef  JBarraoMf
BeerbhoojHf  Berkamporey  BurdufMf
Calcutta,  Chifuurah,  Chiiiagting,
Cutwa,  Dacca,  Doorgapare,  Dwm*
Dum,  Goamalty,  JestoM,  MaUa,
Midnapore,  Moorshedahad,  Sammr
pore,  Silhef,  Tumloek»'\

BERBICE,  a  settlement,  on  a
river  of  the  same  name,  in  Guyana,
to  the  W.  of  Surinam.  The  land
is  low  and  woody.  It  was  taken
from  the  Dutch  by  the  British  hi
1790,  and  in  1803  ;  and  it  was  ceded
to  Britain  in  1814.  The  R.  enten
the  Atlantic  in  long.  W.  S8"  IS*
N.  lat.  ffi  26'.

A  new  and  wide  door  of  nseAd-
ness  appeared  to  be  opening  In  this
colony,  in  the  year  1812.  Several
estates  belonged  to  the  Britldi
crown,  and  were  under  the  directioa
of  commissioners,  who  were  dis-
posed to  encourage  the  instmctioa
of  the  slaves.  These  gentlemen,
who  were  well  acquainted  ^tth  the
valuable  services  of  the  Rev.  Mr.
Wray,  of  the  L,  M,  S,,  at  Deme-
raia,  pTOf^QSttd  to  blm^  lemove  to

1%


\


BER

BeiMce^  and  to  defray  the  expenses
ttf  Ifae  nuteion ;  a  prcpoial  in  wbich
Mr.  Wny  and  the  directors  acqni-


'  In  181d,  notwithstanding  the
many  diiBcolties  with  which  Mr.
v.  had  to  contend^  reports  of  his
Aiocett  were  very  favourable.  A
lehool  he  had  established  was  on
fte  Increase.  A  great  number  of
poor  free  children,  as  well  as  slaves,
learned  to  read :  many  adults  came
for  this  purpose  occasionally ;  and
many  girls  belonging  to  the  crown
estates  were  taught  to  row,  under
tbe  care  of  Mrs.  Wray.  16  per-
sons had  been  baptiaed,  who  had
•ubsequently  conducted  themselves
with  consistency ;  4  of  whom  had
belonged  to  the  school,  the  rest
were  old  people.  On  the  31st  of
December,  he  administered  tbe
Lord's  Supper  for  the  first  time  in
Berbicej  11  negroes  communi-
cated.

Persecution,  however,  after-
wards arose  j  Mr.  Wray  was  soon
Wb(rily  excluded  by  the  new  mana-
gers, appointed  in  consequence  of
the  restoration  of  about  half  the
crown  negroes  to  the  Dutch,  and
the  slaves  were  prohibited  all  com-
nunication  with  him.  He  there-
fore engaged  in  the  instruction  of
a  Ikrge  body  of  slaves,  about  300  in
number,  who  belonged  to  the
British  government,  and  resided  in
the  town  of  New  AuLsterdajn,
where  they  were  employed  chiefly
as  mechanics.  In  the  pursuit  of
this  object,  he  for  some  time  enjoyed
the  countenance  and  aid  of  the
British  government ;  but  very  em-
barrassing and  perplexing  difficul-
ties were  thrown  in  bis  way  by  per-
sons on  the  spot>  and,  with  a  view
to  their  removal,  he  was  induced  to
visit  England.  Mrs.  Wray,  during
his  absence,  continued  to  instruct,
with  gretX  assiduity,  the  younia:  and
female  part  of  his  congregation.
■  On  Mr.  Wray's  return,  July  IT,
1S18,   his  prospects  of  usefulness


BER

were  very  animating.  He  purchased
a  house,  and  a  piece  of  gpround  on
which  he  built  a  chapel,  towards
the  expense  of  which  upwards  of
£400  was  subscribed  by  the  inha-
bitants. The  crown  estates,  which
'had  been  restored,  by  special  con-
vention, to  tbe  Dutch  company,  to
whom  they  had  formerly  l>elonged,
had  lately  been  purchased  by  a  re-
spectable planter  in  Berbice,  who
encouraged  Mr.  Wray  to  visit  tbem,
and  to  instruct  the  negroes,  as  he
did  when  they  belonged  to  the
British  government;  a  work  on
which  he  immediately  entered  with
gratitude  and  delight.

Prior  to  the  embarkation  of  his
Excellency  Lieutenant  Governor
Beard,  for  Berbice,  in  1821,  a  de-
putation of  directors  waited  upon
him,  for  the  purpose  of  recom-
mending the  mission  at  New  Amr
sterdam  to  his  kind  attention;  a
recommendation  which  was  most
promptly  and  liberally  attended  to.
Nearly  the  whole  of  Mr,  Wray's
time,  at  this  period,  appears  to  have
been  occupied  in  communicating
religious  instniction;  including  in
this  statement  his  visits  to  the  cells
of  the  prison,  and  the  chambers  of
sickness,  with  his  occasional  ad-
dresses at  the  graves  of  the  dead.
Prejudices  against  the  instniction
of  the  slave  population  were  sub-
siding, and  a  great  change,  in  va-
rious respects,  in  favour  of  tbe
mission  was  taking  place.  Several
more  fields  of  lalx>ur  had  been
opened  within  the  ccdony ;  among
which  were  the  estates  of  the  Go-
vernor and  the  Fiscal ;  and  an  aux-
iliar}'  M,  S,j  formed  2  years  before,
was  prosperous.

In  1S23,  the  chapel  needed  a
second  enlargement — many  negproes
were  baptized— the  communicants
had  increased  to  about  40 — ^the
number  of  children  imttructed  in
the  Sabbath-school  exceeded  100,
excliisive  of  many  yox&iv^  ^xaKsu&
who  attended  to  leoA  Tund  V^vcvl^^


BER

catechism— and  the  occasional  la-
bours of  Mr.  Wray  at  plantations
in  the  vicinity  were  attended  with
considerable  success.  On  the  27th
of  January,  1 823,  a  very  gratifyinaf
public  examination  of  tlie  school
was  held  in  conformity  to  the  de-
sire, and  in  the  presence  of,  his
Excellency,  accompanied  by  other
persons  of  distinction.

For  some  time  prior  to  the  dis-
turbances in  Demarara,  the  pros-
pects of  Mr.  Wray  were  brighten-
ing, and  his  sphere  of  labour  en-
larging. Just  before  their  occur-
rence, he  had  received  invitations
from  several  respectable  proprietors,
to  instruct  the  slaves  on  their  es
tates,  one  of  which  contained  as
many  as  1600 ;  and  he  had  just  en-
tered into  these  additional  engage-
ments, under  highly  promising  cir-
cumstances, when  those  events  at
once  interrupted  his  labours,  and
exposed  him  to  much  unmerited
reproach.

Mr.  Wray  was  summoned,  on
false  and  injurious  charges,  to  ap-
pear before  the  Governor.  Here,
in  the  presence  of  the  gentlemen
who  had  brought  them  forward,
he  positively  asserted  his  inno-
cence, and  requested  his  Excel-
lency would. direct  the  Fiscal  to
investigate  th^  afiair,  in  order  that
his  innocence  might  fully  appear.
With  this  request  his  Excellency
complied,  and  the  result  was  the
entire  vindication  and  most  ho-
nourable acquittal  of  Mr.  Wray.

Not  much  more  than  a  fort-
night had  elapsed,  when  he  was
again  plunged  into  trouble, .  from  a
very  different  cause.  His  chapel,
which  had  been  a  second  time  en-
larged, was  destroyed  by  fire,  toge-
ther with  the  school-house.  This
calamity  happened  on  the  22d  of
September.  The  dwelling-house
and  furniture  of  Mr.  Wray  also  re-
ceived considqjrable  damage.  A  very
short  time  before,  the  debt  on  the
chapel  wa8j)aldo^  and  the  building


BER

itself  secured  to  the  MOcUij  iB^om^
formity  to  the  legulaUoiui  of  ttaa
colony.

Although  Mr.  Wray's  laboin.
were  thus  greatly  circumfcribedy  be
availed  himself  of  such  opportonir
ties  as  were  afforded,  to  ccMmnaiM"
cate  Christian  instructioD  both  to.
the  slaves  and  free  people.  The-
members  of  his  church,  althoogb
not  increased  in  number^  advanced  •
in  piety.  On  the  Ist'of  Maivh»
1825,  the  foundatiOD  .of  the  new
chapel  was  laid ;  and  it  was  opened
on  the  12th  of  June,  when  a  laigtt
and  attentive  congregation  aaem-
bled.  The  collection  at  the  doon
amounted  to  about  162  guilders.
His  Excellency  Sir  Benjapiin
D'Urban,  governor  of  the  colony
of  Demarara,  kindly  presented  Mr.
Wray  with  a  handsome  donation.
I'he  debt  was  reduced,  in  1826|  by
the  liberality  of  gentlemen  on  the
spot,  to  about  600  guilders,  or  ofaoat
M65  sterling.

The  number  of  adults  baptised,
during  the  year  1 826,  was  ^1,  In  the
sincerity  of  whose  religious  pro-
fessions Mr.  Wray  has  full  con-
fidence. 12,  during  the  same  pe-.
riod,  were  admitted  to  the  Loni's
table.  The  members  of  the  church
are  highly  spoken  of  by  the  man»-
gers  of  the  estates  on  which  thej
labour.

The  number  instructed  in  the
Sabbath-school,  consisting  of  both
children  and  ^adults,  was,  at  the
close  of  the  year,  about  siso  |  and
many  more,  belonging  to  each
class,  have  been  admitted  since  that
period.  In  consequence  of  the
great  increase  of  scholars,  Mr.
Wray  is  desirous  to  fit  up  the
school-room  under  the  chapel,
which  will  hold  from  3  to  400.  The
cost  of  this  would  be  about  iOOO
guilders,  or  jGOO  sterling.

The   increase  in  the    Sabbath--
school  is  attributed  in  part  to  the
encouragement  given  by  his  Ma-
jesty's CommisiitmerM  of

1\


BER

to  the  crawB  slares  (about  300  in
nnnber)  to  atteHd  on  the  means  of
leligioiis  instrnction.
-  Mr.  Wray  daily  instructs  about
40  negroes  in  religious  knowledge,
ud,  on  eveiy  Wednesday,  holds  a
catechetical  meeting  with  the  chil-
flren  in  the  chapel.

The  thitst  for  ■  knowledge
tmongst  the  negroes,  and  tbe  con-
«M|uent  desire  to  learn  to  read,  ap-
pear to  be  greater  than  at  any
nvmer  ■  period  of  tbe  mission.
Scarcely  a  day  passes  without  ap-
{dtcotions  for  spelling  books  and
catechisms,  from  difierent  parts  of
the  colony.

•  In  consequence  of  this  desire  for
instruction,  an  adult  school  has  been
•commenced,  which  is  held  on
Friday  evenings.

•  Mrs.  Wray,  as  usual,  continues
4o  tdce  an  active  part  in  the  labours
of  the  mission.

BERDITSCHEW,  a  town  in
Poland,  containing  about  30,000
Jews,  among  whom  tbe  agente  of
tiie  Edinburgh  J,  S,  have  la-
boured in  distributing  and  ex-
{dainlBg  the  Scriptures,  and  found
many  diligently  inquiring  after  the
truth.

^  BERHAMPORE,  a  town  of
Hindooitan,  in  Bengal.  It  is
seated  -  on  the  Cossimbazar,  7  m.
S.  of  Moorshedabad,  and  has  a  fine
ttaage  of  cantonments  for  troops.

Rev.  Micaiah  HiU,  of  the  L,
M.  S,y  removed  to  this  station  from
Calcutta  in  ]824.  He  calculated
that  a  circle  of  2  m.  drawn  around
him  wodld  include  a  population  of
about  20,000.  After  encountering
considerable  opposition  from  the
natives,  arising  from  a  peculiar  at-
tachment to  the  superttitions  of
their  forefiathers,  he  succeeded  in
estaUifdiing  6  schools  on  the  in-
digenous plan  (4  for  the  children
of  Hindoos,  and  8  for  those  of
Mahomedans;  the  latter  being
conducted  by  Persian  moonshees) ;
•ad  Mrs.  H^,  after  overcoming  ai-  \


BER

milar  difficulties,  established  a  native
female  scbool,  in  behalf  of  which  she
appealed  to  the  European  residents
at  the  station,  and  not  without  suc-
cess. M  r .  G  ogerly  recenthj  removed
from  Calcutta,  to  assist  5lr.  Hill.
Considering  the  formidable  obsta-
cles with  which  the  missionaries
have  struggled — obstacles  greater
than  those  occurring  in  tbe  southern
parts  of  Bengal — it  is  pleasing  to
find,  by  the  last  report,  that  the
schools  under  the  wing  of  this  mis-
sion amount  to  8 ;  of  which, '6  are
for  boys,  containing  280,  and  2  for
girls,  containing  40.  The  latter
are  under  the  joint  superintendence
of  Mrs.  Hill  and  Mrs.  Warden.
Mr.  HiU  has  3  native  chapels,  and
3  stations  out  of  doors,  and  preaches
almost  daily  at  one  or  other  of
those  places.  On  every  Sabbath
day,  a  congregation  assembles  in
his  court  yard,  consisting  of  aged
and  impotent  persons,  with  whom
he-  converses,  and  to  whom  he
preaches  in  Bengalee.  The  Hin-
doostanee  services  are  attended  by
20  regular  hearers.  A  native  fe-
male, formerly  a  Mabomedan,
has  been  baptized,  and  4  half-caste
females  appear  to  be  under  reli-
gious impressions.  Mr.  Hill  oc-
casionally attends  the  meku  (or
festivals),  on  which  occasions  some
thousands  of  tracts  have  been  dis-
tributed. At  least  30  Europeans,
belonging  to  regiments  successively
stationed  here,  have  given  prac-
tical evidence  of  having  received
the  truth,  from  the  Divine  blessing
on  the  English  services.  A  church
has  been  formed,  consisting  of  13
members,  into  which  it  is  proposed
to  admit  the  Mabomedan  female
above-mentioned.

BERLIN,  a  city  of  Germany,
capital  of  the  marquisate  of  Braii-
denberg,  and  Of  all  the  King  of
Prussia's  German  dominions.  It
is  12  m.  in  circuit,  surrounded
partly  by  walls  and  partly  by  palli-
sades,  and  baa  \&  sa.\e%\  \)»X^V^\^

1^


BER

this  incloflure  are  numerous  gar-
densy  orchards,  and  fields.  Tbo-
itreets  are  straight,  wide,  and  long ;
and  its  large  squares,  magnificeut
palaces,  churches,  and  other  build-
ings, are  scarcely  to  be  equalled.
Bei^  is  seated  on  the  Spree,
from  which  there  is  a  canal  to  the
Oder  on  the  £.,  and  another  to
the  £lbe  on  the  W. ;  so  that  it  has
a  communication  b}'  water  botli
with  the  Baltic  Sea  and  the  Ger-
man Ocean.  It  was  talcen  in  1760,
by  an  army  of  Russians,  Austrians,
and  Saxons,  who  were  obliged  to
evacuate  it  in  a  few  days.  In  1806,
soon  after  the  battle  of  Jena,  the
French  entered  this  city,  and  Buo-
naparte held  a  court  in  the  palace.
It  is  100  m.  N.  of  Dresden,  and  l%6
N.W.  of  Breslau.  £.  long.  13^  S2',
N.  lat.  5i0  31'.

In  1818,  including  the  military,
the  population  was  188,485.  The
Jews  are  also  numerous ;  among
wl^m  the  most  encouraging  indi-
cations appear,  that  the  time  of
mercy  towards  Israel  is  approach-
ing.

In  1822,  a  socieiy  for  prmnoting
Clmstiamttf  among  the  Jews  was
formed  in  this  city,  under  the  ex-
press sanction  of  the  King,  and
much  seal  and  liberality  is  mani-
fested in  the  cause.  .  A  considera-
ble number  of  Jews  have  already
made  a  public  profession  of  their
faith  in  Christ.

In  1826,  above  100  persons  of
the  Jewish  persuasion  were  bap-
tized in  Berlin  ;  of  whom  64  were
baptized  in  some  one  of  the  4
churches,  under  the  superin-
tendence of  a  distinguished  eccle-
siastic, and  a  member  of  the  com-
mittee of  the  Berlin  S.  An  old
and  highly  respectable  Jew  said  to
him,  "  We  are  all  coming,  we
cannot  hold  to  Judaism  any  longer.''

The  Berlin  Missionary  InstitU'
Hon  was  founded  in  1800,  and  is
supported  by  the  voluntary  contri-
bution-v  of  individuals.     It  is  de-


BBR

signed  to  qualify  pious  young  moi.;'
for  missionaries,  and  is  under  l)ti|i
immediate  care  of  the  Rev.  '^^ ,
Jceniclce,  of  Berlin*  Many  iaitb?.
ful  missionaries  have  already  goM
forth  from  thi«  school  of  the  piUr '
phets.  .    .

BERMUDAS,  or  SOMMERS .
ISLANDS,  four  islands  in  .Um.
Atlantic  Ocean,  500  m.  £.  of  Car
rolina,  and  surrounded  by  numeioni
rocks  and  shoals,  which  rente
them  difficult  of  approach,  lliiqj.
were  discovered  by  Juan.  Her-.
mudez,  a  Spaniard,  in  15£i;  M
were  not  inhabited  till  1609,  whet
Sir  George  Sommers  was  cast  «wij.
upon  them  \  and  th^y  have  be-
longed to  Britain  ever  since.  Thej
contain  above  10,000  hihabltantif'
who  carry  on  some  trade  wit^.
America  and  the  West  Indict.
The  principal  one  is  callod  St
George.  .

In  the  beginning  of  ITOO,  the  Rev.
John  Stephenson,  a  native  of  Ire-
land, proceeded  to  these  islands.  On
his  urival,  itwas^uickly  Icnown  thai
a  Methodist  missionafy  from  Ireland
was  in  the  harbour ;  and  Um  report
soon  made  an  impression  to  bis
disadvantage.  Coming  firom  Irc^
land,  it  was  concluded  that  he  waaix
be  a  rebel,  and,  as  such,  lustaining
the  character  of  a  missionaiy,  it
was  instant^  apprehended  that  be
was  about  to  introduce  disaffection
among  the  slaves.  Full  of  then
preposterous  notions,  many  were
unwilling  that  he  should  come  on
shore,  and  would  probably  have.
exerted  themselves  to  prevent  it*  if
an  enlightened  magistrate,  thea
standing  on  tiie  quay,  had  not  dis-
armed theur  momentary  preju-.
dices,  and  dispelled  the  gathering
storm.

After  waiting  upon  the  Governor^
and  laying  before  his  Excellency
the  certificate  of  his  ordination,
and  the  pass  which  he  had  received
prior  to  his  quitting  Dublin,  cer*
tii^ing  that  he  was  appointed  as  a

1^


BER

msry  to  the  Island  of  Ber-
I  Mr.  Stephenson  commenced
inisterial  labours ;  and  though,
ity  bis  hearers  were  but  few  in
ier>  and  of  those,  the  greater
appeared  either  hostile  or  in-
ant  to  the  subjects  Intrtxluced
ilr  notice,  the  violence  of  pre*
i  and  opposition  soon  began  to
(e;  the  congregation  visibly
Boed ;  subscriptions wereraised
le  erection  of  a  chapel ;  and
ie  month  of  April,  IdOO,  74
»  and  30  blacks  had  joined
sciety.

le  prosperity  which  now  began
line  upon  the  infant  mission
iewed  with  a  malignant  eye
e  enemies  of  religion ;  and  as
found  themselves  incapable  of
(ing  its  progress  without  the
r  law,  they  procured  an  edict
}  passed  by  the  house  of  as-
ly,  prohibiting  all  persons,  not
fled  according  to  the  rites  and
nonles  of  the  church  of  Eng-
or  Scotland,  from  preaching,
ring,  or  exhorting,  to  any  col-
d  audience,  public  or  private,
r    a    penalty  of  £50,   and  6
ths'    Imprisonment  for   every
,ce;    and  inflicting  a  similar
ihrneut  on  the  person  in  whose
a  the  meeting  should  be  held.
r.  Stephenson,  considering  this
u  hostile  to  the  spirit  of  tole-
n — as    an  infringement  upon
bhrthright  of  every   subject-
as  diametrically  opposite  to  the
red  sentiments  of  the  reigning
arch — continued  his  ministerial
urs  as  formerly ;  but  though
Rras  suffered  to  proceed  for  a
weeks   without    interruption,
'as  at  length  apprehended,  ear-
before  itie  magistrates,   and
mitted  to  the  common  gaol,  to
his  trial  at  the  next  assizes.
Pallais,  the  ()erson  in  whose
e  he  had  preached,  was  also
mitted  with  him :  Mr.  S.,  how-
,  procured  bail,  and  obtained
liberation  on  the  15th  day  of


BER

his  imprisonment,  as  his  companion
had  done  some  days  before.

In  December,  Mr.  Stephenson
was  brought  to  trial  for  the  crime
of  having  preached  the  Gospel,  or,
as  one  of  the  principal  evidences
swore,  of  having  "  read  prayers
from  a  book  which  he  held  in  his
hand,  and  sung  psalms  to  a  con-
gregation.'* And  for  this  high
offence  he  was  sentenced  to  b6
confined  6  months  in  the  common
gaol,  to  pay  a  fine  of  £50,  and  to
discharge  all  the  fees  of  the  court.
After  he  had  been  imprisoned  about
5  weeks,  the  Governor  offered  to
set  him  at  liberty,  on  condition  of
his  promising  to  quit  the  island
within  60  days;  but,  as  he  con*
ceived  such  a  proposition  dis-
honourable to  the  cause  for  which
he  had  hitherto  suffered,  he  de-
clined accepting  it,  and  remained
a  prisoner  tUl  the  month  of  June,
1801,  when  the  period  of  his  in-
carceration expired.

Mr.  S.  continued  on  the  island
during  the  remaining  part  of  the
year;  but  his  health  was  so  se-
riously impaired,  that  he  was  no
longer  equal  to  the  exertions  be
had  formerly  been  accastomed  to
make  ;  and,  as  the  interdiction  of
the  law  precluded  him  from  uniting
in  public  or  social  worship  with  the
members  of  the  society,  he  was  re-
called from  Bermuda  early  in  1802,
and  those  who  had  formerly  heard
the  word  of  God  with  gladness,
were  left  as  sheep  without  a  shep-
herd.

Applications,  in  the  mean  time,
had  been  made  to  his  Majesty^s
government  in  England,  to  disallow
the  intolerant  edict  which  had
driven  Mr.  Stephenson  from  the
scene  of  his  labours ;  but  though
the  request  of  the  petitioners  was
readily  granted,  nearly  3  years
elapsed  before  the  repeal  of  the  act
was  publicly  announced.  And  even
subsequently  to  that  period,  such  a
spirit  of  detennvned  Ytf»\5\VV^  N*%i

h2  n


B£R

exhibited  against  the  introduction
of  the  Gospel,  that  no  missionaries
could  be  induced,  for  some  time,
to  venture  among  the  inhabitants.

At  length,  in  Sie  spring  of  1808,
Rev.  Joshua  Marsden  sailed  from
New  Brunswick  to  Bermuda,  with
the  view  of  re-establishing  the
mission.  After  repeated  inter-
views with  the  Governor,  Mr.  M.
was  permitted  to  commence  his
ministration  ;  and  though,  at  first,
he  was  merely  attended  by  20  or
30  hearers,  his  congregation  soon
began  to  increase ;  and,  in  the  be-
ginning of  September,  he  had  the
satisfaction  of  uniting  about  60
persons  in  society,  most  of  whom
were  negroes  or  people  of  colour,
who  appeared  truly  anxious  for
spiritual  instruction.  A  chapel
was  aftervi'ards  erected,  and  some
of  the  most  respectable  persons  in
the  island  became  regular  at-
tendants on  the  means  of  grace,
whilst  others  could  hardly  be  re-
strained by  their  relatives  from
uniting  with  the  society.

In  1811,  a  quantity  of  Bibles
and  religious  tracts  were  sent  to
Bermuda,  and  the  happy  effects
resulting  from  their  distribution  are
thus  pleasingly  described  by  Mr.
M.,  in  a  letter  dated  Sept.  24th : —

«  The  Bibles  which  you  sent  to
this  place  were  as  the  sun  rising
upon  a  dark  and  I)enighted  land.
The  poor  blacks,  who  could  read,
eagerly  inquired  for  them;  and
those  who  could  not,  began  to
learn,  that  they  might  peruse  the
word  of  God.  To  this  new  em-
ployment, their  intervals  of  rest,
their  meal-times,  and  their  Sab-
baths, were  devoted.  Passing
through  a  field  or  a  lane,  with  a
spelling-book  in  their  hands,  they
would  solicit  little  boys  coming
from  school  to  teach  ^em ;  and
would  frequently  beg  of  me,  upon
the  road,  that  I  would  stop  a  few
moments,  and  hear  them  repeat
their  lessons.    To  be  able  to  read,


was  to  them  like  being  placed  in  •
new  worid,  as  they  teheld  tU^p
in  a  different  Ughty  and  a.  tnJbkJSf
new  ideas  sprang  up  in  tl^elr  mMi..
In  a  little  time  many  of  tbem  m-
derstood  the  word  preached^  end  4
work  of  reformation  wet  tnni^
diately  visible  among  them. .  Vt^
fane  oaths  and  imprecationt  ime
now  laid  aside; — ^the  pdygaaiM
left  all  his  wives  but  the  one  mho
had  a  prior  claim; — ^tfae  evening
worship  called  them  from  the  Ur
bidinous  dance,  and.  the  midnigfat
theft; — the  stupid  and  dcYthfulbe?
came  pliant  and  diligent; — mon-
sters were  transformed  into  men  ;—
and  the  voice  of  rellgioui  melody
sounded  from  huts  and  cottages,
formerly  blackened  with  Uie  vilest
pollutions."

Nothing  of  particular  .  interest
occurs  in  the  history  of  thismierion,
from  the  date  of  Mr.  M.'s  letter
till  the  month  of  May,  1824,'wjhen
the  annual  meeting  of  the  auxHiwy
M.  S.,  held  at  Hamilton,  appean  to
have  excited  a  very  lively  interetrt;
and  the  following  observations
were  made  by  the  Hon.  J.  C.  Eiten,
the  Ctiief  Justice  of  the  island,
who  presided  on  the  occasiosi : —

*'  I  will  maintain  that  your  mis-
sionaries, in  the  scene  of  their
operations  of  ail  others  the  most
interesting  to  lu,— I  mean  the.-Wert
India  colonies,  —  have  entitled
themselves  to  the  thanks  of  the
establishecl  church,  which  they
cannot,  without  being  calumniated,
be  accused  of  undermining.  We
see  a  splendid  religious  establish-
ment, and  not  more  splendid  than  I
sincerely  hope  will  be  useAil,  going
out  to  our  West  India  colonies ; —
2  bishops,  3  archdeacons,  and  a
number  of  clergy.  One  of  the
principal  objects  of  their  appoint-
ment, as  stated  by  Lord  BathflOEst,
the  colonial  Secretary  of  State,  is
to  improve  the  religious  condition
of  the  slave  population.  I  vi-ill
maintain,     therefore,    that    your

19


\


BER

missioBariesy  sent  from  your  parent
ipcielj'v  have  prepared  the  way  for
tUa  eiiablishment ;  they  have  been
tbe  humble,  but  useful  pioneers,  who
hare  preceded  and  removed  impe-
(ttnienti  from  its  march ;  and,  in-
stead of  being  accused  of  a  wish  to
inbf  ert  it,  Ihey  ought  to  be  per-
mitted to  diaie  in  iti  triumph ;  for
what  they  have  sown  in  tears,  the
church  will  reap  in  joy; — ^they
have,  in  fact,  laid  the  foundation
npon  which  the  fabric  of  the  church
irill  be  reared  among  the  slaves  in
the  West  Indies.''

Tbe  state  of  the  mission  last  re-
ported is  as  follows : —

Mimilitm*— The  society  here
eonaista  of  four  classes — three  of
whites,  and  one  of  coloured  and
black  persons,  who,  by  the  steadi-
ness and  uprightness  of  their  con-
duct, adorn  their  Christian  proi'es-
slon.  In  this  place  the  missionary
leads  two  classes,  conducts  a
prayer-meeting,  and  preaches  three
times  a-week.  Tbe  children  of
the  Sunday-school  have  lately  been
taught  and  catechised,  in  the  in-
tervals of  preaching,  on  the  Sab-
bath. Th4  congpregations,  when
the  weather  is  fine,  are  numerous
and  attentive ;  and  there'  is  reason
to  believe,  that  many  of  the  regular
bearers  are  deeply  impressed  by  the
tnitiui  of  the  Gospel.  The  num-
ber of  black  and  coloured  commu-
Uicants  is  now  much  larger  than  in
the  preceding  year ;  and  tbe  pro-
spects promiM  an  increase  of  mem-
bers to  tbe  society.

£U.  Cfeorge't, — In  this  place  the
congregation  is  not  large.  The
society  consists  of  23  white,  colour-
ed, and  black  persons,  in  one  class,
who,  in  general,  are  decided  Chris-
tians.

J/ariey't  Bay. — Here  is  a  small,
but  good,  chapel.  The  congrega-
tions have,  of  late  years,  been  very
flnetuating ;  and  the  few  black  and
coloured  persons  who  wish  to  meet
in  claas,  have  been  refused  tickets.


BER

on  account  of  their  reluctance  to
comply  with  the  rules  respecting
marriage.

Port  Jioj/al.— The  society  in  this
place  consists  of  6  white  persons,
who  show  much  kindness  to  the
missionar}',  and  are  remaricably
steady  and  pious.  Theie  is  no
chapel  here,  and  the  congregation
is  small.

Paget.— In  this  place  a  good
stone  chapel  has  lately  been  built,
which  will  seat  about  200  persons.
It  was  opened  Nov.  27,  lHHiS,
when  it  was  filled  with  attentive;
hearers,  chiefly  h]ack  and  coloured
persons.  The  society  ccmsists  of
two  classes  of  black  and  coloured
persons,  chiefly  slaves ;  one  of
which  has  been  formed  in  the  course
of  the  year.  Many  of  them  re-
gularly receive  the  Lord's  Supper.
Their  walk  is  regular,  and  consis-
tent with  their  profession :  gentle-
men in  the  neighbourhood,  who
daily  observe  them,  speak  in  their
praise ;  and  most  of  their  owners
give  every  encouragement  to  their
religious  endeavours.

Schools, — At  the  time  of  the  last
report  of  tbe  Sunday-schools  on
this  station,  the  mL<(sionary's  ex-
pectations were  considerably  raised ;
and,  in  many  respects,  they  have
been  realized ;  but,  in  others,  they
have  met  with  disappointment.
The  long  affliction  of  one  of  the
coloured  teachers  for  Somerset  and
Heron  Bay  schools,  has  proved
greatly  detrimental,  and  occasioui*
ed,  in  these  places,  a  considerable
decrease  in  the  number  of  scholars.
In  Hamilton  and  Paget,  the  schools
have  suffered  from  the  want  of  pa-
tient and  active  teachers.  At  the  for-
mer place,  during  the  last  quarter,  in
the  intervals  of  public  worship  on  the
Sabbath,  Mr  .Moore,  the  missionao',
taught  and  catechised  the  children
himself;  and,  at  the  latter,  some  of
the  more  advanced  have  taught  the
junior  and  less  advanced  scfaolarf*
In  all  the  places  where  schools  are

1^


BET

established,  they  suffered  much
from  waftit  of  superintendents  and
Kealous  teachers.  However,  to
counterbalance  these  discounige-
nrents,  the  Lord  has  given  his  bles-
sing. A  few  of  the  scholars  have
become  members  of  the  society,
and  many  have  improved  much  in
reading  and  spelling.  The  First
Catechism  has  been  committed  to
memory  by  the  majority'.  Order
is  becoming  more  and  more  esta-
blished; and  the  prospects  of  the
missionary  are  by  no  means  dis-
couraging.

In  the  Bermudas,  the  Society  far
the  Propagation  of  the  Gospel  in
Foreign  Parts,  has  laboured  for
6  years.  **  The  Bermudas,"  saj-s
the  last  report,  ''  are  divided  into
9  parishes,  each  provided  with  a
respectable  church;  and  though
these  churches  had  been  for  many
years  very  insufficiently  supplied
with  ministers,  the  Bishop  of  Nova
Scotia,  during  his  visit,  made  pro-
vision for  the  regular  weekly  per-
formance of  divine  service  in  every
one  of  them.  Throughout  the  co-
lony, the  zeal  of  the  clergy,  and
the  excellent  dispositions  of  the
people^  excited  his  admiration.
He  administered  the  rite  of  confir-
mation in  each  church,  and  to  more
than  1200  persons  in  the  whole,  of
whom  above  100  were  blacks."

BETHANY,  formerly  i:/i>?
Fountain,  a  settlement  in  Great
Namaqua  countr}'.  South  Africa,
about  ^50  m.  from  Gape  Town,
near  the  former  station,  called
fFarm  Bath.

Rev.  Mr.  Schmelen,  of  the  L,  M.
S.,  on  his  return  from  the  Damara
country,  which  h^went  to  explore
in  18 15,  fell  in  with  a  kraal  of  Na-
maquas.  At  first  they  were  greatly
elarmed  at  the  appearance  of  him-  .
self  and  his  people ;  but  finding '
that  he  was  not  the  freebooter,
Africaner,  but  a  peaceful  mission-
-nry,  they  expressed  the  highest  joy,
iuid,witii  Flemerius,  their  chief;  at


fiST

their  head,  earnestly  entreated  him  '
to  continue  among  them.    Mr.  St
wished  to    decline  this,  bat  tbi^
would  take  no  denial.    Great  fiio**
cess  followed  his  acquiescence :  a'
concern  about  religion  became  ge-
neral— 20  persons  were  baptised,'!
On  a  credible  profession  of  fidth
— a  school  was  opened,  which  soon '
contained  140  children — andciTiU-'
zation  commenced.    These  happy'
results,  however,  were  not  of  long
continuance;  Mr.S.,  after  strag-
gling with  many  difficulties,  partly
arising  from    the    failure    of  tiie
crops — no  rain  having  fallen  in  some
parts  of  Namaqualandfor  3  yean —
and  partly  from  the  disturbed  state
of  the  tribes  after  the   death  of
Africaner,  left  Bethany  in  18SS,
accompanied  by  many  of  his  people,
who  settled    with   him  near  the
mouth  of  the  Great  Orange  River.
BETHEL,  a  mission  station  at
the  French  Camps,  in  Mississippi,
among  the  Choctaws,  on  the  pub-
lic road  from  Tennessee  toNatches,
about  60  m.  S.  W.  from  Mayhewj
and  the  same  distance  S.  £.  firom
f^lliot,  an    elevated    and   healthy
situation  on  the  high  land,  between
the  Pearl  and  Big  Black  rivers ;
4  m.  S.  of  the  upper  French  Camp.
The  mission  buildings  are  pleasantly
situated  50  rods  W.  of  the  rood.
In  the  vicinity  are  several  whites,
with  Indian  families,  most  of  whom
speak  the  Indian  and  English  lan-
guages ;  as  do  their  sla\'es,  who  are
numerous.  Within  40  m.  are  many
natives,  groping  in  spiritual  dark-
ness.   The  pernicious  examples  of
unprincipled  whites  have  poisoned
their  minds  and    corrupted  their
morals ;  so  that,  with  very  few  ex-
ceptions, they  have  been  degraded
by  every  species  of  vice.     This
place  was  formerly  known  by  the
name  of  French  Campy  afterwards
Newell,  and,  recently.  Bethel,  The
Rev.  Loring  S,  fFilliams,  assistant
missionary,  and  Mr.  Stephen  B,  Ma*
comber,    schoolmaster,    from    the


BET

Amerifittn  Board  of  Comnu'ssioners
for  Foreign  Misnotu^  labour  here.
Mr.  M.  arrived  in  the  spring  of  1 823.
In  (be  summer  of  18i!l,  Mr.  Williams
hid  charge  of  the  school  at  Elliot ;
and^    being  obliged  to  travel  for
his  health,  was  directed  to  visit
different    parts   of  the    Choctaw
nation,  in   order   to   learn  their
disposition  as    to  the  instruction
of  their  children.     At  this  place
ho  found  the  white  inhabitants  ver>'
anxious  on  the  subject ;  made  ar-
nngements   to  establish    a  local
ichool;  removed  his  family  in  Oct.
following  i  and  took  up  his  residence
in  an  old  cabin,  where  he  opened
a  school  on  the  5th  of  Nov.    He
Klacted  a  site  for  the  station  on  a
pleasant  eminence,  In  a  thicic  fo-
rest j  and  such  was  the  zeal  of  the
Uihabitants,   that,  in  less  than  a
month,    they  nearly  completed  a
large  dwelling-house,  divided  into
&  apartments,  besides  a   hall   16
feet  wide,  a  piazza  in  front,  and
one  44  feet  long  in  the  rear  $  the
whole  covered  by  a  loqf,  90  feet
by  40;  also  a  meat-house,  and  a
cabin  for  a  cook.    In  addition  to
this,  they  agreed  to  provide  for  the
teacher's  family,  and  for  such  of
the  children  as  could  not  boud  at
home  J  to  supplj'the  necessary  do-
mestic help ;  and  to  clear  10  acres
of  land  for  a  garden,  corn-field,
and  other  necessary  purposes.    In
Jan.  1822,  there  were  15  scholars ;
and,  in  Feb.  1823,  there  were  24,
besides  2  of  Mr.  Williams's  chil-
dren :  7  of  this  number  were  fe-
males; 8  full  blooded  Choctaws;
9  supported  wholly  at  the  expense
of  the  Board,  and  the  others  prin-
cipally by  their  parents.    The  chil-
dren were  very  diligent,  in  and  out
of  school,  and  maide  great  profi-
ciency.   From  the  commencement
of  the  establishment,  provision  was
made  for  the  accommodation   of
poor  children,  to  be  educated  at  the
expense  of  the  mission.    A  small


BET

congregation  usually  collects  on  the
Sabbath,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Wil-
liams, for  religious  worship;  and,
in  the  summer  of  1822,  a  consider-
able revival  prevailed  at  the  sta-
tion, principally  among  the  blacks:
and  as  many  as  10  or  12  gave  evi-
dence of  real  conversion  to  God ;
some  of  whom  were  formerly  no-
torious for  their  wickedness.

On  the  nth  Nov.  following,  a
church  was  organized,  and  4  pub-
licly professed  tiieir  faith  in  Christ.
On  the  19th  of  Jan.  6  others  united
with  the  church;  and  it  was  ex-
pected that  more  would  soon  come
forward.  This  station  is  important
as  a  depository  for  Bibles  and  tracts.
Many  people  emigrating  from  the
StatM  to  the  new  purchase  are
destitute  of  Bibles  and  other  books ;
and,  among  the  white  settlers  in
the  neighbourhood,  onW  4  Bibles
and  1  Testament  were  found  when
Mr.  Williams  first  visited  them.
Many  Bibles  and  tracts  have  already
been  distributed  to  residents  and
travellers.  The  Sabbath  is  now
regarded,  especially  by  the  black
population,  and  vice  is,  to  a  great
extent,  restrained.

BETHELSDORP,  or  Village
of  Bethel,  situated  westward  of
Algoa  Bay,  at  the  mouth  of  the
Zwartzkopts  R.,  and  about  600
m.  £.  of  the  Cape.  To  this
station,  Dr.  Vanderkemp  and
Mr.  Read,  the  r^resentatives  of
the  L,  M.  S»  removed,  in  conse-
quence of  the  dangers  to  which
they  were  exposed  at  Bota's  place.
Having  marked  out  a  plot  of
ground,  240  paces  in  length  and
14'4  in  breadth,  they  divided  it  into
difforent  portions  for  the  families
under  their  care,  and  gave  the
name  of  Bethel  Fountain  to  a
stream  that  ran  through  the  middle
of  the  settlement.  They  then
erected  a  temporary  cBurch,  and
houses  for  their  own  accommoda-
tion— the  walls  and    roofs  being


BET

chiefly  constructed  of  reeds;  and^
in  July,  1824,  they  commenced
public  worship,  and  opened  a  school
lor  the  instruction  of  the  young.
Nor  were  the  missionaries  per-
mitted to  labour  in  vain.  Cupido,  a
man  notorious  for  \ice,  and  distin-
gnished  above  all  his  neighbours  for
the  enormity  of  his  crimes,  found,
in  the  blood  of  Christ,  a  remedy
sufficient  to  heal  all  his  diseases;
and  when  be  heard  that  the  Son  of
God  was  able  to  save  sinners,  he
cried  out,  "  This  is  what  I  want !
This  is  what  I  want ! "  Tbist^n-
▼ert,  like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  no  sooner
received  the  faith  of  the  Gospel,
-than  he  s^traightway  preached  it  to
bis  countrymen ;  and,  in  one  year,
he  could  number  of  them  17  adults
converted  by  his  instrumentality —
one  of  whom  became  the  wife  of
Mr.  Read.  Many  other  instances
of  usefulness,  peculiariy  pleasing,
also  occurred.  Just  before  the
IB-capture  of  the  Cape,  however,
the  opposition  of  many  persons  had
risen  to  a  great  height ;  and  the
missionaries  feared  that  tbey  should
be  compelled  to  relinquish  their  la-
bours. They  were  summoned  to
the  Cape,  where  they  vindicated
their  conduct  to  the  satisfaction  of
the  Dutch  Governor ;  yet  so  ma-
lignant were  their  enemies,  that
lie  recommended  the  missionaries
to  delay  their  return  till  a  more
fiurourable  opportunity.  That  op-
portunity was  unexpectedly  afibrded
by  the  capture  of  Cape  Town ;
which  was  no  sooner  eflfected,  than
the  General,  Sir  David  Baiid,  sent
for  Dr.  Vanderkemp,  whom  he
treated  in  the  most  cordial  manner.
Shortly  after,  full  permission  was
granted  to  resume  the  care  of  the
congregation  at  Betfaelsdorp,  where
the  doctor  arrived,  March  Slst,
1S06.  Mr.  Read,  who  was  desired
by  Sir  David  Baird  to  return  by
sea,  was  preserved  from  the  most
imminent  danger  of  being  ship-


BET

wrecked  on  the  coast  of
and  proyideatially  reached  '  fti
settlement  in  safety.  The  6flM
of  Messrs.  Ulbrlcbt,  Tromp,  ai4
Erasmus  Smith,  having  been  gn^
blessed  in  the  absence  of  Dr.  r!^
and  Mr.  R.,  the  mission  was  ftm*'^
rishing;  and  a  valuable  coa^'
tor  had  been  found  in  Mrs.  Swm,
who  formerly  lived  at  Rodeand,
and  had  devoted  herself  to  the  lo;
struction  of  the  heathen.  The
missionaries  were  received  by  tiieir
beloved  flocks  with  the  most  en?,
thusiastlc  tokens  of  joy.  V  Em
the  old  Hottentot  women,  n^
could  scarcely  leave  their  hoan^
made  their  appearance,"  sayi'lfr.
Read,  "  on  this  occasion,  to  Joiir
the  general  acclamation  of  claj^piiv
of  hands ;  and  I  was  almort  anas
of  being  smothered  by  their  ca-
resses.'^

The  report  of  the  misslonaiiei,  In
1810,  demonstrates  their  succte.
^^The  external  state  of  Bethelf
dorp,''  they  remark,  ''puts  on  gro-
duidly  a  more  promhdng  appear
ance — ^the  people  become  more  in-
dustrious.     The   knitting  school
flourishes  under  the  direction  of
brother  Read's  wife.    Fonneiiy  ^
had  no  com  of  our  own ;  but  this
year  the  Lord  has  shown  that  it  ii
in  his  power  literally  to  change  a
desert  into  fertile  ground,  by.  af-
fording, throughout  &e  whole  year,
such  an  abundance  of  rain,  thatwa
have  been  able  to  sow  wheat  and
barley  sufficient  for  out  provi^ott,
which  is  almost  ripe,  and  promltet
a  copious  harvest.    The  number  of
inhabitants  also  increases ;  so  that
we  have  been  obliged  to  sntroond
the  square,  which  forms  Bethels-
dorp,  with  a  second,  and  that  with
a  third,  which,  in  all  probablli^«
will  soon  be  filled  up.    Our  fields
are  covered  with  cattle,  amounting
to  about  1200  head,  not  including
the  sheep  and  the  g^ats.    There  is
such  an  abundance  of  milk  and


BKT

butter,  that  this  last  4^icle  has
been  employed  in  manufacturing
nap.  Other  necesary  articles,  as
ciothing,  Qorn,and  flour,  are  brought
Iqrthe  boors  in  waggons,  as  to  a
market-place."  Connected  with
this  acQOunt  of  their  temporal  af-
fairs, tbe  missionaries  say : — **  The
mxtd  of  truth  is  by  no  means  lifeless
among  us:  and  although  we  can-
BOi  well  estimate  the  number  of
those  ^o,  we  have  reason  to  be-
lieve, are  favoured  with  a  saving
knowledge  of  Christ,  on  account  of
tbeir  concealing,  in  great  part,  the
invard  dispositions  of  their  hearts ;
vet,  firom  what  we  hear  accidentally
norn  others,  we  believe  it  to  l)e
coDsiderabie.  There  are,  how-
erer,  not  a  few  in  whom  the  worlc
(rf  converting  grace  is  more  evident
to  ns.'*

In  1811,  Messrs.  Wimmer,  Verg-
host,  Bartlett,  and  Coner,  (a  con-
verted blacic  from.Demerara),  were
added  to  the  labourers  at  this  set-
tlement, Dr.  Vanderlcemp  having
long  contemplated  a  mission  to
Madagascar;  but,  in  the  midst  of
Us  anticipations  of  reoiovol  to  a
new  Sphere,  he  was  siunmoned  to
tbe  enjoyment  of  eternal  rest.

On  the  20th  of  March,  1813,
the  Rev.  John  Campbell,  who  had
kindly  undertaken,  in  behalf  of  the
L.  M,  S.io  visit  S.  Africa,  arrived
at  Bethelsdorp,  and  beheld  a  much
greater  degree  of  civilization  than
be  had  expected.  He  found  many
of  the  natives  exercising  the  busi-
ness of  smiths,  carpenters,  saw}'ers,
basket-maker8,brickmaker$,thatch-
ers,  coopers,  lime-burners,  mat-
manufacturers,  stocking-makers,
tailors,  «fec.  &c.  Cultivation  was.
alio  much  extended,  and  the  stock
had  greatly  increased.  The  effects
of  religion  were  likewise  displayed
in  the  existence  and  prosperity  of  be-
nevolent institutions  formed  among
the  Hottentots.  They  had  a  fund
for  the  sick  and  indigent,  which
amounted  to  23d  rixdoUars }  and


BET

they  bad  recently  proposed  erecting
a  bouse  for  the  reception  of  part
of  their  poor.  They  had  also  a
common  fund  for  the  purpose  of
improving  the  settlement,  amount-
ing to  130  dollars,  and  about  30
head  of  cattle;  and,  in  addition
to  this,  they  had  contributed,  dur-
ing the  preceding  12  months,  tbe
sum  of  76  dollars  in  aid  of  ttie
L.  M,  S.

The  colonial  government  having
demanded  the  pa>7nent  of  taxes,
and  "  remonstrances,''  says  Mr.
Read,  in  a  letter  dated  April  9,
1815,  '<  having  proved  in  vain,  tbe
only  alternative  was  for  our  people
to  exert  themselves  to  the  utmost
in  order  to  raise  the  money.  Ae-
cordingly,  they  dispersed  them*
selves,  and  applied  themselves,  some
to  hewing  and  sawing  timber,  and-
others  to  beating  bark  and  burning
charcoal.  The  smith,  the  wheel-
wright, the  carpenter,  <fi?c.  all  ex-
erted themselves  to  comply  with  the
demand  made  on  them  and  tbeir
poorer  relations,  so  that  at  the  ap-.
pointed  time  the  tax  was  paid,
amounting  to  3000  rixdollars,  or
about  £lSo,  And,  on  the  follow-
ing day,  a  regular  Auxiliary  Society
was  established  for  this  settlement,
in  consequence  of  many  of  tbe
natives  having  long  expressed  a
desire  to  do  something  more  for
the  cause  of  Christ  than  they  had
hitherto  done.  Twelve  of  the
members  were  chosen  to  form  a
committee,  and  subscriptions  were
immediately  made  to  the  amount  of
800  rixdollars,  or  about  £160.'^
In  the  same  year,  a  general
awakening  took  place ;  and,  in  a
short  time,  ^  persons  were  added
to  the  church,  among  whom  waa
the  son  of  a  Caffre  chief,  who  had
been  a  ringleader  of  tne  young
people  in  their  follies.  His  con-
version made  a  deep  impression  on
the  minds  of  many,  especially  of
his  companions.  Affecting  scenes
took  place  at  some  ol  \XveVc  \>\i^>^


BKT

meetinii^ :  the  greater  part  of  the
anemUy  being  bathed  in  tears,
and  crying  fdr  mercy;  while  the
belieTiiig  Hottentoti  wept  fat  Joy,
on  beholding  so  many  turned  from
darkness  to  light.

The  mission  -was  subsequently
strengthened  by  the  arrival  of
Messrs.  Messer  and  Barlcer,  who
were  permitted  to  rejoice  in  in-
creasing prosperity.

In  July,  1819,  the  ehuivh  con-
sisted of  about  200  members.  The
deputation,  who  risited  it  at  that
time,  were  of  opinion  that  as  much
piety  existed  among  them  as  exists
among  an  equal  number  of  persons
connected  with  any  Christian  so-
ciety in  England,  in  which  atten-
tion is  paid  to  the  personal  religion
of  its  members.  They  observe,
also,  that,  independently  of  the  good
effected  at  this  station,  in  reference
to  persons  of  real  and  decided  piety,
a  standard  of  morals  had  been  esta-
blished generally  among  the  people,
and  their  minds  and  condition  con-
siderably improved.

In  18^,  the  former  reed  houses
were  removed,  and  streets  formed,
the  houses  of  which  were  arranged
in  regular  rows.  A  public  shop  or
store  was  opened  for  the  sale  of
goods.  The  Hottentots  had  become
contractors  with  the  government  to
convey  stores  from  Algoa  Bay  to
Oraham's  Town.  The  agents  ap-
pointed at  the  two  places  were
lilcewise  Hottentots,  all  of  whom
acquitted  themselves  to  the  perfect
satisfaction  of  their  respective  offi-
cers. And  liesides  supporting  them-
selves by  their  own  industry,  the
Hottentots  of  Bethelsdorp  paid,  in
^.the  course  of  a  few  mcmths,  7000
dollars,  or  about  £680  sterling,  for  a
fimn  called  Hankey  farm,  situated
on  the  (jhamtoos  River;  built  a
school-house  nearly  equal  in  value
to  that  sum ;  and,  in  many  Instances,
erected  houses  for  themselves.-
At  this  period,  Mr.  Kltchingham
was  the  misiionary,  and  the  schools


BET

were  under  the  auperintendeiKMi  of
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Monro.

In  the  following  year,  t&ft  .iaew
■cho(d-bou8e  was  finUhed.  Apuigd
of  alms-houses,  17  in  numb^/U
been  erected,  by  the  laiwur  aatfit
the  expense  of'^  Hottentoti.    J^
merchants'  store  succeeded  befsM
all  expectation.  The  contract  wMi
government  afforde4  seasonahle-p^
lief  under  privations  arising  ftom
want  of  com  seed  and  of  jgniU
weather.    They  were  ato  nrther
assisted  by  proitts  derived  £ram  a
species  of  aloe,  which  Dr.  yeulfl^
kemp  supposed,  in  1810,  woold  It-
quire  a  herculean  effort  to  Indqce
them  to  gather.    Every  Mondiy,
by  unanimous  consent,  was  appro-
priated by  the  people    to   paoUc
labour,  when  all  the  men  in  the  vil-
lage engaged  in  the  execution  of
some  work  for  the  common  benefit
The  Sabbath-school  was  -bIbo
prosperous.      Dr.    Philip    sap*—
''  The  people  meet  at  8  o'clock  in
the  morning,  and  in  the  afternoon.
Here  all  is  activity :  the  wives  of
the  missionaries,  and  the  daughten
of  others  belonging  to  the  instita-
tion,  with  the  Messrs.  Kenop^'tiie
merchants,  are  all  engaged }  ^nd  it
is  a  ddightful  sight  to  see  all  ages,
from  childhood  to  grey  hairs,  uiuler
such  superintendence,  conningofor
their  lessons,  from  the  A  B  C  4o
the  most  advanced  classes,  reading
the  most  difficult  parts  of  the  sacnd
Scriptures    without    the    aid    of
spelling.     There  is  scarcely  any
thing  at  Bethelsdorp  I  take  man
pleasure  in  than  this  school.    Here
we  see  ell  the  energies  of  the  insti-
tution, all  the  taients  of  the  station,
,in  full  exercise;  and  It  is  truly
affecting  to  behold  children  of  7  «nd
1 0  yearsof  age  (which  is  frequenUy
the  case)   acting  as  monitovs  to
classes  of  aged  pe<qple,  from  40  to
70  5rear8  of  age."

His  Majesty's  Commu9iotter$  ^
Inquiry  arrived  at  Bethelsdorp  qb
the   S8th  of  Dec.f  acooBBpuied


BET

hy  liieir  secretarf  and  a  gen-
ttemaa  of  tke  colony.  They  at-
tonded  divine  service  at  the  mission
chapel,  when  Mr.  Kitchingman
areached  from  Psahn  cxxvi.  3 —
jie  Lord  hath  done  great  thmgt
ybr  tcf » whereof  we  are  glad.  After
the  aennon,  about  20  Hottentots
lead  the  3d  chapter  of  St.  John's
Goipely  and  were  examined  as  to
liieir  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.
The  children  afterwards  read  a
chapter  in  the  Bible,  and  were  ca-
techised. The  English  class,  be-
loag^ng  to  the  mission-school,  then
lead  aiew  easy  lessons.,  When  aU
waa  finished,  the  Hon.  Commissi-
aners  announced  the  object  of  their
visit ;  when  some  of  the  old  men  of
tta  institution  rose  up  and  replied,
thaiddng  the  King  of  England,  and
thanking  them  for  the  interest  they
took  in  the  Hottentots  of  Bethels-
dorp.  The  Hon.  Commissioners
expressed  their  satisfaction  at  the
progress  which  the  people  had
made  in  the  knowledge  of  the
Gospel  and  in  civilization.  An
anxUiary  B,  S,  was  formed  at
Bethelsdorp,  on  the  5th  of  January,
18S0.

The  school,  formerly  superin-
tended by  Mr.  Monro,  has  recently
been  placed  under  the  care  of  Mr.
Coraeliiis  Vanderkemp,  the  elder
son  of  the  late  Dr.  Vanderkemp,
wba  acquits  himself,  in  this  iilte-
rssting  office,  greatly  to  the  satis-
iiution  of  the  missionaries.  The
scholars,  in  number  165,  are,  gene-
rally q>eaking,  making  rapid  pro-
gress. The  average  attendance  is
about  125.

An  evening  school  has  been
eommenced  for  the  benefit  of
adult  Hottentots,  among  whom  a
great  thirst  for  knowledge  is  pre-
valent; They  are  instructed  in
reading,  writing,  and  arithmetic.
In  this  school,  which  is  well  at-
tended, the  Messrs.  Kemp  render
faluable  personal  aid.

Tlbe  Rer.  Mr,  Foster,  who  arrired  j


BET

with  Mr?.  F.  in  1826,  has  under  his
tuition  several  promising  youths  be-
longing to  diflerent  African  tribes,
besides  several  of  the  sons  of  the
missionaries.

A  new  and  more  commodious
school-house  is  being  erected  at
this  station.

The  attendance  on  the  public
religious  services,  both  on  the  Sab-
bath and  on  week  days,  is,  in  gene-
ral, good.

That  interesting  feature  df  this
mission,  the  Sabbath  adult  school,
still  continues  to  wear  an  encou-
raging aspect.

One  of  the  missionaries  spends  a
considerable  portion  of  his  time  in
visiting  the  people  at  their  own
dwelling-houses ;  when  he  endea-
vours to  impress  upon  their  minds
the  importance  of  attaining  a  right
understanding  of  the  Scriptures,
and  of  giving  their  children  ^e
benefits  of  education.

Stated  services,  and  a  Sabbath-
school,  have  been  commenced  at
Port  Elizabeth,  in  the  vicinity  of
Algoa  Bay,  for  the  benefit  of  the
Hottentots  and  slaves.  Messrs.
Helm,  Robson,  and  Foster,  alter-
nately, preach  there  on  the  Sab-
bath; and  it  appears,  from  the
testimony  of  respectable  individuals
resident  at  the  place,  that  their  la-
bours have  not  been  in  vain.  It  is
intended  to  erect  a  chapel,  towards
the  expense  of  which  a  considera-
ble sum  has  been  subscribed  on  the
spot.  The  committee  of  the  Cape
A,  S,  has  granted  4i0  rix  dollars  in
aid  of  the  object.

Mr.  Robson  and  Mr.  Helm  also
preach  alternately,  every  Sabbath-
day,  to  a  body  of  Hottentots  be-
longing to  the  institution,  who  re-
reside  at  a  place  a  few  miles  distant
from  Bethelsdorp.

Mr.  Helm  having  completed  the  -
arrangements  of  a  small  printing-
office,  has  begun  to  print  elemen-
tary hooks   fox   Uie  \ae    ol   >^«
misiion,

I  %5


BET

The  anniTenaiy  of  tlie  JBetheh"
dorp  A.  3/.  5.  was  held  on  the  10th
of  May,  1826,  when  several  Hot-
tentots addressed  the  meeting  with
much  good  sense  and  feeling.

On  the  16th  of  the  same  month,
Mr.  Brownlee,  missionary  to  the
Ciaffres,  was  ordained  at  this  sta-
tion.

.  More  Hottentot  families  continue,
from  time  to  time,  to  join  the  insti-
tution.

The  number  of  couples  married
during  the  year  1826,  was  37.

BETH^SDA,  formerly  Orlams
Kraal,  a  settlement  in  the  interior
of  S.  Africa,  on  Great  Orange  R.,
about  600  m.  N.  of  Cape  Town,
Inhabited  by  Orlams,  Corannas,and
Bushmen,  in  a  very  rude,  unculti-
vated state.  /  The  Rev.  Messrs.
Sass  and  Helm,  of  the  L,  M,  S,,
commenced  a  mission  here  in  1808,
where  many  were  soon  after  con-
verted to  God.  More  than  80  were
baptized  in  the  course  of  one  year.
Mr.  Helm,  however,  was,  at  an
early  period,  compelled  by  ill-health
to  remove  to  Grlqua  Town.  Mr.
Sass  relates  in  bis  journal,  received
1818,  many  pleasing  instances  of
the  power  of  divine  gnce  in  the
hearts  of  the  poor  Cariinnai,  many
of  whom  appeared  to  be  truly
pious.  About  20  adults  were  bap-
^zed  in  the  course  of  the  previous
year,  besides  children.

The  converted  people  of  this
settlement,  in  their  intercourse
with  kraals  of  Bushmen  and  others,
frequently  took  occasion  affectiont
ately  to  speak  of  Christ  and  salva-
tion to  them,  and  sometimes  appa-
rently with  much  effect.  In  one
place  they  found  a  large  kraal  of
Bushmen,  and  were  surprised  to
l^ear  their  chief  speaking  to  them
of  the  things  of  God,  wUch  he  had
occasionally  heard  at  Bethesda,
and  conducting  divine  service  in  an
orderly  manner.

They  frequently  sufl^red  by  the
jncunioju  of  the  wild  Bi]«hmen>


BEY

who  stole  their  cattle.  lib  bod  M
stance,  they  apprehended  agiwit
men,  who  some  months  be£m  JuA'
robbed  them ;  but  instead  of  .f^*
nishing  them,  as  was  expecJMk
they  treated  them  with  Unriniwr
and  made  them  a  present  of  aamJI,
sheep  and  goats.  They  wen  «!»■
nished  and  ashamed;  and  one'Of
them,  tremblings  said  tq  Mmi
others,  « I  shall  not  belieie  fbiy
will  spare  my  life,  until  I  gethiw
in  safety;  for  though  thejF.iM
thus  kindly  with  us  atpresenVu^f
will  certainly  kill  us  as  we  zeUuaJ*
They  found,  however,  that  thei^iw-
nign  principles  of  the  G<ispel  p|B»
vailed,  and  thus  the  Ghri«ttiiii
«  overcame  evil  with  good.''

Unable  to  endure  the.ezcMriie
heat  of  the  summer  months^. Mft
Sass  removed,  in  1820,  from  Bo-
thesda  to  Campbell,  TheGriqni^
who  previously  resided  at  the  fowwr
place,  followed  him  to  the  lattev;
and  of  the  Corannas  on  the  Gnsk
R.,  whom  he  occasionally  tIiM^
are  some  who  were  formedy^nvdit
his  instruction  at  Bethesda.

BEUVILLE,  a.tDwivinFnmM»
containing  nearly  2000  inhabitntk
Here  the  fF.  if.jS„bas  a  congre-
gation in  a  stedbst  and  pEoqpevQVS
state.

BEYROUT,  a  city  olByd*,  «t
the  foot  of  Mount  Lebanon.  .It
has  a  fertile  sqil,  and  is  abundantly
furnished  with  good  water,  by.  the
wrings  which  flow  from  the  ac^a^
cent  hills.  The  houses  are  bolU.  of
mudf  and  6f  a  soft,  sandy,  ccnmb-
ling  stone ;  and  are  darl^  damp,  and
inconvenient.  The  streets  are
narrow  and  dirty ;  find  during  the
winter,  are  seldom  dry.  On  theW^
and  N.  W.  Beyrout  is  entfrely  open
to  the  sea.  At  no  great  distance
to.  the  E.  is  Lebanon;  vhkh
jBtretches  forth  to  the  N.  andtfae^>
and  afibrds  a  pleasant  resort  liar  the
summer,  and>itissaid,  a  safe.ie-
treat  in  times  of  political,  diitub->
aiice.    On  ^^  %« ^a  ^  lax^  and


^enrtiftil  plaiOy  varied  by  small
hfUiy  covered  wltii  olive,  palm,
tK^BgPy  lemcm,  pine,  and  mulbeny
U^nm  cjpeclally  the  last ;  enriched
trHh'Tines^  and  enlivened  by  ntf-
-Bitoiu  cottages.  Beyiout  was  once
the  tMe!  town  of '  the  Druses ;  and
thoa^  it  is  now  possessed  by  the
Tatk»,  yet  it  is  still  the  great  emf-
•porion  of  tBH  that  dwell  upon  the
■Mfofitains.  Besides  three  lai^
■QtqpieB  and  several  small  ones,
te  Aty  eontatoiB  a  iloman  Catholic,

■  Maronite,  a  Greek,  and  a  Catholic
Greek  church.  iThe  whole  popn-
ktiaki- is  supposed  to  be  not  less  than
■MOO  souls.  Here  the  American
minlcamries,  Ibellev.  Messrs.  Flsk
tfd  Kiiig>  took  op  their  residence
in  1823,  and  others  from  the  same
Boud  liave  idnce  entered  into  their
IriNKin.  The  chaich  missionaries,
who  were  going  to  Abyssinia,  ar-

■fivtNl  at    Beyront>    in    February,

•  lOIT,  and  ttaey  have  transmitted  the
foHofwing  remarlcs  on  the  state  of

■  the  mtoion ": — <'  It  has  pleased  God
ta  to  bless  the  labours  of  the  bre-

:  mten  Bird  and  GoodeU,  that  there
are  10  or  18  persons  whom  the>'
eonlder  to   be  truly  converted  ;

•  vhAs  many  diligent^  search  the
Bcfflptiirss,  to  see  if  things  be  so
WB  the  miMionaries  say.    Bat  it  is

■  htn  as  it  is-througliout  the  world —
f  He  that  is  bom  after  the  flesh,
Irtwecates  him  that  is  bom  after
the  spirit'    TheGreekS)  ingene-

-  nl^  xeeeive  the  missionaries  well ;
Wt  the  Greek  patriarch  of  Beyrout
lolminates  against  them ;  under  the
faifuenee,  it  is   supposed,  of  the

'  Maionites  and  other  Roman  Ca-
tholics. Not  only  ire  calumnies
cfaeulated  against  the  missionaries,
Imt'the  patriarch  curses  and  excom-
tannfcates  those  who  maintain  any
•faKereourse  with  them, — even  tiie

-  poor  who  receive  tfieir  alms  I  The
iatm  Iloman  patriarch  has  also
wlntd  a  yoang  convert,  and  has
-kept  klm  tnr  pition  in  the  convent

for  man  tinui  ayeir ;  he  often


BOG

causes  his  victim  to  be  beaten,  and
compels  him  to  undress,  and  to  pass
<the  night  in  the  cold ;  limiting  his
sustenance  to  the  smallest  pwtioa
of  bread    and  water  which  will
prevent  him  from  dying!    He  as*
sembles  the  monks  daily  round  the
-prisoner,  to  insult  him,  and  allows
-him  neither  to  read  nor  write.  But
when  they  smite  Asaad   on  the
rigtrt  cheek,  he  turns  to  them  the
other  also;  and  when  they  tell  him
he  has  a  devil,  and  curse  him,  he
blesses ;  when  they  interrogate  him,
he  answenby  a  passage  of  Scripture,
whether  they  promise  or  threaten.
The    Mussulmans     are   tolerably
quiet ;  bat  they  avail  themselves  of
all  opportunities  to  fill  their  purses.
This  is  the  manner  of  effecting
their  purpose:  When  any  one  begins
to  read  the  Scriptures,  or  to  visit
■the  missionaries,  those-  of  his  sect
go  to  the  Mussulman  judge,  doubt-
less with  a  present  in  their  hands,
and  beg  him  to  cause  such  an  one
to  be  punished :  the  poor  man  has
no  apprehension  of  the  mischief,
till  a  Turk  meets  him  in  the  street,
and  tells  him  that  he  is  condemned
to  buy,  for  example,    100  lbs.  of
soap,  of  the-  manufacture  of  the
pacha,  at  3  Jivres  per  lb.,  whereas
the  just  price  is  but  1  livre:    if
he  refose,  they  put  him  in  prison,
and  there  beat  him  till  he  consents
to  pay.     This  Roman  patriareh
has  g^ven  the  missionaries  and  other
Christians,   the  name  of  *  Bibli-
cals,' — a  new  word,  which  denotes
a  follower  of  the  Bible."

BIG  SPRING,  Upper  Sandusky,
Ohio.  The  Methoditt  miuion-
aries  in  Upper  Sandusky  have
laboured  here  among  the  Wyandots
with  success.  In  1822,  many  at-
tended with  much  seriousness ;  and,
on  one  occasion,  10  oflered  tiiem-
selves  for  admission  as  members  of
the  society.

BOGLIPORE,  a  town  240  m.
N.  bv  W.  of  Calcutta,  and  2  miles

S.  01  the  Gvnttes*

%1


BOG

Mr.  Cbristiacn  was  pieced  here  by
3ishop  Heber.

<'  Boglipore^as  an  European  sta-
tion (says  tbe  archdeacon  of  Calcut-
ta), is  midway  between  Berhampore
and  Dinapore'^  tbe  nearest  stations
whefe  a  chaplain  resides.  There
are  only  about  20  European  Chris-
tians of  all  descriptions  at  Bogli-
pore;  but  westward,  MongbjT  is
little  more  than  30  m. ;  northward,
Pumeah,  about  60 ;  and  eastward,
■  Malda,  from  70  to  80.  At  each  of
these  stations  are  civU  and  military
servants  of  government ;  and  in
these  districts  are  many  families  of
Indigo  planters,  who  would  occa-
sionally visit  Bogli{)ore  for  the  ser-
vices of  a  clerg>'man ;  or  these  sta-
tions might  be  visited,  with  little
trouble  and  expense,  in  the  cold
season,  by  a  clergyman,  to  the  great
comfort  of  these  residents  and
.  others."

With  a  view  to  the  superin-
tendence of  native  schools,  Bogli-
pore  offers  considerable  advantages ;
.  there  being  no  one  large  town  in
which  the  inhabitants  reside,  but
several  bazaars,  within  a  circum-
ference of  6  or  8  m.,  containing
about  15,000  people.

Boglipore  is  particularly  inte-
re.<$ting,  as  the  head-quarters  of  the
district  which  Includes  the  Raje-
:  ranhel  Hills,  containing  a  popula-
tion of  a  totally  difierent  kind  from
the  inhabitants  of  the  plains.  These
hills  are  a  separate  cluster,  sur-
-rounded  by  a  level  cultivated
country  on  all  sides.

Tlie  Board,  in  their  last  report^
gives  the  following  views  relative
to  tbe  people  and  the  mission : —

'^  The  people  who  inhabit  these
hills  are  distinct  from  the  Hin-
doos ',  theii  customs,  religion,  lan-
guage, and  features,  bear  no  re-
semblance to  those  who  live  around
them.  They  have  many  religious
ceremonies,  and  are  extremely
.superstitious,  but  liberal  in  their
opinions  of  those  who  differ  from  |


BOG^

them.  Ag  these  people  BiiiVffr
distinction  of  cutea  among  HktiM^
the  success,  Mr.  Chrlstltn  tn/^
will  be  great  and  decisive.^  tte
present  obstacles  exist  in  their  !■»•
guage,  which  has  no  written  dH^
racter;  and  all  the  aids  to  be-e^
tained  in  that  country,  .aie  nn
insufficient  to  remove  tliese  dMh
culties :  he  is  engaged,  at  fttwoA,
in  writing  a  vocabulaiy.  Sidi
anxious,  if  possible,*  to  .go  aBMBf
these  people  in  December,  whia
is  the  best  time  fov  risitlng  tbMK;
when  he  purposes  to  eatabMi
schools  in  different  parts  of  thiP
hills,  as  aids  to  his  higher  riewi.
He  gets  on  so  slowly  with  iris  woik
of  preparation,  that  he  ahnost  ftui
at  that  time  be  shall  fall  short  Of
the  requisite  qualifications  j  at  tt
would  be  desirable  to  give,  then
some  portions  of  Scripture  in  tMr
own  language,  which  he  purposes
writing  in  the  Nagree  character.
He  has  been  Tisited  by  sone'tf
their  chiefs,  to  whom  he  nw9-
tioned  his  wishes  to  eomnraalcsle
better  knowledge  among  them -than
they  had  hitherto  received:  thcgr
seem  to  be  pleased  with  tUs  mtak
of  consideration;  and  cAseited,
that  they  woi4d  forward  his  riewi,
by  <Mrecting  the  children  of  their
respective  villages  to  attend  the
schools  when  erected.  '

<<The  hills,  from  their  insalubrf^,
are  only  to  be  approached  3  montti
in  the  year ;  and  his  residence  inr
the  other  mcmths  has  been  fixed  at
the  civil  station  of  Boglipoie,  with
directions  to  perform  the.  clerical
duties  of  it.  The  gentlemen  of
the  station  have  shown  him  flie
kindest  attentions;  and,  being
chiefly  of  the  church  of  England
are  regular  in  th^  attendance  at
divine  worship.  He  has  also  re-
ceived instructions  to  make  occa-
sional visits  to  the  invalid  station
at  Monghyr;  this  statimi  betaig
destitute  of  the  services  of  a  cler*
gyman,  the  bishop  directed  him  to


BOO

■op  tiMn  CHiee  a  month.  On  lew*
ug  Calcutta^  be  proceeded,  in  the
tat  Instance,  to  MOnghyr ;  when  a
IMnlar  attendance  on  tiie  services
oTtliB  church  was  obserred  by  a
VUnber  exceeding  70.  But  as  the
■laclllties-  which  JMfered,  to  obtain
aa  acquaintance  with  the  Hill  lan-
guge,  were  ffTeater  at  Boglipore,
fimada  thatof  greater  consequence
.as  a  settled  residence.''
'  The  committee  of  public  In-
^feniotion  appropriated  3600  rupees
far  annum  to  the  support  of  a  go-
•ftniment  school  at  Bliagulpore,  or
Boffllp(»«.  In  a  Tolume  published
bv  Mr.  Charles  Lushington,  of  the
Bengal  oifil  service,  on  religious,
eharttable,  and  benevolent  iostitu-
■tiooB  connected  with  Calcutta,
the  author  states  the  allowance  to
be  400  rupees  per  month,  and  gives
•the  following  particulars: —

'<  This  school  was  established  by
government,  for  the  purpose  of  in-
strootingthe  recruits  and  children
Hi  the  corps  denominated  Hill
lUagidn,  in  the  Hindoostanee
liaguage,  and  the  elements  of
tfi&metic.  It  is  also  open  to  the
children  of  the  HiU  chiefs  (  so
that  there  is  every  just  reason  to
expect  that  the  institution  is  cal-
eidated  to  streng^en  the  efficiency
of  the  corps  of  Hill  lUngers,  and
to  promote  civilization  among  the
nide  tribes  from  which  it  is  em-
bodied. The  number  of  pupils
averages  about  200  $  at  a  late  exa-
mination many  exhibited  a  cre-
ditable proficiency.  Captain  Gra-
ham, with  whom  the  project  of  the
school  originated,  has  compiled  a
vocabulary  of  the  language  spoken
fey  the  Bo^ipore  mountaineers,
which  is  conjectured  to  bear  a
elose  affinity  ^ith  that  of  the
Bheels.'*

306UE  TOWN,  a  station  of
the  Zr.  M,  S,,  in  Taiarapu,  or
mailer  peninsula,  Georgian  Is*
lands.

The  RevtMr.Ctookeettledhere^


dOM

at  the  request  of  the  inhabitants,
atthe  end  of  1823  ;  and  soon  had
a  congregation  of  about  500,  a
church  of  47  members,  and  a
flourishing  scliool.  In  1826,  the
number  baptized,  of  adults,  was
241 ;  of  children,  91 ;  making  a
total  of  38&  adults  and  170  chil-
dren. Besides  these,  there  were
alwut  100  natives,  who  were  bap-
tized prior  to  this  station  being
formed.  The  candidates  for  bap-
tism were  28 ;  the  church  consisted
of  90  men  and  70  women  $  and
the  congregation  had  increased  to
upwards  of  1000.  A  Femaie  Be^
nevolent  &,  superintended  by  Mrs.
Crook  and  her  eldest  daughter,
had  also  been  in  full  operation  for
sometime,  with  good  effect;  and
a  similar  society  was  afterwards
formed  among  the  men.  The
schools  are  still  well  attended,  and
both  adults  and  children  make  en>
couraging  progress^  Many  have
been  recently  baptized,  and  the
number  in  communion  announced
in  the  last  report  wps  236.  A  new
and  commodious  chapel  was  opened
Sept.  2 1, 1 825.  The  congregation
keeps  up,  and  has  been  joined  by
all  the  principal  people,  with  many
others  from  the  opposite  side  of  the
peninsula^

BOMBAY,  a  small  island  near
the  W.  coast,Hindoostan,  about7  m.
long  and  1  wide,  near  the  fort,  con-
tainingavery  strong  and  capacious
fortress,  a  large  and  populous  city
of  the  same  name,  a  dock-yard,  and
marine  arsenal,  ijt  has  a  very  spa-
cious and  safe  harbour ;  was  ceded
to  the  EngliRh,  by  the  Portuguese,
in  1002 ;  and  was  chartered  to  the
East  India  Company,  who  retained
the  possession,  in  1068.  Toleration
is  granted  to  persons  of  every  re-
ligious profession.  The  population
has  been  estimated  at  220,000 ;  but
a  late  census  gives  161,550,  of  the
following  classes  :•— British,  4,300 ;
native  Christians,  t .  e.  Portuguese,

Catholics  and  Aimei^a:Q&,\^)'^^  \
1 2  «^


BOM

..Tevrs,  800;  Mahomedans,  28,000;
Parse«s,  13,150;  Hindoos,  108,800.
The  Jews,  Mahomedans,  Catho-
lics, Hindoos,  and  Parsees,  are
strongly  addicted  to  their  several
supei^iUons.  The  Armenian
Christians  have  little  of  religion
but  the  name ;  and  very  few  of  the
English  settlers  manifest  the  power
of  it.  T^e  Hindoos  generally
speak  the  Mahratta;  the  Parsees
the  Guzarattee.  The  climate  is
unhealthy,  and  the  water  brackish.
Bombay  has  an  extensive  com-
merce with  the  neighbouring  con-
tinent and  the  fertile  island  of
SaL«ette.

BOMBAY  is  a  ciiy  at  the  S.  £.
end  of  the  above  island,  and  one
of  the  three  presidencies  of  the
English  East  India  Company,  by
which  their  oriental  territories  are
governed.  It  has  a  strong  and  ca-
pacious fort,  a  dopk-jrard,  and  ma-
rine arsenal.  Here  the  finest  mer-
chant ships  'are  bnilt,  and  all  of
teak,  supplied  chiefly  from  Bassein.
The  inhabitants  are  of  several  na-
tions, and  very  numerous.  This
city  commands  the  entire  trade  of
the  N.  W.  coast  of  India,  and  that
of  the  gulf  of  Persia.  It  is  156
m.  S.  of  Surat.  £.  long.  72<>5£',
N.lat.  180  58'.

On  the  western  side  of  this  is-
land, about  3  miles  from  the  city
of  Bombay,  Is  the  celebrated  temple
of  Maha  Luoeumeef  or  the  great
Goddess  of  fVealth,  to  which  an  an  -
nual  pilgrimage  is  made,  principally
by  the  idolaters  of  the  island.  In
3815,  it  was  judged  that  100,000
people  were  assembled  on  this  oc-
casion, who  went  individually  into
the  temple — got  a  glance  at  the
idol — made  a  prayer  about  half  a
minute  in  length — presented  a  tri-
fling offering — and- then  retired.

This  is  ihe  seat  of  the  British
presidency,  and  capital  of  the
British  possessions  on  the  W.  coast
of  Hindoostan,  as  Madras  is  of  the
CoTomandel  coast,  and  Calcutta  of  I


BOBC    -

Bengal.    E«  long.  WM,  N.  taL
180  58'.  w

The  Rev.  CMbmlh  II,  miuimujk^
andMr  mfamesGarretfy  prmierfimi
ihejimeriean  Board  of  CmimitKf
sionertfor  Foreign  Jft'wfjwt y  coi  fi
menced  their latourt  here  InlBltt-

This  was  the  fint  itotiM  eil»j
blished  fay  the  Board. .  The  M>'
missionaries,  Rev.  Mesn.  NmHij^
Hall,    Natty    Jt/dson,   ami  Jltav.'
sailed  Feb.  1812;  and,  after  ttt-c
rious  wanderingi  and  disappoliiR^
ments,  Messrs.  Hall  and  Nott  ■»&
rived  at  Bombay  in  about  a  -jtm^
and  were  joined  by  Mr.  Neipgft
the  year  fcdlowing;  before  lAM:
time,  Mrs.  Newell  died  at  the  Ub-
of  France.    Mr.  Judson  and  hb
wife,  and  Mr.  Rice,  became  Bap*'
tists  in  Bengal,  and  left  the  trnt-
nexion;  and  Mr.  and  Mia.  Nott-
returned  to  America^  on  acoooift
of  his  health,  in  1815.    About  ttif :
time  Messrs.  Hall   and  Newel^  .
the  only  missionaries  at -this  star  -
tion,  began  to  instruct  the  Dttttf^^'
in  the  principles  of  Chdstiani^-.-
and  to  translate  the  Scriptures  aid  .
tracts  into  the  Mahratta  langnagt ;  <.
they  also    established  a   pnnlilsr-^
ing  school  for  European  axid  bel^  -f'
caste  children  ;  and,  from  the  IM,  '<
preached   to   su«h  as  undeisiood-
English.     Rev.  Horatio  Banho^U
and  his  wife  arrived  Nov.  1,  1819:
about  the  same  time,  a  printings  •'
press  was  procured  from  Calcntta^  -^
which  he  was  competent  to  owf
nage ;    and  another  valuable'  addl-  -
tion  was  made  to  the  mission,  faj
the  marriage-  of  Mr.  Hall  to  an  <
English  lady,  who  had  acquired-  a  ^
knowledge  of  the  Hindoostan^y  .
one   of  the   principal   langoegcfe  *■
spoken  at  Bombay.

In  Feb.  1818,  Rev.  Messrs.  jiUm
Gratfes  and  Mm  Nichols,  witik  '
their  wives,  and  Miss  Pkilami^la
T>%«r«<an,  joined  this  mission ;  foA,
in  March  following.  Miss  T«  was
married  to  Mr.  Newell.  In  Jan.  -
1821,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bardwell  )eft

90


BOM

e  Atation^  and  embmrked  for  Ame**
sa,  on  account  of  his  ill  health ;
1^  Mr.  NeweU  diad  May  30th  of
m  Huna  year.    A  few  weeks  pre-
ona  to  this,  Mr.  Garrett  arrived,
lio  haamanied  the  widow  of  Mr.
lUfwen.      In  1822,  Mrs.  Graves
iBbaxked  for  America  forihe  reco-
•ry  of-  her  health,  and  sailed  for
Utebay,  with  Rev.  Edmund  Frost
ni'hb  wife,  in  Sept.  1923.    Not-
rittstandingthe  numerous  changes
ladiiereavements  of  this  mission,
imch  has  been  done  to  irradiate
hii  land  of  gross  pagan  darlmess
ftth   the    light  of    the    Goq^el.
Ilrae  important  stations  have  been
kmed  beside  this  one  at  Mahm,
n  the  same  island,  and  one  at
Tkmuh,  on  the  island  of  Salsette.
.  Bombay  is  the  seat  of  the  rois-
ioa;   the  8  companies  form  but
Qie  ^urch  and    one  missionary
laociation,  subject   to  the  same
nifes.      The     missionaries    have
tnaHatad  and  printed  most  of  the
New  Testament  and  portions   of
the  Old  into  the  Mahratta,  which
ii  ipoken  by  12,000,000  of  pagan
idotaten  in  Bombay  and  the  ad-
joinfaig    country,    amounting    to
,90^000  books  and  tracts ;  nearly  all
of  which    have   been   circulated
UDong  the  natives,  and  read,  pro-
btbly,  by  several   hundred  thou-
■odi.    At  each  of  the  stations,
md  on  the  continent,  they  super-
ntand  several -schools,  which  had
ncreased  to  25  in  1818,  containing
iSOO  heathen  pupils,  who  received
Haistian  instruction ;  but,  for  want
if  fbnds,  the  schools  were  reduced,
D 1823,  to .  18,  and  the  pupils  to
boot  900,  many  of  whom  make  a
latifying  proficiency  in   literary
nd  Christian  knowledge.    Several
bildren  are  supported  in  each  fa-
lihTy  and  some  whose  expenses  are
efrayed  by  their  parents.  A  Jew-
fa  acliool  promises  much  good,  in
reparlng  teachers  for   the  other
dKiols.      The  Female  Jew's  So»
t^  t/  BoHsn  has  contributed.


BOM

liberally  for  its  support.  Benevo-
lent persons  in  Charlestown,  South
Carolina,  and  Savannah  and  Au-
gusta,-Georgia,  have  engaged  to
supports  free  schools  in  or  near
Bombay,  to  be  named  after  those
places  respectively.  Accordingly
the  missionaries  have  called  the
first  school  established  at  Bombay,
Charlestown ;  one  atTannah,Savan  -
nab ;  and  one  at  Mahin,  Aagasta.
The  annual  expense  of  a  school  of
50  scholars,  is  estimated  at  about
150  dollars.

The  missionaries  mingle  with
the  natives,  to  communicate  Chris-
tian instruction  and  preach  to
such  congregations  as  they,  can
collect,  which  are  very  irre-
gular; but  they  are  much  en-
couraged by  the  hope  that  the
time  of  favour  to  this  people  is  not
far  distant.  At  this  place  they
have  bought  a  valuable  piece  oi
ground,  on  which  they  have  built  a
stone  chapel,  60  feet  by  35,  which
was  opened  on  the  30th  May,  1823,
in  the  Mahratta.  This  is  the  first
house  of  public  worship  erected  by
protestant  Christians  to  accommo-
date the  natives  in  the  vast  region,
extending  N.  from  Cape  Comorin
to  the  Russian  empire,  and  W.  from
the  interior  of  India  to  the  Medi-
terranean. A  mission  college  is
contemplated.

Besides  the  schools  at  the  sta-
tions,/?omday,  ifoAm,  ondTannaA,
the  missionaries  have  established
one  at  each  of  the  following  places :
AUabttgfBasseenf  ChandneCf  C/ioub,
Culliany  Kaup,  Nagotnea,  Pane,
Panwell,  and  Rawadunda.

The  Bgmbay  Education  Society
was  formed  in  1815,  to  rescue  the
half-caste  children  of  soldiers,  and
other  Europeans,  from  profligacy
and  heathenism,  in  Bombay  and
the  adjoining  country. '  The  num-
ber of  scholars  reported  is  more
than  1000,  who  make  very  satisfisic-
tory  progress.

The  Societu  /or  t/ie  Pr«mAti<m


BOM

^fCkrUtimiKnmblmlge  eommeoc-
ed  operetloiis  here  la  1816,  and  has
procured  to  be  printed,  at  the  preis
of  the  American  missionaries,  vast
numbers  of  bixiks  and  tracts,  which
have  been  furnished  gratuitously
to  the  schools  of  the  Education  So-
ciety, and  otherwise  advantageously
distributed.

In  1816,  a  mission  was  begun  by
the  ^.  S»,  but  ill-health  compelled
its  agents  to  retire.  Since  that
period,  the  work  appears  not  to
have  been  revived.

The  Rev.  Richard  Kenney  was
appointed  to  Bombay  by  the  C,  M.
SAn  1820.  About  2  years  after,
he  had  150  boys  under  religious
instruction  in  the  native  schools.
Upwards  of  20  attended  at  his
■bouse,  to  learn  Mahratta  and
Engliki,  and  thus  afiforded  him  an
opportunity  of  conveying  to  them
B  knowledge  of  the  saving  truths
of  the  Gospel.  About  this  time
one  of  these  youths,  in  a  letter  to
Mrs.  K.,  which  was  entirely  his
own  uncorrected  composition,  thus
wrote : — "  We  have  visited  the  two
Mahratta  schocds  Saturday  even-
ing, and  heard  some  of  the  children
read  Gospel  and  say  the  Ten  Com-
mandments perfectly  well.  We
put  them  some  questions,  namely.
Who  God  is  ?  «fec.  They  seemed
quite  ignorant  of  Him  and  His
will.  They  answered:  *  Sun,  moon,
sea,  cow,  and  the  trees,  <fec.,  are
the  objects  of  their  worship.'  We,
being  iorry  for  them,  taught  them
that  there  is  but  one  God,  the
Maker  of  hdaven  and  earth '.  he
ought  to  be  worshipped.  I  employ
my  time  very  well  in  attending,
every  Sunday,  except  few,  with  my
Gompanlonsi,  diviiie  service,  where
we  hear  Mr.  Kenney  preaching,
which  I  understand  perfectly  well,
and  find  gladness  in  it."

Mr.  Kenney  has  been  recently
compelled,  by  domestic  indisposi-
tion, to  return  to  this  country:
Uie    Rev.  Mesfidrs*  Mitchell  and


BOO

Steward,  with  Miu  Mlicbill.
Mn.  Steward,  have,  tfattd
been  appolntBd  to  succeed*]
In  Sept*  1826,  a  nativi  te
school  was  opened,  at  «]
about  20  gtrk  attended ;  omttf
in  October  a  leoond  school  •
opened,  in  whii;h  there  an  il
15  girls.  These  instttutloiu^  h
ever,  soon  experienced  a  httny.
in  the  removal,  by  death,  of  1
Steward.  On  Simdayi,  the  1
sionaries  employ  some  part  ol
day  in  giving  instroction  to  a
native  youths,  "^hls  is  oandn*
hi  English ;  and  it  is  gratlfytajj
find  that  several  of  thcMe  who  t
formerly  instructed  by  Mr.  Kem
are  tolerably  regular  in  attetfi
on  these  occasions.  It  is  h^ed
readiness  to  receive  Instmctioi
a  decidedly  religious  nature,  tri
appears,  will  one  day  be  folio
by  beneficial  results.  The  i
sionaries  urg^  the  erection  -0
mission  chapel.  An  auxUlaiy  Jl
has  been  established,  the  coiitt
tions  to  which,  during  the  Isiit  j
have  considerably  increased.

The  LmtdonJews*  Soeie^h
school  here,  which  is  confer
many  benefits  on  the  descend
of  the  house  of  Israel.

BOOTAN,  aprovince  of  mnU
Hindoostan,  200  m.  long  am!
broad ;  bounded  on  the  N.  by  Thl
£.  by  Assam,  S«  by  the  same
Bengal,  and  W.  by  Sikkim*
abounds  in  mountains  covered  ^
verdure,  and  rich  with  idiiuM
forest  trees :  there  is^  scarce
mountain  whose  base  is  not  wai
by  some  torrent ;  and  many  of
loftiest  bear  on  tibeir  sides  popu
villages,  amid  orchards  and  (mk
tions.  The  Booteas  are  n
fairer  and  more  ndiust  than  f
neighbours  the  Bengaleae  )  ^
broader  faces  and  higher  cl
bones ;  their  hair  invaxiably  hi
Snd  cut  short ;  their  eyes  small
black,  with  long  pointed  com
and  their  skins  remaikaUy  smo

«2


BOO

houses  are  built  on  posts,  and
Mmded  by  a  ladder:  the  lower
ifii^  closed  on  all  sides,  serves  for
Mol^iiig  stores)  and  accommodating
■jttgs,  cows,  and  other  animals.  Tbe
%i|ital  is  Tassisudon.
'  in  March,  1707,  Messrs.  Thomas
hd  Carey,  of  the  B,  M.  S.,  set  out
•■r  an  expedition  to  the  Bootan
tnnntiy ;  and,  in  about  4  days,  ar-
ified  at  tiiat  part  of  it  which  is  be-
M  the  bills.    They  then  went  to
■fr  place  called  Oopalgunge,    and
indted  on  a  Bootea  officer,  called
^Jinhff,  who  received  them  very
ItaSty,  and  appeared  much  pleased
vifli  tbe  dimrent  articles  which
.fti^liad  brought  for  his  acceptance.
1%ey  found  that  it  would  be  ne-
Mmryto  see  some  other  officer,
•  tad  to  get  a  regular  permission  to
inend    the   hills.      During   the
•gnafest  part  of  the  day,  however,
tbey  remained  in  the  jlnkoPs  house,
Vblch  consisted  of  two  stories,  and
im  constructed  of  bamboos  and
Bifi,  with  pillars  of  what  is  called
.Ml-tree.    He  offisred  them  some
bacon  and  tea,  called  runga,  but  of
ftts  they  conld  not  partake.
.  \  From  Oopalgunge  the  missiona-
ites  went  to  Bote-Haut,  to  see  the
loobah,  who  Is  a  kind  of  viceroy,
ind  the  gpreatest  officer  in  these
fiiti.    A  letter  having  been  for-
wuded  to  him  by  the  jinkof,  he
sBflt  two  horses  for  them,  and  the
jiakof  himself  accompanied  them.
**  On  our  approaching  the  town,"
1^  Mr.  (now  Dr.)  Carey,  *'  a
.  Bomber  of  females  met  us,  and  made
their   saiaarn,    by   putting    their
hands  to   their  head  and  gently
bowing ;  after  which  they  ran  be-
fine' the  horses,  and  all  the  inha-
bitants of  the  place,  J  should  sup-
pose to  the  number  of  2  or  3000,
johied  the  procession.'^

In  this  manner  the  missionaries
vent  to  the  house  of  the  soobah,
who  received  them  with  great  po-
liteness, and  presented  them  with
a  white  silk  scarfs  in  the  name  of


BOO

the  grand  lama,  a  red  one  in  his  own
name,  and  another  red  one  in  the
name  of  a  friend.  After  receiving
these  presents,  they  ascended  by  a
ladder  to  his  house,  which  was
something  like  that  of  the  jinkof,
but  larger  and  more  elegant  j  com-
prising four  rooms  In  the  upper
story,  which  were  entirely  covered
with  mats.  At  the  farther  end  of
the  principal  room  was  the.  seat  of
the  soobah,  elevated  about  2  feet
from  the  floor,  covered  with  red
cloth,  and  hung  round  with  cur-
tains of  thin  gauze.  Here  the  mis-
sionaries were  seated  by  the  si(&
of  the  soobah,  whose  distinguished
urbanity  is  said  to  have  exceeded
every  thing  which  our  European
visitors  could  have  imagined,  and
his  generosity  was  equally  striking.
"  He  insisted,"  says  Dr.  Carey,
"  on  suppl}-ing  all  our  people  with
every  thing  they  wanted;  and  if
we  did  but  cast  our  eyes  on  any
thing  in  the  room,  he  immediately
presented  us  with  one  of  the  same
sort.  Indeed,  he  seemed  to  inter-
pret our  looks  before  we  were
aware ;  and  in  this  manner  he  pre-
sented each  of  us,  that  night,  with
aswoid,  shield,  and  helmet;  also
with  a  cup  made  of  a  very  light
beautiful  wood,  used  by  all  the
Booteas  in  drinking.

**  After  eating,  we  talked  about
Bootan,  and  respecting  the  Gospel ;
and  the  appellation  of  lama  was
given  to  us,  which  appears  to  mean
teac/ier,  and  which  tiUe  is  em-
phatically given  to  the  grand
lama.

**  We  found  tiiat  the  soobah  had
determined  to  give  the  people  a
testimony  of  his  friendship  for  us
in  a  public  manner ;  and  the  next
day  the  performance  of  the  cere-
mony took  place,  in  our  tent  in  the
market-place.

"  When  the  ceremony  was  over,
we  were  conducted  to  tlie  soobah's
house,  where  we  found  another
officer^  I  be\ieve>  \h«  vakeel>  Ckx

4^


..  noo

ikttortiey  of  the  court  below  the
hills.  This  man  was  just  the  re-
.  verse  of  all  we  had  seen.  He  pro-
posed  to  us  various  questions,  but
our  answers  were  very  brief,  and  '
did  not  give  him  satisfaction.

*^  After  exchanging  a  few  angry
words  with  the  soobah,  he  took  ois
leave  abruptly ;  and  when  he  was
gone,  the  soobah  appeared  trans-
ported with  rage,  and  threatened
him  dreadfully.  He  tore  off  his
upper  garment,  seixed  a  kind  of
dagger,  called  a  erece,  stuck  it
into  the  table,  beat  his  breast,  and
threatened  to  go  after  him  and
kill  him.  We  endeavoured  to  ap-
pease him,  however)  and  were  sue*
cessful.

'*  Our  people  were  now  much
.afraid;  for  though  the  Hindoos
had  hitherto  expressed  the  greatest
confidence  in  the  gentleness  of  the
Datives,  they  now  began  to  propa-
gate a  number  of  sanguinary  tales,
and  nothing  was-  talked  of  but  the
insincerity  of  the  Booteas.  As
for  ourselves,  we  were  not  quite  so
timid,  though  we  were  not  with-
out our  cogitations.  We  told  them,
however,  to  run  away  for  their
lives,  if  any  danger  appeared.  For
•  fear  of  wild  elephants,  we  had
.taken  a  gun  or  two ;  but  we  or-
dered that  no  piece  should  be
loaded,  nor  any  lulditional  precau-
tion manifested  ;  though  we  were
cerUin  the  people  coidd  not  sleep
much  that  night  We  then  com-
mended ourselves  to  God  in  prayer,
.  and  retired  to  rest.

"  The  next  morning,  the  soobah
came  with  his  usual  friendship,  and
broup^ht  more  presents,  which  we
received,  and  took  our  leave.  He
then  sent  us  away  with  every
hohour  that  he  could  heap  upon
us ;  as  a  band  of  music,  guides  to
show  us  the  way,  &c.  In  short,
.  the  whole  of  bis  conduct  towards
us  was  invariably  as  generous,
polite,  and  friendly,  as  I  ever  wit-
.nessed.    I  suppose  the  conduct  of


BOO

the  fmkeel  anme  from  hb
himself  a  great  man,  and  i
slighted  in  not  xeceiviqg  mn^
sent  from  us;  but,  fti  ttai^
had   nothing    to   prepent;
soobah  proposed  payifeig  "*>'
in  a  short  time.

"  So  great  a   confnrt  X
never  before   seen   betwMn
neighbouring  nations^  n»  Urn
doos  and  Booteas.     llito
are  a  small,  puny,  timid
the  latter  athteUc   and
They  have   a  written
and,  I  am  informed,  many'
written  in  it.    The  namei
letters  are  the  same  as  tliA
galee,  with  a  few  ezceptidnijj
are  written  in  the  same  ordifrr/
only  this  diflbrenee, — that  i
galees  have  five  letters  In  a  UdqI
the  alphabet,  but  the  Bootehi
only  four.     Boofan  la  svA^ftfCt'
the  dib-riyab.     The  tama-i
as  they  call  him,  Is,  Itblnk^
consictered  as  a  repreaeDtalbv^fl
God  \  and  they  have  l|is  haM^f
their  houses,  about  the  ilill  '
large  man's  thumb.    Tho.
said, '  there  was  a  greatiyr
of  worship,  who  could  only  bo.
by  the  mind.' "

In  ]  600,  Messrs.  RoMmooi..
W.  Carey,  jun.,  accoinpaAM;
two  of  the  native  converte,
ram  and  Ghorachund,  isiiili'^
second  attempt  at  forming  i
tlement  at,  or  near,  Bote-r
near  the  Booten  country,  diaf'l^
borders  of  Thibet.  On  the  Sijtt
of  March  they  arrived,  lift^J
fatiguing  journey  on  borsebaiCl^y  m
Barbaree,  where  they  piaadtfci
Sabbath;  and  oh  M(mday ereidii
they  arrived  within  S  m.  of  B^
Haut.  Here  they  w6re
of  procuring  an  eligible
ground  for  the  erection  of  a
but  could  find  none  that  i^
core. from  inundation  in  the
season.  On  the  SStb,  t
market  behig  held  at  Bote^^Hl
tbey  sent  their,  two  nvXtth  (Sum


BOO

j|iQB9,1|iitheT,  inqnest  of'intel-
pii^e.  TbjBse  were  treated  with
utwcMft  ciYility,  both  by  the
and  Bengalees;  and  the
or  chief  magistrate  of  the
said,  that  if  the  misaiona-
jJRi  .«hose  to  write  him  a  letter,
misiiing  their  wish  to  visit  Bote-
s' he  would  send  them  an  invi-
(ittBb*  This  hint  was  of  course
Wided  to  by  the  brethren,  who
ttflMMsd  a  note  to  the  katma  the
ttofdng  day ;  and,  in  the  course
tf  t  few  hours,  they  received  a

a,  in  which  the  magistrate  in-
them  to  *'  come  and  stay  with
ilp  a  few  days,  and  tell  him  all
fl^  joys  and  sorrows."

Qd  tiie  30th,  after  breakfast,
ft^  arrived  at  Bote-Haut,  where
ttey  met  ¥rith  a  very  cordial
ncoptkui  from  the  katma,  and
QtB.  next  day  were  formally  re-
flrifed  into  his  friendship,  by
^'peculiar  ceremony;  and,  after
jlUng  leave,  they  returned  to
Bvfawee,  where  a  s^t  of  ground

a  promised  for  the  -erection  of  a
tation.  Here,  however,  the
1|Ki  native  converts  were  taken  so
tn,  that  Mr.  W.  *Carey  was  under
fko  necessity  of  returning  with
4em  to  Dinagepore:  and  Mr.'
BoUnson  himself,  in  consequence
of  latig^,  and  an  imprudent  ex-
'pome  to  the  sun,  was  afterwards
wHmkA  with  a  fever,  which  en-
tegered  his  life ;  though,  by  the
iMne  blessing  on  the  means  pre-
Ktlbed,  he  was  mercifully  restored
to  health.

.  On  the  21st  of  March,  1810,
Ifc.  Robinson  returned  to  Bar-
btaee^  from  which  he  had,  for  some
Itee^  been  absent,  on  account  of
■fere  indisposition;  and,  in  a
latter  addressed  to  Mr.  Marshman,
hs  says,  <'  Our  situation  here  is
deuant  and  healthy;  we  have  a
Recirculation  of  air ;  and,  on  the
vjiBtoy  a  good  prospect,  which  is
Inprofed  by  a  view  of  tiie  moun-
Miiii.    Tba  weather,  also,  iamwtb  [


BOO

cooler  thaOi  at  Serampore,  in  con«  -
sequence  of  the  frequent  breezes
from  the  N.E.  The  surrounding,
country  is  not  thinly  peopled ;  on
the  contrary,  I  suppose  there  may
be  2000  persons  who  attend  our
market  twice  a-week,  and  there
are  several  other  larger  markets  at
no  great  distance.  I  have  now  had .
preaching  at  my  house  three  Sab-
baths. On  the  first,  my  hearers
were  few  and  inattentive :  on  the
next,  I  suppose  there  were  40  men
present,  besides  a  number  of
women ;  and  some  heard  with  at-
tention. Last  Lord's  day  we  had
more,  both  males  and  females ;  so
that  the  house  was  filled,  and,  be-
fore 1  had  done,  numbers  had  col-
lected about  the  door.V

In  January,  1811,  Mr.  Robinson,
returned  to  Barbaree,  after  a  visit,
to  Serampore  (in  ccmsequenqe  of
the  death  of  Mrs.  R.),  accompanied
by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cornish,  two
members  of  the  Baptist  church  at
Calcutta.  They  arrived  on  Satur-
day, the  19th;  and  during  the  fol-.
lowing  Monday  and  Tue^ay,  they
were  employed  in  arranging  various
articles,  and  in  writing  to  the
soobah  of  Chemerchee,  requesting
permission  to  pay  him  a  visit.  The
letter  was  to  have  been  sent  off  the
next  morning,  and  they  hoped,  in
about  a  fortnight,  to  have  obtained
an  introduction  into  Bootan.
"But,"  as  Mr.  Robinson  justly
remarks,  <'we  know  not  what  a
day  may  bring  forth !"

On  Tuesday  night,  about  12
o'clock,  the  house  of  the  missions--
ries  was  attacked  by  an  armed
band  of  50  or  60  robbers ;  and  the
total  loss,  in  property'  of  different
kinds,  was  supposed  to  amount  to
2000  rupees,  or  about  £250.

Dreadful  and  appalling,  how-
ever, as  was  this  disaster,  the  pro-
vidence of  God  was  clearly  mani-
fested on  behalf  of  his  servants,
who  all  made  their  esca^  itOTa
the  house^  except  Mx.  Ootc^^%


BOO

litUe   apprentice   girl,    Jannetta,
*  vho  concealed  herself  in  the  store-
room.

In  addition  to  the   loss  of  his
property,  Mr.  Robinson  had,   on
this  melancholy  occasion,  received
no  fewer  than  four  wounds;  one  on
his  right  knee,  one  on  his  left  arm,
one  on  the  abdomen,  and  another
<m  the  breast;   and  had  not  the
spear  struck  against  the  bone,  the
last  of  these  would  probably  have
proved  mortal.   The  wound  in  Mr.
Cornish's   side  might,  also,  have
been  fatal,  had  It  not  been  for  a
similar  circumstance.    In  this  dis-
tressed  state,  and   with   scarcely
snfi&cient   clothes  to   cover  them,
they  set  out  on  Wednesday  morn-
ing for  Dinagepore  ;  and  arrived
there  at  the  end  of  three  days,  after
experiencing  many  difficulties.   At
this  place  they  were  received  in
the  most   afifectionate  manner  by
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Fernandez,  and  other
friends,  who  supplied  their  wants
with  the  utmost  promptitude,  and
exerted  themselves    unremittingly
to  sooth  their  distresses.    Though
the  robbers  for  some  time  eluded
the  arm  of  justice,  they  were  at
length  taken  and  brought  to  pu-
nishment.    Three  of  them'  were
hanged;  several  were  condemned
to  perpetual  imprisonment,  and  39
lashes  with  the  kora;  the  others
were  imprisoned  for  a  stipulated
time,    and  scourged  in  the  same
manner;    and  all  of  them   were
condemned  to  hard  labour.

BORABORA,  one  of  the  So-
ciety islands ;  it  lies  about  4  leagues
N.W.  of  Taha.  W.  long.  161^  52',
N.  lat.  W  32'.  It  has  one  harbour
for  shipping.  In  its  centre  is  a  very
Ijfty  double-peaked  mountain  ;  its
eastern  side  appears  almost  wholly
barren,  but  the  western  part  is
more  fertile ;  and  a  low  border
around  the  whole  island,  together
with  the  islets  in  its  reef,  are  pro-
ductive and  populous.  The  inha-
titants  were  wnnerly  noted  foi  x


BOR

more  daring  ferocity  fbahm^t
the  neighbouring  idaDden,  -  dl  4
whom,  at  one  time,  they  sobji^piMi.
Thifl  island  renounced  idolvtry  wttk
the  rest  of  the  Society  idudii^^ii
the  year  1616,  and  manjof  thatth
tives  were  long  very  derivooi  ttit
a  missionary  &ould  settto  uMlf '
them.  Td  meet  their  wlibet,ihe
Rev.  Mr.  Osmond,  from  tiie  L^M,
5.,  left  Raiatea  on  the  ISIh  of  Nov. -
1820.  The  natlTei  recetfed  Ua
with  much  cordialityy  and  'lOQi
after  commenced  the  building  of  •
place  of  worship,  and  aim  of  btftter
habitations.  The  cliapeiwasopflMd
in  Jan.  1822.  <«  The  apoX^tkttM
for  this  settlement,"  say  tite  dipH
tation,  **  is  unequalled  by  adyom
on  the  island.  It  is  on  the  wetton
side  of  the  great  central  raoantrin^
extending  along  its  iMse,  and  i
upwards  of  13  furiongs  in  leagti^
parallel  with  the  winding  sbor*.  b
iiront  is  a  line  harbour,  in  vUek
several  hundred  ships  might  lie  at
anchor  with  perfect  Mfety,  i»  lU
weathers.  On  the  west  side  of  tUi
beautiful  bay  is  the  long  idud
Tobura,  and  two  smaU  coral  ideli ;
where  is  an  qwning  throngh  the
reef,  with  the  island  of  Manpiti  in
full  view,  at  the  distance  of .  80  or
40  m.  A  more  beautiful  mi
suitable  situation  cannot  lie  iuit-
gined ;  while  a  rich  border  of- low
land,  and  some  vaUejt  near,  afibid
sufficient  garden-ground  to  ihe
people  for  growing  the  food  oon-
mon  to  the  counti^.

A  Christian  church  was-  fanned '
here  in  1820.  In  1824,  It  had  86
members,  of  whom  6  were  deacons.
The  number  Iwptized  was,  of
adults  M3,  of  children  440.  Na-
tive schools  for  adults  and  children
were  well  attended.  In  the  achool
for  the  latter  were  149  bojs  ud
130  girls,  of  whom  abont  70  oould
read  the  Taheitan  New  Xearte-
ment  with  fluency.  An  Aduii  and
Juvenile  M.  S,  liad  been  fonned.
Thie  QQii\3[!\b^\lusia  q£  ^bya^ismMT'


I

i


BOR

JHMMnted   to   SOIT   bamboos    of

.eblxia*nut  oil,   and  those  of  the

.latter  to  391.     Excellent  roads  had

-'fcsen  made,  and  a  noble  stone  pier

.erected,   which  was  carried   out

IMuriy  365  feet  into  the  sea.    The

'fklage  conristed  of  a  street  ex-

toodbig  nearly  2  m.  in  front  of  the

:beyy  compoted  of  well-built  houses.

VL  code  of  laws,  which  had  under-

fone  a  veiy  careful  revision,  had

neen  inomulgated  by  the  authority

pf  the  king  and  chiefs,  4uid  with  the

•onsent  of  the  people.    Although

the  mission  was  at  tiiis  period  in  its

infoncy,  it  had  bad  the  honour  of

eendiDg  forth  three  native  teachers

with  their  wives  to  Rimatara,  two

with  their  wives  to  Maupiti,  two

-Barried   and   one  single    to   the

.•FHemdh  Islands,  three  to  Navi-

gmiors  isiemds,  and  two  with  their

wires  to  Harvey  Islands.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Piatt  removed  to
Borabora  in  1824,  to  fill  the  place
of  Mr.  Orsmond,  on  his  taking  the
ehaige  of  the  academy  at  Eimeo.

The  nnmber  baptized  during
■  MSB,  was  5  adults  and  21  children.
Total  baptized,  since  the  com-
.meocement  of  the  mission  in  1820,
of  adults,  618,  of  children,  589 ;
nembers  added  to  the  church  48.
.6^  during  1826,  had  died  in  the
fidtfa :  3  had  been  excluded  from
eommonion ;  of  whom  one,  on  re-
peatance,  had  been  re-admitted :
4  bad  incurred  censure;  of  whom  3,
on  repentance,  had  been  restored.
Total  number  received  into  church-
Mtowship  since  Nov.  1821,  240.

Many  of  the  young  people  at
this  station  have,  of  late,  unhap-
pily, manifested  a  very  untractable
di^KMitlon,  and  occasioned  no
null  trooUe  to  the  missionary.

An  increased  quantity  of  land
has  been  brought  under  cultiva-
tion. The  people  display  their
ingenuity  and  industry  in  the  ma-
nfiictare  of  a  considerable  number
^chairs  and  tables,  and  other  use-
fnl  artiataf  /  sacb  as  apr^U'iniXl  for


BRA

the  sugar-cane,  a  turnery  lathoi
(fee.  (fee.

Tefaaro,  one  of  the  two  kings,
or  principal  chiefs,  of  this  island,
died  during  1826,  while  on  a  visit
at  Tahiti.

BOSJESVELD,  sometimes
called  Kramer's  District,  in  the
diaitrict  of  Tidbagh,  about  40  m.
from  Cape  Town.

In  1817,  the  Rev.  Cornelius
Kramer,  of  the  L,  M,  &,  was  em-,
ployed  in  preaching  to  the  slav'es,
Hottentots,  and  colonists,  who
greatly  needed  his  assistance.  Mr.
K.,  who  is  the  only  survivor  of
the  first  missionaries  sent  out  to
Africa  in  1790,  of  which  number
was  the  late  Dr.  Vandericemp,
continues  to  labour  to  the  present
time  with  the  same  diligence  and
devotedness  as  have  always  charae«
terized  him.

BRAINERD,  formerly  CMcka-
tnaugah,  in  Chickamaugah  dis«
trict,  a  Cherokee  nation,  about  30
m.  from  the  N.  W.  corner  of
Georgia,  in  an  easterly  direction,
2  m.  within  the  chartered  limits  of
Tennessee,  on  the  western  side  of
Chickamaugah  creek,  which  is
navigable  to  .Brainerd,  being  15  m.
from  its  confluence  with  the  Ten-
nessee. It  isneariy  equi-distant
from  the  eastern  and  western  ex-
tremities of  the  Cherokee  country,
and  perhaps  26  or.  30  m.  from  the
northern  limit,  which  is  the  mouth
of  the  Hiwassee.  It  lies  250  m.
N.  W,  of  Augusta,  Georgia,  150
S.E.  of  Nashville,  110  S.  W.  of
Knoxville,  Tennessee,  about  2  m.
N.E.  of  the  road  from  Augusta
to  NashviUe.  W.long.  86®,  N.
lat.  35®.

The  /ace  of  the  country  is  un-
even ;  but  there  are  few  mountains.
LfOokout  is  about  6  m.  westerly
from  Brainerd,  and  is  supposed  to
be  at  least  2500  feet  high.  The
woods  are  generally  open ;  but  on
the  bottom-land,  neat  Wi^  ivjet^,
the    timber  is  thick   axidi  ^i^o^'iS)


BRA

und  the  heibage  luzariaBt.  The
climtUe  is  temperate.  Though  the
days  of  summer  are  hot,  the  nights
are  very  cold.  The  seasons  have
a  much  greater  resemblance  to
those  of  the  central  parts  of  New-
England,  than  to  those  of  Savan-
nah or  Chailestown.  Snows  some-
times lie  upon  the  ground  a  week
or  more,  and  the  surface  of  the
earth  is  occasionally  frozen  hard ;
yet,  during  the  winter,  cattle  are
seldom  foddered,  and  are,  not  un-
frequently,  very  fat  in  the  spring.
In  addition  to  these  natural  ad-
vantages of  the  place,  there  is,  at
the  landing,  what  is  called  a  fish-
trap,  formed  by  a  partial  dam.  It
was  rebuilt  in  1£17,  and  is  of  great
benefit  to  the  establishment.  The
fish  are  caught  as  they  pass  down
the  stream  in  the  nigh^  and  150
have  been  taken  out  at  a  time ;
the  largest  weighing  SO  pounds,
and  a  considerable  proportion  from
6  to  10  pounds  each  $  most  of
which  are  of  an  excellent  quality.

The  pTi^tertjf  of  the  mission  was
summarily,  estimated,  as  follows.
In  May,  1828  :—

DoOan.

Improvements  of  land 1 300

Agricultural  implements. . .  •    660

Livestock 2730

Saw-mill  and  ffrist-miU  ....  4000

School-house  for  girls 1000

Other  buildings    1265

Mechanical  tools 420

Iron,  steel,  lumber,  <&c 485

Household  furniture,   loom,

wheels,  <fec 2500

Library  and  globes 1000

Medicines,    surgical   instru-
ments, (fee.    .« 300

Provisions  on  hand 1840


Total 17,390


The  mission  premises  are  in  the

midst  of  a  wilderness,   and  were

purchased    for  500  dollars  of  a

^hite  man,  who  had  cleared  a  few

^cre^   and  erected  '3  or  4  log


BRA

cabins.  There  are  bow  Trot WiW
30  and  40  buildings  of  nakni
descriptions,  mostly  of  logs,  tka  t
gentle  eminence  principally  0B«
line  from  N.E.  to  ~8.W.  .As  ytn
enter  from  the  N.E.  you  pass.ile
creek  where  are  the  aaw-mffl -alii
grist-mill;  theuce  you  enter  alans^
which  extends  across  the  deailBg
80  or  90  rodsy  on  either  side  «f
which  are  the  principal  buifaUqgi
Nearly  in  the  centre  of  tbenvw
is  the  mission-house,  two  stoites
high,  having  a  piam  its  wlioto
length,  with  a  pleasaikt  comt-yaiil
in  front.  Behind  it,  and  imim
diately  connected  with  it,  are  tin
dining-hali  and  Idtchen  for  t^  te-
tablishment.

A  few  feet  to  the  S.W.  Is  a  two-
story  framed  building  for  the  fs-
male  school,  well  finished,  and
built  by  the  direction  of  the  Pxe*
sident  of  the  United  States,  wlw
called  here  in  1810,  and  wis
pleased  to  express  liis  approbatton
of  the  plan  of  instruction,  and  of  the
deportment  and  impTOvement  of
the  pupils.  Before  his  depaxtontfi
he  gave  the  missionaries  a  letter
directed  to  the  United  States
agent,  and  observed,  **  I  Iwfe
written  to  him  to  pay  the  balanee
of  your  account,  for  what  jou.li«re
expended  in  these  buildings  and
also  to  repay  the  expense  (tf  tile
house  you  are  about  to  bniU.
Make  a  good  house,  having  due- 1^
gard  to  economy. "  Besides  this,  tlie
American  governmeutliimiaiied  va-
rious implements  of  hosbaodry  and
domestic  muinfacture*  AttheS.W.
extremity  of  the  lane  is  tiK.  school-
house  for  the  boys,  large  enongh
to  acconunodate  1 00  scholars,  wiUch
is  used  as  the  place  of  worihip  tax
the  Sabbath.  Most  of  the  biiiliUogs
are  constructed  of  logs,  having  &
interstices  filled  with  mortar,  .and
make  but  a  plain  appearance.    ..

The  ground  on  the  S.E.  aide  of
the  lane  is  divided  into  agaidtny
an  oichaid)  vnd  le^vKiL  otlnrlaiti^


BRA

which  are  neatly  fenced,  and  jpre-
leot  a  pleasant  prospect  in  front
of  the  mission-hoose.  Near  the
fchool-hoQse  for  boys  is  the  grave-
yardy  where  lie  the  remains  of  the
Her.  Dr.  Worcester,  late  Cor.  Secy*
of  the  Board,  who  died  on  a  visit  to
this  station,  June  7th,  1821.

The  Americmn.  Board  of  Com-
mUwUmM  fixr  Foreign  Mistiona  sent
the  following  persons  here  in  1817 :
Rot.  Ard  Hayt;  and  Messrs.  Elizur
Builer,  physician;  Sylvester  Ellis,
tckaohmaster ;  John  Fail,  Henry
Parker,  Frederick  Elsworth,  far^
wters  ;  Srastus  Dean  and  Ainsworth
S,  Blunt,  mechanics  J  all  married.
In  ^ov.  1823,  the  following  per-
sons arrived  on  their  way  to  dif-
ferent stations,  assigned  or  to  be
asB^ned; — Rev.  Scunuel  Mosley,
licensed  preacher  and  missionary  ;
Messrs.  David  f^right  and  David
Gage,  schoolmasters ;  all  married:
Messrs.  Wm.  Holland  and  Josiah
Hemmingwav,  farmers,  with  the
wifeofMr..&/^Siifuf;  Mt.  Ebenezer
Bliss f  mechanic;  together  with
Bflikses  Electa  May,  Sophia  Sawyer,
Cftd  Philena  Thatcher.  Abont  the
middle  of  Jan.  1824,  Mr.  and  Mrs.
C^ge  were  instructing  the  schools
on  account  of  the  sickness  of  Mr.
EUis.  At  this  time  there  were
about  20  labourers,  some  of  whom
were  expecting  to  open  new
schools.  Many  others  have  la-
boured here,  who  have  removed  to
other  stations,  or,  from  various
causes,  have  left  the  field.

The  Rev.  C^us  Kingsbury  vi-
sited the  Cherokees  with  a  view  to
a  mission  among  them,  in  Sept.
1816;  and,  in  uie  early  part  of
October,  presented  the  subject  to  a
general  council  of  the  chiefs  of  the
Cherokees  and  Creeks,  who  were
desirous  that  his  plans  for  the  in-
struction of  tbeir  children  might
speedily  be  put  into  operation,  and
appointed  one  of  their  number  to
go' with  him  and  to  select  a  suitable
place*  Sot  an  estMbUabment,     la


BRA

pursuance  of  his  instructions,  he
then  communicated  the  designs  of
the  Board  to  the  heads  of  depart*
ments  at  Washington,  and  solicited
their  patronage.  It  is  worthy  of  re-
cord, that  they  favoured  the  design^
which  has  been  already  noticed  in
this  article.  After  making  suitable
preparation,  Mr.  K.  commenced  his
labours,  Jan.  1817,  and  was  joined
by  Messrs.  Moody  Hall  and  Loring
S.  Williams,  with  Iheir  wives,  in
March.  A  <cAoo/ was  soon  opened  f
and  in  June  following  they  had  ad-
mitted 26  pupils,  mostly  to  be  pro-
vided for  in  their  famUies.  Within
about  a  year  the  number  had  in-,
creased  to  46,  and  the  year  fol*
lowing  to  83,  which  may  be  near
the  average  number  since.  In
Jan.  1824,  the  number  was  con-
siderably reduced,  in  consequencb
of  a  prevailing  sickness  in  tiie  fa-
mily. The  pupils,  generally,  have
made  very  satisfactory  progress  in
English  studies,  and  rapid  improve-
ment in  domestic  industry,  being
required  to  labour  when  out  of
school.  Several  have  become  pious,
and  are  rendering  important  aid  in
this  benevolent  enterprize.  From
April  1820,  the  American  govern-
ment made  an  allowance  of  260  dol  3
lars  a  quarter  for  the  school.  In
1822,  tbe  quarterly  sum  was  raised
to  300  dollars.  A  dtureh  was  orga-
nized in  Sept.  1817,  consisting
only  of  the  mission  family.  In
less  than  a  year,  9  were  added,
some  of  whom  resided  in  the  vici-
nity, and  had  been  accustomed  to
attend  worship,  on  the  Sabbath,  at
this  place.  Among  these  were  5
natives,  one  of  whom  was  Catha*
rine  Brown, — a  name  dear  to  every
friend  of  Indian  missions.  She
was  the  first  fruit  of  missionary
labour  in  this  heathen  land.  Early
in  1823,  26  had  been  admitted  into
the  church,  exclusive  of  missiona-
ries and  assistants.  Many  of  these
have  been  transformed  from  an
idle,  dissolute,  aTi^wa»AftV«v%>2L\ft^


into  laborious,  pnident,  and  exem-
plary citizens,  and  even  ornaments
to  their  Christian  profeesion.  This
is  the  first  attempt  of  the  Board  to
introduce  the  arts  of  civilized  life,
and,  at  the  same  time,  to  plant  the
Gospel  among  the  vrandering  tribes
of  the  west;  and  the  successful
experiment  excites  a  cheering  hope
that  this  growing  plant  will  soon
become  a  great  tree~  fill  the  land,
and  bleas  the  nations  with  its
fruit.

This  is  the  principal  seat  of  the
mission  among  the  Cherokees,  and
was  called  Brainerd,  in  affectionate
remembrance  of  the  devoted  mis-
sionary, who,  about  80  years  ag^,
anticipated  the  spirit  of  the  present
day,  and  laboured  alone,  but  suc-
cessfully, for  the  salvation  of  the
Aborigines  of  this  country.

BRESLAU,  a  beautiful  city,
capital  of  the  dachy  of  Silesia.  It
is  seated  on  the  conflux  of  the
Ola  with  the  Oder,  and  is  one  of
the  most  beautiful  cities  in  Ger-
many, about  2  German  m.  in
length.  E.  long,  ll®  8',  N.  lat.
6P  3'.  It  is  the  centre  of  the  trade
in  Silesia,  and  its  manufactures  are
considerable  and  various.  Here
are  26  Catholic  and  8  Lutheran
churches,  and  a  Catholic  univer-
sity, with  14  professors  and  400
students.  One  considerable  part  of
this  city  is  inhabited  almost  exclu-
sively by  Jews.  It  is  thought  that
more  than  half  of  them  are  con-
vinced of  their  errors,  and  are,  in
a  good  measure,  prepared  to  em-
brace Christianity.  A  society  has
recently  been  formed  here  for  pro-
rooting  Christianity  among  the
Jews,  and  receives  liberal  support
from  men  of  influence  and  wealth.
Three  of  the  members,  the  Rev.
Mr.  Edward,  Professor  Fischer,  and
Dr.  Lichtenstult,  are  converted
Israelites,  who  now  stand  forth  as
«idvocates  for  the  Gospel  among
their  brethren  after  the  flesh.
,    An  efficient  auxiliary  JB.  S,  has


BRU

been  formed  here,  wUdi  bad,  to
1820,    distributed     about    16^'  {
Bibles  and  Testaments.     POfKO*^-^  |
tion,  including  the  mOltaxy,  T6^1l(  ^

BROACH.    The  iSdWeotite  A  '  ,
at  Bombay  has  opened  a  iiallft  ,^
schpol  here,  under   the   fopoti^*''''
tendence  of  the  chaplain  ttt  Sunk    -4

BROTHERTOVVN,  aTiUageof  /
Oneida  Indians,  in  Ptah,  New';
York,  containing  about  400  watQ^  '
who  subsist  principally  by  flgrlcQl^  '
ture.

The  Rev.  SamMon  Oeeom,  a  lfe«  ',
began  Indian,  the  first  native  edn^   '
cated    at   Moor's  Indian    chail^
school,  left  his  charge  on  Long
Island,  and  came  to  this  place  la
1761,  where  he  was  kindly  receiTedp
and  laboured  about  6  yean  with
considerable  usefulnen.    He  then
went  to  England  to  make  eoUec^
tions  for  the  school,  in  which  be  .,
was  very  successful.    In  1788^  he
returned  to  America,  and  removed
with  the  Indians  under  bis  caM
from  Connecticut  to  this   jdaeef
where  he  continued  until  his  deaths
which  happened  a  few  yean  aflerv    ^
At  that  time,  the  Indians  here  wart  '
all  Christians,  in  distinction  Irom'pa*
gans  ;  and  many  adorned  their  pro*
fession.    Since  then,  their  spirited
interests  have  not  been  entirety
neglected.  .

BRUSSELS,  a  city  of  the  Ne-
therlands, capital  of  Brabant,  and
of  the  other  9  provinces,  which
were  formerly  denominated  the  •
Austrian  Low  Countries.  It  is  7  Bi
in  circuit,  contains  80,000  inhabit-
ants, and  has  many  magnificent
squares,  public  buildings,  walkii
and  fountains.  It  was  bombarded
by  Marshal  Villeroy,  in  1096,  by
which  14  churches  and  4000  bouwf
were  destroyed.  It  has  been  seve-
ral  times  taken  since ;  the  last  time
by  the  French,  in  1794.  It  is  seated
partly  on  an  eminence,  and  partly
on  the  R.  Senne,  S3  m.  S.  Antwerpi
and  166  N.  by  £.  Paris.  E.  long»
40  22\  N.  lat  50»  61',


BUD

Ai  the  request  of  fome  English
aUmte  in  this  city,  the  fV,  M.  S.
1 1615^  aiipointed  Mr.  JioberU  to
MUBance  a  missioD;  and  found
I  vuch  encouragement,  as  io-
ned  the  appointment  of  a  second,
Ir..  Be  Kerpezdron,  who  could
reach  iii  French,  English,  and
enfiaa,  with  directions  to  visit
.ntw9l)p^  A  large  chapel  has  been
lilt  ftt^Bnissels,  and  considerable
iccesi  has  followed  their  labours.

BUDDALORE,  or  BUDA-
OOR,  a  considerable  >111age  in
le  Camatic  Hindoostan,-  12  m.
r.  Taiyore,  inhabited  by  Collaries,

set  of  people  infamous  for  theft
Bd  robbery,  as  their  name  denotes.
]  177T,  they  were  all  heathens.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Swartz,  and  other
tanUih  missionaries,  occasionally
iboured  here,  and  persuaded  many
I  cultivate  their  fields,  and  abandon
lehr  plundering  expeditions,  which
repered  the  way  for  the  establish-
leut  of  schools  and  religious  in-
mctlon.  In  one  day,  7000  men
itumed  to  their  villages  for  the
irposes  of  agriculture ;  the  rest  of
lese  inhabitants  soon  followed  their
umple,  and  gave  the  following
■urance  to  Mr.  Swartz : — *'  As
3u  have  shewed  kindness  to. us,
Du  ahall  not  have  reason  to  repent
f  it ;  we  intend  to  work  nighi  and
ly  to  shew  our  regard  for  you."
'o  this  resolution  they  seemed  to
Ihere  $  and,  about  the  close  of  the
ist  century,  in  this  country,
trough  which  a  traveller  could  not
ifely  pass,  no  robberies  were  com-
litted,  and  many  had. embraced
hristianity.  In  1800,  the  (Ms-
an  knowledge  Society  had,  for
)me  time,  exerted  a  happy  in-
uence  at  this  place,  by  their  mis-
ionaries,  and  the  establishment  of
;hools.  A  house  for  prayer  was
rected,  in  which  a  large  congre-
atlon  attended  on  the  stated  in-
tructions  of  Daw'ttsagayamy  an
ble  and  faithful  catechist^  who
eceived  occasional  assistance  from


BUE

the  missionaries  at  Tranquebar.
During  this  year,  the  following  in-
crease of  the  congregation  is  no*
ticed;  46  children  baptized,  94
heathens  properly  instructed  and
baptized,  and  17  converts  from  tbe
Romish  communion.  Four  schools
were  regularly  maintained.

These  efibrts  have  since  been
successfully  continued.

BUENOS  AYRES,  socaUed  on
account  of  the  peculiar  salubrity  of
its  climate  ;  a  country  of  S.  Ame-
rica :  bounded  N.  by  Peru;  £.  by
Brazil  and  the  Atlantic;  S.  by-
Patagonia;  N.  W.  by  the  Andes,
which  separate  it  from  Chili.  It
extends  from  14<>  to  3%f^  dC/  S.  lat.
about  1700  m.  It  is  rich  in  mines
of  gold,  silver,  and  otiier  valuable
metals.  Those  of  Potosi  are  the
richest,  apd  have  yielded  between
4  and  5,000,000  of  dollars  an-
nually.

In  1817,  the  official  estimates  of
the  population  were  1,300,000,  ex-
clusive of  Indians,  of  whom  it  is
supposed  more  than  700,000  ore
civilized.

Numerous  wandering  tribes  oc-
cupy the  N.  part  of  this  country.

Buenos  Ayres  was  formerly  a
Spanish  colony,  but  independence
was  declared  July  9, 1 81 6.  The  es-
tablished religion  is  Roman  Catho-
lic ;  yet  there  are  many  advocates
for  universal  toleration,  and  it  is
thought  the  time  is  not  far  distant
when  Protestants  will  be  permitted
to  introduce  their  own  forms  of
worship,  notwithstanding  the  strong
prejudices  of  the  Catholics,  and  the
violent  opposition  of  the  priests.

Buenos  j^yres,  the  capital  of  the
above  province.  This  city  was
founded  by  Mendoza,  in  1535,  but
was  afterwards  abandoned ;  and  in
1544,  another  colony  of  tbe  Spa-
niards came  here,  who  left  it  also  ;
but  it  was  rebuilt  in  1582,  and  inha-
bited by  Spaniards  and  the  native
Americans.  It  is  well  fortified ;  the
streets  are  gtcaicbtaxi^^Ne^*^  «.\v\

k2  V^V


the  houses  built  of  brick  or  chalk,
generally  of  two  stories,  with  a  tiled
loof.  It  has  about  50,000  iuha-
bitauts.  Buenos  Ayres  surren-
dered to  the  Knivlish  in  1 806,  but
they  were  obliged  to  abandon  it  soon
after.  In  1807,  the  English  made
an  unsuccessful  attack  on  this  city.
In  1810,  a  revolution  took  piece,
the  viceroy  was  deposed,  and  a  pro-
visional government  established,
which  still  remains.  The  city
stands  on  a  peninsula,  on  the  S.
side  of  the  Plata,  220  m.  from  the
ocean,  though  the  river  is  here  21
m.  in  breadth.  W.  long.  68"  31',
S.  lat.  3i9  35'.

Mr.  James  Thompson,  agent  to
the  B,  ^  F,  S,  S,  arrived  here
from  Edinburgh,  October,  1818 ;
"^'hen  he  presented  a  memorial  to
the  government  on  the  subject  of
education ;  at  length  obtained  its
sanction  ;  and  was  appointed,  Sept.
1810,  superintendent  of  schools,
which  be  was  authorized  to  esta-
blish, with  a  salary  from  govern-
ment. He  remained  about  a  year,
in  which  time  he  collected  up-
wards of  400  bo}'s  and  100  girls  in
the  central  schools.  Having  put
these  schools  into  successful  ope-
ration, he  proceeded  to  Chili,  where
he  was  also  successful ;  thence  to
Peru ;  and  intended  to  visit  all  the
states  of  S.  America,  with  a  view
to  [iromote  the  means  of  education
on  the  British  s}'stem.

'  Messrs.  John  C,  Bn'gham  and
Tfieophilus  Parvin,  from  the  j4me'
ricaji  Board  of  Commitsioners  for
Foreign  Missions,  embarked  from
Boston,  July  25,  1823,  and  landed
at  this  city  on  the  24th  of  October
following,  where  they  found  a  wide
sphere  for  usefulness.  Here  they
were  instructed  to  reside  several
months ;  then  cross  the  continent
to  Chili;  puss  along  the  coast,
through  Peru,  to  the  isthmus  of
Darien  ;  visit  Mexico ;  and  advance
to  the  N.  as  far  as  Santa  Fe.  Their
inguiries  were  to  relate  to  every


subject  which  might  hATe  t  JM^
ing  on  the  moral  and  wllgti
state  of  the  people ;  bow  fiv  %
principles  of  religious  toieratfaS'tfi
likely  to  prevail  $  and  what  anlte
most  eligible  placet  lor  maUil
evangelical  exertions  of  a  pflp*
manent  character*

Since  then,  this  prorinca  has  takv
the  lead  in  education  as  welliii
other  things.  The  sum  appw*.
priated  to  the  purposes  of  edae^:
tion,  ior  182.1,  was  upward*  of
125,000  doUan,  being  about  40,11V
more  than  in  1824.  Tlie  scbatb
are  105 ;  and  contain  about  5000
children,  of  whom  two-thirdi  an
boys :  of  these  sohoolsy  30^  at  liai^
are  free  schools,  and  are  taug^oa
the  British  system,  the  axpcMe
being  defrayed  by  the  goranuoMl}
the  others  are  piivate  schools,  (ta
female  education,  to  which  ihB0h
vernment  pays  especial  attentiiNty
an  American  gentleman,  wbohiBg
resided  in  the  province,  says — "^
society  of  females  of  the  fivt  n*
spectability,  denominated  *  inn
Society  of  Beneficence,'  was  VMj
established  by  public  autboilly}
and  to  it  is  committed  the  superin-
tendence and  direction  of  ail  the
public  schools  for  females,  the  hoaw
of  orphans,  and  other  public  Insti-
tutions intended  for  the  liendtt  of
young  children  and  of  the  femtk
sex.  According  to  the  latest  stlto-
ments,  this  society  had  undM  Us
care  0  public  schools,  contatadng
between  5  and  600  female  cbildieo.''
The  university  had,  accotding  ta
the  last  printed  statementi  419
students.

BULLOM  conntiy,  W.  Allies,
N.  Sierra  Leone  colony.

The  Bulloms  are  a  numenMis
people,  extremely  degraded  and  su-
perstitious, and  very  much  addieied
to  witchcraft.  Among  them  the
tjTanny  and  cruelty  of  satanical
delusions  are  most  affecting^  dis-
played, f

In  every  town  are  derU's  ~


BUL

Id  guard  the  place ;  and  almost
very  BuUom-house  has  some  re-
presentation of  Satan.  Before  the
iavil*s  houses,  which  are  small
thatched  huts,  8  or  4  feet  high,  the
blood  of  animals  Is  sprinkled,  a  li-
bation of  palnii  wine  poured  out,
and  an  oft'ering  of  iruit  and  rice
oooaslonally  maide.  The  BuUoms
believe  in  a  state  of  existence  after
death,  and  erect  huts  over  the
graves  of  the  dead,  in  which  they
place  a  jug  or  two  to  supply  the
laixtts  of  the  deceased  with  what
they  want  when  they  come  out,  as
tiifly  suppose  they  do,  at  diilerent
times.

In  1818,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Nylander,
having  resigned   his   situation  as
chaplain  at  Sierra  Leone,  for  the
purpose  of  commencing  a  mission-
aiy  station  among  the    Bulloms,
had  fixed  his  residence  at  a  place
called  Yongroo  Pomoh,  which  is
described,  by  the  Rev.  C.  Bicker-
steth,   as  **  pleasantly  situated  at
the  mouth  of  the  Sierra  Leone  R.,
nearly  opposite  to  Free  Town,  and
about  7  miles  from  it."    Here  he
opened  a  school ;  and  by  the  syavity
ot  his  manners,  and  the  consistency
of  his  conduct,  so  effectually  con-
ciliated   the  respect  and    esteem
of  the  natives,  that  a  considerable
number  of  them  were  induced  to
place  their  children  under  his  tui-
tion.    Even  the  king  of  BuUom
eotrn^ted  one  of  his  sons  to  the
eare  of  this  excellent  missionary  ;
but  the  young  prince  had  not  been
long  in  the  seminary  before  he  died.
*'  After  he  was  dead,"  says  Mr.
Nylander,  '<  the  people  were  going
to    ask  him,   according   to  their
custom,  who  hud  killed  him  :  but  I
was  very  glad  that,  after  long  rea-
soning in  opposition  to  their  opi-
nionsy  t!ney  were  satisfied  that  he
had  not  fallen  a  victim  to  the  arts
of  any  witch  or  gpregree ;  but  that
God,  who  gave  him  life  at  first,  had
now  called  hhn  home,  to  be  with
him,  in  a  good  and  happy  place :


BUL

and  I  assured  his  friends,  that  if
they  would  begin  to  pray  to  God,
they  would  once  more  meet  him  in
that  place,  and  rejoice  with  him  for
ever.  As  I  stated  my  belief  that
God  had  killed  him,  I  was  allowed
to  bury  him,  in  *  white  man's
fashion,'  and  the  king  gave  me  a
burying-place  separate  from  their
own.

<'  It  is  lamentable,"  says  the
same  writer,  in  another  communi-
cation, ''that  the  Bulloms  should
have  been  left  so  long  without  any
religious  instruction.  They  live  in
gross  darkness,  worshipping  evil
spirits,  and  dealing  very  cruelly
with  each  other,  on  account  of
their  superstitious  witchcraft }
which,  perhaps,  was  encouraged
by  the  inhuman.  traflSc  in  slaves.
If  any  slave  ship  had  been  per-
mitted to  appear  in  the  Sierra
Leone  R.,  about  15  or  more  witches
would  have  been  sold,  and  sent  off
for  the  coast,  since  I  have  been  at
Bullom.  *'  The  following  facts  will
exhibit  some  of  their  superstitions
in  an  affecting  manner.

''  A  young  man,  named  Jem
Kambah,  was  employed  by  me,  and
attended  pretty  regularly  on  our
family  and  public  worship.  Going
one  day  to  visit  his  mother,  she
gave  him  two  small  smooth  stones,
which  she  had  laid  by  for  that  pur-
pose ;  telling  him  to  wash  them
every  day,  and  rub  them  with  oil )
and  that  then  they  would  take  care
of  him,  and  he  would  prosper — be-
cause they  were  two  good  spirits.
'  Mother,'  said  he,  *  these  are
stones,  how  can  they  take  care  of
me?  I  hear  the  white  man  at
Yongroo  Pomoh  telling  us  that  God
alone  can  help  us,  and  that  all  our
gregrees  (charms)  are  good  forno-
tiiing.  These  stones  can  do  me  no
good:  I  will,  therefore,  look  to
God,  and  beg  him  to  take  care  of
me.'  Thus  saying,  he  threw  the
siones  into  the  fire,  as  unworthy  of
notice.


BUL

*'  This  was  a  heinous  sacrilepre  i
fuid,  on  his  mother  acquainting  tier
friends  with  It,  tfaey  sharply  reprov-
ed him  ;  and  totd  him  that,  by  thus
actings  he  would  UMike  the  derll
angry,  and  wouM  bring  mischief
upon  the  country.  He  assured
them,  however,  that  he  would  pay
no  more  attention  to  any  of  tlieir
customs,  but  would  listen  to  what
he  heard  ut  Vongroo  Pomoh.

"  One  Sabbath,  after  divine  ser-
vice, Jem  ag^in  went  to  see  his
mother,  and  met  the  people  danc-
ing, and  tiying  some  persons  for
witchcraft.  He  told  them  that  it
was  the  Lord's  day,  and  that  they
sliouhl  not  dance,  but  go  to  Yon-
groo  Pomoh,  to  hear  what  the
white  man  had  to  say.  <  And  then,'
he  added,  '  you  will  leave  off  all
dancing  and  witch-palavers,  which
are  nothing  but  the  work  of  the
devil.'  This  speech,  together  with
the  throwing  of  the  stones  into  the
fire,  aflronted  them  so  much,  that
they  threatened  to  punish  him ;
and,  the  next  morning,  he  was
summoned  before  the  king,  and  ac-
cused of  having  made  a  witch-gun^
and  concealed  it  in  his  house,  for
the  purpose  of  killing  and  injuring
his  inmate.  Jem  replied — *  I  never
saw  a  witch-g^m,  and  do  not  know
how  to  make  one.  He,  therefore,
who  told  you  this,  did  not  speak
the  truth.'  He  was  urged  to  ac-
knowledge it,  and  then  the  whole
palaver  would  have  an  end.  *  No,'
said  he,  <  I  cannot  tell  a  lie  merely
to  please  you.'  He  was  then  called
upon  to  prove  his  innocence,  by
rubbing  his  arm  with  a  red-hot
iron,  or  by  drinking  red  water ;  but
he  coolly  replied — *  I  am  no  fool,  to
burn  myself  with  the  hot  iron ;
and  as  for  the  red  water  palaver,
I  shall  look  in  my  bead  first ;'  mean-
ing that  he  should  take  time  to
consider  the  matter.  He  after-
wards came  to  me,  and  told  me  the
chaiges  which  had  been  brought


,>i


BUir

against  him;  and  wM,  '  I  «fl-^
drink  the  red  water  to  dear  Wff'.^
s«elf,  and  to  bring  my  family  out  oC^
the  blame — and  I  hope  God  v^i^j^
help  me.'  I  advised  him  to  pnyj^^
and  to  consider  well  ^fhni  he  vnt^
goihg  to  do.

<' A  day  before  the  trial,  Jam  VI
confined ;  and  persons  of  bolh  l^/^
ties,     his    friends    and  enemies  ^j,
questioned  him,  and  urged  him  te  ,.^
confess  every  thing  he  had  doae  ^
evil.    At  last  the  day  came;  be  ^
was  carried  to  the  place  of  eJOBca^  ,)
tion,  stripped  of  his  clotfaeSi  and  -
had  some  plantain  leaves  tied  roand'  ,,
h\»  waist.    About  two  tea-^ioda*'  .,;j
full  of  white  rice  had  been  given  to    ,
him  in  the  morning ;  and  if  thit  ,|
rice  were  thrown  up  with  the  led  -.,
water,  it  was  to  prove  him  innocent   f
Jem  now  ascended   the    scaffold,
and  drank  8  calabashes  (about  4  .^
quarts)  of  red  water,  which  wis    |
administered  to  blm  as  fart  as  he*  ^
could  swallow  it.    He  threw  all  up    .
again,  with  the  rice  which  he  had
eaten  in  the  morning ;  but,  as  he^
fainted  before  he  oould  get  down'  .,
from  the  scaffold,  it  was  said  that   .■
some  witch-palaver  must  be  left  in'   ■;
his   stomach,   because   the   deril   .•>
wrestled  with  him ;  and  be  was  re-'  , ,
quested  to  drink  the  water  again.    .•
This,  however,  he   refused ;   ob-
ser\'ing  that  he  had  merely  drank
it  in  the  first  instance  to  please -his
accusers,  and  to  shew  that  he  was
no  witch.    A  few  days  afterward
he  came  to  work  again,  and  the
business  was  dropped ;  but  Jem  did
not  appear  so  serious,  nor  did  he
so  regularly  attend  on  public  wor*
ship,  as  before."

The  poor  creature  whose  case
is  next  narrated,  had  not  the  cou*
rage  of  Kambah,  but  was  terrified
into  the  confession  of  an  imagi*
nary  crime,  in  order  to  save  herself  «
from  the  further  cruelty  of  harper*
secutors.

*^I  was  told,"  says  Mr.  Ny-

1(14


BUL

isTy  "  that  there  v^as  a  woman
f  -ill  with  the  small-pox,  and
^Another  woman,  who  had  just
eta  ill  of  the  same  disease,  had
ritchedher.  I  visited  the  sick
aian  first,  and  found  her  danger-
Ij  ill :  afterwards  I  Went  to  the
i'^  -where  the  supposed  witch,
ifed  Damfurry,  was  13'ing  in
ins,  under  a  tree,  in  a  high
sr — the  sraall-pox  just  coming
.  I  begged  the  people  to  re-
te  her,  and  to  let  her  lie  down
ofortably  in  a  house ;  but  they
t  they  could  not  do  it,  I  must
ak  to  the  head  man  of  the  town,
king  not  being  at  home.  1  ap-
sdto  him,  but  he  refused;  al-
tng^  that  she  was  a  bad  woman,
0  bad  been  in  the  Sbeerong  (a
t^cxf  purgatory,  where  the  evil
riti  dwell,  and  whither  the  sup-
ed  witches  resort),  where  she
ifffat  the  small-pox,  and,  by
sncraft,  brought  the  disease
m  this  woman.
«<  If  she  be  so  skilful,?  I  said,

00  can  make  money  by  her.
ote  her,  and  let  her  go  this  night
lin  to  the  Sbeerong,  and  bring
i  small-pox,  in  order  to  witch
)  small-pox  upon  me ;  and  if  I
:ch  the  disease,  I  will  pay  you

1  baxB.'  One  said  that  I  had  had
»n,  and  therefore  she  could  not
ng  them  on  me.  <Why,'  said
'  if  she  be  a  witch,  she  can  cause
tick  to  have  the  small-pox  to-
irrow ;  and  if  she  knew  any  thing
witchcraft,  she  would  not  stand
rore  you  to  be  flogged,  but  would
id  3^00  all,  that  you  could  not
tch  her.  She  knows  nothing,
we\'er,  about  witch -palaver,  and,
your  dealing  so  hardly  with  her,
>u  do  extremely  wrong,  and  dis-
ease God.'

*'  As  the  poor  creature  could  not
t  loosed  without  the  consent  of
Mdck  woman's  husband,  I  sent
or  him ;  and,  after  some  time,  he
ouented  that  she  should  be  taken


BUL

out  of  the  stocks — and  so  I  left
them.  But  the  relations  of  tlie
person  dangerously  ill  began  to
question  the  supposed  witch,  and
gave  her  a  severe  whipping;  and
the  woman,  at  length,  confessed
that  she  had  bewitched  her.

«  The  doctor  was  now  called  in
to  examine  the  sick  person,  and  he,
in  his  turn,  l^  pretended  witch-
craft, pretended  to  take  out  of  the
woman's  head,  1.  A  worm,  called,
in  Sierra  Leone,  the  forty  footf
2.  A  small  bag,  containing  the  in-
struments of  a  witch — such  as  a
knife,  a  spoon,  a  basin,  <&c. ;  3.  A
snail ;  4.  A  rope  ;  and,  5,  the  small-
pox !  1  The  witch  was  then  whipped
a,  second  time,  and  asked  whether
she  had  not  put  all  these  things
into  the  head  of  the  woman,  whia
was  now  almost  dead.  She. con-
fessed it;  and  brought  forward  a
man  and  two  women,  as  having
joined  wifh  her  to  kill  this  woman.
The  man  said  that  he  knew  no-
thing of  witchcraft,  and  consented
to  prove  his  innocence  by  drinking
the  red  water.  The  two  females
were  whipped,  and  sent  to  work  ;
and  the  principal  one  was  to  be
put  to  death,  as  soon  as  the  sick
woman  should  die.  Till  then^
Dumfurry,  the  supposed  witch,
was  appointed  to  guard  the  sick
person,  and  to  drive  the  flies  from
her."

"  I  oppose  these  foolish  witcb
accusations,"  says  Mr.  N.  "  whercf
ever  I  can ;  and  numbers  of  the
Bulloms,  especially  the  younger
ones,  see  plainly  that  it  is  the  powec
of  darkness  and  ignorance  which
works  upon  the  minds  of  the  old
people;  but  they  dare  not  say  a
wonl  in  opposition  to  this  evil  prac-
tice, for  fear  of  being  themselves
immediately  accused  of  witchcraft."

Among  these  benighted  people,
Mr.  Nylander  continued  to  labour
for  a  considerable  time,  with  the
most  unwearied  patience  «h,iA  mt^


BUR

remitting  leal ;  and,  in  addition  to
the  instraction  of  the  children
placed  in  bis  school,  and  the  preach-
ing- of  the  truth,  he  translated
the  four  Gospels,  the  epistles  of
St.  John,  the  morning  and  even-
ing prayers  of  the  Church  of  Eng-
land, some  hymns,  and  se^Wal
elementary  boolcs,  into  the  Bul-
lom  language.  In  1818,  how-
ever, the  pernicious  influence  of
the  slave  trade  rendered  the  prospect
of  success  more  daric  and  distant
than  ever,  and  the  mission  was
consequently  abandoned;  Mr.  N.
retiring  into  the  colony  with  the
greater  part  of  the  pupils,  who,  at
that  time,  were  nnder.his  Instmc-
tion.

BURDERS  POINT,  a  station
in  the  district  of  Atehuru,  in  the
N.E.partofTaheite.

In  1881,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Bourne
joined  Mr.  Darling,  who,had  com-
menced a  mission,  to  the  Orapoas;
the  inhabitants  of  this  district,  and
the  station  ultimately  formed,  as-
sumed the  above-mentioned  name.
Public  religious  services  had  been
rqo^larly  Icept  up  from  the  time
or  Mr.  Darling's  arrival.  About
SOO  adults  had  been  carefully
examined,  and  SOO  children  had
been  baptized.  Of  the  former,
81  were  admitted  to  the  Lord's
Supper,  And  the  rest  were  under
instruction  as  candidates  for  com-
munion. Schools  had  also  been
established,  both  for  adults  and
children.  They  contained,  at  this
time,  of  the  former,  386 ;  of  the
latter,  830.  At  another  place,  in
the  same  district,  there  was  a  school,
which  contained  about  80,  chiefly
adults.  A  large  and  commodious
place  of  worship,  in  the  English
style,  had  been  built,  in  the  erection
of  which  the  natives  cheerfully  as-
sisted. The  natives  were  likewise,
in  some  degree,  inured  to  industry.
Mrs.  Bourne  and  Mrs.  Darling  had
taught  the  females  to  make  them-


BUR

selves  bonneti  of  •  speetet  df  g^l
adapted  to  this  purpose.  &LiuS^
woman  was  to  be  seen  In  ttaff  Wtf
gregatiim  without  abonnet»<*attil
without  a  hat,  of  this  shn^  MMI
facture.  A  printing-estabfishiM
was  formed  here,  and  51100  'dflpi|
of  the  Gospel  by  Mattheir,  -m
3000  of  that  by  John,  in  tfa(»  to
heitan  language,  printed}  triM
were  received  by  the  natiiu'ii|
the  greatest  avidity.  Mr.  TliiiJI
having,  soon  after,  remoffed  (Ml
this  station,  Mr.  Darting  cohtHiiB'
his  zealous  exertions,  MmM^H^
the  most  encouraging  soceetk  "^

In  the  middle  of  18S3,  UmtboM
of  the  baptized  had  inct«asbdto1ll|
of  whom  411  were  adnlti;  liMM
candidates  for  baptism  was  14.  Ill
church  coiisisted  of  50  inekMl
and  there  were  10  candlMis  If
admission.  Among  the  fottsfMi
a  man  named  Malohaa,'  imIIdiiII
formerly  distinguished  by  t*kll^>ik
lead  in  acts  of  rebelUon,  and  mi
oifice  it  was  to  recite  all  the  anbM
speeches  of  wnr.  Othm  mKt
atrocious  transgresNts,  had  nelv
ly  died  in  the  Loid.  A  sfattM
proof  of  the  peaceful  Ittflneile^
the  Gro^)el  must  also  be  mentioflit
—During  the  e^ly  part  <^fta  {MP
viousyear,  some  nuschieTosf^'nii'
sons  having  raised  areporti  teinWl
to  excite  war  between  the  wdjfl
inhabiting  the  districts  of  AtebHi
and  Pare,  tiiose  of  the  former  dk
trict  ci^me  to  Mr.  Daiilng,  nd  di
clared  that  they  would  not  tnktii
arms — ^that  tiiey  would  not' M(
with  their  countrymen,  asth^ySl
formerly  done,  as  they  bad  now  10
ceived  the  Goqiel  of  peaee,  JB«d  WW
become  brethren  in  the  0<MjM
The  greatness  of  the  change  wiuli
felt,  when  it  is  remembtted  tUI
before  the  overthrow  of  idobdiy
the  Atehuruans  were  notorious  III
violence,  and  had  deUglited  in  tm
and  bloodshed  for  ages  nnknown.

The    schooto,    hi   Jidy,  ISHi

106


3UR

led  IM  boyi  and  ISl  girls ;
I?e8  peifonned  the  p«rt  o/
tm  in  the  schools,  of  whom
a  'women.  Sobsequent  re*
mre  us  that/ in  both  a  civil
Ligious  point  of  view,  the  af-
'  this  station  are  prospering.
bat  of  1S37,  it  appears  that  an
:c  had  been  very  prevalent
eaxried  off  13  adults  and  14
D*  Among  the  deceased  was
pfous  and  devoted  deacon  of
oreby  who  had  wished  to  go
leher  tosome  of  tlie  surround-
ioda,  but  no  opportunity  had
>d  for  ttiat  purpose.  H e  died
w.  Of  the  children  who  de-
two  or  three  of  the  boys
.easing  evidence  of  a  spiritual
»•  Several  of  those  who,
avlng  professed  Christianity,
itumed  to  their  former  evil
bad  g^ven  proofs  of  repent-
Among  the  rest  was  the
of  a  family,  whose  children
sd  •  the  mission  school.  It
that  his  compunction  was
ned,  by  observing  his  chil-
attention  directed  to  that
is  gpod,  while  he  himself  was
In  sin.  The  weekly  meet-
era  numerously  and  regularly
Ml.  The  da3'-schools,  for
and  children,  wece  in  a
ling  state.  At  the  Sabbath-
ibe  attendance  was  good,  and
ogress  of  the  children  was
ig.  Several  books  had  been
I.  The  Tahitian  public  li-
for  the  Windward  Islands,
I  at  this  station,  had  been
9d  by  many  presents.  A  new
i«house,  a  very  commodious
•house,  and  several  good
ig-houses,  had  been  erected.
'  road  bad  been  made,  and,
hout  the  district,  the  people
ngaged  in  making  plantations
^  <&c.  <fec. ;  and  several  pious
lad  given  themselves  up  to
ark  of  the  Lord  among  the
nding   islands.      The   total


BUR

number  of  adults'  baptized  was
427  ;  of  children,  416.  Total  num«
her  of  communicants,  14] .  Several,
more  were  candidates  for  church
fellowship;  32  had  been  added  to
the  church  during  the  year ;  3  had
incurred  censure,  but  none  had  been
excluded;  and,  during  the  same
period,  9  had  been  married.

BURDWAN,  a  town  of  Hin-
doostan  in  Bengal,  capital  of  a  dis-
trict which  is  the  first  in  rank  for
agricultural  riches  in  all  India.  It
is  seated  near  the  Dummooda,  58
m.  N.W.  of  Calcutta.  £.  long.
81 »  57',  N.  lat.  23»  15'.

At  the  close  of  the  year,  1816,
the  Corresponding  Committee  at
Calcutta,  connected  with  the  C.
Af.  S,,  received  a  cmnmunication
from  Lieut.  Stewart,  stationed  at
Burdwan,  proposing  an  extensive
plan  of  native  schools  at  and  near
that  place.  Three  schools— in
Burdwan,  and  at  Lackootfy,  and
Ryan  — were  accordingly  taken
under  the  societ}''s  care.  With
the  concurrence  of  the  committee^
the  plan  was  afterwards  extended^
and  additional  schools  opened.

Of  the  state  of  the  Burdwan
schools,  an  impartial  observer  tes-
tifies, under  date  of  Aug.  S8th,
1817  :—**  I  am  at  Burdwan,  in  the
house  of  Lieut.  Stewart,  an  officer
in  the  company's  service.  If  every
missionary  did  as  much  as  he  has
done,  and  is  doing,  for  the  cause  of
civilization  and  religion,  he  need
be  in  no  fear  as  to  bis  reputation
with  those  who  employ  him.  He
has  done  wonders  in  this  neigh-
bourhood, in  regard  to  education."
The  number  of  schools  was  soon
after  increased  to  10,  in  which
about  1000  children  were  taught
the  Bengalee  language,  by  the
new  method  so  successfully  adopted
in  Europe,  with  judicious  modifi-
cations and  improvements  by  Lieut.
Stewart.  The  places  at  which
they  were  built,  in  addition  to  those


BUR

mdntioned,  were — KonsAunnufur,
Komiipare,  Gmtwqtore,  Poura,  Cro^
ot^Hfre,  Mirzapore,  and  Coilgong,
The  roost  disUmt  of  these  villaji^
ig  but  6  miles  from  Burdwan,  but
the  greater  Dumber  are  only  from  2
to  3  m.  distant.  Though  Lieutenant
Stewart  did  not  formally  and  regu-
larly teach  the  Scriptures,  he  con-
tinually distributed  copies  of  the
Gospels  and  relig^ious  tracts,  which
were  eagerly  sought  after  by  the
young  people  when  they  had  learned
to  read.  Receiving  an  impulse  and
borrowing  light  from  the  plans  and
operations  of  the  late  active  and
efKcelient  Mr.  May,  at  Chinsurab,
he  still  further  improved  his  system ;
and  of  its  efficiency,  Mr.  Robertson
and  Mr.  Thomason  speak  in  the
highest  terms.  The  latter  says,
after  an  examination  be  conducted
— "  It  was  very  pleasing  to  hear  a
simple  and  good  account  of  the
English  government,the  two  houses
of  parliament,  the  army  and  navy,
and  universities,  of  England,  with
its  chief  towns,  cities,  and  rivers,
from  a  company  of  poor  Bengalee
boys,  who,  unless  they  had  been
brought  under  instruction,  must
have  remained  in  entire  ignorance,
and  stupid  indifierence  to  improve-
ment."

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Jetter  and
Deerr  were  settled  at  Burdwan,  on
the  17th  November,  1819,  Captain
Stewart  having  purchased  apiece  of
ground,and  built  a  house  for  the  ac-
commodation of  the  missionary  fa-
mily. The  former  took  charge  of
the  central  school  recently  erected,
in  which  the  English  language
was  taugbt;  and  Mr.  Deerr  super-
intended the  Bengalee  schools.

In  July,  1820,  there  were  about
60  scholars  in  the  central  English
school,  and  1060  in  13  Bengalee
schools.  Their  attendance  was  in-
terrupted by  the  frequentrecurrence
of  heathen  festivals,  and  by  occa-
sional labours  in  the  field.  Mr.Jet-


BUR

ter  writes^  on  occaflon  of  a  yi\AfA
them  by  a  kind  friend — ''  We  «»
much  grieved  that  he  could  notM
much  of  tlie  schools,  as  the  tiriim
had,  just  then,  2  holy-days,  If  w
may  coll  them  so,  when  idl  fti
schools  w«re  shut  ap.    They  vfh
shipped,  during  those    two.  dn
paper,  pens,  vlaid  iiik  I    Bydng,
so,  they  say,  they  become  wisB»?
in  1821,  an  English  cleigyva
being  much  wanted,  the  Rev.  Jqki
Perowne  proceeded  to  this  state
His  reception  by  the  residenti  vm
most  cordial :   a  subscripUon  wh
set  on  foot  for  the  erectiim  oCi
suitable  place  of  worship  ;  and,  at
application  to  government  fay  (hi
local  authorities,  an  eligiUespotflf
gnround  was  assigned  for  the  sttsflC
a  church,  and  an  order  issoed  ti
supply  the  sum  wanted  to  comriBli
the  estimate  out  of  the  public  CMiL
The  success  of  the   schools  ««
demonstrated  by  an  interesting  al
extensive  examination.  Mr.Dedr,
in    addition   to  his   ordinary  a-
gagements,    took    five  boys  hito
his  house    at   his  own    expeiii8y
to  whom  he    g^ve   religious  in*
struction.    "  I  am  sometimes  d^
lighted,''  he  says,  ^^  with  the  aii*
swers  which  I  obtain,  when  I  wk
these  boys  the  meaning  of  apaaage
of  Scripture.    For  instance,  whsn
I    asked,    <  What  did    our  Lori
mean,  when  he  said,  Wkomem
seeth  me,  teeth  the  Father  V  Oat
who  is  of  the  brahmin  caste  an-
swered, *  I  think  it  maybe  ondeN
stood  thus:    As  the  Father,  the
Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  one,
therefore  whosoever  seeth  the  Son,
seeth  the  Father  also/    At  ano*
ther  time,  when  I  asked  how  It  waf
that  David  called  Christ  his  <Lonl,
though  he  was  also  called  the  Soi
of   David?   the    same    boy  said
^  David  had  become   acquainted
through   the  prophets,   with  tba
great  Redeemer  who  was  to  come
and  in  that  respect  he  called  lite

IDS


BUR

ff  Lord ;  and  because  he  became
icarnate  in  tbe  family  of  David,
•  IscaUedhisSon.^'
-lit  1822,  the  Rev.  J.  Perqwne
nd  the  Rev.  W.  Deerr  (Rev.  Mr4
'ettjar  having  suspended  his  la-
Ann  at  Banlvan  from  impaired
iBBlth)  were  joined  in  the  charge
i  the  mission  and  schools  by  the
Ker.  Jacob  Maisch.  In  April,  a
bvrch  was  nearly  finished.  Di-
im  service  was  held  twice  on
Inidajs..  The  first  converts  in  this
Blsion  were  baptised  on  tbe  dth
f  May.  An  adaU  native  received,
B  this  interesting  occasion,  the
iBoie  ■  of  Daniel,  and  a  youth  of
J  years  of  age  that  of  John.
knofher  promising  youth  was'  a
•ndidate  for  admission  to  the  holy
fdinance.  Mrs.  Perowne,  after
BUiy  unsuccessful  attempts,  sue-
seeded  in  forming  a  female  Ben-
jUee  school.  Mr.  Perowne  ob-
wneSf  /'The  remarks  and  ques-
kmi  of  the  children  in  the  schools
(rinee  that  a  foundation  is  laid  for
BDcli  future  good.  There  is  abun-
tant  reason  to  bless  God  for  what
las  been  done.  Who  would  have
(zpected,  a  year  ago,  to  see  1000
Ilndoo  children  reading  the  60s-
«!?  Nay,  so  greatly  are  these
cejndices  removed,  that  those  very
oys,  who,  a  few  months  since,
Uiked  or  refused  to  read  any
ook  which  contained  the  name  of
ream,  are  now  willing  to  read  a
Bofeseed  history  of  his  life  and
ioctrine ;  and,  what  is  more,  in
one  cases  they  have  scdicited  the
iospel  in  preference  to  every  other
ook.'^

In  1823,  the  work  appears  to
lave  increased  and  prospered.  Two
Bore  adult  youths  were  added
a.. tbe  church;  and  tbe  blessing
i-  God  manifestly  rested  on  the
•ttgioos  instruction  affoided  to
ha  elder  youths.  To  the  schools
■I  the  western  side  of  the  town,
tnder  the  more  particular  care
}f  MeggTk  I>eenr  aad  MaLvb,  Mr,


BUR

Perowne  added  two  on  the  east-
ern I  one  containing  80  boys,  and
the  other  about  100.  At  the  an-
nual examination,  conducted  by
the  Rev.  Mr.  Thomason,  there  was  -
a  much  wider  range  than  on
former  occasions  of  subjects  purely
religious;  the  boys  continued  to
manifest  the  same  zeal  and  interest
in  the  books  they  read,  and  their
sensible  and  pertinent  answers  to
the  questions  put  to  them  were
highly  gratifying.  The  English
school,  also,  which  had  been  la-,
bouring  under  various  disadvan-
tages, was  in  a  more  pleasing
state  than  at  any  former  period :
it  contained  65  boys ;  about- 32  of
whom,  at  an  examination  in  March,'
passed  very  satisfactorily.  Four
more  schools  were  opened  for  fe<-
male  children;  containing,  with
the  one  previously  established,  up-
wards of  100  girls.  The  opera-
tions of  the  missionaries  were  con-
tinued with  much  energy  in  all  the
departments  of  their  labours,  until
many  of  the  school  buildings  were
either  seriously  injured,  or  entirely
swept  away,  by  an  alarming  inun-
dation, in  the  automn  of  1823.  All
the  houses  of  the  poor  Bengalees
fell  in,  and  the  people  were  obliged
to  climb  up  the  trees  in  order  to
save  their  lives.  ''  There  tbey  sat,
without  sustenance,  for  four  da3rs,"
says  Mr«  Reichardt,  then  on  a  vi-
sit at  Burdwan,  "  crying  to  their
gods,  *  Hori  I  Hori !  save  us — we
are  lost!'  Brethren  Deerr  and
Maisch,  and  myself,  were  together
in  one  house ;  and  if  the  water  had
risen  but  one  inch  higher,  it  would
have  entered  our  rooms,  and  we
should  have  been  obliged  to  flee  to
the  roof;  for  which  purpose  we
kept  a  ladder  ready :  however,  we
were  spared  this  danger,  by  the  ^
water-  decreasing.  Many  idols,
and  particularly  those  which  they
had  prepared  to  celebrate  the  poo*
jab  of  the  goddess  Doot^t^  ^«\a
broken  to  pieces,  01  ^oaXedi  w^^  •


BUR

I  saw  a  heap  of  them,  about  60  in
number,  lying  broken  near  the
road.  The  impotency  of  these  idols
\ras  gn'catly  exposed ;  and  many  of
the  Bengalees  began  to  ridicule
them,  saying,  '  Our  gods  are  dead
— they  could  not  prevent  the  flood.*
But,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  this  impres-
sion of  the  nothingness  of  idols,
which  they,  during  this  awful  catas-
trophe, received,  is  already  worn
off;  for,  soon  after  that,  instead  of
the  image  of  Doorga,  they  wor-
shipped a  water-pot,  into  which
they  had  cited  her  spirit."  The
injury  sustained  by  this  calamity
was,  however,  repaired  as  soon  as
possible.

In  1825,  Burdwan  was  deprived
of  two  valuable  missionaries.  The
death  of  Mr.  Maisch  took  place,
Aug.  29  ;  and  Mrs.  Maisch's  con-
tinued ill-heallii  rendered  her  re-
turn to  this  country  necessary.  The
encouraging  prospects  of  the  male
and  female  schools  continued.  Of
the  examination  of  the  latter,  it  is
said,  '*  The  general  impression
seemed  to  be,  that  the  children  ex-
ceeded the  expectations  formed  of
them.  The  order,  regularity,  and
respectful  behaviour,  for  \iiiich  the
Burdwan  boys'  schoc^  are  noted,
were  equally  exemplified  in  those
pf  the  girls;  there  was  no  confu-
sion, no  improper  conduct — but  all
conducted  themselves  in  a  modest
and  becoming  manner.  All  read
or  answered  the  questions  without
fear  or  hesitation ;  but  nothing  for-
ward or  presuming  was  seen  in  any
of  them."

The  most  recent  accounts  are
very  favourable.  A  small  chapel
was  opened  for  native  worship,
on  the  mission  premises,  on  the
18th  of  Dec.  1825.  Divine  ser-
vice is  held  therein  twice  on  Sun-
days ;  and  daily  morning  and  even-
ing worship.  Several  persons  seem
to  be  thinking  of  their  eternal
interests :  i^mong  these  is  a  young
man  (a  prahmin)  brought  up  in  the


BUR

English  school. .  Tha  pandit  if
that  school  also,  and  two  friewbef
his,  have,  for  some  timey  attnkM
the  meauA  of  grace;  and  two  of
them  •  (both  Coolin  brebmini)  pio»
fess  themselves  detiroiif  of  emiiiM--
ing  Christianity.  Tbiee  dia|ick'
have  been  erected  in  neighbovim.
villages:  the  avevage  attenduei
at  each  of  these  is  not  lea  thai
1 00  persons,  often  1 50  <»  800.  Ob
Mr.  Deerr'aremoTaltoCulnayiooe
of  the  most  remote  and  wont  st*
tended  \illage  schooU  were,  of  na*^
cessity,  given  up.  StiUy  ^owover,
15  schools  remain  under  the  diree»
tion  of  Mr.  Perowne  and  his  urirt*
ant,  containing  about  11,000  diH*
dren.  These  are  collected  ttom,
perhaps,  not  less  than  150  dllbrat
villages.  Mr.  Thomason  and  Mi;
Sherer  were  present,  recently^  it
the  examination  of  the  boyi  .of
the  central  school,  ■  and  i^cik
highly  of  their  proficiency  and
religious  knowledge,  llie  giiV
schools,  12  in  number,  ^iriUch  oe
superintended  by  Mis.  Pennnie^
have  been  taken  under  the_pa»
tronage  of  the  Native  Female  Jabh
cation  Society,

BURMAN  EMPIRE.  Tbii  b
an  extensive  empire  in  Asia,  totbe
E.  of  the  bay  of  Bengal,  contaia^
ing  the  kingdoms  of  Burmah,  Cas*
say,  Arracan,  and  Pegue,  and  ail
the  western  coast  of  Siam.  This
and  some  adjacent  countries  hove
sometimes  been  termed  Indo-CU^
nese  nations,  as  situated  between
India  Proper  and  China.  The  en*
pire  of  Burmah,  in  its  present  state,
is  about  1200  m.  in  length,  and  80Q
or  900  in  the  broadest  part.  It  ex-
tends from  the  9th  to  the  88th  deg^
N.  lat.,  and  from  the  -91st  to  the
108th  deg.  E.  long.,  and  cootaiBi
a  population  estimated  at  about
19,000,090.  The  kingdom  of  Bur-
mah, Avquently  callod  Ava,  from
the  name  of  its  ancient  capital,  has
Pegue  on  the  S.,  A»am  on  the  N.,
Ainucan  and  C«n«}  f3s&\bibVr  .^isA


BUR

ina  and  Upper  Siam  on  the  £.
Js  Idngdom  was  conquered  in
S89  by  the  King  of  Pegue,  who
Tied  the  Burman  monarch  pri-
ler  to  Pegue,  wber^  he  was  mur-
vd  in  1754.  But  Alompra,  who
a  a  Burman  of  low  distinction,
1  continued  by  the  conqueror  as
Mi  at  Monchabon,  a  small  place
tbe  N.  -of  Ava,  revolted  against
I  Peguese^  got  possession  of
a  in  17^,  and,  after  numerous
^$Sf  with  various  success,  be-
ne the  conqueror  of  Pegue  in
$7.  This  deliverer  of  his  country
itlnued  in  a  state  of  warfare  till
death,  in  1760 ;  and  his  succes-
I  have  added  the  other  countries,
ich  now  form  the  Burman  em-
b:  The  northern  part  of  the
mtry  is  barren  and  mountainous;
.  the  plains  and  valleys,  situated
re  southerly,  are  very  fertile,
e  dimate  is.  considered  salu-
908 ;  and  the  natives  are  remark-
y  )iealthy  and  vigorous ;  thesea-
s  being  regular,  and  the  ex-
nes  of  heat  and  cold  seldom  ex-
ienced.  ,The  soil  is  remarkably
UlOy  producing  rice,  sugar-canes,
acco,  indigo,  cotton,  and  all  the
;>ical  fruits,  in  perfection  ;  and
the  banks  of  the  Irawaddy,
tch  runs  S.  through  the  whole
Uitry,  is  produced  pure  amber,
I  the  finest  teak  timber  in  the
rid.  The  kingdom  of  Burmah
liinds  in  minerals ;  it  has  mines  of
d,  silver,  rubies,  and  sapphires ;
I  affords  amethysts,  garnets,
ysolites,  jasper,  loadstone,  and
(ellent  marble ;  it  has  also,  near
langbeoum,  celebrated  wells
petroleum.  The  government  is
ctly  monarchical.  The  Emperor
n  absolute  sovereign,  and  is  re-
ded as  the  sole  lord  and  proprie-
of  life  and  property  in  his  do-
lions :  and,  without  the  concur-
ce  of  any,  hisr  word  is  irresis-
B  law.  Like  the  sovereign  of
na,  he  acknowledges  no  equal.
9  prevailing  characteristic  of  his


BUR

court  is  pride.  Four  private  mini^
ters  of  state  (called  Atwenwoon),
and  four  public  ministers  of  state
( Woongyee),  are  the  organs  of  ad-
ministration:  the  latter  compose
the  supreme  court  of  the  empire
(Tlowtdau),  in  the  name  of  which
all  imperial  edicts  are  issued.  There
are  no  hereditary  dignities  or  em-
ployments in  the  government ;  for  all
honours  and  offices,  on  the  demise
of  the  possessor,  revert  to  the  crown.

The  Burman  empire  is  divided
into  districts,  each  of  which  is  g(0-
vemed  by  a  viceroy  (Myoowoon)
and  a  court  (Yongdau).  The  dis-
trict courts  are  composed  of  a  pre-
sident (Yawoon),  chief  magistrate
(Sitkai),  collectors  of  tbe  port
(Akoukwoon),  auditors  (Narkiui-
dau),  and  secretaries  (Saragyee).
The  members  of  the  district  courts,
and  the  wives,  relations,  and  fa-
vourites of  viceroys,  have  also  the
privilege  of  holding  private  courts,
and  of  deciding  petty  causes,  sub-
ject to  appeal  to  higher  authority.

The  Burmans  are  boodhlsts,  or
a  nation  of  atheists.  They  be-
lieve that  existence  involves  in  it-
self the  principles  of  misery  and
destruction ;  consequently  there  is
no  eternal  God.  The  whole  uni-
verse, say  they,  is  only  destruction
and  reproduction..  It  therefore
becomes  a  wise  man  to  raise  his
desires  above  all  things  that  exist,
and  aspire  to  Nigb€m,  the  state  in
which  there  is  no  existence.  Re-
wards and  punishments  follow  me-
ritorious and  sinful  acts,  agreeably
to  the  Nature  of  things.  Gauda-
ama,  their  last  boodh,  or  deity,  in.
consequence  of  meritorious  acts,
arrived  at  that  state  of  perfection
which  made  him  deserving  of  an-
nihilation— the  supreme  good.  His
instructions  are  still  in  force,  and
will  continue  till  the  appearance  of
the  next  deity,  who  is  supposed  new
to  exist  somewhere  in  embryo;
and  who,  when  he  appears,  as  the
most  perfect  of   «U  be\T^E:&»  m\L

\\\


3UR

-introduce  a  new  dispensation.  The
•boodbist  system  of  morality  Is  pure,
though  it  is  destitute  of  power  to
produce  purity  of  life  in  those  who
profeto  it.

In  the  empire  of  Burmah,  it  is
the  practice  to  pity  very  extraordi-
nary honours  to  a  white  eiephanty
which  is  considered  peculiarly
sacred,  lodged  near  the  palace,  and
attended  with  great  devotion,  even
■by  the  monarch  himself.  The  fol-
lowing account  of  this  singular
custom  is  extracted  from  the  jour-
nal of  a  traveller  who  lately  visited
Ava;  and  ought  to  inspire  deep
commiseration  for  a  whole  empire
sunk  in  such  astonishing  stupidity
as  thus  to  honour  and  reverence  a
mere  unconscious  brute !

<*The  residence  of  the  white
elephant  is  contiguous  to  the  royal
palace,  with  which  it  is  connected
by  a  long  open  gallery,  supported
by  numerous  rows  of  pillars.    At
the  further  end  of  this  gallery,  a
lofty  curtain  of  black  velvet,  richly
embossed  with  gc^d,  conceals  the
animal  from  the  e3'es  of  the  vul-
gar.   Before  this  curtain  the  pre-
sents intended  to  be  offered  to  him,
consisting  of  gold  and  silver  mus-
lins,   broad-cloths,  otto  of  roses,
rose-water,  Benares  brocades,  tea,
(fee.  <fec.  were  displayed  on  carpets.
After  we  had  been  made  to  wait  a
short  time,  as  is  usual  at  the  audi-
ences of  the  Burmese  princes,  the
curtain  was  drawn  up,  and  discover-
ed the  august  beast,  of  a  small  size,
the  colour  of  sand,  and  very  inno-
cently pla}ing  with  his  trunk,  un-
conscious of  the  glory  by  which  he
was  surrounded;  the  Burmans,  at
the  same  time,  bowing  their  heads
to  the  ground.    The  dwelling  of
the  white  elephant  is  a  lofty  hall,
richly  gilt  from  top  to  bottom,  both
inside  and  outside,  and  supported
by  64  pillars,  36  of  which  are  also
rlclily  gilt.    His  two  fore-  feet  were
fastened  by  a  thick  silver  chain  to
one  of  these  pillars,  his  hhid  legs


BUR

being  secuwd  bv*  rapes.  *  Hit  Mi

ding  Gonstoted  of  a  thick  itoawarf

trass,  covered  with  the  .litest  Mi

cloth,  over  which  "waa  iprccd  li^

other  of  aofter  matariaiiy  coMMi

with  crimson,  lilk.   The  aniiiMllik

a  regular  household,  oouistiiwirf

a  Woongfae^,  or   chle£^raiiiliHr|i

Moondddk, 'or  wecniaxf  of,ilili)

Sereghee,   cr   inferior  wwaJiMy^

Nakaun,  or  obtainer  of  JntniHgWi^

and  other  inferior  niihktarijg  «ki

were  all  present  tareeeive  tau.  IS^

sides  these,  he  bos  tfOiet'tMom

*who  transact  the  bosiiiQMJrf  scwrti

estates  that  he  poiaeMea  in  mdm

parts  of  Ihe  coantry^  andan-erfk

blisbment  of  1000  men,  iadottf

guards,  servants,  and  other  attSw

dants.  His  trapping!  are  of  eztraii^

magnificence---be£ig  aU  .of  .nlL

and  the  richest  gold  cloth,  1i£l^

studded  with  largs  diamond^  peail%-

sapphires,  Tubies,-  and  other  fttp'

clous  stones.    Hit  betel  booc,  qitt^

ting  pot,  and  l)aiigles,:and  the  -nh;

sels  out  of  which  he  eats  aad-driiilBa

are  likewise  of  gold,.. and  inhdl

with  numerous  precious  stonei,  Qi .

the  curtain  being  drawn  .op,. nl

were  desired  to  imitate  the  'Bta^

mese  in  their  prostrations;'  com^ '

pliance,  however,  was  not  inrfftod

on.    The  white  dephant  appuawd

to  me  to  be  a  diseased   anioali

whose  colour  had  been  changed  ly

a  species  of  leprosy.  -  ■  -  <

''  These  honours  lure  aaid  t»  It

pakl  to  the  white  elephant,  'on  m  '

count  of  an  animal  of  this  deacsip*

tion  being  the  last  stage  of  mm

millions  of  transmlgratfons  tiiroogli

which  a   soul  passes  previons  ia,

entering  Neibawi^  or  Paradise  |  at^

according  to  the  Burmese  doctilni^

previous  to  her  being  absorbed  iato

the  divine  essence,  or  rather  aUiH

gether  annihilated.     One  of  '  tlM

King's  titles  is  Lord  of  the  WhttB^

Red,  and  Mottled  Elephants ;  and^

I  am  infbrpied,  the  same  distinct

tion  is  shown  to  those  of  the  flrit

mentioned  colours,  by  the  Siamese^


BUR

ka  elephant,  tenned  red,  was  kept
in  a  verandah  of  the  white  ele-
[thant's  residence ;  but  I  coald  per-
ceive^ in  his  colour,  little  difiering
ftom  thai  of  any  other.  The  King
was  in  the  habit  of  paying  his  re-
jects to  the  white  elephant  every
moming,  and  of  attending  when  he
was  taken  to  the  river  to  be  washed,
and  paid  him  the  same  honours  as
be  received  from  his  household*'^

The  Bnrmans  are  a  lively,  in-
dustrious, and  energetic  race  of
people,  and  farther  advanced  in
civiliauition  than  most  of  the  eastern
natiens.  They  are  'frank  and  can-
did ;  and  destitute  of  the  pusillani-
mity which  ciiaracterizes  the  Hin-
doos, and-  that  revengeful  .malig-
nity which  is  a  leading  trait  in  the
Malay  character.  The  pasHion  of
jealousy,  which  prompts  most  east-
em  natiohs  to  immure  their  women
ind  surround  them  with  guards,
leems  to  have  little  influence  on  the
minds  of  the  Burmaus ;  for  their
svives  and  daughters  have  as  free
intercourse  with  the  other  sex,  as
iie  rules  of  European  society  ad-
mit. The  Burmans  are  extreme-
ly fond  both  of  poetry  and  music  ;
ipd  their  language  has  been  highly
cultivated  in  composition,  for  they
!iave  numerous  works  in  religion,
listory,  and  science ;  some  of  them
bitten  in  the  most' flowing,  beau-
Ifnl style:  and  much  ingenuity  is
nanifested  in  the  construction  of
heir  stories.  Some  of  their  men
ire  powerful  logicians,  and  take
lelight  in  investigating  new  sub-
ects.

^11  the  boys  in  the  empire  are
anght  by  the  priests,  who  are  de-
)endent  for  their  support  on  the
'contributions  of  tbe  people ;  but  no
ittention  is  given  to  female  educa-
:ion,  excepting  in  a  few  instances
n  the  higher  classes  of  society.

The  capital  of  the  kingdom,  and
tbe  metropolis  of  the  empire,  is
LJmmerapoor.  [See  Arracan  and
ftangoon,\


BUX

BUXAR,  a  town  in  Bahar,
Hindoostan,  situated  in  a  healthy,
pleasant  plain,  on  the  S.  side  of  the
Ganges,  abdut  70  m.  below  Be-
nares, and  about  400  N.W.  of  Cal-
cutta, in  the  midst  of  a  -very  nu-
merous heathen  population.  Here
are  about  00  European  invalids,
and  nearly  that  number  of  native
Christian  women.  Less  than  half
a  mile  from  the  town,  is  a  j)lace
where  numerous  devotees,  from
difierent  parts  of  India,  take  up
their  residence,  mostly  for  life.
Two  grand  fairs  are  annually  held,
which  greatly  increase  its  im-
portance as  a  missionary  station.

A  native  Christian,  Kurrum  Mes-
seeh,  from  Chunar,  commenced  his
labours  in  this  place  in  1820,  under
the  direction  of  the  C.  M,  S,  He
was  very  useful  in  teaching  the  na-
tive Christians  to  read  the  New
Testament,  and  to  repeat  the  ca-
techism, as  well  as  in  leading  their
worship,  according  to  the  Hindoos-
tan  ee  Prayer-book.  About  40  re-
ceived instruction  at  this  time,  in
various  ways,  and  he  has  continued
his  eflbrts  with  some  success.  One
adult  was  baptized  by  the  Rev.  Mr.
Bowley,  .and,  subsequently.  Arch-
deacon Corrie  writes : —

'^  The  Bishop  saw  Kurrum  Mes*
seeh's  congregation,  consisting  of-
about  30  women,  young  and  old.
He  heard  them  read  in  the  Hin-
doostanee  Testament,  and  ques-
tioned them  in  their  catechism.
His  Lordship  expressed  to  me  his
entire  satisfaction  with  the  pro-
ficiency they  manifested.''    *

In  a  letter  dated  Sept.  25th,
1826,  the  Archdeacon  says : —

'*  I  passed  a  Sunday  at  Buxar,
when  about  35  adults  attended
divine  service.  The  people  here
are  very  attentive,  and  Kurrum
Messeeh  continues  to  enjoy  their
confidence  and  esteem.  The  want
9f  a  place  of  worship  has  long  been
felt  here.  A  circumstance  oc-
curred which  led  me  \o  \)«?\ii  oiiv^^

l2  \\^


i>


CAP

Mary  Currol,  a  native  ChrisUan,
baTing  obtained  some  arrears  of
pension,  as  a  widow  of  Serjeant
Carrol,  brou^t  me  100  rupees,
'  as  an  offering,'  to  use  her  own
words,  'to  the  church.'  This
woman  bas  been  long  one.  of  llie
most  attentive  and  consistent  Chris-
tians at  the  station :  her  religious
impressions  were  first  received  at
Chunar ;  and  this  offering  she  made
of  her  own  accord,  in  token  of  her
gratitude  for  the  blessing  of  Chris-
tian instruction.  I  obtained  from
the  commanding  officer  leave  to
inclose  a  small  piece  of  public
ground,  adjoining  the  parade ;  and
with  a  donation  from  miother
friend,  added^  to  Mary  Carrol's
gift,  commenced  a  small  building,
convenient  -also  for  the  natives
who  live  in  the  adjoining  bazaar.


C.


CAFFRARIA  commences  at
the  Great  Fish  R.,  which  divides
it  from  Albany  in  the  colony ;  and
runs  along  the  Indian  Ocean,  in  a
N.E.  direction,  to  the  R.  Bassee,
which  divides  it  from  the  Tam-
bookie  country.  It  does  not  ex-
tend more  than  70  m.  up  the  coun-
try;  or  to  the  W. — at  least  at  the
S.  end  of  it — being  separated  from
the  colony  and  Bushman  country
on  that  side  by  a  chain  of  moun-
tains. It  abounds  with  mountains,
woods,  and  water,  and  is  far  more
populous  than  either  the  Bushman,
Coranna,  or  Namaqua  countries.
The  people  also  are  taller,  more
robust,  and  more  indastrious.  **  Bet-
ter shaped  men,''  says  Mr.  Camp-
bell, "  I  never  saw."  They  are
a  warlike  race,  and  many  of  them
are  greatly  addicted  to  plunder-
ing. Like  the  Chinese,  they  con-
sider all  other  people  inferior  ti^
themselves,  and  suppose  that  Euro-
peans wear  clothes  merely  on  ac-


tA»

covat'  of  lisvliig>  Mbto  imi  iU^
bodiek.  They  hare  -feoMMly^
religion  i  but  mMM  of  tfeem  fm
fesi  to  believe  thai  mnam  ipmi
being  came  from  abote^  aad  Mill
the  world,  altar  wbldi  ka  laiMnli^
and  cared  no  aiove  about  it.  IMi
very  probable,  that  avaa  thli  i
ray  of  light  was  obtained  bj :
of  their  intercooTsa  witb  the  Dalil
boon  during  several  agea.  -  IM
consider  man  as  on  a  larel  ^ipii^
the  brutes,  with  regaid  to  tha^i^
ration  of  his  being ;  so  that  «ta
he  is  dead,  there  ts  an  end-^'Mr
existence.  Like  the  Mitchap^ea^
they  have  circnroofadon  mbUV
them,  though  ignorant  of  iriM
gave  rise  to  the  ciistoiii«  tktf
perform  this  ceremony  oa  thik'
young  tiifen  at  the  age  of  14  jmi,
or  more.  Polygamy  is  ytufgh
neral  among  them.  The  'coniMi
people  have  seldom  -moie  tlian  lie
or  two  wives,  bat  their  dhleliM*
nerally  four  or  five.  When  a  Cmdv
is  sick,  they  geiierally  send  fart
person  who  is  considored  a  pt^ri"
clan,  who  pretends  to  extraibt  Mi
the  body  of  the  sick,  s«p«atij
stones,  bones,  ifirc.r  At- other ttaM
he  beats  them  on  theelboW|MMMi^
and  ends  of  their  fiag^vSy  tfll^'ai
the  Hottentots  express  tty  <t|en
are  almost  rotten  :  ttkejmmtiUmm,
also,  kill  cattle  in  the  way  of  aidff"
fice  for  the  person :  and-  at  ottUD
the  doctor  pretends  to  drive  out^hi
devil,  and  to  kiU  him.  The  Caftei
have  a  barbarous  custom-  of  ex-
posing their  siek  Meads/  w^  is
their  opinion,  are  not  likely  tare-
cover.  Theybufy  none  1fut4hcir
chiefs  and  their  wives  $  othen<aie
thrown  out  to  be^  devoured  hf  Hit
wild  beasts.  Should  a  panott  dir
accidentally  in  his  own  houi^'  thi
whole  kraal  is  deserted.  'Many
of  them  are  very  hoqiitdbta  io
strangers ;  not  waiting  tfll  th^  uk
^  for  victuals,  but  bringSig  it  of  their
own  accord,  and  setting  it  halbia
them,  and  always  of  tiia  bast  tfa^

VU


I

I


CAF

ive.  The  riches  of  a  Gaffire
liefly  coDsist  of  his  cattle,  of
'hich  he  is  extraTagantly  fond.
(e  keeps  them  as  carefully  as  the
liner  does  his  gold.  He  does  not
le  them  as  beasts  of  burden,  ex-
ept  when  he  is  removing  from
Be  place  to  another  along  with
if  Ixaal,  and  then  they  carry  the
lilk  bags,  or  skin  bags  which
ontain  milk.  He  is  never  more
ratified  than  when  running  before
liem  with  his  shield,  by  beating  on
rhich  the  whole  are  taught  to
vUop  after  him.  In  this  way  he
Mds  them  out  to  take  exercise,
ad  those  oxen  which  run  quickest
B  such  occasions,  are  considered
ito  best  3  of  these  he  boasts,  and
reats  them  with  peculiar  kindness.
lie  Cafires  chiefly  subsist  upon
lilk ;  but  in  part,  also,  by  hunting,
bA  by  the  produce  of  their  gardens.
They  sow  a  species  of  millet,  which
I  known  in  the  colony  by  the
flme  of  Caffre  com.  While  grow-
ngy  it  very  much  resembles  Indian
orn,  only  the  fruit  grows  in  clusters,
Ika  the  grape  ;  the  grain  is  small
nd  round,  and  when  boiled  is  very
•latable.  They  frequently  bruise
t  between  two  stones,  and  make  a
ind  of  bread  from  it.  To  sow  it
I  the  work  of  the  women.  They
eatter  the  seed  on  the  grass,  after
rfaich,  they  push  off  the  grass  from
he  surface,  by  means  of  a  kind  of
vooden  spade,  shaped  something
Ike  a  spoon  at  both  ends,  by  which
Iteration  the  seed  falls  upon  the
ireund,  and  is  covered  by  the  grass ;
rom'  .underneath  which  withered
Jid  rotten  grass,  it  afterwards
prings  up.  They  also  sow  pump-
du,  water-melons,  <fec.,  and  use
wrious  vegetables,  which  grow
rild.  They  cultivate  tobacco,  and
moke  it,  like  the  Matchappees,
hrough  water  in  a  horn.  The  men
ipend  their  days  in  idleness,  having
M>  emplojrment  but  war,  hunting,
uid  milking  the  cows.  The
women  constiibct  inclosnres  for  the


CAF

cattle,  utensils,  and  clothes ;  ili^
also  till  the  ground,  and  eut  wood.
They  likewise  manufacture*  matt
of  rushes,  and  neat  baskets,  wronght
so  close  as  to  contain  milk,  but
which  are  seldom  washed  or  clean-
ed, except  by  the  dogs'  tongues.
They,  moreover,  build  houses  in  the
shape  of  a  dome,  formed  of  long
sticks  bent  into  that  shape,  thatched
with  straw,  and  plastered  in  the  in-
side with  a  mixture  of  clay  and
cow-dung:  the  entrance  Is  low —
seldom  higher  than  two  or  three
feet ;  and  having  no  chimney,  the
smoke  proceeding  from  the  fire,
which  is  placed  in  the  middle  of
the  hut,  must  find  its  way  out  the
best  way  it  can,  through  the  roof
or  by  the  door.

Next  to  these  people  is  another
numerous  tribe,  called  Tambookies  ;  .
and  further  to  the  N.E.,  near  De-
lagoa  Bay,  are  the  Mbmbookies,
who  are  very  numerous.  These
are  said  to  be  of  the  Cafire  race,
as  are  the  numerous  tribes  of  the
Bootchuanas  to  the  W,

Dr.  Vanderkemp,  with  other
agents  of  the  L.  M»  S,,  attempted
an  establishment  on  the  Keiskamma
R.  In  1799 ;  but  owing  to  the  dis-
turbed state  of  the  countr}',  and  the
prejudices  of  the  people,  they  re-
moved to  Graaff  Reynet,  within
the  colony,  in  1801 ;  not,  however,
till  they  had  conciliated  many  of
the  Cafires,  and  prepared  the  way
for  future  labours.
'  The  Rev.  Josiah  Williams,  ac-
companied by  his  wife,  Mr.  Read,
and  a  native  convert,  Tzatzoe,  ar-
rived at  a  place  intended  for  a  sta-
tion, near  Cat  R.,  in  1816,  The
chiefs  of  this  country  welcomed
them  with  the  greatest  kindness.
Several  of  them  remembered  Dr.
Vanderkemp,  whom  they  called
Jankanna,  and  for  whose  memory
they  entertained  a  high  venera-
tion. One  of  the  chiefs  said,  "  You
must  not  be  tired  of  us,  though  we
are  perverse ;  but  often  -vUit.  >3&.


€AF

Jftttkanna  is  dead,  and  you  are  in-
stead of  him.''  T'Geika,  the  princi-
pal chief,  appeared  to  be  deeply  con-
vinced of  his  sins ;  which  he  com-
pared one  nighti  after  the  public
service,  to  tbe  stars,  then  glitter-
ing over  his  head.  He  lamented
his  neglect  of  the  word  formerly
preached  by  Jankanna;  but  said
that  God,  who  would  not  suffer  bim
to  die  in  his  kins,  had  sent  Jan-
kanna's  son  (for  so  he  and  the
people  styled  Mr.  Read)  :  and  now
he  declared,,  that  if  God  would  be
pleased  to  streng^en  him,  he
would  renounce  the  world,  and  give
himself  wholly  to  Christ;  with-
out whom,  he  said,  all  things  are
nothing ;  adding,  that  if  the  Caf-
fres  refused  to  hear  the  Gospel,  he
would  leave  them  and  cleave  to
the  missionaries  and  their  friends
at  Cape  Town,  that  he  might  enjoy
it.  He  also  desired  that  his  thanks
might  be  given  to  the  Grovemor,
and  to  the  King  of  England,  for
sending  missionaries  to  Cafiraria.

Under  these  auspicious  circum-
stances, Mr.  Williams  commenced
his  labours.  He  built  a  house,
formed  a  garden,  inclosed  ground
for  com,  and  prepared  for  con-
ducting water  to  it  from  a  distance.
About  100  Cafires  attended  his  mi-
nistry on  tbe  Sabbath,  and  about  70
on  other  days.  A  school  he  com-
menced, contained  about  150  native
children.  But  in  the  midst  of  his
efforts,  Mr.  W.  was  called,  on  the
24th  of  August,  1818,  to  his  re-
ward. Obstacles  afterwards  arose,
partly  from  the  existence  of  a
Caffre  war,  which  prevented,  for
a  time,  the  establishment  of  the
mission.

In  1825,  the  Rev.  John  Brown-
lee,  who  had  been  successfully  en-
gaged at  Chumie,  at  the  expense
of  the  Colonial  Grovernment,  agreed
to  attempt  its  ^revival.  Accom-
panied by  Jan  Tzatzoe,  who,  since
the  death  of  Mr.  Williams,  had
been  a  teacher  at  Theopolis^   he


CAP

proceeded  to  Tsatne's  kfaalf-ji
the  Buffiilo  R.,  the  reaidenee  ^
his  assistant's  father,  who  li  t
Caf&e  chief  of  considerable  ii-
fluence.  A  quantity  of  grooirilBM
since  been  enclosed^  and  il  Ij
course  of  cultivation.  A  good  eoi:
gregation  has  been  collectedi  uj
the  place  of  worship  is,  at  Ham,
full.  In  a  letter  dated  April  ISfj^
1826,  Mr.  B.  thus  states  the
claims  of  Caifireland  to  mtaskmni
efforts  :-t-

'^  A  dense  populAtion,  living  k
the  vicinity  of  a  Christiao  Piotai^
tant  British  x:olony — the  Cafinn
language  perfectly  nndertftood  aaj
spoken,  with  little  variation,  kt
500  m.  along  the  eastern  coaifr^
access  to  the  CafEre  country  firqp
the  colony,  and  a  daily  intevcoiBii^
maintained  between  the  CaflSm
and  the  colonial  frontier — awef^
market  in  the  vicinity  of  the  fron*
tier,  attended  by  the  Cafires  aid
other  tribes  beyond  them — the  sik
perior  local  advantages  of  the
CaHre  countiy,  compared  wltti
other  tracts  of  South  Afirica,  ud
a  free  and  uninterrupted  ii>teir>|  j
course  maintained  between  tiw.
Cafires,  the  Tambookles,  and  soioM
of  the  Mombqokie  tribes.  Ths
population  of  the  Caffres  subject  ,
to  T'Geika,  Hinza,  and  SlamUei;  ^
does  not  probably  amount  to  Um
than  130,000  souls.  The  Tarn-
bookies  may  amount  to  the  same
number ;  and  their  most  distant
kraals  are  not  much  more  than  8001
m.  from  the  colonial  territory.  M
present  there  would  be  no  oljee-
tion  made  by  the  above-mentioned
tribes  to  missionaries  settlii^
amongst  them.

<'  Missions  among  the  Cafflrea
would  form  connecting  linluwith
others  that  may  in  future  be  esta-
blished among  the  Tambookles,
Mombookies,  and  other  tribes^'
But,  perhaps,  the  strongest  rea-
son that,  could  be  adduced  for  in-
creasing the  missionary  stations^hi

116


CAP

■ffnoria,  is  the  success  which  has
tended  tito  feeble  means  ahready

The  Her.  Gottlieb  Frederick
ijMr,  irom  the  university  at
[aJle,  has  recently  been  appointed,
I  consequence  of  these  circum-
Biices>  a  missionary  of  the  society
I  Cafl&Bria.

The  Rev.  Wm.  Shaw,  accom*
mied  hy  other  members  of  the
K  M,  S,,  travelled  through  a  con*
derable  part  of  this  country  in
SS3,  and  the  northward,  to  take
Msession  of  a  place  for  a  mission,
hich  lay  between  the  residence
I  two  chiefs.  Mr.  S.  says,  "  We
(W  as  many  kraals,  or  villages,
ithin  2  m.  of  the  place,  as  must
mtain  a  population  of  at  least
IQP  souls ;  and  this  number  will
mditleas  be  increased  from  other
nte  as  soon  as  the  mission  is  esta-
Jdied."  To  the  station  thus  de-
trmined  on,  the  missionaries  gave
le  name  of  fVesleyville,  in  honour
f  the  founder  of  their  society.  In
iS4»  Mr.  S.  says :— «  The  vUlage
IS  been  laid  out  on  a  regular  phm,
id  the  bouses  are  now  in  progress
'building;  It  will  be  highly  gra-
cing to  see  a  number  of  natives
ring  together  in  decent  cottages,
iitud  of  their  miserable  straw
its ;  this  change  ia  their  houses
ill  imperceptibly- draw  after  it  a
lange  of  habits,  which  is  a  mat-
T.  cu  much  more  consequence.
wo  strong  wattled  and  plastered
Hises,  of  four  rooms  each,  have
sen  finished.  I  am  living  in  one,
id  Mr.  Shepatane  occupies  the
her:  so  that,  compared  with  our
im  residence  in  the  waggon  and
nty  we  are  now  quite  comfort-
ile.  The  Caffires,  both  men  and
omen,  readily  work  for  us  at  any
ling  we  have  for  them  to  do,  re*
ihrhug,  as  their  wages,  6  strings
f  beads  per  day.  A  school-room,
)  feet  by  15,  has  been  com-
lenced,  and  will  probably  be
Dished  by  June ;  when  it  will  be


CAP

used  for  the  double  purpose  of  a
school-room  and  chapel,  until  it
may  appear  desirable  to  c(unmenoe
a  larger  building  for  divine  wmr^
ship.  At  present,  service  is  held
in  ttie  open  air,  and,  when  exces-
sively hot,  which  has  frequently
been  the  case  this  summer^
we  avail  ourselves  of  the  shadow
afforded  by  some  large  spreading
trees."

"  I  am  extremely  anxious  for  the
completion  of  the  school-room,  that
I  may  be  able  to  organize  a  school
for  the  children,  and  such  adults  as
may  be  anxious  to  learn.  This
cannot  be  effected  until  the  build-
ing is  ready.  Many  of  the  chil-
dren have,  however,  learned  the
Alphabet.''

"  A  four  months'  residence  in  a
Pagan  country  hardly  warrants  my
saying  any  thing  as  to  the  direct
e&cts  produced  by  the  preaching
of  the  Gospel ;  and  indeed  it  is  not
at  present  in  my  power  to  speak  of
any  true  conversions:  but  I  may
state,  that  a  considerable  number
of  the  natives  have,  become  regular
hearers. of  the  word;  and  I  trust
that  some  of  them  will  prove  it  to
be  '  the  power  of  God  unto  salva-
tion.' Much  discussion  on  the  sub-
jects spoken  of  by  the  missionaries
has  been  induced ;  many  contend^
ing  for,  and  many  producing  their
ttrcng  reasons  againsty  the  ^  Mk*
wadienkooloo'  (Gxeei  Book).  They
are  generally  very  attentive  and.
decorous  during  service;  and  one
of  the  pleasing  things  which  I
ought  not  to  omit  mentioning,  is,
that  although  in  a  heathen  country,
the  Lord's  day  is  reverenced  and  ob-
served by  the  inhabitants  of  Wesley*
ville  and  its  immediate  vicinity  in  a
most  gratifying  manner.  TMs  is
some  encouragement,  when  it  is
considered  there  was  no  such  day
known,  or  observed,  among  these
people  previously  to  the  commence-
ment of  the  minion  among  them."

"  The  three  biothex  chief  ty  Pttt<s


CAP

Cmgo,  and  Kamay  ard  very  sel-
dom absent  firom  divine  worship.
The  last-named  is  particularly  in-
qnisitive^  very  docile,  and  tells  me
he  often  prays  to  the  Great  God,
that  he  may  be  guided  into  the
truth.  We  have  great  hope  of
this  young  man,  and  should  he  be
truly  converted  to  God,  he  will,  no
doubt,  be  a- very  useful  auxiliary
to  us.  Of  his  wife  we  have  also
great  hope;  she  is  a  daughter  of
Gmka,'*

**  The  obstacles'  with  which  we
have,  to  contend  in  this  mission,
arising  from  the  extreme  Ignorance
and  wickedness  of  the  people,  are
neither  few  nor  small.  In  Eng-
land, books  are  frequently  pub-
lished in  defence  of  what  is  very
falsely  called .  the  religion  of  nO'
ture,  as  opposed  to  the  reiigion  of
ike  Bible.  I  wish  the  authors  of
these  speculations  enjoyed  the  be-
nefit of  merely  a  4  months'  resi-
dence in  Cafireland ;  it  would  give
them  a  melancholy  opportunity  of
beholding  the  folly  and  wretched-
ness of  many  unblessed  with  the
light  of  revelation.  They  would
behold  in  the  Caffires — ^those  '  sim-
ple children  of  nature,'  *who  daily
appear  in  public,  without  shame,
in  a  state  of  complete  nudity,  and
who  profess  no  religion  but  that  of
nature — an  exhibition  of  all  the
grosser  vices.  Here  are  liars,
thieves,  adulterers,  murderers,  (fee,
in  appalling  ^numbers ;  and  not  a
few  who:  will  even  justify  such
things  against  the  contending  mis-
sionary, and  that  without  blush  or
shame."

In  1826,  Mn  Shaw  says,  "The
population  continues  much  the
same  as  that  reported  to.be  re-
siding on  the  station  last  year ;  viz,
about  150  souls.  Besides  these,
there  is  a  considerable  number  of
natives,  who  occasionally  reside
here  for  several  nntonths  at  a  time,
and  who  are  either  employed  in
the  public  works  of  the  station,  or


CAF

in  the  terfiee  of  tlicMe  that  aft
settled  at  the  Inrtitntion.  lta»
are  two  things  which  at
operate  agaiut  any  veiy
able  population  being
a  mission  village :  lal,  the
of  their  feudal  custonaa  aad
tionships;  and.Stf^,  their  Io»-«f
cattle,  and  decided  piedflecttofct'j
grazing  pursuits,  inducing  thMH
live  a  partially  wandering  VHibf^
much  unlike  that  of  the
and  herdsmen  of  patriarchal  tiai^'
as  described  in  the  Book  of  ^
nesis." .  •         ■''■'i

PubUe  ff^orskip^-^'Tb»\
ance  at  public  wordiip  has
on  the  whole,  veiy  encaanifK^
during  the  past  year ;  the  comwi
gations  on  Sabbath  days  hate  ■»,
tuated  between  80  and  9M<pri»
sons,  whose  decorous  befaavioar^ '
divine  service  is  very  remnlGili
considering  that,-  with  moiii
them,  the  wor^ip  of  ^^"Hft
God  was  but  recenfly  a  new  1aa§f
It  is  a  gratifying  circmnstanc^  WN
we  usually  have  a  number  qIj^^
tives  not  belonging  to  the
tion  at  public  wonmip ;  aa^  b^tt4|
means,  we  hope  that  tiie  infieHlt'
of  Christianity  wiU  9ibiUijii,f$
toidely,  extend  itself.  The  ^4
tered  manner  in  which  the  nettvjK
live  along  the  banks  of  tlM
streamlets  that  water  the  comlqi
induces  us  occasionally  to  itineMK
among  the  neighbouring  knd^
for  the  p\^>pose  of  preadiliw  tM
Gospel ; — ^we  are  generally  Send
with  attention,  and  sometimea  Ibid
the  natives  inquisitive  aa  to  .tta
great  truths  revealed  in  tfa^  Socf^
tures ; — at  one  place  (mily  aboik
2  m.  from  the  mission  premJsM)
we  have  always  had  a  congt^ga^
tion  averaging  100  foiillf.  VOx»f
rant  labours  must  always  fons  a
very  necessary  and  important  pvt
of  missionary  work  in  CaflBrelaed*  ■>

"  The  Society 'W9is  formed  about
a  year  ago.  At  the  time  the  mia-
hers  were  reported  to  our  dMrl4


.


CAF

MMktiDg,  it ccHisifted of5  members,
taridet  the  miasion  families;  but
Mi  number  is  increasing,  and  we
Ivpe  much  reason  to  be  satisfied
vith  the  character  and  conduct  of
on  members ;  indeed,  I  am  quite
iflODiahed  at  the  general  pro-
Hletj  and  consistency  of  their  con-
■■ct.  3  adult  natives  have  been
laptiied  on  this  station  during  the
pMt  year]  and  we  have  4  candi-
Mes  for  that  ordinance,  of  whose
^Bceie  belief  in  the  doctrines  of
Christianity  we  have  no  reason  to
tediti  even  though  we  apply  to
Ibtm  the  test  contained  in  the
^fWds  of  the  Saviour,  <  by  their
^■itt  ye  shall  know  them. ' "
•  Tke  Sehool.—**  The  number  of
jcholan  in  OUT  school  is  56:  seve-
nl  of  these  have  passed  over  the
tat  difficiilties,  and  will  shortly  be
•Ue  to  read  with  ease.  Our  best
aqholar  is  Yinganay  a  young  chief
^  this  tribe,  and  brother  to  Paio;
1ft  can  read  with  fluency  any  part
of  the  Spelling-book  published  at
CSmmie.  A  select  number  of  the
gbb  are  taught  to  sew,  and  make
much  improvement  therein;  they
ave  all  taught  to  read  the  Caflre
Ingaage ;  but  such  as  pass  through
the  spelling-book  will  be  also
tangiit  to  read  the  English  lan-
guage. The  school  is  a  very  im-
portint  branch  of  the  work  of  a
ftaiioB  4n  this  country ;  it  is  only
hgr  its  means  that  we  can  indulge  a
lope  of  raising  up  native  ifUer^
pnters,  schoolmasters,  a.nd  preach'
en:  I  am  therefore  greatly  con-
eemed  for  its  welfare  and  effi-
deney;  and  being  myself  unable
to  devote  such  a  portion  of  my  time
to  the  instruction  of  the  scholars,
as  U  indispensable .  for  their  im-
provement, I  have  engaged  a  pious
yoong  man  (D.  Jtoberts,  son  of  a
settler  of  that  name)  as  scfiool'
master;  he  was  trained  up  as  a
scholar,  and  was  afterwards  a
^sacbery  in  our  school  at  Salem^


'/


CAF

sent  him  to  Theopolis,  where
there  is  a  good  school  of  Hottentot
children,  managed  after  the  Bri-
tish system,  in  order  that  he  might
make  himself  acquainted  with  that
method  of  teaching.''

Cultivation. — ''There  are  about
30  acres  of  ground  in  cultivation  on
this  institution,  and  belonging  to
its  inhabitants ;  they  have  just  reajK
edan  abundant  harvest  of-  maize,
and  Guinea  or  Caffre  com.  We
prevailed  on  k  few  of  them  last  sea-
son to  try  the  plough ;  and  the  crops
on  the  ploughed  lands  have  yielded
so  much  better  than  those  cultivated
in  the  native  manner,  that  an-  im-
pression favourable  to  the  plough
appears  to  have  been  made."

Buildings, — "  We  have  erected  2
additional  cottages  on  account  of
the  mission ;  one  is  used  as  a  work-
shop, and  the  other  affords  store-
room, (fee.  Last  year  I  reported
that  tme  of  the  natives  had  built
himself  a  house,  after  the  manner
of  the  colonists.  I  have  now  the
satisfaction  to  state,  that  6  more  of
our  people  have  followed  his  ex-
ample, and  built  themselves  very
strong  and  comfortable  wattled  cot-
tages ;  so  that  the  village  now  con-
sists of  14  houses,  including  the
school-house,  which,  as  before
stated,  is  also  used  as  a  place  of
worship.  Thef  remainder  of  our
people  still  live  in  their  native  huts,
but  the  greater  part  of  them  intend
building  decent  cottages.  The
effort  to  effect  this,  is,  to  them,  a
great  one;  but  as  we  think  it  of
much,  importance,  we  stimulate
and  encourage  their  exertions  of
this  kind  as  much  as  possible.  With
better  and  more  convenient  habita-
tions, a  desire  has  arisen  among  the
people  for  clothing,*  and  other  use-
ful articles  of  civilized  life.''

Another  station  has  been  eom*-
menced  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Kay,  to
which  he  has  g^ven  the  name  of
Coke's  Mow^i  a]idMx.€t^'«^V3l«


CAL

tn  a  letter,  dated  Sept.  1,  1896,
thus  intimntes  the  commencement
of  a  third  : —

**  Having  corresponded  with  my
hrethren,  preparatory  raeasutes  have
been  taken  for  commencing  a  rAM
missionary  circuit  in  Caffireiand.
It  is  proposed  that  my  residence  be
with  ihntza,"who  is  the  principal
ehief  of  CafiVaria,  and  who  is  dis-
poeed  to  give  a  friendly  reception
to  a  messenger  of  peace.  I  shall
be  about  90  m.  in  the  interio'r  be-
yond Wesleyville  and  Mount  Coke ;
the  relative  situation  of  the  3  sta-
tions forming  a  kind  of  triangle.
The  population  is  Itirge,  butscatlier-
ed;  even  those  who  belong  to  the
same  tribe,  or  clan,  do  not  reside  to-
gether ;  but,  being  subdivided  again
into  families,  it  is  seldom  that  more
than  6  or  8  houses,  or  huts,  are
found. in  one  spot.  It  Is  probable,
however,  that  they  Will  unite  to-
gether more  closely  when  mission-
aries dwell  among  them.  Some-
thing of  this  kind  is  now  taking
place  at  Mount  Coke,  for  Brother
K€tp*s  people  are  increasing'  daily.
The  Caffire  mission  is  certainly  one
of  great  promise.  Fruit,  as  well
as  blossoms,  already  begin  to  ap-
pear at  Wesleyville ;  and,  of  Bro-
ther fVilUam  Shaw,  it  may  be  said,
thai  he  lives /or  the  Caffres,  His
whole  heart  is  in  the  mission,  and
his  mind  is  bent  on  one  object  as
the  principal  end  of  his  life — ike
promotion  of  their  temporal,  and
spiritual,  and  eternal  good.

'<  Brother  Kay,  also,  has  reason  to
believe  that'  tujo  of  the  Cafires  at-
tending on  his  ministry  at  Mount
Cc4ce  are  awakened,  and  beginning
to  inquire  earnestly  after  God  our
Saviour."

CALCUtTA,  a  «ity  of  Hin-
doostan,  ^e  emporium  of  Bengal,
tiie  seat  of  the  supreme  govern-
ment of  British  India,  and  the  See
of  a  Bishop,  with  b  citadel  called
JPort  ViUiaaik  It  is  titntted  on  tlie


CAL

left  bank  of  the  Hoogly,  or
arm  Of  the  Oang^  IM  m.
its  mouth,  and  extendi  frsB^lli
W.  point  of  Fbrt  WttliaiB/  ipiiM
rhrery  about  «  m.;  the  hiAdl^^
many  parts,  ia  InconsMeanthltfi'  -OiK
nerally  speaking^  the  flauut|liOilf
one  Indian  city  is  ade«tl^tt«if
all;  being  all  built  on  one  pi%
wiih  very  narrow  '«nd  ■
streets,  interspersed  wMini
reservoirs,  ponds,  and  gtlMib
A  few  of  the  stieeli  ate-^fmA
with  brick.  The  hooMi  ov
variously  built;  some  'witt  Mck,
others  with  mud,  and  «  MM
proportion  with  bamibooe  and  tkti?
these  diffinrent  kinds  oF  tMrn^
intermixed  with  eaeh  eftli0lry<ini
a  motley  appearance.  "1TMB4tf
the  latter  kinds  are  tmoiifa^tf
one  stonr,  and  covered  wHh  flMdA^
those  of  brick  seldom  eOECseed  \m
floors,  and  have  flat  terraced  Mibt
but  these  are  so  thinly  setttlBM
that  flres,  which  often  hngfimtki
not,  sometimes,  meet  with  the  ^
structionof  a  brick  hoose-timilr
the  whole  street.  Bat  CtilesMeV
in  part,  an  exceptioA  tothii  nivtN
building;  for  the  ^oaiter
blted  by  the  Englisfa  fai
entirely  of  brick  lMiilding%
of  which  have  the  appeotaiM-tf
palaces.  The  p^^ukoim'  Ui
been  varioudy  estimated  betntci
500,000  and  1,000,600)  Mkt  tt  hv
been  recently  ascertained^  I9  tt
accurate  enumeration,  that  ilie  le*
sidents  amount  only  to  ITtyflt;
viz.  13,138  nominal  Chrirtiaiis;
48,162  Mahomedans;  12l,sn
Hindoos ;  and  414  Chinese;  b«id0
these,  it  is  estimated  liimt  tfNNrt
100,000  daily  enter  and  deptit
from  the  ci^.  The  iMnAer  of
premises  inhattted  is '  IIT,;01%-^
which    6480    are    upperi^TOoned

houses,  8800  lower-rooiiied  totaW
15,792  tUed  huts,  9mA  n^iM'iitam

huts.

The  oity  U  seid  to  ^  dtawiriig


\


CAL

both  in  wealth  and  population.    In
fli02,  the  population,  including  a
^farcuit  of  20  m.,  was  estimated  at
%^a6,W0.      Unlimited   toleration
li  granted  to  all  forms  of  religion.
Thete  are  three  churches  of  the
wtablishment  of  the  mother  coun-
trf,  one  of  which  is  the  cathedral.
When  are  also  a  Scotch,  a  Portu-
guese, a  Greek,  and  an  Armenian
cimrch,    several   mosques,    many
Htaidoo  temples,  and  aMahomedan
«0ilege.     The-  government-house
i»  a  mofit  superb  edifice  ;  here  are
ttsewiae  a  coiurt  of  justice,  a  town-
iKMMe,  a  custom-house,  and  a  bank.
■'  In  1766,  Calcutta  was  taken  by
Ihe  s6abah  of  Bengal,  who  forced
4ha  feeble  garrison  of  the  old  fort,
i(»  the  amount  of  146  persons,  into
«  anall  prison  called  the  Black
ilQle,  out  of  which  only  23  came
«live  the  next  morning.     It  was
f^taken  the  next  year ;   the  vic-
tory of  Plassey  followed ;  and  the
.^nhninan  soubah  was  deposed,  and
pot  to  death  by  his  successor.    Im-
mediatriy  after  this  victory,   the
'election  of  the  present  Fort  Wil-
ilam  commenced,  which  is  supe-
Hot  in  regularity  and  strength  to
«ny  fort  in  India,  is  supposed  to
Iwve  cost  about  £2,000,000  ster-
lings and  is  capable  of  containing
15j000  men.     No  ship  can  pass
v^out  being  exposed  to  the  fire
of  the  fort,  nor  can  an  enemy  ap-
proach by  land  without  being  dis-
cerned at  the  distance  of  10   or
IS  milesw

Sir  fFiUiam  Jones  instituted
here,  in  1784,  the  Anatic  S,,  de-
signed to  concentrate  all  the  va-
liuible  knowledge,  which  might  be
obtained  in  India.  The  «  Asiatic
Researches''  are  the  productions  of
this  society,  forming  a  noble  and
splendid  monument  of  British
science  in  a  distant  country.

In  1800,  the  Ck>llege  at  Fort  Wil-
liam was  founded  by  the  Marguis
fFeHetby,  to  initiate  the  EngUsh
youth,  wiro  wwe  to  fill  the  different


CAL

departments  of  government,  into
the  languages  of  the  country,  and
also  to  promote  tbe  translation  of
the  Scriptures  into  those  languages'.
Early  in  1601,  Dr.  Carey  was  con-
nected with  the  institution  a^
teacher  of  Bengalee  and  -Sung-
skrita,  with  the  design  of  rendering
it  the  centre  of  all  the  translations
of  Eastern  Asia ;  and  to  facilitate
these  purposes,  in  less  than  5
years,  about  100  learned  men,  from
different  parts  of  India,  Persia,  and
Arabia,  were  attached  to  it;  tbe
translations  of  the  Scriptures  in  7
different  languages  were  in  a  pro-
gressive state,  and  portions  were
printed  in  several.  About  the  close
of  this  period,  the  college  con-
tinued to  afford  important  aid  to
this  benevolent  work,  jretthe  care
of  the  translations  devolved  prin-
cipally upon  the  Baptist  missiona-
ries at  Serampore.

In  1816,  a  Hindoo  college  was
founded.  This  institution  is  re-
markable as  being  the  ilrst  which
has  l)een  projected,  superintended,
and  supported,  by  the  natives,  for
the  instruction  of  their  sons  in  the
English  and  Indian  languages,  and
in  the  literature  and  science  of
Europe  and  Asia.

The  supreme  government  has
resolved  to  establish  and  liberally
endow  another  ifiWoo  college  here,
to  encourage  the  study  of  the
Sungskrita,  and,  through  the  me-
dium of  that  language,  of  general
literature.  It  is  to  be  placed  under
the  superintendence  of  a  committee
of  European  gentlemen.

A  large  sum  having  been  placed  by
the  Society  feir  Propagating  the  GoS'
pel  in  Foreign  Parts  at  the  disposal   .
of  the  Rev.  Dr.  Middleton,  while
bishop  of  Calcutta,  he  established
Bishop's  College,    The  objects  of
this  institution  are  j — 1.  To  prepare
native  and  other  Christian  youths
to  become  preachers,    catechists,
and  schoolmastets  *,    ^.  To  \a«k^
the  elements  oi  \isiei\xV>»vo'«iV^^%^
I      M  \"3Ax


•      ^


CAL

•

and  the  English  laogoage  to  Mm-
sulmen  and  Hindooe ;  3.  To  tram-
late  the  Scriptures^  the  Liturgy,
and  tracts ;  4.  To  receive  EngUsh
missionaries,  sent  out  by  the. so-
ciety, on  their  first  arrival  in  India.

The  supreme  government  was
induced,  in  consequence  of  the
late  Bidiop  Heber's  known  wishes
on  the  subject,  to  malro  a  large
and  extremely  important  addition
to  the  land  already  g^ranted  to  the
college,  rnie  Society  for  the  PrO'
pagatioH  of  the  Ooepel  it  is  under-
st(x>d,  has  given  instnictions  for  the ,
immediate  completion  of  the  build-
ings according  to  their  original
plan,  and  proposes  to  enlarge  them
with  as  little  delay  as  possible,  to
an  extent  which  will  admit  of  the
reception  of  40  students.

The  Society  for  Promoting
Christian  Knowledge  has  increased
the  number  of  scholarships  found-
ed by  it  to  7 ;  and  various  amend-
ments, ,  originally  suggested  by
Bishop  Heber,  have  been  intro-
duced by  the  Society  for  the  Pro^
pagation  of  the  Gospel  into  the
statutes,  from  which  it  is  expected
that  the  funds  and  general  useful-
ness of  the  institution  will  reap
material  advantage.  As  a  resi-
dence for  missionaries  on  their  first
arrival  in  India — as  a  seminary  for
native  preachers  and  catechists —
and  as  a  source  of  accurate  trans-
lations of  the  Scriptures  and  the
Liturgy  into  the  Eastern  lan-
guages,— ibe  college  is  now  in  ef-
fectual operation.  The  attention
of  the  public,  both  in  this  country
and  in  India,  more  especially  of
.that  part. of  it  which  is  employed
in  promoting  Christian  knowledge
according  to  the  principles  of  the
Church  of  JSngland,  is  steadily  di-
rected to  this  quarter;  and  tiiere
appears  every  reason  to  believe,
that  the  day  is  not  far  distant,
when,  in  the  glowing  language  of
its  late  visitor,  '<The  college,  will
pr&fmt  A  ipectftde  illustrionis  to


CAt

f finr  mil  ttin  m nrlil,  mil  thr  mm
and  distinguished  leaaiim^i«rdAf
profeiion  will  mate-  thMMhM
known,  we  will  not  H|r  taMf
Indue  to  the  Omngetf  Im^  -wrMf-
pearancet  now  indfeatSy  ftvttiiJIm^
eaUm  to  the  fiLrthelt  IMIuli
wMch  Mritieh  Biam,  or
or  enterprise,  have  m
accessible  to  iMk"  .v^

The  Rev.  John  Zadt  Kimmmm,
from  the  Society  for  PtwmtiM
Christian  Knowledgo,  In  lTiM»
the  honoured  inftrameiit  i
blishing  the  iliitProteitaai
in  BengaL  After  Uboail«g.<
years  >at  Cqddalorey  li^  ciiini,to
Calcutta,  in  1706$  wh9i«M-ipHit
ed  a  place  of  wonhipy  andlMlA
a  church,  which  was  the  Qii||:Bifr
testant  one  in  .Be%d  ismj00^
^0  years.  About  177S^  tte.«a»^
municants  were  17Z,  mwbam.  IN
were  natives.  In .  me :  two  ,$t^
ceeding  years  89  ware  y«NA
mostly  Hindoos.  Amidgt  mHnMliv
discouragements,  he  o^QftteueMi
witness  many  precious  firnite  ol-tii|l
labours,  till  1787 ;  wlmkMu4kmi
purchased  the  house  fnr  ff  iflfl  iflJiPt
called  it  the  MissionaiyGtaA
and  devoted  it  to  its  erigtoal  Mit»
About  this  time,  the  UmJtSm
Brown,  some  yean  flnt  rCbi|M*
of  the  Presidency  and
the  college  at  Fort  WilUooi,'
other  zealous  efibtts  lQr«.flie:
motion  of.  Christianity  in.
devoted  much  of  his  tUne  iteifte
spiritual  good  of  this  floek^f  |fll
about  1811 ;  when  the  Ror^-X^T.
Thotnason  took  the  dmige^tfed
continued  to  preach  for  nmuy  ymm
in  the  mission  church,  tot*  kHgt
and  respectable  congf^pat|M^ifeteh
raised  a  fund  for  his  tnpfjfOtL     •-(.

About  1815,  the  socMy  riMpwii
its  labottis  in  the  estabUdmnafcoi
English  and  Bengalee  atiaoeia,^  nd
the  circulation  ai  the  «8flri|^nwi
and  tracts,  under  n  dloaoMiii  OQH-
mittee  at  CakuttB,  i»lK)*ie|MifiitQd
disixict   commltteet  •  In  mflbnnl


CAI/

parts  of  India^  by  wiuch  means  its
fadMMis  have  become  extensive  and
efllcient.  Mr.  Fan  GHeken  is
nperintendent  of  the  society's
ptosperous  schools  here.

The  native  schools  in  the  neigh-
hoorhood  of  Caieuita,  which  were
originally  established  by  Bishop
Btiddleton,  have  also  received  a
great  accession  of  strength  from
the  patronage  of  the  late  Bishop  of
Gaicntta:  16  schools  are  now
■aintained  in  that  district,  and
IS80  native  boys  are  receiving  the
Mnswings  of  education,  and  imbibing
principles  of  morality  and  religion.
They,  are  at  present  superintended
by  the  missionaries  residing  in
Bukop's  CoUege ;  and  as  the
Bomber  of  mi^onaries  increase,
ifBd  new  missionary  stations  are
becnpied,  new  schools  will  follow
in  their  train.

•  The  Rev.  Thomtu  Robinson,  se-
cretary to  the  Calcutta  district
eommittee,  states,  "  That  their
BtttiTe  schools  in  Bengal  hold  out
iDOst  encouraging  prospects  of  suc-
9em,  in  converting  the  heathen  to
•or  holy  faith.  I  have  visited  these
•eminaries,''  he  says,  <'  and  am
satisfied  that  no  human  means  can
be  so  effectual  in  sapping  the
loiimdaticms  of  idolatry  as  they  are.
A  beg^ning  has  also  been  made
amdog  the  female  part  of  the  com-
iranity,  on  a  limited  scale,  for
want  of  funds  to  extend  it.  We
leqoire  nothing,^'  he  continues,
*'  but  pecuniary  resources  and  mis-
donaries,  to  assemble  Ihe  whole
youthful  population  of  our  Indian
tillages,  wherever  a  tree  can  aSotd
Its  shade,  or  a  thatched  roof  give
shelter.  You  may  easily  imagine
the  effect  of  a  Christian  system
over  such  plastic  minds,  and  how
impossible  it  is  for  a  superstition,
founded  on.ignorance,  and  abetting
the  most  revolting  cruelties,  to
withstand  the  diffusion  of  light  and
troth.'*
:  While  the  Bi^t.  M.  S.  was  de-


CAL

liberating  on  its  first  efforts,  th0
committee  learned  that  Mr.  John
Thomas,  who  had  been  sevexal
years  in  Bengal,  preaching  the
Go^el  to  the  natives,  was  then  in
London,  endeavouring  to  establish
a  fund  for  a  mission  to  that  coun^
try,  and  that  he  was  desirous,  of
engaging  a  companion  to  return
witii  him  to  the  work.  On  parti-
cular inquiry,  it  appeared  that  Mr.
Thomas,  after  having  embraced
the  Gospel,  under  the  ministry  of
Dr.  Stennet,  went  out,  in  the  year
1783,  as  surgeon  of  the  Oxford
East  Indiaman :  that  while  he  was
in  Beng^,  he  felt  a  desire  to  com-
municate the  Gospel  to  the  natives ;
and  being  encouraged  to  do  so,  by
a  religious  friend,  he  obtained  hiis
discharge  from  the  ship ;  and,  after
learning  the  language,  continued,
from  the  year  1787  till  1791,  preach-
ing Christ  in  different  parts  of  the
country.  -  Of  the  conversion  of
three  persons  he  entertained  hope  ;
two  of  whom  were  brahmins.
Mr.  Thomas  was  accordingly  in-
vited to  join  the  Rev.  Wm.  Carey;
and  having  acceded  to  the  proposal,
he,  with  Mr.  Carey  and  family,
arrived  in  India  in  Nov.  1793.
Severe  trials,  however,  awaited
them.  Their  remittances  failed,
and  they  were  without  support*
Early  in  the  following  year,  Mr.
Carey  accepted  an  invitation  to
take  charge  of  an  Indian  factory  at
Mudnabutty,  200  m.  N.  of  Cal-
cutta, and  Mr.  Thomas  acceded  to
a  similar  appointment  at  Moypaul-
diggy,  16  m.  further  N.  Here
their  means  were  ample;  and  at
the  same  time  they  had  charge  of
several  hundred  Hindoos,  to  whom
they  gave  instruction,  besides
preaching  to  the  natives,  both  at
their  places  of  residence  and  in
various  excursions.

Mr.  Carey's  appointment,  in  1 801 ,
to  an  important  station  in  the  new
college  at  Fort  William,  prepared
the  way  for  the  establishment  of  a


CAL

mission  in  this  city.  In  Jtn.  ISOS,  a
piac6  of  worship  was  opened ;  a  few
only  attended;  perhaps  80.  More
attention  was  shortly  afterwards
awakened.  A  shed  was  taken  in
Lai  Bazar,  in  which  large  con-
gregations assembled  ;  and  in  Jan.
18Q9y  a  new  chapel  was  opened.
In  a  few  weeks  from  that  time,  6
persons  were  baptized ;  others  were
inquiring  the  way  of  salvation ;  and
2  native  missionaries  were  sent  out.

In  1811,  an  auxiliary  B»  S.  was
formed.  Many  persons,  who  had
lived  in  drunkenness,  in  profane
swearing,  and  in  g^ross  impurity,
laid  aside  their  vicious  practices*
Not  a  corner  was  there  in  the
fort  wherein  the  Gospel  had  not
found  a  reception :  indeed,  a
wider  extension  of  truth  took  place
during  this  year  than  in  any  one
preceding.  The  word  of  God
continued  to  prevail,  and  a  con-
siderable number  of  persons,  Eu-
ropeans and  natives,  were  added  to
the  church.  Certain  Hindoos,
condemned  for  an  extensive  rob-
bery, were  visited  in  the  jail  by  a
native  preacher.  They  received
his  attentions  with  gratitude  ;  and
two  «f  them  united  In  a  request
that  he  would  attend  them  to  the
place  of  execution ;  with  which  he
readily  complied.

Among  the  laborious  native
inreachers  at  Calcutta,  Sebuloram
was  particularly  distinguished  for
the  zeal  he  displayed,  and  the  re~
spect  in  which  he  was  held.  On
one  occasion,  in  1812,  he  was
visited  by  nearly  300  persons  at
once,  chiefly  fishermen,  from  a
town  about  30  m.  distant;  who,
having  received  a  book  they  could
not  fully  understand,  came  to^  him
to  have  it  explained.  This  proved
to  be  a  copy  of  the  Scriptures  ;  on
which  he  discoursed  to  them  great
part  of  3  days,  which  was  iho  ex-
tent of  their  visit.

On  Jan.  11th,  1816,  Uie  Rev.
Messrs.  John  Lawsou  and  finstace


CAL

Carey  were  ordaiiied  oo-pMAon  ti

the  church  at  Calcottay   India'

nexion  with  the  senior  brettneBA  ■»

A  new  chapel  was  opened  Sat

English  worship  In  1821 ;  liiB  «■•:
pense,  about  kwoo,  was  mm^
defrayed  by  subscriptions  <B.  Hi
spot<  A  chapel  was  also  eiSBl*
ed  at  the  charge  of  a  pkmi  IHfr
male  servant.  A  benevolent  Ix
stitution,  and  other  schocds  in  cdi-
nexion  with  the  mission,  wete  tm*
ful.  Indications  of  hopcM  mt^
ousness  were  observed  in  naof  si
the  pupils;  and  one,  who  died^  IJf
said  to  have  g^ven  undoubtedevii'
dence  of  conversion  to  God.  Mtk'
ness  and  death  invaded  the  ndf
sionary  brotherhood,  but  othdl
agents  were  raised  up.

That  useful  knowledge  was  mik<
ing  great  progress  at  this  period,  !•
obvious  from  the  following  paaigB
from  a  missionary's  .  joarnid.>—
**  This  morning  asked  my  foadU^
who  has  lately  visited  every  lehool
connecte<l  with  the  Calcutta  Sekmi
Society,  to  examine  its  ptogam^
whether  he  had  witnessed  any  elU
fects  of  the  instruction  now  ^
forded  to  children?  He  feplied^:
*  Yes,  Sir ;  the  efifeets  are  astd^
nishing,  both  among  the  childieri
and  the  parents.  A  few-ttiOBlte
ago,  before  your  books  v^re  iaiiot
duced,  if  I  had  asked  a  boy  -tk-
school  what  was  the  matter  duiiay
the  late  eclipse,  he  wouU  lunv
replied,  that  the  giant  Rahoo
eating  the  moon,  and  would
joined  in  thb  beating  of  drums,  ded;
to  frighten  him,  that  he  mi^  let
go  his  g^asp.  But  now  they  all*
know  better ;  they  see  such  .ar
event  without  alarm,  luiow  it  to  be
produced  by  the  shadow  ol  thif
earth,  and  despise  the  fooHrii  ide^r
and  customs  they  formerly  entail
tained  and  practised.  AfewmontiM
ago,  had  a  snake  bit  a  person,  luf
would  have  dond  nothing  biitimAie«*
diately  call  for  a  priest,  to  repeat  tf
mantra  (at.  incantation)  over  him)


CAL

•Id,  if  the  nake  were  poitonons,  die
iBthe  repetition : — but  now,  as  soon
ei  iie  18  Utten>  he  pate  no  faitii  in
moBtrasy  but  directiy  ties  a  bandage
Offer  the  wound,  and  gets  a  hot
inn  applied  to  bum  out  the  poi-
SDn— «nd  if  he  get  it  done  quickly,
there  is  great  hopes  of  his  reco-
veij,  eTen  though  the  snake  were
pobonous.^  '>

In  1884,  Mr.  Klrkpatrick,  a
yoBOg  man,  had  discovered  such
a^tode  and  inclination  to  the
work,  that  he  was  adopted  as  a
■dnionary;  •  He  was  educated  in
the  Benevolent  Institution,  and
thw  affords  another  striking  proof
of  the  utility  of  those  exertions  that
had  been  made  to  instruct  the  chil-
dren of  the  poor.

-  The  state  of  the  mission  is  thus
described  in  the  last  Report: —
"  The  congregation  in  Lai  Bazar
chapel,  under  the  care  of  Mr.  Ro-
binson, has  beet  gradually  in-
croasiiig,  and  9  persons  have  been
added  to  the  church,  &  of  whom
are  nattres.  Chodron  and  Gora-
chond,  the  native  itinerants,  coo-
tinve  to  labour  as  usual,  nor  are
their  endeavours  without  effect.
■  Respecting  the  church  in  the
Circular  Road  fsay  the  junior  bre-
tloeo,  in  aletter  recently  received),
we  are  happy  to  state  that,  since
thA  death  of  brother  Lawson,  we
have  experienced  a  gracious  revi-
val. The  Spirit  of  God  has  evi-
dently been  poured  out  on  the  con-
gregation. We  have  reason  to  be-
lieve that  it  commenced  with  the
dying  breath  of  our  beloved  bro-
ther. His  solemnly  afiectionate
admonitions  to  some  of  the  young
people  proved  effectual  to  their
conversion.  The  firmness  and
happy  frame  of  mind  with  which
he  encountered  the  last. enemy,
were  gn^eatiy  sanctified  in  reviving
the  drooping  graces  of  several  of
hii  friends.  He  died  as  the  pa-
triarchs, leaving  a  blessing  behind
him.    His  funeral  sermon,  preach*


CAL

ed  by  brother  Yates,  was  also
blessed  to  several;  so  that,  during
the  last  year,  30  have  been  added
to  the  church,  most  of  whom  are
young  people,  from  the  age  of  13
tQ  20.  Several  of  these  are  Por-
tuguese young  men,  who  speak  the
Bengalee  language,  and  who  per-
form, to  a  certain  extent,  the  work
of  missionaries  among  the  heathen,
both  by  their  example  and  faithful
addresses.''

From  the  annual  Report  of  the
Calcutta  JuxiUary  Bapt.  M.  5.,
which  was  held  in  Aug.  1 826,  when
Dr.  Carey  filled  the  chair,  it  appears
that  there  are  4  native  places  of
worship  occupied  by  the  society,
situated  in  the  most  public  places
in  the  city,  and  generally  attended
by  many  hearers.  Mr.  lUrkpatrirk
and  Mr.  Carapiet  are  principally
engaged  in  this  service,  which  not
only  affords  them  an  opportunity  of
preaching  the  Gospel  to  thousands,
but  also  of  distributing  great  num-
bers of  tracts.  Gospels,  and  other
portions  of  the  Scriptures.  On  an
average,  it  is  estimated  that  not
less  tiian  20  native  services  are
held  every  week  in  these  Bungakiw
chapels ;  and  frequently  the  whole
day  is  spent  in  them,  either  in  con-
ducting public  worship,  or  con-
versing familiarly  during  the  inter-
vals with  those  who  remain  for
that  purpose.  3  members  bad
been  admitted  into  the  native
church,  and  a  fourth  was  proposed
for  baptism,  but  was  soon  afterwards
removed  by  death.  The  present
number  in  connexion  with  this  na-
tive society  is  15.

The  Rev.  James  Thomas  renders
assistance  at  the  English  chapel,
while  his  principal  attention  is
devoted  to  the  Mussulman  popu-
lation of  Calcutta,  who  are  com-
puted at  10,000  souls,  without  any
missionary  expressly  engaged  for
their  benefit.  Mr.  Thomas  was
prepared  for  this  branch  of  ser-
vice by  his  acqualulKiiCQ  ^^  ^<^

Al2  \%&


CAL

HMdoottanm,  i^qnirMl  UfaK  hk
left  BpgUnd.

The  Benntltnt  Muilali»!>,  con-
itacted  li;  Mr.  asd  Mn.  Pwnwy,
coctlaues  to'be  b  «iii«e  of  taiKh
booeBt  to  tbe  IndlgcBt  foutb  of
GalcOttA.  Tbe  pra*eiit  ninBher  of
p<ViU  i*  SS%~~nnmBg  wbom  ««
tO'be  fcMnd  EuTopenn*,  Hlndooe,
MmnlniHDi,  PoitDrireiB,  Indo-
BrllaoB,  Cbinne,  Africnu,  ATme-
nlsns,  and  Jews.  Since  tbe  aft*-
Ulihhient  of  lliii  IntitutiOD,  up-
««rd<  of  1000  children  hsTo  been
fostered  underllibeneTOlent  wing,
irtMi  would  otherwlM,  In  all  pra-
bsblUtf,  bme  been  doomed  tn  a
llie  oi  Ignorance,  wntchednen,
■od  Ttce.  Initead  of  Utti,  mutj
of  tbem  are  now  flllinv  leipeetabte
atBtiotu.in  Utt,  wttn  bcnHiDi  to
themselves,  and  snUiIactliu
their  empluyen;  while  In  Knne
there  Is  reason  to  hope  tfact  effect!
lor  more  pleaMng  hare  been  pro-
duced. Two  brotbeit,  who  bad
been  educated  In  tbe  hutltution,
died  leteljr,  testtljlng  their  faith
In  the  Son  of  God,  and  ~  ~
tng  for  their  relttlons,  ti
anil  the  «bole  world.  Nor
)>e  furgottea  that  tbe  QikMtia  Ju-
teniie  SBcietji,  who  are  ■eeJontly
engaged  in  nniductlng  prajer-
meetingi  fromr  boun  to  house,
dlstrlbutiii^  tracts,  and  eetabllshlng
Sabbsth-iebools, .  Is  cMnpoaed  of
.Tonng  men  who  hsTe  been  edu-
cated here.  It  is  gratlf^Dg  Va  add,
that  the  Tslne  of  this  Inttltution  is
eridentl;  B)^reciated  bf  the  pub-
lic and  the  Goremment.  For  se-
vernl  years  past,  a  highly  leipect-
^le  lady  has  prennted  each  girl
ntth  a  gannent,  on  condition  of
ber  making  It  henelf.  The  go-
irenimeat  haTO  also  made  a  gene-
TOQS  danatiQn  of  13,000  rupees,
during  tbe  Tear  lBt6,  In  order  to
liquidate  the  debts  end  repair  the
w^ol-raom  of  tbe  Inmltutlon.


b;  Hr.  PeoroB,  li  >


GAL
tnportant  as  a  raeass  rf'

dil!ii(ing  IntelleGlual,  moral,  ui
rrliitiaui  ttulh.  Besides  maaf
Ihoiuand  tracts  and  school -boeky

riouB   languagei,    and  •  "■■"'

llaneoiu  v --'     -'

there  havi
Commenlnry   on   tbe  RoniBnt  It
Bengalee,  b;- brother  Eustace  CM


1  publications,  in  tip
HfTe,  by  brother  Pearcef-r
many  of  the  Gosp^  W


n  epiloraetf
various  otb*
by  brstMV


noliva  Christine;,  thus  comfortdb
aiipiiorted  by  their  own  labour,  *'
senile  is  held  for  the  benefit  ofaV
the  office  setranls  twice  or  tlnieaJt
week,  which,  it  is  hoped,  m^  Ml
maiif  ofthem  to  an  acquahiuilk
with  Ilie  tnilb  of  the  Go^el,  M
eventually,  under  tbe  dlrlne  UiIp
inp:,  to  en  ejiperience  of  it*  poilSb
A  Corre^onding  Coaniilttet/S
connexion  with  the  P.  At.  S.,  IM
formed  at  Calcutta,  in  ms^>)^
which  the  etTniri  of  that  insHbTlM
in  tbe  N.  of  India  were  entriutlR
£]S0O  per  annum  were  nllowed^t
lUem  by  the  society,  and  tbe  BO-
ropenn  resident;  added  to  this  ttM
several  hundred  pounds.  The  pW
ceedings  of  tbe  comDilMee      ~


ipliin


■d  by  cnnylnff  ii


een  long-biM*


On  the  nh  of  Jane,  inti'mi
Rer.  Hr.  and  Hn.   OiMmmI

and  Mr.  SdiiMtrt  ntM.:riU
weni     glwU;    nM(M«  'bf   «


CAh

iMieA  waiting  their  oouihig.  Tbey
lltM  placed,  pref  tmHfote,  ia  a
bama  jast  purcliaaed  at  Garden
mach,  aboof  4r  m.  below  the  city,
iteve  tbey  were  diligently  em-
ployed in  learning  Bengalee*  Six
nam  yeniQis,  the  frait  of  Mr.
Conie^  mlniitry,  were  pot  under
Mr.  Greenwood's  care,  and  were
■ttBBded  by  Serjeant  M<Cabe,  their
pvotector  and  prorider.

At  Kidderpoie,  a  Tillage  near
Garden  Reach,  a  native  having
giveB  ground  for  the  purpose,  a
Mhool-rDOni  was  erected,  and  a
ftaeber  was  appointed  to  carry  into
dbct  tile  new  system  of  instruc-
tion. .Some  brahmins,  who  wit-
aessed  the  opening  of  the  school,
ttpressed  their  approbation  of  this
^tefflpt  to  diifUae  knowledge.  The
ichool  commenced  with  33  chil-
dieny  but  soon  increased  to  100.
On  -  the  6  native  youths  leaving
Gakotta,  first  to  return  to  Mr.
RobartiBon,  and  finally  to  accom-
paiiy  Mr.  Corrie  to  Benares,  Mr.
Gfieeowood  devoted  more  time  to
tiM  school;  attended  the  Female
Oirpliaii  A^um,  containing  be-
Iwaeii  80  and  30  destitute  children ;
and  was  enabled  to  establish  divine
MTfiee,  in  Englidi,  in  the  large
iHiB  of  tiie  mission-house  every
Smday  morning.

Oh  the  12th  Oct.  1817,  after
llw  fint  discourse  had  been  deli-
veredy  professedly  with  a  mis-
skmary  object,  from  a  pulpit  of  the
established  church  in  India  (which
pfodnced  about  £300),  a  native,
from  BareiUy,  was  baptized  by  the
name  of  Foez  Messeeh,  who  had
been  a  year  under  instruction,  and
had  given  satisfactory  evidence  of
his  stocerity.

The  native,  who  gave  the  ground
for  the  erection  of  the  school  at
Kidderpore,  wished  that  those  boys,
who  should  become  most  proficient
ia  Bengalee,  should  be  taught  Eng-
lish. This  was  attended  to,  and
between  20  and  30  boys  received


CAL

(instraction.  Of  the  state  of  tife
school  Mr.  G.  reports  very  favour^
ably,  under  date  of  Nov.  5,  1817.
In  consequence  of  a  putifiular^
necessity  for  hu  services,  he  soon
after  proceeded  to  Chunar,  and  the
Rev.  Deocar  and  Mrs.  Schmid
were  appointed  to  the  station .  One .
chief  object  of  Mr.  Schmid's  re-
moval from  Madras  was  the  supers
intendence  of  a  periodical  work,
connected  with  the  plans  aad  exer-
tions of  the  society,  to  which  he
had  particularly  applied  his  atten-
tion. About  the  time  of  his  arrival
at  Calcutta,  a  vacancy  occurring  in
the  situation  of  mistress  of  the  Fe-
male Orphan  Asylum,  Mrs.  Schmid
was  appointed  to  that  office,  for
which  she  was  well  fitted.  The
charge  of  the  school  at  Kidderpore,
and  others  lately  opened,  devolved
on  Mr.  Sandys,  son  of  Col.  Sandys,
of  Cornwall,  who  was  both  well-
qualified  and  disposed  for  the  task.
Of  Mr.  Schmid,  the  Correspond-
ing Committee  observe  in  the  fol-
lowing year : — "  His  acquaintance
with  Tamul  has,  in  some  degree,
facilitated  his  Bengalee  studies,  in
which  language  he  has  just  pre-
pared a  useful  school-book. — being
a  collection  of  extracts  of  Holy
Writ,  with  the  corresponding  £ng-
lidi  in  the  opposite  oolumns,— de-
signed, at  once,  to  assist  the  scho-
lar in  his  acquisition  of  Engli^
and  to  enrich  his  mind  with  Efan-
gfelical  truth.''  They  also  remark :
—"The  school  at  Kalee  Ghaut
(one  of  the  4  lately  under  the
charge  of  Mr.  Greenwood)  has
been  transferred  to  the  Diocesan
School  Committee,  in  consequence
of  its  having  been  jud^d  to  fall
most  convenientiy  within  the  line
of  that  committee's  operatioxis.
Of  the  other  3  schools  belonging
to  the  Kidderpore  station,  1  of
them — the  school  erected  on  the
ground  made  over  to  the  com-
mittee by  Colly  Shunker,  a  few
yean  ag<>— has  beeiv  VttoVj  c]haa.<^5it^

\i1


GAL

lata  an  Eog^  sehobl,  at  the  pii>»
tlcular  request  of  CoUy  Shanker  $
wbo  expreoed  his  regret  that  the
fingllsh  language  had  not  been  re*
gularly  taught  at  the  scho(d,  and
handsomely  offered  himself  to  pay
the  monthly  sum  of  \5  sicca  ru-
pees, for  the  support  of  an  English
sahoolmaster.  ■  A  suitable  person
has  been  found,  it  is  hoped,  in  Mr.
Parker,  whq  has  lately  been  put.  in
charge  of  the  schocd.''  On  the
subsequent  removal  of  the  Baboo,
Colly  Shunker,  to  Benares,  the  ex-
pense of  the  school  devolviMi  again
on  the  committee.

About  this  time  H^e  B,  fy  F.  S,
S^,  |n  concert  with  some  members
of  the  Calcutta  S,  &,  then  in  Eng-
land, had  obtained  funds  for  send-
ing out  a  suitable  female  teacher
to  India.  Such  a  person  was  found
in  Miss  Cooke,  whose  services,  on
her  arrival  in  India,  were  surren*
dered  by  her  first  suppcarters,  to  the
Corresponding  Committee,  who
were  extremely  desirous  of  promo-
ting female  education.  The  com-
mencement of  her  exertions  was
singularly  interesting.  While  en-
ga^  in  studying  the  Bengalee
language,  and  scaic^  daring  to
hope  tibat  an  immediate  opening
for  entering  upon  the  wod[  to  which
she  had  devoted  herself  yrould  be
found.  Miss  Cooke  paid  a  visit  to
one  of  the  society's  boys'  schools,
in  order  to  observe  their  pionuncia^
tion.  This  circumstance,  trifling
in  appearance,  led  to  the  establish-
ment of  her  firat  school.  Unaccus-
tomed tp  see  an  European  female  in
that  part  of  the  native  toWn,  a  crowd
collected  round  the  door  of  the
sdiool.  Among  them  was  an  inte-
resting looking  little  girl,  whom  the
school  pundit  drove  away.  Miss
Cooke  desired  the  child  to  be  called,
and,  by  an  interpreter,  asked  her  if
,die  wished  to  learn  to  read  2  She
^ras  told,  in  reply,  that  this  child
had,  for  3  months  past,  been  daily
begging  to  be.  admitted  to  learn  to


A^k^B


-.iv«aM»>of4l>f]


ready  UBDiigiht  boftf

MissC«dw<wlM^lMd

her  purpose  bf  defOttag

the  inftmotkm  of^gfadQ-aniiiiif

tend  4iezt  day,  twMrty  gtiltf  *aai

be  coUeeted.  ■:  ;>'}f«lp

0nthef<mcywh«da^,lflM0a4«ft»
accompanied  by  a  bmti^^MmifH
who  speaks  Bengalee  fliiiiHif^  '     '
tended accoidinj^.  (IhiiBiliJMpi
accompanied,  in  aeteial  mmMIP
their  mothers,  ■nwmhW}^  aaAtjIpp
following  few  p«ittcnl«n:taf«i~
conversation  which  took
them,  will  afibid
the  modes  of  thinkiiig '
among  them.-   Onthifr'
Miss  Cooke's  chrcaoHrtBaoa^
were  told  that  she  had
England  that  tbe
country  were  kept  in  tm^'IpM'
ranee ;  that  thej  wefe-^not lH||^
even  to  read  orwrite'  thai  AmmHh
alone  were  allowed  to
degree  of  knowledge : *tmAJii
also  generally  uadfloniftoody
chief  objectimi ■. toifaahr
knowledge,  arose  £nmb  tMr
no  females  who  would
to  teachthem.  She  hadf
felt  compaadan  foe  tbafar
had  determined  to  Jam:  tar
try,  parents,  friaKiSy  andtaailj.i<Kllfi
advantage,  and  to  cooMrtenfiK  Aiitf
sole  purpose  of  educattof  .-tiiilMpI^^
male  children.  >  fhegr^ -iMitfHIff
voice,criedoat,attitingthalfka9qrti
with  their  right  haadi— <«Oh  L  «Wr «
apeail  of  a  wobmh  is  this  IV-  iii|ili:v
added,  **  She  Jms  glvan  nit  vmf^  •
earthly  expectation  to  eema  iMWf-
and  seeks  not  the  xlehM  of -Ml''
world,  but  to  promote  yoBr.h<gtJaiiir'.
terests.''    '^Ourdiiklranaiasma^i
•^we  ghre  them  to  yon,^  l4|iH|i  *
two  or  three  of  theii:  moHwi.al.-'-
once.    Aftor  a  while>  09a  a4h9^'^
'' What  wiU  be  the  uw  of  ,]anvl«g
to  our  female  chikhran?  awl^xM.
advantage  wiU  it  be  to  them  F?  M
was  told,  that ''  itwiU  anahla.M»
to  be  moie  useiiil;  in  -tMi; AaQlifb'
and  increase  iheif  kMHWttl.W


nUimhehaped,  that  it  wffl  tend
■ho  to  gttln  them  nsptxtf  and  in-
ctwte  the  haHnony  of  families.'''
^  True/'  laid  one  of  them,  "  our
hMmnds  now  look  npon  as  as  litUe
Wtter  than  brutes."  And  another
•ddod»  «  What  benefit  wiU  you  de-
rifB  from  this  work?"  She  ^^as
Wd  that  the  only  retom  we  wished,
WM  iki  promote  their  best  interests
adhq^iness.  "  Then/'  said  the
>  "  I  suppose  this  is  a  hcdy
In  your  si^t^and  well  pleas-
lag  to  God."  As  they  were  not  yet
ilia  to  understand  our  motiTes,.  it
^m  only  said  in  return,  that  <<  God
k  always  well  pleased  that  we
AMdd  lofe  and  do  rood  to  our  fel-
lav-creatures."  The  women  then
ipoke  to  one  another  in  terms  of
the  highest  approbation.

TUad^relopementofMissCooke's
plana  aeems  to  hare  prevented  much
■Bipkiion  from  being  entertained  as
ki  .her  motiTes,  and  the  effects  of
.bar  failercoarse  with  the  children.
fMkms  were  presented  from  time
to  iiimt,  from  different  quarters  of
th»  Mttfe  town ;  so  that  8  schools
ware  soon  established,  and  more
■iBfht  have  been  begun,  had  time
dknrod.  One  instance,  however,
of  ttie- suspicion  with  which  iin-
Mond  minds  are  apt  to  view  dis-
faiteiested  labourS^  for  their  good,  it
Mgr  be  well  to  notice.

The  first 'girl  who  presented  her-
self, alter  baring  attended  daily  for
soiae  wMu,  was  withdrawn ;  and,
aoder  the  pretext  of  goihg  to  a  dis-
tance, was  absent  about  a  fortnight.
Bally  inquiry  being  made  after  her,
the  fktber,  one  day,  presented  a
pqier,  written  in  Engli^,  which  he
teqoired  Miaa  Cooke  to  sign ;  and
proanised,  in  that  case,  to  send  his
tiUkI  to  school  again.  This  proved
to  be  an  agreement,  by  which  Miss
Cooke  traa  required  to  bind  herself
to  lAake  no  claim  upon  the  child
bereafler,  on  the  score  of  educating
beri'and  that  her  parents  should
ke  atiiberty  to  take  her  away  when  1


CAL

theycl^dae.^  MtesCooktiwitii  the
utmost  readiness,  signed  tiie  agrees
ment :  the  child  returned  to  scho^
— nor  has  any  further  intemiption^
except  what  the  ignprance  and  in-
dolence of  the  parents  occasion,
arisen  in  any  quarter.

At  the  time  of  printing  the  fifth
Report,  there  were  2T7  grirls  in  the
10  schools ;  about  200  of  whom
were  in  daily  attendance.

It  is  pleasing  to  add,  that  several
of  the  eider  girls  at  the  Asylum  for
the  Female  Orphans  of  European
parents,  who  haid  given  evidence  of
having  become  truly  pious,  entered^
with  gladness  of  heart,  on  the  study
of  Bengalee,  in  order  that>  under
Miss  Cooke's  instructions,  they
might  be  prepared  to  act  as  teacherrt
in  the  female  schools.  'Other
schools  for  boys  were  opened,  and
the  various  means  of  usefulness  were
plied  with  great  activity.  The.
visits  of  the  Marehioness  of  Hast-
ings to  the  female  schools  seem  to
have  been  attended  with  happy  re-
sults. <<  Certain  it  is,"  4say  the
committee,  "  that  since  her  Lady-
ship's visit,  the  mistress  of  the  JShy-
am  bazaar  school  (the  only  femide
teacher  that  could  at  first  be  found)
has  been  called  to  instruct  a  re-
f^>ecteble  brahminee,  a  widow,  with
3  other  adult  females,  at  her  own
house,  during  the  hours  not  occi»-
pied  in  the  school :  and  this  w^
dowed  brahminee,  though  herself
still  a  learner,  attends  daily  at  the
house  of  a  brahmin  to  instruct  hia
two  daughters."

On  the  28th  of  August,  1823,
an  auxiliary  M,  S.  was  formed,
and  3000  rupees  contributed ;  and
a  Ladies'  5.  for  the  promotion  of
female  education  was  subsequently
estid)lished,  under  the  patronage  of
Lady  Amherst.  The  total  number
of  publications  reported  the  follow-
ing year,  as*  issued  from  the  so-
ciety's press,  was  55,200.

From  the  last  Report,  the  following
particulaii  are  extiB»\«A' — TI^^


CAL

temlli  of  Bidiop  Hebcur  pioduced  an
iniprenion  hinily  hoooiirable  to  his
diaracter andiiiefiilneis.  At Cal-
Mta,  it  VfBB  determined  to  erect
a  monument  in  tlie  cathedral,  'and
to  appropriate  any  surplus  in  the
ftind  to  the  founding  of  **  Heber
scholarships"  In  Bisbop's  C<dlege.
The  sum  of  8800  rupees  was  sub-
esribed.  The  committee  also,
wishing  to  perpetuate  the  memory
of  their  regard  to  the  late  Bishop,
hare  directed  the  founding  of  S
scholanhips  in  Bishop's  College  to
bea^  his  name.  The  society,  at  itr-
annual  meetings,  having  repeatedly
sanctioned  the  yearty  appropriation,
lo  long  as  the  state  of  the  funds
would  allow,  of  the  sum  of  £1000
to  the  use  oif  Bhihop's  College,  the
committee  have  acted  on  that
authority ;  and  have,  at  the  proper
aaasons,  voted  the  sidd  sum  for  the
yners  1889, 1823,  1884,  and  1886
yespectively.  In  voting  the  grant
for  J820,  which  was  done  unani-
nously,  at  the  mon^y  meeting  of
the  committee,  on  the  11th  of
Qec,  the  committee  have  request-
ed the  conmiittee  of  the  Calcutte
anxiliary  to  appropriate  the  said
grant,  in  conjunction  with  such  a
portion  of  former  grants  as  may  be
requisite  for  the  purpose  of  form-
ing 2  theological  scholardiips  in
Bishop's  College,  to  bear  the  name
of  "  Bishop  Heber's  Church  Mis-
sionary Scholarships."  A  special
meeting  of  the  committee  was  held
at  Freemason's  Tavern  on  the  16th
of  Dec.  1826,  when  the  minutes  of
the  previous  meeting,  relative  to
"UMs  subject,  were  coniirmed.  Re-
xdutions  were  passed,  expressive  of
the  feelings  of  the  committee  oc-
casioned by  the  death  of  Bishop
Heber,  and  of  their  conviction  of
the  inadequacy  of  one  bishop  to  the
due  discharge  of  the  duties  of  so
vast  a- diocese ;  and  a  memorial  to
government  agreed  on  for  the  ap-

Etintmeiitof  more  than  one  pra-
te to  this  aidiKntt  stetion.


CAI,


AnoBff  Hm
eanse^  of  reUgioB '  iMia
India,  tt  Is  Impoiribto  to
that  which  has  bam
the  departure  of  tbvlriad
oos  friend  of  the
T.Thomason.  .'    ^•'..*?«^l

The.seoond  amiifenHyt  «tf
Ckbmtia  C.  M.  Ji^
the  old  church-TOOtoiOB  tkt
Ing  of  the  9tfa  of  Dae.;
lamented  Bishop  tetha  cMn  «i
receipts  of  the  Id  yaar
8686  rupees,  and  tba
8693.    The  annual
preached  fas  the  aocialfy  at
dinrch,on  Whitnodi^y
800  nqiees  were
anmial  meeting
86tii  of  Mqr,  and
600  rupees  made.

tht  Rev.  John  ThaoBUte
ehardt,aiklMr8.RefclnMly«V
Rev.  Isaac  Wilion,  ata
diately  conneeted  wHb.tti^
oljects  of  the  mlMloai  alill<iigj
Wilson  (late  MIh  CooloB)^«IIMf
to  the  native  femalOMlMsl ifiW
ment ;  and  the  Rev.  'Dcoom
and  Mrs.  SchmijLhwm  thai  g  ■
tettdenee  of  the  MtateOnhanypi
lum.  The  conmalttaa  baviwMfr
unaUatoiend  out  ^waMtimft^
son  to  aoccead  Mr.  Bnm^^ib
printer,  Mr.  Reichaidt»  wl»«#ftf
ducts  that  department  In  aiM|i»
to  his  other  duties;  ii  at  pieMMK
sistedbyMr.deRoaarla.  -      «-:ii'^

An  idea  may  ba  fonaaJ  al4b.
extent  of  Its  opaAttoiH-  h6m  '"
following

1884,  to  Feb.  1886^
printed  68  diAtent
forming  a  total  of  IttiiM
these* works  were  > of
from  a  tract  of  4  paga%  to-
of  438;  and  the  edtttaw
from  80  copies  to  0000»
duced  a  totil  of  neariyMMUNNf
pages :  of  these  pagesy'  novatjte
one-half  coaristed  af  ilBgl»'«tai»r'
pels,  the  Acts,  and  iha  baak'sif
Isaiah,-Mnted  te  Iba  AMr  A;


CAL

iiMzly  one-twdftbof  the  whole  were
iat  other  societies  and  indlTiduals^;
9fA  the  remainder  were  printed  for
the  ese  of  the  society's  missions,
f .  The    Calcutta  Committee  thus
ipeak  of  the  missionaries'  labours : — •
H  <'  The  ReT.  Mr.  Wilson  and  the
■Ber*  Mr.  Reichiurdt  are  each  oc-
'npied  3  or  4  OTenings  in  the  week^
in  preaching   to  and   conversing
'^iMi  sudi  as  choose  to  attend  in
fte  bungalow  chapels  of  the  so-
ckiy ;  pf  which  there  are  2  in  the
JMtive  town,  distant  nearly  2  m.
Ahd  each  other.    The  attendance
it  these  places  is  very  encouraging,
Jometimes  amounting  to  200  per-
HBs  end  upward,  but  usually  from
10  to  80;    many  of  these   stay
during  the  whole  time  of  divine
mvice.     Some  prepare  questions
in  writing  at  home,  and  apply  to
■the  BiisiionarieB  for  answers :  these
qoettions  relate  chiefly  to  the  pep-
m  of  Christy  the  nature  of  the
4ihiifltian  religion,  and  what  would
.be.  required  of  them  on  their  be-
eoning  Christians.    Some  will  oc-
■eaikMuilly  debate  for  a  long  while
4111  controverted  points  of  difference
between    Christianily    and    Hin-
do^sm,  which  generally  ends  in
'their  being  left  without  any  plau-
iflile  objection  to  the  truth ;  and
tbey  conclude  the  argument  with
i^^ig  —  *  Let   the   Baboos   and
Pundits  first  embrace  Christianity,
•then  all  the  other  castes  will  fol-
low.'"

.  Besides  the  chapels  at  Mirza-
pore  and  Potuldunga,  Mr.  Rei-
cfaardt  writes,  in  June : —

f<  Another  chapel  has  lately  been
erected  in  Semlya,  in  a  very  eli-
.giUe  spot.     We   opened  it  only
.  about  a  month  ago,  and  have  hi-
therto had  an  attendance  of  from
■  100  to  200  hearers,  who  generally
stay  to  hear  during  the  whole  time
oi  the  service.     The  chapel  will
hold  300  persons ;  and,  as  numbers
of  the  people  constantly  pass  by^


CAL

and  many  Hindoos  live  around,  a
numerous  attendance  is  secured."

Of  the  services  at  Mirzapore,
Mr.  Wilson  writes : —

**  Our  little  chapel  at  Mirzapore
has  been  a  great  convenience  and
comfort  to  the  few  native  Chris-
tians whom  we  have  collected
about  us.  There  are  now  residing
with  us  8  Christian  families;
making,  in  all,  18  baptized  adults
and  8  chUdren.  Within  the  last
12  months,  16  persons  have  been
baptized ;  of  whom  8  were  adults,
and  7  children."

**  The  missionaries  express  the
encouragement  which  they  derfv«
from  the  present  aspect  of  things,
and  the  spirit  of  inquiry  which  the
heathen  are  beginning,  in  some
degree,  to  manifest.  With  these
encouraging  circumstances,  how-
ever, they  are  not.forgetful  of  the
difficulties  with  which  their  work
is  attended."

''  There  are,  in  connexion  with
this  station,  1  English  and  13  na^
tive  schools:  the  native  schools
contain  812  scholars."

Of  the  boys  in  the  native  schools,
the  committee  report : —

''  They  are  instructed  in  all  the
elementary  books  published  by  the
School  Book  S.;  besides  whicfa^
they  read  portions  of  the  Chris-
tian Scriptures,  and  are  instructed
in  a  catechism,  compiled  by  the
Rev.  Mr.  Reichardt,  on  the  Evi-
dences and  principal  subjects  of'
Christianity.  This  they  commit
to  memory  with  the  utmost  readi-
ness ;  and  answer,  on  examination,
to  the  questions,  with  a  precision
which  would  do  credit  to  any
Christian  institution."

The  English  school  is  thus  spoken
of  by  the  committee,  in  their  last
report : —

<<  In  addition  to  the  13  Ben-
galee schools,  the  English  school
on  the  sociely's  premises  continues
to  be  reguiaily  a.Ueiiifi^>s^  «)w»aX


CAL

SOjroDtlUi  Bmong  IbateUe  6im-
Uve  CbriftioD  bi^  whoM  «tteii-
itenM  bBldg  mow  Kgular,  ibej
make  neiter  piogMM  than  Uw
otbei  Kholai^  both  In  tlwlr  Ben-
galee tnd  Enijiih  itodlM."

"  Tbe  committee  of  tbe  auxt-
llaiy  tM*e  It  In  view  to  ertabUih  a
■cbool  for  the  InirtiuctloB  of  the
mlnlODailas'  chtUren ;  and  alao  for
tbe  education  of  poor  natire  diU-
dren,  preaervlng  tbeli  utual  habit!
in  reipect  of  food.  In  order  to  their
being  apprentleed  out  to  booie-
holdei!  who  will  watch'oter  them  j
alid  thus  tber  hope  to  raise  a  race,
of  trustwoiUlf   and  piou*  oatln

With  reiereoee  to  natlTB  female
educatloa,  the  committee  erf  the
'LaJiet'  S.  lemaik  i —

"The  lubject  of  DatlTe  female
education  In  this  coontt;  1>  be-
oomlni  Incieadngly  popalu  among
sL  TBnka  of  •oele^,  and  ii  erldentl;
gaining  laptd  acCniloiuof  ttrength,
l^oth  from  tbe  wisdom  and  leal  Mth
vhlcb  Its  plant  aie  executed,  and
from  the  Incieaie  of  11a  fundi,
wlilcb  are  annually  augmented  b^
the  geneioni  contrlbutloili  of  Eu-
ropean! and  natlTe  gentlemen."

■■  We  look  opcm'  facta  a!  nnap-
swerable  w^tfwA  Id  the  cawe  of
truth;  end  to  fecti  we  can  now
appetd,  Bx  far  aa  the  work  of  fe-
male education,  under  tbe  care  of
the  Ladies'  S.,  i»  concerned.  Mra.
Wilfon  commenced,  her  labours
under  tbe  patronage  of  ibe  C.  M,
S.,  in  ^e  ;ear  HaS.  Durfaig  tbe
fint  ^ear,  8  icbocJt  wpre  opened,
containing  SOO  children ;  In  tbe
teeaad  year,  tbey  had  Increaied  to
aboie  300;  dnrlJig  tbe  thlid,  the
niunber  of  children  wak  about  fiOO;
when  the  Ladiii'  S.  was  founded,
and  Mrs.  Wtlion  was  joined  In  her
'  lahoon  by  Mr^.  Jetter,  wbo  li  now
Id  Gogland;  and'tbortly  after  by
Ht«.  Ariebardt.  .  Thai,  In  the
9Ka^4>Mnf  aboMAM  natttv.


CAL

Female!  bave  been  broiigbt  undal.

made   fair   pcogrea!    in    reading
wriUnf),  and  needle'tcork."

"  The  aeparale  fund,  whicbJwi
been  opened  by  the  aoc^laty^.d
support  of  the  oalivB  f
cnlion  in  India,  amoun
£\HO<i:  of  tbt!  sum,  upwudal^
£4UU  has  been  produced  1^  aiflM
of  Isdiei'  work.  The  opeuu'4
tills  fund,  by  a  grant  of  £dO0  fin*
the  society,  eucouragedlheXodi*^
S.    to   begin   f  ^    .      .    .

For  tbis  object,  13,000  ropeeibaM
bt'un  raised:  of  these,  S^S"
nipi^HS  have  been  cootiibnted  b]
uatlre  rnjab,  Budioatb  itcTf
18,000  have  been  raised  by  KB
exertions  of  the  ladies  ;  and  Hm
remaining  jOOO  by  tbe  socie^V
granl.  Of  tlie  sum  thus  ntrr.
S0,000  rupees  were  applied  to4t
purchase  of  the  gropod,  and  4*
remainder  appropriated  totbe'|»
quisite  buildings.  Tbe  fbuadftta^
stone  was  laid  on  the  IBtb  of-Uql.
hj-  the  lady  of  the  GomTBaffle
uerni;  nod  solemn  prayer  waiidf-
(ered  by  the  Archdeacon  of  CM-
culla  for  tbe  divine  hiesiiitg.  Maw
natlfes,  particularly  women  aid
their  dauifhteis,  wereprefent  T
liberal  benelaclor  of  tbe  sobl
Budlnath  Roy,  addressed  Li
Amherst,  through  bis  lnteipTat„,
in  terms  of  deep  gratitude  folifa
cibligatton  bestowed  on  hli  ooo^
trj-women,  and  congratulated  hat
ladjship,  and  tbe  other  lodlec  "~
tbe  success  attending  their  a

Tbe  nmnber  of  school!  I*

skited  by  Mrs.  Wilson,  in  Feb.:-v-

"  I'be  society  supports  30»cbMli^

'perlntendeali


wan  schools,  12  tn  number,

tbe  superintendence  of  Mrs.  Stl-
rowne,  at  a  mon-Uily  cost  of  lit
rupees.     Tbe  Ladif


CAL

has  7  schools,  which  will  be  in-
creased to  10.''

'    Tlie  demand  for  tracts  is  thus
noticed  by  Mr.  Reichardt : —

''  After  addressing  the  natives,
tracts  are  distributed  to  those  who
•re  desirous  to  obtain  them.  The
eagerness  for  them  is  sometimes
^olte  overwhelming  —  a  hundred
hands  lifted  up  at  an  instant ;
•while  one  cries,  '  I  will  have  a
book :'  another,  '  I  can  read ;  let
■e  have  one:'  another,  '  I  wish
til  get  one  for  my  brother,  who
wHl  read  it  to  me  :'  thus,  60,  80,
|00,  or  more  tracts  are  occasionally
Attributed."

The  committee  further  state,
fhat  on  the  society's  premises  a
Puekah  chapel  is  now  erecting  for
the  use  of  the  missionary  establish-
■kent  and  the  neighbourhood.  This
neasure  received  the  sanction  of
Bishop  Heber ;  who,  at  the  second
annual  meeting  of  the  C,  M,  A,,
appropriated  to  this  object  the  sum
et  1000  rupees,  from  a  fund  placed
at  his  disposal  by  the  Society  for
Promoting  Christian  Knmoledge.
About  1500  rupees,  in  addition,
were  subscribed  at  the  nneeting.
'  In  the  year  1798,  the  Rev.  Mr.
ForR3rth  was  sent  to  Calcutta,  under
the  patronage  of  the  L,  M,  S.
He  preached  for  several  years
•very  Sunday  at  Chinsurah,  where
he  resided,  and  also  at  Calcutta,
where  he  had  the  use  of  a  large
ehapei  open  to  all  denominations
of  Christians.

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Townley  and
Keith  arrived  at  Calcutta  in  Sept.
1816,  and,  at  an  early  period,  began
to  preach,  in  Bengalee,  the  Gospel
of  God.  To  their  own  country-
men also  they  proclaimed  the  truth
with  acceptance  and  success.  They
likewise  opened  a  place  for  preach*
ing  at  Howrah,  on  the  other  side
the  R.  Hoogley,  where  the  at-
tendance was  good.  Agreeably  to
their  instructions,  they  were  active
In  the  estabUshment   of  schools, ,


CAL

•

Mr.  Townley  built  a  school-room
at  Calcutta,  capable  of  accommo-
dating about  100  children,  and
Mr.  Keith  engaged  a  poojah-house,
(a  place  for  pagan  worship),  for
another.  A  Sunday-school  was
also  commenced,  in  which  the
children  learnt  the  catechism,  and
at  which  some  of  their  parents  at-
tended.

In  1817,  a  School  Book  S.  yfM
established,  principally  for  the
supply  of  native  schools,  as  was  also
the  Calcutta  School  S,,  the  design
of  which  is,  to  improve  existing
schools,  and  to  establish  and  sup-
port any  further  schools  and  semi-
naries which  may  be  requisite ;
with  a  view  to  a  more  general  dif-
fusion of  Icnowledge  among  the  in-
habitants of  India,  of  every  descrip-
tion, especially  within  the  pro-
vinces subject  to  the  presidency  of
Fort  William.  The  missionaries
were  exceedingly  active  in  distri-
buting Scripture  and  evangelical
tracts  among  the  people ;  and  to
assist  them  in  doing  this,  a  printer
(Mr.  Gogerly)  and  printing  ma-
terials were  sent  to  Calcutta.

The  erection  of  a  spacious  and
commodious  chapel,  to  be  called
Union  Chapel^  was  contemplated
in  1818,  towards  which  the  sum
of  14,000  sicca  rupees  (about
£1160  sterling)  had  been  sub-
scribed 'y  exclusive  of  which,  the
sum  of  2200' sicca  rupees  (or  £275)
had  been  contributed  in  support  of
public  worship.  The  Bengal  A,
M,  5.  produced,  in  2  years,  2400
sicca  rupees  (or  about  £300).  The
total  sum,  in  sterling  money,  con-
tributed at  Calcutta  for  religious
purposes,  and  received  by  Messrs.
Townley  and  Keith,  up  to  Aug.
1818  (/.  e,  in  less  than  2  years),
amounted  to  upwards  of  £230Q.

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Hampson  and
Trawin  arrived,  with  their  wives,
at  Calcutta,  Feb.  8th,  18)9;  but,
a  few  months  after,  Mrs.  H.  was
removed  by  deatli.    In  Vicie  Qi^>^^^


, ».TDwn-

.  .   ._    Ji  ocoHpled  a  n<v  ■(»

tioo,  cdted  n%  Otrngt,  sttuttd
ahout  4  «.  ftoM  the  •oattms
bomdaiyaf  flwd^,  la  Uw  ulM
of  ta  azbcaMlr  yopnlou*  iwl|^
bourlnod.  !■  s  clMoit  of  atnirt
20  m.,  rMkoDlngSD.  bomTalljr
Gunxe  in  «11  dlmettiHii^  K  b  cal-
culated tut  there  are  not  len  titaa
lOa,CiM  Moli.  Mean.  Tonnler
and  Eeltti  had  cmtfaniad  tb  *Ut
tbii  place  mtO  the  ralnt  act  In,
ud  to  pieaeh  aUaiBatel;,  aonM-
tUne*  not  only  to  attMtim  bat  ta


B  boUt  hen,  and  SpAr.M  chtt-


dren  attaodad,  who  vtl«'iwi«tlt  t

-   'leSd^oiM.    AKeBtfeaw

of  Calcotta  kMlf  sceooimolBte


read  the  S.


th^  biathna  with ,

brickJipwa,  wblcta  the;  wcie  fat-
ffllttad  ta  oequpf  foi  3  ^eui,  with-
out pa;  mant  U  rant

' "M  i^  the  urlnl  of

B  and  Tmwln,  n-


ilntiog  that  i«Bi,  tbi' mlnionarin
had  dented  tbemelTti  nvon'  ex>
cjiuin^  to  tita  pfeacUng  of  th«
Qov^  aoMiiB  file  heathen.  Thqi
e.irtaUiihed  fcr  that  imrpaaa,  U
(t&tt^n^  at  each  of  which  ther
pmphed  In  Bengalee  opce  eteir
week.  The  laigaat  bungalow
chapel  for  natiTe  wcidiip.  erected
bj:  a  meqibai  of  the  Enallih  ea»-
gragattao,  andpnaentcd  bv  him  to
Oe  BmgalA.  M.  A,  to  the  nte
oflbtmmo^  l^aitBatcdatJEM.


dtrptre.  It  was  opened  on  Uk
AtS  of  March,  \hM,  when  ibovt
IM  luiUves  altemteij  the  lenln
tinoiijfhQut.

i^r  the  (|)ol  nf  giCHUld  on  wUeb
another  bungojaw  chapel  wu  bnil^
the  brt^lhreii  were  inJebted  ki  0*
kind  iiiilueiice  of  B  very  einiBeal
naUie,  a  bnihmln.  The  imi[iTletV
of  thEi  ground,  who  wa<  dn  I
bnhhiiii,  had  more  than  oDceifr
tended  Urn  chnpal,  and,  at  Ow  eoa-
clarion  oC  one  of  the  strvies,  m
far  BKiireu^d  bh  approbntioa  w  W
mj,  "  that  be  deemed  it  a  gpod
w«lt  to  iiuinl  out  to  bit  cwuiliy"
men  the  deliuion  of  wonhliipu
ideti,  and  bowing  down  to  jn
n4tlcfa  cannot  aave."  •*

Divine  wtnthip,  in  Englithiirf
nsnloriy  held  at  the  Free  Mwiii
Mdge,  whicb  continued  to  be  ^h
tnltMuly  aSbrdeil  to  the  mMW
twlca  eiery  Subliatii  daj.  In  JV
monlni;,  aboul  1:^0  asHimbledi  k
the  eiening,  about  140.  Tm
chureh  coDBisted  of  ^loiit  30  ma/t
ben,  who  u-aiked  worthy  af  thefl
hoty  vocation.  Every  SaUaNl
monUng,  children  of  all  denodM
nations,   whose  parents  were  Ak


ne  placVf  in.>itjucted
ilatof  ChrlsliBOjty.
A  prIiitinK-itrBss  was  eitabUi


louiS,


I  wttb  the  niiEflfiuHiHi
and  was  placed  Ufli^t-

—    .mmedlBte   niperinlaw'

daaac  of  thu  /tengi  ■   '   -


and  J.  B.  Wantafi
heir  wives,  atCMW^J


^•^m,      DIVCU     OLD,      IBX4.  OOv     I

Tnwfa),  ahorily  after,  remBvad.lK^
Sidfaipore  wUh  hii  fnailty,  TMb  1
oatin  ufaoalB  p^ually  IndeaWw"
and  one  for  natlve^femalee,  wM^t


CAL

^Ifccoii'nteaaiiced  b)r  tb»  bnhmtiis,
as  being  contrary  to  the  institutes
of  Menov.     To  assist  infuither-
ing  this  ol^act,  the  Af.  S.  placed
at    the    disposal   of   Mr.  Town-
leiT)  the  sum  of  1000  sicca  rupees.
An  4DStitutioD,  called  the  Chris-
tian JScA6ol  S.,  was  also  formed  at
Calcttttfty  the  object  of  which  is,
t»  itttiodiice  Christian  instruction
into    tiM    indigenous,   or    native,
sehoolsy  under  the  entire  manage-
nent  of  native  schoolmasters.

A  Bethel  S.  was  established  at
Gslcntta,  in  connexion  with  the
B*ptist  bretiiten    who  reside   aj;
Imaipore    and  Calcutta,  in  the
«me  year ;  as  was  also  an  auxiliary
A.  A,    The  station,  however,  was
I      lalled  to  suffer  a  severe  loss  in  the
^      lOHMivsl  of  Mr.  Townley,  on  ac-
k      tioant  of  health,  first  to  Chinsurah,
I       4ad  «fierwards  to  England.
.  In  1 823  and  1 824,  success  accom-

I  ptnied  the  various  efforts  of  the  mis-
dimaries.  Union  Chapel  was  well
Attended,  sad  Mr.  HiU  was  dili-
gent  in  tiie  discharge  of  his  duties
as  {kastor  of  the  infant  church.
The  Sabbath  school  was  in  a  pros-
^Mons  state.  Bengalee  preaching
was  continued  at  the  bungalow
chapel,  Mtrzugfore,  opened  some
time  before,  and  the  school  at  that
place  was  under  the  superinten-
dence of  Mrs.  Warden.  A  bun-
galow chapel  had  been  erected  for
divine  worship  in  the  native  lan-
gOBge,  on  the  main  road  of  Bho-
ptm^^tte.  The  station  at  Tally
GfUsSfe  was  occupied  for  some  time,
Ittt  was  afterwards  vacated  at  the
n^pisg^f  And  in  favour  of,  the  Dio-
6enn  Committee.  At  Kidderpore,
Mir.  Trawin's  prospects  were  be-^
sotting  daily  more  interesting  and
ettconmgingk  A  cluipel  had  been
erected,  nearly  the  whole  sum  for
which  (^KNit  £400)  had  been  sub-
serfbed.  A  Sabbatti  adult  school
Wd  been  commenced,  composed  of
the  workmen  of  s  gentleman  at
ULidderpore.    A  native  school  for


CAL

boys,  snd  another  for  girls,  had
been  commenced  at  ChitSih,  a  few
miles  from  Kidderpore.  At  NoufU'
iee,  a  village  near  Chittah,  a  na-
tive girls'  school  had  been  com-
menced, called  the  Irvine  Female
School.  A  native  boys' school  had
been  opened  at  BeeUbab,  a  large
village  situated  about  3  m.  S*  of
Kidderpore,  under  circumstances  of
extraordinary  promise.  The  vil-
lage, which  is  very  populous,  is
situated  in  the  midst  of  several
other  villages,  and  is  inhabited
chiefly  by  brahmins.  One  of  these>
a  respectable  and  wealthy  indivi-
dual, named  Haldam,  publicly
countenanced  the  school;  and  of
the  100  boys  which  composed  it^
he  was  instrumental  in  placing  80
under  instruction.

In  the  summer  of  1 823,Mr.TraWi  A
performed  a  tour  in  Bengal,  for  the
purpose  of  conversing  with  the  na-
tives on  religious  subjects,  preach-
ing, and  distributing  tracts.  And  in
Dec.  of  the  same  year,  Mr.  Trawin,
accompanied  by  Messrs.  Hill  and
Warden,  proceeded  as  far  as
Gour,  the  ancient  capital  of  Ben-
gal. At  some  of  the  places  visited
in  the  course  of  the  Journey,  the
people  remembered  the  illustra-
tions used  by  the  brethren  in  con-
versations on  a  former  tour,  and
requested  that  one  of  their  number
might  remain  among  them,  as  a
misisionary.

The  proceeds  of  the  Benffai  A.
M.  S.  for  the  year  ending  31st
Dec,  1828,  were,

S.R.  3313  8  6
Calcutta  Ladies'  Br,  S,  818  4  0
Chinsurah ....  do 667  0  0

The  Rev.  Mt.  and  Miss  Pifiard
reached  Calcutta  at .  the  close  of
1825,  and  found  the  various  means
of  religious  instruction  vigorously
employed.  In  addition  to  those  al-
ready mentioned,  a  new  station  at
JfFetlesleystreef  had  been  taken,  a
bungalow  had  beei\  et^cVft^,  ^bA-*.
schfiKol  cOttkmenoed  foi\w^iSc^  iKWft,


CAL

The  bnngilow  wai  opODed  tor
'  wonbipinBenfcalu,  on  Uw  3Ttli
Jan.  Ui6,  ojid  the  natlTei  lliteaed
tollu  Goipel  -wltfa  (tttsntlon,  and
the  appeanuice,  at  leait,  of  oppio-
baUoQ.  Mr.  and  Mitt  PifTard  took
njtUMli  tMldence  at  KIdderpoTe,
•nd  pMiceeded  to  establlib  addi-
tional aehoDli  (or  the  benefit  of  tbe
natlTe  pt^ulatloo.  Tbe  total  j
bar  of  native  couMrti  baptized  at
Klddeipore,  all  of  tb'em  (rulta  of
Mr.  TrawlQ'a  miniatry,  woi  fl.
The  native  convert,  Rtuuharree,
bad  alao  entered  Into  regular  ea)>
plof  at  tfab  itsUon.

On  the  eth  Jan.  1836,  Mr.
Warden  departed  thli  lite.  It
being  hia  eatnnt  dedre  tbat  Mti.
W.  mlf^t,  aTlei  his  decease,  con-
tinue in  India,  and  exerl  berielf
In  promoting  native  female  e<
tlon,  she  removed,  iliortl;  afhtr
the  melmchoi;  event,  to  Berham-
pore,  to  anUt  Mn.  Mlcoiah  Hill.
Mr.  Ha;,  wl»  llad.  Mon  after  hli
letum  to  India,  joined  Mr.  M.
HIM,  lettledatCalcutU.  Thelol-
lowlng  particular!  will  exhibit  the
pre«ent  itate  of  aAln  at  thij  im-
portant flation : —  '

The  icbocdi  lafftlletlBf-tfwtre,
fbrmerlj  (operintended  by  Mr.  vid
Hn.  Werden,  were,  after  Mr.
Warden'!  decease,  placed  under
the  direction  of  Mr.  and  Mn.  Go-
geil]'.  The  fonper  had  coinmenced
a  ichool  In  the  bungalow  chapel
at  Mirzopore,  In  irtilch  were  43
■chola^ ;  the  latter  had  opened  a
school  In  Sooty  Bagan  •/am  Bw
taar,  bi  which  were  13  girls.
Thete  idiooii  bad,'  however,  been
Bounded,  In  coiuequence  of  the
necenllr  for  Mr.  Gogeil;  taking  a
n>regeto  Cejlon  tor  the  recovery
of  bb  bealth.

Vnim  Ctw/— Mr.  Jamet  HfU
pmaehei  at  uili  chapel  Tver;  Sab-
batb-dBT  altenatelr  with  ime  o^
other  of  hia  ooileague^  to  the  Ed-
mpean  coDgngatlon  j  and  In  the
nmiMf  mielM  tbf  foang  people


belonging  to  it,  lu  formerij-,  lo
ituttucl  them  in  the  pclncipliuami
duties  of  ChrisliBnit}-.  Ailditioiii
are,  from  time  to  linie,  made  Ibi
Itie  church.  ^

Kiiiderpart  Sbr/ion.— BeddeMi
t:aslaually  preaching  in  the  diff^
aiiil  market-places,  the  fipllav^nf.     .
Ktutttdiienices  are  perlomied  iq  Itti     {
f  bflpel  :^Sabbaih   tnarrdtig,  '"---    "
Ruiee   worsbip  — 4/4emoiM,
ing    the   sacred    Serip[ure!_
snmetinies  preBchiog  —  ficnri^   C
English  wurship.— 'JlueWojr   nB"     ^
iug,  DBllve  worship.— /■>irfoy«p«»-
iag,  ditto,  reading  (ha  Seripto^

congregeliDna  are  occasionHll)'  wit
tucled  at  the  scbool  biingHlow,  ntw
tbe  boys  are  catechised.  BjOim
various  lueans  the  Gospel  has  bxa
ptuclainied  to  multitudes,  and  there
ii  reason  to  believe  not  wlQuMt
good  eSect.

Mr.  Piffurd  anisti  Mr.  Tml»
in  the  Engliib  services,  and  ei^'
peels  lo  be  soon  able  to  preofh  in,
Bengalee.

Orii/ian  SeKuasri/. — Thenb*
sionnries  have  determined  to  re-
ceive Into  this  institution,  whlob  ll
designed  tu  provide  a  supplr  of  ~  ~ '
tlve  prescliers  and  scbooli
(be  descendants  of  oative
tians  onlj,  unless  others
oift^r  of  unqueslionable  pie^j.
iKganS  tliemselves  under  an
lieiijable  obligation  to  furUiib
means  of  a  good  educatioaj
dutted  un  Christian  priuci^e^.
Ibe  sons  of  their  native  coorf»|
nnd  ibej  trust  this  important  oly|
will  not  be  retarded  by  the  —
of  funds.  Tlie  number  of  i
CbriKliaii  youths  at  present  hi
seminary  is  3  ;  but  Ihe  i  '
e  looking  forward  b
ilargement  of  it.  Mr.  Pil
has,  in  connexion  with  thislj
rendered  valuable  aid  to
'in,  in  Uie  work  both
n  and  superintendence:
ilice    Schwtli.  — The  scfaoaC'


CAL

tbieh  eofltains  50  bojs,  and  ig  ia
t  idnrlablng  stote,  enjoys  the  he*
lUkt  df  a  teacher  who  Is  well  in-
sirueted  is  the  Cbrlstian  religion.
12  of  the  boys  read  the  Scriptures^
and  giye  appropriate  answers  to
oueBtioils  relating  to  tbeir  leading
netrlnes.  BesHe  this  school^
tliere  bto  4  other  boys'  schools
imdAr  Mr.  Tmwin's  snperintend-
Mee.  Tliere  are  also  connected
WWH  the  Kiddet|K>re  station  6  boys'
iehooLi>  which  were  raised  by  Mr.
PHford,  and  are  supported^  and  in
part  superintended,  by  him.  The
httmber  in  each  school  is  be-
Nreen  50  and  TO.  Respecting
lereral  of  these  schools,  some  par-
tfenlars  will  be  found  under  the
liMds  of  the  respective  out-sta-
toits.

Naiive    Church:  —  The   native
converts  who  were  baptized  at  this
fliRtlon  in  October,  1S25,  remain
stedfast,  amidst  much  opposition.
fleren  more  have  been  since  re-
ceived into  the  church,  which  now
coBsiiits  of   15  members;    all  of
them  Christian  Hindoos,  and  af-
fording satisCactory  evidence  of  the
sincerity  of  their  profession.    Of
tfte  7  last-mentionea,  4  were  bap-
ttMd  in  March,  1820,  of  whom  3
belong  to  the  village  of  Ram-ma-
M-eboke ;  one  a  female  of  80  years
of  age,  and  the  mother  of  a  con-
vert baptized  in  October,  1825,  by
Mr.  TVawin.    For  some  time  after
the  baptism  of  her  son,  she  mani-
fested   a   strong    aversion  to  the
truth ;  but  there  is  good  reason  to
beUcfve  that  God  ha&  changed  her
Besrt,    and  she  now  speaks  with
fhanlmilness   of  his   goodness   in
srving  her  at  the  eleventh  hour,

Bhcwaneepore.  —  Worship,  in
Bengaifee,  is  performed,  as  usual,
hi  mt  chapel.  Large  congrega-
tions are  frequently  present;  and
nmny,  who  come  from  a  distance
to  pay  their  devotions  to  the  idol
Kalee,  ure  here  invited  to  <'  behold
(he  Lamb  of  God^  which  tsketb


CAL

away  the  sin  of  the  world."  The
number  of  boys  in  the  school  is  50)
of  whom  10  read  the  Scriptures,
and  possess  a  considerable  Icnow-
ledge  of  them.

Chitlah. — Regular  services  are
statedly  performed  oli  every  Wed-
nesday morning  and  Saturday  even-
ing, and  the  people  are  very  atten-
tive to  the  preaching.  On  the
market-days,  many  also,  who  come
from  a  distance,  hear  the  word  of
God.  At  this  place  two  native
converts,  aA  Ram-makal- choke,
ftrst  heard  the  Gospel ;  which  event
has  led  to  the  introduction  of
Christianity  into  that  village.  The
attendance  at  the  boys'  school
fluctuates  between  40  and  56.  The
first  class  read  the  Gospels,  and
can  answer  questions  put  to  them
with  readiness.

iteaZ/c.—lTie  number  of  boys  in
the  school  is  about  100, 10  of  whom
read  in  the  Gospels.  Many  in  the
first  class  are  youths  from  10  to  18  .
years  of  age.  Occasionally,  some
adults  may  be  seen  reading  the
Scriptures  with  the  boys.  When
the  missionaries  visit  the  school,  it
is  usual  for  the  brahmins  to  attend,
for  the  purpose  of  cavilling.  Some
of  the  best- instructed  boys  are  at
times  called  upon  to  answer  the
objections  of  the  brahmins,  who
are  not  seldom  confuted  by  them
before  the  multitude,  and  silently
withdraw.  Much  Christian  know-
ledge is  now  diffused  through  the
village,  and  the  missionaries  ex-
press confident  expectation  that
the  gross  errors  of  the  people  will,
eventually,  be  chased  away  ^y  the
light  of  divine  truth  which  has
been  introduced  among  them.

Ram-makal'Choke ,—  At  this  vil-
lage a  bungalow,  designed  to  serve
the  purposes  of  a  native  chapel  and
school-room,  was  opened  for  Chris-
tian worship  on  the  26th  of  Jan.
1826.  On  the  26th  of  the  follow-
ing month,  the  emblem  of  one  of
the  forms  of  t\i^lilii\^'()0  tt,cA  Seersor

.N  2  i^'t


it  to  the  minloguietv  to  be
in  building  s  chapel  foi  Chiliitian
wonhlp ;  and  he  would  llio  bne
fflTen  the  groanU  oa  which  the
temple  fomeAy  atood,  bod  tbe
■Ituatlon  beat)  eligible.  Thecbape!
vBl  opened  for  dlilne  serrice  on
tbt  Tth  of  Not.  Tbe  DepolatlOD
were  preient  oq  tbe  occuion,  and
.  were  biKhl;  graUtled  with  behtjdiiig
the  IndlTJdiud  wbo  bod  been  the
proprietor  of  tbe  temple,  fitting  an
attentlie  heirei;  end  deront  wor-
ihlpper  of  tbe  Itiing  sad  true  God.
la  the  beginning  of  the  «tme
inonib  a  acbool  v«i  eitablldied,  In
wblcb  are  more  than  SO  bo}«.  A
joung  brahmin,  who  liad  reeelied
Initmctlon  at  Ktdderpore^  and  potp
■enei  a  knowledge'  of  the  Goapel,
li  the  teacher.  A  feiDBle  uatiTa
(choid  hat  alao.been  fbnned.  Tbe
decldedl;  Cbrtitian  aipeet  vrlth
which  theie  )chi>ot8  hsTe  been  com-
menced, and  tbe  clrenmitonce  of
otfasc  aiyacent  Tillages  baring  since
applied  for  iMtmctlon,  togetber
■with  tbe  open  i^ectlon  of  one  of
Ou)  WoIm  Bio(t  geneiall;  wnnhipped
bj  the  Hlndoog— tbe  mlnloDaiiei
liall  t)  among  [be  Indlcatloni  of
the  dawn  of  ■  brighter  da;  In  Ihli
part  of  India.

Rain -makal- choke  li  dittant
about  S  m.  from  Klddsrpare,  and
standi  In  tbe  centre  of  a  number  of
Tillagek,  the  aggregate  popnlatlon
of  which  li  Bt  leait  !0,000.  Of
.  tbite  vitlagat,  S  haie  been,  within
•  diort  tlmr,  brought  Into  tbe  light
of  ChrliUanilr*

SeAaalmatlert.  —  Tb«  acfaocd-
RMitsn  of  the  aboie-mentioOed
natira  lelnoli  aMembIa  at  tbe  cha-
j«d  We^  niniidi;  Honlog,  whan


CAL

tbof  go  IfaMogh  a  c« ^

UmlBrinwItoii.  ThebcneatlM
HbtaiBed  li  communicated  lo  IM
h^  at  thett  respecUve  acbocdh  »
Sttim  Female  Se:Aool$,  .
Editrfm-e  School  was  eOM
nenc^  in  iHSj.  At  the  puUla
enmfaiatlon.  in  Feb.  1816,  it  MM
■  ri,  which,  fromivf


um,  had,  in  tbe  foUowlK-
eeo  (educed  to  19.  lt«d
T,  expected  that  in  a  Mt


aUOoA  SeAool  wa.4  estaUtaM
aboat4VeBR  ui^,  and  iMialsMiit
InTBriabfy  aferded  suttsfactian.    '.

Iniiu  Seiool  was  eslabliihad  la
Oct.  1834,  at  the  vitlagE  of  H<MH
aUee,  and  consist*  of  18  schalan;'!

BKnooMepore  School  waiop«M<
aboot  3  7«BK  since,  and  has  affiirii
ed  great  mcourugement.  Itjt
numbeilntbe  scbool  ii  aboot  MT
Anotbei  achool  was  opaned  iBfi
different  part  ul'  this  village  ia  JMI
18Sa,  which  conlainB  16  aehoUlv)

Cathtt-Bagan  Sc/iaalviu  ttfOr
ad  In  Not,  ,l6i»,  and  contolna  S(
ffh'l*.  -

D^^a-Furan  School  v/aa  oftV^
ad  on  the  Itt  of  Dec.  ISW,  mi
conilili  of  Is  girls.  •

Oiral  SeAaoi  vas  opened  on  IH
ilft  of  December,  18SS,andQafl
taloi  i»  gill).  .

Stum  Seluol  was  opened  tt
March,  1BS6,  and  coDtalna  lOgiila

BAortaibi/i  Sclioot  contaim  14
ghrU.

Tbe  Scriptures  and  other  da^
tian  book*  arc  taught  In  aU  lib>
«Cbooli — and  the  process  of  tJM
•cbolan,  gaiierclly  speaking,  hi
tiie  aaTeraTbraacbe*  vi  Itraraiiiali
wblcb  tbe;  «t«  imbraate^  3M*
inncb  credit  ob  tite  fiHBiJB'
ben  of  tbe

hwetbelD

On .  Am  1ft  'of  Pek;'  IM^^


CAL

of  the  opening  of  Kid-
ehapely  a  puUic  examiiia-
of  tfeiebojv  aii4  girls  ^m  the
15  edKioli  then  connected  with
tte  ftation  took  place;  when  it
Uppearedy  that  the  boys  examined
la-tho  Scriptures,  catechisms,  and
Mgnpby>  considerably  exceeded
)■  number  those  examined  at  the
pieredlug  anniversary,  and  that  the
■mgiMsmade  by  them  in  Christian
taKvirMge  was  highly  creditable
Intii  to  teachers  and  pupils.

Oi  the  female  native  schools,-  6
ynm  formed  and  superintended  by
Ito.  Trawin ;  the  remaining  4
vine  formed,  supported,  and  su-
perintended, by  Miss  Piffard.  The
kEfetefy  however,  having  entered
IflAo  the  marriage-relation  with
Ml.  Ray,  whose  sphere  of  labour
liittuated  in  the  heart  of  Calcutta,^
the  superintendence  of  the  native
Isnale  schools  belonging  to  the
'lOddeipc^  station  has  devolved
■poa  Mrs.  Trawin,  assisted  by  a
ladjr  resident  in  that  neighbour-
hood.

BeHgtd  AuariUary  Mistianary
&e»f%. — The  anniversary  of  this
iutitution  was  held  on  the  12th  of
Apiily  1886,  when  W.  Chalmers,
Eaq.9  M.D.,  presided.  The  col-
lection at  ^e  doors  amounted  to
MO  dcca  rupees,  which  is  a  larger
aom  than  was  ever  before  collected
on  a  simihdr  occasion.
..The  iotal  receipts  of  the  institu-
Uoo  for  the  year  1825-6  amounted
to  upwards  of  5000  sicca  rupees.

The  printing  establishment  which
bekmged  to  this  station  has  been
vriiiiquished.  This  measure  w^
determined  upon  at  a  meeting  of
the  Committee  of  the  Bengal  A,
if.  iS.,  and  met  with  .the  concur-
nnce  of  the  Deputation,  who  were
piuient  on  the  occasion.  As  the
birethren  of  the  Baptist  Mission
firasi  have  purchased  the  materials
on  hand  at  their  estimated  valiie,
so  loas  has  been  sustained  by  the
aocie^.    Miw  Gogeriy^  who  has  for


CAL

seveial  years  had  the  8uperintend«
ence  of  the.  printing  establishment,
being  now  at  liberty  to  devote  him-
self entirely  to  missionary  labours,
has  been  appointed,  ptQ  tempore f
to  Berbampore  ;  to  which  station^
should  his  health  have  been  suffi-
ciently restored,  it  is  probable  he
has,  ere  this,  proceeded  with  his
family.

CALEDON,  a  Hottentot  vil.
lage  in  S.  Africa,  about  120  m.^
E.  Cape  Town;  formerly  called
Zuurhraek,  from  the  valley  in
which  it  is  situated.  In  1820,  the'
inhabitants  were  estimated  at  about
1100.

The  Rev.  John  Seiden/aden^
from  the  L^M.  S,,  laboured  here
about  seven  years  with  success.
Permanent  buildings  were  erected
for  the  mission,  and  many  of  the
Hottentots;  and  inclosures,  were
made  for  cultivation,  sufficient  for
the  subsistence  of  500  families.  For
several  years,  the  members  of  the
church  varied  from  aboht  60  to  80 ;
and  the  scholars  averaged  about  50.
A  Bible  l^iety  was  also  formed,
and  a  fund  was  raise4  for  charita-
ble purposes.

After  a  short  vacancy,  the  Rev.
W,  Anderson  ciMne  hither  iicom
Griqua  Town,  about  1821,  preach-
ed to  the  Hoitehtots,  and  super-
intended, the  school  for  a  s&ort
time;  but  afterwards  removed  to
Pacaltsdorp,  where  his  services
were  likely  to  prove  much  noore
useful.

CALLENBERG  InstHuikmwtm
founded  at  Halle,  in  Germany,,  in
1728,  by  a  pious  evangelical  mi-
nister, principally  for  uie  conver-
sion of  the  Jews,  and  derived  its
name  from  Professor  Calienberg,
who  raised  it  to  eminence  and  use-
fulness. The  Gospels  of  Matthew
and  Luke,  and  more  than  70  dif-
fe^rent  tracts  calculated  to  under-
mine the  foundation  of  Jewish  pre-
judices, were  published  in  great
numbers,  and  extensively  clt<;u.«


MfparaagpKteljttt,ei

aktjxe  IttbMuwl  «KlaBulTily  m  a
tfllalaiiitT  for  die  lHltt«tfaiv.lMnl
1T»  t0  ITM;  Imt  tto  oppotlOoB
vraa  wo  iloleot  Mill  dlMonngil^,  m
to  (UdmrtA  ttt  Meodi,  rod  Uey
jieliled  In  Md  daanodeMr.

CALFENTVK,  a  Inrm  nittre
Vtll^e  on  Am  Vj  dde  or  Cerbm,
■bout  100  m.  S.  of  Jafftan;  rod
Bbont  Ui»  Mate  dtotuee  N.  of  Co-
bunbo.  E.  lone.  ^^  ^>  N.Iirt.
^\f.  TbelnlMbltaBtt  are  chiefly
Ronvn  CalhoUCi,  MahomedMit,
Bitd  Oentoea ;  bet  fl»ie  are  mraxy
ntXtm  PiDtMtaiiti  ta  Ike  diatrtet,
wbo  bsTB  little  Of  iettj:toD  ksl  the

The  Rev.


hanlw,  Stpt'st,  ISlB^lnl  left  the
itarthm  in  Dm  tbu  a  year,  on  ae-
coocrt  of  lU  bealtlu  He  fcrod  it
0B«  of  grt»i  taipottaiiK,  attmUng
■cccB  to  at  leut  40,0M  penon
deitKate  of  pioper  iMtrnelkm.;
thne  betn;  nOieaideittariBUteT  for
.  aboQt  IWm.ontbeocMtL  Da^
tik  Mf,  be  nweeeded  In  eclaUtih-
tug-  several  pKmMag  atiuKib,  and
fanndioaie  who  (eented  tn  pnrftt  by
h\»  pRBCbtaiB.  Tbe«e  eftrt^  bcnr*
ever,' ban  notbsan  Temmd.
'  CALTURAiatUlaieandfartrew
of  Ce^M,  tT  n.  8v  trfColomlWi,  at
(be  Bontlt  ttf  OBO'  of  tte  targest
hnndlei  irftln  VtMiuMy,  nblch
laBereabontBinileirfda.  Ttwaiiiei
two  itdeaof  the  tM  lAleb  coM-
nanblt,  AdMnvrtgatietTbasta
(□  tbc  tea.  Tbe  edJolBliiE  edoritty  b
popnloin,  and  certain  net le  fnaua-
faetDK*  are  carried  en  to  a  con-
aiderable'estent.  E.  1m$.  IB*  tt/,
S.  lat.  e*  M'.


CAL

5.  commenced  their  la>
n  ISIT.     The  circuited  '

_.  _..  aom.  Mid  : _'  ^

la  ItiB  iirtprmediato   one  botwe*'  '
w*e  o(  Gal)<>  and  CalDmho;    IF   '
IMS,    (h^rc  were  B  actiMA  Ml'
M«  pu))!l>.  with  a  MuitBUe  M»
Wt  i>[  mitsters  and  eMARbictBi  M|'
lmi>  UiHt   tlmt)   to    the   prtMl''
tfc«    wotk    of  God   has   pre^Mtf'
ed.      "  pfBj-er  meetlngi,"  •qV^,^
■WoDatj;,  "  have  spread  a  Wfc    ■
and  gracious  Influence;  and^BBjr   l'
artey  houso  la  open  to  it»  Ibf  W
partioses  of  prajer  and  esborMMf
Out  eongreiiallons  Mffltf nUe  U  Ml'
rtearjy  tri  their  nltendflnda.     O*
cla<W5,  tan,  RivB  us  great  mmli«f
tlML    At  lienlutle  oar  -work,  6m
rartiuscBuie?,  does  not  keep  jWO
wtth  tliB  iilher  parts  of  the  lAnnXL
II  Be?  far  from  us,  and  ft  req«i(B>
ttioconitHnt  and  zealous  efibrfti
holj  (fxBDiple  of  a  mlnlnnary,
aa    asaislant   mtssionarr,
thele.  AtPmiKj-aourwork
ntgrreallj.    The  rcsldeiwe  6f-
•vfttant  brother  here  has  beOB
great  utlllly,  ss  he  has  spAiti
e^ttj eveninif  in  religfousr
fat  ftiE  nfttllehuls  round  the'
al>dhi!9  kept  »li»e  the  |;oo
evdted  by   more   pidiilc
We  bate  no  doalit  but  (he
jear  will  be  one  of  still  ^
good  i  n  ttib  psrt  of  the  stafl on.
wai  Inlely  witness  to  arAylitlei
tog  circiLmsljuicr,  which  will  rf
M<0  truth  oiieroles  where  leMt
pecied.     Ob  walking  I     '
fug,  ihree  or  four  Weeks  ago,  Fi
a  group  of  people  BMembledaP
waj  from  the  door  of  a  naUre
I  went,  through  ruriosily,  Is
qalrE  the  cause,  and  was  Mtrpnzng|  i
and  pleased  1d  hear  a  boy,  of  abod^  i
18  ycnre  of  age,   reading  the  W*  ,
cBibter  of  the  Gospel  by  St.  Joh<^
(0  tiree  brothers  and  his  motllW?
hWIb  the  people  wrtKoul  were  19    i
'— "i-elj  listening.     I   pasted  tlllf   i

one  erening  irineB,  and  hearf
tftstame  boy  reading  an  eteolB^


CAN

Many  veiy  interesting
of  a  somewliat  similar  na-
Bve  come  wittiin  my  notice,
tmonstrate  ttiat  our  lal)ours
»tbeen  in  vain."
tfVAPOSy  a  department  of
I,  bordering  on  tlie  Britisli
ii,  is  2,233  square  m.  in
,  and  contains  a  population!

nrs.  Henry  de  Jersey,  and
TourgiSf  two  fVesleyan  miS'
'etf  were  stationed  here  in
n  connexion  witli  the  neigh-
gp  departments  of  L'  Orne  and
mchis.  The  extent  and  po-
ftn  of  eaob  of  these  differ  but
rona  those  of  Calvados.  Use-
{  appears  to  have  attended
*orts  that  have  been  made.
.MPBELL,  a  settlement
\  tbe  Griquas,  South  Africa,
£.  of  Griqua  town,  and  about
e.N.E.  of  Cape  Town.  The
^.  Sass,  from  the  L,  M,  S.,
ed  from  Bethesda  to  this
Ul  ISil,  and  divided  his  la-
between  the  Griquas  and  se-
knials  of  Corannas  on  the
River.  Here,  however,  he
Dcompassed,  for  some  years,
trials  and  discouragements;
Q  1824,  he  removed  to  Gri-
3wn.  In  about  a  year  after-
f.  a  gratifying  revival  took
by  means  of  a  catechist,  who
i  a  Sabbath  and  a  day  school,
sting,  in  the  former,  about
^ildren,  and,  in  the  latter,
-60.  He  still  continues  to  be
.  A  school -room  is  being
dy  which  is  designed  to  serve
( a  chapel.

NAJDA,  a  large  country  of
America,  bounded  on  ^  the
New  Britain,  £.;  by  Labra-
id  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,
New  Brunswick  and  the
i  States,  and  W.  by  unknown

It  was  discovered  by  John
(bastian  Cabot,  of  Bristol,  in

and   wa»  settled  by.  the


CAN

French  in  1608.  The  summer
here  is  very  hot,  and  winter  con-^
tinues  for,  6  months,  very  severe  ;•
but  the  sudden  transitions  from  heat
to  cold,  so  common  to  the  United
States,  are  not  known  in  Canadar
and  the  seasons  are  more  regulai'.
The  uncultivated  parts  are  a  con-^
tinned  wood,  in  which  are  many
kinds  of  trees  unknown  in  Eunm^  ;•
but  the  land  that  is  cleared  is  fer-
tile, and  the  progress  of  vegetation
so  rapid,  that  wheat  sowed  in  May,
is  reaped  in  August.  Of  all  the
animals,  the  beaver  is  the  most
useful  and  curious.  Canada  turpen^
tine  is  greatly  esteemed  for  its
balsamic  qualities.  This  country
abounds  with  coal,  and  near  Quebec
is  a  fine  lead  mine.  The  different
trilies  of  Indians,  or  original  na-^
tives,  in  Canada,  are  almost  innu«.
merable ;  but  they  have  been  ob-
served to  decrease  in  population
where  the  Europeans  are  most
numerous,  owing  chiefly  to  their
immoderate  use  of  spirituousliquois.
Canada  was  conquered  by  the  Eng-
lish in  1759;  and  confirmed  to
them  by  the  French  at  the  peace
of  1763.  In  1791,  thU  country
was  divided  into  two  provinces.
Upper  and  Lower  Canada,  which
have  since  made  great  progress  in
population  and  agriculture.

Upper  Canada  is  bounded  N.  by
the  territory  of  the  Hudson's  Bay  •
Company ;  E.  by  Lower  Canada ;
S.  by  the  United  States:  on  the
W.  the  limits  are  undefined.  In
1783,  the  population  did  not  exceed
10,000  souls;  in  1814,  it  was  95,000.
Upper  Canada  is  deemed  the  gar-
den of  America,  and  not  subject  to
the  extreme  heat  or  cold  of  the
Lower  Province,  The  chief  pro-  ^
ducts  for  exportation  are  flour,
wheat,  potash,  oak,  and  pine-
timber  ;  masts,  staves,  planks,  and
firewood.  The  principal  incon-
veniences to  which  this  province  U
subject  are  the  ia\U  anOi  xa^^  ^


BiulMoDlnal.  Tka  frtBclpal  tovm
to  VoA.
iMotr  Cn— rfg  to  bttvMn  61^

brllMteitUoiT
&)e'HndnB>iBnC(iHBUT|  S.
-      -  '-'-•BdihaUBltwl


WNw


It  to

dfrided  iBtD  9r«<ntlai,  contaJB-
ing  a  iw^aUao  of  about  400,000 ;
•bcwt>M,000af'  ~


QMbea


Then  an  about  800  CaflipUo  cn-
'      '   '       la*  in  Umi
.     ..         ,   npa'^  br  w-

„_.._jedliw  Uirt,
ItthechirftovB.

The  IMM  AwMtmi,  In  lin,
faniMted atetUoiMnt  in  U»ar  C».
Badiicnitlie  HJlelMMCh  ocThamM,
irtiicli  hJli  into  Laka  St.  Ckir,  fn
the  mldrt  of  BDBaraa  tribal  ff  the
CUptimnT^toiTbloh  thaygaN  flie
name  of  FaofiM.  The  bnthian
wen  aeeoi^aiiiad  by  theft  IlMlian
MO^ngathuu,  «la  hedbeea  dfiren,
Id  11B1,  foai  Ihelr  •ettteHnato  oa
(be  MaiUiwiua.  Dmlu  tlmt  in-
terral  they  bad  remored  dtdbi  plaee
to  place,  and  foimd  no  reft  till  they
Mt  Aortn  bem  ia  peace,  on  a  tnct
of  land,  joontaliihig  abost  IMO
•em,  HrigMd  tbem  br  the  BHttofa
goreameak  .  The  MtUaueiit  be-
came angular  townUp,  ^ODtlt
ID.  kHK,  and  8  wide,  and  waa  m
wen  e£tintad.-fliat  tbe  wUdenea
wai  llttial^  changBd  Ulo  a.&njl-
fiilAeU.  NeabdUogiaoeeBwai
granted  1b  the  ecmf  eiakm  of  the
IndlaiH}  but  than  waa  a  gndnal


y«ient>  when  gnwa  xm  to  Biata>
lUf.  At  the  ebM  of  IBIl,  the
tnMberof  neMionkattto  waa  ItB.


CAN-
than  so  yenrs,  the  setQemeirt'
lieiUoyed  by  the  American  an
under  General  Harrison,  in  111
After  lesldiit^,  for  some  tow
huts  on  the  site  of  their'  old  hu
in^,  Uiey  erected  a  town  da
□ppDslte  bank  ol  the  river,  towt
till'}'  ^Te  tbe  asms  of  JVoH  A
jield.    To  Ibis  place  tfaay  rema
ill  the  aulumn  of  ISl^,  when  tl
iliimben  amaunted  to  100  pent
The   fbllowing   fenr,   an    Ind
named  Onim,  who,  fram  hto  jm
hod  [evinced  the   mod  iaraUl
batred    agajiut    tbe
wBi   aaiinffly  conveilAd   la
WEE  baptized,  and  died  i»  the
of  the  (lOf^el ;  and  by  thia  etnan
stance   an    lni|>ict»{ion   waa  *■■
boib  sniDng  the   Indiana  andli
niiltG  people,  wbluh  afterwaidila|
to  an  Bxteniivti  awakening  In  tl
neighboutlioo '


iiatiH-E  had  octurrcd,  Ibem

rlcE  wra-e  enabled  to  rejt^ce,  d
by  ia  tbe  greater  part  of  F*
eongrejfstlon  continued  to  T  "  '"
ful  foQuwers  of  Chrlit,  (
Ibeir  confidence  In  tbe  help  of  ■
Lord  vas  frequently  revtved  tf
stjenRttiened  by  pnioft  a(  blBneij


t  lh»   1


stated  tl

Cbriitian  Indhini  most  cbeefAfl
lent  tbeir  UHislance  tawatdl  Qj
building,  without  any  remunaiBlM
AfterSj'earBtaadpassedawa;  i*il|
outsnyofthebealbenbuliu;  imblM
devoted  ta  God  by  tJM  rite  of  bapM
Mxe  mlsslannileshHdtbepleuiaej
baptising  S  Indian  females  |  w
on  CbiMmos-duy,  1§32;  a  seoofl
on  New  Year  Vdiiy.  lSX3  J  andlll
third  on  tbe  Feiut  of  the  Eplpbaiq
Two  of  these,  an  aged  wonaa,  M
her  daughter  about  14  yean  tdl
had  rernoved  in  tbe  pnceA
iprlng,    froM  the    Uppev  iSam


CAN

J}aWti  to  New  Fairfield,  and  here
IMr  hearts  were  opened  to  the
•«n4  of  the  Ootpel.  The  other,
.liilD  was  sirter-ln-law  to  one  of
.|^  fomale  aashrtants,  had  resided
4- or  5  yeais  in  the  setttement;
IPmI,  dnsiiig  that  time,  had  been  a
lQHi;ent  attendant  on  the  means  of

ri,  but  liad  not  appeared  to  de-
a  closer  connexion  with  the
iohvcli.  Now,  however,  she  en-
.iMted,  with  team,  that  she  might
^%i  baptized;  and  as  she  made  a
flithftuBtory  confession  of  her  faith,
Vd  avowed  her  exclnaiTe  depen-
for  saifation  on  the  all-
ient  sacrifice  of  Calvary,  lier
llfiieflt  was  granted,  and  the  dinne
fHMnce  seemed-  to  be  enjoyed  by
«n  who  witnessed  the  ordinance.
'  In  a  communication,  dated  April
tthi  1823,  Mr.  Luckenbach  says —
.''An  ImUan  named  Simon,  who
M  been  baptized  at  Petquotting,
M  had  afterwards  left  the  con-
Ingation,  and  lived  for  more  than
ilyean  among  the  wild  heathen,
ntnmed  hither  this  spring,  and
legged  most  earnestly  for  re-
ananhui.  He  was  in  a  rapid  con-
Miptkm ;  and,  as  we  believed  he
kid  aoogbt  and  obtained  mercy
kam  Hhoa  who  treats  all  returning
IRodJgals  with  compassion,' he  was
i|h.«lMltted,  and  assured  of  the  for-
jf^mmun  ai  the  congregation  on  h»

^  Many  of  the  boys  in  the  school
kmre  asade  good  progress,  and  are
Me  to  read  their  own  language
veil.  They  even  begin  to  under-
itUMi  Baglish,  and  read -the  three
vptaflei  m  St.  John  in  that  lan-
gMge.  After  hearing  single  verses
i  or  6  Hmm  distinctly  repeated
Viey  learn  them  by  heart,  and  ap-
pear ddighted  witii  this  mode  of
ioftmcticni.^^

The  Hiost  recent  intelligence
Jram  this  settlement  is  contained
hi  a  letter  dated  Oct.  Itf,  ^  1823,  in
vUch  Mr.  Luckenbach  wrote  as
follows:-^*'  Since    my  lagt,   the


CAN

number  of  our  inhabitants  has  been
augmented  by  16  persons  from
G<^en,  8  from  among  the  hea-
then at  Sandusky,  and  4  of  the
Monsy  tribe.  The  latter  is  a
family,  consisting  of  an  ag^
mother,  who,  four  years  ago,  was
baptized  at  Old  Schoenbrunn,  on
the  Muskingum,  her  son,  grand**
son,  and  great  gnrandson.  Her  son
is  upwards  of  60  years  old,  and  has
very  indifferent  health.  Being,
asked  why  he  wished  to  reside  in
our  settlement,  he  replied,  '  I  have
no  greater  wish  than  to  lay  down
my  bones  in  this  place.  All  I  long
for  is  to  experience  the  pardon  of
my  sins,  through  the  mercy  of  our
Saviour,  before  I  die,  and  to  be
received  by  baptism  into  the  Chris-
tian church.  I  now  believe  all
which  I  formerly  heard  at  Schoen-
brunn, concerning  our  incarnate
God  and  Redeemer,  who  died  upon
the  Cross  to  save  us  from  eternal
death.  In  this  place  my  poor  doul
derives  comfort  and  good  hope;
and  I  am  therefore  come  to  dwell
among  the  believers,  and  to  die  with
them,  because  among  the  heathen
I  find  neither  rest  Aor  peace.' ''

<'  On  the  7th  of  Sept.  we  had  a
true  festival-day,  when  a  heathen
woman  and  her  child  were  bap-
tized ;  and  a  person,  baptized  as  a
child,  was  received  into  the  con-
gregation. The  husband  of  tiler
former  was  baptized  a  year  and  a
half  ago.  They  removed  hither
from  the  Upper  Monsy  Town,  that,
as  they  said,  they  might  believe,
and  be  converted  to  Jesus.  She  is
sister  to  a  man  named  Simon,  who
departed  this  life  last  spring,  re-
joicing in  the  Lord.  His  end,  as
a  believer,  and  that  of  her  mother,
who  died  among  the  heathen,  made
a  deep  and  salutary  impression  upon
her  mind,  insomuch  that  she  began
most  seriously  to  be  concerned
about  the  salvation  of  her  immortal
soul.  During  her  baptism,  a  power*
fui  sense  of  the  presence  ol  3^\i*&

\4a


CAN

was  felt  by  the  whole  congrega-
tion. Thus  one  after  another  finds
the  way  to  our  Saviour,  and  we
have  reason  to  rejoice  that,  by  the
power  of  his  word,  some  small
additions  are  made  to  his  church,
and  that  the  reward  for  the  travail
of  his  soul  is  increased  from  among
the  Indians.  Painful  occurrences
are  indeed  not  wanting;  but,  in
general,  we  have  much  cause  foi
^ankfulness,  seeing  that  our  la-
bour is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord."

The  IV,  M.  S,  comprises  the  fol-
lowing stations  in  the  Canada  dis-
trict: the  annexed  extracts  from
the  last  Report  of  their  agents  will
intimate  their  present  condition  :^—
Quebec  Circuit,  Mission,  —
^  **  Several  have  been  awakened  to
a  sense  of  their  danger,  and  brought
to  a  saving  knowledge  of  the  truth.
Our  members  generally  are  grow-
ing in  grace,  and  the  congrega-
tions are  much  improved. '^

Schools. — <'  In  this  school  there
are  80  scholars,  divided  into  II
classes.  We  are  happy  to  say,  that,
during  the  past  year,  considerable
improvement  has  been  made  in  the
behaviour  and  learning  of  the  chil-
dren ;  and  some  favourable  symp-
toms of  early  piety  appear  in  se-
veral of  them.''

Montreal, — A  report  for  this  year
has  not  been  received ;  the  previous
one  says,  ^*  We  have  13Q  children
in  this  school,  but  the  average
number  who  attend  does  not  ex-
eeed  90.  The  children  generally
make  great  progress;  and  the
teachers  manifest  the  most  decided
interest  in  the  prosperity  of  the
school,  by  a  regular  and  cheerful
attention  to  their  duties."

Kingston  Circuit,  Mission, —
"  Through  the  past  year  we  have
had  in  this  station  many  seasons  of
refreshing  from  the  presence  of  the
Lord.  The  society  is  at  present  in
a  good  state."

Schools,  —  **  We  have  here  a
large     and    flourishing     Sunday-


CAlf

school,  of  at  least  100  cMlk^
which  is  weU  attended,  Mb  If
teachers  and  acbolan.-  Then  hi
circulating  library  faf  thdr'H^
consisting  of  a  variety-of  inteiilt
ing  and  instmctiTe  books,*  iMI
we  have  reason  to  hope  are  Mi>
dered  very  useful  to  the  chttdraL'

.S^^  Armand^s  Oremt.  JfiMk
-><'  With  unfeigned  gratttiteli
God,  we  have  to  record  the  iv»
perity  of  the  work  in  tills  <kML
At  the  commencement  of  the  yMf
every  thing  bore  a  gloomry  H|itcC{
the  station  had  been  left  wtttnt
a  preacher  for  18  monthi— 4lM»
dinances  of  religion  bad  been  111^-
lected — immoridity  and  caielM
ness  had  become  awfoUy  pien*
lent ;  and  a  universal  stupor  bil
spread  through  all  the  clasns.  Bit
a  delightful  change  has  since  tihii
place;  the  Lord  has  poured  oit
his  Spirit  upon  the  people  (  Ai
means  of  grace  are  well  attended;
and  more  than  100  persons  hsis
manifested  a  change  of  hear^  ai
joined  the  society."

Schools, — '*  We  haTe  three
day-schools  in' this  circolti*
taining  about  150children,wlioBi*
nlfest  a  great  desire  to  attend ;  ^ai
some  of  whom  have  become  ^Mj
serious."

T/iree  Rivers  Circuit.  Murim
—*'  Our  society  in  this  plaee  b
still  small ;  but,  as  the  PruteiUat
population  is  becoming  morenoBie-
rous,  we  hope  that,  by  the  blesring
of  God,  many  more  will  be  added
to  our  *  little  flock.'  During  tke
past  year  our  chapel  bas  been
well  attended,  and  the  preaebiBg
of  the  Gospel  has  been  niade  Ibe
ppwer  of  God  to  the  salTotun  of  a
few,  who  are  enjoying  the  peae^
ful  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  and  who
show,  by  their  general  deport*
ment,  that  they  have  paseed  Jnm
death  unto  life.  The  memben  of  the
society  are  much  united,  and  ere
giving  all  diligence  fo  make  tbeb
calling  and  election  soie."  /

144


(Jan

tiead  Chvuii, '  Missifm, —
itate  of  religion  in  this  cir-
ery  encouraging,  though  we
it  sees  that  general  awaken-
Ich  was  experienced  last
We  are  happy  to  state  that
have  been  converted  to  God.
embers  of  the  society  are
ly  stedfast  and  orderly  in
onduct^  the  congregations
d^  and,  in  general,  deeply
e  to  the  word  of  life ;  and
ipectsof  increasing  useful-
j  truly  encouraging. '^
Ua. — "  We  have  on  this  cir-
Sunday-schools,  containing
I  of  100  scholars.''
ord  Circmt,  Mission,  —
ig  the  past  year  all  the
ng  places  on ,  this  circuit
jen  regularly  visited,  some
\eA  have  been  added,  and
gregations  have  been  ^ewe^
od  and  attentive."
ils. — "  The  Sunday-schools
circuit  have  been  generally
ished,  on  account  of  the  in*
le  difficulties  in  the  way  of
ig  scholars ;  no  more  than
hool  of  about  30  children
en  preserved  in  operation
the  whole  of  the  year :  two
have  been  recently  com*-
[,  but  their  continuance  is
1.  It  is  not,  however,  to
mess  that  the  meagreness
account  is  to  be  attributed ;
ely  to  circumstances  over
jve  have  no  control."
/  Town  Circuit.  Mission. —
success  which  has  resulted
le  preaching  of  the  Gospel
circuit,  is  such  as  to  excite
xmest   emotions   of   grati-

Jpper  Canada,  the  Society
Propagation  of  the  Gospel
ign  Parts  has  the  foUow-
fctions :  —  Adolphiis  Town,
ttberg,  Ancaster,  Augusta,
He,  Beverley,  Carrying
Cavan,  Chippawa,  Com'
EUzabeth    Toum,    Earnest


CAN

Tovan,  F&rt  Erie,  Gatpi,  Grimshy,
Hamilton^  Kingston,  Matilda,  Mo~
hawks,  Niagara,  Perth,  Peter-
borough, Prescot,  Queenston,  Rich'
mond,  St,  Thomas,  Sandwich,  fVtl'
lianisbcrbugh,  Yonge,  and  York.
At  these  places  32  missionaries,
2  catechists,  and  2  schoolmasters,
are  eqaployed.

The  stations  of  the  society  in
Lower  Canada  are  as  follow: —
Aubigny,  Cakfwell,  Chamhly,
Drumtnondville,  Dutt/iam,  Eaton,
Gaspe,  Hat  ley,  Hull,  Montreal  and
Lachine,  Mai  Bay  Cove,  New  Car-
lisle,  Quebec,  RiviSre  du  Loup,  8t»
Andrew's,  St.  Armand,  St.  John's,
Shefford,  SherbrBeke,  Terre  Bonne,
fVilUam  Henry,  and  Yamaska  ;  en*
gaging  the  labours  of  21  missiona-
ries, and  a  catechist  and  school-
master.

CANOFFEE,  a  mission  station
in  Susoo  country.  West  Africa,  3
m.  higher  up  the  Rio  Pongas  R.
than  Bashia,  more  than  100  m.
N.  W.  of  Sierra  Leone,  and  some
dis^tance  from  any  native  town.

The  C.  M.  S.  opened  a  school
here  in  1809,  which  continued  to
prosper  for  several  years,  and  the
missionaries  preached  to  the  na«
tives  in  the  neighbouring  towns,
where  they  were  cordially  received.
In  1815,  a  house  for  worship  was
erected,  and  the  prospects  were  very
encouraging ;  when  the  slave-trade
revived,  and  blasted  their  fondest
hopes.  In  12  months,  more  than
3000  slaves  were  carried  out  of  the
Rio  Pongas,  and  vast  quantities  of
rum  were  introduced  in  exchange.
The  missionaries,  however,  con^
tinned  to  labour  in  jeopardy  of
their  lives,  till  1817,  when  they
removed  to  the  colony  of  Sierra
Leone.

CANTON,  or  QUANG-
TCHOO,  a  city  and  sea^port  of
China,  capital  of  Quang-tong.  It
is  seated  on  one  of  th^  finest  rivers,
in  the  empire,  about  HO  m.  ttomv
the  sea,  and  is  the  oiiVy  CYvVue%«\53iv\

o  H5


CAN

allowed  for    European    maritime
traffic.  Witliin  ttie  bocca,  or  moiitli
of  the  river,  is  a  small  island,  which,
bearing    some    resemblance  to  a
tiflfer   couchant,    is    called    Tiger
island ;    and    the    river   is    hence
named  Tigris,  but  the  Chinese  call
it  Taa.     The  city  consists  of  3
towns,  divided  by  high  walls,  but
so  conjoined  as  to  form  almost  a
regular  square.     The  streets  are
narrow,    paved  with   small  round
stones  in  the  middle,  and  flagged
ut  the  sides.    The  houses  are  only
a  ground-floor,  built  of  earth,  and
covered    with  tiles.      The  better
class  of  people  are  carried  about  in
chairs ;  but  the  common  sort  walk
barefooted  and  bareheaded.    The
river  is  covered  with  barks,  which
have  apartments  in  them  for  fami-
lies, where  many  thousands  reside,
and  have  no  other  habitation.  The
number  of  inhabitants  is  supposed
to  be  1,500,000^     The  immense
quantity  of  goods  and  money  which
foreign  vessels  bring  to  this  city,
draws  hither  a  crowd  of  merchants
from  all  the  provinces ;  so  that  the
factories   ahd  warehouses  contain
the  rarest  productions  of  the  soil,
and  the  most  valuable  of  the  Chinese
manufactures.      In    1822,    a   fire
broke  out,  which  destroyed  many
lives,  1^,000  houses,  and  property
to  an  immense  amount.    It  is  1 180
m.  S.  by  W.  Peking.    E.  Long.
11.30  18',  N.lat.  230  T.

The  person  deemed  most  suit-
able for  this  station,  by  the  L,  M,
S,,  was  the  Rev.  Robert  Morrison,
whose  studies  at  Gosport  had  been
peculiarly  directed  to  a  preparation
for  so  important  an  undertaking ;
and  who  was  subsequently  assisted,
in  London,  by  a  native  of  China,
in  learning  the  language,  and  in
transcribing  a  Harmony  of  the
Gospels  and  other  parts  of  the  New
Testament,  from  a  manuscript  copy
in  the  British  Museum.  His  at-
teation  was  also  directed,  under  a
suihble  tutor,  to  the  mathematics^


CAN

and  astroitomy^  and  he  attenM
the  lectures  at  the  Rojal  luttte-
tion  ;  this  course  of  studies  havtm


been  determined  opooy  In
quence  of  some  Taluable  infonuh
tion  received  by  the  dlcectiM%
from  an  intelligent  enrrmwiit
at  Macao.

In  the  month  of  Jan.  ISOT,  Ml
Morrison  sailed  from  En^jsni;
and,  in  Sept.,  he  arrived  hi  sslbfr
at  Canton,  where  he  applied  U^
self  with  unwearied  assiduity  to  Ai
study  of  the  language  ;  tfaongli,  k
doing  this,  he  was  obliged  to  ob-
serve the  greatest  poesiUe  seciei^,
and  the  persons  who  assisted  Ite
intimated  that  they  trembled  fv
their  own  safety,  under  the  anfld'
pation  of  being  discovered.

In  consequence  of  a  teoipomj
misunderstanding  between  i£m  Eik
ropean  residents  at  Canton  ani
the  Chinese  govern menty  the  latte
prohibited  all  intercourse  with  fo-
reigners, and  the  commencement
of  hastilities  was  seriously  antici-
pated. Mr.  Morrison,  therefore^  le-
tired,  in  the  beginning  of  Nov.,  Id
MacaO)  where  he  resumed  the  sto^^
of  the  language.  Matters,  henweveti
were  soon  amicably  arranged,  aii
he  returned  to  Canton,  vdiere,  b
1809,  he  was  appointed  ChineM
translator  to  the  English  factixy.
Alluding  to  this  circumstance,  ke
says,  '<  My  reasons  for  aecepttng
this  situation  were  briefly^  that  tt
secured  my  residence ;  that  \\s
duties  contributed  to  my  impxoie-
ment  in  the  language  ;  and  that  tbe
salary  attached  to  it  wonld  enaUe
me  to  make  my  labour  in  the  Goqiel
less  chargeable  to  tbe  ciiorches  of
Great  Britain.  The  sitoatieBy
however,  whilst  it  has  the  advu-
tages  which  I  state,  has  also  its
disadvantages.  It  oceuplet  a  great
part  of  my  short  life,  in  that  wbSdi
does  not  refer  to  my  fint  olyact.
Whilst  I  am  translating  oAdal
papers,  I  could  be  compiling  mj


CAK

lit  snential  service  to  future  mis*
tkmaries.^'

In  the  course  of  his  reading  with
ills  assistants,  Mr.  M.  embraced
^rmry  opportunity  of  speaking  of
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  salvation
through  him,  as  well  as  of  the
BJUstence  of  the  one  only  living  and
true  God.  On  this  latter  subject,
bfi  observes,  ''  their  ideas  are  ex-
eeedingly  obscure.  The  Chinese
people,  according  to  what  I  have
leeo,  hove  no  idea  of  one  Intel-
(Igent,  independent,  and  perfect
being — the  Creator  and  Governor
of  the  world.  They  have,  how-
ever, lords  many  and  gods  many,
before  whose  images  they  worship,
and  to  whom  they  offer  sacrifice.
The  word  heaven,  in  their  lan-
roage,  is  exceedingly  vague  ;  and
fb  seems  impossible  to  deternyne
Its  precise  signification,  as  they
ever  vary  in  their  definition  of  it.
An  atonement  my  people  do  not
think  necessary,  at  least  for  small
gins ;  and  of  ihe  pardon  of  great
sins  they  have  no  hope."     «

In  a  letter  addressed  to  the  di-
rectors, and  dated  April  2d,  1812,
Bffr.  Morrison  says,  ''  By  the  last
fleet,  which  sailed  about  a  month
ago,  I  wrote,  and  enclosed  you  a
copy  of  my  translation  of  the
Gospel  by  Luke,  and  a  Chinese
tract  on.  the  way  of  Salvation,
which  I  hoped  would  reach  you  in
safety.  I  now  enclose  you  a  trans-
lation of  a  Chinese  edict;  by
which  you  will  see,  that  to  print
books  on  the  Christian  religion,  in
Cliinese,  is  rendered  a  capital
crime.  I  must,  however,  go  for-
ward, trusting  in  the  Lord ;  though
I  shall  be  careful  not  to  invite  the
notice  of  government.  Indeed,
notwithstanding  my  consciousness
of  my  own  weakness,  I  am  not  dis-
^uraged>  but  am  thankful  that  my
most  sanguine  hopes  have  been
more  than  realized ;  as  the  practi-
cability pf  acquiring  the  language
4n  no  great  lengtii  of   time,   of


CAN

translating  ihe  Scriptures,  and  of
having  them  printed  in  China,  have
been  demonstrated.  I  am  grateful
to  the  Divine  Being  for  having
employed  me  in  this  good  work;
and,  should  I  die  soon,  it  will
afford  me  pleasure  in  my  last  mo-
ments.^'

The  Hev.  Wm.  Milne  arrived
at  Macao,  with  Mrs.  Milne,  in
July  1813,  as  a  colleague  to  Mr.
Morrison,  by  whom  he  was  most
gladly  received.  By  the  instigation
of  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy,
however,  the  Portuguese  govern-
ment ordered  him  to  quit  the
island  in  10  days.  To  this  .severe
measure  Mr.  Milne  was  obliged  to
submit,  and  he  removed  to  Canton,
where,  under' suitable  teachers,  he
applied  himself  assiduously  to  the
study  of  the  language.  As  Euro-
pean females  are  not  permitted  to
reside  at  Canton,  he  was  necessa-  '
rily  separated  from  Mrs.  M.,  who
continued  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Mora
rison  at  Macao.  Mr.  Morrison,
however,  subsequently  joined  Mr.
Milne  for  the  season,  which  con^
tinues  5  months.

In  Feb.  1814,  Mr.  Mihie  left
China,  in  a  vessel  which  conveyed
nearly  500  Chinese  emigrants,  for
the  purpose  of  distributing  the
copies  of  the  New  Testament  and
the  tracts  which  he  and  Mr.  Mor-
rison had  prepared;  and  he  had
the  pleasure  of  seeing  many,  while
on  board,  reading,  in  their  awn
language,  the  wonderful  works  of
God.  He  touched  at  the  island  of
Banca,  a  new  settlement,  where
the  Chinese  were  landed,  when,
by  permission  of  ^e  commanding
officer,  he  distributed  his  books.

It  haviilg  been  deemed  of  great
importance  to  commence  a  mission
at  Malacca,  Mr.  Milne,  at  the
urgent  request  of  Mr.  Morrison,  re-
moved thither  in  the  summer  of  1815.

Mr.  Morrison's  labours  among  his
domestics  were  nol  m  \a\w.  0\»
mon  was  bapUzed  vol  \%V&)  offi^  i

\\1


Can

Credible  profession  of  bis  faith ;  tod
some  others  were  inclined  to  declare
tbejnselves  Christians,  but  were  in-
timidated by  apprehension  of  the
consequences.

In  a  letter  dated  September  4,
181 T,    Mr.  (now    Dr.)   Morrison
says — '*  I  have  translated  the  morn-
ing and  evening  prayers,  just  as  they
stand  in  the  book  of  Common  Pray-
er, altering  only  those  which  refer  to
the  rulers  of  the  land.    These  I  am
printing,  together  with  the  Psalter,
divided  for  the  30  days  of  the  month :
I  intend  them  as  a  help  to  social
worship,  and  as  aftbrding  excellent
nnd  suitable  expressions  for  indivi-
dual devotion.     Mr.  Milne  wished
to  modify  them,  so  as  to  render  them
more  suitable  to  our  peculiar  cir-
cumstances j    but  as    they  possess
here  no   authnrity  but  their  own
general    excellence,    and  are    not
binding  on  the  practice  or  consci-
ence of  any ;  and  as  they  are  not
exclusive f — I  judged    it  better  to
preserve  them  as  they  are.    Addi-
"tionul    helps   may  be  afforded,   if
Ihey  shall  not  be  fully  adequate.
The  heathen,  at  first,  require  helps
for  social  devotion ;  and  to  me  it
appeared,  that  the  richness  of  de-
votional phraseology,   the  elevated
views  of  the  Deity,  and  the  explicit
and  full  recognition  of  the  work  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,    were    so
many  excellences,  that  a  version  of
them  into  Chinese,  as  they  were,
was  better  than  for    me  to  new
model  tliem.    The  church  of  Scot-
land supplied  us  with  a  catechism ;
the    congregational    churches   af-
forded us  a  form   for  a  Christian

^  assembly ;  and  the  church  of  Eng-
land has  supplied  us  with  a  manual
of  devotion,  as  a  help  to  those  who
.  are  not  sufficiently  instructed  to
conduct  social  worship  without
such  aid.  We  are  of  no  party.
We  recognize  but  two'  divisions  of
our  fellow-creatures — the  righteous
nnd  the  wicked — those  who  love

voT  Lord  Jesus  ChrMy  and  those  \


CAK

who  do  not."    Other  aaelal  Hoiii
were  also  executed.  (

On  the  25th  of  Nov,  lS19i  fhi
translation  of  the  Hoty  ISci^ptiini
hi  to  the  Chinese  langruage  was  hap-
pily brought  to  a  termination.  Ot
this  interesthig  occasion,  Dr,  Mor
rison  wrote  to  the  directon  ■
follows :— «  To  have  Moms,  Darht
and  the  Prophets,  Jesus  Cfaristand
his  Apostles,  using  their  own  wndi^
and  thereby  declaring  to  the  liA»
bitants  of  this  land  the  wcndBrfU
works  of  God,  indlcfites,  I  hopeyAi
speedy  introduction  of  a  happforoi
in  these  parts  of  the  world ;  and  I
trust,  that  the  gloomy  daiknewrf
pagan  scepticism  will  be  dineUei
by  the  day-spring  from  on  ofgli;
and  that  the  gilded  idols  of  Bnddal^
and  the  numberless  images  wtSA
fill  this  land,  will  one  day  assnndtf
fall  to  the  ground  before  the  power
of  God's  word,  as  the  idol  Dagoi
fell  before  the  Ark."

In  the  annual  Report,  commiiBfr
cated  to  the  general  meeting  of  the
L,  Mm  S,,  in  1823,  the  directm
observe — "  The  completion  of  Dr.
Morrison's  Chinese  and  Engttdl
Dictionary,  (which  has  occ^ried
more  or  less  of  his  time  during  •
period  of  \5  years),  as  well  as  that
of  the  Chinese  version  of  the  Hoty
Scriptures,  forms  a  kind  of  qxich  fa
the  histor}'  of  the  mission.

It  is  due  to  Dr.  Morrison  to  ob-
serve, that  by  means  of  his  Ghinott
and  English  Dictionaiy,  in  conjan^
tion  with  the  Chinese  GiammBr,
compiled  by  him,  and  pubUdied
about  12  years  ago,  he  hasfimiidied
for  the  use  of  English  students  of
Chinese,  highly  valuable  facilities
for  attaining  a  knowledge  of  th&
very  difficult  language  $  and,  at  the
same  time,  he  has  contributed  to
open  more  widely  the  door  of  accett
to  the  stores  of  Chinese  litenton
and  philosophy.

But  his  labours  in  this  depeit-
ment  are  chiefly  importani,  as  tbor


CA?f

iiie  iiaeBBS  of  attqining  witb  aficu-
nM7>  and,  as  Car  as  possible,  with
BMB,  the  language  o^  a  people  wiio
QOmpose  about  a  fourth-  part  of  the
mUn  population  of  the  globe.

It  may  further  be  observed,  in
rafaieoce  to  the  philological  labours
oi  ]>r.  MorrJ£on,  that  thiey  have  also
contributed  to  prepare  the  way  fcnr
the  future  dissemination  of  Euro-
pawB  learning  and  science,  through
tb0  medium  of  the  English  Ian-
gufge,  among  the  natives  of  China.
Tlie  Introduction  of  these  into  the
ompire,  as  objects  of  study,  in  the
tat  p}ace  to  the  more  learned,  and
gradually  of  education  to  others,
vould  naturally  tend  to  loosen  the
MsfB  of  superstition  and  prejudice ;
to  substitute  for  a  contempt,  perhaps
noro  feigned  than  real,  a  degree  of
mpect  and  veneraticm  for  the  inha-
Utants  of  Europe;  and  thus,  at
length,  to  procure  a  candid  atten-
tion, on  the  part  of  the  more  in-
quisitive of  the  Chinese  at  least,
tp  the  doctrines  and  evidences  of
Clinstianity.

Ever  since  the  year  18^,  the
Gospel  has  been  more  or  less  regu-
Uiiy  preached,  both  in  English  and
C}iinese,  either  at  Macao  or  Canton.
Nor  has  this  small  portion  of  the
Christian  ministry,  thus  insulated,  as
It  were,  and  conducted  almost  to
the  extremities  of  the  eastern  world,
been  wholly  destitute  of  effect.
Besides  the  advantages  derived  from
tbmie  religious  services  by  European
and  American  residents, ''  there  are
some  Chinese,"  to  use  the  language
of  Dr.  Morrison,  "  on  whose  con-
icieQces  divine  truth  has  made  an
impression. '^

On  the  9th  of  December,  1823,
I)r.  Morrison  embarked  for  Eng-
land, where  he  arrived  in  safety  on
the  20th  of  March,  in  the  ensuing
ji^ear.  Previous  to  his  departure
from  China,  he  dedicated,  by  prayer
and  imposition  of  hands,  a  native
convert  to  the  work  of  an  evan-
{[•list   among   his   own  countiy-


men;  securing  to  him  a  small
.annual  stipend  for  the  duties  to  be
performed  in  diichaige  of  his  sacred
obligations,  and,  at  the  same  thne,
permitting  him  to  pursue  his  secular
calling,  as  the  principal  means  of
his  support.

Shortly  after  Dr.  M.'s  arrival  in
England,  he  had  the  honour  to  be
introduced  at  Court,  by  Sir  George
Staunton,  Bart.,  as  the  first  Pro-
testant missionary  to  China;  and
was  presented  to  the  Kiiuf  by  the
President  of  the  Board  ofCoptrol,
the  Right  Honourable  Charles
Wynn.  Dr.  Morrison  was  per-
mitted to  lay  before  his  Mi^esly  a
copy  of  the  Chinese  version  of  the
Holy  Scriptures,  made  by  himself
and  the  late  Dr.  Milne ;  and  also
to  present  to  the  King  an  account
of  the  Anglo- Chinese  college  and
Singapore  institution.

In  an  official  communication  of
Sir  Geoi^e  Staunton,  dated  April
12,  1824,  Mr.  Peel,  the  Secretanr
for  the  Home  Department,  stated,
that,  in  laying  the  Chinese  Bible
before  the  King,  he  had  mentioned
the  very  singular  and  meritorious
exertions  made  by  Dr.  Morrison
for  the  promotion  of  religion  and
literature  in  the  East :  and  that  he
had  it  in  command  to  communicate
his  Majesty's  marked  approbation
of  that  gentleman's  distinguished
and  usef^  labourls.

Another  letter  was  subsequently
addressed  to  Dr.  Morrison  himself,
by  his  Majesty's  librarian ;'  in
which  the  writer  observes — "  I
have  received  his  Majesty's  cpm-
mands  to  convey  to  you  his  ac-
knowledgment, and  to  express  his
sense  of  your  attention  in  present-
ing, through  Mr.  Peel,  a  copy  of
your  Chinese  Bible.

**  And  his  Majesty  has  beep
pleased  to  direct  me  to  take  it  into
my  partic^r  care,  as  an  important
and  valuajki  addition  ifi  bis  li-
brary."

After  TendeiiuaxMXLN  \T)LN^>»xiSG\A


CAN

fervices  to  the  cause  of  missions,
ftiid  to  that  of  China  in  particular,
Dr.  Morrison  left  England  in  1826,
with  his  family^,    and  arrived   at
lAacao  on  the  19th  of  September.
,  The  first  Sabbath  after  his  arrival,
he  resumed   the  religious  services
he  had  been  accustomed  to  perform
previously  to  his  visit  to  £urope.
During  his  absence   from  China,
Leang-a-fa  composed,  among  other
works,  a  small  volume,  in  Chinese,
containing  explanatory   notes  on
the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     Of
this  work,  considering  the  few  ad-
vantages Afa  possessed.  Dr.  Mor-
rison speaks  favourably.    Afa  had
also  written  a  small  Essay  in  favour
of  the  Christian  Religion,  entitled.
The  True  Principles  of  the  fForld's
Salvation  ;  in  wnich  he  points  out
the  necessity   of  a   Saviour,    and
shews  that  Jesus  Christ  has  made
an  atonement  for  sin.    He  directs
the  attention  of  his  countrjinen  to
the  Bible,  which,  he  informs  them,
European  Christians  have,    at    a
great  expense,  caused  to  be  trans-
lated into  Chinese,  printed,    and
given  to  the  people.    He  had  like-
wise drawn  up  a  short  account  of
several    interesting   conversations,
held  at  different  times,  with  certain
of  his  countr}'men,  who  hod  casu-
ally taken  up  the  Bible  when  he
was  himself   present.    Since   Dr.
Morrison's  return,  Afa  has  drawn
up  a  brief  statement  of  the  religious
progress  of  his  own   mind  while
under  the  tuition  of  the  late  Dr.
Milne  at  Malacca,  which,  at  length,
issaed  in  his  determination  fully  to
embrace  Christianity.

The  above  accounts  relative  to
Leang-a-fa,  however  in  themselves
pleasing,  derive  additional  interest
from  the  almost  universal  rejection
of  the  Gospel  by  the  inhabitants  of
China,  with  which  they  stand  con-
trasted. An  empire  |J«  here  pre-
sented to  our  view,  ccnfrtaining  150
millions  of  souls,  involved  in  gross
spiiltaaldaikness;  while  standings


CAP

as  it  were,  on  its  utmostiieigBy  «^
behold  a  single  Individiiai  of  1M
empire  defending  the  existence  ai
perfections  of  the  true  Ood,  tte
necessity  and  efficacy  of  our  liOuM
atonement  for  the  sin  of  the  worl^
and  inviting  his  countrymea  to  ml
the  Scriptures,  which  have  hen
translated  for  their  use,  as  contii*'
ing  words  by  which  tbey  may  to
saved.  May  this  light — smaU,  faiiM^
and  comparatively  dim, — ^IncnHB
more  and  more,  until  it  shall  ik
length  break  forth  in  all  the  brigilW
ness  of  meridian  day  I

So  fully  persuaded  is  I>r,li(ab
rison  of  the  importance  and  ntiUI|f
of  comments  on  the  Scripture%  iii
reference  to  converted  and  inqoifr
uig  heathens,  that,  while  tlie  pnsaik
obstacles  to  preaching  the  Gospd
in  China  continue,  he  conceives  hi
ctmnot  moT^  profitably  employ  Ui
time  than  in  composing  explanstoiy
notes  on  the  Chinese  Bible.

CAPE  BRETON,  an  island  \^
the  gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  109  ■.
long  \  separated  from  Nova  Seotii
by  atfnarrow  strait.  PopuUdioi
about  3000.

The  Society  for  pntpagaimg  the
Gospel  in  Foreign  ParU  laboon
here.

The  principal  station  is  at  Bdi'
ivey^  where  are  a  missionaiy  tod
about  00  communicants.

Several  schools  are  supported  w
the  island  by  the  society.

CAPE  COAST,  or  CAPK
COAST  CASTLE,  a  British  set-
tlement on  the  Gold  Coas^  WJ
Africa.    Population  8000.  ■

The  Society  for  propagaUng  Hm
Gospel  in  Foreign  ParU  cmn-
menced  its  efforts  here  in  1T61.
'ifhe  principal  design  was  to  be-
nefit the  negroes  in  the  yicinily ;
but  it  was  soon  relinquished,  rad
renewed  in  1766,  by  ^e  appoint-
ment of  the  Rev.  Philip  Qumpitf'
a  native,  educated  by  the  society  fai
England  for  the  purpose.  He  con-
tinued to  labour  as  a  nAmUstmrf,

160


CAP

tttechist,  and  schoolmaster,  till
bout  1816.  He  was  soon  suc-
ceeded by  the  Rev.  fy,  Philip,
thaplain  to  the  African  Coip^any,
fho  died  soon  after,  and  was  fol-
Qfwed  by  the  Rev.  James  Collins.
for  several  years  the  African  Com-
mny  has  patronized  a  school  here,
if  about  75  pupils ;  but  the  super-
.titioDs  of  the  natives  have  greatly
"etarded  the  progress  of  civilization
md  Christianity.

CAPE  COLONY,  or  COLONY
>F  THE  CAPE  OF  GOOD
HOPE,  South  Africa,  extending
sast^rly  from  the  Cape,  about  700
B.  to  the  Keiskamma  R. ;  the
ireadtb,  from  N.  to  S.  varies  from
MM)  to  315  m.  Except  the  new
listrict  of  Albany,  the  colony  was
sken  by  the  British  from  the
Ootch,  in  1806;  who  were  the
wiginal  planters.  The  soil,  next
x>  the  sea,  is.  fertile,  and  the  face
>f  the  country  level;  but,  as  you
>roceed  to  the  N.,  it  rises  into  lofty
nountains.  The  population,  ae-
xnrding  to  late  official  returns,  is
l07,516,consisting  mostly  of  9utch,
Bnglish,  and  Hottentots.

The  colonial  government  is
taking  active  measures  to  abolish
ilavery;  and  several  schools  have
leentopened  for  the  instruction  of
daves.  Measures  have  also  been
wcently  adopted  to  employ  British-
xnm  ministers  in  the  churches,  who
ire  conversant  with  the  English  and
Dutch  languages,  with  a  view  to
nromote  the  established  system  of
the  church  of  England.  In  the
>olony  there  are  4  episcopal,  and
ibout  14  Dutch  churches.  In
July,  1822,  6  English  teachers  of
whools  arrived  jfrom  England,  who
Krere  also  instructed  in  the  Dutch
language,  to  be  employed  at  the
public  expense,  for  the  purpose  of
facilitating  the  acquirement  of  the
English  language  to  all  classes  of
jociety.  Soon  after  their  arrival,
%  piroclamation  was  issued,  in  which
it  was  ordered  that  the  English


CAP

language  should  exclusdvely  supef'
sede  the  Dutch  in  all  judicial  and
o£Bcial  acts  and  proceedings,  froih
the  1st  of  Jan.  1827.  These  inr
structors  are  placed  at  Caledon,
George,  Graaff  Reynet,  Stellen-
bosch,  Tulbagh,  and  Uitenhage.  It
is  intended  to  establish  similar
schools  at  every  principal  place  in
the  colony ;  within  which  are  se-
veral missionary  stations.  Cape
Town  is  the  capital,  and  ft  is  situ-
ated in  E.  long.  1 8°  23',  S.  lat.  34<>  6'.

CAPE  TOWN,  the  capital  of
the  territory  of  the  Cape ;  a  set-
tlement founded  by  the  Dutch.  It
stands  on  the  W,  side  of  Table  Bay,
and  is  a  town  rising  in  the  midst
of  a  desert,  surrounded  by  black
and  dreary  mountains.  Here  are
two  churches ;  the  great  one  used
jointly  by  the  English  and  the
Dutch  Calvinists,  the  other  by  Ger-
man Lutherans:  also  an  hospital
for  sailors,  situated  close  to  the  go-
vemor's  gardens,  to  which  there  is
free  access.  The  mountains  be-
hind the  town,  are  the  Table
Mountain  (3315  feet  high),  the
Sugar  Loaf,  the  Lion's  Head,
Charles  Mount,  and  James  Mount,
or  the  Lion's  Rump.  From  these
mountains  descend  several  rivulets,
which  flow  into  the  different  bays,
as  Table  Bay,  False  Bay,  (fee.
Among  these  mountains,  extend-
ing along  the  valleys  and  rivulets,
are  a  great  number  of  plantations ;
and  10  m.  S.E.  of  the  town  is  the
celebrated  farm  of  Const^ia,
yielding  the  wine  of  that  name.
This  town,  with  its  extensive  co-
lony, surrendered  to  the  British  in
1Y95,  and  was  restored,  in  1808,
by  the  treaty  of  Amiens ;  it  again
surrendered  to  the  British  in  1806,
and  was  finally  ceded  to  them  in
1814.  Cape  Town  is  34  m.  N.  by
W.  from  the  Cape.  E.long.  18<»23^,
S.  lat.  30»  50^.

"  Mahomedanism,"  says  the  Rer.
J.  Campbell,  in  1812,  <<  is  greatly
on  the  increase   m  Ca^eTomcu


CAP

Tbejrbave,  I  believe,  6  mosques,
tvbere  they^asseqable  for  their  wor-
ship. About  20  free  Mahomedans
club  tof]fether,  and  rent  a  large
house,  to  which  they  invite  poor
ignorant  slaves,  to  gain  tbem  over
to  their  party.  By  this  method,
an  alarming  number  have  been
persuaded  to  join  them,  and  ren-
dered ten  times  more  prejudiced
against  truth,  and  against  all  white
people,  or  persons  called  Christians,
than  they  were  before. '^

''  The  masters  say  that  such  houses
are  dens  of  thieves,  and  receptacles
of  goods  which  the  slaves  steal
from  them.  Perhaps  this  circum-
stance may  Induce  masters  to  at-
tend better  to  the  instruction  of
their  slaves,  which  may  ultimately
prove  a  blessing  and  a  security  to
the  colony.  In  general,  the  slaves
are  treated  with  tenderness  in  Cape
Town.  In  the  house  where  I
lodge,  they  are  treated  as  if  they
were  their  own  children,  and  most
of  them  would  be  sorry  to  leave  the
family.  Their  children  are  put  to
school,  and  play  about  the  room
where  the  family  sit  at  their  meals,
with  as  much  freedom,  and  receive
as  much  attention,  as  if  they  were
their  own  children.  But  they  are
slaves ! — a  condition  which  shocks
human  nature.  All  the  children
of  a  female  slave  are  the  property
of  her  master,  whether  the  father
be  bond  or  free :  of  course,  it  is
the  interest  of  the  master  to  see
that  even  the  motlier  treats  the
child  well,  on  the  same  principle
on  which  the  farmer  takes  care  of
his  young  foals,  because,  by  their
death,  or  their  disease,  he  becomes
a  loser.  Slaves  are  not  permitted
to  marry  5  which  is  not  only  an  act
of  great  injustice  towards  tbem,
but  a  heinous  sin  against  God.
There  are,  however,  many  slaves
who  consider  themselves,  by  their
own  mutual  consent,  husbands  and
wives.''

**  A  slave-ship,  containing  many


CAl»'

nlfiyet  bom  Mad^gaicar  Aiii  l|>
sambiaue,  was  lately  captiae^jkjf
one  of  our  crulzers.  The  ilim
were  landed  at  Cape  Town^  m^
apprenticed  to  masters  (or  14  jei|Bh
who  are  bound  by  ag^reement  |p
treat  them  well,  to  teach  thep  ■
trade,  and  to  instruct  them  in  iti»i^
ing,  and  in  the  principles  ojf^
Christian  religion — ail  whicby  k
some  caseSf  will  be  perfbnned.  I
visited  a  school  of  20  of  thop
strangers,  entirely  supportei^
Commissionefr  Shiel5._  Tfaej  ip
appeared  to  be  from  18  to  S4  yeip
of  age.  Several  of  them  Rpd  4p
New  Testament  tolerably  veU,
and  repeated  questions  f rom<  WfifipY
Catechism.  On  the  Loid's^i^
they  are  well  dressed  in  e  Idnd  of
uniform,  and  attend  the  cbviclk*
I  have  no  doubt  that  their  teqpi*
rary  captivity  will  not  only  be  |
blessing  to  themselves,  but  also  to.
their  country,  should  they  ew
return."

The  Rev.  Geo.  Thom,  from  tJv
Ij,  M,  S.,  arrived  at  Cape  Town  i|i
i8l2y  and  laboured  zealoody  tP
promote  the  cause  of  religioPy  9|ft
only  there,  but  also  in  other  paid
of  the  colony,  for  several  yeaqLi
and  afterwards  accepted  .the  oOiff
of  Dutch  minister  at  CaledpOyji^
der  the  appointment  of  the  oa|p«
nial  government.  In  1819^^  flip
Hev.  Dr.  Philip,  who  had  bM
appointed  superintendent  of  tjf
society's  missions  in  that  part  of  t|^
globe,  increased  the  qongregatJlD|i
previously  collected,  and  obtfthM^
permission  to  build  a  chapel.  Tjiif
commodious  place  of  wonhipvii
opened,  Dec.  1,  1822.  Throm^
Dr.  Philip's  agency,  premises  hvff
also  been  purchased,  to  he  occ^
pied,  in  part,  as  a  dwelling-hooae
by  the  society's  resident  egei^
and  as  a  temporary  abode  for  A
missionaries  who  may  tondi  at  the
Cape,  disembark  there^  or  oc6ar
sionally  visit  it  from  the  interior*
The  building  will  ahK>  afibid  fui-

1^


IB;


(c


r


k
Ifb-


i

\

i


CAP

titles  in  aid  of  plans  of  education,
priilch  enter  into  the  measures  of
the  Society  for  promoting  the  dis-
lemination  of  the  Gospel  in  South
Africa.  The  Rev.  Mr.  Beck,  for-
merly connected  with  the  S,  Afri'
lan  if.  S.y  which  laboured  here,  for
many  years,  with  considerable  ef-
fect, was  at  this  time  an  important
uid  gratuitous  coadjutor  ;  16  hea-
Qiens  were  united  in  church-fellow-
Aj!p,  and  under  bis  pastoral  care.
Between  300  and  400,  chiefly  adults,
iirere  under  his  weekly  catechetical
Inatruction  ;  and  the  Sabbath-school
3onsisted  of  about  100.  Through
mcceeding  years,  considerable  suc-
cess attended  the  means  thus  em-
(floyed.  It  being  deemed  neces-
lary  for  Dr.  Philip  to  visit  England,
tiis  place  is  supplied,  pro  tempore,
by  the  Rev.  R.  Miles.  An  aux-
Uary  M.  S.  has  been  established.

The  fF,  M:  S.,  by  means  of  se-
veral of  its  agents,  has  sought  the
gvelfare  of  this  once  destitute  town.
\.  buildiiig,  designed  for  a  school
ind  meeting-house,  was  opened,
Fane  16,  1821.  This  mission  is,
iowever,  more  important  in  its
sonnexion  with  the  interior  mis-
dons  than  in  itself.  But  still  the
opportunities  of  usefulness  are  not
ew ;  and  the  preaching  to  the
layes,  and  the  school  for  slave
children,  have  conveyed  to  many
>f  this  class  the  knowledge  of
Christ,  and  brought  them  under  its
noral  influence.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Wright,  a  mis-
ionary  from  the  society  for  the
^^^ropagation  of  the  Gospel  in  Fo-
reign Parts,  restored  the  national
chool  to  a  state  of  efficiency,  in
.sSly  which  soon  increased  to  more
ban  300  scholars,  mostly  Dutch.
fie  also  preached  to  a  congregation
it  Wynberg.

Efficient  Tract  and  Bible  Socie-
ies  were  formed  here  in  1820, which
ire  patronized  by  the  local  autho-
rities, and  are  designed  to  extend  .
Iheir  beneflts  tbrougbout  the  cO'  I


CAH

lony.  The  B.  S.,  within  aboui  A
year  of  its  formation,  declined  a
grant  of  about  £200  from  the  Pa*
rent  Institution,  in  consequence  of
the  sufficiency  of  its  pecuniaiy  re-
sources

CARRADIVE,  asmall  island  of
North  Ceylon,  about  4  m.  from  Bat-
ticotta.  Here  are  several  thou-
sands of  people,  mostly  Roman
Catholics,  among  whom  the  jifne-
rican  Missionaries  in  Ceylon  have
frequentiy  laboured  and  distributed
tracts  and  portions  of  the  Scrip-
tures. The  influence  and  oppod-
tion  of  the  priests  are  the  most  dis^
couraging  circumstances  against
the  prevalence  of  truth.

CAREY,  the  mission  station  of
the  American  Baptist  Board  for
Foreign  Missions,  among  the  Pu-
tawatomie  Indians  in  Michigan.
This  station  was  so  called  by  the
Board  as  a  token  of  fraternal  affec-
tion and  respect  for  the  Rev.  Dr.
Carey,  missionary  at  Serampore.
It  is  situated  on  St.  Joseph's  R.  in
the  southern  part  of  Michigan  ter-
ritory, 100  m.  N.  W.  Fort  Wayne,
about  the  same  distance  from  any
white  inhabitants,  and  nearly  200
m.  from  any  compact  settlement.

The  Rev.  tsaac  M^Coy,  who  had
been  for  several  years  at  Fort
Wayne,  removed  here  in  the  latter
part  of  1822 ;  encouraged  by  the
generous  ofi'er  of  the  Indians,  that,
on  condition  of  his  settling  among
them,  they  would  give  him  a  mile
square  in  the  heart  of  their  settle-
ment, in  addition  to  1000  dollars  a
year  for  15  years,  secured  to  them
by  the  government  of  the  United
States,  to  support  a  teacher  and
blacksmith.  A  school-house  and
a  dwelling-house,  containing  3
apartments,  have  been  erected.  A
school  was  commence,  Jan.  27^
1823,  which  contained  53  native
pupils  at  the  close  of  the  year.
The  Indians  appear  very  friendly^
and  are  ready  to  commit  t\\«vx  cbi^-
dren  in  grester  n\im\«T&  \»  ^Jcva  ^«»

\5^


CAR

xsi  the  mifsionaries^  than  their
means  will  enable  them  to  sup-
port. The  pupils  are  instructed  in
the  arts  of  civilized  life,  and  ac-
customed to  habits  of  industry.  A
considerable  farm  is  cultivated,
which  has  been  mostly  stocked  by
individuals  in  the  neighbouring
states.  Before  the  end  of  1823,
Mr.  M 'Coy  had  several  associates
in  his  labours.  Their  prospects
are  very  encouraging.

CARMEL,  formerly  Talomy,
a  mission  station  of  the  Am^ioan
JBoard  of  Commissioners  /or  Fo-
reign Missions,  among  the  Che-
rokees,  62  n^.  S.  E.  Brainerd,  and
30  S.  E.  Spring  Place,  on  the  di-
rect road  from  Augusta  to  Nash-
ville, near  a  small  river,  called
Talking  Rock  Creek,  and  6  m.
from  the  Cherokee  town  of  Talo-
ney,  which  lies  oii*  from  the  road,
in  a  north-easterly  direction.  Mr.
Moody  Hall  removed  his  family
here  urom  Brainerd,  and  opened  a
School,  May  9, 1820,  in  compliance
with  the  earnest  solicitations  of
the  principal  men  of  the  village
and  its  vicinity :  previous  to  which,
suitable  buildings  had  been  erected.
About  30  entered  the  school  the
first  week ;  and  the  number  soon  in-
creased to  50.  The  average  num-
ber may  be  about  30,  who  generally
are  eager  in  the  pursuit  of  use-
iul  knowledge,  make  good  profi-
ciency, and  cheerfully  submit  to
wholesome  regulations.

The  agricultural  prospects  of
this  station  are  pleasing ;  and  it  is
expected  that  provisions  for  the
mission  family  will  easily  be  fur-
nished from  the  land  here  culti-
tivated.  The  labours  of  Mr.  Hall
have  been  blessed  to  the  spiritual
good  of  many.

He  has  given  religious  instruc-
tion to  a  small  congregation  on  tbe
Sabbath,  when  the  scholars  are  re-
quired to.  attend,  who  are  cate-
chised in  the  presence  of  the  con-
gregation.    Early  in  the  spimg  oi


CAA


1^23,    a  church
when  6  Cherokee  convertf
admitted  to  ChrisUan  fello!
and  with  their  household^
number,    were    baptized.
!  scene  was  witnessed  by  a'  na^
i  rous  assembly  £rom  di£»rent  p«k.
of  the  nation,  and  excited  gnn^
interest.    The  seriousnese,  ^riii\
then  prevailed,  continued  in  ij|
early  part  of  1824,  and  gate  '
creasing   hope   that  many
become  savingly  benefited
Gospel.    Previous  to  that  time,  f  I
more    Chetokees     and    a  irbwl
woman,  wife  of  a  Cherokee,  M ,
been  admitted  to  t^e  priTilegei  4 !
the  church  ;  and  several  nov  gff
evidence  of  a  saving  change.    Til
Rev.  Daniel  S.  Butrick,  wf^ki
laboured  as  an  evangelist  in  alaoit
every  part  of  the  nation,  has  bp*
stowed  much  attention  on  the  Cjih
cerns  of  this  mission.

CATARAUGUS,  an  Indian  19«
servation  in  the  State  of  Nflf
York,  o^  the  eastern  shore  of  LdB
Erie,  about  40  m.  S.W.  of  B«&
falo.  It  comprises  about  89>Mf
acres  of  land,  and  450  inhabitulh
a  large  majority  of  whom  fm  P*
gans,  and  opposed  to  the  intro4B(r
tion  of  the  Gospel.  Tliey  bekai
to  the  Seneca  tribe,  except  a  liff
families  of  Munsees,  so  ci^ed  fitw
the  name  of  the  place  where  Ibir
formerly  resided.  The  PJ^v.fFmJt
Thayer,  assistant  missionarvfim
the  United  Foreign  M.  S.  (ifnM
States),  commenced  labouring  hert
in  1822.  Mr.  T.  was  ijippoi^tedtf
this  station  in  compliance  with  tiw
earnest  solicitations  of  22  chlet
and  2  interpreters.  Of  the  chidfib
7  belonged  to  Cataraugus*  3  to
Allegany,  and  12  to  BuffiUo.  He
arrived,  with  his  family,  in  ."Mp^i
1822,  but  found  the  oppositjonif
tbe  pagan  party  so  violent,  that  IM
judged  it  inexpedient  to  settle  oy^
the  reservation,  and  procured  ac-
commodations fbt  his  scImmI  Iv
\\Vie  \mm&^Q.\ft 'HVcA&lt^^  which  hi


CAW

Jan.  14,  1823  ;  and  at  the
the  year  he  had  27  pupils,
ire  provided  for  in  his  fa-
The    Christian    party  are
gratified  with  the  school,
3  pleasing  change  effected
children,  and  seem  ready
rd   every  assistance   which
anty  means  will  allow.    A
r  land  has  been  purchased,
i  on  the  reservation,  about
from  the    Seneca  mission-
on   which   buildings  have
ected  for  the  mission.    Mr.
has  been  very  useful  to  the
m  party  by  holding  meet-
ith  them  on  the  Sabbath,
latter   part  of   1823,  Mr.
f  and  Miss  Lucy  Beards  ley
signed  to  this  mission.
'^NPORE,  a  town  and  im-
militarj-   station  in    AUa-
Hindoostan,  on  the  W.  bank
Ganges,   49  m.  S.  W.   of
w.     E.  long.  8P,  N.  lat.

'  in  1809,  the  lamented  Rev.
Marty n  removed  from  Di-
to  this  place,  and  continued
iful  labours  among  the  sol-
d  natives  till  the  latter  part
)llowing  year.  At  the  same
e  indcfatigably  pursued  the
ion  of  the  Scriptures  into
stanee  and  Persian ;  and
d  the  erection  of  a  house
ship.

)nsequence  of  the  zeal  of
pious  soldiers  who  were
ed  at  Cawnpore,  Nriputa,
the  natives  assisting  the
missionary  at  Allahabad,
it  hither  in  1818,  and  was
3ful.

^ee- School  Association  was
ed  by  the  principal  Euro-
sidents  at  this  station.  May
^21,  to  afford  gratuitous  in-
n  to  European  and  Hindoo
children  in  Cawnpore  and
fiity,  and  to  support  such  as
titute.  Within  about  two
be  number  of  beneficiaries


CEL

amounted  to  158.  The  funds  tiro.
supplied  by  subscriptions  and  sa-
cramental collections.  The  Dis-
trict Committee  of  the  Christian
Knoioledge  S,,  furnish  books  for
the  children.  They  have  alko  es-
tablished a  Lending  Library.  This
is  an  encouraging  field  for  mis-  -
sionary  labour.

The  C.  M.  S.  also  labours  here.  ^
The  following  account,  ^iven  by
Archdeacon  Corrie,  is  from  the
last  Report : — "  The  native  con-
gregation, commenced  last  cold
season,  has  continued  to  increase,
under  the  steady  labours  of  the  na-
tive catechist  (Peter  Dilsook),  who
is  now  encouraged  and  supported
by  the  presence  of  the  Rev.  Mr.
Torriano.  The  number  attending
on  Sunday  worship  is  now  about
30,  and  a  separate  place  of  wor-
ship has  become  necessary  for  their
accommodation.  There  are  se-
veral candidates  for  baptism."

CELEBES,  or  MACASSAR,
an  island  in  the  Indian  Ocean,  to
the  E.  of  Borneo.  It  is  660  m.
from  N.  to  S.,  and  divided  into  va-
rious portions  by  large  bays,  so  that
the  breadth  is  commonly  not  above
60  m.  The  E.  side  of  the  Island
is  sometimes  called  Celebes,  and
the  W.  Macassar ;  but,  in  general^
the  former  name  is  given  to  the
whole  island.  The  inhabitants  are
Malays,  consisting  of  several  na-
tions or  tribes,  and  the  best  soldiers
in  these  parts.  The  most  power-
ful tribe  are  called  Buges,  and  have
something  free  and  dignified  in
their  manner,  superior  to  other
Malays,  and  are  remarkably  in-
dustrious. Their  chief  town  is
Boni,  situated  on  a  river,  near  its
entrance  into  the  Bay  of  Boni.
The  Dutch  have  some  settlements
on  the  coast,  of  which  ^e  chief  is
Macassar.  In  1810,  the  English
obtained  possession  of  those  of
Gorontano  and  Manadg;  and,  in
1 8 1 2,  of  that  of  MacassKT  *,  \i\i\.>2aK3
were  restored  in  \%\5.

\55


CER

The  NetkerkmdM  M,  S.  appointed
the  Rev.  Mr.  Kellendroon  to  Ma-
cassar, the  capita),  having  a  po-
pulation of  100,000,  in  1820.  This
i^and  is  also  occasionally  visited  by
the  Rev.  Mr.  Kam,  of  the  L»  M,  S,

CERAM,  one  of  the  Molucca  or
Spice  Islands,  in  the  East  Indian
Ucean,  near  the  N.  E.  coast  of
Amboyna,  190  m.  long,  and  nearly
40  broad,  belonging  to  the  Dutch.
The  inhabitants,  including  .3  small
islands  in  the  vicinity,  are  estima-
ted at  15,000.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Kam's  occasional
visits  have  been  instrumental  of
much  good  to  the  native  Christians,
and  recently  a  mission  lias  been
established  here  under  his  direction.
The  inhabitants  of  two  villages  in
this  island,  where  the  Rev,  Mr.
Stamink  then  laboured,  have  de-
stroyed their  idols.  The  children
were  summoned  to  attend,  with
their  parents,  to  witness  the  spec-
tacle, that  they  might  keep  the
event  in  remembrance.  The  people
of  the^e  villages  were  formerly
notorious  for  wickedness-;  but  since
they  have  embraced  Christianity,  a
great  improvement  in  their  con-
duct has  taken  place.

CEYLON,  an  island  in  the  In-
dian Ocean,  separated  from  the  S.E.
point  of  Hindoostan,  by  Palk  Strait,
and  the  Gulf  of  Manaar.  The
natives  call  it  Cingala,  whence  they
are  called  Cingalese,  and  by  the
drabs  it  is  called  Screndib.  It  is
270  m.  long,  and  140  in  its  greatest
breadth,  nearly  resenibling  a  ham  in
shape,  the  narrow  part  to  the  N. }
and  hence  the  peninsula  of  Jafiha-
patam  was  called  Hamsheel  by
the  Dutch.  The  flat  track  around
the  coast,  cohered  with  rich  fields  of
rice,  are  bounded  by  groves  of  co-
ooa-nut  trees ;  and  the  prospect  is
usually  terminated  ^y  woods,  which
cover  the  sides  of  mountains.  The
woods  and  mountains  completely
surround  the  kingdom  of  Kandy,
/ind  form  a  strong  natural  b&xnex.


CET

The  climate  oa  the  S.  andSi*
is  more  temperate  than  ontta^  -^^
tinent  of  Hindoostan ;  boty  iB  ^
interior  of  the  country,  the  he»  #
often   extremely    sultiy  and  ^.i
healthy.    The  most  considfln^
mountain  is  called  Adam^.Aifc
in  the  S.  part  of  the  island,  uilF
visited  by  numerous  pilgiimi.  Jit:
of  a  conical  form,  alxtut  TOW  tt,
in  height ;  and,  in  the  area,  oi V
top,  is  a  rock  of  iron  stone,  wttLw
impression  on  it  in  the  shape  at  |
man's  foot,  but  considerably  luiii;
the  Cingalese  have  a  tiaditioii  ftit
Budha,  the  great  aiititor  <tf  M.
religion,  left  the  print  of  his  fint
on  this  rock,  when  he   taoaiti
into  heaven.    The  only  'eonitti*
able  river  in  the  bland  is  tfaeUir
hawelle ;  but  there  are  many  ettff
fine  ones,  yet  few  of  them  are  Mi
vigable,  even  for  small  baat%  Ujda
up  than  16  m.  from  the  sea.    a^
side  the  rivers,  with  which  theli-
land  abounds,  there  are  ma[nylikH^
tanks,  and  canals,  conminnieilii^'
with  them ;  also  many  natunl »
line  pools,  some  of  great  ezM^
from  which  much  salt  is  pradnoiti
In  some  places  there  are  rich  mian^
whence  are  procured  rubiei^sj^
phires,  topazes,  and  other  ttau»4
less  value;  also  iron  und  maigir
nese.     Colombo    js    the  ca{dtA
£.  long.  I9^6(y  to  S2^,  N.  ULIS^gf
to  9°  52'.

The  inhakitawU  are  diTide4  ^P
Malabars,  Cingalese,  PortqgiiM^
Dutch,  and  English,  and  ha«e  beM
estimated  at  1,500,000;  and  If
some  between  2  and  3,000,0001
They  are  mostly  pagans  of  HindOi
origin,  or,  as  they  are  often  deapv
miuated,  a  nation  of  atbeista.
There  are,  however,  m^ny  j^tHm
who  bear  the  Christian  oaiMj
amounting,  it  is  estimated^  t)
200,(iOQ,  one-fodrth  of  whan  an
Catholics,  In  the  northern  part  d
the  island  are  about  7000  Ma^
medans;  and,  in  the  interior,  ft.  r


CEY

ctve  never  been  subjected^
U>  the  native  Cing^ese  or
Europeans ;  and  i^  so  de-
»  as  to  be  incapable  of  any
ivenunent.

Malabara  speak  the  Tamul
ige,  and  profess  the  Hindoo
II.  They  occupy  ail  the
rt  of  the  island,  from  Ne-
on the  W.,  and  Batticaloe
£.,  to  the  extremity  of  Jaf-
Jie  N.  They  are  a  manly
.  much  superior  to  the  Cin-
and  are  said  to  be  not  in-
x>  any  of  the  tribes  of  In-
At  times  they  have  been
to  put  off  the  forms  of  hea-
1^  and  to  take  the  i^emblance
rfetianity;  yet  they  have
tidlcally  changed  their  reli-
fior,  to  any  great  extent,
utoms.  Some  barriers  have
iioken  down,  such  as  the
f  of  widows,  and  polygamy ;
one  have  been  weakened,
s  the  rights  of  ckste ;  but,
fisential  respects,  the  people
)  same  grovelling  idolaters
Y  ever  wefe.  As  soon  as
!tish  government  gave  them
to  worsliip  their  idols,  the
s  were  rapidly  rebuilt ;  and
tvho  had  assumed  the  pro-
of Christianity  to  please
Mrmer  masters,  almost  una-
ly  relapsed  into  idolatry,
ihmins  are  of  the  first  caste,
deceitful,  treacherous  set  of
^bo  succeed  in  imposing  on
nds  of  the  people  the  most
tenets.

Cingalese,  supposed  to  be
lent  possessors  of  the  island,
all  the  interior,  and  the
•n  parts — speak  the  Cinga-
rnguage — are  indolent  and
it,  and  worshippers  of  Budhu.
eem  to  possess  fewer  pre-
against  Christianity,  than
Uowers  of  the  brahminlcal
,  chiefly  from  their  indif-
i  about  fill  religion.    Tbey^


CJSY

,  having  no  hereditary  priesthood,  nor
division  of  caste,  are  more  ac-
cessible than  the  Malabars  or  Hin-
doos. Their  temples  are  nume-
rous, in  which  are  gigantic  images
of  Budhu,  30  or  40  feet  high.
Their  priests  amount  to  about
1500,  who  differ  so  much  in  their
sentiments,  that  it  is  very  difficult
to  ascertain  what  forms  tiieir  reli-  ^
gious  system.  They  sdy  that  Na-
habrachmea  is  their  great  God,  and
that  he  dwells  in  the  highest  hea-
ven, but  does  not  concern  himself
with  the  affairs  of  this  world.  Be-
side him,  they  have  gods,  whose
names  they  can  mention,  to  the
number  of  30,000 !  They  deny  the
existence  of  a  Creator,  atid  main-
tain that  the  wor^i  owes  its  being
to  chance !  They  hold  the  doc-
trine of  the  transmigration  of  the
soul,  for  a  certain  time  ;  and  when
that  has  elapsed,  they  suppose  it  is
totally  annihilated.  Budhu  is  the
object  of  their  worship,  because
they. think  l^e  superintends  the  af-
fairs of  men.

Throi^hout  the  island,  detnl'
worship  prevails,  but  the  Cin^ese
are  most  dreadfully  devoted  to  it.
Devils  are  regarded  as  the  authors
of  all  temporal  evils ;  to  avert  which^
they  have  temples  and  priests  de-
dicated to  them.  This  is  entirely
distinct  from  Bndhism ;  and,  in
many  districts,  is  rapidly  gaining
the  ascendancy.  It  leads  to  tiie
most  inhuman  sncrifices  and  prac-
tices. When  the  Portuguese  made
inroads  upon  the  island,  in  1506^
they  brought  their  artillery  to  bear
upon  the  heathen  temples,  and
levelled  them  with  the  ground;
and  thus  thousands,  through  fear,
were  induced  to  acknowledge  the
supremacy  of  the  Pope.  In  1658,
the  Dutch  took  possession  of  the
island,  and  introduced  the  protes-
tant  religion  j  yet  their  policy  was
calculated  to  make  nominal  Chris-
tians, lathei  thiSi  t««\  c^tv^v^r^^i^

p  \61


CHA

issuing  a  decree,  that  no  one  should
hold  an  office  under  government,
who  was  not  a  baptized  Christian.
They,  however,  did  much  to  en-
lighten the  people,  and  had  many
faithful  ministers,  the  vestiges  of
whose  pious  labours  are  still  appa-
rent. They  divided  their  posses-
sions on  the  island,  into  240  parishes,
in  each  of  which  a  protestant  school
was  established.  They  also  trans-
lated and  published  considerable
portions  of  the  Scriptures  in  the
Tamul  and  Cingalese  languages.
Since  1796,  most  of  the  island  has
been  in  the  possession  of  the
British.

The  Governor  is  appointed  by
the  King  of  England,  and  not  by
the  East  India  Company.  For  a
considerable  time  the  religious  in-
struction of  the  natives  occupied
no  part  of  the  attention  of  their
new  masters.  After  the  lapse  of
about  3  years,  most  of  the  schools
I  were  revived,  and  the  Dutch  minis-
ters resumed  the  charge  of  their
congregations ;  but  these  are  mostly
dead,  or  have  left  the  country  ;  and
the  people  are  now,  in  a  great  mea-
sure, destitute  of  Christian  instruc-
tion, except  what  is  afibrded  by
chaplains  and  missionaries.  It  is
a  very  interesting  and  important
field  for  missionary  labour.

[See  Amlamgodde,  Atchavelly,
Baddagamme,  J^atticaioe,  Bat  it'
cotta,  Calpentyn,  Calturcn  Cohm-
bo,  Cotta,  Galie,  Jaffna,  Kandy,
Koniegalle,  Manepy,  Matura,  Ne^
gumbo,  Nellore,  Oodoovilie,  Pan-
diteripo.  Point  Pedro,  Tillipally,
Trincomaiee,]

CHANGANY,  or  CHAN-
GANE,  a  parish  in  Ceylon,  about
2  m.  N.  of  Batticotta,  The  Ame-
rican missionaries  at  Batticotta
have  bestowed  much  attention  on
the  people  here  in  preaching,  dis-
tributing Scripture  tracts,  and  es-
tablishing schools.  In  J  818,  a
large  school  was  opened,  which  is


CHA

supported  by  childieD  in  tb^  fltajj^
bath-scho(d  in  Chailestowiiy  S^^
rolina.  The  roi«doiMiriea  hf|i
opened  2  other  school*  in  tUifft*
rish,  in  the  village^  ol  Moolai  iid
Sittinkemy.  Many  aeem  imzliHi
to  receive  religious  instruction.

CHARLESTOWN,  a  tovB  li
Rhode  Island,  Washington  Coo*
try  (America),  on  the  aeaK^m^  1$
m.  S.W.  of  Newport.  Jiem  a?
about  400  of  the  Narragamettil^
of  Indians,  who  have  »  Bh^
church  and  a  school.  The  Saeit^
far  propagating  the  G^ipeiammi
the  Jndiatis  and  others^  in  N.  Am^
rica,  erected  a  schooI-lioiiN  iiii
established  a  school^  in  ISUi
which  has  been  maintainedi  vtfh
occasion^  interrujptions,  and  Tim
been  highly  beneficial  to  the  i|i->
tives.

CHARLOTTE,  a  town  of  libe-
rated Africans,  inthepaxiahofSt
John,  Sierra  Leone,  W.  Afiiek
In  1817,  the  inhabitants  amqanted
to  only  85.  In  1823,  there  wesefRI.

The  C.  M.  &,  in  i819^;Hit
hither  Mr.  Christopher  Titylir  i9d
Mrs,  Taylor,  scho(d«teacbcii|  aid
Mr.  John  Jackson,  na;dve  atBisM
The  progress  of  education  w«tple»
ing,  and  habits  of  industry  bavcbm
happily  induced.  A  schogl-honii^
30  feet  by  30,  wasbuilt»  and  w^smid
as  a  place  of  worship,  but  waa  VP
found  insufficient.  AMissionaiuAft*
sociation  was  formed,  anil  ^  naliw
collectors  appointed,  who  faitl^fiilty
discharged  tiie  duties  otHif^Ut
fice.  It  having  been  sug^^estij)
that  produce  would,  bis  received  ii
lieu  of  money,  160  bushela  of  cap*
sada  were  presented  in  the  coane
of  a  ieyf  days.  Tlie  amooiitof
contributions,  in  1824,  was  JM  fir*
The  returns  of  the  school,  .at  the
close  of  this  year,  yrpt^x  —  'Bag^
day-school,  57 — girls'  day-acboeli
73 — scholars  residing  with  tiieir|iar
rents,  20— adults'  eveninff  school,
48  i-^tot«^  108,    S^pe  tfat  tijBBf),


H

IB

ta


1 1


n


■


4
5


9

i


CHA

Sir.  Taylor  has  died,  but  other  la-
UDmers  have  been  sent.  At  pre-
tent  the  ehurch  services,  on  Sun-
ill^  find  week-days,  are  rep^arly
kept  by  Mr.  Pierce,  as  far  as  is
consistent  with  bis  lay  character.
He  states,  that  about  100  adults
attend  on  Sundays,  and  from  12
tb  16  on  the  week  eveninjcrs.  The
fltiendance  has  been  much  im-
proved, in  consequence  of  Mr.  P.
irecently  visiting  from  house  to
boose.  The  numbers  in  the  schools
at  Michaelmas  1826,  were,  boys,

CHATTOOGA,  a  settlement
among  the  Cherokees,  about  60  m.
B.W.  Brainerd,  and  6  from  Fort
Armstrong.  In  1820,  Mr.  Milo
Hoytf  of  Brainerd,  opened  a  school
for  the  natives,  which  was  relin-
qoished  before  the  close  of  the  year.

CHEROKEES,  an  Indian  na-
tion, whose  territory  embraces  the
8.  W.  comer  of  N.  Carolina,  the
N.  W.  part  of  Georgia,  the  N.  E.
part  of  Alabama,  and  that  portion
of  Tennessee  which  lies  S.  of  the
Hiwassee  and  Tennessee  rivers  ;
containing  at  least  10,000,000
acres.  Its  greatest  length  is  about
f50  m.,  and  its  greatest  breadth
•bout  130,  from  the  mouth  of  the
Hlwassee,  in  aS.S.E.  direction,  to
the  boundary-line  between  the  Che-
Tokees  and  Creetcs.  The  climate  is
generally  healthy,  and  the  soil  fer-
tile. The  population  is  estimated  at
about  12,000,  exclusive  of  about
6000  who  reside  in  the  Arkansas
territory.  Those  who  emigrated  to
the  Arkansas  R.,  as  well  as  those
on  their  ancient  grounds,  have
made  considerable  advances  in  ac-
qairing  the  useful  arts,  particularly
in  the  manufacture  of  cotton  and
•  woollen  cloths.  In  1816,  they  had
upwards  of  500  looms,  most  of  which
they  made  ;  and  about  as  many
ploughs.

They  live  mostly  In  log  cabins,
not  much  inferior  to  those  of  the
whites  Jn  the  neigbboming  settle-


CHE

ments,  and  cultivate  their  land.
Many  have  large  stocks  of  cattle,
and  raise  an  abundant  supply  of
provision.  About  one-half  of  the
nation  are  of  mixed  blood,  by  in*
termarriages  with  the  white  people.
They  are  brave  in  war,  and  yet
remarkable  for  their  hospitality.
In  their  dress,  they  have  almost
universally  adopted  the  English
habits,  and  are  neat  and  clean  in
their  persons.  Their  intellectual
powers  have  been  sufficiently  tried,
to  prove,  beyond  debate,  that  tfiey
are  not  inferior  to  the  whites  in
mental  capacity,  and  that  they  are
capable  of  receiving  the  highest
Improvement.  The  structure  and
regularity  of  their  language  evince,
beyond  a  reasonable  doubt,  that
their  remote  ancestors  were  refined
and  improved.  The  Hon.  John  /Vc-
kering,  of  Salem,  Massachusetts,
has,  with  the  .assistance  of  Mr.  Da-
trid  Browriy  a  Cherokee,  nearly  pre-
pared for  the  press  a  Grammar  of
the  language,  which  wiU  render
important  aid  in  systematizing  the
kindred  dialects  of  the  Choctaw,
Chickasaw,  Creek,  and  several
others.

Many  of  their  religious  rites  bear
a  striking  resemblance  to  those  of
the  Jews,  and,  some  think,  forcibly
argue  that  the  aborigines  of  Ame-
rica are  the  last  ten  tribes  of  Israel.
They  believe  in  the  existence  of  the
Great  Spirit,  and  can  form  no  com-
bination of  words  in  their  language,
by  which  they  cim  profane  the  name
of  God.  They  are  said  to  have  a
tradition  among  them,  that  the
Great  Spirit  has  made  provision  for
the  recovery  of  bad  men  by  pro-
mising his  Son,  which  is  yet  to  be
fulfilled.  By  their  intercourse  with
unprincipled  white  men,  they  had
become,  generally,  divested  of  re-
ligious principles  and  moral  r^
slraints ;  but,  by  the  introduction  of
schools,  their  situation  is  rapidly
improving,  both  Viv  mQ(T«^&  «w^  ^\«
Tilization:  and  \\.  \s  ivo\.  cYvV\M5tvR»!L

\5^


CHE

to  calculate,  that,  at  a  period  not  far
distant,  they  will  become  English  in
their  language.  Christian  in  their
religion,  and  civilized  in  their  gene-
ral habits  and  manneit.

In  1799,  the  Rer.  Abraham  fSUn-
fwr  was  sent  out  by  the  United  Bre-
thren,  to  ask  oermission  to  establish
a  school  in  the  nation.  He  pressed
the  subject  in  the  national  council,
and  was  seconded  by  the  officers  of
gOTernment,  but  was  utterly  refused.
In  1600,  he  renewed  his  applica-
tion, and  was  again  refused :  but,  be-
fore the  close  of  the  council,  two  in-
fluential chiefs  agreed  to  patronize
the  school,  which  was  soon  opened
on  land  cleared  by  one  of  them;
and  sjiortly  after,  the  mission  and
school  were  commenced  at  Spring
Place,  At  Uiis  time  no  waggonr
rDad  had  ever  been  cut  in  the  terri-
tory, and  no  one  was  permitted  to
own  a  waggon.  The  objection  was,
if  waggons  were  owned,  roads  must
be  made,  which  would  afford  faci-
lities for  the  whites  to  come  among
them.

In  1824,  the  work  of  God  was  pros-
pering— new  instances  of  usefulness
occurring  from  time  to  time.  Bro-
ther Schmidt  says,  in  a  letter  dated
May  26th : — "  On  Whitsunday,  one
young  perscm  will  be  baptized,  and
two  confirmed  for  the  first  enjoy-
ment of  the  Lord's  Supper.  In  this
manner  the  Lord  encourages  us,
and  strengthens  our  faith.  He  also
grants  the  children  in  our  school  to
give  us  much  pleasure.  We  have
at  present  13  scholars,  viz,,  10
boys  and  3  girls  $  who  all  shew
diligence  and  obedience.  They  all
board  with  us,  and,  out  of  school-
time,  assist  us  in  our  housekeeping.
The  girls  cook  and  wash,  and  the
boys  are  very  serviceable  in  the
garden  and  the  farm.''  The  mis-
sionary had  recently  procured  2
Cherokee  children  for  their  school,
who  were  to  be  educated  at  the
expense  of  certain  friends  of  the
brethren  at  Boston,  and  to  beat


CHiB

thehrnamet.  HkoongngatloBo^
sisted  atthistimeof  0  baiitjaBdadS^
of  whom  6  were  cawimiinic«irt%.  ..i,

A  chief,  and  wanaX  nsttiK
residing  at  Ooekgeelogy,  M-in,
from  Spring  Place,  Geoigik  tli
central  point  of  ttia  joiikmu  Qit>
vemment  of  the  Char^Eew^  MlPi
been  converted  by  jneana  of  ^
missionaries  at  Spring  Plaoe,  a  m0
station  was  fonoftd  thera  in  UXL
Divine  service  is  aiffteoded  ifi.fk
house  of  a  chief;  and,  ia  Majj^lflML
8  persons  belonged  to  tha  8odii|^.s

The  Rev.  Gideon  J9U^Mm,
under  the  auspices  of  the  tfmh
rai  Assembly  of  the  Pw€$ii/tmim
Church,  instituted  a  miinitu  aaof
the  Cherokees  in  1804,  wfaid^lp
conducted  in  person,  aqi  with  im^
inadequate  assistance  and  nfiport*
and  within  about  $  yean,  betip^
4  and  500  young  pencms,  of  botil
sexes,  were  so  instmcted  ap  to  Ip
able  to  read,  with  a  good  degnie  4
facfiity,  in  the  Englidi  BiUe^win
propor^nably  advanced  in  fp^Hlgp
writing,  and  arithmetic;  and, .|t
the  same  time,,  were  taqgiht-1lN
principles  of  the  Christian  seUglfln;
and  several  became  liopeM  9tf^
exemplary  Christians.

They  have  now  public  loadib  9^^
have  made  astonidiing  advaacatil
agriculture,  domestic  maaoiaciamk
and  the  mechanical  arts ;  and  hvie
made  a  liberal  grant  of  ahiMit
100,000  acres  of  land  for  a  peipt-
tual  school-fund,  to  beap|ilied,ttimi
the  direction  of  the  Preaideiil  ^
the  United  States,  to  the  edofift'
tion  of  their  children.  They  have
instituted  a  civil  govermnent,  md
their  legislative  proceediogi  -  aie
marked  by  integrity  and  paMot-
ism.  They  have  divided  tiieb  eoia-
try  into  8  districts,  or  coimtii%
laid  a  tax  on  the  pecq|>le  to  boildA
court-house  in  each  of  tltme  coim*
ties,  and  appointed  4  circuit  Ju4gei*
Tlieir  incipient  jurisprudence  u>*
pears  to  secure  ti^e  reqieet  of  tM


CHI

NotwiHutanding  these  encoa-
rai^ng  appearances,  however,  it
l«*not  to  be  disgruised,  that  many
things,  still  remaining  among  the
Cheitdcees,  are  greatly  to  be  de-
plored.  Much  poverty  and  wretch-
Bdneas ;  several  gross  vices, — par-
tieularly  drunkenness,  and  an
•ImcMt  total  ignorance  of  (rod,  his
law,  and  the  plan  of  salvation ; —
need  to  be  chased  away,  before  the
people  generally  can  reach  the
proper  standard  of  rational  and
Immortal  beings.  What  has  been
already  done  in  the  way  of  com-
unmlcating  evangelical  instruction,
though  of  inestimable  value  to
such  individuals  as  have  received
flptrituai  benefit,  and  as  an  experi-
aient  of  what  may  be  done, — is  yet
«  mere  specimen  of  that  benevolent
agency,  which  needs  to  be  ex-
tended, not  only  to  every  part  of
the  Cherokee  country,  but  to  ail
the  Indian  iribes  in  N.  America,
and  to  all  the  heathens  on  the  globe.

[See  Arkansas,  BrainerU,  Car-
melf  Chattooga,  Coosawaytee,
Oteek  Path,  Uaweis,  High  Tower,
ykUeW'Towns,  /ViiUtomi.]

CHlAUW,OT  ZlAUW,an  island
belonging  to  the  Dutch,  in  the  B.
Indian  Ocean,  situated  near  the
equator,  in  E.  long,  about  128^.
The  Rev.  Mr.  Kam,  of  Amboyna,
haft  extended  his  labours  here,  and
oecqsionally  preaches  to  large  con-
gregations. The  King  is  a  truly
pious  man,  is  much  disposed  to
promote  the  spread  of  the  Gospel,
terotes  much  time  to  the  instruc"
tfcrn  of  his  slaves,  and  has  erected
a  large  house  for  worship.  During
one  visit  Mr.  Kam  baptized  about
SOOO  persons.

CHICKASAWS,  Indians,  whose
eoantry  lies  mostly  within  the  char-
lered  limits  of  Mississippi,  but  em-
braces a  small  portion  of  Alaba-
ma; bounded  N.  by  Tennessee,
R.  by  part  of  Alabama,  S.  by
the  Choctaw  country,  and  W.
by  the  Mississippi ;  about  120  m.


CHI

long,  and  nearly  the  same  in
breadth.  The  population,  accord-
ing to  the  return  of  the  United
States'  agent,  a  few  yean  since,
was  6456.  In  1823,  it  was  esti-
mated at  only  4000 :  and  of  this
number,  it  is  supposed,  300  are
resident  whites  and  negroes.

Like  their  neighbours,  the  Che-
rokees  and  Choctaws,  they  are
considerably  advanced  in  civiliza-
tion. They  are  said  to  possess
more  than  ordinary  capacity  for
learning,  are  naturally  good-hu-
moured and  affable,  and  exceed-
ingly fond  of  mirth  and  ornaments*
Their  territory  is  divided  into  4
districts ;  over  which  are  4  here*
ditary  princes,  who  are  under  the
direction  of  a  hereditary  prince  or
king.  The  succession  of  these  is
in  the  female  line  of  the  family.
Beside  these  officers,  they  have  a
chief  counsellor  and  speaker,  and,  in
every  district,  a  chief  warrior,  with
some  other  subordinate  chiefe.
These  are  all  elective.  They  are
governed  by  laws  of  tiieir  own;
but  almost  all  their  regulations  are
very  defective.  They  have,  how-
ever, passed  an  act  against  the
introduction  of  ardent  spirits  into
the  nation,  which  has  produced  a
salutary  restraint,  and  rendered
the  vice  of  intoxication  less  fre-
quent than  formerly.  The  spirit  of
civilization  is  evidentiy  advancing,
and  they  are  more  and  more  con-
vinced of  the  importance  of  educa-
tion, and  of  the  necessity  of  a  dif-
ferent mode  of  life  from  tliat  which
they  have  hitherto  pursued.  Their
previous  dependence  for  subsistence
is  becoming  more  precarious,  and
the  only  alternative  left  is  to  aban-
don the  pursuit  of  game,  and  to
turn  their  attention  to  the  culture
of  the  soil.  Such  a  state  of  things
is  peculiarly  favourable  to  the  in-
troduction of  the  agricultural  and
mechanical  arts,  and  the  Gospel  at
the  same  time.
A  school  was  estQb\is\i«d.  vxanicij^
p2  \^V


CHI

fais   people   by   the    Cumberland,
M,  S.  in  1821,  containing  between
80  and  SO  scholars.    The  govern-
ment of  the  United  States  allows  400
dollars  annually  to  tills  institution.

The  M,  S,  if  the  Synod  of  S,  Ca-
rolina  and  Georgia  also  selected  a
station,  in  1821,  situated  within  the
chartered  limits  of  the  Mississippi,
about  50  m.  from  its  eastern  boun-
dary, on  an  elevated  spot  of  the  di-
viding ridge  between  the  waters  of
the  Tombeckbee  and  Jazoo,  2  m.
S.  Mackintoshville,  about  30  W.  of
Cotton-gin-Port,  and  TO  N.  W.
Columbus.  This  station  is  called
Monroe,  Eighteen  months  were
occupied  in  clearing  land  and
erecting  buildings.  In  1823,  about
40  acres  were  under  cultivation.
In  May,  1822,  the  school  com-
menced ;  the  average  number  of
scholars,  who  are  orderly  and  in-
dustrious, is  about  60.  Religious
meetings  are  well  attended,  and
several  persons  have  hopefully  em-
braced the  truth.  Local  schools
are  contemplated  in  the  vicinity.

CHILI,  or  CHILE,  a  country
of  South  America,  extending,  on
the  coast  of  the  Pacific  Ocean,  from
lat.  250  to  45*  S.  from  the  desert  of
Atacama  to  the  River  Biobio.  Its
length  is  1400  m.,  but  it  varies  in
breadth  from  140  to  340,  to  its
eastern  boundary, which  is  the  great
chain  of  the  Andes.  It  was  go-
verned by  a  Spanish  ofiicer,  who
held  the  title  of  Captain-general  of
the  kingdom  of  Chili,  and  was  the
president  of  the  royal  audience,
established  at  St.  Jago  and  Con-
ception. But,  in  1810,  a  revolu-
tion took  place  among  the  inhabi-
tants of  this  countr}',  who  separated
themselves  from  the  Spanish  mo-
narchy ;  and,  on  Jan.  1,  1818,  .the
Chili  government  issued  a  procla-
mation from  the  directorial  palace
at  Conception,  declaring  Chili  and
its  adjacent  islands  an  independent
state,  and  for  ever  separated  from
Ihe  monarchy  of  Spain.    By  \h»


CHI

consUtatkm  of  1918,  Ite  a«niHe
was  gofemad  by  a  SopMne  Dliw
tor  and  a  CongfeM.  TbB  IbBM
pos«e»ed  all  the  ezeentiie  im»m
but  his  acts.murt  liare  tl>e  tMdtai
of  the  latter.  TliegofeiiimeBftli^
however,  still  in  an  nnse^lled  iMbl
Chili,  though  bordering  cm  the  te*
rid  zone,  never  faelithe  extrefld^cf
heat,  being  screened  on  the  E.ly
the  Andes,  and  lefiedied  finon  ttii
W^.  by  cooling  setf-breeset.  Hi
fertility  of  the  soil  Gonpei|KMidi  vlA
the  benignity  of  the  cUmatey  oi  ii
wonderfully  accommodated  to  S«|i
pean  prodactiooeu  CluU  Is  nstJi*
fested  by  any  kind  of  insect.


I


i


the  chiguas,  or  pricker ;  norlijaif
poisonous  reptile.  In  the  wni
and  fields  some  snakes  wre  Idsb^
-but  their  bite  is  not  danigeroiis ;  n
does  any  savage  or  feiooloQi  bMk
excite  terror  in  the  plains.  Tbi
chief  rivers  are  the  Maale>BkiM0^
Cauten,  Tolten^  Valdivia,  Chaifll^
Riobueno,  and  Sin£ondo»  ipftdflh^
with  many  others,  rise  in  the  An-
des, and  flow  W.  into  the  PteUfi
Ocean.  The  population  is  000,0H^
exclusive  of  Indiana.  It  is  difiM
into  the  three  intendencies  d  Go-
quimbo,  St.  Jago,  and  ConcepiUflit
St.  Jago  is  the  capital.

Mr.  Eaton,  from  Uie  jBL  jr  /•
S.  S.,  became  superintendent  d
schools  here  in  1821.  After  sa^
cessf uUy  establishlngschoids  en  iha
British  system,  at  Boenoa  AjN%
Mr.  Thompson  also  proceeded  i
this  coun^,  and  was  no  less  pra-
perous  in  the  objects  of  his  nsiisina  ■
He  was  followed  by  Mr.  .He«la%
who  arrived  at  St,  Jag9,  thec»piial
of  the  country,  Sept.  1881  $  was
favourably  received  by  the  Sopreae
Director  of  the  govenmenty  and
was  immediately  engaged  to  sqw-
intend  a  school  for  150  bc^ys.  An-
other  school,  on  a  laiger  scale^  wai
soon  opened,  in  rooms  provided  hf
government;  and  several  moie
were  in  progress  to  be  imtahlinhfri
in  the  Literary  Institutkin.

\8a


I

I


CHI

Tbe  Ammcan  B»  S,  has  for-
«ud0d  aeoasklerableiiumberofSiMi-
iridi  £U^e9  wid  Testaments  to  Chili,
wUdi  haw  been  gladly  received;
■ad  the  translation  £is  been  approved
liy  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy.

CHINA  Proper,  extends  from
the  g^at  wall  on  the  N.,  which
iepamtes  it  ^om  Chinese  Tartary,
te  the  Chinese  Sea,  about  1300  m.;
•nd  about  the  same  distance  from
Ihe  Pacific  Ocean  on  the  £.,  to  the
frontiers  of  Thibet  on  the  W. ;  lying
Jietween  100^  and  120P  £.  long.,  and
tetween  210  and  41<'  N.  lat.  The
ienitories  of  the  empire  embrace
Thibet,  Maodshuria,  Mongolia
Proper,  and  the  whole  of  central
Asia,  between  Hindoostan  and
Asiatic  Russia.  On  the  W.  it  is
iseparated  from  Independent  Tartary
1^  a  chain  of  mountains.

The  population  of  China  Proper
has  been  estimated  at  333,000,000 ;
but  is  generally  supposed  to  be  about

jiM,ooe,ooo.

The  language  is  not  only  one  of
the  most  anciei^t  in  the  world,  but
ii^  perhaps,  the  only  one  of  the
early  ages,  which  is  still  spoken
liy  the  living.  It  is  supposed  to  be
used  by  about  one-third  part  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  globe.  It
possesses  much  ancient  literature,
which  has  been,  for  many  centuries,
the  constant  study  of  the  literati  of
China ;  who  have  polished  it  to  a
high  degree  of  what  they  deem  an
el^^t  conciseness,  and  richness
of  classical  quotation  and  allusion  ;
so  that  the  written  style  of  the
learned  is  nearly  as  different  from
the  plain  language  of  the  people,
as  that  of  ancient  Rome  from  the
aodem  dialects  of  Europe.  This
language,  the  most  singular  upon
earth  in  its  construction,  and  sup-
posed to  be  so  difficult,  that  any
knowledge  of  it  was  limited  among
Europeans,  to  the  curiosity  of  a  few
learned  men  and  to  the  imperious
necessities  of  commercial  inter-
course,   has   been   conquered   by


CHI

Christian  missionaries ;  and  is  now
rendered  tributary  to  the  difiusion
of  Gospel  light  among  this  immense
portion  of  mankind,  notwithstand-
ing the  violent  opposition  that  is
maide  to  Christianity.

The  got/emment  ,is  patriarchal.
The  emperor  is  absolute ;  but  ex-
amples of  tyranny  are  very  rare,  as
he  is  taught  to  regard  the  people
as  his  children,  and  not  as  slaves.
The  first  principle  instilled  into  the
people,  is  to  respect  their  prince
with  so  high  a  veneration,  as  almost
to  adore  him.  All  places  of  honour
or  profit  are  at  his  di^osal,  as  well
as  the  lives  and  property  of  his
subjects.  He  is  seldom  seen,  and
never  addressed  but  on  the  knees.
0[  the  officers,  or  mandarins,  there
are  9  classes,  from  the  judge  of  the
village,  to  the  prime  minister.

The  national  pride,  and  exclusive
claim  to  pre-eminence,  of  the  Chi-
nese, derives  most  powerful  support
from  ibe  vain  idea  that  their  go-
pemment  is  formed  on  the  model  of
nature ;  and  is  a  transcript  of  the
noblest  of  its  visible  parts, — viz,,
the  heavens.  The  form  of  their
cities — the  reg^ulation  of  the  palace
— the  duties  of  prince  and  people —
the  evolutions  of  their  armies — the
order  of  their  standards — ^the  m^e
of  their  chariots — the  ascent  and'
descent— the  arrangements  at  th^ir
feasts—  and  even  tin  very  shape  and
fashion  of  their  garments,  (fee.  <fec. —
were  all  anciently,  and  still  are  in
a  good  degree,  supposed  to  bear  a
resemblance  to  something  in  the
visible  heavens;  to  some  star  or
constellation — ^to  some  motion^
supposed  or  real — ^to  some  grand  ter-
restrial objects,  or  to  some  recon-
dite physical  principle.  They  often
judge  of  the  intentions  of  Provi-
dence with  regard  to  the  events  of
war,  and  the  destiny  of  nations,
from  the  appearances  in  the  hea<«
vens.  Of  old,  they  sent  forth  their
armies — they  overturned  thrones —
they    puni^ed     opv^«s»«%— Ab^i


CHI

Mized  on  territory ;  all  in  obedience,
«s  they  supposed,  to  the  asi)ects  of
celestial  phenomena.  If  to  .these
erroneous  conceptions  be  joined
their  antiquity,  their  vast  popula-
tion, their  immense  riches,  their
defect  in  scientific  improvements,
their  want  of  sound  principles,  and,
especially,  the  depravity  of  the  hu-
man heart,  which  they  have  in  com-
mon with  others, — ^we  can  hardly
wonder  at  the  high  and  exclusive
tone  which  they  assume ;  or  at
their  extravagant  claims  to  supe-
riority over  the  nations  of  the  earth.

The  religion  of  China  is  a  strange
mixture  of  superstitions,  of  which
everyone  receives  or  rejects  as  much
ss  he  pleases.  From  time  immemo-
rial, peculiar  homage  has  been  paid
to  the  memory  of  the  dead  by  the
Chinese.  What  is  known  of  their
religion  previous  to  the  time  of
Confucius,  is  fabulous  and  uncer-
tain. This  most  celebrated  ancient
philosopher  of  China,  was  born
about  450  years  before  the  Christian
era ;  and  seemed  designed  to  re-
form, in  some  measure,  the  corrup-
tions which  prevailed  in  the  civil
and  religious  establishments  of  his
country.  He  condemned  the  ido-
latry practised  by  his  countrymen,
and  maintained  that  Deity  was  the
most  pure  and  perfect  principle,
— «temal,  infinite,  indestructible,
omnipotent,  and  omnipresent.  He
considered  the  sun,  moon,  <fec.  the
immediate  agents  of  Deity,  inse-
parably connected  with  Him,  and,
as  such,  objects  of  worship.  Many
parts  of  his  doctrine  were  calculated
to  preserve  the  superstitious  notions
stiU  prevalent.  By  his  sage  coun-
sels, his  moral  doctrine,  and  exem-
plary conduct,  he  obtained  an  im-
mortal name,  as  the  Reformer  of  his
country ;  and,  from  respect  to  his
memory,  his  descendants  enjoy,  by
inheritance,  the  title  and  office  of
mandarins.

Soon  after  his  death,  a  species
of  Lamanism  was  introduced  into


CHI

China  from  Thibet :  and,  aboot  fhe
year  85,  the  lectof  FbWw  iBM'
duced  from  India.    The  name  il0 ,
derived  from  the  idol  Fb,  imniMtf
to  be  the  Budhu  of   Hindoo«Mr
About  the  Idth  century,  raai^  #
the  literati  embraced  a  new  vfAmU^
nearly  allied  to  atheism  \  bat  Mt
is  confined  to  a  few.    The  Chi— >
in  general,  are  so  far  from  beiilj''
atheists,  that  they  go  into  the  oppi^
site  extremes   oif  polytheiam.    H
China  no  religton  is  prefened «
encouragred   by  government,    il
the  present  time,  ita  gods  vx%  IL .
use  an ,  expression  of  the  seettfj

number  like  tiie  sands  of  Hof
river."  Most  of  the  forms  of  w^'-
thology,  which  make  any-figme  li-
the page  of  history,  now  eiM  li
China,  except  that  their  indk^cil
parts,  and  their  direct  tendency  to
injure  human  life,  have  been  eik
off.  The  idolatry  of  ancient  Oi*
naan,  of  Elgypt,  of  Greece, of  Roiii^
ofChaldea,  andof  India,  are  aH'ti
be  found  here,  though  with  loM
slight  variations.  ^  China  has  In
Diana,  her  .Solus,  her  Ceies^  kr
Esculapius,  her  Mars,  her  Mereiriff
her  Neptune,  and  her  Plato,  II
well  as  the  western  pagans  hid*
She  has  gods  celestial,  terresWd^
and  subterraneous;  gods  of  the  hffl^
of  the  valleys,  of  the  woods,  of  ftl
districts,  of  the  family,  of  the  §baff
and  of  the  kitchen!  She  adcm
the  gods  who  are  supposed  to  pfi*
side  over  the  thunder,  the  rain,  al
the  fire ;  over  the  gprain,  over  bdhrffei
and  deaths,  and  over  the  small-poi*
She  worships  "  the  host  of  heafen—
the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stan.**
She  also  worships  the  genii  of  the
mountains,  rivers,  lakes,  and  seas  t
together  with  birds,  beasts,  9M
fishes.  She  addresses  prayers,  and
offers  sacrifices,  to  the  q»irits'af
departed  kings,  sag^  heroes,  ifii
parents,  whether  good  or  bad.  Her
idols  are  silver  and  g^d,  wood,  aai
stone,  and  clay,carved  or  molten,  tht


CHI

pudc  <if  men's  bands*     Her  altars
ijni  on  the  high  hills,  in  the  groves,
99der  the  green  trees.     She  has
1^  up  her  idols  at  the  comers  of  the
rtipeets,  on  the  sides  of  the  high-
vajRs,    on  the  banks  of  canals,  iji
ImstB,   and  in    ships.     Astrology,
dbrination,  geomancy,  and  necro-
Wratcy,  everywhere  prevail.  Spells
aaid  charms,  every  one  possesses :
Ihey  are  hung  about  the  neck,  or
■titched  up  in  their  clothes,  or  tied
to  the  bed- posts,  or  written  on  the
doors ;  and  few  men  think  their
p^fsoDs,  children,  shops,  boats,  or
gjDodSy  safe  without   them.     The
eaaperors  of  China,  her  statesmen,
tier  merchants,  her  people,  and  her
liUlosophers  also,  are  all  idolaters.
With  regard  to  future  retribu-
tloDs^  those  of  the  sect  of  Confu-
cius profess  to    know  no   life   to
GfMne^  but  that  which  their  children
aiid  posterity  shall  enjoy  on  earth :
tience  their  views  rise  no  higher ;
In  this  their  fears  and  hopes  seem
to  terminate.
•  The  Elysium  of  the  West,  which
the  followers  of  Fuh  look  for,  is
such  as  the  deluded  imagination  of
Qji  Asiatic  would  naturally  paint.
IPortified  palaces — groves  of  trees
Iiroducing  gems — pools  of  fragrant
"Water,  yielding  the  lotus  flower  as
large    as   the  wheel  of  a  cart —
showers  of  sweet  odours,  falling  on
a  land  the  dust  of  which  is  yellow
^old — myriads  of  birds,  of  the  most
exquisite  plumage,  singing  on  trees
of  gold,  with  the  most  harmonious
and  ravishing  notes,  of  a  hundred
thousand  kinds,  <&c.  <&c.    Such  is
their  paradise  ;  but,  in  conformity
with  the  comparative  contempt  in
which  the  female  character  is  held
throughout  the  east,  they  exclude
all  women,  as  such,  from  a  partici-
pation therein.  Those  females  who
have  acted  well  on  earth,  are  first
transformed  into  men,  and  then  ad'
mitted  into  that  palace  of  delights.
The  sufferings  of  the  Tartarus
which  iheir  terriBed  imaginaUons


CHI

have  figured,  are  represented  in
pictures,  as  the  punishments  in
purgatory  and  Tartarus  were
exhibited  in  the  Eleusinian  and
other  heathen  mysteries :  with  this
difference,  however, — that  these
are  exposed  to  public  view  ;  those
were  seen  by  the  initiated  only.
Lakes  of  blood,  into  which  women
who  die  in  child-bed  are  plunged ;
red  hot  iron  pillars,  which  the
wicked  are  caused  to  embrace ;
devouring  lions,  tigers,  snakes,  dec. ;
mountains  stuck  all  over  with
knives,  on  the  points  of  which  the
condemned  are  cast  down,  and  seen
weltering  in  gore ;  cutting  out  the
tongue — strangling — sawing  asun-
der between  flaming  iron  posts  j
the  condemned  creeping  into  the
skins  of  those  animals  in  the  form
of  which  they  are  destined  to  ap-
pear again  on  earth ;  boiling  of  the
wicked  in  caldrons  \  the  wheel,  or
apparatus,  by  means  of  which  all
the  operations  of  the  metempsycho-
sis are  performed ;  horned  demons,
with  swords,  spears,  hatchets,  and
hooks;  wretched  mortals  alter-
nately shivering  with  indescribable
cold,  and  burnt  to  coals  with  de-
vouring fire  ; — these,  with  number-
less otber  such  things,  are  repre-
sented with  gross  and  disgusting
minuteness.  Instead  of  producing
any  salutary  fear  in  the  mind,  they
fill  the  imagination  with  horrid
figures ;  the  real  existence  of  which
the  better,  informed  surely  cannot
believe;  or  which,  if  believed,
must  either  totally  weaken  the
springs  of  action,  or  render  those
deluded  heathens  inconceivably
wretched  even  in  tbls  life.

Their  system  of  morals,  as  ex-
plained by  the  sect  of  the  learned,
contains  much  that  is  good.  Many
of  the  duties  of  relative  life  are  set
forth  with  as  much  clearness  as
could  be  expected  from  a.  people
who  know  not  the  true  God.  But
to  those  who  can  com^fare  it  ?^ith
the  system  of  ChmUaii  e\5Q\c&  ^\i-

\^5


CHI

tabled  in  the  New  Testament,  it
must  in  all  particulars  appear  de-
fective, and  in  many  exceedingly
erroneous;  especially  if  the  mo-
tiTes  and  ends  of  human  actions,
and  the  spirit  in  which  they  should
be  performed,  be  taken  into  the
account.  Some  important  duties
are  also  entirely  left  out ;  and  others
carried  to  such  extraTagant  lengths,
as  to  render  them  not  only  irksome,
but  oppressive.

Female  infanticide,  which  still
prevails  in  China,  if  it  had  not  ori-
ginallv  sprung  from  their  doctrine
of  YIN  and  VANG,  which  sets
•very  thing  masculine  in  so  ex-
alted, and  every  thing  feminine  in
■o  inferior,  a  light,  was  doubtless
gfrcatly  increased  thereby.

Their  general  belief  in  the  me-
tempsychosis, and  in  the  inevitable
decisions  of  a  numerical  fate,  pre-
vents the  cordial  exercise  of  bene-
volence and  beneficence.

Their  cold-hearted  philosophy,
indeed,  teaches  and  applauds  the
practice  of  alms-deeds.  Charity
falls  clear  as  the  dew-drop  from
the  lips  and  pens  of  their  sages,
but  often  freezes  ere  it  reach  the
ground.  Even  the  natural  desire
which  all  men,  as  human  beings,
feel  to  assist  their  fellow-creatures
in  distress,  is  greatly  weakened  in
China — often  entirely  counteracted
— by  a  fear  of  opposing  the  will  of
the  gods,  who  send  men  back  to
endure  poverty  and  misery  in  this
world,  as  a  punishment  for  the
crimes  of  a  former  life ;  or  by  a
belief  that  all  efibrts  which  tend  to
counteract  the  decrees  of  fate,  are
not  only  fniitless,  but  wrong;  or
by  a  criminal  selfishness,  hardness
of  heart,  and  indifierence  to  other
people's  happiness,  which  some-
times allows  them  even  to  sit  still
at  ease,  and  suflfier  another  man,
close  by,  to  drown  in  the  waves,  or
his  property  to  consume  in  the
flames,  when  a  little  effort  on  their
part  might  save  both.


CHI      •

Itittrae,  indeed,  that
the  more  rational  coBdan
evils,  and  have  written
them ;  especially  agabut  ft —  -^  _
fanticide;  but  nflww  Itttto  iii|>
can  all  such  well-nieaiit  eftrikl
correct  the  horrid  crime  Ie|i4||
the  principles  which  me  tf^^^
are  held  in  bcmoar !  Tliej  MV
consistent  with  tbemsdiei  "V
one  part  of  their  writtBg^  lA
deplore  the  bitter  eonsmifll
and  warn  men  i^^aimt  tttft
while,  in  the  other,  theyWV
vertently  magnify  the  eaanlM
which  they  rise,  as  the  oiiIy«Mf||k
of  excellence  and  perfectiiNi  1411
universe.  They  deprecate  %
mortal  sbeam,  and  yet  Icel  tt
impoiaoned  fountain ;  th«y  11119
to  lop  the  branches,  andyetBoilJ
the  root!

Though  vice,  in  all  its  dhenM
forms,  exists  in  China,  stilL  i|i
haps,  its  external  featnrei'oDW
at  first  sight  appear  so  gnw  m\
some  other  countries.  But  H'
not  to  be  concluded  from  beM
that  the  degree  of  it  is  leas  that
other  parts  of  the  heatten  wori
For  the  opinions  and  cintom '
aU  ranks  of  society  not  only  ,fi
nish  sufficient  excuse  fQir  the  en
mission  of  many  sins  agafnU'  i
law  of  God,  but  have  ema  ink
them  to  a  certain  degpree  of  i
spectability  and  honour ;  ondlifa
it  becomes  very  dlfllcalt  to  d
vince  them  of  the  moral  turptti
of  those  evils  in^hich  their'pan
and  their  best  and  wisest  men,  bi
from  age  to  age  indulged.  Chto
manners  and  customs  are  tbiA
into  80  regular  and  digeitod
form,  as  that  a  stranger,  but  an
ficially  acquainted  with  the  fc
giiage  and  real  spirit  of  the  C
nese  people,  seems  to  see  moet
praise,  and,  comparatively,  litttt
blame :  while,  at  the  same  tfa
the  nation  groans  under  oppreai
and  violence;  their  ooorta  are  ffl
w\Vk\  \)itfti«n  veA.  VQ:vaMBb\  ^


\


CHI

rlcets  with  coining  and  deceit ;
Ikouses  with  concubines;
itr  monastexies  with  ignorant,  in-
»xit,  and  filtiiy  ascetics,  *'  who/'
use  the  words  of  a  Chinese
'-A  Viit«9r,  "  are  not  worth  the  ^own
'*  ^  •  feather  to  society;'*  their
"^'Whools  and  colleges  with  high-
ViVftliided,  self-sufficient  literati,  to
^  VilQse  proud  and  sophisticated
^  JJttds  the  humbling  doctrines  of
^  MliB  Gospel  will  be  no  less  ob-
"*  ^^^Ixlous  than  they  were  to  the  sar-
^  ^^•■tic  pride  of  a  Celsus  !
^  8uch  is  the  state  of  China!  Such,
rj"  5^?*'  enjoying  the  philosophy  of
^  -^OQliicius  for  more  than  2000
"^Birs!  Such,  after  Roman  Ca-
.  ^  Vk)Uc  Christianity  has  existed  in
^'  -'it  for  upwards  of  two  centuries !
^  Cbch  it  was,  when  the  mission  to
China  was  proposed,  and  such  it  is
^     «t  the  present  hour !  —  [See  Can-

Jmu]

'      ^  CHINSURAH,  a  town  of  Hin-

doortan,  in  Bengal,  with  a  fortress.

it  stands  on  the  W.  bank  of  the

•  '^  Hoogly,  20  m.  N.    of   Calcutta.

The  principal  houses  are  built  of

brick,  with  terraced  roofs,  in  the

Moorish  style.      In   consequence

of  a  convention  entered  into  on

the  part  of  his  Britannic  Majesty

.with  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,

it  was  ceded  to  the   English   in

JS26.

-  The  Rev.  Robert  May,  who  was
sent  out  by  the  L.  M.  S.,  with  a
yiew  of  aiding  the  mission  at  Vizi-
gapatam,  especially  in  the  tuition
of  chUdren,  for  which  be  had  a
peculiar  talent,  was  enabled,  after
«  long  detention  in  America,  to
pvoceeid  to  India.  He  landed  at
Calcutta,  Nov,  21st,  1812,  and,  by
a  peculiar  concurrence  of  circum-
stances, WAS  led  to  settle  at  Chin-
suxah.  Soon  after  entering  on  his
labours,  he  was  bereaved  of  Mrs.
May.

In  1816,  the  number  of  schools
under  Mr.  May's  care  was  30,  in
which  Uiere  were  mor^  than  2000


I


CHI

children.  The  Rev.  Mr.  PeanoB»
who  was  highly  qualified  for  the
work,  was  afterwards  sent  out  to  bis
assistance ;  and  he  was  also  joined
by  'an  European,  Mr.  Harle,  who
was  fully  approved  by  Mr.  Townley
and  himself,  to  assist  in  the  super-
intendence of  these  seminaries.  In
the  benevolent  effort  still  further
to  extend  the  means  of  instruction,
Mr.  May  finished  his  earthly  career.
Mr.  Pearson  received  jfrom  the  in*
habitants  a  written  request  to  per-
form the  duties  of  the  settlement
church,  which  he  accepted.  With
vigour  and  success,  he,  with  his
colleague,  Mr.  Harle,  carried  on
the  schools ;  and  into  one  or  two
of  them  the  British  system  was
introduced,  in  which  it  approached
the  perfection  exhibited  in  Eng-
land in  schools  conducted  on  the
same  principle.

Messrs.  Townley  and  Haropson,
who  visited  the  schools  at  Chin-
surah  and  its  vicinity  in  1819,  re-
ported, that  they  were  ui  the  most  ^
prosperous  state ;  and,  of  the  schools "
at  Bankeepoor,  under  the  particu-
lar superintendence  of  Mr.  Harle,
their  account  was  equally  favour-
able.

In  addition  to  these  engage-
ments, the  missionaries  were  vari-
ously occupied.

Mr.  Pearson  established  a  ptint-
ing  press,  partly  under  the  patro-
nage of  the  Calcutta  School  S,,
the  profits  of  which  he  designed  to
devote  to  the  Bengal  A.  M,  S.
During  the  summer  of  1821,  his
health  suffered  interruption,  but  a
short  voyage  in  the  Bay  of  Bengal
was  the  means  of  his  restoration.
During  his  absence,  his  place  was
fiUed  by  Mr.  Trawin,  of  Calcutta.
In  the  previous  spring,  Mr.  George
Mundy  arrived  at  this  station.  At
this  period  the  Bengalee  boys  in
the  school  manifested  a  laudable
and  highly  useful  spirit  of  emula-
tion. There  was  also  v^^-s^XftTi^
among  them  a  stcoiiR  Ciosk^  \a


CHI

Idarn  English;  and,  in  order  to
attain  this  object,  they  appeared  to
be  willing  to  read  the  Scriptures,
or  any  other  book.  Mr.  Pearson,
aware  of  the  importance  of  meet-
ing this  disposition,  compiled  a
grammar  and  vocabulary,  in  Ben-
galee and  English,  with  a  view,
when  they  were  printed,  to  open
an  English  school,  in  which  the
reading  of  the  Scriptures  should  be
indispensable ;  and,  by  this  method,
he  hoped  to  pave  the  way  for  their
introduction  into  all  the  native
schools.

The  native  schools  at  this  sta-
tion were  visited  by  many  respect-
able individuals  of  intelligence  and
discernment,  who  highly  admired
their  economy ;  and  regarded  them
as  models  for  all  schools  of  this
description.  The  manner  in  which
they  were  conducted,  met  also
with  the  entire  approbation  of
his  Excellency,  Mr.  Overbeck,  the
Dutch  governor  of  Chinsurah,  by
whose  liberality,  on  the  part  of  his
government,  they  were  supported.

The  Chinsurah  schools  were  gra-
tnitously  supplied  with  books  by  the
Calcutta  School  Book  Society,  who
ordered  1000  copies  of  Mr.  Pear-
son's Bengalee  and  English  Gram-
mar to  be  printed  at  their  sole  ex-
pense.

Religious  books,  in  Bengalee,
were  extensively  circulated,  and
scarcely  a  day  passed  without  nu-
merous applications  for  them  at  the
Mission-house.  Connected  with
the  circulation  of  religious  tracts,
the  brethren  sent  copies  of  the
"  Gospel  Magazine,''  published  at
Calcutta,  to  between  300  and  300
respectable  natives  of  the  town ;
and  they  intended  to  pursue  the
same  plan  every  montii.  It  was
understood  the  magazines  were
very  generally  read.

In  1820,  a  bungalow  chapel  was

erected  on  the  outside  of  one  of

the  fates  of  the  town.     Here,  or

on  tSe  Toad^side,  the  missionatfes


CHI

daily  took  their  gtand.  Mr.  Fav-
son  thus  describes  the  plan  pooHi
in  the  evening  native  service  stlka
bungalow  ohapel)  which  he  4«-
sidered  as  replete  with  Importnt
advantages.

'<  On  a  raised  part  of  tfae'floor
we  place  a  table,  a  stool,  and  fe
candlestick ;  one  of  us  dlf  dom,
and  the  people  coming  in,  lib
their  seats  also  on  stooli  uA
benches,  in  fronts  and  on  dApt
side.  The  missionary  op«m  tka
Bible,  reads,  expounds,  and  pi^)
then,  sitting  down  again,  cooisdm
with  his  hearers  on  what  hai  ba«
considered.  Afterwards  Inek-m
distributed  among  those  who  en
read.  Often,"  continues  BIr.  P.
«  do  I  think  I  could  sit  and  cot-
verse  thus  night  and  day !  AH  %
as  it  were,  clear  gain.  ladsptB-
dently  of  the  good  which,  bj  the
blessing  of  God,  we  may  expset
will  accrue  to  the  people,  hmt  k
rapid  improvement  in  the  langiage;
in  the  ioiowledge  of  popvbur  ob-
jections, with  the  mode  of  leiiBtbg
them ;  and,  best  of  all,  in  the  «-
ercise  of  faith,  and  lore ;  for  weftii
that  hard  words,  or  hard  aigmnes^
if  alone,  will  do  ju&t  as  mnok  u
hard  stones  towmrds  making, an
Christians."  Mr.  P.  adds^  ^  tfr.
Townley  is  now  looking  oat  Ik
another  spot  of  ground  within  ^
gates,  where  it  is  intended  to  pv-
Bue  the  same  plan  of  native  initnc-
tion."

In  1821,  an  additional  uttie
school  commenced  at  a  vlU^e
called  Khonnian  ^  the  expense  d
which  was  defrayed  by  hka  Hldi-
ness  the  Rajah  of  Bnrdwan,  ^Hb
active  exertions  of  Mr.  PeaitOB)  is
this  department,  also  reorived  Ifae
express  approbation  of  his  Sneri"
lency  th^  Marquis  of  ITtiitipp
Mr.  Townley,  who  had  semoiad
from  Calcutta  in  consequence  of  itt*
ness,  now  awistsd  the  ralotaiiiiei
in  thehr  labours,  and  a  nattve  tt-

V  \«^


CHI

txf  the  fort,  kindly  assigned  by  the
Dutch  governor  for  the  purpose,
^mder  the  superintendence  of  Mrs.
Townley  and  Mrs.  Mundy.  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Townley,  in  consequence
of  the  veiy  unfavourable  state  of
"Airs.  T.'s  health,  were,  however,
toon  after  conipelled|to  leave  Indi^ ;
•Qd  arrived  in  England,  April  17th>
1823.  In  1824,  the  mission  was
^prospering — the  schools  were  well
attended — the  preaching  of  the
txospel  was  continued  in  four  bun-
galow chapels,  and  the  nlimber  of
school  publications  in  Bengalee,
prepared  by  Mr.  Pearson,  had  in-
creased to  12.  *  The  contributions
of  the  Chinsurah  branch  of  the
Calcutta  A,  M,  S.,  for  one  year,
amounted  to  rupees  773.  2.  3.

The  indifferent  state  of  Mr.
Pearson's  health  rendered  a  visit  to
this  country  necessary,  whefe  he
arrived  on  the  8th  April,  1824.

At  the  close  of  the  year,  the  Rev.
John  Edmonds  and  Mrs.  Edmonds
/  arrived  at  Chinsurah,  to  the  joy  of
Mr.  Mundy,  who  greatly  required
aid  in  the  business  of  the  mission,
and  was  deeply  suffering  from  the
loflB  of  Mrs.  Mundy,  who  departed
this  life  after  a  short  illness,  on  the
80th  of  the  preceding  July.  This
pleasure  was,  unhappily,  of  short
duration.  Mrs.  Edmonds  being
faicapable  of  bearing  the  climate,
Mr.  E.  was  reluctantly  obliged  to
return  with  her  to  England,- which
they  reached,  March  29,  1827.
Mr.  Pearson,  who  embarked  on  his
return  to  India  on  the  20th  of  Jilne,
arrived  safe  at'  Chinsurah,  and  re-
sumed the  superintendence  of  the
native  schools.

The  Rev.  A.  F.  Lacroix,  for-
merly of  the  Netherlands  Society,
X^  committee  of  which  had
"deemed  it  expedient  to  relinquish
their  missions  in  this  part  of  the
world,  was  recently  received  into
connexion  with  the  L,  M,  5.,  and
will,  for  the  present  at  least,  act
iaeonc^iiwiUi  its  missionariea  at


CHI

this  station,  where  he  had  for  se-
veral years  previously  laboured.

The  present  number  of  the  schools
supported  by  the  Bengal  govern-
ment is  16 ;  and  that  of  the  boys
instructed  in  them  upwards  of  2000.
They  are  in  a  state  of  great  ef-
ficiency. The  mission  schools,
which  are  three  in  number,  contain
295  boys,  who  make  encouraging
progress.

Besides  the  preaching  in  the  mis-
sion school-rooms  (of  which  another
very  commodious  one,  eligibly
situated,  was  lately  built,  and
opened  for  that  purpose),  the  peo-
ple still  continue  to  be  addressed
whenever  congregations  can  be  col-
lected. During  the  cold  season^
numerous  visits  are  made  to  the
surrounding  villages  by  the  mis-
sionaries, who  on  these  tours,  preach
to  the  natives  and  distribute  tracts.
The  peopla.  listen  with  apparent
attention ;  sometimes  propose  se-
rious inquiries^  and  even  manifest
much  earnestness  in  the  investiga-
tion of  truth ;  but,  in  general,  they
evince  an  awful  indifference  to  the
claims  of  Christianity  and  the  wel-
fare of  their  souls.

Every  Sabbath  morning  the  chil-
dren of  the  mission  schools  are
collected  in  one  of  the  school-
rooms, when  they  read  the  Scrip-
tures, which  are  explained  to  them
in  a  course  of  catechetical  instruc-
tion. A  considerable  number  of
the  natives  attend  on  those  occa-
sions, and  listen  with  surprise  to
the  definitions  (frequently  express-
ed in  an  admirable  manner)  which
the  boys  give  of  the  doctrines  of  the
Christian  faith.  This  mode  of
communicating  instruction  is  fre-
quently employed  when  the  schools
are  visited  by  the  missionary,  wlio
usually  addresses  the  people  that
assemble  at  such  times.

During  the  year  1826,  great  suc-
cess attended  the  preaching  of  the
Gospel  to  the  E.\xto^e«n&  «\  >iD\&
station,  a  coiv&\deT«^\AA  nxne^^x  ^V


wbom  appeu  to  be  dMldedlf  ptouk.
A  eburch  wu  foipied,  conilitlng
of  tbont  SO  membeiti  Mt.  Miuulf
wu  ordained  to  tbe  oOce  of.  CbiU-
flanmlDlitnlDNoT.lWfrOiiirblcb
oceailon  th«  R«>.  Dr.  Cai«T  gare
the  charse.


of  tbe  BMfoM.  5.  fm  Igsa.

*'  In  Ihli  brancb  of  laboni  the  ex-
eitlontoflhemlsdoDarleifaicUn-
Mtab)  have  beea  rendered  pecu-
liall;  oieftil  g  and  «e  are  eonilticed
tbat  it  will  fa«  conalderedai  a  great
boDoar  conferred  on  th»  iiocle^,
that  iti  DiMonarlet  have  been  lua-
fol  In  pretervlng  the  InflocDce  of
real  religion  during  llie  laat  SO
yean.  In  thii  placa ;  the  Inbabi-
tamti  of  which,  witbont  their  gra-
tnltous  laboun,  would  hare  beea
deitltiite  of  the  aidlDancei  of  pub-
lic wonblp,  and  would,  doubOew,
nMDiUe  others  wbo,  in  (IhiIIbi
cIrcmniUnceg,  bate  manifested  a
fearful  Indifference  to  pure  and  un,
de&led  relisloD."

The  JVeMfrbiuff  M  S.,  thronrh
the  meani  of  thelc  Ihte  agent,  the
RcT.  Mr.  Lacrolz,  lucceeded  In
forming  among  the  Dotcb  lahahl-
tonts,  an  auultai;  to  the  ■oclet;  at
Rotterdam.

CHIPPEWA YS,  a  tribe  of  In-
dlani  In  North  America  i  tbe  wbI
of  wboie  country  ii  aboat  Macklna,
Lake  Huron,  Sanlt  de  3t.  Marie,
and  the  S.  (Jde  of  Lake  Superior  i
bnt,  witbin  B  few  jeara,  many  baie
emigrated  to  tbe  extensile  country
between  Lake  Soperlor,  and  the
N.V.mdofLakeVtnlpek.  The;
are  xery  wuUke  and  MpenHtioui.
They  belieTe  there  I*  one.  Suprema
.Being,  ftnd  many  mbordinate  godi,
whom  they  niually  Inroke ;  lup-
poilDg  thattfaey  have  considerable
power  and  Influepce  over  mortals.

Their  population  iiTeryTarlouil.
ertfrnaleo.  Mr.  Harnion,  tbe  author
of  a  TOlnme  of  trafeii  in  the  N.V.
p&tU  of  ttm  eoattMst  of  Amoriot,


est'

ctal»~"  When  the  white  pe<9l|

1^  tbem,  they  wen
I  brnVK  nation,  win
2D,01H|  or  3a,0«
□Off    they    harf


Indled  d


SOO  D


The


Rar.  lb.
StH,

mDit$


Lninl,  tbe  miuionaiy  ai
wboM  inromiation  must  tK
ilerlved  from  Mr.  Scboolcmft,  Die
'Iniled  Stales  agent  BtSaoitde  St  '
tlurie,  and  who  Aemnm  nuch
redil,  soys,  In  IB23,  "The  CUp
jpKWuy  Iriba  It  one  of  the  most  Gon-
.ble  In  Nortli  AmellcB.  Tk
compiitBlloD  makestllemmi
aO,000  in  number.  That
luDguogu  Is  spoken  from  Montrad
to  the  Rocky  Mountaini./'  Ml
Srboolcriilt  bai  made  dlltgent  n
searches  into  the  languaae,  amUb
formed  a  grammar  and  ilictiouiK
■«  bleb  he  proposes  to  publish,  01 '
resign  lbs  munuscrlptt  to  any  b
sioimry  who  may  deiiru  to
them.     These  will  afford  very  loh

jiortaiit  facilities  to  mlssi'

lljem.    Tbt;  language   i
bear  a  very  tfldkiiig  resembbwceto
Ibd  Hebrew.      [See  Fori  (JraBt^
Mac/iinaio,  Savllde  S'.  J&n-u;.]
CHITPORE,  a  village  ii   "
north    part    of    Calcutta.
C,  K.  S.  IiH!  reeenUy  eslaW  ..
promising  nittlre  scfaoel  here.

C  H ITTAGONG.  a  diitrkt  in
S.  E.  part  of  Beggfll,  Hindoo  "
.■.leTding  lao  m.  by  85  a.r.
tueadthi  separated  from  Burmt
i;.,  by  a  range
rests;   the  Bay  of  BoDgal  is
W.,  SoD  m.  E.  CfllcUlU.
ceded  to  the  British  in  IIBO,  ^
haie  here  a  militarjr  force,  BnC]
cldl  estebliahment.     """    •-•--^


few  Pon

I  about  1,300,^

The  Mugs  fled  from  tbe  igfl
the  Bumian  government.  _-  i

They  reiiemMe  tbe  Biirmantlii  I
language  and  monnersj  have  apk' i
cuU  -,  uid  ue  tnteUlEent,  ftaafe


CHI

and  kind.  They  ocenpy  the  cotin-
tty  S.  of  Chittai^g,  for  about  100
IB.  to  Ramoo.

ChHiagangf  or  Islamabad,  a
town  ttfld  capital  of  the  district
of  the  same  name,  on  the  river
GM%tagong,  aboat  12  m.  from  the
Bay  of  BeBflral.  £.  long.  01<>  45',
X.  lat.  2if*  2(f,  Two  divisions  of
the  town  are  occupied  by  Por-
teguese  «atholics,  who  have  two
chapels,  but  are  very  ignorant.  The
proportion  of  Mahomedans  is  large,
•ad  their  mosques  are  numerous,
while  the  Hindoo,  temples  are  few.

The  Rev.  Mr.  De  Bruyn,  from
iie  Bapt.  M,  S,,  commenced  la-
booring  here  in  1812,  with  very
encouraging  success,  especially
among  the  Mugs.  The  great  ene-
ny  of  souls,  however,  beheld  with
an  evil  eye  Uiese  attempts  to  rescue
hem  his  g^rasp  those  over  whom  he
had  long  tyrannized  without  oppo-
dtion,  and  meditated  a  blow  in  a
waylftUe  expected.  A  young  man
wlKmi  Mr.  de  Bruyn  had  taken  into
his  house,  and  treated  as  a  son,^ be-
ing reproved  by  him  for  improper
coBdoct  with  more  severity  than
wttaly  Satan  so  inflamed  the  pas-
sinns  of  this  headstrong  youth,
that  seizing  a  knife,  he  plunged
it  into  the  side  of  his  benefactor
tad  friend;  who,  after  languishing'a
d&f  and  a  night,  expired ;  not,  how-
ever, before -he  had  written  to.  the
judge  of  the  court,  excusing  the  rash
deed  of  his  murderer,  and  entreat-
ing that  he  might  not  be  punished.
AUhough  the  infant  church  suf-
fered so  great  a  loss,  it  was  not  left
OBtirely  destitute,  A  young  man,
named  Rereiro,  who  had  been
among  the  first  baptized  by  Mr.  de
Broyn,  exerted  himself  so-  far  as
pjossible  to  supply  the  deficiency,
ontil  the  arrived  of  Mr.  Peacock,
in  1818,  who  was  chiefly  employed
OS  superintendent  of  the  schools.
In  the  early  part  of  the  year,  Mr.
Ward,  from  Serampore,  visited
Chittagongy  and  baptized  7  con-


CHI

verts,  which  raised  the  number  of
members  to  lOO.

On  the  death  of  Mr.  Pea-
cock, in  1820,  Mr.  Johannes,
who  was  educated  in>  the  Be-
nevolent Institution,  proceeded  to
this  station.  At  this  period  the
church  consisted  of  160  meml>ers,
residing  in  four  or  five  villages.
The  care  of  it  subsequently  devolved
on  the  Rev.  Mr.  Fink.  He  was
aided  in  his  eflbrts  by  6  native  iti-
nerants, but  considerable  opposition
arose.  One  chieftain,  in  particn*
lar,  was  so  hostile,  that  he  would
neither  suffer  Mr.  F.  to  enter  his
petty  domain,  nor  allow  his  peopleto
leave  it  for  the  sake  of  hearing  him.

War,  with  all  its  attendant  evils,
has  been  permitted,  since  that  time,
to  ravage  the  district  of  Chitta-
gong,  and  to  disperse  the  nume-
rous church  formed  there  ^mong
the  Mugs.  Still  they  have  re-
tained their  attachment  to  the
means  of  grace;  and,  since  the
conclusion  of  peace  between  the
Burmese  and  our  Indian  govern-
ment, these  poor  people,  who  were
originally  refugees  from  the  neigh-
bouring province  of  Arracan,  now
ceded  to  the  British,  have  returned
thither  in  a  body,  with  their  pastor
at  their  head.  Thus,  in  a  most'
unexpected  way,  a  new  and  easy
access  is  obtained  into  the  Burman
empire ;  and,  from  the  relative  po-
sition of  that  country  to  China,  it
seems  not  at  all  improbable  that,
ere  long,  the  extensive  frontier  of
that  vast  and  populous  region,  may
be  laid  open  to  the  Gospel.

At  present  the  church  \i  very
small,  and  contains  no  native  mem-
bers. The  station  is,  notwith-
standing, exceedingly  interesting,
chiefly  from  the  promising  charac-
ter of  the  Benevolent  Institution,
under  the  care  of  Mr.  Johannes.
Tlfis  school,  which  is  on  the  Lan-
casterian  model,  furnishes  the
means  of  a  plain  English,  and  a
Christian  educaWon  \/o  ^fewA.  \^a

\1\


noct  ehlUrMit  MlBelpallr  ^  ^"^
Fortngumt  bMlllM,,wIiloh  ilKiuiid
iBCUtUgMqc.  Tbe  temporal  be-
n^d  wueb  the  cUldcCD  receive
ran  being  edDcated  iDtbauhoal,
aie  lo  gtMt  hhI  manlfsit,  that  the
people  contlDiie  to  Hind  them,  tn

£te  of  the  warninp  and  nUcHa-
u  of  tbelr  pilerti.  And  the  tfl-
iltoal  benelt  ,tccelnd  wltbdiawi
man;  (iom  the  dark  and  miMrable
thraldom  of  poperj,  and  make*  them
q^lrltual  wonhlpperi  of  the  living
andtnieOad.  Aulotereitlngncle^


1  among  theMfouthi


for  prayer  and

nirellgloBi  nlgecti)  and  the;  have,
b;  niucrlptlOB,  rabed  a  coDveai-
«nt  boiue  br  bohUng  their  meet-
Ingi,  "tmI  ue  collecting  a  imall  11-
brai;  tta  tlwlr  hnptoremeBt  in
knowledge.  Hr.JoliuuieipreBchei
ijl  hli  ■chool-room  eier;  Lord"!
da;,  Srtt  In  Beonlee,  and  then  Id
Engllih.  At  the  former  lervtce
Uiemastenof  leveial  native  achooU,
and  s  number  of  their  «cholsn,  at-
tend, vlth  men;  other  penom  ( and
St  the  Utter  the  children  of  the
.  Benevolent  IniUtntlon,  ffltta  a
number  who  have  fonnerl;  been
educated  in  It,  and  wme  faiiilllei
oonnected  nith  the  aim;.  Mr.
Johannei  alio  goei  out  to  different
placet  lo  preach  the  Go^el  pub-
lic!;, both  on  Sabbathi  aDd«n  other
dap  of  the  week,  and  meeti  gene-
nU;  with  •  nepectfiil  lecepUou  ;
and  initencee  frequentl;  occur  of
petaoni,  who  hue  been  hli  hearen
on  inch  occttitoM,  celling  Cor  fur-
ther convsnetlon.  He  reeeivea  no
emolument  ai  a  mlmiooaij,  but
drawl  hli  ulor;  bom  the  fundi  of
the  Benevolent  IniUtotlon.

The  C.  £.  5.  hai  eitabUihed  a
rending  libnr;  here,  and  lui  alio
&  depAt  of  booki-

when  the  Barman  empMor  re*
polled  the  American  oUnlonarie*,
In  1880,  Hi.  CMmm  temaved  to
thli  ^ace  fan  Rangoon,  and  todi
^Mgv  of  tha  mMon;  hot,  lit


ISU,  provuion  having  been  mijt
fn  hli  fsublishment  at  Coi'l  ba«
laar,  where  the  Burnmn  laDgni^il
Voken  b;  a.  numerous  populsUaB,
he  iBMoved  to  that  place,  and  died

CHITTOOR,  a  town  of  Hte-
dooitan,  on  the  W.  fronllen  of  tlw
Camatic,  chief  of  s  atrong  MBj
diltrict.  It  i)  82  m.  W.  bj  H.
Mednusi  E.  loD?.  19°  10',  N.UL
13«  Ifr-.

Tb»  Rev.  Mr.  and  Mra.  Jc».
□ingi  have  recently  been  appointed
b;  thi!  Z,.  Af.  S.,  to  this  Malka,
Mew;.  Crisp  and  Tiiylor  baveix.
gaged  tu  vtsll  thU  proiniiing  heUaf
labo(u,iilteruat<3l}',eTei7  4  months
until  tile  nriivBl  uf  the  mualDDii^
Mr.  CriFp  commenced  these  pi>.
rlodtcal  vigils  ia  the  earl;  paitt(
ISSS,  Diid,  during  hLss(a;,fo]  '
in  coDiptiuiice  with  1li«lr  owi
queit,  H  number  of  nulive  Ctalt*
Hani  belonging  lo  the  place  (wop
verti  from  pHL^nifm  and  MshonM^
danim)  iiitu  a  Christiun  chuichk
He  b1»>  mJoiiuii^tered  lo  them  Hi^

.  Lord'«  Supper  (on  which  occBilo^
TO  niemhers  wure  present);  pnsufct
ed  bolh  to  the  natire  ChtUtiasi
and  Uio  European  residents;  hipa'
tiled  40  natives,  including  c^
dren,'     and     married     11     i   "

eoDfdes.   Two  large  native  icl .^

one  lor  boys,  and  the  other  fl|'
gilb,  have  been  eKtabllsfaed,  anf
are  niiported  at  the  charge  of  ttm
qiactable  European  re&ideDli,  v^
ptopoke  to  erect,  Ht  their  sole  s«f

,  pen>e,  a  chnpei  for  the  misslonoi^
Theitev.Henr;  Harper.the  cbljif
Uhiat  tliis<itallon<C.  J/.  &],  a^
tiiel;  superintended  tbe  schoob  b^
about  3  yearii,  till  bb  removal  ]|^
Hjninbnd,  nad  was  otherwise  iQj
itrumentol  of  much  good.  -

CHOCTAWS,  a  tribe  of  (to
dian^  whose  territory  lies  8.  qf
tlw  Chickoiawi,  chlelly  within  thi
chartered  limits' of  Miaialppl,  bfi
extends  to  Tombigbee  river  fi|
AI«baiD&.     TlM    Mil    li    feriav


CHO

iHy  the  extemire  prairies,
rhleh  the  coantry  abounds,
opidation  is  scattered  over
pe  extent  of  coantry,  and
mated  by  some  at  15,000,
ers  at  25,000 ;  a  medium  be-
these  is  probably  nearest  the
They  hatie  made  consider-
idfances  in  agriculture  and
ts  of  ciirUized  life.  Their
y  is  divided  into  3  districts,
liower  Towns,  Six  Towns,
pper  Towns ;  and  these  again
▼fded  into  clans.  In  1816,
>ld  a  portion  of  their  country
United  States,  for  which  they
to  receive  0000  dollars  an-
fer  17  years.  In  1820,  they
the  following"  appropriation
annuity  for  the  benefit  of  the
n  schools  in  -  the  nation,  un-
e  patronage  of  the  American
r.the  Lower  Towns  2000
r«  yeer  for  17  years ;  the  Six
8  idoOdoUars  for  the  school  for
in ;  and  1000  uoUars,  for  the
period,  for  a  blacksmith's
and  the  tJpper  Towns  2000
I  for  10  years,  for  the  school
3t :  making  an  amount  of  6000
!,  annually,  for  the  time  spe-

■

srreral  clans,  in  the  S.  E.
>f  the  nation,  laws  have  re-
'  been  made  to  prevent  drunk-
s,  infanticide,  and  other  gross
The  introduction  of  whis-
las  been,  and  still  is,  very
ictive  to  the  morals  and  im-
ment  of  the  Choctaws.  The
ce  of  infanticide  has  pre-
:  among  them,  from  time  im-
nrial ;  and  parents  have  pos-
1,  and  frequently  exercised,
inquestioned  but  barbarous
of  murdering  their  own  ofT-
f,  whenever  it  was  trouble-
to  rear  a  (^hild.
e  first  punishment  for  the
lisston  of  this  crime,  was
ted  about   the  beginning  of

ej  have  very  ragae  and  ftn-


CHO

dful  notions  of  the  Great  Spirit  and
of  a  future  state ;  but  these  apr
pear  to  be  very  seldom  the  subjects'
of  contemplation,  and  have  no
efiect  upon  tbeir  conduct.  The
general  feeling  is,  that  the  dead
cease  to  be.

As  a  people,  they  ate  in  almost
total  darkness  on  moral  and  reli-
gious subjects,  exposed  to  various
and  imaginary  terrors  from  sup-
posed witchcraft  and  other  causes,
and  addicted  to  the  intemperate  use'
of  ardent  spirits ;  in  short,  ignorant,
degraded,  and  miserable.  They
are,  however,  awaking  to  some
just  sense  of  their  condition,  are
desirous  that  their  children  should
see  better  days,  and  are  Importu-
nately asking  the  charity  of  the
Christian  community  to  aid  them
in  becoming  acquainted  with  the
arts  of  civilized  life  Jind  the  Chris-
tian religion.  It  is  fondly  lioped
that  those  who  have  the  means
will  be  prompted  to  greater  exer-
tions, to  promote  the  present  com-
fort and  everlasting  welfare  of  this
interesting  people.  Experience  hat
abundantly  tauffht,  that  the  plain
truths  of  the  Bible,  presented  to
their  understandings  and  consci-.  .
ences,  mu^  be  'reUed  upon  as  the'
efficient  cause  of  civilization ;  and
that  by  no  other  process  can  any
change  be  expected  materialy  for
the  better.

Beside  ttie  following  mission  sta-
tions, Befhel,  Elliot,  Emmaus,
I'tk-hun-nah,  Mayhewy  and  Yokena
ChuAamah,  several  small  schoote
have  been  opened  in  private  families,

CHOUB,  a  town  on  the  W.
coast  of  Hindoostan,  near  Bombay,
under  the  Mahrat^  government.
The  American  missionaries  at
Bombay  established  a  large  school
here  about  1817,  \rhich  promises
much  good.

CHOULE,  a  district  on  the  W.
coast  of  Hindoostan,  about  25  m.
S.  Bombay;  tetig;th  about  ^  tsi.s
populaUon  about  U()jW^,  mo^i

q2  Vl^


CHR

HbtdoOi.  TUiVMsplaeeofgiaat


niUw  of  thett  fortUMtiooa,  tbelr
frflfMJutffl  BOd  othn  puUlc
Imlliili^  itrUiiig^  eil&ce  the
__.., ,^j    power  which  that


CHRISTOPHER,  ST.,  o
KlH'i,  one  of  tha  Caribbee  idaiidi,
in  ttia  W.  IndiM,  BO  m.  W.  An-
tig;iu.  It  if  IS  m.  long,  and  0
1»oad,  with  Ugh  iDoaotatau  In  ttie
middle,  whence  livnlett  Bow.  Be-
Iweot  the  moontaiB*  are  dieadful
nidu,  borrid  precipicei,  and  thick
woodi  I  and  In  Ote  S.  W.  part*  hot
luIphuKow  qninga  at  the  foot  of
then.  The  produce  i>  chiefly  su~
BK,  cotton,  glager,  indigo,  and
uie  tropical  fruit*.

The  natural  itiengtli  of  the
ialand  ii  luch,  that  a  gaitlMii  of
SOM  etfectiTe  tnopi  would  render
it  liDpreniable  to  a  fbrmtdable  In-
ndon.  It  wai  flnt  dlaeorered,  In
1493,  1^  ColBmbu,  who  gaTe  it
hti  own  Chriatlon  name:

The  flnt  En|^  wtUement
Ibnned  In  I.61D,  For  aeraral  yean^
the  al«»lglnai  Inhabitant!  IlTod  on
friendly  termi  with  the  aetUeri,
and  ai^idled  tbem  with  {noriiJoni,
tm  the  {dantenaelMd  thefr  londi.—
After  a  aeyere  cmfllct,  in  which
many  of  tlie  Cartbbeei  were  inhu-
manly morderod,  they  wen  driven
from  theiiland.

It  wai  in  the  poneMim  of  the
French  and  Engliih,  alternately,
an  IT63,  when  K  wai  permanently
leftored  to  Graat  Britain.  The
cliief  towns  aiip  Baeie  Terre  and
^mdr  Point.  JUkaUUotU.aftfiOOft
large  pnqnrtion'  of  whom  are
tlaTee  and  colonied  people.  The
N.polBt  Ilea  in  W.  long.6S'4r,


•   Th«   U.  B.   in    Antigua  l
ing  hmin   repeaieilly    solicited  i
extend  iheir  missionary  labours  ll
tbia.  Uniid,    Messrs.     Blrkby  ■
Gotwald  were  sent  liiLU      '     '
ITTT.
HaflSK  hired  u  house


of  J
preecbhig


,   they


the  negroes ;
attended  in  coMideJ
able  numbers,  and  the  bietln
were  oounteniuiced  in  their  ui  '
taking  by  many  of  the  proprU..
the  pPDRTusa  of  tha  Gospel  i
eompahiUvelv  slow;  as,  i  '~
MTen  fears  trom  the  Hrst  ei

ment  of  the  mission,  lie

of  concerts  scB.rcslysicceeded'M

In  i'fii,  Ibe  brelbren  purchai

a  piece  of  ground  for  the  esl^liri

the  pluce  of  worship  i
now  erected  was  so  i
attand»d,  that  a  more  spaeiH
church  soon  becam"  ""  "*
neee«*ij.  This  n
GtnnpUled  in  lYSO ;  Iba  beUerj
ne([loe>i  not  only  Hsslsted  In  i^
woi^  by  manual  labour,  but  atff
aided  It  by  pecuniary  contributloai
On  the  day  of  consecrsiticai,  H
personi  were  boptlied,  and  3,w1m|
had  piuviously  belonged  to  otbti
denomi nations,  were  admitted  n)
members  of  the  church.  ITie  niuBI
ber  of  liBi>tized  persons,  at  dj
time,  amounted  to  S;9,  bes^
about  «U  calechumens.  I

A  eKrcd  flume  was  now  klniUoj
in  the  island,  which  continued  tl
■pread,  until,  in  the  course  of  a  fM
yean,  lhe  congregation  consislal
of  iSOa  ;  and  Ibu  attendance  («f
public  worsbip  was  so  numeroa)
Ihatltvas  only  on  the  week-dag{
evenings  the  bearers  could  be  ew
commodaled  within  the  walls  of  tb
church:  on  the  "  '  '
Ute  negroes  were  in  the  habit  d
coming  from  various  distant  plaob^
tloni,  greet  numbers  were  obli([ii
torpmain  in  the  open  air  aroun^


bit  at


CHR

In  ^788,  Ibe  town  of  Basseterre
W  .visijted  by  a  dreadful  inunda^
tta;  and  a  hurricane  which  raged
tal  4m  ensuing  antumn,  pro? ed  ex-
tomely  destructive ;  bu^  on  each
of  these  occasions,  the  missionaries
WMe  mercifully  preserved)  though
teir  premises  sustained  consider-
able ii^jury.  The  work  of  the
JiOgrd  also  continued  to  prosper,
■ad,  in  the  course  of  a  short  time,
flief  obtained  the  privileg^e  of
paiaching  to  the  negroes  on  no  less
wu  50  plantations.

The  invasion  of  St.  Christopher's
by  A  French  fleet,  which  had  pre-
vtoosly  been  anticipated,  took  place
OB  the  6th  of  March,  1805 ;  when
GomTBl  Balbot  fixed  his  head-
qonlen  in  the  neighbourhood  of
uo  missionaries,  and  stationed  a
gaaid  of  4  privates  and  a  corporal
at  the  entrance  of  their  burial-
giQQsd.  A  capitulation,  however,
bting  agreed  upon,  the  enemy
quitted  the  island,  after  levying  a
cottbribotion,  burning  six  vessels,
spiUng  the  cannon,  and  destroying
ut  powder-magazine ;  and  the
brethren  were  enabled  to  resume
their  labours  without  further  fear
of  Interruption.

For  jKmie  following  years,  no
oeeorrence  worthy  of  particular
namtion  marked  the  progress  of
the  mission.  Those  who  were  em-
ployed in  it,  however,  persevered
in  their  interesting  work  with  un-
nmitting  zeal  and  faithfulness:
the  vacancies  occasioned  -by  the
death  of  some  of  their  number,
were  soon  supplied  by  other  de-
voted servants  of  Christ;  and,  in
every  year,  some  of  the  negroes
were  received  into  the  church  by
baptism,  whilst  others  exchanged
worids,  rejoicing  in  the  grace  of
ijod,  and  in  the  atQnement  of
Christ.

In  the  year  1819  a  new  settle-
menty  ealied  Betkesda,  began,  to
be  formed"  on  the  Cayen  estate;
and  on  the  S5th  oi  Feb,  18B2,  the


CHR

church  at  that  place  was  scrfemnly.
consecrated  for  the  celebratkin  ii
divine  worship; — a  circumstante
which  appearwl  to  excite  the  most
fervent  gratitude  in  the  breasts  of
many  aged  and  infirm  negroes,
who,  on  account  of  their  distance-
from  Basseterre,  had  previously
enjojred  but  few  opportunities  of
attending,  on  the  Sabbath,  to  hear
the  word  of  God.

In  1824,  one  of  the  misstonarles
at  Basseterre  says : — *^  It  affords
'us,  indeed,  g^reat  comfort  and  en-
couragement that  our  church  is  ge-
nerally filled  with  attentive  hearers,
and  that  the  presence  of  our  Lord
and  Saviour  is  powerfully  felt  when
we  meet  in  his  name.  The  numbet
of  this  congregation  is  about  2000^
besides  about  500  new  people.
Those  also  who  were  formerly  ex-
cluded on  account  of  transgres-
sions, constantly  attend  the  public
worship.  A  great  proportion  of
the  congregation  g^ve  evidence
that  they  are  .children  of  God.
On  the  first  Sunday  after  Easter,
those  who  had  attained  to  di£Rerent
privileges  in  the  church,  ha4>  as
usual,  a  particular  meeting:  188
were  baptized,  or  received  into  the
congregation  since  Easter,  1888,
and  72  admitted  to  partake  of  the
Lord's  Supper.  At  the  close  of
1825,  the  congregation  consisted
of  681  communicants,  737  bap-
tized adults,  554  children,  404  call-
didates  for  baptism ;  248  were  ex^
eluded  for  a  time,  but  most  of  them
still  attended  worahip,  and  begged
for  re-admission ;  and  370  new
people;— in  all,  nearly  3000  souls.

At  BetAesda,  during  the  year
1825,  23  adults  and  79  children
were  baptized,  131  persons  were
received  into  the  congregation,  lY
were  re-admitted,60  were  admitted
to  the  holy  communion,  140  were
candidates  for  baptism  and  recep-
tion, 42  had  departed  this  life,  and
31  had  been  excluded.  The  numbet
of  the  congxegaUou  a\  Khe  ^qha^

\n6


tt*  jtn  wm  IM  eMomaleiBii.
dOe  iMpttwd  adalti,  ST*  dllUraB
onder  U  yekn  ef  igt^,  113  cui-
dMUn  ibr  btftlM,  and  about  400
flzdaded  and  MwpM^ile^n  til
IWB ;  IBS  moN  tfaBO  it  tbe  eloM
of  IRSl.

IB  Jan.  1TI1,'U10  RcT.Dr.Coke,
•ocampaiited  t^-  the  R«t.  Mmri.
Bmztac,  Cluka,  asd  HBnunett,  of
the  fr.  S.,  f  Utted  tU*  Umd.  Thslr
OB,  tt  fNOU,  b«d,  br  Mine


inhabltooli,  t?  Mvenl  of  whonr'
tlM?  ware  i«c«t*ed  with  gnat  cor-
dJallty  and  napect,  and  enDooraged
to  Mimnence  tlietr  laboors  ob  tit*
TNj  ercnlnf  of  .ttaeli  anlnl.
Altera  few  daji,  ladccd,  bothtfee


*tled  to  preach  in  ths  eoart-ho«aa
at  Boagtorre,  nd  •  or  T  of  the
priDetpat  geoOsBieD  in  the  t
tadodtng  tbe  eleigrnwi  of  the
pnitfc,  poUtotradred  them  toihek
mpactbe  bootei ;  when  tbe;  had
•  mtj  farounble  oppottimitr  of


•nlainhMt  tk

htk  iaviinr.  Tbeae  ^ond  fillip
MtMactoiT]  and  ••  It  wai  IbnU;
MTaaKcdtlMtMT.HaBnaeU  '     "


OMnmodatloB  is  Baaateire,  and
MBfleman  at  a  fnalt  tom  called
Saadf  Ptrin^  p
MIleamnH  for  paepatl^^  a  place
'  lattatBelgkbonrinad  tor  the


p^Mnallj  eonrlnocd  of  tbe  graat
keaeati  «Ucb  bad  leaalted  (ram
Hie  [ntrodiietion  of  ibe  Goipe)  Into
thla  tiland.  Tbe  laboun  of  Mr.
Hammett  had  been  aaTeinlttIng )
and,  in  the  iptce  of  two  jaen,
thiocgib  the  dlriae  aoiitBiieei  tie
kadialMd  a  mietr  of  TOO  men
hun  ttepHtarpaitviiAes,


bad  noaon  to  believe,  were  tiM-   I

bewof ihemj-stictabodjofChifctf  I

The  gheat  Head  of  tb«  L'hnrah  laf  I

■  ■   rtlsed  up  in  this  socifl^t»U

ihei^,  qUaliGed  to  imparl  h

Uun  to  otben ;  and  tc  iM

Mil  connnQnlcated    a  wmiM

eqiiiil  to  their  ahllitj-,  to«

themselves    entirely    to   Hi


eoDttnufil


the  I


r  Ih?


lealeilthfii     .

tiiaottnustkindneHj—the  BegM
throi^ed  to  hear  the  word  of  OtI
and  at  a  proof  that  many  of  tbA
bad  Rally  profitnl  hy  the  hutne
tkM  which  thE}'  nweired,  Itw
fowrf  that  Ihey  might  be  «dl'
eBtjwBfd  with  nnns  for  the  pi.
teotlon  of  the  colonj',  when  t
attack  was  antictpatBd  from  f
combined  force)  of  France  (
Spain,  "  Nothing,"
Coke,  "  but  the  power  of  tf
grace  eonld  induce  the  nejtToafl
ofifer  themselveB  forthe  ileiinee  ■"
a  Cotutrj'  in  which  they  were  b
at  ilaves;    and    to    protect  IT

bad  trenteil  them    i

And  nothing   but  f

cmld  incline  (beirm

III  tbeni    a  deifreB  of  c

Wtlch  Ihpy  feltreluctnirt  li

Inotbvir;."

'  In  the  jpringoflBOS,  the  mcB

bon  In  tbe  society  al  St.  CbiV

tenet's  amounted  to  358T,  andT

■peat  blessinff  appeared  to  rert  M

foe  gtneml  affiiirs  of  the  miBdW

In  tbe  month  of  April,  in  the  mtjf

year,  Messrs.  Debill  and  Bradn^

two  pioufi  anil  lealous  young  met^

anireii  to  tiip   assl^ita"**  "*"   ***

Bmwnell,  who  had  bee

ttatfanpd  there  ;  and,  '

4iT  t^t  they  huided,  •


CHR

'preached  to  such  a  crowded  con-
gti^gBtioo  as  struck  them  with
Mtnnlshinent.  Indeed,  the  atten-
Iniceoalhe  means  of  g^race  had
tacreased  considerably  during  the
needing  12  months ;  so  that  Mr.
Biowiiell  observes,  he  was  con-
ifaaiDed  to  pray  for  an  enlarge-
■ent  of  their  borders.  **  When,"
i^  this  missionary,  '^  I  see  the
tides  of  the  chapel  clo^ly  wedged
vith  white  and  black  people,  pro-
ndscuousiy  interspersed,  without  a
niit  upon  which  to  sit,  together
with  numbers  in  the  yard,  who,  in
fomier  days,  could  scarcely  be
knoogfat  to  worship  God  in  the
anie  place,  I  cannot  but  acknow-
ledge that  this  is  the  Lord's  doing,
end  it  is  marvellous  indeed.'^

From  this  period  we  have  no
historical  documents  relative  to  the
itete  of  the  mission  in  St.  Christo-
pber's,  till  the  year  1816,  when
Messrs.  Whitworth,  Raby,  and
Whitehouse,  observe — '*  The  fall
of  the  year  in  this,  and  in  many  of
the  islands,  has  been  sickly;  but
we  feel  pleasure  in  stating,  thpt
though  many  of  the  members  of
onr  societies  have  fallen  victims  to
death,  yet,  in  their  last  moments,
they  witnessed  a  good  confession.
During  the  late  festival  (Christ-
mas), at  which  the  negro  popula-
lation  have  a  little  time  at  their
di^iogal,  such  multitudes  assembled
for  prayer  and  praise  as  were  truly
astonishing.  Contrasting  what  we
tiien  saw,  with  the  conduct  pursued
by  them  at  this  season,  antecedent
to  the  introduction  of  the  Gospel
among  them,  we  were  led  to  ex-
,  claim,  *  What  hath  God  wrought ! '  '*

"In  Sept.  1819,"  says  Mr.Gil-
gre»,  ^'the  inhabitants  of  this
island  were  dreadfully  alarmed  by
a  hurricane.  Since  the  hurricane
there  has  been  very  little  trade,  or
work  of  any  kind,  for  free  people,
and  every  article  of  food  has  become
very  dear  indeed.  Flour  was  raised
in  one  day,  after  the  gale,  from  7/.  4m.


CHR

to  10/.  16«.  a  barrel.  Some  of  oar
people  have  unavoidable  fasts  two
or  three  times  a  week;  whiM
others  have  no  other  alternative
than  that  of  dying  with  famine,  or
of  begging  their  bread  from  door
to  door.  Many  also  have  not  a
shed  of  any  kind  to  screen  them
by  day  from  the  heat  of  the  sun,  or
by  night  from  the  heavy  dews  and
torrents  of  rain."

Notwithstanding  the  affllctiona
which  the  missionaries  and  the
people  of  their  charge  were  thus
called  to  endure,  the  word  of  €rod
continued  to  be  promulgated  with
success ;  and  the  chambers  of  sick-
ness and  death  sometimes  exhi*
bited  scenes  well  adapted  to  sup^
port  and  comfort  those  whose  pa-
ramount wish  was,  that  they  might ,
be  made  instrumental  in  the  con-
version of  sinners.  "  A  coloured -
boy,  about  the  age  of  eighteen,  be-
longing to  our  school,"  says  Mr»
Pinnock,  "  was  taken  ill  of  a
fever,  of  which  he  died.  In  his
affliction,  he  sent  to  request  that  L
would  visit  him.  Accordingly  I
I  went;  and  on  my  approaching
his  bed-side,  he  laid  hold  of  my
hand,  and  pressed  it  to  his  bosom
with  apparent  gratitude  and  de-
light. On  my  speaking  to  him  re-
lative to  the  state  of  his  mind,  he
told  me  he  was  happy,  and  that  he
longed  to  be  with  Jesus.  He  then
requested  me  to  sing  some  of  the
hymns  which  I  had  taught  in  the
school,  and  he  occasionally  joined
with  me.  At  his  funeral  all  the
scholars  attended,  and  followed  the
corpse  to  the  grave ;  each  of  them
having  a  piece  of  black  crape  tied
round  the  arm,  as  a  badge  of
mourning.  Thte  was  a  new  and
interesting  sight  in  this  place,  and
I  doubt  not  it  has  had  a  tendency,
to  establish  the  reputetlon  of  our
school,"

On  Saturday,  Jan.  1st,  1825,
fVesley  Chapel^  belonging  to  the
society,    from   whose  fovuvdei  i\

\11


CRR

tftkes  its  nune,  was  dedicated  to
the  solemnities  of  religion,  t>efore
«  very  crowded  and  attentive  con-
gregation, at  which  were  many
persons  of  the  first  distinction.

The  chapel  is  an  oblong
square,  81  feet  by  66,  and  30  feet
in  the  elevation.  It  is  a  substantial
building'  of  stone,  with  a  slated
roof  {  and,  when  completed,  will
accommodate,  it  is  supposed,  about
160Q  persons.

'*  After  the  close  of  the  opening
service,''  says  Mr.  Morgan,  one  of
the  missionaries, "  we  waited  on  his
Excellency  at  the  government-
house,  to  express  our  sense  of  his
kindness,  in  contributing  to  the
erection  of  the  chapel,  and  in  at-
teilding  at  its  dedication.  He  ex-
pressed, with  much  feeling,  his  sa-
tisfaction as  to  the  chapel  and  the
services;  and  said,  that  our  well
organized  school  had  given  Mrs.
Maxwell,  as  well  ts  himself,  much
pleasure;  and  that  our  labours
should  have,  as  they  justly  merited,
his  countenance  and  support.''

The  following  account  of  the
various  stations  on  this  island,  the
number  of  which  has  of  late  greatly
increased,  is  given  in  the  last  Re-
port.

SafuUf  Point.'-' ^  A  variety  of
jdeasing  circumstances  in  combi-
nation, induce  the  hope- that  the
state  of  this  society  is  ipaproving.
Still  we  must  lament  the  superft<;ial
letigion,  and  consequent  incon-
sistency, of  many  among  us.  The
piety  of  some  of  our  members  has,
however,  obviously  deepened  during
the  past  year.  Solid  religion,  we
believe,  is  extending  among  us,
though  not  rapidly.  Number  in
society,  623 ;— 2  Whites,  94  Free
Coloiured  and  Blacks,  6dt  Slaves,
and  41  on  trial."

Deep  Bay, — "  The  condition  of
the  society  connected  with  this
place  excites  our  warmest  grati-
tude, and  presents  a  most  jpyful
contrast  to  its  state  »  few  years


««^


m


CH1I

ago.    The  ioeietj,
on  trial,  has  been  man
bled  since  Dec.  18S4;  ill
who  have  been  united  to  \
almost   invariaUy    hraBgjtt
fruits  meet  for  leMBtance.
chapel  has  beea  too  nuA
since  May.    Our  clwisiM  I
qHently  obliged  to  ttend
outside.     Catechetleal
continues  to  augment  their
tural  knowledge.  Nvoberi

8  Whites,  SO  Free  Coloiini
Blacks,  280  Slavee,  and  M
trial."

Paimetto  Pmnt.--"  U  sbWii
great  pleasure  to  report  wtftti
work  of  God  in  this  place  k  HV
prosperous  state. '  Number  II  IP
ciety— 8  Free  Cokrared  and  BMHI
and  105  Shives.    Total>lli(M

9  on  trial.'*  '*

Old  Rsad,--**  The  rtife
ciety,  in  this  place,  is  by  no
so  prosperous  as  we  could
Latterly,  the  congregatioM
greatly  increased,  and  we
shall  yet  see  good  daya  in
place.  Number  In  9oeie4|f-^f
Whites,  60  Free  Cbhraied  mk
Blacks,  and  192  Slavtn.  TlMb
248.    On  trial,  11."

Half' Way  7Vee.--»I>iirtefl»
past  year,  this  society  htm  euMi
a  small  declension  in  nunriMm^^lff
the  want  of  suflcient  dlUgcBtfe^'lt
some  of  the  remohiiiijg  menilil
gives  us  great  pain.  'Not  m»0f
have  come  forward  during  the  yfjir
for  admission  into  socl^.  .The
congregations,  however,  Mve  ie>
cently  increased,and  we  hopethetwe
shall  soon  see  our  exertjimt  ftuwned
with  success*  Nnmber4needtely  ■■
24  Free  Cokrared  and  Blecli^  end
72  Slaves.  Total,  90.  pn  triid»  L**

Basseterre.— ^^*  On  leflewliigtht
circumstances  of  tiie  past  jem^  «•
have  cause  to  acknowleitee  irtlh
gratitude,  that  the  good  hand  ef
the  Lord  has  been  with  w.  WM
regard  to  our  society^  though  ve
,  have  not  witnened  a  gimt  .hiuilwi


€


P
^

t


CHR

lwak>Ti,  yet  fome  hare  been
iad  to  the  Lord,  who  prcnnise
frtobe  omaments  to  the  cause
ly  hive  eqKNued ;  and  we  have
iieD  to  hope  that  most  of  our
mben  are  growing  in  grace^
ri  la  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord
i  Saviour,  Jesus  Christ.  Num-
r  iB  society  — 24  Whites,  263
B»  Coloived,  and  426  Slaves.
M,  713.  On  trial,  10."
C9py0fi  and  Niehola  Town.—
Hnr  chapel  in  Cayon  is  occupied
the  society  there,  and  that  of
:hola  Town,  alternately,  as  we
e  no  house  to  preach  in  at  the
er  place.  We  cannot  but  re-
t  that  so  promising  a  spot  of  the
rionary  field  should  have  so
le  cultivation.  Our  preaching
jpenerally  well  attended,  eq>e-
tty  on  the  Sabbath.  Number  in
lety  — 19  Free  Coloured  and
icks,  and  367  Slaves.  Total,
L  On  trial,  5."
SMotffr.— £ztract  from  the  Fifth
nnal  Report  of  the  St.  Christo-
or't  Wesleyan  Methodist  Sunday
lool  Institution : —
Basseterre. — "  The  children  be-
glng  to  this  school  have  con-
ned to  reward  the  labour  he-
wed upon  them,  both  as  it  re-
^  regiilarily  of  attendance  and
leral  improvement :  4  boys  and
liils  have,  during  the  year,  been
nitted  into  the  society.  Several
Qie  children  have  received  cloth-
:  during  tiie  year.  The  present
nberinthis  school  is  284— 203
Is  and  81  boys.

^TAe  Country  Children's  Schoolin
r  town  affoids  some  encourage-
»nt  to  perseverance;  although  ihe
lited  attendance  of  the  children,
ing  to  their  various  occupations
the  estates,  materially  impedes
sfar  improvement  in  reading,
inre  are  in  this  school  132  chil-
im — 47  boys  and  85  girls ;  and  6
lehers,  who  also  belong  to  the
tier  ichool.''  '

Pabneita  Point.  -^  *'  The  state


CHR

of  this  school,  yre  legret  to  laj,
is  quite  diicouraging.  The  num-
ber on  the  class-papers,  at  present^
is  31—16  giris  and  15  boys.''

Old  Road.—"  The  school  in  this
place  is  in  an  improving  state.  The
number  of  scholars,  at  present^  is   '
113^76  girls  and  37  boys.''

Hal/' Way  Tree.—*'  It  gives  us
g^reat  pain  to  state,  that  the  school
in  this  place  is  nearly  dissolved.
The  number  of  children,  at  present^
is  only  14 — 10  girls  and  4  boys."

Sandy  Point.—'*  Throughout  the
past  year,  this  school  has  much  im-
proved, and  yielded  us  much  gra*
tification.  Number  of  chihSen,
259—103  boys  and  156  girls.  The
average  attendance  is  121.

"  Our  Friday-night  school  waa
originally  established  for  the  be-
nefit of  adults;  but  as  few  have
availed  themselves  of  its  advan-
tages, the  young  have  been  ad-
mitted; and  its  present  condition
affords  us  no  ordinary  degree  of
satisfaction.  It  is  composed  of
adults  and  children;  and  through
the  present  year  has  been  so  en-
larged, that  die  number  is  now  258.
About  50  of  these  are  adults.  Some
of  our  children  attend  our  Sunday-
school  also ;  but  the  majority  are
youths  of  both  sexes,  who  have  no
instruction  elsewhere,  or  at  any
other  time.  The  application  iwd
advancement  of  the  scholars  are
subjects  of  grateful  reflection.''

"  About  60  children,  from  a  few
of  the  neighbouring  estetes,  re-
ceive catechetical  instruction  in
the  chapel,  on  Thursday  after-
noon."

Deep  Bay.—"  God  has  blessed
the  school  in  this  town  in  a  very
especial  manner.  The  number  of
scholars  is  249—99  boys  and  150
girls,  under  the  care  of  13  teachers.
The  average  attendance  is  131."

Cayon.  — "  Our  school  in  this
place  is  not,  at  present,  in  a  very
flourishing  stete.  The  number
under  instroction,  dxnVng  ^]bA  ^ns^


CHU

ywr,  liak  been  86  boys   and    64
girifl,  with  only  8  teaehert."

NiciUla  Town.-^"  The  childien
mentidned  as  bemg  under  cateche-
attHL  initniction  in  Ibis  place,  have,
during  the  ^'ear,  been  formed  into
a  s<J1kk>1,  in  which  there  are  18
boys  and  30  girls,  whose  improve-
Bent,  although  they  have  been
ilnder  the  care  of  but  one  regular
teacher,  has  been  satisfactoty.

"  There  are,  at  present,  in  the
schools  of  the  Institution,  1368
ehttdreo,  being  an  increase,  during
they9eBr,of446.''
•  MuU  Schoolg.—*'  The  number
in  each  school  is  as  follows: —
Basseterre,  20;  Pahnetto  Point,
8 ;  Old  Road,  62  ;  Half- Way  Tree,
48;  Sandy  Point,,  50;  Nichola
Town,  10.    Total,  102."

CHUMIE,  a  mission  station,  in
South  Africa,  among  the  Cai&es,
situated  on  the  Chumie  river,  in
the  midst  of  a  fertile  and  populous
country.  The  village  is  laid  out  on  a
Iregular  plan,  to  which  all  the  Caflires
submit  who  build  on  ttie  premises.

In  1821,  the  Rev.  J.  Brownlce,
andW.  R.  Thompson,  missionaries,
and  Mr.  John  Bennie,  assistant,
commenced  labouring  here.  The
colonial  government  supports  the
two  missionaries,  and  the  Glasgow
Missionary  Society  the  assistant.
This  mission  was  commenced  in
compliance  with  the  earnest  solici-
tation of  Gaika,  one  of  the  princi-
pal chiefs  of  the  Caffivs,  for  a
Christian  instructor,  and  one  to
teach  him  and  his  people  the  most
useful  arts  of  civilized  Ufe.  A
small  congregation  of  attentive
>irorshippers  fate  been  collected,
and  of  the  piety  of  many  hope  is
indulged.  The  missionaries  are
extensively  gaining  influence  with
the  Caffires,  and  the  way  is  rapidly
preparing  for  the  introduction  of
the  Grospel  and  the  arts  of  civilized
life.  Mr.  Brownlee  fads  lately  re^
moved  to  Tzatzoe's  Kraal.

CHUNAR,  or  CHEMAROUR,


CBST

atttimaiid  fartwf  .Uhriwiiin
in  AllahabMl,  cUef  nl  a  dIMi
iHiidi  is  fertile  to  fb^nmOk^M
mountainous  to  tihs  toaflk  tt
fort,  built  on  a  look^  wa»  vmi
cessfuHy  attempted  hy  thrBriM
hi  1764;  but  in  ITTSli  wts/olll
to  them  by  tile  Nabob  ^  Ml
It  is  seated  on  the  rig^  bnhjtfp
Ganges,  15  m.  6.S.W.  BtaaM)
and  68  E.8 JEl.  AMahobad.

Mr.  WiUiam  Bovlcy,  a  M|
man  bora  in  the  aoontnry  mAwtit
nectedwith  the  C.  If.  JL^-WM  te^
tied  at  this  place  in  1810.  Am
the  time  of  his  anival^  he  vai  A
ligenl^y  occupied  in  fmiwimn  ni
superintending  aehoole  fartivJ|»
tives.  To  <me  centnd  MkeiAli
attached  others  in  the  manmnUti^
villages,  at  convenieirt  cUalBBea^  m
as  to  admit  of  stated  or  ooeulMi
visitation.  He  also  condactBifl^
assemblies  of  native  Chiistiaak  Al
the  end  of  1817,  the  itvte  oCH
schools  was  as  foUanra:-— 1»  Jh
EngUth  F^ee  Schooi,  ceateiBedfl
boys,  chiefly  of  European  ertBlfr
tion,  or  sons  of  native  ChtMaMl
all  read  tiie  Scripturee,  wuay,.fA
them  wrote,  and  a  few  learned  oUb
metic.  2.  A  Persian  tmd  iSmiam
tanee  School,  had  33  tcliolai%9l
of  whom  were  native  Cbsklhm^
and  7  heathens:  all  the  naiin
Christians^  and  3  of  the  '^-iHfrfi'^
read  Martyn's  Translatiooa.  I.  ^
PeriioM  School  in  thetown,  hadM
Hindoo  and  Mussulman  chiUraii,'!
only  of  whom  read  the  PeniaA  aa^
HindoostaDee  Gospels.  ^AUkik
dee  School^  had  35  boys,  lennliig
writing  and  arithmetio;  of  ttt«
20  had  learnt,  from  a  tniet^  the  tta
Commandments,  in  tene.  Bcridi
these,  a  Sunday-school  vas  qfMM^
for  the  native  Christiana,  kt  Vm
repetition  of  passam  of  fieriptee^
and  catechising.  The  Bie?«  Mi,
Corrie,  on  visiting  Clnmar  «t  tti
conmiencement  u  1B18,  ayv^
"  The  usual  number  of  fianpfliBi
^^ebo  aUendDV^UieaeTvice  regdaib


CHU

|i  about  40,  and  that  of  nati?e
GbrlstlaM)    who    attend   worship
ia  Hindoostanee,  about  70  or  80.
SHie  number  in  both  congregations
baa  been  gradually  and  regularly
Ipereadng,  and  testifies,  of  itself,
to  tile    diligence  and  exemplary
oondoct   of  Mr.  Bowley,  and  of
th9  blessing  attending  his  labours.
I  conversed  with  ten  Hindoos,  who
■ppear  to  be  fully  convinced  of  the
tta^  of  Christianity,  though  not
fet  prepared  to  encounter  the  con-
sequences of  an  open  profession.
Some  of  them  even  join  Mr.  Bow-
lej  occasionally  in  prayers.    One
Of  them,  on  being  asked  what  he
considered  the  great  peculiarity  of
fto  Christian  religion,  answered,
fliat  in  every  other  system  of  reli-
gkm,  worka  were  made  a  condition
ofjnstification,  but  in  Christianity,
ouy  faith  in  Christ  is  required ;
irtiile,  wonderful  to  say,  it  pro-
faces-  more   exemplary    holiness
ten  any  other  system.  The  whole
ooi^gpreg^tion  almost  were  in  tears
faring  a  sermon  in  which  Mr.  Bow-
ley  set  before  them  the  Saviour's
snflferings ;  and,  during  the  commu-
iJoOy  tlie  greater  number  appeared
deeply  affected,  and  all  of  them
eioeedingly  serious  and  attentive.''
A  convenient  spot  of  ground  for
Hie  erection  of  a  church  having
been  fixed  on,  Mr.  Turnbull,  the
iraprietor,  on  being  requested  to
dispose  of  it,  generously  offered  it
U  a  gif^  for  the  purpose  intended ;
and  the  Marquis  of  Hastings  was
pleased  to  aid  the  collection  by  the
leiy  liberal  donation  of  1000  sicca
mpees.

■  In  the  month  of  July  a  brahmin
and  a  moonshee  were  baptized.  At
tiUs  interesting  service,  after  the
regular  worship,  and  an  address
from  Mr.  Bowley,  they  both  came
forward.  The  brahmin  then  ad-
dressed the  hearers : — "  Behold !  I
declare  before  all,  and  let  Hindoos
and  Mussulmans  pay  attention  to
m^  words:  J  have  been  on  pilgrim-  I


CHU

age  to  Jugger-nauth,  to  Dwarka-
nauth,  to  Budee-nauth,  and  to  the
different  Teruths  (or  Pilgrimages) ;
but,  in  all  my  travels,  I  found  not
the  true  way  of  salvation,  till  I
came  to  this  place,  and  heard  the
Gospel,  which  by  God's  grace  I
am  convinced  is  the  only  way  to
happiness ;  and  I  truly  believe  and
declare,  before  Hindoos  and  Mus-
sulmans, that  if  they  do  not  em-
brace the  Gospel,  the  wrath  of  God
will  abide  upon  them,  and  theji
shall  be  cast  into  hell."  On  say-
ing this,  he  drew  out  his  brahmihical
thread,  and  broke  it  asunder  before
the  people,  saying,  ''  Behold  here
the  sign  of  my  delusion ! "  and  then
delivered  it  to  Mr.  Corrie.

After  him,  Moonee  Ulee,  the
moonshee,  thus  addressed  the  peo-
ple:— '<  Attend  brethren,  and  hear-,
ken  unto  me.  I  was  a  Mussulman,
and  had  spent  much  of  my  time  iu
the  company  of  learned  men  of  the
same  profession.  I  liave  studied
the  meaning  of  the  Koran,  and  I
have  paid  adoration  at  the  tombs  of
peers — [saints,  or  spiritual  guides].
In  those  days,  whenever  I  saw  a
Christian,  my  spirit  was  stirred  up
within  me  to  slay  him;  but  on
hearing  the  holy  Gospels,  light  has
sprung  up  in  my  mind,  which  has
increased;  and  I  have  been  more
confirmed  in  this  faith  since  I  saw
the  Pentateuch  and  Psalms.  To
receive  Christian  baptism,  I  have
come  from  Delhi.  My  mind  has,
moreover,  been  strengthened  and
established  by  the  instructions
which  I  have  received  from  the
Rev.  Mr.  Corrie ;  and  now,  before
all  my  brethren  present,  I  eqnbrace
this  true  way  of  salvation."

After  this,  Mr.  Corrie  addressed
the  people  from  Matt,  xxviii.  ]  9 ;  and
then  baptized  the  two  candidates,
the  brahmin  by  the  name  of  Ke-
roul  Messeeh,  "  Only  Christ ;"  and
the  Mussulman  by  that  of  Moonef
Messeeh,  "  Eminent  CY«\sV..^»

The  chui^:h  ha\U\s  "V^ti^aii  cotcv-


CHC

menced,  the  Calcutta  correspond-
ing committee     were     naturally
anxious  to  provide  the  station  with
an    ordained    mlsslonarf.     This,
however^   could   only  be   accom-
plished  by  the   removal   of  Mr.
Greenwood  from  Kidderpore, where
he  had  no  employment  as  an  or-
dained minister  ;  and  various  rea-
sons urging  this  measure,   he  ar-
rived at  Chunar,  Jan.  131^,  1819.
Mr.  Bowley    continued  his  wise
and    zealous   efforts,    assisted   by
Nicholas,  one  of  the  natives  edu-
cated by  Mr.  Corrie :  the  place  of
divine  worship  was  usually  crowd-
ed on  Sundays  by  native  Christians,
and  the  heatlien  were  occasionally
drawn  to  hear  the  words  of  life —
among  whom  some  instances  oc-
curred of  saving  conversion  to  the
Christian  faith.    In  addition  to  his
labours  during  the  year,  Mr.  Bow-
ley  was  employed  in  a  revision  of
Mr.  Martyii^s  Hindoostanee  trans-
lation of  the  New  Testament.  Two
of  the  Gospels  had  been  printed  by
the  Calcutta  Auxiliary  Bible  So-
ciety, and  from  these  he  derived
essential  help  in  his  labours-for  the
good  of  the  natives.

In  the  following  year,  Mr.  Bow-
ley   wishing   to   superintend   the
press,   visfted  Calcutta,  and    was
there  solemnly  set  apart  to  the  sa-
cred ministry,  by  the  imposition  of
higKls,  according  to  the  usage  of
the  German  Lutheran  church.  Mr.
Greenwood  regularly  officiated  at
Chunar  twice  on  Sundays,  and  on
Wednesday  evenings   to  the  Eu-
ropean inhabitants  of  the  station.
The  schools  also  were  prospering,
and  new  ones  were  opened.

A  ge;itleman  in  the  Company's
service,  who  visited  this  place,
bears  the  following  testimony  to
tUe  exemplary  state  of  the  native
Christians : —

"  It  was  delightful  to  witness  the

beautiful  order  and  decorum  of  the

native  women.    The  first  .sight  of

saeli  a  coDgregaUon  of  worshippeis


is,  of  coarse,  tbe

because  one  lias  Utherte  1«ca

customed  to  see  tlM  wohma  «f -

country  under  sneh  Teiy

eireumstaocet.''

<<  The  wbde  appesrpBee  ef
barracks,  of  the  boMec  of  M
valids,  and  of  tboteof  tlW
Christian  womeii^
minded  me  of  a  eoantiy
England  on  the  Sebbath  diy.
were  sitting  at  the  doon,  and
in  the  verandas^  leading  ^  amI;  M


whole  of  them  were  so-^pte^
one  coidd  not  but  be  afoan  HMti^
Gospel  of  peace  was  laiow&ttfliii;
I  have  not  seen  any  thlteUkrttlt
India  before;  on  which
perhaps,  it  was  the  waom  (
by  me :  bat  the  nativee
Mr.  Bowley  told  dm,  say  tlftll  ff|
place  has  been  quite  allmd  ikMf
the  Gospel  has  been  pruacljs^.
The  hawkers  and  venden  if  gaatif
now  never  tiilnk  of  goJUiff  to  tti
barracks  on  a  Sunday'inr- H^f
only  meet  with  reproi^  or  adtlfi^
instead  of  selling  anyihinf ;  mA
the  very  Coolies  of  the  place  fewiaF
learned  something  of  Jesus  CUt/L
for  the  women  tidk  of  hl»  toiiff
who  will  listen."

In  1821,  Mr.  Bowley  sa^s^^
*<Ihave  baptized  four  adaili(firo
males  and  two  femrie»>y  andHlai'
children,  four  of  natif»  CMiUaaii;
the  rest  adopted  by  Cbrisiiana.  H/m'
of  the  men  was  our  Hlqdee  toaehu^
who,  so  .long  ago  as  yrbmi,  Mr.
Corrie  was  at  Benares,  intiaiatBd'
his  wish  to  be  baptized ;  bat  |i»ar  dF
the  worid  and  shame  nade  hiB
shrink  from  the  ordinance,''

<'The  native  ChristlaiH  eMH
tlnue,'^  say  the  missionaries  ^t»=
conduct  themselves  to  the
tion  of  ail  that  love  our  Lord  <
Christ  here,  with  the  excep^kuLof
one  or  two  who  were  suspeaW
from  the  communion,  but  wlMlliM'
also  been  restored  iqieii  moalfiNi^
ing  true  signs  of  peniimee;  ThB^
cQmmQnkvtk\a«rft«bcsiji50.  ¥tom


CHU

iMr  stciamental  oolleetioiis  made
t^  tbe  native  Christiaiu^  toge-
mr  wHh  a  pecuniary  aid  received
firbjp  «  Christian  aiar  off,  we  are
eudiled  to  dispense  to  poor  indi-

C  widows  32  rupees  per  month :
alio  sobsciibe  about  12  rupees
ptr  mcmth  to  tfa?  ^.  ^  C  Af.  5.,
wd  we  obtain  about  the  same  sum
fram .  tbe  European  invalids  for
flieao  focieties.  But  really  I  feel
MJned  to  accept  so  much  from
ft^niy  being  satisfied  that  they  are
VuUnig  beyond  their  means  and
Sover.  We  have  public  Hindoos-
tenae  aervice  three  tiipes  a  week,
bolides  «  meeting  for  prayer  every
SvhmUj  morning,  and  a  monthly
jnyar  meeting  for  the  propagation
of  the  GospeL  Our  Christian  at-
tendants are  irom  80  to  100,  and
Mi^ns  from  3  to  30."  Mr.
fiowley's  report  of  the  schools  at
ftir  period  is  also  encouraging;
fbt  labours  of  the  missionaries
irm  tvdieequently  continued,  and
impend.

In  lS84j  Mr,  Bowley's  impor-
Wit  Hinduwee  Testament  (al-
tered from  Mutyn's)  was  com-
pleted.

The  Bishop  of  Calcutta,  accom-

ded  fay  the  archdeacon,  passed
lay.  Sept  12th,  1825,  at  this
Italfam,  of  whidi  the  latter  gives
tbe  following  account: —

*'  At  Chunar,  I  may  say,  we  be-
held more  than  had  previously  been
told  OS.  On  Saturday  morning,  67
of  Mr.  Bowley's  congregation  were
•dmitted  to  confirmation,  together
irith  nearly  the  same  number  of  Eu-
ropeans. Next  day,  a  still  greater
nomber  of  native  Christians  commu-
Dicated,  together  with  a  large  num-
lier  of  Europeans.  Several  gentle-
men came  from  Benares,  and  some
.ofl&cers  from  Sultampore.  The
.whole  had  the  appearance  of  a
Jubilee;  end  the  fine  church,  which
the  Bishop  calls  handsome  and  ap-
propriate, was  entirely  filled."
.    Mr.  Bowl^  continues  to  labour


CHU

with  assiduity  at  Chunar.  He  has-
been  joined  by  Mr.  J.Landeman,  a
country-bom  person,  who  was  (Us-
missed  to  his  station  by  the  Calcutta
committee,  on  the  15th  of  Dec,
1826.  On  the  ITth  of  Feb.  1827,  he
opened  one  of  the  schools,  which
is  in  tbe  bazaar,  for  public  worsliip,
for  the  special  benefit  of  the  hea-\
then,  intending  to  hold  Hindoos-
tanee  service  there  twice  a  week,
in  addition  to  tbe  services  in  the
church ;  aI>out  50  were  present.
The  novelty  soon  attracted  gpreat
crowds,  especially  of  the  higher  class
of  the  natives;  and  a  subscription
was,  in  consequence,  opened  for
the  erection  of  a  chapel  and  school-
house  in  the  bazaar.  Several  of
tbe  natives  appear  to  havQ  already
felt  here  the  power  of  tbe  Gospel :
8  adults  received  baptism  in  tbe
course  of  a  few  months ;  of  these,
3  were  devotees,  2  of  whom  were
deeply  learned  in  all  that  belongs  to
the  Hindoo  system.

Besides  his  usual  ministration  in
the  church,  Mr.  Bowley  has,  since
his  return  to  Chunar,  opened  a
chapel  in  the  midst  of  the  native
town,  where  he  is  attended,  on  the
evenings  when  he  officiates,  by  a
considerable  number  of  nativjes'  of
respectabUity,  who  would  not,  for
fear  of  incurring  reproach,  enter
the  church.  He  is  heard  with
much  attention ;  and  only  on  one
occasion  has  any  one  ouered  to
dispute  on  the  points  of  controvers}*.
An  adult,  somewhat  advanced  in
life,  and  a  youth,  have,  in  conse-
quence of  this  service,  proposed
themselves  as  candidates  for  bapr
tism,  and  been  admitted.

The  last  report  of  the  Calcutta
auxiliary  states,  that,  there  are  6
schools  at  Chunar,— one  for  Eng-
lish, one  for  Persian,  one  for
Oordoo  or  Hindoostanee,  one  for
Nagree  Hinduwee,  and  two  for
Kytbee  Hinduwee.  The  number
of  boys  generally  attending  is  180 ;
no  return  of  the  idtW  schooVi  bsdi


CHU

bees  TBcelnd.  Neul*  100  pm-
mu  pirtook  ncantl;  M  tte  eata-
■nuoioD.

Archdeacon  Conle,  mtUr  hi*
vUt  to  thli  itatton,  ghret  Um  fol-
imring  accomtt  of  It;—

"  The  coogT^;«tlon  of  Hindooa-
tbnee  wonhlppen  1>  ratber  on  the
Ipereeie :  the  da;  I  wat  there,  np-
Kordi  of  iOO  attended,  of  h^kmd  at
.leait  SO  were  unbaptiied  nettraa.
I  convened  wlUi  tome  of  tite  raceat
«im»ert«,  who  appeared  to  be  Tealljr
alncere.  Among  tbem,  iome  aie
natlTei  of  vlOaget  In  the  nelgli-
bouibood,  who,  st  flnt,  were
greatly  oppowd  by  thetr  r^allTei ;
but,  retreallDg  to  Chnnar,'  con-
tiliued  to  reeeiie  renewed  itrength
and  encouragement  b;  attending
cai  the  meani  of  grace.  B7  re-
peatinn;  heir  visits  home  at  In-
tervals, they  have  at  length  orer-
fcome  prejodlce  ao  far  u  to  be
beard  wlls  attention  on  the  tubject
of  theli  chaoge ;  and  in  one  ease,
the  convert,  who  U  one  of  several
brothers,   brahmins,   who  are  the

eclpil  cultivators  of  the  village,
been  acknowledged  by  his  fa-
mily, and  allowed  to  resDme  his
place  amonffthem.   ThesBclrcum-


ment  to  Mr.  Bovrley.  They  have
niade  the  nibject  of  Christianity
much  talked  of;  and  he  flnda  him-
self more  and  more  attended  to  by
the  people  genenlly.  He  has
phrchased  a  house  In  the  baza&r,
wblch  he  li  fitting  np  for  a  scbotd-
room,  and  for  the  purpose  of
preaching :  the  cost  of  the  whole
will  be  about  TtM  rupees,  which
Mr.  Bowley  has  recelrad  ftom  va-
rious friends  In  the  neighbourhood.
Of  Ihoae  natives  who  attend  Chris-
tian woisbip,  one  whole  family
have  become  candidates  for  bap-'
tlsm.  The  Orst  of  the  lamOj  who
became  Impressed  with  the  sultject'
at  religion  vras  the  eldest  son.
About  9  years  ago,  he  propoaed
Unualf  for  boptlnn ;  hot  hli  (sOurc


COC

._  consider  ..__
e  should  not  join  with  H
Mr.  Onwiey,  oD  Uiii,  MB
■niletl  delay  to  the  son
sntinued  sleadyj  and  _,
and  mother,  an6  sOumoW
?ra  of  the  family,  Bre  rftr
resolved  (0  embrace  ChrMiaat^'.>*
CICACOLE,  or  CHICACOLE,
a  town  In  Btngal,  about  60  d.
N.  of  rizat<al>atani,  and  capiW  fl[
8  clear  of  Ihe  same  nnine.  By  ibt
eHlsbiisbment  of  schools,  the  /Hi-
pernio))  (if  Ihe  Scrijitures,  and  Ok
occitslonni  labours  of  the  misston-
ar)l^<  at  V'iai^pstam,  the  folly  of
iddlntry  begins  to  be  felt,  and  nisii;
ore  mnking  promising  advaocest'^
wnrdi  the  r«llg)on  of  Christ.

CLA.N  WILLIAM,  a  town  tt
Cape  Colnny,  S.  Africa,  about  S»
m.  N.  Cape  Town.

The  NelAtrlaiulaiaid  S.JJntim
M.  S.  have  aided  missionary  (^lets-
tiont  bero  since  about  I81T,  vHA
liave  been  followed  by  pleaslfia
fruits    among    the    Colonists  M

COCHIN,  a  province  rai  tlln
W.  coast  of  Southern  HindoostuB,
ij-ing  between  those  of  Malnbal
and  Truvancore,  80  m,  iong  tM
70  broad,  Nearly  ooe-tliird  of  Ihb
province  I5  attathBd  to  that  Of  Bh-
lahnr.  The  remainder,  whlfbcllB-
tains  enteusive  forests  of  teal^  li
governed  bj  a  Rnjah,  who  ii  trflra-
Isry  to  the  British,  and  girnemlly
residBS  at  Triponlary.

The  vbite  and  black  Jews,  who
had  T  synagogues,  were  estimated,
by  llr.  Buchanan,  at  16,000.  The
Dutvb  inhabitants,  wfad  are  nume-
rous, were  formerly  Christian  in
their  rollKion,  but  they  have,  ge-
nernlly,  relapsed  into  idolatry',  or
MnbonieiJaTiism,  or  become  Roman
Catholics,  for  want  of  pro  lest  ant  In-
struction. The  Dative  and  country-
born  Portuguese  population  is  very

.'     CteMia,  ^  MKvtf  vnk»  itolB
\         -  ■      V»iV


iiiC6>  dtaate  on  •  low  iaUncI,
^if  %  river  which,  a  littia
ITyMltiBn  into  the  aea.  Here^in
L^^  "Pmtagaioae  erected  «  fort,
ui.  WM  the  fknA  possessed  by
I  tn  iQdin.  In  1663,  it  was
ip,  by  the  Dutch  $  and  taken
» &em»  in  1795,  by  the  British,
bm  it  was  ceded  in  1814.  The
ie  of  this  place  is  consideriihley
die  chief  exports  are  pepper,
imomsi,  teaky  sandal-wood,  co-
imtB,  coir  oordage,  and  cassia.
QTm. S* S.  £.  Calicut  £. Ion.
r,  N.  lat.  »<>  ^T'.
benissionaries  of  the  C.  M,  S.
Ib^ie  and  Co^nn  have  suocess-
Jahoured  here,  as  opportunity
ed»  principally  among  the
ft  iMid  Dutch,  who  ^>eak  £ng-

A  respectable  congpregation
It  class  IvBs  been  collected,  who
repaired  a  large  church,  which
toond  in  a  very  decayed  state.
Ifdayalim  schoolmaster  has
,  ^pointed  to  this  place.    The

Smb.  Ridsdale,  who  has  also
fixed  at  this  station,  gives  the
ping  account  of  it  :^-**  I  hlive
Be  of  a  noble  church — a  con-
itioD  of  about  SOO,  who  un-
umI  English — and  immediate
HB6t  of  establishing  a  native
oe»  I  have  also  a  school  of
ill^KVOr  the  number  of  which,
pey  wUl  shortly  be  doubled }
the -prospect  of  establishing
rediools,  amounting  to  about
^Udren.

le-  Jews'  Society  at  Madras
dished  schools  here  in  ISSl,
r-tkie  direction  of  Mr.  Michael
on,  a  converted  Jew;  the
A  eoholais  in  which  amounted,
•8S,  to  116.  Some  consider-
obftacles,  hqwever,  have  lately
n«  which,,for  a  time,  are  likely
ipede  the  progress  of  this  li^

)£d  SPRING,  a  village  of
ea  Indians,  Alleghany  Reser-
D,  in  the  S^  W.  part  of  New


COL

York,  in  the  mklst  of  a  nnmeroiii
Indian  population.

The  S§cieiy  o/fHend$~hm,  for
several  years,  supported  here  e
flourishing  scliool.

COLOMBIA,  in  the  N.  W.  pert
of  S.  America,  including  the  coub<«
tries  of  Caraccas,  or  Venezuela  and
New  Granada.  These  two  coun-
tries >separately  declared  their  in*
dependence^  and  were  united  in  a
republic  by  a  law  passed  Dec.  IT,
1819.  It  is  bounded  N.  ^  the
Caribbean  sea,  W.  by  the  Pacific
Ocean,  S.  by  Peru,,  and  £.  by
Guiana  ;  extending  from  S.  lat*  ^
to  N.  lat.  1S<*.  The  popolation,  in,
1822,  was  2,644,600 ;  a  very  large
proportion  are  Indians.  The  pre*
vailing  religicm  is  Roman  Catholic.

Schools  are  aut&rized  by  law,
and  supported  by  the  public  funds/
Colleges  have  been  built,  and  uni-
versities endowed,  by  the  generosity
of  individu^,  or  by  the  grants
of  government.  The  Lancasterian
system  of  instruction  has  been  in-
troduced in  some  places,  with  its
usual  success;  hnd- provision  has-
been  made  at  the  several  colleges, .
for  the  education  of  native  youths
at  the  public  expense.  The  inter-
course between  the  Republic  and
the  United  States  is  becoming  more
easy  and  frequent.  A  passage  is
ordinarily  made  from  La  Guira  to
New  York  in  16  days.

Such  has  been  the  policy  of  the
Spanish  government  in  keeping
their  subjects  in  igpnorance,  that
very  few  can  read;  consequently
the  distribution  of  the  Scriptures
must  be  very  limited  for  some  time
to  come.  The  jimeriean  B.  S,
has  forwarded  Bibles  and  Te$rta-
ments  toCol^ombia ;  many  of  which
have  been  sokl,  or  gratuitously
distributed.

COLOMBO,  the  capital  of  Cey-
lon. It  was  built  in  1638,  by  the
Portugoese,  who,  in  1656,  were
expelled  by  the  Dutch;  and  the

a  a  185


dot,

Utter  tufrmdnsd  H  t
in  1196.  Tba  fori,  Bpwaidi  of  a
taQe  In  circuit,  itandi  on  tiie  i
freml^  of  a  penlnmla,  mod  b
(ttong  botb  bj  lurtaTe  and  ait.  Tia
tUj  h  bdlt  Bon  In  the  Buropoan
(^e  tlwB  Mjr  other  (taiTlMQ  In  Id-
dle,  end  li  oew^  dTlded  Into  foot
«qmil  qoacten  07  two  pilnclpel
(tieett,  to  lAlch  HBalleT  oaei  tan
parallel)  wHh  eoBBectliw  lanei  be-
tweenthen.  He  PettiH,  or  Black
Town,  wlttNottbewelliof  the  cttr,
Itrery  exteralTe;  and  In  tbe-itreet
nnt  the  wa  li  an  ezcetlent  fUl-
marltet.  On  tlie  riTen  Id  the  t1-
dnitj  of  Colcntbo,  there  are  about
300  Sat-bottomed  boati  moared,
with  entire  famflin  (in  board,  who
have  no  other  liwellingB.  The  In-
habttvita  uraont  to  abore  50,000.
Ct&ombo  It  the  chief  place  fiar  the
itaple  trade  of  the  iHond,  and  li
lAuated  in  a  rich  dMrict  on  the  V.
coait,  toward  tbe  S.  pert  of  the
Uand,  85  m.  W.  8.  W.  of  Kaody.
E.  ]oog.  ttfi  r,  N.  lat  «•  oaf.

In  and  aboot  Colombo  are  Ooa-
flmdi  of  half-caitepeople,  wbo  on.
dentand  theEn^lih  languor,  ud
imed  inatmcUon  ai  much  al  the
heatheni.  Two  loag  itieeti  are
almoat  exclntliely  Inhabited  hj
Mabomedena,  wbo  are  Brmly  ri-
Tctted  to  their  wietched  delttrioni.
rlew  the  Chrlrtlan  t«~
contempt,  and  will
nothing  on  the  nbject.  There  are
man;  who  bear  the  Chrlftlan  name,
but  the]'  are  awIiiUy  deficient  fu
Christian  knowled^  and  practice,
Slaee  1811,  Colombo  bai  been4he
nest  of  an  archdeaconry  for  the
whole  Iiland,  under  the  direction
of  the  Bishop  of  Calentta.

lothe  feailT4D,  the  Her.  Menra.
EUer  and  Nltsebmaun,  jun.,  of  the
U.  B.,  cliited  the  Idand  ofCejrlon.
On  their  arrival  at  C<riombo,  every
thing  appeared  ausplcioui  to  their
uodertalilng,  u  Mr.  ImbolT,  the
Gonrnor,  reeeired  tbem.  with  the


r>»


pfreBteirthindne«i,andre«49TCgM(  |i
10  fscaitatn  tbeir  journey  into  tbl
IntPtlor  of  tbe  country.  The  Cll-
inil«e,  to  whom  they  mldreMd
tbemreivois,  were,  at  firft,  ve
serrwl,  )n  consequence  of  I
been  cBulioaed  Bgoin*!  tbem,  W
men  whose  prlnclplm  wer*  cell-
pletelT  atheifitical.  The  abwmWj
of  Ibis  Idea,  bowever,  becnme  a^
ficiently  obvioua  wben  they  begm
tospeakon  religioussubietUj  «J,
after  a  <bart  time,  the  n
peared  to  lislen  lo  them
iltciittun  and  pleasure.  But  ItW-
forlunetely  happened  at  IhiajiM-
tiira,  thnt  Mr.  Imhoff  retired  fc~
blj<  tUnellon  ;  and  ai  aome  pemi
bI  Colombo  bad  befpin  to  biridd»'
iQtional  meeting!  at  tbeir  hoan,
the  new  (lovernor  wasjierKuadeiltt
isfve  an  order  for  the  remorrfrf
(he  mUsinnnrlet  from  tbe  UbaL
Sbort,  however,  as  was  their  ri
ul  Ceylon,  they  bad  a  pleaidn^t
stniice  of  usefulnesE,  as,  flmni)
Ihetr  Instrumentality,  R  aorgen  .
nameilChrlstian  Dober,  wasbroaghl
to  a  Buvlng  acquaintance  with  di-
vine truth,  and  afterwards  reiDOVBl
to  one  of  the  Brethren's  EoropFUi
'ietUementi,  accompanied  by  a  Ma-
labar, who  was  olao  instructed  i|>  1
the  thiuga  pertafniojte  "
lo-^ing  peace,  and  ws
Into  tbe  church  by  boptlsni  (d  m
In  1805,  the  L.  M.  ~  '  '  -
sereiftl  miiitionsries  1
one  of  whom,  the  Her.  Mr.  t
f.'iis  appointed,  H  years  after,  tl
Dutch  cburch  at  Colombo.

hml  previously  been  nseful  In  tI

inp:  and  letlving  some  acfaoola  tbil'
had  been  formed  ;  and  in  Uietltuab'
tlou  to  which  be  WE
diiceil,  has  lieiter  opportunlUe*  tb
ever   of  beine  serviceable   to  tbe-  i

In  lS12,lbe  Rev,  Mr.  Cbater,-ef '
the  00;!^.  M,  S.,  was  reeommeaded
tl)  attempt  tbe  establishment  «f  a
missionary  station  In  this  city.  One


COL

toaiiiBtaace  particularly  favoarabfe
Fiiioiindertddog  was,  that  a  fount
fGingalese  types,  for  printing  an
HttftB  of  the  New  Testament  in
1^  language,  was  then  casting,
■deirthe  patronage  of  the  Calcutta
Immiliisry' B,  <S.,  at  Serampore;
•d-tbe  President  and  Secretary  of
litt  society  expressed  their  decided
Ipiobation  of  the  projected  mis-
pii>  as-tending  to  bring  their  new
>|ie  into  operation  and  effect.

On  the  20th  of  March,  Mr.  and
tB«  Chater  embarked  for  Ceylon,
idy  after  a.  voyage  of  about  26
lys,  (irrived  in  safety  at  Colombo,
hae  they  were  received  with
neb  kindness  by  the  Governor,
■d  some  other  gentlemen  of  the
4ony ;  and  though  no  immediate
wning  appeared  for  the  accom-
iUiment  of  their  principal  object,
utir  proposal  of  e^blishing  a
ibool  was  cordially  approved.  The
tficNlical  accounts  of  the  Bapt,
tm  S,  were  also  introduced  among
«iie  respectable  persons,  who
ipeared  rather  friendly.  In  ad-
tion  to  these  pleasing  circum-
•Bces,  Mr.  C.  soon  afterwards
itained  permission  to  preach
I  English,  previous  to  his  ac-
itring  the  Cingalese  language;
ivee  niends  agreed  to  purchase  a
■rebouse,  and  to  put  it  in  decent
|>air,  for  the  celebration  of  divine
onhip ;  and  in  Mr.  Palm  he  found
I  agreeable  neighbour  and  a  cor-
■1  Diend.  Mr.  C.  preached  twice
week  in  English.
In  1«14,  Mr.  Chater  says—  "I
KfB  been  directing  one  of  my
utch  friends  to  try  if  he  could
it  find  out  some  Cingalese  fami-
to  to  whom  I   might  endeavour

Impart  some  spiritual  benefit.
e  has  accordingly  found  a  ma-
mdaram,  who  is  a  well-disposed
in,  and  much  wishes  for  reli-
oas  instruction  for  himself,  his
nlly,  and  viis  neighbours.  I  go
his  house,  which  is  2  m.  from
e  forty  eveiy  Sahbath  morning  at


COD

7  o'clock,  and  he  welcomes  me  fft
the  most  cordial  manner.  On  the
first  occasion,  only  his  own  family
were  present ;  but  on  the  following
Sabbath,  he  had  collected  14  or  16
grown  persons,  besides  children,  of
whom  8  or  9  were  females.  The
mahandaram  can  speak  no  Eng-
lish ;  but  he  has  brought  a  nephew
to  me,  who  speaks  it  better  than
almost  any  Cingalese  I  ever  heard;
and  it  is  he  who  acts  as  my  inter-
preter. This,  whilst  it  is  an  im-
mediate attempt  at  doing  good,
will  help  me  forward  in  the  language
more  than  almost  any  thing  else.''

On  the  last  Sabbath  in  May,  a
young  man,  named  Sierce,  formerly
a  member  of  the  Dutch  church,
was  publicly  baptized ;  and,  as  a
little  Baptist  church  had  now  been
formed,  the  ordinance  of  the  Lord's
Supper  was  solemnly  administered
on  that  day  week.  About  the  same
time,  some  pious  soldiers  belongfing
to  the  73d  regiment,  who  had
recently  come  from  New  South
Wales,  obtained  leave  to  attend
the  services  of  the  sanctuary,  and
appeared  likely  to  strengthen  the
infant  cause.

Mr.  Chater  now  turned,  his  at-
tention to  the  attainment  of  the
Portuguese  language,  which  is  more
generally  used  in  Colombo  than
any  other;  and  his  services  in  it
were  very  acceptable.
^  In  1817,  he  observes—"  It  is
with  no  small '  pleasure  I  inform
you,  that  translating  into  Cinga-
lese, with  the  aid  of  a  brahmin^
named  Dhun,  is  become  an  easy
and  pleasant  work  to  me.  Our
congregations,  in  general,  are
small ;  but  the  Lord  does  not  seem
to  have  forsaken  us.  On  the  con-
trary, one  after  another  is  reclaimed
from  a  life  of  sin ;  and,  so  far  as  we
can  judge,  they  appear  to  become
new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus.
Two  of  our  members,  who  appear
to  be  Christians  of  the  right  stamp,
recently  left  this  place  for  England ;

\%1


QOb

«*ftl«l-^ -

IwW  IM  Ikaj  faod  <  tb*  rwd  af
g(Mt   itlee'     •-  ■  ■     "  ■

BlM«tterd_.

ptaoomi  IhenwhBi  fbt  h^tliBi
■Mafanth  kMjoloadoai  ezps-
HnEv.MMtiaKt  wbo  Ufaidi  gMd
MfdaiiM  Ihrt  b«  kw  '  iMcbml
■  tba  Wgimftad  trwd.^


)  MM  of  vhMB  hMi,


KiM,  It  eitnm  lU  bMHli.  to  init
b  aWk«  ttFmmt  A  eWb,  a^
labnn  to  Bn^and.

tfHy  tnjfae  MWlag  TMr,  Am
■^Mt  of  aflUn  b«g«a  to  WlghteD  {
H  flW  atlBiidHM  on  poblio  woiridf^
kott  in  the  fwtnpwa  and  On-
gtlum  taMninfc  wacBUofe  man
DiOMfoqi  tliBB  It  had  Iweo  iot  MBa
tlmapad;  naw openliiBi pmenkd
thaqiialTai  Sat  tM  intraduetbn  of
tbo  Ootpal  into  mne  of  tha  attf*.
«aqt  ftllagaai'aad  tline nattna of
Ccirlo>  tvo  M  irtMHu  bad  fomMtiy


on   inoUoaUon  to  make  a  pabUe
•vowalof  their  cbaiqe  of  faith,  by

Hibmlttliig  to  thailte  of  ^-^ —


WTnal  nUwM  appotiad  to  b»
DDdei  hawftdiwyaJbma.  I>  IBSf,
othM  ^Hf-nri  ««a  n^  to  theii
maahn:  tort  the  whoob  loctuated
mat)t  ton  ddmeia  and  othM
-aiMii  Mr.  C3wta  pubUibed  a
Gma  tnoclattoB  of  AUalM^  AlacB,
Ini  tlw.  RirtKoew  Ifngmge*  aad
ma  ^poiBtM  Saei^aiT  to  a  JIt>
firiMM  nwrt  &  recaollj  fanned.


pilad   by  Ut.  Chatcr

oly  Increucd ;  and  Ihe  i
Bdoplo!,  of  empluying  dbI
gBlera  to  lead  the    Scriptom^
IbeircounlrjniBii,  proiedlLen    *
of  exciting  much  uttontlon  ii
JiUTOuudlng  vlUages.      At  a
tbeie,  called  OvgguUa,  aniTld
ing  ciccuinitaiice  occuirad.
niEibaniliinuii,  a  native  beaif
the  |)lace,  one  of  vhose  »
previou&ly  beeu  united  to  U
church  at  Han)cwell,  ««s  I
wltb  bis  wile  and  otber  aot
lid/  osaigtiing,    on   the  ot
intelligent  and  Bcilptiual


ncing  tb


ius  Imd

leqiient  conduct  of  this  familf

accorded  wilb  iheir  profealDn,  ami

the  CUD  iaii  excltod  considenUe

attention  and  Inquiiy  in  the  neigb-

buurtuud.

Mr.  C.  basCDiioS  )t  expedient  to
nqunst  the  Bssintonce  ul  Mr.  Sierce
at  Colombo.  Several  addiliaiis  ham
beui  made  to  the  church  at  Hang-
well;  a  dbUvb  youth,  called  Cm-
rolls,  li  ap|]otnl«d  auistant  there,
and  Mr.  C.  himi^ir  will  visit  Urn

In  1^14,  several  Heaieyai  mif
sionarie*  anlvfd  at  Caylon,
two  ware  slatloned  at  C  '
Ai  the  gavernini
tbat  place  coutujiml  many  Cloga-
leso   youths  v'—  "■-'    '— '  -


iiiterprel  it  to  their  MuatiyiDMH
and  ai  native  congregattans  coidd
easily  bo  eollectivi  in  the  dlSemti
ichotds  which  were  c^ieaed.  Moan.
Hsrvoid  and  CtoH^  laaolnd,  toi
this  way,  to  diauoiinata  tb*  tntb^
and,  under  their  aupMliitNdcM^
aeieial  of  the  lilla^cei  Is  Ibe  mif^,
bourbood  were  aiippUud,  evaiy  Sihin
bath,  with  putdic  means  of  mifip  j
glODs  initrucliou.    Slylna  aervloM  J
was  «lso    perlormed  by  Ibe  mlij  '
tlanariea,   m  different  parti  at  thW
capilal;  a  Sunday-school  (the  taM|i  {


cou

ijvos  established  by  their
loEfs ; '  ai^d,  on  the  arrival  of
*  r  and  types  from  England,
plied  themselves  sedidously
l-^prlnting  of  elementary  and
'us  books,  of  which  some
'  icb  Were  soon  put  in  circu-
They  also  resolved  on
g  the  erection  of  a  new
]|an£onie  place  of  worship ;
lL--tn-the  subscription  list,  they
m'wocm  the  pleasure  of  enrolling
W'lrames  of  his  Excellency  the
ififinRior,  the  Hon.  Chief  Justice,'
le  *  Archdeacon  Twisleton,  and
itoy  member  of  his  Majest^-'s
totecily  as  well  as  those  of  many
Fthe  most  respectable  inhabitants,
btfi  ciril  and  military.

T%e-  dwelling-house  occupied
f  the  brethren,  'was  situated  on
IB  main  road  leading  from  the
lirt  into  the  country;  and  this
tffe  'Ifaem  frequent  opportunities
^'bonreising  with  the  natives  on
^IffiQUs  subjects.  The  attention
Ifn  which  many  of  them  listened
rfhe-tiiings  connected  with  their
tonial  welfore  was  highly  en-
iniFBging;  and,  on  one  occasion,
feB  wind  spoken  in  the  name  of  the
nnlneems  to  have  been  crowned
ifli  complete  success.  An  indi-
Wbaly  known  by  the  appellation  of
m  And  priestf  possessing  much
Biitftness  of  intellect,  enriched  by
)kaiU&c  and  literary  research;
ad  who  was  an  atheist  in  prin-
^,  and  asserted  his  ability  to
Inrove  the  being  of  a  God,— was
a  to  renounce  Budhism,  and  was
iptteed  into  the  faith  of  Christ  by
le  name  of  George  Nadoris  de
Ihra^  at  the  fort  church.
Sbortly  after  this,  another  priest
te  Introduced  to  the  missionaries,
f  George  Nadoris,  who  wished
»i«nouice  Budhism,  having  been
mg  dissatisfied  with  it,  and  was
Ittmately  baptized  by  the  name  of
lenjamin  Parks;  the  first  name
Bing  cboeen  out  of  respect  to  Mr.
•loiitk,  and  the  second  from  the


COI^

same  feeling  towards  Mrs.Hair-'
vard's  father.

From  the  first'  residence  of  the
missionaries  in  this  city,  it  was
their  practice  to  deliver  a  sermon'
to  children  and  young  people,  at
the  commencement  of  the  year,
at  Easter,  and  at  Whitsuntide;
and,  oh'  these  occasions,  they  were
generally  attended  by  crowds  of
natives,  both  old  and  young,  who
flocked  together  from  the  surround-
ing villages.  The  service  held  on
New  Year's-day,  1818,  was  ren-
dered peculiarly  interesting  by  the
attendance  of  two  priests,  named
Don  Adrian  de  Silva,  and  Don'
Andris  de  Silva ;  who,  having  been
convinced  of  their  former  errors,:
and  having  passed  the  usual  time
of  probation,  made  an  open  re-
nunciation of  Budhism,  and  took
upon  themselves,  in  fbe  most  so-
lemn manner,  the  name  and  cha-
racter of  disciples  of  Christ.  Don
Adrian  was  afterwards  appointed
to  officiate  as  a  Cingalese  local
preacher,  and  Don  Andris  as  ft
master  in  one  of  the  native  schools;
and  it  is  pleasing  to  add,  that  they
have  continued  to  prosecute  thefr
holy  calling,  under  the  superin-
tendence of  the  naission.

In  1821,  there  were  reported,  as
belongingto this  station,  11  schools,
915  children,  and  28  teachers.  That
right  sentiment  was  making  pro--
pess  appears  from  the  following
fact : —

"  A  few  nights^  ago,"  says  Mr.
Fox,  **  we  were  requested  by  thri
inhabitants  of  a  neighbouring  vil-
lage, where  a  dangerous  sickness
had  made  its  appearance,  to  go  and
pray  with  them ;  hoping  that  God
might  be  pleased  to  remove  from
them  a  scourge  which  "Uireatened
to  lay  waste  the  whole  village.
The  request  was  rather  an  unusual
one  in  the  Cingalese  country, — ^the
people  having  recourse,  almost  in-
variably, unttersuch  circumstances^
to  devU-ceremoDllAs,  bMo^^hWrs^


iwllwt  GodWMddlB  MM*  vv

MktUkBMMqf  cMd.  Abort
«  o-dnafc  IB  Dm  otmIiw,  tMiii«
«at  >U  tto(lUi««  *M  MMwhlwl
la  •  huge  Mfeool-iapa,  «•  Mi  on^
•MM^mM  %  Ml.  RMk.  Fto-
Immi  of  tba  lli^  CoUeg*  af  Co-
MflbaSMk  Iwpi  wgte  huag  <■
UtbMB  MWB  BMW  J  almg)  and
flWaUvee  of  dntk  wm  In&e  tU.


^■M  i*bM«  Ite  irtMle  rtll^a,  gld
aad  vooBK  MUHft  llw  tick  and
Mir  sttntekk,  van


«MUag«l^  caa  Mandr  ba  «


CfaNgb,  tboa^  M17  «ai^  da-
lifaiwt  a  *Hr7  ^ywfihla  ezbicta-
tiM{  aad  bAm  Mo  nt^an  bad
baaa  ofead  ^  ga  tb^  behalf,
aaa  la  CimataM  a^  aaa  ia  Pns


It  1b«  dieua
fartag  «lond.  Out  owb  labidi
aran  oM  a  little  afleotod  witb  the
ilanmi^jr  of  tbs  KBiM )  asd  aui
beut*  «N«  i»atii0d  that  tha
rtaflewvf  at  faagth  broagbt  to
•MJaim,  •  Tia^  In  lala  k  nlia-
-  VMtuiftAlarften  tbe  bUU,  aad
£raM  t&a  MDltttoda  of  aaaataini)
'tadr  in- Ihe  Lmd  Oad  oal;  b  Hdra-
tlon.' "

-  Is  laportlBeri  at  the  don  of  tbe
year  ISS^  the  atMonarlM  *^—
"  ire  feel  It  a  pleaatng  do^  to
(UtSf  that  we  hare,  In  wne  da-
paa,  fHtfmUg  in  all  our  txaden.


awwcatkn^  EaglU,

.  _      a,  and  CbiinlaH,  bare  __ ._^

Wat  ttw  neng*  for  tbe  jeu,


COL
hai  much    Improved.     Tbe  itan    ^
there  U   favoured   Hith   a  iha^    ,
and  piou*  leader,  and  the  mcnAq    n
live  111  hntmoiij-  and  lovp."    Ttaf
also  aunounce  tbe  prtntiag  of  m
book  of  Gmtitt  in  Tnmul.

lo  ]&i3,  Uie  uawdatloB  of  J%
wAa/e  Scripluret  Into  ClngriM^
was  con)i>let»l  on  the  win
premltes  In  Colombo,  ondn  %
direction  of  tbe  Colamlo  B,  S.,  ^
the  united  eSoHx  of  Mr.  Anuvi.
one  of  tbe  coloninl  chaj)iaiiu ;  Ifet
Chaler,  Baptist  miaionary;  Muati
Fox  Dud  Clougb,  M'eBlefsn  tii^
stanortes;  (Uid  C.  Lain^  Ei(>t
Bsitsled  by  cunie  learned  aalhwi
SoOD  after,  tlw  Colombo  IPall/m
Xatiiie  IimtitiUitM  was  fixn«4
and  u  Klrong  ami  o
erecled.  .   ,

Mr.  Clougb  bss  also  fioilbMU
Cinf^alete  Hiid  CnglUb  dl::Iiaiiig
wbivb  bas  been  iii-inled  bi  ■!
octavo  volume  of  64^  page))  K
will  bo  of  lucniculoble  u«e  1
translating  froni  tbe  Enrich  ll
Cinft^fAeae.  ltcanlalo9al>Dut4^,lil

The  C.  fi~.  S.  and  tbe  C.  ILi    \

bave  aSbrded  important  old  lo  Sv
mission,  by  fomardingaBd  ptinttig
booiu  to  be  distributed.

Tbe  Coianio  B.  S.  waa  wg*.
ni^ed  in  IHIS,  under  tbe  pationMl
□r  govBrnment,  which  dUtribuM
during  10  years,  more  than  SM
Bibles  and  Tesljunents  in  £p^
and  other  Eurapeaiilunguesgobtllft-
ed  chiefly  fram  the  kiiidnesi  of  tl>e
B.  If  F.  B.  S.  With  tbo  HsuitalM
of  other  liberal  grants  from  Ita
Fareal  S.,  the  Colotabv  S.  bad,  in
18iO,  printed  6600  copies  of  te
New  Testament  in  Cingalese ;  aod
boa  since  piiutod  1000  copies  of
the  Bible  in  tbe  same  laogaiigA
besides  cast  numbers  of  tri  '
portions  of  tbe  Scriptures.

COLPETTY,  a  la^e  and  pb-
pulous  village  in  the  neigbbour-
buod  of  Colombo,  wbicb  is  vtslled
bj    tbe     fVeiUyim    mitu'vnarit'-


Wjri^  ware  ■dnritted.
,_  Jw  farm,  In«rwted  by
i/SkClDult  la  tto  mfaBlaDieliiMd
^  Cftlie,  wiu  appointod  the  g».
*^*nil  nualer,  wftb  h  natite  anl»-
CtaK  teairher  mdat  Us*;  and  tbe
^dlta  were  plaued  andat  tk*  care  oi
^  iFitelll^nl  Touotf  woman  oi
Aotch  extraclton, , 'irao  had  been
xccommeDded  b;  Ltu^  Johnibne.
-Ja  com pliB nee  with  the  prejudices
■ofitu  aathvs,  tbs  ebitdren  of  dlf-

Am  eMb  t^ier  j  aad.  In  oonu-
ifBUn  of  ttb  iCfpdotlaD,  numben
Mas  IndlMd  to  attend,  who,
.oMmrtte,  wddM  oarer  hsTe  en.
joye<  tlie  sMoni  of  initroctlan.
TUi  tcbool,  helnf  under  the  Im-
-"-      •   -     -  of  S'     *     -   '


Iiwlj  J.,  and  oeeailoiMU]'  vlilted
Br  tfia  Hon.  Chief  Justice  and
iMUndbtlngnlihed  characters,  aoon
llaoaaia  tlie  thene  of  conTenatloa
tkrangb  flie  circumjacent  cauntiy,
mai  DOmeiow  apptlcatieni  were
mito  (at  Uw  Bdmltahin  of  cbiUreo
ton  dlfltaat  Tlllagei.  One  bo^,
tte  toa  of  »  native  waihennan,
4nUnd  to  the  mhool  even  mora-
ine, fron  the  diitance  of  A  mile*,
aad latumedin  theevnnbif.  And
HlOtharlad,  irf  Sie  hlgbert  carte,
ninw  attwlanee  wv  panctud,
Bhluiful^  walked  IS  mllei  erary
Af,  to  enjoy  the  adnutasei  of  the


In  lass,  Ow  mtsrioanriM  laj —
"  The  tnimber  of  ctalldrea  li  not
^(rite  10  laisc  aa  fomeiij  f*  but
HMTCBly  «  ebHd  reaielrB  who  was
at  the  achool  st  It*  first  edabliifa-
nMM :  the  bu^  tiien.  admltled
faMW  gone  out  Into  actbe  life,  and
'~f  thioDgii  the  rtreeb  and


often  .grstilled  In  reeogolilng  the
titiet  of  our  rid  (ChoUn,  now
gmm  np  uA  became  ereditable
fOOBir  maiii  nnployed  )n  reipects-
bleiitnaUoiit.   Us  meeting' a«  they


cots

■eUoB  IiU  to  •MDiri  n«  of  their
nnN  of  obligation,  by  the  dRnt-
fioant  natlTB  aalam.  In  till*  way
tlw  natire  popolatlm  [>  becomfaifr
enll^itened  and  marallied,  to  a
degree  nblcb  will  tn^atlj'  open  the
wayof  iiuhaequentisboureri."  I^
school  tuTinK  decreiued,  a  more
ccnrenient  ^otwoa  loand,  and  the-
nomber  in  sttendBnce  wa«  nng^
manted.      It   itUl


prosper.

COMBOOCONUM,  a  tIU^c
between  Traai|uelMU'  and  Tanjore,
Uindooitan.  About  tiie  com-
mencement of  the  elRbteenth  cea-
tul7,  the  DaiKtk  nuutoaariet  la.
boureil  here  witli  succea ;  an^  Id
mi,  their  eoegregatien  amoDnted
to  upwards  of  £00.  Recently,  the
C.  K.  S.  has  supported  a  oatiTe
priest  at  this  place.

In  iaS3,  the  RcT.  6.  T.  Bartn^
hruek  came  here  from  Ma^nt,  with
a  Tlew  of  fixing  himself  ,in  the
most  conrenlent  place  iat  snper-
intendlng  the  estsbllsbments  of  Uie
C.  M.  S.  in  the  Tanjore  country.

The  Rer.  Mr.  Mead,  of  tbs
Ii.  M.  S.,  who  remored.  In  l§2fi,
to  Comhooconum,  for  the  be-
nefit of  his  heallb,  cantjniiet  to
labour  here.  He  has  b  small  En^
Itsh  coogref^ation ;  also  a  Tamiil
coagregHtirai,  consisting  of  aboat
40  pentHis.  He  has  performed
sereral  minionaiy  tours  In  the
nelf^bourlng  country,  preached
tbe  Goepel  to  many  people,  and
the  Scrlptorei  and  tracts  well
•ed}  of  the  latter  serelal
thousendi  hare  been  put  Into  cir-
culation, .

The  aatiTe  leaden,  of  wtiom
»e  are  six,  under  Mr.  Mead's
dlrectlqa,  coDtlraie  to  itinerate
among  the  adjacent  vlUafea,  for
the  pnipOM  of  publicly  reeding  the
Seriptine*,aml  eoaTening  wl^  tba
people  00  rellgloas  lutgacti,  Tlut
they  perform  Amh  aerricaa  wUb
conalderable  ablilly  snd  leal,  la
apparent    fioia     \lb^    ymu^


con

flxtncti  fnan  wUek  ht
isrtBd  In  tlM  ■ocletr'i  ptfctodlCBl
pabUcatioia.  The  naUre  (Cbocdi
at  ComboooonDni,  of  which  9  htn
beeo  fonned,'  contain  (boul  SM
hojt.  It  ii  propoKd  to  bolM  s
chapel  ben,  tovudi  th«  expsMe
of  wUch  wraral  himittTd  mpMi
bBfe  been  tabacrlbed  on  flie  >pot.
Tbe  toahmtm  in  the  lieiifltj  ap-
pear TC17  Mmdlf,  bear  tbe  Ooqiel,
•nd  cabKitbe  t«  Am  MboaU.

CONGO  TOVN,  a  town  of
liberated  Mgroei,  Slon  Leoot,
W.  Afrlcai,  apm  aa  totot  of  tbe
bay  of  Stnn  Leooe,  about  8
W.  Fieetown,  formed  In  181).
IfllS  tbe  munber  bad  Inr  "
about  400,  eiclodTB  of
The  Inhabltanti  are  tn  an
state  of  Improremenl.    The  Jfrt-
leyan  mitiionarin  have  a
hem,  Aid  teteral  menihen,

In  18IT,  the  ChinaA  mdi

fttteippted  to  unite  thli  with  Bimk
and  CoMO  Towni,  under  the  name
aC  Wllberftwce  Town ;  but  luch  li
the  distance  of  Congo  Town  from
tbe  otbei  two,  that  It  !>  thought
tbe  onion  of  tfaii  to  tbem  will  exiit
only  In  name.

CONJEVERAM,  a  pc^lout
t\U  In  the  Csrnalic,  Htndoaatan,
W.  Madras,  dtrided  Into  Great  and
Little  Conjenrem.  The  city  la
'  i«T7  ancient,  and  hat  !  pagodaa,
which  bear  the  marks  of  great
antiquity.  The  people  are  bHnded
1^  tbe  grOMeit  snpentitlonB  1  yet
many  listen  to  Cbrlsttan  teachers.
The  Oitirch  miuimaria  at  Ma-
diM  estaUUmd  aebooli  here  under
native  teachers,  in  ISIT,  whicb
hBfe  been  Ugbl?  osefal.  They
often  Tirit  the  schools,  and  giTe
miicb  rellgtoaa  instmetlon  to  these
bttlight^  Paeans.

CONSTANTINOPLE, tbe  chief
dty  of  the  TorkWi  empire,  il-
Inaled  on  the  W.  side  of  ihe  Bos-
porus, between  the  Black  Sea  and
the  Sea  of  Marmora.  B.  long.
S8'S&,  N.  Ist.  «1°.  .Indndlng  tbe


suburbs.  II

is  upwards  of  SQ  a.  U

clrcmfeie

nre,  and  presentt «  glgifl

iipppsranc

The  number  ofn

s  by  some  estimetatff

]  ,UOO,<HH)

bulittscommoultnigi  I'

l"iU.-.l  sHOO.OOO;  of  whom  aoo,«»  1

;,  re  Turks,

100,000  are  Grteto,lh(   1

n-mniniler

ere  Jews,     AmienliiA  |

public  edifices  qre  very  i
anil  splendid.  There  are
and  magnificent  imperlid  1
richly  endowed  with  nnple
nueg,  dertred  from  the  ronI»  a
estntea,  long  ago '  deioled  la
Ru|)port.  The  revenue  of  the,
moujne  of  SI.  Sc
1,000,000  pla.strf>
lolSA.OOOdollnis.  AltBCbedli)!
Bre  eolleRCB,  called'  Medanes,  #■
vutcd  to  leaching  the  prinelpin'ff
the  MnbOQiednn  rell^m  andjijib
pruilcnre  :  and  imaretba,  or  boUfc
wbere  Ibc  students  are  blpponl
ixee.  of  expense.  At  these  betW
nnorf  tban  30,000  souls  ere  iSi
fcl.  Tbere  are  also  upward*  ti
SOO  mo»[nes  ;  and  3(1  |mbllc  ikbrv
Ties,  each  containing  fram  9  'u
41000  ma.niitcr)pt  Tolmnes,  wbicli
nre  attached  to  tbe  mosques;  toA
iihout  £0  Cbrlstino  churcfatt.  H<''
are  aldo  about  ifiHO  acboobi,

btisbed  and  endowtid  by  the  w

men  of  the  Ottoman  Emplf^
which  Ibe  cblldran  ar    '    '
^DtultniKly  In  varfooa

tuce,  nnd  In  the  priuclpieCr
religion.      Such  llbetd  '

Mah<lTn«lnni<ni  should

KMd   of  Cbriillans   to    extesd

knowlalgc  of  the  Snylour.

The  Rev,  Jamea  CoHner,
the  C.  M.  S.  was  staUoned

1^19  to  IS3I,  during  vtiUi
he  was  usefully  emfdoyedfl
iring  the  tmnslalloo  of  nea"'
'hole  Bible  into  modem  Gnt
n  opening  channels  for  ttwd
ion  of  tbe  ScrlptnrestluDin'
^Q  Uland«  a(  Csndla,  Rha


CON

'Jbid  'CypriB,  and  in   all  parts  of

.",-  'In  this  city,  gome  important  re-
'paltB  have  followed  inunediately  the
iBjiioura  f^fiheLondon  Jews'  Society,
^jLsgidi  of  inquiry  prevailed  to  a
HiBgy  considerable  Extent  amongst
fbe  Sews  of  Constantinople,  and  a
.^great  number  of  copies  of  the  He-
'vcew  Old  and  New  Testaments  had
^bean  actually  purchased  by  them.
The  Rabbis  tools  the  alarm,  and  in
vain  attempted  to  put  a  stop  to  the
circulation  of  the  sacred  books,  or
lo4he  discussions  which  were  con-
tfamally  taking  place  on  the  subject
of.  Christianity.  It  appears  that
Mr.  .Wolff  was  by  no  means  aware
of-  the  result  with  which  it  had
pleased  God  to  bless  his  labours  at
Jerusalem,  until  his  arrival  at  Con-
ftantinople;  when,  on  presenting
fiimifelf  to  the  Rahibis  assembled  in
their  college  for  teaching  the  law,
ittey  imprecated  curses  upon  his
'name  and  his  memory.  On  his  in-
quiring the  cause,  he  was  told  that
he  had  been  disseminating  his  errors
aUerusalem ;  and  that  certain  Jews
had  written  dovtn  his  arguments,
and  had  come  to  Constantinople,
-where  they  had  already  -  turned
away  many  of  their  brethren  from
the  ancient  faith.  They  informed
lUm  that  there  were  about  300  Jews
who  were  more  or  less  affected  with
his  errors.  The  zealous  missionary
rejoic^  to  receive  such  unexpected
testimony  to  the.  power  of  the  Gos-
pel from  the  lips  of  unbelieving
Jews,  and  immediately  replied,  *^  I
am  delighted  to  hear  it,  and  I  hope
that  I  shall  soon  add  you  to  the
number."  He  continued  to  preach
the  Gospel  to  bis  inquiring  brethren
until  his  departure  for  England.
Se\'eral  applied  to  him  for  baptism ;
but,  at  the  recommendation  of  the
British  ambassador,  he  declined
complying  with  their  earnest  re-
quest, feairing  lest,  in  the  political
excitement  which  then  prevailed  in
CoDstantinople,  bis  motives  should  he


CON

(  misconstrued,  and  he  should  be  ac-
cused of  improper  interference  with
the  subjects  of  the  Ottoman  Porte.

The  committee  are  at  this  t|me
anxiously  looking  out  for  a  duly
qualified  missionary — a  man  of
warm  piety  and  sound  discretion —
whom  they  might  send  to  Constan-
tinople, to  strengthen  the  hands  of
Jewish  believers,  and  to  prosecute
the  good  work  thus  happily  begun.

The  British  and  Foreign  S,  S.
has  recently  employed  two  agents
here  and  in  the  vicinity,  viz.  Messrs.
Leeves  and  Barker,  who  are  still
industriously  promoting  the  circu-
lation of  the  Scriptures.  This  is
a  very  commanding  post  Ar  ob-
servation and  labour,  owing  to  its
central  situation,  its  extensive  com*
merce,  the  great  influence  of  foreign
merchants  and  travellers,  and  tt^
facility  of  communication  with  the
N.  of  Europe,  the  shores  of  the
Black  and  Caspian  Seas,  and  the
most  interesting  countries  of  the
Mediterranean.  For  many  years,
however,  the  disturbed  state  of  the
country  has  greatly  retarded  bene-
volent efforts.

In  a  letter,  dated  Dec.  27,  1826,
Mr.  Leeves  says : —

<*  I  cannot  close,  without  men-
tioning that  an  important  event  has
taken  place  among  the  Jews  of  this
capital.  Several  Jews  had  come
to  Mr.  Hartley,  of  the  C.  M,  S,,
and  myself,  professing  their  belief
in'  Christ,  and  desiring  baptism.
This  coming  to  the  knowledge  of
the  Jewish  Ilabbis,  two  of  the  num-
ber were  seized,  bastinadoed,  and
thrown  into  prison.  Three  others
secreted  themselves,  and  were  bap-
tized by  Mr.  Hartley.  They  were
subsequently  discovered,  and  the
Jews  demanded  of  the  Porte, the
execution  of  one  of  them,  which
was  refused  by  the  Turlcs ;  but  they
were  all  condemned  to  the  bagnio
for  six  months,  with  an  Armenian,
in  whose  house  Wie^  '^c\^  fov3L\v\.«
Here  they  sUVi  we>  ^kW^L  \v\\iDk&i\.^,


CON

lnd7  naUriilii  Um  Uth,  ^riikh,
mter  tba  Tinr  of  dntk,  Oey  bul
Mdl;  profetd,  wImo  btongfat  Iw-
fon  the  Onnd  VMn  and  olfaei
aBtbariUM.  SlDMtbq'veielnpil-
■on,  the  J  hn«  fnftmd  much  111.-


of  duUnc  tlMk  coHtuer  j  bat  in
Tola.  I  Mtfl  MMd,  ibd  am  ndag,
««ei7  mattM  to  pmeora  tinm  nana
tOnfMionf    tad,    bj   tte   kitot-


panBcatlaBi
beenwlthdr


nbj«ct  tohu

ttMm,  altboi^  Hh;  are  dUl  in
cbtiM,  and  latoori^  la  the  himrj
woit  of  the  HMoal.  TUa  aflUr
hei  pradQEBd  a  itMBg  Martian
taaat^  aU  elaaiM  tu  tbii  Betio-
polii)  aad  0«d  graat  that  theii
patisDce  mar  retoaln  ntahakea,
and  their  Nfbrlogi,  like  thoae  ef
the  ChrliUant  In  eiAj  tlmei,  pro-
dace  lb  eBeeti  apoa  tttelt  bieUmn  J
Thl(  U  a  nev  thing  In  thii  cqdtal  f
and  yit  ihall,  doabUeti,  bave  great
dUBenltlea  to  encouBter,  even  when
thew  new  Chriitlsn  teettaien  are
leleofsd,  who  mart  (till  expect  to
luffer  penecutlon.  May  Provi-
dence lead  01  to  lueb  meuu  ai
may  buora  their  nfetf,  and  leeve
the  way  open  for  oUien  to  jola
tbemulm  to  Ihii  little  band  I  A
foutb  of  lOiiODe  of  tba  namber,'
lAo  (bowi  great  fortitude  and  zeal,
•nd  hu  naMed  aU  the  toUclta-
ttoni  and  tean  of  father,  mottwr,
and  relationi,  to  drew  him  away
6t>m  hli  faith,  with  oSen  of  mo-
ney, clotbei,  end  «n  Immediate  re-
lEa»  from  hli  fetten  and  priuD.
Hetold  lbem,ttMtJe«urChTl«twM
BOW  bii  fsthar  and  mother;  that  he
preferred  hit  prlion  to  'all  they
eonld  oSbr  blm  ;  and  that,  when
they  became  Chrlftiani,  he  would
Acknowledge  them   a«   hk    nla-


dantmied  far  tlw  JmoekiDgoEtlulr


chsint,  it  wu  sent  ss  requiiei
Ibe  nnswe-r  was;— "  An  oidei  li*
rnme  from  the  Vizier  nattotaluol
the  chaiiu,  bul  to  use  every  pa
wveiity  towards  Ihe  pTi»unm_
"  We  are  ain  iiilomieij,"  uyiMt,
Hartley,  "that  the  JewabaTsl^
vided  iOOOpJMtres  Bmong  tlieTiirk
wba  bnve  cbsige  of  the  priaugo,


furl


e  of  0


exertion*  In  tormenting  tl
Ifae  utmoM  ponible  degree.  Una
■re  ourpoorfrleniliEulfcriDgacali
tinual  martyrdom  !  The  <^ecl  tt
the  Jewt  i>  clear;  they  bi^e  It
wear  out  the  constancy  of  thean^
tens  by  tncessant  auflering*!  of)0
that  Bltempt  ibonld  f^l,  to  brtgg
tbem  down  to  the  grave."  ll
reference  to  one,  the  object  WM
Hccum|>[isbBd,  in  hla
Jiidnium ;  two  of  then
adhered  to   their   profesiian.    A


friend  at  Conftnnlinople  say>,onSlB
poor  Jei


lOthnrNov,  1S8T,-


■  A  fov  i»p


,  .  II  henvy  Irons ;  bol,  I
tbank  God,  they  are  iiim  in  thelt
Gonfesiioa    of    Christ,    under  lU

cdl'ENUAOEN,  tbecydlslol

Denmark,  situated  on  the  E.  CO  '

«l  the  Island  of  Zealand.     It  Li  e

dwithvalls,  and  lithe  bol

tntbeN.of  Europe.    E.

long.  12"  35',  N,   l«l.  35"  41'.     '

"01,  therewere,  In  the  city  and

burbs,  3160  hoiwes,  and  tMMi

linbltants.

In  ttie  history  of  miadoiu,  tbii

inu  deserves  particular  notice,  u

ine  the  seat  of  the  DmUtk  Jfic

«i  Cullege,  founded  by  Fredenc

jIVIb,  in  nil,  which  has,  lot

aut   a  century,    fumlabed    mli-

naries  to  Greenland  and  to  tbe

R.  Indie!  ;  wbo  have  been  snppoit-

rt,  In  the  dlffarent  Beldi

ibour,  from  the  fondi  of

liiB  in-ililntlon.

CORFU,    one  of  the  Ionian
Islands,   in  the   Mediterranean,  il


COR

Iff  m.  long,  and  26  broad.  The
n*<>]^ion  Is  about  60,000;  the
ftople  are  principally  of  theGreek
mteion.

'  tS^rfu,  the  capital  of  the  above
Uand,  on  the  E.  coast,  has  a  po-
polatioh  of  15,000.  E.long.  2(fi\r,
N.  lAt.  99f^  40'.  In  1819,  the  Ionian
J9.  &  was  established  here.

The  Rer.  Isaac  Lowndes,  from
fli»  jL»  M,  S,,  removed  from  Zante
to  18S2y  with  the  design  of  making
Corf  a  the  seat  of  the  mission.  He
omnmenced  his  labours  with  fa-
iRNnrable  prospects.  In  addition  to
proaching  on  the  Sabbath,  and  on
Wednes&y  evenings  at  his  own
boDsey  Mr.  L.  prepaured.some  works
In  modem  Greek.  Permission
having'  been  granted  to  him  to  print
tracts  at  the  government  pfess,
between  4  and  5000  were  printed,
In  porsiiance  of  this  privilege,  and
many  copies  of  the  Scriptures  were
also  circulated.

.  In  the  Report  of  1825,  the  fol-
lowing particulars  of  his  labours
were  given : —

<<  Mr.  Lowndes  continues  to
preach  in  English,  as  usual.  The
attendance  is  encouraging.  His
miniftry  has  been  blessed  to  seven
ymmg  raeuy  who  exhibit  satisfac*
tory  evidence  of  genuine  piety.  A
AfMoM-jcAoo/ has  been  formed.  It
i«  superintended  by  Mrs.  Lowndes,
and  is  In  a  promising  state.  A
Charihf'Sekooly  established  through
the  instmmenlalityof  Mr.  and  Mrs.
.  Lowndes,  has  been  attended  with
ocmsiderable  success :  it  meets  with
the  countenance  and  support  of  the
leading  British  residents  at  Corfu.
Mr.  L.'s  Modem  Greek  and  Eng-
lish Lexicon  is  in  the  press ;  the
edition  will  consist  of  2000  copies ;
and  lie  purposes  to  translate  into
that  language  the  Rev.  Mr.  Scott's
E^Bsays,  and  some  olher  approved
English  works.  Several  tracts  of
tbe  Religitnu  Tract  Society  haye
iMen  tramlated  into  Albanian^  and


COR

some  are  in  course  of  printing.  A
translation  of  Mr.  Wilson's  Mo»
dem  Greek  Spelling-book  is  pre-
paring in  the  same  kuoguage.  I>m>
ing  the  past  year,  Mr.  Lowndes  has
been  instrumental  in  putting  into
circulation  tbe  following  tracts  and
copies  of  the  Scriptures: — Tracts  in
Modem  Greek,  4843 ;  Italian,  782 ;
English,  680 :  total,  6305 :  Copies  of
the  Scriptures  in  various  languages,
1232.  Among  other  places  to  which
the  Scriptures  and  tracts  have  been
sent  is  Missolonghi ;  of  the  Scrips
tures,  to  the  extent  of  500  copies :
Mr.  Lowndes  understands,  that
they  were  received  with  much
eagerness  by  the  Greeks,  who,
while  encamped  and  waiting  the
approach  of  tiie  enemy,  were  often
found  reading  the  word-  of  God.
He  has  supplied  with  tracts  many
of  the  Ionian  schools,  in  which
they  are  regularly  read  as  school--
books. He  has  engaged  a  person
to  itinerate  for  the  purpose  of  re*
tailing  tracts,  as  he  did  formerly
when  stationed  in  the  island  ojf
Zante.  Much  of  his  time  has  lately
been  employed  in  correcting  the
proof-sheets  of  the  Albanian  Fier^
sion  of  the  New  Testament,  printing
at  Corfu,  for  the  British  and  Fo^
reign  B,  S,  He  cannot  ascertain
that  any  book  was  ever  before
printed  in  the  Albanian  language;
and  thinks  it  probable  that  the
volume  containing  the  Gospel  of
Salvation  will  prove  to  be  the  first.
He  has  performed  two  missionary
tours  in  Corfu,  for  the  purpose
of  distributing  the  Scriptinres  and
tracts.  In  these  tours  he  has  met
with  considerable  encouragement.
At  CarusadeSt  during  his  second
tour,  he  gave  public  notice  that  be
had  books  to  distribute,  .and  the
Greek  Primate  instructed  the  peo-
ple to  attend,  which  they  did  ac-
cordingly, in  considerable  num*
hers :  so  that  Mr.  L.  was  not  able
to  meet   the  wishes    of   all  the


ippUcuto.    At  PtimMm,  ba  bad

ttw  ntkfaetkni^  lewntavthatttae

•bacli  Mi  tbcK  en  iili  fliM

-bad  ba«i  read  \j  Uw  people.
■Ida  dtotributiu,  dnrins  IbaM  t
-iDaii7  eoplei  of  Uib  SciiptDTCi  and
'  tiacti)  and  dt^radag  of  icbool-
iMoki,  ccqdet  of  blataaiulatton,  Ma-
MD  OD  StV.  Omiltigt,  ^.,  be  en>
daanmred  tomke  hlmult  uKfiilbr
jnnetliDe*  praacblog  to  the  people
In  tbeir  own  langwge,  on  wblcfa
«ceailon  he  bad  manj  audlton.  A
■lKt»riear4ia  Steitty,  eommenced
bj'Mr.andMn.  L.,  limaehencoa-
Taged  by  penoni  of  tank  Id  Corfu ;
' 'ItMn.


.    .  lait    Report,

Lownde*  tenuned  hli  Oreek  Ltc-

tw»,  and  bad  a  terf  pleailng  et>
tendance.  Hewaifaappj'todticene,
anong  otban,  K»ne  wbo  bad  at-
tended durfnR  Ibe  preceding  aea-
aon.  Tbe  Ortet  Saibath-tcAool
•tHl.co&ttdiit  about  40  >cbolan,wbo
eonmlt  te  Bienioi7  ptattoni  c^  tbe
New  Teftammt,  and  tbe.Cate-
cblami  of  Dr.  Watti.  Tbe  attond-
anca  on  the  SngSsk  ttnieei  hat
Jieen  more  encouiaglng  duriagtht
paityear,  and  Mr.  L.  bas  reamn
to  hope  that  be  bai  not  laboured  Id
vain.  Tbe  EngHth  Sabbath-xihiiU
li  In  a  more  promising  slate,  and  ii
better  supplied  with  teocbera.  Tbe
_  printing  of  Mr,  Lowndes's  Eng-
liih  and  Modern  Greek  Lexicon  ii
flnlsbed;  and  that  of  the  Oieek
and  ^lianian  Tettametil,  carried
on '  under  the  lUperintendence  of
Mr.  Lowndes,  hnadianced.as  for
a*  the  flrct  EplsUe  to  the  Corin-
thians. Another  Albanian  tract,
niaMng  the  Sflh,  has  been  sent  to
press.  Porlloiu  of  the  New  Tos-
tsDient  in  Albanian,  have  been
forwarded  lo  Constantinople,  for  dl>-
tribullon.  J)r.  Wftttsi  Catechlanu,
In  Italian,  have  been  printed."
^  «  Tbe  tfOMMiem  of  tbe  Sei.Mr.


■COR
Scott's  Esugs  into  modera  finik
\t  flnlshed,  bdcI  will  sbortl)>  IkmM
to  piee>.  Tlie  translation  of  Ihe
Ren.  Mr.  Bickertteith's  TvtttK
on  Praj-et  is  in  progreH,  Ht.
Lowndes  has  been  amplj' cu^iiJel
hy  Mr.  Wilson  with  traets,  dt>
nientary,  hjiiI  other  icbecd  baiia,
lur  sate  and  gratuitoiu  dislryiutbrn;
and  he  baa  Introilttced  Mr.  WOiuft
Greek  Spelling-book  into  setanl
schools.  He  bns  alio  reeebd
books,  for  dL'tilbution,  from  Bw
Rev.  Mr.  Jowett,  of  the  C.  M.  8,
Tbi^  lamented  faU  of  Miesdoiidi
closed  up  an  LoipaKant  channel  «i
the  clistribiilion  ol  books  tn  Greeee.
Mr.  L.,  howeier,  has  been  enaUed
1o  open  n  communication  with  1^
tbroii^Ii  the  niedlum  of  a  gefltl»
man  resident  in  tbe  Morea,  itlu
has  eiigo^^  to  lake  measures  Ibr
[luttlng  into  circuUtioQ  copies  itf
Ihe  ScFlplirres  and  tracts,  snpplia
of  whirh  have  been  Conngiwd  la
his  rhar^  far  that  purpose.  Hb
L.  bus  B^n  (islted  VefAaioMiai
Zanle,  and  bus  mode  arrsnfcenwoh
for  promof  inR  a  constant  and  ra-
tensive  circulntion  of  the  Sfiip-
lures,  and  the  mlBsloa  puldicaliuai,
in  both  of  those  islanda.  He  im
hIso  perlonnei!  auDtber  lour  111
Corfu,  during  which  he  prenAti
in  Greek  In  the  nnllves,  end(»«aa
-ai^cDslon  had  more  (ban  SOObenn.
The  people  were,  in  geCeldi
nniioLB  to  obtain  books.  Tie
Mhericentia  Sociely,  estsblid^
some  time  since,  gOes  on  prosper.
Dusly.  The  sum  eif)ended  In  the
relief  of  objects  In  dJstress,  during'
the  past  venr,  exceeded  £St>."

CORNPLANTER'S  VIL-
LAGE, B<  Jennesadn^cH,  ou  Ihe
AllesH"}-  R.  within  the  limlls  of
Penn^jlvania,   among  the  Seneca


here  in  ]81.'5,  at  the  urgenlrequa*-    ,
□f  Complanter,    wbicb  lies  *ttt0-  J


COS
qr  ^isefiil  to  the   rfaiiig  gene-

ttCMl.

CORNWALL,  A  post  town,  in
itebfldld  county,  Connecticut,  on
B  fi.ddeof  HoaMitonick  R.  10
.  K;  W.  Litchfield.    Popnlation,

In  1816,  A  Foreign  Mission
was  instituted,  and  opened
Tp  181 T,  under  tbe  direction  of
.jimteriean  Board  of  CommiS'

f^  for  Foreign  Missions;  the

IT.  u.  Daggett,  principal,  Mr.
ihn  H.  Prentice,  assistant.  The
Jeetof  this  seminary  is  to  edu-
te  JbeAthen  youths  in  such  a  man-
r  UMf  with  subsequent  profes-
mml  •  instmction,  will  qualify
pBi  to  beoome  useful  missionaries,
gvlcians,  surgeons,  schoolmasters.

Interpreters;  and  to  communi-
tB  to  tiie  heatiien  nations  such  a
jowladge  in  agriculture  and  the
ISy  aa  may  prove  the  means  of
pmoting  Christianity  and  civili-
tlon.  The  constitution  also  pro*
loiiy  that  American  youths  of  ac-
lowladged  piety  may  be  admitted
to  the  school  at  their  own  ex-


In  18S3,  the  number  of  pu|>ils
u  30  $  of  whom  15  were  from  0
flSevent  tribes  of  American  Abo-
l^es,  0  from  the  Sandwich
lands,  1  from  New  Zealand,  1
am  Malayan  Archipelago,  1  from
e  Portogair  3  from  China,  2
am  the  Greek  Islands,  1  Jew,
id .  S  young  men  of  the  United
atee.  Since  the  commencement
'  the  school,  a  very  large  portion
^tiie  pupils  has  been  hopefully
QUE ;  and  many  have  returned  to
leir  native  lands,  to  publish  the  Sa-
onr  to  their  benighted  countrymen.
The  government  of  the  United
■tes  has  paid  460dollarsa-year,  for
mr  years,  to  defray  the  expenses
:  4  Indian  youths  at  this  school.
COSSIPORE,  a  very  populous
gtricty  N.  and  in  the  immediate
cinity  ol  Calcutta,   where   the


(JOT

C  JlT.  &  has  a.  circle  of  several
very  flourishing  Bengalee  schools.

COTTA,  a  viUage  in  Ceylon,
about  6  m.  S.  £.  of  Colombo,
situated  in  p.  very  populous  district.
Inhabitants  4600.

The  Rev.  Samuel  Lambrick,  of
tbe  C.  M,  S,,  entered  on  this  de*
sirable  station  in  Dec.  1822.  A
piece  of  ground  of  about  6  acres
was  purchased  in  perpetuity  from
government ;  and  a  dwelling-hoase
and  printing-office  erected.  The
people  among  whom  he  laboured  are
nominally.  Christians,  though  many
of  them  profess  to  hold  buddhism
also ;  they  seem,  in  fact,  to  be
budhists  in  heart,  while,  forteropo-
ral  interest,  they  call  themselves
Christians.  Lamentable  ignorance,
however,  generally  prevails  among  •
them.  Mr.  L.  in  addition  to  the  «
establishment  of  schools,  has  been
exceedingly  active  in  the  discharge
of  his  ministry,  but  hitherto  he  has
seen  but  litUe  fruit,  and  mourns
over  the  spiritual  torpor  of  the  people.

The  Rev.  Joseph  Bailey  arrive^
at  this  station  on  the  28th  of  August,
1826,  and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Selkirk,
on  the  1st  of  Sept.  The  schools,
since  Mr.  Selkiric's  arrival,  have
been  placed  under  his  charge:
in  seven  schools  thero  are  161
scholars,  with  an  average  attend-
ance of  108.  In  addition  to  these,
there  is  an  English  school  contain-
ing 16  boys.

The  masters  of  tbe  respective
schools  come  to  Mr.  Selkirk's  every
Saturday  afternoon ;  when  he  re-
ceives an  account  of  the  attend*
ance  during  tbe  week,  and  gives
such  directions  as  appear  necessary
to  each  master.  The  meeting  is
concluded  with  reading  a  portion
of  Scripture  and  Prayer.

Mr.  S.  reports,  in  November,
1826,  that  the  attendance  of  tbe
boys  had  rather  increased.

During  his  visit  to  Ceylon,  Bishop
Heber    examined    the  '  diflerent

B  2  \^1


beuefactloD  to  the  ndetr  of  800
rfi-doUui,  and  dliectDd  Ikst  llw
dildrcD  diould  bare  a  dlmm  pro-
vided at  bli  eip«DM.

Tbe  ground  for  a  CKrMrM  ti»-
*tittitioK  hai  been  deawd,  aiuf  tbe


■nence.   Some  piaoia  of  land,  coit>

bave  abo  been  pmcbued,  vblcb
will  be  (bund  of  fieat  adrantage.

The  Printing  Dtpartmatt  ii
coming  Into  action  (  a  aacood  preM
hai  been  obtained  {  aaTnal  piece*,
in  Cingaleaa  and  In  Englidi,  bai«
bean  printed)  fit  Hatthaw'i  Ooa-
pel,  of  Mr.  Lambrlck'i  tchIoii,
bai  been  circulated,  end  he  wa*
about  to  put  to  pran  either  the
Book  of  GeoeiU  or  Ute  Acta  of
tbeAportlei.
'  CUTYM,  ■  Tillage  on  tbe  Ma-
labar coait,  Hlndoortan,  abont  IB
■n.  from  Alleple:  including  a  nnall
circuit.  It  cmtelm  about  1000
homes,  sod  li  In  the  mldit  of  a
Tery  populoni  .country.  The  la-
boun  61  tbe  mlnlonaTiei  hare  art
principally  d^ioted  tc  tbe  ^Irltual
good  of  the  Syrian  Chriitiani  on
tbli  coait,  of  irbom  it'  li  necenary
to  prenilw  wune  scoouat.

Tbe  Si/TitM.OviiHalu,  otbenrlae
called  S<.  Thimuu't €hTiitiiau,\a-
hobit  the  Interior  of  Malabar  and
Travancore,  fn  tbe  S.  W.  pB
Mindoostan.  Tbey  extend  from
X.  to.  8.  ISO  or  aOO  m.,  and  '
Iireadth  W  ot  fiO.  Between
end  60  churehei  belong  to  tbli
wiclent  hianch  of  the  Cbriftiao
Churcb,  wblcb  bai  preierred  the
Syrlac  Scripture*,  in  lotuiunript,
from  Chriat  and  the  Hpuatlea  ;  and,
Rnconnedted  wltii  the  rert  of  the
ChtlstlaD  world,  has  ttood  for  agea,
fmldit  the  darkert  tcene*  of  idola-
ftrVHlpeiMcettaD,  Tbetndllfan


COT
X  thoDi  li,  Ibat  tbe  Go(^
IniilcJ  iu  HinJoortftnby'
pThDmns.  I.niullngntCta-  ■
ganoTc,  m  ClipngBDoar,  fiom  Adu
in  AynblB,  he  va»  well  lecelM
by  Uiwleui,  kin);  of  the  ccunn^
:  sou,  Zuxan,  he  baptiM^
Md  nflerwimis  arjojaed  ducM.
After  continuing  mne  time  4|  i
CraBRMioie,  he  liaited  the  coait)!,
Gotomandel,  and  preached  tbeflw
tol  at  Mela|iooi,  end  Rnally  rtSfe
Tbomiu'B  MduuI,  near  Madll*.
:^  he  wm  pill  to  death.  Hk'
lon)r  remained  an  object^l'
ntion.  Dr.  Buchanan  enlii
1  a  decided  opinion,  tbBl  «»
ns  (tuod  nulhorily  to  belim
that  the  fl]>ottle  Thomiw  died  1«
India,  us  ihnt  the  apoctle  l^ln
-"ed  nt  Rome.

That  Cbriiliiini)  existed  In  Indll,
la  tbe  Sit  century.  Is  a  (act  fitUj
Btteated.  The  Bishop  Dflndis  WW
nt,  and  signed  his  iianie  atlltt
■ilof  Nice,  in  325.  ThCBKl
Fnimentiue  was  contecntnl
at  oHice  by  AttianosliB,  cf
Aleiandria,  Hi>ri  fouudeit  toaoi
heE  in  Iriilia.  In  tlie  5th cen-
tury, u  Christinii  hiibop,  from  An-
Uocli,  Btcomiiunied  by  n  niail
ooloD}'  uf  Syrians,  einlgratad  k>
India,  and  settled  on  the  roast  «f
Malabar.  The  Syrian  ChrixHaiu
eqjtqed  a  fiueceuioa  uf  hlsbopl,
appointed  by  tbe  patriarch  of  An-
liocb,  from  (tie  beginntn);  of  the  H
century,  till  the}'  were  Invailedbj
tbe  Portuguese.  They  still  retain
tbe  Liliirg}'  ancielitly  used  la  tbe
ohniches  of  Syria,  and  employ  In
their  jiublic  worship  the  Innguijrc
qioken  by  ourSHviourin  tbe  stre«ti
of  Jerusalem.  Tbe  Srift  noUcei  of
thii  ]>ei)ple,  in  modem  times,  are
foonii  In  the  I'artu^uese  hlstorlet.
In  1503,  there  were  upwardsof  100
Chrt-llan  churches  on  the  coast,  of
Maiubor.    As  soon  as  Ibe  Porta'


\


Sedi


dtmckea.a


COT

-Idmoiwledge  the  supremacy  of  the
Jtope ;  and  in  1599,  they  burnt  all
fte  Syriac  and  Chaldaic  books  and
Bcords  on  which  they  could  lay
ftair  hands.  The  churches  which
were  thus  subdued,  are  called  the
Hfro' Raman  Christians y  and,  with
tta  converts  from  other  tribes,
lomi  a  population,  of  nearly
140,000.  Those  in  the  interior
would  not  submit  to  Rome;  but,
after  a  show  of  union  for  a
tifliey  fled  to  the  mountains  in
1A53,  hid  their  books,  and  put  them-
jelvea  under  the' protection  of  the
natlTe  princes,  by  whom  they  have
been  kept  in  a  state  of  depression.
These  are  called  the  Syrian  Chris-
Hirns.  About  10,000  persons,  with
63  churches,  separated  from  the
Catholics;  but  in  consequence  of
the  corrupt  doctrines  and  licentious
manners  of  their  associates,  they
bare  fallen  from  their  former  state,
and  very  few  i^aces  of  the  high
character  which  tbey  once  pos-
seaied,  can  now  be  discovered.
■  With  regard  to  the  actual  number
of  these  people,  it  is  difficult  to
irriTe  at  any  exact  conclusion.  It
appears,  however,  most  probable,
■a  well  from  the  reason  of  the  case,
as  from  the  accounts  of  Anquetil,
Du  Perron  and  others,  that  they
were  a  much  more  numerous  body
of  people  in  former  times  than
tbey  are  at  present.  They  now
themselves  reckon  up  88  churches
belonging  to  their  body,  of  which
66  have  maintained  their  inde-
pendence of  the  Roman  Pontiff.
According  to  the  most  accurate
estimate  that  can  be  formed,  the
number  of  families  belonging  to
these  66  churches  amounts,  at  the
lowest  computation,  to  13,000 ;  the
majority  of  these  are  poor,  and
support  themselves  by  daily  labour ;
others  employ  themselves  in  mer-
chandize and  agriculture.  Though
many  among  them  are  most  highly
xespectable,  especially  those  of  the


COT

class  termed  Tarragan,  yet  there
are  none  who  can  justly  be  styled
men  of  property;  there  are  very
few  indeed  among  them  possessed
of  property  to  the  amount  of
6000  rupees.

The  number  of  officiating  priests,
commonly  called  Catanars,  is  144.
These  are  wholly  supported  bj-  the
offerings  of  the  lai^,  on  festival
days,  and  on  the  administration  of
the  occasional  rites  of  the  Church,
which,  for  the  most  part,  affi^rd
but  a  ver>'  scanty  support ;  and  in
very  few  instances  do  the  monthly
offerings  received  by  a  Catanar  ex-
ceed five  rupees.  They  are  gene-
rally of  the  best  families,  and  con-
sequently upon  their  character,  as
to  morals  and  information,  depends,
in  a  great  degree,  that  of  the  dis-
tricts in  which  they  reside.

The  Syrian  Christians  are,  in
themselves,  awfully  sunk  and  de-
graded. The  total  disregard  of
the  Sabbatti,  the  profanation  of  the
name  of  God,  drunkenness,  and,  to
a  considerable  extent,  especially
among  the  priesthood,  adultery, —
are  very  prevalent  among  them.

In  1806,  this  people  was  visited
by  the  late  Dr,  Buchanan,  who
presented  their  case  to  the  pub-
lic, in  his  Christian  Researches,
since  which  much  has  been  done  to
meliorate  their  condition.  He
commenced  a  translation  of-  the
New  Testament  into  the  Syrian
language,  which  has  been  com-
pleted and  published  since  his
death,  and  copies  sent  to  each  of
the  churches.

Some  account  of  other  means
adopted  for  their  welfare  remains  to
be  given.

Colonel  Munro,  the  Company's"
resident  in  Travancore,  having
erected  a  college  at  Cotym,  for  the
education  of  the  Syrian  priests,
wished  to  place  an  English  clergy-
man on  the  spot.  Accordingly  the
Rev.  Benjamin  Bailey  proceeded.


■•COT

irilh  Hn.  BaUcT,o*nU»dto  Tm-
vawon,  •adtfkq'w«nAMdfttCi>-
trm  abMtthe  iMgtnnlng  of  I81T.
AU  tba  DMunm  pUnntd  hj  CoL
Mnnra  wen  ewdlallj  mppnnad  b;
tHa  Syrian  cleigr,  and  aldadbrtban)
n far M K hadbvn pracUubie,  to
canj  tbs  HTangciiisota  fm  ttteli
accompUahmuit  Into  bBdcL  For
tba  traudBtkn  of  the  Syrian  acili>-
(Draa  a&d  IJtiDvy  into  Ual^yallnif
Um  TBrmcalat  langnagB  of  tlM
MHintiy,  a  Bumbei  of  laamed  Ca-
■■   ■  -y  theUs-


of  pMdm^  PnmrlH,  and  part  of
Inlahi  aod  In  tha  N«w,  to  llw
EJpMIe  to  tlw  FhlUpplaDi.  Tha
exacuQoa  of  lUi  mnlKwai  lujier-
iDtsoded  by  Uu  Rer.  Mi.  Bailey,
and  the  eipaiiw  of  it  irai  boms  by
the  Caleim  A»m.  B.  S.  The  Col-
,  lege  alio  \rai  committed  Id  the
cfcoiiS''  ^^  U''  Bailey,  ior  whom  ■
houte  «M  erected  e4olnl°K  that
liiititutton.

In  the  MDiie  of  IBlB.her  Hlgh-
nea  tlie  IUdiim  of  Tramncore
l>TewDtedlhe  College  with  20,000
tupee^  lAtcI)  wetq  laid  oat  in
land;  beaidea  a  neriow  Rtft  of  iOOO .
Topeai,  kt  ciecbiM  a  chapel,  and
farnlihinalbe  bifiliUiigi  of  the  Col-
lege.   She   ala>  winexed  to  it  a

'  liact  of  land  in  the  nelgfabonilKMid
of  Qulloo,  at  lout  1  ra,  in  ciicum-
feience,  with  lerent  aubildiary
Kianti,  In  ordqr  to  lender  it  pio-
JuctiTe ;  and,  lavUir,  appointed  b
monthly  UkiWBDce  of  70  rupee*
from  the  itate,  foi  the  wpport  of
B  hospital,  to  be  atlmJied  to  the
college.  The  Rqah  of  Cochin,
^«o,  euiiiloai  of  ^r  Big^neH'a
boim^,  pieMoted  MOO  rapeea  toe
tbe  beneOt  oi  the  Protertwit  rale-
iknu ;  the  vbtHe  of  wUoli  wa*  ap-

"  pro^lated  h*  the  teddent  to  the
■ni^'H't  (^  vw  fonthen  mlitfm,


COT

uniteT  the  Rev.  Mr.  Alead,  of  tlw

TUlihe  end  of  lbI8,  ul  wbkt
Uma  Mr.  Feaa  urrlved,  Mr.  SuStf
v/as  the  only  missionary  tijiideDtal
Cotym  ;  and  tliH  number  oF  hkcc-
cujialiiiiiB  (ireientcd  biamnlungn
tnucb  ^rogreas  in  thf  arningemanlf
of  Ibe  caUr^e  aa  be  winlied,  uuU
conse  que  ally,  Uiis  uccenianwmaf
greiit  lin|iortuiice.  •

In  Dec.  ISId,  tha  mi
wrole  :  —  "  The  j'ear  boa  Ihm
onxiousone.  Tbe  departuM ,a
late  re^Ldeiil  deprened  oui  ^


of  erenti,  p«M
plexed  In  their  connexion,  and  ipi;
porlttul  in  Itaelr  consequencei,  Jm
kept  our  mindi  on  a  oonUlOH'
atretcb,  and  occupied  m^ob  of  nqj
most -valuable  tlaie;  while  Ihgi
have  been  as  a  dead  weight  upoi'
our  spirits.  The  efflciencj  Of  tte
missionaries,  in  the  pakyeac  ba|
therefore  been  small."  Of  tbt
College  they  soy: — "The  nmbe
of  students  receiving  instmc-
lion  b  i5  ;  (heir  studies  are  Ibe
Syriuc  and  the  English :  3  of  the
sluddQls  sre  surpassed  by  very  few
of  the  catanars  in  their  kjiowledge
of  Ibe  Syrlac.  Their  progren  in
the  English  is  small ;  Uie  pronun-
ciation Ihey  ure  gradually  acquir-
ing, and  6  or  7  of  tliem  con  read
any  book  with  tolerable  ease  :  be-
yond this,  tlieir  knowledge  of  tba
language  can  scarcely  be  said  la
extend.  Besides  the  students,  thecB
are  IS  children  receiving  inatme-
tion  In  English.  The  diflerene»«l.
these  from  the  student
their  having  received
lion,  by  which  the  studenta  ate
rcvocably  set  apart  to  the  '  '
office."  There  wa  '
at  this  time  in  Cotym,  (he  «
of  vFbich  varied  from  311  to  M  ti
number ;  and  another  o
lege  properly  In  Calade,
19  scholars,  (be  iuslruc


COT

hen  confined  to  Malayalim.  In
vference  to  the  improiring  state,  of
be  Syrian  Church,  the  missionaries
[be  the  following  facts :— «  The
int  is -the  marriage  of  the  clergy,
md  the  few  objections  seriously
■Ade  against  it  by  any.  From  the
vesent  dissolute  state  of  the  mo-
«li  -  of  the  clergy,  the  metropoli-
an Is  anxious  for  the  measure.
rhe  number  of  catanars  now  mar-
ied  is  nearly  30.  Another  fa-
NNurable  circumstance  is,  the  plea-
are  with  which  the  metropolitan
ud  sereral  of  his  clergy  have  re-
seived  Mr.  Bailey's  present  of  the
Banish  Liturg}'  in  their  native
tongue.  Of  their  own  accord,  some
of  ue  catanars  have  read  it  in  their
dterches.  There  are,  besides,  other
ntrks  of  improvement ;  as  a  grow-
ing decorum  in  the  house  of  God,
Ac."

Through  subsequent  years  the  mis-
lionary  work  was  prosecuted  with
energy  and  effect.  The  transla-
tion of  the  Scriptures  proceeded  in
the  Mnlayalim,  and  preparation
WM  made  for  printing  them.
Hopeless  of  any  thing  better,  at
letft  for  a  long  time  to  come,  Mr.
Belley,  witliout  ever  having  seen  a
tgrpe-roundry,  or  its  apparatus  of
BDj  kind,  and  eager  to  get  «ome
portion  of  the  Scriptures  and  some
other  works  respectably  printed,  as
non  as  possible,  set  himself  to  en-
deavour to  form  his  own  types,
vitfa  such  aid  as  he  could  find  from
books  alone,  and  from  common
workmen.  He  had  recourse  chiefly
to  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica;
and,  with  the  instructions  which
he  derived  from  this  and  another
analler  work  or  two,  a  common
carpenter,  and  two  silversmiths,  he
socoeeded  so  completely,  that  he
tent  a  specimen  of  his  types,  in
irint,  to  the  Resident,  who  much
idmired  their  beauty  and  correct-
len,  and  complimented  Mr.  B.  on
lis  success.  Mr.  Bailey  counted
ipon  being  able  to  pivpare  a  5uffi-  I


COT

ciency  of  types  for  the  printing  of
the  whole  Scriptures,  in  little  more
than  a  quarter  of  a  year.  Besides
the  correctness  and  beauty  of  bis
tj-pes,  noticed  by  Colonel  Newall,
he  afterwards  so  reduced  them  in
size,  that  they  could  be  printed  at
one-half  of  the  cost  of  the  old
types.

A  permanent  reduction  in  the
expense  of  printing  also  took
place,  involving  another  interesting
circumstance  in  connexion  with
Mr.  Bailey.  The  printer,  sent
from  Madras,  was  dismissed.  In
the  mean  time,  a  youth,  adopted
some  years  ago  by  Mr.  Bailey  as  a
destitute  orphan  child,  had  acquired
the  art  of  printing  sufliciently  to
succeed  as  head  printer,  to  which
office  he  was  appointed  on  a  salary
of  7  rupees  per  month.  This  little
incident  added  singularly  to  the
completeness  of  Mr.  Bailey's  work
in  the  edition  of  the  Malayalim
Scriptures.  The  translation  was
entirely  his  own — the  types  were
formed  by  himself  from  the  very
mould — and  the  pHnting  was  exe-
cuted by  an  orphan  boy,  reared  up
by  his  charity.

About  this  time  Mar  Athanaftius,
a  metropolitan  from  Antioch,  paid
a  visit  to  the  Syrian  churches.  At
the  time  of  his  arrival,  the  retired
metropolitan,  Philoxenus,  had  re-
sumed his  pastoral  cares,  in  conse-
quence of  the  death  of  Dionysius,
who  had  succeeded  him :  the  Mal-
pan  Philip  had  been  appointed  suc-
cessor to  Dionysius ;  but  the  return
of  Philoxenus  to  his  labours,  for  n.
time  at  least,  was  thought  neces-
sary. Over  these  metropolitans,
and  the  whole  Syrian  church,  Atha-
nasius  assumed  uncontrolled  au-
thority, as  having  been  deputed  by
the  patriarch  of  the  mother  church
of  Antioch,  and  commenced  a  se-
ries of  violent  measures.  He  en-
deavoured to  persuade  the  catanars
to  renounce  their  allegiance  to
their  metrans— dented  Wk^  'lAV^Wj


COT

orUMmtniw'tma,  asdtka  oidan
wUch  ttwf  hid  confomd— !»■'
lilted,  U  1m  wen  acknowladged,
on  tlMbr  bdus  itr^pad  of  tbdr
tobM,  ind  nidgnliw  tteir  ctoh  uid
putonl  ifjff  inirnijUwl  meh  a
tnmiil^  hfhSa  pnieaedftn  o*  can-
p^Bd  the  nddnit,  CoL  NewoU,
to  TemoTB  him  from  tbe  countiT.
'  Tbli  tmat  iMi,  u  might  lure
bMD  Apaclad,  In  mnat  degn4  af-
feeted  tlw  Intamti of  tbe  mlmkiA)
but  It  apptui)  fron  raeent  me-
eootit^  that  Iti  dfectiangndoBllr
MbriOag.

Tlie  eoUen,  wtild^  on  :
Fean't  d«partn«i  wm  pw«d  m
Mr.  Oona'i  fapeiUitAiidenea,  c


MUrel  d


i-IneonKque]
irderVUcfi  li


1  Imd  left  &e
eoUage,  and  Mr.  Donn  had  «np.
pUad  Oeif  place*  \rftb  boj«  fnnn


Belanejr  of  flw  b(9i
notiprMt;  the  wfa^nunbet  iiihovt
•1l>,'ofwhoin«oaMaTed4'>(cbokri
mm  Cottajam,  and  aome  heathen
children.  After  gMng  an  aecount
of  their  itodlai,  Mr.  Baker  eddl —
■'  Qn  /the  SaUiath,  the  larger
bofi  attend  the  fingUih  ararlce  In
flweoUegedrnpel,  while  the  snaltei
hejt  gn  to  one  of  the  Svrlan
dwrdwi  Id  tbe  Tillage ;  and  the
wtwle  reeelra  nUgkini  Inrtrnctlon
In  fbe  afternoon."  The  parochial
•ehooli  are  aa  In  mtnbar,  and  ecm-
taln  nOMhoUnt  of  tbsM  US  an
Brrtani,  and  Sftf  an  heatheni,
".Many  of  tha  foTBtar  acbooti,"
Mi;i  Mr.  Balnr,  "  were  teiy  thinly
attended  |  and  thti,  added  to  the
total  failure  of  contiibutloiu  from
the  cfanrchei,  hai  led  to  flie  necei-


Ir


•  CRA

(hat  Ibey  could  he  rlsited  but
dum,  unit  then  not  withant  coadi
derabli!  lubtiur  and  dlfficidtj.  B
was  therefore  deemed  adTiuAft
rpmore  Ibe  schoolmaitm  iA
Iheace,  sod  to  place  them  in  nil
of  IhG  more  (lopnloos  dUtrtdincm
home;  and  ihU  has  been Bceoff
iiifCt;  done  in  two  or  three  InituMk
Petitions  for  schools  bavIogtiiH
presented  by  the  beattmB  popd^
tion  around  usi,  liome  Echooli  M
been  opened  in  the  vlclnf^  ofGit-
taynm,  witb  the  prospect  ofania
good  ;  many  petitions  mie  p*
Mnled,  but  tbey  could  notlDH
attended  to,  as  the  mtwitm  FuUi
would  not  allow  of  more  letaB
being  establlidied."
It  appears,  from  tbe  list


up  their  nuniben,  several,
used  to  he  well  atleoded,
alnoBt  deserted.  The  NJuxitu^,
tersare,  huwerer,  continued;  w
there  Is  no  renwnto  doubt buttW
tbe  people  will  send  tbeir  chilM
apoin,  after  a  time.  In  i«l  F
MhaaLiasbsvecontinued  tobevCI  ^
attended,  <be  attention  of  (hi
fchoolmnstem  baa  been  reiuMf
end  several  of  tbeni,  though  hifr
tbens,  have  Riven  considerable  »
tlsfaction  by  their  dlilgflnce  In
teaching  tbe  catechlsnis  and  ctbn
letiglous  books. .

The  press,  which  oantliiBeiaa>
der  the  superintendence  of  llT-
Bailey,  b  still  in  active  operad«,

CRANBERRY,  a  town  in  tl»
central  port  of  New  Jersey,  ftON
N.  to  S.

In  May  lT4a,  the  Rer,  DaiU
Brainerd  remored  from  CrojawaeU
to  this  plnce,  with  tbe  whole  Mf
of  tbe  Indians  under  his  eiMi
less  tbnn  IS  montlH  lb«f
hail  cleared  about  40  acres  of  UHl
e  continued  tiU  March  SOtti
.'lien,  owln)t  to  the  laTHKH
monary  consumption,  m)
,  us  s  nii.<sionary,  were  ter-
inlnU.ed,  no^  be  bade  farewell  t>


CRE

ed  chuirch  And  people^  and
Niirthampton,  Massachu-
St.  9th,  1747.  He  was
lec^ed  by  his  younger  bro-
Kf,  John  Brainerd,  under
le  affairs  of  the  mission
d  to  flourish  for  several
rbe  school  was  also  in  a
18  state.  Many  of  the  In-
advanced  life,  were  very

0  learn  to  read  and  under-
Scriptures.

imber  of  Indians  increased
200,  and  many  were  hope-
its  of  renewing  grace.
K  PATH,  a  town  of  the
i  nation,  on  the  S.  side  of
!e  river,  in  Alabama,  about
r.  S.  W.  Brainerd.
Bv.  Wm.  Potter,  from  the
t  Board  of  Commissiotiers
ign  Missions,  came  here
In*  consequence  of  an
aquest  from  the  principal
is  in  this  place  and  its  vi-
e  Rev.  D.  S.  Butrick,  and
ch,  a  native  convert,  left
in  March,  1820^  and  visited
th.  to  inquire  into  the  ex-
of  establishing  a  school.

1  the  zeal  of  the  Chero-
he  subject,  that,  in  a  very
e,  they  erected  two  school-
i  which  schools  were  soon
and  the  scholars  in  both
i  to  80.  One  for  girls  was
I  care  of  Catherine  Brown,
convert,  who  devoted  her-
iie  advancement  of  this
intil  her  death,  July  18th,
oon  after  the  commence-
his  mission,  a  considerable
ig  prevailed  among  the
Jid  numbers  were  the  sub-
alutary  convictions.

rch  was  soon  organized,
nsisted  of  10  native  mem-
1823.  A  Female  Benevq-
9ty  was  formed  in  1821,
^.  of  14  members,  which
1,  the  first  year,  six  dollars
cation  society  in  W^  Ten-


CRfi

CREEKS,  Indians  inhabiting
the  W.  part  of  Georgia,  and  £.
part  of  Alabama.  Their  country
is  extensive  and  fertile.  The  po-
pulation is  estimated  at  about
20,000  soul^  Jhey  are  a  warlike
tribe ;  have  a  general  idea  of  a
Supreme  Being;  but  observe  no
religious  days,  nor  any  religious
rites,  unless  the  green  com  dance
be  one.  Confidence  and  generosity
were  formerly  their  characteristic
virtues ;  but  a  desire  of  gain,  caught
from  the  whites,  has  chilled  their
liberality ;  and  abused  credulity  baa
taught  them  suspicion  and  deceit.

The  introducj;ion  of  whiskey  has
produced  a  very  pernicious  effect.
The  more  reflecting  are  fully  con-
vinced that,  with  respect  to  their
future  destiny,  it  is  a  question  of
civilization  or  extinction ;  and  a
question,  the  decision  of  which
cannot  long  be  postponed.  They
have,  therefore,  become  very  soli-
citous for  ^e  establishment  of
schools,  and  the  introduction  of  the
various  arts,  from  which  the  whites
derive  their  superiority.  In  some
of  these  they  have  made  consider-
able progress.

In  1735,  the  United  Brethren
attempted  a  mission  among  the
Creeks,  which  was  soon  relin-
quished.

In  1807,  they  made  another
effort  on  Flint  B.,  about  00  m.
from  Milledgeville,  the  seat^f  go-
vernment in  Georgia.  Here  their
prospects  were  flattering  at  first;
but  the  mission  has  «ince  been
abandoned.

The  American  Baptist  Board
has  a  station  among  the  Creek
Indians,  named  Wtthtngton,  in  the
town  of  Tuchabanchee,  Georgia,
on  the  Chatahooche  R.,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  the  late  Big
Warrior.  Suitable  buildings  having
been  erected,  the  school  was  com-
menced. May  18th,  1823.  The
liumber  of  scholaxs  s^^n  Vivc^tft^ifi^
to  37,  which  was  Qbo\x\.  &Q  «X  >^^


era

.  it  of  oat.  In  l«a
tboii  a  ftu,  prcfloiiito  Sept.  1B8I,
■Mriy  SOOO  doUan  had  bera  for-
wanlMl  to  thb  itatkM )  SOOO  dol-


bom  lodlvUiiak  utd  a«c»elatioiii  In
tlM  vlfllnl^.  TUt  b  eaUed  IhB
VUhli^ton  9tatkm,  a«a  tribute  of
laKMct  to  the  late  Mr.  Jt^tm
tfilAiiutsm,  of  New  Yok,  nbo
bequeathed  40,000  doUan  to  dlf>
fetent  benendent  InititutkHii, —
[See  ^(*Mv,|

CREMEN,  a  town  tn  Livonia,
where  the  LUM  BrttArai  luper-
intended  an  hatltutiiHi  ka  tbe  edn-
Aatlon  of  Mhoolmaiten,  for  Mreral
rean,  wliich  ma  lanetiiined  b;  tile
Eecleiiaitical  Court  of  the  emirire  is
173S ;  in  conwquence  of  wlilcb,  tbe
namber  orpnjdli  looti  anwunted  toTO.

Tbeae  nweanre*  eitentlrelr  ez-
eltedadednilbrTellDiani  knowledge
In  dlflerent  pari*  of  the  coontr;.

CRIMEA,  apenlnndaof  Euro-
pean Runia,  In  the  B,  part  of  the
goremaient  of  TauiMs,  formed  b;
the  BlRck  Sea  on  the  W.  and  S.,
and  the  lea  of  Asofon  the  E., about
800  m.  long  and  124  broad.  Tbe
population  Is  ettimtiled  at  300,000.
A  large  portion  of  tbeie  are  natlTe
TwtsniWbo  are  rigid  Mahomedalu.
There  ate  also  man;  Jem,  Arme-
nians, and  Greeks.  This  li  becom-
ing a  Terr  Interesting  field  foi  mfs-
■lonar}'  labour,  and  mach  attention
has  been  excited  on  the  subject  of
Christlani^,  especially  uoong  the
Jews,  by  the  distribution  of  Bibles
and  Testaments,  furnished  princl-
pBtl;  by  the  B.i[  F.  imd  the  Rui-
tian  B.  S.  Tbe  T^mridim  A.  B.  S.
has  become  very  efficient.  The
Sultiin  Kstegerry  has  taken  up  bis
abode  ett  SynpJifrapok,ibe  mudern
eoplln]  of  the  Crimen,  and  mani-
fests a.  deep  interest  Id  tbe  spiritual
welfare  of  hiscoun-Uymen.  He  has
a  icbool  under  a  Tarter  teacher,
who  uses  (he  Scriptures,  as  a  school
booli,  foftead  of  the  Koran.
0a  tto  weriikleof  the  CibM»t


about  !0  in.from  the  south  cc

of  Baktchetarai,  •  ,
is  reRanlBd  bj  the  Tertan  of  4
Crloit^aas  tbeseitt  of  leeniing,ll
baseontained  31 1  "  .-.    .

pulallunwa*  formerly  30,000,  h
ISOO,  tbe  number  was  redoceA,
StU;  of  tchum  3000  were  Dill
rar(ais,l  103  Jews,Bad  IheKstM
lirinclpally  Armeniaus  and  GrM
Here  the  Rev.  Dr.  Ron,  of  J
Scotvh  SI.  S.,  labooradloEa
time,  but  aflifrwarilB  remofw!
Astrarhan.  Tbe  Rev.  J.  J.  I_
rutbers,  of  tbe  sanie  society,  luri
become  sufficiently  moslef  of  J
laagiiBge, began  to  itinerate  thin
tbe  Crimea.  At  first  he  wail
fasournbly  received  j  and  OOJIill
tbe  New  Testament  vere  -Kti
accepted,  but  were  aftenraitk
many  instances,  returned.  3
Greeks  were  hostile  iroDi  tbe  A
and  represented  him  as  en  it'
Hiiii  bis  hooks  as  inipcisitions.
in  tbe  niiilst  of  these  dlfficE
the  work  of  conversion  begi
appeflr.  Mabmed,  a  Tartar,  j
tirsl-fruits  of  the  miiwlun,  WBi.kT
tized  Aug.  e,  1SS3.  Soon  A
wards,  ttiree  other  Tartan  requed
tu  be  taken  under  Mr.  Cs  ua
with  the  view  of  being  Initnwtet
tbe  principles  of  Chrlstjanlty  J  |
as,  afler  some  lime,  they  net  V
ivnouncetl  tbe  deluuoas'of  Hal
meilnnlsm,  but  appeared  to  ^
lepiety,  be  bqitii


IhcQ


putaful  to  lind  that  wli
lus  subsec[uently  arose:  tl
.  was  prevented  from  a


luted  h  _

recently  rellp^

irum  Ibis  beut^bted  part  of  the  a«A«
CRUIX,  ST„  oneoftbeViiHti
isIanLls,  £0  m.  long,  and  1  wbM»
bruudtsst,  Ijbig  40  ni.  S.  by  ^M
St.  Thomas.  It  belonKS  to  &■
Drnies.    The  cblaf  town  is  Chi9»>


^.


CRO

Ifee  harbour,  defended  by  a  fortress.
W.  long.  85»  28',  N.  lat.  17"  45'.

In  1733,  this  fine  and  extensive,
but  long  neglected,  island  was  sold

5t  the  crown  of  France  to  the
BOish  West  India  company ;  and
Ibe  )^Td  Chamberlain  Pless,  having
prchased  six  plantations,  applied  to
Oaant  Zinzendorf,  for  some  of  the
Vmied  Brethren  to  go  out  as  over-
ners  of  his  estates,  and  at  the  same
fline  to  employ  themselves  in  the
nl%ioii8  ins<3ruction  of  the  slaves ;
Mcordingly,  4  married  couples,  and
10  nmnarried  brethren  quitted
Hermhut,  in  August,  for  these
pnrposes.

'  After  a  tedious  and  dangerous
tojage,  the  colonists  arrived  at  St.
Oroix  in  June>  1734 ;  but  the  insa-
hdnity  of  the  climate,   added  to

■fteir  incessant  labour  in  clearing
Ibe  land,  bad  such  an  effect  upon
Uieir  health,  that  they  all  sickened ;
and  before  the  expiration  of  the
fBar,  10  of  their  number  were  re-
BOfedto  the  world  of  spirits.  Their
places,  indeed,  were  supplied,  early
in  the  ensuing  year,  by  a  second
company  of  11  persons  from  Herm-
hnt  $  but  these  were  soon  attacked
by  the  same  diseases  which  had
proved  fatal  to  their  predecessors ;
and,  as  the  colony  did  not  answer
la  other  respects,  the  few  who  sur-
Tifed,  either  went  to  St.  Thomas,
or  returned  to  lEurope,  and  the  idea
of  a  settlement  in  St.  Croix  was  for
a  time  abandoned.  The  negroes,
however,  were  not  left  wholly  des-
titateof  instruction,  as  the  mission-
aries in  St.  Thomas  visited  them
occasionally,  and  were  successful
in  awakening  their  attention  to
the  important  truths  which  were
thus  sounded  in  their  ears.

The  first  persons  who  succeeded
in  establishing  themselves  on  this
island  were  Mr.  George  Ohneberg
and  two  other  brethren,  who  were

joyfully  received  by  the  Christian

negroes ;  but  both  they  and  tbeslaves  .

httbeirneigbbourboodwerefoTSome


CRO

time'kept  in  a  state  of  constant  alarm
by  the  repeated  attempts  of  some
wicked  incendiaries  to  bum  their
houses.  In  some  instances,  the  fire
was  discovered  and  extinguished
before  it  had  done  much  mischief;
but,  in  others,  the  huts  of  the  ne-
groes were  completely  consumed  ;
and  Ohneberg's  house  was  eventu-
ally destroyed,  though  his  furniture
was  happily  rescued  from  the  con-
flagration. Nothing,  howetrer,  could
shake  his  resolution  of  remaining
at  his  post;  and  when  his  inflexi-
bility on  this  point  became  known^
the  torch  of  persecution  was  extin-
guished, and  the  mission  began  to
assume  such  a  promising  aspect,  that
the  brethren,  who  had  previously
resided  on  one  of  the  company's
plantations,  purch&sed  an  estate  of
4  acres,  to  which  they  gave  the
name  of  Friedensthal,  and  erected
a  church  and  dwelling-house  upon
it.  The  number  of  persons  who
attended  the  preaching  of  the  Gos-
pel also  rapidly  increased,  and  up-
wards of  100  negroes  were  annu-
ally received  into  the  church  by  the
rite  of  baptism.

In  1765,  a  new  mission-house  at  '
the  west  end  of  the  island  was  un-
fortunately destroyed  by  fire.  But
in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  in  ad-
dition to  the  rebuilding  of  this  edi-
fice, a  second  church  was  erected,
and,  in  1771,  the  settlement  in  this
district  received  the  name  of  FriC'
densberg.

The  ensuing  year  was  a  period
of  severe  trial. .  By  a  hurricane
which  occurred  on  the  31st  of
August,  the  church,  the  dwelling-
houses,  and  all  the  oflices  of  Fried-
ensthal, were  completely  blown
down ;  the  newly  erected  house  at
Friedensberg  was  removed  from  its
situation,  and  materially  injured ;
and  the  brethren  and  their  families,
who  had  sought  an  asylum  in  their
cellars,  were,  for  several  hours,
kept  in  constBiv\.  ex^^Xs^Uotiv  <a>\
death.    The  iaxaiiie  wi^  ©\\^«is!i\R.


CRO

licknon  iriilch  foUowed  tbe  toinpMt
iwept  off  manf  of  ifie  tUtt%i  and
dirobUibedtlwuDBiMT'of  the  ml»-
tloaules.  Amidct  the  (cmenl  dl«-
tiew,  iMnrnei',  tbe  caa«  ot  Ood
continiiad  to  Boorldii  JIm  uegtOM
■piMsicd  more  and  mon  MuliMt  to
ascertain  tbe  «^  of  Miratlooi  and
(uch  wattbe  iplrit  of  haaitaw  among
tbam,  tbat,  notwIthrtaocUu  th«
public  wrrlcei  at  FriedeMtbu  were
held  for  naariy  IS  monttx  In  11m
open  air,  tbe  aodltoi;  (reqaeatlf
coDikted  of  mon  flian  LOOOpetMmt,
and  manr  wem  ewijr  month  ad-
mitted to  tbe  ptltilege  of  Cbrictlan
baptiim.  Sacb,  Indeed,  wai  tbe
rapid  pni^reM  of  the  nlMkin,  that

thlid  I


■es  were  perfoniwd
chapel,  snd  alteniluil  by  n
coufcregaliuiui  but  the  iitoBlltm  be-
coming erery  da;  le«s  tolerable,  it
wu  rdinguished.  Suae  of  'it
mlBrinnarlea  •treat  to  Frtednutbit,
and  oUton  were  kiniUy  Hcemnan-
dated  on  a  Deighbouring  plantation
for  about  i  months,  when  tbe  bck
pilal  was  remonsd  ■-  "^  •    *

of  the  island.

Oil  tbe  S3d  of  Pebnuiy,
tbe  new  cburch  at  FrledensfeU  MM
consecrated  to  tbe  worship  of  Qjg
living  God ;  and  on  that* intenHliiq
occosion,  a  great  number  botb  o(
the  caloiired  and  ^rhite  inhaUtull
of  the  island,    comprising  sevejd

bled  togelber ;  Indeed,  the  con^

third  pari  could  obtain  admitUIW
within  tbe  doors  ;  end  tbemrvicvial
tbe  day  aiipBared  to  be  attended  vDt


.  ]Ul(


(ianin  fto  t
■t  speekd


became  dedr^leta  oUaln

and,  in  1TT8,  an  astato

chased  foi  that  poipoK,  to  whlcb

tbe    bretbien   gare  tbe  name   of

In  ITBS,  Cdonel  MalferiUe,  for-
QMTl;  the  Commandant  of  St.  Tbo-
Diai,  and  a  kind  patron  of  tbe  mii-
Blonarlea,  wax  appointed  Gorernor
Genetsl  of  the  Danish  Wert  India
Islands,  and  look  up  bis  reridenee  In
St.  Croli,  whicb  had  been  constl-
tuted  the  seat  of  fbe  goTemment
But  the  joy  which  this  BTent  difiused
among  tbe  biethien  was  of  ibort
duration  ;  as  this  excellent  friend
was  seized  with  a  fit  of  apoplexy

wbicb  proved  fatal.  In  compliance  also  leads  many  to  ua  from
with  bis  own  desire,  his  leolaias  tbeheatben,  who  earnestly  lufidni
were  interred  in  the  burial  gtouod  wlint  they  mu<;t  do  to  be  sored-"
of  tbe  mlsslonaiiea  at  Ftledensthal  j  CROSWEEKS,otCROSWEE^
a  funeral  oration  having  been  pre-  SUNH,  npleceaboutSOm.  W.An-
Tiously  delivered  by  the  incumbent '  lioy.  New  Jersey,  on  the  road  fniM
of  the  Dutch  Call  iniitlc  church,  In  ;,  Am  boy  to  Bordeiitown.  Tblim
irhlch  he  had  been  educated.  [  formerlyanlniliiinvillngeiWhetethe

St.  Croix,  together  with  St.  Tho- I  Rev.  Dnviil  Brninord  sneceBfnltr
mas  and  St.  Jbd,  was  spared  the  I  Inboured  in  174fi-e,  in  wbich  tine
horrors  of  bloodshed  by  the  capitu- ;  many  became  hopefully  ptoni;
latlon  of  the  Governor  bilHOI  1  but  nni1  lie  baptized  3 S  adults  and  H
the  brethren  at  Frledensberg  wece  i  chiUlreu.  Here  about  ISO  ludui
severely  tried.  In  consequence  of  I  beouine  resident,  moral,  induttri-
tb^  mlalon-house  being  occupied  ou;,  and  to  r  considerable  exIHl
asaboqdtal  for  the  British  troops.  Iclvlli7.ed.  On  May  3,  1746.  here-
For  tome  time,  Indeed,  the  i^iiai  \TOiive4vi\fti  Von  i^itfie^nfti  tA<J»


The  most  recent  intelligence  »
latiiH  to  St.  Croix  is  contained  in  a
letter  of  the  laie  venerable  Mnttlm
WlEd,  limed  Friedensberg,  AngK
ISziK,  ill  wbicb  hu  says — "As  to
llie  proc^ess  of  tbe


luiy  great  awakening  amoag  "tlK
negroes,  yet  fe  may  declare,  to  It*
praise  of  God,  that  He  caniM  <n
his  work  in  our  congiegations,  wd


CUD

[ndians,  about  15  m.  to  Cranberry ^
vfaere  he  closed  his  labours  among
udians.

CUDDALORE,  a  town^  in  the
Camatic,  Hindoostan,  near  the  fort
of  St.  David.  E.  long.  79*>  40',  N.

kt.ii«4r.

■  Two  missionaries  from  the  C,  K.
S,f  were  stationed  here  in  1737,
i^  laboured  many  years  with
■iiich  success,  and  were  useful  to
the  soldiers  ^in  the  fort.  In  1749
ftey  had  a  congregation  of  341.
■embers.  In  1750,  Mr.  Hutte-
Jten^  who  accompanied  Mr.  Swartz
to  India,  settled  here,  and  his
fkithful  labours  were  gpreatly
Uesed.  The  apostolic  Gericke,
lAo  spent  more  than  30  years  in
Indta,  made  this  his  principal  sta-
tfcm.  He  came  hither  in  1767,
9Md,  during  his  labours,  a  very  con-
ritereble  church  was  gathered.
Mr.  Holzberg  succeeded  him,  and
continued  many  years.  In  1803,
the  communicants  amounted  to  102.
it  the  last  dates  this  station  was
ncant.

CUDDAPAH,  the  capital  of  a
diftrlct  of  the  same  name,  in  Gol-
eonda,  Hindoostan,  which  is  said  to
contain  from  60  to  80,000  inhabi-
liilts.  E.  long.  290,  N.lat.  W2%\

To  this  place  Mr.  Howell,  late
n^erintendent  of  the  native  schools
Q  connexion  with  the  Bellary  mis-
ton,  under  the  patronage  of  the
^.  M,  S,  removed  in  Nov.  1822.
it  the  request  of  T.  Lascelles,
Baq..  Registrar  of  the  Zillah  Court,
le  took  charge  of  two  native
chools,  previously  established  by
hat  gentleman ;  and  having  united
hem,  they  soon  increased.  A  na-
hre  female  school  was  also  esta-
dlahed,  and  schools  were  opened  at
he  following  villages,  situated
irllliin  a  distance  of  10  m.  from
>Kldapah,  viz. — Sharpett,  Ootoor,
Ckinmaar,  and  Gunganpally,  The
igg^regate  number  of  native  chil«
Iren  in  the  several  schools,  into
all  of' which  Christian  instruction


CUD

was  introduced,  was  about  150,  and
their  progress  was  very  encouraging.
Besides  these  engagements,  Mt.
Howell  preached  in  the  school-
room to  a  congregation  of  natives,
fluctuating  between  40  and  50;
translated  the  catechisms  used  at
Chinsurah^and  Bellary,  into  Teloo-
goo,  examined  the  Canara  version
of  the  Old  Testament,  and  distri-
buted numerous  copies  of  theTeloo-
goo  New  Testament.

In  the  following  year  the  success
of  his  labours  was  apparent.  He
says  — "  In  my  last  communica-
tion I  stated  my  intention  to  bap-
tize two  or  three  adults,  but  since
then  the  Lord  has  so  disposed  the
hearts  of  the  people,  (who,  it  would
appear,  were  for  a  long  season
'halting  between  two  opinions,')
as  to  cause  households  to  forsake
their  lying  vanities,  by  turning
from  ^darkness  to  light,  and  from
the  kingdom  of  Satan  to  the  king-
dom of  his  dear  Son,  as  will  appear
from  the  list  of  baptisms  I  have  the
pleasure  to  transmit.  The  number
baptized  by  me  is,  74  men,  25  wo-
men, 40  boys,  and  21  girls:  and
with  those  baptized  previously  to
my  coming  here,  make  a  total  of
119  adults  and  67  children.''  All
of  these  had  nominally  embraced
Christianity,  while  a  regular  church
had  been  formed  of  10  members,
in  which  three  pious  natives  were
appointed  deacons.

Mr.  Howell  made  a  tour  of  about
100  m.,  preached  to  great  multi-
tudes, and  distributed  tracts  very
extensively.  Although  his  health
suffered  much  from  excessive  heat,
his  labours,  twice  suspended
through  the  two  succeeding  years,
were  resumed,  and  that  with  the
most  happy  results.  In  1826,  the
schools,  previously  increased,  had
been  reduced  to  four,  and  the  time
thus  gained  was  devoted  to  impor-
tant purposes.  The  native  church,
augmented  to  21  members,  had
diminished,     in    conse^v^^ivt'ft    c^l


remOTali,  to  V;  and •  piqvT-awat-
iug  wu  held  eraiT  Friday  nwraiiig.
AHIndcxi,  Bbout Ureal* of  ag^  of
Ibe  Sanaiil  Mct  (or  eaite),  who
came  to  Cuddajiali  ta  tbe  month  of
Oct.  ISSff,  unattlnd,  Mth  kag
clotted  hair,  and  hli  bod]' beimeand
yrltli  BiliM,  )wd  entmced  Cbrii*
tlanlQ',  bad  been  baptiied,  and
[ita]«d,  wbeo  called  ofoa  in  the
focial  meeting,  with  modi  pio-
priet;.  A  chapel  had  been  com-
pleted and  opaiwd  ou  tbe  11th  of
Qct.,  the  eipenie  of  which
defrayed  by  nibiCTiptloni  ~
(pot.  Bji  the  ajd  of  n^
European  reildenti,  B  iroAtb)^
wai  eititdlihed  for  nallTe  Chila-


lated,  principallr  at  HMdoo  feiti-

Tali.  Copies'  of  portloBi  of  the
Sciiplurea  In  the  ume  langnaga
had  been  distributed  among  re-
ipecld>le  Qatlve*  and  childfen  in
the  icltDoU;  end  E>'Sl'<h  traeta
had  been  occaiionslly  f^Ten  to  tn-
Tellen  and  to  IndiTlduali  in'  the


The  ReT.  Mr.  and  Mn.  Cdtp
htve  recently  been  lent  to  aid  Mr..

Howell.

CULLIAN,  a  large  town  In
Hiadooittin,  about  40  m.  N.  E.  of
Bombay,  and  aboot  IS  E.  of  Tan-
nob.  It  wat  formerly  tbe  leat  of  a
petty  rajah,  and  hu  sow  tae  ap-
pearance of  decay.

The  Rav.  Mr.  Nlcbol*,  of  Taa-
n«b,  eilabUihed  a  school  here  In
ISIS.  "Hie  Tlslt  of  an  EngUihieui
it  n  rare,  that  It  eicltei  much  cu-
rloii^  and   lUiplclon   among  tbe


CULN'A,  Blown  on  the  W.ta
of  the  Hoo(fly,  *^  m.  N.  of  Cil-    ■
CDtta.    Tbls  place  has  lately  ciJM    i
forth  the  eObrta  and  liberality  nl    ■
the  C.  M.  S.

From  tbe  spot  where  tbe  nclel|r^
premiBea  are,  n  contiiiuedraigaal
nouses  extends  4  niii  eouth-earielly,
<m  tbe  we«lem  bank  of  the  bendd
tbe  R.,  down  lo  GootipalB,
Saiitipuia,  on  tbe  eastern  bide;  ud
there  in  an  equal  range  for  i
wtslerly  lowords  Buniwan.  Tla
InbabtlRnIs  fonn.  Recording  ta  Ha
acroiint  of  the  oatlrea,  IS  or
80,000  bouses  or  fdiniliet ;  if  only
5  p(^rH)l]s  are  iupjiosed  to  be  in  aw
familv,  the  number  would  am
to  betwi-en  NO  or  100,000  s__..
The  iubabilunti  oppoflite  Cidm,
itbigiit  Bcross  the  R.  in  Sanlipont
a*  slHled  by  the  natives  ns  forni
DOI  less  than  go  or  22,000  famili

"  In  this  region,"  fays  The  m
itonary  "  a  considerable  part  of  Utt
piViitallan  are  brahmini;  but  Ae
general  occupation  of  the  bulk  td
the  people  Is  in  diOerenthrascbr*
of  Ir.ide,  and  employ  menti  ll
oflicetj  In  agriculture  n
are  eH^Wed.    The  place  pn>p«4

called  Cuhia,   is  chiefly  ii

by  tbosd  who  come  from  diB^H^
parts  of  the  counliy  lo  eaajxt
Huit  trade  here  :   ttala  nta^  tt  •
rsistin  why  the  people  tbenhl
not  the  simpllclly  which  rtlitg
getiprally  have,  but  we  inon  c
ceitful ;  and  j-et  Ihej  haw  n«t
nraeh  of  the  .liberty  wbtch  peoi
in  other  towns  possess,  wberettaF
eare  but  little  Tor  one  anothei[  M
the  first  people  uf  the  place  hi
great  Influence  oyer  the  otben.   I
hate  also  formerly  obssrred,  tl...
tiie  people  who  often  caoie  from  Alt

ters ;    and  even   now,   IdolaiiT  b
carried  on  there  with  for  groal
fence  than  it  is  in  liurdwan."
..  In  Jan.  1831,  it  wasslnted  tb
there  were  nearly  1000  boys  ai
^U  ^M  Uw  Q  schools,  menlioneil


CUT
y  Mr.  Deerr  in  the  following  ex-

<'  In  Culna  and  Ombica,  which
Ko  united/  we  have  established  4
mys'  schools^  and  4  for  girls  ;  one
)f  the  girls'  schools  is  on  the  mis-
rioaaiy  premises.     Besides  these,
Wq  boyE'  schools  lie  easterly  of  us,
ODe  at  the  distance  of  2  m.  and  the
i|0ier  of  4  $  and,  at  the  same  dis-
iinoes,  2  are  established  westerly  ;
«Bd  1  hoys'  school  is  opened  at
Smtipare,  with  the  design  of  ob-
Mning  access  to  that  interesting
|bce."
In  Sept.  Mr.  Deerr  writes, —
*'  The  schools  are  promising  in-
ted.    The  8  boys'  schools  are  fiill
of  large  boys — more  so  than  in  any
oQier  station  occupied  by  our  so-
ciety in  this  presidency;  neither
m  tiie  female  schools,  compara-
IMy  speaking,  ill  attended.    One
ttJiig  is  particularly  pleasing,  viz.
ttst  in  Culna  and  Ombica,  where
the  bulk  of  the  people  reside,  there
ii  no  native  Bengalee  school  $  but
ill  tfae  children  are  under  our  in-
rtfoction*    With  the  principal  in-
lltbitants    of  the    place    I    have
klready    formed  an  acquaintance.
'  look  for  success,  however,  only  to
be   Messing  of  our  Lord,  whose
mce  is  not  confined  to  any  parti-
nlar  place.    I  would  not  omit  to
aention,  that  the  lower  classes  in
Solna  are  as  much  depraved  as  in
ny  other  place ;  they  are  equally
ddieted  to  imposition  and  deceit."
The  circumstances  of  the  mis-
loa   having  rendered  it  probable
kit  Mr.  Deerr  might  not  be  fixed
t  Culna,  and  the  inhabitants  hav-  I
ig  been  apprized  of  this,  a  petition,
ddraiBed    to  Archdeacon    Corrie
rtm  drawn  up,  and  signed  by  15  of
le  jMrincipal  inhabitants,  which  at
nee  exhibits  the  desire  which  they
lel  for  Christian  instruction,  and
leir  Tiew  of  the  advantages  which
ley  expect  to  derive  from  the  la-
ours  of  a  missionary.
CUTTACK,  a  district  in  Orissa,


CUT

Hmdoostan,  between  20**  and  22^
N.  lat.  140  m.  long,  and  60  broad,
containing  about  1,200,000  inhabi-
tants. The  temple  of  Juggernaut
is  about  40  m.  distant.  The  in-
fluence of  the  Gospel  has  greatly
lessened  the  number  of  attendants.
Missionaries  have  taken  advantage
of  the  favourable  opportunity  af-
forded for  the  distribution  of  tracts.
At  a  late  festival,  those  of  the
B.  M,  S.  distributed  about  8000
pamphlets  in  the  Bengalee  lan-
guage.

Cutiackf  a  fortified  town,  and
capital  of  the  district  of  the  same
name,  250  m.  S.  W.  of  Calcutta,
is  calculated  to  contain  5741
houses.  '  Every  foot  of  it  is  es-
teemed holy  ground,  and  the
whole  of  the  land  is  held  free  of
rent,  on  the  tenure  of  performing
certain  services  in  and  about  the
temple.

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Bampton,
Peggs,  and  Lacy,  from  the  General
J?.i/.5.,  arrived  here  in  1822.  The
study  of  the  language  at  first  chiefly
occupied  their  attention  :  from  its
aflinily  to  Bengalee,  of  which  they
had  acquired  some  knowledge,
they  were  soon  able  to  make  ex-
cursions among  the  natives,  and  to
hold  intercourse  with  inquirers,
who  would  sometimes  visit  them
from  a  distance  of  20  m.  English
preaching  was  begun  on  Sunday
mornings  and  evenings,  for  the
benefit  of  the  European  residents ;
few,  however,  attended.  A  monthly
missionary  prayer  meeting  was  esta-
blished ;  and,  in  6  schools,  the  mis-
sionaries collected  120  scholars..
Four  are  Orissa — 3  for  boys  and
girls,  and  one  is  the  evening  school
for  adults ;  one  is  Hindoostan ;  and
the  sixth  is  English.

CUTWA,  a  town  on  the  west-
em  banks  of  the  river  Hoogly,  in
the  province  of  Bengal,  district  of
Burdwan,  75  m.  N.  of  Calcutta.
At  the  period  when  the  Mah-
rattas  were  contending  with  U)t.v&
t2  %^


COT


"confBHd  w>iw,  utd  of
ndMIiiblaad|»aBdttft

Rei.  J^  ChniberifdB,  cf  0>e
Shml.X.S.i  ntcnd«iliDewBeld
«r  eSnt  Ifl  I8S4,  and  labotnad  fn
tt  Did  tti  utMilNDrtMod  moit  iDde-
fMgMj tmSiMixnij.  TwoTcan
after,  he  wirte:— "BntUtUeme-
ecs  attende  Qm  noric  In  ttia  riaee  |
7^  UeMd  beOodt  lam  notvltt-
<rat  hope,  DOT  irtftool  mbm  «n-
countgementk  Kaukalee  e»d  Mk
wih,  who  ban  been  Iwtrtlied,  ara
a  comfort  to  ne,  and  In  htn  we
■UtywetlietrlDinpbfrftnitti.  He
waaonee  ah  hUe,  RllglotN  beggar  ^
but  rince  ha  hai  turned  from  danb
Molt  to  wiTa  the  IMdk  and  true
Oed,  he  labonn  eheemllj  with
hi*  oira  handi  to  prorlde  thln|n
honest  In  the  light  of  all  men.
Three  othen,  who  IItb  at  a  dis-
tance, give  ni  hope.  People  are
irften  coming  to  heai ;  and  when
ttef  aeem  attentlTe,  nothing  so
l^addem  017  hewt  ai  to  tell  them
oftbekneofmn  Ssriont."

Amther  oboamilanee  ought  not
to  beondttad:— A  ^tnAvh  named
Btfnddimd,  bndb«es  alio  fomanr
j«an  a  KUgtona  nendteaot  HIa
bahr  had  beramffimd  to  grow  so  at,
ablKMt  to  conceal  bii  eyes,  and  he'
feed  Indolged  In  m(>kli^  to  inch  an
excess  as  neaity  to  deprlTe  himself
of  sight.  He  tot  heanllhe  Gospel
st'alaTgfl  hit  between  Cntwa  and
Berbampora,'  He  waH  obsHrad  to
poj  great  attention  the  wtele  day)

and  at  other  times  Jo  wel^.  At
Bight  he  came  to  Mr.  C,  and  mid,'
in  aUnaloa  toflie  cust'imBmoiigtha
nattvea  0/  presenting  flowen,  "  I
bare  a  flower  (meaning  Us  heart]
xrtllch  I  wbb  to  give  to  some  one
wbo  is  worthy  or  11.  I  have,  for
many  j^ars,  trarelled  about  the
countrj'  to  find  noli  a  person,  but
la  train.  I  ban  been  to  Jigger-
Dan^  bat  tbara  I  sawodI;  a  piec*


nol  woffff  rf
It;  but  lo-(lny  I  have  founil  Oat
that  Is,  and  He  shaU  hare  it~JeM
Christ  i.i  worthy  of  my  flown."
His  subsequent  conduct  proved  Ul  I
ilnceritj.  He  lenmed  to  revi!  r
fnoii  being  an  idle  devotee,  he  to'
came  an  Industrious  old  ml  "  '
WB.4,  for  some  years,  a  most
jDdtcUiiu,an<])Dde  fatignble  f
of  the  Gospel.

In  1810,  Mr.  Chamberlala  ttA
Cutwa;  fai9  pla
tbeRer.  Wm.  Care)-,  jiui.'j  and*!
the  cammen cement  of  fbe  na^
j'Esr  we  bnve  the  following  aecaant
of  the  miwion  from  Dr.  Ca^q^-
"The  churrh  at  Cutwa  is  m
Email ;  but  they  bave  lately badtbe
aildltian  of  one  member,  a  m!ttn\
and  I  hear  of  sin  or  seven  moleiAi
are  desirous  of  being  bapltaedi  O*
of  Ihe^  U  a  native  merchant,  nf
CDiisiderable  property,  whoforaHf
bail  a  house  of  gods.  After  lHfl>
iiig  and  reading  the  Gospel,  irt  11
expellnd  his  idols,  tied  tham  in  ll  '
strait,  and  sent  them  to  brms
Chiunlwrlain,  who  sent  then  fc
Seram[iore.  This  was  a  year  aid
a  half  ago.  He  also  clove  up  a  IH
Ruthn,  or  cor,  of  tbe  god  KiUn^
and  used  It  for  fire-wood.  Hhcf-
devanl  tenijde  is  filled  with  tan-
chandizB.  There  are  otherswhosd-
here  to  him,  and  who  have  receiied
the  word  of  God.  Tbese  peejill,
lirtng  too  far  from  Cutwa  to  atleDd
tbe  Gospel  (about  sixty  mUe^
have,  I  undenland,  sanetified  lb
Lord's  do;  to  reading  ttie- word  and
carrying  on  the  worship  of  tbe  li»
God  In  tbe  best  manner  tiieynr
nble.  Their  heathen  nel^bmn
have  teken  every  opportiml^  ta
(heir  power  to  injure  them,  Md
bove,  by  »otne  false  FbnrgeainthE
Zillah  Court  of  Beerbhoom,  Mca-
sioned  one  of  tliem  considomNi
expense.  I  bear,  however,  tbst
the  magistrate  has  been  infornredol
this  villainy,  and  obliged  them  to
enter  Into  security  re^ipeMIng  tbeir


CUT

itoTtt  conduct.  The  place  where
Iwy  lire  (Lakra^kooiida),isalaTge
Mm  lying  an  one  side  just  at  the
■fteance  into  the  Mahratta  coun-
tw,  and  on  another,  just  at  the  en-
ffuice  into  South  Bahar| -hoth
iidch  countries  the  meichant  often
Istte  in  the  way  of  trade.''

Through  subsequent  years,  Mr.
Jmtey  exerted  himself  greatly,  both
n  pergonal  labour,  and  in  sending
nit  and  watching  over  a  considerable
nimber  of  native  brethren  employed
M  readers  and  itinerants.  By  these
■eans  a  general  knowledge  of  the
gospel  was  diffused  through  a  great
lart  of  the  districts  of  Burdwan  and
Beerbhoom,  and  many  thousands
became  acquainted,  in  some  mea-
,  with  the  nature  of  the  Gospel
Nor  were  these  endea-
wholly  unattended  with  im-
modiate  fruit.  About  70  persons
vrere  baptized  in  ten  years,  of  whom
the  far  gpreater  part  continued  sted^*
fiut  in  their  profession,  while  two
or  ^ree  discovered  a  desire  to  be
Qteful  to  their  countrymen.

By  tbe  Report  of  1825,  we  have
inieUigence  of  increasing  attention
pnd  seriousness  on  the  part  of  the
people,  and  also  of  many  additions
to  the  church.    Some  of  the  con-
verted Hindoos   had  died    in  the
fialtb,  sustained  in  the  last  conflict
by  tbe  consolations  and  hopes  of
trae  religion.    A  quotation  from  a
journal  of  one  of  the  native  preach-
ers will  shew  that  they  are  not  de-
ficient in  an    acquaintance  with
Dirine  truth,    or  unskilled  in  the
mode  of  conveying  it  to  others : —
-  **  Spoke  to  a  brahmin,^'  says  Kan-
galee,    "  who  asked  me  what  I
thonghtof  Ram  Mohun  Roy's  wayP"
I  said,  ■  '*  that  he  was  like  a  man
wiio  shews  me  a  fine  house  in  the
jangles,  ]but  cannot  point  out  the
way  or  door  to  it.    Ram  Mohum
Roy  points  out  one  God,  but  does
not  point  out  tbe  way  to  hinf ;  and
^  bis  inttructions  can  be  of  no  use


DAC

to  me :  Christ  is  the  door,  and  none
can  go  to  God  but  by  him.''  .

Mr.  Carey,  more  recently  lamentSj,
that  although  his  hearers  are  often
deeply  affected  under  the  word,  in**
stances  of  conversion  are  few ;  still,
those  who  havebeen  united  in  church
fellowship  afford  him  pleasure  by
their  general  steadiness  and  consist'
ency,  and  two  or  three  have  lately
expressed  a  wish  to  join  the  church,
though  he  is  not  yet  quite  satisfied
of  their  piety.  Mrs.  Carey  has  en-
deavoured to  revive  the  female
school  at  this  station,  but  hittierto
can  procure  none  but  the  children
of  native  Christians.  The  preju-
dices of  the  heathen,  stronger  in
this  distant  part  of  the  province
than  in  Calcutta  and  its  environs,
not  allowing  them  to  send  their
daughters.


D.

DACCA,  the  richest  district  in
Bengal,  180  m.  long,  and  60  broad.

Dacca,  or  Selapore,  the  ca-
pital of  Dacca,  situated  on  a
branch  of  the  Ganges,  N.  E.  Cal-
cutta, 170  m.  travelling  distance^
containing  150,000  inhabitants,  of
whom  more  than  half  are  Miiho-
medans,  and  a  few  are  Armenian
and  Greek  ChHstians.  £.  long.  90^
lT',N.lat.28«42'.

The  Rev.  O.  Leonard,  from  the
Bt^t.  M,  S,,  accompanied  by  a  na-
tive, arrived  in  1816.  in  18S8,
there  were  1300  pupils  in  17  Ben«>
galee  schools,  into  most  of  which
the  Scriptures  were  introduced
without  exciting  alarm.  A  school
for  indigent  Christian  children  in
the  city  formed  many  into  valua-
ble members  of  society,  who  would
otherwise  have  been  wandering
about  in  vice  and  wretchedness.

The  hands  of  Mr*  Leonard  have
lately  been  strengthened  by  the
accession  of  Mr.   D'Cruz,   from


SwuntMn.   Hn.  PtModt,  the
dow  i^  k  tiMoniaj,  Iih  iln  ■
bt  Dacdk  to  taka  chwn  of
femtlaielMOla.   BannlBitanl
bwre  bMD  beU  bv  th«  mintoiu
Willi  Iha  Arttjrm  OoonxM,  a  div
wet. of    HlMooi,   who  bma
nooneed  idoli  aod  pnfea  to  ^
pion     CbrlfUaiiltri    of   which,
Umn^  the  nadhnu  of  &•  Scrip*
tant  ia  ttadr  own  language,  thej
hare  aonnlnd  ooDiidenUa  kaow-
ledge.    wUla  fltaw  ham  azotted
•oaM  hope,  Ht>  Ii.  baa  baan  Bncoa-
ngad  la    hli    azeitlODi   for   the
yoaug,  by  plaailBg  oridenoa  that
two  of  hli  paplto  ban  dlod  In  lbs
Uth  of  Cbriit.    Veif  Uttia  frolt
baa  jet  been  iMped  at  thk  rtatkM
In  the  ooBreitiMi  of  the  iiallfa»
The  mlarionartea,    howoMr,  itlll
labour  abundsntlj  In  pieaahlngtba
Oofl»d,  botb  to  ftated    ---
Uoni  and  '


of  heathen  and  UDBalmen.  On
Sabbatb  dajitbajbam  two  Englbh
■arrlca^  and  two  alM  dnrinsflie
weak.  Thej  haie  UkewlM  ca(m>
^Nwdlnf  feirleei  In  HindooaUnee
and  Bragalee.  The*  aaKdala
tbebpKaeblng  witfa  uie  Mperiu-
tendence  of  the  large  and  Intaeat-
Ing  clrole  of  acbow  under  Ihalr


into  a  chapel,  and  eveiy  Tliit  Into


BM  iMnlarij  I
BngUn  charch  to  teoelTO  pnbllc
abnt  frain  tha  Audi  of  the  raiilir.
llMT  aln  attend  aD  Td%km*  iaatl-

I  of  ta  nattrae

nraadiaal
uawmd^f


Ood;  and,  d


A  the  adjoining
dMrlcla.

Tbe  (7.  f.  5.  ba«  a  depot  of
booki  in  till*  [dwe.

DELA60A  BAY,  fttoated  on
tbe  E,  eoaitof  &.  AMi»,  and  ex-


DEI.

tmdtMC  fMm  about  86°  to  37°  3,
lat.  It  presenti  to  em i scants,  nk
lierlor  ndvautogi^  to  ao;  In  AfrliM
It  la  tpacluus,  and  oxtenilx  about  If
m.  frum  N.  to  S.  BdJ  20  Krom  «»
lo  E,,  and  19  much  frequented  If
whales.  Thren  larjco  rivers  fall  tDl>'
the  bflf :  Matiicn  Is  the  most  ntlrfe-
em  :  MacbavuniiB,  on  the  S.,  nf
Deli^oa,  tlie  ceatral  rtver,  [i  i^
vif^le  fur  iieurly  iOO  m.  by  lojV
Iwita,  and  for  more  tban  4Dni.hr
wskU  whlcb  draw  about  li  lit
Water.  Tbe  following  eenntiM
are  in  the  vicinily  at  tbe  tift.
Inifoek  lie*  8.  of  the  eapa  tilt
Island  of  that  name,  and  twotite
Bboul  10,000  inhabitBiiU.  TtaevJ
Uto  ore  a  nalieil.  timid  race:thqj
haiB  do  religion  i  yet  ue  ctir —
llilon,  and  are    under  the  I

of  wltcbcmfl.  Tbelr  blag  W
tributary  M  the  kins  of  Ma^jtilt
Which  Is  bouDded  N.  b;  Delogoa
Baf,  and  cunlains  SO.OOO  inhiUt-
auts.  These  people  are  a  Boe  inoe
Of  Coffrei,  and  warlike.  In  nil-
gion  and  maDDers  thej  resemliit
UiOK  of  Injnck.  Tbe  iieople  of
Teaby  are  Irac table  end  indattilon^
ftnd,  includlaic  Panggilg,  anwant
to  SS,(HH).  these  countriea  tie
Ul  trlbulJirr  lo  tbe  kl  ng  of  Tembj.
Tbe  language  of  the  jieople  ix  anlf'
a  dllferent  dialect  to  that  ipokv
b;  tbe  CalTref,  the  Boutchnaaeai,
id  the  Inhabltniils  of  the  ConHM
lands.  A  tarffe  tract  of  land,  ta
le  Ticinitj'  of  the  buy  bu  ■«•
intlf  been  ceded  to  the  BriUA
/  the  natii-Ei,  on  condition  that
they  should  be  luppiieil  with  Cfaria-
tlan  teachers.  Accoidln^jr  anna-
(Ion  was  cummenced  beie,  in  ISSSr-
by  the  /f  .  «.  5:

Tbe  Rev.  Mr.  Tbrelfall,  in  his
pralsewortby  zeal,  but  cootmrj  to
the  intentions  of  the  cammiltee,
went  from  Cape  Town  alone,  and
fixed  hjnlscir  near  the  coast,  which
It  exeeedlnglyunheallhr.  He  was,
U  cunsequcnce,  soon  attacked  hy
212


DEL

ttnidera  incident  to  the  bay,  and
ifter  i^at  sufferings^  was  at  length
Iriuoi  off  by  a  Tessel.  The  inten-
ttoB  of  the  committee  was  jto  form
%.  regular  mission^establisfament
bdand  of  the  bay,  on  the  higher
iDd  -more  healthy  parts;  and  for
Us  purpose  Mr.  Whitworth  was
ant  out  to  join  Mr.  Threlfall.  On
is  arrival  at  the  Cape,  however,
e  found  Mr.  T.  on  board  a  ves-
il  there  under  strict  quarantine,
I  a  distressing  state  of  sickness ;
ad  as  permission  could  not  be  ob-
ilned  for  his  landing  before  the
q^lration  of  a  long  quarantine,
19  ciew  being  also  sickly,  Mr.
r.  went  on  bc^rd  to'  afford  con-
ilation  to  his  aiflicted  brother,
ader  an  engagement  to  remain
■^.  the  time  of  quarantine  should
>  expired.  The  mission  thus  sus-
indedy  is,  for  the  present,  vacant.
iDEILHI,.a  province  of  Hindoos-
GDj  240  m.  long  and  180  broad,
iqnded  on^be  N.  by  Lohore,  N.E.
f  Serioagur,  S.  £.  by  Oude,  S.  by
igTB^  and  W.  by  Agimeer  Having
Ben  the  seat  of  continual  wars
iring^  the  18th  century,  it  is  almost
spopulated;  and  though  it  pos-
— Ofl,  in  general,  every  advantage
lat  can  b^  derived  from  nature,  it
-but  little  cultivated.  The  prin-
pal  rivers  are  the  Ganges  and
iiainnj  which  enter  on  the  N.  £.
xder.  The  country  iiaving  en-
lyed  a  state  of  tranquillity  since
MMy  it  may  be  expected  to  improve
i  cultivation,  <fec.  From  this  pe-
od  the  city  of  Delhi  and  its  dis-
ict  hasy  in  reality,  been  subject  to
le  British  government;  but  the
3ople  are  nominally  under  the  au-
lority  of  the  emperor  of  Hindoos-
m  and  are  now  all  that  remains  to
ae  §preat  Mogul,  of  his  once  exten-
,ve  empire.

Delhi  is  the  capital  of  the
bove  province.  It  is  the  nominal
apital  of  all  Hindoostan,  and  was
iitually  so  during  the  greatest  part
if  the  time  since  the  M ahomedu)


DEL

conquest  In  the  time  of  its  splen-
dour, it  covered  a  space  of  20  miles,
Ifrom  the  appearance  of  the  ruins.
The  present  city  is  built  on  the  left
bank  of  the  Jumna,  and  is  about  7
m.  in  circuit,  surrounded  on  3  sides
by  a  wall  of  brick  and  stone,  in
which  are  7  gates.  The  palace
stands  on  the  bank  of  the  R.  sur*
rounded  by  a  wall  of  red  stone,
about  1  m.  in  circuit.  Adjoining
it  is  a  foiisress,  now  in  ruins ;  and
there  are  many  splendid  remains
of  palaces,  with  baths  and  gar-^
dens.  The  grand  mosque  is  a
magnificent  edifice  of  marble  and
red  free  stone,  and  there  are  30
others  of  an  inferior  size.  The
streets  are  in  general  narrow,
except  2  that  lead  from  the  palace
to  different  gates;  and  there  are
many  good  houses,  mostly  of  brick.
Caravans  iffrive  annually  Irom
Cashmere  and  Cabul  with  shawls,
fruit,  and  horses.  Precious  stones
of  a  good  quality  are  to  be  had  at
Delhi.  It  is  320  m.  N.  W.  Calcutta,
E.  long.  77®  6',  N.  lat.  28«  41.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Thompson,  of  the
Bant,  M.  5.,  removed  from  Paths
to  Delhi  in  1822.  Soon  after  his
arrival,  disease,  which  was  preva-
lent in  Bengal,  began  its  awful  ra*
vagesin  this  imperial  city ;  sweeping
away,  among  the  first,  four  mem-
bers of  the  royal  family,  beskles
numbers  of  inferior  rank.  -Still
nuMre  awful,  however,  were  the
proofs  exhibited  of  spiritual  death.
But  while  the  missionary  was  much
discouraged  on  this  account,  he  dis-
tributed a  number  of  Gospels  among
the  Afghans,  who  are  supposed  to
be  descended  from  the  twelve  tribes
of  Israel.  Some  of  them,  when  leav-
ing Delhi,  repeatedly  solicited  Mr.
T.  to  accompany  them;  assuring  him
that  their  own  countrymen  would
be  very  anxious  to  p<»se8s  and  to
search  the  writings  of  inspiration.

He  was  afterwards  much  engaged
in  extensive  journeys  to  the  N.  and
N.  E.  of  Delhi,  duiin^^  iibic&i  ^.


vuioDi  linnwgca,  AmoiV  Ui
MCcHmti  of  UwM,  ha  nyi— ''  Some
■trangen  frooi  Nilui,  tn  the  hlll^
were  one  mombig  (4  the  Jage«^
whtthef  I  bad  gona  tonad  tbe  Ooi-
peli  and  pnr-  Th^comlitodaf  I
tak*^  bam  tbs  Nilm  R^a,  witli
theli  attendsnti.  Our  books  m
not  new  to  theag  people,  Sookha
baring  been  aaMKi^  tbem,  and
read  and  dUtriboted  prettr  vUdf.
Sime  who  bad  not  an  apportonify
then,  now  took  tiacta.  One  of  the
TakesU  bad  taken  tiacta  in  lUB,
at  Kurnal,  and  wai  entnated  with
the  book!  (Panjabee  acitpturaa)
wbicb  Captain  Bird  had  obtained  of
me  for  the  Nahn  Raja,  hli  maitBi.
TheM  petwie  lend  an  attenlhe  ear
whenever  IhaFe  beenieadlngattbe
jogee'ii,  or  the]' attend  at  mjlMMMe.
"  ThcM  ttkeeU  and  tbeli  at-
tendant! gare  me  a  faoRlble  aeconnt
of  thBncrifleeofcfgvUanrfAMMff '


name  of  Sottea,  which  took  place
notamonthiagaiDthehllli.  The
individual  wbo  died  wat  Iiree  Sein,
the  Raja  of  Mnndee,  a  town  and
rajariiip  In  the  hilli;  and  the  per-
wora  who  were  thut  ciuellj'  burnt,
it  all  wiiei  or  concnblnei,


batK


e  of  them  itave  glila.    One


through  good  Intereit,  peA^ii .
emboldened  to  declue  her  deter-
minatloDnotto  be  bunt,  andtliey
bare  not  daied  to  bnnwlate  her.
Some  SO  jiean  ago,  a  rqja  itaring
been  ilain  In  battle,  U  wmnen  were
bimit  with  fail  coipie.  Twelve  ]«an
ago,  the  betn>thed  wlfto  of  a  brah-
min, avif  T  rean  oU,  wa*  cntellj
burnt  with  bl«  corpse.    Manj


of    1


r    the


»  relsted  by
them,  Bj  baTlog  taken  place  in  the
bUtt,  ofirtiicbtherwme  either  ere-
wttiii««*ei  or  reetdred  mart  eoteln


In  hl«  journal  Mr.  T.  also  nalsdi
fact  which  detecvea  ntl^ntioil.  "I
found,"  hetemnrks,  "  Uiot  of  all
who  came  to  hear  me,  «dc1i  a
were  mast  remote  from  tbe  BrllU
provinces  were  the  readlisl  at
most  unreierved  In  rec^vlig  (m
Scriptures.  I  know  not  howtl^
but  the  wastem  nations  certalnll
pusseu  B  tlilrsi  for  knowledge  ti
thoie  in  Hlndooslan."

In  18S3,  Mr.  T.  wa«  cbsc
by    Bn   event,    bighlj'    grafi^ha
lo   himself,    and    which     exsM
a  grest  seniation  in  this  po,
eib/.   An  aged  brahmin,    held  k
the     highest    estimation     anM|
bli    neighbours    for    his    attats-
menLs  in  Sanskrit  literature,  ud
for    bis   kuowledga  of   the  Shn-
ters,  after  bearing;  the  Gospel  bi
some    lime,     publicly  renouDcel
iddatiy;  and,  notwithstanding  at
the  eflinti  made  both  to  allnre  ml
terri^  bim  from  his  purpose,  of
pnifened  his  faith  in  Christ,  ssj
WBsbsptlzedby  Mr.  Thomaaintte    ,
pmence  of  many  spectators.    Ot    ,
this  occurreace  the  Serampore  M    ,
thrsn  observe—"  This  renunclsWi    ,
of  Hlndouism.bein^  InthstpsrtBl   ;
the  country  quite  a  new  thli^  bM    ,
procured    much    attention   to  """
joctrine  of  the  Gospel.     It  B.,_,
io  sbew,  among-  other  things,  ttl
-jn/a/y  with  which  Christianity  Wf
be  promulgalod  In  the  darkest  pi  '
of  Indin.    All  the  throBteoed  i^i
sition  to  this  man'E  apnn  profea
of  Christianity,   ended    In   a    1
expressions  of  [lerMinal  dislike  fmm
hjs  old  ocquBintunce,  on  accoonto'
the  course  he  had  token,  and  hk
haling  tacitly  coDilemned  the
al>  their  religious  obsorvsncei,  fcT
nobly  daring  to  follow  hisowneon-
victions  of  the  truth.     For  aU  ttH
bcweTcr,  be  was  prepaiad  ;  and  by
»iustainlng  the  whole  in  tbesplritiu
genuine  Christianity,  be  in  a  great
measure  diaanned  the  reaentiiMel
of  his  neighbours  ajid  acqualn
\  So    CDm^\e\s\.'5    i\al«l  were


DEL

eed^  in  the  expression  of  their
.ike,  that  not  only  was  there  no
Brence'to  any  European  (at  the
le  of  hisbapti9n),hutthe  attention
"flie  lowest  person  in  the  native
Ice  was  notofficially  called  to  the
naaction.''

Hie  church  at  present  consists  of
members  in  full  communion }  of
KMn,  however,  only  2,  Kiaba  and
okha  Misr,    are  natives.    The
fer  is  actively  engaged  in  spread-
^' abroad  the  knowledge  of  the
i^>el  in  the  neighbouring  coun>
ots,  and  seems  to  meet  with  great
Deptance  among  the  people.   His
m   character  is  much  improved,
d  he  gives  pleasure  and  satisfac-
fn  to  all  who  know  him.
Mr.     Thompson's    labours    are
andant  and   highly  interesting.
English,  he  has  regular  worship
I  Sabbath  morning  and  evening  at
I  own  house,  and  the  same  on
'ednesday  evening;   and,  except
I  the  fii^  Monday  of  the  month,
hep  he  holds  a  missionary  prayer-
aeting  at  his  own  house,  he  has  a
•ayer- meeting  on  Monday  even-
igs  at  the  hoase  of  one  of  the
leinbers  of  the  church.    The  usual
cmgpreg^tions,    at     these    times,
noimt  to  about  20  persons.    Hin-
xwtanee  woi^ip  he  has  at  his  own
Duae    every  '  Sabbath   afternoon,
rhlch  is  very  variously  attended ;
oA,  indeed,  on  every  afternoon  he
mM  worship  of  this  kind,  varying  in
dime    degree    according    to    the
.umber  and  circumstances  of  the
Isltors  he  may  have.    He  al^  fre-
uently  conducts  worship  in  Hin-
ioostanee,  with  a  number  of  Chris-
Ian  drummers  in  the  military  lines,
ct  some  distance  from  his  house.

To  preach  the  Gospel  to  the
leathen,  he  continually  frequents
ieveral  places  ^hich  are  the  head-
quarters of  some  Hindoo  sects,  and
ftlso  some  ghats,  which  are  places
of  great  resort.  In  addition  to  these,
he  attends  many  religious  assem-
blies in  the  city  and Deigbhourhood]


DEM

and,  in  spring,  he  travels  to  the  great-
annual  assembly  at  Hurdwar>  and
in  November,  to  that  at  Gumnook-
teswar.  On  all  these  ocasions  he
finds  opportunities  of  circulating  the
knowledge  of  the  Gospel  to  an  unu-
sually great  extent,  and  of  marking
the  progress  which  is  made  in  the
work  of  missions.  Many  resort  to
him  for  instruction,  and  he  has  now
several  very  promising  inquirers.

The  C.  M,  S,  sent  Annud  Mes-
seeh,  a  native  teacher,  to  Delhi,  in
1822.  His  time  is  usually  em-
ployed in  reading  and  conversing
with  the  Hindoos,  brahmins,  and
others,  who  seek  him  for  the  saJce  of
information  in  the  Christian  Scrip-
tures, and,  as  is  sometimes  the  case,
in  the  hope  of  confounding  him  and
entangling  him  in  his  talk.  He  is
under  the  eyes  of  Mr.  Fisher,  the
chaplain,  and  with  him  pursues  his
scriptural  inquiries.  '<He  is  as
warm-hearted  and  regular  in  the
good  cause,''  says  Mr,  F.  ''  as  he
ever  was."

DEMARARA,  a  settlement  in
Guyana,  on  a  river  of  the  same
name,  contiguous  to  Essequibo.
The  river  is  2  miles  wide  at  the
mouth,  defended  by  a  fort  on  the
east  bank,  and  navigable  upward  of
200  miles.  The  country  oroduces
cofifee,  sugar-canes,  and  the  finest
kinds  of  wood ;  it  was  taken  Arom
the  Dutch  by  the  British  in  1706,
and  in  1803  ;  and  it  was  ceded  to
them  by  the  Dutch  in  1814.  This
settlement  and  that  of  Esequibo
form  one  government,  and  the  ca-
pital is  Starbrock.

In  December,  1807,  the  Rev.
John  Wray  was  sent  hither  by  the
L,  M,  S,,  in  compliance  with  the
solicitations  of  Mr.  Post,  a  pious
and  respectable  Dutch  planter  on
the  east  coast  of  the  colony.  He
commenced  his  labours  on  the  plan-
tation of  Le  Jtesouvenir,  belonging
to  Mr.  P.,  who  had  upon  .it  about
600  slaves,  undex  A])[ie  luos^.  di^^^o.-
raging  circums^AXicea.  Xie:^  \siQTi^CD&


•ftw  hli  Hifi*),  fas  auonced  tto
NBTenli»  of  noTB  tlun  W  negtoM
■•^bat^wudioflOOlMil  leaned
V«tV«  Pint  CatMblm— thet  he
|MdbapttMd4MMti,  iad  wraMl
oUldnn-mdtluthkcangtegatlaU
veM  large  aadattantlfe.  TUimc-
eew  IneieaMd  during  the  jear  I8(M|
K>  that  eu^  In  tbe  eiw^Bg  apring
the  Dunbet  of  iUtc*  admmed  Into
the- dnireh  b;  butkB  Buoonted  to
84,  andDOtlaa  than  lM^)peaied
to  be  leekliig  the  MlTatku  of  theli
Muli.  Ner-wMthliidl— tbetnitbt
the;  had  leaned  the;  wen  aazlona
to canm^eBle to otben.  "lam
iBfinmed,"  mjt  Hi.  W,  "  Oat
aaine,  «t  the  dlitauceof  Mm.,  who
hara  DeMT  teen  oui  ehqwl,  hate
learned  Di.  Watts'*  Fbit  Cate-
chUm ;  and  10  of  oar  pet^e,  who
best  imdenland  It,  bBre  taken  8
each  ander  their  care,  to  Initnict
them,  to  watob  orei'  their  conduct,
and  to  saUle  dlipales  ammg  tbem.
TOs  moaagsr  of  thexe  daves,  who
attend!  out  place  of  nanhlp.  Is
aft<miihed  at  the  ohange  wroiight
amongthem.  Befoiethq' heard  the
Gwpel,  the;  were  lnd<dent,  nol^,
and  rebellloiB;  hot  now  they  are
Induitrioui,  ^nie't,aMl  obedient."
Whilst  M>.  W.  w«*  i^oldng
In'thebleskngwUchtbotieite^oQ
hi*  iBboun,  he  was  eslled  to  endore
a  aavere  trial.  In  the  remoral  of  hli
friend  and  patron,  Mr.  Pott,  who
fell  oiUaep  io  JeiHu,  amidst  tbe  do-
cere  and  bitter  lamuntaUong  of  bis
■loTei.  Dealioos  that  Uie  prMlegea
of  ChrlsUan  initruction  ahould  be
enjoyed  after  his  deeeaae,  he  had
•ecured  to  the  use  of  the  mlidon,
the  chspel  and  the  dweUlng-honni
of  the  minister ;  and  genercHidr  al-
igned 100/.  iteiilng,  M  an  annual
eontribattoQ  to  his  savportt  m  long
■1  one  ahonld  be  prorided  by  the
aoclete  to  preach  the  doctrines  trf
therefiMmedchuRib.  Other  friends,
howerer,  w«re  afterward*  taised
vp,  anMHig  whom  were  tome  plant-
ain, wtoM  pi^aUeet  bad  been  n-


arj'  tnbiiius.

In'  the  early  part  of  tSll,  JA.
Wray  was  introdaceil  |P  Jfniwia^i
rillnge  npon  tbe  const,  sbostlSa.
fruRi  biwn,  uiii  in  the  TidUt^if
several  enlales.  The  geoQmM
residing  here  not  only  expreaa^i
desire  that  a  mlEslonary  migU,!^
hour  emoDt;  them,  but  acbNJB)
tuhlcribed  1 DOOA  towards  the  «(«•
lion  of  a  place  of  worship.  BfcT.
nftenraTd^  remaite,  with  respeellg
tbe  mission  si  l^  Reaoitvnur,  "Om
of  tbe  ne)^TDe!i  told  me  that  IISU
come  to  blm  to  be  instructed;  nil
I  am  Eomelimes  astonished  to  lii
Low  correctly  they  lenrn  the  cat
chlsm  from  one  another.  Aboil
200  attend  puhiic  worship  regnlsdj,
H^ve^ll  of  whom  can  comluct  ttt
sillying  without  the  BssiEtaoce  of
white  people  )  and  many  begin  JD
pray,  In  our  social  meetings,  «ift
fi-reat  Quency,  and  vet;  often  b
scriptural  language."

Tbe  colonial  government  hartBJ
on  the  3o[h  of  May,  iwiied  a  l^
latiun  which  was  fonnd  to  ooeBl)'
almost  lo  ihe  total  auppressW  tf
the  reli^iouE  assemhlies  of  the  a^
grot»,  Mr.  W.  visited  Englapdi  tfll
a  representiiUan  of  the  restaicttn
being  niaile  to  tbe  gofarnmeBttf
home,  the  evil,  which  had  thisl()^
^inaled,  was  removed.  BborW
after  hia  return,  b  proclaiDBthn.'li^
'nlllng  the  preriow;Q)l|i


inK,  ami  „  .__.  ...
bed  been  re« .
from  his  Royal  Higbnestbe  PJioa
Regent,  to  give  every  aid  lo  iBls-
jionarles.  In  tbe  conin^unicetlDll  of
religious  knowledge;  nnaanauoM-
ment  which  was  oceompanied  bj
tbe  mast  friendlj'  and  liberal  coo.
duct  on  the  part  of  the  goretnoi.
The  effeotof  Ibis  was  very  apparenl,
in  the  Incrensed  attendance  of  lilt
slaves — 0  oiTOOofwhomfrequeDllj
assembled.  Soon  after,  the  Rei-
^Mi.BKiVT^.-dWttiibeBBsent  ou'


DEM

Dtidy  to  the  death  of  Mr.  Post,
xl  a  large  and  commodious
si  at  George  Town,  towards
trection  ef  which  the  inhahit-
sontrAited  upwards  of  600/. ;
ibout  60/.  was  siib8crii)ed  by
legroes— each  ofwliom  gave
a  bit,  or  twopence  halfpenny.
it  the  satae  time  an  A.  M.  S.,
Ung  people  of  colour  and
i,  was  formed  at  George  Town,
he  subscriptions  raised  in  the
nstanoe  amounted  to  80/.
'.  W.  subsequently  removed  to
lee,  amid«(t  expressions  of  af-
mate  regard,  and  poignant
t  on  the  part  of  his  people,
soember,  the  Rev.  Mr.  £lliott,
had  for  some  years  laboured
>bago,  paid  a  visit  to  Dema-
and  was  highly  gratified  at
ssingthe  success  of  his  bre-
.  <<  Some  ihousmtds,"  he  re-
ed^ '<  know  that  Christ  is  the
)f  Grod,  and  the  Saviour  of
rs ;  and  I  doubt  not  that  some
-ede  believe  in  him  to  the
;  of  their  souls.''  For  nearly
'ears,  the  directors  were  un-
o  obtain  a  resident  successor
r.  W.,  though  during  that
the  chapel  was  suppUed  by
Navies,  and  other  missionaries.
Blliott  also  appears  to  have
red  with  equal  zeal  and  sue-
in  the  first  instance  at  George
,  and  afterwards  on  the  west

where  his  services  were  so
antly  blessed,  that  a  strildng
rement  was  visible  tn  the  mo-
'  great  numbers ;  and  scarcely
>ath  elapsed  without  some  of-

themselves  as  candidates  for
n.

oediately  after  the  arrival  of
BV.  John  Smith,  in  1817,  at
lesouvenir,  the  attendance
much  increased,  and  in  a
t|me  the  chapel  was  found
cient  to  accommodate  all  the
i  that  flocked  together.  Some
5  planters  would  not  suflfer
glares  to  attend,  but  othen


DEM

found  it  most  conducive  to  their
own  interests  to  g^ve  them  permis-
sion.   In  one  of  Mr.  S.'s  letters,
he  says,  <<  The  white  people  attend
much  better  than  they  have  hitherto
done,  and  express  themselves  much
pleased  with  the  decent  behaviour
and  clean  appearance  of  the  ne-
groes, who, are  usually  dressed  in
white.     With  respect  to  the  reli-
gion of  these  poor  peqple,  I  believe
it  does  not  consist  in  outward  ap-
pearances so  much  as  in  the  ho-
nesty and  simplicity  of  their  con-
duct.   Their  masters  speak  well  of
them  in  general ;  nor  have  I  heard '
(though  constantly  inquiring)  more
than  one  complaint  made  by  any
planter  or  manager  in  consequence
of  religion.''    The  exception  id-
luded  to  is  worthy  of  notice.    One
of  the  planters  said,    <<  that  the
man  concerning  whom  inquiry  was
made,  was  too  religioue  ;  and  that,
not  satisfied  with  being  religious
himself,  he  was  in  the  habit  of  sit-
ting up  at  night  to  preach  to  others.
In  every  other  reqsect,  however,*'
said  he, ''  he  is  a  good  servant ;  so
much  so,  that  I  would  not  sell  him
for  6000  guilders,  which,  according
to  the  present  exchange,  would  be
about  460/.  sterling."

In  June,  181Q,  tiie  church  mem-
bers are  stated  to  amount  to  107 ;
and  Mr.  S.  mentions  his  having
baptized  249,  of  whom  about  180
were  adults.  Among  vartous  in-
stances which  might  be  adduced  of
the  happy  effiscts  of  his  ministry
upon  many  of  the  negroes,  the
abandonment  of  a  custom  may  be
mentioned,  which  they  had  long
considered,  not  onbr  as  innocent  in
itself,  but  as  an  important  source
of  profit  to  their  families.  The
plantation  slaves,  comprising  nearly
seven  eighths  of  the  whole  negro
population  of  Demarara,  are  usual-
ly allowed  a  piece  of  ground,  which ,
they  are  expected  to  cultivate,  for
the  purpose  of  tinni^VYi^\b»iDM>n«[k
with  such  neceiaaxiea  aa^Sbe\i  q\2cax

u  liVl


DEM

means  do  not  provide  for  them;
but  the  only  time  they  have  for
carrying  their  produce  to  market  is
tiic  Sabbath,  that  being  the  market-
day.  <<  Although/'  says  Mr.  S.,
**  this  practice  is  a  shameful  viola-
tion of  the  Lord's  day,  and  ex-
tremely fatiguing  to  the  negroes,
V  ho  are  often  compelled  to  carry
their  saleable  articles,  such  as  yams,
Indian  com,  bananas,  Ac,  to  a  dis-
tance of  six,  eight,  or  even  twelve
miles  ;  yet  the  trifling  profit  they
derive  from  their  labour,  and  the
pleasure  they  find  in  going  to  the
market  in  town,  strongly  attach
tiiem^toit.  With  pleasure,  how-
ever, I  see  many  of  our  baptised  ne-
groes abandon  this  practice — a  prac-
tice  so  specious  in  its  appearance  to
them,  and  so  deeply  rooted  by  cus-
tom, that  nothing  but  the  power  of
r<3l]:riun  could  cause  them  volunta-
rily  to  relinquish  it.  Many,  very
many,  now  neither  go  to  market,
nor  yet  cultivate  their  grounds,  on
the  Sabbath ;  and  yet  these  are  the
persons  that  make  the  cleanest  and
best  appearance,  and  have  more
of  the  comforts  of  life  than  most
othei-s.  The  reason  is  obvious —
tbey  are  diligent  in  raising  live
stock,  fowls,  ducks,  turke>'s,  <fec.,
which  they  dispose  of  to  per-
sons who  go  about  the  countiy  to
purchase  them.  By  not  going  to
market,  they  have  less  inducement
to  spend  their  money  in  buying
useless  or  pernicious  articles  \  and
by  a  little  economy,,  such  as  the
Bible  teaches,  they  make  their
money  go  further  than  others."

fn  the  autumn  of  1820,  as  many
of  the  negroes  resided  at  a  cons^
dcrable  distance  from  Mr.  S.'s
place  of  worship,  it  was  proposed
to  biiild  a  chapel  at  Clonbrooky
about  15  m.  from  Le  Resouvenir,
and  that  the  Rev.  Mr.  Mercer,  of
the  Jj.  M.  S,y  then  in  the  colony,
should  instruct  the  negroes  in  that
quarier.  And,  with  a  view  to  in-
tere^t  the  gentlemen  of  Cloubiook.


DBM

in  this  object,  a  recoanBendito
certificate  of  the  good  eifecll  ^
religious  iiiitruction  was  |givaii  I9
Messrs.  Van  Coften  and  HaiaUfpiy
the  attorney  and  manager  o£1hB
plantation  Le  Resolivenlr.

After  stating  that  the  nmnlBi  of
adult  negroes  baptiaed  during  flJB
preceding  year  was  3i0;  thitfti
njumber  admitted  to  the  LaA
table,  during  the  same  period,  vyi
61 ;  that  the  total  numlnnr  of  Bi^
bers  of  the  church  was  901,  ad
that  of  marriages  1 14  ;<— Mr.  .Sprift
observes: — <'We  ha^e  now  auj
candidates,  both  for  baptitfB  f^
the  Lord's  supper:  our  vnam
congregation  is  800  peiwoa.  m
have  certainly  much  cause  tD^|i
thankful  to  the  great  Head  of  Hk
Church,  for  the  success  thiitsttwt
our  labours.  We  behold,  en^
Sabbath,  an  overflowing  congiqp
tion,  behaving  with  pralwiafty
decorum ;  and  we  see  tlMm  aadms
for  the  spread  of  Christlani^.
They  are  fast  abandoning  ftA
wicked  practices  for  mora  regato
habits  01  life,  as  is  evident  firaoi  &
number  of  marriages,  few  of  whleh
(not  as  one  in,^jr)  h^m  hitti|Bf|»
been  violated.  A  great  propotttB
of  them  are  furnished  with  BVtiBii
Testaments,  Dr.  Watts'  Firstor  Ito-
cond  Catechism,  and  a  hymnboi^;
and  these  being  their  whole  Ubnof  I
they  usually  bring  them  tocli|i||d
on  the  Sabbath.  Our  congregf^tiiiBy
young  and  old,  bond  and  irae>  41s
catechised  eveiy  Sunday ;  flnt.  In-
dividually, in  classes,  and  ^(Iw-
wards  collectively.  TXds  depiflrt-
ment  is  managed  by  Mrs.  SmiflLf'

Mr.  Smith  at  the  same  thpe
added,  that  the  Mission  Reg^ter
contained  the  names  of  about  A|M
persons,  who  had  professedJty:  M|-
braced  the  Gospel  at  Le  llesoufsfilr
and  the  adjoining  plantations.  |)Ui
subsequent  labours,  and  tbotp  of
Mrs.  S.,  who  took  an  active  Mrtb
I  the  UvatbEUfillon  q(  the .  feipa4€  n^

1\%


i)EM

!^tifying  results.  But^  instead  of
theh*  efforts  meeting  with  that
hanction  and  countenance  from  the
cifll  authorities,  and  other  leading
Individuals,  which  they  merited,
they  had  in  many  instances  to  con-
tend with  increasing  op)>osition  and
reproach.  This,  however,  was  not
niiiveTsally  the  case.  Some  of  the
white  inhabitants  candidly  acknow-
ledged the  advantages  resulting
'to  the  negroes  from  the  labours  of
the  missionary ;  while  several  re-
'spectable  gentlemen,  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Le  Resouvenir  became
Inbecribers  to  the  Demarara  A,  S, ;
and  gave  their  testimony  to  the  im-
]iroved  character  and  good  beha-
vioer  of  the  negroes  who  had  re-
ceived the  benefit  of  religipus
Instruction.

The  contributions  of  the  Le  Re-
■oavenir  branch  of  the  Demarara
A,  S»  for  1822,  amounted  to  about

*£aoo,

'To  enter  into  details  of  those
transactions  '^ich  afterwards  oc-
cnned,  is  at  present  injpossible:
ndRce  it  to  observe,  as  the  report
lor  1824  ^tes,  that  Mr.  Smith,
whOy  **  at  the  period  of  the  pre-
Vtons  anniversary,  was  peaceably
end  nsefully  labouring  ih  the  mid^
of  aii  extensive  slave- population,
bf  whom  he  was  univeiially  re-
jected and  beloved,  was,  on  the
Slit  of  August,  1823,  taken  into
coatody;  his  private  journal  and
other  papers  seized;  and  himself  and
Mrs.  S.  lodged  in  the  Colony^house.
After  a  painful  imprisonment  of  7
weeks,  during  which  period  he  was
recused  all  communication  with  his
friends,  Mr.  Smith,  a  ministerof the
frospel,  was  summoned  before  a
court- martial,  to  be  tried  on  a
charge  of  conspiracy  against  the
peace  of  his  Majesty's  government,
tod  for  abetting  the  late  disturb-
ibic^  among  the  slaves  of  the  co-
lony. Being  thus  made  amenable  to
a  mfUtary  tribunal,  he  was  deprived
of  ibdse  ordJiuuyr  civil  rights  and


DEM

privileges  which  belonged  to  him
as  a  British  subject.  An  immense
mass  of  evidence  was  brought  for-
ward by  his  accusers,  which,  in-
stead of  establishing"  his  guilt,
served,  on  the  contrary,  to  show  the
general  excellence  both  of  his  per-
sonal and  official  characters.  The
court,  nevertheless,  thought  proper
to  iind  Mr.  Smith  guilty  of  death  !
and  he  was  accordingly  sent  as  a
felon  to  the  common  g^ol  of  the
colony.  The  sentence  of  the
court  was  referred  home  for  his
Majesty's  decision.  His  Majesty
was  pleased  to  remit  the  sentence ;
but  Mr.  Smith  was  required  to  quit
Demarara,  and  to  enter  into  his  re-
cognizance not  to  reside,  in  future,
in  any  part  of  the  British  West
Indies.  Before,  however,  these
determinations  of  his  Majesty's  go-
vernment reached  Demarara,  his
happy  spirit  bad  ascended  to  that
place  where  "  his  Judgment  shall
be  brought  forth  as  light,  and  his
righteousness  as  the  noon-day,'*

The  congregation  of  Mr.  Davies
suffered  greatly  from  these  distress^
ing  events:  it,  however,  revived  in
the  course  of  1824.  ITie  last
report  states,  that  the  average  at-
tendance at  the  chapel  on  the  Sab-
bath, is  about  400  :'but  as  the  con*
gregation  consists  chiefly  of  ne-
groes from  the  adjacent  country,
the  fluctuations  in  the  attendance,
arising  from  the  seasons  of  the  year,
are  considerable.  Those  who  at-
tend the  Wednesday  evening  ser-
vices, amount  to  about  140.  The
number  in  church-fellowship  is  130,
of  whom  upwards  of  50  have  been
admitted  since  Mr.  Davies's  return
to  the  colony  in  1 823.  Most  of  them
had  been  his  hearers  for  many  years.

Beside  the  services  above  men-
tioned, there  are,  during  the  week,
two  catechetical  meetings,  and  two
meetings  for  religious  conversation
and  prayer.

In  the  Sabbath-scYiQioV  %ctft  vt«
300  adults  and  100  OdlVL^Ols^tv.  Wt»X


DEK

of  the  teicbeiiy  who  were  educated
byMn.  Davies,  are  well  acquainted
with  the  principiet  of  the  Christian
religion,  and  are  regular  attendants
at  the  chapel.  Some  of  them  have
been  lately  admitted  to  communion.
The  children  of  the  Sabbath;>school
are  also  instructed  on  other  days
dukng  the  week.

A  distressing  bereavement  was^
however,  in  reserve  for  this  sta-.
tion; — Mr  .Davies  deported  tbislife,
after  a  coAiparatively  short  illness,
on  the  20th  of  AprU,  1826.

The  fVtileyan  misHonan'es  have
also  laboured  for  some  years  in
Deroarara.  Their  cause  greatly
suffered  from  the  events  to  which
allusion  has  been  made.  The  exist-
ence of  martial  law  for  some  time
prevented  their  evening  meetings ;
and  a  hostile  spirit  ag^ngt  missions
of  every  kind  prevented  the  at-
tendance of  the  slaves,  and  many
others,  on  the  Sundays.  The  cha-
pels, especially  in  the  coontry,were
lor- some  time  nearly  deserted — ^the
societies  were  greatly  scattered,—
and  though  the  two  missionaries
escaped  the  hand  of  legal  violence,
they  were  exposed  to  many  oblo-
quies and  Insults.  One  of  them,
indeed,  but  narrowly  escaped  a
base  attack  from  certain  white
people,  who  waylaid  him  on  his
return  by  night  from  his  duty  in
the  country.  Tho  clouds  began,
however,  afterwards  to  disperse.
In  1824-5,  there  was  much  cause
for  gratitude ;  and  in  the  last  re-
port the  following  statements  are
made : —

"  In  George  TotoUy  our  course
has  been  unobstructed,  nor  have
we  been  without  considerable  en-
couragements. Our  congregations
throughout  the  year,  and  at  each  of
the  (Afferent  services,  have  been
large,  attentive,  and  cmlerly ;  they
consist  of  persons  of  all  the  varie-
ties of  grade  and  station  of  which
the  colony  is  composed ;  but  chiefly
o/MUres  and  £n9  coloured  people.


Nor  baa  the  ngolar  admlataMlv
of  the  word  and  ovdinuieM  •■■(<;
this  people  been  In  vain  liif^lW'

Lord.  AconsideraVABiiiBbvh^ii.
been  added  to  theaodetj,  !4M[
young  people  of  botb  aexMi^M ,
it  is  a  natter  of  great  joiy  to  MfB^^
of  our  old  memter%  widto  w«|h^"
to  see  their  chiklrea,  £dc  iriMV
convenion  th^y  have  lopg  >i«i,
ardently  pnqred»  giving  tHpMwimi-
to  the  Laid.  Uuring  the  last  jmi'
increased  exertiona.  wm  aiJNP
among  the  dafea  *»^**»g''tff  t^-4k
station.^'

JUdAaiea^—"  Hese  wauxf^  •»  ^
quiring  their  way  to  Zloii,  !eM-
their  faces  thitherward.    Cttiio(l%'
repeal  of  euurtiai  law,  and  the  in  .
tontion  of  religious  rmllnam^
the  congregations  have  motik'jmi-
creesed,  and  a  consldeFaUe  eMtTi
tion  has  been  made  to  the  abdib|
many   more   are   amdoaa  jo  jif
added;  but  the  want  of  chiipei  tflm
obliges  tbp   miwiionaiy  to  n§m
them,  or  to  put  tiieiii  off  ead  mif'
select  a  few.

<'  We  continue  to  preach  eftiM*
zier*9  DeHfhif  aboat  5  m.  up  tjto
coasts  and  there  we  have  en.  ler
crease  in  the  ccmgregetloii^  anialiQ
of  members  to  the  aoeie^.

'<  The  Uttte  place  fitted  n^  «•  «
chapel  at  ifoAaieei^,  oontliUHi4B
be  well  attended ;  the  lodetjp  h«
increased,  and  several  are  onUk.
Numbers  in  society — 8  .WkMm^
182  Free  coloured^  and  IM
Slaves.    Total  16SX>'

SehooU.—'*  Theie  aie,  !■  tNt
Sunday-school  in  ■  G^9rg9  Jkmir
about  126  scholars.  Moat  of  thtm
are  free  children,  attendiag  theer»
dinary  week-day  schoola,  whieh  ve
very  numerous  here..  We  dlrMt
the  children,  without  exceptiea,  te
remain  in  the  chapel  duriag  oK
Sunday  forenoon  service.  The
visitor  for  the  day  also  catechtw
them  {  and  this  is  done  MkewlitL
more  largely  by>the  preechir  hi
lown  csn  VeQ  vtfnt&n^eC  the  «etk»


^fte  MaTe  sereral  young  peopld
mtta  devoted  to  the  \rork  of
tomthXng,  of  t^bose  piety  we  have
^tbtaAn^  eridence."
•  D^TMOLD,  a  towD  of  Wert-
.^kftalla.  In  the  county  of  Lippe,
t'wttll  a  fortified  castle^  17  m.  N.
N.  W.  Paderborn.

ttera  iff  a  Jetn*  Society,  in  con-

itezion  with  that  at  Berlin,  kept  in

tfiperatiaii  chiefly  through  the  exer-

ttnB  of  the  venerable  Baron  von

Sldmberg.      Mr.  Petri,  formerly

ilie  tniarionaTy  of  this  society,  has

lieen  received  under  the  patronage

mmA  cmitrol  of  the  L.  S,    He  has

iMidii  for  some  time  at  Hamburgh ;

Ini^  upon  the  pressing  solicitations

of    Baron   Blomberg,.    the    com-

nHtee  have  resolved  that  he  should

lie-  again  stationed    at  Detmold,

^hdre  he  may  be  the  means,  on

tteone  band,  of  carrying  on  the

"work  already  commenced  amongst

tlie-  Jews  in  that  neighbourhood,

and   on  the  other,  of  awakening

4lfresfa  the  zeal  and  the  energies  of

lirofessing  Christians  on  behalf  of

their  Jewish  brethren.

Mr.  Petri  has  probably  before
ttab  commenced  his  tour  through
"tiie  Wastphalian  provinces,  which
are  the  proper  sphere  of  the  Det*
mBld  Society's  operations.
~  "DlOAn,  a  populous  town  in
BahBTy  Hindoostan,  on  the  S.
bank  of  the  Ganges,  near  the  ex-
teifsive  cantonments  at  Dinapore,
3Sam.  N.W.Calcutta.

Two  native  brethren  connected
wttfa  the  Biqtt,  M.  S,  were  sent
hittier  several  years  since.  In
1816,  Bir.  Chamberlain  visited  the
station- 9  and  says  in  his  journal
dated  Jan.  3— <<  We  assembled  this
evening  to  hear  four  natives  de-
clare what  God  had  done  for  their
soats.  Their  declaration  was  very
interesting  and  encouraging.  One
of  these  persons  is  a  native  of
Bhnmtpore,  a  town  beyond  Agra.
He  was  on  his  way  so  far 'for  Ju-
gunnatb^  hut  here  divine  mercy

I


Tbf5

shond,  bpoh  him  $  he  was  picked
up  by  the  hative  brethren  by  the
way  side.  'Another  is  a  native
of  Joypore,  which  is  still  further
beyond  Agra.  He  was  arrested
by  divine  grace  on  his  return  from
Jug^nnath,  by  meeting  with  the
brethren  Brindabund  and  Kureem.
Two  others  were  Byraggees  from
those  parts  of  the  country;  one
of  them  was  a  Gooroo,  who  had
made  many  disciples.  He  had
been  under  a  conviction  of  his
sins  for  some  time  before  he  beard
of  Jesus  and  his  salvation.  He  told
us,  that  he  had,  from  the  pressure
of  his  sins  upon  his  conscience,
been  accustomed*  to  go  out  into
the  fields,  and  call  upon  God  to
shew  him  the  way  of  salvation.
Upon  which  he  declared,  that,  at
a  certain  time,  he  saw,  in  a  vision,
a  form  much  like  a  European,
which  told  him  to  go  to  the  Euro-
peans, from  whom  be  would  learn
the  true  way  to  obtain  safety.
This  wrought  so  much  upon  his
mind,  that  he  told  his  disciples
what  he  had  seen  and  heard,  and
that  he  had  determined  to  act
accordingly.  Many  of  them  en-
deavoured to  dissuade  him  from
his  purpose^  but  he  invited  his  dis-
ciples to  a  farewell  feast  before
he  left  them.  A  few  attended  to
his  invitation  ;  and  these  were  very
urgent,  persuading  him  not  to  act
so  rashly.  The  r^ult  was,  that  he,
and  one  who  cleaved  to  him,  left
all,  and  came  to  Dinnpove  in  quest
of  salvation  to  be  gained  from  the
Europeans.  Here  they,  at  different
times  and  places,  met  with  the  na-
tive brethren,  who  proved  the  wsy^
marks  to  conduct  them  to  the  fiil-
filment  of  their  wishes."  Mr.  C.
afterwards  sat  down  with  ^3  per-
sons, 9  of  whom  were  natives,  at
the  Lord's  Supper.

After  this  the  Rev.  Mr.  Rowe
was  appointed  to  this  station,  and
native  schools  were  oveiv^^.  Ttel
misrfoaarles  piocxxte^^c^  ^Vaft^«i%^

u2  'iav


Die

from  the  uioy  of  m  Mrima  jmiog
man  of  tha  nune  of  Stewut,  wbo
imifted  Mr.  Kowa  Id  hli  ■ebtnl,
and  made  mncli  progiMi  In  the
HlndoortuiDB.  ''OfUte,"Mj«Mr.
R,  in  JSlfl,  "wabare  had  three  at
four  Inqulrcn,  vho  eiamined  the
Coipel  BMMage  with  canilderabls
•ttentlon  ;  but  then  ii  not  dm
among  them  of  vhom  we  can  tar,
'Behold,  he  piv«tbl'  Iwaalatd;
vUted  by  a  ilch  Miunilman  at
Fatna,  Into  whaie  baud  I  pat  an
Arabic  BlUe,  which  I  had  fin  nle
on  account  of  the  Bitk  Seeii^.
He  wai  mneb  plernd  with  the
printing,  lead  the  flnt  chapter  of
Geneil^  and  wai  to  delighted  that
he  jmrnediatelj  puTchaaed  it.''


making  progren.    Mn.  Rowe  tiad

cumpUed  a  Spelling-book  and
Gtaninmt  at  the  Hindooatanee
language,  which  were  publLdted
hj  the  Calcttag  Sehool  Boot  So-
ciety. Tbe  (trtlon  bad  witalned
a  loas  bj  the  death  of  Mr.  Slewait,
and  some  othei  drcumitancei  had
DccuTTud  to  eieiclie  the  faith  and
patience  of  the  minlonariei  j  but
lUll  they  met  occasionaliy  with
Incidents,  such  ai  the  foUowing,
adapted  to  cheei  them  with  the
hope  that  their  labour  would  not
be  In  vain  In  the  Lord.  "Some-
time ago,"  lay  the;,  "  a  man  al  the
name  of  Naiion  came  from  Ctaond-
pore,  a  vlllige  about  60  m.  N.  of
HI.  He  wa<  tlienreryuizloiutabe'
baptized,  and  appeared  to  be  equally
amtous  io  obtain  a  tolaiy,  and  to
be  empioyed  ai  an  Itinerant.  We
thoaght  b\t  latter  requeit  ratlier
premature,  and  could  nut  help
doubting  the  slnceil^  of  hii  pro-
fession on  account  of  it.  Wa
therefore  adilnd  lilni  to  return  to
hla  Tillage,  to  follow  tila  occupa-
tion— a  smith, — and  to  do  all  in  bla
power  for  the  good  of  hii  neigh-
boon ;  and  promiied  that  one  of
our  natire  brethren  should  Tiilt
itai  la  tbe  coone  of  a  few  moothi,


going  00,1^


DIN

tOKcbow  lie  wi  _
which  \re  would  comlda  tbejat
prletf  cf  hi)  baption.  A  ftar^
MO,  t^o  of  hii  relatires  MM
blthat.  They  say  Narion  wall
at  Ui  trnde,  and  reads  and  t»
plain*  the  Scriptures  to  aoora  tt
hli  relatloni  and  neighbours  dajh
Fioni  their  eccoimt  then  ,mu
of  hit  family  who  hue  tenWBBll
IdnUtiy,  and  are  of  ooe  mi^n
■pectiBg  the  Gospel.  He  li  p»
Hontad  by  many,  and  a«niA
by  than  of  hii  owD  gmIkTmS
it  deteanined  to  MnevBuTK
wIAm  to  bs  bathed  lK,^,Mi  ,
rilUga,  that  he  mn  n^  iLMW  ik
ptofiiNfaa  befon  thove  ^AwM  |k

In  ttLe  fDOowing  yeoi,  Hwyp*
berof  «ciiooi>  undai  tfae.dli^S
of  Mr.  and  Mn.  Bjovo,  i^ut
containing  in  aU  1T8  tK7S.nli
female  pupils.  After  cootiDdif
hli  labouiB  and  n^terialeadkl
tboia  of  natire  itineraiOi  wUt^
gRatsT  success,  Mr.  K.  waaj*
moredby  death  in  1833.  Bb.Ba-
ton  wBi  appointed,  lioce  thatfl-
riod,  to  tbls  station  ;  tlie  mM
having  be^u  Guperintended  la  b
Interim  by  Mii.  Rowe.  Bami
tnembersoflbe  native  cbar«h^fc
Ing  left  the  neigiibaDrbood,  tk
nomber,  according  to  the  la^  N-
counti,  i«  reduc^lo4.  Thisll'
cludai  tbe  i  Itinerauti,  wte.  at
conilanlly  engaged  among  tWi
countrymen  at  fain,  aad  ,04*
plecei  of  public  resort,  b^ikr»
golariy  preaching  at  aiit  ptaaa^ll-
eluding  tbe  city  of  Palam,.timi
SaMuth  day.  Mr.  Bnitaa^  wUk
acquirbtg  the  language  fi  ■■(
without  more  congenial  lipijjij
ment;  preacliing  at  Dlnapun  tnl
ir  of  Europeam,  chie^ail-
dien,  and  superinteniilng  tbe
■diools,  which  were  undeitlie  di-
rection of  Mrs,  Rowe,  who.  hM
lately  found  it  neceasary  to  nbot
•o  thla  country.
DltfAfi&POREl^cltrofBaipl,


BIN

^pifiil  of  %  diiMet  q£  the  lame
flM^i^  240  Biki  N.  Calcutta,  con-
'<yiiiBg40,00aiiilua>itanti.    At  the
of  1805,  anew  jElfl9iA'«#clMUch
foffned  bore.    SeToralofthe
ibexs  who  redded  ia  the  neigh-
-^qoiiioody  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Biss^
•Hme  diamiwfid  from  the  Seranpore
-'^jliiiieh'for  this  purpose,  who  choie
:^ie  Rev.  Mr.  Fernandez  for  their
jIMlar*    Schocds  ware  lubsequently
■irtahltihed ;  the  children  were  fond
•wi  reoding  the  tracts  put  into  their-
'%Bnda ;  and  the  general  aspect  of
^  mteion  was  very  encouraging.
.  In  18S1,  more  perscms  were  said
^-have  been  baptized  here  than  at
mmy  other  station  of  the  society.
The  number  in  the  church  was  li,
and  the  whole  number  of  those  who
And  renounced  caste  was  167.  Ido-
liuKiyy  indeed,  was  Tisibly  declining
OTong  the  natives  at  large  in  that
district ;  many  large  temples,  built
mj  former  Riyahs,  were  hastening
io  rain ;  and  the  pecuniary  allow-
«no«  allotted  for  their  support  by
the  native  government  was  reduced,
^nd   annually   decreasing.     This
itation  continues  to  enjoy  a  consi-
daraUe  share  of  the  divine  blessing*
Tlia  memben  of  the  church,  in  fiUl
conuniinion,   amount  to   85;   of
wlion  18  were  baptized  and  added
to  the  church  during  the  year  1 826,
via.  7  men  and  6  women.    The
chinch  is  nearly  equally  divided
into  two  portions:    one   residing
upon  premises  belonging  to  Mr.
FOTnandez,  and  close  to  his  own
liouse  at  Dinagepore,  the  civil  sta-
tion of  the  district ;  and  the  oiber
on  a  factory,  the  property  of  Mr.
P.,  at  Sadamahl,  about  24  m.  from
Dinagepore.    The  native  piyach-
en  rwide  at  Sadamahl,  and  besides
conducting  worship  regulariywith
tlie  Christian  congregation,  labour
in  proclaiming  the  Gospel  in  the
markoet  places  and  villages  in  the
Ticinity.    Through  these  labours,
several  of  the  late  accessions  have
bectt  madQ,    Mr.  Femandeg  visits


DIN

Sadamihi  as  frequently  as  possible, -
but  reiides  at  Dinagepore.  Here,
on  every  evening  during  the  weeic,
he  conducts  family  worship  in  Ben-
galee, at  which  from  20  to  40- of
the  Qiristian  people  generally  at--
tend.  After  singing,  he  reads  the
Scriptures,  gives  an  exposition  and
suitable  adidress,  and  concludes  with
prayer.  On  Friday  evenings  a
prayer  meeting  is  held  in  the  house
of  one  of  the  native  brethren  in
rotation ;  and  a  prayer  meeting  is
likewise  held  amon^  the  sisters
every  Wednesday  mornings  in  the
same  maimer,  in  their  own  bouses.
On  the  Sabbath  there  are  two  regu-
lar services— one  at  half-past  9
a.  m.,  and  the  other  at  4  p,  m.
The  morning  service,  being  attend-
ed only  by  Christians,  is  held  in
the  hall  of  Mr.  F.'s  house ;  but  that
in  the  afternoon  is  in  acommodious
bungalow  chapel,  and  is  attended
by  the  servants,  the  masters,  and
some  children  of  four  scliools  esta-.
blished  by  brother  F.,  and  a  few
people  from  the  town,  as  well  as
the  Christians.  There  is  also,,  as
at  all  the  other  stations,  a  prayer
meeting  on  the  evening  of  the  first
Monday  of  each  month,  for  the
spread  of  the  Gospel.

It  is  necessanr  to  observe,  that  all
the  expenses  of  this  station  are  de-
frayed by  Mr.  F.  him^lf,  except
that  some  gentlemen  contribute  to
the  support  of  his  schools.  He  has
expressed  an  earnest  desire  that  the
JB.  M.  S,  should  talce  Sadamahl  un-
der its  care,  and  supply  it  with  a
missionary  $  and  he  has  generously
offered  to  make  a  present  of  the
factory  there;  which  perhaps  might
be  made,  without  improperly  inter-
fering with  the  mi^ouary's  spiri-
tual labours,  to  furnish  all  the  ex-
penses of  the  station.  The  arrange-
ment is  not  without  difficulty,  but
its  accomplishment  is  hoped  for  be-
fore long.

In  Oct.  1826,  the  Rev.  Mr.
Mack  had  an  oi^ooTWDit^  ol  NSaiw\2A%


Dlnagep**'*  '"^  SBdaiBBhl  (at  ths
Istter  he  lud  the  plenun:  of  bsp-
ttslng  foai  foung  men),  and  vu
gnMj  deHghted  with  the  bumble
Bnd  aActionate  deportnient,  and
indeed  the  irhoto  app«ennce,  of
tbe  people.  Their  Terered  paitor
seemed  to  rule  thtiiii  all  by  Iotc.

DIKAPORE,  a  toKn  m  Baher,
Hlndoorian,  on  theS.  bank  of  Uie
Ganna,  11  m.  from  W.  Patna,  for
the  defence  of  wbtcb  an  extensiTe
mlUtaijr  cantonment  h«  been  con-
itnictsii  by  the  Britiita.    E.  long.

»y,  N.  let.  as*  as*.

In  1806,  the  lamented  Rer.
Henr;^  Matlyn  waa  itatlaned  bore
aicfa^itiitn,  mlvionary,  and  tranr-
lator,  and  labonred  vitb  nneoa^
querable  penererance  and  zeal  for
•ome  time.  He  wa*Tery  actlTcIn
tbe  Mtnbliihment  of  BCboDli;  and,
through  his  I nstru me ntnllty,  nlarge
house  for  wonhlp  wu  eiecled  at
(be  expense  of  i^aTeniment.

Tbe  mlsilonariei  at  Dl^b  hsTe
Mitered  Into  bis  labouir.

DINDEGAL,  orDINDIGUL,
a  fartilled  city  in  Mynre,  Hln-
dooetan,  tbe  capitid  of  a  dbttlctto
whicb  it  glresname.    E.loog.  TB*

a;  N.  lat.  lo'sy.

The  Soeielf  for  Pnmulitlg
CkritHan  Knovleagt  takes  ti)is
witfain  ill  ftelil  of  Itibonr.    Here  a

chapel  WHS  erected,  at  the  expense
of  H  Malabrian  and  Portugese
congregation,  about  the  year  1800,
wtilcb  has  been  occasionally  ilslted
by  missionarlei  and  catecbists.

DINGLE,  B  se«-port  and  bo-
TOUj!;h  of  Ireland,  In  Kerry  eoun^,
wbeie  the  /fetiej/aH  Socielf  has  a
miraionary.

D(X  COVE,  a  British  fort  on
the  Gold  coast,  W.  Africa,  40  m.
S.  W.  Cape-coast  Castle,  wtiere
'ne  African  Itufitntion  liM  re-
eentlyopened  a  Mhool,

DOMINICA,  one  of  the  Carib-
be  Inlands,  which  lies  about  half
w aj  between  Guadeloupe  and  Mar-
linieo,  andliSS  m.  long,  ftndia


bitMl.    ThB nil  fiibiti, Will
welt  mpUed  «lth  rlndM,  tt^
■IdDi  of  the  hllla  beartbe  batf^
IntbeVatlDdlei.   ItmUk
theBmUitnlTSI,«ndrt

ibMB  In  ites.  n*'n

tttalTTi,  botiH*«Wl„„-
and  Iq  ITN  thgf  ntde  «roi
ceisFiil  attempt— fat  all  thePir^
men  that  landed,  wereeithn
OTtakanpTbanen.  TbectpMW^F
CbarlottaTown.  '

'    Id  the  Enmtb  of  Dec
Rer.   Dr.  Coke,  accmnpanMlff'l
few -     .-J  ■


tion  from  sama  of  the
partlcularlr  from  his   ExceBU^
Gorenior  Orde.

Alter  ipendlib;  n  few  days  IheHi
Dr.  C.  deterailTied  on  leaving  Mh»
H'CoTnock  on  the  Istanil.  TW
mtnianaTy  tbus  nppoinl4^d.  imm^
diately  camiBeni^eil  his  lahoiinwiHf
irreet  ceal.  Mnltitiidpo  flocked  to
bear  him  t  and  bin  preachlnif  w
sttsnded  with  nirh  succesi,  IJiat  br
Uw  qwce  of  a  fov  mnnlhs,  nbotC
lAO  Indlridnait  spiiearto  haiebeM
deeply  Impreaaed.  But  whilst  tiM
work  was  thus  jiroaperous,  the  dc-,
•oted  mtotDnaiT  fell  a  martyi  U
tbe  cause  be  bad  espDused.

Tbon  who  bad  been  beneflt«<
by  bli  mlnistiy  were  nnw  Mt
without «  pastor,  and  sereral  yean
elapsed  before  another  missioDaty
could  be  aent  to  supply  his  place.
Many,  howoTCr,  io  whom  tin
word  of  God  bail  been  blessed,  K-
talned  their  stedfanness,  and  con-
tinued to  shine  4s  lights  amidst  the
gross  darknes  by  which  tttey
surrounded.

In  1T04,  Mr.  Cook  was  appoloU
ed  to  take  chni^  of  tbe


unremitting  anidu  Ity  tlH  M
another  m  Inionni;  waa-MT*
ceedbim.  Undertba  i
tallty  oftblspeiK    ,  _.   „.__

tloni  began  Id  incMaae   bott  li
wimbn  ia&  Tc^rMbiUlttf .  -


■ppBwed   Wielj  to  b«
ijofcd  by  tbe  Mclotr.   WM-

these  praapecti

:  1h«  hscknejed  nolltm,  tbat
to  tb«  ilBvei  would  iD-
wttl)  ideai  of  equslltf,


..  ..  s<}et«inilnediw^
-r^^  «?""  i  ■"xl  bafon  U)e  moDth  of
fj]^^*n.ITM,  bod  eqilred,  the  ml»-
>>[^,  ^NmiT  neelted  b  unwiMDslo  up-
Q^'  nvbitbt  fleld,  M  the  eruolnR
^yiilh,  tolean  tteoMof  ai —


1^  ^tO,  he  watted  lint  upoD  tbe  Colo-
4~  ^d  wlM  had  mnunoned  him,  sod
^  «JlwwaTdinpaatbePreiadent,«riUi
^  ^thom  the  mMnirfr  bail  wlgtiiateil;
*  «Ml  iMtltiMMd  that  he  might  be

*  ^tzmptedfiwBmUltfti^ierTlce,  In
V  «lnln  that  be  might  atteDd  tu  hli
r  MBliilrteTUl  duties.  Hij  peUtliA,
fe  liewerer,  wu  tnafed  with  con-
I  ^onpt;  and,  aflar  belog  told  tliat
n  %•  Tai  con^doed  u  a  vtrj  wqil-
I-  «diMa  eberaeter,  trho  dlnemloatcd
i:  ymnicloiM  Joctrlnei  among  the
r    alkvea,  be  w«  peieniptarUr  ordered

toqnttthaUand.
t  AA&r  the    I^m  of  about  tm>

I  yawra,  Ut.  Dumbletoa  proceeded
t  to  Doninlca,  whara  ha  found  the
t  ■oclrty  1b  a  very  low  «tate,  and  the
I  pi^JiuUon  o£  the  planten  bf  no
I      iBamu  remored,    In  cooaequence

•  of  »  TscominendBtor]'  letter  from
t  an  Englidi  nobleman,  howavar,
I  Ihe  Goversor  wadndnoed  to  pro-
t       iiilw  Um  hii  prolectioD ;  and  when

the  people  paitaived  that  they  could

I       — emhln  fen  rellf(ioDi  wonhlp  wlth-

<mt    moleitatlou,    their    aumbera

r       van  npidl*  aogmented,  uiii  be-

)       fon  the  and  of  the  year  ttae  eoa<

grefatloB  had  become  very  coual-

decabla.    Prejudice  bepn  nov  to

■ubalde)  and.  In  the  year  1800,  many

indlTlduali,  who  bad  formeiiy  pro*

toatad  agalnft  the  realdenc?  of  a


byMr.Booeocki  bntthtimlidoB.^
uywu  much  debilitated  by  tha*^
e^cts  of  an  unpleawnt  paoage,
and  preached  hut  twice  after  nla
orrivsl.  Hli  death  plunged  the
■oclety  and  congregation  into  a
■tateofdeep  diitr^j  ainopreachei
was  on  the  liland  to  lupplj  hit
place,  and  many  montlu  iiiii  iiMiiiilj
elapsed  before  any  nwiilance  could
be  procured  from  En^and.

Mr.  Shepley  anlrod  at  Dominica
In  February,  1B03,  and  had  tlw
latiifacllan  of  re-anlting  thoas
membera  of  the  nclety  who  bad
been  icatlered  whlkt  dwUtute  of  a
pe*tar.  He  bad,  ako^  InTitatlimi  to
visit  several  of  the  olatea}  anLoo
iome  of  tbeae  he  Eauad  that  the
negroes,  with  the  consent  of  their
maaten,  bad  erected  wooden  huti
for  Ibe  eelebratloa  of  divtne  wor-
■bip.  Mr.  Shepley  wu  aftecwanb
Joined  by  Mr.  Rlchordsia,  at  then
were  now  two  prlne^Ml  ettabliib>
ments  formed  in  the  Island  J  tbe-ow
in  the  town  of  JIbmok,  and  the  othw
at  iWs«*  BmtrPt  Baf,  about  M
m.  distant  The  nMnby  dtnatkm
of  Prince  Rnperf*  B^,  however,
pioradM  extremdy  uubsaltby,  that
■Hr.  Sh(|il^  WH  lepeotadly  leized
with  on  intermitting  (ever,  which
brought  Mm  atmoat  to  the  grase  (
and  Hr.  Richardson,  after  an  IllnaM
of  5  days,  was  colled  to  hla  etonal


_jward.

]d  December,  ISOA,  Mr.  Joha
Hawkshaw  arrived  in  Dominica  (
and  after  spending  a  few  days  •gi
Roseau,  be  went  to  St.  Rupert's
Bay,  Ibe  place  which  had  ab^ody
furnished  to  other  labourern  abun-
dant employment  and  ou  untimely
Aitbough  the  people  bad
veiely  tried  by  a  vloient
hurricane,  yet,  previously  to  hii  ar-
rival, Ihey  bad  contrived,  throu^
the    fottber     franerQsA,\^    ol  'i^'s


friends,  to  [rebuild  another  chapel,
edible  of  accommodating  a  con-
gregation of  about  1000  people;
and  at  the  time  he  visited  this  insa-
lubrious spot,  the  society  consisted
of  nearly  600.

After  preaching  at  this  place
about  a  month,  with  considerable
success  and  much  personal  satis-
faction, he  was  seized  with  the
kame  malignant  fever  which  had
already  proved  fatal  to  Messrs.
M'Cornock  and  Richardson,  and
from  which  Mr.  Shepley  and  Mr.
Dumbleton  (the  latter  of  whom  had
eome  time  since  returned  to  Domi-
nica) had  escaped  with  extreme
difficulty.  On  hearing  of  this  cir-
cumstance, Mr.  Dumbleton  has-
tened from  Roseau  to  visit  his
-afflicted  brother,  and  soon  witnessed
•his  departure  from  this  world.

From  this  time,  nothing  of  parti-
cular interest  occurs  in  the  history
<if  this  mission,  till  the  year  1813,
when  Mr.  John  Willis,  who  was
appointed  to  it,  narrowly  escaped
<Iestruction  from  the  effects  of  a
hurricane  which  destroyed  the  inis-
slonaiy  buildings.

In  1816,  Mr.  Boothby  com-
menced his  labours  at  Dominica;
where  he  found  things  in  a  very
discouraging  state,  there  being
neither  a  chapel  nor  a  residence  for
ft  minister.  Premises,  however,
were,  at  length,  obtained  in  Roseau,
for  these  purposed;  and  the  exer-
tions of  the  missionary  began  to  be
evidently  crowned  with  success,
when,  by  a  ihysterious  providence,
liis  work  was  cut  short,  and  he  was
summoned  to  enter  into  his  rest.

In  1822,  the  Earl  of  Huntingdon
arrived  at  Dominica,  to  assume  the
government  of  that  island;  and,
having  assured  the  missionaries  of
his  countenance  and  protection,  in
October,  1822,  he  laid  the  founda-
tion stone  of  a  new  chapel  in  the
town  of  Roseau ;  the  opening  service
of  which,  accompanied  by  several  i


DOM

penoiu  of  distinctloD,  hetftol^
attended.

In  1884,  Mr.  Felmi  qf0
have  been  zealooriy  OW
communicathig  religloai  tai
tion  to  the  negroes  In  a  dhb
the  island  called  8t,  Jaaepktli
in  alluding  to  the  Roman  Citt
who  are  there  very  nanMm
obsenres,  «  Their  lupoititla
such  as  many  persons  wonldsa
credit.  On  Good  Frid^f-tiM
a  great  stir  among  them.  In  A
Judas  and  the  DevU  oat «
€hurch;  and  for  this  pmpoi
the  old  barrels,  drums,  wA  i
they  could  procure,  were  li
into  use,  and  the  noise  and  t
were  intolerable.  Thed^fii
ing,  at  the  sound  of  a  beUyi
good  Catholics  ran  hato  thai
wash  away  their  shu.'*

<' Another  form  of  sapn
practised  among  them,  ii^  to  i
bottle  of  water,  cm  Good  FiU
the  priest;  and  uriien  he  hn^
crated  it,  thejtake  tt  hoaM
charm  against  eivU  sfkMti
thieves,  wad  as  a  pledge  o
fortune.'*

''  When  an  Afirlcan  teb^
a  priest,  and  admitted  ial
Romish  church,  should  ha  be
wards  robbed  of  his  pinopeil
stead  of  going  to  an  Obe&  a
get  him  to  perform  certain  m
tricks,  in  order  to  put  tiie  ti
excruciating  pain,*  until  he
restore  the  stolen  goods  ^  he
a  number  of  candies  to  burn
church,  and  is  told  that  as  1
thdsa  candles  continue  Im
the  depredator  will  l>e  in  ton

The  following  acconnt  e:
the  last  reported  state  tif  th
sion  !-—

RotMu,-^"  Owr  memben
have  long  been  re&Mirludi
steadiness ;  evincing  to  eli  11
cerity  of  their  (aiih,  bf  net
ency  of  character  beoomis
Chdstian  nwam*    Tiie  past


DOM

I  has-  been  one  of  general
ritjy.  The  work  of  God  has
lied  to  advance  in  the  same
aBhe  manner  which  has  al-
lUstioguished  our  society  in
ice."

rejudice  has  likewise  yielded
force  of  truth  in  the  minds
my  respectable  individuals
'Xy  belonging  to  the  church
ne."

if-  Joseph.-—"  Here  we  have
>  contend  with  serious  diffi-
u  Our  proceedings  have
"egarded  with  jealousy,  and
inds  wounded  by  a  spirit  of
tion ;  yet,  under  every  disad-
eous  circumstance,  our  So-
ttas prospered,  and  the  in-
i  of  religion  is  evidently  ex-
1^  among  the  slaves  in  Layon-
•  The  conduct  of  those  who
'  to  us  is  such  as  merits  the
t  approbation/'
hdut* — "  Here  we  have  no
'  s  but  pleasing  prospects  pre-
emselves.'^

tee.  Rupert's,  —  "  Here  we
iffered  considerably  from  the
of  a  chapel.  The  situa-
.the  people  calls  loudly  for
an  sympathy.  Visited  only
.  month  by  a  preacher — des-
of  a  chapel — poor  in  their
stances,  and  unable  to  build
they  can  only  wait  till  Chris-
benility  comes  forward  to
relief.  Here  we  have  up-
of  100  members,  with  the
3t  of  increasing  usefulness.''
7ye. — '' Here  the  same  want
us.  This  society  is  visited
I  two  months ;  and,  consider-
little  influence  we  have  over
continues  to  prosper.  Here
ve  the  largest  congregation
whole  island:  the  people
ith  attention,  and  the  gene-
imony  borne  in  their  favour
le  who  are  competent  judges,
us  they  have  not  received
ce  of  God  in  vain.    Number


DOO

in  society — Whites  12,  Free  colour-^
ed  177,  Slaves  274;  total  463."^

Schools,—"  The  state  of  the  Do-
minica Sunday-school  is  such  as
calls  for  our  gratitude.  In  number,
we  have  increased  something ;  in
regular  attendance  much.  We
have  also  been  favoured  with  a
number  of  teachers,  who  appear  to
take  great  interest  in  the  schools
Those  children  who  can  make  it
convenient  to  attend,  are  also
taught  three  mornings  in  the  week,
and  catechised  by  the  missionary.
The  blessed  effects  of  religious  in-
struction have  been  seen  here,  a^
well  as  in  other  places.  We  have
many  young  persons,  of  both  sexes,
who  were  brought  up  in  the  school,
who  are  now  steady  members  in  tfie
society,  and  adorn  their  profession
by  a  useful  life.  Others  are  teach-
ers in  the  school ;  and  several  of
the  larger  girls  are  met  in  class,
preparatory  to  their  being  admitted
into  the  society.  Number  in  the
school — boys  09,  girls  78,  teachers
16;  totaU63.»

Mr.  Dawes,  agent  of  the  C,  M,
S,,  opened  a  school  at  Roseau  in
1823,  and  procured,  the  organiza-
tion of  an  auxiliary  society,  which
is  cordially  patronized  by  the  roost
distinguished  and  respectable  per*
sons  on  the  island.

DONEGAL,  a  town  of  Ireland,
where  the  fF",  S,  has  a  missionaiy.
*DOORGAPORE,  a  town  in
Bengal,  Hindoostan,  4  miles  from
Calcutta,  in  the  midst  of  a  nume-
rous heathen  population.

In  1819,  a  station  was  formed
here  by  the  Bapt.  M,  S, ;  where  a
neat  place  of  worship  now  stands
by  the  side  of  the  public  road,  in  a
very  favourable  situation  for  coU
lecting  a  eongregation.  It  has  been
visited  by  several  labourers.  In
1826,  it  was  stated  that  a  number
of  poor  natives  of  the  lowest  class,
whose  conduct  had  always  been  so
riotous  and  disorderly  as  gireaUy  ta


DRE

annoy  the  miuionariesy  had  come
forward  of  their  own  accord,  to  re-
quest that  a  service  mip^t  be  held
once  a  week  for  their  accommo-
dation; and  eren  offered,  out  of
their  own  property,  to  defray  the
expense  of  lighting  the  chapel  on
the  evenings  when  they  assemble.

DRESDEN,  a  city  in  Germany,
on  the  Elbe.  Population,  in*1811,
46,000,  many  of  whom  are  Jews.
It  contains  11  Lutheran  churches,
S  Catholic,  and  1  Calvinist.

The  L, ./.  S,  stationed  Mr.  J.  P.
Goldberg,  a  converted  Jew,  in  this
city,  in  1822,  to  instruct  his  bre-
thren according  to  the  flesh.  He
has  opened  a  school  for  Jewish
children,  and  his  labours  have  been
much  blessed.  An  institution  has
been  formed,  under  the  patrona^
of  many  distinguished  men,  for
promoting  tnie  biblical  knowledge
among  the  Jews;  and  a  Ladies'
Association  also,  under  equally  dis-
tinguished patronage.  The  greater
part  of  the  J  ews  begin  to  inquire  into
the  trutli  of  Christianity ;  and  the
New  Testament,  and  other  works,
are  read  with  avidity  by  multitudes.

DUM-DUM,  a  military  station,
about  7  m.  N.  E.  of  Calcutta,  oc-
cupied by  the  E.  I.  Company's  ar-
tillerj'.

The  Serampore  missionaries
have  long  preached  the  Gospel  to
the  European  soldiers  here,  |s
circumstances  would  allow ;  and
have  empl(^ed  a  native  brother
to  preach  it  in  Hindoostanee  and
Bengalee  to  their  wives,  who,  in
general,  are  either  natives,  or  the
daughters  of  European  soldiers  and
native  mothers;  and  therefore
speak  the  native  languages.  From
these  labours  a  church  has  been
raised,  of  awrj*  pleasing  character.
Its  members  are  liable  to  be  scat-
tered over  all  parts  of  the  country ;
and  though  this  subjects  their  re-
ligious principles  to  rather  severe
trial,  yet  they  frequently  are  made


"  DU8      •

the  means  of  doing  good,  mid
spreading  the  knowledge  of  wim^
tion  where  it  was.unkiwwn  w-i^
attended  to  before.  The  nn^i
of  members  in  commiinian  al  m»
sent  cannot  be  le«  than  SO  $  VM
are  all  females,  with  the  nfiytiM
of  4  sokiiers,  and  tiie  nattve  pm^
er,  whose  ministry  has  been  gmlf
blessed;  and  there  ia  nowmjM
work  going  on  iimangrt  the  B»
peans.  During  the  year  1 8M^  riv
women  were  baplined,  and  idU
to  the  church:  there  wM,ali%iM
soldier ;  but  he  haa  faUen  avnt

Soobhroo  devotes  much  «  Ik
time  to  the  instruction  of  UiiDCI^
and  the  remainder  to  the  siiyJi
tendence  of  two  native  schoqi^^
the  preaching  of  the  Gospel  bottli
them  and  in  the  baiaars  ladii'
lages  around  the  station.

DUSSELTHAL,  an  asjrlip  k
Jews,  near  Dusseldorf,  attheiilB-
tion  of  the  Rhine  and  Dnsselnm
in  the  Prussian  dominions.  £.li4g>
60.4b',N.lat.5l».  14'.

In  1810,  Count  Von  Der  Recte
erected  an  institution  here  Ar  tti
reception  of  orphana  and  the  chfl*
dren  of  criminals;  and  in  ltt|»
enlarged  his  original  plan,  so  ii^ti
embrace  such  Jews  as  may  dsdn  •
knowledge  of  the  Christian  reUgiiik
and  wish  to  be  colonized.  Aeoari-
ing  to  theur  dispositions  and  tsl^lb)
instruction  is  given  in  agiknltaSr
the  mechanic  airts,  ormanuiactDei-
This  is  intended  as  a  prepantay
school  for  the  American  JeeM
colony ;  and  there  is  much  resms
to  hope  that  there  will  soon  be
gathered,  by  this  means,  a  peopto
of  the  Lord  from  among  the  dB-
scendants  of  Abraham.  In  AprOi
1823,  the  Count  states,  <<We  ne
already  pretty  numerous  here:
about  80  Christian  children,  amaqg
whom  the  grace  of  God  is  iMj
displayed,  live  happily  and  contAit-
ed  in  our  asylum.  With  the  Jevi
of  the  iostitntion,  waare  aometiiiiy


I

r
im


if

IB
»

le
I

*;

!■


e
h

V

h

a
a

^

i
I


DUS

Ifee  120  persoDs,  to  whom  the  hand  i
I  fte  Lord  gives  daily  bread."
uAy  In  1824,  9  young  Jews  were
mning  different  trades,  and  press-
1^  applications  were  made  by
»W8  from  different  parts  to  be
leeivejinto  the  institution  for  the
ike  of 'Christian  instruction,  far
Byoud  the  means  of  accommoda-


Tlie  Count  has  purchased,  for  the
Hn  of  20,000  rix-dollars,  an  estate
F  40  acres,  with  buildings  used  as

monastery,  the  whole  encom-
laed  by  a  wall ;  and  provided  for
w  permanency  of  the  institution
I  case  of  his  decease.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Treschow,  who  vi-
tad  it  in  1820,  was  gratified  by
■  improved  state.  He  says,  <'  The
nofksbops  are  in  full  activity,  and

was  delighted,  not  only  to  see
le  proselytes  cheerfully  employed,
nt  also  to  hear  from  their  lips  ex-
revions  of  gratitude  for  the  happy
iMnge  they  have  experienced,  from

wandering  life  to  regular  and
■efiil  industry ;  but  the  workshops
Bve  ftill  a  very  humble  appear-
neey  and  all  is  regulated  by  the
iwi  of  strict  necessity.  An  addi-
on  of  pecuniary  means  would  be
B  access  of  neatness,  and  many
nprofvements.  An  institution  here
zurtiy  in  which  24  adult  Israelites
re  brought  up,  by  the  aid  of  Chris-
Ian  charity,  in  habits  of  regularity,
leanliness,  and  industry ;  submit-
Ing  to  rules  and  privations,  from
rhichy  a  few  years  back,  they
roold  have  shrunk  with  horror;
nd,  under  rebukes,  suffer  them-
alves  to  be  instructed,  reprimand-
d,  and  corrected,  like  children,
istening  to  the  sound  of  the  Grospel,
ind  every  day  bowing  their  knees
^fufte  a  crucified  Redeemer.'*

'<  On  Whitsunday,  in  last  year,  a
DOft  interesting  occurrence  took
liaee ; —  8  converts  were  received
nto  llie  Christian  church,  by  bap-
iam.  in  a  very  solemn  manner."

}fix,  Tnscbow  says  in  a  «uhse-


DUS

quent  letter,-—"  I  rejoice  to  say  that
the  institution  still  goes  on  well ;  se-
veral of  the  8  proselytes,  who  were
baptized  on  Whitsunday,  came  ori-
ginally to  Dusselthal,  with  no  other
intention  than  that  of  worldng  for
a  short  time  as  journeymen,  and
were  far.  from  intending  to  be-
come Christians.  A  few  of  these
still  remain  in  the  institution,  others
of  them  have  left  it  to  exercise
their  trade  in  other  places,  and  all
of  them  have  continued  to  do  ho-
nour to  their  profession  by  their
Christian  conduct."

"A  young  Jew  had  been  admitted
into  the  institution,  where  he  fre-
quently annoyed  the  assembled  con-
gregation by  his  irreverent  beha-
viour; but  on  the  last  Sunday,
when  the  Rev.  Mr.  Schmidt,  in
his  sermon,  was  led  to  speak  of
persons  whose  glory  is  in  their
shame,  who  boast  even  of  the
crimes  they  have  committed,  in
cheating  or  defrauding  their  neigh-
bours, this  individual  was  visibly
affected,  turned  pale,  and  fell  into
fits.  He  was  parried  to  his  bed-
room. After  the  service  was  over,
he  was  visited  by  the  minister;  on
seeing  whom,  he  exclaimed,  'I
am  lost— lost  without  remedy!'
In  the  course  of  the  conversation
which  ensued,  he  confessed  his
having  cheated  a  widow  of  1000
dollars;  said  that  his  whole  life
had  been  a  series  of  crimes ;  add-
ing, that  even  here  he  had  con-
tinued in  his  wicked  course,  by
assuming  a  false  name,  after  hav-
ing robbed  a  sailor  of  bis  passport.
The  minister  did  not  palliate  ihb
guilt  of  the  penitent,  but,  as  he
appeared  to  be  of  a  contrite  heart,
set  forth  the  atoning  power  of  the
blood  and  the  death  of  theRedeemer,
and  encouraged  him  to  seek  par-
don through  the  Lamb  of  God,
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the
world.  This  at  length  melted  the
guilty  conscience  of  thfi  «\xv\!ax<»
and  he  felt  it  Yi\&  ^^^  \o  V5=^  V^


EIM

the  place  where  the  widow  re-
sides, to  make  an  open  confes-
sion of  his  crime,  and  to  suffer
for  it  what  the  law  requires.  He
was  setting  out  for  this  purpose,
when  I  left  Dusseltbal.  He  has
a  letter  from  the  superintendent
of  the  institution  to  the  widow,
and  also  to  the  authorities  of  the
place,  explaining  the  reason  of  his
coming ;  and  without  presuming  to
interfere  with  public  justice,  the
superintendent  has,  in  consequence
of  his  conscientious  motives  in  thus
giving  himself  ilp  to  the  rigour  of
the  law,  recommended  him  to  a
favourable  consideration.  If  the
widow  does  not  prosecute  him,  he
is  determined  to  pay  his  debt  by
working  for  her.  May  the  Lord
guide  and  streng^en  him  to  per-
severe!*'

This  account  may  be  properly
closed  by  a  letter  received  from
Count  von  der  Recke,  dated  Jan.  4,
182T.  "Your  kind  letter  of  the
17th  Nov.  last,  containing  the  in-
formation that  an  unknown  friend
has  presented  my  institution  with
£60,  arrived  just  at  a  time  when
an  urgent  payment  was  pressed
upon  me;  and  thus  I  have  expe-
rienced once  more  how  the  Lord
truly  and  mercifully  provides  for
those  who  serve  him,  putting  their
dependence  entirely  upon  him.

**  I  rejoice  in  having  to  give  you
nothing  but  favourable  accounts
respecting  my  proseljde  institution.
The  advantages  of  the  method  I
have  adopted  towards  them,  are
more  and  more  apparent  every
day."

I

£;iMEO,  one  of  the  islands  of
the  Pacific  Ocean,  more  com-
monly called  by  the  natives  Moreai
It  was  formerly  independent;  but
having  been  subjected  by  the  late
King,  it  affoMed  a  seasonable  re-
fuge to  his  sonv  when  expelled
^m  bis  proper  dominions.   It  As


\


EIM

said  to  be  10  m.  or  mora  Ik
length  fipom  N.  to  8.  t  wnd  1101*
half  as  much  tn  Imadth.  ilthl
a  very  narrow  bortler  of  lo«rlHi
along  its  coast,  ftOB-  vUih  %l
hills  rise  In  ateop  aocIMtii^M^
cept  on  the  N.y  wmi^  a  eopMlM
harbour,  called  Ttfa,  la  ahtlMi
from'  the  prevallitig  wtaid%  aiAl^
land  has  a  gradu^  ascent  tD<thil
interior.  This  hAibonr  k  ifr
ated  in  17<»  80*  S.  and  160^  Wi^
Matavai.  In  fbn*^  'Elmeo  n/im
greatly  from  Tahiti^ .  bwrlilg
clous  valleys,  and  -Miwtnl  ■
locked  harbours  oh  Its'  teOMt»  -  Hi
lower  hills  are  fertile  i  biit^-ttt
air  is  thought  leaa  taluMoislln
that  of  the  g^reater  fdaad.     ■    ■>

Several  minlonarlea  of  Iko.A  ft
having  been  driven  fiom  TtUU^
commenced  an  ertaWtahrtml  ^«i
this  Island,  at  Piqsefeoaf,  in  1814^^

Pomarre  showed  them  wtH
kindness  ;  and,  in  the  ainnHMriC
the  following  year,  lie.gladdBMd
their  hearts  by  dedaiing"  Ui  M^
tire  conviction  of  thetroth  of  Ifei
Gospel,  his  determination  teiMl^
ship  Jehovah  as  the  foiy  livtag
and  true  God,  and' his  deriM  to
make  a  public  pn^Bsrion  d  'Mi
faith  by  baptism  $  but  notiritt-
standing  many  phasing  afipinr'
ances,  tiiey  deemed  it  prndsttltB
defer  this  ordinance  mitil  he  HiiMtt
be  more  fully  instructed  In-  tts
truths  of  revelation.-  '•"       ■  ..■f>

During  the  yean  1818  and^'Ulf
an  abundant  blessing  was  poMid
out  on  this  station,  sO  ihit  -tts
missionaries  could  ref^oVt  tliat  M
less  than  60  of  ibe  natives  htd
renoiunced  their  idols,  and  dSkliM
td  be' considered  as  Hie  ^^onUf^
pen  of  the  Most  Higli.  -     •  ■  '

At'  the  comnencment  of  As
year  1815,  the  congwgaittsn  iMi
considerably  incretod  -by  ■  •»  Itf'
flux  of  strangers  from^other  irfmdi^
whose  earnMt  dedrtf  to  HcnHe*^
ligious  iristroctlota  pWUtileditlMii
liom  Uma  \o  .A&id«  t»  vki^'lhii


Ei&r

fHacB..  The  congregation,  in  ge«
utanlf  coiudstod  of  about  300>  and
the  number  .of  persons  who  had
tvqneated  their  names  to  be  writr
tarn.:  down  as  professed  worshippers
,  of  the  true  God,  was  increased  to
■pwards  of .  200 ;  the  pupils  in  the
flehooJsy  of  whom  the  major  part
ware  adolts,  were  about  260«  Of
tiioie  who  h{|d  desired  their  names
te  be  inscribed  as  worshippers  of
Jehovah,  4  individuals,  (1  man
•nd  3  women,)  died  very  happy
•bout  this  time.  The  priest  of
ftpetoai  (the  district  in  which  the
brethren  resided)  also  embraced
Christianity,  renounced  idolatry,
Bad  publicly  committed  his  god  to
tfie  flames.  His  example  was
apeedily  followed  I^  many  of  the
BBtives ;  and  not  only  were  the
Ibcaer  objects  of  superstitious  wor-
ship cast  into  tiie  fire,  but  the
tmmnJD  and  altars  were  destroyed ;
i|nd  eren  the  wood  of  which  they
were  composed  was  used  to  dress
eommon  food,  of  which  different
classes,  and  both  sexes,  partook  in-
<liseTiminately,  in  direct  violation
of  ancient  customs  and  prohibitions.
.  The  brethren  at  Eimeo  having
beard  that  the  attention  of  some  of
Ihe  people  In  Tahiti  had  been
drawn,  to  the  subject  of  religion,
tome  of  them  went  over  to  ascer-
iein.the  truth  of  this  report.  Upon
their  arrival,  they  found  that  a
lirayep-meeting  had  been  esta-
lilUiied  in  the  district  of  Pare,  with-
4Mit  the  knowledge  of  any  of  the
iDhisionaries.  It  originated  entirely
with  S  of  their  former  servants,
vamed  Oitu  and  Tuaheine,who  had
^ei^oyed  the  means  of  religious  in-
struction long  before,  but  remained,
according. to  their  own  language,
among  the  <'  greatest  and  mo^  har-
dened sinners  in  the  place.''  Oitu,
having  felt  strong  convictions  of
guilt,  in  consequence  of  some  ex-
prearions  which  had  fallen  from  the
Sing,  applied  to  Tuaheine  for  in-
struction^ knowing  that  he  had  long


£IM

lived  with  the  missionaries.  This
was  a  means  of  deepening  his  coii-
victions.  Both  these  men  now  agreed
to  separate  firom  their  heathen  com-
panions, to  converse  and  pray  toge*
ther.  Thisconduct  speedily  brought
upon  them  the  scoffit  and  derision
of  their  idolatrous  acquaintance ;
nevertheless,  several  of  the  young
people  joined  them.  These  formed
the  prayer-meeting  above-menUon*
ed;  and  they  had  frequently  as-
sembled, amidst  much  contempt^
prior  to  the  visit  of  the  missionaries.
Two  of  the  brethren,  after  having
made  a  tour  of  the  larger  peninsula
of  Tahiti,  for  the  purpose  of
preaching  to  the  people,  returned  to
Eimeo,  and  brought  over  with  them
Oitu  and  Tuaheine,  and  their  com-
panions, that  they  might  be  more
thoroughly  instructed  in  the  know-
ledge of  Christianity.

In  this  island  the  Gospel  had  now
been  embraced  by  about  1200  per-
sons ;  and  in  every  district  a  place
had  been  built  for  Christian  wor-
ship, in  which  the  people  held
prayer-meetings  three  times  every
Sabbath  day,  and  once  every  Wed-
nesday. Almost  every  house  had
family  worship  daily,  and  most  of
the  people  retired  for  private  devo-
tion twice  and  sometimes  three
times  a  day.

On  the  13th  of  >fay,  1818^
general  meeting  was  convened  in
imitation  of  the  meetings  held  in
London,  when  about  2000  of  the
natives  assembled,  and  agreed  to
form  an  Tahitian  A,  M,  S,,  to  aki
the  parent  society  in  England  in
sending  the  Gospel  to  other  nations.
Mr.  Nott  preached  on  the  occasion
to  this  large  auditory,  who  were
very  attentive ;  after  which  the  King
delivered  a  sensible  and  Interest-
ing address  of  considerable  length,
on  the  propriety  of  forming  the
proposed  society.  With  a  view  to  ex-
cite the  people  to  emulation  in  this
good  work,  he  adverted  to  the  for-
mation o{  simVias  «oc\&\\«&  ^tosm'ti,


the  Hottentots  in  Africa,  and  to
their  contributions  of  sheep  or  other
property,  in  places  where  they  had
no  money.  He  also  reminded  them
of  the  labour  which  they  had  per-
formed, and  the  pains  they  had
taken  for  their  false  gods,  and
diowed  how  trifling  the  oflferings
they  were  called  upon  to  malce  to
the  true  God  were,  in  comparison
with  those  they  formerly  offiered  to
their  idols ;  ol»er?ing  further,  that
even  their  lives  were  sacrificed  to
the  God,  that  was  indeed  no  God,
being  nothing  but  a  piece  of  wood
or  cocoa-nut  huslc !  He  then  re-
commended that  they  should  collect
a  little  property  for  the  spread  of
the  Gospel  in  other  islandEs,  where
it  was  not  yet  enjoyed.  He  ob-
served, that  although  they  had  no
money,  they  might  give  pigs,  arrow
root,  cocoa-nut  oil,  and  cotton,  to
6tfy  money  with,  '*  Yet,"  said  he,
**  let  it  not  be  by  compulsion,  but
voluntary.  He  that  desires  the  Word
of  God  to  grow  where  it  has  been
planted,  and  to  be  taken  to  countries
miserable  as  ours  was  before  it
came  here,  will  contribute  freely  and
liberally  towards  promoting-  its  ex-
tension. He  who  is  insensible  to
its  call,  or  ignorant  of  its  benefits,
will  not  exert  himself  with  this
view.  So  let  it  be.  Let  him  not
be  called  an  illiberal  man,  neither
let  the  chiefs,  his  superiors,  be  angry
with  him  on  that  account."  Such
was  the  substence  of  the  King's
speech.  When  ■  he  drew  to  tiie
close  of  it,  he  proposed  that  all  per-
sons present,  who  approved  of  the
plan,  and  were  willing  to  unite  in
promoting  it,  should  hold  up  their
right  hands.  A  most  interesting
sight  ensued,  when  in  an  instant
every  hand  in  the  assembly  was
raised,  to  signify  their  readiness  to
unite  in  the  glorious  work  of  spread-
ing the  Gospel  of  Jesus  Christ
among  the  unenlightened  heathen.
Pomarre  then  read  the  rules  of  the
proposed  society ;  persons  were  ap-
/W//2  ted  AS  treasurers  and  8ecxetai\es\  c\oUk\xv^,^


\


in  the  smral  distziGti  of  fl»  bW}
and   the    people   dkp&tmd ,  qpi^  ^
rently  highly  giatifled.

In  182S,  a  new  chape!,  of  cofi.
rock,  was  coBuneiMiett  at  tte  4l^
tioninthis  Island,  now  aSM  tk.
by's  PUwe,BltttTown.  JLdm
manufactory  waaalao  eieeW-  vk
particulars  of  the  f  nntiUmHoMiii
ing  the  year  were — ^10,804  baaHip
of  oU— being  15T8  mote  Huk  fi
preceding  year— 109  bolb.of  •!■#
root,  106  basketa  of  oottonv«|^'
and  1 7  pig8»  The  DepntattOQ  Mil
their  official  visit  to  Ifala  Uh^  h
18S4,  and  on  this  occaikB.to
wrote: —  '  ".'

<<  The  church  that  was  otgaaW
here  in  1820  has  greatly  tncwMf^
and  now.  numbers  among  iti  Mk
municants  no  fewer  than  %ltL  iM
(4>pear  to  be  truly  pions  aad.cqi^
sistent   professors  of  the  Go^
living  in  great  peace  and  haiHai|
with  each  other,  while  their -4^
and  deportment  adorn  the  doeb^
of  God  their  Saviour.    Often  hm
we  surrounded  the  table  of  the  Lori
with  this  worthy  flock,  with
pressible  delight,  while
assisted  in  the  administratiott  of  te
Holy  Supper.    Diffisrence
and  of  colour  firomourselTesi
but  to  endear  these  onr  ChxMip
brethren  and  sisters  the  more  to  ov
hearts. .  So  long  as  life  lasii^.  in
shall  remember  these  sacred  .pB^
sons,  both  with  this  and  all  tiwote
churches  in  thesft  islands,  wifli  ftt
noblest  feelings  of  Christian  afl»»
tion ;  while  sorrow  fills  onr  h^ai^
that  we  shall  break  bread  and  drisk
wine  with  them  no  more,ti]lweiliiir
drink  it  new  in  our  FatfaKenr^skimidqB*
While  we  have  reason  to  tfainjc  wdl
of  the  piety  of  the  men^bers  of  the
church,  a  general  air  of  nrrinnmoM
was  ever  apparent  in  the  "vribole  eon*
gregation,  who  crowd  the  plae^Qa
Lord's  days,  and  on  other  ooeastoni}
and  the  greatest  decency  of  dieie  v
seen  throughout  ainong  hofli  aexA%


»


In  the  following  year,  the  build-
BJB  and  various  apparatus  of  the
m/fu  factory  were  completed.
)ii  the  Ist  of  March,  Mr.  Armi-
Bg6,'  its  superintendent^  received
he  first  supply  of  native  cotton,
aUe(ited  by  members  of  the  Taht-
tan  A,  S.  On  the  5th  of  July,
IftB  operation  of  carding  was  t^om-
iiehced ;  on  the  26th  of  Sept.  that
if  wnrping  the  first  web ;  and  on
his  30th,  the  process  of  weaving.
|li9  natives^  who  were  incredulous
9  to  the  possibility  of  producing
lath  from  cotton,  were  highly  gra-
Ified  by  receiving  ocular  demon-
tration  of  the  fact.  Since  that
leiiod,  the  adult  and  children's
choois  have  considerably  increased
li  to  number,  and  improved  as  to
llllgent  application*  All  the  learn-
)n,  are  divided  into  classes,  and
aiu[ed  under  proper  teachers.
Bkiwuthe  schools  are  now  under
tfr.  Heniy's  superintendence ;  Mr.
Innitage's  engagements,  in  con-
lezion  with  the  cotton  factoiy,
iiiiTing  rendered  it  necessary  that
ie  i^ould  relinquish  the  boys'  school.
M[t9.  Henry  has  taken  the  girls'
tc^oolat  BuTtnelPsPlace,  under  her
jaamediate  charge.

The  number  baptized  at  this  sta-
tion is  10  adults  and  38  children.
Members  added  to  the  church,  31.
Hie  whole  number  in  communion.
In  May,  1825,  was  270:  in  1825-0,
fbre  of  the  members  removed  by
leath;  two  of  them  were  veiy
bappy,  and  the  others  with  a  good
liope.  During  the  same  period,  3
[jf  tile  members  were  excluded  ;  of
whom  1,  on  repentance,  has  been
restor^.  A  Raiatean,  who,  about
two  years  ago,  had  acquired  undue
influence  over  the  minds  of  some  of
the  judges  in  Eimeo,  and  had  begun
to  use  it  to  the  prejudice  of  the  mis-
sionaries, has  become,  Mr.  Henry
hopes,  a  sincere  convert.  He  came
voluntarily  to  the  missionary,  and
acknowledged  his  criminal  conduct,
professed  repentance,    has    been


EIM

since  baptized,  and,  as  far  as  ssj^
peacs,  behaves  consistently.  A  Bs-
nevolent  Society,  superintended  by
Mrs.  Henry,  has  been  institnted
among  the  native  females,  with
whom  she  keeps  up  her  conversation*)
meethigsas  formerly^ — A  good  mis-
sion-house, 60  feet  by  31,  has  been
built  by  the  natives  for  Mr*  Henry,
who  receives,  from  time  to  time,
many  proofs  of  their  attachment  and
affection.  The  people  here,  urged
by  the  privations  and  sufferings  they
have  endured  from  the  scarcity  of
the  preceding  season,  have  fenced  a
considerable  extent  of  ground,  and
brought  it  into  cultivation. — The
cotton  factory  is  still  under  the  di-
rection of  Mr.  Armitage.  It  has
met  with  many  difficulties,  arising
from  local  circumstances;  bu^
under  more  favourable  auspices,
no  doubt  as  to  its.  success  is  enter-
tained. A  quantity  of  shrong
calico,  preferred  by  tiie  natives  to
that  brought  by  vessels  touching  at
the  islands,  has  been  manufactuSred.

There  is  anotiier  station  of  the
L.  M,  S,  on  this  islaivi,  at  Bogue's
Harbour,  called  Gr^n  Town,
where  the  Rev.  Mr.  Orsmond  la-
bours.

In  1825-6,  the  buildings  of  the
South  Sea  Academy  were  com-
pleted :  17  pupils  were  received ;
all,  with  the  exception  of  the  young
king  Pomarre,  then  about  7  years  of
age,  children  of  the  missionaries,
for  whose  benefit  the  institution
was  founded.  The  natives  also
erected  a  chapel,  which  was  opened
on  the  8th  of  May,  1825,  Two
native  schools,  one  for  adults  and
another  for  children,  were  likewise
formed,  and  placed  under  the  care
of  native  teachers. — In  1826,  the
number  of  youths  in  the  academy,
including  the  young  king  Pomaire
(who  departed  this  life  on  the  11th
of  January,  1827,  after  a  few  days'
illness),  was  27.  The  result  of  an
examlnatioiv  was  wl\.\b.I«£.\ot^  .

Mr.  aQdMY&.BYo«&Q>m>  ^wSJOa.^^

X  2  /a:^


KLI

full  concurrence  of  the  mlflBionorieSy
removed  from  Blest  Town  to
Bogue's  Harbour,  to  take  the
general  superintendence  of  the  ex-
ternal aflhirs  of  the  academy;  by
this  arrangement  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Orsmond  have  been  enabled  to  de-
vote much  more  of  their  time  and
attention  to  the  work  of  tuition.
Notwithstanding  some  instances  of
exclusion  during  the  past  year,  the
fchurch  under  Mr.  Qnmond's  care
is  in  a  flourishing  state.  He
preaches  3  or  4  times  during  the
week,  and  tiie  congregation  at-
tends with  commendable  regularity.

Mr.  O.  continues,  as  far  as  his
duties  in  connexion  with  the  aca-
demy will  allow,  to  engage,  beside
his  public  ministry  at  the  station,
in  general  missionary  senrices.  He
has  prepared  a  Catechism  and  a
small  book  of  Exercises,  in  Tahi-
tian  ;  also  a  dictionary  of  that  lan-
^lage,  which  is  nearly  finished.
He  has  also  translated  several  por-
tions of  the  Bible  into  Tahitian.
The  people  of  the  station  are  laud-
ably engaged  in  building  dwelling-
houses,  and  making  gardens  for
themselves ;  in  which  labours  they
would  have  made  greater  progress,
had  they  not  latterly  employed  a
portion  of  their  time  in  the  erec-
tion of  the  chapel  at  Blest  Town,
of  which  they  have  performed  a
moiety  of  the  stone  work.
■  The  marriages,  at  the  two  mis-
sionary stations  in  Eimeo,  during
1825-6,  were  10.

ELTM,  first  called  VogehiringS'
kraal,  a  settlement  of  the  United
Brethren  on  New  Year's  River,
near  Cape  Aiguallas,  10  or  12
hours'  ride  S.  £.  from  Gnadenthal,
8|  E,  from  Hemel  en  Aarde,
which  last  is  T  hours  S.W.  from
Gnadenthal ;  the  3  settlements
thus  forming  the  points  of  a  tri-
angle, each  boing  a  day's  journey,
on  horseback,  from  the  other.  The
first  adult  heathen  was  baptized
here  on  Oct  9,  1825.    About  400


£LL


new  year^  lestiTaL  ~  In  Um
ning  of  Feb.  ISM,  the
had  70  inhaUtantiy  and  ti»
dens  were  in  a  flouridiiiig
the  third  crop  of  beauy
montbf,  was  in  fimraidiw  ob-^
same  piece  of  gramid.
Luttringliad  greatly  Inprorad'
mill,  which  wai  Teaorted  io
all  qharters.    He  atoo  uttBBJitf
a  daily  school  for  the  chiUiaiig&
the  settlomenty  and  to  a  ^ll^1^irf|^j.
school  for  those  of  aUve^  BMi
tentoti,  and  farmers.    Of  the  ^M:
of  this  mission  he  gftves  the  follow^'
ing  account  :—''Onr  neigMw
are  friendly  and  well  dispMd  t^
wards  us;  externally  We  Imm^
cause  for  complaint.    Am  ^  W'.
spiritual  course  of  our  small  ctm'  ■
gregation,  #e  may  with  trnft  Mr
sert,  that  the  blessing  of  God  M^
Saviour  attends  our  laboitn  $  flMM|^.
it  cannot  be  denied,   that  Sate
also  endeavours  to  set  his  anoras  ftl>
the  way,  when  souls  ate  tfwakoMl
by  the  Gospel,  fearing  toktoe-M
prey."  ^ :

ELLIOTT,  a  station  of  thr
American  Board  of  Cmmminumrt
/or  Foreign  Mt^siont,  among  ttr
Choctaws,  within  the  chartend
limits  of  Mississippi,  aboot  100  Mr
from  the  northern  line,  and  nmt
the  middle  of  the  state  from  E.  t0
W.  It  is  near  the  Talo  Bodlt-
Creek,  about  40  m.  above  its  jane*
tion  with  the  Yazoo ;  400  m.  W«
S.  W.  Brainerd,  and  145  N.  &
Walnut  Hills.  W.  long.  80^  6€t,  N.
lat.  33<>30'.  By  means  of  the  Yalb
Busha,  Yazoo,  and  Mississippi,  tt
has  a  communication  '  writh  Now
Orleans.

The  Rev.  Cyrus  Kingdnuy  and
Mr.  L.  S.  Williams  commenoed
this  station  in  an  entire  wilderaesi,
in  1818  :  they  were  soon  joined  ky
others.  In  April,  1810,  a  sdidol-
was  opened,  which  consisted  of
aboxit  QO  ^^^tis  at  the  end  of  tUs


\'


feMM

\  the  number  was  $0;  but
diminished  in  1823.  The
s  conducted  on  the  Lancas-
plan,  and  the  pupils  have
ty  made  very  satisfactory
I.  The  annual  allowance
I  this  school  by  the  govern-
f  the  United  States,  may
I  1000  dollars;  beside  2000
'or  the  erection  of  buildings.
:22,  the  property,  consisting
cres  of  improved  land,  well
,  and  having  convenient
;s,  amounted  to  15,490  dol-
A  church  was  organized,
28th,  1819.
Byington  has  devoted  much

reducing  to  four  the  ele-
>f  the  Choctaw  language,
ition  was  named  Elliott,  in
of  the  Rev.  John  Elliott,
the  first  settlement  of  New
d,  laboured  much  for  the
n  of  the  natives,  and  trans-
le  Bible  into  one  of  their
:es.

lAUS,  sometimes  called
^rairies,  about  140  m.  S.
•  from  Mayhew,near  the  line
separates  Mississippi  from
a,  and  about  2  m.  from  the
[^ements  at  the  S.,  on  the

of  Buckatunnee  Creek,
the  Choctaws,  in  the  most
s  clan  in  the  S.  E.  district,
rs.  M.  Jewell,  schoolmas-
Dyer,  farmer,  and  A.  Olea-
chanic,  from  the  American
f  Commissioners  for  Foreign
8,  were  stationed  here  in
Lfter  erecting  suitable  build-
the  establishment,  a  school
?ned,  July,  1823,  with  fa-
3  prospects.  >

LISH  BAZAR,  a  town  in
,  nearMalda,  about  ITOm.
laicutta.

1 1815,  Kristnoo,  a  native
of  the  Jiapt.  Mission,  re-
Tom  Goamnlty  to  this  place,
oured  with  some  success  in
i  the  neighhouring  towns
'ges.


ENO

ENNIS,  a  borough  of  Ireiaddi
capital  of  Clare  county,  in  which
the  ff^,  S,  has  a  missionary.

ENON,  a  station  of  thd  United
Brethren,  upwards  of  600  m.  £.  of
Cape  Town,  in  the  district  of
Uitenhagen,  Cape  Colony,  S.
Africa,  near  Algoa  Bay.  The
brethren  commenced  their  efforts,
in  1818,  for  the  benefit  of  the  Hot-
tentots, with  the  best  prospects  of
success;  the  government  having
assisted  them  in  prociving  land  for
a  settlement;  but  early  in  1819,
the  predatory  Caffires  came  upon  it,
and  drove  off  235  head  of  cattle.
Not  content  with  this,  they  bar-
baroushr  murdered  9  of  the  Chris-
tian Hottentots,  and  the  station
was  broken  up.  Most  of  the  stock
was,  however,  retaken,  and  mis-
sionary labour  was  resumed.  Of
the  rapid  and  interesting  improve-
ments subsequently  made,  an  accu-
rate idea  may  be  formed  from  the
following  remarks  of  the  Rev.  H.
P.  Hallbeck,  contained  in  a  letter
dated  Nov.  30,  1821  :—

'<  What  I  felt  at  the  first  si^i  of
this  village  of  the  Lord,  no  Ian-
guage  is  able  to  describe :  I  had,
indeed,  been  informed  of  the
changes  that  had  ti^ken  place  here
since  I  first  witnessed  its  begfin-
nings ;  but  even  the  lively  descrip-
tions given  in  brother  Schmidt's
letters,  presented  things  much  more
faintly  Ilian^I  now  saw  them  with
my  own  eyes.  The  wilderness  and
the  impenetrable  thicket  of  1819
were  still  present  to  my  imaffina*
tion.  Judge,  therefore,  of  my"
surprise,  when  I  saw  that  wilder-
ness transformed  into  fruitful  gar-
dens ;  that  thicket  extirpated,  and
a  fine  vineyard  planted  in  its  place ;
the  lurking  places  of  tigers  de-
stroyed, and  in  their  stead  the  com-
fortable habitations  of  men  erected.
Imagine  my  heartfelt  pleasure,
when  on  the  spot  where  two  years
ago  we  knelt  down  Vxv  \3cie  itvidd
imck  of  an  elepYionY,  nnd.  oCL^t^^


£N0

up  our  first  pmyerj  I  now  found  a
beautiful  orauge  tree^  adorned  at
once  with  ripe  fruit  and  fragrant
blossoms;  and  when,  shortly  after
my  arrival,  I  was  InTited  to  tea
under  the  huge  yellow  tree,  in  the
shade  of  which,  but  lately,  there
were  no  assemblies  but  those  of
wild  buffaloes,  elephanU,  and  other
dreaded  inhabitants  of  the  desert.
You  used  to  say,  that  every  tree
and  shrub  planted  at  Gnadenthal
was  an  ornament,  not  only  to  the
place,  but  to  the  Gospel ;  and  you
may  say,  with  equal  truth,  that
every  tree  and  thorn -bush  which  is
extirpated  here,  to  make  room  for
more  useful  plants,  is  not  so  much
a  proof  of  the  strength  of  the  hu-
man arm,  as  of  the  efficacy  of  God's
lioJy  word ;  for  by  its  influence  the
work  was  accomplished.  It  is  cer-
tainly more  than  I  had  expected,  to
find  here  a  piece  of  ground  nearly
3  times  as  large  as  the  great  garden
atGnadenthal,  cleared,  levelled,  and
laid  out  as  a  garden  and  vineyard
for  the  missionaries,  besides  about
40  gardens  of  the  Hottentots ;  and
all  this  done  amidst  a  yarietj^  of
other  needful  work,  and  even  in
the  most  distressing  times.''

Other  proofs  of  ihe  power  of  re-
ligion were  soon  visible.  Although
for  two  years  the  people,  generaUy
speaking,  did  not  taste  a  morsel  of
bread — for  it  was  not  to  be  procured
in  any  way — they  did  not  lose  their
confidence  in  their  heavenly  Father,
but  said,  ''  He  who  did  not  aban-
don us  in  our  most  dreadful  distress
during  the  Caffre  war,  will  not
forsake  us  now."  Their  circum-
stanees  continued  to  be  very  dis-
tressing in  the  latter  end  of  1823,
in  consequence  of  a  great  flood,  as
appears  from  a  letter  written  by
Mrs.  Schmidt,  Nov*  2,  in  whichshe
says: —

"Our  own  buildings  have  suf-
fered no  material  injury,  nor  our
garden  and  vineyard ;  but  the  lower
i^art  of  the  Hottentots'  gardeii2>\


£NO

which  lie  In  aline  wtfli  on'i
land,  is  entirely  swept  awoj.
poor  people  bad  been  veiy  ~
in  planting,  and  it  was
see  eveiy  thing  was
now  all  is  carrfed  away,
of  stpnes  covers  the  ground! .
as  these  misfortunes  aflUct  0% !
ever,  we  have  great  reaaon  to  f
God  that  we  have  boUt  jiHt  m.'\
spot;  for  there  is  not  so  safea]  ~
along  the  whole  river.  In
floods.    Had  we  built  on  4b']
place,  we  must. have  fled  to'
hills  ;  for  nearly  all,  ftom  one  .
to  the  other,  was  under  wkIk.^^:

Needed  relief  was,  howef«|  ^
mately  afforded,  and  tiie
truth  and  righteousness
During  the  year  1824,  tfaare
baptiz^  16  adults  and  18  (
9  persons  were  received  IntD.
congregation,  and  12  were'
mitted  to  the  Holy  Commnqj
At  the  close  of  the  year,  ti^  isii^
hers  were  as  follows : — ^28 1iapw|
adults,  of  whom  72  are  conmiaP
cants ;  82  baptized  childrra :  in^
210  persons.  Besides  these,  ""^ '~
were  20  candidates  for
and  89  new  people  and
Total  of  mhabitants,  328

In  Sept.  182^,  brother' Scbmfitt
says : —

''  Enon  has  been  so  much  en-
larged, and  in  every  reqpect  ip^
proved,  within  these  ^  few  yen
that  I  am  often  excited  to  joy  anl
thankfulness  towards  our  gradooi
God  and  Saviour,  by  whose  pn^
tection,  grace,  and  blessing,  ftib
work  has  been  founded  and  main-
tained. He  has,  indeed,  fulilUed
the  promise.    Jer.  xxxiii.  12.^'

"  As  to  thehr  external  si^parl^
the  Hottentots  find  Enon,  hytb»
blessing  of  God,  a  veiy  el^lfUe
place  to  dwell  in.  Those  that  wfll
work  may  earn  their  livdihood.
Many  who  came  hither  without  a
farthing,  and  clothed  in  nothfa^bnf
a  kaross,  have,  by  their  indnstiyi


EUS

though  they  were  obliged,
their  own  hands,  to  clear
the  thicket  before  they  could
or  plant:  they  are  likewise
tly  clothed.  All  this  they
at  a  time  when  no  bread
be  purchased  for  them,
the  increase,  by  the  arrival
*  joew  comers,  who  obtained  leave
here,  was  very  considerable,
j|bd  most  of  them  were  very  poor,
•one  have  suffered  from  hunger.
tjereral  of  our  inhabitants  last  year
hupeA  good  crops  from  their  gar-
4hm(.  God  has  given  to  our  own
gMrden-grounds  his  blessing,  and
vpe  have  reaped  an  abundant  crop  of
Ipdian  corn,  beans,  and  pumpkins,
ftipininrh  that  we  could  supply
mpy  that  had  need.  Of  the  latter
froi^  we  had  about  4000,  and  by
f|ie  kind  gifts  of  our  friends,  our
foon*  box  was  able  to  lend  much
Hristance. ''

EUSTATIA,  ST.  one  of  the
toaft  of  the  Caribbee  islands,  10
m.  N;W.  of  St.  Christopher.  It
li  a  mountain  in  the  form  of  a
Hi^^loaf,  whose  top  is  hollow  j  yet,
for  its  size,  it  is  the  most  valuable
oi  all  the  Caribbee  islands.  It  was
teke9  by  the  British  in  1 78 1 ,  but  was
afterwards  taken  by  the  French,
and  restored  to  the  Dutch  in  1783.
It  was  again  taken  by  the  British
In  1810,  and  restored  to  the  Dutch
in  18 14.  It  lias  a  town  of  the  same
name,  with  a  good  fort.  W.  long.
03*6',   N.  lat.  17«  31'.

The  number  in  the  ff.  S,,  re-
pixrted  in  1821,  was  323,  under  the
care  of  one  missionary.  Several
instances  occurred  about  this  time
of  the  power  of  religion  in  re-
daijning  some  of  the  most  aban-
doned negroes,  whose  reformation,
from  the  notoriety  of  their  cha-
racters, made  a  great  impression
in  favour  of  the  value  of  Chris-
tian instruction.  One  instance
was  that  of  a  negro  who  cut  off
his  hand  to  be  revenged  upon  his
master^  by  disabjin^r  himseli,    An-


Etrs

other  case  is  thus  stated : — *'  I  have
on  thu;  island  four  places^"  sayb
the  Rev.  Mr.  French,  ''  in  each  of
which  I  preach  once  in  tile  coarse
of  the  week.  The  last  of  these
was  opened  under  the  following
peculiar  circumstances  :  — a  slave
belonging  to  a  person  on  this
island,  had  ran  away  fh>m  his
master,  and  become  a  most  no-
torious robber  ;  and  having  got
others  to  join  him,  he  was  iq)
pointed  their  captain.  He  resided
with  them  in  the  mountains  14
months ;  but  having  been  surprised
while  on  one  of  his  predatory  ex '
cursions,  he  was  taken  and  put
in  confinement.  His  master  ex-
postulated with  him  on  his  con-
duct; but  the  slave  replied,  that
no  one  had  cared  for  his  reUgioos
concerns,  and  therefore  he  had
been  ignorant  and  wicked.

The  master  applied  to  me,  and
I  told  him  that  if  he  would  suffer
me  to  preach  to  his  negroes,  it
would  save  him  a  great  deal  of
trouble.  I  went  to  the  robber^
conversed  with  him,  and  left  him
apparently  sorry  for  his  past  wick-
edness, and  purposing  to  act  very
differently  in  future.  The  master
offered  me  a  larg^  warehouse  for
worship,  and  has  since  fitted  it
up  for  that  purpose.  I  preach  in
it  to  all  his  negroes,  who,  with
his  own  family,  and  many  others,
attend  from  the  neighbourhood.
The  late  robber  himself,  I  am
happy  to  state,  manifests  a  real
change  of  life  and  heart,  to  the
truth  of  which  his  master  bears
a  pleasing  testimony.  He  has
been  received  as  a  scholar  into
our  Sunday-school,  and  has  since
requested  to  be  admitted  on  trial
as  a  member  of  society.

Our  excellent  governor  lately
visited,  with  his  secretary  and  a
member  of  the  council,  the  Sun-
day-school ;  and  expressed  hfa
high  satisfaction  with  the  improve-
ment of  the  cbU^eu.


FU

•  In  1823,  the  miMioDarieg  say,
*^  W6  bate  9iach  plaasure  in  being
able  to  report  tbe  spiritual  pros-
perity of  tlie  society  in  this  island,
although  the  past  year  has  been
to  oar  people  a* year  of  distress
and  tritti,  arising  from  the  want
o{  many  of  the  common  neces-
saries of  life.  They  have,  how-
ever, manifested  the  sincerity  of
their  faith  by  their  Christian  obe-
dience, and  their  love  for  the  ordl-
taances  of  tha  Lord's  house.  Oar
prospects  of  future  usefulness  are
Of  an  encouraging  nature ;  our  con-
gregation is  large,  and  very  atten-
tive during  divine  service, 'and  we
receivB  great  encouragement  from
the  ruling  authorities.''

The  missionaries  observe,  in
their  last  accounts,  that  'Hhe  at-
tachment of  the  members  to  the
cause  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  unites
tbe  two  characteristics  of  ardency
and  constancy,  which  they  display
by  their  exertions  to  promote  it.
The  congregations  continue  as
large  as  they  have  ever  been,
and  are  deeply  attentive.  At  the
£.  side  of  the  island,  a  place  for
preaching  has  been  recently  ob-
tained, and  is  visited  three  times  a
week.  The  congregation,  though
small,  is  regular,  and  very  atten-
tive. Number  of  members  in
Town  Society— Whites,  13  j  Free
Coloured  and  Blacks,  76;  Slaves
13^.  E.  side  do.  20.  Total  244.
At  present  there  are  belonging
to  the  school,  115  girls  and  68
boys.    Total,  173."


F.


FIJI  ISLANDS.  These  islands
lie  between  16°  and  10<>  S.'  lat,
and  between  177®  and  180«>  E.,  and
l77«andl800W.  long.

Soon  after  the  return  of  Mr.
Davies,  of  the  L.  M,  S.,  from  a
visit  to  the  islands  of  Raivavai  to
TaMU,  the  members  of  bis  cbuTch


FIJ

tPm  eonvenad  fin  flw
considering  tbe  praprletsf
ingouttwoof  their  own]
teachers,  to  tlia  idfead  of'
one   of  the   FQi   lalaiiih.
Minerva  and  Macqnaiie
the  point  of  failing,  agali^  Itf-^
direction.

It  seems  that
before,  two  strtogenyfioB'
South  Wales,  came  to
the  hope  ox  proemijig  a
to  tbe    F^l  IslaBda.     WM^
had  seen  while  Iq  the  eolDiyl

given  them  an  mifi lalJii  Ha

of  Christianity;  but  tbey


ledged  that  the  new  reHgimL  %
they  called  It,  bad  effiMttd  wm
good  at  TahiU.  They  kid  4111-
ral  times  ezppessed  a  wlib  :1fell
teachers  might  accompaij  ftlv^
on  their  return  heme,  to  laMtfi
the  Fijians,  and  had  propom^  <va
suitable  place  for  an  ezpeiUiiA
the  island  Lagebay  whick  li'kt
disturbed  by  wan  as  TaknMi
and  Baa,  and  the  other  liq|k
islands,  are.  They  also  adde^wk
Tuineau,  the  chief  of  Lageb^  fei
quiet  and  friendly  man*

At  the  meeting  of  the  ctack
at  Papara,  to  which  aUvrim'hi
been  made,  the  two  ilnitfgiki
being  present,  it  was  dedde^-ait
in  the  first  instance,  to  tead'l^
milies,  but  that  two  stnglef'iMi
should  accompany  the  strangiBfl^
as  teachers ;  and  proflded  4egr
were  well  treated,  and  a  pioBMt
of  success  presented  itawTuHt
one  or  two  families  should  fbilDV;
Mr.  Davies  had  himself  tMW
the  Fiji  islands,  in  the  year  1009^1^
and  had  then  made  some  pn»>
grass  in  the  langtiage.  ]>iiiiii»Ui
short  stay  there,  he  wrote  WVB
many  words  and  sentences^  wUc^
with  the  assistance  of  the  stiaqgwi
who  were  now  at  Tahiti,  h^-im
enabled  to  revise.  He  has  IdN
compiled  a  small  speUing-bOolb
<&c.  in  the  Fiji  langaage,  ^Mdk,
\Ytfa  \ie«ii  vAi^ued.    in  Ifads  litflp


F
fa

k

i

i

I

t
c
h

1


FOR

the  strangers^  before   they
Tahiti,  had  made   consi-
proficiency.
J  Oil   the  27th  of  January,  the
jhhitian  teachers,    whose  names
■sa   Hape  and  Tafeta,  were  so-
jBwnlj  set  apart  to  their  work;
liBcly  on  the  2d  of  March,  accom-
anied     by    the    two    strangers,
jiilBd   in   the  Minerva,    Captain
JJMlly  who  was  bound  to  the  co-
loiiy  of  New  South  Wales.
';  Presents  were    given    to    the
itengers,   partly   for  themselves,
■ifed  partly  for  the  chief  of  Lageba.
mRT   GRATIOT,  a  military
post,  Michigan  territory,  on    St.
Glair  river,  which  defends  the  en-
tance  into  Lake  Huron,  and  is
about  a  mile  below  the  outlet.
.'In  1821,  the  Northern  M,  S.  of
JVSnq  York  opened  a  school  here  for
fbe  Instruction  of  Indian  children,
wkicb  was  transferred  to  the  United
Fateign  M,  S.  (United  States)  Sep-
tamber,  1823.    Early  in  ]  824,  the
■chdol  consisted  of  about  15  chil-
dren, living  in  the  family.    The
Rev.  S.  Hudson  is  the    assistant
misiionBry.

FRANKFORT,  a  large  city  in
Germany,  on  the  Maine,  20  miles
abo?e  its  influx  into  the  Rhine.  £.
long.  8®.  aa.  N.  lat.  dOfi.  Popu-
lation 41,500,  of  whom  about  9000
are  Jews.  Here  are  2  churches
for  Calvinists,  7  fqr  Lutherans,  and
9  for  Catholics.  Mr.  J.  D.  Marc,
A- converted  Jew,  from  the  L^,S,,
hu  for  several  years  laboured  suc-
oatsfolly  among  the  Jews,  princi-
pally in  this  city.  Many  have  been
baptized ;  the  prejudices  of  others
against  the  Gospel  are  much  weak-
aaad ;  multitudes  seek  opportunities
to  converse  with  Mr.  M.  on  the
sabieot  of  the  Christian  religion,
and  appear  desirous  to  know  the
troth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  He  now
resides  at  Offenbach,  which  is  only
a  short  distance  from  Frankfort.
Tbe  brother  of  the  sovereig^n-prince,
ChriatiaD^  who  is  president  of  the


FRE

Darmstadt  B,  S,,  has  kindly  inte-
rested himself  in  his  favour,  to
secure  to  him  the  undisturbed  exer«
cise  of  his  office  amdng  the  Jews^
under  the  declared  protection  of
government.  An  auxiliary  society
has  been  established,  but  its  fan&
are  very  low,  and  its  eiibrts  rouQb
circumscribed :  Jews  who  apply  for
Christian  instruction  receive  it;-
butnone  have  been  baptized  for  a
long  time.  Such  as  appear  to  bo.
in  earnest,  are  sent  to  Dtiwelthat,
with  a  moderate  sum  of  money,  jurt
sufficient  to  reach  that  place ;  and
this  is  the  chief  use  the  society  can
make  of  its  scanty  income.

FREETOWN,  a  seaport  of  Gui-
nea, capital  of  the  colony  of  Sierra
Leone.  The  harbour  has  three
wharfs,  and  is  protected  by  a  batr
tery.  It  stands  on  the  S.  side  of  the
river  Sierra  Leone,  7  m.  above  \i$
entrance  into  the  Aliantic  ocean*
W.  Long.  12P  56',  N.  lat  8°  80'.

Some  missionaries  from  the  ff^m
S.  took  up  their  abode  here  in  1 8 16  $
and  in  1820,  so  successful  were
their  effi>rts,  that  in  Freetown  and
its  neighbourhood,  there  were  in
society  upwards  of  1100  persons,
almost  exclusively  blacks  and  peo*<
pie  of  colour.  Some  misqnder-
standings  afterwards  arose,  but  the
prospect  was  soon  more  favourable.
A  chapel,  built  by  the  Maroons  at
Freetown,  was  opened,  and  others
at  fTest  End,  Congo  Tontnh  and
Portuguese.  Town,  were,  reg^ularly
supplied.  The  chapel  at  the  latter
place  was  destroyed  by  a  fire^  which
almost  consumed  the  whole  place  >
but  one  of  stone  w&9  subsequently
erected.  Towards  this  work,  and
the  rebuilding  of  the  town,  mai^y
of  the  Europeans  very  handsomely
subscribed,  among  whom  were  the
Governor  and  the  Chief  Justice.  In
1 823,  a  painful  dispensation  of  provi-;
dence  deprived  this  mission,  in  rapid
succession,  of  both  its  laboureis*

IThe  society  was  consequently  be-
reft, for  a  time,  of  p«sU>i«\.^«t«^v^


PRE

of  public  ordiiBiices.  Two  heroic
men  were  at  leng^  found  to  give  the
preference  to  this  post  of  danger.
One  of  them,  Mr.  Pigott,  wrote : —
'*  Through  the  kind  providence
of  God,  brother  Harte  and  myself
arrived  here  on  Friday,  March  10,
1824,  after  a  voyage  of  five  weelcs.
Never  could  two  missionaries  be
more  joyfully  received.  The  news
of  our  arrival  soon  spread ;  and  to
aee  the  poor  biaclcs  running  from
one  house  to  another  to  inform
their  brethren  and  sisters — lifting
up  their  eyes  and  hands  towards
heaven — thanking  and  praising
God,  was  such  a  scene  as  we  never
witnessed  before ;  and  we  could
not  for  a  moment  regret  having
left  home  to  preach  salvation  to
those  of  whom  it  may  be  said, '  the
fields  are  white  already  to  harvest.'
On  Saturday,  the  20th,  J  examined
the  class  papers,  and  met  the  lead-
ers, and  was  happy  in  finding  that
the  society  had  been  wonderfully
preserved.  On  the  Sabbaths  the
leaders  have  had  service  in  each  of
our  chapels.  In  the  Maroon  cha-
pel some  one  regularly  read  prayers
every  Sunday  morning ;  and  occa-
sionally one  or  two  of  the  leaders
gave  exhortations.  The  number  of
members  in  society  is  81,  and  there
are  several  on  trial.  We  have  called
upon  several  gentlemen,  and  they
promised  us  every  assistance.^'  in
little  more  than  12  months,  how-
ever, Mr.  Harte  was  no  more.

In  1826,  Mr.  Pigott  says— "  A
little  after  the  death  of  brother  H.,
I  began  to  urge  the  friends  to  get
the  chapel  finished,  but  was  in-
formed tiiat  nothing  more  could  be
done  till  an  old  debt  of  03/.,  which
was  due  for  the  slates  and  copper
on  the  roof,  was  paid.  I  called  a
trustee  meeting,  proposed  to  pay
the  shares  in  small  sums,  and  un-
dertook to  collect  it  myself;  and  I
am  happy  to  say,  that  during  the
year,  not  only  has  the  debt  been
discharged,  but  mpre  than  that  sum


VRE

again  has  been  coBected  aaAMJl
upon  the  chapel.  ConcembigJ^
tuguese  Thum,  we  have  tM'4|i
utmost  to  get  the  chapel  taiHH^
but  find  we  try  in  Tain,  adesjiKi
receive  help  inim  home,  la  ij^
tion  to  the  circuity  the  Loid^^t
noes  to  visit  as  with  his  UntK
Out  of  20  memben  that  .ImjEi
class  at  PorhtpteMe  TUmi,  lUim
18  cleariy  enjoy  the  paidoiiiaglM
of  God.  Our  chapels  an  pM^
well  attended ;  and  omr  nuaimi
members  this  quarter  (Jane)  hii

Since  1818,  the  colonial  sdnb
at  Freetown  have  been  coBHithi
to  the  care  of  the  C  V.  &,  jpi
of  the  chaplains,  who  hate  npih
intended  the  schools,  and  hfli
faithfully  laboured  to  praiMte  tti
best  interests  of  the  peopto.  b
1 823,  benevolent  eflforts  weie  mmI
interrupted  by  the  death  of  Mb
chaplains,  and  several  of  the  imj^
ers.  Other  labourers  were  seat  ti^
but  bereavements  still  occindL
The  Rev.  John  Raban,  assisted  ly
Mr.  George  Fox  and  his  wiii^.iAB
have  the  management  of  the  school^
had,  for  some  time,  the  chaigB  sf
this  station.

Mr.  Raban  continued  the  em-
cise  of  his  ministiy  till  Jane  189%
when  an  attack  of  dysenteiy^  lot
lowed  by  fever  and  ague,  diiiiMfli
him  from  attendinyg  to  Us  datlefc
The  usual  services  at  the  Goai^
room  had,  till  Mr.  Raban's  dflk«
ness,  been  regpilarly  perfbnned ;  uA
an  increased  att^tion  had  ben
manifested  by  the  European  pvtaf
the  congregation.  Few  intnny-
tions  had  taken  place,  till  tiie  SfMS
period,  in  the  services  at  OiimUat
Towrif  on  Sunday  and  Wednesd^F
evenings.  A  small  chapel  «n
opened  there  on  the  0th  of  April:
from  50  to  70  persons  genenDj
attended,  with  much  devotion  $  and
several  adults  bad  been  haptiiad,  or
were  candidates  for  baptism.*-  -  -

Ai    Michaelmas,    Mr.  Rabes^
disorder,  though  much  eb^ted*  ftn


R
I
t


FRE

^fefented  him  from  resaming  his
wttva  duties.  Mr.  Metzger,  from
■  WeIUiigtoii>  and  Mr.  Betts,  from
'  Regent,  had,  with  some  interrup-
tions, kept  up  the  services  at  the
Coini- house ;  but  those  at  Gibral-
tar town  had  from  necessity  been
left,  except  in  one  instance,  to  the'
people  themselves.  Thero  '  being
BO  |nroq)ect  of  Mr.  Raban's  imme-
diato  resumption  of  his  labours,  it
WW  agreed  that  Mr.  Betts  should
lemore,  with  the  consent  of  the
eeting  governor,  from  Regent  to
Freetown,  and  be  there  stationed
■s  second  rector ;  and  that  he  should
fiiit  the  mountain  villages  for  the
administration  of  the  sacraments.
At  Christmas,  Mr.  Betts  reports,
that  the  number  of  baptisms  during
the  quarter  then  ending,  had  been
98  $  of  these,  two  were  adults,  who
lud  previously  received  instruction,
mnd  who,  there  was  good  reason  to
bope,  were  sincere  in  their  profes-
^n  of  faith.

By  the  returns  of  the  school,  it
appters  that  there  was  an  increase
in  the  number  of  the  scholars.  The
Colonial  school-rooms,  which  had
been  occupied  by  the  military  as  a
temporary  hospital  for  about  12
months,  wero  restored,  in  July,  to
their  original  occupant:  ^e  supe-
rior accommodation  afforded  by
these  rooms,  immediately  increased
the  attendance.  The  numbers  at
Christmas  were — boys,  344 ;  girls,
106.  The  number  of  adults  in  the
last  quarter,  with  boys  occasionally
attending,  was  2T.

In  the  beginning  of  May,  public
meetings  were  held  in  support  of  the
Aiuriiiary  Bible,  Church  Mission-
tary,  and  Prayer  Book  Societies,
which  were  attended  by  the  acting
Governor.  With  reference  to  this
circumstance,  Mr.  Raban  writes  —
«  Though  all  that  zeal  was  not
witnessed  on  these  occasions  which
was  ardently  to  be  desired,  yet
enough  was  seen  to  afford  encou-
ragement to  future  exertion8,and  to
obU  forth  tbankfulness  to  God,  who  >


PRI

put  it  into  the  heiEh  of  the  chief
magistrate  of  the  colony  to  counte-
nance these  benevolent  institutions,'
in  a  manner  so  public  and  decided.*'

FRIED  ENSTADT,  or  Toum
of  Peace,  formerly  a  settlement
of  the  U.  B»  among  the  Indians
in  Pennsylvania.  About  1770,
the  Christian  Indians  at  Gosh-
goshuenk  removed  here,  and  at-
tempted t0  form  a  settlement ;  but
the  outrageous  persecution  of  the
heathen  Indians  induced  them  soon
to  remove  to  Gnadenhutten,  on
the  Mi^skingum.

FRIENDLY  ISLANDS,  a
large  collection  of  islands  in  the
Pacific  Ocean,  so  denominated  by
Captain  Qook,  from  the  apparent
disposition  of  the  inhabitants.  These
islands,  of  which  there  are  188>
including  the  Harpies  and  Vavaoo,
are  generally  very  low,  not  exceed-
mgfrom  10  to  20  feet  above  the
sea.  They  are  all  skirted  round  by
a  reef  of  coral  rocks,  and  present  a
beautiful  appearance  from  the  ocean,
being  almost  covered  with  trees,  the
most  plentiful  of  which  is  the  cocoa-
nut.  The  soil  is  generally  fertile.
Medium  E.  long.  \25^,  S.  lat.  %iP.
The  natives  have  no  knowledge
of  God,  but  seem  to  entertain  some
confused  notions  of  the  immortality
of  the  S.0U1.  Their  views  of  this
subject  are,  however,  so  indistinct
and  corrupt,  as  to  produce  no  salu-
tary influence  on  their  conduct.
Navigators  who  first  visited  these
islands,  represented  the  inhabitants
as  possessing  many  social  qualities,
and  much  gentleness  of  character ;'
but  subsequent  visitors  have  shown
them  capable  of  the  greatest  ex-
cesses of  cruelty  and  revenge.

Of  the  3  teachers  lately  sent  by
the  L.  M,  S,  from  Borabora  to  the
Friendly  Islands,  2  only  appear  to
have  reached  the  place  of  their
destination.  These  settled  in  Ya-
vaoo,  one  of  the  islands  of  that
group ;  but  their  labours  do  not  ap-
pear  to  have  been&tteiidedN«V\i.«xv^
visible  bene&t  to  lYie  \xO[i«^\\»xi\&«


FUT

One  of  them,  after  tbe  decease  of
hif  wife,  haviiig  fallen  into  immo*
ralit}',  cea§ed  to  bear  the  office  of
teacher.  His  colleague  has  lince
remoT^  to  Tongatabu,  and  has
taken  up  his  residence  with  one  of
the  chiels  of  that  island.      [See

FUTTYGHUR,  a  town  in
Agra,  Hiudoostan,  00  m.  N.  N.  W.
of  Luclcnow,  and  a4|oining  Fur-
ruckal>ad.

A  Baptist  missionary  has  la-
boured here  since  1831.  Some  of
the  natives  have  been  baptized,  and
hoi)e  of  much  usefulness  has  been
awakened.  A  brahmin,  named
Porundas,  on  hearing  the  Gospel,
threw  away  his  poita,  and  renounc-
ed his  caste ;  and  another  acknow-
ledged that  for  0  years  he  had  been
anxiously  seeking,  but  all  in  vain,  a
solid  ground  of  hope.


G.


G  ALLE,or  POINT  DE  G  ALLE,

a  sea-  port  on  the  S.  coast  of  Ceylon,
in  a  rich  and  beautiful  district,  wifh
a  strong  fort  and  a  secure  harbour.
It  is  populous,  and  in  point  of  trade
ranks  next  to  Colombo.  The  chief
branch  of  its  traffic  consists  in  the
exportation  of  fish  to  the  continent ;
but  a  great  part  of  the  products  of
the  island  are  shipped  here  for  Eu-
rope. It  is  68  m.  S.  by  £.  Co-
lombo,  E.  long.  80®  IT,  N.  lat.  62®.
Oa  the  arrival  of  several  fFes^
/eya^i  missionaries  at  Ceylon,  the
Rev.  Mr.  Clough  was  appointed  to
this  place,  where  he  conducted  an
English  service  in  the  Dutch  chm-ch
every  Liord's  day,  and,  by  the  joint
subscriptions  of  some  of  his  hearers,
a  private  house  in  the  fort  was  fitted
up  for  a  weekly  lecture,  and  for  the
purpose  of  conversing  on  spiritual
subjects  with  such  persons  as  ap-
peared to  l>e  under  serious  impres-
sions. The  infant  caase  was  also
e/^nUally  benefited  by  the  decided


GAt

who  freqaently  ■ppawd  la  Mn^
panywtth  tiia  mWooaix  oa  yMi
occasioniy  and  was  avUoai.  afcMt
from  the  eottage  vheia  tlia  vl*
gious  meeting9  w«ie  baU.  09.4a
European  leildeBli*  this  I
the  part  of  Us  InrddUpy .
the  moat  pkwaiag  alRwts  \mA  Ito
military  irera  not  cmly  latanlli
attefid  to  tlM  wind  of  Gadfp  h«k»^
veral  of  the  priTate  toldlanaiiNll
in  society,  and  thoqgh  a  fa*  »
turned  to  the  woiU^  iSbft
remained  itedliMty  uid
them  diedv^jolalar  in  tha<
of  Christ.

Amidst  aU  tba
which  hereeeivedy  and
which  he  felt  in  the  prrMaaattParf
his  present  afocatkmss  'bMx*OmAH
attention  was  anzkMHly  dtaaclMi<tS
the  natlTes  of  GaUe,  aft  tha  awH
immediate  objects  of  hia-via^llb
Such,  indeed,  was  hfcs   darift.li


commence  hit  worlc  amoM
that  he  formed  the  idea  of
ing  oBitlrely  with  tiieniy  fai.
to  stu4y  their  langaage,  and  ta  MHt
himself  unremitfingly  fot^thalr^^-
ritual  welfare}  and  an  evead  iOoa
occurred,  which  emdilqd  ^jka.ts
carry  this  faTOurite  acheva  Mo
execution.  He  was  ono  day  liriM
at  the  govemment  lioaea  tar  lie
maha,  or  great  moedeliarof  Geili^
a  man  of  good  undexstandii^Mia
liberal  mind,  who,  froaalUaMal^
was  possessed  M  mtfiialted  laihK
enoe  throughout  the  dlttricl«
the  usual  oonpUiBen^  lia  \
Mr.  Clough  in  BngUdi,  and  «U»
'<  I  am  come,  re?erend  Sir*  toaftr
my  children  to  your  psotacttaa  aad
instruction.  I  hw»  liaaid  thai  jaa
are  desirous  of  estabUdiiDg  a  scisel
for  the  sons  of  our  aatiia.-  feeaA-
men ;  and  I  have  a  hoasa>  liiAr
furni^ed,  near  my  ofwn  reaUaaee^
which  is  at  your  servica  km  that
purpose.  If  you  will  pteaae  taaae
whether  it  will  suit  yon^  I
consider  it  an  honor  to  Jiava


a  T«v«i«nd^iitleBian  living  aoasv


patronage   of   Lord  Moleswoilh  •,  \  \o  m^  \  axk^^a^ wnfteti^^  ^^


^A9t


GAL

— iJHtince  in  my  power."  Grateful
fcrrach  an  unexpected  and  wel-
««Be  proposal,  Mr.  Clongh  hai-
tned  to  Tiflit  the  premises,  which
infonnd  situated  in  a  sweetly  re-
(tied  and  romantic  spot,  about  a
afle  from  the  fort,  and  within  a
■tone's  throw  c^  the  house  of  the
Idnd  proprietor ;  and,  of  course,  ac-
•ipted  the  generous  offer.  The
Aiendship  and  patronage  of  the
Boodelior  had  an  astonishing  inilu-
•aacc  cm  the  surrounding  population.
Mr.  Cft  school  was  soon  attended
hf  eome  of  the  most  intelligiint
bo^  in  the  island;  and  curiosity
-  was  so  strongly  excited,  that  he  was
vMted  by  learned  priests,  and  per^
■ont  of  Tarious  classes,  who  came
to  Inquire  respecting  the  religion
iriilch  be  profesMd.  With  these,
flnoQ^  the  medium  of  an  inter**
{HPeteT)  he  had  frequent  opportu-
nities of  conversing  concerning  the
fttth  in  Christ;  and,  in  some  in-
slilicesy  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing
ttwfn  depart,  evidently  impressed
vjttii  the  result  of  their  inquiries.

Attendance  at  a  grand  festival
cflbrded  Mr.  C.  an  opportunity  of
■leeting  w4th  a  learned  priest  of  the
BndliiBt  religion,  named  Petrus
PlmdittB  Sehara.  The  reputation
he  had  acquired  raised  him  to  emi-
nence, and  secured  for  him  various
marks  of  high  distinction.  He  had
reilded  for  a  long  time  with  the
kbag  of  Kandy:  at  his  inaog^ra-
tkln  as  a  priest  he  rode  on  the  Idng's
SMf  elephant,  and  was  indeed  uni-
virtaily  celebrated.  His  interview
Mth  the  missionary  was  followed  by
othen,  until  about  two  months  had
elapsed,  when  he  expressed  his  first
eoilvletlon  of  the  divine  origin  of
Cfariitianity,  and  his  wish  publicly
to  profess  it.  Aware  of  the  sacri-
iees  he  would  have  to  malce,  and
the  perils  to  which  he  would  be  ex-
poeedy  Mr.  C.  laid  his  case  before
the  governor,  who  kindly  stated,
that  If  tile  priest,  from  conviction,
eaibnced  the  Chrfstiaii  religion,


GAL

protection  should  be  affi>rded,  and  a
small  allowance  granted.  In  con»
sequi^nce  of  the  unavoidable  absence
of  Mr.  C.  for  a  short  time,  this  con*
yert  was  placed  in  much  danger:  14
of  the  bead  priests  were  sent  by  the
high  priest  to  reason  with  him,  and
their  number  in  the  course  of  the
interview  increased  to  67.  To  their
arg^uments,  to  the  tears  and  threats
of  destruction  by  which  his  family
assailed  him,  and  to  large  presen'te
brought  by  the  head  men  of  the
dist^t,  Petrus  was  immovable  $
and  he  retired  for  safety  to  the
house  of  an  European  in  the  fort  of
Galle,  till  he  received  directions  to
proceed  to  Colombo.  On  bis  arrival
at  that  city,  he  experienced  eveiy
kind  and  christian  attention ;  ahd^
though  a£focted  by  the  continued
entreaties  and  remonstrances  of
his  relatives,  be  steadily  adhered
to  the  cause  he  had  espoused.  On
Christmas-day,  1814,  he  received
toe  ordinance  of  baptism,  in  the
presence  of  a  large  congregation^

This  newly  converted  Cturistian
had  received  from  Mr.  C.  the  va-
luable present  of  a  New  Testa*
ment  bi  Cingalese ;  which  not
only  caused  him  to  read  it  throt:^-
out  with  a  mind  bent  on  the  search
after  truth,  but  induced  him,  at  a
numerous  meeting  of  priests  of
Budhu,  to  take  the  Testament
with  him,  and  lecture  them,  during
a  whole  night,  from  the  Gospel
of  Matthew,  which  they  heard
with  no  less  astonishment  than
attention.

The  literary  qualifications  of
this  convert  procured  for  him  the
sitoation  of  Cingalese  translator
to  the  government  at  a  certain
salary ;  and  as  his  return  to  Galle
would  have  exposed  him  to  the
insults  of  those  who  were  most
violently  enraged  at  his  renuncia*
tion  of  Budhism,  it  was  deter-
mined that  he  shoald  remain  at
Colombo,  under  the  cere  of  Mr.
Aimoui,  the  maalec  ollihft  \n\!&K.\\i(iiL


OAL
.  Wbool  In  that  citf,  and  that  his
■todies  ibould  be  directed  vltti  a
(lev  to  bl>  becmnlag,  at  some
future  period,  a  preacher  of  the
Gospel  among  Ms  own  country-
Mien.  At  the  same  time,  as  the
change  which  bii  lentlmenti  had
undergone  was  likely  to  produce
a  peculiar  InBuence  on  the  minds
of  both  natives  and  Europeaoi,
Mr.  C.  was  requested  by  tbe  go-
lemor  to  draw  up  a  connected
statement  of  the  case  |  to  which
Ills  Excellency  condescended  to
prefli  an  appropriate  Introduction,
and  ordered  the  whole  to  be  in-
serted In  the  Ceylon  Goremment
Gazette.

The  circuit  afterwards  formed,
extended.  In  one  direction,  over  a
tract  of  country  of  upwards  of  30
miles ;  and  In  sddlllun  to  the  ser-
vices conducted  in  tbe  chapel  In
the  fort.  In  the  English,  Portu-
guese, Bod  Cingalese  languages,
there  were,  In  18S4,IKplaces  sup-
plied with  at  least  one  service  a
week.  A  considerable  part  of
this  worii  was  done  by  native
young  men,  whom  God  had  raised
up  on  the  spot,  and  who  laboured
with  great  acceptance  and  success.
At  this  time  the  fort  school  con-
tained CD  boyi  and  8T  girls :  30
boys  and  5  girls  read  the  Englldi
Testament,  and  all  of  them  wrote
on  paper  or  slates.

The  mlssiuuaries  remark,  in  a
recent  communicaUon : —

"  Among  the  few  who  com-
pose our  little  society  in  GoUe,
6  or  &  profess  to  enjoy  a  sense  of
the  favour  of  God,  and  tbelr  con-
duct in  general  is  such  as  to  give
satisfactory  evidence  of  their  sin-
cerity. Their  attendance  at  the
class  meeting,  and  other  means
of  grace,  is  very  regular  ;  and  they
seem,  upon  the  whole,  to  be  much
attached  to  ouc  discipline.  The
members  of  oni  congregation  in
the  fort,  seem  to  be  generally
Jtnprvriog  ia  religious  loiowledge-,


OAU

and  In  m»hj,  an  outward  relbmii-
Uofl  of  conduct  ^as  been  effeetri.
We  hope,  bowerer,  astheybeeont
more  alive  to  the  (i>^i>'''^  ^
Christian  communion,  the;  vill
avail  thenBetrea  of  It,  and  be  moic
decided.  As  it  respects  the  On-
galeae,  we  do  not  fevi  nt  llhertjr  to
speak  with  tnueh  cunlidence,  siva
have  to  often  been  deceived  ij
what  wo  thooj^f  promising  *f-
pearancei  amoBg^l  tbem.  Ttans
are  *ome,  however,  concerning
wbom  we  are  nui  without  hope;
but  trust  that  tbe  kingdom  ol  liM-
van,  like  a  grain  of  iniistiird-srtii,
istakingrootintbeir  liearK.  lime
alone  will  prove  nhetlter  our  bapet
are  well-foimded.  It  U  our  inlaft-
Hon,  by  God's  help,  to  coatloiic  b
watch  over  Hxm,  and  mhtbtv
unto  them  with  ull  care  ajtd  fit-
gence,  tnutlnf  eventually  M
thsy  will  bring  foith  fruit  nSi
perfection,"

The  CAiavi,  ZMufaN,  m^t^
iitt  mistiminrlea,  ban  Utsii
here  at  di&reiit  tiniwa,  bat  tim
made  no  peimaoeDt  setOMD^.-

GALWAY,  a  boroagh  ud  M^


of  Ireland,
lat  3S°  1 1'.

The  W.  if.
here,  who  labour^  aiai  At


GAMBIER,  fbrmeilr  a  nWv
station  of  tbe  C.  M.S.  aimmf^
Bagoes,  West  Africa,  on  Iha  Sb
Dembta  river,  at  KeppanM,  ■  »KJ
consider^e  native  town,  slorilt
m.  N.W.  of  Sierra  LeoM.

The  Rev.  J.  S.  Klein  caaw  h«a
about  1813,  and  remored  taUtt
de  Lo«>,  In  181)1,  nvHh  s  vtowtbl
more  extended  Held  of  Inboqrt  de-
signbig  Bt  the  same  tlioe,  to  iiiOk
some  attention ta  the  apirltodgaad
of  this  people.  Dnrlitg  hb.iiri-
dence,  he  preached. tn, IS  aiMm
towns  in  the  vicinl^,  and  n&Mi
much  attention  hj  the  dMrtMlM
o{\KNlnaad  ttacta.    SoiMpMtif


OAM

tte  Jtime  30  children  ^trere  main-
t^laed  and  educated  in  the  misdon
tnpSltym  A  salutary  impression  was
qiideonthe  minds  of  the  children ;
^iiifxwl  of  the  girls  became  hope-
taUy  pious;  and  the  misj^onary
•■jlofed  the  confidence  and  affec-
ttoo  of  the  natives.

GAMMAP^aviUage  of  achlef  of

ri%  name,  in  G.  Namaqualand,
Africa^  in  the  Yiclaity  of  Angra
Pii|!Miia  Bayy  more  than  300  m.
M..  of  Great  Orange  R.  The  bay
it  frequented'  by  -vessels  employed
III  tfao*  fisheryy  and  thus  occasional
Inlnooiiise  is  maintained  between
tfte  Enzopeans  and  the  natives.

Tbe  Rev.  J.  Archbell  from
Ihe  ^fy,  M.  S.  commenced  his  la-
boms  in  18S1,  with  a  Hottentot
awiitaiit ;  he  endured  many  discou-
ngemehts  and  hardships,  yet  had
mme  pleasing  fruits  of  his  effi>rts,
tin  188S,  when  the  disturbed  state
of  fhe  country  induced  him  to  re-


GANJAM,    a    very    populous
towDy  in  Orissa,  Hindoostan,  ca-

Sltal  of  the  district  of  Ganjam,
69  m.  8.  Calcutta.  The  Rev.
Wm.  Lee  from  the  L.  M»  S,  re-
aoved  from  Vizagapatam  to  this
place  in  1 813,with  the  pleasing  pro-
tgect  of  usefulness,  especially  as  offi-
olating  chaplain  of  the  settlement.

A  bouse  for  public  worship  was
elected  by  the  assistance  of  govern-
ment, in  which  a  considerable  con-
gregiUion  atte'nded,  and  a  native
aehool  was  established.  Mr.  L.
oontbiued  to  labour  with  accept-
ance and  some  success  till  1816,
when  the  prevalence  of  a  malig-
nant fever  among  the  people,  and
the  state  of  his  own  health,  ren-
dered it  expedient  for  him  to  retire.
GAY  A,  a  town  of  Hindoostan,
in  Bahar,  and  the  capital  of  the
Bahar  district.  It  consists  of  two
ports:  the  eld  town,  on  a  roclcy
eminence,  wholly  occupied  by
priests )  and  the  other  part  on  a
Idaioi  the  residence  of  tradesmen


GIB

and  others^  called  Sahebffunge,
It  is  a  celebrated  place  of  worship  ;
the  last  is  now  visited  by  numerous
pilgrims,  and  stands  on  the  left
bank  of  the  Fulgo.  55  m.  S.  by  W,
of  Patna.  E.  long.  86°,  N.  lat.
24«  40*.

Mr.  Forbes,  a  native  of  India,
resided  here  on  his  own  estate,
which  comprised  several  villages,
and  laboured  in  connexion  with  the
Baptist  M,  S,  for  several  years.
His  efforts  appear  to  have  been
useful.

GEORGIAN,  or  WINDWARD
ISLANDS,  four  islands  in  the
South  Seas,  so  called  in  honour  of
our  late  king.  Through  the  in-
fluence of  missionaries,  idolatiy  has
been  renounced,  ChristiiHiity  intro-
duced in  its  stead,  and  the  temporal
and  moral  state  of  the  people  has
been  improved  almost  bieyond  any
former  example.  [See  Burder's
Point,  Bogue  Town,  Eimee,  Haweis
Tovm,  Hidia,  and  Jlahiti,]

GIBRALTAR,  a  town  in  the
S.  of  Spain,  between  the  Atlantic
and  Mediterranean,  on  the  N.  W.>
side  of  the  promontory,  belonging  tu
the  British.  In  the  bay,  it  is  said,
more  than  3000  sail  of  shipping
anchor  annually,  a  considerable
part  of  which  are  English  or  Ame-
rican. The  town  is  large  and
strongly  fortified:  the  population,
exclusive  of  the  garrison,  is  about
12,000,  combining  British,  Spa-
niards, Italians,  and  Jews,  all
attracted  by  mercantile  enterprize.
The  Jews  amount  to  nearly  2000.
W.  long.  6«  10',  N.  lat.  37«  t.

The  Rev.  Wm.  Croscombe,
firom  the  ff^,  M,  S,,  laboured  liere
for  some  time,  and  the  station  for  a
long  period  has  been  highly  bene-
ficial, especially  to  the  soldiery.
Within  a  year,  including  part  ef
1821-2,  60  members  were  admitted
into  the  society.

Considerable  exertions  were  also
made  to  supply  the  neighbouring
parts  oC  Sptiiik  loitk  ao^^^  ^^  '^^Mt

t2  ^"^


QLO

Scriptures  in  Spanish,  a  number  of
which  have,  at  diflforent times,  been
kindly  furnished  by  the  BriHsh  and
Foreign  B.  S.,  and  useful  tracts
were  distributed  among  the
Spaniards.  F.  U.  Tripp,  Esq.  Cap-
tain in  bis  Majesty's  26th  regiment,
was  one  of  the  fruits  of  this  mission.
In  token  of  his  regard,  he  left  by
will  £50  to  the  funds  of  the  society,
and  £000  to  liquidate  the  debt  on
the  mission  chapel, ,

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Dixon  and
Barber  succeeded  Mr.  Croscombe
in  1823.  Not  only  are  the  English
cong^gation,  the  society,  and  the
school,  at.  present  in  a  state  of  reli-
gious prosperity,  but  the  preaching
and  other  services  in  the  Spanish
tongue,  still  promise  to  be  useful  to
many  of  the  Spaniards,  occasionally
or  permanently  resident  on  this
station.  The  Scriptures  and  useful
tracts  in  that  language  continue  to
be  circulated,  and  are  received  with
great  eagerness  )  and  in  many  in-
stances are  conveyed  into  Spain,
notwithstanding  the  vigilance  of
the  priesthood.

GLOUCESTER,  atownof  libe-
rated  negroes.  Sierra  Leone,  W.
Africa,  situated  between  Free  Town
and  Regent's  Town.

The  Rev.  H.  During,  from  the  C,
M,  S.f  commenced  his  labours  Dec.
18l6,andfound  lOTmiserable  beings,
almost  entirely  without  shelter,  who
had  recently  been  released  from  the
chains  of  the  slave-trader,  and  sent
into  this  forest  with  an  European
to  manage  them :  many  of  them,
by  want  and  siclcness,  were  reduced
to  mere  skeletons.  Beside  super-
intending the  temporal  concerns  of
the  settlement,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  D.
soon  opened  schools,  and  under  their
fostering  care  a  flourishing  settle-
ment arose  from  the  most  unpro-
mising materials.  In  1823,  there
were  about  150  communicants,  and
415  pupils  in  the  schools.  In  Aug.
of  that  year,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  D.
«ftii6(i  for  England,  but  the  vessel


QUO


and  all  on  hoaxA  «ro  somoiUiI^
hart  been  loit  at  «a.  wIMllii.
Tambi^  the  mlOn  tercher.liUiiii

dUigentiyyafter  till 1  ifMiiiNW'

events  and  the  Rew.  Chas.  Ui|Mi
was  tent  to  his  aid,  but  vitjipi
mot ed  by  death  within  a  Um.inM-
after  he  entered  on  the  di<|wfj|
hisatati(».  Tlw  finmernpqilM;
at  Lady-day  UiS,  that  ibf^mkbm
had  been  kept  regolaily,*  aai#j|>
well  of  the  progrev  wUdi  bdMl
boys  and  giris  were  i
were  in  the  schools^ '  at'
i9boysand85  giris..  TimlmSk
Supper  liad  been  r^ffiilailj
nistered  every  months  irttt.
exception  —  when  cirei
presented  the  Rev,  Mr,  GMM
attendance.  The  number  of  «Mfr
municants  residing  in  tli^  piilA^Jl
138.  The  Sunday  and  with  tf
services  are  well  attendqit  Ihe
numbers. on  the  Snndaj  mngmftg
400,  and  on  the  weekrdi^t  lli
The  people  conduct  thtiuntlwii
on  Sundays  in  an  cHderly  oil  flirt
manner,  and  go  to  churcli  tit^fftij
and  neatly  drened  $  alawoql^^v^
cepted,  who  still  follow  tfieir '
try  fashion.  The  lives  <^
the  communicants  affind  hqmM
evidence  that  they  are  true  CW^.
tians ;  conversation  at  the  fiataiilf
evening  meeting  is  often  editUpgi
and  many  fervent  petiti<Mit  wnnpf-
fered  up  at  prayer! meetiBgi^ fa
their  countrymen,  for  the  mfii^il$jf§
and  for  more  iabour^kv. .

The  surplus  produce  bn^g^'ia.
sale  during  1825,  was —  .  £  Mi-ji,,
Cocoa,  2257  bush.  atl«.  lit  IT  0
Cassada,  2285  bush.  atOif.  M  19/9

■  • "    '    ■  ■■  ■■  I  ■
^IMIftS

*»m  ■■■  ■■■■  ■.


After  the  death  of  Mr.  KideMr
Mr.  Lisk  had  the  care  of  tfedi  ilbir:
tion. '  He  continued  in  ebamtf.
it  tiU  the  Rev.  Alfred  Scbcldte.
was  placed  here,  at  -tbo  fsoi^-M;
February,  and  afterwatda,  wmiM.
I  in.  the  duUes  of  it,  till  hit  deputut


6NA

SiiglaiMl  about  the  beginning
pfU,  1820.

pleased  Gxxi,  soon  after  Mr.
l^ng'8  arrival,  to  visit  Glou-
dr  with  a  series  of  afiSictive
t%  which  entirely  deprived  its
litants  of  any  regular  Euro-
instruction.  From  these  losses,
obvious  that  Gloucester  is  in  a
destitute  condition.  Matthew
[ardingy  a  native  assistant,  has
the  charge  of  it ;  while  Wil-
Davis,  from  Leicester,  renders
.  assistance  he  is  able.

-August,  Mr.  Betts)  reports,
the  place  looked  deserted ;  the
zh  had  scarcely  a  whole  win-
In  it,  and  the  dwelling-house
chool  were  much  out  of  repair,
adance  on  the  means  of  grace
however,  since  been  on  the
tee.

I^ADENHUTTEN,  or  Tents
hrace,  formerly  a  settlement
he-  U.  B.,  in  Pennsylvania,
t;  SO  m«  from  Bethlehem,
the  junction  of  Mahony  and
la  rivers,  which  was  com-
ied  for  the  benefit  of  the
itian  Indians  who  were  driven
Shekomeko  by  the  whites,  in
I  and  soon  became  a  regular
ant  town,  with  a  place  for
iiip  and  a  school.  The  congre-
a  increased  to  500,  and  the
on  produced  salutary  impres-

on  many  heathen  Indians.
0^  the  war  with  France,  the
iren  were  called  to  peculiar
ings:  not  only  were  they
9d  to  pay  a  sort  of  tribute  to
roqoois,  as  an  acknowledgment
eir  dependence  on  that  war-
lation,  but  a  new  and  sing^ar
ige  was  sent  to  them,  to  the
ving  effect:  —  "  The  Great
cil  of  the  Iroquois,  in  Onon-

speak  the  truth  and  lie  not.
rejoice  that  some  of  the  be-
g  Indians  have  removed  to
«nik ;  but  now  they  lift  up  the
inlAg  Mahikans  and  Dela-
1^   and  set    them    down   in


ONA

Wayomik  also ;  for  there  a  the  is
kindle.d  for  them,  and  there  they
may  plant  and  think  on  God :  butu
they  refuse  to  hearken  to  this  met*
sage,  the  Great  Council  will  oonie
and  cleanse  their  ears  with  a  red
hot  iron  (implying  that  they  wouJd
bum  their  houses),  and  shoot  themf
through  the  head  with  musket
balls.''  This  menace  induced  somo
of  the  congregation  to  remove,
but  the  majority  resolved  to  con-
tinue with  their  teachers  j  some  of
them  observing,  in  reference  to  the
threat  of  the  Great  Council,  *<  The
God  who  created  and  redeemed  us^
is  also  able  to  protect  us ;  norileed
we  dread  the  displeasure  of  man,
since  not  a  hair  can  fall  from  the
head  of  a  Christian  without  the  di-
vine permission."

The  missionaries  at  this  station
now  began  to  resume  their  itbierant
labours  among  the  heathen  re-
siding at  a  distance  ;  and,  though
the  joumies  which  they  performed
were  attended  with  many  inconve"
niences  and  dangers,  they  considered
themselves  amply  remunerated  for
all  their  toils,  when,  through  the
instrumentality  of  their  preach!^,
converts  were  added  to  the  church,
and  those  who  had  already  east  In
their  lot  with  the  people  of  God,
were  seen  -to  continue  in  the  faith
and  hope  of  the  Gospel.  Little  did
some  of  them  suppose,  whilst  thus
rejoicing  over  their  occasional
visits,  that  so  terrific  a  catastrophe
awaited  them  at  home.

Oh  the  commencement  of  hosti-
lities between  the  French  lyid
English,  an  Indian  war  broke  out,
accompanied  by  its  usual  horrors,
and  spreading  constematioD  and
dismay  through  all  parts  of  the
country.  The  first  outrage  was
committed  in  the  vicinity  of  Sho-
mokin>  where  three  of  the  Moravian
missionaries  resided  ;  but  by  the
overruling  providence  of  God,,  they
weremercifu)ly.preserved.  The  bre-
thren at  GnadcuhutleYi>  hcyn^^t^t.


ONA

vho  badresolred  to  remain  at  their
port,  notwitlutanding  the  imminent
danger  to  which  they  were  exposed,
as  friends  of  the  British  government
were  doomed  to  drinic  the  cup*  of
bitterness,  even  to  the  dregs.  In
the  evening  of  Nov.  84, 1766,  whilst
the  brethren  in  the  mission-house
were  sitting  at  supper,  they  heard
an  miusual  barlcing  of  dogs,  fol-
lowed by  the  report  of  a  gun.
Some  of  them  immediately  went  to
the  door,  when  they  perceived,  to
their  unspeakable  terror,  a  party  of
French  Indians,  with  their  muskets
pointed  towards  the  house ;  and  in
the  space  of  a  second  they  fired,
end  killed  Martin  Nitschman  on
the  spot :  his  wife  and  some  others
were  wounded,  but  they  precipi-
tately rushed  up  stairs  to  the  garret,
and  barricadoed  the  door  so  firmly
with  bedsteads,  that  their  savage
pursuers  found  it  impossible  to  force
it  open*

Reserving,  however,  not  to  be  dis>
appointed  of  their  prey,  the  san-
guinary monsters  set  fire  to  the
house,  which  in  a  short  time  was
completely  enveloped  in  flames.
Two  of  the  brethren  had  pre-
viously effiicted  their  escape  by
jumping  out  of  a  back  window,
and  now  one  of  the  sisters  and
a  boy  saved  their  lives  by  leaping
from  the  burning  roof.  One  of
the  missionaries,  named  Fabricius,
attempted  to  follow  their  example,
but,  being  discovered  by  the  In-
dians, they  dispatched  him  with
their  hatchets,  cut  away  his  scalp,
and  left  him  lifeless  on  Uie  ground.
AU  the  others,  who  had  fled  to
the  g^arret,  were  burned  to  death.
Mr.  Senseman,  who  on  the  first
alarm  had  gone  ost  at  the  back
door,  had  the  heart-rending  anguish
of  beholding  hie  wife  perish  in  this
dreadful  manner.  When  literally
surrounded  by  the  devouring  ele-
ment, this  excellent  woman  was
heard  to  exclaim,  in  the  true
Viritof  a  Christian  martyr,  *^Dear


16  maSSi


GNA  '

than  11  persons  perished  oa  4)h
melanchoty  oceaston,  ns.  T
sionariesy  3  of  tiielr
a  female  diild  odIj  16
old  1  The  inhamaD
completed  their  work
at  the  mission-lKMMe,  ssi  to  %
the  stobles,  aad  thus  daifan|i|i
all  the  ooni,  haj,  aad  9HBtlfi^
They  then  regaled  thenwlillr
with  a  hear^  nieal  said  difHfpi|j[
They  afterwards  retmaed^
ever,  to  bum  the  itiwn  aaid
the  plantations  f  but  the
of  the  congregfatiOD
escaped,  having  fled  to  the
as  soon  as  they  saw  the


house  in  fiames^  end  were  wfifiiiff^:

by  one  of  the   brethvea  m^km

tragical  eatastroiphe,  ^ ,  >]«

Dreadful  and  disastrooiae
these  events,  they  beoeBt
means,  in  the  hand  of  QMlii
.  Providence,  of  avertiog  e  Mi^j
more  extensive  calamity  i  a-dH'
termination  having  be«i  Aoiai
that  such  a  carnage  Aould  W.
shortly  made  in  aU  the  Mmmim
settlements,  as  had  never  jt^^^
viously  been  heard  of  in  mifli:
Ameriea.

A  station  was  afterwwdslonBB^i
about  a  mile  from
called  AotJi;  and  the
soon  increased,  so  as  to  leaiBrjI.
expedient  to  form  another.  > '^njk.
this  view,  the  brethren  pmchMid
about  1400  acres  behind  the  JBJiMi.
Mountains,  whither  severaUaafbi^  -
ed,  and  built  a  town  called  WStAf
fuetank.  During  the  war  te  IVH^
the  brethren  and  the  rhilijiiifii
dians  were  forced  toabandoD-tiMi»
settlements,  and  the  ladlaaawviPe
taken  under  the  protectloa  of  ga^
vemment  at  PhUedelidiia.  Bngf
in  these  circumstances,  the  fivyff
tile  mob  could  scarcely  be  leetaatof.
ed  ;  for  the  whites  were  tmelaiil^
againrt  all  Indians,  hpwppei]^
able  or  friendly.  AJfter  the
satioil  of  hoetiatieib  a


GNA

mned  od  the  Sasqnehannahi
ddled  FriedeTuhutten,  or
its  of  Peace."'  Here  they
)d  IS  Indian  hutS|  and  more
D  houses  in  the  English  style.
lettlement  was  frequented  by
en  Indians  from  all  quarters;
b  were  established,  and  the
tilng  of  the  Gospel  appeared
blessed  to  the  conversion  of
k  The  treachery  of  the  Iro-
however,  in  selling  to  the
ih  the  land  which  they  had
Uy  ceded  to  the  Christian
18  at  this  place  in  1765>  com-
the  congregation,  consisting
I  persons,  to  abandon  that
nent,  and. they  removed  to
mhutten  on  the  Muskingum.
ADENHUTTEN,  formerly  a
iQ  station  of  the  U,  B.  in  Ohio,
e  Muskingum,  commenced
%%y  by  the  Rev.  David  Zeis-
ry  together  with  240  Christian
IS,  who  were  obliged  to
on  Friedehshutten,  These
•con  followed  by  the  congre-
I  at  Friedenstadt,
B  Christian  Indians  were  all
icdlected^  at  2  settlements  on
river.  The  other  station,
d  a  short  time  before  about
.  up  the  river,  was  called
hnmnj  or  the  Beautiful
f.  Here,  as  at  their  former
SMnt,  they  were  at  first  ha-
.  by  Indian  wars ;  but  peace
it  length  restored,  and  their
KTts  of  usefulness,  among  the
^Hiring  Delawares,  were  flat-
'.  Several  became  hopeful
rts.  In  compliance  with  a
rt  from  the  Delawares,  who
in  full  council  to  receive  the
1,  another  settlement  was
enced  in  the  vicinity,  and
Lichtenau ;  and  at  the  end
'8y  the  converts  in  the  3  set-
ate  amounted  to  414  persons,
lie  the  mission  was  thus  hap-
rospering,  it  received  a  fatal
from  the  war  between  Great
n  and  the  Colonies.    To  add


GNA

to  these  trials,  >i  party  of  apostates
was  formed  in  Sfioenhruimy  yrlao
were  ready  to  murder  or  imprison
the  missionaries;  on  which  account
the  faithful  abandonded  the  placd,
and  removed  to  the  other  sUition*
They,  however,  soon  after  formed
a  settl^ment  on  the  opposite  sido
of  the  river,  and  called  it /Ss/inBi.

In  1781,  they  received  orders
from  the  governor  of  Detroit  to
remove,  and  were  permitted  to  go
to  Sandusky 9  where  they  suffei^
extremely  from  cold  and  hm^psr
during  the  winter.  In  the  spring,  a
company  of  them  returned  tq  gather
the  corn  on  their  former  settle*
ments,  when  they  were  attacked
by  a  large  body  of  soldiers,  who
threatened  them  with  Instant  death.
They  pleaded  for  their  lives  in  vain;
but  a  short  space  was  reluctantly
granted  to  prepare  for  their  fate.
Immediately  after  singing  and  pray-
ing to  God  for  mercy,  96  defence-
less Christian  Indians  were  mur-
dered, and  the  settlement  was
burnt.  After  this  the  remnant  were
driven  about  from  place  to  place,
and,  in  1792,  was  settled  on  a  traiCt
of  land  assigned  them  by  the  British
Government  in  Upper  Canada.
See  Canada.

GN  ADENHUTTEN,  fonncsly  a
settlement  of  the  U,B,,  about  30  m.
from  Detroit,  on  the  Huron  itrer;
formed  after  the  destruction  of  Gna-
denhutten  on  the  Muskingum,  and
previous  to  the  settlement  at  Fair-
field. They  continued  here  about
3  years,  and  began  to  prober,
when  they  were  driven  off  by  the
Chippeway  Indians.

GN  AD  E  N  T  H  A  L,  <Mr  (Trwe
Fale,  a  station  of  the  U.  B,,  130
m.  E.  of  Cape  Town,  S.  Africa,
near  Serjeant's  river,  formeily
called  ^avtofMAr^o/'.  Thismisrion
was  begun  by  tne  Rev.  George
Schmidt,  in  1737,  who  laboured
successfully  among  the  Hottentots,
till  he  had  formed  a  smaU  congre-
gation, when  ha'  ^eut  to  liMWiA


GXA

to  represent  its  promising  state  and
procure  assistants ;  but  be  was  not
permitted  by  the  Dutcb  East  India
Companyi  for  some  time,  to  re-
sume his  labours.  After  repeated
applications,  leave  was  granted  to
send  bither  S  missionaries,  wbo
commenced  their  labours  in  179S,
on .  the  spot  where  Mr.  S.  had  re-
sided.

In  1800,  they  built  a  church,  and,
onder  the  British,  enjoyed  both
cItU  and  religious  liberty.  On  the
restoration  of  the  colony  to  the
Dutch,  they  found  a  kind  friend  in
the  new  governor,  Gen.  Jensens,
and  one  of  the  missionaries  was  ap*
pointed  chaplain  to  the  Hottentot
corps,  which  had  been  raised  for
ill  defence ;  in  which  situation  he
was  highly  approved  by  the  consti-
tuted authorities.

In  Jan.  1806,  the  Cape  wasonoe
more  attaclced  successfully  by  a
British  force;  but  though  the
government  was  transferred  into
other  hands,  the  missionaries  con-
tinoed  to  meet  with  the  same  favour
and  protection  which  had  formeriy
excited  their  warmest  g^titude.
Sir  David  Baird  and  many  fhiglish
officers  and  gentlemen  visited
Gnadenthal  in  the  most  condescend-
ing and  friendly  manner ;  and  Lord
Caledon,  who  was  appointed  gCK
vemor  in  1807,  evinced  the  most
friendly  dispositi<m  towards  the
brethren,  and  encouragfed  them  to
form  a  second  settlement  at  a  place
called  OroenekkM/f  or  Green  Glen,
in  the  high  road  between  Cape
Town  and  Saldanha  Bay.
^  To  this  spot  Messrs.  Schmidt  and
Kohrhammer  removed,  with  their'
wives,  in  March,  1808,  and  took
up  their  residence  in  a  farm-house,
the  lease  of  which  had  just  expired.
They  then  applied  to  the  Hotten-
tot captain  of  that  district,  explain-
ing the  object  they  had  in  view,
and  requesting  him  to  convene  his
people,  that  the  word  of  salvation
aUg^t  he  addrenedto  them.  Aboot


GNA.

lOOpenoM  wvra  MooatdSaiff
sembled  ;  and,  aftet yritn'ig*
the  most  profonnd  lAleattoii
solemn  and  pathetto
veral  of  them  atfifwd  to
the  vicinity  of  te  ■
and  eighteen  loli  of
immediately  BMuove
erection   of   their  hvlB,
formatloii  of  their
subsequent  labom  of  the
at  this  new  statloiiy  wen
attended  with  ih«
Holy  Spirit.

But  vi^Ust  th^y
plating,  with  Moio
indications  of  the
the  minds  of  tiM  li0«th0B^
cumsta|ice  oecimed  which
ened  to  be  productive  o£. "
disastrousoonseqaemsee*
the  slaves  in  a  dlsMot  ctftod^
tentot  Holhuidy  roae  ia
to  the  number  of  SOO^  aai
to  set  lire  to  Cape  Towh,
all  the  European  melee  in
lony,  and  to  reduce  the
slavery.    They  had  hetaal]|f
and  boond  several  of  ibaUr
carried  off  armsy  itacsea^  en#
gons,  and  committed  a
depredations.    By  the
ertions  of  govenunen^
this    formidable  tneuiMlloi
crushed,  andtheiingli
plot,  with  many  of  their
adherents,  were  made

The  mission  ettU  fimHMM0
enjoy  the  patronage  shmI
of  government  j  and,
smile  Of  the  Ahnigtafy,'
at  each  of  the  settlementa
to  make  eonsldeniMe
the  knowledge  of  .  divine
Many  of  the  heathen,  ali«i,^«M
'came  from  considerable  dllMiiiV
evinced,  by  their  aTtleieell*!*'*'
tions,  that  tiiey  had  been  Mtfil^
brethren  by  the  Immedlati  IdJlMi*
of  Him  who  hadieaolvedlft  Ifc
them  miderthesonndof  hHitaWW
One  of  tbem,  in  nnrtlin  tb'IN
mbntoiwrttta     on    thle-^

VI4


u
h

i  i


\:


QNA

ukedy  ''  Qod  has  led  me  in  a
^erfnl  wvy  from  the  lower
ifay  to  this  settlement.  I  was
told  about  Bavian's-kloof
•ome  travelling  natives,  who
that  teachers  had  come  across

gretxt  waters  for  the  ex-
«  purpose  of  instructing  the
tontots,'  and  that  in  their  dis-
se«  they  described  an  illustri-

personage  who  came  down
1  betiven,  in  order  to  save  poor
ars  £rom  the  black  kloof,  of
oh  we  had  heard  such  dismal
vanis,  and  to  introduce  them,
r  death,  into  a  most  delightful
iitiy.  From  that  time,  my
ig^ts  were  continually  occu-
l  ^witb  the  necessity  of  visiting
place ;  but  I  could  not  acoom-
I  my  desire,  till  God  in  his
F^ence  led  me  hither.''  On
ther  occasion,  a  woman  stated,
f  'When  she  was  a  girl,  her  fa-
r  one  day  called  his  family
md  him,  and  addressed  them  to

/cdlowing  effect : — ''  My  dear
jdven,  though  you  are  Hotten-
^  and  despised  by  men,  let  it  be
r  «tu4y  to  behave  well ;  far  I
e  a  strong   presentiment  that

I  willf  at  some  future  time,  send
pben  to  our  nation  from  a  dis-
fe  country.  As  I  am  already
anced  in  years,  it  is  probable

I I  may  not  live  to  see  that  day ;
yoa,  who  are  young,  will  here-
nr  discover  that  your  father  has
\  you  the  truth-  As  soon,  there^
9p  as  you  are  informed  that  such
»ple  have  arrived  in  our  land,
tBB.  to  their  residence,  wherever
y  take  up  their  abode,  and  be
tdient  to  their  instructions."
nrtly  after  the  death  of  this  Hot-
tpty  his  prediction  was  fulfilled ;
I  when  the  intelligence  reached

daughter,  she  removed  to  Gna-
itlial,  where  she  was  instructed
tlie  way  of  salvation,  and,  after
ae  time,  was  admitted  into  the
arch  by  the  rite  of  baptism.
Tlie  visit  of  the  Rer*  Mr.  La-


GNA

trobe^  to  this  place,  in  1815-<16v
appears  to  have  been  prodnctive  of
much  benefit,  both  in  a  spiritual
and  temporal  sense;  as  the  bre-
thren were  animated  to  proceed  In
their  arduous  labours  with  increas-
ing zeal  and  diligence )  and  various
disorders,  which,  had  formerly  oc-
curred at  Gnadenthal,  were  effec-
tually prevented,  for  tiie  future,  by
the  introduction  of  several  salutary
rules,  and  the  establidiment  Of  a
regular  police,  consisting  princi-
pally of  fathers  of  families  in  the
settlement.

In  the  beginning  of  December,
the  inhabitants  were  suddenly  in-
volved in  distress,  by  the  descent  of
a  torrent  from  the  mountains,  wUeh
overwhelmed  great  part  of  their
premises  with  destructive-violeiiee,
.  ''On  this  occasion,''  the  mis-
sionaries observe,  ''we  are  much
pleased  to  see  such  willingness  and
diligence  as  are  not  always  met
with  among  the  people,  and  are  bj
no  means  natural  to  the  Hottentot
nation:  and  when  we  spoke  with
them  of  the  damage  which  bad
been  done  to  their  grounds,  they
replied,  that  they  had  cause  to
thank  ihe  Lord  for  his  mercy,  that
notwithstanding  their  gpreatdeme*
rits  th^  had  been  chastised  with
so  much  lenity."  On  the  20th  of
January,  1817,  the  governor.  Lord
C.  Somerset,  accompanied  by  his
two  daughters.  Captain  ^eridan,
and  Dr.  Barry,  paid  a  visit  to  the
settlement  at  Gnadenthal,  and  ex-
pressed the  highest  gratification,
whilst  surveying  the  various  im-
provements in  that  district.  In
the  evening,  the  whole  party  at-
tended the  celebration  of  divine
service  in  the  chureh,  and  i^pear-
ed  much  pleased  with  the  singing
of  the  Hottentots ;  and  the  follow-
ing day,  his  Excellency  and  suite
visited  the  school,  the  smithy,  the
cutlery,  and  the  joiner's  shop  $  and
before  they  departed,  his  lorddiip
presented  the  biti\itaKeii,  Vn  NSu^


GKA

nunM  of  hlmielf  and  hli  daugiitfr
with  300  Tli-doUiui,  for  th«  uie  t
the  achool ;  ui  eiampls  wblch  w)
Kcnerouilr  Mlowed  b;  CapUi
Staeridu.

In  1BS9,  the  tbIm  and  floodt
wen  vtcemtn.  One  of  the  bre-
tlrren  wrote: — "Thoa^  none  of
the  building]  belonginf;  to  the  mli-
ftoaarlei  hare  fallen,  our  poor  Hot-
tohtoti  hB*e  luDtred  mod  Hirerely ;
48  hoinei  have  been  ao  materlaUj
Injured  as  to  be  rendered  uninha-
bitable, for  tome  time )  and,  of  Ihb
number,  upwards  of  !0  lie  in  rulni.
The  rinileti  wblch  Irrigate  our
Tallej  have  orerfiowed,  and  da-
maged lome  of  tbe  gardmi;  bat
the  river  Sonderend  rose  to  na  enor-
mous height.  All  tbe  boats  be-
longing to  the  famii  higher  up  the
liTer  were  carried  away,  and  pick-
ed up  by  our  Hottentots.  Great
quantities  of  trees,  bushes,  roots,
and  trunks,  were  also  brotight  down
tbe  stream,  and  collected  at  the
foot  of  the  bridge,  the  wood-work
of  wblch  was  now  dislojged,  and
some  of  the  beams  and  planks
carried  to  the  distance  of  several
English  miles.

"Besides  the  loss  sustained  by
the  falling;  of  houses,  our  Hotten-
tots have  also  lost  a  great  many
cattle,  by  wet  and  cold.  I  have
this  morning  made  a  list  of  all  the
oxen  which  remain,  and  by  this
means  have  discovered,  thet,  of
400  bead,  whtcb  they  possessed  on
tbe  Sflth  ofMay,  one  half  are  ettber
consumed,  in  consequence  of  fa-
mine, or  have  perished  by  tbe  se-
verity of  tbe  weather,  in  Che  short
space  of  3  months.  In  fact,  we
are  ruined  outright;  and  all  the
fond  hopes  of  progressive  Improve-
ment, which  once  cheered  the  spi-
rits of  tbe  missionaries,  vcitl  be
entirely  blighted,  unless  God  dis-
pose tbe  hewts  of  benevolent  friends
tograntol  their  assistance.  Often
bare  I  nsed  that  eipression,  ema-
m'ated  vnth  Aunger,  but  never  ^


I  feel  the  force  of  the  pins
powerfully  as  In  tbeie  d>y(,i
my  door  is  Incessantly  bes^fi
women  and  children,  who  |m
to  my  eyei  the  frightful  reali
what  was  formerly  only  a
picture  in  »iy  imagination.


A


cultlei  of  5U
benevolent  n\
tbe  Lord,  I
;s  again


jp]ifi


ciroi^anraT*
I  the  hlessbf'V
■aging      ■      *■


sinlth


lei**


of  1S3S,  ^  to'  tile  subsistence  tt
tbe  Hottentols,  —  the  wheat
Gnadenthal  having  t
destn^ed  by  the  wel
of  God,  however,  continued  »
pnMper.  At  ihi=  lime,  J^OOdBI-
tentots  inhabitftt  Ifiis  place;  IF
whom  306  WITH  ^<^hl1ol  ebildm;
besides  which,  ji  nmiiber  of  Jaim
people,  who  IieiJ  left  tbe  d^
school,  were  instructed  once  a
week.  As  fnr  ns  possible,  the  Bft-
tlsh  mtem  bud  been  adopted.

GOAMALTY,  a  town  in  BIl-
dooitan,  near  tlie  uncient  eity'iif
Com,  whlcA  was  formerly  tbe"«-
pital  of  Bengal;  between  CU^
and  Djnagepore,  about  200 a.]).
Calcutta.

Tbe  Asp/.  Jtf.  5.  has  B  iMta
here.  Mr.andMrs.Matdbti,«Jlk
Kristna  Dasji,  and  gevenl  oBk
native  coovi^rls,  were  fomnd  UHftk
church  In  IR08,  and  Mr.  H.
intended  tbe  Bengalee  ■
which  bad  been  before  InbQ— „_
Kristna,  who  was  afteriratd^lij^'
pointed  to  this  place,  labotoad  iM
diligence  and  ossidiii^  omoa  '"
countrymen,  and  distilboted
quantities  of  Bibles  «»d
1813,  this  slntion  was  removed  to
EafrUih  Birznr,  near  Malda.

GOLD  COAST,  a  conntfy  In
W.  Africa,  which  extends  from
Cape  Appolionia  to  the  Rio  VoHa,
where  EurOipeao  settlements  haw
l>een  formed,  and  trade  liaa  Ms
carried  on  mo'n  ezteoslf^  llta-
la  any  otha  part  of  Atiiem. '  lis


GOR

itlybeen  mipe^e4  to  the  govem-
it  ot  Sierra  Leone.    Chaplains
t.  been  appointed  to  the  chief
^^  ling,  and  other  important  mea-
]$mm  bave  been  taken,  to  introduce

» enforce  the  principles  of  Chris-
\i^l  but  it  will  require  Tigo-
Jpns  and  persevering  efforts  to
jMisb  the  superstitions  by  which
"Qi^  Hfttives  are  oppressed.— -[See
j§ecra,  ^nnamaboe,  Cape  UHut,
.JKif  Owe.]

4  GOREE,  a  small  island  of  Africa,
■;^  the  soutii  side  of  Cape  Verd,  of
^aportance  for  its  good  trade,  and
^^eoded  by  a  fort.  The  French
igunrendered  it  to  the  British  in
1|00 ;  it  was  retaken  in  1804,  by
Ipe  French,  who  wer^  soon  com-

fUed  to  surrender  it  again;  but
was  restored  to  them  in  1810.
^  long,  n®  26'.  N.  lat.  14°  40'.
Xio  town,  which  includes  the  ha-
bitable part  of  the  island,  contains
^J^t  ^,000  inhabitants,  chiefly
JalooJsy  who  are  crowded  together
In  a  deplorable  state  of  ignorance
^Dd  superstition.

-  ,  Mr.  ilobert  Hughes,  from  the
Xm  M,  <S.,  succeeded  in  establishing
wthools  here,  which  contained  more
man  100  pupils;  but,  after  a  few
Xean,  the  number  was  much  dimi-
l|i^ed>  thp  island  having  been
leftoired  to  the  French,  and  the  sta-
iilpin.  was  relinquished.  Since  that
time  the  Education  Society  of  Paris
(as  stationed  a  teacher  at  this
Dlace."

,  GdRRUCKPORE,  a  town  of
Hindoostan,  about  100  m.  N.  of
Benares,  having  about  T  0^000  in-
habitants.

Some  leading  members  of  the
European  Society  in  this  place
paving  long  desired  the  presence
o(  an  English  missionary,  and
^ving  engaged  to  provide  a  house,
aikl  also  to  sup])ly  i^  considerable
portion  of  the  necessary  expense,
the  Rev.  Mr.  Morris,  pf  the  C,  M,  S,,
proceeded  tq  it  in  March,  1823,
yfitif  a  view  to  ascertain^  irofn .  ac-


ooa

taal  experience,  the  openings  fov^
usefulness..  Amidst  the  ordinary
difficulties  arising  from  the  mis-
apprehension of  the  natives,  he
succeeded  in  establishing  a  boys'
schooL  and  Mrs.  M.  collected
around  her  a  few  girls.  A  severe
attack  of  fever,  however,  greatly
debilitated  Mr.  M.  soon  aner  the
commencement  of  his  efforts,
which  required  a  temp(5rary  ces--.
sation  from  all  labour.  The  Rev.
Michael  Wilkinson  and  Mrs.  Wil-
kinson were,  therefore,  appointed
to  the  station,  where  Mr.  W.  still
continues ;  but  repeated  atta/;ks  of
illness  have  so  weakened  JVlrs.  W.
as  to  compel  her  to  returp  home.

The  church  was  opened  on  the.
first  Sunday  in  August,  1826 ;  and,
since  that  time,  there  have  been
two  English  and  two  Hindoostai^ea
services  on  Sqndays.

"  My  more  general  labours,''
says  Mr.  W.  "  consist  of  a  regular
service  i^mo^g  the  Romish  Chris-
tians twice  on  Sundays;  besides-
which,  a  number  attend  my  house
at  9  o'clock  every  morning:  the
Scriptures  are  read,  and  expounded,
and  this  exercise  concludes  witlit
prayer.  Some  good,  I  think  I  may
say  much,  has  already  resulted  from
this  daily  attendance.

<'  I  have  administered  the  LoiU's.
Supper  to  3  persons :  2  were  ibr-i
merly  of  Mr.  Rowley's  congre-
gation,--a  converted  brahminj  and
a  brahminee,  his  wife  \  she  is  a.
recent  convert,  and  appareqtty  very
humble  and  sincere :  the  third  was
of  the  Romish  comiqunion,  and  I
trust  is  now  a  Chri^ian  indeed."

Some  of  the  native  Christians
of  Beteah  and  Crowree  having
shewn  a  disposition  to  settle  here,
professedly  fpr  the  sake  of  religious
advan^ges,  a  range  of  tiled  houses
has  been  built,  where  they  have
taken  y^^  their  quarters,  to  tfa^e
number  of  26^-men,  women,  an4
children.  ^

Mr.  W.  \ask  iom^  NX.  «&!l^^>i:^
z  ^5^


GOS

tb  obtain  iiatiTe  aviftants  in  the
sehools;  and  this  hat  led  hhn  to
commence  a  semlnarjr  for  training
youtlis  as  catechists  and  readers
of  the  word  among  their  country-
men! There  are  at  present  0  stu-
dents I  of  wliom  2  are  of  Christiani
2  of  Mahomedan,  ai^d  2  of  Hin^,
parentage.

There  are  3  kojfs*  ichooh ;  1
called  the  upper  school,  consisting
of  08  boys ;  a  second  formed  nit
t^e  sepoys,  in  which  the  numbers
sre  not  stated ;  and  a  third  on  the
inission  premises; — of  which  Mr.
W.  gives  an  encouraging  account.

Before  the  establishment  Of  a
female  school,  Mrs.  Wilkinson  had
some  girls  under  instruction,  some
of  whom  read  very  well  in  the
Pentateuch  and  Testaioent ;  but
9  schoolmistress  having  been  ob-
tfUned  from  Chunar,  a  school  was
commenced,  and  from  tt  to  8  girls
attended.

'GOSHEN,  lately  a  station  of
the  United  Brethren,  among  the
Belawares  on  the  Muskingum,
Ohio.

After  peace  was  restored  be-
tweea  the  Indians  and  the  United
S^tes,Congress  grantecjthebrethren
12)000  acres  of  land  to  renew  their
settlements  on  the  Muskingum,
which  had  been  destroyed  during
the  war.  In  1798,  after  a  lapse
of  17  years,  about  30  of  the  sur-
vivors of  the  old  mission,  under  the
guidance  of  the  venerable  David
Zeisberger,repaovedfrom  Fairfield,
Upper  Canada,  where  they  had
taken  refuge,  and  commenced
building  a  new  town,  near  the  site
where  Shoenhrunn  once  stood,
which  they  called  Croshen*

Here  a  large  number  of  Indiai^s
were  gathered  into  the  church,
many  of  whom  adorned  their  pro^
fe&ion  ;  but  the  thinness  of  the
Indian  population,  and  the  influ-
ence of  abandoned  whites,  induced
tbe  brethren  to  remove  with  theix
eoi^gTegfttioii  in  1823  b!l|^ef  u^


.  »<cy-


\


the  tivir  to  Mar  JHUMllv'fWP

OrmMfo.]        ^Si'

GOSHGOBIlU^lUilC^
a  settleneitt  of  fOBUUfr  ^v*
OUo  R,

one  of  the  Uniiifd
estabUdied  a  ntHloii
most  abandoned  uattinti
joined  by  several  oi|lkei%
laboured  with  wwy
cess  for  some  yean.

Drfven*  however^
gronn(i^  by  a  war  bctweeir
tions  of  Ihdlatt%  ihej
Friedemtadt,  and' allMwMir  ii»
barked  with  their  cimaiwiliarfc
16  canoes,  and  reatea  Hi  BifMl^
Creek,  where  th^  yretm  .Jitat
by  the  ccmgregajUom  ftoM'-'fllll^
qnehannah,  and  botb  naif/Mt
to  the  MusWngmn,  mYimm  'fty|
formed  the  statton  ettUBd  QhiMp
Imtien,  '^

GRAAFF  REYWET,  W<^.
tensive  district  in  the  oaitaBpit
of  Cape  Colony^  S;  Aftiea.  Wtf
population  is  upwmdi  of  liiiHtf
nearly  9000  of  whoitt  awr  'BM^.
tentots.  In  1822,  tiiere  irm  «tNi
heathens,  not  under  Hie  M^^^
missionaries.

The  town  of  Gnu^  Mnpmt^
situated  on  the  Zondagi  imry.#d
contains  nearty  2000  in|jnmiMfcL  :

The  Rev.  Dr.  YaiiderkMiiK^^nV.
Messrs.  VanderUngsn  aad'  Mi^
from  the  L,  J§»  9*  atlBnfted  a
settlement  here  la  1801^  Mb
Vanderlingen  took  ^^uam  of  %
colonial  church;  wiiiie  l>r,  llHh
derkemp  And  Mr.  Read  Utai^-
successfuUy  for  a  short  tine'  i
the  Hottentots.  The  coteidfli]
raised  a  persecution  in
of  this,  which  induced  Ihe^
sionaries  to  re^iove  witb  fiid(  v
adhered  to  tiliem  to  Fart  ReiMBji)
.near  Algoa  Bav/  U^  £^*18fl^
and  finally  to  nNrm  ar  MtfllMiiil
at  Betheladmf.    Aboot  «•  tf  *B


cwra  ollAx*


VA


ir  iivptfter  to  the  Mil-

'ted  lidkNMMd  wifh  i^^FBst  sue*

2ak  ttver,  look  olisrge  of  tiie

~  oinmfti  at  tliis  plaeey  about

git4,  %«t  fetehied  Itis  coRnezion
•Ilk  tt»  flilftsioii,  «imI  wts  followed
If  Ifew  rnsMtft  4ff  Ua  mtlTe  con-
MfgHion,  1b  ISMt  Here  he  cen-
WMd  to  labour  with  conaJkleTable
Moceai  asMng  tiie  fiiHopeaiMs  and
far    floore    tfam    H)


*Tbe  Aer.  A.  Paorei  now  Dutch
Wililn  at  this  place,  is  zeaioea  in
yaiagtiug  flriaaioiMaiid  the  iiuKaruc-
flan  «f  Um  slavaa.  He  has  reccnitly
aatililibirt  a  niiasioD  among  the
Bi^fliiuaBs,  V>  he  supplied  with
iMtNta  teacdheia.

-  «ftAND  RIVER,  vhieh  rises
N»  4if  late  H^oMn,  and  ^Is  into
flia  81.  Lawrence  above  Montreal,
iAttr  «  courae  of  560  miles.  It
Hmm  Ike  Ixinndary  Hne  between
bMTM  «ld  Ufper  Canada.  The
MriMNf  #f  It^Miawks  <m  this  river
li^iatteated  ait  MOO,  among  whom
Ite  CKMtM«  itftkddist  Con/erenoe
tea  tiP»  misitonariesk  This  mis-
Am  tea  been  eminently  bleased.
Jn  tte  lAttet  pert  of  1888,  there
90  comvrted  nattves,  an
ttmttber  of  converts  among
1te%Mte  population,  and  a  SaV
teth  «6heol  for  fodian  yotith.

«RflfiN  BAY,  a  town  on  tte
W;  aide  of  Mlchigmi  lake,  Michi-
Ml  tortitoiy.  United .  States,  on
Pn  river,  If  «.  abonre  its  en-
tnnaeiiito  Green  Bay,  164  m.
8.W«  Maelclnairo.  The  inhabitants
^mfte  ibmeriy  FVeneh  Jesuits ;  tet
by  intermarriages  with  tte  Meno-
■Unee  Indians,  they  are  almost
WittKNit  exception  of  mixed  bkxxl.
A  Itttie  below  the  town  is  Fort
KMraid,  a  military  post  of  tte
mted  States.  Tte  nomber  of
Ike  gwrlaoii  is  about  000.  W.
Itng.  W,  N.  lat.  4^.


tte  Bief.  E.HrUifaiB,  iam  ti
-eoimeKiea  witii  tte  .Damsiitfe  ami
ffdttijtn  MuMtiottinjf  Shti t9if  m
ike  iV»«aitear  Efiioofmi  Omak,
(  Umited  SkUet),  has  laboured  tei«
for  aaveral  yean^  and  has  employed
a  teacher,  who  had,  in  1888,  60
children  of  Ite  Bffenominee  tribp
vndei'  hia  charge.

Tte  papUs  hisve  made  eonrider*
able  improvement.  The  trite  It
represented  oa  very  rihterestin^
and  extremely  atudeus  for  ili-
atraction.

6RE£NLANI>,  an  extensive
region  toward  tte  N.  pole,  which,
whether  continental  or  insider.  Is
regarded  as  telonging  to  NmHi
America.  Tliis  count^  was  disco*
vered  in  tte  year  088,  by  seme
Norwegians,  from  Iceland;  lund
it  was  named  Greenland^  from  its
superior  verdure  to  Iceland.  They
plimted  a  coleny  on  tte  easteiii
coast }  and  tte  intercourse  tetweAi
this  colony,  Iceland,  and  Denmaril^
was  continued  till  tte  beginning
t>f  the  fifteeiith  centuiy.  In  that
century,  l^  the  gradual  increase  of
tte  arc^  ice  upon  tte  coast,  tte
colony  became  completely  inac-
cessible I  while  on  tte  W,  a  range
of  moamtains,  covered  with  perpe-
tual snow,  precluded  all  approach.
This  settlement  oontahied  se^nd
churches  and  monasteries  (  and  la
said  te  teve  extended  about  80O
m.  in  tte  S.E.  part.  In  more
lecent  tlsaes,  the  western  coaat
was  chiefly  explored  by  Davis,  and
other  Englirii  navigators }  but  there
was  no  attempt  to  settle  A  coltmy.
The  country  is  said  to  te  inteblted
as  far  as  T6^  N.  lat.,  but  tte  Mora-
vian settlements  are  chiefly  in  tte
B.  W.  part.  The  people  have  some
teeves,  and  a  considen^le  numter
of  sheep,  for  whose  winter  sub-
sistence tiiey  cut  the  g^ress  in  sum-
after,  and  make  it  into  hay.  Tte
shwt  summer  Is  very  warm,  but
foggy ;  and  the  northern  lights  di-
veisify  tte  fdoom  of  ^nittUR^  H)\&s.\i

X  2  W^


rfrtenMTen.  It y  *^  that  the
N,  W.  eo^.ol  OnmiB^  i»  wpa-
ToMd  from  AoieilM  b;  a  nuron
.itnit;  that  ttw  Mthe*  of  tbatm
(ouDtriei  turn


and  that  tbe  Baqulmauxof  Am
.perfect];  reiemble  ttas  GreenI
'  «n,  in  tbeir  upect,  drcM,  mode  of
lliiiig,  and  laagwwv  Cape  Pare-
weU,the  S.  W.point,  liio  W.long.
AS^  48",  N,  lal,  iV  3S'.
.  The  DatitA  Mttiim  wai  eom-
.menced  la  lT2I,b;  the  R«t.  Haiu
Egedn,  of  Nonraj,  who  felt  an
Bnilaiudeilre  to  became  acquaint-
ed wltb  the  tituatlon  of  bis  coun-
Irjnienin  Greenland, and  toconref
to  tbem  the  truths  of  the  Goipel.
AAer  >truf(gllnf!  13  yean  with
'diSculUti  ieemijigly  Inaurmoant-
able,  he  lucceeded  in  getfioft  a
«ma]]  colon;  fitted  out.  At  tint
the  King  of  Denmarii  pa&onlzed
the  miifion,  and  appointed  Mr.
Egede  paitor  of  the  colon;,  sod
mluionary  to  the  heathen,  with  a
salarr  of  ttOf,  Soon  after  lhl>  the
mission  was  pattonized  fa;  Uie  Da-
niih  MlnloQ  College.  When  the
Greenlanden  became  convlaeed
that  Mr.  E.  intended  to  make  a
peimaneat  (ettlement,  the;  were
alarmed,  end  fled,  Into  ths  Inte-
riorj  butat  leogrthhe  alla;ed  their
feers,  and  in  aome  meanire  gain-
ed tbelr  confidence,  tbougb  far
n  long  time  few  became  hopeful
converti.  Other  minloDarles  and
colonials  aflerwaids  came  to  tali
mslslance,  who  endured  almost  In- .
credible  hardihlpi  and  prlTatloni,
and  sometimes  their  hopes  gave
wa;  to  deipondencf .
'  TheDanishsettlementanawex.
tend  on  the  W.  coast,  from  about
S9°  to  T4«  M.,  hit.  a  distance  of
more  than  1000  miles.

The  population  was  estimated,
in  181U,  at  6000  i  though  the
rambling  life  of  the  natives  renders
it  difficult  to  ascertain  the  exact
nnpiber.
i'tie  following  are  the  principal


sMtbmenti,  or  colonies,  fennedl^
the  l>Diiisb  misskmaries  on  u
Tbe  flares  shew  the  IM
-'  Mishment,  and  abol
n  nbich  the;  BleiK


of  their


esfi—Oodhaab,  or  Good  Oaf,*
BnUU  river,  nil,  64«.— ifa«t4
1TS1,S4°.— SuMfl-^op,  otZiuUiiii


(!•«'«  Hope,  Wii,  eS"  IV;  m
wored  a  few  mUes  N.  to  CW
ihmrn,  llBi.—Kgedeinimde,  ■*■
Egeie'tMeHarial,  llM.&ffM^
Jacat',  Haven,  1141,  tS'  4DM
(JtdiaveH,  or  (Jeod  HitBen,  MhH
SitUnbenk,  17Sfi,  QB"  iff.  TbelM
last  rientlaaed  settlementa  OMJI
the  Ticinit;  of  Diska  Baf..^lMl
«a*,  W.—  Vpemaiiik,  1106,19*,''
It  is  DOW  more  than  a  owU^
since  the  truly  apostolir.  EgodeSlll
attempted  lo  introduce  ChriEtiu^
into  Greerdand  ;  oiijl.  If  we  Kteefl,
the  nnrtlierl;  colony,    Upenitilkf

shaab,  tberi;  ere  scarcely  an;  hel>
theni  lelt  In  tbe  known  parts  of
Greenland,  and  theaa  but  a  fi*.
old  people.  Fonuetly  there  wa#
nine  Duiiish  missiouiules,  bat  h4»
terl;  Ibe  number  hot  been  mu^
dtmlniibed.  Ueside  the  mMairi*
rlei,  the  number  of  caleohlata  bM'
bfen  considerable, — in  some  of  Afr
colonies,  no  less  than  U  or  S.  TV
Daolsb  mlsrionaries  huiB  twf^
lated  the  NawT«itaiMnt^-THi)t
has  been  cireolated;  tkaji-kM^
alio  printed  a  h;iBn<lMa^  c  MtN
chism,  and  a  spelllng-boal^  Jl>to'
--me  ISngaage,  -■       -  v    -■■

Since  tbe  ;e^  1T3S,  ttc  C.  A

have  laboured  la  Hila

land:  tbelr  Oivt  a
Matthew  Staol
such,  and  Christtan  DatM.  'fer
about  2  yean  the;  wen  Jatoid  !••
two  otben,    Fv  ■amtlj^bt-jmflt


MMt   to   iht   CltaMiui   iatOl.

iltiittod  aihort  «ivtBiie«  ftMi

tte  tesiikfiioe  df  Mbf.

i>i  N.  lit  fft%  ui4  caliMl

-  nsyoM-lTtO^pms  rendek«dt«^
iMteMi  by  ikm  change  iHiieh
iwk  jiltiit  Uk  Hit  teetlmn'8  node
<<pi—iihing;  wMob  is  aosthi^K
Mr  dMCClbed  ki  the  fdUowiHg  saN
of  an  ni»oon^btg  Instance


■  #ohaiiiwg,  All  indlati  of  the  Ma<^
Wrafciter  mUob,  who  bad  foftneity
'ten  a  very  wkslwd  man,  was  tfte
|ter«f  iiial  tribe  whose  faetit  tra^
ywrerfuMy  a^ivakened.  Thvoiwli  fhe
mmmtitlag  of  the  mMonaiy,  Cbria-
jhn  Heavy  RbvoIi,  the  Dirine
piW^  %as  nanlfested  in  him  fai  to
i<bctunl  a  mantoer,  tiuit  he  not
ttd^  beoa»e  a  belie^wr  in  Jesos
<flbrMt,  but  a  blenefl  witsem  of
9v  trath  Id  hit  own  nation.

Vt/t  ehaiige  which  took  plaee  in
iMHit  and  induct  of  IMs  man
^IMinay  #ttlkin|f ;  for  he  had  been
dMihguiibed  in  aU  parties  Biet
iMT  ilotoas  div<eni<Hi  as  the  most
OMtiageousy  and  had  ^en  made
UMMatf  a  cripple  by  debanchefy.
<le  aitetwar^  became  a  fetlow-
iaboutar  In  tiie  owigregation  g^-
Ikend  from  ateong  the  heatiien.
At  ome  of  the  meetings  which  the
liWfttiiea  held  for  pastoral  confer-
MiltaBy  and  inqviry  into  the  state  of
the  eongreffations,  he  related  the
oecaskn  of  his  convevsion  in  the
Mlotrlag  oManer,  in  oonseqaenee
•f  their  spealdng  with  one  another
■bimt  the  method  of  preaohing  to
tha  heathen  :>-

^^Bretfaren^  t  have  been  a  hea-
tfMn,  and  have  grown  old  ambngst
them :  therefore  I  know  very  well
how  ft  is  with  the  hea^n,  and
hew  tiiey  think.  A  pteaober  once
cane  t6  as,  desiring  to  instruct  as,
aad  began  by  providg  to  us  that
Ihtft  was  a  God$  oa  whieh  we


laid  %»  %lfti—' Weil  $  lllii  Mt
ttma  Hihik  i#e  aie  IgMftmt  ef  that  ?
Bfow  go  heck  egrite  to  Qie  |ito6e
AiMa  ehoueo  tttfu  aamoil*'

**  Then,  again,  another  pteacfaer
came,  and  began  to  Instt^t  ts^
seyhig,  <  You  enist  3M  steal,  mit
driek  lee  much,  nor  He,  nor  lead
wiehed  lives.'  We  aastrered  hiA,
*  9*001  that  thoa  ait  I  dolt  thou
thliik  that  we  do  not  know  that?
Oa,  and  learn  it  Unt  thyself,  ahd
teach  tile  people  whom  thon  be^
ionf^  to  not  te  do  these  things  ;
fot/whe  Mfl  greater  dronkards,  or
thl^efe.  or  lia»,  than  thine  o#ft
people  r  Thtas  we  eeitt  him  a^vay,
also.

"  Some  time  aft^  tUs,  Christlfta
Heaiy ,  one  of  the  brethrmk,  came  to
me,  into  my  hat,  and  ftat  down  by
me.  The4x>nteatB  6f  his  disboone.
to  me  were  neaHy  these :  ^  t  come
to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of
heaven  and  eaith  \  he  sends  md
to  acquaint  thee  that  he  would
gladly  sate  thee>  and  make  thee
happy,  and  deliver  thee  Irom  th^
mtoerable  state  iA  which  thou  Heat
at  present.  To  this  end,  he  became
a  man,  gate  his  lifo  a  ransom  fof
man,  and  shed  his  blood  foir  matk.
All  that  believe  in  the  name  of  this
Jesus,  obtain  the  fo^veness  of  sin  if
to  all  them  that  receive  him,  by
faith,  he  gfiveth  power  to  becomd
the  scms  of  God:  the  Holy  SpiiAt
dw^etfa  in  theif  bearts>  and  they
Are  made  free,  tfaroagh  the  blood
of  Chrtet,  from  the  slaveiy  ahd^do-
minlon  af  sin.  And  though  tboik
art  the  thl^  of  sinners,  yet^  if  thbil
prayest  to  the  father,  in  his  name^
and  beli^vert  in  Um,'  as  a  sacriftce
for  thy  sins,  thaa  Aalt  be  heard>
and  laved,  and  he  wiU  give  thee  a
crowii  of  life,  and  thou  dielt  live
with  hiin  in  Maven,  for  ever.'

"  #heto  he  had  ftaished  his  dis*
temrse,  he  lAy  down  upon  a  board
in  my  hut,  fatigued  by  his  journey^
and  fell  into  a  sound  deep.  I
thoegfat  within  nqrself,  what  man^


tfMf  of  manbtUi?  .There  he  Um,
andsieeptioiw^etlyi  I  migbtkill
•hiniy  and  throw  him  out  into  the
forest— and  who  would  regard  it?
Bat  he  is  unconcerned ;— this  can-
not, be  a  bad  man;  he  feais  no
evil,  not  e? en  from  us,  who  are
to  savage,  but  sleeps  comfortftbly,
and  places  bis  life  in  our  hands.
However,  I  could  not  forget  his
words,  they  constantly  recurred
to  my  mind ;  even  though  I  went
to  sleep,  yet  I  dreamed  of  the  blood
which  Christ  had  shed  for  us.  I
thought — this  is  very  strange,  and
quite  different  from  what  I  have
ever  heard )  so  I  weht  and  inter-
preted Christian  Henry's  words  to
the  other  Indians;"

As  the  result  of  the  preaching  of
the  cross,  an  extensive  awalcening
toolc  place.  One  of  the  baptized
Greenlanders  informed  the  mis-
sionaries, that  he  had  found,  liis
countrymen  many  leagues  N.  so
anxious  to  be  instructed  in  the
things  of  God,  that  they  urged  him
to  spend  a  whole  nig^t  wiSi  them
in  conversation ;  and  after  he  had
retired,  on  the  second  night,  some
of  them  followed  him,  and  con-
strained him^  resume  the  subject.
Even  one  of  the  angekoks,  or  ne-
cromancers, was  brought  under
such  serious  impressions,  that  he
wept  almost  incessantly  during  two
days,  and  asserted  that  he  had
dreamed  he  was  in  hell,  where  be
witnessed  scenes  which  it  would
he  utterly  impossible  for  him  to
describe.  '  At  the  close  of  the  year
1748,  no  less  than  2S0  Greenland-
ers resided  at  New  Hernnhut,  of
whom  35  had  been  baptized  in  the
course  of  that  year.

The  unusual  intensity  of  cold.
Some  years  after,  was  productive
of  all  the  horrors  of  famine.  In  an
account  of  one  of  their  visits  to  the
heathen,  at  this  awful  crisis,  the
knissionaries  observe —

"  Near  a  habitation,  which  had
l^eenlong  since  forsaken,  we  found


1^  .

.fUCll

home,  tiMitwecoald
rights  hut  vera  faoMi  %»
on  ourbelUes. '  They  by
another  |b  Older  to  keep
warm  \  heving  neflre,  i
monelto  eat|  aad-tfaegr
emaciated  that  ther  did
raise  tbemsehrei, 'er
to  us.    At  length  »


a  couple  of  fisttee  |  ^wteD'^avilV
who  looked  pale  m  daeH^Sl)
whose    countenaiiee     wmYdttft

ghastly,  seised  one  of  IImb«  BMtii
it  was,  tore  it  fin  piaoM

teeth,  and  devoured  U  -

utmost  aividity.  Four  cblidMHlit
ahready  perished  with  iMBgor*^* J%.
distributed  among  tbem  %  fmmrn
of  our  own  scanty  pittnM^'4i5.
advised  them  to  go  -to
ment<  which^lKmeverytbef^
ed  rather  reluctant  to  do,  ■feilA'.
eyittced  no  imclimition  to  hcn^olL
Gospel,  and  carefully

intercourse  with  our  Gi    ,

To  tiie  horrors  of  luliM-'t
now  superadded  the
disease.     No  less  than  36'flC'4l9
Greenland .  converts  -were
off;  but  whilst  tiie  hretiina;

over  so  extensive  and        ^

bereavement,  they  w^re  n^ttwl'tl
rejoice  in  the  succeae  of  tlwtfIN
cious  Gospel  which  had  iMiipOriii
these  poor  creatures  in  their.viil
trying  circumstances,  andheddnh
enabled  them  to  exchange
with  serenity  and  holy
They  had  also  the  moat  litadli
and  substantial  proofs  of  tha^^
of  divine  grace  in  manyof^
surviving  cUsciidesy  when
the  readiness  with  which  itifiWt^
dertook  to  assist  in  the-enppial'of
the  wido¥^  and  orphans.- of .vfti
deceased ;  and  they  wereemoiefljy
grateful  for  the  trimnph  ^^IMae
influence,  when  they  saw  mtek-^
the  female  converts  as  were  molhnte
alternately  suckUng  -  the.  be^ilait
infants,  who  msu{  have


iMnot  their  timely  aid,  and  who/
lfi»;lBft-in  limilar  circiiinitaiice&
rffong  tlie  heatlien^  must  have  been
btrud  mlive  with  their  parents ;  as
mthlii^  is  so  abliorrent  to  the  feel-
tafli  of  8  Oieenland  woman^  unac-
Mtnted  with  the  Gospel,  as  the
naa' of' nourishing,  with  her  own
■Uky  the  child  of  another.
'4  Jknother  pleasing  instance  of  the
power  of  Gotqpel  truth,  in  expand-
Bg  the  heart  and  exciting  to  sym-
IKtiiy  and  active  benevolence,  is
Ikoa  related : — *<  It  was  customary
vlth  the  brethren,  at  some  of  their
■eatings,  to  read  to  their  fiw^  the
MCOirats  which  they  received  from
Iheir  congfregations  in  Europe,  and
Hpecially  such  as  related  to  missions
mong  the  heathen.  These  com-
OBmieations  were  generally  heard
vlth  a  considerable  degree  of  in-
i^veit;  but  no  intelligen(5e  ever
ifbcted  them  so  deeply  as  that  of
ha  destruction  of  the  Moravian
atilement  among  the  Indians  at
fatadenhutten.  When  they  were
old  that  most  of  the  missionaries
rere  either  shot  or  burnt  to  death,
y  the  savages  in  the  interest  of
l^rance,  but  that  the  Indians  had
leaped  to  the  settlement  at  Beth-
ihem,  they  burst  into  tears,  and
Djuediately  prepared  to  raise  a
ttle  contribution  among  them-
ihres.  '  I,'  exclaimed  one,  '  have
fine  rein-deer  skin,  which  I*  will
hra.'  *  I,'  said  a  second, '  have  a
0W  pair  of  rein-deer  l)oots,  which
^irill  cheerfully  contribute.'  '  And
/  added  a  third,  <  will  send  them
iealy  that  they  may  have  some-
linff  both  to  eat  and  to  bum.'
uch  contributions  could  not  fail
>  be  highly  appreciated  by  the
liisionaries,  and  the  value  of  them
rat  faithfully  transmitted  accord-
ng  to  the  wish  of  the  simple-
learted  and  benevolent  donors;''

In  1758,  a  new  station  was  form»
d,  which  the  brethren  called' Z^'eA-
en/elt,  at  which  the  settlers  were
ompelled  to  endure  many  priva^


tkmi,  'from  the  scarcity  ^aiim^
vailed  in  the  district,  4^^^*^  ^
continimnce  of  which  many  of  the
savages  died  of  absolute  w^nt;  even
the  Greenland  families  were  at  last
reduced  to  the  necessity  oi  feedifljg
principally  upon  muscles  andsei^
weed,  and  tiie  missionaries  wese
often  brought  hito  the  most  painlitf
straits.  Amidst  a  succession  Of
temporal  trials,  and  of  successes  in
their  spiritual  efforts,  a  third  tttai*
tion  was  formed  at  the  idand  of
Onartok,  where  they-  had  disco-
vered, with  surprize,  at  the  mouth
of  a  warm  spring,  a  verdant  mea-
dow, adorned  with  different  kinds
of  flowers.  This  was,  of  course,
a  powerful  attraction  in  such  a
country  $  but  as  the  situation  would
have  been  inconvenient  in  some
respects,  they  fixed  upon  a  spot  a
few  miles  distant,  to  which  they
gave  the  name  of  Lfchfenau.  This
district,  situated  about  400  m.  from  «
Lichtenfels,  contained  within  the
circuit  of  a  few.  miles  not  less  than
1000  inhabitants.  At  first,  consi*
xlerable  numbers  flocked  to  the
brethren;  so  that  previous  to  the
erection  of  a  church,  they  were
frequently  obliged  to  worship  in  the
open  air ;  and  during  the  winter  of
1TT5,  nearly  200  persons  took  up
their  abode  with  them.  Many  of
these  were  baptized  at  the  expire^
tion  of  a  few  months,  and  in  a  few
years  the  believing  Greenlanders
at  Licbtenau  exceeded  in  number
those  at  either  of  the  other  settle^
ments.  Trials  and  deliveraneeft
still  attended  the  progress  of  this
mission.  Some  thousands  have  been
baptized  since  its  commencements
Vast  numbers  have  died  in  lively
hope  of  a  blessed  immortality.  The
missionaries  have  translated  the
New  Testament  into  the  language
of  Greenland,  which  has  been
printed  by  the  British  €md  Foreign
B,  S,;  and  its  reception  In  1823,
by  the  natives,  was  •  accompanied
by  indescribable  joy.  -Some  tfaM

%5^


aMW  ADA,  MM  tf  te  CarftM
Mui*,  IrlivMlMfMiN.T.  W
TobiCB.    II  It  U  m.  bag  ud  U


aritad  to  inteM  moi,  tibMto,
MftlMUn.  H«Mt&ro6iMathB
AM»dii>  IHI,  «MinDe«  to  tbB

rtwd  !■  lilt,  aM  iMioMl  to

FmNb   UaJaJ  w«»  torn  wad

MtvMiM  tui  nBc'staM^


MMPttal.
lie  ffU


The  ffaitiytmt  t


■  bmbi  ITH)  battbefrt-
«RW0f  tbaOvqiel  hM  beMifaw
«MBW  tbe  MpM^  «ba  we  dM<Mt
wkoUr  IfDorut  of  tba  B^IWi  kD-
Mn,  aad  VMk  B  eomptoddtatMt
of  FMMh,  wMuat  pnpaWMA  uid
ptMM*  to  Kkkh  to  noelve  ate-


and  NadcRd  tt  aiactatl  to  IbE  ial>


M  to  04  who  are  an

,   -„JB«I  ■  towAMi  !■

Am  SmMlBJ'iiidKMil,  MM  «tf  ^HM
p«MT«iuioa  ««  ham  iihiaring
L^.  Ik  addtUoB  to  tbue,  4
■*lilte%  i  aialM  aad  t  CmalM^
haM  caA  In  IMi  lot  mxng  m.
CM  two  tof  toe  eiUtot  wt  riitt,
UiMe  la  MM  good  doii^  {  aa^ral
■waAan  haTtw  baaii  nceked  on
bolhofttaB.  VpwtbabthaBwa
MHEalir  daieto   atf  ve  aae  as;


good,  Bicept  th*l  tor  M


lUre  (rhU«  wc  ore  Bwfc^^l
I.     Upon  ttte  ii'hok,  w  ^5l


thai  thiti^  La  tbudeininrBnli
work  are  more  bopefvl  Aui  k
vbicb  wa  can  nlufbute  oni;

lies,  ourbi^
filed  bj'  our  Isbotm,  ai
fTHine.     Htdy   waUr  is
vblcb  tbcf  puTcbnse  o(  tl
Bad    upon    wliicb    Ihej    i
depend  for    »lvntioD.     i»
ence  U>  the  windwuU  part  <i  t

labour  hevtowed  upon
imiDeiisi',   but   the  fruit  of  it  d

members  Ibere  who  were  in  to
In  Aall^^ua.     Theiew

lile  RliOnU.  NambersLasoelBl
II  Whites;  IHSFTvet-oloitfa^J
Btnck* ;    and    lltS   Sliivea.    '
310.    The  order  of  ttae  w
been  recenltf  ii
mtuns  the  ileinorullziitg  ii
of   cril  examjile    b«    rac
clieck.    Number    of  childr
males  aaiJ  \H  femules

OaiQLtA  TOWN,
Klaar  U'altr,  a  atatioD  of  J
L.  M.  S.,  Soalh  Africa.  Hi
tbe  Orau^  R.,  160  m.  N.  E.  0.
Town,  In  thecouiilrj  of  tfae  (
quBs,  jbnuerif  called  Baitonl  S
traitols.     Populalioii  about  £("

When  the  miaiarariea,  iL
Anderaan  nail  Kramer,  Sntal
in  1^02,  thef  found  Uie  "

horda  of  roTiiiK  and  deg

n^Fs;  bat  Hflut  trttnilliiv  ■_
wilb  Uiem  ibr  aereral  J«an,  II
induced  tbnn  lo  lettle  at  Kt
WHier,  the  plnce  wbero  Ortt
Town  now  stands-  AgricultiWC^
introducHl,  B  school  ettobldli  '
and  a  church  built.     In   ISOS,  i


were  tat^t  lo  read,  Mtd  U  p


or!

5^  ^  «f  piety.  SocmI  alter  Xtk\»,
•^K^s  of  tiie  BiiiaU-poz>  and
1^ uily  of  the  natives^  threat-
lejdestniction  of  the  settle-
'i.^he  missionaries!  however,
^c^d  to  labour  with  diligence
iss.  In  1821,  the  church
of  about  260  members,
pf  'Whom  evinced  the  reality
■*  Ohristian  principles  by  cor-
Mling  deportment.

^viinber  of  Griquas,  called
^fiars     (or     Moiyitaineers),

^^ir  having  stationed  them-
>>  among  the  mountains,  com-
*^  a  few  years  after,  many
I  of  depredation  and  violence.
B  Griqua  chiefs  had,  on  several
wtons,  commendably  exeried
imselves  to  disperse  and  reclaim
w  marauders,  but  without
Hi.  in  reference  to  one  of
ir  principal  efforts  made  with
t  view,  the  following  statement
ztrected  from  a  letter  from  John
Eflll,  Esq.  government  agent  at
]ua  Town,  to  the  editor  of  the
tk  African  Ckr&nicle  (written
9ie  purpose  of  obviating  certain
(tatements  of  a  communication
rted  in  a  preceding  number  of
■  paper),  as  it  beautifully  illus-
is  the  moral  and  civilizing  ten-
y  of  Christianity  in  relation  to
Qfiquas : —

The  Griqua  chiefs  proceeded
le  ftation  of  the  Bergenaars,  to
such  measures  as  might  put  a
io  the  system  of  depredation
"were  carrying  on  against  the
tf  around  them.  Instead  of
ing  any   disposition  to  alter

conduct,  they  set  the  com-
lo  a^defiance,  and  maintained

attitude  till   night  came  on

rain,  when  they  made  their
>e.  The  commando  returned
riqua  Town  with  4000  head  of
3y  followed  by  some  hundreds
bie  people  of  the  plundered
■y  to  whom  a  considerable
of  these  cattle  belonged^  and,


em

cbhtrary  td  the  practice  hf -teinigjl
tribes,  a  scene  of  justice  took  pltkoe
which  would  have  done  credit  to
any  civilized  people.  The  chieib
restored  to  these  poor  people  aB
their  cattle,  without  reserving  a
single  hoof  to  themselves  to  which
any  one  of  those  people  could  esta*
blish  a  right.  When  the  peOfiio
had  got  their  cattle>  they  were  told
that  they  might  go  to  their  own
place  of  abode  \  but  they  were  so
struck  with  the  justice  of  the  Gri-
qua chiefs,  that  they  begged  to  h6
allowed  to  put  themselves  under
their  protection,  and  follow  them
to  Griqua  Town."

The  following  paragraphs"  finoiil
the  same  letteif,  eidiibit  pleasing
evidence  of  missionary  influence  in
promoting  peace  and  security
among  uncivilized,  oir  partly  civi^
lized  tribes  :-^

"  Finding  it  necessary  to  visit
Cape  Town  (says  Mr.  MelviU)^
and  to  bring  the  chiefs  and  some  of
the  leading  people  with  me,  In
our  absence  the  Bergenaars  caooe
again^  Griqua  Town,  and  having
attacked  a  place  in  the  vicinity;
they  killed  two  people  and  burnt  a
woman  in  a  house,  to  which  they
set  lirew  After  this  they  proceeded
to  attack  the  village,  but  hearing
that  there  was  a  missionary  stiU
residing  there,  they  retired  to  a
distance  and  sent  for  him,  and  he
brought  them^to  terms  of  peace.

Here  we  see  a  lnissionary>  so
far  from  being  the  cause  of  war^^
has  so  much  respect  attached  t6
his  character,  that  even  the  Berge-
naars would  not  attack  the  plaee
because  he  was  there :  the  pretenee
of  Mr.  Sass  afforded  a  protection  to
the  whole  people."

Indeed,  there  is  good  reason  ftyt
believing  that  the  missionaries,
either  directly  or  indirectly,  hare
been  for  many  years  instrumental
to  the  preservation  of  peace  be«
tween  the  colonists  and  the  tribea


xlAi

ivmeiK,  «  MBMof  jMtloe;  faiUbt*
Utter,  •  sgiiAi  of  kftg^uon,  when
lh#fonDer  have  vialatod  Hitft  prin^

''Dttrinf  Hm  yMt  year,"  mjib
llw  isst  rapnrty  ''great  inproreo
SMAt  luM  takea  piece  both  in
4lie  iteto  ead  procpecti  of  thii
wiiaikm.  The  veligioiit  aervioei
Me  Boie  nuBeroudy  and  nere
jceguledy  etteeded.  On  Hie  Sab*
bath,  the  ^laoe  of  iranhlp,  «nhich
is  Urge,  is  well  filled.  Whltethe
missionaries  eedeavoarto  mrntkem
ttMife<i!ple  to  •  -cottoeEB  te  their
own  salvation,  they  on  oaieAdte
WBge  epoe  them  the  Obligation
Umf  are  under  ie  promote  the
feligioiis  instnietiiMi  of  their  <A\^
diOB,  and  these  eodeavome  here
not  been  inefiectiiaL  A  Sabbath-
school,  devoted  entirelj  to  the  le-
Mgtous  iMhmotioB  of  the  children,
)tu  been  ooasmeoced.  It  excites
QMsideiabie  interest  omong  the
people,  aid  has  been  elveady  the
means  «f  eAscting  great  good.
Maay  of  the  fMveati  attend  the
foheol,  and  one  of  the  urisskm-
aries  isnaUy  gives  en  addnes  on
the  occasion.  The  ettendanoe  at
the  di^y-school,  wibieh  had  deolned
to  ebeet  49,  is  now  increased  to
180.  The  cfaiUren  mahe  good
progress.

,  4(  jjie  noaberof  Bediuanas  who
haye  settled  et  Oiifoa  Town,
chiefly  in  oooaeqiienoe  of  the  Man-
tatee  inmaien,  is  iqiwaids  of  S60.
iThe  missionaries  are  active  kt  pio-
meting  their  religions  instmction,
tlom^h  the  mediam  of  an  inter-
preter, wiiom  they  have  engaged
ior  the  purpose.  Theddldrenof
the  Becbuanas  regularly  attend
the  school,  And  make  good  pro-
gress. The  misBionartes  consider
it  not  improbable  that  some  of  them
youths  naay  be  the  first  to  ooav^
tbe-Goqpel  to  their  own  oountTymea.
^/*  The  Beigenaars  are  desirous
iifbareiagain  in  the  Teli^\i«aAd


.f '


chA  pArftini  of
BMyof

for
^TheOrlKMisiii
sisihis  df  tim
curing  >tiii  mem  ft
le  ape^

«e  agncelinMii  tnHB
I,  be  fiwDndfisieMI
and  the  formattan  of  giiltaiM|
GftOfiNACLOOF,  4  Ml

IBO     Xnttfvm      ■VWhIWI*    Oi   «

Jkfrloa,  afamt  -4^  m.  l^'i^
Town,  among  the  HottmMl

This  ntsdios  vn  MHMHll
1M8,  WMlBr  the  patinfn^
Gml  aif  CalataH  «m  OmM
the  Cape.  The  fenthMi>!
mrigned  akoet  fiOM  wna  li
on  wncn  mcy  penmnBii  ■
buiU,  but  such  aa  engagad'^
mgnlar  ilves;  and  ea  lWi(
dples  A  Krtthimaiit  ^««J
formed.  Ih4y8ai%M«m
tieed.  Tin  aassberof  taW
hilM2wm40flL

About  thia  ttee  j«  ^
handsome  ohapelf
erected,  WW  BBueh
reins  and
^^lole  eettlement
ingmry.  In  the  folkimi^  yS
though  aim  felt,  wen  b  ^
measure  repaired ;  the  iMHil
brethren  were  antmated  If
proofs  of  the  D*itBo  i^gj
the  harvest  WBBypnnMHrtM!^
abundant.  At  tho  ptoeati
elso,  ttis  station  Bi^)Q9«lil
theUessiiigofGml.

The  B.  and  F,S.&  \m
vaftoabie  donatjona  ef
TestamentiloliUa


H.


HANKSY,  a
Ir.  if.  S.  In  S.  AMc%
its  Triomior,  in
cuUarty.bewilifiil^  «Ma  tM>^
tOQs  iU,  betweea  PMilMsi


HAR

imioi^  Tbs  R«r.  W«  Foster
idM  to  Airk^  te^  taks  charge
|cr9B4iBMiy  to  be  formed  here
»  odfMiUioa  of  the  chil^eA
-  mifsioiiaries  in  that  ^sqaB-
emL  for  tbo  pieperatioB  of
Kift  Qntiyes  for  iottrucjbiiig
vxx  couatiyiBea.  This  pLace^
x>  is  denned  by  Mr.  F.^
^ar  important  reusons,  iaeti-
The  attendance  at  the
'whin^  if  represented  «&  in
state,  if  nsually  about


;AaONY,  a  station  of  the
bf^  &,  Qomraesced  in  l9Stl,
great  Osagea  of  the
situated  on  the  Marias
B  good  miU-streaWy.  ^  m.
rnnction  with  Osage  riwer,
.  m  the  largest  of  the  Great
v^&Uagesy  ami  about  80  m.
I  Osage,  on  the  Missouri.
_3s  of  the  Missouri  are
iXltjt  in   their  habiti  and
te  those  cm  the  Arkansas,
divided  into  Great  ,aod
J  this  distinatkHa  being
L^inal^  and  tUl  recent)^
^n  two  separate  villages,
riTes>  about  360  mu
junction  with  the  Mis-
^jt  they  wander  about  like
^   ^fane  they  pursue.    7^^^'
are-  nothing  more  thao.
can  remove  upon  the
iotke ;  one  horse  being
of  ~  carrying    bouse   and
^Xcl  furniture  at  one  load,
commencement  of  the
the  time  of  planting  their
L«y  usually  reside  in  one
*^4iich  they  call  their  village-
p^r^iainder  of  the  year,  they
^^^  into  parties,  and  stay  but
^ayM  in  a  place^  according
'      abundance  or  scarcity  of
^bere   they   set  up   their
^^     In  gummer  the  men  go
•    «laie   of  nature,  except  a
^  iOxNit  their  wsirtR;  and  in
<^Y>  wlwn  the  thwrwwwtar  i$


below  Zero^  most  oi  their  ttttti*
children  etm  seen  naked.  Tiey-
am  divided  into  T  dans^  vrkMt
bear  the  following  names: — Bh^
fala,  Elk^  Dmery  Bear,  Eagh^
Fuk,  and  AtaumpbeM.  Id  1889,
the  great  body  of  liiia  tribe  removed
about  6i  or  70  m.  south-westerly,
to  the  grand  river.  The  tract  oi
land  given  bgr  the  Intfians  for  tfa»
use  of  tile  mission  contains  aboa»
1^,000  acres,  which  are  very  ^iw
tile,  and  weH  snpptied  vsith  mo-
terfails  for  boilding.

Ihreliing- bouses,  a  school-
house,  a  grist-mill,  a  saw>-miUy
and  other  suitable  boikiings,  liav»
been  erected  for  the  accommoM
dation  of  the  missioDi  famfly  \  and
in  the  course  of  the  smnmev  d^

1823,  i  fields,,  embracing  opwarde
of  00  acres,  were  enclosed,,  a  ee>»>
fieU  of  40  acrca  planted^  and  the
farm'  stocked  with  100  head  oi
cattle.  Sickness  at  fimt  retarded
the  progsess  of  the  mission;  bat
the  confidence  of  the  chiefis  bee
been  secured,,  and  the  prospects  of
extensive  and  increasing  inflvenoer
in  the  tribo  continued  to  b»  eiH>
couraging^   in  the   eady  part  of

1824.  The  school,  in  the  lattM
part  of  1823,  consisted  of  18  Okage
children,  who.  make  such  proA-^
ciency  in  acquiring  the  EngUsil
language,  and  in  domestic  and
agricultuKal  aiti,  as  to  rendev
much  service  to  ibe  family,  and
to  promise  extensive  osefuhien
to  the  mission  and  to  their  natton.
The  government  of  the  United
States  contributes  to  this  work.
The  Rev.  Messn.  Pixley  and
Montgomery  have  devoted  their
time  principally  to  the  study  of
the  language,  and  are  cheered
with  ttie  prospect  of  soon  preach-
ing the  Gospel  in  tiie  Indian
tongue.'  In  pursuing  this  object,
Mr..  Pixley  has  lived  several  montiis
with  tlie  Indians,  accompanying
than  in  thi^  huattn^  \om.


c.


llAlt


.  HARVEY  ISLANDS,  a  l

■dq^ted  u  t  gcMral  dedgnathm  of
tha  gnrapi  Cram  ons  gf  tba  driit
iiUMk  of  «Uoh  K  cDnbU  bclnf
odled  Han«r  Uud,  and  bet
Uurt  Uaad  li  batter  known  in
osoffraDh;  than  an  other  of  tte
One  of  UwD  It  bdIh-
.      ISed.  Aibtbtk;   JpR,


btbitw


'  HAWAII,  eaUed,  aeeoidlnc  to
■f>6leatart£o«raph]')  OWHY  HBE,
all  Uand  is  Oe  N,  PaeiOc  Ocaaii,
the  latfcft  of  ae  Sandwich  kland^
BT  uUm  long  b7  TS  'wide,  cbntaln-
tw  4000  i^aBTe  milei.  IfIlMB..E.
,  ofthe  gtottf,  t)|e  N.  poht  IsIiiK
In  W.  long.  lU*  iff,  N;  1st.  SO*  10^
Copt.  Cook  dlacoTerad  thli  liland,
Nor.  30,  ITTS,  and  wo  kUled  by
tka  DatlTei,  FU).  14,  1110.  1'  '
divided  Into  S  laise  dlAlcli.
the  N.  E.'  part  of  thlt  lilaad  l|
Bountghi  Kuht  tha  top  of  wh
If  contlniMllj  corerad  wltb  lac
tluhetgfat  ia  eatlmated  to  be  8400
feel.  Mnnr  parti  of  the  Uand  ate
mr  fertile  end  pcqMlow.  ^  In  the
(Mitheiii  partlbe  nouqd-li  eofeied
irltfa  eliiden,  end  bitM«eoted«lth
mutj  black  (iMalu,  which  aeen  to
marie  the  C0Dne,.of  Un  that
flowed  fram  the  nnantatiM  seme
'  Bgee  ago.  The  iropidsttan  It  «tl-
inaleJ  at  atore  NO.OOir,  by  Kime  at
100,000,  and  fonnerly  at  IfiO,OOOi
The  following  itatlona  hare  been
fanned  on  the  Idand  :—

jldirva,  ,oa  tbewarteni'coait,
nearij  eqeldlttant  tiim  ttt  N.  and
5.  pidDti.  The  lidnUtaiits  nuoont
todKHitSOOO.  KalTDalitheMatot
•oTenuiMBt,  iwdarTaniebameba  I .-;
gai  tba  ietidfeMw.otKtiakltDv,thl*


&  -    HAW  ^

GomTHir,known  among  Ant^^
hj  ihe  name  of  "  John  Msi^^

The  Rev.  Mr.  TbuBton,  f
A.  e.  C.  F.  if.,  rwnoWl  S^
from  Hoiioiurii  in  Oct.  IBB^
wni  »«Uteil  for  mmi
Rt-v.  Mr.  Bishop.
worship  wa!  built  by  the  Gon.
the  sl2a  of  which  U  60  bj  SB  2  ^
Two  leTtlcea  have  slnoe  Iwenl^  ^^
in-  it  on  SundayB.  "  The  ctraj'^^
gallon,"  says  the  Board,  "uiiH**vL
conElBli  of  from  UDO  to  IOOO«hI*V
who  listen  I
giiod  degree

GovemoT  UDlfonnly  atlandi,  an
quires  bis  people  to  ubtei
Sabbath  in  the  Elrlcleet  i
At  his  particular  request,  alia,l|
TburstoD  conduct*  lamil;  w
St  bla  house,  morn iiiit  ander
and,  in  imttation  of  bis  ej
this  practice  has  been  Inti
Into  the  families  of  the  il

In  August,  I8S4,   the  UHitf  M-
teudauce  at  public   -worabb,  Wl

ahout400.     Tbe   mlsalonadti  t^-  '

serve— <•  Id  addition  to  preaMl  »

we  bare  the  daily  cbnrge  of  tl)  ^

schools:  one  at  the  klng^i  bib  t

adjoining  out  dwelUnga,  cOWMMf  '

of  nearly  60   scholais,    BiM  C»  'i

dueled  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bim  h

■uotber  in  a  house  latelf  eM^  *

for  tbe  purpose  in  the  OoreiMfl  '

inclosure,  coneuting  of  tbe'cUA  >

and  principal  persons  of  tbe|lM9i  '

and  conducted   by  Mr.  ThnW  t

and  Honoili.    Mrs.  TburttM  t»  >

likewise,  under  her  care  a  dto  *

of  FClrl>,  whom  she  is  inatnet^  *

"  We   have   distributed  tn  tlb   <

of  inslrurtiun,  nhoiit  400  «pdli«f

hooks,   and   100  hymn  boi*i,  *  <

nenriy  ns   many   difl'erent  iiidW-  t

dunb;  nBajlynUof  whom  tati'  <

considered  asunder  a  pouneoiSi-  <

siruclion.lhoiighnotBllareiqpilir  »

atteadanLt  at  our  ECbooIx.    TiHI  k


|l  tti6  habH  of  aniting  in  com-
tm  to  read  their  lessons  aloud,
one  voice.  Though  this
of  learning  to  read  is  not
where  a  better  can  be
;  yetwe  are  persuaded  that
-more  individuals  than  we
instruct  are,  in  this  way,
ng  themselves  to  read  the
riptures,  whenever  we  shall
kkle   to   put  them  into    their

ciUitMiroa,  about  16  miles  S.  of
i^Ua,  on  the  western  coast,
^^uolani;  the  late  mother  of
f^ortno,  lived  here-  when  Mr.
^tttston  settled  at  Kairua ;  and
Md  go  to  that  place  to  spend  the
pHiday.  Kamakau  also,  the  dis-
iJDiguisbed  chief  of  Kaavaroa,  did
kia  fiune.  Of  him  one  of  the  mis-
iniBries  writes— <'  He  forbids  his
Bople  working  or  bathing  on  the
iboath^  and  regulaiiy  assembles
em  twice,  to  pray  and  converse
Ith  them  on  religious  subjects:
b  has  been  his  practice  for  many
smthspast.  Of  late,  he  has  ex-
uded his  exertions ;  crossing  the
iT>  and  there  meeting  the  people,
1.  conducting  religious  ser\'ices.
s  lias  received  but  little  instruc-
n  from  the  missionaries;  yet
sre  are  few  natives  on  the  islands
to  have  more  correct  views  on
Ig^ous  subjects.  He  seems  to
re  been  searching  for  truth  as
'  bidden  treasure.  I  once  heard
D  pray  in  his  family;  and  was
ich  surprised  at  the  simplicity,
▼ency,  and  apparent  sincerity
lich  were  manifested,  as  well  as
th  the  correctness  of  religious
itiment  which  the  prayer  con-
ned.^'

The  Rev.  Mr.Ely,  of  the  J,  B.  C,
M-y  it  appears,  is  stationed  here,
the  very  spot  where  Capt.  Cook
[g  killed.  He  sees  the  rock  on
lich  that  great  navigator  fell — the
ins  of  the  temple  in  which  Oboo-
ihonce  worshipped  an  idol- — the
BOS  of  bujnan  beings  which  lie  en


HAW

the  sea-shore.  Yet  his  prospects  aro
very  animating.  Of  their  own  ac-
cord, the  chiefs  have  built  him  a
house  of  worship  (which  was  dedi-
cated on  the  2Stl)  of  April,  1824}
and  a  dwelling-house.  They  have
made  laws,  forbidding  any  disturb-*
ance,  or  sleeping  in  the '  house  of
God  :  the  monthly  concert  is  well
observed :  the  house  is  crowded  oii
the  Sabbath,  and  the  assembly  is
very  solemn.  Mrs.  Ely  has  a  Sab-^
bath  school  of  40  children ;  and,  on
other  days,  more  than  100  are
taught  the  rudiments  of  knowlMge.

In  a  recent  communication  of  Xhe
Board  it  is  said — *'The  people,  a  lit-
tle more  than  two  years  ago,  wer6
opposed  to  Christianity — given  to  in-
ebriation— quarrelsome — often  en-
gaged in  domestic  broils — and  gro-
velling in  the  lowest  ignorance  and
debasement;  but  within  a  few  months
we  have  been  informed,  on  authority
not  to  be  questioned,  that  intoxi-
cation is  no  longer  to  be  witnessed
in  that  place — that  there  are  no
more  family  quarrels — that  family
prayers  are  uniformly  attended —
that  kind  offices  are  everywhere
rendered — and  that,  from  remote
villages,' individuals  come  to  inquire
respecting,  the  "  New  Way,  '*  and  j
with  tears,  beseech  that  some  one
may  be  sent  to  instruct  them.''

fFaiakea,  on  the  eastern  coast,
nearly  in  a  line  from  Kairua,  on  a
large  and  ooipmodious  bay.  The
Rev.  Messrs.  Goodrich  cfe  Ruggles,
of  the -^.  B,  Cf  F,  M.  arrived  here
Jan.  24, 1 824.  Two  small  schools
were  immediately  commenced,  but
under  some  discouragements  from
the  extreme  ignorance  of  the
people ;  which  rendered  some  afraid
of  the  ^'palapala,"  and  nejirly  all
insensible  of  its  value.  On  the  7th
of  February,  Koakou,  a  chief,
under  whose^  protection  they  were
to  live,  arrived:  he  was  much
pleased  that  missionaries  had  come
to  Waiakea,  and  promised  to  «t«c.V
,  a  house  for  ou\)Ucfron\iV^.  \a.^sl


HAW

iiilerim,  one  of  Uie  utlTe  hoiuei
wu  uied  fur  tb«  purpose.  Coming
to  Ifai*  houta  one  Sabbath,  Mr.
Ruftglea  found  the  natlt-a  at  their
"  ijoe"  ilLihei:  on  hli  entnuice
they  ioquiml.  If  cbUiik  *>>*  "  ta-
bueil"  (forbidden)  on  tLe  Sabbath  :
they  were  aniwered,  of  courae,  that
Itvunot:  they  continued  eating
but  a  (bort  time,  however,  when
Ibe  headmaa  lald,  "  Como,  let  ua
put  up  our  calabashes,  that  tbe
Kittg'i  auiotitiei  maypraj."  The
mliKionarlGJi  are  said  (o  be  often
ijioken  of  under  that  denomination.
Tbeir  church  was  completed  on
the  lOth  of  Maj,  being  the  mmM
which  bai  been  erected  forthewor-
f  hip  of  the  true  God  on  thoTC  Idondi.
.  In  Not.  \%i\,  the  mlulonarlei
U]',  "  \fe  bad  feared  that  the
itKtiixi  at  Wolulica  miut  unaToid-
•iblf,  for  the  present,  be  glTen  up ;
but  the  proipect  begins  to  bripbten.
Mr.  Goodrich  hot  a  school  of  about
40  icbatan :  tbe  natiTes  haTS  begun
to  itbow  thraiKilvea  more  friendly,
and  their  attention  to  the  Word  of
God  has,  for  sonic  time,  been  in-
creasing ;  lo  that  now  the  tioiise  of
God  on  the  Safaliath  ii  sometimes
erowded  with  hearerB."  (See
Saiidtoich  blandt.]

H  AWE  IS,  rormcrlr  Turnip
Hiiimiain,  a  station  of  the  A.  B.
C.  t'.  il.  among  the  Cfaerokees,
about  60  m.  sautherly  from  Braln-
eid,  about  a  mile  N.  of  the  Coosa
river,  not  many  m.  E.  of  tbe  chai-
teied  limits  of  Alabnmn,  and  about
tbreu  quarter!  of  a  mile  from  the
rood  which  passes  through  the  na-
tton  from  Georgia  to  Alabama.
The  principal  lettiementa  are  In
ojipodte  directions,  on  the  River
Cooiia,  whicb  here  runs  near)}'  W.

Mr.  John  C.  EUworth,  scbool-
master,  commenced  this  station,  in
an  entire  wilderness,  about  the  end
of  April,  1823,  in  compliance  with
the  urgent  request  of  the  converted
Cherokee,  named  Samuel  J.  Mills,
p^  neiUe*  lo  fbe  selgbbotubooi,


aad  wbim
convmioii


HAV

rdent  desire  fof  tt
■  bis  eountrjTnea  llh
mBke  many  eKntlll
Suit(d>le  buildup
have  been  erected,  and  n  few  m*
oflandrltured.  A  Hotall  wboal  •«
CtKnmenccd,  November,  IBSSJ  o)
in  the  tally  part  of  1834,  nsciiW
attentidn  to  religtoo  wax  ^fmt
in  the  nei((libourbood,  aodant^l
pemai  ^aie  tattsractorr  evMcnK
of  s  wvinit  chnnge.  The  pei^
ore  generally  deslnKis  of  reUglM
Instructiun.  This  otstiaawMMiN
Hateeii,  In  respcctfid  rem)  '  "'"
of  the  lete  venerable  Pr.
a  very   ardent    and     .  _

friend  of  mi&sJonB,  and,  {at  ■VW
time,  an  active  meaiber  of  Hi
L.M.S.

HAWEIS  TOWN,  la  ft»  lb
trict  of  Papara,  TaUtl,


LOmM

aanS


eeedlng  by  meatM  of  tte  A :
Tbis  lUtloD  alM  take*  U*  HP
from  the  late  Her.  Or.  Hiplkl
and  for  several  yean,  ttlwibMBflk
tended  with  proq)eTlty.  '  WWlt
sited  by  tbe  depatatloa  Ib  HH
they  stated  that  the  DinAm«f  fli
baptized wu  1000— af  iAomM
were  adults,  Ud  450  wen  ckUMJi
The  coDgregiitloa  coniMadiatM
Ume,afJromli0Otal«nMMa|
4J0  adults  oonid  teadln  the  Oi^
and  about  100  DMie  nai  elM»
tary  books.  In  tbe  ehUdi«a^«Rpit
wereeObays«ndllOglrl*,»     -

A  new  school-boau  hM  U4
been  erected  forth*  chlldn^M^
end  uf  whlcb  Is  oocopied  l(f  fl»
bayt,  and  tbe  otber  iy  tke  |bH
with  their  teachers.

Mr.  Davies  has  completed  tOW'
latloDs  of  the  eplitle*  ef  JaBM.
Peter,  John,  and  Jiide,  oA.  iltt
of  tbe  book  of  Ptalma.

The  subacriptloai  to  Ite  TiU
Uan  AoiUlaiy  Jf.  8.  fci  tbe  T«K
1890,  exceeded  that  of  taimm
years.    In  tbe  year  widtec  ~*


of   tKmm    I
to    IW


ttAt

ofeocoftButoil.  Thenfam-
mm  <tf  baptioed  in  18i6  vas^— of
idattv£Y$  of  children  64;  and  se-
mnl  wcie  candidates  for  baptism.
nm  total  nnmber  of  baptized  is —
If  adnte  771^  of  chUdien  002^  iThe
added  to  the  cbntch  in  1826,
)  Ihe  total  number  of  corn-
is  344.
IHarinp  the  year,  0  members  of
im  4lwirch  have  died ;  4  bare  been
isclnded,  8  of  whom,  on  repent-
tacmf  ba?e  been  re-admitted;  3
MB>e  withdrafwn,  on  remoral  to
Vtiwr  cbulrcbes;  and  4  bave  been
MtfelYfd  on  removal  from  other
bknrdieB.  3  members  hare,  at
ilfibrent  times,  been  sent  out  as
iBAciwrs  to  other  islMids  |  on  which
Odcasions  the  church  and  congre-
ffMim  iiave  manifested  the  abun-
ifaBee  of  their  liberality,  by  supply-
imp  them  with  various  articles  of
fnmrty  for  their  use.
'  oaparate  meetings  of  the  young
flBople  and  children,  who  have  been
Hqpttod,  are  belJ  at  this  station
flmce  ft  fortnight.  The  attendance
Ib  general 'is  regular;  and  the
y^tsBg  people  seem  to  like  these
e^txate  meetings  far  better  than
wse  which  they  ibnneviy  attended;
where  thev  were  interrogated  in
pwaenye  qf  the  adults.  The  ravages
of  (tfsMe  have  been  experienced
0t  this  station,  reducing  the  births
and  deaths  nearly  to  an  equality.
Marriages,  during  the  year,  20.

rHAYTI,  Hispaniola,  or  St.
Dteiingo,  one  of  the*  richest  islands
i*  the  W.  Indies, -370  m.  long,  and
fHta  60  to  120  broad,  except  at
tt»  W.  part,  where  it  divides  into
two  peninsulas,  about  36  m.  broad,
tluit'  tie  the  S.  being  the  longest,
arid  extending  150  m.  It  was  dis-
cavefed  by  Cohnnbus,  in  1492,  who
cilled  it  Hispaniola;  but  his  son
Bartholomew  building  a  city,  t6
vhich  he  ^ave  the  name  of  St.
iXmiingo,  the  island  became  more
litequently  called  by  that  name  than
hy  Hifl|Nmiohu    The  naitives  call  H


HAV

Haytl>  trt  Island,  for  snch  it  prei
sentf  itself,  particularly  to  the  Ni
It  has  mines  of  goh^  talc,  and
crystal ;  extensive  and  rich  vallies>
and  immense  verdant  plains,  where
numerous  herds  pasture  in  common*
The  chief  rivers  are,  the  Artibo*
nite,  St.  Jago>  Neyba,  Yuna,  Oza-
ma,  and  Nisao.  The  Spaniardi
had  possession  of  the  whole  island
for  120  years;-  inthe  first  15  of
which  they  reduced  a  million  of  in-
habitants to  60,000.  They  were  af^
terwards  forced  to  divide  the  island
with  the  French,  who  had  the  W.-
part,  but  not  equal  to  one  third  ^"^
and  the  Spaniards  retained  the  E.,
which  is  the  more  fruitful.  This
joint  possession  continued  till  179^^
when  the  Spaniards  ceded  their
part  to  the  French.  Since  the  re-
volution in  France,  this  island  hasr
been  subject  to  great  calamities.

The  £.  part,  originally  settled  by
Spaniards,  remained  under  the  go-'
vemment  of  Spain  until  December
1, 1&2I,  when  a  formal  declaration,
of  independence  was  made  by  the
people.  The  resolution  appeerr
to  have  been  unanimous,  for  the.
change  was  effected  without  the
loss  of  blood.  St.  Domingo,  and
Port  au  Prince,  are  the  capitals.
The  independence  of  Hayti  has
recentiy  been  acknowledged  by
France.

DontingOy  8t,,  is  the  capital  of
the  £.  part  of  the  island,  and  an '
aivhbisbop's  seoi  It  is  the  most
ancient  town  in  America  built  by
Europeans;  and  was  founded  in
1504,  by  Bartholomew  Columbus.
The  cathedral  forms  the  S.  side  of
the  main  square ;  and  in  it  is  pre-
served the  ftfst  cross  Columbus
planted  in  the  island.  On  the  right
of  the  high  altar,  for  many  years,
rested  his  remains,  brought  from
Seville,  in  a  brass  coffin ;  but  on
the  island  being  ceded  to  the  French  ■
they  were  removed  to  Havannah,  in
1 796.  This  city  was  the  last  prin-
cifMil  ptoce  te  tin  ^i^keAiik  "N^j^xin^  >


HAY

hy  the  Flencb,  who  iiirfBiideted  it>
in  1809,  to  the  Britidi  and  Spanidi
forces.  The  inhabitants  are  esti-
mated at  12y000 ;  but  before  the
late  calamities  they  were  far  more
numerous.  W.  long.  69^  6^.  N.
Lat.  \h^  28'.

•  Under  the  Spanish  and  F^nch,
the  religion  was  Roman  catholic^
and  the  mass  of  the  people  was
extremely  ignorant.    The  present
iroremment  supports  schools  in  all
the  principal  settlements.
'   In  the  early  part  of  1824,  the
government  of  Hayti  sent  an  agent
to  the  United  States,  who  was  au-
thorized to  defray  the  expense  of
transporting,  during  the  year,  6000
^loiured  people  to  Hayti,  and  to
promise  the  emigrants  a  perpetual
title  to  the  land&  which  they  culti-
Tate ;  and,  in  consideration  of  these
proposals,  a  society  has  been  formed
♦n  the  city  of  New  York,  to  pro-
mote the  same  design,    hi  1820,
the  B.  8r  F.  S.  S.  reported  1800  pu-
pils, in  their  schools  in  this  Island..
.  AtCa^/fenr|r,OTCapeHaytien,
a  town  on  the  N.  coast  of  this
island,  having  in  1803  a  population
of  20,000,  a  college  was  instituted
by  the   late  king,  Henry,  about
1817,  for  the  instruction  of  those
who  were  designed  to  fill  the  most
important  offices  in  the  government;
and  the  Rev.  W.  Morton,  of  the
Church  of  .England f  was  appointed
to  the  office  of  clfusical  professor,
and  commenced  with   20  pupils.
The  number  soon  increased  to  40 ;
and  in  1820,  to  80.    There  is  also
a^  professor  of  surgery  and  medi-
cine.   About  181d,  Mr.  Gulliver,
patronized  by  the  National  Edu^
cation  Society,  opened  a  Lancas-
terian  school,  which  increased,  in
a  few  years,  to  between  2  and
300  pupils.

.  In  1820,  the  Rev.  Messrs.  Jones
and  HarveyyfFegleyanmiesionaHeSf
arrived  here,  and  were  cordially  re-
ceived by  the  king;  but  were  obliged  I
tpJeftvesooD^onftccottntofiUbealth.  I


luar


head  <tf  the  bay  •£  Lngn%«Mlli
nr.eoaftofH^tfyaaUanteilBiM.
tela  20,00»  inhiMtaM^  94HM
sive  aeadeaiy  has  immMpdkliM
established^  in  wideh  aD^lmnHb

of  juiispnideiiee I  IHinfrtMBtiitt

the  principlee  of
medicine,  are  taagphi.^
also  been  oitaUialMd

In  1817,  two
the  fV9»Uwan  iS.  weite  asi
place,  with  the  ipecial  .
of  govemmeat.    Thmf\
dially  reeeived  -  by  tfatf
who  gave  thea  libeilif  4o

schools,  and  build.  dMnii  ,

part  of  the  lepidUia.    Ttn|it(i

collected  attentive  and  Imnmlt^

congregations  in  the  toWBf.aili

thecouii^viUiffltea«    Aaodill^

30  members  had  been  i

18  on  trial,  when  the

tholics  raised,  a  violent

against  them,   and  the

thought  it expedieaty  that]

should  be  discontiDiied«

sionaries  removed,  abont  %  M$k

after  thehr  arrival^  when  tfaejftili*

dent  addressed  an  obUgiqg  latig#

the  committee  of  the  SoaMgyHM'

companied  with  a  benelaellDVifi

500/.    Since  the  departaeof.|hir

missionaries,  tbe  jfeffturfjjfgpjii^t

has  been  cruelly  per^aeajtad^*

some  of  the  memben  haie:

imprisoned.    In  1828,  theie.

56  members  in  the  eQnneziai»rh.kH

At  this  period  itwasandtt.te

care  of  Messrs.  Plreanir  end  WBA

Denis,  natives.   After  having  ^*^

wholly  prevented,  for  a  tfan^  hm .

assembling  together,  ^nd-  aaflMMTr

imprisonment,  they  renewed 'Hw?

meetings,    ^nd  cooragooiidjt: '•§•<

dured  the  hostility  \  of  their  pc^i

secutors.     Tbis  was  Iblla«ad4|ri

heavy  trials;  public  wobA^

prohibited,  luid  the  private

ings  of  the  society  were

occasionally    to   -the    Inaidh -af .

the  rabble*    An  appHcation  mm-.

made  to  the  jgovermiiant  inJ0l9i|u


amhtii,  ty  jt  geatteaan
Jiwiijilirilfa  tbe  oQOHiiittse^aiid  tin
^■Urt^iythoqgk  not  in  an  anfriendlj
contoini  m  curioua  eaq)orit&MH
tie  notians  whieh  prevail  in
ao  the  sabject  of  toieratioB.
Mm  SMthodiats  are  penecuted^  it
1^  MiaiMrledged,  bjrthe  Catliotic
moh  t  JM  tfaes  the^  are  the  came
■C.Iha  aacitamest^  beoaasa  they
IpMr  iiNMMincad  Popery,  and  the
thainltrwhieh  this  oecasions  cannot
tei  aUoared.  Why>  ttien,  does  not
Ik&r.  Haiftiaii'  goweroment  suppreo
ikma.?  for  itis  not  the  methodiats^
feMK  the  Catholic  mob,  which-  ac-
taHy  oommita  the  riot.  The
■IMFW  is,  ttial^taoblige  the  Catho"
^itio  toep  the  peace,  would  be  to
yeneente  them  for  their  religion  I
i«cb  if  tiia  gnbstaace  of  this  sio-
niar  latter.

^  MasRV.  Wiliiam,  6.  Penning^
tte^  and  —  Hughes,  coloured- mis-
iteiiaiha,  have  been  sent  hithev,
tfom  the  L\  F.  MiSfiyto  the  Ame-
iloaii  eailgraots*  Mr*  P.  was  edu<-
•atecb  at  the  Afidoan  school,  at
Bteeippony,.  Kew  Jersey,  under
the  patenago  of  thesynods  of  New
Yorlc  and  lihBigr-  Jersey.  He  sailed
ffpm  the  city  of  New  York,  Oct.
Mtt,  Jt8»4,.  with  nearly  200  emi-
^OHiti^  sevemi  of  whom  were  pre-
^aaaljn  ibriBed  into  a  elmrch.  Mr,
Mw  sailed  aboat  the*  dose  of  the
amc  year,  and  had,  for  soma  time,
flBStained  the  pastoral-  charge  of  a
Cfitauxed  congregation  in  Philadel-
ptaia.  He:  isi  saperiotandant  of  the
iniasfbn.

'  £ariyin  1893; the ifwaao^fMe/fo
j$..Mi  &  sent  the  Rev.  T.  Paid,  a
osteoted  preodier,  of-Boston,  on  a
misilonary  tour  to  this  island.  At
JPsrf  flW'  Pfnnce  he  was  coorteously
rstealved  by  the  President,  and  per^
ddtted  to  preach  in  private  houses
and  balls.  Here,  and  at  Cape
M%tien,  be  was  occupied  for  se-
veral weeks  in  accempUbihing,  by
vaakms  a^aas,.  the  object  of  his
aitssion*


tBBBL

HfiM£L  SNi  ARINS,  HhbispMtf
for  the  rdtef  of  NottenlDt  tepen,'
about  13*  m.  £ront  Catedikn,  South
Aihca^  and  •  siiort  distance  fieom
the  sea.  The  Rev.  Peter  Leitaer,
«ie  of  the  U,3!^  eame  liere  in  16S3j
and  principally  confines  his  labours
to  the  hospital,  under  the  8uperin*<
tendence  of  the  government,  which
contained,  at  that  time^  aboat  150
patients.  The  coniiaUly  with  which
he  was  received  excited  hopes  o^
success^  which  have  been  more
than  realized.

In  January  18S8>  he  writes  :^->
'^Amoag  our  padents  many  anr
very  w«fik    and  declining ;    and
during  last  year,  ISt  baptized,  and
14  unlMptiaed,  departed  tins  life:
25  adultsy  and.  6  cliildren,  were-
baptized,  and  8  woe  adndtted  to
the  Loid'B    Supperj    The  ^whole.
number  of  inhabitants  of  this  hos-
pital was,,  at  the  doae  of  1835,  li)d.
To  aU  of  them  the  g^  tidings  of
g^at  joy  areproclainec^  and  they^
are  both  publicly  and  privately  in-
structed in  the  blessed  troths  of  the
Gospel.    Ovad  people  aoe  remark*'
ably  attentive   and  devout  at  all
their  meetings."

Ii£NR££PORE,ieemerlyJ£bto.:
abee^  the  most  centml  ef'tiie  Saadh
Tillage^  about  lO'm;  N.  W.  Delhi,
Hindo<»tan.    The  Saadhs  are  &&-  -
paratists-  from  the  prevailing  reli-
gion of  the  Hindoos; .  a   name*
expressive  of  theur   great   puri^
and  devotion.

The  C.  Mi  &  tooM  IMs  within
its  field  of  labour,  in  1820.  Native
teachers  have  been  stationed  herej.
and  iiave  laboured,  with  consider-
able success,  in  several  neighbour- '
'ing  village»of  this  interesting  peo-  ^
pie*    By  means- of  one  of  then^  a-
-  brahmin  haslatefy  bean  brought  to?
the  feet  of  Jesus«

HKRHHUT,  a  town  in  Saxony, :
inUi^er  Losatia,  founded,  in  1 T92,  >
il^-the  l/tJ9«,  who  settled  on  lands
belonging  to  Count  Zinzendcnrf.   It
IMS'  baqomia  thak^  uMtaoiiyQUek^  tnifr

aa2  ^^


Ihe  chief  ntatery  of  their  numetous
missiung  among  the  heathen.

HIDIA,  a  diitrict  on  the  N.  £.
side  of  Tahiti,  Geoigian  idands.

In  May,  1886,  the  number  ad*
mitted  to  baptism  was  139,  of  whom
11  had  received  this  initiatory  rite
at  other  stations.  The  church,  at
that  time,  consisted  of  tfi)  meml)ers,
of  wliom  22  were  admitted  into
communion  at  other  stations.  The
confpregation  consisted,  on  the  Sab-
'bath,  of  between  600  and  600,  and
on  Wednesday  evenings,  of  about
300.  A  school  was  formed,  in
which  about  200  children  attended.
An  adult  school  was  aUo  com-
menced, and  attended  by  between
200  and  300 ;  and  a  chapel  and
dwelling-house  were  erected.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Jones,  of  the  L*
M.  S,f  removed  from  Papara  to
this  place  in  M^rch,  1826,  where
no  mUsionary  had  before  statedly
laboured.  On  the  18th  of  Novem-
ber, he  was  deprived.of  his  wife  by
death.  After  this  event  he  appears
to  have  found  himself  incapable  of
attending  to  his  missionary  duties.
He  left  the  islands  in  October,  1 826,
retired  to  N.  America,  anddinolved
bis  connexion  with  the  Society.

No  missionary  appears  to  have
laboured  at  this  station  since  the
departure  of  Mr.  Jones.

HIGH  TOWER,  a  staUon  of
the  jd,  B,  C,  F,  M,  among  the
Cherokees,  86  m.  S<  S.  W.  Carmel,
and  about  80  S.S.E.  Brainerd,
situated  on  the  R.  Etowee,  now
called  High  Tower.  In  1818,  the
Indians  were  desirous  of  religious
instruction  for  their  children ;  and
in  Nov.  1822,  Mr.  /.  Procter,
assistant  missionary y  visited  them.
A  school-house  was  immediately
erected,  and  in  April,  1823,  he
opened  a  school  under  favourable
auspices.  This  school  Is  in  an
important  place,  both  on  account
of  the  number  of  children,  who
live  .within  a  moderate  distance,
and  the  sdicitudt  their  parents


Bianiiert  In  tlieir  TwUtrift
punctual  attendviee..  Oel»lia^
1823,  a  chincli  was  fiime^  mm
sisUng  of  6  penoniy  '**'**"t'*B'^
the  minion  liaaUy  ;  a  mhalAlah
place,  and,  as  its  fhiHa,  16*mIIm
were  received  into  ChMUmkW
lowship  in  April  1884,.aMtJft4C
their  children  were  baptiaad*  --^^i

HINDOOSTAN,  ox  INDIA,*
region  of  Asia,  whU^  est
Cape  Comorin  to  tba
mountains^  by  which  It  k:
rated  on  the  N.  tern  TUhili
Tartary.  The  mnrtheni  IMlbM
tends  from  the  R.  SlDcIa^  m
on  the  W.  bordering  apon-
to  the  moun^ns  whieb
Bengal  irom  Caatay  and  tht
man  dominions;  in  tba
part,  the  Bay  of  Bengal  Hea^it
and  the  Indian  Ocean. 8*  ndA
It  is  situated  Jbetween  N.  lat#
and36<^;  and  E.  long.  60^ an* Mk
Its  greatest  length  is  aboni^]
m.;  iU  breadth  1600^  The
and  seasons  are  conslderahly
sified  by  diOerende  of  hitihidr«i:
local  situation  \  but  thrangh  ttl
regions  of  Hindoostan  thtn^i'
some  similarity  of  <

This  vast  countiy
of  large  plains,  fertilised  hf  »
merous  rivers  and  streaiMy  jai
interspersed  with  a  few  laufwrf
hills.  The  periodical  rains  ai^i»
tense  heat  produce  a  limiiigM
of  vegetation  almost  nnkBOWB.i»
any  other  countiy  on  the  i^sbi^.
Hhidooetan  has  been  kaoivni-  la
Europeans  for  three  centtfau-
The  Portuguese,  at  tliat  tinw  -te
greatest  naval  power  in  tiia  wvii^
iformed  the  first  conuneicial  ^i^
tablishment  in  the  ccNuitiy«. .  Tha
Spaniards^  the  Dutch,  the  ~
the  Danes,  and  the  Rwgi<«hj
since  been  attracted  by  (
interests;  but  it  was  roserwed'fcr
the  last-mentioned  power  i»pitk
almost  unlimited  swi^.

The  pojfuUiiiom  haa  heeo-fvi*
Qusly    estimated,    ftom    UO.  1m


:•  *.  I


■M^00d;000;  who  9xe,  tnriiicipaHf,
mamuB$  and  about  half  British
Mlj^ts.  Mahomodans,  Christians,
■id' Je^fi^  are  numerous.
H  Jkmoiig  tiie  Hindoos  there  is  a
distinction  of   caste,

is  a  Portuguese  word ;
the  Indian  term,  signifies  a
iBBiMis  or  kind.  Tlie  different  castes
Itfiha  Hindoos  are,  thereforei  con-
jUned  as  so  many  different  species
W^  luaiian  beings,  and  it  is  believed
ttnit  diAsrent  forms  of  worship  and
lyibitBof  life  are  necessarily  adapted
%Bk  each.  Originally  there  were  four
<p0tea»  which  are  supposed  to  have
jfBBmg  from  different  parts  of  Brah-
VM^  body,  and  from  such  parts  as  to
^UtaMish  their  different  ranks.  The
M  were  tbecdogians,  or  the  brah-
mbu  |.  the  2d  were  kings  and  sol-
4|M|]^-the  3d,  merchants  and  hus-

n ;  the  4th,  mechanics  and
This  distribution  is  of

antiquity.  In  process  of
ttaiiiy  the  original  distinction  ex-
iMtied  to  a  subdivision  of  em-
dojiiieDts.  There  are  now  about
1(00  dlffinent  castes,  all  of  which
ape  included  under  the  general
denominations  of  brahmijis  and
flBOdeis.  Subdivision  has  been
«Uedto  subdiviston.  The  lowest
CBsfte  of  sooders,  for  instance,  ad-
-mitt  of  many  subordinate  castes,
extending  to  persons  of  the  most
MwUe  occupations,  and  each  inva-
Mblf  follows  the-  occupation  of
]ii»  forefathers.  From  generation
to  generation  the  same  family  fol-
low the  same  business,  and  hold
the  same  rank;  a  circumstance
wliich,  while  it  suppresses  every
aspiring  aim,  has  greatiy  contri-
birted  to  peifect  the  ingenuity  of
Hindoo  artisans.  The  brahmins^
Jiowever,  reserve  to  themselves  the
right  of  descending  to  secular  em-
ployments, and  even  to  those  which
•ve  menials  According  to  the  rules
of  caste,  those  of  one  may  not  in-
termarry, nor  even  eat  or  drink,
.vitb  those  of  another*  It  is  said  none


iiiK

of  the  higlr  castes  will-  even  drink
water  in  the  family  of  a  white
man;  and  in  those  countries
where  Europeans  are  their  rulers^
the  heathen  rank  them  under  the
lowest  castes.  The  distinction  of
caste  is  interwoven  with  every  cijp-
cumstance  of  life;  lulherence  io
it  is  viewed  as  a  matter  of  reli-
gion, and.  the  castes  become  so
many  religious  sects,  if  one  vio-
lates the  rules  of  his  caste.  i»
is  excommunicated,  which  is
ctiHed  hsing.catie*  From  that  timq
his  nearest  relations  abandon  him  f
and  he  can  seldom  recover  his
former  standing,  and  only  by  a
large  fee  to  the  brahmins.  In  this
way  he  may  generally  be  restored^
but  not  always.  Dr.  Carey  men-i
tions  the  case  of  a  man,  who  ha4
lost  caste  l^y  means  of  a  woman
in  his  family ;  who,  while  the  Ma*
homedans  had  pcMsession  of  the
province,  had  been  compelled  t(x
live  with  a  Mussulman..  He  offered
j610,000,  or  about  44,400  dollan»
for  the  recovery  of  his  caste^  but
he  could  not  regain  it.  i

As  to  religion,  three  of  the  six
schools  of  pSlosophy,  once  famous,
in  India,  were  atheistical.  ITie
doctrines  of  these  atheists  were
established  for  a  considerable  pe-!
riod,  and  they  are  stiU  taught  lUi
the  systems,  which  prevail  through-i
out  China,  Japan,  the  Burman.
empire,  Siam,  Ceylon,  (&c.  These,
philosophers,  of  whom  V^dvas,  the-
compiler  pf  the  V^dtt,  was  oqe  of,
the  most  distinguished^  tauffht,  that;
eveiything  we  can  see,  or  form  any
conception  of,  is  to  be  referred:
to  one  or  other  of  two  princi-
ples ;  it  is  either  spirit  or  matter^ ,
since,  be^de  these,  nothing  else  ex^ :
ists ;  that  all  spirit  is  God ;  and  that
God  exists  without  attributes,  in  a .
state  of  eternal  repose,  intanffible
and  unconnected  with  any  of  the:
forms  of  matter.  They  also  teacb^ ;
that  the  spirit  of  man  is  individuated .
deity }  that  Vn  $hi^  co^aivs^otk^^i^i^^


SUktteTy  iplrit  h  degraded  nd  Ini"
priMiied;  and  that  the  great  and
onlj  Inniiieaf  of  man  on  eartb  la  to
aeek  emaneipirtloiiy  and  retum  to
the  Neflwd  Anirce  horn  which  he
(that is.  8plrft|  fnl, thou,  and  he,
are  teWRihfe- only  to  spfrlt)  haa
heen   aeveied.    The  mode  of  ob-
taining- emancipation,   is  by  the
practice  of  ceremonlesdenominated
J^fuey  all  of  which  are  connected
with  bodily  austeritiea  and  tortarea,
having  for  their  object  the  annihi-
lation of  all  conseloiis  connexion
with  the  body  and  with  material
tMngs.    9ucb  a  deliverance,  it  is
iupposed,  will  leave   spirit,  even
while  In  the  body,  in  a  state  of
dhrine  tranquillity,  resembling  that
of  God — ^for-  the  passions    alone
•ra    the    sources    of  pain;   and
wlU  IR  the  Individuated  spirit  for
reunion  to  God-*-for  the  passions  are
the  sources  of  life  and  death ;  and
oonine  the  individuated  spirit  ta  a
•ontinued   course   of  transmigra-
tions, and  rivet  its  union  to  matter.
These  speculations-  fonn  the  be-
lief of  all  theHlndooa;  and  there
are  still  a  number  of  mendicants
hi  India  who  imitate  the  jogees.
The  people  at  large  do  not  become
Jogees,   because  these  austerities
are  incompatible  with  the  existence
of  human  society;  but  tbeymalte
constant  aUusions  to  this  doctrine
orspirit;  to  the  subjugation  of  the
passions,  and  jto  transmigration  as
ihevitably  attaching   to  men,  till
perfect  abstraction  and  absorption
are  obtained.

T%e  pepuUtr  supersHtioiu  of
the  Hindoos  are  deeply  afiecting.
While  they  verbally  admit  the
doctrine  of  the  divine  unity,  they
speak  of  38(^000,000  of  gods.
They  prostrate  themselves  before
dead  matter ;  before  the '  mon-
key, and,  the  serpent  before  idols,
the  very  personifleaitionfr  of  sin  ;
and  this  animal,  this  reptile,  and
the  leefaer  Kridmii,  and  bit  con-
cMne  JZodha^    m   nmofBg  the


ftMortti  dtttlat  or  tto:
Mavhig  BO-  kMaiiai%«*
of  the  dMar  ginuMiiaV  Jttn
suppose  the  world  to  \m  fmA
ttiKter  the  nuMgemoBt  di'Mrili
ignomnt,  capriatoMi,-  aa*iMM|
that  the  thrae  prind^  driM
the  crealdr,-  the  pMnaci^'Wl
the  destroyeVf  ha^ng  ■•*  toNKlf
righteoBsneas,  nor  aay  istllidNki
of  govennMnt^
lenhtg  with'  M^  otiMiv  Mi'
vertitigonei

and  thua  they  know  iiotr
obey,  or  hi  whona  to^
EquaUy  Ignonnt  mte  thiy  if  ttl
laws-  of  God,  and  of  Ar  arM*
neetBd  with  a  dhpodttatf'  MM
from  the  Divfoa  mind,-  aai  m4
moral  evil.  Hence  th^
to  the  waters  of  the
traordtaiary  virtoe  ;•  the  wfca»f»
pnlation  residing  in  ita:    *  '~'


hood  crowd-  momiiw  and-elllllpf
to  the  river^  the  Mf-  wvlM
carried  foi*  religtoaa  uaovlisii
most  distant'  p«rts;^  asd  tlte^ Mtf
are  hurtled,  in' their  laf&flMHMli
to  reoelre  their  last  umlJaaUWi
the  sacred  stream.  Uodw  Af
delusion  tiiat  sia  la  to  he*
by  the  merit  of'  worfcSy
imdeitake  long  and  iTang»iOha|ii
grimages,  In  which  tbooMUfe
perish^  or  hifllet  ou-thairhoiK
the  most  dreadfol^ttntarea^  nMI
thRHigh  the  day  and  throt^lM
year,  repeating  the  iMHMa^Mf
guanllan  deities^  As  totiM  WdWii
ture  of  the  present  statSytlllf  k^
boor  imder  the  most  fiatei-ap|M£aMt
sions^  they  believe  tlwgobd'iroHl

-nf f  IVrMtth  liTinntlpfDdfljir

by  the  voUtiont  of:  their  cnrw
but  arise  from,  aad  ore,
voidable  results  oi^  tin
the  past  birth;  that  tiiailn'pmMt
aottona  wUI  hievitahly  giie  iMf
to  the  whole  oooflesioa  of-lfeffi
(^racters  and  eonduat*  Ifi^-tlV
feUowingbirtbi  and-  tiwttimMtaf
ue  doomed  to  tntendiiiible


^  mifiin^toaAy  to.iMat'  aa


«v^


•HlN

MB  on  the  bosom  of  an  ince*
tonent.  With  reference
me  state^  tbeir  ideas  are
Bixoneous  and .  pernicious.
I  tbey  commonly  under-
othing  more  than  transmi-

and  they  di&  with   the
kkm  of  immediately  rising
h  again  in  some  other  body
it  of  a  dog  or  a  cat,  or  a
ieding  on  ordure  ;  and  if
re  committed  some  dread<»
i,  they  expect  to  fall,  for
nto  some  one  of  th6  dread-
B  of  torment  described  in
trtt.    Indeed,  no  Hindoo,
te  has  given  all  his  wealth
iriests,  or  has  performed
ler  act  of  splendid  merit ;
9t  he  drown  himself  in  a
ver^or  perish  on  the  fu-
e— has  the  least  hope  of
•  after  death.    Those  who
KMed  to  attain  happiness,
bo  ascend  to  the  heaven  of
»  where,  for  a  limitted  pe-
iy  ei^joy   an   unbounded
oe  in  sensual  gratification.
tie  only  heaven  held  out  to
},  and  held  out  to  him  on
18  which  the  great  bulk  of
B  find  to  be  impracticable,
te    beyond  tills,  reserved
ly  for  jogees,  is  absorp-
i  complete  loss  of  separate
ly  in  union,  to  the  soul  of
I.

,  indeed,  is  the  state  of
x^eiy.  The  anxiety  of
oo  to  obtain  a  son,  who
ent  the  funeral  offering,
presentation  of  which  he
bis  future  happiness  to  de-
i  the  expenses  attending
>rt  and  marriage  of  girls,
:  birth  of  a  female. In.  a
imihr  an  unwelcome  event,
of  female  children  among
ots  exhibits — though  this
telongs  only  to  one  of  the
Ibes — a  strong  corrobora-

of  the  low  estimation  in
tn  the  lives  of  femalei  are


HINT

held  In  India.   One  of  tha  famlli^i;
of  the  nLJpoots,  it  is  said,  be^oi  the^
practice  of  butchering  their  fejBaj0>
children,  to  prevent  the.  f ulfilfoeQ^
of  a  prediction,  that  thrpugh  a  ^f
male  the  succession  to  the  crowa:
would  pass  out  of  the  family.    4>^
the  tribes  have  since  followed  that
royal  example ;  and  now  not  One;
female  child  survives — ^the  paxents^
it  is  believed,  are  themselves  :lik>.
murderers.   The  boys  marry  in  the  ,-
tribe  next  in  rank  to  them«   -A:
bramhin  fnnn  one  of  the  western*
provinces,''  says.  Mr.  Ward,  of  Se*,
rampore,  (from. whose  ftatemants*
this  artide  is  compiled),  i'  oave  m^.
this  relation  : — ^A.n^poot,  for  some;
unassigne4reason,qHiied  hisfpmale
child,  which  grew  up  in  the  father>
house  to  the  age  in  which. g^ls  in.^
India  are  married.    The  sight  of  a^
girl,  however,  in  the  house,  of  m
rajpoot  was  so  novel,jand  so  poo*^
traiy  to  the  customs,  of  the  tribef^
that  no  parent  soughi  her.in  mai^,'
riage  for  his  son.    The  fiB^tli^r,  sq^  •
/ering  under  the  fio^i^  of  his  oynk
tribe,  and  trembling  for  tho  €hA»«i
tity  of  his  daughter  an4thefaonoBt:
of  his  familyjt  was  driven  Into  a*
state  of  phrenigr;  and  in  this  state^^.
taking  his.  daughter  aside,  .he>.ai^.
tually  put  a  period  ,ta  her  .«xiit-<
ence.''    To  the  HJlndoo  female  all;
education  is  dexUed  by  the  positlvdt
iiy  unction  «f  the  Shasirfi,  and  .by>.
the  general  voice  of  the  populaUoq. .
Not  a  single  school,  thereforej  lor
girls,  is  found  all  over  the  coantiy«»
With  knitthig,  sewing,  ambroideQ/^,
painting,  music,  and  drawing,  they;
have  no  more  to  do  than  with  iet^
ters  5  even  the  washing  is  done  by,
m«iiof  aparticulaitribe.  TheHin^-
doo  girl»therefore,8pends  the  fir^  10;
years  of  her  life  in  sheer  idleness^,
immured  in  the  house  of  her  father*.
Before  she  has  attained  to  this  age^ ,
however,  she  is  sought  after  by-tbe»{
ghutuks,  men.  employed  by  parent%
to  seek  wives  for  their  sons.    Sh^
i<  betrothed  Nv\thoiQLt\9i«t  ivs^mo^x^


llfrgal  agreement,  which  binds  bet
Ibr  life,  being  made  by  the  parenti
da  both  Bidet,  while  the  is  yet  a
4hild.    At  a  time  mott  contenleat
to  the  parents,  this  bov  and  girl  are
brooght  together  for  the  first  time,
afid  the  marriage  ceremony  is  per-
ibrmed ;  after  which  she  returns  to
the  hoQse  of  her  father.    Before
the  marriage  is  consummated,  in
many  instances,  the  boy  dies,  and
this  girl  becomes  a  widow )  and  as
the  law  prohibits  the  marriage  of
widows,  she  is  doomed  to  remain  in
this  state  aslong  at  she  li?es.  The
greater  number  of  these  unfortu^
nate  beings  become  a  prey  to  the
■educer,  and  a  disgrace  to  tbefar  fa«
miliet.    Not  long  since,  a  bride,  ott
Ihe  day  the  marriage  ceremony  was
to  hatebeen  performed, was  burnt  on
the  funeral  pile  with  the  dead  body
of  the  brideg^room,  at  Chandema-
gore,  a  few  miles  K.  of  Calcutta.
Goncobinage,  to  a  most  awful  ex*
teot,  is  the  MLi  of  these  marriages
without  choice.    VThat  a  sum  of
rfiiseryis  thus  attached  to  the  lot
of  woman  In  India  before  she  has
attained eren  heir  16th  year!    In
some  cases,  as  many  as  60  females,
the  daughters  of  so  many  Hindoos,
are  gfifen  in  marriage  to  one  bram*
bin,  in  order  to  make  these  fami-
lies something  moter  especfable :
find  that  Uie  parents  may  be  able  to.
s^y,  we  are  allied  by  marriage  to
the  kooTeens,  the  highest  rank  of
brambans.     Supposing,  howerer,
ftiat  ihe  Hindoo  female  is  happily
BHurried,  she  remains  a  prisoner  and
aslaTQtai  the  house  of  her  husband.
She  knows  nothing  of  the  advantages
of  a  liberal  totereourse  with  man-
kind. Ste  is  not  permitted  to  speak  to
A  person  of  the  other  sex,  if  she  be-
liRig  to  a  respectable  Mmily,  except
to  old  men  very  nearly  allied  in
blood;  she  retires  at  me  appear-
snee  of  a  male  guest ;  she  never
^ts  with  her  husband,  bat  partakes
df  what  he  leaves.    She  receives


not  affirm,  with  womt  BCriMMMtNl
that  females  have  M  «Ml^  M
treat  them  as  thodgh  thb  Itnf  M
beUef .    What  com|wlwii  <■«■
husbands!-- what  AMVthsM  thMJ
Yes;  It  it  not femateariutta mkUfk
the  sufferen.  Wliito  aol^  H  il
mental  condition  of  liieaM^-tflNi
much   happineti  must    Mbilk
children,  and  aoelety  at  lHftvi(
deprived!    What mtiat be ttt  ^ '
of  that  country  where  f&mftHii  ^
and  the  female  preamcey  w
nnknown ;  for  the  loweit  mMH
females  alone  ate  seen  in
thestreettl  tliitveoeitfof
these  habits  of  ladcileiioe^
totd  want  of  iBformatioii^  4f .
ciples,  and  of  aoeiet^y;  Imm^IH
Hindoo  female  an  easy  piey  %9tWi
greatest  evils.  FatthfuIneattoMM
riage  vows  is  almoetiuikiio#tfiiMi
dia )  and  where  tte  mamiaBi.dfM
East  allow  of  it,  the  femabt
fast  a  more  entfauaiestle
to  the  snperstlttons  of  the  _

than  even  the  inen.    The  XVMM
mendicants,  the  prieats^   irfJty
pnbHc  shows,  preserve   aa-  MP
\i^elming    influence    over  ftwj
minds.    Many  become  iaeMiliMl|
and  some  undertake  long-  pUti
ages;  in  shorty  the  power « MR
l^rstition  over  fhom  hi  loAly'lM
no  parallel  in  any  other  dcNnllli
But  the  awful  state  of  fiemSt^m
ciety  appears  in  nothfaigaoaiMidbit
in  dooming  the  widow  to  he  W#
alive  with  the  putrid  caiMsrof  MK
husband.    The  Hindoo  Tinthhlwr
have  sanctioned  this  Ineiwiifti^
shewing  hereto  a  studied  dsMv
nation  to  insult  end  degwrifa  ft»
man.     She  is,  iheiefoie^  far  tttf
ftrst  instance,  dehnled  hito  Ifalradt
by  the  writhigs  of  these  hiaflihilrt
in  which  also  slie  is  piottliMlb  »
if  she  will  offer  herself.  Ar  itr.
benefit  of  her  hUfknd,  ouimhm
ralpile,  sheshaU,  bytboezhM^.
dinary  merit  of  thte  JKstlbBy


w

k
t


'


th^  bemit  from  books  or  feem  ao^  \\i\m  tcom  tE6a«n>


'XW


urn

Ipsnetathmi  of  faU  ftnd  ber
ith  her  tobeafen;  where
I  eiyoy  with  them  celestial
«y  uhtU  14  kings  of  the
ifl  ha?e  sacoee4ed  to  the
tSf  hevren  (that  is,  milUons
I !  **l  ha?e  seen/'  says
xAf  *' three  widows,  at  diif-
Bes,  -  burnt  alive ;  and  had
.  o{HK>ittinitles  of  being  pre-
tanilar  immolations,  but  my
foiled  me."  The  funeral
sfaits  of  a  ^[u^tity  of  fag-
1  on  the  earth,  rbing  in
tout  three  feet  from  the
abont  four  feet  wide,  and
in  length.  After  the  fie-
I  declared  her  rescdiution  to
e/'  as  the  people  call  it,
es  her  house  for  the  last
Dompaaled  by  her  children,
I,  and  a  few  neighbours,
seeds  to  the  rlTer,  where  a
Aends  upon  her,  and  where
ceremonies  are  perform-r
ompeoied  with  ablutions.
Fer,  she  conaes  up  the  pHe,
lay  be  ten  yards  from  the
f  the  river.  She  walks
le  pile  several  times,  scat-
•orched  com,  <fec.  as  she
nd,  and  at  length  lays  her*
n  on  the  pile  by  the  dead
ping  her  arm  over  it.  Two
idng  been  laid  across  the
1  uiuder  the  dead  body,  with
fds  the  dead  body  and  the
xly  are  now  tied  fast  toge-
k  hurge  quantity  of  faggots
I  laid  uucrn  the  bodies,  and
nrs  are  brought  over  the  pile
s  down  the  widow,  and
her  from  escaping
le  flames  begin  to  scorch
[er  eldest  son,  averting  his
Ith  a  lighted  torch  in  his
ben  sets  fiie  to  the  pile,
ims  are  immediately  sound-
ch,  with  the  shouts  of  the
fectnally  drown  the  sfaorieks
widow  surrounded  1^  the
The  burying  alive  oi  wi-
mnlfetia,  if  that  wete  pot-


RIN

If ble,  a  still  more  abominable  stati
of  feeling  towards  women  tiian  the
burning  them  alive.  The  weaven
bury  their  dead.  When,  therafem^
a  widow  of  this  tribe  is  deluded
into  the  determination  not  to  sofw
Vive  her  husband,  she  it  barted
alive  with  the  dead  body.  In  thii
kind  of  immolation  the  eUUtnUk
and  relations  dig  the  gtave.  Alter
certain  ceremonies  have  been  at*
tended  to,  the  poor  widow  anivc^
and  islet  down  Into  the  pit.  She  siti
in  the  centre,  taking  the  dmdhodf
on  her  lap  and  enoiBoliBg  It  to  hei;
arms.  These  ralatkms  now  begin
to  throw  tai  the  soil ;  and  aftn  n
short  space,  two  of  .them  descend
hito  the  grajfe  and  tnad  tbe  enth
firmly  round  the  body  of  the  widMir*
She  gfts  a  cafan  and  unnmanstratiag
spectator  of  the  horrid  proeeK.  Sbe
sees  the  earth  rising  higher  aad
higher  around  her,  wtthoot  np-
breiding  her  nmiderers,  or  amk^
ing  the  least  eflert  to  ariier  anU
make  her  escape«  At  length  te
earth  reaches  her  lips — covets  h^
head.  The  rest  of  the  cnrtli  is
then  hastily  thiown  in,  and  tiiese
chilcfaren  and  relations  meant  the
grave  and  tread  down  the  CMth
upon  the  head  of  the  soflbcctiag
widow-— the  motiier !  Vj  an  efl»
cial  statement  from  India,  it  ap^
pears  that  every  yearmore  than  700
women  (more  probably  1400)  are
burned  or  burled  alive  inttiejpre-
sklency  of  Bengid  alone.  .  Ho^
many  in  the  other  parts-of  Indin  ?
At  other  mmoMims  iw  «!■>
shudder  with,  instinctive  honoi*
Instigated  bf  the  demon  at  m^
perstition,  many  moihen,  hi
fulfilment  of  a  vow,  entered
into  for  tiie  purpose  of  procop-
ing  the  blessing  of  chUdivn,
diown  their  first-born  in  the  Bnun-
hu-pootru  and  other  rivers  in  India*
When  the  child  is  8  or  8  years  old,
the  mother  takes  it  to  the  rlver^en-
eoorages  it  to  enteC)  «a  tfcnrai^
about  to  UOm  V!l»  \SN^«ABta  WM;^


IIIN

t)att  into  the  midst  of  the  cummt,
when  she  abandons  if,  and  stands
Ml  inactive  spectator,  beholdini^  tlie
stnigpfles,  and  hearing  the  screams,
of  her  perishing  infant !  At  Sau-
gur  isianil,  mothers  wei^,  formerly,
seen  casting  tliclr  living  oflSipring
among  a. number  of  alligators,  and
standing  to  gaze  at  these  monsters
quarrelling  for  their  prey,  beholding
the  writhing  infant  in  the  jaws  of
the  successful  animal,  and  standing
motionless  while  it  was  breaking
the  bone^i  and  sucking  the  blood  of
.the  poor  innocent !  At  the  annual
festival  in  honour  of  Muha  Devo
(the  great  god),  many  persons  are
suspended  in  the  air,  by  large  hooks
thnuit  through  the  integuments  of
the  back,  and  swung  round  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour,  in  honour  of
this  deity.  Others  have  their  sides
pierced,  and  cords  are  intmduced
between  their  skin  and  the  ribs,  and
drawn  backwards  and  fona'ards.
While  these  victims  of  superstition
dance  through  the  streets,  others
cast  themselves  from  a  stage  10
feet  from  the  ground,  upon  open
knives  inserted  in  packs  of  cotton.
Sometimes  one  of  these  knives  en-
ters the  body,  and  the  poor  wretch
is  carried  off  to  expire.  At  the
■same  fcsti^-al  numbers  have  a  hole
cut  through  the  middle  of  the
tongue,  in  which  they  insert  a. «tick,
a  ram-rod,  or  any  thin  substance,
and  thus  dance  through  the  streets
in  honour  of  the  same  deity.  At
the  cldse  of  the  festival,  these  de-
votees dance  on  burning  coals,  their
/eet  being  uncovered.  Thousands
of  Hindoos  enter  upon  pilgrim-
ages to  famous  temples,  to  con-
secrated pools,  to  sue  red  rivers,
to  forests  rendered  sacred  as  the  re-
treats of  ancient  sages,  to  places
remarkable  for  some  natural  phe-
nomena, <fec.  (fee.  These  pilgrim-
ages are  attended  with  the  greatest
fatigue  and  privations;  frequently
with  starvation,  disease,  and  prema-
ture  death*  Hundreds  aie  supposed


to  perish  on  these  Joonw]^}^
some  of  these  places,  the  xonrt^
pilgrims,  becooie  fri^tM  ceflft
teries ;  to  one  of  which,  JagiiBB(|i(
in  Orissa,  Dr.  Buchanan  liBtnqi
properly  given  the  name  of  Gohp^
tha.     «  I  once  saw,"  saji  |l&


\


Ward,  «a  man  making
sive  prostrations  to  Jnguaii^
and  thus  measuring  the  dMni
between  some  place  In  tte  nodl(
down  to  the  temple  of  Jngnimi^
which  st^ds  nearly  at  the  nsttHI
extremity  of  India.  The  Iflidgl
writings  encourage  penmuaABW
with  incurable  distempers  foputl^
end  to  their  esdstence,  1^  eaitt^i
themselves  under  the  wbeelscMl
car  of  Jugunnaut,  or  into  idHf
sacred  river,  or  into  a  fire  pnpod
for  the  purpose;  promising  fld
self-murderers,  that  they  thsU  ill
to  birth  again  in  a  healthfidboK
whereas,  by  dying  a  natural  dBl%
they  would  be  liable  to  hsM  tt
disease  perpetuated  in  the  MBt
and  succeeding  births.  MoltitaAi
of  lepers,  and  other  chUdiea  d
sorrow,  perish  annually  In  ftM
prescribed  modes.  Mr.  W.  Ovq^
of  Cutwa,  the  second  son  of  Db
Carey,  states,  that  he  was  of
morning  informed  that  some  peajpb
had  dug  a  deep  hole  In  the  esril^
not  far  from  his  own  hoose,  wd
had  begun  to  kindle  a  fire  it  lb
bottom.  He  immediately  pi^
ceeded  to  the  spot,  and  saw  a  paor
leper,  who  had  been  deprtfad  <l
the  use  of  his  limbs  by  the  dlsesiW)
roll  himself  over  and  over  till,  it
last,  he  feU  into  the  pit  amUittto
flames.  Smarting  with  agany,  Ml
screams  became  most  dreadluL-  fie
called  upon  his  family,  who  for*
rounded  the  pit,  and  entreated  tbea
to  deliver  him  from  tlie  fltnwb
But  he  called  in  vain.  HIsovli
sister,  seeing  him  lift  his  hands  to
the  side,  and  make  a  dreadful  eftrt
to  escape,  pushed  him  back  again;
where,  these  relations  still.  oool[f


Hm

ly    endnring   indescribable
.  .  Every  Hindoo,  in  the

death,  is  hurried  to  the

the  Ganges,  or  to  some
jcnA  river,  if  near  enough
\  where  he  is  laid,  in  the

pf  death,  exposed  to  the
'  sun  by  day,  and  to  the
id  cold  of  the  night.  The
if  the  river  is  poured  plenti-
•wn  him,  if  he  can  swallow
I  his  breast,  forehead,  and
le  besmeared  with  the  mud
river  (for  the  very  mud  of
Ages  is  su[U)osed  to  have
ig  properties).  Just  before
d  quits  the  body,  he  is  laid

earth,  and  then  immei^sed
Oie  middle  in  the  stream ;
bis  relations  stand  around
ormcnting  him  in  these  his
oments  with  superstitious
nd  increasing  a  hundred-fold
ins  of  dying.  Very  often,
recovery  might  be  reasonably

for,  these  barbarous  rites
OB  premature  death.  It  is
certain,  that  many  private
rs,  in  using  these  rites,  are
rated.  Human  sacrifices,
re  enjoined  in  the  v^du,  and
ily  made  a  part  of  the  Hindoo
Ution  in  very  early  times,
9  they  unknown  at  the  pre-
ly.  The  v^u  describes  the
)  be  observed  at  the  sacrifice
lan  $  and  the  Kalika  pooran
M  the  degree  of  merit  at*
.  to  such  a  sacrifice,  compared
tie  offering  of  a  goat,  <fec.
[  while  Hindooism  is  thus

its  immortality  is  fully  at-
.  The  writings  of  the  Hin-
every  class  of  them,  even
works  on  ethics,  are  full  of
nable  allusions  and  descrip-

so  that  they  are  to-day,  what
irere  ages  ago, — a  people  un-
id  for  impurity.  Many  parts
e  works,  called  the  Tunus,
poorans,  and  of  their  poetical
igs,  are  so  indelicate,  that
;annot  possibly  be  tran^ted ;
faa.'never  see  the  ligbU    But


what  is  a  million-fold  mtite  aixo'
cious,  the  object  of  worship  ap-
pears as  the  personification  of  sin
itself.    One  or  two  of  the  Hindoo
objects  of  worship  cannot  possibly
be    named !    but  in   the  acts  of
Hindoo  wmrship  the  same  licen-
tiousness prevail!!.'     In  the  songs
and  dances  before  the  idols,  at  tho
perkxllcal  festhrals,  impurity  throws
away  her  mask.    The  respectable
natives  themselves  are  absoliitelj^
ashamed  of  being   seen   in  their
temples.    Gopal,  a  bramhin,  ac-
knowledged that  he  never  witnessed
these    spectacles   without   hiding
himself  behind  one  of  the  pittan
of  the  temple.    The  scenes  ex-
hibited in  the  boats  on  the  Ganges
every  year,  at  the  festival' of  me
goddess  D<x>rga,  in  the  presence  of
hundreds  of  spectators,  are  grossfy
impure ;  and  at  the  annual  festivid
of  the  goddess  of  learning,  the  con-
duct of  the  worshippers  is  intole-
rably ojffensive.  The  figures  painted
on'  the  car  of  Jugunnaut^  wfaich.
is  exhibited  to  the  public  gaze  for
fifteen  days  together,  at  £e  festl-
tivals  in  honour  of  this  deity,  ate
equally  licentious.    And,  us  might
be  expected,  the  priests 'and  the
religious  mendicants,    under  t&U
profligate   system,    are   the   very
ringleaders  in  crime.    The  whole
country  is,  indeed,  given  up  to
abomination  to  that  degree,  that^    -
accoErding  to  the  opinion  of  one  of
the    eldest   and  most  resectable
residents  in  India,  delivered  in  Mr.
Ward^s  hearing  more  than  once,
there  is  scarcely  a  chaste  fenale  to
be  found  among  all  theve  >rayriad8
of  idolaters.

Such  is  a  brief  account  of  Hin-
dooism as  it  still  exists.  Thanks
be  to  God  that  the  efforts  of  various
bodies  of  Christians  in  England
and  America,  made  in  his  strength,
have  already  obteined  a  rich  re-
ward. Several  hundreds  of  Hindoos
have  renounced  their  gods,  the
Ganges,  and  tih&Vi  v(^«i^\  xbA
have  shaken  fiom  ^&it  Yas^A^dzA


HON

lion  chain  of  caite.  A  laige  nmnber
of  coDferted  nathres  have  become
in  some  seme  miMionailes,  and  l»?e
been  the  initnunents  of  '<  turning
many  to  righteomnesi."  Anxiety
iias  been  generally  awakened  for
instruction>  which  promises  the
happiest  results;  and  a  vast  band
of  agents,  too  numerous  and  too
Tarious  for  recapitulation,  are  car-
rying forward  the  work  so  auspi*
ciously  commenced.  May  He,  to
whom  the  heathen  are  to  l>e  given
for  an  inheritance,  ftill  send  pros-
perity!

HONDURAS,  a  province  in
Mexico,  North  America,  bounded
K.  by  the  Bay  of  Honduras,  £.  by
the  Caribbean  Sea,  S.  by  Nicaragua,
and  W.  by  Vera  Paz.  It  is  390  m.
long  from  E.  to  W.,  and  150  from
N.  toS.  Its  soU  is  rich  and  fertile,
producing,  in  great  abundance,
most  of  the  tropical  fruits ;  it  has
a  few  English  settlements,  but  the
principal  inhabitants  are  Musquito
Indians.  In  consequence  of  an
urgent  request  of  the  Re?.  J.
Armstrong,  chaplain  to  the  English
settlement,  seconded  by  the  bene-
Tolent  widies  of  the  Commandant,
Col.  Arthur,  the  C  M,  S.  sent
to  their  assistance  the  Rev.  J.
Ditcher,  Sd  chaplain,  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Moore,  teachers,  and  Mr.
Moore,  printer.  The  principal
design  of  this  reinforcement  was  to
promote  more  extensively  the  good
of  the  settlement,  and  also  to  dif-
fuse the  blessings  of  Christianity
among  the  Musquito  Indians,  who
inhabit  a  country  from  1000  to
1200  m.  in  extent,  on  the  southern
shores  of  the  Bay  of  Honduras.
They  are  characterized  by  the
general  marks  of  heathenism,  being
indolent,  igpnorant,  and  supersti-
tious ;  though  not  so  strongly  ad-
dicted to  vicious  habits  as  many
barbarous  nations.  They  are  much
attached  to  the  English.  Their
king,  who  has  received  his  eduoa-
tha.at  ibe  expense  of  the  Btlttih


'HOW

govwnmettt,  mow  W— rif  a  O^
tian,  and  has  piOKited  hkanifll
to  any  efloita  to  nwfrtlialp  |i
subjects.  Manyofhia.aUAfawli
their  children  to  ba  t^bnelid^
various  circumstanecB  mnadjw  >
recommend  those  mda  Mdlmttalli
attentk>n  of  the  ClaMintWQ^in*
The  B.  M.  8.  statknedteAH
J.  Bourne  at  BaUai^  teiW
which  is  situated  on  aiti«rtf(|li
same  name ;  who,  on
some  difficnltiei

sion  among  the  native  triliiiaUli
time,  turned  his  attonttoB.- 1»  tti
disbanded  African  toUken^iwfea
with  thefar  families,  inriiliiiliiMlM
place.  In  his  laboan  ha  dnlsi
much  assistance  frani.  one  of  Ik
friends,  a  nun  of  eolonvwlali
acquainted  wiUi  "Qie  FnmthmH
Spanish  languagea,  aa  weU  aiwMl
the  Indianspoken  ontbeeoMtyaiifi
diligently  employed  In  pnaefel^
and  holding  pras^er  meetli^pMaai
the  people  in  diffiBient  parts  of  ftt
neighbourhood.  The  noabwif
communicants  haa  lecentlj  li^
creased  from  4  to  IS,  and  theilt
tendance  at  the  chapel  la  aood.  ■

HOWRAH,  a  popaloui  ariial
of  Calcutta,  on  the  opporiteriiaif
the  Hoogly,  in  whi^  reilda  mm^
Englishmen,  and  thoumndft  of  i^
tives.  Since  1891,  the  Jtyilhr
MimmuarieM  at  Calcutta  hav9-J^
boured  here  with  eneouiaffta^  wm»
cess.  The  Rev.  Mr.  StraMBWii
fixed  at  this  station^  and  a  eh^d
built,  at  an  exnenae  of  10^000  w  |
pees  defrayed  by  tubaeiifUoaa  «
the  spot,  was  well  attended*^  ic
school  was  also  furmed^  and4itcii
were  distributed  fai  gieat  mmakim,
which  wer^  c(UTied  to  dlfibnat
parts  of  the  country*  A.aeoQad
chapel  was  aftenmds  eneted.
Here  a  |if  ussulinan  mnnilioti,  or
teacher,  was  J>^t|aed ;  aa  ewet
which  occasion^  gfeat-  laipiiis
among  that  class  ctf  natives^  oaA
led  to  much  inquiij.
y  V^seM&I^^■  tDfildoDtei   ifr.  8^


HOW

tile  kXLowiag.'^  **  A  poor
'  wmaiai  wu  sick,  and  lent
me^  abe  appealed  to  be  very
taideedy    .yet    calm    and    le-
_  On  my  asking  her  how

it^-kat  wtih  iB9gud  to  entering  on
Mi  Metnal  woiM,  she  said,  <ItwUl
ter ' «  happy  change  ior  me.'    I
~  tiie  grounds  of  such  a-  hope,
cla^ied  her  Bengalee  Bible,
lay  by  her  cot,  and  said,
^*  I  ind  Christ  here,  Christ  in  my
Aamrt,  and  Christ  is  in  heaven.    He
•died  for  poor  sinners  like  me )  I
•knofw  be  is  able  to  save  me.    I  be-
4l0ve  he  will :'  and  then  she  prayed
M9  iweetly,  that  I  could  not  forbear
^njkig  ooit, '  Oh,  that  my  latter  end
be  like  hers  !>''
Jba  another  communication,  he
**  There  is,  and  none  can
it  who  know  an^  thing  of
matters,  a  feur  greater  pros-
Met  of  the  establishment  of  the
'llcdeemer's   kingdom  among  the
Xtedoos  than  ever  presented  itKlf
Aefbnw  I  well  remember  the  time,
iwhen  if  I  offisred  a  tract,  or  Gospel,
to  a  rich  Baboo,  he  would  reject  it
in  aborn ;  and  now  the  same  cha-
:iBBter  is  continually  inquiring  for
mmt  ioekt.    Not  two  years  ago,
tftnaie  education  was  looked  upon
Vj  the  rich  natives  as  a  thing  deio-
atoiy  to  their  caste ;  now  they  are
detlroBs  to  g^t  female  teachers  for
JiMdir  wives  and  daughters.  I  reool-
ieet»  when  in  Sulkea  Bazaar,  the
iHtlves  would  not  let  myself  and
ilie  native  with  me  get  a  place  to
pnach  in ;  now  they  say,  *  Come
Dften — ^teU  us   more  about  these
.lUngs  f  I  have  at  this  moment  36
iMiyB,  tiie  sons  of  natives  of  good
Mtato,  reading  the  Scriptores  in  my
%«randah,who  some  time  ago  were
jifrald  to  touch  a  book,    Dqsend
M  it,  that  the  Lord  is  fnUUUnghis
VrooDrfses  quicker  than  our  thoughts
aormise.'^

Mr.  Stotiiam  was  sabseqoentiy
Mnpelled  to  intermit  his  labours
ipcatlme^  and  seek,  bjwfijttiog


HCA

his  natifv  land,  for  a  renewal  of
that  vigour  which  tong  continued
exerttoos  had  materiaUgr  impaired.
During  his  abaence,the  services  he
has  Utherto  coBdncted  will  he
chieily  mamtained  by  Mr.  George
Pearce.

HUAHIN&,  one  of  the  So-
ciety  Islands- in  the  Pacific  Ocean,
30  leagues  firom  Tahiti.  It  is  SI
miles  in  circuity  populous,  and  fer-
tile, andhas  a  coDraiodtons  hatbow
called  Owharre,  W.  kmg.  16V  5'
S.lat.l6P44'.

Here  the  Zr.  Jtfl  &  hat  a  stetkm.
Previous  to  its  fonnatlaD,  idolatiy
had  been  abolished  throng^  the  Iik
fluence  of  the  eflbrts  made  at
Tahiti;  but  the  mteiioBaries,  on
their  arrival,  were  received  mlftk
apparent  coldness  by  the  bodv  of
the  people,  who  manifested  Uttte
desire  to  enjoy  religious  InstroctkHi.
The  tone  m  ieeih^,  however,  soon
changed; — ^the  minfonaries  were
treated  with  the  greatest  defi^renee
and  respect,  and  every  exertton  was
made  to  facilitate  their  object.  In
1882,  itwasstoted,  that  the  co«-
gregation  on  the  Sabbath-days
usually  consisted  of  firom  1000  to
1400  persons ;  thav  TS  adults  had
been  baptlied,  and  38  childieo ;
that  400  caindidates  for  baptism
were  receiving  preparatoij.lnrtrae^
tion;  that  a  Sundaj  school  had
been  formed,  containing  about  230
bqys  and  ISO  giris$  that  the  average
nmfaber  of  aduiti  and  children  in
the  native  sehooHs  was  about  450 ;
and  that  the  contrlbntionB  at  the
Third  Anniversaiy.  of  the  HuaUn^
A.M.  8.  amounted  to  IS  balls  of
arrow  root,  and  0840  bamboos  of
cocoa-nut  oil.  Civilintion  was
also  rapidly  advancing.

Some  time  after  this,  a  code  of
laws  was  drawn  up,  approved  by  the
king  and  chiefr,  and  adopted  by  the
people;  some  works  were  prepared
for  the  press;  and  asoctoly  for  the
relief  ch  the  sick  and  disabled  was
establiibed  by  Um  na^^ea.    K&»i


HUA

deftribing  the  palrtictilan  of  tbe
cbanffe  produced  by  this  misfdoiiy
the  Deputation  proceed  at  follows :
— **  In  fact,  the  improvement  of  the
people  in  indoftry,  and  their  ad-
.  VBucen\ent  in  the  sca!o  of  society
are  so  evident,  that  every  foreifcner
.who  comes   here  is  straclc   with
surprise  and  delight.    We  seemed
rather  to  be  in  an  English  town
.than  in  a  country  so  lately  in  a  bar-
barous state.    That  all  this  mighty
^change  .should  have  been  eflected
in  so  short  a  time  as  siK  years,
.  would  appear  almOst  incredible,  did
we  not  witness  the  fact  with  our
,(i^'n  eyes.    But  it  is  the  work  of
God  and  not  of  man.    The  inter-
vention of  an  Almighty  agency
can  alone  account  for  the  effect
produced.    At  the  tame  time,  we
•  will  not  withhcM  our   meed    of
.praise  from  those  who  have  been
made  the  honoured  instruments  of
,eflecting  this  great  work.''    The
Deputation  conclude  their  report
as  follows: — "  On  a  general  and
minute  view  of  both  the  temporal
■«nd  religious  condition  of  this  mis-
sion station,  there  is  every  reasou-
for  gratitude  to  God,  and  encou-
ragement to  that  society  which  has
bi^  the  honour  of  conferring  so
many  blessings  on  thispeOple.  Had
nothing  more  been  done  by  the
L.  M,  o.  than  has  been  effected  in
this  one  station,  all  its  labours  and
expenses  would  have  been  most
amply  compensated.''

The  children's  school,  which
contains  about  300,  and  that  for
the  adults^  which  comprises  the
chief  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
station  who  have  arrived  at  years
of  maturity.are  still  in  a  flourishing
state.  The  children  are  taught
reading,  writing,  and  arithmetic  ;
and  make  good  progress.  Of  the
adults,  the  greater  number  are
able  to  lead  the  Scriptures,  and
write  a  tolerable  hand.

As  the  greater  part  of  the  people
h&ve  been  dedicated  to  GodioiYia^


Rink

tlm,  th«^  nmnbtfr  wbo  ■iintf,  tli
tine  to  iime,  as  fwdMrtBi  ItrM
OTdinance^  neceswilly  NeflHi
smaller;  The  mmbur  6f  vMI
baptized  at  thk  stetfoB,  dai%M
year  1885-809  was  5 1  tiwl  of  di-
dren  of  Christian  pmtfl^  Msr<1b
total  number  baptiaed-  riMalU
oommeneement  <m  ttie  vWiai^
1 81 8,  it,  of  adults,  T83 1  of  AflM^
683.  The  number  addei  «» •!
church,  daring  l8Stf-96;
The  total  number  In
375  $  and  the  number  of
for  communion  Is  eonsideiiklfc*^'^

The  c<»igfegtttkm-  onal^-M^
tittB  of  from  1800  to  14m|aMi^
whose  attendance  is  Trgnfar  Hi
many  of  whom  alRnd  praof 'W
they  do  nothearthe  GoqwHaiitak
The  week^'day  meettngrfbrariri^
tatton,  religious  coa¥enBtlai^-Ml
prayer,  in  which  a  very  Bte^F^
teresi  prevails,  are  attended  tMk
profitable  results.  Mn.Baiff««My
week  meets  the  female'  memUnti
the  church,  about  800  In
for  religious  confciaattoi
prayeir.

The  chapel,  which    has
rebuilt  on  an  enlatged  seatoi  wB
hold  about  2000  persons*  and
tains  a  gallery  that
400  children.

Mr.  Barffhas  Inhaifd
tion  of  the  prophecy  of

Civilization  continues  to
Several   new  houses   have
lately  erected,  and  many  mora
in   progress.     More    ground  faM
also  been  brought  into  a-st«lB>«f
cultivation.

After  these  pleasing  itnlBawt^
it  is  the  more  painful  to  add^'  that  a
calamitous  event,  which  hajqiened
nigh  to  this  station  during  the  year
1826,  has.  been  made  an  occadoo^
on  the  part  of  some  of  the  nattvei^
for  acts  highly  discreditable  to  their
character.  It  seems  that  an  Ameil*
can  vessel  called  the  IfyMeo^  eoai*
manded  by  Capt.  Coffin,  (m  the  81il
oi  l!VQnvGcte«t  lAzQck.  ogl  ^htt  iec£


JAf

iMlt  bekmging  to  the  vmhI,
lenog  their  ntuatkm  perilous,
iqbmI  It  to  a  body  of  natlfet,
fcore  requested  by  the  captain
keereiyposnble  effi^tosave
rNmvtj  on  board.      These

■  .iMfiaif,/ during  the  night,

■  4  qmntiily  of  spirits,  and
•of  UMB  immoderately,  pro-
A4o  epprimrlate  to  their  own
Bamber  of  articles  belonging
I  ship.-  They  afterwards  re*
l«a  part  of  this  property,  but
t  whole.  Mahin^,  the  prin-
diief  of  Huahin^,  who  was  at
ne  on  the  opposite  side  of  the
r  €D  being  informed  of  what
iken  place,  acted  in  a  most
•ndable  manner.  He  made
lent  to  the  captain,  as  some
nmtion  for  the  loss  he  had
led,  adopted  measures  for  the
tlon  of  the  remaining  pro-
and  even  himself  personally
ed  in  watching  it.  The
dr  part  of  the  natives  who
Involved  in  the  guilt  of  the
•mentioned  transactions,  had
snefliofi  with  the  mission;
is  painful  to  state,  that  some
im  made  a  profession  of  reli-

With  few  exceptions,  these
dnee  manifested  repentance,
ave  been  restored  to  their
omed  intercourse  with  their

Christians.  A  spirit  of  holy
lyand  self-examination  ap-
to  have  been  excited  very
illy  among  the  people  of  the
I  by  these  occurrences,  and  a

diligent  attention  to  the
of   gprace   has  been    the


J.

FFNA,  or  JAFFNAPA-
,  a  peninsula,  in  the  north*
rt  of  Ceylon,  connected  with
and  by  an  isthmus.  It  is  40
g,  and  10  wide.  The  whole
i  is  one  coatimiB^fMBf  bo


JAt.


^ ' »


pvt  q(  H  rising  hls^  thaii  M  ImI
above  th« level  of  the.  sea;  aa4ii
OQBsidend  the  most  haoUfay^  te.
tile,  and  popukme  .part  of  the
isiaad.'  The popalnttioii,  various^
estimated  Isom  ISO  to  900.000,
coDsists,  pijneipaUy,  of  .Malriwrs,
who  epii^nttad  froin  the  continent :
they. are- a  bnve. people,  and  iiur
superior  tai  eneigy  to  the  Cittgalesey
theoriffinallniMUtai^ta.  Wtthtbe
ezcepwNiof  a  few  tfaomand  Kamva
CatboUcsy  a  «nall  number,  of
Mahome<kttiB,  and  S  or  SOO  nominal
Christians,  the  whole  populetiim  of
this  district  are  heathens.

WhUe  the  Dutch  held  possession
of  the  iilandy.  consklerable  eflbri
was  made  to  infuse  Into  their
minds  theprinelplea  of  Chrktisiiiiiy*
As  no  one  was  eligible  to  any  of*
ftce  of  govarnmeoty  unksshe  pro-
fessed the  Christian  fidth,  the  gi^at
mass  of  the  people,  probably  from
motives  of  interest,  were  beptized :
but  a  change  of  masten  produced
an  altexatian  intlieir  religioia  prac*
tices ;  for  no  sooner  was  permission
given  1^  the  Britldi  goveniment^
than  they,  almost  with  one  consent,
threw  off  their  profession,  and  n*
sumed  their  fenner  supentitlons.

They  have  not,  ^mwever,  given
their  sanction  to  some  of  the  more
appalling  customs  of  heathenim,
such  as  those  of  burning  widows,
and  polygamy.  Their  religion  is
that  of  the  brahmins,,  tboqgh  thej
are  not  so  devotedly  attached  to
their  peculiar  rites  as  ere  some  of
the  devotees  of  that  nrstem ;  and
they  have  feebler  pnyndtcesagainst
Christianity.  A  few  miles  from
Jaffiiapatam  Is  a  fvnous  JHindoo
temple,  at  whose  shrine  they  pay
their  (kvotions.  They  speak  the
Tamul  or  Malabar  language,  which
is  spoken  hiy  8  or.O  millions  of
people  on  the  adjacent  continent.
A  consklerable  put  of  the  sacred
writings,  together  with  other  books
of  a  religions  nature,  were  tnms-
Jatad  and  .piibVUh^  Vn  ^^ea  Tvbo^

BBS  ^\


JAP'

fangvage  ^  the  Dutch ;  Irait  toon
aftnr  Iheir  deptrtuie,  ttie  diftrict
was  enveloped  in  Ignorance  and
miperalitton,  and  remained  in  that
CGOiditiony  with  little  exception^
till  1810,  when  the  Rev.  Menn.
Richaidi,  MeigVy  Poor,  and  War*
len,  from  the  ji»  JB,  C  /\  M,
arrived,  and  estaUished  them-
«elvei  in  the  district  of  Jafiha.
Application  was  immediately  made
to  government,  and  liberty  was
soon  granted  them  to  occupy  the
ancient  church  buildings  and  glebe-
lands  in  several  of  ue  parishes.
Having  determined  upon  TiiUpaU^
and  jBaltfcofAi,  as  suitable  places  to
commence  their  operations,  they
repaired  immediately  to  Jafiha,
and  proceeded  to  make  the  neces*
sary  repairs.

In  June,  1810,  the  Rev.  Messrs.
Winslow,  Spaulding,  and  Wood*-
Ward,  together  with  Dr.  John  Scud-
der,  miled  from  Boston  to  strengthen
this  missionk  Next  to  their  prin-
cipal employment,  viz.  the  acquisi-
tion of  the  Malabar  language,  was
the  establishment  of  free-schools.
Such  natives,  therefore,  as  wished
to  be  employed  as  teachers,  were
sent  out  into  different  parishes  to
collect  scholars,  whose  immediate
Instruction  was  entrusted  to  them,
under  the  superintendence  of  the
missionaries.  Boarding  schools,
also.  Were  established  at  each  of
the  stations,  in  which  children
were  supported  by  the  bounty  of
benevolent  individuals,  or  societies,
in  America.  These  schools  are
tinder  the  immediate  care  and  in-
struction of  the  missionaries  or
their  wives.  At  their  first  opening,
12  dollars  was  considered  a  sum
adequate  to  defray  the  expenses  of
one  scholar  a-year;  but  after  a
thorough  trial,  this  sum  was  found
insufficient  to  cover  the  contingent
expenses,  and  in  1821,  the  sum  was
raised  to  20  dollars.

The  number  of  pupils  in  the
Umrdhig  schools  in  1823,  wasl70>


""■<**


JA»-.

the  whofo  nwmliiir-  of?
attached  to  the  miirii
containing  ISOO  cMMwWi
attended.

Owingtotha
of  the  people  at  the  (
of  'the  mifldon,   i^jfM ;  oa^,
suffered  to  receive  the  ~
instruction ;  bat   their
have  been  so  £ur  nmoti
schools  have  been  leoentl^i
for  the  benefit  of /ewmiM.  ■•.  -■  -fx

A  plan  is  now  cont»nnirtwfc.wl
will  probably  beshortlj
of  establidUng  •  netlva
Such  an  institntioDy  it  ii
will  tend  to  a  mate  genei
sion  of  Christjan  kiiowM|^,i  ^
by  connecting  the  sto^y  if !»
sciences  with  Ciiriitiaqity^  irfl
raise   the  standard  of   edHriHik

and  strike  with  powe^  at  the  mgM
idolatry.  Here,  also,  safliepiiej^
ers,  translators,  teaching  aqd'fff
sistants,  can  be  well  qnoUted  tt
each  of  these  departnent^  lit^
will  ultimately  irader  ingaiM
service  to  the  minefam*

An  Academy f  also,- it  abcwttDlJI
establishedatBatffcetftef  ataffteol
preparatory  to  wdmitsion  iafchfili
college.  " ».

Soon  after  the  anival  of  theM;
missionaries  at  Colombo,  tiMj^^
organized  Into  a  Cimtekm
their  removal  to  Jaffna,  tlioim^ite»
tioned  «t  difierent  placet,  it  jJWt
thought  best  to  act  in  eoDeeit,ai
have  but  one  church,  ivith  which  d
the  mission  family  noight  be  mtM

Since  the  establishment  ol  tht
mission,  24  nttivet  have  bean  n-
ceived  into  Christian  fiailoini^i
and,  with  the  excepticm  of  S  er  1^
have  uniformly  adorned  their  Ghii^
tian  profession,  qod  exempUBediht
beneficial  efiects  of  mitnona^lap
bours.  Three  indlvidaait  have  Dpoi
licensed  to  preach  the  GomI  to
their  deluded  brethren^  Hieie^
together  with  tome  of  the  mnt
forward  scholars  in  tlie  boaidiqg>
BchooU  fteqiientlj  itinemte  istt


JAL

dU^rant  parts  of-  the  district,  and>
tor  .reading  the  Scriptures  and  con-
vevsations  with  the  natives,  a£K)rd
taiential  aid  to  the  mission.
Some  of  the  scholars,  not  belong-
ing to  the  church,  are  believed
to  be  pious,  and  many  more  are
verioosly  disposed.  The  missionaries
kt  this  place,  by  means  of  their
pchools,  the  distribution  of  tracts,
(BooTersations,  and  preaching,  are
continually  exerting  a  powerful  and
happy  influence  on  a  large  popula-
tion.

In  addition  to  the  station;  occu-
pied by  the  American  missionaries,
the  ifesleyan  and  C,  M,  S,  have
badh  stations  in  Jaffna,  and  their
mlttidnaries  have  laboured  with
6cknsiderable  success.

Jqfiha,  or  Jaffnapatam,  a  large
and  very  populous  town,  capi-
tal of  the  district  of  Jaffna,  si-
tuated several  miles  from  the  sea,
on  a  navigable  river.  It  is  the  se-
cond town  in  the  island,  and  the
lesidence  of  the  superintendent  of
the  district.  The  inhabitants  are
principally  of  Mahomedan  extrac-
tion. £.  long.  800 1 8',  N.  lat.  ^  42'.

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Carver  and
Botty  and  Mr.  J.  Hunter,  assistant
missionary,  from  the  fV.  M,  S,
came  here  in  1814.  The  mission-
aries jMreach  in  the  Tamul  language
to  a  large  and  attentive  congrega-
lion>  in  a  new  chapel,  towards
Which  a  very  handsome  subscription
of  hot  less  than  3000  rix  dollars
i^as  raised ;  and  also  itinerate  in  the
neighbouring  parishes,  and  preach
with  much  acceptance  to  numerous
crowds  of  people.

In  addition  to  these  labours,  they
have  the* care  of  12  schools.  Pu-
pils, 583  ;  catechists  and  school-
masters, 11 ;  members  in  society
22.  In  Dec.  1821,  a  branch  B.  S,
was  formed,  the  funds  of  which
have  since  much  increased.

JALOOFS,  a  people  of  W.
Africa,  inhalU.ting  the  countiy  be-
tween the  lower  part  of  the  Gam-


JAM

bia  and  the  Senegal.  They  are  Jet
black,  are  divided  intot  several
classes  or  castes,  are  very  expert  td
war,  and  are,  therefore,  dreaded  bjr
other  nations.  Many  of  them  pro-
fess the  Mahomedan  religion ;  but
their  extreme  ignorance,  and  ridi-
culously absurd  prejudices,  are  be-
yond conception.  The  Society  of
Friends  has  made  some  advances
towards  diffusing  the  light  of  divine
truth  among  liiis  people.  Han-
nah Kilham,  one  of  their  number,
has  made  considerable  progress  in
learhing  their  language,  and  in  re-
ducing it  to  order,  with  the  design
of  translating  into  it  the  Bible  and
other  religious  books..

JAMAICA,  an  island  of  the
West  Indies,  discovered  by  Colum-^
bus  in  1494,  and  decupled  by  Spain
in  1559.  It  was  attacked  by  the
British,  and  ceded  to  them  in  1656.
It  lies  30  leagues  W.  St.  Domingo^
nearly  the  same  distance  S.  Cuba,
and  is  of  an  oval  figure,  170  m.  long
and  60  broad.  It  is  divided  into  3
counties,  Middlesex,  Surrey,  and
Cornwall,  and  contains  upwards  of
4,080,000  acres.  A  ridge  of  hills
runs  lengthwise  from  £•  to  W.
whence  numerous  rivers  take  their
rise  on  both  sides,  though  none  of
thetta  are  navigable.  In  the  valleys
are  sugar-canes,  and  such  A  variety
of  fruit-trees,  as  to  make  the  coun-
try exceedingly  beautiful.  The
year  is  divided  into  2  seasons,
the  wet  and  dry ;  but  the  rains  are
not  so  frequent  as  formerly,  which
is  supposed  to  be  owing  to  the  cut-
ting down  of  the  woods.  The  pro-
ducts and  fruits  are  in  great  variety
and  plenty.  This  island  is  now  the
most  valuable  of  the  British  West
India  colonies.

In  1795,  the  Maroons,  or  original
natives,  who  inhabited  the  moun-
tains, rose  against  the  English;
they  were  not  quelled  for  9  months^
and  by  cruel  means.  St.  Jago  de
la  Vega  is  the  seat  of  government^
but  Kingston  is  themaxt  oC  txBdA«


JAM

—In  this  island  the  V.  B,  have
laboured  amidst  many  trials  and
difficulties,  since  the  year  1754.

In  1 804,  50  rears  from  the  com-
mencement of  the  mission,  the
brethren  oljsen'e : — **  Though  we
cannot  exuit  over  an  abundant
in-gathering  of  souls,  or  even  over
our  present  prospects,  yet  we  have
sufficient  cause  of  gratitude  to  the
Lord,  for  having  preserved  a  seed
in  Jamaica,  which,  in  his  own  good
time,  may  grow  up  into  a  rich  har-
vest. It  appears,  that  from  the  be-
ginning of  this  mission  to  the  pre-
sent period,  938  negroes  have  been
baptized,"

New  stations  were  afterwards
commenced,  which  appeared  to
be  the  scenes  of  a  very  serious
and  progressive  awalcening.  The
following  accounts  will  describe
the  state  of  the  various  departments
of  the  mission,  at  the  dates  affixed.

New  Eden,  May,  1823.-  "  When
I  came  to  this  place,  12  years  ago,"
says  Brother  Beclcer, "  I  found  very
few  who  Icnew  any  thing  more  than
that  they  had  been  formerly  baptized
by  a  missionary.  Not  long  after,  I
perceived,  that  by  the  power  of  his
word,  preached  in  simplicity,  the
Lord  caused  convictions  to  arise
in  the  minds  of  the  negroes,  and
their  blind  eyes  to  be  opened :  many
came  to  inquire  what  they  must  do
to  be  saved.  At  present  this  is  still
more  frequently  done.  Our  new
chiurch  is  too  small  to  hold  the  con*
gregation.  About  500  may  find
room  in  it,  and  our  auditor}-  is  ge-
nerally 900.  April  27th  being  our
prayer  day,  12  persons  were  bap-
tized, and  22  added  to  the  Candidates
for  baptism.  From  Easter,  1822,
to  Easter,  1823,  99  adults  have  been
baptized,  or  received  into  the  con-
regation,  and  52  have  become  par-
takers of  the  Lord's  Supper."

Irwin,  September  7, 1825,  Bro-
ther Light  remarlcs :  —  "  During
the  ten  years  of  my  residence  here,
/  bare  ha^tized>  on  the  esta\j&s  ol  \


JAM  .ri^

Messrs.  Hall  and  I«wi0^^^^i^

adults,  and  182  children    ^:^^W

ceived  63,  baptized  by^

church  fellowship.

gation  at  Irwin  coi

persons;  of  whom  40

ntcants,  19  candidates,

tized  adults,  not  yet  canaar  '

to  these  may  be  added  3S

children,  under  IS  yean

in  all  150.    At  Mutimio

tate,  in  Hanover  ponsh,

which  I  visit  every  9

are  26  adults,  and  14  chlldi  ^^B^i

tized  at  the  special  yequiag  "^it^

proprietor."

Fairfield,   Febmory  1^^^^
Brother  Ellis  announces  tik.


ing  and  opening  of  a
at  this  place,  and  obeerver/""'^
the  year  1825,  the  number  cljJB'
sons  at  Fairfield  who  attalMi^
further  privileges  in  theetaA
Were  as  follows : — admitted  c^
didates  for  baptism  or  recepfldlf
110;  baptized  as  adults,  SS)  n*
ceived  into  the  congregaQoniTI')
admitted  candidates  for  the  lid|
communion,  91;  communtcairiiil^
re-admitted  to  the  GongregOtkttyli
children  baptized,  31 .  In  Sie  oons
of  the  year,  27  persons,  exdntrt
of  Europeans,  have  departed  tUi
life.    At  the  end  of  the  year,  fte
congregation  consisted  of  3Sl^  eoB*
municants ;  '97  candidates  for  tbo
communion;    135  bi^tlzed  adolta^
not  yet  communicants;    bopttad
children,  130 ;  candidates  for  b^
tism  and  reception,  125 ;  new  peo-
ple, 375 :— in  all  1190;  143  moM
than  last  year."

In  1789,  the  Rev.  Dr.  Coke  of
the  /F.  M,  S.  visited  Jamaica,  tnd
preached  a  few  times  to  incieei*
ing  congregations,  and  wlfh  bat
little  opposition.  Mr.  Hammetl^
however,  who  was  afterwards  ap-
pointed to  labour  in  KingstoB)
where  a  commodious  chapel  wes
erected,  experienced  so  mocli
persecution,  Uiat  his  life  was  iie-
^^eivW:^  «TtA»2D^i«l)  and   be  mtt


JAM

haolu't^ly  compelled  to  refrain  from
reflusbijag  by  candle-light.  Some
f.  tibi^  members  were  under  the
pctsssl't;^  of  guarding  their  place  of
onlilp^  le^  the  outrageous  mob
i0Uld  demolish  it ;  and  one  night,
iCW-^^^Ei  11  and  12  o'  clock,  some
lfsc»xis  actually  broke  down  the
Pii^s  o£*  the  court  leading  to  the
^pely  and  would  probably  have
i[|i^***itrted  still  greater  outrages,
ip^  "^^^y  not  been  checked  in  their
ip!^*^«s  proceedings  by  the  arrival
^  tbe  town-guard.  Through  the
tJBj^^nstrances  of  a  gentleman  of
||pl\ieiice  in  the  town,  the  magis-
,*.^J*^'were  induced  to  publish  an
^  .ymtisement,  which,  for  some
*  «^,  kept  the  rioters  within  tole-
^^^.TB»te  bounds.    "But  the   news-

o  «  Qied,   for  several   months,  with
xk  M^ien  for  and  against  us.    Eveir
^^r  -^UagbadwassaidofMr.Hammeti,
**.*   ^nd  every  disgraceful   name  was
^'   .^;iven  to  him.    With   respect  to
^     WMlfi  they  published  an  anecdote
'      ^  my  being  tried  in  England  for
t      'J^te^teaUngf  and  flying  to  Ame-
jricato  escape  from  justice,  though
fynr  persons,    if  any,    I    believe,
'flrcK}j[ted  the  report.    Some  of  the
iloters   were  prosecuted,  but  the
Joiy  acquitted  them,  against  the
clearest  evidence.    Harassed  with
.persecution,  opposition,  and  fatigue,
Sir.  H.  was  compelled  to  relinquish
J)^  labours ;  and  as  I  was  shorUy  to
Hsit  the  continent,  I  determined  to
take  him  with  me,  as  two  other  mis-
sionaries were  sent  to  the  island. "

The  flames  of  persecution,  which
had  hitherto  raged  so  furiously,
now  began  to  subside,  and  the  bre-
thren who  were  left  in.  Jamaica
.were  soon  enabled  to  extend  their
jnlnlstrations  to  Port  Royal,  Man-
tego  Bay,  and  several  plantations
in  the  country ;  and  they  had  the
pleasing  consciousness  of  knowing
that  their  labours  were  not  in  vain.

In  April,  1802,  some  of  the  local
preachers,  belonging  to  the  society


JAM

at  Kingston,  paid  a  visit  to  a  viUaga
called  Morant  Bay,  and  found  many
of  the  inhabitants  disposed  to  join
in  public  worship.  They  were  se*
conded  in  their  endeavours  by
Messrs.  Fish  and  Campbell,  then
residing  in  the  island;  and  in  a
short  time  a  small  society  was
formed.  The  enemies  of  religion,
however,  viewed  these  proceedii^
with  indignation,  and  resolved,  if
possible,  to  crush  the  rising  cause*
They  accordingly  presented  the
houses  in  which  divine  service  was
performed  as  nuisances,  at  the
quarter  sessions ;  but,  as  they  could
substantiate  no  charge,  their  maw
lignant  attempt  proved  unavailing  \
and  the  meetings  were  continued
with  every  appearance  of  increasing
prosperity.  Severe  trials  and  impri*
sonments  still  awaited  the  labourer8>
and  at  length  the  house  of  assembfy
thought  proper  to  pass  an  ac^
which,  whilst  it  professed  to  recom-
mend the  instruction  of  the  slaves
in  the  doctrines  of  the  established
church,  strictly  prohibited  the  Wes^
leyan  missionaries  from  presamlii^
to  teach  them,  or  even  to  admit
them  into  their  houses  or  places
of  worship,  under  the  penally  of
fine  or  imprisonment.

The  situation  of  the  missionaries
was  now  painful  indeed.  '^Fie*
quently,*'  says  Dip.  Coke,  "belbie
the  chapel  was  completely  shut^
while  men  of  free  condition  en"
tered,  to  hear  the  preaching,  tlie
slaves  crowded  about  the  doors,
which  the  edict  forbade  them  to
enter,  wiUi  looks  of  the  most  ex«
pressive  sorrow,  and  words  of  the
most  penetrating  eloquence.  In-
deed, we  do  not  envy  the  feelings
of  that  man  who  could  hear  un-
moved these  pathetic  expressions,
accompanied  with  tears ; — *  Massa,
me  no  g^  to  heaven  now.  White
man  keep  black  man  from  serving
God.  Bluck  man  got  no  souK
Nobody  teach  black  man  now!*
If  ever  the  "wot^  oi  ^\»roft  \»&^


MM

ft  meaning,  when  he  sajB, '  I  heaid
his  chains,  and  the  iron  entered
into  his  soul!'  it  must  have  been
on  this  occasion  ;  and  the  man
who  stood  at  the  chapel  doors,  to
forbid  the  entrance  of  the  slaves,
must  have  felt  them  in  all  their
force."

The  intolerant  act  passed  by
the  house  of  assembly  was  no
sooner  transmitted  to  England,
than  it  was  set  aside  by  his  late
Majesty.  But  though  the  ene-
mies of  religion  were  thus  frus-
trated in  their  attempt,  they  con-
trived, by  temporary  ordinances,
to  throw  insuperable  obstacles  in
the  way  of  the  missionaries,  whose
chapel  was,  in  ccmsequence,  shut
tip  for  a  succession  of  years.  In
December,  1815,  however,  it  was
lre«opened  by  Mr.  John  Shipman,
who  succeeded,  after  several  un-
mccessful  applications,  in  obtain-
ing a  licence  to  preach  the  Gos-
{)el.  The  same  privilege  was
afterwards  obtained  by  oiher  mis-
sionaries $  and  in  1818,  a  second
chapel  Was  opened  in  Kingston,
And  the  magistrates  In  Montego
Bay  consented  to  licence  a  new
plaoe  of  worship  in  that  part  of
the  island.

•  In  succeedhig  years  the  mis-
sioaary  worlc  was  greatly  extended,
as  will  appear  from  the  following
particulars  of  the  Jamaica  dis-
trict, recently  furnished  by  the
missionaries : —

>  Kingafon  Circuit,  Kingston.y
"  Here  large  congregations  conti-
nue to  attend  our  ministry,  many
of  whom  have  found  the  Gospel  to
be  '  the  power  of  God  unto  salva-
tion.' Number  in  society— Whites
66$  Free  Coloured,  1862$  »aves,
2136.   Total  4064."

Port  Royal.-—**  This  infant  so-
ciety is  in  a  very  pleasing  state.
Number  in  society — ^Whites,  6 ;
Free  Coloured,  86;  Slaves,  49.
Total,  140."
'  Spaniih  Town  Gtrouit.  Sp«miaK


JAk

I  ^0Mtai.— »Tbe  pnMitflit0tf||i

society  if  encouiragliig.''        ^  K'\

OH  Hwrk9wp.^**\%  ttli.te

the  small  soctetj  ii  in  a  v«iy|ift

perous  state.''  .  *.-.'-^'-

estate  has  been  Tliitail  ^iWlft
much  regularity  at  cireiiUBiSlft
would  pKMsibly  alhm;  IniPvff
work  here  laboon  imdsr^
disadvantages,  on  accoaiit
distance  from  thtf  miarion
Number  in  aoclelgr— WUtii|%
Free  Coloured^  843}  Stara^M
Total,  ^B«.  ..-^

«  Out  Sunday-sclioal  at  ^^hU
Toum  is  at  present  in  a  veMriA
state,  and  the  hopes  of  Iti  vim
have  been  greatly  lUmiyuiilii
It  is,  however,  a  Taiy  eneoai|i| .
circumstance,  that  adveral  'lAI
scholars,  botii  male  and  fttSlL
have  become  memben  of  ^y^t
ciety,  and  there  are  iBfeiil'  ilk
on  trial."  '  ■*•

MoTtmt'Bmf  Circuii^  iMtf-
^y.-~'<The  society  ddrln^  tt
past  year  hu  xMt  IneraaiBtflp
number.  ■  '-■■'

'<At  YalhihB,  the  aocftr^tti^
tlnues  to  increase  la  number,  pfMk
knowledge,  and  zeal.  NasdM^l
society— Whites,  4^  FIree  CdtoMA
90 ;  Slaves,  1646.    Total,  \H^

**  The  school  at  Martmi  BmM
suffered  much  for  waint  tiiivMf
books;  but  the  children^  to  w
number  of  50,  attend  wd^'liai
are  making  improvement.*'  '"^^

Bath  and  iAmekUmemi  ClfM.
Bath,—**  The  society  and  eoM^
gations  are  acqotring^  a  oonahmUf
degree  of  stability  ai^  diaiMtau
afiford  very  great  encooragcmsit^
to  their  future  piety  and  nseftmbifc"

**  At  ManMone€U  the  taif^
gations  are  very  large  aood  n^^M^
able,  and  an  excellent  a|iirlt,|i^
vails  amongst  thein.  Knmberlii
society— Free-cdoqred,  07 1  fibiicl^
1928.     Total,  S0S6."

Gratfful  maChemiU  GnOi^
\  BilU— «^  T%A  ^««B^5Ncatioa  tii


i


i


I


JJiM
jjijnlwty  we  npidly  increatiiig  at  this

^...^iW'  —  '^^^r^  &l<o  both  the
IbmigAsgation  and  society  are  in-
rifaiilini, ,  and,  with  veiy  few  ex-
lylhe  members  evidence  their
by  the  correctness  of  their

^ oondiict.''

BghgaU.—*^  This  place^  which

be^   but    recently    opened^

ground  for  much  encou-

leirt^    Number  in  society —

litefy  6;   Fr^e  Coloured,  138;

596.    Total  T40."

'.^7/  GrcuiU  Stoney-HilL

'*  Af  this  station  the  spiritual

of  the  society  is  very  encou-

miU^*'  This  infant  society
out  much  encouragement ;
increase  of  146  members  has
made  to  the  society  in  the
of  the  year.  Number  in
'nelety — Whites,  4 ;  Free  Coloured|
1 5  Slaves,  408.  Total,  665."
At  Stoney-HiU  a  Sunday-school
commenced  in  February,  1826,
inder  rather  auspicious  circum-
iteDces ;  but  the  severe  rains  which
Iwfe  fallen  in  the  course  of  the
jCftr  have  greatly  retarded  its  pro-

eas  the  children  have  often
prevented  from  attending.
tht  teachers  have  been  most  di-
UffBnt  in  their  work,  and  a  few
noiilti  have  been  taught  to  read  the
BJBriptores.—  Scholars,  33.

immiego  Bay  Circuit, — '^  We  are
kapinr  to  say  that  the  work  of  the
l^onl  at  this  station  is  prospering,
IUkI  that  there  is  a  prospect  of
inofeflsing  prosperity.  The  number
in  aociety  is  411,  making  an  in-
eroBse  diuring  the  year  of  76.
-  <<  Our  Sunday-school  has  not
pnMpered  so  much  as  we  could
dobe.  Nevertheless,  we  are  happy
to  be  able  4o  state,  that  those
ehfldrep  who  have  shown  a  better
eoDdnct,  have  made  very  consi-
djBrable  progress,  and  several  pro-
mise fair  for  fruitfulness  in  the
fineyard  of  our   God,    Number


JAM

in  the  school—Boys^  84  \  girl^
31.    Total,  66,

**  The  negroe  children  on-  the
estates  Blue-Hole  and  Spring  aro
veiy  interesting.

''  At  the  commencement  of  the
year  we  made  an  attempt  to  esta«
blish  an  evening  school  for  adults,
in  which  we  succeeded.  The  po*
gress  has  exceeded  our  mostsan*
guine  expectations,''

Falmouth  Circuit.^"  The  so^
clety  in  this  place,  though  small,
is  prospering.  Tlie  numl^r  in  so?
ciety  is  66;  34  havQ  been  added
during  the  year."

Saint  Ann*e  Circuit,  Saint
Ann**  Bay,  —  "  The  word  of
God  appears  to  make  but  slonf
progress  among  the  people  of  this
town,  who  are  exceedingly  ignoa
rant  of  divine  things,  and  manifest
but  little  desire  to  attend  the  means
of  grace.  The  members  of  society,
however,  both  free  and  slaves,  are
very  stedfost  and  consistent ;  and
several  have  been  added  during  the
past  year."

Bellemont.—^Thls  station  pre-
sents encouragement.  Number  la
society— Whites,  6;  Free  Coloured,
24;  Slaves,  188.    Total,  SIO."

In  compliance  with  the  solicita*
tion  of  a  mulatto  Baptist  preacher,
nam^d  Moses  Baker,  who  had  for
some  years  laboured  among  the
negroes  in  Jamaica,  the  Rev.  John
Rowe,  of  the  B,  M,  S.  arrived
in  February,  1814,  In  April,  ho
took  a  house  at  Falmouth,  and
opened  a  school,  with  the  hope  of
lessening  the  expenses  of  the  com-
mittee on  his  account.  He  also
opened  a  gratuitous  Sabbath  school,
for  the  children  of  poor  people,  and
slaves  whose  owners  would  permit
them  to  attend.  Preaching  was
subsequently  commenced ;  and  the
persons  who  assembled  to  hear
the  word  of  life,  both  negroes  and
white  people,  conducted  themselvei
with  the  utmost  decorum  and  appa ;
rent  attentioii  \  ihsxn^  \  ^ssl^  ^


JAM

pnwcatloB  bad,  (or  meral  yean
pTLiloun,  raffed  In  the  illHDil,  end
numbeti  of  (ba  iDhabltonta  were
Mill  to  be  strDnel^iiTeindlcfcl  agnlnat
tha  Bautitt  ilenonilnstlon.

On  the  iUt  of  Not.  1S15,  Mr.
Lee  Conipi-re,  accompuiled  by  bli
n'lfE  nnd  tvo  of  the  memben  of
Dr.  Ryland'f  church.  In  Broad-
tnaad,  'till»d  from  Brlatol  <o  occupy
othfr  Elstioni  In  Jamnica,  with  an
especial  view  to  the  Inatiucllon  of
theslavei,  and  the  children  of  slarea,
under  the  uinctjon  of  their  re-
apttctire  prai>rietor<.  On  their  arri-
val, the;'  lit  Hnt  Sied  Ihetr  residence
near  Old  Harbour,  St.  Dorothy  1
butaflerwanliremaTedtoKlnitaton,


mm  penon ;  niid  toward*  Qw  den
of  September,  {he  partner  of  Hit
aHectioni  tms  suized  with  »  tllh
lent  ferer,  wbkb,  in  a  short  tin^
pat  a  period    to  her  mortal  u-

SulaeqiiPutly  to  this,  Mr.Cnl-
tart'i  IndbpositioD  increawj  ,tt
«ucb  an  alarmlni;  degrve,  Ihtjl
became'  indispensably  Decsiiq
for  him  tn  return,  at  leait  fall
MUpn,  to  England.  The  In
MeBRi.  Kilcbins  and  Goddeninn,
therefme,  sent  to  Jamaica,  lb
ronner  of  wboni  proceedd,  pi
(be  autumn  of  ISiS,  (o  bii  jilwt
of  dettlnation,  and  the  lalloruiU
from  Eng-land  early  in  the  easdtf;


t  Uie  pressing  Inritatian  of  the  1  spring.    Their    reception   r


9  raid  t


3apll>ti,
amount  to  nome  thoumumu  m  nuu
near  that  place.  Here  Mr.  Com-
pere obtained  a  license  from  Ibe
Mayor;  and  he  had  tbe  pleasing
rrospect  of  becoming  useful.  Mr.
Howe,  mean  while,  wa«  remored
from  bis  laboun  by  the  hand  of
death.

As  aslstance  was  much  needed,
tbe  Re>.  Jamei  Coullart  anlied  in
Kingston  harbour,  May  0,  ISIT,
nnd  in  less  than  a  fortnight  sdb-
ceeded  in  obtaining  a  license  to
preach  among  the  negroes.  Both
be  nnd  Mrs.  Coultert  were,  how-
ever, much  grleiedon  Snding  Mr.
Compere  in suchadebllitated state,
from  repeated  attacks  of  the  ague,
that  he  wai  scarcely  able  to  walk
across  his  apartment ;  and  when  he
partially  recoYered,  he  Judged  it
adrisable  to  quit  tbe  West  Indies,
and  remove  to  America.

Thus  unexpectedly  deprived  of
bis  fellow -labourer,  and  left  to  sus-
tain  the  whole  weight  of  the
mission  In  vhich  be  had  merely
anticipated  employment  as  an  as-
sistant, Mr,  Coultart  was  doomed
to  encoiinterstlU  more  serious  dlffi-
coltie),   and  to  submit  to  a  loss

reafBlcUTe.    He  was  for    of  Mr-'Goddeifi  lalMian  a  Mt


to  ban)  been  extrenielj'  kind  ;  ui
they  , were  encouraged,  bylhedt
cUntitancB  of  the  congregitiia
increaiini;  so  rapidly,  to  enli^
the  place  of  wuriihip,  so  ai  tG
accommointe  2^0  peifons  mm
previously  attendnl.
^,  ever,  had  they  en-
tered fully  upon  their  laboun,  sol
congratulated  tbenuelvejt  on  U»
prooitslng  aspect  of  the  misdog,
when  Mr.  Godden  was  depril^
othls  amiable  and  eKoeUenl  -^"
and  within  lufs  than
after  that  alllictive  providenre,
Kltehing,  vcbo  had  Iransmitt^
"heavy  tidings"  lo  England,
bimsel/ numbered  with  the  '"

Mr.  Coult^irt,  In  (he  mei
having  derived  much  beneQl
B  residence  of  several  montL ,
England,    ami    bnvitiii:    enlerd

second  time    Into   tbt   coqta|


severely  from  the  coafinad  _
of  tbe  place  of  wor^p,  ■nd

heat  arising  (rom  an *~

congregBtloD.
At  Spanish  Town,


■e  time  Mreiely  esnctieA  tn  lAi  \  teuU^  «.\


of  ft

\tauJj


JAM

1§80,  to  bnm  that  devoted  ser-
jVAikt  of  the  Redeemer  in  his  bed ;
^fK>4  though  this  barbarous  design
>'wa«  providentially  prevented,  the

iiouie  in  which  he  resided  was  re-
duced to  ashes,  and  his  health,
.which  had  been  previously  in  a

delicate  state,  was  much  afiecfed

hy  the  alarm  connected  with  so
-lamentable    a   catastrophe.     The

Mlowing  anecdote  aiTords  an  afiect-
-In^  instance  of  strong  attachment

-  to  a  spiritual  instructor :—  On  the
.nJgiit  of  the  fire,  a  female  slave,
•wfio  bad  been  previously  baptized,

-  ezerted  herself  greatly  in  carrying
ftWater  from  the  river,  in  order  to
•oadtt  in  extinguishing  the  flames.
.*When  her  strength  was  nearly  ex-
hausted, she  eagerly  inquired  of
^heby-standers,  "Where  my minit>-
4bt  ?"  A  person  answered,  "  He
•  bas  been  burnt  in  his  bed.''  The
•jioor  creature  was  so  affected  by
.thii  dreadful  intelligence,  that  she

fell  down  and  expired  immediately
without  uttering  another  word !

;  At  Kingston,  Mr.  Coultart  had.
In    the    mean  time,    commenced

•the  erection  of  a  neat,  substantial
chapel,  situated  on  lofty  ground,
near  the  entrance  into  the  city,
and  calculated  to  hold  2000  persons.
He  had,  also,  many  encouraging
evidences  that  the  power  of  God  at-

.  tended  the  dispensation  of  the  word
of  truth,  as  nearly  200  persons  had
lieen  admitted  into  church  fellow-
ship within  the  ^ace  of  12  months,

-notwithstanding  the  utmost  discri"
mination  appears  to  have  been
exercised.

Mr.  C.  relates  the  following
proof  of  liigh  estimation  of  reli-
gious privileges  : — "  A  slave  wished
his  owner  to  give  him  permission
to  attend  with  God's  people  to
pray :  his  answer  was  *  No  ;  I  will
rather  sell  you  to  any  one  who  will
Iniy  you.'  *  Will  you,*  said  he,
'  suffer  me  to  buy  myself  free,  if
Die  can  ?'  '  If  you  do,  you  shall  pay
dearly  for  your  freedom;  as  you


JAM

are  going  to  pray,  two  hundred  and
fifty  pounds  is  your  price. '   *  Well,
massa,'  said  the  negro,   who  Icnew
that  the  common  price  for  a  slave
was  about  140/.     *  it  a  great  deal
of  money,  but  me  mtut  pray  ;  if
God  will  help  me,  me  will  try  and
pay  you.'    He  has  been  a  long
time  working  hard,  and  at  last  sold
all  himself  and  his  wife  had,  ex-
cept his  Manket,  to  purchase  liberty
to  pray  in  public,  or,  in  other  words,
to  meet  with  those  who  love  Jesus
Christ!"

Towards  the  close  of  the  year,
Mr.  Coultart  was  induced,  by  the
pressing  invitation  of  a  friend,  to
pay  a  visit  to  the  parish  of  Manchio-
neal,  and  make  an  excursion  to
Montego  Bay,  where  he  found  the
venerable  Moses  Baker  blind  with
age.  He  was  much  gratified  with
the  interview,  and  received  from
the  proprietor  of  the  estate  on
which  *Mr.  Baker  resides,  a  most
jsatisfactory  testimony  to  the  moral
improvement  which  had  taken  place
among  his  negroes,  in  consequence
of  the  pious  instructions  of  that  ex^-
cellent  man.  So  convinced,  indeed,
was  this  gentleman  of  the  advan-
tages resulting  from  an  attendance
upon  the  Gospel,  that  he  expressed
an  earnest  wish  for  some  person  to
be  sent  thither,  under  the  sanction
of  the  B,  M.  S,,  who  might  take
charge  of  the  congregation,  which
Mr.  Baker  was  now  unable  to
supply  in  consequence  of  his  years
and  attendant  infirmities.  The
Rev.  Mr.  Tripp  was  al'teiwards
appointed  to  this  station.

In  Januar}',  1822,  the  new  chapel
at  Kingston  was  opened,  and  was
both  numerously  and  respectably
attended.  Upwards  of  2000  per-
sons were  numbered  within  the
edifice,  and  above  500  were  ac-
commodated with  benches  on  the
outside.  Mr.  Coultart  having  of-
fered some  remarks  on  the  rejiorts
and  other  statements  of  the  society,
some  uukDO^'n  ^uWttvneii  h;^\«
c  c  %^^


JAM

induced  not  only  to  efpome  but  to
advocate  the  cause,  aiid  to  solicit
the  public  to  support  an  institution
which  appeared  "  so  likely  to  be
advantageous  to  the  general  wel-
fare." On  the  first  Sabbath  in
March,  the  Lord's  Supper  was  ad-
ministered, in  the  new  edifice,  to
about  1600  communicants,  and  Mr.
Godden  came  over  from  Spanish
Town  to  assist  in  the  pleasing
solenmities  of  the  day.

In  a  letter  dated  March  18, 1838,
Mr.  Knibb,  who  had  recently  ar-
rived, wrote — "  You  have,  peiinips,
been  informed  that  we  have  opened
a  house  at  Port  Hoyal,  about  6  m.
from  Kingston,  on  Uie  opposite
side  of  the  harbour.  It  is  a  very
wicked  place;  a  short  time  ago,
it  could  vie  with  Sodom  and
(jomorrah  in  wickedness.  Once
it  was  wholly  swallowed  up  by  an
earthquake;  and,  in  1811,  almost
the  whole  town  was  consinned  by
fire. — 22  persons  are  received  as
candidates  for  baptism."

In  the  course  of  the  year  1883,
some  hundreds  of  members  were
added  to  the  churches  in  Kingston,
and  from  that  time,  notwithstanding
various  personal  and  relative  afflic-
tions, the  missionaries  have  had
much  cause  of  rejoicing.  The  last
Report  says — **  The  increase  of
members  in  the  first  church  at
Kingston  has  been  considerable ;
and  though  Mr.  Coultart  has  been
constrained,  on  account  of  Mrs.
C.'s  continued  indisposition,  to
leave  his  important  charge  for  a
season,  the  worship  of  God  has
been  regularly  maintained  among
them  by  the  united  efRirls  of  Mr.
Tinson,  Mr.  Knibb,  and  Mr.  Flood ;
the  last  of  whom  left  England
shortly  before  the  last  anniversary,
with  Messrs.  Mann  and  Baylis.
The  school  conducted  by  Mr.Knibb
appears  to  be  of  growing  utility.
A  j)ublic  examination  of  the  pupils
was  held  in  December  last,  when
manypemoB  of  respvctibiUty  a.V


JAM


tended^  and
sure  and  surfnlaa  stiha.fngnM  tf
the  pnpilf.  It  ii  ■higillF'^Hiv  i
ragingto  add,  tlmt  nnyvb^tMl  Ijii
eduQBted  in  thta  aekoal  tai0#  |
come  memben  of  :tha*chm%iii
others  are  ffimdl^tM  far Umim
privilege.'*  .  ^  jS  I

" ■  *


«  The  chaiiel  Uthaito
byMr.Tinfon^
lag  been  found.  In  pcSnt^
and  otherwlie,  tacoarMak
mises  better  nila|iiiil  fia  IIm|i^
have  been  angagad  tbi
They  were  opened  te
ship,  after  the  -neecaaqr.^^lMK  i
andatteralionabad-taeBaaBiW^'  I
on  the  S4th  of  Daoaankar.  i  mtif>  I
pearono^"  nja  Mr.  V.^iotiil^  i
encouraging."  .  f <lt

«  The  ezarUona  iililiili  iifffc
several  yean  been  nada.aC4|l
iZoya/,  the  ancient  e^rilri^lf^B
island,  have  ionied  in  tT
of  a  church  theia^  .of
Knibb    has    taken     1
About  1^0  membeiB
Kingston  have  been
and  at  the  date  of  the  laat
the  nu:;il>er  of  eonverti
derably  increased."  ■>'-  .H-

<<  At  Saanisk  lbmh»>  Mfe  JH-
lippo  writes,  "  oar  piwipifc  iW
indeed  cheering;  the  'OHnhBEflf
our  stated  congregation  tattl^
doubles  what  it  was  laat  ymm  Mi
less  than  400  young  pannM  hne
been  added  to  itidttiiii  thri  laiifn
three   months,  jdnmat  «!«£


or  ,

whom  seem  earsestly  InqoiitagtAB
way  to  Zion,  with  their  fraaBJU-
therward."  Mr.  Philino  -Hi
been  laboriously  engaged/'iiai  fia
ral  months  past,  in  wperiatandlBg
the  erection  of  a  nenpr. chapel  |  md
such  is  the  interest  taken  jhfihe
people  in  this  service,  that«MB|r
free  persons  of  e(4oi]r,:]Kith  in  the
church  and  in  the  congngatkai,
submit  to  the  .greatest  diudMiyi
solely  that  they  may  piesan  lie
fruits  of  their  is^nr  ar.an
tothetaoaaaoC  God.''   .  .


JAM.

"  At  CNtf  MatrftfMfy  Panage  Ftrt,
aeverel  other  places  in  the
ibonrhood,  which  are  supplied
Joiirt  exertions  of  Mr.  Phi-
and  Mr«  Baylis,  the  prospects
.^■MraqaaliyaniiDttting;  and  scarcely
«(WadtpaflM»  but  deputations  are
■OBtdown  to  Spani$h  Toitm,  from
'tibe  contiguous  parishes,  reiterating
iMbeedoniui  cry^  **  Come  over

hBfy  OS."

**  Although  the  Tacancy  atuAnotta
oocaitoned  by  the  decease  of

r«  PMHips,  has  not  yet  been  sup-
IpHody  tbe*  worlc  of  the  mission  has
mt  beenoltogetiier.at  a  stand.  Mr.'
Hood  hu  (McadoBally  visited  the
flMlbii)  and' had  the  pleasure  to  re*
-.caive  upwards  of  30  members  into
the  church  at  the  close  of  1826."

''The  churches  both  B.t  Miontege
Mkjf  and  Crocked  Spring  are  in  a
vsiy  pleadng  and  prosperous  state.
^Dto  exertkMis  of  Mr.  Mann,  dur-
iair  tlx.  BttTchefi's  visit  to  this
oottntiy,  had  been  unremitting  and
saeeeHfiil ;  and  on  the  third  Sab-
batt  in  March,  76  persons  were
baptixed.  Mr.  j^rchell  has  eom-
■nnced  preaehing  at  the  town  of
PUmmihf  where  for  a  long  time
faondrods  have  eagerly  desired  his
vMtik  Arrangements  have  also
■  bewi  made  for  occupying  a  station
at  Ridglmid,  in  the  pari^  of  West-
loorehuid'."

**  Bvt  while  so  encouraging  a
ftatemevt  of  the  progress  of  reli-
gion in  Jamaica  may  be  made,  in-
ttlfigenee  has  lately  been  received
o#  a  nature*  to  excite  serious  appre-
hensions for  the  future  welfare  of
ihe' mission.  A  consolidated  slave
law  passed  the  House  of  Assembly
on  tiie  28d  of  December  last,  tn
which,  among  many  other  enaet-
menta  of  a-  wideTy  different  charac-
tety  several  clauses  are  inserted  of
•  tendency  equally  injurious  and
HBJuiit.  Repeated  applicatione  have
been  made  to  government  upon  the
Mbjeot,  and  it  is  earnestly  hoped
the  repreientationt  will  not  be  in-


JAN

vain.  May  He  6y  t^hom  kings
reign  and  princee  decree  Jtutiee,
gracioudy  interpose,  to  defend  bis
cause  in  this  important  island  from
the  danger  which  threatens  it  I "

The  C,  K,  &  has  several  schools
on  this  island,  which  are  in  a  pros-
perous state.

A  correspondence  having  been
entered  into  with  the  Bishop  of  Ja-
maica, by  which  it  appeared  that
opening»  of  usefulness  presented
themselves  in  the  estabiishment  of
schools  in  the  island,  the  com-
mittee of  the  C.  M,  jS.  have  placed
the  sum  of  £200  at  his  Lordship's
disposal,  for  that  purpose.

An  opportunity  having  occurred
far  the  beneficiei  employment  of
the  society's  lunds  in  the  parish  of
St  Thomas  in  the  £ast,  the  com- '
mittee  have  granted  the  sum  of
£100,  to  be  appropriated  at  the  dis-
cretion of  the  reKBtor.  With  this
sum  a  catechist  has  been  provided
for  the  district  ef  Blue  Mountain
Valley,  containing  a-  population  of
5600  persons,  who  have  hitherto
had  no  means  of  spiritual  instruc-
tion.

Mr.  Taylor  and  Mr.  Jones,  with
their  wives,  pursue  the  work  of
education  on  the  estates  of  Salt
Savwmal^  and  Papine.  In'  the
school  under  Mr.  Taylor's  care
there  are  83^  scholars,  consisting  of
aHults  and  children ;  and  in  that  of
which  Mr.  Jones  has  the  charge,  81 .
JAN,  ST.  one  of  the  Virgin
Islands,  W.  Indies,  about  36  m.  E.
Porto  Rico.

In  1 741 ,  a  pious  man,named  Jen»
Rasmers,  an  overseer  of  one  of  the
phintationS)  who  had  formed  an  ac-
quaintance with  the>  missionaries  ut
St.  Thomas,  began  to  preach  to  the
negroes  under  his  care,  and  occa-
sionally invited  some  of  the  U.  B.
to  come  over  to  hi»  aid.  Great  at-
.  tention  was  tiius  excited  among  the
staves ;  and  in  the  course  of  a  few
years,  it  "was  so  evident  that  the
.  word  spaben  waa  fl^^AiA  ^V<ii  «.


JAN

divine  blessing,  that  a  nnall  estate
WHS  piirchaxed  as  a  missionary  set-
tlement, and  called  Bethahif;  and
ill  November,  1764,  Mr.  Brucher,
Trom  the  ixiand  of  St.  Thomas,  took
lip  hirt  residence  there.

In  176tf,  the  rhiirch,  >K-hirh  had
been  unfortunately  blown  down  by
n  temi>efit,  was  rebuilt ;  and  in  1782,
the  brethren  purchased  a  house  and
H  piece  of  pn^^und,  in  another  part
of  the  island,  for  the  accommoda-
tion of  those  negroes  who  were
Iirecludfd  by  distance  from  regu-
larly attending  the  worship  at  Be-
thnny.  In  this  settlement,  which
was  CHlled  JCmmaui,  a  new  church
was  erected  and  a  missionary  was
settled ;  two  circumstances  which
appeared  to  gratify  the  white  iuha-
hitanlM  of  the  neighbourhood,  as
well  as  the  peculiar  objects  of  the
mission.

In  August,  1793,  a  dreadfuUhur-
ricane  occurred  in  the  West  India
islands,  and  proved  particularly  de-
structive to  St<  Jan.  Of  the  two
missionary  settlements,  Bethany
)uid  Emmaus,  the  former  was  most
exposed  to  the  fury  of  the  tempest,
and  there  the  scene  was  truly  up-
palling:  the  stonn  commenced  in
tile  evening  of  the  12th ;  and  before
morning,  the  brethren  and  many
})ersoiis,  both  Europeans  and  peo-
ple of  colour,  who  had  fled  to  them
from  different  parts  of  the  neigh-
bourhood, could  scarcely  find  shel-
ter in  any  part  of  the  buildings.
About  8  o'clock  the  wind  suddenly
veered  to  the  S.,  when  all  the
houses  of  the  negroes  were  swept
away  in  an  instant ;  and  soon  after,
the  church  fell  with  a  tremendous
crash,  and  its  ruins  were  whirled
into  the  air,  and  carried  to  a  con-
siderable distance — boards,  beams,
rafters,  and  shingles,  flying  in  all
directions.  The  mission-house  also,
was  in  the  roost  imminent  danger.
Providentially,  however,  this  was
p^reserved,  together  with  the  church
and  dwelling-house  of  the  brethren


JER

at  Emmaiu,    though  tt&fhtfw
rounding  buUdlngi  were  eaiB|M%i
destroyed.  '"  •

In  the  year  1818,  the  cuiwiig*'
lions  of  the  brethren  on  tUtlihel
consUtedof  1461  baptfaed  yuiw^fc
including  children  |  and  ef  'ttk
number  Hit  had  been  adnlMti
the  holy  sacrameDt.

The  hurricane  which  wm  M»
severely  in  St.  Croix,
of  1819,  also  visited
St.  Jan,  and  did  couideiBlie  #
mage  to  the  miulonaiy  aetllHiMUi  ■

JERUSALEM,  a  citj  ol  i*L,
capital  of.  the  ancient  JndBani'
of  modem  Polertine,  dtnateddMl
26  m.  westward  of  tlie  Tmdin,  iij .
40  E.  Mediterranean.    B.  ka$,'
350  2&,  N.  Ut  21^  48'.     It  ii  lif-
poied  to  have  been  founded  tay>]M-
cbizedeek^  and  named  Satami  Ml.
when  the  Israelitea    oitoed  tts.
land  of  Canaan,  it  was  e^UM  Jeta%
from  the  Jeburites,  whoie  cnNii.
it  was.    It  was  the  capital  a£«lM .
Tid's  kingdom,  under: its  jamA
name.    Here   Solomon,  hbiiM*'
cessor,  built  his  magnificent  tBH>
pie,  which  was    dedicated  -  MH
years  B.C.  About  418  yean alki^
the  city  and  walls  were  deraoUiM
by  Nebuchadnezear.    It  hae  Mi
several  times  destroyed  by  tkfe  Wi^ '
mies  of  God,  and  rebidlt  tay^-.
chosen   people.    In  the  reign  cl:
Tiberius,  it  was  rendered  mamir
rable  by  being  the  scene  of  -tBitKf
of  Christ's  miracles,  and  espediPy
of  bis  death  and  resnrreotioa'}  ned-
was  taken  and  destroyed  1^  Ttta^
A.  D.  70.   At  the'slege,  aocovdhy
to  Josephus,  97,000  were   taken
prisoners,    18,000    perished  -^wVk
hunger;  and  the  whole  nioAerflf
slain  and  prisoners,  during  the«»,
was  11,000,000.  ItwassoonreboBtj
has  since  been  often  plonderednn
partially  destroyed  \  and,  for  setelel .
centuries,  has  been  annexed  to4hB
Turkish  empire.    It  has  long  ben
an  object  of  much  yeneratlani  aaf .
the  resort  of  numerous  pUgrioi^  ei;


JER

It  denoiiiiiuiti<)ns  and  dcnxA'^
who  pay  aa  imlneiise  Irerenue
i  Turin.

e  city  is  bailt  on  several  bills ;
[km,  at  the  S.  W.  part ;  Cal-
at  the  N.  W. )  Moriab,  at  the
I  and  Besetha,  at  the  N.  E.
laailjr  square,  and  little  short
Sb  in  circuit.  The  popuiatitm
jDated  as  follows: — -Mussiil-
10,000 — Jews,  0000— Greeks,
-Catholics,  IdOO— Armeni-
SOO.— Total,  20,000.  Some
the  Jews  are  more  numerous
lie  Muss^mans ;  they  occupy,
wr,  a  much  smaller  part  of
ty  than  the  Turks  and  Arabs,
Kfe  5  synago^es  in  the  quar-
here  they  live.  There  are
1  nosques,  and  20  monaste-
beiooginff  to  the  different
linations  of  Christians,
that  remains  now  of  this
splendid  city,  is  a  Turkish
1  town,  enclosing  a  number  of
» unomomented,  stone  houses,
lere  and  there  mined  heaps
vcant  spaces,  seated  amid
i  hills,  on  a  stony  and  for*
gioil, — "a  cemetery  in  the
of  a  desert."  Jerusalem  is,  .
iy  no  more }  what  exists  on  its
96106  only  to  mislead  topo-
leal  inqirkiet.  Not  a  monu-
of  Jewish  tintes  is  standing,
sry  course  of  the  walls  is
ed,  and  the  boundaries  of  the
it  city  are  become  doubtful,
noaks  pretend  to  show  the
€  the  sacred  places ;  but  nei-
ralvary  nor  tiie  Holy  Seuul-
EBBch  less  the  Dolorous  Way,
oase  of  Caiaphtts,  drc.  has
ghtest  pretensions  to  eren  a
>le  identity  with  the  real  lo-
to  which  the  tradition  refers.
}  general  aspect  of  the  country
immediate  neighbourhood  of
dem  is  blighted  and  barren :
bare  rocks  look  through  the
sward,  and  the  grain  seems
bt  whether  to  come  to  ma-^
or  to  die  in  the  eari'^    On


JBR

Ikp^iroMhiiig  tfee  dty  fient  tiie  W.
toward  the  Jafih>  or  Pilgrim's  gate,
Httie  is  seen  but  the  embattled
walls,  and  the  gothic  citadel,—the
greater  part  of  the  town  being  con-
cealed in  the  hoUow  formed  by  the
slope  of  the  ground  toward  the  E.
Bat,  from  the  high  ground  in  the
road  to   NaUons  and  Damascus,
where  the  distant  city  first  bursts
onithe  trareUer,  the  view  is  ex-
ceedingly noble  and  picturesque.
Amid  a  seemingly  megnfficent  as-
semblage of  domes,  and  towers,  and
minarets,  it  Is  said,  the  eye  rests
with  delight  on  the  elegant  propor-
tions, the  glistening  gilded  crescent,
and  tjie  beautiful  green  blue  colour
of  the  mosque  of  Omar,  occupying
the  site  of  die  temple  of.  Jehovah ;
while,  OB  the  left,  the  lovely  slope
of  Mount  Olivet  forms  a  soothing
feature  in  the  landscape.    The  ge-
neral character  is  a  sort  of  foriorn
magnificence ;  but  the  distant  view
is  ab.    On  entering  at  tlie  Damas-
cus gate>  meanness,  and  fl!th,  and
misery,  soon  reveal  its  fallen  and
degraded  state.    The  traveller  is
lost  among  narrow,  unpaved,  de-
serted streets,  where  a  few  paltry
shops  expose  to  view  nothing  but
wretchediiess :  the  bouses  are  dirty
and  dull,  looking  Ifke  prisons  or
sepulchres;  scarcely  a  creature  is
to  be  seen  in  the  streets,  or  at  the
gates;  and  throughout  the  whole
city,  there  is  not  One  symptom  of
either  commerce,  comfort,  or  hap-
piness.   ^'How  doth  the  city  sit
solitary,  that  was  full  of  people !
How  is  she  become  as  a  widow !  she
that  was  great  among  the  nations,
and  princess  among  the  people ;
how  is  she  become  tributary  I  From,
the  daughter  of  Zlon  all  her  beauty
is  departed.    All  that  pass  by,  sa}-,
Is  this  the  city  that  was  called  the
perfection  of  beauty,  the  joy  of  the
whole  earth  V

Bat  even  that  distant  view  of  the
modem  town,  which  has  been  pro-
noonced  so  exceedingly  beautiful,

c  c  2  %^:i


JER

is  revolting  to  the  mind ;  for  what
can  rtH:oiicile  the  feelin^rs  of  n
prutcstant  Christian  to  the  mon-
strous incon^iiity  of  Turlcish
domes  and  minarets  towering  over
the  site  of  the  temple,  and  the
triumphant  symbol  ot  tlie  Mahum-
medun  ini|M).stun*  glittering  amid
the  towers  of  convents  and  churches
dedicated  to  fraud  and  idolatr>-  ?
The  features  of  nature,  however,
po!isess  ail  nnchangeabie  intere:»t ;
and  it  is  on  these,  uot  on  llie  pre-
tended lioly  places,  and  intrusive
shadows,  that  the  eye  reposes  with
complacency^ — with  these  it  is  thai
the  heart  communes.  "  The  beau-
tiful gate  of  the  temple,"  remarks
Dr.  Chirke,  "  in  no  more  j  but  Si-
loti's  t'ountain  haply  flows,  and
Kedron  sometimes  murmurs  in  the
V'alh'y  of  .lehosliaphnt."  A  few
ganlens  ^till  remain  on  the  sloping
ba>e  of  Mount  Zion,  watered  from
tlie  |KH)1  of  Siloani.  The  gardens
of  Getlisemane,  the  vale  of  Fat-
ness, are  in  a  sort  ^rf  ruined  culti-
vation ;  the  olive  is  still  found
growing  spontaneously  in  patches
at  the  foot  of  the  mount  to  which
it  has  given  its  name ;  there,  too,
the  road  to  Uethuuy  still  winds
nnuid  tlie  declivity,  and  Mount
Olivet  itself  retains  a  languishing
verdure.

To  Jerusalem  the  attention  of
vnrioiLs  societies  has  been  directed^
as  furnishing  the  most  favourable
opportunities  for  the  distribution  of
tlie  Scriptures  and  of  tracts.

In  IHlf^,  the  Rev.  C.  Burckhardt
visited  .Terusjdem,  as  agent  of  tlie
Ma/ fa  liiUe  S<tciety,aiM\  distributed
the  Scriptures  in  12  languages,
(hiring  the  festival  instituted  in
honour  of  the  day  of  Pentecost.

In  1819,  the  Rev.  J.  Conner,
Church  missionary,  made  a  visit  to
this  city  lor  a  similar  purpose.

^It.  J.  VVoltr,  a  converted  Jew,
and  missionary  of  the  6.  J,  S,,  has
visited  Jerui^em  several  times
since  the  early  part  of  1822^  and


laboured  indefatigably  amaiK'lii
brethren  ftccordiiig  to  tiie  fleii«  j

The  Rev.  L.  PanoqStOft}ie4.i.
r.  F.  M,  entered  Jeniwdem  Mr
17,  ]821,  ami  continaeil  there |Qi|i
than  2  mouths.  Near  the  dM
of  his  labours,  he  said,  "  1  hnye  w
visited  13  Greek  monaiteriii^  t
Catholic,  1  ArmeniaOf  I  Bfik-
and  1  Coptic,  within  the  ^nM
Jerusalem  :  and  distributed,  in.^
including  the  church  of  StdConilit*-
tine,  1 000  tracts.  Tliese  tr«8ti«|
to  be  widely  distributed;  uaitpff
haps,  read,  by  perun^  aerevat  tM^
sands  of  miles  from  tbe  Holy  (^
The  very  fact,  that  they  wm
brought  from  Jerusalem,  will  sttiA
to  them  a  degree  of  sanctity,  ai||
give  them  higher  claims  umb  flb
attention  of  a  multitude  of  Cfarilt*
tians."  ...  I

The  Rev.  Messrs.  P.  FIsk  ol
J.  King,  of  the  same  Bond,  agmi
about  2  months  in  this  city,  io  ISflJI.'
mostly  in  May  and  June ;  nnddwiif
their  residence  they  sold  84  cofln.
of  the  Scriptures,  and  gave  aw«y  A^^'
and  circulated  770  tracts.  *  AtOMg
.  the  Greeks  and  Armenians  .thq^
found  a  ver}-  gratifjing  eageiMJb
possess  the  Scriptures.  In  theWw
part  of  the  same  year,  Mr.  M^
accompanied  by  the  Rev.  W.  Jowsl^
Church  tHi'ssiojiary,  again  visited ttil
city  I  and  in  the  early  part  of  IWi
the}' were  joined  by  the  Rev.  LBfadr

The  Rev.  Mr.  Cook,  fretkfm
missumary.  was  appointed,  in.lW^
to  visit  Jerusalem,  and  to  io|kii^
from  personal  observation,  on  tfai-
facilities  which  might  presentths**
selves  for  commencing  a  missis  in
Palestine.  His  statements,  on-ths
whole,  are  deemed  favourable  to  tks
enterprize,  and  present  no  giMln
obstacles  than  the  circumstanwof
that  interesting  but  long  benigirted
region  might  be  expected  to  es-.
liibit.  The  purpose  of  the  com-
mittee, though  still  kept  in  yiewy
has  not,  as  yet,  been  accomplisbid*

JESSORE,  or  MOORLEVy  H

294


•JES

.i6f  Hindoostan,    in  Bfengd/
il  of  the  district  of  Jessore,
h  extends    into  tbe  Siinder-
u    It  is  62  m.  N.E.  Calcutta.
W.  890  16'.,  N.  lat.2307'.

church  was  formed  at  this
'  through  the  instrumentality
6  Bi^.  M,  S,  in  1807,.  and
d  monthly  by  one  of  the  native
len.  Not  only  were  many
nrted,  but  one  individual  was
tiyrestoredi  and  his  wife  and
er  were  baptized.    In  1810,

church  consisted  of  four
Jies,  each  about  30  miles  dis-
I  from  the  other ;  the  whole
rehending  an  extent  of  coun-
r  little  less  than  100  miles  in
}ter.  At  this  period  4  native
ren  were  stationed  at  these
ent branches,  to  assist  Garapeit
;  indefatigable  labours,  which
e'en  the  means  of  greatly  in-
Ing  the  church.  The  Rev.
Thomas  afterwards  occupied
itation,  in  connexion  with  the
is.  Additions  were  made  to
lumber  of  believers,  but  some
brethren  were  compelled  to
de ;  whp,  happily,  retained  a
lent  knowledge  of  the  Gospel
ep  them  from  relapsing  into
tiy.  One  of  them,  in  his  last
en,  declared  that  his  depend-

foT  salvation  was  on  Christ

;  and  calling  his  wife,  pressed
Q  the  most  eamesi  manner  to
nee  every  other  hope, — en-
tg  tbis,  indeed,  with  so  much
stness,  as  almost  to  make  it  a
tion  of  her  inheriting  the  little
rty  he  possessed.  Every  year
ons  are  reported  as  being  made
e  church;  and,  in  1824,  the
;t  in  which  it  is  situated,  is
bed  as  *'one  of  the  best  cul-
d  fields  In  Bengal^''  Mr.  Tho-
and  his  itinerants,  being  per-
Uy  employed  in  traversing  the
rous  villages,  fields,  and  roads,
n  .visiting  the  bazars,  ghats,
)ther  places  of  public  resort,
gh  ^a  considerable  extent  of


•JES

country.  The  church,  at  this  tho»f
consisted  of  nearly  SOjnembers^  in'-
habiting  10  diiierent  villages.  At
NeelffunJ,  in  this  district,  a  school
was  formed  at  the  expense  of  the
Serctmp&re  School  Institution.  Z
native  youths  were  sent  by  Mr.
Thomas  to  the  Seramporie  college )
and  the  distribution  of  the  Bengdee
Testament  in  this  quarter  was  irery
considerable.

The  present  state  of  this  misniOH
is  rather  discouraging.  As  g^at
alterations  have  lately  taken  plac«
in  the  residence  of  many  members,
an  exact  statement  of  their  iium-
bers  cannot  be  given :  it  is  feared
the  members  in  communion  do  not
exceed  .30.

The  whole  population,  nominally
Christians,  amounts  to  about  100.
Mr.  Thomas  resides  at  Sahebgunj^
which  is  the  civil  station  of  the  dis-
trict. Formerly  the  greater  part
of  his  flock  were  situated  at  Chris-
tianpore,  16  m.  N.  Sahebs^nj ;  but^
during  theyear  1826,  they  have  been
brought  into  Sahebgunj,  that  they
might  enjoy  the  benefit  of  his  con-
stant instruc4ion  and  care.  Other
portions  of  his  people  are  situated
at  Bakuspole,  a  village  12  miles  to
the  south  of  Sahebgunj,  and  at
several  villages  scattered  in  difierent
directions  through  the  district,  and
some  at  great  distances.

Mr.  Thomas  conducts reg^arseT'i
vices  on  the  Sabbath,  and  on  several
days  of  the  week,  chiefly  for  the
edification  of  the  native  Christians.
He  likewise  visits  different  parts  of
the  town  and  neighbourhood^  to
preach  the  Gospel  to  the  heathen
and  the  Mussulmen,  and  he  stqier-*
intends  4  native  schools,  which  are
supported  by  funds  for  that  purpose,
by  gentlemen  formerly  resident  at
the  station.  In  the  schools  the
Scriptures  are  read,  and  Chris-
tian catechisms  taught;  and  one  of
the  gentlemen,  now  at  the  station^
takes,  a  deep,  interest  in  their
welf«re,  and  promotes  it  both  by  1:^


JEW

Tidtf  and  libwality  in  tsmwdfiis
the  children.

A  considerable  portion  of  Mr.
Thomas's  time  should  hIso  be  spent
in  Tisttin^  those  parts  of  the  district
where  Christian  families  reside;
but  iDterniptluns  continually  orcwr
in  this  part  of  his  duty,  fnun  wea^
ther  and  other  circumstances.

There  has  been  an  addition  of
one  perwni  a  female,  to  the  church
durinf^  the  >-ear  18S6.

JEWS,  in  the  most  eztemtrt
sense  of  the  wordi  is  a  term  com-
prehending all  the  descendants  of
Abraham;  but,  in  its  more  re-
stricted sense,  it  incliides  those
who  belong  to  the  tribe  of  Jndah,
and  who  inhnbitedv  Judea.  This
name  was  given  them  soon  aAer
the  BalA-lonisb  captivity,  when  the
tribe  of  Jiiduh  became  the  most
considerable  of  what  was  left  of
Israel.  In  preceding  times,  they
were  ca]le<i  Israelites,  or,  more
commonly,  Hebrews.  According
to  ancient  prediction,  the  Jews  be-
came  subject  to  the  Romans  at  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  A.D.70,
were  persecuted  and  disperaed
through  the  earth,  and  hare  e?er
since  ceased  to  be  a  distinct  na-
tion. They  still  remain  a  monu-
ment of  the  truth  of  Christianity,
unincoriK)mted  among  the  inha-
bitants of  the  countries  in  wh'lch
the>'  reside.  They  profess  to  pay  a
regard  to  the  worship  and  cere-
monies enjoined  by  the  law  of
Moses ;  to  which  they  have  added
many  rites,  that  are  merely  of  tra-
ditional authority,  and  entertain  the
unfonnded  expectation  of  u  Mes-
siah, to  deliver  them  from  their
present  state  of  subjugation  and
oppression.  Tlie  following  is  sup-
posed to  be  as  accurate  an  esti*
mate  of  their  present  population  as
circumstances  will  admit,  x\t,  under
the  dominion  of  the  Grand  Seignior,
2^,500,000;  States  of  Barbery,
360,000;  in  Poland,  before  the
/wrtition  of  1772,  1,000,000*,  in


JEW


RmUt

and  WaUaebtk,  a6t.M0 1  la  1te#

ferent  states  of  Sermaaf,  iOlMl
hi  Holland  and  Bdgtwn^  IMM
in  Sweden  awl  Detfmaifci  Mil
in  France,  SOJOOO ;  in  Ckwt  M-
taln  and  her  depcadanelei^  i^Mll
in  tha  Raltai  StatM»  MO^OMl'^
the  United  ««tei  of  Amim
3000;  in  Penia,ChtnBy
Un,  <fce.,  8,500,000.  --'liii
7,0M8,000.  Tbo  aggragilBar^l
Jewhih  popolatloD  is
mated  at  0,000,009.  Wlfti»4
few  years,  the  firlcada  e£
have  awoke  Iroa  the
nearly  SOOO  yean :  they  haia  higa
to  feel  thetr  oMigatlona  to  th»*-
scendants  of  ttieae  thnn:^  wIhb
they  have  Infaerlttd  the
the  Gospc;!,  and  to  eBploy
means  for  their  advantage.

The  hmimnJtwt^  &  wail
in  1809,  and  its  miaaioBailai  mik
agents  have  widely  dtetrihiM  I*
New  Testament  and  1apaetitaHM«#
languages):  and  taken  otliereUill
measures  to  remove  the  irettfiip
the  eyes  of  the  Jews,  in  ffiM^
Italy,  Switxeriand,  HoUaa^  €i»
many,  Prussia,  and  Folm^  nirtlf
continent  of  Europe,  and  in  nM
partaof  the  world.

The  PMU^itdman  S.  detlgaiMr
promote  the  temporal  and  ipldfeHl
welfare  of  the  deacenduto  af
Abraham,  wasinatituted  in
in  May,  1880.

The  Bimbwrffh  S.  for
itMg  Ckristkmiij^  amBngtkt
was  formed  in  1819.  It
cordially  and  vigoroasly
in  ttie  service  indicated  by  Iti  i
and  promises  a  lasting  iaA  pywef
ful  influence.  A  very  eSdaHl'
ally  of  this  society  has  been
in  Glasgow.  There  eie
other  sBwIler,  bat  similar  and  nit
inconsiderable,  asaociattona  in  In-
land and  on  the  contineot^and  oob

:  or  DBore  in  Asia.   Similar  aocMiv
have  been  ibrmed  in  tlw  NUaitid

.  Slates,  oC  which  the  Amtrhm  &


■

P

I

f

II

iV
|i

l!
I

I


KAN

>  ^^ffmiBSoraiing  the  Condition  of  the
■ifem9  it  the  most  important,  though

^  '.iidtttie  oldest.  Although  the  sum  of
'  idcxi  accomplished  by  these  insti-
tolions  cannot  be  precisely  stated,
yist  it  may  be  viewed  as  the  com-
jnencement  of  a  train  of  effects
fdmtited  with  the  ultimated  rege-
^siemtion  of  Israel,  and  with  the
general  fulfilment  of  the  prophecies

-  ivUeh  announce  the  universal  do-
'  Bilnion  of  the  Redeemer.
..'  [See  Amsterdam^  Berditschew,
BerUn,  Breolau,  Callenberg,  Con-
^imUinople,  Detmoid,  Dusselt/tal,
-Dresden,  Frankfort,  Konigsberg,
Jerusalem*]

K.

;  K  AND  Y>  a  kingdom  of  Ceylon,
CfNitaining  about  a  fourth  of  the
island,  in  the  interior  part  towards
t|ie  S.  The  country  is  mountain-
mUy  very  woody  on  the  frontiers,
^d  difficult  of  access  from  the  great
qvantity  of  jungle.
.-  The  central  part  consists  of
monntains  cultivated  to  their  sum-
jnitB,  interspersed  with  villages,
xlvulets,  and  cattle,  fields  of  rice
and  other  grain,  well  trodden  foot-
patiu  in  all  directions,  and  fruitful
valleys,  with  groves  of  are  lea,  jaccaj
4Uid  cocoa-nuts,  limes,  oranges,  ifec.
In  many  parts  of  the  interior  vol-
canoes have  burst  forth  at  different
times;  and  the  hills  seem  to  possess
the  principle  of  those  eruptions.
Jron  and  other  ores  are  to  be  met
•with ;  but  the  Kandians,  for  years
past,  have  paid  no  attention  to  dis-
.coFering  or  working  any  of  the
veins.  The  air  is  subject  to  heavy
fogs  and  dews  at  night,  succeeded
by  excessively  hot  and  sultry  wea-
ther by  day ;  rain  and  thunder  are
-also  frequent  and  violent.  The
Inhabitants  use  fire-arms  and  bows
and  arrows  for  weapons  of  offence.
The  king  was  long  absolute  5  and
he  was  clothed  in  all  the  state  and
splendour  of  other  Asiatic  princes,
with  the  peculiar  distinction  of  a


KAN

crown.  The  tjrrannical  government*
of  the  last  ruler,  and  his  cruelties,
were  in  the  extreme ;  so  that  many
of  his  subjects  removed  to  the
British  settlements.  His  atrocities
continuing  to  spread,  the  British,
in  1815,  took  up  arms  against  him
solely,  promising  security  and  pro^
tection  to  his  subjects.  They  en<«
tered  the  capital,  which  was  found
deserted,  and  stript  of  all  valuable
property  j  but  the  king's  retreat
being  soon  known,  he  was  taken
prisoner,  sent  to  Colombo,  and
thence  to  Vellore,  where  he  is
still  in  confinement.  The  con<~
quest  was  bloodless  on  the  part  of
the  British,  who,  with  Kandian
chiefs,  settled  a  treaty  for  deposing
the  King,  and  establishing  his  Bri-
tannic Majesty's  government  in  the
Kandian  provinces.

Kandtf,,  the  capital,  stands  at
the  head  and  widest  part  of  an  ex-
tensive valley,  in  tbe  midst  of
wooded  hills  and  mountains,  and' is
more  regularly  built  than  most  In-
dian towns.  The  palace  is  a
square  of  great  extent,  built  of  a
kind  of  cement  perfectly  white,
with  stone  gateways.  The  temples
of  Budhu  and  the  gods  are  nu-
merous ;  and  that  of  Malcgawa  is
the  most  venerated  of  any  in  the
country,  as  it  conteins  a  precious
relic, — ^the  tooth  of  Budhu.  The
houses  that  constitute  the  streets
arQ  all  of.  clay,  of  one  stor}',  stand-
ing on  a  low  terrace  of  clay  >  and
are  all  thatehed,  except  those  of
the  chiefs,  which  are  tiled.  Kandy
was  entered  l^  the  British  troops
in  1803,  the  king  and  principal
inhabitents  having  previously  fled  \
but  the  expedition  terminated  in  the
massacre  or  imprisonment  of  the
whole  detechment.

In  1815,  it  was  again  entered,
and  with  better  success,  as  noticed
in  the  preceding  article.  The  town
is  nearly  surrounded  by  the  river
Mahawelle,  and  an  artificial  lake,
made  by   the  \«i\e  >lVcvv;,  ^  \a.^


KAN

E.  N.  E.  Colombo.      E.  long.  80^
47',  N.  lat.  T"  18'.

The  dtrectun  of  the  C,  M,  S.
having  determined  un  sending  four
clergjmen  to  Ceylon,  the  Rev.  Mr.
Lambrick  wua  appointed  to  Kandy.

In  a  letter  dated  Oct.  27,  1818,
he  myf^y  ''  I  have  had  full  employ-
ment for  tlie  exercise  of  my  mi-
nistry among  the  numbers  of  our
couiitT}'meu  here,  both  civil  and
military,  and  especially  in  the
crowded  hospitals;  but  hitherto  I
have  been  precluded  from  any
public  missionary  exertions.  The
town,  indeed,  has  been  almost  de-
iterted  by  the  native  inhabitant*
ever  since  the  rebellion  broke  out;
but  we  have  the  greatest  encou-
ragement to  hope  that  God  is
about  to  restore  the  blessings  of
peace,  and  with  it  the  people  will
return.  I  cannot,  at  present,  be
permitteil  to  preach  to  the  natives ;
but  I  have  obtained  authority  to
open  schools,  and  have  engaged
two  of  the  priests  to  be  the  masters
of  them,  as  they  have  promised
to  conform  to  my  directions.

A  few  days  ago,  the  Governor,
In  the  prospect  of  the  rebellion
being  speedily  terminated,  pro-
posed returning  to  Colombo,  and
desired  that  1  might  be  asked
whether  I  would  remain  here  after
he  had  left.  And,  on  my  signi-
fying my  assent,  his  Excellency
conierred  upon  me  the  appoint-
ment of  assistant  chaplain  to  the
forces  in  Kandy;  which,  as  long
as  I  retain  it,  will  save  the  society
my  personal  expenses,"

In  this  situation,  Mr.  L.  bad
continual  dalls  of  duty  among  his
countrymen,  and  the  best  oppor-
tunities of  studying  Cingalese  in  its
purity.  He  also  established  a  large
school  on  the  national  system.
The  Rev.  Mr.  Browning  joined
him  in  1820 ;  and  on  the  arrival  of
an  additional  chaplain,  Mr.  L.  re-
tired from  the  office  he  had  held  to
Cotta,  on  which  occosIoq.  \a  te-


ItAlt

eeived  the  tfaonki  of  tito  givMaF
ment  for  the  ezemptaiy  ettMMi
which  he  had  paid  totlie  RwopeMfc
Mr.  Bm  however,  eontlniiwMI
efforts  at  this  statlonye«MAW%
Cingalese  serriees,  vfidtMy  ttl
gaol,  in  which  from  HOtb-Tffll^
soners  were  coHflMed,  naA  uiiJIi^p
superintending  5  schools.

A  school-house  wus  opeuei'iil
divine  service,  od  the  19fll>olJilt
1820:  besides  Sunday  seniccs^ni
B.  has  a  Cingalese  aervioe  on  1M
nesday  evenings,  and  one  in  1^
tuguese  on  Tfaunday  ewillp
The  attendance  at  puBlie  wufi^
had  previously  been  small;  MHy
of  the  scholars  were  kept  vmi$  fef
their  parents;  few  adult  beathei
could  be  prevailed  on*  to  attend  Itf
of  the  prisonei»,  tboogii  sonfeHMt
totheword,  ottkersore  indilMMt
and  callous;  but  he  conttanflrtf
avail  himself  of  variouii  Cfpill'
nitlesto  make  kno^m  iSSbSotfik
Sickness  having  again  dimlledHi
chaplain,  it  dendTed  ott  Hr.
Browning,  early  in  tho  year  Ittif
to  take  such  part  of  his  iaHs  m
could  be  done  withoat  nwteiliil  ti^  '
jury  to  his  own.

At  the  annual-  meeting  la  fSt^
tember,  Mr.  Browning  wpaitrf
that  the  service  In  CtagaliieiMl
somewhat  better  attendM  tteH
had  been  a  Aw  months-Befofe^  mi
particufarly  by  the  fbmeleiif  Ml
that  there  were  6  schoQto>  wHUil
average  attendance  of  100  scHdMl

It  is  gratifying  to  learn,  thif  tt6
sons  of  the  Kandian  cbiefis  lAfe
attend  to  learn  English,  baveM^
of  their  own  accord,  come  forMd
to  purchase  the  Gingaleie  oA
English  New  Testament,  to  md
and  compare  at  home.

HARASS,  a  luge  Tfltege  tk
Asiatic  RussIb,  sitna^  near  tts
source  of  the  Rhrer  Cuban,  attte
northern  foot  of  Meant  Csacaso^
between  tlie  Black  and  CamlBB
Seas,  and  a  diort  distance  DM


\


K.VR

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Jack,  Patter-
lAoni  and  Galloway,  from  the  Scot-
Ji^h  M,  S.,  commeoced  exertions
.faara  jn  1802,  with  a  view  to  intro-
duce the  Gospel  among  the  Tartars.
JThough  for  some  time  they  had
.Wmay  .difficulties .  and  discourage-
•iveuw  to  encounter  {  yet  they  ex-
iperienced  evident  tokens  of  the
divine  £ivour  and  protection,  and
.gnat  good  has  resulted  from  their
jMnevering  efforts.  Soon  after  they
^Wi  established  themselves  at  Ka^
npy  the  Russian  government,  in
■COniequence  of  an  urgent  solicita-
JOon,  gave  a  grant  of  land,  of  more
.lluui  14,000  acres,  for  the  benefit
of  the  mission,  with  certain  immu-
jiities  flattering  to  its  future  pros-
.pect«.  Native  youths,  slaves  to  the
^Circassians    and    Cuban    Tartars,
were  early  redeemed  by  the  mis-
■ionaiias,  and  placed  in  schools,
,where  they  received  instruction  in
the  Turkish  and  £nglish  languages,
.wid  ware  taught  the  useful  arts
4nd  the  principles  of  Christianit}*.
Among  those  who  early  embraced
.the  Gospel,  was  the  Sultan,  Kata-
gerry,  who  has  rendered  essential
aid  to  the  mission,  and  advocated
Ua  cause  in  the  metro^xdis  of  En-
gland.   In  I8O0,  a  reinforcement
of  missionaries,  with  a  printing-
ness,  was  sent  to  this  place.    The
New  Testament,  which  had  been
txanslated  into  the  Turkish  lan-
guage by  the  a^iduous  labours  of
Sir.  Bainton,  together  with  some
tiacts  written  by  him  against  Ma-
temmedanism,  were  immediately
printed,  and  circulated  among  the
people.  Some,  perceiving  the  great
•■Vperiority    of    Christianity,    re-
nounced their  former  superstitions,
to  embrace  it ;  while  the  confidence
of  others  in  the  truth  of  their  sys-
tem was  greatly   shaken,  among
whom  were  some  eifendis,  or  doc-
tors.   One  priest  is  said  to  have
ezchanfl^ed  his  Koran  for  the  New
Testement.
The  German  J/.  S,  has  also  a


KAR

station  at    Karass,  which  is  inr
creasing ;  and,  in  consequence,  Mr.
Fletnitzer  was  removed  from  the
neighbourhood  of  Odessa,  to  assist
Mr.   Lang.     The   latter  has  l^-*
boured  with  success  in  the  German
congregations  committed  to  him,
and  has  itinerated  with  Mr.  Gal-
loway among   the   Tartar  tribes.
Speaking  of  these  visits,  he  sa}-8 : —
''  In  general,    the  more  sensible
among  them  acknowledged,  that,
on  our  skie,  there  is  more  truth
than  on  theirs;    but  also  among
them  it  is  said.  What  is  truth?
Their  indifference    toward   every
serious  thought  is  almost  unbear"
able.     There  is  not  one  that,  tm-
derstaudeth:    there  is  none  that
seeketh  after  God,    The  misstou-
aries  have,  however,  lately  con-
templated  the    trial  of  a  school
among  these  people."    Of  Mad'
chary  a  second  German  congre-
gation of  which  Mr.  L.  has  the
care,  he  writes :— "  With  feelings
of  great  delight  do  I  turn  to  my
dear  congregation  :  with  sure  hope
I  am  waiting  for  the  day  of  their
salvation.    At  my  last  visit  to  this
people,  I  examined   more   parti-
cularly into  their  real  stete;  and
oh,  how  delightful  was  it  to  my
soul,  to  find  many  a  precious  plant
in  this  garden  of  our  God — in  this
otherwise  barren  field  I  What  feel-
ings of  adoration  and  thanksgiving
filled    my   breast,  when  I  heard,
during  divine  service,  the  sacrifices
of  prayer  aniLpraise  rise  with  deep
veneration  to  God  Almighty,  fxom
this  newly  awakened  people !  How
lovely  sounded  the  voice  of  the
little  children !  And  how  many  a
heart  exclaimed,  O  Lord  hear  us !
O  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us !    The
zeal  among  the  school-children  is
very    great.      The   spelling-book
sent  from  B&sle  is  already  com-
mitted to  memory ;  and  it  is  with
difiiculty  the  parents  can  keep  the
children  from  school.  The  Lord's-
d9y  is  kept  holy  ;  dedicated  to  the


TCAU

'cxclusife  worship  of  God  our  Sa-
viuur,  niid  to  the  building  up  in
our  holy  fuitb  und  religion.  Tiie
defaults  of  ii  few  menihers  of  the
congregation  were  noticed  by  the
Elders  of  the  chnpel ;  nnd  reprored
in  Christian  love,  according  to  the
Gospel.  The  flourishing  state  of
this  church  is  tlie  more  interesting^
Its  it  is  {surrounded  with  numerous
tribes  of  Ttirtiurs,  to  whom  their
Christian  conversation,  by  tlie  grace
of  God,  may  become  a  light  to  guide
their  feet  into  the  way  of  peace.*'

KALNAUMEEK,  formerly  an
Indian  settlement  between  Stock*
bridge,  Massachusetts,  and  Albany,
New  York.  Here  the  Rev.  David
Brainerd  commenced  his  missionary
labours  among  tlie  Indians,  April  ],
1743,  under  tlie  patninuge  of  the
<.\  K,  S,  in  Scotland  ;  and  laboured
n  year,  when  he  persuaded  the
Indians  to  remove  to  Stockbridge,
nud  attend  on  the  ministry  of  the
Rev.  Mr.  Sergeant.  Mr.  Brainerd
was  ordained  as  a  missionary  at
Newark,  New  Jersey,  June  12,
1744 ;  and  on  the  22nd  of  the  same
month  entered  on  his  labours  at
Sakhawvofung,  within  the  Forks
of  the  Delaware.  He  visited,  for
the  first  time,  the  Indians  on  the
8us(}uehunnah,  und  commenced  his
labours  at  a  place  called  Opehol'
haupungyOi'X,  5,  1744;  whence  he
removed  June  19,  1.745,  to  Crosg-
iceeks.

KENT,  a  town  of  Africans,  in
the  parish  of  St.  Edwanl,  at  Cape
Shilling,  about  40  m.  S.  Freetown,
Sierra  Leone,  W.  Africa.  Popu-
lation, in  382;V  418,  of  whom  318
were  libenited  slaves.

This  station  was  commenced  by
the  C.  M,  S,  in  1810.  About  200
people  were  placed  under  the  care
of  Mr.  Handle,  who  was  brought
to  a  serious  concern  for  his  own
salvation  under  the  ministry  of
Mr.  Johnson  at  Regent's  Town.
He  had  at  this  time  an  evening
school  of  nearly  70  boys  and  adults.


\


KEN

Painful  clrcunutancet  aneited  kii
laboun,  and  Mr.  Renner  wii)i
consequence  appointed  to1lie'<il^
tion.  The  sum  of  8/.  ISt.  IlA
was  contributed  by  a  mlvloiiBifih  |
sociation,  formed  here  in  Septilp
ber,  1820,  in  the  lint  4  imoihl.
A  singular  circnmstance  occoM
on  this  occasion.  In  the  opporftfai
of  an  African,  which,  howenr,)H
soon  withdrew:  his  counti7i!e»
pie,  he  said,  had  sold  him  nr  s
slave ;  he  had  no  wish,  tfaeidbn,
to  do  ihem  any  good,  irho  hA
done  Aim  so  much  injury ;  bdt  be
relented,  after  a  suitafaJa  adnoBl-
tion,  and  became  a  subscriber  to ib
funds.  Mr.  Renner  l>eingreBqitfl
by  death,  Mr.  Beckley  was  if-
pointed  his  successor,  while  luk
Renner  was  left  in  chaige  of  tie
females.

The  official  return  of
inJanuaT>',  1881,  was  M
and  58  men  and  boys.  A  lajp
stone  building,  the  floor  of 'wldeb
was  to  be  appropriated  to  dirlBB
worship,.was  finished ;  the  Ubentad
negroes  were  making  progren,  liil
cultivation  was  extending.  Tte
average  number  of  adult  scholaii^
through  the  year  1884,  was  beiveci
89  and  9tl.  Both  the  bcgfi'  sild
men's  schools  continued  to  impnm
under  the  care  of  a  native  yoiift
from  the  Chrigtian  LutituHon,  it
this  time  Mr.  Beckley  remarks  :«^
**  With  much  sorrow  I  state,  tb«t
this  settlement  has  received  iqjin^
in  spiritual  things,  on  account  of
my  frequent  absence  from  it.  Tte
church  (s  bv  no  means  so  well  91U
tended  as  before,  though^-  at  tttt
same  time,  I  have  great  reasoB  for
thankfulnesss.  It  has  pleased  God
to  contimje  his  grace  in  tb^  up-
holding of  such  as  profesi  to  lore
him.  In  outward  things,  such  m
building  and  cultivation,  tiie  settle-
ment has  prospered.  A  wall  has
been  completed,  enclosing  the  mi-
perintendent's  liouse,  with  boys'
«Lud   ^ItU*  achooUlflmses   in-tiM


KEN

Mpective  wings^  contaiDing  10,800
.Ceet  of  mason  work,  and  the  bojrs'
'school  is  so  far  finished,  as  for
^emto  be  able  to  live  and  Iceep
■chool  in  it.  The  quantity  of  cas-
oada  purchased  by  government  dur-
ing tnb  last  two  quarters,  has  been
^raO  bushels;  which,  contrasted
with  the  state  in  which  the  settle-
.  ment  was  when  I  first  came,  gives
ine  much  satisfaction :  a  bushel  of
Ctttada,  not  quite  3  years  since,
was  not  to  be  found  throughout  all
Cape  Shilling."  The  number  of
communicants  was  13.
'  The  Rev.  Mr.  Gerber  at  present
labours  at  this  place.  Besides  the
Sunday  services,  he  has  others  on
Wednesday  and  Friday  evenings.
The  average  attendance  is,  at  the
former  about  120,  and  at  the  latter
about  15.  At  Midsummer,  1826,
tber^  were  10  communicants,  but  at
Michaelmas  he  had  felt  it  his  duty
to  exclude  3.  The  heavy  rains
which  had  fallen  between  Mid-
summer and  Michaelmas,  and  fre-
quent indisposition,  had  prevented
him  from  regularly  visiting  the
neighbouring  stations.  At  Mi-
chaelmas there  were  in  the  school
146  boys  and  95  girls.  '<  The
iocreased  average  number,"  says
Mr.  G.  "  inclusive  of  children,
U,  on  Sundays  from  360  to  419,
and  on  week«days,  from  229  to
839.  Our  present  place  of  worship
baa  become  too  small  to  contain  so
large  a  number,  so  that  many  have
to  sit  outside  in  the  piazza."  Mr.
G.  had  also  30  persons  preparing
for  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper,
and  mentions  tlie  following  inter-
esting case  of  one  of  them  : —

"  A  woman  at  Housa,  who  was
a  strict  worshipper  of  two  idols
made  of  wood,  in  the  figure  of  a
man  and  woman,  whom  she  call-
ed Bacumbagee,  and  to  whom  she
from  time  to  time  sacrificed  a  fowl ;
when  convinced  by  the  Spirit  of
God  that  she  was  thus  ignurantly
worshipping    the    devjl^    cut  her


RHA

idols  to  pieces  and  threw  them
away,  and  is  now  worshipping  Ckxl
in  spirit  and  truth."

Two  days  after  Mr.  G.  settled  at
Kent,  one  of  the  Commissioners  of
Inquiry  visited  the  settlement,  and
wished  an  examination  of  the
schools  to  take  place.  In  conse-
quence, 106  boys  and  75  girls  were
examined :  of  tlie  boys,  9  only  could
read  the  Scriptures  tolerably  well,
and  14  could  read  the  New  Testa-
ment imperfectly :  of  the  girls,  11
could  read  the  Scriptures  fluently,
and  spell  vei^'  well,  and  1 3  could  read
the  New  Testament  imperfectly,
and  were  incorrect  in  spelling.
The  commissioners,  on  seeing  the
state  of  the  schools,  advised  Af r.
G.  to  obtain  assistants  more  ade-
quate to  the  proper  instruction  of  so
large  a  number  of  scholars,  VVil-
liam  Neville  and  his  wife  having
been  placed  at  Kent  with  that  view,
and  the  boys  being  withdrawn  from
that  labour  which  had  for  a  consi-
derable perio4  left  them  far  too
little  time  for  iiLstniction,  Mr.  G.
was  enabled  to  report  at  Michael-
mas a  remarkable  improvement  in
the  schools.  Examinations  are
now  held  every  quarter — ^which
plan  acts  as  a  great  stimulus  to  the
children.

KHAMIESBERG,  a  station  of
the  Jj,  M,  5.,  on  the  Khamjes
Mountain,  Little  Namaqualand,  S.
Africa,  S.  Or^ge  R.,  and  near
Cape  Colony.  A9  early  as  1809,
Mr.  John  Sydenfaden  made  an  at-
tempt to  establish  a  (ninion  among
the  Namaqua  Hottentots,  and  soon
succeeded  in  gaining  4  or  500  fol-
lowen ;  among  whom  many  seemed
to  serve  the  Lord  in  sinceritj-.
Owing  to  numerous  embarrass-
ments, however,  |)is  stay  was  short.

At  this  place,  and  in  its  neigh-
bourhood, two  /Fesiejfon  mission'
aries  are  employed.  A  laige  part
of  the  tribe  of  the  Little  Nama-
qua Hottentots  have  been  reduced
irom     migiaWim^  Vvb3q\Vs    V^    ^^^

D  D  '^^\


rultiTation  of  the  ground,  to  the
pnictice  of  lueful  arU,  and,  abo«-e
ali>  have  wholly  renuuiiced  super-
jttitiori  and  klolatiy.  Buildino^s,
fields,  and  gardens,  have  taken  the
place  of  the  former  Hottentot
kraal,  and  the  chapel  and  the
school  are  regularly  attended  by  the
cliristianized  adults  and  their  chil-
dren. From  almost  the  first  com-
mencement of  the  mission,  the
most  satisfactoiy  instances  of  true
conversion  have  taken  place,  and
they  still  occur.  One  converted
Hottentot  family  alone  has  fur^
niithed  three  native  teachers,  of  de-
cided piety  and  suitable  knowledge
of  the  truth,  and  others  have  ac-
quired such  a  maturity  of  religious
experience  as  to  be  useful  to  their
fellows.

KILKENNY,  capital  of  a
county  of  Ireland  of  the  same
name,  where  the  /F.  M,  S,  has
placed  one  of  its  labourers.

KILLALOE,  a  town  in  Ireland,
in  Clare  county,  where  the  /F.
M.  S.  has  a  missionary.

KISSEY,  a  town  of  liberated
Africans^  in  the  parish  of  St.  Pa-
trick, Sierra  Leone  colony,  W.
Africa,  about  3  m.  £.  Freetown,
on  the  Sierra  R.  Inhabitants  in
tliis  town  and  its  vicinity  1500.

The  C,  M.  S,  commenced  its
benevolent  efforts  here  in  1816.  By
nn  official  return  of  April  1,  1817,
\i  appears  that  the  Rev.  C.  T.
Wenzel  had  the  charge,  at  that
time,  of  404  negroes,  of  whom  74
males  and  77  females  attended
school.  On  Mr.  W.'s  death,  soon
after,  the  Rev.  O.  R.  Nylander,
from  the  BtUlom  shore,  and  Ste-
phen Caulker,  a  native  usher,  pro-
ceeded to  this  station.  In  1819,
Mr.  N.  gives  the  following  ac-
count of  his  situation  and  labours : —

«  I  have  family  prayers,  morning

and  evening,  with  about  SCO  adults

and  children;    and,    through  the

day,  my  time  is  taken  up  with  the

uffain  oi  the  settlement.    On  \Sda


Lordli  day,  there  ii  a  tOiMlwjgtiMi
of  SCO  or  nor*  asMmUBdi  M
none,  as  yet,  aeem  to  bavi  emii
hear  or  hearti  to  iimkulw
However,  seeing  n  many  pied—
souls  assembled  bafoie  ne,  I  hi
often  refreshed  in  apeaUi^^  totkBi%
and  encouraged  to  cdttttmie'in  tie
work  ;  thougii  aomctlaiei  wkA
dejected  became  I  eea  no  M^
as  others  do.

"  The  Khool  le  carried  or  If
Stephen  Caulker  and  another  in
from  Rio  Pongaa.  We  klnre  ahv
an  evening  and  a'  Sunday  lAOiti
and  if  I  could  spare  a  little  tliit|I
would  introduce"h  Builaai  Kh^ll
here ;  as  there  are  ebonttfOBrtW
and  Sherbro  children^  wfaa  atHH^
stand  one  enother^  and  mmeaefc
their  tongue.  <  -.

"Here  are  about  9»fm/lik
young  and  old,  on  raUom  "mm
government;  aiid,of  Gonree^dliir
my  immediate  care^  Abaut^tfl
more  live  in  scattered  hats,  win
Kissey,  and  the  Timmaneei  wA
Bulloms  are  in  oar  neigfalwaidieeil;
so  that  if  a  missionarj  were  infrii
confined  by  the  care  and
ment  of  the  affidn  of  tiie
ment,  he  mlg^t  mako
useful  in  visiting  all  the  plaeet  la
the  vicinity.  I  iiave  IntxoAlcef  a
weekly  prayer  meeting,  on  WeA-
nesday  evenings:  aboat  s'ddiMi
adults  attend."

In  1822,  the  number  of  iHli^
bitants  being  greatly  incroMed,  ^Xm
N.  says — *'  Divine  iprrlce  li  at'
tended  on  Suadays  by  800  people
and  upward ;  and  aboat  400  attoed
morning  and  evening  praycfci  ob
week  days.  About  6fk  aechmricf
attend  evening  tcbool:  10l>  b^
and  100  girls  axe  at  the  'day
schools ;  a  few  married  ~  weMufau
attend,  but  very  irregutarly." ;  Id
October,  a  if.  A,  wae  fonaed,
when  4/.  0«J  9(/.  waa  eollected,''flBd
the  subsequent  monthly
tions  were  pleadng.


:kok

fr^pcfited  that  the  people  vere  very
■ngUg^iit  about  spiritual  things,
tern,  besides  the  communicants  at-
tending the  ministry  of  the  word.
At  Midsummer  their  attendance
Jukt  somewhat  improved.

The  number  of  communicants
•2t  Micliaelmas  was  40 ;  and  within
the  three  quarters  then  terminat-
ingf  10  adults  and  17  children  had
Men  baptized.

'.  vThe  returns  of  the  schools  at
Christmas,  were  boj's  22,  girls  34«
f  KONDAIA,  asettiementinthe
Qoaoo  countr^^  VT.  Africa,  about
.40  m.  op  the  Rio  Pongas  from
fteeport  The  Rev.  Messrs.
Bmnton  and  Greig,  from  the
^iteopai  M,  S.  commenced  a  mis-
l{^ni  here  in  1798,  and  laboured
vnder  many  discouragements  and
interraptions,  till  1800;  wiien  a
company  of  Foulahs  murdered  Mr.
irreig,  and  the  mission  was  relin-
^yisbedithough  favourable  prospects
M  oief  ulnesswere  beginning  to  open«
-  KONIGSBERG,  a  city  and
tiapital  of  Prussia,  4  m.  from  the
inoiifli  of  the  Pregel.  £.  long.  20"
9ff,  N.  lat.  ^«  40^.  Population
AAfOOO,  of  whom  8000  are  Jews.
ik.  nniirersity  was  founded  here  in
iM4,  which  has  18  professora  and
•beiit  SOO  students.
.  A  wide  field  of  useful  exertion
Iws  been  opened  here  among  the
Jfews,  upon  which  much  successful
oUnionary  labour  has  been  be-
vtowed.

.  KORNfiGALLE,  the  chief
town  in  the  Seven  Korles,  or  dis-  .
tricts,  of  the  Kandian  territory,
idiout  25  m.  N.  W.  of  Kandy,  and
J60  N.  £.  of  Colombo.  Early  in
1821,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Newstead,  of
the  fV,  M,  S.,  was  enabled,  by
■permission  of  the  'Lieutenant-go-
'Vemor,  and  by  the  friendly  offices
cyf  Henry  W^right,  Esq.  the  Resi*-
dent,  to  commence  here  a  mis-
sionary establishment.
V  On  the  first  Sabbath  day  after  bis
arrival,  he  preached  in  an  unfl-


KOR

nished  bungalow  intended  for  a
temporary  hospital.  Sir  E.  Barnes
having  unexpectedly  arrived,  he
was  waited  upon  by  Mr.  N.,  who
was  informed  that  he  might  build
upon  anyplace  he  deemed  eligible;
and  a  piece  of  ground  about  600
feet  in  circumference  was  therefore
allotted  for  that  purpose.

"  Here  is,"  said  Mr.  N.  ''  *
garrison  of  200  soldiers,  many  offi-
cers and  European  children ;  houses
are  building,  and  streets  formings
every  day ;  a  irest-house  is  also  to
be  immediately  built,  and  new
barracks ;  hence  it  is  easy  to  see
the  station  Js  one  of  gprowing  im-
portance. Schools  have  been
opened,  and  we  have  gained  ad*
mission  on  a  very  friendly  footing
to  two  Bndhist  temples  in  the
neighbourhood.  The  most  inte»
resting  fact,  however,  is,  that  a
small  company  have  begun  to  learn
the  Engli^  language  in  the  house
of  a  Budbist  priest,  contiguous  to
his  temple ;  himselfbeing  one  of  the
scholars,  and  at  his  own  request!
The  temple-school  arose  from  a
conversation  with  the  priest,  whe
solicited  instruction ;  I,  of  course,
assented,  and  proposed  a  small
school  at  his  house,  which  our
teacher  should  visit  every  day.
In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day>
Z  had  the  priest's  hoase  ornament^
with  large  English  alphabets,  spell-
ing and  reading  lessons,  dsc.,  and
several  young  Kandian  students
were  seated  on  their  mats  round
our  schoolmaster,  who  continues  to
visit  them  every  day.

*'  There  will  be  an  European  con-
gregation every  Sabbath,  of  at
least  200  persons,  and  the  natives
are  not  at  all  indisposed  to  assem-
ble; having  already  come  together,
both  priests  and  people,  in  consi-
derable numbers,  to  hear  tlie
preaching.

**  The  Slstof  December,  1821,"
says  Mr.  N.  -**  was  the  day  appro-
priated to  the  wii^oiia  oi  d«4\K.«M£Bi%


KOR

to  God  the  fint  borne  erected  to
the  honour  of  his  glorious  name  in
the  Kandian  kiogdom,  and  vre
trust  it  will  be  remembered  through
eternity  with  joy."

In  1823,  Air.  N.  reports :  «  The
last  quarter  has,  I  think,  produced
more  pleasing  instances  of  real
good  than  any  preceding  one.  Se-
veral native  chiefs  of  different
ranks  have  lately  come  from  con-
siderable distances,  voluntarily
bringing  their  sons  to  place  under
our  instructions.  It  is  a  circum-
stance which  has  been  a  real  sup-
port to  me,  to  see  the  constant
attendance,  eveiy  Sabbath,  of  two
entire  village  schools,  all  of  Kan-
dian children,  without  ol^ection
attending  the  ordinances  of  Chris-
tian worship;  it. has  excited  my
surprise  almost  as  much  as  my  gra-
titude $  and  their  frequently  being
accompanied  by  their  parents  and
friends  has  rendered  our  native
congregation  far  less  fluctuating
and  uncertain  than  the  English.
The  latter  continues,  of  course,  ex-
tremely small ;  not  from  neglect,
but  because  of  their  number.  The
Kornegalee  schooihegins  to  revive,
and  we  have  the  prospect  of  many
additions.  Two  village  schools  will
be  regularly  opened  in  a  few  days,
the  bungalows  having  been  com-
pleted, and  all  things  in  a  fair  train
for  permanent  usemUiess.''

In  1826,  it  is  said,— <<  The
prospects  of  usefulness  in  the  Se-
ven Korles  are  as  encouraging
as  can  be  expected  in  a  country
professedly  heathen,  considering
the  confined  means  possessed  of
communicating  religious  instruc-
tion during  the  past  year.  The
few  members  of  society  we  have
In  that  district  being  school-mas-
ters, are  necessarily  separated  much
from  each  other,  and  seldom  are
able  to  meet  in  class;  but  it  is
hoped  that  by  their  Christian  con-
duct and  conversation,  a  willing-
neu  to  consider  the  truths  of  our


KUR

holy  religion   baa  been  iitarf
among  the  Bativea.  AltfaoaghwMh^
ground  may  not  have  been  giteiji
during  the  year;  yet  it  la  aatkliMf
toiy  to  know  that  none  bai  tas
lost,  but  that  some  ptomm  hip»
ceptible."    [See  XofuQr.]        .  <
KURREECHANE,  the  pduA*
pal  town  of  the  Marootze  Mbeof
Bootchuanas,  S.  Airicay  iipwvidiiijf
1000  m.  N.  E.  Cape  Towoy  jp.
about  24^  S.  lat.  and  liot  farfEonflM
eastern  coast.   The  iiopalatioa»li
1 820,  was  estimated  at  16,000.  ijip.
Bootchuanas  are  jet  blacky  a  imy
athletic,  warlike  race, .  free  ia^f^f.
neral  from  every  species  pf  depp*
mity.  Their  mannen  aze  pecuBib
and  the  grossest  superstition  k  tah
terwoven  in  all  their  customs;  thoy
are  veiy  thievish,  but  hold  tbe  crine
of  adultery  in  the  utmost  ahtany
rence.    Their  language  pommm
no  regular  form,  but  is  flUed  wtth
all  the  unsoftened  barbaiifyofH^
vage  sounds.    It  is  not  uncyiDUMi
to  find  from  2  to  10  or  18,QQpiirlv
in  a  compact  body,  and  scarcely,  n^
thing  will  induce  them  to  reBom*
Each  tribe  has  its  laws,  gofebb.
ment,  and  king,  who  is  invirivlilj^
hereditary.  They  have  advaneod  It: :
the  arts  of  civilization  beyond  thrft.
neighbours,and  are  paasionateljtai
of  hunting.  The  men  hunl^.bpild^
and  take  care  of  the  incloomesicir
their  cattle,  and  prepare  their  weer^
ing  apparel,  which  conaistt  ehl4|  ■
of  skins  sewed  together  with  th»
sinews  of  goats,  sheep,  and
The  females  build  the  housQi  _
its  hedge,  dig  the  garden,  andi
the  land,  which  .they  appear  topai^
form  with  the  utmost  cheerfidnew.  -
Sorcery  and  witchcraft  univeririljf  -
prevail ;  and  their  faith  i»  finn  ,fti
almost  any  thing  fictitious^  espe*.
cially  when  affirmed  by  their  mtr
giciahs.   The  majority  cany  pleefs
of  ^tone,  horn,  or  roots,  auqienM
from  their  i^ecks,  which  thef  iwt
for  magical  purposes;,  accordlqgto  .
the  direction  of  their  aorperen.


.:•


IJABf

'•Hil^,  the  Rer.  Menis.  Camp-
Mi  and  Moflkt,  6(  the  L.  M,  S,,
vlMed  tblf  and  other  places  in
Hm-  ▼idnity,  to  prepare  for  the
•Utelilishment  of  a  minion,  which
was  fafonred  by  the  chief  men  of
the  nation ;  but  little  was  done,  ez-
t0pt  by  way  of  preparation,  before
lbs' town  was  destroyed  by  a  com-
akhf  of  about  40,000  Milntatees,
mo  passed  throngh  the  country  on
ft' plimdering  expedition,  in  June,
ISks,  and  ^dispersed  the  Marootze
tifbo;  ■  This  disastrous  event  de-
t&Dged  the  Society's  plans ;  but  it
Is  i^nfldenltly  believed  it  will  eren-
tnally  turn  to  the  furtherance  of
'the  €k»pel  in  these  parts.


L.


LABRADOR,  an  extensive
^cdwntry  in  N.  America,  situated
on  ttie  N.  E.  part  of  New  Britain :
bounded  W.  by  Hudson's  Bar ;  N.
Iiy  Hudson's  Straits  5  E^byDavis^
atraKsy'tbe  Atlantic,  and  the  Straits
Of  Ralisto ;  and  S«.  by  the  Gulf  of
St  Lawrence,  and  L.  Canada.
Bot#een  56*  and  79*  W.  lonj?.  and
6ff  and  08*  N.  tat.  The  face  of
Ue  9mmirff  is  rough  and  mountain-
oos,  tibe  soil  poor,  and  the  natural
{noductions  those  of  the  coarseat
plants,  adapted  to  the  subsistence
<tf  deer  and  goats.  The  whole  of
tbo  E.  coast  exhibits  a  very  barren
•qipoarance-;  the  inlaiid  territory  fe
inore  fertile,  and  trees  are  more
ttOOierous.  T-he  climate,  though
verere,  is  salubrious.  There  Is
Uttlo  appearance  of  summer  till
about  the  middle  of  July,  and  in
September,  winter  indicates  its  ap-
proach ; — this  season  is  longer,  and
more  intensely  cold  than  that  of
tSreenland.  Immense  quantHies  of
foe-  render  the  sea-coast  much
eolder  than  the  interior.  The  ther-
Mometer,  from  December  to  April,
la  genenUly  70^  below  freezing-
Ipolst^  And  shoals  of  icet^  from  the


Lab

N.,  frequently' set  in  In  sprint  aqd
summer.  The  mhabitant*  of  this
country  are  two  distinct  tribes  of
Indians — 3§mntameers  and  Ei^pii-
maux,  between  whom  there  subsists
an  invincible  aversion.  The  Mown-'
tdineert  inhabit  the  interior  of  the
countiy  towards  the  N.,  and  are  a
small,  hardy  race  of  people,  well
adapted  to  tlie  rocky  country  which
they  are  continually  traversing.
The  Esquimaux  are  inferior  to
Europeans,  and  flatvisaged;  their
hair  is  black  and  very  coarse,  and
their  hands  and  feet  are  remarkably
small :  their  dress  is  made  enthrely
of  skins:  their  food  consists  chiefly
of  seals,  deer,  fish,  and  birds.  The
men  are  extremMy  indolent,  the
women  are  mere  drudges.  Constant
dread  of  the  Mountaineers  induces
them  to  live  near  the  shore.  In
suflMner  the  natives  occupy  tents,
made  circular  with  poles,  and  co»
vered  with  skins;  and  in  winter
they  live  in  caverns  and  snow-
houses.  Before  the  arrival  of  mis-
sionaries, the  Esquimaux  believed
in  the  existence  of  an  invisible
Being,  influencing  boiii  the  good
and  the  bad,  which  they  called  tbo
Torugak.  ^orceiy  and  witchcraft
were  universally  practised  {  and
stealing,  perfidy,  asfl  murder,  were
common  crimes.  Their  nun^er.
has  not  been  acc^n<ately  ascertain-
ed ;  it  has  been  estimated  at  about
]>600.  The  erporti  are  fish,  whale-
hone,  and  furs ;  the  latter  of  which
are  of  superior  quality.

The  first  idea  of  sending  out
missidnories  to  the  Esquimaux  ap-
pears to  have  originated  in  a  con-
jecture that  a  national  affinity
subsisted  between  those  people  and
the  Greenlanders }  and  though  the
excellent  and  devoted  Matthew
Stach-did  not  suoceed  in  his  ap-
plication to  the  Hndson's  Bay
Company  for  permission  to  attempt
ihe  evangelization  of  the  Indians
belonging  to  their  factories,  a  shif
was  fitted  out  Vn  \n5i,\n  vnsA  cl
Do2  ^^


LAB

the  U,  B.  and  fereral  otber  mer*
chants,  for  the  purpose  of  trading
uD  the  coast  of  Labrador.  Four
missionaries  sailed  from  I^ndon
on  the  17th  of  May,  taking  with
them  the  frame  and  materials  of  a
house,  a  boat,  various  kinds  of
seeds,  and  different  implements  of
agriculture;  and,  on  their  arrival
in  a  fine  bay,  they  went  on  shore,
and  fixed  on  a  spot  for  their  future
residence,  to  which  they  gave  the
name  of  Hopedale ;  but  some  pain*
ful  circumstances  occurring,  the
mission  was  for  a  time  abandoned.

Jens  Haven,  however,  sailed  for
Labrador  in  May,  1786,  accompa-
nied by  €•  L.  Dracharti  formerly
one  of  the  Danish  missioi^aries  in
Cireenland,  and  S  other  brethren.
On  this  occasion  they  penetrated
farther  into  the  interior  of  the
country;  and  on  their  return  to
the  coast,  they  had  an  opportunity
of  addrening  several-  hundreds  of
the  natives,  who  seemed  to  listen
to  them  with  profound  attention ;
but  on  several  other  occasions  they
either  evinced  a  total  indifference
to  the  truths  which  were  sounded
in  their  ears,  or  spoke  in  a  way
which  demonstrated  the  hardness
of  their  hearts,  and  the  blindness
of  their  understandings.

A  tract  of  land  in  Esquimaux
Bay  was  afterwards  granted,  by
an  order  of  council,  for  the  esta-
blishment of  a  mission ;  and  a  brig
of  about  ISO  tons  burthen  was
purchased,  with  the  design  of  an*
nualiy  visiting  Labrador,  and  tra-
ding with  the  natives.  In  the
month  of  May,  1770,  Messrs.  Ha-
ven, Drachar^  and  Jensen,  sailed
from  England,  in  order  to  explore
the  coast,  and  to  fix  on  a  conve-
nient situation  for  a  settlement.
On  their  arrival  they  availed  them-
selves of  the  first  opportunity  of
preaching;  and,  notwithstanding
the  grant  which  they  had  previously
obt^ned,  they  deemed  It  advisable
to  pmtbase  from  the  lava^  the


LAB

piece  of  ground  which  they  hitiii
ed  to  occupy  as  a  nlHkmaiy  iIk
tion.    They  then  vetilned  to  £»•

J^land,  to  make  further  prefiinttaii
or  the  accompUshmeiit  of  thoti
benevolent  design.  : «

The  interest  excited  by  n  IN
tempt  to  Introduce  tiie
light  of  revelation
wretched  and  benighted
maux  was  very  great,  and
members  of  the  Momvlan
both  male  and  female,  avoiradttdr
wiilingneas  to  abandon  ell  the  ei»*
forts  of  civilized  society,  nd  li
expose  themselves  to  eveiy  tfmki
of  inconvenience  and  prlvaftlo%  ^
the  furtherance  of  so  Impoitsalff
object  Accordingly,  In  the  iplpf
of  1771,  a  company  of  14  ytaoa^
comprising  3  married  coiiplB%  a
widower,  and  seven  single  hrethn%
sailed  for  Labrador;  and  ate  a
tedious  and  hazardpos  vcyagsi^  w*-
rived  on  the  0th  of  August  at  thdt
place  of  destination.  The  ^
after  their  arrival,  they  tock  poi^
session  of  the  spot  which  had  beca
purchased  in  the  preceding  hdmi^
and  gave  it  the  appellation  of  JVUk
They  also  immediately  rnmmonnid
the  erection  of  a  .inlsslon-hoa%
the  frame  and  materials  of  wfekk
they  had  brought  firom  Engtail
but  great  exertions  were  lefrini
to  complete  it  before  the.oov*
mencement  of  winter,  wtlefe^.lft
these  northern  regions,  is  so  Ip*
tensely  cold,  that  mm,  placed  ia
the  open  air,  freaies  like  wateic
and  rectified  spirits  in  a  short  tlBft
become  as  thick  as  oil.  :  »

In  this  situation  the  hMflDi»
could  obtain  but  few  of  the  nee»»
series  of  life ;  and  as  a  considna^-
ble  delay  occurred  in  the  fiorwas^
ing  of  supplies  from  England laiha
ensuing  year,  their  provisions  WBie
ahnost  entirely  exhausted;  bo^
happily,  deliverance  appeared.

The  conduct  of  the  Es^aiman
had  been  uniformly  friendly  towaids
thamfravattu^  fint  aniral ;  andlw


\


the  btefbren  acted,  upon  all  oeca-
iioB%  in  the  most  open  and  inge-
^■9iM  mannei,  entire  confidence
VH    loan    establislied    .between
tham.    In  former  times,  no  Euro-
pean could   have  passed  a  night
aaong  these  savages,  then   cha-
neterized  as  thieves  and  murderers,
«t^ut  the  most  imminent  dan-
ger;   but   now   the  missionaries,
fegardless  of  the  inclemency   of
tiie.  season,    travelled   across,  the
,  ice  and  snow  to  visit  them  in  their
winter  bouses,  and  were  hospitably
•ntertained  for  several  days  and
BJIghtfl  successively.     These  visits
were  afterwards  returned ;  and  in
eoosequence  of  the  friendly  inter-
eomse  thus .  opened,   the   natives
Hot  only  asked  the  advice  of  the
brethren  in  all  difficult  cases,  but
•yen  chose   them   as  umpires  in
their  dilutes,,  and  invariably  sub-
mitted to  their  arbitration.    They
alao  listened  with  silence  and  atten-
tion to  tibe  preaching  of  the  Gos-
ael  9  and,  in  a  few  instances,  the
Dope  was  entertained  that  impres-
sions were  made  which  might,  at
a  subsequent  period,  be  productive
of  some  fruit  to  the  honour  of  the
Redeemer.      Generally  speaking,
however,  they  were  too  little  ac-
quainted with  their  own  guilt  and
wretchedness  to  discover  the  nei-
eevity  of  salvation,  or  the  suitabi-
lity cuid  preciousness  of  that  Sa-
viour who  was  represented  to  them
M  the  only  refuge  from  the  wrath
to  come.    Though  devoted  to  the
gratification   of  the  most   brutal
passions,  and  habitually  commit-
ting the  grossest  sins  with  delight,
they  were  never  destitute  of  ex-
cuses and  causes  of  self-gratula-
tion.    The  angekoks,  or  sorcerers,
alfo^  as  mi^t  naturally   be  ex-
pected, employed  all  their  artito
prevent    their    countrymen   from
receiving  the  Gospel.

A  man  named  Anauke,  how-
ever, who  had  been  formedy  a
ferocious  and  desperate  cbar8cter>


LAB

was  at  length  induced  to  iltteiid
the  preaching  of  the  brethren  $■
and,  after  hearing  them  repeatedly,
he  pitched  his  tent  in  their  settle-
ment in  17TS,  and  remained  tfaere-
till  the  month  of  Novembet,  when
he  removed  to  his  winter  house*.
Even  then  his  anxiety  for  Aurtber
instruction  in  the  things  of  God
was  so  great,  that  he  actually
returned  on  foot,  far  the  purpose
of  spending  a  «few  days  more  with
the  heralds  of  the  cross;  though
the  Esquimaux  were  never  accus-
tomed to  travel  in  that  manner;-
as  in  summer  they  pass  from  one
place  to  another  in  their  kiyaks^
and  in  winter  they  perform  their
journeys  in  sledges.  From  the  time
of  his  second  departure,  the  mis-
sionaries heard  nothing  of  him  till
February,  1773,  when  his  wife
came  to  Nain,  and  stated  that  he
had  died,  calling  on  the  name  of
the  Lord  Jesus.  Though  no  ChriiB^
tian  friend  was  present  to  direct  or
influence  him,  he  would  not  per-
mit one  of  the  angekoks,  who  are
considered  as  the  physicians  of  tte
Esquimaux,  to  come  near  him ;
but  committed  himself  unreservedly
into  the  hands  of  that  great  Phy-
sician who  descended  from  heaven,
to  bind  up  the  broken  hearted,  and
with  whom  he  was  enabled  to  hold'
sweet  communion  even  when  heart
and  flesh  were  failing.  After  hla
demise,  this  person  was  invariably-
spoken  of  by  the  natives  as  **  the
man  whom  the  Saviour  took  to-
himself.''

The  brethren  now  resolved  to
select  from  among  their  heavers
such  as  appeared  the  most  seriously
inclined,  and  to  form  them  into  a
class  of  catechumens,  in  order  to
prepare  them,  by  suitaUe  instme-
tions,  for  the  holy  rite  of  baptism.;
At  the  same  time  they  determined*
to  erect  a  church  capable  of  con-
taining some  hundreds  of  persons,
ai  the  apartment  in  the  mission-
honsei  whlcU  boA  \M«a  Ys&i^^ftnNik.


tiAB

xtnd  for  the  eelebrstion  of  divine
emrvice,  could  no  longer  bold  the
congregatton.

In  the  summer  of  1775,  in  com-
filience  with  the  instructions  which
they  had  received  from  Europe,
MesuB.  Ha?en  end  Jemen  set  out
with  the  design  of  commencing  a
fMw  settlement  at  a  place  called
Okkakf  about  IM  m.  to  the  north-
wanl  of  Nain.  As  this  spot  «p-
l>eared  peculiarly  eligible  for  -the
4)urpose8  of  a  mission,  being
abundantly  furnished  with  wood
end  fresh  water,  contiguous  to  an
eccellent  haTen,  and  surrounded
by  a  numerous  population  of  the
heathen,  the  land  was  immediately
purchased  from  the  Esquimaux  f
and  as  soon  as  the  ensuing  season
permitted,  tlie  missionaries  took
up  their  residence  here,  and  began
to  preach  the  glad  tidings  of  sal*
vi^tion  to  the  natires  in  the  vici-
nity. At  first  they  met  with  much
discoinragement )  but  at  length
some  indications  of  seccess  began
loappear;  and  in  17  8 1,  they  had  the
)Mtisfaction  of  minigtering  among
•8  persons  who  had  been  baptized
hi  the  faith  ef  Chtist,  besides  10
tithers,  whb,  as  catechumens,  were
feceiving  pellicular  instruction.

In  the  month  of  August,  1788,
the  brethren  proceeded  to  form  a
third  settlement,  at  a  place  to  the
southward  of  Nain,  to  ^fiicfa  they
gave  the  ftppellation  of  Hopedeth^
lliis  spot  had  been  formerly  re-
oonnoitred,  -and  considered  parti-
cularly suita'ble  for  a  missionaiy
station ;  and  it  was  Mow  hoped
that  great  numbers  of  the  Esqui-
maux would  rejoice  in  the  oppor-
tunity of  receiving  religious  instruo
tion.  This  pleasing  anticipation
was,  for  the  present,  disappointed ;
and  for  several  years  the  preadiitag
•of  the  Gospel  on  this  «pot  appeared
to  be  attended  with  so  little  suc-
cess, that  both  the  missionaries
and  the  directors  in  Europe  felt
iacUned  io  rellnqtiiBh  mchvx  uik^


prafttahte  itetkm.  ItegnMMl'
of  the  ebucli,  bowwrer,  hmk*


\


wise  detennlned,-  mm±.  Mpiii#
in  the  leqeely  beMne  IfcgirwMr
of  an  awakening  urtileb  aAeMttt
extended  its  lile«ed  laftHMMf
the  other  iottiAiiMiit%  aAd^^MI^'
stmined  the  firiends  of  IttWi'
deemer  to  r^'irlnii^  "tfhltiiit
Qodwroi^btV'  •!- ■   :i»-

At  ttie  eoBameaeiiiieat  «^Mi'
the  miflrfonarlei  ware  .mod^^W;
conraged  on  a  tbvIow  of'  thei4Brii  -
succesi  wfalota  aeeined  tpbawfciljf
tended  tbehr  faithful  ^
among  the  heatfiMi  in
but  before  the  end  of  that

was  their  privUego  to ,

dawn  of  a  brfghter  day^'  tfit<ll*
wltneia  eflbcts  which  tbqF»'iMi#
aware  could  only  have  beW :gW^
duced  by  the  agency  and  liilirtiiir
of  the  Hofy  Spfait.  I&  taMl^
times  it  had  been  «  iri^M"^
deep  regret  that  Ihe  fttttielMMh^
received  by  the  Esqiiiniais?4iii^
different  settlementSiy :  doiiag  }M -
winter,  weie  too  geneii^y 'flj^''^'
gotten  in  their  summer  exennMl^-
when,  by  associattiig  •  with  MUf  ^
heathen  countt^inen,  the^-^'fill^
themselves  open  to  tiiiniiiilirf'
and  in  many  faistancee  titiftp
into  their  former'  pTactlce•'>^«4l^^
the  retem  of  the  profeMi4g!.riiM0'
to  Hopedale,  however,  tn-tbeF^fyil^
to  which  alliMon  la  now-  iat0[.^
the  brethren  were  abondaatlf  p0^"
tified  to  And  thtft  their  aoitft
prospering-,  and,  by  .their

many  who  had  |irevioiii|y  |

nothing  more  than  the  ibMi"«l
religion^  were  awakened  ic^i'tf
sense  of  its  vital  InipiHtiiimt
and  began  eameitiy  to  tenM
how  they  might  be  drtiveied  Ml'
their  offieinces  and  received  iM»
the  divine  &voar.  ■■•'>r

The  awakenings  so  happi]yedi»i
menced  at  Hqiedale,  wMm  bam*
inmiieated  itft  sacied  inflnenee'-tt
Nain.  ■     '  .-.    •

Oik  ^Sh^  tth  of  Ajogw^  im


I*.-


i


LAB

fti^  iniMionaTi4tt  at  Nain  had  the
-TtHlifitrtion  of  seeing  the  new
r  4|Hp  called  the  Harmony  come  to

M  aochor  in  their  bay,  just  60
;  3Wn;  after  the  first  vessel  arrived
,  Vamte,  with  14  brethren  and  sis-
i  tna  cm  board,  with  the  view  of
j  faning  a  Christian  settlement  in
I -a.  land  which,  previously  to  that

Mriody  had  been  covered  with
^  Wck  darkness.  They  endeavoured,
,' AaiefcHre,  to  express  their  joy,  by
I  hoiftliig-  two  small  flags,  and  a
I  -  vtjite  one,  on  which  some  of  the
J  airten.  had  formed  the  number  60

1  vith  red  riband,  and  surrounded
f  it  with  a  wreath  of  laurel.  Their
l^«BalI  cannon  were  also  discharged,
,,.aild  answered  by  the  guns  of  the
iMilp,  and  the  Esquimaux  fired
^itiMir  muslcets  as  long  as  their
jjowdei  lasted.  Some  tunes  of
if li^na  expressive  of  thanksgiving
x&  divine  mercies  were,  in  the
y jqiaan  time,  played  on  wind  in-
.  itrapieQts ;  which  altogether  made
■M  ndtable  impression  on  the  minds

.,<lCfhe  converts,  and  afforded  them
•M  tolarohle  idea  of  a  jubilee  re-
^Jificing.  The  missionary,  Kohl-
'  BMijrter,  explained  to  them  that
-the  number  on  the  flag  was  in-

2  .tended  to  denote  that  this  was
'the  fiftieth  time  that  a  ship  had
'  eoQe  safely  to  the  settlement  for
.  tteir  sakes,  and  that  the  gracious
ymservation'  which  had  been  af-

mded  during  that  long  period  was
the  cause  of  the  present  rejoicing.
Th^  listened  to  this  with  profound
'  attention,   and    then    exclaimed,
'  /<  Yes  I  Jesus  is  worthy  of  thanks !
'  ■  JoMis  is  worthy  of  thanks,  indeed  I "
.'.  .'<In  the  public  services  of  the
'  ^f''  the  missionaries  observe,  "  a
^  qiirit  of  joy  and  thanksgiving  pre-
lalled  throughout  the  whole  con-
gregation $  and  the  baptism  of  two
adults  tended  greatly  to  solemnize
tbii  festival.''

The  jubilee  of  the  mission  was
also  celebrated  in  tbe  other  set-
ttements  with  due  solemnity^  and


LAB

many  of  the  Esquimaux  aftef*
wards  observed  that  it  had  been
a  most  important  and  blessed  sea*
son  to  their  iouis.

The  most  important  benefits
appear  to  have  resulted  from  the
translation  and  printing  of  dlfierent
parts  of  the  New  Testament  in
the  Gsquimaiix  langruage  ;  and  the
contributions  which  tbe  people
made  of  seals^  blubber  Is  a
striking  illustration  of  their  giav
titude.

The  brethren  wrote  from  Hope*
dale,  July  27, 1825 :-~"  We  have,
indeed,  even  in  the  year  past,  richly
experienced  that  the  good  seed
has  not  been  sown  in  vain.  The
Spirit  of  God  accompanied  ibe  tes-
timony of  the  life,  sufl^ngs,  and
death  of  Jesus,  witti  power  iin  the
hearts  of  our  people ;  and  we  en«
joyed  with  them  many  richbles*
sings  whenever  we  met  in  His
name.  It  gave  us  peculiar  sati^
faction  to  perceive,  that  all  thoee
who  had  for  some  time  past  been
excluded  from  the  congregation,
returned  with  true  signs  of  repen-
tance, bemoaning  their  sins  and
transgressions,  and  crying  to  the
Lord  for  mercy.  We  could,  there-
fore, at  difierent  opportunities,  re-
admit them  all  to  fellowship  with
tbe  believers.  Several  persons  ad-
vanced In  the  privileges  of  tbe
church;  two  girls  and  eight  chil-
dren were  baptized;  four  persons,
baptized  as  children,  were  received
into  the  congregation ;  seven  be-
came candidates  for  the  holy  oom-
munion ;  six  partook  of  it  for  the
first  time ;  a  youth  was  added  to
the  class  of  candidates  for  baptism.
One  child  departed  this  life.  Tbe
Esquimaux  congregfation  at  Hope-
dale  consists  ot  65  communicants,
35  baptized  adults,  83  baptized
children  and  youths,  7  candidates
for  baptism,  and  2  children  yet  un-
baptized ; — in  all,  of  192  persons !

"  In  externals  we  have  cause  to
thank  our  heaveiiVy.'Sa>3a«t  lot'NftBk


aare  of  Hb  poor  children .  Thon^
^few  seals  wera  caught  by  our  Es-  •
;quimaux  during  the  La^  autumn
•and  winter,  they  ne^'er  suffered  real
.want.  The  rein-deer  hunt  turned
out  well,  and  nrnny  partridges  were
shot  in  the  countr}' ;  so  that  we
■could  always  procure  a  good  supply
of  fresh  meat.  Towards  the  end
iof  spring,  the  Esquimaux  were  re- '
.tnarkably  successful  in  catching
4eal8.  which  enabled  them  to  dry  a
considerable  stock  of  meat.  We
iiad  littie  snow  during  the  winter ;
but  from  the  24th  of  Nov.  to  the
Wk  of  June,  this  year,  our  bay
vas  frocen.'^

On  Augwt  13,  1886,  the  mis-
-akmaries  wrote  frcni  Nain :— f'  The
lintemal  state  of  our  E^squimaax
•congregation  has,  hy  the  Lord's
Aoercy,  aiforded  us  more  joy  than
4min.    Most  of  the  baptized  ha^-e
:|>e0Q  desirous  ,of  experiencing  the
•power  of  our  Saviour'a  grace,  to
•€inablB  them  to  walk  worthy  of  the
{ Gospel,  and  to  give  honour  to  Him
.wiio  has  delivered  from  darkness
«nd  the  power  of  sin.  Some  painful
txscorrencesinay  be  expected ;  for
the  enemy  of  sonls  .is  ever  active,
aeekingto  do  harm  to  the  cause  of
^od.    aoT  has  he  spared  us,  but
even  sought  to  lead  the  children
into  mischief,  and  create  disturb-
•ance  among  tbenu    But  the  spirit
.of  God,  ruUng  in  the  congregation,
.fffoved  more  mighty ;  and  Sie  evil
being  broaght  to  light,  the  machi-
nations •f  the  enemy  were  soon
•destroyed.     We  thank  the  Lord,
that  we  perceive  that  the  spirit  of
<<mr  people  is  with  us,  and  all  are
.intent   upon    putting  away    that
which  is  evil  in  the  sight  of  (jod.
•Against sach  a  spirit,  which  is  his
gift,  Satan  cannot  long  exert  his
craft  with  success.    May  the  Lord
preserve  it  among  us!    As  to  ex-
eternals,  we  can  declare  with  gra-
titude, that  our  merciful  heavenly
•  Father  has  cared  for  our  people.
Jfyne  have  suffered  ecsVxeme  Yra^n-


•i

Ik


yMMfk


KAB

gier.    Tb&f  ux^  Wirtr  «i
in  kayaks,  or  i^an  Iks  k%lilRI
more  in  nets^  by  viriekftlfjiiBii
tained  a.suAelBiiqyiDr.ihdM*
sistance.    Nor  bKM  tb^f .dW  Uk
•much  from  savae  Vtam,  -  fi^

**  During  iha-  viaM  Mm
5adQlti  and  4flUUra«aMf
tised;  SpenanswenisfiaMIV
the  congtegatkmf.UwniW
to  the  candidates  fa  thtM
Snppor,  and  j3  becaiM  f0^
At  present  our  EsqniMUSll^
gation  consists  of  SOT  ywwgjjj
whom  8S  an  commanlculMtai
have  departed  4his  life.    .  >^^

About  10  chiUrei  sttitf 'f
meetinga  and.  scbmlsi
gence  and  proftL"  '^^

In  a  letter  dated  OUdk^  il^
84,1685,  it  Is  ttM^-^'
departure  of  the  jUp  MW]
j9  children  and  IS  advita  wmim^
tixedj  IS  becanw  pactakawtf t
lord's  Supper;  d  yoathalMi*
celved  into  the  congn%s<iii|)l
persons  «anie  .to  lite  fasinvMNJ
to  be  converled.  to  Hie  Ud^
•family  of  i  peraoai  vamaM
Nain;  T  adoMs  and sS  cUOwi
parted  this  U£b..  Tbcj  iHip
evidence  of  their.. Adfty'tfiiii
pressed  thehr  desire  to  daghil
be  with  Christ  OurxMilgMpI
consists  of  338  peraonis^vl
97  are  communicants.''  .'••  -  b«

The  support  of  the  aWH
Labrador  is  scttended  «ifh««
expense,  and  can  odIjWWm
by  a  vessel,  belonging  ^.-1^
ciety,  annually  8eat.oali«riil
worthy  of  grateful -natlGa^v  4
amidst  the  maiqp  dangeieMW
the  navigation  of  this  mckg^tui
no  interruption ocentred  fiarU
60  years  in  transmitting  tiie  an
supplies.  In  1816,  tlie  vesMli
for  the  first  time  prevented^  Ij
ice  and  the  foiy  of  stanM^I
touching  at  Hopedole ;  wad.
obliged  to  return  to  Rmupe,  Jin
4  missionaries  on  bomd*  .  •   '  '

TVift  E«v,  Mr,  JSUite  ImM


\


t  to  LabnuJoTt  by  tbc«
,  and  at  the  last  account
iHiilding  ft  bouse  for  a
esidence,  to  the  great
tn  of  the  natives.
AKOO,  a  city  and  capital
ufat^happee  tribe,  about
.  K,  of  Cape  Town,  South
In  June,  1813,  the  Rev.
impbell,  of  Kingsland,
is  place,  with  the  hope  of
permission  to  send  mis-
to  that  part  of  South
After  waiting  a  consider-
for  an  interview  with  the
teebe,  and  overruling  his
;,  the  king  said — "  Seiul
«,  and  I  wiU  be  a  father

aged  by  this  assurance,
ors  of  the  Z<.  3/.  &  sent
donaries,  Messrs.  Evans,
,  Williams,  and  Barker,
iry,  1815.  On  their  ar-
teebe  and  several  of  his
lOok  hands  with  them
it  cordiality,  supposing
have  been  traders  come
purpose  of  exchanging
ut  on  finding  that  they
missionaries  promised  by
he  king  appeared  much
,  some  of  his  captains
>  express  their  disappro-
id  in  their  feelings  the
Qcurred.

grieved  by  this  un-
disappointment,  the  bre-
amed to  Griqua  Town,
was,  however,  resolved
b  the  establishment  of  a
and  soon  after  this  he
.  thither  with  7  waggons,
iber  of  persons  of  dillerent
)n  their  arrival,  Mateebe
very  cool,  and  repeated
obse^ations  with  respect
mcient  customs  of  th6
nas,  and  their  aversion
tion.  "  To  these  objec-
lys  Mr.  Read,  "I  g^ave
,  \  but  told  him,  that  in
^  to  the  agreement  with


LAT

^  Mr.  Campbell,  the  good  ptfople  eC;
the  couritiy  beyond  the  great  watei .
had  sent  missionaries;   tliat  they>
had  rejoiced  at  his  having  promised
to  receive  such,  and  had  sent  by.,
them  a  variety  of  articles  to  make
him  and  his  people  happy.  Mateebe
now  seemed  satisfied^  and  said  we
might  unyoke  our  oxen  under  a
large  tree  wUch  stands  near  bis
house ;  and  two  days  afterwards^  oo-.
his  being  asked  where  we  should
get  wockI  and  reeds  for  buikUng,
and  .where  we    should  buildy  \m\
replied  that  wood  and  reeds  were-
at  hand,  and  that  we  adght  build-
where  we  pleased."

Mateebe's  mind  was  deeply  af--
fected  by  a  defeat  he  experienced
about  this  time  ;  and  Jhe  not  only
acknowledged  that  he  bad  dope,
wrong  in  refusing  to  listen  to  the.
advice  of  the  missionaries,  who
attempted  to  dissuade  hin  fiom
war,  but  declared  that,  in  future,,
he  wQukl  be  guided  by  their  di-
rections.

On  the  2«ih  of  April  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Hamilton  arrived  at  Lattakooy
and  were  very  kindly  received  hy
the  king,  who  told  them  that  tbejr
must  consider  bis  country  as  their
own,  and  spend  the  remainder  of
their  lives  with  his  people.

On  the  4th  of  June  the  mission-
aries, in  compliance  with  the  wish
of  the  king,  removed  to  the  Kroo-.
man  R. ;  and  on  the  dth  arrived  at
the  place  of  their  destination/
which  appeared  to  be  well  situated
for  a  permanent  settlement.  ''  Tb&
plain,"  says  one  of  the  brethren,
<Ms  as  large  as  the  city  of  London,:
and  surrounded  by  lofty  trees,,
which  afibtd  a  delightful  shade  in
the  summer,  and  give  it  a  very
pleasing  appearance."  On  this
occasion  they  were  accompanied
by  Mateebe  and  several  of^hi^
chiefs,  who  went  with  them  ip  or-
der to  determine  on  the  spot- where
the  new  town-  should  be  bnilt^
Many  of  the  chiefi  ni^ta  vstenmki.


LAT

vntne,  both  to  the  King's  renoo-
vbI  and  to  bis  protection  of  the
miffionaries.  Mateebe,  however,
declared  bis  determination  of  acting
according  to  the  dictates  of  his  own
judgment  {  and  obsen'ed,  tbat  the
brethren  had  evinced  their  attach-
ment towards  him  by  regularly  at-
tending to  dress  his  wounds,  after
his  own  captains  had  left  him  sick
and  wounded  in  the  field,  to  be  de-
voured by  the  birds  of  prey.

In  a  letter,  dated  New  Lattakoo,
March  0,  1818,  one  of  the  mis-
sionaries observes, — '<  Things  are
going  on  better  here  than  we  ex-
pected in  so  short  a  time,  as  we
have  no  longer  any  opposition  from
the  Bootfhuanas ;  but,  on  the
contrar}',  some  of  them  are  thank-
ing God  for  sending  bis  word  among
them,  and  praying  that  we  may
never  leave  them.  Some  of  them
begin  to  see  the  vanity  of  their
former  ways,  and  to  entertain  a  de-
sire for  the  '  one  thing  needful ;'
end  last  Sabbath  I  counted  62  in
attendance  on  the  preaching  of  the
Gotspel."

In  a  communication,  dated  Sept.
24,  1818,  it  is  stated  that  two  of
the  natives,  who  bad  obtained  some
knowledge  of  the  Gospel,  had  re-
cently taken  a  long  journey  ;  and
in  every  place  through  which  they
passed,  .they  told  all  they  knew  of
Jesus  Christ  to  the  inhabitants,
who,  for  the  most  part,  listened  to
them  with  attention  and  pleasure.
In  one  place,  indeed,  they  met  with
violent  opposition,  and  their  lives
ap})eared  to  be  in  danger.  Undis-
mayed by  this  circumstance,  how-
ever, they  continued  to  speak  on
their  favourite  subject,  observing  to
their  persecutors,  ^*  You  may  kill
us,  if  you  please  $  but  we  are  deter-
mined to  tell  you  all  that  we
know.''  On  two  occasions,  the
interposition  of  God's  special  pro-
vidence was  strikingly  manifested
on  their  behalf,  when  they  were
nlmo8t  ready  to  periih  wiUi  ^\m^.


LAT

Once  they  found  an  etk  «1ikkW
been  killod  by  a  lion ;  and  it  ■•
other  time  a  knu  which  had  km
caught  by  a  tiger.  ThwIfaQiiibi-
tained  a  supply  of  food  in  ttahav
of  azttemityy  and  thm  theb&dft
in  the  pioridence  of  God  mtdtai*
dantly  strengtbenod.

In  March,  1820,  the  RecMa
CampbeU  paid  a  vklt  to  NevM-
takoo,  and  had  the  satlrfaetiBiflf
finding  that  a  commodious
worship  had  been  erected,
of  containing  aboat  40Q
and  a  long  row  of  ml
houses,  with  excellent  gaidem  k^
hind$  a  neat  fence,  oompOKd-flf
reeds,  had  alio  been  fdaced  ftitel
of  the  houses,  which  tended.tota-
prove  the  general  appearanct)  ml
the  name  of  Bmrder*€  Rm  mi
given  to  the  new  haildliig%  »•
token  of  respect  to  the  late
secretary  of  the  X.  M.  8.

Among  the  improvementi  i
ed  by  the  laborious  and
exertions  of  the  miarianaiia^v
canal  must  be  noticed,  whic^  «|ft
the  assistance  of  the  few  Hflttv*
tots  attached  to  the  mlsrioB^  Asf
had  dug  from  a  distance  of  S  ■§■
above  the  town,  for  the  puiparrf
leading  the  waters  of  the
man  into  their  fields  and
Mr.  Campbell  went,  one
after  breakfast,  to  view  tills
work,  and  foiind  extensive  fisULof
Cafire  com,-  belonging  to  tham-
tives,  on  both  sides  of  the  cad  i
whilst  similar  cultivation  iTtf*"^
two  miles  higher  up  the  iliwfa
the  same  direction.  Though- ths
Krooman  be  emptied  by  the  caml,
it  soon  becomes  larger  than  bafne,
inconsequence  of  IS  or  L4 fan-
tains  issuing  from  the  ground,  dMMt
a  quarter  of  a  mile  lower  dsn
than  the  dam,  and  diwihaiging
nearly  an  equal  quantity  of  inter
at  all  seasons  of  the  year.

<<  Old  and  New.  Lattakoo,"  flV*

Mr.Campbell,  **  are  abo^tMihdli^

\\aab  ttnm  ««Ah  other,  nd  ooalita


LAT

■  ^'Weailj/  the  same  number  of  inha*

■  *'%ituit«,  peitiaps  4000  each.  The
ft  AftMiea  and  cattle-kraal  are  of  the
ta''^ilMta^  forniy  and  arranged  in  a  simi-
iir;:iftr  manner.''

ri.' ' '  ^*  We  visited  3  of  the  public  en-

■  *  ^tkmntesf  where  the   men  usually

rod  the  day  together,  at  work,  or
conversation.     Each  enclosure
li'^^taiwhat  may  be  called  a  summer-

■  ^iMMHe,-  which  is  generally  in  the
fe^'^^Mtem  comer;  and  to  this  they
a.;lMlr8  when  the  heat  of  the  sun
g  -^becomes  oppressive.  It  is  com-
'r'-  pomA  of  strong  branches  of  trees,
I  to  bent  as  to  form  a  roof,  which
« •  iwts  upon  a  pillar  placed  in  the
«  i-ariddle  of  the  house ;  and  the  whole
«  •  la  neatly  covered  with  thom-
a  '  bnnches  twisted  together.''

^i  «>■  •  The  Matcbappees,who  constitute
g  tiODe  of  the  most  numerous  tribes  of

0  '  Ibe  Bootchuanas,    are   extremely
{    Imd  of   potatoes;  but  they  have

g  ;Be«erbeen  induced  to  plant  any,
g  .^  beeanse  nothing  of  the  kind  ap-
^  [foan  to  have  been  cultivated  by
g  tbeir  forefiathers,  to  whose  customs
^  and  manners  they  are  as  strongly
^  .  attached,  as  the  Hindoos  or  ike
^  -4iaeiples  of  Mohammed.  It  is  pos-
g  -  4ble,  also,  in  this  case,  that  indo-
^  leiiceimay  be  united  with  a  bigoted
n'  adlierence  to  ancient  practices ;  as
ij  Mr.  C.  observes,  that  on  Mr.  Mof-
g'  -fat  requesting  two  strong  Mat-
^  cbappees,  who  were  walking  with
ii  bira  In  Mr.  Hamilton's  garden,  to
^      Mrist  in  gathering  some  kidney-

1  beans,  they  complied  with  his  soli-
^  citation;  but  in  less  than  10  minutes
f  Ibey  desisted,  and  complained  that
,      ''tfaelr  arms  were  almost  broken


with  the  labour."

The  exertions  of  the  mission-
fries  to  form  a  school  had  hitherto
bean  attended  with  little  success ;
ii  the  children  seemed  to  consider
that  they  were  conferring  an
obligation  on  them  by  attending
to  their  instructions,  and  that  their
Attendance  ought  to  be  remunerated
awary  day,  either  by  a  fopplj  of


LAT

victuals,  or  presents  of  beads,  <&l.
The  same  feeling,  also,  pre-
vailed among  many  of  the  adults,
with  respect  to  coming  under  tbe
sound  of  the  Gospel ;  so  that  when
a  captain  was  ordered  to  attend
regularly  for  a  short  time,  who  had
not  previously  been  in  the  habit  of
hearing  the  word,  the  missionaries
generally  anticipated  aa  early
application  for  the  loan  of  their
waggon,  or  their  plough,  or  some^
thing  which  he  particularly  wished
to  obtain.

Notwithstanding  these  discou-
ragements, however,  Mr.  Campbell
found  that  some  of  the  young  people
had  paid  considerable  attention  to
the  instruction  of  the  mission-
aries, and  had  evidently  profited  by
them.

Previous  to  his  final  departure,
a  poor  female  Matchappee  called
on  him,  and  said,  that  when
she  first  heard  of  the  Bible  she
did  not  think  it  was  true,  but
when  she  found  it  describe  her
heart  so  exactiy  she  could  not  but
believe  what  it  said.  8he  was  de-
termined, she  added,  always  to  live
near  some  place  where  the
word  of  God  was  preached,  and
where  she  might  hear  about  a
crucified  Saviour,  even  though  she
might  starve.

After  the  removal  of  Mr.  Camp-
bell, the  missionaries  continued
their  labours  among  the  Bootchu-
anas, preaching,  catechising,  and
conversing  with  them.  The  at-
tendance on  public  worship,  how-
ever, fluctuated  extremely;  the
number  of  hearers  being  sometimes
very  considerable,  and  at  other
times  very  small.  Mr.  Moffat
occasionally  itinerated  among  the
neighbouring  kraals,  where,  as  in
the  town,  his  congregations  varied
considerably  as  to  numbers,  and
the  people  listened  to  his  message
with  more  or  less  attention.

A  defeat  of  the  Mantateet  was
ofterwarda  ov«rrak4  ktt  ^smA,  \^


LAT

the  report  of  1824,  the  Directors
observe,  **  The  expulsion  of  the
Mantatees  from  tlie  Bootchuona
country,  effected,  under  Prori-
dence,  chiefly  by  the  courage  of
the  Griquas,  and  the  promptitude
and  intrepidity  of  Messrs.  Mofiat
and  Melvlile,  has  given  an  entirely
new  aspect  to  the  mission  at  New
Lattalcoo*  Mateebe  and  his  people,
aware  that  they  owe  their  niei^
to  the  missionaries,  are  far  more
disposed  to  listen  to  their  counsel.
The  King  has  consented  to  remove
the  town  to  a  neighbouring  valley,
where,  it  is  expected,  many  ad-
vantages will  be  obtained,  and
many  evils  obviated.  Of  thU  val-
ley he  had  formerly  ceded  a  portion
for  the  exclusive  use  of  the  mission.
The  chiefe,  who  formerly  revolted
f^om  Mateebe,  observing  that  New
Lattakoo,  where  the  missionaries
reside,  has  been  protected  from
the  invaders,  while  the  old  town,
where  they  themselves  remained,
has  been  destroyed  by  the  barba-
rians, have  again  submitted  to  his
authority,  and  engaged  to  remove
with  their  people  to  the  Krooman.
Thus  the  inhabitants  of  Old  and
New  Lattakoo  will  be  re- united,
under  the  same  government  $  and
all  of  them,  more  or  less,  with
impressions  favourable  to  the  mis-
sionaries, naturally  resulting,  as  to
each  party,  from  the  late  events.''
The  Bootchuanas,  it  appears
from  the  last  report,  manifest  in-
creased attachment  to  the  mission-
aries, and  listen  to  the  preaching
of  the  Gospel ;  but  no  spirituid
change  is,  as  yet,  apparent.  The
school,  which  has  been  placed
under  the  care  of  Mr.  Hughes,  is
chiefly  confined  to  the  children  of
those  natives  who  are  connected
with  the  mission.  2000  copies  of
a  spelling-book  and  catechism,  in
Bechuan,  prepared  by  Mr.  Moffat,
have  been,  during  the  year  1826,
printed  in  London,  and,  in  part,
hrwarded  to  Africa*    A  miaaiQiio


LEI

home  hu  been  eoBiplBtsd.  SflMMl
gardeni  hsfe  bom  famed  h^M
Bootcbueni  for  thMr  own  -mti
Mateebe  and  hie  peovle  hmmM
length  removed  to  the  flue  iiliv
in  wUeh  the  aterioMiiM  ihMb^
where  they  puipoee  to  erect  4k|ir
new  town.  Daring  the  yeer  M%
the  sunounding  coqntiy  veifUlil
by  fwarma  of  lociiste»  whUk  ^
troyed  all  vegetetlon^  It  li  »
msirfcable,  that  whtte  then  taMifh
seemed  to  threaten  nothiiv.  M
famine,  they  themeetfef  ImiiM
means  of  suppcnrt:  to  the  Mlfai^
many  of  whom  appeared  enttafl^
to  subsist  upon  them^

The  general  aapect  of  tfah  id^
sion,  at  present,  is  not  enooaiegii^g{
and  the  school,  in  partioolor,  mjMi
tobeinalanguiahingstate.  wim,
however,  the  hooka  in  the  BedMi
language,  which  hove  been  M|r
sent  out,  are  received,  donl|tta«i
more  systematic  plan  of  Mho#
instruction  will  be  adopted ;  wMi^
it  is  hoped,  may  l>e  attended  i>t>
beneficial  results,  /  both  as  nmak
an  increase  in  the  number  orftft
scholars  and  their  impreveowBt^
learning;  The  Mantatees  hM
continued  to  hover  near  thtiitittw
and  neighbourboody  by  whieh  As
people  have  been  kept  in  a  ooaited
state  of  anxiety  and  alarnij  and  i^
forts  in  furtherance  of  themiota
are  thereliy  greatly  impeded.

LEICESTER  MOUNTAIN,ta
the  colony  of  Sierra  Leone^  W.
Africa,  about  3  m.  from  Freetawp.

Soon  after  the  commeneoMBt
of  a  mission  by  the  C Jf.&  la
1816,  a  grant  of  1100  acres  w
made  to  the  societjyy  on  wUoh  a
Christian  ifUtHuUan  was  esbt-
blished ;  where  negro  eliUdm  sf
various  tribes,  re-captored  ImB
smuggling  slave-eliipsy  have  bsea
supported,  and  received  relMss
instruction.  The  nomber  of  sa-
pils,  in  1817,  fsis  M6.  Tto
original  deriga  of  the  faatttatioa
i  beiBK^however,  SQW  after  ehiMsi


LEI

IS  MAoved  to  Regent's  Towfi ;
B  most  of  the  pupils  were  dis-
ited  In  the  neighbouring  schools,
ft  part  of  the  teachers  turned
r  attention  to  the  liberated
oes  inhabiting  Leicester  Town.
BICESTER  TOWN,  a  hamlet
(berated  negroes,  nearly  3  m.
I  Freetown,  W.  Africa.  It  is
oldest  of  those  settlements,
Dg  been  formed  in  1809.
i  1816,  a  school  was  established
by  die  C.  M,  S,  and  the  mis-
nries  have  laboured  with  some


lie  station  remains  under  the
Kif  Wm.  Davis,  a  native
ber.  Divine  service  is  held
e  on  Sundays,  and  three  times
le  week.  In  the  latter  part  of
i  and  the  beginning  of  1826,  the
,  Mr.  Lisk,  from  Gloucester,
ted  Wm.  Davis  on  Wednesday
tng  and  Sunday  afternoon.  I'he
lii^  used  as  a  place  of  worship,
a  school,  has  fallen  into  ruins ;
another  is  about  to  be  erected,
people  continue  to  be  very
ittye%  Wm.  Davis  visits  the
in  the  hospital  at  Leicester
miain,  and  those  who  live  about
town.  The  communicants  have
eased  to  4, — several  having  been
oded  for  sinful  conduot.  The
lars  were,  at  Michaelmas,
\f  9  boys  and  4  girls :  they
i  anxious  to  improve.  Tfaie
bitants  are  very  industrious  in
vation.

EOPOLD,  a  town  of  liberated
cans,  in  the  parish  of  St.  Peter,
ra  Leone.  Inhabitants,  1083.
^  station  was  commenced  in
^by  the  C.  J/.  S.;  and  in  the
iwing  year,  there  were  about
persons  collected  under  the
of  the  Rev.  M.  Renner.  The
iars,  of  whom  about  60  were
banics,  amounted  to  lOiS.
rtly  after  the  population  was
h  augmented  $  and  among  the
ig,  in  particular,  the  prospect
very  promising.    A  misBioaary


UfO

asioeiatioA  tras  formed  here  June
SO,  1820,  and  6^  0».  9d.  collected.
At  this  period^  there  were  40  com-
municants. ■  Cnltivatloii  was  also
happily  advancing.

In  1823,  there  were  813  sekplers ;
the  place  of  worship  was  under
enlargement,  so  as  to  receive  up-
wards of  1000  persons;  contribu*
tions  to  the  socie^  a:nounted-  to
17/.  12f .  dd, ;  the  pec^Ie  had  sold  to
government  during  the  year,  6118
bushels  of  cocoa  and  cassada,  for
which  they  received  296/.  ISs.TfdP;';
and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Davy,  their  so*
perintendent,  gave  pleasing  proof
of  the  right  use  which  some  of  his
people  made  of  the  Word  oi  God. .

In  the  accounts  of  the  yeaar  1886,
it  is  said  :  — "  The  attendance
at  puUic  worship  increased  in  the
early  part  of  the  year,  but  after-
.waid  somewhat  declined.  4  adnlts
were  baptized  by  Mr.  Raban ;  and
the  number  of  comnnmicantB  had
increased  to  14.  The  average
number  of  persons  attending  dirine
worship  was,  at  Christmas,  100.
The  foUowing  were  the  munben
in  the  Sehoolt  at  ChHstmas : — bo^s
166;  gbls,  188.  The  secular
business  in  'which  Mr.  Weeks  is
engaged  (having  had,  since  Mt,
Ridian's  removal  to  Freetown,  the
charge-  of  Regent  in  addition  to
Gloucester  and  Leopold),  has  pre*>
vented  his  attending  to  the  hay^
school  so  often  as  he.  wished.  -  Not-
withstandii^  this  disadvanfagfe,  he
r«>orts  of  the  boys  at  Michaelmas —
*  I  thiqk  that,  on  the  whole,  their
progress  is  satisfactoiy:  18  i>f  the
larger  boys  have  been  sent  to  pre-
pare farms,  and  build  bouses  for
themselves;  most  of  them  attend
evening  prayer  during  the  week,
and  an  on  Sundays.'  *'

Of  their  spiritual  state,  Mr;
Weeks  remarks:—"  I  cannot  say
any  thing  with  respect  to  the  love
they  have  to  the  ways  of  God ;  yet
charity  leads  me  to  hope,  that,
while  they  continue  to  be  in  the


waj  of  heulng  aod  ibmItIiue  «pl>
ritual  initmctlan,  tbsj  irlll  flnd
Chilst,  u  man;  otben  bave  round
him,  tolMthewB;,  the  truth,  and
the  life."

At  Michaelmu  Mr.  Weeki  KiTci
the  taHoviag  utliTacIor;  itatenwnt
rulsUie  to  the  glrli*  school :— "  The
greater  |)ut  of  the  glrla  In  the
Khool  can  read  laleieblj  nell;
the  tint  aod  (ecoiid  ciaaea  are
TWy  worthy  of  notice,  for  the  pro-
llclency  wbicb  they  bare  made  in
tewlag,  rewUng,  uid  the  under-
(taadiag  of  the  Scripture*  i  thi<
bo*  not  been  ettaiQed  by  anj  rapid
ptDgrew,  hut  I*  the  reiult  at  many


3  of  her  glr]3,  who  were  baptized
by  Mr.  Raban,  jurt  before  ber  de-
jiartuie  for  Eugland,  are,  I  believe,
lincerely  following  Chriit."

LIBERIA,  a  imall  territory  on
the  S.  W.  cout  of  W.  Africa.
Tfaii  territory  wax  purchased.  In
iSil,\>!  tile  Amerkat%  Culaniaitiim
Society,  for  the  establlabment  of  a
colODy  of  free  people  of  colour
rram  the  United  SUtei.  It  Is  situa-
ted on  the  WB»lem  extremity  of  the
Gold  Coast,  on  the  riier  Meaurado,
and  includes  the  whole  of  a  cape
of  tbe  nme  name.  The  tract  ori-
ginally belonging  to  tbe  Society
was  about  40  milcu  square,  eiclii-
sive  of  one  or  two  small  islands  In
the  mouth  of  the  river.  Distant
from  Siena.  Leone,  about  SSO  m.
W.  long.  1S»,  N.  lat.  e».

The  cUtnate  is  said  to  be  salu-
brious and  healthy,  especially  to
tbe  blacks.  In  tbe  hottest  seasons,
tbe  mercury  la  Fabienheit's  scale
Jierer  rises  above  90.  The  sun  is
leidom  visible  at  noon,  buing  ob-
scured by  H  dense  vapour.  The
mil  is  exceedingly  rich  and  fertile  ;
and  all  plants  and  trees,  peculiar  to
a  tropical  region,  have  an  asloniah-
ingly  ti^ld  and  luzuitaot  growth.
KJce,  IniUgo,  cotton,  co^,  and  .


■im    -

fugu-ciBe,  are  prodoced  in.  gnat
■busdance.  Tbe  forest- trees,  pit-
tlcnlarly  on  the  cope,  are  loflf,
rMembllng  tbe  sturdy  forests  ol
X.  America.  Tbe  slluatioa  of  tin
cape  li  upL-n  and  somewhat  ek-
nted,  and  commands  a  large  Bwl
which  oBtm
ercial  entH-
nlheAHcu
coast.  The  lenitory  b  wfUvr
tared,  and  seems  to  posaen  eiei]
'quisite  for  the  aceoat.
lid  convenience  of  n
Increasbig  colony.  The  natiw
in  the  vicinity  are  exceutljigl;
ignorant  and  superstitious,  thu^
mild  and  inoffensive  for  rude  ebb-
dren  of  nature.

In  the  early  part  of  the  yen
ISIP,  a  vissel,  ohartered  by  IM
society,  was  dispatched  to  lb
African  const,  with  about  80  w-
loured  people  for  fonnbig  ttt
Intended  cull) ny,  together  witbAi
Rev.  S.  Bacon  and  Mr.  John  A
BankaoQ,  as  agents  fnHU  th
American  government,  and  St.
Crozer,  u  agent  from  tbe  Cahti-
talian  Seeieli/.

The  Ont  location  of  tbe  coloohtd
on  their  arrival,  which  was  «t  Ua
Sberbro  country,  unhappily  proved
to  be.  In  every  respect,  disadnut
tageoui.  Tbe  3  agents.  togHiim
with  about  20  blacks,  were  witkta
a  few  weeks  canied  off  by  a  nt-
Ilgnant  fever;  but ootwlthstaadlw
this  distressing  and  melancboS
event,  the  socie^'  did  not  reiinqtun
the  object  in  view,  nor  deqilr
of  ultimate  success.  In  Jao.iBil,
a  second  enpedition  wo*  sent  Odl^
consisting  of  40  blncks ;  the  Rei.


J.  a.  And™


ind    Mr,  C.  fflB:


berger  went  as  agents  o_ ,

of  the  society,  and  Mr.  Jph«  ft
Winn  and  Mr.Bphraim  BaM^a^
agents  on  the  part  ofgoTBiBpiWl
This  reinforcement,  with.  I&«:n^
vtvDis  of  the  Snt  dtokldi,  vm*
put  undn  the  piotecmm  of  tte
Eoglbdi    gonmawnt    at    SlNit


LIB

Uine..    The  society  and  friends  of
]iaoisntty»    were,   however,   goon
dUM  to  mourn  the  early  removal
.ftf two  more  of  the  zealous  and  kide-
fiitlg«bie  friends  of  Africa*  -  Mr.  An-
flbntt  and  Mr.  Winn — both  of  whom
dM  hi  July  of  the  same  year.  As  the
int^aee  designed  for  the  permanent
MCtbmient  ofthe  colony,  was  found
titb»  anhealthy,  it  was  relinquished,
anl  a  compromise  was  soon  after
mnd»  with  the  natives  for  a  small
texritory    in  tiie    Bassa   country,
hteg  between  the  rivers  Bassa  and
oL  John's.     This  also  was  soon
MHnqiriahed,  and  another  territory,
catted  Liberia,    purchased  imme-
dbltely  after  by  Dr.  Ayres,  a  dis-
tlii^ished  agent  of  the  society,  and
Uaut.    Stoclcton,    of  the    United
States  nav}'.     To   this  place  the
solonlsts  were  removed  from  Sierra
Iteoae^  in  April,  1821,  and  thefoun-
Ihtioa  of  a  settlement  was  laid  at
he  town  called  J/oiirovia,  in  honour
if    the    chief   magistrate    of  the
Jltfted'  States,  for  the  distinguished
ervlces  he    rendered    the   infant
olony.

A  second  reinforcement,  of  about
O,  arrived  at  Monrovia  in  August,
82S  ;  Mr.  Ashmun,  agent.  About
bis  time  some  dissatis&ction  arose
ci'  "Uie  part  of  the  natives,  who
hreatened  the  destruction  of  the
seble  settlement ;  but  the  colony,
fter  one  or  two  successful  strug-
169  with  them,  settled  down  in
eace  and  safety.  The  misunder-
banding  which  at  first  existed
etween  them,  was  satisfactorily
dj  listed,  and  every  thing  seemed
ropitious  to  the  growth  and  per-
etuity  of  the  establishment.  The
3ciety  has  formed  a  constitution
nd  code  of  laws  for  the  govern*
aent  of  the  colony,  to  whicb  every
migrant  is  required  to  subscribe  his
ante,  and  to  take  an  oath  that  he
rill  support  them.  The  settlement,
1  1823,  consisted  of  about  240.
:iie  A.  B.  C.  F.  M,  appointed  2
oloured  missionaries  to  W*.  Africa^


in  1821 ;  viz.  Messrs.  Collin  Teagucf
and  Lot  Carey,  who  commenced
their  laboutrs  on  the  island  of  Yonce,
in  the  vicinity  of  Sierra  Lfeone,  with-
favourable  prospects  of  success.-
Mr.  Carey  has  since  removed  to
Liberia,  and  has  the  care  of  a-
Baptist  church,  "which  has  been*
formed  in  tiie  colony  and  has  re-
cently been  joined  by  the  Rev.  Mr.-
Waring,  a  coloured  preacher  from>
Virginia.

The  Protestant  Episcopal  Mie^-
sionary  Society y  (United  States,)
has    also  appointed  Mr.  Ephraim
Bacon  to  this  station.

The  effect  of  these  missions  has
been  most  happy.    Should  this  in-
fant colony  proceed  as  it  has  begun,
it  will  become  a  powerful  auxiliary
in  the  cause  of  African  conversion
and   civilization.     ''  The   mana-
gers," says  the  last  report,  **  are^
happy  to  state  that  the  efforts  of
the  colonial  agent  to  enlarge  the
territory  of  Liberia,  and  particu-
larly to  bring  under  the  govern-
ment of  the  colony  a  more  extend-  '
ed  line  of  coast,  have  been- judi-
cious and  energetic,  and,  in  nearly
every  instance,  resulted  in  cbmplete
success.''    Two  hundred  and  twen-
ty-four plantations,  of  from  5  to  10-
acres    each,  were,    in  June  last
(1826),  occupied  by  the  settlers;
and  most  of  them  are  believed  to
be  at  present  under    cultivation.
1 14  of  these  are  on  Cape  Mesurado ;
33  on    Stockton    Creek,  denomi-
nated   Halfway    Farms,    because
nearly  equi-distant  from  MonroWa
and  Caldwell,  the  St.  Paul's  set-
tlement ;  and  77  at  the  confluence
of  Stockton    Creek  with  the  St.
Paul's.

Between  the  1st  of  January  and
the  l^th  of  July,  1826,  no  less
than  \5  vessels  touched  at  Monro-
via, and  purchased  the  produce  of
the  country,  to  the  amount,  accord-
ing to  the  best  probable  estimate,
of  43,080  dollars,  African  value.
The  exporten  o(   \)Qi%    v^^^^'^

E  E  2  ^Vl


LIB

realixei  on  the  lale  of  the  goods  |
giren  in  barter  for  it,  a  profit  of
21,900  dollarf;  and  on  the  freight,
of  8786 ;  makbg  the  total  profit  of
30,7Td  doUan.

Much  progreit  has  been  made,
during  the  last  year,  in  the  con-
struction of  public  buildings  and
works  of  defence;  though,  with
adequate  supplies  of  lumber,  more
might  doubtl«|^  have  been  accom-
plished. Two  handsome  churches,
erected  solely  by  the  colonists,  now
adorn  the  village  of  Monrovia.
Port  Stockton  has  been  rebuilt  in
a  style  of  strength  and  beauty.

A  receptacle  capable  of  accom-
modating 150  emigrants  is  com-
pleted. The  new  Agency-house,
Market-house,  Lancasteriaa  school,
and  Town-house,  in  Monrovia,
were,  some  months  since,  far  ad-
vened, and  the  finishing  strokes
were  about  to  be  given  to  the  g^
vernment  house  on  the  St.  Paul's.
The  wing  of  the  old  Agency-
house  has  been  handsomely  fitted
up  for  the  colonial  library,  which
now  consists  of  1200  volumes,
systematically  arranged  in  glazed
cases,  with  appropriate  hangings :
all  the  books  are  substantially
covered  and  accurately  labelled;
and  files  of  more  than  10  news-
impers,  more  or  less  complete,  are
preserved.  The  library  is  fitted
up  so  as  to  answer  the  purpose  of
a  reading-room ;  and  it  is  intended
to  make  it  a  museum  of  all  the
natural  curiosities  of  Africa  wiuch
can  be  procured.

The  moral  and  religious  charac-
ter of  the  colony  exerts  a  powerful
influence  on  its  social  and  civil
condition.  That  piety  which  had
guided  most  of  the  early  emigrants
to  Liberia,  even  before  they  left
America,  to  respectability  and
usefulness  among  their  associates,
prepared  them,  in  laying  the  foun-
dation of  a  colony,  to  act  with  a
degpree  of  wisdom  and  energy
w/iidb  no  earthly  motives  couVi


XJB


implie.  HanUe,  ad^ior.«itf
moat  part  nnletlnred  mnn^twiiii
bred  hi  drcumitaiicei  tiw.  site
anfafQUTBUe  to  Bwntal
unsustained  117  the  hope  of  1
and  nnfRwiiHm'  ^th  the
great  achievMnenta  mad  *\
virtues^ — thein  waa,
a  niritunmofed  by  danger  JClff
snflEerings,'  which  nuiifovtnBai  Mlp.
not  dariien*  nor  death  =  dlaM|b
They  left  AmetiGa,  and  fatttelll
was  for  ever.  They  landid^l«
Africa,  poaUbly  to  find  ahaBBfbvl
certainly  a  grave.  Strange  ikfM
it  have  been,  had  the  ittUgyil:ef
every  individual  of  then  en^H^
tiers  proved  genuhie:  hot  Im-
mensely changed  as  have'  liip
their  circunutancesy  and
tried  their  faith,  most. ham  .
served  untarnished  the  hamikd.
their  profession ;  and  to  the*
of  their  morals,  and  the


of  their  condocty  1%  in  a  gHt
measure,  to  be  atlrlbiited  IhuwiM
order  and  general  proaperily  ef  te
colony  of  Liberia.  Thehr  eaaih
has  proved  moat  aalutuyi  ^
while  subsequent  emigiaali  htm
found  themselves  awed  apd  M*
strained  by  their  regulaiilyi  aa^
ousness,  and  devotion,  tha  pcMt
natives  have  given  their  conlUam
and  acknowledged  the  ezceflppiiNf
practical  Christtanity.

Mr.  Ashmun  aifiii — "tt-dB-
serves  recoEd,'1kBi  religion  hai^le^
the  principal  agent  emplOTcdb
laying  and  confirming  tin  Midi^
tions  of  the  settlement.  TotUiNP"
timent  ruling,  restralnhig,  aai  •&■
tuating  the  minds  of  the  coinaWii
must  be  referred  the  wIk^  stn^gtti
of  our  civil  government."

Examples  of  intemperance^pie-
faiieness,  orlicentiouaneM^  oreti-
tremelyrare;  and  vice,  whoever
it  exists,  is  obliged  to  see^  con-
cealment from  the  public  qre,  Tl^
Sabbath  is  univenally  renaotMi;
Sunday-schools,  both,  lor  the  chU-
\^«n.  qC  the  ccdiH^  and  lor  Hit
»  \V4


LIL

Wtivagy  are  establuhed ;  allclasies
-m^jid.  regularly  on  the  woiship.
■f  Qod  $  some  charitable  associa-
tfcma  have  been  formed  for  the
(•aeftt  of  the  heathen ;  and,
tliDQgfa  it  must  not  be  concealed
tlftftt  the  deep  concern  on  the  sub-
J«Gt  of  religion,  which  resulted  to-
WBid  the  conclusion  of  the  year
1885,  in  the  public  profession  of
Cbristianily  by  about  50  colonists,
has  in  a  measure  subsided,  and  some
few  €ases  of  delinquency  since  oc-
curred— and  though  there  are  faults
growing  out  of  the  early  condition
and  habits  of  the  early  settlers,
which  require  amendment, — yet  the
Qianagers.  have  reason  to  believe
.  that  there  is  a  vast  and  increasing
preponderance  on  the  side  of  cor-
rect principle  and  virtuous  practice.

LILY  FOUNTAIN,  a  station  of
Die  fV,  M.  S,  in  Little  Namaqua-
.iHid,  n^ar  the  Khamiesberg.  The
R^v.  B.  Shaw,  who  has  long  labour-
ed at  this  place,  was  joined  in  Aug.
26i6,  by  Mr.  Haddy.  The  mem-
ben  in,  society  are  83.  Mr.  Threl-
UOl,  who  came  hither  for  the  reco-
▼eiy  of  his  health,  having  attained
(hia  object,  set  forward  at  the  end
of  June,  1825,  with  2  native  Chris-
tians, on  a  journey  towards  the
coast,  in  search  of  a  suitable  place
for  a  mission ;  but  they  appear  to
have  met  a  melancholy  end  by  as-
aaasination,  in  the  bloom  of  life, —
not  one  of  them  being,  it  is  be-
lieved, 30  ye^rs  of  age.

Of  the  influence  of  the  Gospel  on
the  people  at  this  station,  Mr.  Haddy
gives  an  animating  view :  —''  The
number  of  persons  who  regard  Lily
Fountain  as  their  home,  is  between
7  and  800 ;  and  though  the  Nama-
qiias  are  naturally  addicted  to
wandering,  yet  now  they  seldom
leave  the  institution,  unless  cir-
cumstances compel  them :  the  Gos-
pel, the  means  of  grace,  their  pro-
perty and  friends, — all  tend. to  give
them  an  interest  in  the  place,  and
to  unite  them  together;— a  rare


LIL

sight  this,  in  this  thinly  inhabited
and  barren  part  of  the  globe!  They
have  derived  another  greaX  advan-.
tage — ^the  absence  of  those  ho^*
lities,  which  none  of  the  tribea  of
Africa,  yet  discovered,  in  a  purely
heathen  state,  are  free  from.  Be-
fore Christianity  was .  introduced,
their  neighbours  the  Bosjesmans
were  frequently  making  attacks  on
them,  and  stealing  their  cattle ;  the
consequence  of  which  was,  that
much  blood  was  shed:  but  since
they  have  been  concentrated  into
a  body,  and  have  had  a  missionary
residing  among  them,  they  have
had  nothing  to  fear,  either  from
enemies  without,  or  from  any  who
might  be  disaffected  within;  for
the  Bosjesmans  dare  not  venture  .to
attack  the  Namaquas  now,  and  title
NamaquasunV/  not  atteck  the  Bos-
jesmans— having  been  teught  by  the
Gospel  to  regard  them  as  the  off-
spring of  the  same  common  peurent.
Their  spiritual  and  moral  improve-
ment is  seen  in  their  regard  to  truth
and  sincerity  in  their  intercourse
with  one  another,  and  with  all
men.  While  enveloped  in  darkness,
having  no  fear  of  God  before  their
eyes,  but  little,  if  any,  regard  was
shewn  to  honesty ;  but,  on  the  con-
trary, he  who  most  excelled  in
deception,  judged  himself  the  most
praisevrorthy.  Their  veneration  of
Jehovah,  as  the  God  of  Providence,
and  ttie  Sovereign  Disposer  of  all
things,  is  great  and  affecting.  Al-
though the  Namaquas  were  not  ido*
laters,  in  the  common  acceptetion  of
the  term,  yet  many  degrading  cus-
toms and  ridiculous  ideas  prevailed
among  them :  divine  light  has  shone
into  their  hearts,  and  most,  if  not  all,
of  these  are  laid  aside.  ^They  have
been  taught  to  look  above  the  earth
for  fruits,  and  higher  than  the
clouds  for  rain. — even  to  Him  'who
gives  both  the  former  and  the  latter
rain,'  and  commands  <  the  earth  to
yield  her  increase.'  Of  many  it
may  be  truly  saidr-'  their  convex-


tb*7  look  tai  tba  Sariour)  —  theli
nab  breatbe  kftcr  God.'  I  hsTO
been  frequently  itnicli  with  grati-
tude and  ulmiraUoii,  while  heBring


buti,  oBenog  praiie  and  supplica-
tion to  ttie  God  of  Inel ;  am]  «e-
Tsral  tlmea,  Iste  U  nigtat,  fcfter  I
have  gone  to  Tetl,  I  bora  hsari)
them  cotiUnulng  to  sing  the  HinffB
of  Zlon.  1  do  not  niean  to  convey
the  Idea  that  thar  haie  all  receired
aiul  obej'ed  the  Gospel.  No  1  much
renaini  yet  to  be  dona ;  but  luivly
tbwe  fcuit)  of  the  Goqirl— of  the
grace  of  God—call  loudly  for  grati-
tude, and  fumlib  the  most  encou-
laglng  mutlvei  to  be  '  stedfast,
tminoTeable,  always  abouudlng  In
thB  woilfof  tha  Lord.'"

LIVUNM,  a  prolines  of  conti-
derabla  extent,  in  the  N.  W.  part  of
European  Hunia,  situated  E.  of
tha  Baltic,  and  N.  of  CauiUnil.
Popolation,  000,000.  The  Inba-
bltaats  are  principally  EilAoniaiu
and  LetloKiatu.  The  Lower  ranks
axe  much  addicted  to  Intempe-
nnce.  Uiifaithfulnen  toward  their
tnaitere,  a  disposition  to  cheat  and
steal,  and  otherTices,  prevail,  which
Biife  In  port  from  the  slavery  In
which  they  ura  held.  They  i&reiy
rob  one  another,  but  are  very  In-
genious in  devising  means  to  im-
pose upon  their  employers.  Cbris-
tlanity  was  introduced  among  tliem
In  the  twelfth  oentuiy,  by  the  Ger-
mans and  Danes;  yet  there  *re
many  remalnsof  heathenism?  they
lice  in  a  miserable  state  of  igno-
rance and  degradation  ;  but  edicts
hats  recently  been  issued,  to  miti-
gate tiielr  vassalage,  and  provide
for  their  instruction.

About  1739,  in  compliance  with
a  reqiieat  of  sereral  noblemen  nnd
cle^jmen,  the  V.  B.  commenced
an  institution  at  Cremen,  to  educate
scboolmastera  to  be  employed
among  the  EsthoDlans  and  Letto-
cioDf.       Ttaa  InGuenci!  of   tlicw


tNektn  WBs  soon  apparent  amnf
th*  natlTCt:  a  destre for  rel^klM
kBOvledgB  was  manifested,  nail
geseial  letiouines*  spread  IhimA
the  country ;  whicb  via  fcHknnt
by  a  irMble  TefiirmatiDn  in  the  lof
nJ  deportment  of  many.  In  11«*(
bowover,  a  persecnUnfrsi>irit»ro«i
and  the  bfeihren  w^re  pnihibiW
IMereoune  with  tbe  natives;  todt
of  tbem  Wert-  impriHineit,  otbert
w»Te  banlaLeil,  and  th«  people  waf
not  permitted  to  meet  for  mM
edifkatlon.  In  IT«4,  tha  bnOMT
iMumed  tbfitr  Idioun  bere,lgr|{|ipi'
mladon  of  the  Egnr^  CatURMt
and  tha  harreit  fan  bean  pK
Their  labours  haro  bean  pnif
larly  biased  in  (uid  near  MA
Am/,  SenMgn,  Id  Um  dbbWat
ffendeH,  and  many  otber  plMv
Beside  tbelr  seminartsa  fw  M»
eating  schoolmasteti  at  CkratIL
Lindheim,  anABalgtem,  In  (M^
land,  they  hare  9  acbotda  for'  (Ml
at  Netmeefiei  1  for  Qmmtneit
tower  stBtioDi,  irho  are  tralnatW
domestic  purposes,  aitd  1  forttoHj
of  higher  ranli.  lo  1818,  tha  mil'
ber  of  Lettontana  and  Eatbonl^
anlted  with  the  Bretfare^  '«i,
3S,000;  tbe  number  of  Q^mtt
bretbren.  at  that  time,  was '
ID.  Tbe  mtssion  i«
conducted  by  ni

The  Lettoriians  and

associated  with  the  BreOmn  W
very  active  in  lyromoting'  tbe  d^
culation  of  the  Scriptures.

In  ^8lr,ll^AuxitiaryB.a,lm
formed  fur  a  few  parixhes.  On  tbe'
Itrst  day  iiOO  membera  entered  tliett
names;  and  tbelr  number  soon  &)•
crensed  to  1000,  mortly  Lethndai
pen^nb.  Within  6  montb*  of  lb
esiablisbment,  400  I'erianMti
were  gratuitously  dtstriboted  tbtta
poor,  and  such  children  aa  bad
made  the  best  proSciency  In  nad-*


inpr.
The  s


3  of  tbo  BreUnm^
>een  anireradlT  IE-
I?  the  ^roTiDclal  go--


LUC:

ig||Byun#iiti»4ukl  they  have  eminently
■yqgred  the  faTOur  and  protection
^f.m^  in  power*
^tJUVCKNOW,  a  city  in  Hindoo-
ilM»  ,4nd  capital  of  Oude,  situated
(■jUtlinni  side  of  Goomty^a  branch  of
Ike  .Ganges,  about  127  m.  N.  AUa-
lUBbad.  It  is  very  ancient,  and  of
VODfliderabie  extent;  it  was  for-
■HBrij  the  residence  of  the  Nabobs
off  .Oude. .  The  houses  of  the  mer-
ntwnts  are  constructed  of  f>rick,
loAgr«  and  jtrong,  but  the  greatest
part  are  in  the  natiTe  style.  The
aUmtiU  are  narrow  and  filthy.  Po-
pnla.tinn,  including  the  vicinity,
M0,000.    £.  long,  sol',  5^^  N.  lat.

>  Mr.  Hare,  superintendent  of
^ehoolfy  who  has  resided  in  India
40  years,  had  opened  a  school
hmtts  at  his  own  charge,  when  he
was  recommended  to  the  corre-
sponding committee  of  the  C  M,  S,
«fc  .Calcutta.  They  have  allowed
lliati  60  rupees  monthly,  for  the  em-
ployment of  native  teachers,  and
otter  charges  necessaiy  to  give
^Aciancy  to  his  school.  Children
4o£  all  classes  and  descriptions,  Pro-
|»gtaoty  Armenian,  and  Roman  Ca-
HloUc  Christians,  with  Mussulmans
mod  Chinese,  appear  on  the  .list  of
aehooLi.  About  26  children  of
Christian  parents,  who  would  other-
wise be  wholly  destitute  of  educa-
tloa,  are  taught.

.    The  childron  attend  Mr.  Hare^
Yiamily  worship.

The   C,  K.  S.  has  a  depot  of
books  here.


M.

MACHINAW,  or  MMnaw,  a
IbrU^ed  village  on  the  island  Mi-
chilimarhinaw,  in  the  straits  which
connect  the  lakes  Michigan  and
Huron,  within  the  limits  of  Micbi-
can  territory,  313  m.  N.  Detroit.
ft  is  pleasantly  situated  on  the  S.E.
aide  of  the  island,  on  a  small  cove.


MAD

which  is  surroondsd  by  a  steep  eliif
150  feet  high,  on  which  stands  the
fort.  Half  a  m.  distant  ftom  thii^
on  another  cliff,  300  feet  above  .the
level  of  the  lake,  is  FortHcdmes^
From  this  spot  there  is  an  extensive
prospect  of  the  lakes.  During  the
summer,  Machinaw  is  the  resOTt  of
many  fur  traders,  and  4  at.GOSX^
Indians,  many  of  whom  beloi^  to
the  Chippeway  tribes.

The  Rev.  W.  M.  Ferry,  from  the
v.  F.  M.  &,  Miss  Omar,  and  Miss
E.  M'Farlaiul,  commenced  a  mls«
sion  here  in  1823.  Previous  to  its
location,  Mr.  Feny  spent  a  year  in
Machinaw,  during  which  be  or-
ganized a  church,  and  persuaded
tiie  inhabitants  generally  to  aban-
don secular  em)doyments  on  the
Sabbath,  and  to  attend  public  wor>«
ship.  In  October,  18S3,  he  com-
menced a  mission  for  the  benefit  of
the  Indians.  Within  a  few  mouths
after  his  arrival,  20  children  were
received  into  the  mission  famity^
4  others  were  soon  added,  and  a
considerable  accession  was  expect-^
ed.  The  children  have  all  been
accustomed  to  habits  of  order  and
diligence  in  their  studies.  It  is
intended,  that,  in  addition  to  a  mi-
nister of  the  Gospel,  tlie  family  at
this  station  shall  ultimately  com^.
prise  one  male  and  two  female
teachers,  a  former,  and  a  man  lAid
woman  to  conduct  domestic  con-
cerns.

MADAGASCAR,  a  laige  island
in  the  Indian  Ocean,  discovered  by
a  Portuguese,  in  1402.  It  lies  40
leagues  E.  of  the  continent  of
Africa,  from  which  it  is  separated
by  the  strait  of  Mosambique.  It
extends  900  m.  from  N.  to  S»,  and
is  from  200  to  300  broad.  .The
inhabitants,  amounting  to  more  than
4,000,000,  are  divided  into  a  num-
ber of  tribes.  Thmr  are  commonly
tall,  well-made,  of  an  olive  com-
plexion, and  some  of  them  pretty
black.  Their  hair  is  black,  but
not  woolivi  and  foe  tb»  moa^.  \%s\


MAD

dailt  oatnnUy ;  their  note  it  mall,
tlKMigh  Bot  flat ;  mod  thay  have  thin
Upt.  They  have  no  towiis»  but  a
great  number  of  TiUageiy  a  small
diftance  from  each  other.  Their
houaes  are  pitiiiil  hutt,  without
n^dowB  or  chimneys,  *and  the
roofr  coTered  with  reeds  or  leaves.
Those  that  are  dressed  in  the  best
manner,  have  a  piece  of  cotton
cloth  or  siik  wrapped  round  their
middle ;  but  the  common  sort  have
stiU  less  clothing.  Both  men  and
women  are  fond  of  bracelets,  neck-
laces, and  ear-rings.  They  have
little  knowledge  of  commerce,  and
exchange  among  themselves  goods
for  goods:  gold  and  silver  coins
brought  by  Europeans  are  imme-
diately melted  down  for  ornaments,
and  no  currency  of  coin  is  estab-
lished. There  are  a  gpreat  many  petty
kings,  whose  riches  consist  in  cat-
tle and  slaves,  and  they  are  always
at  war  with  each  other.  There
are  only  some  parts  of  the  coast
yet  known;  for  both  the  air  and
the  soil  are  destructive  to  strangers^
The  Madagasses  believe  in  one
only  true  God,  the  Creator  of  all
things,  «nd  the  preserver  and  su-
preme Ruler  of  the  universe ;  whom
they  call  Zangahara.  When  they
speak  of  him,  they  do  it  with  the
greatest  degree  of  solemnity  and
Teneration.  Though  they  consider
him  so  infinitely  exalted,  that  he
does  not  stoop  to  notice  the  con-
cerns of  men ;  yet  he  has  delegated
the  government  of  the  affidrs  of  this
world  to  four  inferior  lords,  whom
they  denominate  lords  of  the  North,
South,  East,  and  West.  One  of
these  only,  they  consider  the  dis-
penser of  the  plagues  and  miseries
of  mankind ;  while  the  other  three
are  engaged  in  bestowing  benefits.
The  souls  of  all  good  men,  they
believe,  will,  after  death,  ascehd  to
Zangahara,  and  enjoy  perfect  hap-
piness in  his  presence,  while  all
bad  men  will  be  tormented,  ac-
eor0ng  to  thehr  demeiita,  \rf  \bA


BCAiy

•vU  apirit,  whkih  4hiy  «ift.il|l

gatyr.    Tha  fow  0nat  luiimfl

regarded  by  them  ■•  iMtfagMft

influence  with  Zaoflphnnk  ISii

lamily  has  its

conveya  th«lr  prayen-to

lords,  who  are  lli»  only

access  to  the  Deity.  fkmabw^fM^-

ances  of  Judalmi-aie  wmmitHBii

these  islanden.    They  piuctN  *

cumeiaion,  and  oflbr  the  flflbiMh

ofharveat.   Of  a  Saviour  thcfiMl

no  knowledge^    Tbe

the  Madagasses  isTeiy

and  is  said  to  be  coptons )

it  bad  never  been  lednoii'^lMi

written  Iwm'  till

aries  resided  among  them.

Interior  are  aomc

trodocad  into  the

the  arts  of  clviUnHoa.    ftlTi*

bahly  owiag  to  the  iiBiiMMI'«f

these  eniigranlB  oa  the

ing  tribes,   that  many

exhibit  evident  maifca  of

improvement

from  bazbaiism*  '  •    iiif^'H

The  Rev.  Meesn.  Je—iN
Bevaa  were  sent  by  the  Xk  Jlflt
in  1818,  to  thia  iaiaady  and
menced  their  misakm
These  devoted  laboaren
called^  however^  to
heavy  afllictiotts  la -their
and  families;  wliich-irere^lrikUil
by  the  death  of  Mr.  BenUf-mi
by  Mr.  Jones's  removal  bam?Mt
station  to  the  Mauritian  fiMit
decline  in  his  health.  -  .-'

In  the  autumn  of.  18Mfai»b
ceUency  R.  T.  Farqahar,  BifrM
vemor  of  the  Mauritiuiy  eoadiM
a  treaty  with  Radama,  Kiiw.  ol'
Madagascar,  having  for  its  o&Ht
the  total  extinction  of  tiie  mm
traflic  in  that  island.  .WMh^Hl
full  approbation  of  the  CkMPOOWt
Mr.  Jones,  -being  eBgclewH|g-ie>
covered,  accompanied  the  9§it$f
Mr.  Hastie,  to  the  ooart  of  m
dama,  by  whom  he  me  neeMi
with  much  conyality.  The  El«
l\AlD«  sathAed  with  the  ;daf«eaf


dia


bdi

ikie
kai

km


«l

hi-

Mae:
ifte

«i(r


illbs


tie
It:


\


MAD

lects  of  the  society,  which  were
plaJjied  to  him  by  Mr.  Jones,
ote  to  the  Directors  for  mis-
mariesto  instruct  his  people  in
viatian  knowledge,  and  also  in  the
sful  arts.  It  was  Mr.  Jones's
antion  to  have  returned  to  the
■uritius,  after  the  conclusion  of
9  treaty ;  but  in  consequence  of
formal  Invitation  from  the  King,

consented  to  remain  at  Tana-
riTOu,  when  the  King  allotted  to
n  one  of  the  royal  houses  as
I  residence,  with  servants  to  at-
id  upon  him.  According  to  a
pulation  of  the  treaty  abeady
uded  to,  20  Madagasse  youths
une  to  be  instructed  in  useful  arts,
th  a  view  to  promote  civiliza-
in  in  their  own  country ;  of  whom
I  "v^ere  sent  for  this  purpose  to
B  Mauritius,  and  10  soon  after
rived  in  England,  and  were
used  in  the  Borough  school,  to  be
itnicted  in  the  English  language
I  the  plan  of  the  B.  and  F,  S,  S,
.  the  mean  time,  the  King  placed
ider  the  care  of  Mr.  Jones,  to  >
oeive  an  English  education,  16
ilive  children  ;  of  whom  3  were
lildren  of  his  own  sister,  and  one
'■  the  three  was  heir  apparent  to
m  crown ; — the  rest  were  chil-
ren  of  different  nobles.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Griffiths  arrived  in
le  iqiringof  1821 ;  and  in  June,
iSSy  the  missionary  brotherhood
as  increased  by  the  arrival  of  the
«v.  Mr.  JeiiVeyfi,  accompanied  by
Irs.  J.  and  four  missionary  artisans.
'he  valuable  patronage  of  the  King
unained  undiminished.  After  pro-
ving for  Mr.  Jones  a  dweiling-
Duse  contiguous  to  the  royal
;hool  in  which  were  upwards  of
0  children  under  his  care,  he  af-
jtded  considerable  assistance  in
le  erection  of  a  conunodious  ha-
Itation  for  Mr.  Griffiths,  together
Fiih  a  school-house  attach^,  ca-
able  of  containing  about  200
hildren  ;  and  also  allotted  a  house
X  the  use  of  Mr.  Jeffir^ys  and


MAD

his  family.  Allowances  were  also
ordered  for  each  of  the  mission-
aries, by  Governor  Farquhar,  as
well  as  for  the  artisans.  On  the
arrival  of  the  latter  at  Tananarivou,
the  King  gave  them  a  piece  of
ground  for  their  residence  and  for
ihe  carrying  on  of  their  respective
txades.  About  2000  of  the  natives
were  employed  to  prepare  the,
ground  for  the  erection  of  the  re-
quisite buildings.  By  direction  of
the  King  3  Madagasse  youths  were
placed  with  each  of  the  artisans ;
two  of  them  respectively  as  ap-
prentices, and  the  other  as  a  ser-
vant, of  whom  very  favourable
reports  were  made.  One  of  the
artisans,  Mr.  Brooks,  was,  how-
ever, suddenly  called  from  his
earthly  engagements^

At  this  early  stage  of  mis-
sionary effi)rt,  good  effects  .ap-
peared; among  which  may  be
noticed  the  suppression  of  common
swearing;  though  it  should  be
stated,  to  the  reproach  of  multi-
tudes called  Christians,  that  it  was
the  custom  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  kingdom  of  Ovah  to  swear
by  the  name  of  the  King  and  by  the
name  of  the  Queen,  not  by  the
name  of  the  Almighty  Creator  and
Benefactor  of  mankind.  The  B,
and  F,  B,  S,  made  a  grant  to  the
Madagascar  mission  of  50  English
Bibles  and  200  Testaments.

The  kingdom  of  Radama^  now
called  Imerina, .  is  divided  into  4
provinces ;  in  all  of  which,  during
1824,  schools  were  established,
with  the  sanction,  and  under  ihe
patronage,  of  the  King.  At  the
close  of  the  year  they  amounted  to
22,  and  the  number  of  children  to
above  2000.  The  three  schools
successively  formed  at  Tananari-
vou were  united  into  one,  which
the  King  denominated  the  Ro^
College.  From  this,  seminaiy,
containing!  about  S70  boys,  60  of
the  highest  gifted  and  best  In-
structed ware  tent  to  tska  €butB^


PabUe  MMl— ttwM  ttf  lh»  bqn>
«d  ■tote' NkMb  took  pbM'ia  &•

INMM*  af  tto  ElK  «N  of  «•

nmb  otkk  M^Mfy,  ud  Jh.  I&i-
tti,  Kb.  te  BittM  ■g«l^  irtdefc
««nkuHr  BUActBi;.  Hwn*.
jMWS&d  OiMtti  e«nn>MM4
l>rHtUi«laKUd^MWtoP«MHr
of  tta  Mae  jaw  t  thth  snwngB-
doM  cmMh  MMribof  aboM
IIM,lMtoeeMtoMBr  M  M  MOT  M


ooki  wtn  an-

HMd  ud  pnfaitng  iar  pnhUeadoa.
OBlhaSM<rfAp(0,  Mt.  Jattiji


■wyi  ■  whool  fof  bo^MiJ  Ito.
J.  anobcr  tm  gtilt,  nd  MsdueM
Mitei  imiMi  tn  MUIwmm.  It
bmlME  bMD  Mowt  mtpcdlMrt  ttrt
tkeaitlMiMibodU  MperiDtendllM


■  «tllw»  ^ort  IS  m.  (nM  tlM  m>
pttBl,  wbara  bF  bad  •  fctaool  of  1 10
tcgrtt  ud  Mi.IUMluiditouMrthn

riUtgc  abMit  IS  m.  dMnt  iroM  tbe
■WW,  wbw«  babadateboolwui-
lalainB  IM  boyk  Baeb  ot  Ihm
iMHbltolKM  •pfWirtieei)  wbo
kOTMd  tbtlr  t«¥<kU*s  tndag
Md  Mr.  Chhsk  tm  dlUBaaUr  em-'
jlojti  on  th*  Babbitt  In  c«tiB<
tbWoff  ddldiaD  I  aBdonfliawaek
dajitaUitNde.    IfltteMhwlBK


Hob  of  tt«  MKbgwe  NovTert*.
meat  <ni  cmnpleied ;  s  printer,  m
tottan-if  tnncT,  and  ■  ceipeoter,
««(«MBtoati  and  tba  nbslan  wai
d^rt*«d  of  a  valnaUe  agsnt  bj  Dm
deattoflfr.JaftaT*.  Abo|rt  tfah
Itee  iDBa  of  tba  HadaguM  f MttH,
tm  of  «]»■  had  bran  at  hti
•TB  aanatt  Nanart  bapUied,  ar-
ilnialthecapRBL

Tlw  lait  nmUarw  i-~"  Tb>  Rb*  .
If.  JUa^  aal  -tfimmk.  Cbmm


uid  CuiDininfci,  mitBumaTy  vtUq
wilh  their  wives,  arcompante^
Itoloan  Boloun,  anotbw  oTl
MadagBsse  youlhi  who  had  ■
b«en  baiillzed,  arriYed  at  TauM
fou  (In  tliB  1 1  lb  of  Sepbm
Mr.  Johni  will  reside  for  a  ttiM
tfae  rBpllol.  DuritiE  a  partcifj
day  lie  will  iDEtnict  ama*  OM
buys  in  Ihe  n>haol  In  EngliAiMl
tbe  other  npiily  himself  to  Ike  M
of  MadasHsse,  with  Oe  ai^
of  Mr.  Oriffitlis.  He  taktf^
liim  IB  Engliib  preacblng  Wlflfj
other  mlsaionaries."  "

Kittive  School*. — "The  m4
of  thete  Is  S8,  cantslntiy  H
boys  and  i&O  girls,  Diakiag  ■  ■
of  nearl}'  8000  ;    of  wbqDi,  l^


are  scattered  over  the
within  a  circrult  of  30  ti
the  capital.  His  Majest;',!)
busignifittd  his  pleasure  ttaat1i|
the  more  promiKinff  __  _  _  .
central  wbool  (or  Royii  CaSd
should  be  initiucted  In  Onet]
Lntln.  In  thii  acbool  Ihnel
aboiit  IGOboys.  "

"  Two  ot  Ihe  belt  IMtrrf
bojB  asalil  as  mheis  In  Dm  ■
trnl  school,  and  onothn  Itu '
sole  charge  of  a  large  ictra
■^ h    SmTon


the  country,


<l-fellDv


for  »


Many  more  boys
taking  a  *in:illBr  cbarge,  sboiilK
enlBrii:ement  of  the  acboolj
enable  the  mlsslonariei  to  Incit
the  ttiimberof  schools.

"  The  result  of  Ihe  PuOie  A
mtnaUen  of  the  school*  fbrlW
which  took  place  at  TanuMfV
in  Mnrch  of  the  latter  yea^,  *
hiplily  satlifactory.    His  Mij«


nlly  erifra^  in  the  eiaml
Tho  missionaries  exerclsea  gefl
superintendence  oTcr  tbc  tchot
and  occBsionully  tIhII  them,  fot^
purpose  of  lDi}iecting  them  aati
ttnt^cVn^^ba  wholara.    TheyMi


MAD

jtV^t.tbe  progress  made  by  the  chil-

fdren,  generally  speaking,   in  the

.  faiowledge  of  the  Christian  reii-

„Jl/km,  IS  touly  gratifying ;  and  such

■tfi.i^ftects  credit  upon  the  diligence

.)^  of  the  teachers  and  their  pupils.

•  .A  society  in  aid  of  the  schools

hbM  been  established  at  Tananari-

'iTDiiy  with  the  sanction  of  the  King,

.  denominated  the  Madagascar  Mia*

/imuarv  School  Society.     Several

efmtribu^ions  have  been  received

fiom  individuals  resident  at  Tana-

'.  BBiiyou,  and  at  the  Mauritius ;  but

Qie  missionaries  chiefly  look  for  sup-

port,  in  this  measure,  to  the  friends

.(if  missions   at   home.     In   con-

.  Q^xion  with  the  School  Sbciety,  is

|i  repository  for  such  articles  as  are

leqaisite    for    carrying    on    the

•chools.

.  Native  Services. — The  number
id  Madagasses  who  attend  these  is
not  large:  indeed,  we  are  con-
pern'ed  to  say,  the  missionaries  re-
mark, that  the  adults,  generally
^Making,  evince  little  desire  to
jfear  the  Gospel ;  but  many  young
persons  belonging  to  the  schools  ap-
pear very  attenti  ve,and  afford  ground
iCNr  the  hope  of  better  things,  in
reference  to  the  rising  generation.
Mr.  Hovenden,  it  was  hoped,
would  commence  the  printing  of
the  Madagasse  translation  of  the
New  Testament,  but  his  life  was
suddenly  terminated.  As,  how-
ever, the  measure  of  providing  the
$k;riptures  in  the  vernacular  tongue
will,  relatively,  be  more  or  less
important  in  proportion  to  the
^umber  of  natives  who  are  able  to
read  them ;  and  as  any  consider-
^le  augmentation  of  the  present
nwnber  will  depend  on  the  perma-
nency and  extension  of  the  means
pf  education  provided  by  the  mis-
aionaries; — it  will  be  at  once  evident
|iow  powerful  a  claim  the  native
schools  under  their  superintond-
ence  have  for  support  on  the  libe-
ndity  of  such  as  are  desirous  of
imparting  the .  knowlejige  of  the


MAD

Gospel  to  those  numerous  and  in-
teresting islanders.  For  this  pur-
pose they  have  established,  in  the
centre  of  the  island,  with  the
sanction  and  under  the  patronage
of  the  King,  Radama,  nearly  30
schools.

The  rapidly  advancing  im-
portance of  this  mission  induced
the  directors,  during  the  year
1826,  to  accept  the  offer,  on  the
principle  of  limited  service^  of  the
Rev.  J.  J.  Freeman,  late  minister
of  the  Gospel  at  Kidderminster,  to
unite  his  efforts  with  those  of  the
missionaries,  for  the  dissemination
of  the  Gospel  in  Madagascar.
Volave  and  Thotoos,  the  2  Mada-
gascar youths  still  remaining  in
this  country,  are  making  good  pro-
gress in  various  branches  of  learn-
ing, and  in  the  knowledge  of  use-
ful arts :  they  conduct  toemselves
with  great  propriety.  Of  those
originally  sent,  one  had  d^ed,  leav-
ing behind  him  pleasing  evidence
of  real  conversion ;  and  others  had
been  compelled  to  return  to  Mada-
gascar from  an  ill  state  of  health.

MADEWISPATNAM,  a  large
city  in  the  vicinity  of  Tranquebar,
Hindoostan,  where  the  Danish  mis-
iionaries  at  Tranquebar  have  la-
boured with  pleasing  success.  As
early  as  1747,  their  congregation
consisted  of  540  persons,  and  their
schools  of  57  pupils.

MADRAS,  formerly  called  Fort
St,  George,  a  populous  and  cele-
brated city  in  the  southern  part  of
Hindoostan,  on  the  E.  coast  of  the
Peninsula,  near  the  margin  of  the
sea.  E.  long.  80°  17',  N.  lat.  13"  4'.
Travelling  distence  from  Calcutte,
1,020  m. ;  from  Bombay,  770.
About  the  year  1620,  or,  as  some
suppose,  1640,  the  English  E,  India
Company  obtained  permission  of
the  King  of  Golconda  to  esteblish
a  settlement  at  Madras,  and  built
what  is  now  called  Fort  St.  George.
The  town  was  taken  by  the  French
ii^    1744,  but   was  ceded  to  tJbiQ


MAD

Britiih  In  nil)  i   ilnce  which  time

it  liu  been  gnitluiLy  riiing  in  im-


.  Itli


ufth


furtreoes  in  Uritiib  Iniiiu,  r&nki  ai
wcond  of  the  3  Eiifrllih  Presi-
tlenclei,  uiil  i>  the  teat  o(  an
arcli-deacQni}'.  1'he  tovrn  Btandi
on  a  barren,  aniy  [ilaln,  so  ei-
cMdinf(ly  sterile,  that  nothing  trill
coma  to  [nalurit;  vilhout  Ibe  moat
diligent  cultlYBlion  and  care.  The
water  with  vhich  the  city  is  nip-
|i11gi].  Is  brouglit  frotn  a  disIaDce
of  more  tbtLR  a  mile.  Muinu  is
dirided  into  two  dlatlnct  parts,  each
receiving  an  BjipellBtion  cbaiac-
terUtlc  of  the  colour  of  it«  Itihe-
bltanti.  The  /fAile  Tmni,  In-
cluding Fort  St.  George,  is  the
reildence  of  all  the  officers  of  the
English  goTemmeiit.  It  li  en-
circled by  a  nibstnntlH)  wall,  and
stnmi^f  fortified  by  batteries  and
haitloni.  Near  the  centre  of  this
la  the  fort,  about  100  yards  square.
The  bouiHi  are  principally  bulit  of
biick.  The  Bladr  Tbipn,  anciently
called  Cbina-patiim,  Is  situated
about  a  mile  N.  of  the  White
Town,  and  is  also  encompaued  by
a  \rall  IT  feet  tliick.  The  houses,
though  many  of  them  are  built  of
brick,  make  bnt  an  indtlTerent  ap-
pearance. The  situatioD  of  Madras
for  mercantile  business  is  extremely
unfaTourable.  Tbere  is  no  com-
modious port  for  the  convenient
lading  and  unlading  of  vessels,  the
coast  forming  nearly  a  slraight
line,  against  which  a  violent  and
dangerous  luif  dashes  incessantly  ;
]-et  it  is  a  place  of  vast  wealth  and
Importance,  and  the  gnnd  mart  of
all  the  southern  part  oj  Hindoostan.
The  papalaiien  is  estimated  at
about  300,000.  A  colUge  has
been  recently  instituted  at  Fort  St.
George,  for  the  instruction  of-  the
junior  civil  students  fo  all  the
native  languages.  Here  Is  also  s
type-foundry.

The  Rev.  J.  P.  RotUet,  D.  D.
Bod  h.  P.  HBUbtoe,  fion  ttie  C.  E.


TheRev.B,

Schultz  fonned  the  Gnt  mbdn  I
estabUihmcDt  at  Madras.  Ha  ^
sltedlttnl19T,undertbepalranga
of  Frederic  IV.  king  of  Dei^ii^
■ndopeued  Bwhoul  at  )'.7wr.ott
of  the  suburb!  ot  Mudras,  which  Wh
been  the  principal  seat  of  this  ^i.


duced  Mr.  S.  toaettc^  wifhTiW
of  est^iihing  •  pttmaaemi  sMriik
He  was  noa  ncelved  undn  |tt
immediate  can  of  this  aodatirt
and  proaecuted  his  labour*  *M
unwearied  dlUgence,  and  ^Sk
much  succeM.  In  ITSS,  he  nc-
ceeded  in  a^mizing  a  cfauRH
which  consiitad  of  17  membaa
Tbe  following  yt:ar,  140  wui
added  to  It,  and  considerable  »
cesrions  contiDued  1u  be  made  for  t
number  of  yeara.  In  1*3S,  a  hogn
for  pubUc  wortbip  was  eredd,
In  1746,  the  citj'  was  token  by  tin
French ;  tbe  mbisior
destroyed,    and    thi

abandoned,    it  was, , ..

sumed  in  ITSO,  sjid  a  church  biiill
bythe  Roman  Catholic  Portufuei^
WBi  oSered  Ibr  tbe  accomoiodatio  ■
of   the    mtaiioniu''  ~


ss.  From  ft
the  misiiaal
less  than  If^

le  cbnrcb.  "Ot

dcants  iQlHH'
ut  this  time  tf
to  di^clinei  bft
yeare,     eflecliA


the  year  1780,  ]  ^

were  united  with  the  cbnrcb.  Tfi
number  of  commiiDicants  lo  IH^'

About    this    ■'
minion    began
within    a    few

iJopled'  to  n

It  to  a  state  of  efficiency.  In  IMk
s  depdt  of  booki  was  eslablltMi
which  bai  beeji  of  great  serviw.
A  printing  press  lias  been  M-
established,  vihteh  Imdc^  diMr
tbe  first  year,  4,000  booto  tmt
tracts.  '-  ""■?.  iitimil  nUii'hJBM
were  regularly  inatmcted  b'lti
minion-schooli,  aniT  0M  M^rt'
gatlon  wai  rapldtr  Incrcadagi  ^ ' '
In  1805,  the  benenrient^liite
ottlM  L.M.B.  wm  iHrtctod  VOb


MAD

MqNiiUnt  city,  and  in  it  thd  Rer.
JfTk  Loveless  laboured  for  several
')QMn^  particularly  in  a  new  chapel
jll  Black  Town,  which  was  sup-
ifOttbd  by  the  liberality  of  bis  con-
dUt  hearers.  Here  the  attendance
Mf 'fiflropeans  and  natives  was  con-
#Blenfale;  and  8  free  schools  ad-
rtnlwg  tiie  chapel  went  on  well.
nPa  Umidate  the  debt  on  the  latter,
'SI  Inmvidnal,  who  would  not  suffer
«lrifl  name  to  appear,  contributed
JTOO  pagodas.    A  small  church  was
Axmed,  and  a  *'  Missionary  Fund
^Society"  established.    In  1816,  the
Her.  Mr.  Knill  arrived  as  a  fellow-
labourer.     Two  years  after,  147
*tetaes  were  on  tiie  books  of  the
WW  aehools  for  boys ;  a  free  school
-  'Har  girls  had  been  commenced,  in
liMcli  there  were  about  40,  while
tte  schoob  for  natives  contained
'■boot  400,  and  the  New  Testament
*wia  learned  and  repeated.    When
%  diort  time    had   elapsed,    the
JiBhools  were  increased  to  ]  1,  and
iiftidedgrtsst  encouragement;  and
ibete  were  4  congregations,  viz.
S  BttflUdi,  and  1  Tamul,  or  native,
•n  of  idiieh  were  now  in  a  pros-
ftubm  state.    Mr.  K.'s  declining
nwiHh,   however,    compelled    his
jMlnquishment   of    his  important
iBmrttons,   and  his   pursuit  of  a
colder  clfanate :  other  agents  were
ttnrefore  sent  forth.
•    In    1810,    a  new   chapel    was
fiBoned    at    PursetDonkum,   near
Vepery.    In  1820,  John  Apavon,
/irho  had  some  time  before  been
baptized,   had   the   charge   of  a
Tamul  congregation ;  and  the  va-
fious    aehools    which   had   been
opened,  togethei:  with  the  religious
laatitationt  which  had  been  esta-
Uiriied,  as  well  as  the  sacred  services
'^ich  were  conducted,  were  all
ftmiiihing.    Fresh  labourers  arriv-
ingy  ^016  inroads  made  by  removals
and  deatll  were  filled  up,  and  new
designs   were  accomplished.     In
loss,  a  ncttre  female  school  was
oitabUdied^    mider  the    soperin-


MAD

tendence  of  Mrs.  Crisp;  and  a
central  school  was  also  opened  for
qualifying  native  youths,  of  pro-
mising character  and  talents,  for
the  of&ce  of  schoolmaster;  into
which  about  30  were  admitted.
The  following  extracts  from  the
last  report,  will  show  the  effect  of
this  and  subsequent  efforts : —

*'  Central  School, — We  are  con-
cerned to  state,  that  this  institution,
the  object  of  which  was  the  tralni-
ing  of  promising  native  youths  for
the  office  of  schoolmaster,  has  not
hitherto  been  so  productive  of  be^
nefit  as  the  missionaries  anticipated.
A  new  plan  of  arrangement  and
organization  for  this  seminary  has,
however,  been  prepared,  which,  it
is  hoped,  when  carried  into  effect,
will  be  attended  with  more  pro-
mising results.^'

"  Native  Schools, — These  schools,
in  number  12,  contain  about  000
boys.  At  a  public  examination,
held  on  the  17th  of  April,  1826,
gratifying  evidence  of  proficiency
was  exhibited.  The  Hindoostanee
school  at  Rojrapettah,  has  been  dis-
continued, and  a  seminary  for
Mussulmen  children,  under  the  im^
mediate  superintendence  of  Mr.
Taylor,  commenced.''

'^NaUvePreachMng,'—T\iet  Tamul
services  are  continued  as  usual  in
Black  Town.  At  Pursewankum,
where  there  is  a  protract  of  forming
a  native  church,  an  additional
Tamulservice  hasbeen  commenced.
A  Tamul  service  has  been  also
commenced  at  Periamoattoo.''

''A  place* of  worship  has  been
erected  at  Royapooram,  which  is
supplied  alternately  by  Mr.  Crisp
and  Mr.  Nimmo,  We  regret  to
state,  that  the  missionaries  have
not  found  the  opening  for  the
Gospel  here  so  encouraging  as  they
had  been  led  to  expect.  At  Tri-
passoor,  a  church  has  been  formed,
and  a  school  commenced,  contain*
ing  nearly  80  children."


MAD

Crlip  ahd  Taylor  altenuitely  per-
formed mlvloiiary  ^toun,  daring
which  they  Tiiited  Chittoor,  Tri-
passoor,  Wallajah,  Ac, ;  and  there
it  reason  to  believe  that  beneficial
effects  hafe  reiulted  from  their
▼isits  to  these  places.  Mr.  Taylor
has  translated  into  Tamul,  Aylifie's
Catechism  on  the  Evidences 'of
Christianity,  abridged  from  Dr.
Bogue's  Esray.''

<<  EnffliMh  Prtaeking. —The
English  services  at  the  chapel  in
Black  Town  are  performed  as  usual.
TheEnglish  service  at  Pursewankum
chapel  has  been  discontinued,  and
another  Tamul  service  substituted,
as  already  intimated.  The  atten-
dance at  the  prayer-meeting  at
Pursewankum,  we  regret  to  say,
is  not  encouraging.''

**  Madras  Aumliany  Society, —
The  amount  of  the  contributions  to
this  Institution,  for  the  year  1825-0,
was  1000  Machas  rupees.  At  the
anniversary  meeting,  held  on  the
11th  of  July,  2  sermons  were
preached, — one  in  Black  Town,  by
the  Rev.  R.  Carver,  of  the  fr,M,S, ;
the  other  by  Mr.  Taylor,  at  Purse-
wankum chapel.  The  united  collec-
tionsamounted  to  aboutOSOrupees."

*'  This  mission  is  advancing  with
a  firm  and  steady,  though  gradual,
progress."

A  corresponding  committee  was
formed  at  Madras,  in  connexion
with  the  a  M,  S.  in  1815,  and  the
Rev.  Mesnrs.  Schnarr^  and  Rhenius
were  soon  after  appointed  to  labour
in  that  city.  The  society  placed
1500/.  at  the  disposal  of  its  friends
there,  and  the  mission  commenced
under  circumstances  truly  auspi-
cious. In  1816,  the  missionaries
had  so  far  advanced  in  the  acquisi-
tion of  Tamul,  that  they  began  to
preach  in  Dr.  Rottler's  chapel,  in
Black  Town,  where  their  services
were  highly  acceptable  both  to  Dr.
R.  and  his  congrregation.  A  school
was  formed  for  native  children  in


.«'■■.■


MAD

Mflntiit  allflv  tt>
niakniariM  im  the
and  four  otiwii
raised.    A  lidal  eplda«l^
like  a  pertUenee,  lud  ranpftti
N.  of  India,  fomid  its
dras  in  1818,  and  an
superstitkms  of  Ilia  mtliifc-  alp
extract  of  a  latter  wiittMi^«t«l
time,  gives  an  aflecttng  fM
the  state  of  the  nattre  wibaAwit
this  calamity:— "Alai I  It 4iMi
awful    and    dfptemAMm  MMMfc
We  have  heard  tliatlia  jiMa
affrighted  and  trembUBg^  haUi
fered,  what  haa  not  been  ~
these  many  yean,  a  iurimg:
fice  /—an  idiot  boj,  to  om  if  Mr
gods:  iind  ill  miiimis  ilamjijift
be  a  procesrion  and  laai^  «lkl
will  cost  1500  pagpdaa,  to  aff—i
goddess  who  has  been  ncglacWA
many  years,  and  who  th^wyhi%1i
offended  anger,  tent  this  ■twpfcy
During  this  year  the  adMoltJri
increased  to   18    in   mnriM^  M
which  the  average  nMmtt|yalM4<
ance  throughoat  the
In  the  following  year,  the !
ries  wrote: — "The  «<   _    ,
relnains  much  as  before..  AImI  i^
far  as  our  knowledge  mwMtmfM
must  say  that  their  hearti  atei
in  general,  like  the  stoogr-gH
hearers.     The   Christian
masters,  with  the  catecUsti^  «ii
few  other  members  of  .the-eaq|^
gation,  are  a  salt  amcmg  .tiiftm^
and   have   been   our    i  ii<  miMga
ment.  Some  others,  whpaeeMMS  to .
awaken,  and  to  give  us  sqbm  bopd
of  a  thorough  purification  of  ihk
minds    and   conduct*    hawe  --IMl
realized  our  hope»  and  haidAaH  W
heart  seems  to  have  again
on  them.    One  of  two  grown
sons  preparing  for  **"|*"r"^
vered  wicked  and  worldly
and  is  no  more  in  pin|MaratiHi{  .the
other,  a  young  man^  has  been  bap-
tized- the  fintt-frtdt  of  the  nfaaloa.
Two  men  and  two  women  aie  now


the  m/ssjon-garden,  within  a  fe^v  \i9!t«^^Tv%  Vst  Xwv^dossk,   A».  ^^4


MAD

9  Hie  second  heathen  ad-
tarto  the  Christian  ehurch,
anbaaqnently  baptized.''  In
1819,  the  minionaries  re-
tothe  new  minion-hoiue;
•lA  Hie  premises  purchased  by  the
mjJBtfi  and  on  Jolj  the  SOth^  the
4lBiidatioa  of  a  new  church  was
4tiA,  which  was  to  be.  erected  at
Ih*  «ipense  of  the  government.
oAbont  this  time  a  printing  press
MBBt  out  by  the  society,  arriFed,
Mad  was  set  to  worlc  on  the  revised
•Mnton  of  the  Scriptures  in  Tamul,
ite  Dr.  Bottler  and  Mr.  Rhenius.
-.Mr*  Harringtdn,  of  Calcutta,  had
"IMida  the  society  a  present  before
•feBilaft  India,  of  a  fount  of  Tamul
topaa.  This  liberal  benefaction,  with
vie  tjpes,  dte.  sent  from  home,  put
H  -latb  the  power  of  the  corre-
committee  to  proceed  to
with  the  best  prospect  of
18,^00  copies  of  4  tracts
printed  in  Tamul,  and  circo-
Excuisions  among  the  na-
likewise  frequently  made
•lytlie  missionaries.  The  various
mans  thus  put  inaction,  continued
ttroogh  after  years  to  be  vigorously
wplogred,  and  also  increased,  1^
lenlor  missionaries,  and  1^
who,  on  their  removal,  ar-
to  supply  their  lack  of  service.
laiS^, services  took  place  almost
tmay  day  in  the  week,  with  a  view
to  tlw  advantage  of  the  native  con-
gngation;  and  the  total  number
^  scholars  in  the  various  schools
was  668.

•  A  lending  library  had  been
recently  established;  a  seminary
was  opened  for  training  up  youths
f<0r  eventual  employment,  accord-
ing to  their  cqncities  and  disposi-
tlonh  in  the  society's  missions;
and  about  40,000  cojHes  of  different
worics.  In  Tunul,  had  isnied  from
the  presi  during  the  year.  "  To-
dagr/'aays  Mr.  Ridsdale,  in  one  of
his  communications,  ''we  heg^n
to -.wade  a  new  press,  a  chrcum-
stasee  in  the  history  of  which  is


MAD

rather  interestilig.  A  little  while
ago,  an  old  chariot,  belonging  to
the  Pagoda  near  the  mission-hovse,
was  sold,  and  from  a  part  of  one  of
the  wheels  we  made  the  platen  ef
ournewpresi.  Tliis  suggested  to
me  the  idea  of  turning  Satan's
weapons  upon  himself;  and  accof-
dingly,  with  this  piece  of  wood,
which  had  been  for  years  emf^oyed
in  his  service,  we'  struck  off  1000
copies  of  that  beautiful  portion  of
Holy  Scripture,  the  40th  chapter
of  Isaiah,  in  the  form  of  a  tract."
The  work  of  translation  was  alff>
happily  advancing.

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Ridsdale  and
Sawyer  continued  to  occupy  this
station.  The  following  view  of
their  labours  is  given  by  Mr.  R.,  in
March,  1826:—  .

''It  has  pleased  our  heavenly
Master  to  give  us  much  encou*
ragement  in  the  various  branches
of  our  mission.  I  have  great  rea-
son to  believe  that  a  deep  and
broad  foundation  is  laying  in  the
Tamul  labours  of  my  colleague.
Sawyer;  he  is  devoted  to  Ids  work.
Our  several  congregations  are  all
on  the  increase.

"In  the  interesting  work  of
female  edueatiam,  we  have  unex-
pected success.  Our  native  girls'
schools  are  4  in  number,  and  con-
tain 130  children;  our  English
girls'  schools  are  a  in  number,  and
contain  about  ISO.  The  first  pub-
lic ezaminati(m  of  our  female
schocds  took  place  in  tiie  mission-
church,  on  the  31st  of  December.
We  have  raised  a  separate  fund  for
this  important  work,  for  whicn  I
have  collected  upwards  of  1600
rupees.  We  are  on  the  point  c^
beginning  a  central  girls'  school,
under  Mrs.  Ridsdale's  immejliate
care ;  into  which  we  intend  to  col-
lect the  most  proficient  giris  from
the  different  schools,  in*  order  to
give  them  a  superior  education,
that  they  may  be  employed  a«
schoohnistresses.

F  v2  ?^  ^


MAD

««Tb6  applftcatloM  BMde  to  ae
from  all  pvtt  of  KMrtbeni  ImUs  ftir
rellgtow  booki,  are  lo  mnDeroat
ttat  it  Is  qoite  paliiM  tobe  imablfr
torsiipplytteiii.''

llie  teminaiy  dodgnad  for  the
tnining  up  of  joong  men  as  Mboal-
■MMrtan  and  a«lftaiiti  in  tbo  woric
bf  BBliiioiit,  was  ooaomenced  opon
a  Miall  tcale,  tn  the  beginning  of
the  year  18£i.  In  January,  1888,
a  ecniiderabte  acceaioii  was  made
to  this  nomber,  liy  the  anriral  of
18  boys  from  the  society's  institu-
tion at  Tranqoebar.

From  that  time  to  the  pnsefit,
the  numbers  liate  been  giaduaily
ineraasing';  and  tlie  total  nombcur
of  boys  now  under  instruction,  is
30,  of  which  83  are  natffes,  and
T  couhtry-bom.  Since  the  esta-
blishment of  the  seminary,  8  of
the  elder  ronths  have  been  placed
in  •  diifefent  situations,  according
to  ttieir  ouattAcations.

Mrs.  tUdfidale  has  tlie  charge
of  tlie  femtUe  9ek0ols,  of  which  8
are  Tamul,  and  8  English,  and
contain  833  scholars,  with  an  ave-
rage attendance  of  about  190.
There  ii  a  steady  advance  in  this
interesting  field  of  labour,  and
many  encouraging  circumstances,
by  the  blessing  of  God^  attend  it.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Carver,  of  the  fF,
M,  S,  wrote,  from  Madras,  March
28, 1883 :— '<  We  haveNipwards  of
30  members  in  society,  at  this
place,  chiefly  pensioners,  with  their
wives  and  oil^ring — ^men  who  have
tieen  great  trials,  and  have  little
hope  of  revisiting  their  native  land.
Our  prayer  to  Qod  for  them  is,  that
they  may  be  saved.  We  have
sometimes  preachedto  them  in  the
open  air,  but  they  have  commenced
a  subicription,  and  are  erecting  a
room  for  worship,  which  may  co$t
perhaps  60/.  steiiing:  a  piece  of
fOround,  on  which  the  Rev.  Mr.
Hough  once  had  a  native  school,
has  been  kindly  granted  for  this
purpose  by  the  commandant.    On


iHoaflybyi^

wdUnotto

Ths  acbool

fawraasad  a  Itttiei

•eoordlng  tolhs

catioos  nada  fef

•trttctadf  bat  aass

of

We

astabtfahichoateteA^

part  of  Black  TawByi

with  soaMleac«m

funds,  wa  did  ulmtm  «M*|fMI

more  upon  our  h$i,'^MUkmmM

now  upwaids  of  100

we  were  nndas  the

sityof  rafnaliig^

wards  of  300  eliikka^

hafo  beea  formed*  hdm-'

the  netriiboQiiiood  of

This  sehool, wUchia  i

chapdi  also,  glwao  the:  .

opportanMy  ciMifoilng  Iw'

God  preached.   iTkia

very  suitable  fkoaawii

tribute  the  holj  Serlotafiai

ligious  tracts,  wblek^ttB'

have    soo|^t    wHh


\


veral  pnbiicatioaa  iiavi
parsed,  wo  hope  vaefoHyy/i
the  peoplff  dmrlngtlie  I.

The  JKidhw  Jtmt
ibunded  Feb.  S3, 1 0S1»  tori
disseminatian  of  the
religious  tracts  anMmg'
Jews  inhabiting  Asia  ;  wai^f
the  respective  historleaof  ftaW*
caUed  <<Beni  Isml»«'  •n^.'ftf
black  and  whtta  Jewa.  ^    .  .'.}*;U»'

The  mimioiiaiiea  who
boured  at  thia  fdaee^
been  greatly  assisted
raged  in  their  efifarta^  bv
services  and  cotnnsela  of  -Ihei
lains  of  the  East  India
who  have  mantfesfcad  a  doa^J
citude  for  the  moral
of  the  natives.

MADURA,
fortified'  town-


I
\f
I
1

\i
I


■..-  -W.


in   the  CmmOii


UAH

IBlMto>iliin,tti<l  capitalof  aprorince
■MW  MBe  name.  It.  waf  surren-
iMadtD^fhe  British  in  1801;  itlsSO
jAs^SbB.  W.  Tai\jore,  and  S3d  S.S.W.
M«*iii*  E.  loDg.  78<»  14',  N.  lat.
|iti«r.  TJie.  e.  K.  &  hM  efta-
hHiiiad  ft  minioii  here.  Since  the
Brftkh  took  ponenion  of  the  town,
q^btli  have  been  made  to  introduce
Ihtt*  Goipel/  principaily  by  natiTe
MndMiB  aod  catechiitS;  who,  in
IMitioii  to  their  other  labours^
diftributed  the  Scriptures  and
in  considerable  numbers,
the  Portuguese  and  Mala-


•  ■-  MAHIM,  a  town  on  the  northern
pMt  of  the  island  of  Bombay,  about
m  -m,  from  the  town  of  Bombay,
MBtalning  a  compact  population
9i  about  80,000  heathens.  The
IVBediate  vicinity  is  also  very  po-
indooi.  The  soil  is  sandy,  and  the
fltacft  is  a  complete  cocoa-nut
MNsit-^as  much  so,  indeed,  as  if
th0to  were  no  inhabitants.

•  The  Rev.  A.  Graves,  from  the
ji^  H.  C.  F.  ^.arrived  at  Mahim
imt  iai8.  Previous  to  this,  Mr.
Kewell  i^nt  several  weeks  here,
pnaehing  the  Gospel  to  many  who
Md  never  heard  it  before.    Two

were  established  in  Mahim,
S  in  the  vicinity;  they  have
increased  to  7,  and  are  in  a
state.  One  school  is
iMVpiDfted  by  benevolent  indiiiduals
tai  Augusta,  Georgia,  and  is  called
liw  Augusta  school.  In  the  spring
oi  18i8S,  Mr.  Graves  and  his  wife,
Qonpassionating  the  wants  of  some
leetitute  children  who  came  under
Uielr  observation,  took  20  of  them
into  their  family.  The  children
wm  promising,  and  became  very
lear  to  their  instructors.  Under  such
an  accession  of  care  and  labour,
however,  the  health  of  Mrs.  Graves
tleflUned;  and  as  it  was  deemed  ex-
pedient for  her  to  take  a  voyage  to
America,  some  of  the  children
orere  received  into  the  mission  fa-
milies at  Bombay.and  Taonab,  and


MAJ

the  remainder  letomed  to  thei^
pArents.  Soon  after  Mr.  'Graves
entered  off  his  miasUm,  he  com-
menced preaching  in  the  Mahratta
language,  and  has  faithfully  em-
braced opportunities  wUch  have
offisred  for  instructing  the  natives.
A  large  portion  of  his  time  hu  le-
cently  been  spent  in  itineratbig  at
a  distance  j  and  though  there  have
been  no  qpecial  instances  of  ootivie-
tion  and  conversion,  theinfluenoe
of  the  Gospel  on  the  minds  of  the
natives  is  apparently  incieaclDg.
[See  Bombay*]

MAIAOITI,  one  of  the  Society
Islands.

The  mission  in  this  island  is  under
the  immediate  careof  twp  nature
teachers,  of  the  L,.M,  8,^  sent  there
by  the  church  at  Huahein^.  The
church,  consisting  of  S3  memben,
all  of  whom  are  regarded  at  truly
pious,  is  under  the  pastimd  care  of
Mr.  Bar£f,  who  visits  them  as  often
as  his  other  engfagementsvdll  allow,
when  he  administers  the  ordinances
of  the  Lord's  Supper  and  baptim.
In  Ills  absence  the  teachers  conduct
the  public  worship)  and  explain  ttie
Scriptures  to  the  people ;  they  also
superintend  the  schools,  which  em-
brace, infante  excepted,  toe  whole
population  of  the  island,  wliich
consists  of  810  souli.

A  chapel  has  been  built)  00  feet
by  30,  which  vras  entirely  the  work
of  the  natives.  They  have  also
built  and  furnished  a  house  for  the
accommodation  of  Mr.  Barff,  when
on  his  occadonal  visits.

The  deputation  could  hear  of  ne
crimes  in  this  island;  and  the
judges,  as  to  criminal  cases,  were
consequently  without  employment*
They  suppose  a  happier  people  than
those  of  this  island  do  not  exist

MAJAQURAM,  a  populous
towain  the  vicinity  of  Tranquebar>
Hindoostan.  The /><iiii>A  nuM^-
ariet  at  Tranquebar  formeriy  la-
boured here,  and  occasionally  gain-
ed many  converts.


MAL

Their   congngatkni,   In  lT4T,
lunted  to  upwaid  of  1400.

MALACCA,  or  Mmimytt,  a  pe-
Bimalaat  the  MHithem  extremity
of  Asia,  connected  with  the  Idng-
doB  of  Siam  by  the  iitthmm  of
Kiaw,  bounded  W.  by  the  Indian
Ooean,  and  £.  by  the  Chinese  Sea.
It  eztenda  from  about  1^  to  aboat
11*  N.lat.  It  if  computed  to  be
TTd  m.  long,  and  its  average  breadth
•boiitlfO.  The  surface  of  the  pe-
alnsula  is  delightfully  variegated
•with  plains,  gentle  hiUs,  and  lofty
mountains.  Its  soil  is,  generally,
highly  vegetative,  producing  rice
in  abundance,  and  various  other
tiopioai  fruits.  The  climate  is  fa-
voiBsMe  for  its  latitude^  there
being  a  constant  alternation  of  land
and  sea  breews,  which  render  the
air  pure  and  healthy.  The  whole
ooontiy  was  formerly  subject  to  the
government  of  Siam,  but  tlie  south-
.ecn  part  has  become  emancipated
Jroin  the  yolce  of  tyranny,  and  the
northern  pays  but  a  small  tribute.
The  inhabitants  of  Malacca  are
principally  Malays,  though  there
an  many  Portuguese,  Moon,  and
Chinese.  The  Malays,  as  a  people,
are  exceedingly  ferocious  and  vin-
dictive, faithless  and  treacherous,
fond  of  conquest  and  plunder,  much
addicted  to  habits  of  piracy,  and
draadfidly  cruel  to  enemies  and
strangers.  They  are,  however,  in
some  measure,  intelligent  and  ac-
tive, and  exhibit  evident  marlu  of
advancement  in  the  arts  of  civiliza*
tion.  Their  language  has  l>een
compared,  for  softness  and  haxmony,
to  the  French  and  Italian.  It  is
peculiarly  adapted  to  poetry,  of
which  the  Malays  are  passionately
Ibnd.  It  is  extensively  used  in
mercantile  business  in  all  the
Idands  of  the  Malayan  Archipe-
lago, and  in  all  eastern  India.
•  Mdlaccay  the  principal  town  on
the  peninsula  above  described,  is
sItMated  near  the  W.  coast,  on  the
Straits  of  Malacca.    £.  long.  IW


iy»  K.  lat  t*  It.   Ttote*!!^^

of  this  town  WM  taUhy  te^


modus*  io  tho  Mtt
wot  •nUocttoIhe
164I»  when  It  woi
Dntchy  and  wrniaiooi  li
seointiUlt
tish  loMos  In  ITM.
reirtored  it  to  tin  D
peaee  of  AmloBti
and  again  mtored  m
Fmn  ita  peddivlj  ~
tuation  it  ha^  in
point  of  view,  booonoA
great  hitereat  and
ready  naval  intereooiBB
tween  it  and  aU  tho
chipelago,  Slaa,  CUaOp;
China*  India*  on~
This  ciicomataiioo
vonrablo  plaeo  fiv  tho
meat  of  a.miorfftn,  ham
Bible  and  loUgioDt
diflfused  thiongli  all  Ifco  ^-
coantrioi.     Tho   Inhaldti
variously  estfniBtBd*  .btm
15,000;   thegieotm
whom  are  Maloyi.
religions  ace

Paganism.  .siA&r

In  January,  1010,  tfaa  BobihP
Milne,,  of  the  Xf.  it  &*  fdltik
to  Fenang,  when  he
Honourable  the
bers  of  the  council*  lAo
granted  Um,  at  hie
of  land  at  Malaoeo*  oil  lUki^
erect  a  miasionniy-honen  nHM^
needful  buildinga.  Tiio>.OHMi^
scholars  under  :&e  cnn4dM^fki
soon  anMRmtsd  to  TO*  oadUtoirikF
jutor,  Mr.  Thonaae
day-schodl  and  .an  ^

for  the  inatructUui  of  tho
Partly  in  conaoquenoit  of
Mr.  M.  subeaqoonfljpoUsiiMiii^
Penang.  HeCTlio.»etiitlhMi^
a  man  of  talent*  -who  aoMa^iii:
before  lenoonoed  tho  reOglitf  ifc
Mahomed*  and  proftwad^  tsMH^'
brace  that  .'of..iaM  Qoqiaiii4l.
religious  pafetio  inmod  mmmtmr
expectotkiis    of    .^


MAL    /

.    Bat  he   became   an
and  wrote  against  Chris-
He  profess^,  however,
and  again  to  receiTe  the
He  wrote  an  affectionate
Ir.  Milne  on  the  subject,
menced  thus : — **  Sabat,
pted,   turned,   and    lost
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
n  of  God,  the  Rev.  W.
;c.    Towards  the  close,
-"  Though    my  body  be
he  truth,  yet  my  heart,
imderstanding,  are  with
ill  they  ever  be  turned
it  by  silver,  gold,  jewels,
es  of  the  world,  or  any
f  science,"  «fec.  «fec.
ere, Mr.  M.  was  favoured
excellent  opportunities
copies  of  the  Chinese
ament,  catechisms,  and
}iam,  where,  it  is  said,
linese  reside,    to  Rhio,'
ina,   and  various  other
iiere    the    Chinese    are
reat  numbers,  as  well  as
ng  on  religious  subjects
lilors  belonging  to  the
which  they  were  con-
Penang  only,  there  are
WH)  Chinese  inhabitants;
m  Mr.  Milne  went  from
bouse,  distributing  the
and  tracts.    He  calcu-
in  China  and  Malacca
here  had  been  printed
ited  at  that  period,  not
(,000  Chinese  pamphlets
exclusive  of  the  Holy
Towards  the  great  ex-
rinting  Chinese  tracts,
(ms    Tract   Societyy  in
berally  contributed  the

le's  laboitrs  were  abun-
nuing  his  translation  of
res  into  Chinese,  stu-
[alay,  and  superintend-
binese  schools.  Other
I  also  proceeding  ;  be-
the  settlement  had  the
of  two  presses,  with


MAL

snitable  workmen,   and  an  Mb
superintendent.

Among  other  important  olj^ets
which   engaged  the   attention  of
Dr.  Morrison  and  Mr;  Milne,  dmr*
ing  a  visit  of  the  latter  to  Cantdby
was  the  establishment  of  a  semi-
nary, now  denominated  the  Jingh*
Chinese  Collegey  the  principal,  eb*
jects  of  which  are,  to  impart  the
knowledge  of  the  Elnfflish  hmgoage,
and  the  principles  of  tiie  ChriitUui
religion,  to  Chinese  youth;  andthte
instruction    of    missionaries    antt
others  in  the  language  and  Iftem-
ture  of  China.    Dr.  M.  generously
proposed,  on  certain  conditions,  to
contribute  towards  the  object  the
sum  of  400(^  dollars,  exclusive  o#  a
separate  donation  of  600/.  to  defn^
the  expenses  of  educating.  In  the
college,  1  European  and  I'ChineM
youth,  for  5  successive  years.    Sa
the  importance  of   this  plan  the
directors     concurred,     and     the
foundation-stone  of  the  institotioii
was  laid  Nov.  11,  1818,  by  Mi^or
William    Farquhar,   late  EngUdi
Resident  and  Commander  of  Mft&
lacca ;  and  several  persons  of  high
distinction,  as  well  as  the  chief
Dutch  inhabftants  were  pleased  to
attend  the  ceremony.  ThecoUegv>
since  erected,  stands  on  the  mlsrikm ,
premises,  in   an   open   and   aliy
situation,  close  to  the  western  gate
of  the  town,  and  commands  a  flue
view  of  tte  roads  and  of  the  sea.
At  this  time  a  ¥vifd  was  formed '
for  widows  and  orphans   of  tbo
Ultra  Ganges  Mission-^the  ChhMse
schools  were  in  a  flourishing  stete
— tracts-  were  extensively  oIkiia
lated— the  work  of  translation  wff
making  rapid  progress-^tfae  press
was  vigorouslyemployed — andmueb
was  done  in  the  direct  commnnlca*
tion  of  tiie  Goq)el.

About  this  period  3  Chinese
schools  were  going  on  prosperously,
and  the  Malabar  scho<d  was  well
attended ;  in  the  English  and  Mo*'
lay  school  ievei«\Ykui!yQcK4Vr|«\ft&


MAL
iMrned  to   tssd  the  Holr  Serip-
imtm  ;  t.  t/laSaj  Kbool,  which  «u


opened)  anda/rmairMalsficbocd,
tha  flnt  Brtabltihinent  of  the  Und
In  Malacca,  wai  cammenced.  On
June  1,  ISil,  Mr.  tben  Dr.  Milne
.pobllclf  baptlud  a  heathen  voman
(her  father  wai  ■  Chlnen,  and  her
dMtheraSlameK);  andonthegth
of  Jul;  follonlriK,  Mr.  ThonuFD
baptlied  a  Malaji,  all  of  whoiD
were  ■pparanlly  lincere  coafert*  to
Chrlitianlt]'.

la  contequence  of  the  deceaaa
of  Dt.  Milne,  which  look  place
Jan.  S,  18ii,— the  Cblneae  mt-
Tlcea  preiloiuly  coadacted  were
neoeaurlly  luspended.  During  a
tUU  which  Dr.  Morrffon  paid  to
Malacca,  howerer,  they  wrre  re-
•unedrauT  times  on  the  Sabbath,
«nd  twice  on  week  daj-i:  s  Chinese
youth,  formeilj  s  itudent  in  the
Anglo  Cbloese  College,  ocea-
donellj  antited  In  tbeie  lervlces.
Thii  ladlvidiiol,  who  underalandi
both  the  FIttikeeii  and  Cantoa
dlalflCta,  WBi  alio  employed,  IB
connexion  with  the  mliaian,  as  a
pidillc  reader,  explaining  the  Scrip-
tore*  b>  hii  countrymen  according
to  hU  abllitri  and  occaitooal^
conducting  Cbrlrtian  wonhip  in  the
Pagan  temple,  where  Dr.  Milne
formerly  preached.  The  Malayan
female  servanta,  and  the  female
FortugueMserraotawbo  understand
Malay,  belonging  to  the  mteslon
compound,  Assembled  every  Sab-
bath erenlng,  when  the  Scliptuies
were  read,  and  an  exbariatlou
gtTen    in  Malay  by   Mrs.

On  the  30th  of  May,  1S23,  the
printing  of  tbe  wholeChineM  version
oftheScriptureswasflnltlicil:  Afa,
a  Chinese  convert,  had  the  honour
both  to  commence  and  to  complete
this  work,  having  arrived  from
China  for  Uiat  purpose.  The  num-
ber of  students  on  the  foundation
o{  the  college,  was  ttwn  \&,  Uu,\


Theae  jouUh  bad  profenedl]  •  L

"  ChiUtisnity,  and,  gi      '

ift,  ablered  with  t
eheerfulnttN    into     Ibe    i^^K


recant aceoont  of  Uie  staletfl

miulwi  i«  a«  follows : —

.     ObMM  SeAooU.—"  tlie  nik    £

her  of  thMO  scbooli  U  1,  Maw  ,
Ing  Iron  Mo  u>  950  boji.  11f  '.
BnaHeondactedoudecidedluCUfr   J
tiao  principles.      The  DepoUH  \
Tlsited  and  Ibstrucled  each  olM   i
In  Juuai7 1 8^8,  and  so  far  n^ '
were  able  ta  judge,  wereiitl
both  with  the  (iroKren  of  thai
and  the  pribciples  on  whlglt
fcbooU  an  coodiicted."  _   ,

gorenmBnttiasengagedtaaitfrf  J


iobabltantt,  has  also  been  of


It  170  Malay  M
icled  Id  tbaag*   ,
nity.     ThaattH


who  an  Instructed  li

plesof  Cbrtttlotiity.

(cbooli  ar«  Under  the  mpniiiMft
«ae«  of  Mi,  HiiDi)ihr^«,  «&>)■  ,
the  cbaigs  of  the  Malay  mad*  !
themlNlon.ancj  wboseattalnoiA  l
In  Malmyan  qualify  him  £3rp)  '
lag  theteln,''  .

ChlneM  aerviceii    continw  '-"^

perfonned«Tury  morning  at

Ing  bi  the  CaUege  Hall,  wlran  d  \
the  studenta  attend.  Da  the  Sdr  K
bath,  betldeii  three  Aort  ledam  1,
there  ate  ofrier  religion  eienM  j
adapted  io  Imbue  the  cnind  Wlb  ,
trutti,  and  to  impress  it  upon  IM  !
coniclenee.  The  ftiundatlaa  of  Ih  1 1
chapel,  wblch  is  being  ereeladll  I
this  station,  was  laid  on  the  W  |j


of  J


It  the  U


deputation  were   there,
derable  number  of  persons,  o
ferent   natloai,    attended   on  i»  r


"■  ■'sill


MAL

by  Messn.  IVerman,
^u  )BDd  Humphreys,  m  Eng-
l^hliiegQ^  and  Malayan.  The
•nicBifl  oif  the  chapel^  which
bpgi*  secured  to  the  society,  are
mtt  by  30.  The  missionaries
1^  that  the  subscriptions  on  the
I  towards  defrayiDg  the  ex-
B  attending  its  erection,  have
Mad  their  most  sanguine  ex-
Kttans;  but  they  hope,  never-
ni»  that  friends  at  home  will
iMn  in  the  work.''
bip  missionaries  still  continue
ttnerate  in  the  interior  of  the
let  of  Malacca,  for  the  purpose
npftiching  to  the  Chinese ;  on
sb  OGcasIons  they  are  uniformly
iia|MUiied  by  some  of  the  stu-
)m,  belonging  to  the  Anglo-
wmm  college.  They  express  a
1^  tbat  by  thus  taking  the
Mie  youths,  belonging  to  the
tj^p  with  them  on  their  preach-
tfiaJn,  they  may  be  gradually
Hd  fcnr  the  work  in  which,  it  U
HSitly  desired,  they  may  even-
ij  engage,  viz.  preaching  the
pd  to  their  fellow-countrymen.
..Kidd  conploys  a  portion  of  his
9  In  gohig  out  among  the
pk!,  and  conversing  with  them
n  religious  subjects.  To  such
■•  able  to  read,  he  gives  tracts ;
HKh  as  are  not,  he  explains  a
Hem  or  some  suitable  book.
enl  works  are  prepared,  and
en  ore  in  progress.  Mr.  Kidd
translated  into  Cbinese2several
nous  on  the  leading  doctrines
CauteUanlty,  some  of  which
e  been  ifinted  and  put  into
mlation.  By  this  method,  he
nabled  to  promote  his  own  im-
roment  in  the  language,  and,  at
jame  time,  provide  useful  books
tta  heathen.

ti^U  Chinete  CoUege.—YTom
My  1886,  to  June,  1826,  six
Inaee  youths  were  received  on
.  foimdation ;  and  8,  during  the
M  period,  left  the  inrtitution.
a  number  of  students  on  the
>k^  at  ibe  tenDination  of  the


MAL

above-mentioned  period, -was  80 f
of  whom  17  were  supported  by  tha
college  funds,  and  3  by  private
individuals.  There  were,  at  the
same  time,  6  candidates  $  someol
whom,  it  was  probable,  would  ba
admitted  on  the  foundation.  Two
Dutch  youths  attend  the  CQUam^
fdr  the  purpose  of  acquiring  ua
English  and  Chiiwse  langnagei.
The  total  number  of  studenti^
exclusive  of  an  evening  class,  coa-
sisting  of  Chinese  and  Portugoepey
who  are  learning  English,  was  88.
The  moral  And  literary  effect  desired
has  not  as  yet  been  produced*  but
it  is  hoped  ground  has  been  gauied^t

MALAPEETZEE,  a  towd  of
Corannas,  near  the  source  of  tha
Malareen,  S.  Africa,  about  100  m.
E.  Lattakoo,  and  1000  N.  B.  Caper
Town.  In  1813,  the  Rev.  Mr.
Campbell,  of  the  L.  M,  5.,  explored
this  region,  with  a  view  to  tha
establishment  of  a  mission;  and
obtained  permission  of  the  chief,
and  a  minority  of  the  inhabitaidi»
to  send  missionaries  amoiuf  them,
though  they  had'  never  beraie  seen'
a  white  man.  His  propomlt  were,
in  lilce  manner,  favourably  rece^red
at  Makoon's  Krttai,  situated  S.  of
Malapeetzee,  which  is  the  residanea
of  Makoon,  the  chief  of  aU  tha
Bushmans  in  this  part  of  Afiff^-
In  1817,  Cupido  Kakkalah,  aBaUva
Hottentot  teacher,  Wat  statkmed
at  Malapeetzee,  and  laboured  with
considerable  success  about  8  yean  9
when  he  removed  to  Mohaiee  with
part  of  the  inhabitants,  on  accoQBt
of  the  scarcity  of  grass.  Tha
others  settled  about  80  m.  firdlB
that  place,  and  are  still  attached  io
the  mission.

MALDA,  a  populous  town,  and
capital  of  a  district  of  the  same
name,  situated  on  the  Ganges,
about  170  m.  N.  Calcutta,  £.  long.
88«4',N.lat.26«3'.  Tha  B.  ML\
estabUshed  a  mission  here  in  18 IS  \
when  the  station  at  Oamalijf
was  removed  to  JSngCisK  Bnsmt^
near  this  place^  an^Yna  itofiA>M«&


MAL

known    81    the    Malda    Station.
Though  thii  wm  among  the  flnt

Iilacei,  in  Bengal,  where  the  in-
lahitanU  beard  the  Gospel  in  their
own  language,  it  has  met  with  a
less  favourable  reception,  than  in
many  others  where  it  has  been
more  recently  introduced.

MALL  AG  rM,  a  large  parish
on  the  island  of  Ceylon,  8  miles
from  Tillipally,  towards  Jaffna-
|wtam,  nearly  in  the  centre  of  the
i  parishes  which  are  under  the
care  of  the  Americtin  missionaries
in  the  district  of  Jaffna.  In  this,
as  in  others,  they  have  permis-
sion from  government  to  occupy
the  church  buildings  and  glebe
lands.

Soon  after  the  establishment  of
the  mission  at  Tillipally,  the  mis-
sionaries opened  a  school  here,  and
commenced  preaching  regularly
on  the  Sabbath,  in  the  court-
house of  the  Dutch  magistrate.  In
1818,  Francis  Maleappa,  a  native
preacher,  who  hw  since  removed  to
Oodoovilie,  was  stationed  here,  in-
structed in  English,  superintended
the  moral 'instruction  of  the  Tamul
schools,  read  to  the  people  on  the
Sabbath,  and  superintended  several
schools  in  the  vicinity.  The  mis-
sionaries at  the  other  stations
continue  to  preach  here  on  the
Sabbath,  and  make  frequent  visits
'  abroad.  In  18il,  a  Tiimul  Bible
Society  was  formed  at  this  place,
composed  almost  entirely  of  hea-
thens, who  pay  an  annual  subscrip-
tion for  the  spread  of  the  word  of
God  in  their  own  language.  During
the  first  year,  nearly  300  rix-dollars
were  collected.

MALTA,  a  celebrated  island
in  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  under
British  authority,  memorable  for
the  shipwrecic  of  St.  Paul.  It  is
about  60  miles  S.  Sicily,  and  nearly
60  in  circumference.  £.  long.  14^
10*,  N.  lat.  35«  51'.  The  shore  is,
for  the  most  part,  abrupt  and
rugged,  there  being  bul  Vno
coavenieni  harbours^    one  c«Ji\ft^^  >3aft  moiin^


UAL

Mam,  tte  otkert  -oa  th»-
of  the  idand,  callad  Man  IfapkLJ
The  island  ii  ilranglj  iorUMi  I
garrifons  and  hulwiikit
which  90^000  men  woyU  tej
site,  raietia,  tbe  c^Mb
at  the  N.  end  Af  the  Idu^  IIl  „
entirely  of  atone,  and  oobUWI
or  25,000  Inhabitant!.  IMm
given  to  the  Knighhi  of  8tJ»
of-  JenuHdem,  hy  the  Bv|4l'
Charles  V.,  in  1530,  to  «I|M
was  subject  tlU  17M;  «taft
was  forcibly  taken  bom  ttntfc
Buonaparte.  In  1800,'li«M<lr
sieged  and  captured  .faj  Ifaa  BMb
to  whom  it  was  confinnid  lihli
treaty  of  1814.  .  *

The  surface  of  the  WMi||»
nerally,  levels  with  a  nU  MM
unproductive,  but  .much  lapijp
by  cultivation.  The  iOaai  liii'
ded  into  about  SO


■U


k

Q

ships— a  lasal  incladtaya  4HP  i
and  the  surrounding  oountqii  4p  i
inhabitants,  with  thoM  on.M  i
a  small  neighbouring  idmA<9  %
estimated  at  110,000.  TliifHP  I
generally  miserably  poQr,aM^  |
plorably  ignorant.  It  Is  thnK  j
that  among  a  populationof  M0A  |
not  more  than  1000  wentM^  i
read  or  ^rite ;  and  In  one  iBVk  \
containing  6000  inhnhttaat%-/iff  1
30  had  ever  been  instmctBd  i^ii
elements  of  knowledge.  Itt
language  is  a  dialect  of  tiw  Airilhi
though,  tiU  missionarici  vldMP
island,  it  could  haidlr  be  flUfiH
to  have  been  reduced  toavriJlP
form.  The  principal  Uten^  tatf-
tutlons  are,  the  liteaiy*.  of  if
Knights  and  the  jreraiti»  (M^i
or  University  of  Mal^ ;  bolh  MV
under  the  regulation  of  tha  BiM
government.  Tlie  Ubniy  -^tf-
tains  50  or  60,000  Yolomei^pqrflf
ancient  Latin  works,  though  Jta
are  many  Italian  and  tome  taMk
books.  The  llbrai^  Is  OM  Iv
the  reception  of  the  Utnia,  ^
others,  at  stated  horns ;  botno  biiii
y  vxft  Y^nfi&tkad  to  be  carried  fit*


^  ^versify  are  from]
^' V^StJ^d  in  1822,  aboi
^  ly^J*^©  religion  of  1


JJ^ewitjr  are  from  15  to  20  profes-

lut  200  students.

sw  «ae  reugton  oi  the  Maltese  is

,  vlj^usively  Roman  Catliolic.    The

^,  y^mon    people    are    designedly

^-*  ?'V  by  their  religious  instructors

B:  ',  ^  ^  ''^te  of  ignorance,  and  readily

2  ..'^oUere  whatever  their  infatuated

;j  .  'Uriests  tell  them  is  true.    The  con-

^  ;  ';4Kloii8  of  the  late  treaty  secure  to

.  the   people    an    undisturbed   pos-

'  wtBion  of  their  favourite  religion.

'-  The  Jnpusition  at  Malta,  which  a

^ibw  years  ago  was  in  full  force,

'tes     been,     under     the     present

.ttdministration,    converted    into  a

"  konital.

The  island  of  Malta,   from  its
'Central  situation,  and  the  protection
;^^nted  to  all  individuals  of  different
-  -nations,  has  become  a  place  of  vast
Importance    and    interest   to    the
'  Cluristian  world.     It  is  a  kind  of
'focus,  or  rallying  point,   of  mis-
lionaries  from  different  countries,
nHio  wish  to  perfect  themselves  in
»     Hie  languages  of  the  adjacent  na-
tloiif,  and  the  head-quarters  of  all
-the  various  missions  destined  to  the
rilores  of  these  inland  seas.    From
fliis  place  there  is  a  ready  commu-
nication with  Europe,  Asia,  and
Africa,  with  all  the  islands  of  the
I      Mediterranean   and    Levant,    and
I      with    those    particular     countries
which  have  been  distinguished  and
lendered  memorable  by  the  grandest
numil  movements  in  the  history  of
mankind, — ^tbe  first  establishment
and  subsequent   promulgation    of
Christianity,     the    dispersions   of
God's  chosen  people,  and  the  diffii-
rion    of    Mahomedanism,     nearly
coincident  with  the  rise  of  Papacy.
Here    Jews,    Mahomedans,     and
Fagans,  may  be  addressed  by  the
judicious,  pious,  and  learned,  upon
-    fuhlects    connected    with    Cluris-
tianity,  and  the  unyielding  claims
it  lias  upon  the  obedience  of  man-
kind. Malta  is  visited  yearly  by  mul-
titudes from  all  the  circumjacent
Islands  and  countries,  and  is  the


MAL

resort  of  many  men  of  literary
distinction.  In  1810,  and  some
years  before  and  after,  not  less
than  40,000  foreigners  resided
there,  of  whom  12,000  were
Greeks,  and  6  or  7000  Jews.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Blomfield,  who
was  sent  out  by  the  L.M,S,  in
1811,  to  promote  the  knowledge
of  the  Gospel  among  the  Greeks,
was  directed  to  reside  for  a  time
at  Malta,  where  he  might  have
an  opportunity  to  learn  the  Italian
language,  and  to  perfect  himself
in  the  modern  Greek,  as  well  as
to  obtain  the  best  information
concerning  the  places  to  which
he  might  afterwards  direct  his
course.  While  faithfully  fulfilling
his  trust,  he  preached  to  a  number
of  Englishmen  resident  at  Valetta,
and,  it  is  believed,  with  spiritual
advantage  to  many.  He  was  also
active  in  distributing  copies  of  the
Scriptures,  of  Dr.  Doddridge's
Rise  and  Progress  in  Italian,  and
of  religious  tracts,  some  of  which
were  sent  to  Sicily,  <fec.  F][e  was
informed  that  a  gentleman  who
visited  the  Morea,  left  two  Greek
Testaments  at  a  convent,  with
which  the  inhabitants  were  so
delighted,  that  they  rang  the  bells
for  joy,  and  performed  some  ex-
traordinary religious  ceremony.
In  the  midst  of  these  cheering
circumstances,  however,  Mr.  B.
resigned  his  work  to  receive  his
reward.

In  Sept.  1816,  the  Rev.  Mr.
Lowndes  of  the  L.  M.  S.  was  sent
out  for  the  same  purposes  as  those
contemplated  for  his  excellent  pre-
decessor, and  his  ministry  was  not
in  vain.

The  Rev.  S.  S.  Wilson  of  the  same
society  arrived  at  Malta  at  the  com-
mencement of  1810 ;  in  consequence
of  which  Mr.  L.  left  that  place,  to
carry  into  effect  the  various  objects
of  his  mission :  he  afterwards  settled
at  Zante,  and  ultimately  at  CQt(\k,
Mr.  W.,  in   addV\.\o\i  \o   "tv^^^^^

a  a  ^W


Mal


powd  of  fereral  Mqieet^Uife  WlHi


pn^iis:en)ents,     prepared     ieveral

books  for  publication  in  modern  produced  about  15/.  per
(;ri*ek.  In  1^23,  his  confn^e^tion  i  and,  durlngf  one  winter,
hH(l  increnxeii  to  about  :250  hearers,
oC  whom  a  considerable  nomber
ffiiTe  satisfactory  evidence  of  ge-
nuine piety,  and  many  others  of
niorit  promiitini^  moral  qualities.
The  number  of  communicants  was
increased  to  60.  In  the  8abbath-
M'hool  there  were  about  30  English
children ;  20  Greek  bo>i  and  girls
almattendedywho  learned  Mr.  Wil-
son *n  Ci  reek  catechism,  and  passages
ol  Scripture  both  in  Greek  and
Italian.  Mr.  Wilson  resumed
his  (ireek  ser^'ices ;  tbe  attend-
ance, including  children,  was  about
.'>0.  During  his  absence  in  Eng-
land, the  Aniericun  Brethren
commenced  a  jimali  school  for
(!rpek:«;  an  English  yonng  lad}*,
whom  Mr.  Wilson  formerly  in-
structed in  modem  Greek,  had  the
rharge  of  the  female  department
of  it.  The  boys  were  taught  by
Mr.  Temple,  assisted  by  Mr.  Wil-
si^n.  The  latter  devoted  a  portion
<»f  every  day  to  the  iiiFtniction  of
n  few  Greek  boys,  from  Scio,  in
ancient  Greek,  English,  and  Ita-
lian. One  of  these  boys  translated
R  considerable  part  of  Turner's
*•  Arts  and  Sciences,"  and  pro-
«'ee(Ied  with  the  work  under  Mr.
Wilson's  direction.

After  his  return  to  Malta,
lie  printed,  in  modern  Greek,
fit  the  American  mission- press,
nhout  10,000  books  and  tracts  ;
other  works  were  in  progress;  a
RtflfgimiB  Tract  Society,  formed
some  time  before,  in  connexion
with  the  English  chapel,  donbled  its
funds ;  about  700  tracts,  of  which
a  portion  were  sold ;  and  about  60
Bibles  and  Testaments,  in  Greek,
French,  Italian,  English,  and  other
languages,  were  circulated;  some
of  them  were  given  to  poor  Greeks
proceeding  to  the  wair.
A  "  Pfltff '#  fVorkin^  Society,


ty


clothiog  to  about  40

The  last  report  ■ayas-^^^fll

English  congregmtlon  goefe  itt  ^

and  the  Sabbath-eebool   It  hi

prosperoiis  atate.    Mr.'  WttilB  «■

tinuet  to  preach  once  a  vi^ft

Italian;  and  the  aentcei  M^

tended    with    encoaragemMrti^w

regards  both   native  MaHflMfli

Greeks.    The  miBtateriil  hU*

of  Mr.  Wilson  oonttane  te  Ir*

tended    with     qtlrltnal  bMBlk'fe

his  hearen.     Sereral  wtthilHk

been  printed^  during  the  pHk^

at  tlie  mission  printing<i-aBC0i  n

printing  of   Mr.  Wlbon^  mM

Greek  translation  of  the  Her.  Ml

Burder's  Village  Sermons  lailia

commeneedy    and    is   rapll^#'

vancing.    A  colleetlon  of-^yHk

translated    into    Italian  tj  Ifc

Wilson,  has  been  printed  at  OHk

A  Catechism  on  the  SaenMK^

by  the  late  Rev.  Mr.  Bra«%«f

Haddington,  translated  inte  Mhi

by  Mr.  W.,  is  also  in  eommd

printing  at  the  same  plnee.  Jfr*

Wilson  has  engaged,  as  Hn  W***

tice  in  the  printing-olBce,  b  AmI

youth,  to  whom  he  has  glTei'MW

instruction  in  languages,  andM

him  a  great  acquisition.    Of  tte

Greek    Spelling-book    and   Dr.

Watts's   Catechism,    1000  oopls

each  have  been  sent  to  CwvlM-

tinople,  and  500  of  each  sdl^iv

tbe  purpose  of  being  sent  ^sAn.

School-books  have  also  been  nst

to  Cerlgo,  for  the  use  of  the  dU-

dren  of  Greek  refugees  fron  Mb-

solonghl.    The  elementaiy  sehool-

books  and  tracts,  in  modem  QnA,

prepared  by  Mr.  Wilson,  bavefeect

widelydlspersed.  Ineaseoftbellbe-

ration  of  that  country, — an  eimt,

it  is  to  be  hoped,  not  nr  dtstaaV-

many  of  the  natives  will  be  ifi^f

to  go  immediately  Into  dmhest

parts   of  it,   for   the  pmpase  of


•ftaUished  by  Mn.  W\\80ii)  com-  \w^\A35»%  «ayl  ^oodttciing  scbsob


MAL

.opL'  th0  Lancasterian  plan,  who
IWSB  derived,  while  they  them-
tikiKca  were  under  tuition,  much
oi  their  fitness  for  the  work  from
I|l9  ichool  publications  furnished
lor  Mr.  Wilson.''

7he  Ladies'  Malta  Charitable
Sooi^i  commenced  by  Mrs.  Wil-
ttHkf  continues  to  afford  relief  to
bidigsnt  and  infirm  persons  in
Afolte;  and  by  aQbrding  the  means
of  providing  their  children  with
49Q«&t  clothing,  is  instrumental  to
their  admission  into  the  Normal
Sok9oU.  Thtt  amount  of  receipts,
imthe  year  ending  31st  December,
1686y  was  upwards  of  ^51.
.  The  attention  of  the  C.  M,  S.
toviJDig  been  drawn  to  the  Medi-
tBfcanean  as  an  important  sphere
of  l4dK>ur,  it  was  determined  to
■end  thither  a  representative.  The
Rtv.  Wm.  Jowett  offered  himself
lor  this  service ;  and  after  due  pre-
pantion,  proceeded,  in  the  year
1816,  to  Malta,  as  the  most  suit-
Hble  place  of  residence.  The
flociety  had  adopted,  on  the  sug-

festioB  of  the  late  Rev.  Dr.
luohanan,  the  plan  of  sending  a
IMeraiy  representative  to  a  sphere
of  this  nature,  where  direct  mis-
sionwy  labours  were  not  practi-
cable; and  Mr.  Jowett  had  the
benefit  of  much  friendly  conference
with  that  distinguished  man,  who
had  himself  led  the  way,  and  given
ma.  admirable  model,  in  the  con-
dncting  of  Christian  researches.
The  objects  of  the  society,  in
establishing  representatives  in  the
Mediterranean  were— the  acqui-
aition  of  information  relative  to
the  state  of  religion  and  of  society,
with  the  best  means  of  its  meli-
oration, and  the  propagation  of
Christian  linowledge,  by  the  press,
by  journeys,  and  by  educiitlon.
Mr.  Jowett  returned,  with  bis
family,  to  this  country,  for  the
renovation  of  hU  health,  in  the
year  1820.  During  tiie  6  years
of  his  absence,  he  had  been  resi*


MAL

dent  ebiefiy  in  Malta ;  but  he  had
spent  a  considerable  time  in  Corfu,,
and  had  twice  visited  £gypt  and
some  parts  of  Greece.

The  results  of  this  visit  to  the
Mediterranean  have  been  in  many
respects  highly  important;  these
he  has  since  given  to  the  public,
in  a  very  interesting  and  valuable
volume,  which  has  awakened  a
lively  interest  in  behalf  of  the
sphere  in  which  his  energies  have
been  engaged.  Mr.  Jowett  sub-
sequently returned  to  Malta,  and
has  since  been  variously  occupied-
in  benevolent  exertions.

The  ji,  B,  C,  F.  M.  commenced,
a  missicm  here  in  1820,  with  the
design  of  benefitting  the  mingled
inhabitants  of  Palestuie.  The  first,
missionaries,  sent  by  the  Board
to  the  Holy  Land,  were  the  Rev.
Messrs.  L»  Parsons  and  P.  Fisk,
who  arrived  at  Smyrna,  Jan.  15,
1820,  and  were  cordially  welcomed
by  the  ohaplain  and  other  gentle-
men. After  obtaining  the  requisite
information  for  the  government  of
their  future  measures,  they  em-
barked for  the  island  of  Scio,
where  they  spent  some  time  in  tlie
study  of  the  modern  Greek,  and
soon  after  visited  the  7  churches  of
Asia.  Mr.  P.  then  went  to  Jeru-
salem, where  he  spent  some  montlis
in  di^buting  the  word  of  life,
and  rdigious  tracts  In  0  different
languages.  In  Jan.  1 822,  in  con-
sequence of  his  declining  health,
he  sailed  with  Mr.  F.  for  Alex-
andria, where,  on  the  10th  of  Feb.,
he  yielded  up  his  spirit  to  him  who
gave  it.  The  Rev.  D.  and  Mrs.
Temple  arrived  at  Malta,  Feb.  22,
1822.  A  printing  establishment
was  also  sent;  which  has  been,
and  will  probably  continue  to  he,
a  powerful  and  useful  engine  in
promoting  the  designs  of  the  mis-
sion :  this  press  was  procured,  mid
is  to  be  kept  in  operation  for  the
term  of  5  years,  by  benevolent
individuals   in    Boston*      It  vru^


MAL

calculated  that  in  about  two  ywn
there  were  printed  by  it  more  than
two  million  and  a  half  of  pagea  of
Telifi:i()ux  tracts.

Tlie  Rev.  Mesirs.  Ooodell  and
Bird,  with  their  wives,  arrived  at
Malta,  Jan.  81 ,  1823.  These  mis-
sionaries were  under  the  direction
of  the  Jmerican  Board  ;  but  were
supported  by  a  benevolent  associ-
ation in  the  city  of  New  York,
entitled  the  Palestine  Miuionary
Society.  After  their  arrival,  they
continued  at  Malta  till  October  ;
when,  in  compliance  with  the
wishes  of  their  brethren,  they
sailed  for  the  Holy  Land,  where
they  expected  permanently  to  be
scuttled.  On  their  remo\'al  they  re-
mark : —

*'  Agreeably  to  our  instructions,
we  have  devoted  our  principal
time  and  attention  to  the  attain-
ment of  the  languafi^  ;  and,  in
the  mean  time,  have  assisted  in
preRchinfjT  several  times  a  week,  in
English,  to  verj'  attentive  hearers ;
in  conducting  various  religious
meetings  with  different  classes  of
society,  in  different  stages  of  reli-
gious knowledge  and  experience;
and  in  managing  a  Sabbath-school,
consisting  chiefly  of  English  and
Greek  children  and  youth  of  both
sexes,  who  have  committed  to  me-
morj'  about  40,000  verses  of  Scrip-
ture and  hymns.  We  have  been
happy  in  possessing  these  imme-
diate means  of  usefulness,  while
we  have  been  engaged  in  study;
and  we  trust  a  future  day  will  shew
that  the  labour  bestowed  upon
Malta,  by  other  missionaries  and  by
ourselves,  has  not  been  in  vain."

The  Rev.  Mr.  Fisk,  in  com-
pany with  Mr.  Wolff",  of  the  L,
J.  S.,  and  Mr.  King,  of  the  French
Protestant  Missionary  Society  at
Paris,  left  Malta,  Jan.  3,  1823,
on  a  tour  to  Egypt  and  Jerusa-
lem. While  on  their  way,  at
Alexandria,  they  preached  in  5
different  languages  to  small  assem-


i


MAL

bliei,  and  digtrRratad  te  BftH
or  portioDi  of  it,  in  10  lugviHi
On  April  96,  ibmy  eatmd  U
Holy  City,  where  tliQj  ipcBt  fOH
months,  labouring  for  the  iplriW
good  of  its  mingled  IphiWiifc
Though  the  miaioneitei  of  fc
American  Board,  in  comMMimi
mission  to  the  Innd  of  promlH^
been  called  to  endnre  mtaay
ships  and  deprimtionay  and  to
rience  numerous  din  imiiigiiiiht
yet  there  are  mmnycinwadrnm
calculated  to  encourage  and  ■!<
mate  them  to  more  penaMfev
diligence  and  fidelity.  GiedH  M
Armenians  manifest  an  inocadK
eagerness  to  obtain  the  woiii
truth,  and  Jews  and  Mabamaim
are  disposed  to  listen  with  e»
dour  to  arguments  in  Smaa  d
Christianity.

Dr.  Naudi  has  also  been  an  dt
cient  and  active  agent  In  piuisitt^
the  cause  of  truth,  and  the  Ub'
rests  of  the  Medltemnesn  bI^
sion.  He  was  educated  a  RoHi
Cathcdic ;  but  was  indoesd  is
change  his  views  in  consequsMe  d
reading  some  religious  hooka,  mk
to  Malta  by  the  B.  and  F,ASk
As  early  as  1818,  he  suggested  ti
the  society  the  propriety  of  sdi^
blishing  a  permanent  mkrinn  it
Malta,  and  offered  to  wccamfmf
a  mheionaiy  under  their  uamjm
on  a  tour  of  investigation.  wUs
engaged  as  a  physician  in  :fhff
island,  he  was  very  active  in  «•
tending  the  knowledge  of  a  en-
cified  Saviour.  In  1817,  he  w
received  under  the  patronage  sf
the  society,  and  employed  in  cob*
piling  and  translating  into  te
eastern  languages;  in  wfaidk  oc-
cupation he  has  heen  emtaeal^
useful.

The  society  has  a  printing  cite*
Uishment  at  Malta,  at  which  the
Scriptures  and  religious  tracts  have
been  printed  in  several  langoagBk

The  Reverend  J.  King,  ftoB
\\i<ft  FrencK  PTOtetCosiiC  Jffiii'saniif


MAL

Saeieiy  at  Paris,  commenced  his
Mnnhs  here  in  1828.  Mr.  King,
»  native  of  the  United  States,
tat  Vwn  residing  in  Paris,  was
Uwtuced  to  join  the  Palestine
nlaioii  for  a  limited  period,  in
eoBsequence  of  the  urgent  solici-
lattons  of  Mr.  Fisk,  soon  after
i§r*  Parsons'  death.  The  circum-
Srteoce  of  his  going  from  Paris
awakened  in  a  few.  individuals  a
spirit  of  missionary  enterprise,
wliich  resulted  in  the  formation  of
^fi  society.  Mr.  K.  was  received
under  their  patronage,  for  at  least
one  year,  but  was  to  be  under  the
direction  q{  the  American  Board,
He  laboured,  in  conjunction  with
llielr  missionaries,  since  his  arrival,
which  was  November  2d,  1822.
With  Mr.  K.  the  society  sent  2
fmmts  of  Greek  types  in  aid  of  the
mission.

The  following  are  among  the
important  institutions  that  have  re-
sulted from  missionary  efforts  at
Malta  and  its  vicinity.

■  The  Malta  B,  S,  was  organized
in  1817,  Though,  on  account  of
tlie  Kilsturbed  state  of  Greece,  the
society  has  lieen  considerably  em-
barrassed in  its  operations  in  that
quarter;  yet,  through  various  chaur
nsls,  the  Italian,  Greek,  Arme-
irien,  Arabic,  Syriac,  Hebrew,  and
French  Bibles  and  Testaments  have
been  distributed  in  most  of  the  other
•oontries  bordering  on  the  shores  of
ttte  Mediterranean  and  the  Levant.
The  vital  in^rests  of  this  society
baveheen  greatly  promoted,  and  the
sphere  of  its  operations  much  en-
kiiged,  by  the  j4meriean,  Church,
sad  Lotuion  S,  missionaries.  In
their  itinerations  into  the  ai^acent
countries  they  have  been  furnished
with  Bibles  by  this  society,  and
have  obtained  subscriptions  to  aid
its  future  progress.

In  1818,  a  school  was  established
at  Castie  Zeiltm,  \fy  Don  Lugi
Cammilleri,    a  Aoman    CatholSc


MAN

priest  This  enlightened  man  com-
menced his  school  ip  a  private,
house,  at  his  own  expense,  with  3(|
boys.  Having  received  his  educa-
tion in  Spain,  the  Spanish  Consul^
on  being  made  acquainted  with  his
design,  seconded  Ids  efforts  by  con-}
tributing  upwards  of  3000  dollars
for  the  erection  of  a  commodious
school-house.  In  1823,  the  number
of  pupils  in  this  school  was  100»
A  female  school  was  attached  to  i\
in.  1822,  which,  in  1823,  contained
dO  scholars.  Mr.  Cammilleri's
fnstructions  are  gratuitous,  and  h^
expresses  a  strong  desire  to  have
his  countr3rmen  Income  more  en-
lightened and  less  superstitioiis.

The  Malta  Jews*  Society  was
commenced  May  0,  1823.  Thi?
object  of  this  association  is  to  form
a  centre  of  correspondence  and
communication  for  all  societies
wiilch  may  wish  to  send  missiona-
ries into  these  paris  for  the  conver-
sion of  the  Jews.

A  School  Society  was  formed  at
Valetta,  in  1819,  through  the
efficient  exertions  of  Mr.  Jowett
and  Mr.  Wilson ;  apd  a  convenient
room  was  soon  appropriated  by  the
government  to  ihf  use  of  au  jsh-
creasing  school  under  its  direction.
Lieutenant-governor  Power  is  the
President ;  and  his  Lady  Patroness
of  a  female  school,  which  was  esta-
blished by  means  of  the  unremit^
ting  efibrts  of  a  few  benevolent
ladies.  The  number  of  pupils  iii
both  these  schools,  ip  ISilj,  was
about  320 ;  and  the  whole  number
that  had  been  admitted,  from  their
commencement,  was  606  boys  and
330  girls.  These  schools  are  con-
ducted on  the  Lancasterian  system,
and  exert  an  extensive. and  siUutary
influence.  Aschoorfias  been  re-
cently commenced  on  the  island  of
Gozo  ;  and  preparations  axe  making
to  open  them  in  several  villages  in
Malta

MANAPAR,  a  town    in   th^
aeS        '  341


MAN

CarnaliCy  Hindoostan.  Themisiion-
ariei  of  the  C.  K.  S,  have  laboured
here  ^ith  considerable  ffuccen.

In  the  latter  part  of  the  ISth
centiiryi  there  was  a  chapel,  in
which  a  catechist  officiated,  besides
superintending  a  school.

MANEPY,  a  parish  in  the  dis-
trict of  Jaflna,  Ceylon,  4|  miles
N.  by  W.  from  Jaftiinpatam  and  4
from  Batticotta.  Within  S  m.  of
the  church  and  mansion-house  be-
longing to  the  mission  are  10  idol
temples,  where  heathen  offerings
are  daily  presented.

The  Ilev.  H.  Woodward,  of  the
j4,  B,  i\  F.  M.,  commenced  a  mis-
sion here,  in  the  early  part  of  1821,
but  wus  soon  obliged  to  remove,  in
consequence  of  ill  health ;  and  the
Rev.  Mr.  Spaulding  immediately
succeeded  him,  as  resident  at  the
station,  and  superintendent  of  its
concerns.  Before  the  establish-
ment of  the  mi!«ion,  the  missiona-
ries from  Batticotta  occasionally
laboured  here,  and  opened  schools.
The  first  school  >Kas  commenced  in
December,  1818,  and  soon  con-
tained more  than  60  boys.  In
182:2,  there  were  5  schools  con-
nected with  the  mission,  containing
about  260  pupils.  During  the  same
year,  a  boarding  school  was  begun,
which,  in  June,  1823,  consisted  of
16  boys  and  8  girls,  who  had  re-
ceived names  in  compliance  with
the  wishes  of  benevolent  individuals
by  whom  they  are  supported ;  and  6
others  were  on  trial.  The  children
have,  generally,  made  satisfactory
progress,  and  many  of  them  have
manifested  considerable  anxiety  for
their  spiritual  welfare.  The  native
preachers,  interpreters,  servants,
and  larger  bw  in  the  mission,  hold
a  meeting  once  a  month,  for  the
purpose  of  acquiring  religious  in-
telligence.   [See  JaffifUL.]

MANGEEA,  or  Manaia,  Da-
vida  and  Tiere,  two  native  teachers,
were  left  at  thisi  which  is  one  of


MAN

{be  Hunrey  Iriancto,  hj  tin  dgyiH
tion  from  the  Zr.  iT  &    iMiir'

the  first  two  mcmths  of  tbelr  l»
dence  on  the  Idand,  a  few  <
the  Gospel ; — ^that  nmnbeT  \
increased  to  180.  '^TheM
easily  distlngulahaUe/'  ngpi  Mfe
Bourne,  **  among  the  crowd  1W
collected  on  our  going  on  ikM;-
by  the  neatness  of  their  diea  mk
their  orderly  behaTiour*  We  pil»>
ceeded  to  the  teachers*  Imh^
which  we  found  equal  to  any,  al
superior  to  most,  of  the  hounif
the  natives  at  the  Society  Uak
Not  far  from  the  teachers'  hon^
is  the  chapel,  round  wUd  ftr
dwellings  of  the  Christian  aasBli
are  scattered.  The  number  ef  te*
habitants  is  from  1000  to  IMO;  ftl
people  who  have  emhraeed  CUh
tianity  are  diligent  in  their  lemi^B
a  few  are  banning  to  reed  111
Scriptures  ;  and  family  and  priiib
prayer  are  strictly  observed  WKtK%
them.  They  pay  great  respect  ti
their  teacher;  and  althoi^  tki
King  and  the  principal  part  of  1^
people  are  still  idolaterv,  yet  thir
are  all  upon  friendly  tenns  iili
Davida,  frequently  visiting  hin,  ui
bringing  him  presents  of  food.  AD
idolatrous  distinctions  liave  bea
abandoned  by  those  who  have  «■•
braced  Christianity.  Infntlcfth
being  here  unknown,  the  cUUm
are  numerous.  There  is  litfiB
sickness  among  the  people,  and  As
diseases  are  few.  They  dlifliy
great  Ingenuity  in  the  fabiicsftin
of  their  cloth,  canoes,  stone  ai%
and  ear-omaments ;  their  heidi
are  profusely  covered  with  flgocd
cloth,  red  beads,  and  sinnel^  of
beautiful  workmuuliip.  Theteerfc
ers  have  been  industrious  tai  ceitl-
vating  yams,  pumpkins,  and  iulIbMi
all  of  which  were  before  unknswi
here;  fowls  also,  and  hc^gs,  hen
been  introduced,  and  are  upon  the
increase.  We  left  some  sweet  f^
tatoes  for  seed,  which  will  fona  s

848


MAQ
ralnakle  addition  to  their  stock  of

'  MAQUASSE,  a  tovn  in  the
Bootchuana  country^  S.  Africa,
llemr  the  Maquasse  mountains,
■bout  120  m.  from  the  Great,  or
Yellow  River.  This  place  is  well
iU|i|>lied  with  water,  and  the  air  is
nlvbrious.  In  1823,  Sibbunel,  the
iebief,  with  his  people,  removed
fipom  Yattaba  to  Maquasse,  to
Mcape  the  fury  of  the  Mantatees ;
■nd  here  he  intended  to  form  a
pennanent  settlement  as  soon  as
the  country  was  relieved  from  the
confusion  that  had  arisen.  There
aie  about  500  houses  in  the  town,
end  a  number  of  considerable  vil-
lages in  the  neighbourhood,  with  a
vast  population  in  the  vicinity.  The
Inhabitants  are  an  interesting  hea-
then people,  believing  in  the  ex-
tftence  of  a  good  and  an  evil
being,  superior  to  themselves ;  they
seem,  however,  to  be  entirely  igno-
rant of  a  future  state  of  existence.
As  far  as  the  missionaries  have  been
vUe  to  ascertain,  they  have  not  the
smallest  vestige  of  religious  wor-
Aip  among  them.

The  /F.  M.  S.  sent  Messrs.
Hodgson  and  Archbell  hither,  in
1683.  Their  mission  was,  how-
eirer,  broken  up  by  the  invasion  of
the  Mantatees  and  other  native
tribes.  With  great  courage,  and
in  the  spirit  of  Christian  enter*
prise,  they  afterwards  proceeded  to
Itsre-establii^ment.  They  have  en-
dured, in  consequence  of  the  dis-
tance, and  the  stale  of  the  country,
many  privations  and  dangers,  but
they  are  hopeful  as  to  ultimate
success.  Mr.  A.  took  with  him  a
press  and  t^^pcs  from  the  Cape,  and
they  have  printed  an  elementary
school-book  (the  first  book,  ever
printed  in  that  language  or  country)
which  bears  the  impress  *'  Ma-
quasse, 1826.''  It  is  in  the  Sichuan
language  with  the  Roman  character.

MARQUESAS,   five  islands  in


MAR

the  Pacific  Ocean,  named  Chris-
tina,   Magdalena,   Dominica,    St.
Pedro,  and  Hood.    The  first  four
were  discovered  by  Quiros,  in  1595 ;
the  last  by  Cook,  in  1774.    Domi-
nica is   much   the  largest,  being
about  48  m.  in  circuit.    The  pro-
ducts of  these  islands  are  bread-
fruit,   bananas,    plantains,  cocoa-
nuts,    scarlet   beans,   paper   mul-
berries (of  the  bark  of  which  their
cloth  is   made),    casuarinas,  with
other  tropical    plants   and   trees.
The  Marquesans  are  of  large  sta*
ture,  well  made,  strong,  and  active,
of  a  tawny  complexion,  but  look
almost  black   by   being   tattooed
over  the  whole   body.     Some  oi
the  women  are  nearly  as  fair  as
Europeans,  and  among  them  tat-
tooing is  not  common,  and  then
only  on  the  hands  and  arms.  Their
language  much  resembles  that  of
the  Society  Islands.  Two  Tahitian
teachers    were    stationed  by   the
Rev.  Mr.  Crook,  of  the  L.  M.  S.,
on  Tahuata  (or  Santa  Christina),
in  1825 ;  but  after  continuing  there
about  10  months,  and  seeing  no
prospect  of  success,  they  returned
home.     It  has  been  since  deter-
mined  to    attempt   a    missionary
settlement  on  Nug^iva,  another
island  of  the  same  gproup,  consi-
dered for  that  purpose  as  superior
to  Tahuata.      Maracore,  one  of
the  teachers  who  were  stationed  at
the  latter  island  by  Mr.  C,  pro-
poses, with  that  view,  to  return  to
the   Marquesas,    accompanied  by
three  or  four  families  from  Tidiiti.
Mr.  C.  has  prepared  a  Marquesian
Spelling-book,  an  edition  of  which
has  been  printed  for  their  use.

Maracore,  and  his  companions,
expected  to  proceed  to  the  Mar-
quesas, in  the  Minerva,  Captain
Ebrill,  who  is  son-in-law  to  Mr.
Henry,  missionary  in  Eimeo,  and
well  disposed  to  promote  their
views.  Mr.  Crook  has  supplied
them   with    stationery,    and   the

343


MAR

memben  of  hii  church  and  con-
gregation have  furnished  them
abundantly  with  articles  of  apparel
and  foody  useful  implenienti,  6cc,
Each  of  them  presented  some  gift
on  the  occasion;  they  have  also,
jointly,  presented  to  Capt.  Ebrill
about  luUf  a  ton  of  cocoa-nut  oil,
as  a  iH>mpensation  for  the  passage,
drc.  of  the  teachers.  Mr.  Alex.
Simpson,  one  of  the  niijuionaries
who  have  accompanied  Mr.  Nott
on  his  return  to  Tahiti,  is  ap-
pointed to  labour  in  this  group.

MARSIIPEE,  a  town  on  the
sea-coast,  Barnstable  County,  Mas-
sachusetts, near  Plymouth.  The
KeT.  R.  Bourne,  wishing  to  effect
the  civilization  of  the  Indians  in
this  neighbourhood,  purchased,  at
his  own  expense,  a  small  territory
at  Marshpee,  and  gave  it  to  them,
by  deed,  about  the  year  1660.  His
son  soon  after  obtained  an  entail-
ment of  the  land  to  them  and  their
cliildreh  for  ever.  -Mr.  B.  had
previously  laboured  among  the
Indians  here,  and  was  permitted
to  witness  in  them  the  happy  effect
of  his  instructions.  About  1666,
an  Indian  church  was  organized,
and  Mr.  B.  ordained  pastor  of  it.

in  1074,  there  were  at  this
place  and  in  the  immediate  vicinity
upwards  of  500  Indians,  of  whom
00  had  been  baptized,  and  27
were  in  full  communion.  Many
had  made  considerable  progress  in
the  elements  of  knowledge.  After
the  death  of  Mr.  B.,  an  Indian,
named  Simon,  was  settled  over  his
brethren,  who  laboured  among
them  above  40  years.

In  1693,  there  were  214  cate-
chumens here,  and  at  two  neigh-
bouring villages.  During  the  18th
century,  the  number  of  Indians
continued  about  the  same  as  at  the
close  of  the  17th.  They  were  all
professed  Christians,  ahd  many  ex-
hibited the  spirit  of  the  Gospel,
Mr.  Hawley  commenced  his  la-


f


BfAR

boun  among  tbem  about  1151,  ii4
continued  ull  ISOT,  wfan  hp.fM  |f!
removed  by  death.     ^  wy"
merly  supported  ^7  a  ^
in    London    for   propaoaliw.
Gospel    in    New    Ea^aafi.
this  society  having  wi1lidn«(|;
support^  be  received
tance  from    a  locietr  in  ]Mn
for  propagating  the  uagftitMm
the  Indians  and  othen  in  IM
America.    The  present  nankill.
Indians  is  about  150,  over  «hi||
the   Rev.  Mr.  fldi  ii  aettM  •
a  minister.  >

MARTHA'S  VfNEYABQ»«  1
island  S.  £.  Mavaduuett^  ifaid
8  miles  S.  of  Fabnouth,  aid  ^%
Nantuclcet  Island,  which  la  Ub
long,  and  from  6  to  7  wide.  I^
lation  about  3800.  IndiawPk
The  Rev.  T.  Mayhew,  jun.  ^
blished  himself  here  in  164S,Ji4
commenced  learning  the  laki
language,  with  a  view  to.  At
Christian  instruction  of  4t
natives.  HiacoomeSy  who  dih
ward  became  a  preacher  ■  of  4c
Gospel,  was  the  first  fruijt  of  lili
labour.  This  convert^  tiMM^o^
l)osed  and  derided  by  his  Ineflmii
manifested  so  much  bolifaieB  oi
intrepidity  in  the  cauae  of  Qbrii^
that  many  were  induced  to  itr
nounce  their  former  idotahwi
practices  and  embrace  the  GtM|fli
In  1650,  such  was  the  anzie^  of
a  considerable  part  of  the  liidini
to  hear  the  word  of  life,  thatS6«
Mayhew,  to  acconunodate  tiwi^
preached  weekly  at  difiRerent  pvil
of  the  island.  About  this  tiae^
schools  were  estabiiahed  anflng
them.  In  1674,  there  weie  sap*
posed  to  be  2  or  3000  Indians  m
this  and  a  neighbouring  iaiand^  of
whom  1500  were  praying  Indin%
and  50  were  re^lar  church  mm-
bers.  Soon  aner,  the  numlier.of
Indians  began  to  decrease {  ift
that  in  1792  the  whole  nanboi
amounted    only    to    about  4M.

844


X.:  MAR

Wbile  the  Indians  were  fast  verging
m<mid  annihilation,  the  zeal  of  the
W^fliew  fiunily,  in  bringing  them
ttf  a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  did
ilfai  abate.  Five  successive  gene-
iiitloiu  have  been  indefatigable
ItftKNuren  on  this  and  the  neigh-
iUnriiig  islands.

>-^^Tlle  Rev.  F.  Bailies,  nnder  the
I^Kbonage  of  the  Society  for  propa^
gmHrng  the  Gospel  among  the
ndtaiis  and  others  in  N.  America,
ku  laboured  for  several  years  here
.and  in  the  vicinity.  The  Indians
Manifest  an  increasing  desire  to
Inar  the  Gospel,  and  to  have  their
abUdren  receive  instruction.  Mr.
9.  extends  his  parochial  duties  to
iSknttianicvm,  Farm  Neck,  North
Sktre,  and  Gay  Head,  and  also  to
tha  small  island  Chabaquiddick ;
■It  some  of  which  places  he  in-
atancts  or  superintends  schools.  The
nnmber  of  pupils  in  the  several
whools,'in  1823,  was  141.

MARTIN,  ST.,  one  of  the
Ouibbee  islands,  44  m.  in  circuit.
it  has  neither  harbour  nor  river.
.It  was  long  jointly  possessed  by  the
Fkench  and  Dutch ;  but  was  taken
by  the  British  in  1810.  The  W.
and  is  ^  m.  S.  of  Anguilla.  W.  long.
08*  ff,  N.  lat.  180  4/.  Here  the
agents  of  the  fF,  M,  S,  have  for
some  years  been  engaged.  Recently
tha^ observe : — **  On  this  station  we
have  had  reason  to  thank  God,  and
take  couragre !  Three  estates  have
baen,  within  the  last  3  months,
opened  to  our  labours :  these  being
the  first  instances  of  the  kind,  two
of  them  are  visited  once  a  fortnight
at  noon,  and  the  slaves  are  cate-
chised and  preached  to  alternately,
In  the  proprietor  and  manager's
bouse.  The  other  is  visited  at
night  $  and  being  in  a  populous
neighbourhood,  is  likely  to  be  well
attended  by  persons  of  all  descrip-
tions. On  each  we  have  members ;
and  from  tbe  serious  and  earnest
attention  given  to  the  word,  there


MAR

is  every  reason  to  expect  good  will
be  done.  From  Cole  Ba^  (where
our  week  night  as  well  as  Sunday
congregations  are  from  80  to  100,
chiefly  coming  from  4  or  d  of  the
neighbouring  estates),  several.  In
the  course  of  the  last  year^  have
joined  our  society  in  town.  Mai^
have  been  baptized  there,  and  8  or
3  more  added  to  the  communicants ;
but  the  want  of  a  chapel  evidently
retards  the  work.  In  town  the
stated  hearers  are  between  2  and  300
who  are,  for  the  most  part,  tmly
serious  and  devout.  Several  more
have,  during  the  last  year  (1826)^
established  family  wonhip ;  and  a
considerable  number  have  been
added  to  the  communicants,  and  to
the  society.  Upwards  of  40  have
been  admitted  in  the  year,  but  15
or  .20  have  been  excluded  or  have
withdrawn :  of  those  who  have
died,  2  especially  left  this  world  in
the  joyful  assurance  of  entering
into  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the
people  of  God.  Number  in  society —
Whites,  96$  Free  coloured,  53;
Slaves,  151:  Total  220.''

There  are  179  children  now  on
the  class-papers  of  the  schools;
the  average  of  their  attendance,  in
the  former  part  of  the  year,  was
from  130  to  150 ;  but  during  the
latter  part,  the  attendance,  from
various  unavoidable  causes,  has
been  only  from  100  to  120.  Many
of  the  children  have  made  a
marked  proficiency  in  reading  and
other  attainments ;  several  of  the
oldest  girls  have  been  dismissed,
with  credit  to  themselves  and  their
teachers;  two  or  three  of  them
still  frequent  the  school,  and  act
as  assistants  in  teaching  the  ju-
nior scholars,  when  their  help
is  required.  In  the  week  mom*
ing  school,  there  have  been  from
40  to  80  children  attending
throughout  the  year.  <<  Concern-
ing the  fFomen*s  Sunday  School,
kept  at  the  missionaiy's  house,  the


MAR

•apBrfailmdent  lepoili, '  that  It  bu
been  unceula^  cani  ed  o  n,  tlmuth
Uteattonduice  hai  often  been  imail ;
■gme  or  the  mcxt  diligent,  favw-
eT«r,   have,  in  the  coune  of  tlw

¥>ar,  attained  to  reading  the  New
eitament  with  tolen^le  ea>e.*
Id  thli  uhool  thsie  aie  S  teacben
aad  M  leamen."

MARY,  ST.,  •  BuaU  Idand  at
Ibe  month  nf  the  Ganbia,  N.
Abice,  •eparated  bom  tbe  main
lantb;  a  cneii.  between  13°  and
14*  N.  let.  The  inliebltaoU  are
faamdlfienatputiof  the  continent,
■ut  many  from  tlM  heart  of  Africa.
The  iiland  li  woU  litnated  for
commaroa,  aad  tlie  ■attlement  i*
floBTiahing.  Bathunt  la  tile  prin-
cipal town.  Here  the  *f.  M.  S.
haa  a  tocletj  and  a  ichaol,  both  of
wlileh  ate  atleaded  hj  pleailng
circnmiiancea,  [S«a  Bathurtt.^
MATURA,  a  (tnaU  town  ai
fartreai  neai  the  Molliein  eitreml^
of  Ceylon,  atthenonlhaf  Mellpu
rirer,  near  Dandra  Head,  100  m.
S,  E.  Colombo,  30  m.  S.  Galle,
and  110  S.  Ksndy.  E.  long.  80°,
V,  N.  lat.  S*  3S'.  The  lurrounding
eoanti?  Is  wild ;  but  welt  lupplied
with  ptofUions  of  bU  ktndi,  parti-
cularif  gsme.  The  Inhabitants
are  moitty  Clngaleie  and  Portu-
goeae,  who  are  eitremely  auper-
■Uttaui,  and  profligate  to  a  proverb.
The  place  Is  famoua  for  budbism,
prieitii,  templna,  and  Cingalese
learning.  Intellect,  and  even  ge-
niiu,  are  Ter;  iblldngly  maoilest
in  the  cblldrea  at  this  station.

The  IUt.  Mr.  Errhardt,  fram
tha  L.  M.  S.,  arrived  at  Ceylon  la
1804,  andwasaooD  after  directed,
bj  GoTemot  North,  to  tettle  at
Matura;  where  he  laboured  amldiit
moch  opposition,  and  many  dia-
couragemeatj,  with  Christian  for-
tltade  and  prudence,  more  than
10  years.  His  cong;regBtlons,  how.
ever,  were  small,  and  bis  lobouts  at.
tended  with  little  (uecast.    During


«'.  II.  S,

^  lereinlili
The  Matun  circuit  exlendt  i  th
E.  and  14  N.  V„  comprcbeuVm

"   "' ' hkrli    inbslonriB

ly ;  olhets  ant^


loKgulad'
lUy^tad.'


In  IBM  tilers  were  codimW
with  thli  itatiMi  14  AchoolE,  n»
tainingiaOacbolsTs;  but  format
of  fand^  the  achool-;  bnit  mt
htm  mdiicwl  to  0,  aud  tiiepifll
to  about  dW,  with  12  maitNiat
cate^iMi.  A  chapel  naa  a^
la  1891.  ^JTl

The  mfaaliMMries  hwraimU
in  Cingaleov,  PortagoMV"*
EngUrii;  and  aDtwithrtaaMrtk
forbidding  nppMiaBoai  of  Ittm
pie,  and  the  amaaram  nAHBi
ment*  under  wUch  th»liM»'1k
boared,  wreeM  of  tM  nin
bafe  enbreced  Ctiriali*nl^~i|l
the  mladinuriM  wcm  ■aeniriM
to  hop*  flwt  their  lahMi  y*
be  eitendrely  vseM,  MOHi^
tatbe^nggniMallMt.  InlA
the  aoclety  bad  »B  nMndna;  1h
number  of  the  scfaoolt  at
oa  this  atatlon   '


1  i&cds


r  tSSm

ke  Sim


870,  B
Serenl


Mr,  Ennardt,  IbrmoHy
leaded  them)  tliey  Imn  wanmrn
been  under  the  cars  of  iH^
Mayor  and  Want,  CAwMtayMto-
ariei  at  Galle.

MAUI,  one  of  Um  St^ftUt
Island),  48  m.  long  and  »  MM.
Population  SfiOO.  At  falaisf.  m
the  N.  W.  eoai^  there  la  a  oWm

The  Rer.  W.  Rlebaifc  MftG.
S.  Stewart,  with  Betaey  «eclim
B  coloured  fesinle  a^stnt  ta*
the  ^.  ik  C  J^.  M.,  tommmd
their  nddenu  bne,  A^.  m


» 4n  bouses  built  bjr  the  Queen
ger  for  their  use,  in  the  native
,  Hned  ^ith  the  leaves  of  the
r  cane,  and  thatched  with
p  without  floors -or  windows.
Pitt,  the  prime  minister,  gave
a  siinall  plantation,  with  men
Itlvate  it.  Adjoining  the  in-
reof  the  missionaries,  a  chapel
mmediately  erected,  100  feet
K  The  houses  stand  upon  the
beach,  so  near  the  sea  that
urges  break  within  a  dozen
of  the  doors.

»  after  their  arrival,  the  mis-
ries  wrote :  —  "  Pigs,  hogs,
,  and  goats,  have  been  sent
antly,  by  some  person  or  an-
;  in  fact,  no  Christian  con-
;tion  in  America  could,  in  this
ct,  have  received  a  clergyman,
ig  to  administer  the  word  of
0  them,  with  greater  hospi-
»  or  stronger  expressions  of
ind  goodwill.''

t  is  literally  true,"  say  they,
t  hundreds  have  committed
x>ks  to  memory,  and  probably
o  so,  faster  than  the  mission
Dssibly  furnish  them.  Indeed
•aspect  of  usefulness  is  limited
IT  own  strength,  and  not  by
rcumstances  of  the  people."
D  death  of  Keopuolani  at  this
a  was  the  occasion  of  intro-
i;  Christinn  marriage  among
wple.  Her  husband  Koapini
ig  to  talce  another  wife,  they
united  with  great  solemnity.
Lahaina,  not  long  since,
ily  any  thing  could  be  kept
the  rapacity  of  thieves,  who
as  numerous  as  the  inhabi-
theniselves :  locks,  guards —
tmost  vigilance — eveiy  pre-
m,  were  ineffectual;  but  so
has  been  the  moral  change,
»r  successive  months,  although
thing  was  exposed,  and  no-
was  guarded,  and  hundreds  of
i  were  entering  the  mission-
labitation  every  day,  nothing,
tely  nothing,  was  lost     A


MAU

new  church,  04  feet  by  24,  was
opened  July  10,  1826,  when  two
adults,  the  first-fruits  of  the  mis*
sion,  were  baptized ;  from  that  time
the  church  has  been  completely
filled.  ^<Not  a  day  passes,"  says
Mr.  Richards,  ^  but  what  we  see
evidence  that  the  Lord  is  here."
[See  Sandurieh  IsUrndt*]

MAUPITf,  one  of  the  Society
Islands  in  the  S.  Pacific  Ocean ;
40  m.  W.  Borabora.

About  1822,  two  native  teachers
were  sent  here  from  the  L,  M.  S,h
station  at  Borabora.

In  1823  the  deputation  visited
-Maupiti,  in  compliance  with  the
earnest  request  of  the  King.  They
"witnessed  the  rapid  progress  which
the  peqple  bad  made  in  the  know-
ledge of  the  Gospel,  and  were  pre^
sent  at  the  baptism  of  74  persons,
291  having  been  baptized— in  all,
865.  They  assisted  also  in  the
formation  of  an  A,  M.  S.,  the  sub-
scription to  which  amounted  to
nearly  1000  bamboos  of  cocoa-nut
oil.

Subsequent  efibrts  have  not  been
without  reward.

The  number  of  members  added
to  the  church  during  the  yem*
1826,  was  36:  a  few  died  truly
happy.

Some  of  the  young  people,  un-
happily, have  turned  aside  to  folty,
of  whom  one  only  has  repented,
and  rejoined  the  Christians;  it  is
pleasing,  however,  to  add,  that  the
state  of  religion  and  morals  has
been,  on  the  whole,  during  the  year,
favourable.

The  teachers,  beside  attending
to  their  appropriate  missionary  du-
ties, have  not  been  inattentive  to
civilization;  they  have  displayed
their  industry  and  skill  Ui  the
erection  of  dwelling-houses,  boal-
building,  and  in  making,  with  dried
goat-skins,  a  pair  of  bellows  for  m
smith's  forge.

MAURITIUS,  or  /#feo/fWnwe,
an  island  la  the  Indiaii  Oqma,  4IW^


MAU

m.  E.  of  Madagucar.    It  was  dis-  j
covered  b}-  the  Portup^iese;    but  .
the  flrst  settlewwere  the  Dutch,  in  |
1508.    Thev  called  it    Mauritius
in  honour  of  Prince  Maurice,  their
stadt holder,  but  on  their  acquisition
erf  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  they
deserted  it,  and  it  continued  unset-
tled till  the  French  landed  in  1120,
find  gave  it  the  name  of  the  Isle
of  France.    In  1810  it  was  taken
from  them  by  the  British,  to  whom
It  was  ceded  in  1R14.    The  island
is  150  m.  in  circuit,  and  the  cli-
mate healthy,  but  the  soil  not  very
fertile ;  there  are  many  mountains,
some  of  which  have  their  tops  co-
vered with  snow ;  but  they  produce
the  best  ebony  in  the  world.    The
valleys  are  watered  by  rivers,  and
made  productive  by  cultivation,  of
which  coiTee  and  indigo  are  the
principal  objects ;  and  there  are  a
great  number  of  cattle,  deer,  goats,
and  sheep.    The  town  and  spacious
harbour,  called    Port  Louis,   are
strongly  fortified ;  but  in  the  hur-
ricane months  the  harbour  cannot
aAbrd  shelter  for  more  than  eight
vessels.    In  1816,  a  ftre  consumed
1517  houses  in  the  most  opulent
part  of  the  town ;  and  in  1818,  the
bland  suffered  great  devastation  by
a    tremendous    hurricane.      Port
Louis  is  situate  on  the  E.  coast.
E.  long.  57«  28',  S.  lat.  20°  10'.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Le  Brun,  an  agent
of  the  L,  M,  S.  arrived  here  in  June
1814,  and  immediately  commenced
his  important  work.

In  1817,  Governor  Farquhar,  in
addition  to  placing  at  the  disposal  of
Mr.  Le  Brun  a  spacious  building,
well  adapted  to  the  purpose  of  edu-
cation, wrote  to  the  directors  in
terms  of  high  approbation  of.  his
labours.

Twenty-five  persons  were  about
this  time  united  in  a  Christian  so-
ciety. In  1821  these  had  increased
to  43  ;  the  congregation  was  con-
siderable ;  112  boys,  and  80  girls
were  under  instruction,  Governor


MAU

Farqubar  ordeiiqg  «b  aHafwneaif
SO  dollars  per  month  towodifte
support  of  the  fonnerj  andaKhoil
at  Belombre  Gontlniied  In  n|ipi*
perous  state.

Success  hns  attended  "<— **^
efforts  to  the  pieaent  time.

«  Mr.  Le  Bnm,''  i^ys  tbd  Iflpat
of  1827,  «<  stm  contlmm  hk  h-
boun,  chiefly  among  the  eoloail
people,  of  which
his  church  ie  diiefly
The  number  of  children  ik  thi
Sabbath-school  ii  increamd  tslM.
The  day  school  is  also  on  tin  !■•
crease :  there  are  now  midir  !■•
struction  about  180  boiy^  «k
attend  with  tolerable  rq^uliiHy.
About  70  liberated  negnei  ml
slaves  are  instructed  1^  mftmkn
of  Mr.  Le  Bnin's  church ;  sobs  of
them  have  expressed  a  desim  to  be
baptised.  The  favourable  chM
wrought  in  their  character  l^w
instruction  imparted,  has  beea  at-
tested by  their  masten.

«  Mr.  Forgette,  in  April,  18M^
took  charge  of  the  relig^oa  li-
struction  of  the  slave  ^mpidatlm  it
Riviere  du  Ren^part,  where  a  «■!!
chapel  has  been  built.  A  BsMnfli
school  has  been  commencw^  is
which  are  about  S5  children.  A
day  school  also  has  been  ntsMMi
ed.  Mr.  Le  Brun  visits  Rivleie  di
Rempart  every  montii,  wbBt  he
preaches  to  about  40  or  50  coloand
people.  A  few  French  fasnlUei^
resident  in  the  nei|^ibonriMMd^
usually  attend.  His  EaceHeBcy
Sir  L.  G.  Cole  has  aiRmlsd  sB
possible  facilities  for  tiiedisMwi*
nation  of  Christian  instruetioa  at
this  place.

"  Mr.  Le  Brun  has  commenced
another  school,  at  a  place  called
Camp  Yok^s,  inhabited  by  sevotl
hundred  negroes,  who  were  bdMe
entirely  destitute  of  the  means  of
religious  instruction.  From  M  to
30  children  attend,  some  of  wlna
are  able  to  read  in  the  New  Tesl^
^  ment.    Once  a  weeic  Mr.  Le


MAU

''^fos  an    addren  to  the  people
'-'  then.

"  Hie  aggregate  number  of  slaves

-  -  UiitiiH  liid,  at  (Afferent  places,  under

tbe  wing  of  the  mission,  is  about

'  S90.    The  number  in  the  island  is

about  TOyOOO;  that  of  Europeans

fien  10,000  to  12,600.    In   the

'  couvse  of  last  year,  Mr.  Le  Bran

'^^^  ^Wted  a  district  of  the  island  called

Bkriere   ties    Tomarini^    situated

about  16  m.  from  Port  Louis.    He

-  CMuid  the  people  in  a  state  of  entire
igporanee  as  to  religion,  but  wil-
ling to  receive  instruction.    It  is

«  in  contemplation  to  form  a  school
at  this  place.
.  «  .  «  The  subscriptions  on  the  spot,
for  the  erection  of  a  new  place  of
wonhip  at  Port  Louis,  amount  to
4000  dollars.  The  estimate  was
8000  doUars.''

Mr.  Jenkms,  of  the  B,  ^  F.  S,  S.
commenced  a  school,  in  1823,  at
this  place,  where  the  lamented
HarrietNewell  expired,  Nov.  181S.

At  Beile  Ombre,  Mr.  Jones,  of
the  L.  M.  S.,  opened  a  day  and  a
Sidibeth  school,  of  about  60  scho-
Inn  each,  on  visiting  it' from  Ma-
dagascar for  the  recovery  of  his
heaHh.  Mr  Telfair,  on  whose
extensive  plantation  this  was  done,
bai  superintended  the  schools  since
Mr.  J.'s  return.

MAUTJ,  or  Party's  Island,
cme  of  the  Harvey  Islands,  where
two  of  the  L.  M.  iS.'«native  teachers
•la  engaged.

The  people  of  this  island  have
anlversally  embraced  the  Gospel.
Tbey  are  diligent  in  learning,
and  behave  with  kindness  to  the
teachers.  Family  and  private  prayer
ia  observed.  A  neat  chapel  has
been  erected;  and  the  same  at-
tention to  the  preaching  of  the
Goq>el  is  manifested  here  as  at
the  other  islands.-  Civilization  is
advancinff.  The  following  is  an
extract  m>m  the  records  of  the
voyage  of  the  Blonde^  describing
the  visit  of  Capt.  L(»rd  Byron : —


MAU

''Two  personsj  who,  by  theit
dress  and  appearance,  seemed  to
be  of  some  importance,  stepped
on  board,  and,  to  our  great  sur-
prise, produced  a  written  docu-
ment from  -  that  branch  of  the
L.  M.  S.  settled  at  Tahiti,  qua-
lifying them  to  act  as  native
teachers  in  the  island  of  Mauti.
They  were  very  fine-looking  men,
dressed  in  cotton  shirts,  cloth
jackets,  and  a  sort  of  petticoat  of
very  fine  mat,  instead  of  trowsers.

*'  When  the  teachers  had  satisfied
their  curiosity  in  surveying  the
ship,  at  the  size  of  which,  and  with
almost  every  thing  on  board,  they
were  much  astonished,  his  Lord-
ship and  suite  accompanied  them,
as  their  guides,  on  shore.

'*  We  embaiked  on  the  0th  of
Augdst,  1825,  in  two  boats,  taking
one  of  the  missionaries  in  each;-
but  we  found  the  surf  on  the  beach
so  violent,  that  we  got   into  the
natives'  canoes,  and  trusted  to  their
experience  for    taking   us    safdy
through :  this  they  did  with  admi-
rable dexterity ;  and  our  passage
in  the  canoes  convinced  us  that
no  boat  of  ours  could  have  effected
a  landing.    The  coral  bank  at  the
landing-place   extends   60   yards
from  the  land,  at  about   2   fleet
under  water ;  when  we  reached  it,
tbe  natives  carried  us  ashore  on
their  shoulders.    When  arrived,  it
appearod  as  if  the  whole  male  po-
pulation had  assembled  to  greet  us ;
the  only  two   women,   however,
wero  the  wives  of  the  missionaries,
decently  clothed  from  head  to  foot.
Each,  individual  of  this  numerous'
assembly  pressed  forward  to  shake
hands,  and  seemed  unhappy  till  the
sign  of  friendship  had  passed ;  and
this  ceremony  being  over,  they  con-
ducted us  towards  their  habitettons,
which  were  about  2  miles  inland.
Our  path  lay  through  a  thick  shady
wpod,  on  the  skirts  of  which,  in  a
small  open  ^ace  on  the  left,  2
canoes  were  building,    ThA^  h;«k%

HH  ^^


MAU

«ach  80  fset  long;  the  lower  pmrt,  as
usual,  of  a  tinncle  tiee»  Hollowed  out
with  great  skill.  The  road  was
rough,  over  the  firagments  of  coral ;
but  it  woand  agreeably  through  the
grore,  which  improYed  in  beauty
as  we  advaaeed,  and  at  length,  to
our  surprise  and  pleesure,  ter^
minated  in  a  beautiful  green  lawn,
where  there  were  two  of  the  pret*
tiest  white-washed  cottages  inui»
ginable— the  dwrilings  of  the  mis-
Kionaries.

<<  The  inside  of  these  habitations
eorreqionded  with  their  exterior
neatness.  The  floors  were  boarded ;
there  were  a  sofa  and  some  chairs
of  native  worlcmaiiship :  windows,
with  Venetian  shutters,  rendered
the  apartments  cool  and  agree-
able. The  rooms  were  divided
from  each  other  by  screens  of
taiia;  in  one  there  was  a  bed
of  wbite  tape,  and  the  floor  was
corered  with  coloured  varnished
tape,  resembling  oil-cloth.  We
were  exceedingly  struck  with  the
uppearance  of  elegance  and  clean-
liness of  all  around  us,  as  well
as  with  the  modest  and  decorous
behaviour  of  the  peq>le,  especially
the  women.

*'  After  partaking  of  the  refresh-
ment offered  us  by  our  hostess,
which  consisted  of  baked  pig,
bread-fruit,  and  yams,  we  accom-
panied the  missionaries  to  their
church.  It  stands  on  a  rising
ground,  about  400  yards  from  the
cottages.  A  fence,  composed  of
the  trunlcs  of  cocoa-nut  trees,  sur-
rounds the  area  in  which  it  stands.
Its  form  is  oval,  and  the  roof  is
supported  by  4  pillars,  which  bear
up  the  ridge.  It  is  capable  of  con-
taining 200  persons.  Two  doors
and  12  windows  give  it  light  and
air;  the  pulpit  and  reading-desk
are  neatly  carved  and  painted,  with
a  variety  of  pretty  design^,  and  the
benches  for  the  people  are  arranged
neatly  round.  Close  to  the  church
is  the  barying-place,  which  is  «i


KAY


tt


■  zitV


■  UT


■iciniid   of  •■rtk^

green  swud)  sad  Mm  whoit  te
in  air  if  mrriMtihi
deliffhtBdBolosi.thM
AsIiaMti  iMM  not
in  aaychvty  or
iiaTlgatDry  w»  xmdikm
diaeov«rer8»  Mid  wna
Island.   ItUaiiBW.
S.  latttada  M^  r.

«0n  our  retan^lifctts
one  of  the  wXkkmulm
As  we  mtraeed  ronr-fltafKftHfti^
the  wood,  the  imM!lag~i^m
birds,  whose  {aoauigot  wh  m.Mi
as  it  was-iMfsr-  irrr  tmi  i  tlw
tinted  butteifliee  that
across  oar  patk^-^ttte

mate^-tho  magnUiMiit „

•—and,  above  all»  the  paifcei
and  hamiooy  ^wt^iw^g
natives, — presented  as
agreeable   pictuns^    wUolt.
not  fiOl  to  delight  us. 'f

Mr.  Boune  bapttaady.  ^
visit  here,  4S  adulta  and  M

MAYAVfiRAM,  •  Ibl^-  -
of  about  10,000  lnhaliitaiil^M_
N.E.  of  CombooconaflDy  and!  WiVL
Tranquebar.  The  C^M^Af'km
had  a  school  at  this  piaaa.^Me
1810,  which  was  vlsfted  wttbaur
others  from  Tranqnebar.  llialMil
quarters  of  its  school  eatahHshaMiit
had  been  at  Tranqoabv-ftaa  Ab
year  1616,  but  th^  an  BoM^v*
moved  to  Mayareraai*  Xha
sion  premises  lk»  liiitwaiia
town  and  the  village  dC  Coll
the  foundation-stone  oi,  the

ings  was   laid  June.lOtli»

The  Rev.  Mr.  BfaanfaM^  tei
spent  the  greater  part  ctf  UMat
Combooconum,  not  without  •  mX~
sing  on  his  laboon :  in  Afifl
June  1825,  he  adndttod  to
tism,  before  he  left  TrnqaalVy
9  adults,  most  of  whoai  veia  ,iht
fruits  of  his  laboan  wiMn  at-0»
booconnm,  and  hadcametohiBiil
Tranquebar  for  '^p^Jtm  lOa-aas
of  these  occaflkMMy.aona  ahttrikea
.  also  were  .  baptlaed;  .la  lafHaaiBi


MAT

4b  whoMi  lie  feelingly  sayt:— ^<I
was  Teiy  much  li£fectedy.  during
lb#«ist  of  baptiraiy  tin  seeing  two
of  theM  dear  little  ones,  4  and  6
ftmn  of.  age,  kneel  down  before
Hm  font;  and  though  some  of  the
tjitBiiden  wished  them  to  stand
ai^  they  were,  not  to .  be  moved,
kat  held  their  folded  hands  np*i
ttaidsy  appaiently  with  mueh  de-
votion, which  afiected  meto  tears.'*
At  Bftehaehnas  182^,  the  schools
onder  Mr.  B.'s  superintendence
artM  82  in  number,  and  contained
1683  scholars ;  consisting  of  118
Fratestant  Christians,  61  Brah^
mfoMf  1388  Soodras,  61  Mahome-
^laiis,  and  6  Parriart.  The  semi-
fwiy  for  training  nativb  teachers
had  13  youths,  from  12  to  21  years
«f  age.  Unavoidable  attention  to
the  buildings  at  Mayaveram  had
ifttenrupted  his  regular  visitation
of  the  schools.

MAYHEW,  a  mission  settte-
jnent  of  the  A,  B,  C,  F.  M,  among
the  Ghoctaws,  in  the  lower  towns
district,  within  the  state  of  Mis-
sissippi, 3d  miles  from  its  eastern
toandary.  It  is  situated  on  the  S.
ckto  of  the  Oolctibbeha  creelc;  12
jn«  a^pfve  its  junction  with  the
ToBibeckbee,«nd  100  hn.  £.  EUiott,
•W.  long.  W?  \b\  N.  lat.  ^  20\,
-The  name  of  Mayhew  was  given
to  tt  in  remembrance  of  the  dis-
4iBgniBhed  family  of  Mayhews,  who
'lallaiilred  among  tiie  Indians  in
liartha's  vineyB]Rl.  This  site  and
the  scenery  around  are  thus  Tividly
deseribed  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Ooodell,
flnteionaiy  to  Palestine.  ^'Asldiew
-near  the  I6ng  wished  for  sipot,  there
.tipened  unexpectedly  to  my  view
en  eztonslve  prairie,  which  con-
tains several  thousand  acres,  and
'Which  appeared  to  be  without  a
•single  stone,  or  tree,  or  ftmce,  ex*
cept  the  railing  which  enclosed  tl^e
fields  of  Mayhew.  These  fMds  are
on  the  N.  side  of  the  prairie,  and  di-
-fectly  in  front  of  the  mission-bouse.
Certiiig  your  eyes  over  the  prairie,


MAT

yon  will  diflcovfer,  here  land  tiiere,
herds  of  cattle,  of  horses,  and  of
wild  deer,  all  graaing  and  happy.
This  is  certainly  tlie.lovelleiiqwt
my  eyes  ever  saw.    The  prairie
has  very  gentle  elevations  md  de*
ptessions,  whieh  contain  each  from
100  to  1000  acres,  and  vdikh,  from
a.littie  distance,  resemble  the  uit*
dnlatoiy  mottons  of  the  waters  of
the  Atliintic,  a  few  leagues  from
the  land,  after  a  tremendous  storm.
As  I  waUced.on,  pausing  and  won*
derfng,  Mayhew  would  often^almost
wholly  disappear,  and  again  it  would
rise  to  view  in  still  greater  loveli*
nets,  half  encircled  with  the  oak,
the  sycamore,  and  tiie  mulberry,
which  border  on  the  prairie  on  all
sides;    Flowers  of  red,  purple,  3^1-
low,  and  indeed  of  every  hue,  were
scattered  by  a  boontifnl  God  in  rich
profusion,  and  in  all  the  beauty  and
■innocence  of  Eden,  on  each  side  of
my  path,and  their  fragrance  was  as  if
the  incense   of  heaven  had  been
offered.    The  distance  frixn  May-
hew, which  at  first  appeared  to  be
not  more  than  a  few  hundred  rods,
I  found  to  be  not  less  than  2  miles.
Butthough  the  distance  was  so  great,
and  though  my  limhs,  throu^  ex«
cessive  friigiie,  could  scarcely  per-
form their  office^  yet  in  contem-
plating this  lovely  scene,  with  all
its    interestihg    associations,   my
soM,  erp  I  was  aware,  <*  made  me
like  the  chariot  of  Amminadib."
The  Rev.  C.  Ktiigsbnry,  and  A.
Wright,  missionaries;   Mr.   Wm.
Hooper,  Miss  A.  Burnham,  teiach*
ers ;    Mr.   C.  Cushman,   fanner ;
Messrs.  S.  Wilson,  P.  P.8tewart,
mechanies  ^  and  Mifi  V.  Everett,
tailoress,are  atpiesentatthisstation.

Mr.  Kingsbui^  commenced  pre-
paratkms  tor  building  Feb.*  23d,
1820,  and  removed  with  his  family
in  November  following,

Mr.  Wright,  who  has  pakl  con-
siderable attention  to  the  Choctow
language,  joined  him  the  next  year.
A  school  NTia   o^^ttMil  ^vj^^daDL  VI.


MAY

icholan,  April  80, 1892;  «t  the  elate
of  one  month,  it  contained  34.  On
Dec.  30th,  of  the  same  year,  a
school-houie,  constructed  on  the
Lancasterian  sjrstem,  was  opened
for  the  reception  of  the  school.

Tlie  schools  at  the  station  are  in
a  flourishing  state,  and  contained,
in  1824,  60  pupils.  Many  of  the
sclM^ars  have  received  English
names,  and  are  supported  by  the
munificence  of  benevolent  Indivi-
duals or  associations.  A  church
was  organized  May  6th,  1821,
composed  principally  of  the  mis-
sion family.  A  pleasing  yvfitk  of
grace  has  since  been  experienced,
and  as  fruits  of  it^  several  have
professed  their  faith  in  Christ.
The  property  belonging  to  the
station,  consisting  of  lands,  build-
ings, live  stocic  and  utensils,  was
estimated,  in  1822,  at  9306  dollars.

Mooth^olaiubbee,  one  of  the
chiefs  of  the  Choctaw  nation,
residing  about  20  miles  southerly
from  Mayhew,  has  been  a  steady
friend  of  the  missionaries,  and,  in
compliance  with  his  request,  a
school  was  commenced  in  his
house  in  June  1823,  for  the  in-
struction of  his  family,  and  such
other  children  as  may  conveniently
attend.  This  mission  is  under  the
patronage  of  the  A,  B.  C,  F,  M,
Adin  C.  6ibl)s,  schoolmaster.

At  I'tk-hun-nahy  there  is  also
a  Choctaw  settlement  of  about
26  families ;  it  is  about  20  m.  W.
Mayhew.  It  has  been  formed,
within  3  or  4  years,  through  the
influence  of  Capt.  Folsom,  an  en-
lightened chief.  Most  of  these
families,  previous  to  their  coming
together,  were. wanderers,  without
property,  industry,  or  character.
Since  about  the  commencement  of
1823,  they  have  excluded  whiskey
entirely  from  their  settlement,  have
built  comfortable  houses,  and  possess
fields  in  which  they  raise  a  gfood
supply  of  com  and  other  vegetables.

The  A,  B.  C.  F.  AT.  has  recQuUy


COBUBMIMdft

[See  Ck§eHtm§.}  *         m

M£ERUT,  aloMtova-lrtt
proflnoe  of  DalU,  HliilrHiiW
22  mUet  S.  E.  Delhi,
of  the  meet  frnpati
fitaWidmieirte  tn  fe  ]
Bengal.  E.long.n^M'.  «r
20*.  lO'.  I  .-»-.

The  ConemoodfaHr  CoapMIr
of  the  C.M.S.  ^GdBOtt^S
employed  8  natife  ChiMMH^
Meenit,  to  read  the  fii  ilplMwIMB'
superintend  edioole  )  biit  ta  MHr
the  Rev.  H.  Fisher  eniieSB
chaplainof  the  milltBiydepaMni^
who  has  since  been  aothe
moting  the  ffiiritiial
heathen  aioond  hln.  He
instrumental  in  hdn^tag,
natives  to  the  kaaw&Sgt  .dt'^
troth,  and  of  coUeetliiv  '•-mm
church  and  eoagi^atioa  t»<i<li
he  statedly  preachee  oaeeeB'^i'
Sabbath  in  Hindooeiuiee,  flenai
schools  have  been  i  ■tiWMhU%
the  vicinity,  mWkr  die  MpM*i
tendenoe  and  instmetloii  of
Christians.  ■  ..-'

Alluding    to
which  Mr.  F.  had  yrWk  'the;
Christians,  according  to'hii
practice  on  the  Snbbethyhe  ipyt  j-^
"  Last  Sunday  we  weve  C€n|vM%
on  the  universality  of  the  imitm
that  prevails  in  aU  mtkm,iim
some  atonement  for  eln  k^saH**:
saiy.    1  related  to  them  whet  iif
three  sons  had  seen-aa  thig'rf-
turned   with  me  hom-HemK
A  falceer  was  observed  b^  the  nn^.
side,  preparing  aomethliqf
ordinary ;    wideh,    lia¥liig
observed  before,  neited  a
to  draw  near  and  ezamlBe
ployment.   He  had  seveffal  Hledie
Pilgrims  round  him,  all  en'theh
way  from  the  Hoty  6luwt;'«lto
assisted  in  preparing  thewnjiihel
devotee  for  some  horrible  pmntm,
to  which  he  had  wokaaltaii^  bami
himself,  in  order  to  euMe  tte
I  fS>i!lltof  some  crime  wfaioh  he- iMd


MEE

Mmmitted  long  ago.  His  atten-
iMti  literally  worsliippdd  him^
dtring  his  feet,  calling  him  God;
iml  Invoking  his  blessing.  A  laige
ligt  wfs  Idndled  under  the  er-
levdeds bittoch  of  an  old  tree;  to
lik.bimiieh  the  falceer  fastened  two
itiOBgv  ropes,  having  at  tiie  lower
aid  of  each  a  stu&d  noose,  into
irhlch  be  introduced  his  feet ;  and
thai  being  snspenijed  with  his  head
knmwanl  over  tlie  fire,  a  third
rope  (at  a  distance  toward  the  end
if.  the  branch)  was  fixed,  by  which
lie  mieceeded  with  one  hand  to  set
tiiflDself  in  a  swinging  motion
iMokwaid  and  forward  throngh  the
OMike  and  flaming  fire,  wiiich  was
Iwpt  iilasing  by  a  constant  supply
»f  fuely  ministered  by  many  of  his
tollowers ;  with  the  other  hand,  he
coonted  a  string  of  .beads  a  fixed
moiber  of  times,  so  as  to  ascertain
the  termination  of  the  four  hours,
for  which  he  had  doomed  himself
daily  to  endure  this  exercise  for
lal;  yean,  9  of  which  are  nearly
BXjrired,  ■  A  narrow  bandage  is
over  his  eyes,  and  another  orer  hi;i
mouth,  to  guard  against  the  sufib-
cattag  effects  of  the  smoke.  By
this  means,  he  says,  he  shall  atone
for  tlie  guilt  of  his  sins,  and  be
made  holy  for  ever.  The  last  half
boor  of  the  four  hours,  his  people
ny,  he  stands  upright  and  swings
in  a  circular  motion  round  tlie  fire.
On  coming  down,  he  rolls  himself
in  the  hot  ashes  of  the  fire.  The
boys  went  to  see  him  again  in  the
Bvening,  when  he  was  engaged  in
Ids  ynyen^  but  to  what  or  whom
they  could  not  tell.

*'  I  asked  my  little  congregation
vhattheythoughtofdllthis.  They
at  sUent,  with  their  ejres  cast
town,  .  and  sighed  heavily.  At
en^r^,  Anund  turned  to  Matthew
?hiroodeen,  and,  passing  his  arms
ound  his  neck,  exclaimed,  with
he  most  touching  expression  of
iftection  as  well  as  of  gratitude
o  God— •^  Ah,  my   brother  I   my


MEN

brother !  such  de?vilsonce  were  we  I
but  now  (and  he  lifted  up  his  eyes
to  heaven,  and  elevated  his  whole
person)  Jesus  I  Jesus !  •  my '  God  i
my  Saviour  I '  It  was  very  affiicting!  **

Mr.  Fisher  wrote  at  the  close  of
1826: — "  Our  missionary'  esta-
bUshment  this  year  aflords  not
much  to  communicate.  My  own
more  immediate  personal  oc<nipa-
tions  are  extensive  and  laborious.
The  church,  the  hospital,  and  oth^
occasional  dnties,  entirely  engage
a  chaplain's  time  in  a  place  like
this,  and  a  faithfiol  helper  would  be
a  blessing.  Behadur  Messeeh,  as
usual,  resides  on  my  compound:
I  think  him  sincere,  faithful^  and
diligent.  He  still  acts  as  my  clerk
amodg  my  native  flock,  and  teaches
the  difierent  catechumens.  One
of  these  men  is  in  a  very  interesting
state }  and,  I  trust,,  ere  long,  that
I  shall  have  it  in  my  power  to  com-
municate his  story,  when  his  name
shall  be  enrolled  among  the  other
converts.  The  converted  Naik,
Matthew  Purrub  Dheen,  is  still
also  with  us — a  steady,  pious,  and
consistent  Christian.  The!  young
professor,  Jacob  Joypal,  has  ab-
sented '  himself,  and  we  know
nothing  of  htm.  Mooneef,  too,  is
said  to  have  returned  to  his  brother,
and,  of  cooise,  to  his  former  pro-
fession, though  I  have  no  parti-
culars."

A  lending  library  and  depot  of
books,  haVe  been  estebiished  here
by  the  Diocesan  Committee  of  the
C.  K.  5.,  under  the  direction  of
the  chaplain.

MEN  ADO,  one  of  the  Molucca
islands,  in  the  E.  Indiah  ocean,
whose  inhabitants  the  Rev.  Mr.
Kam,  of  Amboyna,  has  occa-
sionally Tisited;  and  wherey-^ns
early  iss  18S2,  he  stationed  one  of
his  fellow-labourers.

MENIOLAGOMEKAH,  for-
merly  an  Indian  town,  about  a
day's  journey  from  Bethlehem,
Pennsylvania.    About  the  middle

hh2  ^^


HID

af  the  18th  eMtnrri  *>>■  ^-  ^■
fariDDd  ■  teguUr  MtablUmeat  of
Chrlitisn  IndUn*  at  thl*  place,  mad
Ml  tied  ■  tnlMlODBiy  among  thim.

MER,  a  town  In  France,  em-
taininK  4,SD0  InhabltaDli.  The
Rer.  Mr,  KeipndroD,  a  fVktlafmk
rolMlonaiy,  hu  laboiueil  imtt  with
encouraging  auccea  (or  Mvenl
yean.  He  bai  opened  a  Loncai-
terian  whool,  and  ronned  a  Bible,
Mloianair,  and  Tract  Society.

MIDNAPORE,  a  town  in  the
proiince  of  Orlaa,  and  capital  of
a  dlitrict  of  the  same  name,  10  m.
W.  bj  S.  Calcutta.  It  li  a  populuui
place,  tbiougfa  which  inultltudei  of
pHgrlmi  paa  on  thulr  way  to  vlalt
the  temple  of  Juggernaut,  and
where  the  Rev.  Domingo  D'Crui,
a  Portugueae  mtsiionary,  and
Huden,  a  natire  aniitant,  cMn-
menced  a  mInloD  In  I81T.  Bj
meani  of  Mi.  D'C,  who  Itlnerat^M
into  the  nelgjibourtqg  region,  many
ban  bMid  the  tldingn  of  the
Goipelwltbjoy.  Tbe  Iphabltanle
of  one  vUl^e  tn  the  licinlly,  wbo
had  formerly,  through  the  initiu-
menlality  of  a  Roman  Catholic
priest,  renounced  caste,  and  become
pronlytei  to  tbe  Csthollc  faith,
recetted  the  Scrlpturea  with  glad-
neu,  having  never  before  seen
them,  and  requested  that  a  house
tat  rsllglous  wonhlp  might  be
eract«d  in  their  village.  Where
a  few  yesn  ago  religious  kKKiks
and  tracts  were  refused  by  the
people,  many  are  anilous  to  penue
the  Sacred  Volonie,  and  tqipetir  to
be  zealous  inquirers  BDer  the  way
ofetemallife.  In  ISia,  Mr.D'C.
bad  distributed  about  1300  Orlna
and  Bengalee  books,  and  9  penaiu
had  been  baptized,  of  whom  S  were
HiadoDs,  1  was  a  Muisulniaji,  and  S
were  Roman  Catholics.  But  as
these  were  oil,  in  tbe  course  of  pro-
vidence, removed  from  that  oelgh-
bonrhood,  and  be  had  recently
experienced  many  discouragements,
'   '  'o  another  station.


HIRZAPOffE,  a  lai^timiiU
Uw  dUrtet  of  Cbimar,  .\llBbsM(
,    On    S.    bank  of  -itt
»  kin^.  82°»',  N.Iilb


clDttni  of  Hindoo  tan^Mit  A
ing   Uw   buiVi   of    the   Oa

Since  1818,  the  Rev.  Mr.  B<n^
mtaalonaij  at  Chunar,  has  tUIII
It  at  the  anniiBl  Hindoo
which


Uf«  witk  lbs  chMrfng
many  wUl  bo  saTlngty
Preftom  to  bis  Flsits,  the
the  Goqial  bad  not  been  sowAk
thl(  DMlat  extensive  field  fcr  Mb-
•loBary*laboan

HITURO,  one  of  tbe  Hmki
UaiKb.     Tblt   island   h  h««d


not  exceed' JOp,  find  it  dfOcW
suMrt.    Tbtj  are  attentln  ta*>
stnicthm,  diligent  In  their  itMUtg    '
and  kind  to  their  teachen,  Mt    |
them  by  the /..  jf.  jl.     TbeyUn    I
erected   a  ne«t  plastered  cbopl^
ood  several  hare  oBerBd  tbWMM
■s  CBodldatei    for    bwUH^U
Bourne  bapUied,    d<M^^^^H
8S  adults  and  24  chlUM^^I

MOBATEE,  th»  WMtMMMV
Coranno  town  In  tha  -BaoliiilH

country,  about   100  ■

New  Lattakoo;  S.  Africft.   I

Kakkalah,  a  nativa   i    ~

tbe  L,  M.  9.,  laboDi

He  removed  from  K

a     portion     of   tba

about   1830,  '  sod    i

people  morning  and   avHll|f'tf

Instruction  and   piBjar,.M#'-Mn

three  limei  on    "

influehce  of  h

very  sjtparent  In  tb»  m

among  the  people  botk  iMrtaH

Id  tbe  TiElnity.

MOHAWKS,  «M  oT  tha,-A
noUoni  of  Indljm%  ccMnMd  la

3M


MOH

the    history  of  America.     They
w«re  formerly  very  powerful^  and
resided   on   the    Mohawk    river.
About  lT76y  a  part  of  them  emi-
grated to  Upper  Canada,  with  Sir
John  Johnson,  in  consequence  of
a  atrong   previous  attachment  to
tine  Johnson  Family.    Having  lost
their  possession  on  the  Mohawlc,
during  the  revolution,  they  settled
on  a  tract  of  land  on  the  Grand
Rirer^  purchased  for  them  by  the
King  of  Great  Britain  for  their
lojalty  and  attachment  during  the
revolutionary    war.      They  were
afterwards  joined  by  their  brethren.
This  tract  100  m.   long,   and  12
"wide^  is  intersected  by  the  river.
Tbe   liturgy   of   the    Church  of
England,  and  some    parts   of  the
Scriptures,  have   been    translated
into  the  Mohawlc  language ;  and
efforts  to  introduce  the  knowledge
of  Christianity  among  them  have
been  crowned    with   tbe   Divine
bleasing.      At    Mnhawk    villagej
they  have    a   chapel  and  school-
house,   where  public    worship    is
attended    and     children    are    in-
structed.   They  have  enjoyed  the
labours  of  several  school -masters
and  catechists,  and  the  occasional
visits  of  missionaries.  Two  churches
have  been  organized,  one  by  the
fVetleyan  missitmaries,    and   the
«ther  by  the  missionaries  of  the
Society,  prop.  G,  F.  P,,  which,  in
18S3,    sent    out   the    Rev.    Mr.
Morley  to  continue  as  a  missionary
among  them.

MOHEGAN,  formerly  a  power-
ful tribe  of  Indians  in  Connecticut,
only  a  small  remnant  of  which
remains,  in  a  village  of  the  same
name  on  the  N.bank  of  the  Thames,
4  miles  S.  Norwich.  Through  the
instructions  of  missionaries,  and
other  means,  many  have  been
brought  under  the  influence  of
Christianity.  DifTerent  dialects
of  tbe  Mohegan  language  are
spoken  by  all  the  Indians  in  New
England,  and  by  many  other  tribes.


MON

The  languages  of  the  Delawares
in  Pennsylvania,  the  Penobscots  on
the  borders  of  Nova  Scotia;  the
Indians  of  St.  Francis  in  Canada  ^
the  Shawanese  on  the  Ohio;  the
Chippeways  to  the  westward  of
lake  Huron ;  the  Ottaways,  Meno-
minees,  and  many  others,  are  radi-
cally the  same  as  the  Mcfbegan,
A  portion  of  this  tribe  of  the
Narragansetts,  400  in  number,
removed  with  the  Rev.  Samson
Occum,  in  1788,  to  land  given
them  by  the  Oneidalake,  which
was  confirmed  to  them  by  tbe  State
of  New  York.  The  (7.  B,  also
laboured  among  this  people  at
ShekomokOf  formerly  an  Indian
town,  about  25  miles  easterly  from
Ponghkeepsie,  New  York,  and
near  Sharon.  The  Rev.  C.  H.
Ranch  commenced  his  labours  here
in  1740 ;  and,  toiidst  numerous
sufferings  and  discouragements,  he
witnessed  some  fruits  of  his  toils.
Many  of  the  most  notorious  of  this
abandoned  clan  were  awakened.
In  1742,  and  soon  after,  several
were  baptized,  and  reinforcements
arrived..  At  the  first  communion
season,  10  Indians  were  admitted ;
at  the  second,  22.  At  the  close  of
1743,  the  number  of  baptized  was
63.  By  the  blessing  of  God  upon
the  labours  of  the  brethren,  the
Gospel  made  rapid  progress  in
several  neighbouring  towns,  parti-
cularly Pachpatgoch  and  fVachm
quatnach.  In  1744,  they  were
charged  with  being  in  alliance  with
the  French,  and  were  brought
before  the  Governor:  on  being
finally  banished  from  the  province,
they  removed  to  Bethlehem.  The
whites,  at  leng^,  became  so  in>
censed,  that  they  drove  away  the
Indians,  who  sojourned,  for  a  time,
at  Bethlehem,  and  the  brethren
formed  a  settlement  in  Pennsyl-
vania, which  they  called  Gnaden*
hutten,

MONGHYR,   a  populous  city
and  capital  of  the  Monghyr  district,

355


MON

in  the  province  of  Bahir,  Hindoos*
tAn.  £.  long.  8ai»  86^  N.  l«t.  25*
21'.  It  Ih  Rituated  on  the  S.  bank
of  the  Ganges,  850  m.  N.  W.  Cal-
cutta, and  has  a  station  for  the  in-
Talids  of  the  British  army.

The  Rer.  John  Chamberlain,  of
the  B,  If.  S,f  was  .an  active  and
faithful  missionary  at  this  place  for
several  years;  and  a  number  of
Hindoos  were  by  his  means  brought
to  receive  the  truths  of  the  Gospel.
He  translated  the  New  Testament,
and  a  considerable  part  of  the  Old,
into  the  Brij.  Basha  dialect,  and
some  parts  of  the  New  into  the
Hindee.  Mr.  Cs  widow  remains
at  tlie  station,  and  is  an  efficient
agent  in  promoting  the  interests  of
the  mission.

In  1820,  there  were  about  60
pupils,  a  number  of  whom  were
able  to  read  the  Scriptures  with
readiness.  Divine  service  was  per-
formed on  the  Sabbath  by  native
labourers,  who  on  other  da}-8  were
engaged  in  reading  and  speaking
to  the  people  concerning  the  way
of  salvation.

In  1825,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Leslie
proceeded  to  this  station,  and  found
the  state  of  the  church  and  schools
to  be  highly  encouraging.  Having
applied  himself  with  great  assiduity
to  the  study  of  the  Hindoostanee
on  the  voyage,  he  was  enabled  to
commence  addressing  the  natives
in  their  own  language,  in  about  6
months  after  his  arrival.  Hingham
Misser,  a  converted  brahmin,  who
had  been  labouring  here,  and  to
whose  moral  and  religious  charac-
ter Mr.  L.  bears  most  honourable
testimony,  was  subsequently  re-
moved by  death ;  but  the  surviving
itinerants  were  very  laborious,  and
considerable  attention  was  paid  to
their  message.  It  was  then,  and
it  is  still,  by  no  means  uncommon
fur  the  natives  to  call  them  into
their  houses  and  shops,  and  there
sit  around,  and  eagerly  listen  to  the
word  of  Gkxl.    Nine  persons  were


HOK

added,  during  the  yau,  to  the
church,  some  of  whom  fonci
striking  instances  of  the  powvii
dirine  grace  Ip  renewing  Ml
who  ■earned  least  likely  to  yiilft
to  its  Influence.  .     .

Thirteen  scbools  ere  Rforti^
in  1&26,  to  have  been  tntrpmsltw^
the  number  haring  been
at  the  request  of
parents,  who  now  permit
children  to  reed  those  ChiMii
books,  the  use  of  which  besstateii
was  an  effectual  box  to  their  tKtm^
ing  the  schools.  :

« llie  church  consists,"  ■!■  A»
last  Report,  «  of  85  menibani'tiif
worship  of  God  is  weU  tttesH'
and  the  schools  for  natlre  eilltt|jii>
are  in  a  proq>eroiis  state.  Aao^y
the  scholars,  30  can  reed  tiieflQri^
tures  welly  and  many  mcnne  en  wmA
tracts  and  easy  books,  and  lepMl
considerable  portkms  of  WattAr
Catechism,  in  Hinduwee."

MONROE,  a  station  of  the  i(&
of  the  Synod  tfSoMihCafUmnwM
Georgia,  in  the  CbickassweomtoK
situated  within  the  chartered  liaif-
of  Missifsippi,  about  60  m.
eastern  boundary,  on  an
spot  of  the  dividing  ridge
the  waters  of  the  Tombeckbee  mt
Yazoo,  S  m.  S.  MackintcMhtAlik
about  SO  W.  Cotton-gin  port^  IM
70  N.  W.  Columbus.  In  1631»  ths
Rev.  C.  Sfuart,  H.  Wilson,  W.  a
Blair,  and  2  male  and  4  femaU  »
sistants,  formed  a  mission  here.  Mr-
Stuart  commenced  the  station^  aBi^
was  employed  about  18  montliBla
clearing  land,  and  erecting  iuti»
ble  buildings,  for  the  missios.  Ii
1823,  about  40  acres  were  aador
cultivation.  In  May,  ISSi,  the
school  commenced,  and  the  avenge
number  of  scholars,  who  ere  oanieKty
and  industrious,  is  about  60.  Tlieir
progress  is  gratifying:,  and  the
pects  of  the  mission  are  hlghi^  i
couraging.  Rel^fi<Mi8  meetings  ars
well  attended,  and  several  baie
hopefully  embraced,  the    troflb^

966


MON

bpcal  lehoc^  are  contemplated  in
iMlTlelnity.

MONTSERRAT,  one  of  the  W.
(■dki  islands  under  British  autbo-
ily.  It  is  .about  25  m.  in  circuit,
uA  contains  a  population  of  about
11  yiOOy  !of  whom  1 0,000  are  blacks.
IT.  lota;.  ««  IT,  N.  lat.  169  46'.
thme  are  more  than  40  estates  on
fab  Uand.

The  Rev.  J.  Maddock,  from  the
WmM»  S.,  visited  it,  and  opened  a
■bool  with  103  scholars,  May  28,
1830.  In  1822,221  pupils  belongred
D  the  schools,  who,  generally,  made
ilantlng  improvement.  Manyown-
n  of  the  estates  encourage  mis-
4amry  efibrts,  and  contribute  li-
Mnlly  to  the  mission.  One  or  two
dwpels  have  been  erected,  which
ve  crowded  with  persons  famishing
far  the  bread  of  life.  The  labours
Hid  instructions  of  the  missionaries
have  produced  a  visible  moral
Aange  among  the  inhabitants,  some
Bf  vbmn  have  become,  it  is  hoped,
nigects  of  divine  grace.  Where
liiMte  of  dissipation  and  rioting
facmeily  prevailed,  decorum  and
|Dod  order  now  predominate.  In
i8S4»  there  were  in  tociety  6  whites
ad  44  Macks.  An  A.  M.  S,  was
imied  August  5,  1823,  under  the
atronage  of  the  most  influential
liuttcters  on  the  island.  At  its
irmation  about  130  dollars  were
mtributed.

**  Throughout  the  year  1 826,"  the
iaelonaries  remark,  <<the  good
ind-of  our  God  has  been  upon  us.
I  have  been  admitted  into  the  so-
ety>  2  have  been  added  to  our
imber  from  Antigua,  and  3  re-
ain  on  trial.  Two  new  estates
iwje  been  thrown  open ;  and  rsmall
ass  has  been  formed  at  the  N.
urt  of  the  island.  The  increase
I  the  society  is  not  so  rapid  here
I  in  some  places.  The  people
onder  well  the  matter,  and  are
ow  to  take  a  step  of  so  much
nportance.    This  was  formerly  a


MON

Roman  Catholic  country ;  and,  no
doubt,  one  great  cause  of  their  d&>
liberation  is  the  fear  of  what  is
called  by  Roman  Catholics  chang-
ing their  religion !  From  this  fear,
however,  about  60  souls  have  been
happily  delivered,  who  are  now
members  of  our  society.  Much  good
is  doing  in  the  ishmd  by  the  mission,
and  the  prospect  is  very  cheering.
A  blessed  spirit  for  reading  religious
books  is  prevalent.  The  number
in  society  are — 8  Whites ;  T2  Free
coloured  and  Blacks,  and  67  slaves ;
making  a  total  of  147 ;  and  an  in-
crease, during  the  year,  of  22;"

Schools. — The  following  are
extracts  from  the  Montserrat  School
report : —

number  of  children  in  this  school,
after  striking  out  all  who  have  been
long  absent  without  cause,  drc.  is
107  boys  and  167  girls ;  making  a
total  of  275,  and  a  clear  increase
for  the  year  of  32  scholars."

jiduli  Male  Sufuia^'tchooU —
*'  There  are  in  this  school  28  men ;
increase  in  the  year,  3.  The
average  attendance  has  been  12  ;
which  is,  upon  the  whole,  good,  as
they  are  all  country  negroes>  and
many  have  far-  to  come.  Sixteen
advances  have  taken  place  to  higher
classes,  and  all  seem  animated
with  a  desire  to  read  the  word  of
Life."

.AduU  Female  Sumda^f'Sekoel.^—
''  This  school  has  increased  during
the  year  16  scholars,  and  now  con-
tains 53.  Here,  too,  the  average
attendance,  which  is  18,  is  as  great
as  can  be  well  expected.  Most  of
them  are  country  negproesyWho  have
affairs  of  a  domestic  nature  to  at-
tend to  on  the  Sabbath  tlay.  The
improvement  in  many  has  been  very
pleasing ;  and  several  who  came  to
the  school  ignorant,  can  now  read
the  word  of  God.  To  facilitate  the
progress  of  two,  who  complained  of
their  sight,  Mn.Hyde  had  spectacles

35T


frOB  Eniluid,  for  wbkh  th«T  FiUd
m  trMe,  utd  me  TC17  tfaukfoL"
P^mmHA  Mtrmng  SnM.—
"  TU*  aehool  hu  coatlnmed  to
Bto*e  a  powBifbl  aaxiUM;


talw  48  bo]M  ud  ei  glili.  Dnin^
the  yau,  •  MbaUn  hne  beoB  nlnd
to  lbs  nak  M  toactoni  "  *^ — ~


— J  jj  ^,^  j^  „


3tw  Shen  SmtJ^-iotatL—
"  Tbk  Khool,  whlcli  WM  opensd
on  the  lAth  of  Aug.  liH,  maw
contaliu  <1  KboUn — 1  hoj%  aad
145W1."

II  boji,  V^lrii,  and  3  trachei*.
Tho  iDCTBue  ioT  tho  year  bH  bMii
4  idiaUn:  tiiey  baie  aeqolred
eonildeiabla  kiiawledB«  of  th»
catecliliBi.    Tbe  ntngt  attend-


aehotl.—"  Tbcn  are  now  Id  tfati
■efaool  14  boyi  ud  tS  gilrb,  1
nM«e  of  8  haring  takeu  place  in

fFehh't  Eitatt  Sundof-ieAoal.—
"  Tbe  anmlien  In  thl*  leboal  bk  B
bOfi,9flrii,BadSadalt(;  being  en
Incieaie  of  3.  It  bai  been  legn-
loiljattended  to."

"  Tbli  tchool  wai  opened  b;  the
rolsloniiy,  on  Friday,  iHb  of  Aug.
Uat,nitb38childnn.  Ititowcott-
taint  81  boyi,  ISglrii,  andSadulti.
Wben  opened,  only  bne  little  gM
coald  leod ;  all  tbe  reit  were  l^to.
rant  of  Uie  elpbabet."

7W  Rieer  Smudiirtehatl.
"  Thli  icbool  wa>  open«d  on  '
mme  day  m  White'*:  4S  ebUdtan


n  a-lmitted,  wdtaiii  ^°^^

KianinaHen  <^  Mf  OMmA  '^'  f'"'
On  Tueri.)',  DMtobu  ll  ^^J  " '  "
nth,  1825,  being  Cbriitti"!*  „  hv
dBJ,tbeeKaininiitlm  otltaTtW  ■"^'  "'
SUn.l«y  and  Mornlog  fldmldff  \'^'>  J,
inn  took  pliice  in  Uk  tUrt  I  j,  „
be^rellielflrge^tandmortitj*  "^Jj-'je
able  congregation  eier  "■"•'  v^Jit  ■
be^e  for  that  purpoM.  Ttedl-  pf  ^^
d»n  on  that  oecaston  B^J  Lr,;'
ITPal  capacity,  aod  « "l™!*  **  LT"  fi
■Imorj  which  nstoniiWaiH'  \^j  '^  .
tbehearefs.  Twoof ttwhown*  Ucur*
mtmbeti  of  his  Majatj^  C»  '^jb*"*
cU  were  present,  ind  W  L^  ^1
look  part  In  theexaminsUon,  TV  'n^^i
giollficslion  expressed));  >II.''Ijul1.
Kit  l>y  the  committee  and  tudtOi


at  very  enceuraging  lo  tluii

MOORSHEDABAD,  » '«|  \'^
large  and  populoiig  town,  ud  Wi  W,i
aerJT  capita]  of  Bennal,  eiteidn  \^


:haf  tJ


!  Ganges!  13*1  »


The  Fopulatlanitn-
tltnated  at  about  200,000.  Mt.  J.
W.Ricketts,of  tbe  A.M.&  cot-
nenced  missionary  eBarlaheR,^!
<^ning  schools  tor  natke  ehlidn^

uisia.

Mi.  Sutton,  wbo  came  ia  bbiM
In  IHIO,  entered  on  hislaboomrill
,yf*  ■        -      ■   ■


oliec


I  Biter


lunU,  and  gt


baptiZGil  SS  in

fld  a  church  01  more  uiaa  ov  meai-

Besldefbig  exertions  la  tbiitMOf

he  preached  to  a  large  congregalin
of  iraldiBr!  at  BerhUopeie,  wbot

be  bad  a  church  of  60

VTS'alJ


On  June  IS,  iei9,  B  .iM«t>;A-  <
eie/y  was  formed,  hy  EuropM  I
eeptlemeo,   at  tbia   place  antil   I


MOT

ire.  Tbe  society  nises
)f  600  doUars  yearly,  and
ereral  schools.  This  mis-
however,  deprived  of  the
f  Mr.  Sutton,  by  iUness ;
ise  of  Kurreem,  a  native
by  death,  whose  instru-
had  been  eminently
Of  its  recent  state  no  ac-
re been  received.
[£LLOOR,  a  viUage  in
Y  district,  Hindoostan,  a
Nazareth.

1800,  the  Rev.  Mr.
from  the  C  K,  S,  com-
mission here,  and  <aIso
v/A,  and  established  a
b  church  at  each  place,
e  same  society  continues
t  native  priests,  and'  to
he  congregations  with
'hese  villages  present  the
benomenon  of  the  abodes
n  India  without  an  idol
In  1819,  there  had  been
ts  from  heathenism^  and
lunicants  at  both  places,
ive  also  been  established,
tmarden,  a  country  priest,
Te.

RAy  or  Matray  or  Mu"

»wn  30  m.  N.  by  W.  of

high  repute  among  the

as  the  scene  of  the  birth

adventures  of  Krishna;

arge  population,  and  like

I  and  Benares,  it  is  the

attraction  to    Hindoos

aarters.

V.  R.  Richards,  of  the  B,
scompani^  by  a  native
Ramdas,  arrived  at  Mut-
b.  1826.  One  Mussulman
IS  recently  been  baptized
I  to  the  church ;  and  an-
ale  (not  a  native),  one  of
lard's  stated  hearers  at
*,  begged  him  to  return
se  her  last  July,  which  he
ut  six  brahmins  and  others
I  with  him,  some  for  long
■s  for  shorter  periods  of
ring  the  past  year;  and


NAG

several  beve  given  up  caste,  anil
their  condact  indnces  him  to  hope
that  they  may  be  aoos  added  to  the
church.

M  YSORE,  a  cify  of  Hindooetan,
capital  of  a  province  of  the  same
name.  It  was  mined  by  the  late  S
sultans;  but  since  the  Britidi  re-
stored the  ancient  family,  hi  1780,
,and  mode  it  the  n^ah's  seat  of,  go-
vernment, numerous  buildingtluMre
been  erected.  The  principal  street
is  about  a  mile  long ;  the  fort  is
well  built,  and  the  palace  is  small
and  neat.  It  is  seated  in  a  valley,
9  m.  S.  S.  W.  Seringapatam.  B.
long.  76®  42*,  N.  lat.  12»  IS*.

Tliis  place  is  visited  by  the  L.  Jf.
S.*8  agents,  at  Bangalore.  Here  15
natives  have  offered  themselves  for
baptism.  **  We  were  received  ahd
welcomed,''  says.  Mr.  Massie,  *'  by
a  young  disciple,  who,  with,  all  hte
family,  was  lately  baptized  by  the
native  preacher,  Samuel  Flavel ;  he
is  one  of  the  medical  attendants  of
the  rajah.  We  met  for  worship  in
a  bungalow,  which  the  Hon.  Mr.
Cole,  the  British  Resident,  has
most  kindly  given  for  this  purpose.
There  were  nearly  80  present.

N.

NAGERCOIL  is  the  head-
quarters  of  those  missionary  opera-
tions in  S.  I'^avoncore,  of  which
Magilady  was  formerly  the  centre.
Here,  in  1822,  was  a  female  school
of  14  pupils,  a  bazar  school  for
heathen  chll(bren  of  40,  and  a  cen-
tral school,  designed  to  prepore-tho
more  forward  soholars,  from  all
the  other  schools^  for  future  use-
fulness. In  this,  above  60  pupils
were  maintained.  A  school  of  in*
dustry  was  also  established,  which
supports  itself.  A  large  chapel  and
dwelling-house  were  presented  to
the  mission,  principally  through  the
liberality  of  the  Queen  of  Travan-
core  and  Col.  Munro,  who  have  ren-
def ed  important  aid  to .  missionary


NAG

eflliTts  in  this  quarter.  In  1622,
there  were  S6  !i<!hools  Ht  this  place,
nnd  2H  out-stntioiis,  at  several  of
which  chupels  have  been  erected.

Mure  than  /)0U0  people,  re-
nouncing their  heathenish  5uj>er-
ftitions,  hu%'e  become  nominally
Christians,  nnd  are  enjoyinfr  the
blessinp^  uf  scriptural  instruction.
Several  hundreds  have  been  bap-
tized. A  printing-press  has  been
established,  the  influence  of  which
is  extensively  felt ;  and  a  Tract  so-
ciety has  been  recently  fomie-d.

This  mission  is  in  part  supported
by  the  produce  of  lands  granted  for
its  use  by  the  native  authorities.
The  following  are  the  last  accounts
of  the  operations  of  the  L,M.  S.: —
**  Nattre  Srniinari/. — The  number
of  vouths  in  this  institution  is  24.
Most  of  them  have  been  recentlj'
admitted,  and  fill  the  places  of  such
ns  have  lately  left  the  seniiiiarj',  to
occupy  ditrerent  situations,  in  con-
nexion with  the  mission,  either  as
readers  or  schoolmitsters.  While
the  attention  of  the  youths  is  en-
gaged in  attainingdiilerent  branches
of  human  learning,  it  is  chiefly
directed  to  the  Scriptures,  in  the
knowledge  of  which  some  of  them
have  made  pleasing  progress.

"  Jfot/s*  School. — The  number  at
present  is  45,  containing  nearly
1500  boys.  The  schools  are  in
most  places  well  attended.  The
proficiency  made  by  many  of  the
scholars  in  reading,  and  the  taste
for  it  which  has  been  inspired,
warrant  a  hope  that  the  surround-
ing moral  and  intellectual  darkness
will  be  gradually  dispelled.  A  small
proportion  of  the  children  edu-
cated in  the  heathen  schools,  are
capable  of  reading  a  book  so  as  to
understand  it.  Independently  of
their  advance  in  common  learning,
their  attainment  in  the  knowledge
of  the  doctrines  and  duties  of
Christianity',  are  considerable ;  and,
what  is  of  still  greater  importance,
some    of  the    boys    manifest    a


\


NAG

serious  attention  to  the  leligiM
instruction  imparted ;  eocouFq;tag
a  hope  that  the  laboar  botnrad
upon  them  has  not,  in  a  ipirtM
point  of  view,  been  in  Tain.

"  The  boj»  belonging  to  5  of ^
schools,  situated  in  the  immediriB  \
vicinity  of  Nagercoil,  amoimtiifto  )
about  200,  attend  weeklj  fet  the  !
mission-bouseywheretbeyaretik-  {
chisedby  Mr.  Manlt.  TheduMven
in    the    schools    situated  in  the
Christian  Tillages,  constantly  attend
public  worship  on  the  SaMafls  it
the  respective  chapels ;  on  irUd
occasions  they  are  catechind  bj  I
the  readers,  who  have  been  eus>  '
fully  instructed  by  Mr.  M.,  with
special  reference  to  this  importnt  /
work.    Instances    now  and  then  \
occur,  of  boys,  who  have  been  p»-  .
sent  at   such    seasons,   retaimni  i
home  so  strongly  impresed  with  the  j
folly  of   idolatry',    as    to  entreat
their  parents  to  renounce  it,  ind
become  Christians.

*'  Some  of  the  schools  soflri
greatly  for  the  want  of  propeilj
qualified  schoolmasters,  and  lOBe
have  been  suspended,  during  the
past  year  (1826)»  on  thataccomt

"  The  progress  made  in  the  knov-
ledge  of  the  Scriptures,  by  tte
boys  in  the  schools  which  sre
under  good  management,  denon-
strates  the  vast  importance  of  edu-
cation in  the  prosecution  of  irii-
sionary  undertakings;  and  indiota
that  it  is  likely  to  Income  a  powo-
ful  instrument  in  the  hand  of  Vto^
vidence,  in  christianizing  India.

**  Native  Female  School.— l^Xbk
school,  which  is  under  the  sapeiin-
tendence  of  Mrs.  Manlt,  upwvdi
of  40  girls  are  receiving  a  religioos
education.  The  g^ood  conduct  of
most,  and  the  serious  attention  paid
by  many  td  the  instruction  im-
parted, plainly  evince  ^at  (he
labour  bestowed  on  them  has  not
been  in  vain.  Several,  during  the
past  year,  finished  tibefar  edncatioB,
and  tiieir  places  havo  been  filled  I7


<
I


E.-
^■,'.

9

ar-
■fcv
b

-»


i

9


ft

k


NAG

iAen,  The  profits  of  the  work
done  in  the  school  contribute,  in
yarty  to  its  support.

"  Qmgregation  ai  Nagercoii. —
The  attendance  on  the  Sabbath
JliSy  in  a  small  degree^  increased
dnrlng  the  past  year,  and  there  is
^■■itiifBCtory  proof  of  good  having
been  done.  A  Sabbath  *  adult
flchool  has  been  commenced  for
ismales  belonging  to  the  congprega-
^n,  of  whom  about  15  attend.  The
Mnior  girls  in  the  female  school  are
tte  teachers,  and  they  appear  to  take
gieat  delight  in  the  employment.

**  The  missionaries  have  also
^ about  30  out^stations,  which  are
'■■pplied  with  various  success.

/<  Priming  Eteabiithment.—S€'
mal  portions  of  the  Scriptures  and
tmets,  in  Tamul,  have  been  printed
Airing  the  past  year.

**  The  congpregations  throughout
the  extensive  range  of  the  mission
•re,  generally  speaking,  on  the  in-
crease ;  2  or  3  have  been  raised
daring  the  past  year.  Many  of  the
people  are  making  rapid  progress
hi  the  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.
Pkools  of  the  power  of  the  Gospel
from  time  to  time  appear,  in  awa-
kening the  conscience  to  a  sense  of
the  evil  and  danger  of  sin ;  and
jiome  are  led  to  inquire,  what  they
wmtt  do  to  be  staved  f  Some  have
cordially  embraced  the  Gospel,
and  live  consistently  with  its  holy
obligations.  The  readers  are
progressively  becoming  more  effi-
cient instruments  in  carrying
Ibrward  the  work  of  the  mission.
A  few  of  the  people,  of  both  sexes,
begin  to  feel  interested  in  the  pro-
pagation of  the  Gospel,  and  in  the
i^iritual  welfare  oi  their  neigh-
boun,  and  devote  a  portion  of  their
time  and  property  in  promoting
their  instruction.  The  number  of
scholars  in  the  native  schools  has
increased,  and  the  benefit  derived
from  the  instruction  imparted  is
■lore  apparent.  The  number  of
native  females  under  ChrifUan  in-


NAG

stniction,    including  the  out- sta-
tions, is  not  less  than  100.  A  groat
desire  to  learn  to  read  is  now  pre-
valent   among    the   adults,    both
heathens  and  professing  Christians '
and  several  evening  schools  have
been  formed  by  themselves,  which
they  support  and  regularly  attend.
This  issupposed  to  be  chiefly  owing
to  the  circulation  of  tracts,  and  the
curiosity  felt  to  know  their  con-
tents.    By  these  various  means
though,  in  some  cases,  the  motive
may  not  be  pure,  knowledge  is  un-
questionably increasing,  more  or
less,     throughout     the     country.
Those  who  are  considered  as .  real
converts  have  renounced  catte,  on
the   ground  of  its  being   incon-
sistent with  the  exercise  of  certain
Christian  virtues,  such,  for  example,
as  humility;  and  among  the  le-
strictions  imposed  by  the  Hindoo
code,  is  the  forbidding  of  widows
to  marry.    This  prohibition  forms
a  considerable  barrier  to  moral  and
civil  improvement,  and  continually
leads  to  crimes  of  the  roost  appal-
ling   character.    In  Travancore,
however,  this 'barrier  has  been,  at
length,  assailed.  A  Hindoo  widow
has  been   united  in  marriage,  by
Mr.  Mault,  to  a  member  of  the
congregation  at  Agatesurum.  Both
of  the  parties  are  considered  to  be
sincere  converts.    They  were  first
baptized,  and  afterwards  married,
in  the  presence  of  an  inunense  mul-
titude of  heathens.

There  are  many  other  indications,
in  this  part  of  India,  of  the  decline
of  prejudice  and  superstition.    Th^

following  instance  is  peculiar:

About  thirty  persons,  who  reside
in  the  vicinity  of  Cape  Comorin,
have  applied  to  the  missionaries  for
instruction,  not  because  tbey,  at
present,  attach  a  just  value  to  the
Gospel,  but  because,  as  they  them-
selves state,  they  are  tired  with
idolatry.

NAGOTNEA,  a  town   in  the
Mahratta  co\mti^,a\K>\i\\  %i\\bl«,^«
1  1  '^<^\


NAK

AUabag;  contaiatDgTorMWfariw*
bitants.  The  Awterieam  wmMumm*
riet  at  BonlMy  estabUsbed  a  ichoal
here  in  1881.

NAMAQUALAND,  GREAT.
[See  Africtmer^t  Krmmt,  BetAmm,]

NAMAQUALAND,  UTTLS.
[See  KMawue9'Berg,  Lify  Fmm^
tain,  Pelloy  Reed  Fmmimih
Sieinkopjf.]

NANTUCKET,  an  iilandin  Mat-
uchuBetts,  aboat  10  m.  E.  MartlMl
Vineyard,  and  about  16  long.  The
Messrs.  Mayhewi  and  Mr.  Ellioit
laboured  with  much  success  among
the  Indians,  who  resided  here,  in
the  early  settlement  of  this  coantry.
In  1674,  the  number  of  Indian  fa-
milies was  estimated  at  300.  Among
these  were  about  80  members  in  the
rhnrch,  and  about  800  who  prajred
to  God,  and  obserred  the  Sabbath*
They  had  meetings  in  8  different
places,  and  4  Indian  teachers.

NARRAGANSET,  formerly  a
numerous  tribe  of  Indians  in  Rhode
Island.  They  haTe  been  scattered
and  reduced  to  about  400,  who  re-
side at  Charlestown.  In  1733,  the
Rev.  Mr.  Parks  was  sent,  by  the
CommissHmers  of  Indian  ajfiurt,  to
preach  to  this  tribe,  and  to  such  of
the  English  as  would  attend  on  his
instructions.

After  some  years,  several  of  the
Indians  were  seriously  impressed
with  the  truth;  and,  in  1743,  the
power  of  God  was  most  remarkably
displayed  among  tbem  :  the  gpreater
part  were  impressed  with  a  serious
concern  for  their  souls,  and  many
gave  convincing  evidence  of  a
saving  change.  They  have  since
greatly  degenerated ;  but  there  are
still  the  remains  of  a  Christian
church  among  them.

At  Chariestawn,  a  town  in  Rhode
Island,  on  the  sea  coast,  19  m.  S.  W.
Newport;  there  are  about  400  of  the
Narraganset  tribe  of  Indians,  who
have  a  Baptist  church  and  a.school.

The  Soeietjffor  Pr&pagating  tfte
(hspisl  among    the    Indians   vni^


KAC


0tMn^  in  Norili


«liool  here  in  .191%
bMA  BMfartalMd^  «l&
inltiraptloM,
benflftetai  to  the  Mllnfc
NATICK,  A


>  ,  '.vc


ij's.-


>}i


Indian^  wko  kaA
Gospel  ueder  the
Her.  J.  ElUolp  OBfcM  te
settteBent,  wUefa  ttM^eriM;
tick,    la   liOO,  the  «irf  li
chueh  wee  oiguiftMd  «t  Urii  fhiL
wUch  toMMed  of  aboeft  "
benie  I6V0.

It  Qonttamed  finr
UtaeveriottMk^  «m
membeniii  ItWf  andtM
hi  lWl,eteBtfae  RM.Oi.aBKM
commenced  Ue  Iwfcnyiii  f  lijjk
were  oonilniieA  te  elMNii  aft:
During  that  period
ofganlxed^  199

tieed,  ami  489  wklto.,penQ«b  A
Indiaoi  were  edeiitted  Mev9»
chanh  endei  Us  Bibdijtiy^eiriJ^
whtftei.  SiBoe  that  tteo  theil-
diaMheve  prfliiilljf  iH^JeiiM  h
nmober^iMMiaie

NAZRAN>  4

BMong  the  Ingiiiih  TertHjiftiea9»
River  Soun^iey  Bear
Rwia.  WithU
this  i^ce  are  almit  99
coDtaMngr  eboet  10^999,
tents;  some  of  wkom  pm
mninnn  hut  ■  grrintiir  pinlliwiihi
no pretonsioDs to enjrraUfdaB.-  >

The  Rev.  G.  BlythBTniH  m
&  if.  &,  commmeed  a  nliriiftftil
1881 ;  and  having  gaiaedfl^MVict
and  confidence  oftbe  Tngirtil^hft
appUed  hhnMlf  to  the  eri|iililliwirf
their  language ;  biitial8991ia«ii
unexpectedly  ordeved  by  gpsfSH
meat  to  quit  the .  pniiiiioe^  yaad.  a
termination  was  inddBDlj  rat  l»  his
plans  of  benevoleace.  ft  Ji  -te-
Jieved,  however,  hialabami  aeipg:
this  people  wece  not  ellMmw


NBO

KEGAPATAM,  ot  Negamki'
ft  «ea-^rt  town  on  tin  Coro-
)t  ooMt,  in  the  Canuitlc,
HMkMMtftn,  48  miles  E.  Tanjore,
hsHng  a  pojiiilation  of  30,000  in-
kabltantg,  who  aie  notorious  for
tamimlity  and  idolatrous  ceremo-
■Ibs^  where  the  C  K.  S.  estaUished
•  nhsion,  in  1T37.  Their  agents
Cillected  a  oong^regation,  and  open-
ed a  school  soon  alter  their  ariiral,
■ad  their  persevering  efforts  have
been,  g;enerall;f,  crowned  with  sue*
mm.  In  l§Od,  05  Portuguese  and
10  Malabars  were  members  of  the
efenrcb.  In  1816,  the  number  of
eoouDonicants  was  about  the  same;
there  had  been  a  consicterable  in-
ttease  of  the  congregation,  and  00
«r  VO  children  were  receiving  regu-
Ipf  instruction.  -The  school  has
iteee  decreased,  and  is  under  the
dfapeetkm  ef  the  C.  M,  S.
'  The  Rev.  J.  Mowat,  and  Mr.  J.
Ktttti^  ajvistant,  from  the  fV^M,S,y
Urived  in  1821.  In  the  early  part
tf  that  year  the  Rev.  Mr.  Squance
visited  this  place,  and  preaclied  in
Tunui  to  consideTable  assemblies.
Other  missionaries  have  sinoeoc-
9^pled  the  station.  A  native  school
llM  been  established,  with  encou-
figing  proRpects. — Members  in  so-
ele^,  in  1823, 20.  Since  that  period
the  efrcumstances  of  ttie  mission
bete  much  improved.

*  The  prospects  this  station  pre-
MHtB,"  says  Mr.  Mowat,  February
n,  1820,  *'  are  to  me  more  cheeiv-
ing  than  ever.  The  appointment
•C  Mr.  Martens  to  Negapatam,
tiMie  is  little  doubt,  will  prove  the
means  of  great  benefit  to  the  For-
taguese  and  Roman-  Catbolle  in-
babttants.  The  first  Sunday  Mr.  M.
preached  in  Negapatam,  the  chapel
was  crowded  to  excess  $  and  a  great
■onber  stood  at  the  outride  to  hear
one  who,  a  few  years  since,  ap-
ipeared  among  the  people  as  a  Ro-
.  nan  Catholic  teacher.  We  have,
of  eouise,  to  endure  a  little  opposi-
tioB  uid  ignorant  slander  fron  the


NEC

Roman  Catholics ;  but  I  have  rea-
im  to  hope,  from  the  interest  ex-
cited, that  his  appointment  to
Negapatam  will  be  the  means  of
extending  the  influence  of  real  reli-
gion among  that  class  of  people,
while  it  wiU  afford  me  grea^r  lei-
fture  to  labour  among  the  ^natives.''

NEGOMBO,  a  populous  town
on  the  W.  coast  of  Ceylon,  20  m.N.
Colombo.  Population  estimated  at
15,000.  Missionary  operations  were
commenced  here  by  the  fV,  M,  S,
about  1815.  •

In  their  last  accounts  the  mission-
aries remark : — ''  Upon  a  general
view  of  the  work  of  God  on  this
station,  there  appears  to  be  cause
for  gratitude  mingled  with  regret.
The  interests  of  vital  religion  are
very  low  in  the  town  of  Negombo
audits  immediate  vicinity.  Thecon-
gpregations  3re  exceedingly  small,
and  the  numbers  of  those  who  from
the  commencement  of  the  mission
were  reg^ar  in  their  attendance
upon  the  means  of  grace,  have
been  gpradually  reduced  by  death ;
yet  we  rejoice  in  knowing  that
they  have  been  removed  to  the
church  triumphant.  But  although
there  is  not  much  prospect  of  im-
mediate usefulness  in  that  part  of
the  circuit,  an  indirect  benefit  has
been  conferred  $  a  higher  tone  of
morab  has  been  induced,  and  the
rays  of  divine  light  spread  over  the
Catholic  population  through  the
medium  of  our  flourishing  schools,
cannot  fail,  by  the  gracious  influ-
ences of  the  Holy  Spirit,  of  pro-
ducing some  good.  At  present,  in
several  instances,  the  Holy  Scrip-
tures are  carefully  read  in  privAte,
by  individuals  who  are  deterred
from  attending  our  ministry  by  the
menaces  of  the  priest.  The  most
interesting  and  encouraging  part  of
our  work  is  in  the  village  of  Seduu,
Though  adjoining  schools  had  been
established  in  that  neighbourhood
for  several  years,  and  had  diffused


NEL

conipteg&tlons  remained  genenUy
exceedinpfly  small.  During  the  year
]  826,  efforts  have  been  made,  with
success,  to  introduce  etening
pleaching,  both  on  the  Sabbath  and
\^ek  days.  The  congregations
have  been  considerably  increased,
the  Word  is  n»ceived  with  the
deepest  attention,  and,  in  that
neighbourhood,  81  souls  hara  been
gathered  from  the  world,  within
the  last  6  or  7  months,  who  are
with  sincerity  seeking  salvation
through  Jesus  Christ.  With  one
exception,  they  have  received  their
religious  convictions  by  attendance
upon  the  word  preached.  Service
has  also  been  introduced  into  two
new  villages,  the  majority  of  the
inhabitants  of  which  are  professedly
Protestants.  No  classes  have  yet
been  formed  in  those  places,  the
preaching  having  been  but  lately
introduce.  The  general  state  of
the  classes  is  encouraging — no  ex-
ercise of  discipline  having  been  ne-
cessar}'  in  the  course  of  the  prece-
ding year,  although  we  have  7
classes,  and  72  members ;  and  we
have  ever}'  reason  to  believe  that
the  work  of  grace  is  dee)>ening  in
the  hearts  of  the  members  of  so-
ciety ;  and  we  trust  tliat,  by  the
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  there
will  be  nn  extension  of  the  work  in
the  ensuing  year."

NELLOK£,  apnrish  near  JafTna-
patam,  in  the  district  of  Jaffna,
Ceylon.  Population  6  or  dOOO.
The  Rev.  J.  Knight,  from  the
CM.S.,  and  a  native  master  of  0
schools,  removed  from  Jaffnapa-
tam  to  Nellore,  Nov.  1818.

"This,"  says  Mr.  Knight,  "is
one  of  the  strong-holds  of  idolatry,
aa  one  of  the  largest  temples  in  the
whole  district  (in  which  there  are
said  to  be  not  less  than  a  thousand)
is  at  Nellore.  There  are  annual
exhibitions,  such  as  are  described
by  Dr.  Buchanan  in  his  Researches;
and  I  have,  myself,  witnessed  the
procession  of  a  car,  wUeie  \][kQVi-


stnda  of  deluded  woidiippaiM
coUeotcd  together,  to  pnMlpdi
themselTCfy  and  {My  theii  1m«N||
to  a  god  which  could  not  ibnb
Their  piejiidices  anf«  at  mmit
deeply  rooted  in  favour  «  Mr
ancient  cuftomiaBd  rapenUltaH
and  the  brabpUne,  in  adiUtlia.ii
their  prejudices  9i  caste  and  niffA
for  reputation,  have  all  tWr  tal^
poral  intereeli  at  stake ;  loclfoHi
they  renounced  idolati7,tlMgr«ilii
have  no  means  of  sufipoit*

*'  With  fpspect  to  tbe  R09^
Catholics,  the  show  and  penis  «C
tlteir  worship  and  pnipMdHS
greatly  attract  the  attentionef4fck
people,  and  their  pvetendsd  peniK
of  working  nsiraclea  is  adMla%
calcuUted  to  operate  on  their  wsfh-
nesB  and  creduUly.  At  their  fe4*
vols,  they  are  said  to  eflsetim-
ders  with  the  ashes  of  a  deesiNii^
saint,  and  niunbers  floclK  te  Ihfp
with  their  maladies  and  their  pAl>*
ings;  by  which  their  funds  and  Mr
influence  are  rapidlj  inrfi—il'.
indeed,  tlie  Catholics  and  flmliwi
seem  to  vie  with  each  other,  «Ib
shall  make  the  naost  q;)lendhl  dwfff  |
while  many  loolc  on  with
indifference,  or  are  even
with  what  they  witness."

Among  the  prooft  nffinded  of  Ab
influence  of  superstition,  It  is  ftatod
that  a  person  who  had  done  Mm
work  for  Mr.  Knight  came  toHk
for  his  money,  saying  that  hewailpd
it  to  buy  rice  for.the  devil.  IVm,
it  seems,  was  in  consequence  of  tts
approach  of  an  annoal  cersnom^
when  the  deioded  heathens.sndii
vour  to  ascertain  their  fata  fivths
ensuing  year.  On  this  occailos^
each  person,  however  poor,  ODa-
trives  to  purchase  a  little  rios^iLwUch
is  boiled,  with  much  snpentttiflM
veneration,  in  an  eartlien  disii,  sMd
only  for  this  porpose,  and  tbm
broken,  or  lakl  aside  till  that  d«j
twelvemonth.  They  piolesi  to
discover  their  destiny  lijy  tbe  mss-
\  ii«t  Viw^MictL  the  rice  fiist  begbis  ts


koU.  If  it  bo£liq>  freely,  tkey  lap-
■  i^  ilie  detil  is  pleued,  onA  thfjr
-i'  «sp«ct  pnMperftj;  bat  if  other-

«Mie,'tlie  nort  diaaftiouf  cone-
aie  anticipated.


j-'flboB  after  Us  nmanl  to  tiiiis
IMkm,  Mr.  KnigM  opened  hU
MiamB  tot  pfea^ing,  and  was  oceo-
■fcWilly  assisted  ty  the  Rer.  Chiton
iltti^Dairid,  of  "oiMin  Dr.  Bochaaaii
MMi  hoBoioable  aientSon.  He
iflio  went  ont  lato  the  adjacent
MBi^es,  and  convened  with  the
pacpliL  wfaeieverliecoald  And  them
•4i  tlieir  temples~-«t  their  hooses
«-HMr  by  the  way  side.  And,  In
feMtflon  to  ttii^  ezeittonsy  he
dfjMiad  a  aeboel  for  the  pnipose  of
tastrocfing  boysin  Teadingthe  Holy
fciiptuies^  and  had,  in  a  diort
ibM^  the  pleasure  of  eoUeoting
tMMrty*foar  i^ilsy  wlio  evinced
Mi  oicellent  capacity,  and  made  a
MBOilag  progress  in  their  studies,
u  Hm  nidstof  an  theUD  exertkinsy
hutliwei,  the  cholera  bkntInis  ap-
peared in  the  district;  in  eonse-
^oeace  of  which  his  labours  were
Bopeairily  suspended,  the  oehool
was  broken  up,  and  tiw  state  of
the  sotiTesy  ondor  this  aflUctive
liiitftthin  became  truly  distressing.
Hir  labours  were,  however,  safe-
seqaently  resumed.

Wnm  the  Repiort  for  ItiM-T,  it
•ppeon  thatthe  woric  of  the  Mni9»>
fty  iMs  been  continued  f  and  anew
oeivioe,  on  Wednesday  afternoons^
iMsbeen  added.

-  Of  the  effect  of  missionary  la-
boors,  Mr.  Adiey  writes:— <<  The
fintonnth  of  this  year  (18»6)  has
been  a  time  of  special  mercy.  Four
penoBs  connected  with  the  station
aie  among  those  nho  have  been
omriKened ;  they  have  continued  to
maaifeBt  such  a  knowledge  of  their
need  of  Christ  as  the  only  Saviour,
with  such  a  deep  concern  for  the
sahrotion  of  thefar  souls,  that  they
here  been  admitted  as  candidates
for  baptism.  8  or  10  of  the  ^der
boys,  also,  who  evince  aaziety  re*


NfiL

qiectiiig  their  eterad  welfare,  am
assAmbled,  once  a  week,  for  fur^
ther  Instruction  and  prayer.^

One  of  the  candidates  for  bep-.
tism  being  cook  to  the  boys  in  the
Family  Schools,  Mr.  Adley  -re-
marlcs:— ^  I  need  scared^  say,  that
it  is  truly  delightfol  to  see'a  part  of
oar  cook-house,  which,  from  the
trials  that  we  have  had  with  some
of  tile  servants,  may  ahkiost  literally
be  said  to  have  been  a  denof  thievesy
now  converted  into  a  bouse  of
prayer:  four  or  more  of  the  ser-
vants meet  there  two  or  three  even-
ings in  the  week,  to  read  the
Soiptures,  and  for  conversaUoo
and  prayer.'^

Three  pemoae  were  admitted  iato
the  church  on  the  ISth  of  Mjoreh.

Mr.  Kni^t  writes  in  January :
— <<The  cholera  has  been  agaiik
raging  in  this  district,  firam  about
the  time  of  our  return  from  Co-
kNobo.  Most  of  our  schools  have
been  broken  up  again;  happ^  it
has  not  yet  attacked  aiiy  on  the
mission  premises."

The  number  of  achools  is  8,  and
the  average  niubbei  of  boys  who
attend  ia  from  280  to  980^  and
about  25  or  30  gIrlsL

In  the  FaniUy  Schoc^  whkh
continues  under  the  eare  of  Mr
and  Mrs.  Adley,  tiiere  have  bee»
about  90  schotan  ttvoogtMmt  the
year;  and  they  appear  to  afibrd.Mr*
A.  much  encouvagement.

On  Saturday  evenings  he  atf»et|
the  boys  and  the  serrants  of  the
minkm  for  religioos  instruction  and
prayer,  especiaily  reminding  them
of  the  prayers  continually  oflRnred
up  by  their  frieods  in  England  on
their  behalf.

Mr.  A.  allows  a  few  boys^  sens
of  some  of  the  chief  natives,  to
learn  with  tiie  difierent  classes  in
the  schools,  on  oonditioo  of  their
attending  at  churchy  and  commit-
tiiw  Scripture  lessons  to  nesnoiy*

Tlie  Lord's  supper  was  adwtois-
tered,   for  the  first  time  at  this'
lift  ^'Mk


NKV

gtation,  on  tlie  fint  Sunday  In
FBbniuj.  Four  nathet,  who  bad
been  preriongly  baptized  at  St.
John'i  Churcb  in  Jafflia,  comnni-
nicated.  Tbe  whole  congregation
were  allowed  to  itay,  that  thaj
might  witness  the  solemn  and  edi-
fying ordinance.

The  /Vetff  has  been  employed  in
printing  tracts;  some  thousands  of
which  have  been  distributed.  Go-
vernment granted  to  the  mission  an
old  church,  with  a  piece  of  land,
upon  which  a  new  chapel,  and
buildings  for  a  printing  ertablidi-
ment  have  been  erected.  In  18S3,
9  schools  were  connected  with  the
mission,  containing  about  SOO
children,  whose  advancement  in
knowledge  was  considerable.  Be-
tween 00  and  70  females  were
under  regular  instruction.

NEVIS,  one  of  the  West  India
islands,  W.  long.  62<»40',  N.  lat.  17«
8'.  The  island  is  a  gradual  elevation
of  land,  being  about  23  m.  in  cir-
cuit. It  is  well  watered,  and  fer-
tile, and  is  divided  into  ^parishes.
Charlestown  is  the  principal  town.
Population,  10,600.  The  Rev.  Dr.
Ck>ke  established  the  first  mission
on  the  island,  in  1788.  The  phint-
ers,  however,  greatly  opposed  his
exertions;  but  their  prejudices
were  soon  removed,  and  they  them-
selves listened  to  the  glad  tidings  of
the  Gospel.  Very  happy  effects
followed  the  labours  of  the  mis-
sionaries among  tbe  negproes.  From
1803  to  1810,  the  average  num-
ber of  members  in  society  was  more
than  1800.  Members  in  society,  in
1823,  25  Whites  and  036  Blacks.

The  recent  circumstances  of  the
stations  are  thus  given : —

C/iarlestown, — "  In  this  part  of
the  society,  we  have  bad  to  lament
some  painful  events  in  the  last  year,
which  have  caused  our  bands  to  hang
down.  Our  congregations,  how-
ever, on  the  week  days,  are,  we
hope,  improving ;  and  on  the  Sab-
bath day  morning  our  chapel  iatoo


NKV

saMUibrtbei

"I

54}  fllavei,di6^    Tolil  8MJ;^.e^

is  too  onall  far  the
There 'hm  bean
the  iDcietyy  and  a  fov
Qieat  attnitloii,  hai
tbe  S«nday  aebool ;  aniHto:
show  an  eagnr  dwira  t»  ~
word.— Whiter  tf  I
6 ;  Slaves,  M.  Tdtal,  7T.^^  K
New  CmUe.'—**Hem  .wv^ftta
hadgieatMtlafaetiiiD.  -TUiJirfiii^
society  have  diowii  gtmitmt/^


aUty  in  their  attendMm.
lately  opened   a  pleee:of

worship  on  TbMtV  Atfete,

we  have  a  IngeeongmgattoBtM
has  lately  become  oneofMfHd
promising  ports  of  cmr.^iqta'
The  manager  hei  ftttod np.m  Imft
boiling  home  aa  a  ehaypel:  ttftriil
lighted  with  lanpay  nd  it  esewftf
with  negroel^-^  Fxee-ooloeie*H*
Blacks,  and  84  Slaves.  toliibflWf
SoBooia.—  Ckmr{9Miomm^r^M
reporting  tbe  state  of  this  I
and  morning*  schooly  we
give  that  £&voinrable  lei
which  we  aBtidpatedk  life  thi
commencement  of  tbe  yeii^tir
numbers  increased  from  86  ts  UK
At  this  period,  4  iiiniiiiiiiii
characters  freely  oflSnedtbeMMlHi
as  teachers,  whose.  .lidhHnee:fli
instructions  contributed  tesstfie*
ably  to  the  improfement  of  .thi
scholars,  and  ihe  enlige—rt  if
the  school.  Just  then  janseMhHl
had  been  formed,  under  tte  Ji^
tronage  of  the  Bishop  of*.
does,  which  received  e  la^
portion  of  the  best  of  <rar  maie^
female  schc^ars,  under  an.lsinfep
tion  not  to  retain  to  the  ckpel
again ;  or,  if  they  did^  they  Hirt
forfeittheir  privnegesin  that  «#«■*-
Tliese  circumstances  redoesd  oiT
school  in  town  to  about  tbemmler
of  50,  including  male  and  feilii
who  are  free  childien,  and  Uve^la
or  near  the  to^.''


NSW

i|Wfairf— << Thii lehool  hat
fad  tmdnr  many  dkndfiuitigiet.
Idlrlreiiy  however,  efidence  an
UMBt  to  the  school^  and  an
it'deaire  to  impiore.  There
oMiw  on  the  list  about  S3t
ly.oid  Sll  regulariy  attend.'^
9  CaiHe.  —  <'  This  infant
I  labom  under  many  embar*
Ball.  There  are,  on  our  list
fu,  daves 24;  Girls,  daveslB )
Bboy.  Total,  44."
>i  Re?«  Messrs.  Daniel  G.
y  and  W.  Hendrickson,  of  the
ffor  the  Qmverntm  o/Negf
r,  have  laboured  in  this  island
ionsiderable  success.  In  1883,
lad  180  pupils  under  their  care.
Hmicants,  36 ;  baptised  52.
LM.S.  to  aid  equally  the
ifa  and  Wesleyan  Missionary
lies,  in  spreading  the  know-
of  Christianity,  was  formed
Its,  1820,  under  the  patron-
rthe  President  and  many  of
expectable  inhabitants  of  the

•  More  than  360  dollars  were
oon  contributed  to  its  funds.
W  BRUNSWICK,  a  British
loe  in  N.  America,  bounded

Canada;  £.  by  the  gulf  of
Kwrence;  S.  by  the  bay  of
%.and  W.  by  the  United
u  It  is  divided  into  0  coun-
ind  contains  a  population  of

80,000.  Fredericton  is  the
I.  The  destitute  situation  of
rovince,  in  regard  to  religious
etion,  has  excited  the  sym-

•  of  a  number  of  b^ievolent
ies,  which  have  done  much
tend  to  the  people  the  bles-
of  salvation.  The  Society
\e  propagation  of  the  Gotpely
to,  occupied  20  stations,  and
rted  16  missionaries,  most  of
I  are  employed  as  regidar
bers  of  parities   or    towns.

schoolmasters  and  catechists
Iso  engaged  by  this  society,
whose  tuition  between  8  and
Aildren  were  receiving  in-
ion.


.      NEW

The  JKM.  &  has  0  einmits  in
New:Bmnswick,  which  aare,.gaii
rally,  in  a  good  state.    Mondmi
in  sDciety,  846.

NEWFOUNDLAND,  an  Idcad
(HI  the  E.  coast  of  North  Anerioiy
lying  between  4t«  and  62<^N.Ut.  It
was  discovered  by  Sebastian  C^bat,
in  140T,  In  an  English  squadrao
fitted  out  fay  Heniy  the  Seventii  |
and  in  1583,  it  was  foUnaUy  taksH
possessimi  of,  fay.  Sir  Hunidir^
Gilbert,  in  the  name  of  Qoeea
Eliaabeth.  After  many  disimtca
with  the  French,  it  was  ceded  to
the  English  in  1T13.  It  has  ma.
merous  bays  and  harboorsjandis
a  mountainous,  wooi^y  coontiyf
and  very  cold,  being  corered  wi&
snow  6  Qionths  in  the  year;  The
inhabitants  of  the  Interior  are  •
savage  race,  called  Red  IncUansy
from  their  skins  being  daubed  or
stained  with  that  colour;  but  ihty
are  now  supposed  not  to  be  n«-
meroos,  for  though  often  heard,
they  are  rarely  seen.  A  few  Mie*
mac  and  other  Indians  are  scattered
along  the  coasts.  About  600  Bri-
tish families  continue  here  all  Hie
year,  beside  tfae  garrison  of  St.
John,  Placentia,  tuid  other  forts.
In  the  fishing  season  for  eod,
which  begins  In  May  and  ends  in
September,  many  of  its  b^s  and
luffbonis  are  resorted  to  by  at
least  10,000  people ;  for  here  they
cure  and  pack  the  fish,  which  are
sent  not  only  to  England,  bat  to
the  Mediterranean  and  the  West
Indies,  in  immense  quantities.  In
winter  the  chief  employ  of  the
inhabitants  is  to  cut  wood;  and
tlie  smallest  kind,  used  for  IM,
is  drawn  by  their  large  dogs,
trained  up  and  hamened  for  that
purpose.  St.  John  is  the  principal
settlement.  The  fF.  M,  8.  has
had  several  labourers  here  slnee
1822.

The  missions  eontinoe  to  exert
a  most  benefieial  and  cheering,  in-
fluence. Thesetttofsaadflshennan

^1


NEW

1li0te  covet  and  huboan  hive
go^  ovt  aad  vidtod)  te
wonhip  of  God  hat  been  et«
tablished  among  thow  wbowoold
oikeiMK  have  nuk  iato  entire
ignoraBce  aad  unchecked  vicei)
and  the  mlahm^schoob  have  pio*
vMed  for  their  children  the  means
of  a  rrtlgioiii  and  ineful  education.
Tlie  following  are  extneti  from
the  Mhiutea  of  the  Meeting  of  ttto
district  for  ltt6.

<*  The  past  year  has  been  a  pros-
perous one }  and  we  have  cause  to
le^ioe  in  the  increase  of  our  con*
giegatiuus,  and  the  general  im-
provement of  the  raisrion.'*

Scnoou. — Day  tdkmtl  ai  Pat^
imgal  Cmf9.-^*  We  have  visited  this
school  frequently  during  the  last
year ;  and  can  bear  tertimony  to
the  diligence  of  the  master  and  to
the  imp£ovemeiit  of  the  children
during  that  time.  The  numlier  of
acbcdurs  at  present  is  00;  average
attendance,  5&,  These  are  taught
reading,  writing,  and  arithmetic.^'

SinuUqf'-Mehooi  ai  Si.  Mi/1^9. —
«  This  school  has  greatly  improved
during  the  pest  year.  The  present
number  is, — hap^  90;  giris^  M.
Total  66."

CarhcnBor  GremU — **  Th^  cause
of  truth  is  here,  though  slowly,  yet
progprestiively  improving.  Our  num-
ber is  a  little  increased,  and  our
members  are  more  spiritual.*'

&4oo/!rw— ''  During  tlie  past  year
our  8<diool  has  been  a  good  deal
neglected,  on  account  of  the  want
of  proper  teachers.  The  opening
of  the  NetoJmmdUmd  <Sfetrtfy'«
school  also  took  away  a  number
of  our  children;  so  that  vre  had
little  more  left  than  a  meeting  of
the  children  to  be  catechised.
About  40  attended  this  instruc-
tkm,  and  made  considerable  pro-
gress. There  is  every  reason  to
hope,  that  this  summer  our  school
will  be  brought  up  to,  at  least,  its
finmer  state."


wkofOaite

ahBQst«»a

an  w^m  imibm

of  ov  reM

•anvinead  of  tiM  Inth^


that  maaj  of  tbona
aftaingttoir
of  ovnMnbei
aentty  oevohM  to
creasing  dalljr  1b
hdlinesjk'*
Biaak  ikmd

we  feel  €
there  U  not


bafecaosa  to  ie|oioa
boar  has  not  hoei
vita  hi  tte  Load.»»


/  f  •M'*'


M


sdioiafs  tai  ihU
which  T6  are  hays


feBKll


nmber  of

attended  thiongh  «ba  ^MaC^Wf
been  SO  bj  daj,  of  wtam JMMI'
boys  and  iT  gMa;  «D^sA'tfM^
aUbaya.  ^rinll rm  1  fll hw ■■JB
already  fisam  the  aclMnl^  tf«fe:f
nottha  least Tbooi  to doibif  dtil
of  the  chOdron  havliig'  inoMMli
a  degree  of  snrkmanasi  anliitf
tion  whkk  prondaoa  nmli  MM
good.  AgreatckangoteidMftir
taken  place  hi  tteir  naaaal  eoS
and  wo  trust  tlMt  tUapmeoobM
merely  frooi  the  oserdM  of  fi
master's  authortty/  hot  totth^s*
gree  of  the  fear  of  God.**

/sfamf  Cbse  oNil  PettMin  OmiK
— ^  At  AAmif  €bewy  alftlMn«ftwi
have  not  augmented  onr
I  trust  the  work-  of
deepened;  and  tiwio  baa
increase  in  the  rnigiiniiiiTiwi  1 1
who  had  not  attsmied  tha  1
of  the  sanctuary  Soa  aona  tM
now  attoad  with  toimhla  1^
larity;  and  the  ^rimlo  saeni  ti
hear  with  tacraaaed  ialBMrt.''   '

<<  At  Pelimm,  there  an  «  lit


NEW

thfly  love  the  Lord,  who  walk  in
Hghi  of  his  cQuntenance,  and
in  spiritual  good.  The
■leetings  in  general  have
well  attended ;  and  We  trust
tboM  opportunities  for  im*«
nt  wiU  not  be  lost"
nfi  At  Northern  Bay  we  feel
1Mb  the  want  of  some  active
■boa  pevson  to  reside  among  them,
ilw  would  teach  the  children,
HU  to  them  on  the  Sabbath,  meet
^  elasB,  4:c."

^f  At  Oraies  Cove  we  have  a
DOietgr  of  80  persons.''
,.^.XXJok*9  Cove  we  have  gene -
■Uj  preached  about  once  a  month,
\4mi  return  from  Nwthem  Bay,
t^  have  not  seen  any  immediate
nit ;  yet  our  eyes  are  to  Him  wiio
■ih  HLid,  <  Cast  thy  bread  upon
le  waters,  for  thou  sbalt  find  it
Her  many  days.' "

B0HOOL8. — *^  Two  great  hind-
mces  to  the  improvement  of  our
ihoolB  are,^  the  intensity  of  the
pill  (for  we  have  no  stoves  in  our
upel),  which  prevents  us  from
aeping  open  the  schools  in  the
dntar  season,  and  the  want  of
iqve  able  and  active  teachers;
0t»  with  the  means  we  have,  the
htldren  have  made  some  consider-
Ue  progress  in  learning."

*•*  At  hland  Owe  the  school
omists  of  21  boys  and  14  girls,
rho  are  attentive,  and  improve  in
eading."

**  At  Pelioan  there  is  a  school
onsisting  of  44  boys  and  27  girls,  se-
eralof  whom  can  read  pretty  well."

Pmri.  De  Grave  Circuit.— Port
^.  Cfrope.—**  The  inhabitants  of
Ufl  place  have  of  late  been  called
D  witness  a  more  than  ordinary
ialtation  of  mortality;  But  it  is
natter  of  deepest  lamentation,  that
,  general  indifference  to  vital  god-
iiiesB  continues  to  exist,  notwith-
landing  these  powerful  calls.  But
ead  as  is  the  cause  of  religioofhere,
et we  have  reason  to bethaUkfiil
bat  we  have  now  and  then  an


JfEW

iiistaiice  in  proof  that  oar  labota
are  not  in  vain."  .     -^

**  In  Bay  Robert**  our  eongrv-.
gations  /are  increasing,  awl  we
have  a  society  of  83  memhefihS
during  the  past  year  we  have  added
9  members."  t

ScHOOLB.^-''  In  this  cbcnitiheie
are  two  Sunday  schools.  .

<<  In  the  Port  de  Grave  school,
there  are  01  boys  and  96  girls."

<<  In  Bay  Robert's  school,  them
are  about  68  boys  and  42  p^ls.'^  -

Brigus  Greuit,  — Brigui*^'—
"  The  congregations  here.aie  veiy-
lars^  BD<I  attentive,  and  this  atten*.
tion  is  daily  increasing."    •  .

BuUCove.—"  Here  the  aodety
is  in  an  Excellent  state."

Schools. —  <'  Sunday  school*
have  proved  to  the  children  of
Brigus,  BuU  Cope,  and  Cubits,  a»
invaluable  blessing,  as  hundreda
have  been  by  this  means  instructed
toreadtheBiUe."

"  The  Brigus  school  has  existed
so  long,  and  its  interests  have  been:
watched  over  with  so  much  care
and  vigilance  by  Mr.  Coge$u,  that
you  can  converse  with  scarcely  ao
individual  of  the  present  generatiQa
who  has  not  been  benefited  by  it*
The  other  schools  are,  now  in  an
improving  state."

<<  Brigus,  boys,  25 ;   girls^  40.

—  Bull  Cooe,hoj%,  I5$glrii»  80.

—  Cubits,    boys,    80;   gids,  40.
Total  170."

JVinity  OrcuiU  —  Triidiu.  ^
"  This  station  having  been  almoit
wholly  without  a  missionaiy  horn
May,  1824,  until  October,  1826,
has  greatly  declined.  The  society
may  be  said  to  have  been  as  sheep
witJiout  a  shejAerd ;  but,  through
Divine  mercy,  they  have  again  had
Gospel  ordinances  administered  to
them,  and  the  efibcts  are  truly
pleasing."

<<At  &u;Ush  Harbour  we  have
a  society  of  86  persons,  who^  as  far
as  we  know,  are  Christians  in  ex^
perience."  .   .  •  ->


NEW

Seaoou.  —  **  Our   Khool   st
Bmglisk  Harbour  it  la  a  ititte  of

pvoiperity.*'

Bommstm  GrtmL-^Bommkim.
-*M  In  coBMqueiice  of  tlie  genml
pofeity  thioaghovt  tkit  itetftoBy
occaiiuned  faj  the  falhire  of  tiM
ood  umA  ami  fttberiet  for  the  two
last  years,  many  of  our  regular
hearen,  and  tome  of  oar  ilBady
memben,  have  been  under  the  ne*
oemtty  of  leaving  the  different
haiboart  in  quest  of  new  settle-
ments.  These  removals  are  ex-
43eedlqglyjpainfuly  as  by  them  they
ate  cut  off  from  the  public  minlstiy
of  God's  holy  word,  and  deprived
of  Ckiistian  communion,  except  it
be  that  which  they  darive  from
their  own  immediate  fomilies.
jhich  of  our  members  as  remained
eo  ttiis  station,  have  been  growing
In  grace,  and  in, a  farther  know-
led^  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
They  have  been  Temariubly<steady
in  tiieir  conduct,  and  regular  in
their  attendance  on  divine  wor-
ship.''

**  At  Bird  Ukmit  the  conduct
of  our  members  has  been  steady
and  uniform;  they  have  been
cleaving  to  tiie  Lord,  and  to  each
other."

<'  At  Catalina  the  society  &i
greatly  decreased,  owing  to  such
removals  as  those  alreac^  stated;
but  those  who  remain  are  sted-
fast."

ScaooLs. — <'  The  poverty  of  this
eircutt  has  been  such,  tliat  many  of
the  children  have  not  had  sufficient
raiment  to  attend  the  school  during
the  winter;  but  those  wlio  have
been  able  to  attend,  have  made
such  proficiency  as  is  highly  satis-
iMtory,  and  as  reflects  great  credit
upon  teacliers  and  children.  Our
present  number  is  96."

Grand  Bank  arcmt.--'*  In  this
circuit  nine-tenths  of  the  popula-
tion are.  hearers  at  our  chapels,  and
uKMrt  of  these  are  very  constant  in
their  attendance,  both  on  vi«iA\Ai%


flie


t»
beneAfcw!


Bitt^i


bomi,  tt  k  fighft  t»

with  lng»  Md

societies  st  ~

ptinrtellia

theflmt

plaoee  whteh  an  In

neighboorhaod.  In

the  inhahllwti   of

stand   OB

Indeed,  the  oonditioi  «l(lw  Mli

part  of  the  inhahttaali  «r«M^

(for  the  mlMleaBiy  c

to  a  snaU  Mot    of  tt>


.     of  pie^M]
ofthoQaspely

persons  tiiat  ean  aaad  tl»'
BiftaittLga  CbsWy
Brmtei,  and   nmny

might  be  addnead   m

ItiswQithj«f  mMih^'talidHi
I,  thaw  wIm


advanced  la  Hfo}  wliUlifiil O*
evidence  that  the  AaW/rf  dffrilpi
neas  bee  not  baa«  afl^ataad  to#k
pvoportkm,  afeaaa  Iha  Oqpi
IntMidaeed  mmmi^  il—jiit

was  before,"  «kri3s

ScHoous^-^'*  Tha

circott,  an  S  f  tll»

Uan^GrmdBmJ^  Istofn,  M|  ifel|
id.  TotalM.  Fktimm, hijyl
girls,  SO.  Total  S6.*'  .  .  r  s«'

Aeultio

socie^at  thlaafcrtian,  at  «lli«»

sonoftheyear,  Baitp  aafottfjvi

canjadge,  «he  moat,'  tf.Ml^^

them,  have  wrtwaei^  no

foliea  from  Pad,  hat  ifoai^yj

to  him  for  hie  fcaadHakta

diaring  their

ca9  over  tham'  la


\


from  the  perils  al  tteawtefrim
from  aad  latuymtog  im  tali  W^
tationa.  .  Bat  iW  va  aia
to  failbna  «Mi  Ihat  «a
Vudiai


Mfr  Jt  &i  ott  ofrinloB,  IM  in
iMi  ^ao0  the  prwpects  of  doing
pwd  «w  brfg^tening  daily.^'
^sMm^  Harh9UT  (Sremi.--*-Himi>9
''<  Tlie  work  of  Ood  on
I  ^ikleiisive  station  gives  w  con-
eneouragoment  The
are  generally  laiigey
lenarkalily  attenthre  while
tte  wocd  of  Vd^t  In  New
*f  and  its  Tkinitj,  where
pMe  U  'A  population  of  ahout  400
Silillaiitn^    a   dan    hag    been

y  ^  8eM00L8«~^TheSanday  tc^oit

r^Hihi  station  are  only  8  in  nnabery
ef  which  is  not  a  little  promising.
alkiB  ibni't  Harbour  sefaool  there
»iM  floliolar»--d4  boys^  and  S5
Mrik  Ih  the  school  at  Seal  €aee
WKte  «re  10  scholars.''
r'^The  A  /or  P.  G.  in  F.  P.  hn
ikont  SO  stations  in  Newfoundland^
Tlissionaries,  more  than  30  school-
sef«ral  catechisU,  and
of  000  children  under  in-


^-  KBWSATZ,  a  settlement  in  the
Orineay  to  which  the  Rer.  Dors
Bloerlin,  of  the  German  M.  S.  at
Basle,  proceeded,  in  18S3,  to  take
Bftwig^  of  a  colony  of  German
•vlgrants.

•  NEW  SOUTH  WALES,  a
— nti>  of  great  extent  on  the  £•
MMt  of  New  Holland,  under  the
MItiorily  of  the  English.  For  se-
wral  m.  en  the  coast  the  surface
Mlilbits  a  sandy  and  sterile  ap-
MaMgMe-;  but  as  you  advance  into
w  interior,  it  becomes  highty
kucoHtnt.

Tbe  climate,  particularly  in  the
Meitor,  is  salubrious  knd  healthy.
I»  ITSO,  the  British  government
exiled  a  number  of  felons,  or  con-
flctS^  to  this  phice,  who  were  the
fnt  to  commence  a  colony,  which
kw  since  continued  to  flourish.  Its
'l^^nlation  has  rapidljF  increased;
ki  1010^  Ihe  inhabitants  were  etti-
Bated  at  ]0,M0,  and,  in  188S,
th«y  4iad  tocreasedio  88  or  40^000.


'NEW.

Wheat,  maize,  hmtey,  and  rye,  hre
cultivated,  and  many  of  llio  tnfhial
fruits  attain  to  maturity.

Comdderable  ezertioBstaavelfieii
made  by  the  C.  M,  8»  to  support
the  institutions  of  the  Gospel  here^
and  the  Governor  has  promised
his  countenance  and  ei&ckmt  sap«
port

The  settlement,  together  witti
the  aboriginal  inhaUtants,  has
also  received  much  attention  isom
the  fF,  M,  8,  A  society  was
formed  at  Sidney,  March?,  1 81 7,
under  the  derignatloa  of  tiw
AumUmy  B,  8,  fee  N.  8.  W*
Grovembr  Macquarie,  with  nAmy  of
his  officers,  and  other  individuals  of
distinction,  were  active  in  its  or-'
ganization.  Its  establidiment  is
regarded  as  an  event  of  great
moment,  since,  from  its  ftiti»e  ope^
rations,  much  benefit  will  probab^
result  to  the  colony  and  the  adja-
eentislands.  In  1888,  about  6000
dollais  had  been  eontributed  to
its  funds,  and  8773  Bibles-and  Tes-
taments had  been  circulated  by  its
exertions.  Several  ottier  institii-
ttons  have  been  established  in  the
settlement,  which  contemplate  the
^iritual  prosperity  of  the  cotonlal
inhabitaiits,  and  also  that  of  the
natives.

The  hut  moe14ng'of  the  New  &
Wales  district  announc6sti»  follow-
ing circuits  and  stations  :—

Sydney  Circuit  —  "  We  lament
to  say  that  this  has  been  a  year
abounding  with  trials  to  our  nith
and  patience.  We  have,  howei^er,
a  few  names  which  have  not  defiled
their  garments,  and  who  are  an
honour  to  the  church  hi  which
they  artfenAdled."

Parrematta  OntuiK  —  Pmrra'
matta* — **  The  members,  in  geneo
ral,  are  g^rowing  in  grace,  and  in
Christian  union  and  brotherly
love.  The  congregattoas  haVe
gradnally  increased."

Kkuing  Peini^-^*  The  people
haw  ht«n,-  wnotL^bA  ^^BcAft,  twjs^bx
1  ^-VY


NEW

and  terioui  in  attending  tbe  word  of
falfation."

Liverpool  lias  been  for  8  jean
paat  a  dbcouraging  place ;  but  that
good  has  been  done  bere  by  the
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  there  is  no
doubt.  '<  The  prospect  of  nsefol-
nea  before  us  in  this  circuit  is,  on
the  whole,  somewhat  encourag-
ing."

m'tuUor  Ofcuit.^fFindwr.^

**  The  congregation  is  somewhat
variable,  but  not  small."

Richmond, — *'  The  number  of
persons  attending  has  rather
increased,  though  it  is  still
smaU."

Ctrf^/rrecr^A.— "Both  the  con-
gregation and  society  have  im-
proved."

Nepean. —  **  A  very  attentive
little  company  regularly  assemble
here."

YellowMotufay>8  Lagoon.— "ThU
station  was  adopted  a  few  months
ago  with  favourable  prospects."

Piti  Town,—''  The  Gospel  has
long  been  preached  here,  but  hi-
therto with  litUe  effisct."

fyHber/orce.—'*  A  few  indivi-
duals have  lately  been  formed  into
a  class  at  this  place."

Sackville  Reach,-"  This  is  a
new  station,  which  has  been  com-
menced under  very  auspicious  cir-
cumstances."

Here  the  C.  K,  S,  has  laboured
for  some  years.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Threlkeld,  of  the
L,  M.  S,,  removed. to  Bahtabah,
Reid's  Mistake,  Lake.  Macquarie,
in  the  latter  pa^t  of  1 886.  He  has
continued  to  exert  himself  in  at-
taining a  knowledge  of  the  abori-
ginal language,  of  which  specimens,
published  by  him,  have  attracted
considerable  interest  among  tbe
more  respectable  classes  in  the
colony.

The  great  expense  attending  this
mission  has  induced  the  directors
to  apply  to  the  local  government
ioT  M  in  support  of  the  mAasKKraa


.HEW

requklte  for  lOPonioitliig  induliy  iii
dviUiatlon  tmang  the  abvkllp
located  at  tbe  atalfon.  ShoplAft
aid  be  declined,  it  la  prateUr«p
misrion  will  be  AbaMkned.        V

NEW  STOCKBRIDG£k«l|-
dhutown,  near  Oneida  Lake,  Ite
York.  The  IndiMii  at  thta  |i£
formerly  resided  on  the  BamSm
R^BerkshlreCoantVyBlaaaehWlib

In  1734,  tlM  Rev.  John  i»
geant    began


them,  and  succeeded  in  edDMflig
his  hearers  at  SimeiOtHdg^^  «ji»
he  laboured  many  yean  xmtm^^
rious  disconragevients;  bat.vH
veiy  considerahle  aucccai.   At  fk


V


death,  in  July,  1740,  lia  W  li»
tised  1()8  of  Ilia  congragatknMl
were  in  full  ccunmuiwin:  .|li
Rev.  J.  Bdwaida  anceaedid  Mi
Sergeant,  in  17M,  wbobete«4lri
to  fiU  the.  cbafar,  aa  ifnSmti^^
Nassau  Hall,  waa  ancoeedrd  1^  ftt
Rev.  Mr.  West.  Soon  aflfl^lfc
J.  Sergeant,  aon  of  tiie  oitgpi
founder  of  the  settlement,  .took  fti
charge  of  theae  Ini4i«ni»wlth  wII|b
they  removed,  in  17g4,  to  k  tnM
land,  about  6  milea  aqoaie,  ghil
them  hy  the  Oneida  InUaK^Ji
which  they  gave  the  name  blXii
StoekMdge.  Theae  IndtaJ^Jfl
sometimes  called  Miilii>alniWi>i
In  1888,  the  total  number  a  infjiiW
to  about  300,  many  of  wboai  hm
made  considerable  pramai  hifa
arts  of  civUization.  Mr.  SenMUt
is  supported  by  the  &,/6rP,  m  9.
among  the  Indiana  and  <ithHi  tk
N.America.  thro.iig|i hisiyUi
labours  many  are  eimyingtha  tfftr
solations  of  the  (MMpeL  Tbo
church,  in  1888,  ronilste^  of  !V
members.  Schoola  are  malntilMil
and  instructed  by  the  IbmH^h^

NEW  ZEALAND,  8
islands  in  the  S.  ^^lAc
of  New  S.  Walea.  The
island  is  about  IM)0  m,  in  laHlki
its  average  breadth  la  150}  anaflvt
southern  is  nearly  «§  lufa :  It  |i
ift^vn^tad  ficom  the.crther  Iv  a  iMI


a


NEW

'It  m  15  m.  broad.  These  islands
Jh  between  S.  lat.  Si^  and  iS%  £.
1l^.  166<>  and  179*.  They  ap-
"j^Kar  to  have  been  first  visited^  in
,lfi2,  by  Abel  Jansen  Tasman,
jk  Dutch  navigator,  who  sailed
ftom  Batavia  for  the  purpose  of
'Mklng  discoveries  in  the  Pacific
'Ocean.  The  land  in  the  northern
Ipdland  is^  generally,  good,  and  in
inany  parts  very  fertile.  The  New
fSralanders  are  supposed  to  have
;i6f|ginated  from  Assyria,  or  Egypt ;
the  overflowings  of  the  Nile,  and
'  file  Argonautic  expedition  are  evi-
dently  alluded  to"  in  their  traditions.
In  their  persons,  they  are  above  the
eiMnmon  stature,  and  are  remark-
i^bUe  for  perfect -symmetry  of  shape
aBd  g^at  muscular  strength.  They
pbness  strong  natural  affections,
^nd,  like  other  savage  nations,  are
gmteful  for  favours ;  but  they  never
t0rt  satisfied  till  they  have  revenged
mtk  injury.  Wen  is  their  glory,  and
ligiiting  the  principal  topic  of  their
Conversation.  They  are  cannibals,
ind  devour  their  enemies  when
dain  in  battle,  and  not  unfrequently
make  a  repast  upon  their  slaves.
They  are  exceedingly  superstitious,
fnd  their  religion  is  constituted  of
fttes  the  most  offensive  and  dis-
masting. Pride,  ignorance,  cruelty,
and  licentiousness,  are  some  of  its
pl^cipal  characteristics.  They
believe  in  the  existence  of  a
Snpreme  Being,  or  the  <' Immortal
Shadow,''  whom  they  call  Atua.
Their  language  is  radically  the
tame  as  the  Tahitian.  The  popu-
lation of  the  two  islands  has
been  variously  estimated,  and  is  sup-
posed by  some  to  exceed  ,500,000.
The  Rev.  Samuel  Marsden,  prin-
elpal  chaplain  of  New  S.  Wales,
who  had  become  acquainted  with
Ihe  character  and  disposition  of  the
people,  and  considered  them  the
noblest  race  of  heathens  known  to
the  civilized  world,  proposed  to  the
C»  M,  S.  the  formation  of  a  settle-
ment for  their  eivil  and  leligioQs


NEW

improvement.  The  proposal  having
been  adopted,  a  mi^on  of  2d  per-
sons was  fitted  out,  which  arrived
at  Port  Jackson  in  1810,  on  their
way  to  New  Zealand ;  but  their  ob-
ject was  defeated.  Having  gained
the  confidence  and  affection  of  seve-
ral of  the  chiefs,  Mr.  Marsden  pur-
chased a  ship  called  the  Active^  for
the  benefit  of  the  mission  ;  and,  ia
1815,  Messrs.  Kendall,  Hall,  and
King,  with  their  wives,  and  some
mechanics  arrived,  accompanied  by
two  New  Zealand  chiefs,  who  ha^
visited  England,  and  were  fixed  at
Rat^ghee  Hoo,  in  the  Bay  of  Islands,
on  the  N.  E.  coast  of  the  northern
island  of  New  Zealand,  where  a
transfer  of  land  had  been  made  to
the  C,  Jf .  S*  of  about  2d0  acres  in
extent,  for  the  consideration  of  12
axes.  The  grantwas  signed  in  a  man-
ner quite  original ;  the  chief,  named
Ahoodee  O  Gunna,  having  copied,
as  his  sign  manual,  the  marks
tatooed  upon  his  own  face.

The  missionaries  endeavoured  to
instruct  the  natives  in  various  useful
arts;  but  though  the  New  Zea-
landers  are  naturally  both  active
and  ingenious,  their  improvement
was  materially  retarded  by  their
predilection  for  a  roving  life.
Parties  of  them,  indeed,  were  wil-
ling to  make  rough  fences,  to  cul-
tivate the  groOnd,  or  to  perform
any  work  which  required  but  little
time  to  learn ;  but  they  had  not
patience  to  wait  for  future  profit, —
immediate  gratification  being  their
permanent  object.  Hence  it  ap-
pears, that  their  predilection  for
iron,  sometimes  induced  them  to
cut  a  wheel-barrow  to  pieces,  to
cut  up  a  boat,  or  even  to  pull  down
a  house,  for  the  sake  of  getting  at
the  nails.  Mr.  Kendall  also  ob-
serves, in  respect  to  his  scholars,
when^he  first  gathered  tbem  out  of
the  woods — '*  While  one  child  is
repeating  his  lesson,  another  will
be  playing  with  my  feet— another
I  taking  away  my  ^aV— t^tA  «cv^>^«^


NEW

carrying  off  my  books ;  yet  all  this
in  the  most  friendly  manner,  so
that  I  cannot  be  angry  with  them.
During  the  first  4  months,  indeed,
my  little  wild  pupils  were  all  noise
4Qd  play ;  and  we  could  scarcely
hear  them  read,  for  their  incessant
shouting,  singing,  and  dancing."
After  some  time,  however,  the
distribution  of  provisions  and  re-
wards among  the  children  was
productive  of  veiy  beneficial  ef-'
fects )  and  many  of  the  adult  na-
tives began  to  acquire  a  tolerable
knowledge  of  some  of  the  more
necessar>-  arts  of  life.

In  January,  1819,  the  Rev.  J.
Butler,  with  Mrs.  Butler  and  their
two  children,  Mr.  Hall,  and  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Kemp,  sailed  from  Eng-
land ;  and,  soon  after  their  arrival
at  Port  Jackson,  they  were  accom-
IMinied  to  New  Zealand  by  Mr.
Marsden ;  who,  during  his  second
Tlsit  to  the  island,  purchased  from
Shunghee  a  tract  of  land  consist-
ing of  13,000  acres,  about  12  m.
distant  from  Rangbee  Hoo,  for  the
pur|)0se  of  a  new  settlement.  The
selection  of  this  spot,  called  Kiddee
Kiddee,  however,  gave  consider-
able umbrage  to  Korrokorro,  a
cliief,  commanding  a  large  extent
of  the  coast  on  the  S.  side  of  the
Bay  of  Islands ;  and  some  of  the
other  chiefs  evinced  much  disap-
pointment that  none  of  the  settlers
were  inclined  to  take  up  their  resi-
dence with  them.  "  One  of  them,
named  Pomarre,"  soys  Mr.  Mars-
den, "  told  me  he  was  very  angry
that  I  had  not  brought  a  blacksmith
for  him  ;  and  that  when  he  beard
there  was  none  for  him,  he  sat
down  and  wept  much,  and  also  his
wives.  I  assured  him  he  should
have  one  as  soon  as  possible ;  but
he  replied  it  would  be  of  no  use  to
him  to  send  a  blacksmith  when  he
was  dead,  and  that  he  was  at  pre-
lent  in  the  (greatest  distress.  His
wooden  spades,  he  stated,  were  all
broken,  and  he  had  naX  an  axe  \o


NEW

make  any  more  j  hli  cmmni
going  to  pieci^  ■nd  lie  hei  Mki
naUto  mend  them  with}  U^l^
tato-grounds  were  lying  wwIb,  ■
he  had  not  a  hoe  to  breaktheaii^
and  for  want  of  coltivatioiiy  he  mA
his  people  would  have  BOtttagli
eat.  I  endeavoured  to  padnpk
with  promisei ;  but  he  piddUtlWil^
tention  to  what  I  said,  in  le^eetti
sending  hhn  a  smith  at  a  hinw^
riod.  1  then  promised  hla  a  m
hoes,  dsc,  which  operated  Hhi  ■
cordial  on  his  wounded  nUBd.**    •

On  the  8d  of  March,  lOO^  Ifr.
Kendall  sailed  from  the  Biy  if
Islands,  in  company  with  tm  »
tive  chiefs,  Shunghee  aad  Wl|flfr
to,  and  arrived  in  the  TiiaBtt*«
the  ftth  of  August.  After  fhriris-
tum  from  this  countiy,  tlie  BMai-
aries  at'Kiddee  Kiddee  wereeffuwd
to  various  insults  and  h  jiiiiM,  h
consequence  of  the  altered  '
of  Shunfi^iee^  who  had  wi
committed  acts  of  appalliiy^
city.  Early  in  1828,  Shungbee
his  adherents  lecommracad  tkt
work  of  destruction,  and  the  ■!§•
sionaries  were  frequently
pelled  to  witness  scenes  of
druelty.

«  I'his  morning,''  says  aas  ef
the  settlers,  **  Shunghee  enm  k


have  his  wounds  dressed;  haite
been  tatooed  afresh  upon  m
thigh,  which  is,  much  InfliMhi
His  eldest  daughter,  the  widow  af
Tettee,  who  fell  in  the  expediflta,
shot  herself  through  the  fleiltfjsrt
of  the  arm,  with  two  balls.  .As
evidently  intended  to  destnj.  hv*
self,  but  we  suppose  that,  in  ^
agitation  of  puUing  the  trlnn
with  her  toe,  the  muade  offflie
musket  was  removed  from  flie  jfatsl
spot.  Yesterday  they  shot  a  poor
slave,  a  girl  of  about  ten  yeaiscid,
and  ate  her.  The  brother  of  Tetttt
shot  at  her  with  a  pistol;  liat,a8-ht
only  wounded  her,one  nfflhniijihnil
little  children  knocked  ht^m
\Ms»\siiiiL\   ^«  had  heard  of  ftB


NEW

gM-being  killed;  and  when  we  went
%i  dress  tiie  wounds  of  Tettee's  wi-
daw,  we  inquired  if  it  were  so.
-Thej  told  us,  laughingly,  that  they
were  hungry,  and  that  they  killed
^&il  ate  her  with  some  sweet  pota-
toes ;  and  this  they  stated  with  as
Uttle  concern  as  they  would  have
riiown   had    tbey  mentioned   the
idlling  of  a  fowl  or  a  goat.''
•    "On  the  29th  of  July,''  says
Mr.  Hall,  "  a  party  arrived  from
the  war,  bringing  with  them  the
bodies  of  9  chiefs,  who  were  drown-
ed by  the  upsetting  of  a  canoe  in  a
litfavysea.    The  tribes  have  made
great  destruction^  and  have  taken
BMiny  prisoners,  two  of  whom  have
^een    already   killed    and   eaten.
There  is  around  us  a  most  melan-
choly din.    Wives  are  crying  after
'tteir  deceased  husbands,  and  the
firisoners  are  bemoaning  their  cruel
bondage;     while  others   are   re-
joicing at  the  safe  arrival  of  their
relatives  and  friends.     Shunghee
ie  in  high  spirits,  and  says  that  at
one  place,  on  the  banks  of  the  Wye-
eoto,  his  party  succeeded  in  killing
1600  individuals !     In  the  morning
of  the  7th  of  August,  the  bones  of
.Shanghee's    son-iti-law  were  re-
moved, and  many  guns  were  fired  to
drive  away  the  Atua,    It  was  our
Intention  to  witness  tbis  ceremony,
bat  we  were  informed  that  Shun-
ghee had  shot  two  slaves,  and  was
•about  to  have  tbem  eaten.    These
Ill-fated  victims  were  sitting  close
together,  without  any  suspicion  of
their   approaching  destiny,    when
fifaunghee  levelled  his  gun,  intend-
ing to  shoot  them  both  at  once,  but
the   unhappy  female,    being  only
wounded,  attempted  to  escape ;  she
Was  soon  caught,  however,  and  had
her    brains    immediately    dashed
out  I!"

On  the  6th  of  May,  1824,  the
following  particulars  are  stated,
respecting  the  stations  in  New  Zea-
land.


NEW

Of  Ranghee  Hoo,  Mr.  LfFigh,
one  of  the  Wesleyan  missionaries)
remarks — "  It  is  near  a  large  and
populous  native  town,  called  Tapoo-
nah :'  within  7  m.  there  are  8  or  l6
villages,  all  of  which  a  missionary-
may  visit  by  a  pleasant  walk ;  and
in  every  village  a  number  of  chil-
dren and  adults  may  be  daily  col-
lected for  instruction.  The  natives
about  this  settlement  have  made
considerable  advances  in  civiliza-
tion ;  and  I  consider  the  place  tt>
be  a  grand  station  for  active  and
extensive  missionary  operations."

Of  the  second  missionary  station
in  New  'Zealand,  the  same  writer
observes, — '<Kiddee  Kiddee  re^m«
bles  a  neat  little  country  vilfoge,
with  a  good  school-house  erected  in
the  centre.  When  standing  on  a
contiguous  eminence,  we  may  see
cattle,  sheep,  goats,  pigs,  ami
horses — chouses— fields  covered  with
wheat,  oats,  and  barley,-^and  gar-
dens ricbly  filled  with  all  kinds  of
vegetables,  fruit  trees,  and  a  va-
riety of  useful  productions.  In  the
yards  may-  be  seen  geese,  ducks,
and  turkeys ;  and,  in  the  evening,
cows  returning  to  the  mission  fa-
milies, to  supply  them  with  good
milk  and  butter.  Indeed,  the
settlement  altogether  forms  a
most  pleasing  object,  especially  as
being  in  a  heathen  land."

Since  that  period  other  stations
have  been  formed.  The  following
are  the  last  accounts  of  tliU
mission : —

Ranghee  Hoo — Mr.  Shepherd  la-
bours here.  Mr.  King  visits  tile
natives  on  the  Sunday,  and  on  the
Wednesday  makes  excursion  to  the
neighbouring  places,  for  the  purpose
of  imparting  religious  instruction:
At  the  quarterly  meeting  in  July
he  reports — "  During  the  last  3
months  I  have  attended  to  the
school  as  usual:  the  scholars  are
improving  in  their  learning  and
behaviour:  from  7  to  10  boys  have

ai5


NEW

tttonded  tlie  leboolyUiii  T  gfaii^aiid
3  adults."

In  November  he  writet-*

"  Tbe  natives  here  oontiiiiie  to
behave  quietly  towards  us:  the
scholan,  and  those  who  live  in  oar
bouMfs,  are  increasing  in  know-
ledge ;  thej  attend  divine  service,
and  are  fond  of  singing  hymns.
Their  parents  are  much  pleased  to
see  them  write,  and  to  bear  them
read,  and  say  that  they  are  mis-
sionaries, and  employ  them  to  write
to  me  for  anything  they  may  want.
It  is  pleasing  to  visit  the  other  set-
tlements, and  see  so  many  natives,
young  and  old,  assemble  together
to  sii^c  and  pray  with  their  teachers.
In  past  years,  they  stood  without,
pelting  our  bouses  with  stones,  driv-
ing and  killing  our  goats,  stealing
our  fowls,  breaking  our  fences,  and
using  all  manner  of  obscene  and
cruel  language.  There  is  evi-
dently a  great  change  in  their  out-
ward behaviour.

KMee  Kiddee.-^This  station  is
occupied  by  Messrs.  Kemp,  Clarke,
Hamlin,  and  their  wives.  Mr. Kemp
and  Mr.  Clarke  are  employed
on  the  Sunday,  and  at  every
other  convenient  opportunity,  in
imparting  religious  instruction  to
the  natives  resident  with  them,
who  seem  from  time  to  time  to  pay
increasing  attention  to  the  great
truths  which  are  proclaimed  to
them.  Of  the  services  at  the  sta-
tion, Mr.  Clarke  gives  the  follow-
ing account : —

"  The  religious  instruction  of
those  about  us  is  especially  attended
to,  twice  on  the  Sunday,  and  one
evening  in  the  week:  and  every
morning  and  evening  all  the  na-
tives in  the  settlement  are  assembled
together  for  praver  in  our  little
chapel.  Some  of  our  natives  seem
fully  convinced  that  they  are  sin-
ners i  but  the  same  obstacles  pre-
vent them  from  closing  with  the
offers  ofrfnercy,  as  prevent  multi-


nmw


A'


ooontiy:  they  want  to  go  !».

van,  they  teU  m,  but  they  v

also  to  the  aftor  theeooMof  fth
worUL'^  ■   '

Mr.  Claika  TCBorti,  In  J^ywM
tb0  attentioii  of  thow  \
under  instnictioii  hosbaoii

during  this   ond    tke    p. ^.^

quarter.  There  weio  then  li  fti
bqyi' school,  14 boys ud  tiMlH
in  the  girls'  school,  IS  glili{««»
of  whom  were  iivliw  to  ttihiiWI
the  rest  In  Bir.  Kemp^ :  IMW
number  under  instraetion*  hiiii

several  working  natifcs  who  oHnK
was  SS,  residing  in  Hm  tvo- 1
liei.    Several  had  leftdnil|«

S[uarter,  of  wfaoai  he  enlBrti'
avourable    opinion :    they
read  and  write  their  own  ki  _  .
with  propriety.    OfthonwiiofNit
under  their  care  in
Kemp  remaika —
"  It  wUl  afibrd  yoo  „

sure  to  hear  that  vo  Iwio

derable  encouragement  fnm  ^
rising  generation,  to  penevMe  #'
the  work  of  the  Lord.  Tk^t^
ti ve  adults  who  live  with  nt  aie  ««9
regular  in  their  attendance  on  Ito
means  of  grace :  some  of  thom  I
hope,  begin  to  ieel  some
for  their  souls.  Their
general  is  pleasing."  •■  K ■

He  adds— «  We  do  not  meat  «*
much  encouragement  in  viditagM
native  villages ;  hot  we  hope*  itiliv
will  hear  what  we  have  to  M^  Stt
labours  shall  not  lie  in  Tain.  V»
hope  to  visit  tbe  Tillagea  Bare  t^
quentiy,  which,  I  traits  will  be  il^
tended  with  good."  -:

Tbe  outward  ImprofenMBtef ttl
natives  is  considerable.

/>Aea.— Bendes  the  Bua^mh
vices  for  those  who  are  inmiedMJtf
connected  with  the  mission  the
Rev.  Means.  WUliaov  and  ih*
associates  make  ezcmsiona  in  va^
rious  directions  among  the  w*
tives.  Mr.  HemryWilliami '


NEW

^iaittiienced  a  service  on  board  one
oi,  the  ships  in  the  Bay,  for  the
IliBnefit  of  the  sailors.
.  ■  The  want  of  a  room  sufficiently
large  for  the  natives  to  assemble  in
ftir  prayers,  has  induced  the  mis-
iloiiaricip  to  commence  a  building
49  feet  by  20,  which  will  serve  for
lids  purpose,  and  as  a  school.

:  There  were  in  the  schools,  in
Jofy,  M  men  and  boys ;  and  in  the
girii'scbool,  10.  Mr.H.  WiUiams
write§>  with  reference  to  them,  in
October :  —  '<  The  schools  make
OQiMidmrable  progress,  and  the  chil-
.dien  are  anxious  to  be  taught.  We
heifa  many  men  and  women  under
ilMfiiii  (Imi — indeed,  all  who  are  in
otr  employ.  We  could  enlarge
Hie  fchools  considerably,  but  we
wotit  the  means  to  instruct  and
fead  the  scholars."
'  At  Kauakaua  ten  acres  of  land
liad  been  purchased,  which  Mr.  R.
Davis  was  employed  in  getting  into
eidttfition ;  there  appear,  however,
to-be  tome  obstacles  in  the  way,
.^diidi  were  not  at  first  contem-
l^atod.

'intelligence  of  a  distressing  na-
ture was  more  recently  received.
IMfltuibances  having  been  renewed
ataong  the  natives  in  the  vicinity  of
Hie  Wesleyan  settlement  at  Whan-
garooa,  several  of  the  Church  mis-
■ioiiBries,  with  a  party  of  natives
firotti  Kiddee  Kiddee,  went  thither
to.  the  assistance  of  their  friends.
They  soon  returned,  accompanied
by-the  Wesleyan  missionaries,  one
of  whom,  Mr.  Turner,  was  to  pro-
ceed to  Port  Jackson.  Mr.  W.
Williams  gives  the  following  par-
ticolan,  under  date  of  the  18th  of
January,  from  Pyhea :  —  "  The
whole  of  the  premises  at  Whanga-
Tooa,  which  have  been  put  up  at  a
great  expense,  are  now  destroyed,
either  by  fire  or  in  some  other  way,
and  the  property  has  been  carried
abroad,  to  any  place  within  distance.
Intelligence    was    then,  receiv^l


NEW

that  Shnngfaee  was  killed ;  and  the
natives  b'elongfingto  Kiddee  Kiddee
said  that  the  missionaries  .would
certainly  be  stripped  of  every  thing
that  they  possessed,  according  to
the  New  Zealand  custom ;  and
recolnmended  them  to  do  the  best
for  themselves.  In  addition  to
these  things,  we  have  every  rea.^n
to  be  apprehensive  for  the  safety
of  this  settlement;  it  being  pro-
bable, that  if  one  part  of  the
mission  is  broken  up,  the  natural
disposition  of  the  natives  would
lead  them  to  complete  their  work
in  the  destruction  of  \he  ^hole.
Mr.  Williams  adds,  on  the  22d,
—''Since  I  finished  my  letter  on
the  i8th,  we  have  received  news
which  leads  us  to  suppose  that
Shunghee  is  either  dead,  or  very  near'
his  death,  from  the  wounds  which
he  received  at  Whang^arooa.  If
this  be  true,  all  that  we  have  anti-
cipated respecting  our  settlements
is  likely  to  come  to  pass.''

The  support  which  God  mer-
cifully gpTfuited  to  his  servants  on
this  trying  occasion  is  abandftntly
shewn  by  the  sentiments  which
they  express.  Mr.  H.  Williams
writes : — "  About  9  o'clock,  a  mes-
senger from  Kiddee  Kiddee  brought
a  letter  stating  that  Shunghee  wak
dead,  and  that  they  hourly  expected
to  be  turned  out  of  doors,  and  plun-  *
dered  of  every  thing.  Our  boat  was
sent  up  immediately  to  fetch  Mrs.
Clarke,  as:  she  was  not  well ;  the  re-
mainder purpose  to  stand  to  the  last.
We  felt  thankful  to  the  Lord  that
our  minds  were  preserved  free  frronii
that  anxiety  which  might  be  ex-
pected, believing  that,  be  it  as  it
might,  he  would  overrule  all  to  the
glory  of  his  majesty."

Dispatches  since  received  have
been,  however,  of  an  encouraging
nature  $•  and  from  some  dated  chiefly
in  September,  182T,  a  few  extracts
are  subjoined.  -^  '<  The  natives
around  ui  are,  at  preteht  quiet,  but


NIC

I  do  not  B^iect  that  they  will  eaa-
Unua  M)  lung ;  there  (•  nuch  lU
will  exlitlDg  unonK  the  tril>M  et
thti  pBTt  of  the  liland.  Sbunf^iae
li  mucb  recovered,  and  will  praba-
bl]'  nwiDie  hU  oprnlioni  In  the
firing.  If  be  can  UMmble  a
force :  but  there  U  ao  celcuUtlng
on  their  nuneineiil*;  for  Ihaiawha
are  Bctln>  In  alliance  one  month,
■mi]'  the  loUowliiK  be  at  vsr,  and
the  third  monlh  acting  In  coiyaDC'
tiOB  aftaimt  B  common  foe.  Our
pioapecls  are  more  pleaiing  than
the^  have  been  )  and  we  DOW  hops
logovutreguUcI}' among  the  na-
tlTei  who  live  wlihin  our  reach,  *o
that  Ibe  greater  number  may  b«  t1-
liled  once  a  fortnight;  ve  ban
miile  the  attempt,  and  flod  It  prac-
ticable,  with  a  few  ezceptloiu.
We  all  continue  In  heellh  and
peace.  On  a  review  of  the  whole
miuiun,  I  tblnk  I  may  tay  that  all
OUT  Operations  are  proceeding  de-
cently and  in  Older ;  for  till*  we
may  pralie  the  Lord  of  all.  We
need  liaily  the  renewing  intluence
of  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  "  '
nay  obtain  11,


you  to  bear  u


ip  by  you


river  of  the  lame  name,  G
America.  The  Rev.  F.  A.  Wii,
minianar;  from  the  N.  it.  S.
meaced  his  laboun  In  1SS3.
diichsrges  the  dutiei  of  a  chaplain
to  the  ganiaon,  and  derotes  the
remainder  of  hit  time  tq  the  in-
■tructjon  oflhe  Arrowack  Indians
and  the  ne^oei.

NOACOLLY,  a  town  li
diitrict  of  Tipperah,  Indln,  N.  Cbit-
tagong,  near  the  Burman  domi-
ntoni.  In  this  place  and  tbe  vlcini^
■re  the  deEcendants  of  Ibe  Portu-
gueie,  who  settled  at  Chlttagong
■hout  a  centmy  ago.  They  are  of
tbe  lowest  clan,  extremely  poor,


MOH

and  butllltla  l«niaved  from  Pagu^
Ism  I  maqy  of  thrm  aie  ai  witinli
lncoipoi«t«d  with  the  aaUve%  ^
hardly  I*  bear  ii  di^linguishingiw^
except  in  Um  name  of  Fwlngetf
or  Chrirtiani.  They  pralM  ^
Bcmau  CatlMlic  religion,  bntM
Ignoraot  oif  iu  twwL
„  the  iustrumentaUti)'  iA%
C.  Plowdon,  Esij.  riiBuleiil  alNan*
colly,  acbools  have  beeo eda'"^-^
by  the  C.  K.  &.  fur  tbe  tat
the  chlldien  of  this  kii
people.  A  iaitlifiil
greatly  deetreii,  end
nenUy  meful.  . .,

NOGAT,  •  rmce  td  Tatw,!*
habiting  tbe  Steppea  on  On  H^
of  the  Ceucilii  mtmMmm
Black  Se&.

Mr.  D.  Schlatter  visited  tlib
place.  In  18S3,  at  his  own  eipotW,
He  fbnnd  the  people  entlMly  4|ft|F
tute  of  nliclooe  knowle^i  mt
that  he  might  iostruct  thtokrlMr
truth*  of  ie?elaIion,  '
blnuelf  to  priiationa
almost  unheard  of.
fruit  ban  hilberto  cro'
denying  laboura,  be
the  b(^  at  ulumata  i  mi  ■■    , .

NORFOLK  ISLAND,h1M
in  tbe  S.  PaclOe  Omu^  i^U>
m.  in  citeult,  wblcti  waidlnmHll
uninbabited,  b;  Capt^  C«4bi^
1714.  ItlaweUwooMaiidMlL
and  has  been  oaed  as  •  ^i/H
baniAment  for  refroctuiy  tK/itit  \
from  Botwiy  Ba; .  The  fetttaHlB
was  made.  In  1T88,  and  mmm
at  leatt  10,000    i^h.trft-,,!,,   *

long,  les*  ir,  s.  ut.  Mf  <,  :Wi

S.  p.  G.  F.  p.  hM  Mkftf
scbool-teacben  on  lUa  '^rT^

NORTH    AHEIUCAH..,|H-    \
DIANS,  aboriginal  inhMM-if    I
N,  America,  a  reianaat  il-ljim
remain  onioag  the  isUte  Mrifr
tlon  in  several  oftbaStatMra^    '
the  great  body  are  nnlag  ttnifk    '
the  droits,  and  obtain  a  piMHllK
subslstenca  by  tbe  dhaia.    lalltit


rtMfe  «tafe>  Hiey  almost  mriTer-
ifeiUy  belieTe  in  the  existence  of
•;  Supreme  Being,  whom  they
•fell  the  Great  Spirit,  and  whom
flifey  worship  as  the  Creator  and
Pkmerfer  of  ail  things.  1  heir  no-
ttons  of  him  are,  however,  very
cbwure,  and  their  belief  has  very
lltUe  practical  influence.  They
ttre  remarkable  for  paying  a  debt
of  gratttode,  and  also  for  revenging
Maries.  Dr.  Morse  has  lately  tra-
Vuied  very  extensively  among  them,
0n  a  commission  from  the  govern-
■ledt  of  the  United  States,  with  a
vl0w  to  ascertain  their  numbers
and  condition ;  and  the  following
is  an  abstract  of  his  official  re->
port  to  the  Secretary  of  War  on
the  subject  of  their  population.
1*  Those  £.  of  the  Mississippi
MBOimt  to  120,625;  2.  Between
fbtb  Mississippi  and  the  Rocky
iffountains,  179,592 ;  3.  W.  of  the
Rocky  Mountains,  17 1 4^00.  Total
4T1,417.  The  details  of  the  1st  di-
vtalon  are  as  follow :  Maine,  966 ;
Ifaanchnsetts,  750 ;  Rhode  Island,
4tO ;  Connecticut,  400 ;  New  York,
»184 ;  Ohio,  2407 ;  Michigan  and
N.W.  Territory,  28,380  ;  Indiana
•ndlllinois,  17,006 ;  Virginia,Caro-
Unaiy  and  Florida,  6497 ;  Creeks,
MylXN);  Cherokees,  11,000;  Choc-
tewa,  26,000 ;  Chickasavrs,  3626.
Of  the  2d  division,  the  foUowing
H  the  estimated  population,  in
districts :  viz.  W.  of  the  Mississippi,
•nd  N.  of  the  Missouri,  33,150;
between  the  Missouri  and  Red
fttv^p>  and  the  Mississippi  and  the
Rocky  Mountains,  101,072  ;  and
between  the  Red  River  and  Rio
del  Norte,  45,370.  The  whole
Anmber  of  tribes  and  branches
dispersed  over  this  vast  tract  of
coimtiy  is  about  200;  of  which
■bout  70  are  in  the  1st  division,
90  in  the  2d,  and  100  in  the  3d.
Between  1784  and  1821,  the  go-
vernment of  the  United  States
purchased  land  of  the  Indians
amounting  to  nearly  192,000,000


NQR

acres.  In  conskteratloD'  of-  snch
land  and  under  treaties,  at  the  last
date,  annuities  were  payable  to
the  Indians  by  the  States  to  the
amount  of  154,275  dollars:  of  this
sum,.  73,600  are  annuities  for  dl^
ferent  periods,  from  6  to  20  years,
the  last  of  which  will  terminate
in  1834 ;  660  dollars  are  for  life  (
and  80,025  dollars  are  per-
manent annuities.  Many  of  the
tribes,  where  missionaries  have  la-
boured, have  appropriate(l  their
annuities  to  promote  the  establish-
ment of  schools.  By  an  act  of
Congpress,  in  1819,  the  annual  sum
of  10,000  dollars  was  given  for
Indian  civilization  and  improve-
ment, under  the  direction  of  the
President,  to  be  distributed  among
individoals  or  societies,  who  have
established,  or  who  may  contem-
plate establishing  schools  for  the
education  of  Indian  children,  and
who  desire  the  co-operation  of
government.  The  distribution  of
Uiis  sum  is  to  be  governed  by  the
following  regulations : — The  sito-
ation  selected,  and  a  plan  of  the
proposed  buildings,  with  an  esti-
mate of  the  costs, -must  be  aub-
mitted  to  the  Secretary  of  War  to
be  laid  before  the  President.  Go-
vernment will,  if  it  has  the  meansy
and  approves  of  the  arrangement,
pay  two-thirds  of  the  expense  of
erecting  the  necessary  buildingi^
and  aid  the  operfitions  of  fie
schools  according  to  the  number
and  progress  of  the  pupils.  This
provision  is  made  for  the  Indians,
within. the  United  States,  and
those  in  the  adjoining  countiy
abready  described.  Among  the
170,000  inhabiting  the  coontiy
between  the  Pacific  and  the  Rocky
Mountains,  no  missions  have  been
attempted  ;  among  tiie  180,000
between  those  Mountains  and  the
Mississippi, .  missions  are  chiefly
confined  to  the  Osmm  and  the
migration  of  the  6!A«r«i&e«;  amoBg
the  120,000  scaltexcd  tbxoiai^  "^S^


NOR

States  between  the  MiniMippi  and
the  Atlantic,  missions  are  in  ac-
tiTe  operation.  On  many  of  the
tribes  inhabiting  this  territory,  and
on  others  now  extinct,  were  for-
merly bestowed  the  missionary
lalraurs  of  Ei^ioi,  the  Afayhewf,
Bourme,  Edwards,  the  SergeanU,
Kirkiand,  /fheel'tck,  Kauch,  Zeis*
berfjrer,  Occunt,  and  others.  Within
the  last  few  years,  missions  have
been  established  among  the  Creeks,
Choctaws,  CMckasaum,  and  Cke^
rokees  of  the  Southern  States ;
while  in  IndioHa,  llUnm't,  Mieki'
gan,  and  the  North-west  Territory,
about  45,000,  open  a  wide  field  for
benevolent  exertions.  Among  the
Chippeways  of  the  last  two  states,
upwards  of  15,000  in  number,  mis-
sions have  been  recently  formed.
To  the  Indians  of  Ohio,  of  whom
there  are  about  S400,  attention
has  been  given  by  ditferent  bodies.
In  the  state  of  New-Yorlc,  upwards
of  6000  Indians,  consisting  chiefly
of  Oneidas,  Seneeas,  Onondagas,
and  Tuscaroras,  the  remnants- of
tlie  former  confederacy  of  the  Sis
Nations,  together  with  2600  of  va-
rious tribes  in  New  England,  have
been  supplied  for  many  years,  more
or  less,  with  moral  and  religious
instruction.  To  the  north  of  the
United  States,  in  the  British  ter-
ritories, it  is  given  to  the  Mohawks,
Deiawares,  Cliippeways,  and  Red
River  Indians,  To  the  north  of
these,  in  the  extensive  territories
of  the  Hudson's  Bay  Company,  and
in  the  vast  country  beyond,  are
numerous  wandering  tribes,  who
begin  to  excite  the  sympathies  of
British  Christians,  but  no  estimate
is  yet  formed  of  their  number.
The  same  remarlc  may  be  made  of
those  on  the  North  American  con-
tinent, who  range  the  country
southward  of  the  territory  of  the
United  States.  Among  the  Mos-
quitos,  in  the  Bay  of  Honduras,
however,  a  mission  has  been  at-
tempted.


\


NOR'

NORTH    WEST   JSOMm

aboriginals  of  Britlah  AM»ie%W
habiting  the  vaet  territnrj  tea-fti
United  States  to  the  fiartbertta  *

point  towaids  the  North ;  aad

Canada  to  the  N.  PmUb  Oni^i
a  distance  of  newly  40W
Little  is  known  of  tlie  |iopi
of  the  nmneiooe  tribealntUsMiii.

tion  of  country;  una        ^_

we  except  the  Red  JUmp  Aflfh
meni,  south  of  Winnipeg  Lihi^n:
Protestant  minlonary  la  kiim.
The  North  West  and  Hadson^Svi
Companiea  oondnct  an  toAtttm.
fur  trade  with  the  Indieni  lilfc
vast  range  of  coimtiyy  mni  hi  iki
posed  to  .favour  mUisioaay-  dfak.
for  their  qiirituaT  good.  Thl  Bm
John  West,  late  chaplate  t»  *M
Hudson's  Bay  Company  at1telrf>
River,  gives  the  foUofvrii^  pMni
of  these  natives :  —  Vhfe

<at  is  painful  to  eoMMv  ili£
state  of  the  numerooe  tribasHli'.
wander  through  this  vait  t^nl|dq|i(:
hitherto  unheeded,  and
to   British   missioaaiy
They  rove  through '  the
plains  with  all  the  wretchedappyi  • :
ance  of  gypsies  bi  England.     Th^f'.^
appear  to  be  sunk  into  the  towwt-,
state  of  deg^radatlon.     Their  Hbr
seems  to  be  one  constant  cpmiaf  ■
difficulties  in  procuring  suhMMMBj/.
and  they  wander  through  it  ivtfhail'
hope  and  without  God  in  thi|.«aMk
When  shall  this  hitherto  negieeM^
race  come  to  the  knowledge  ol  ik^"
Saviour?"

This  description  relates  to  thou
who  inhabit  the  country  betveM
the  Rocky  Mountains  and  Hodsn^
Bay.  Concerning  those  beiwefi
the  Rocky  Mountains  aikt  the  Fa^
cific,  in  the  N.  W.  Company^  te^i
ritoiy,  the  Committee  of  the  CJK*
S,,  in  their  20th  report,  give  the-
following  particulars  :—

<<Ithas  been  suggested  to  the
Committee,  that  the  westen  part
of  British  America  offers  a  aMMt
^TJtftittWe,  promising,  and  pradi-


NOT

Spdbie  field  for  missionary  labours,
kali,  any  other  in  that  quarter  of
M  ^be.  The  climate  is,  in
pWMual,  temperate,  the  soil  sea-
mutkhlj  productive,  and  the  sur-
[JliBe  of  the  country  level.  The
people  are  not  savage,  ferocious,
VmI  wandering;  but  settled  in
and  in  several  respects
i^wliat  civilized,  though  still
^he  hunter  state ;  with  few
no  letters,  no  general  know-
ip^gOy  but  a  great  desire  to  be
iBDglit  by  white  men,  whose  su-
Mortority  they  clearly  discern.'^

.If  OVA  SCOTIA,  a  British  pro-
iliMse  in  N.  America,  bounded  N.
by  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence,  W.
i^  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  and  N.  W.
Iv  jNew  Brunswick.  The  other
ililM  are  washed  by  the  Atlantic.
Kte  population  is  estimated  at
riboot  100,000,  principally  English;
fi^CHigh  there  are  many  Scotch  and
bMi.  The  established  religion  is
tet  of  the  Church  of  England.'
me  means  of  grace  are  enjoyed  by
BBByg  through  the  active  exertions
rf  bmevolent  associations.  The
l^'P,  G*  F.  P.  has  more  tiian
Ml  ■totions  in  the  province,  and
ipqiloys  nearly  30  missionaries,
BOve  than  40  schoolmasters,  and
Ifrveral  schoolmistresses.  Be-
inteen  3  and  400  children  are  en-
ifl||riBg  the  blessings  of  religious
■■tmction.  In  1823,  there  were
IS5  communicants,  at  11  stations.
rbe  fF,  M,  S.  has,  for  some  years,
■Oployed,  in  Nova  Scotia,  a  num-
ler  of  agents.  The  following  are
txtncU  from  the  last  district
wort: —

MkiUfaa  arcuit.—"We  have
liankmlly  to  state,  that  the  cause
if  God  is  by  no  means  declining  in
his  circuit.  In  HaH/aa,  we  have
tdded,  during  the  2  past  years,  19
nembers.  There  is  not,  in  the
KHintzion,  a  society  more  steady
Ad  consistent :  we  have  peace  in
nir  borders,  and  our  congregations


NOV

are  hiige  and  attentive.  Our  Sim*
day  school,  of  206  children^  is
prospering."

Lunenburgh  Circuit. — No  re-
port.

Liverpool  Circuit,^** The  sociel^
in  town  continues  in  a  state  of
growing  stability,  unity,  andpeace;
the  Sunday  school  conthiues  active
and  useful  in  its  operations;  and
the  prospect,  on  the  whole,  is  en-
couraging.''

SheUnlrne  and  Barrington  Gr»
cuiU — "The  sphere  of  labour  in
this  circuit  is  very  extensive.  Our
congregations  are,  in  general,  large
and  attentive,  piuticularly  at  Bar-
rington and  Cape  Negro.*'

Yarmouth  Circuit. — No  report.

Horton  and  fFindsor  Circuit. —
Norton.— "We  have  had  a  little
success  the  last  two  years ;  a  few
have  been  added  to  the  society^
and  it  is  hoped,  to  the  Lord,  during
the  last  year."  ^ijufoor.—"  Dur-
ing the  greater  part  of  the  past  year,
there  has  been  an  unusual  degree
of  afOiction  and  mortality  among
the  inhabitants,  which,  by  the
blessing  of  God,  has  been  sanctified
to  them."

Newport  Circuit. — "  The  society
has  increased  17  in  numbejr,  and
12  others  are  on  trial."

Schools. — **  We  have  formed  a
Sunday  school  at  Kempton,  and
have  been  making  arrangements
for  the  establishment  of  others."

Parrsborough  and  Meccan  Cir»
cuit. — "  Our  members  are  growii^
in  grace,  and  regular  in  attending
their  classes.  Another  very  com-
modious chapel  is  erected  and
finished  at  Nappau,wheTe  our  con-
gregations are  large."

fVallace  Circuit. —"  The  religions
state  of  the  society  may  be  consi-
dered as  prosperous."

Charlotte  Town  Circuit.'--**  In
Charlotte  Town,  the  members,  in-
cluding the  class  across  the  har-
bour, are  much  united  in  Christian


NOV

afleetion,  striving  together  for  the
faith  of  the  Gospel,  aod  unanimous
in  their  efforts  to  co-operate  with
the  missionary  for  the  promotion  of
the  work  of  God.

<<At  Little  York,  the  society,
which  consists  of  about  thirty  mem-
bers, is  very  st<fdfast :  several  who
united  themselves  in  church  fellow-
ship during  the  first  yea^  of  our
labours  in  this  place,  are  now  ex-
cellent members.

''A  new  preaching  place  has
been  opened  at  the  North  River,
about  four  miles'  from  Charlotte
Tonon,  the  frUlt  of  which  already
appears.  Nine  persons  have  been
united  together,  and  now  regularly
meet  in  class."

Schools. — "  There  are  three
Sabbath  schools  in  the  Charlotte
Town  circuit ;— viz.  one  at  Charlotte
Totofif  consisting  of  140  children;
about  40  children  at  Township,  No.
40,  and  the  same  number  at  lAttle
York,**

Tryon  and  Bedeque  Circuit, —
*<  In  Tryon  a  large  increase  of  our
congregations  has  taken  place.
They  are  far  more  attentive  than
formerly,  and  are  frequently  deeply
affected."

<<  In  Crappaud,  which  is  a  neigh-
bouring settlement  about  3  miles
distant,  the  prospects  at  present  are
good."

'*  In  Bedejue,  the  congregations
have  not  been  so  large  for  the  last
few  months.  We  have  preaching
at  three  other  places,  one  4  miles,
another  6  miles,'  and  the  other  10
miles,from  the  preacher's  residence,
once  a  fortnight  on  the  week
nights,  but  no  classes  have  as  je%
been  formed."

Schools. — "  There  are  two
Sunday  schools  in  the  circuit,  one
in  Bedeque  and  one  in  Tiyon,
which,  until  the  approach  of  the
hut  winter,  were  in  successful
operation;  but  here  they  always
suffer  an  interruption  of  six  months


SlfL

in  tho  yMT,  owlug  to  fbb
of  the  Toadfy  and  the
of  the  weather  to  Ifae  AA  cf
year,  the  winter,  and  the

Mumi^  Hmrkmtr  CireuiL-^*
state  of  this  clrenlt  1^  at  tiUi
in  rather  a  growing  eoodllloni^'*

''At   Three  Rntere  wWm
small   and  poor   loelelj  wl*^
endeavonriiMp  to  baOd  a  Ch
towards   Vmch    thejr  bait
scribed  about  £00.    Hmn  ~
a  minister  of  any  other
nation  within  the  fwiirin— rf
circuit.''

NUDDEA,  the  ei^ttirtf-
extensive  district  of  the  «■!
name,  Bengal,  HindoostMyWl
island  at  .the  confloenee  if  ••
Hoogly  find  JeUnghy  itiMbJi
miles  above  Calcutta,
great  seat  of  native  U'

Bengal.    The  BaptUin

at  &lCQtta  ha?e  piepetefl
In  the  Sungricrtt  lan^oagei  to
municate  their  meHsge  -ito4|
leaned  men  In  thli  popaMm
in  the  most  acceptable  A^llirV
the  result  has  -fllen  Ugidly  ""
fyhig.  A  number  of  these
cations,  which,  in  any  ottfair
would  probably  have  been
with  contempt  were
great  readlnems  and  thns^'ikf  ti
language  of  the  inlwlninihlni
<<  The  Gospel  was  totrodaeeiM
the  only  University  of  Beq^^
means  of  publications  in  Harllllr
of  the  East''

NULALIWCJ,  a  piaee  in  «i
Molucca  Islands,  contalnliglAil
400  inhabitants,  who  were  fwd^
Christians;  but  were  conqamft^W
the  Mahomedans,  wlio  bint  ftp
churches,  dettrciyed  Ifaeir  BMk
and  reduced  them  to  a  pisiM
state  of  ignorance  and  idgMtti
Through  the  Instromentalliydfw
Rev.  Mr.  Kam,  mhrioBMy  H
Ambo3ma,  the  pedple  TBaowli
idolatry,  and  dtetAijred  th^ld*
and  devil-h<


I

I


I


\


OAH
O.


AHU>  one  of  the  Sandwich
,  130  miles  N.  W.  Hawau,

long  by  23  broad.  The  high
tains,  and  very  fertile  valleys,
[Wbnnqiersed  throughout  the  island,
|Ail>it  very  romantic  scenery,  and
pnder  it  by  far  the  finest  of  the
pypup.  The  salt  lake^situated  among
Msren  hills,  about  6  mHes  W.  N.
P^«  Hononooroo,  is  one  of  the
■BMUest  natural  curiosities  found  in
Bp  islands.  It  is  an  insulated  body
qtwater,  about  2  miles  in  circum-
fpience,  a  small  distance  from  the

ri  supposed  to  be  a  little  above
leve},  and  is  entirely  saturated
IHllth  common  salt.  It  is  supplied
iiy  a  salt  spring  issuing  from  a
^M^gfabouring  hili.  The  salt  chrys-
Mlizes  in  vast  quantities  at  the
plOltoni  of  the  lake,  and  forms  a
continuous  white  crust  from  shore
t».  shore.  The  salt  thus  formed  is
■rocured  in  considerable  quantities
MP  use.  The  populationwas  formerly
■iiptlmated  at  60,000 ;  but  after  a
jprvey  of  the  island,  the  mission-
avles  have  estimated  the  houses  at
4lp00,  and  the  inhabitants  at  20^000.
^ms^is'  the  residence  of  the  King,
fhe  seat  of  govemment,  the  abode
-of  all  the  principal  chiefs  of  the
Cftfier  islands,  and  of  most  of  the
fienons  of  influence  in  the  whole
4proap.

•  Mknumooroo,  a  large  town,  with  a
ffood  harbour,  in  the  Island  of
&aha,  which  occupies  about  one
.•qjoare  mile,  and  contains  about  ^0
bouses.  The  village  is  estimated
to  contain  between  6  and  6000  in-
habitants, besides  foreigners,  of
whom,  at  times,  there  are  consi-
diMable  numbers.  There  are  about
16  merchants,  including  the  Ame-
rican Consul,  who  reside  here  con-
atantly  to  transact  business  with
the  natives,  and  with  the  masters
of  vessels,  who  are  continaally
•fKitting  in  for  supplies.    Aftei  a


OAH

prosperous  voyage,  the  first  Ame-
rican missionaries  to  the  Sandwich
Islands,  entered  the  harbour  April
18th,  .1820,  and  commenced  their
labours  of  love  among  these  long
neglected  heathens.  They  soon
settled  on  a  piece  of  land,  assigned
for  the  purpose,  about  hidf  a  mile
fi^m  the  village,  where  the  first
temple  on  these  islands  for  the  wor-
ship of  the  living  God  has  been
erected.

In  J  8^,  Mr.  Bingham  began  to
preach  in  the  native  language  ;
and  the  King  and  Queen,  as  well  as
some  of  the  chiefs,  have  been  num-
bered among  the  pupils  in  the
schools.  On  the  first  Monday  in
January,  1822,  the  press  was  put
in  operation,  and  the  first  sheet  of
a  Hawaiian  spelling-book  was
struck  ofi';  ^  the  distribution  of
which  gave  an  immediate  impulse
ta  the  work  of  instruction.

The  number  of  regular  scholars
soon  amounted  to  about  200,  and
the  progress  of  the  learners,  gene-
rally, was  very  apparent.  Soon
after  the  missionaries  arrived,  a
subscription  was  opened  for  an  Or-
phan  School  Fund,  which  is  favour-
ed by  foreigners,  and,'in  little  more
than  a  year,  the  sum  subscribe^
exceeded  800  dollars.  In  June,  1834,
the  chapel  was  burnt  down,  but,  in
about  a  month,  it  was  replaced  at
the  charge  of  the  natives,  by  a  larger
and  more  substantial  structure.  A
week-day  ^rvice  was  begun  at
Waititi,  a  village  about  4  m.
distant.  The  Rev.  Mr.£Uis,  with
2  native  teachers,  of  the  L,M,S.,en'
tered  into  the  labours  of  this  station.
The  effects  of  them  we^  truly  de-
lightful. As  the  brethen  took  their
evening  walks  they  derived  high
gratification  from  hearing  the
hyntns  of  the  chapel  and  the  les-
sons of  the  schools  recited  by  the
people,  instead  of  the  monotonous
sounds  of  their  ceaseless  **  hura,"
or  praise  to  their  gods  and  departed

WE


OAH

heroes ;  while  the  book,  the  date,
and  the  pen,  were  supemding
games  of  chance  and  other  hurtlcu
amusements,  which  formeily  con*
snmed  much  of  the  people's  time.
The  power  of  true  religion  was
manifested  in  the  daily  conduct  of
many  of  the  chiefs,  as  well  as  in
that  of  the  people.  Several  of  them
uniformly  asked  a  blessing,  and  re-
turned thanks  at  their  meals,  sur-
rounded by  their  friends  and  do-
mestics, who  frequently  amount  to
40  or  60  persons.  They  were  also
known  to  attend,  morning  and  erein-
ing,  to  their  devotions.

Mr.  Ellis  wrote,  in  1824:— <' In
addition  to  the  usual  good  attention
given  to  the  preaching  of  the  word,
and  other  public  means  of  grace,  a
considerable  awakening  has  taken
place  here,  among  the  chiefs  and
teachers,  and  many  of  the  people.
Many  new  schools  have  been  esta-
blished ;  and  there  is  a  great  in-
crease of  scholars,  who  continue
diligent  and  persevering.  About
600  were  present  at  a  public  exa-
mination on  the  19th  of  April.  We
have  796,  under  22  native  teachers,
who  attend  at  school  twice,  and
some  of  them  three  times,  every
day ;  besides  which,  there  are  a
good  many  small  schools  among  the
people,  the  teacher  of  which  is,
perhaps,  himself  a  scholar  in  one
of  the  larger  schools.  Indeed  we
cannot  train  up  the  teachers  fast
enough  to  satisfy  the  demands  of
the  people  for  them.  So  great  is
the  attention  of  the  people  to  their
books,  that  we  never  walk  through
the  town  without  .seeing  several
passing  from  one  place  to  another
with  their  books  in  their  hands.

*'  The  chiefs,  particularly  Karai-
moku  and  Kahuraanu,  have  taken  a
very  decided  stand  in  favour  of
Christianity.'*

A  fact  communicated  by  Mr.
Ellis,  in  a  private  letter,  ought  to
be   mentioned,  as  forcibly  illus-


OAH

trating  the  vtfue  which  tl»  dftfc  P
patoninstfiictioii:  Immji—  ■  ^
•<Pnvio«dy  tomy  l0vlitr|i|k
clrcumftaiice-  vendEBred  Bacail^l^
by  the  illiie«  of  M  n.  EQh)^  t^  I  ■
Udy  adcedtlie  chleb  ivhrt  I  AIM  1  e

bring  them  <Nit  when  I
from  KngUuBd;  Ihaj  i
dmultaneoady —  Cohs  laek  VMI*

SELF,  ANDWB   HATS  MOmMMl
TO  BiailiB.''

In  18^,  the  heaien  ImhimHi
nearly  8000,  and  KmlMl»»
dered  a  Isrge  stona  c^qpdlili
erected  for  their  aeecMaiaMllii
The  scholars  were  dmiIj  W
and  the  teacbera  40.  Tht  kNft
of  Karalmoka  had  then  IgrMi
time  been  on  the  decUae.  M
was  the  more  to  be  iLgiuMlj*
advantage  aeemed  to  wttHl
taken  of  his  Ulnento  InflieteaM
serious  ii^lmy  oothemonbtf  ii
people.  AlawhadbeeBMrii^«l
strietly  enforced,  to  ptefHttt*
males  from  rewnpting  on  iMiti*-
sels  for  evil  purpoaes ;  the  c^Hh
and  crew  of  a  scliooner,  belean
to  tile  United  States,  aad  ]fiag  m
Hononooroo,  had  reeoane  te  ll
most  violent  outragea,  in  eidar  1i
procure  the  rqpeal  of  Ihii'lw
BoU,  who  visited  England^  w«id
the  head  of  the  goivernmeat  dalf
tite  Ulness  of  hia  brotiber  Xi»
moku }  though  well  dispoaed  tavMl
the  mission  and  the  morals  of  ii
people,  he  had  noteomaflBtolar
up  against  the  Ylolenoe  m  tUaai*
cer  and  his  crew,  supported  atflkv
were  by  other  sailois ;  aai  Mk
such  measures  as  led  to  the


6

r
i
I
1
i
I
t
I


of  the  evil,  which  bad,  wllh  m
much  advantage  to  the  peo|ii^  bHi
suppressed.

The  lesnlta  of  an  ezamiaittoa  if
the  schools  at  tfaia  stattoa  aai  lb
vicinity,  on  the  19fh  of  ApA
1826,  exhibited  socb  evidMOt  m
improvement  and  edianwMt
in  civilization,  as  ezettad  .Hi
surprise  of  the   foreign -yWMp


ODE

Eieot.  The  Gospel  of  Matthew,  in
waiian,  translated  by  Mr.  Bing-
iMHBy  then  just  finished,  and  another
jkBBiulation  of  the  sameGospelhy  Mr.
Wchards,  were  produced  on  this  oc-
AMIoo.  [See  Sandwich  JtUmdf.]
•'  ODESSA,  a  populous  sea-port
-tMniy  on  a  small  bay  of  the  Black
fciy  between  the  mouths  of  the
^ivefs  Dniester  and  Dnieper.  It
was  founded  in  1792,  by  Catherine
II.  Population,  in  1820,  40,000.
7fae  E,  J.  S.  sent  out  Messrs.  Fre-
^Btkc  L.  Bezner  and  Bemhard
Bnllrt,  in  1820,  to  labour  among
Hm  Jews  in  the  vicinity  of  the
'Black  Sea,  who  remained  there
MMoe  time  to  acquire  the  language
apoken  by  the  Polish  Jews.  They
lunre  •ince  visited  many  Jews  in  the
neighbourhood,  among  whom  they
htere  distributed  Bibles  and  Tracts.
'\  OESEL,  an  island  in  the  Baltic
£ba,  at  the  mouth  of  the  gulf  of
Siga,  containing,  with  2  small
jM^gfabouring  islands,  a  population
iti  36,000.  A  missionary  of  the
U*  B>  has  laboured  here   several

CrSy  and,  amidmuch  persecution,
been  protected  by  government.
.  OHONOQUA6IE,  formerly  an
Xndiaiitown  on  the  bank  of  the  Sus-
guahannnii.  In  1762,  the  S.prop,
tf.  in'  New  England,  sent  out  8
aBteienaries  to  christianize  the  In-
lilaiis*  They  were  cordially  re-
ceived; but,  as  little  success  at-
tended their  efforts,  the  station  was
aoon  abandoned.

'  ONEIDAS,  one  of  the  Six
Nations  of  Indians^  inhabiting  the
eonntiy  S.  of  Oneida  Lake,  in  the
W.  part  of  New  York,  called  the
Oneida  Reservation.  They  are
dyhrided  into  3  tribes,  the  Bear,  the
Wolf,  and  the  Turtle.  Their  pre-
fent  number  is  estimated  at  upwards
oi  1100.  This  nation  receives  an
ennuity  from  the  State  of  New
York  of  35^2  dollars,  for  lands
pnrcbased  of  them  in  1795,  and  an
ennuity  of  about  600  dollars  from
the    United    States.     Th^  have


ONE

tfaeirname  from  their  ^oimef  pagan
deity,  which  was  an  upright  stone,
as  the  word  signifies  in  their  lan-
guage. For  many  years  there
has  not  been  a  pure  Oneida  among
these  Indians,  from  their  hafving
been  mixed  with  whites  of  different
nations.  In  1776,  the  Rev.  Sa-
muel Kirkland,  patronized  by  the
corporation  ^  Hmrvard  College^
visited  the  principal  town  of  the
Oneidas,  accompanied  by  2  or  8
other  missionaries  and  schocA-
masters  from  Dr.  Wheeloek's  In-
dian school.  ^A  flourisliing  school
had  already  been  commenced  \  Uie
people  were  anxious  for  the  per-
manent establishment  of  a  minister,
and  Mr.  K.  consented  to  continpe
with  them,  provided  they  would
engage  to  abandon  their  habits  of
intempeirance.  To  this  they  con-
sented, and  took  efficient  mea-
sures to  prevent  the  sale  of  ardent
spirits.  Drunkenness  soon  disap-
peared, in  a  great  measure,  and
many  received  the  truth  in  the  love
of  it.  In  1778,  Mr.  Kirkland  was
received  under  the  patronage  of  the
Society  in  Scotland  for  Promoting
Christian  Knowledge',  During  the
revolutionary  war,  bis  labours  were
interrupted;  but  after  peace  was
restored,  at  the  request  of  the
Indians,he  returned  and  found  them
very  desirous  of  religious  instruc-
tion. He  died  in  1808,  after  having
laboured  ampngthe  Indians  more
than  40  years.  In  1809,  the
Northern  M,  S.  employed  Mr.
Jenkins,  as  a  missionary  among
the  Oneklas.  They  have  also  re-
ceived the  attention  of  the  Fiends
and  other  benevolent  associations,
by  which  they  have  been  supplied
with  religious  teachers.  The
Episcopal  church  of  New  York,
supported  Mr.  Eleazer  Wil-
liams, several  years,  at  Oneida
Castle.  He  is  the  son  of  a  chief
of  the  Iroquois  nation,  and  was
licensed  by  the  Bishop  of  New
York,  in  \%\<^,  Vil  coov^VN.Mtf^^'wV^


ONO

the  eanieft  requeit  off  the  Oneida
cbiefi.  He  became  emlnentlj
uieful  to  the  pagan  party^  who,  in
ISIT,  renounced  their  idols,  pro-
fessed the  Christian  faith,  and  united
MriXh  the  old  Christian  party  in
erecting  a  new  places  for  public
worship,  which  was  consecrated  in
1819.  In  1821,  the  conununicanti
were  between  io  and^O.

The  Hamilton  B,  M.  S,  supports
a  school  at  Oneida  Castle,  which,
in  the  early  part  of  1824,  consisted
of  30  pupils.  They  have  also  sta-
tioned a  missionaryj^  a  carpenter,
and  a  blacksmith  here.  In  March,
1824,  a  church  was  formed,  con-
sisting of  80  members.  As  a  tribe,
the  Oneidas  have  made  consider-
able progress  in  civilization.

ONONDAGAS,  formerly  the
principal  tribe  of  the  Six  Nations
of  Indians,  who  inhabited  the  State
of  New  York.  Onondaga,  the
chief  town  in  Onondaga  county,
149  m.  N.  W.  New  York,  and  50
from  Utlca,  was  their  principal  set-
tlement, and  the  seat  of  Indian
power.  They  are  now  scattered*
in  small  numbers  in  different  parts
of  the  State,  and  in  Upper  Canada ;
only  2  or  300  remain  at  Onondaga.
They  receive  annually  2000  dollars
from  the  State  of  New  York,  being
the  interest  of  sales  of  the  <<  Mili-
tary Tract."  Of  this  sum,  1000
dollars  belong  to  those  at  Onon-
daga, who  are  represented  to  be
sober  and  well  disposed.  They
acknowledge  the  Bible  to  be  a
revelation  from  God,  and  many  of
them  are  anxious  for  the  instruc-
tion of  their  children.  About  17^0,
the  U,  B,  sent  2  missionaries  to
Onondaga,  who  were  cordially  re-
ceived ;  but  the  mission  was  soon
relinquished.  Other  benevolent  in-
dividuals, who  have  occasionally
laboured  among  them,  have  met
with  a  kind  reception.

OODOOVILLE,  a  populous
parish,  district  of  Jaffna,  Ceylon,
^  miles  N.  Jaffiiapatam,  an^  a)[ko\x\


ORE

S  mtlflt  N.  E.  Mwe^.  IXtmA
oa  an  oztBiHtveidaln^  eovaedvll
grofes  of  paboyn,  cocoa-M^flil
other  firnittceei,  in  tba  aiMrf
which  an  many  TilUgoa  of  Bittn
and  Idol  temptoi.  The  R«f.  )L
WUulow,  firam  the  ^.  ^.  C.  #.  JK,
arrived  herein  18M.  Mr.F.liiki
leappa  Is  the  nathre  pfmrlfif  lb*
Poor  ertabllsbed  tfao  ii«.MNA
here,  in    1818.     In  1811,


were,  exelaiive  of  the  hnriM*
school,  0  wliooU  oonneoMvB
the  station,  containing  Bonto
330  pupils.  The  boaidlBMMI
was  also  flouiiihing.  InllH^ft
comistad  of  3:8  boys  and  8  gkk
A  Sabbath-school  of  186  sobriai
was  commenced  In  1888.  lie
congregations  ai^  laige  aatfittB-
tive.  A  number,  it  Is  hopa^hRt
been  savingly  benefitad;  aaiaftn
are  seriously  disposed^  laUB^
9  natives  had  united  viAAi
chorch.  The  Mi^tngt  infoUairf
the  natives  leqiectinff  ChiWW^i
aflbrd  much  enccmraraneBt.te  m
misiionariei.    [See^|JiMk]  ■  •

OOTTUR  PARllAH,  a  fft*
lage  in  Bengal,  Hindoastaa»  bw
Calcutta,  in  the  Cosslpoie  dfabdel
The  C.  JT.  &  estahUsbed  a  Mhod
here  in  188S,  which  then  coiMi
oflOOscholus.

0RENBER6,  a  town  fata hd-
vince  of  the  same  name.  In  Amk
Russia,  on  the  Ural,  abontdOOn.
N.  £.  Astrachan,  containing  Ml
houses,  and  sorroonded  ty  ai-
meroos  hordes  of  Tartan,  lb
permanent  Tartar  popniatlMf  »*
siding  in  town>  Is  also  veiy  evd*
derable;  while  nomben  htumt
tempormy  residents  from  dlflbnut
parts  of  the  province,  and  frdntbe
most  remote  districts  of  Tntsiy.
It  is  the  great  thoroogfaim  fa
caravans  between  Siberia  and  Giest
Tartaiy,  and  European  Rusrii
E.long.56<»4',N.lat.tfI*48'.  The
Rev.  C.  Fraser,  O.  M'Alpiae,  uA
J.  Gray,  from  the  &  Jf.&,  cov-
\  \batlc»L>3qs\x  Vihouahere,  In  1  Sl^


ORE

^ith  W,  Buchanan^  the  natiTe  as-
■istant.    This  mission  was  origi-
aally  designed  for  the  instruction  of
the  Kirghisian  Tartars,  who  were
lettled  in  tents  in  the  vast  Steppes,
^  NJB.  andS.  ofOrenberg.  They  are
"  described  as  a  very  degraded,  list-
lass  race  of  beings,  but  less  savage
fhaa  the  mountaineers  of  Caucasus;
ibey  are  professed   Mahomedans,
bat,  in  general,    ignorant  of  the
doctrines  of  that  religion.    They,
liowever,  received  the  messengers
of  mercy  with  gratitude  and  joy ;
•nd  maiiifested  an  earnest  desire  to
become  acquainted  with  the  truths
■ol"  Christianity.    For  several  years
tbe  missionaries  prosecuted  their
benevolent  designs    among   these
destitute  and  despised  wanderers,
mad  not  without  cheering  prospects
of  ultimate  success.     Many  dis-
continued their  stated  Mahomedan
sacrifices,  and  made  rapid  progress
In  Christian  knowledge,  and  2  or  3
gave  evidence  of  piety.    One  of  the
principal  chiefs  expressed  a  desire
for  the  permanent  establishment  of
a  missionary  among  his  people,  and
measures  were  taken  to   comply
^th  his  wishes :  a  school  was  about
to  be  established  in  Orenberg,  for
.  the  Kirghisian  children  and  youths.
Tracts  had  been  prepared,  and  the
Hew  Testament  translated  into  the
Orenberg  Tartar;  when,    by  the
order  of  government,  the  body  of
the  horde  was  removed  into  an  ex-
tensive Steppe  beyond  the  precincts
of  the  Russian  territory,  where  they
bave  become  so  disunited  among
themselves,  and  so  hostile  to  the
Russians,  that  it  is  deemed  unsafe
for  the  missionaries  to   continue
their    itinerations   among    them.
Stfme  of  the  missionaries  have  re-
moved ;  others  still  continue  their
labours  at  Orenberg,  and  among
other  tribes  of  Tartars.    The  New
Testament  and  other  suitable  books
and  tracts  are  extensively  circulated
at  this  station ;  and,  in  addition  to
the  regular  distribution  which  is


ORE

made  among  the  strangers  at  Oren-
berg, the  missionaries  have  taken
several  tours  2  or  300  miles,  visiting
all  the  principal  villages  in  their
way,  conversing  with  the  Mollahs,
and  giring  books  to  those  who  could  •
read  them.  From  1820  to  the
close  of  1822,  they  had  distributed
upwards  of  1000  Testaments,  2150
copies  of  separate  books  of  the  Scrip-
tures, and  1840  tracts.  In  their
itinerating  excursions,  and  in  their
labours  among  the  Tartars,  they,
have  been  much  assisted  by  Walter
Buchanan,  a  converted  Caucasian,
6ne  of  the  youths  ransomed  at
Karass,  who  is  distinguished  for
his  piety.  Christian  zeal,  and
knowledge  of  the  Scriptures.

Ou/a,  or  Ufa,  the  capital  of  the
government  of  Orenberg,  Asiatic
Russia,  230  mQes  N.  by  E.  Oren-
berg, near  the  junction  oftheBe-
laia  and  Oufa  rivers,  £.  long.  56^,
18',N.64«42'.  Population,  14,000.
Though  no  Tartars  reside  within
the  city,  except  the  Mufti  and
merchants,  yet  it  is  so  constantly
resorted  to  by  them  for  the  purposes
of  trade  from  the  neighbouring
villages  and  districts,  that,  to  a
stranger,  more  than  half  the  inha-
bitants would  appear  to  be  Tartars.
In  1820,  Messrs.  Alpine  and  Gray,
missionaries  at  Orenberg,  made  a
tour  to  this  city  for  the  purpose  of
ascertaining  the  number  of  Bpsh-
kurts  and  Tartars  in  the  vicinity,
and  the  expediency  of  attempting
a  permanent  mission  among  them.
They  distributed  about  SOO  copies
of  the  Tartar  New  Testament  and
tracts,  which  were  eagerly  received,
and  many  pressed  on  them  for
copies  when  their  supply  was  ex-
hausted. The  Oufa  Tartars  are  an
industrious  people  ;  most  of  them
can  read.  They  are  firmly  attached
to  the  religion  of  the  false  prophet.
In  subsequent  visits,  the  missiona^
ries  have  disMjbuted  manybooks^
and  it  is  to  lijlioped a  missionary
will  soon  be  satUed  here;


OTT

OTTAWAS,  the  nniiiaiit  of  a
once  formidalile  tribe  of  Indkmsi
now  coniisting  of  about  3000,  dis-
poned ill  the  ftates  of  Ohio  and
Michigan,   the    laigest  and  raort
opulent  in  that  vicinity.    They  are
indolent  and  supentitiouf ;  and,  in
conaequence  of  their  intercoune
with  vlcioui  whites,  have  become
exceedinglj  degenerated.  Through
the  instrumentdlty  of  the  Rev.  Mr.
M'Coy,  Bi^ti$t  misnotuny  at  Ca-
rej,  they  have  made  some  adTancei
towards  chrillxation,  and  are  desir-
ous  that  their   annuities,  which
have  formerly  been  chiefly  expended
for  whiskey,  should  be  appropriated
to  the  improvement  of  their  chil-
dren, and  the  support  of  religions
institutions  among  them.     By  a
late  treaty,  the  United  States  go-
vernment has    appropriated   1500
dollars  annually,  for  the  support  of
a   blacksmith,    agriculturist,    and
teacher  among  them,  and  appoint-
ed the  Rev.  Mr.  Sears,   Baptist
missionary,  as  teacher.    The^.J9.
F.  M»  has  contemplated  a  perma-
nent mission  among  this  tribe.    In
1882,   the  fVeatem  M.  S.    com-
menced a  mission  for  their  benefit,
in  the  N.  W.  part  of  the  state  of
Ohio,  on  the  banks  of  the  Maumee,
or  Miamee  of  the  lake,  near  the
W.  end  of  lake  Erie  :  The  Rev.  L.
Robbins,   and  A.  Coe,   missiona-
ries;     Clark,   physician;    J,

Barnes,  L.  Sacket,  I.  Van  Tassel,
M'Pherson,  W.  Potter,  Miss  Ste-
phens,  and  Miss  Biggs,  assistants.
In  1823,  the  society  possessed  pro-
perty here  valued  at  about  10,000
dollars,  and  bad  received,  the  same
year,  300  dollars  from  the  secretary
of  war.  In  1824,  the  school  con-
sisted of  about  40  children,  20  of
whom  could  read  in  the  Testament,
and  all  were  becoming  daily  more
pleased  with  the  industrious  and
active  habits  of  civilJized  life.  The
children  of  tie  Mnidbes  and  Dela-
wares  are  also  instructed  in  the
school.    The  chiefs  and  parents  of


PAA


the  ehOdna
friendty,  and'tiie
to  exert  a  wtintnj


P.


9


PAARL,  a  aottteiMBfr  taOqv
Colony,  S.  Africa,  abovt  «l  &
N.E.  of  Cane  Towb.  Hhm  lit
Dutch  chvek  in  the  plage.  Btm,
and  in  the  wkinlif,  an  dMiiMI
heathens.

The  Rev.  E.  Snoa^  ft&m  1>ti

L.  M,  S.,  commeaoad  a

here  in  1819,  widek  WM

more  particolariy  for  fha

slaves.    Several  yaan  prafispi  ii

its  comme&eeaieii^  a  dapallri

been  built^  in  whieh  midlaMriv

oecasionalty  preaehed.    9mm  ate

the  arrival  of  lir.  Bvaa^aaA  J£I

was  formed,  to  which  tl»  iam

eontriboted  ao  libafaQf  aa  to  »

quire  restraiat  latter

ment.    Sdioola

in  which,  in  1888,

children  and  adidta.

The  number  of  heaien  ia  tka-FtHlb

and  the  vicinllyy  are  ahoal  IM

whites,  and  1200  ooioaiad  pM|fe

The  number  in  eaanmiBiatt  is  If,

aU  of  whom  adoca  tMr  ChiM*

profession.    The  Her.  Mr.  lOak

of  Cape  Town,  wjhe  lale^  vlM

this  station,  says  that  tin  Hiflki

school  here  is  well  conhuteA.    Av

the  ttenefit  of  such  aa

the  day  sdiool,  aa  cfmdog

held  on  two  days  of  tiie  wedt^Mi

been   latdy  opened.     A  aehori*

mistress  has  been  en^paged,  at  a

small  stipend,  to  instniet  ueinwlt

slaves  and  tiieir   ddUtaan.    Ala

public   examination,  ivUeli  Imk

place  during  the  year  18S%  iM

progfress which  had  heen madeto

the  scholars,  waa  ohaonred  wHa

great  satisfactioa.    It  la  fta  eoa-

tdmplation,  if  fimds  eaa  be  pvavMe^

to  establish  schoola  ia  all  the  ao^

rounding  conntiy  of  flie  diitiie^

8jt  one  means  of  eoaalancttv


PAC

•Mdbamedanisni;  which  prevails  in
this  Ticinity.

PACALTSDORP,  formerly
cafled  Hooge  Kraal,  a  settlement
of  Hottentots,  Cape  Colony,  .8.
Africa,  in  the  district  of  George,
8  ip.  from  the  town  of  that  name,
•fid  2  from  the  sea.  The  L.  M,  S,
eommenced  a  mission  here  in  1813.

Mr.  Campbell  gives  the  following
account  of  its  origin : —

**  About  250  m.  from  Cape  Town,
my  waggons  encamped  in  the  vici-
nity of  George,  a  town  then  just
eomnfiencing.  Soon  after  my  arrival
tfiere,  I  was  visited  by  Dikkop,  or
*  Thickhead,'  the  Hottentot  chief
of  Hooge  Kraal,  situated  about  3
m.  distiuit,  together  with  about  60
of  his  people,  who  expressed  en
oemest  desire  that  a  missionary
might  be  stationed  at  his  residence.
On  askihg  his  reason  for, desiring
a  missionary,  be  answered,  it  was
tliat  he  and  his  people  might  be
taught  the  same  things  that  [were
taught  to  white  people,  but  he
«ouId '  not  tell  what  things  these
were.  I  then  requested  him  to
tftay  with  us  until  sun-set,  when
he  would  bear  some  of  those  things
related  by  Cupido,  who  was  a
countryman  of  his,  and  my  wag-
gon-driver. Dikkop  and  ail  his
people  readily  agreed  to  stay  till
evening.  To  Cupido  they  listened
also  with  much  attention  the  fol-
lowing morning.  I  inquired  whe-
ther they  were  all  desirous  of  hav-
ing a  missionary  to  settle  among
tbeni,  which  was  answered  unani-
mously in  the  affirmative  ;  but,  like
their  chief,  they  could  not  assign
any  reason,  except  to  be  taught  the
same  things  which  were  taught  to
the  white  people.  A  very  aged,
miserable  -  looking  man  coming
into  the  hut  during  the  conference,
with  scarcely  a  rag  to  cover  him,
excited  my  attention;  he  came
and  took  a  seat  by  my  side,  kissed
my  hands  and  legs,  and  by  most
significant  gestures^  expressed  his


t>AC

extreme  Joy  in  the  prospect  of  a
missionai^  coming  among  them.
His  conduct  having  deeply  in-
terested me,  I  asked  him  whether
he  knew  any  thing  about  Jesus
Chnst?  His  answer  was  truly  af-
fecting—  *  I  know  no  more  about
any  thing  than  a  beast.'

"  Every  eye  and  ear  were  directed
toward  me,  to  learn  whether  a
missionary  would  be  sent  to  the
Kraal ;  and  when  I  told  them  that
an  excellent  missionary,  I  had  no
doubt,  would  be  soon  with  them,
they  expressed,  by  signs,  a  degree  of
joy  and  delight  which  I  cannot
possibly  describe.  Mr.  Pacalt  ar-
rived soon  after  my  departure.'-'

On  Mr.  Campbell's  second  voy-
age to  S.  Africa,  he  again  visited
Hooge  Kraal,  in  June  1819.  In
his  account  of  this  visit  he  thus
describes  the  striking  change
which  had  been  effected  by  the
blessing  of  God  on  the  labours  of
the  missionary,  who  had  been  a
few  months  before  removed  to  his
heavenly  rest : —

"  As  we  advanced  toward  Hooge
Kraal,  the  boors,  or  Dutch  farmers,
who  had  known  me  on  my  former
journey  in  that  part  of  Africa,
would  frequently  assure  me,  that
such  a  change  had  been  produced
on  the  place  and  people  since  I
had  left  it,  that  I  should  not  know
it  again.  The  nearer  we  ap-
proached the  settlement,  the  re-
ports concerning  its  rapid  improve-
ment increased,  till  at  length  we
arrived  on  the  spot,  on  the  evening
of  June  2.

Next  morning,  when  the  sun
arose,  1  viewed,  from  my  waggon,
the  surrounding  scene,  with  great
interest.  Instead  of  bare,  unpro-
ductive ground,  I  saw  two  long
streets  with  square-built  houses  on
each  side,  placed  at  equal  distances
from  one  another,  so  as  to  allow
sufficient  extent  of  ground  to  each
house  for  a  good  garden :  a  well-
built  wall,  ft  l%e\  Yi\^>  'S?**  Vtv  V\\«N.

L  L  2  ^^^


PAG

of6Mh  fowof  bouiety^ittianie
to  each  bonte.  On  approMhlng
one  of  them;  I  found  a  Hottentot,
dreMod  like  a  European,  itanding
at  his  door  to  receive  me  with  a
cheerful  noile.  <This  home  is
mine!'  uid  he,  <and  ail  that
garden !'  in  which  I  obaenred  there
were  peach  and  apricot  trees,
declced  with  their  delightful  blos-
soms, fig-trees,  cabbages,  potatoes,
pumplcins,  water-melons,  Ac.  I
then  went  across  the  street  to  the
house  of  a  person  laiown  by  the
name  of  Old  SUneon — ^the  very
man  who  sat  in  such  a  wretched
plight,  by  my  side,  in  the  hut,
when  I  first  visited  the  place,  and
who  then  said  he  knew  no  more
about  anything  than  a  brute.  I
was  informed  that  he  had  become
a  Christian,  had  been  baptized,
and  named  Simeon ;  and  because
of  his  great  age,  they  called  him
Old  Simeon.  I  found  him  sitting
alone  in  the  house,  deaf  and  blind
with  age.  When  they  told  him
who  I  was,  he  instantly  embraced
me  with  both  hands,  while  streams
of  tears  ran  down  his  sable  cheeks.
<  I  have  done,'  said  he,  '  with  the
world  now  I  I  have  done  with  the
world  now  !  I  am  waiting tillJesus
Christsays  to  me.  Come  I  I  am  just
waiting  till  Jesus  Christ  says  to  me,
Come.' "

'*  The  case  of  this  singular  mo-
nument of  the  g^ace  of  God  was
very  well  described  by  a  missionary
who  visited  Hooge  Kraal,  on  his
way  to  Bethelsdorp,  soon  after  his
conversion.    He  relates  it.  thus : —

"  On  Tuesday  evening,  April  8th,
*  1817,  before  we  left  Hooge  Kraal,
an  old  man,  about  90  years  of  age,
prayed.  He  expressed  great  gra-
titude to  God  for  sending  his  Gospel
to  his  nation, — and  that  in  his  days,
and  particularly  for  making  it  effi-
cacious to  his  own  conversion.

''  In  bis  youthful  days  he  was  the
leader  of  every  kind  of  iniquity.
He  was  a  great  elephaiitanAWl-


9AC

I  falo  hwtnry  tad  had  tamt
ful  escapes  from  the  jawa  af

Onoey  wlitle  hmittig^  tefen

an  elephant,  who  cndsanaaiai »
crudi  him  to  daalh ;  but  ha
At  another  tfnae^  ha  wm
into  the  air  hj  a  hnfido
times,  and  waa  aefetaW  Inrini}
the  animal  then  Mi  aims  i^
him  J  but  ha  eaeaped  with  Hfk  A
few  yean  ago^  ha  waa  figr  mv
tfane  to  appearance  dead  t  aalw
carried  to  his  graveaoas  aflH^v

is  the  cnttom  In  hoi  cUaMftmi  H
while  the  peopla  wiem  fa  ttial
of  throwing  the  earth  om  Ma,
he  revived,  and  aoon  aatta|f .»
covered.  The  aeeond  tima  IJk
Pacalt  preaehed  at  Hooge  Eu^
he  went  from  the  mecfliy*
joking,  and  Mawiog,  IhaCthaLiri
had  raised  him  from  tiiedaadthm
times,  that  he  might  hnr  fti
Word  of  God,  and  bStofo  fa  Jmi
Christ,  before  he  <diedthafait
time.'

"  He  wasbaptlaed  lartnawyMA
day,  and  was  named  Sfaneon.  lb
Pacalt  told  us  that  it  waa  fnyml-
ble  to  dMcribe  the  old  maa^  hi^
piness  on  that  occaaion.  HeaMilif
joy  had  to  filled  his  hear^  mi
strengthened  hia  weak  fraaM^  M
he  appeared  aa  lively  aa  a  yttrf^
although  00  years  of  age.  UaalL
"  Now  r  am  willhog  to  die :  yiO
would  rather  die  thin  iiie^  thitl
may  go  and  live,  for  eter  and  am^
with  my  preciooB  Sarloar.  BaiH%
I  was  afraki  to  die.  Oh^  jea.'  to
thoughts  of  it  made  mj  waj  hast
to  tremble ;  but  I  did  not  kmw
God  and  Jesus  Christ  then.  N«v,
I  have  no  desire  to  live  anylo^pBr:
I  am  too  old  to  be  able  to  do  aay*
thing  here  on  earth.  In  giori^rhiK
God,  my  Saviour,  or  doing  good  to
my  fellow  Hottentots.  I  ssned
the  devil  upwards  of  el^^rfy  jmn,
and  was  ready  to  go  to  eveilaittiy
fire ;  but,  thowfa  a  Uack  Hottsa-
tot,  through  inilnlte  aDercj^  I  ilnS
\^\n«««dMtln€ha9pfaMai.    Woa-


PAC

^teribl    lofe!    Wonderfiil  grace!
Astonisbiiig  mercy !'

<<  The  next  thing  which  attracted
»Hij  attention  was  the  wall  which
flBironnded  the  whole  settlement,
for  the  protection  of  the  gardens
ftom  the  intrusions  of  their  cattle
•ad  of  the  wild  beasts.

**  A  place  of  worship  has  also
been  erected,  capable  of  seatingS(H)
pmons.    On  the  Lord's  day  I  was
tdeli^ted  to  see  the  females  coming
teto  it,  clothed  neatly  in  white  and
'printed  cottons ;  and  the  men  dress-
^•d  like  Europeans,  and  carrying
their  Bibles  or  Testaments  under
their  arms;  sitting  upon  benches,
instead  ^of  the  ground  as  formerly,
and  singing  the  praises  of  God  with
solemnity  and  harmony,  from  their
Ptalm-books,  turning  in  their  Bi-
Ues  to  the  text  that  was  given  out,
«nd  listening  to  the  sermon  with
ferious  attention.    I  also  found  a
church   of   Christ,    consisting   of
about  46  believing  Hottentots,  with
^wfaom  I  had  several  times  an  op-
poftunity  of  commemorating  l£e
4teftth  of  our  Lord.
-    ^  On  the  week  ,days  I  found  a
jchool,  consisting  of  70  children,
vegularly  taught  in  the   place  of
^forship.    The  teacher  was  a  Hot-
tentot  lad,  who  was   actually  a
jrovng  savage  when  I  first  visited
the  kraal,  and  who,  perhaps,  had
never  seen  a  printed  word  in  his
life.    When  I  first  looked  in  at  the
door  of  the  school,  this  lad  was
mending  a  pen,  which  a  girl  had
farought  him  for  that  pyrpose ;  this
actioii  was  such  a  proof  of  civiliza-
tion, that,  reflecting  at  the  moment
on  his  former  savage  condition,  I
was  almost  overwhelmed.

*'  I  found  a  considerable  extent
of  cultivated  land  outside  the  wall,
^e^ich  the  Hottentots  plough  and
tow  with  wheat  every  year,  though
a  portion  of  it  is  destroyed  annually
by  their  cattle  getting  into  it  while
^e  herd  boys  are  fast  asleep,  and
from  which  no  punishment  could


PAC

altogetbeF deter  them.  An  officer
or  the  Hottentot  regiment  told  me
that  had  they  shot  idl  the  Hotten-
tot soldiers  who  were  found  asleep
upon  their  guard,  tifey  must  have
shot  the  whole  regiment; — 'and
what  would  have  been  the  use  of
officers  then  ?'  said  he.

**  The  Hottentots  were,  at  the
recommendation  of  the  missionary,
about  to  surround  their  fields  with  a
wall  like  that  which  enclosed  their
houses  and  gardens ;  but  whether
this  has  beei^  effected  I  have  not
yet  learned^,

^  Indolence,  and  procrastination
of  labour  from  indolence,  is  almost
universal  among  Hottentots.  At
all  our  stations  they  endeavour  to
put  off  digging  their  gardens,  and
ploughing  their  fields,  as  long  as
possible,  with  this  apology — *  Ttt  is
time  enough  yet.*

**  Mr.  Pacalt  had  much  of  this
temper  to  contend  with;  but  his
fervent  zeal,  his  persevering  appli-
cation, his  affectionate  counsels,
and  his  personal  example,  so  pow-
erfully counteracted  this  previdling
disposition,  that  they  actually  per-
formed wonders.  Ail  the  Hotten-
tots are  still  on  a  level  with  each
other ;  there  are  yet  no  distinctions
of  rank  amongst  theofi.  Some,  dress
better  than  others;  some  have  a
waggon  and  more  oxen  than  others,
and,  it  may  be,  a  better  house,  but
these  things  produce  no  elevation
of  rank ;  they  will  as  readily  com-
ply with  the  advice  or  injunction  of
the  poorest  as  the  richest.  The
operation  of  this  state  of  things,
was  severely  experienced  during
the  period  that  elapsed  between
the  death  of  Mr.  Pacalt  and  the
arrival  of  his  successor,  which  I
think  was  about  4  months.  The
Hottentots  were  like  an  army  with-
out a  commander — every  improve-
ment ceased.  Some  of  the  Hotten-
tots were  for  going  on  with  the
improvements  which  were  included
in  the  plan  of  theit  ^^^baAALXn^sS&et


PAC

And  friend,  but  the  left  of  the
people  would  not  attend  to  their
adTice,  but  defired  thatereiy  thing
ihould  remain  in  the  same  state
until  the  arriTal  of  another  mis-
sionary. They  then  began  to  la-
bour with  the  same  activity  as  be-
fore.

<<Sooa  after  the  death  of  Mr.
Pacalty  the  government  of  the
Cape  colony,  in  order  to  perpe-
tuate the  memoTy  of  that  excel-
lent and  laborious  missionary,  was
pleased  to  alter  the  name  of  the
settlement  from  Hooge  Kraal  to
Pacaitsdorp  (or  Pacalt's  town)
which  spontaneous  act  was  equally
creditable  to  the  government  and
to  the  excellent  man  whose  me-
mory will  thus  be  perpetuated.

**  Dilckop,  who  was  chief  of  the
kraal,  and  who  petitioned  for  a
missionary  on  my  first  visit,  was
also  dead  before  my  return ;  and
Paul  Dikkop,  whom  I  brought  with
me  to  England,  and  who  lately
died  (we  hope  iu  the  Lord),  was  a
son  of  his,  and  was  making  consi-
derable progress  in  his  education,
and  likely  to  be  instrumental  of
good  to  his  fellow  countrymen  on
his  return ;  but  God,  whose  thoughts
are  not  as  ours,  saw  fit  to  call  him
to  the  eternal  world,  professing,  as
a  sinner,  his  sole  dependence  on  the
Saviour.  I  bow  to  his  holy  will,
saying,  Amen !

''His  Majesty's  Commitsioners
of  InpUry  have  since  visited  this
settlement.  They  were  present  at
divine  service  on  the  Sabbath,  and
heard  the  children  read  and  repeat
their  catechisms.  They  were  pleased
to  express  their  satisfaction  at  the
general  appearance  of  the  people,
with  their  knowledge  of  the  Scrip-
ture, and  promised  to  do  all  .in
their  power  to  forward  the  laudable
objects  of  the  Institution.

On  this  occasion  a  scene  equally
unexpected  and  afiiscting  presented
itself.  The  honourable  Commis-
sioners having  biiefty  staled  \a  t\iQ


\


«A€

cQogngatlaii  tli»  oiyeet  of  jMb
visit,  a  leipectriAB  UiMmMtM
iqp,a]id  addiwied  them  H-kaam
— <  I  tiiuklc  God  far  |NittiBff.ifcl^
the  heut  of  tin  King  oTiuW'
to  pity  us  s  mad  I  tliuilL  ttef^
gentlemtD  igrmU  ikMMB>>#|
comhig  so  far  to  tnqiifao  iito  ttf
state.'  He  was  followed  fay  MM
others;  tlMn  lij  nU  tlie  mmMlk
assemUj  ddleetiveljy  win  stuuftt
and  ezpre«ed  thefargnrtttadeMy
CommisBioneT*.  WtieB  tiie  rilr
sat  down,  tlio  wonnen  xom^  iii'«h
preaed  tbenuolvM  in  a.dMt
manner,  aoma  of  them  in  mt  10
appropriate  langoage.  MmmMI
people  were  aaen  in  teaiB.  w#
tisfactlon  axprowod  hy  the  flMi#
able  Commisefoneiv  on  flik  9t0
sion,conveyed  to  tharn  fa,tka-]M|dF
language  bj  Mr.  Andendn  W
missionary  then  thare),W8aiwflMI
by  the  assembly  with  (iia  moitBM^
emotions  of  pleasore.''  •'.-:>

Mr.  T.  Edwaidi,  of  Ttaqrilr
has  lately  remowed  to  this
and  taken  charge  of  tlie
which  had  been  far  aoma  ti
viously. superintended  by  fifr«k»
derson,  aadsted  hy  hie  i***^**",
who  still  have  the  caie  of  tbeghV
school.  The  nomber  ondar  tiuhW'
tion  is  63,  but  the  average  attn^
ance  does  not  exceed  40.  *  At
introduction  of  English  teaddiii^
has  given  great  satiafactian  ik
the  people.  The  8cixMd<4QaB H
about  to  be  fitted  up  forttfae  adm»
tion  of  the  British  syitem ;  Mm
this  ol^ect  the  Committee  of  Hi*
Cape  A.  S.  has  granted  IMlifr
dollars.  •    -

The  congregation,  wUefa  is  ona*
posed  of  Hottentots  of  the -fih
stitution,  slaves  faom  .tiia  Mifh
bouruig  village  of  Geoige  Twfm'
and  a  lew  c<donistB,  usoaUlycoBriNi
on  the  Sabbath,  day,  of  aboot'SML
Their  attention  and  l)ehavioaraie
commendable.  Tlie  people  -aie
frequently  catechised,  after  thaier^
^ctts,  Qfitha  inl^ecti  of  fta


(I

f

b

li


PAD

Hnjr  have  heard.     Meeting!  for

tyer  and  religious  edification  are
d  every  evening  throughout  the
While  some  of  the  people
sincerely  concerned  both  for
own  salvation  and  that  of
too  many  seem  content
witfa  the  mere  form  of  godliness.
Some  suspoDsions  from  the  church
tere,  however  taken  place,  in  con-
■aqnence  of  irregular  conduct
Tlwre  are  4  can(Udates  for  bap-


Marriage  is  become  general
the  Hottentots  at  this  sta-
tiim.  Several  new  houses  have
iMen  built,  and  the  gardens  of  the
•inrtttution  are,  generally  speaking,
batter  cultivated.  About  4OO  shrubs
Imn  been  planted  during  the  year
tMS§,  making  the  .  total  number
flanted  800.  The  repeated  failure
a£  the  harvest  has  been  severely
Ult  by  the  Hottentots  at  this  sta-
tion. A  farm  lately  purchased  for
tiienie  of  the  Institution,  and  which
k^  i^eived  the.  name  of  Burder's
Plaetf  is  likely  to  prove  a  great
•cyrisition  to  the  settlement  The
Hottentots  have  already  subscribed
&  considerable  sum  towards  the
yajrment.

PADANG,  a  Dutch  setttement
4m  tiie  W.  coast  of  Sumatra,  300
laaei  N.  W.  of  Bencoolen.  It  is  a
jpart  of  considerable  commercial
importance,  surrounded  by  a  nu-
■lerons  Malay  population,  and  con-
•sideied  the  key  to  the  large  inland
kingdom  of  Menqpicabow.  E.long.
-00*40'.  S.latOO^O'.

The  Rev.  C.  Evans,  from  the
B,  M.  5.,  arrived  here  in  1821.
Alter  a  long  season  of  painful
•nq^nse,  the  prospects  of  the  mis-
don  began  to  brighten,  many  dif-
ficulties, which,  at  first,  appeared
formidable,  were  surmounted,  and
a  patient  continuance  in  well
doing  recommended  the  mission-
■  axy  to  the  respectful  notice  erf  the
Dutch  authority  of  the  settle-
ment.   Male  and  female  schools


PAL

have  been  established.  Bfr.  Evan
preached  regularly  on  the  Sabbath
in  English  and  Malay,  bat  has
been  compelled  to  visit  England
from  impaired  health.  Mr.  Waid
has  removed  from  Bencoiden  t»
Padang,  with  his  pVhi^ng  press  $
and  Mr.  Bruckner  has  lati^y  been
associated  with  him  in  the  duties
of  the  station.    [See  Sumalra.]

PALAM€OTTA,  a  fortified
town  in  Tlnnevelly  district,  Car-
natic  Coontry,  Hindoostan,  about
3  miles  from  Tinnevelty,  65  £.  N.
E.  Cape  Comorin,  and  200  S.  W.
Tanjore  In  the  latter  part  of  the
last  century,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Swl^rtr,
and  his  associates  at  Tanjore,
from  Ihe  C.  K,  S.  wen  active
and  successful  here.  Previous  to
the  death  of  Mr.  S.,  in  1708,  a
church  was  built^  and  &  cong^
gation  collected  of  more  tiian  200
persons.  At  his  expense,  chapels
were  also  erected  for  ih»  Chria-
tians  in  Padpanadaiwrmm  and
Parani,  Besides  the  prodncial
schools,  he  employed  a  school-
master and  catecbist  at  his  own
expense,  to  instruct  in  Engliah  and
Malabari^  schools,  and  take
charge  of  the  congregations.  Sinoe
1800,  the  C,  K,  &has  placed  here
a  native  catechist,  or  conntiy
priest.  The  Rev.  J.  Hough,  for
many  years-  previous  to  18^,  was
chaplain  to  this  station,  and  was
very  active  in  forwarding  plans  of
benevolence.  When  be  left  it,
283  childijen  were  Instructed  in
9  schools,  under  the  patronage  of
the  society;  and  in  1819,  there
were  34  converts  from  the  hea-
then, and  174  communicants.  Mr.
Hough's  congregation  contributed
liberally  to  the  support  of  schools.

The  Rev;  Messrs.  Rhenius  and
Schmid,  and  Mr.  R.  Lyon,  county
born,  English  asssistant,  David,  na-
tive assistant,  and  16  Tamul  school-
roasters,  from  the  C,M,S.,  com-
menced a  mission  here  in  1820,  and
opened  a  semiQAXv  fot  \hft  ^vdni^.^ffik


PAL

of  natite  tcboolmaften  and  cate-
chifts;  the  happy  influence  of  which
begins  to  be  perceiTod,  by  enabUng
them  to  furnish  competent  teaeben
in  the  schools,  which  Mr.  Hou^
had  established  previous  to  their
arrival  in  18U0|  and  also  to  provide
for  this  extensive  establishment  of
schools  in  different  parts  of  the
district

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Rhenius  and
Schmid,  with  Mrs.  Rhenius.  Mrs.
Schmid,  and  Mrs.  Schnarre,  still
continue  their  labours.  A  new
church  has  been  erected,  and  wa^
opened  on  the  2dth  of  June,  1826 ;
the  expense  amounted  to  2000  ru-
pees, of  which  the  Madras  com-
mittee advanced  800 :  the  remainder
was  raised  by  contributions  from
all  classes  of  people  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, Europeans,  native  Chris-
tians, Mahomedans,  and  heathens.
The  work  of  God,  wliich  has  re-
cently commenced  in  the  vicinity
of  this  station,  by  the  instrumen-
tality of  the  missionaries,  appears
to  be  steadily  proceeding.  The
progress  of  truth,  and  the  opposi-
tion which  is  made  to  it,  are  thus
noticed  by  Mr. Rhenius : — ''  Every-
where, the  number  of  persons  who
renounce  idolatry,  and  put  them-
selves under  Christian  instruction,
increases.  In  one  district,  perse-
cution is  at  a  great  height:  a
modeliar,  related  to  one  of  our  se-
minarists, has  expressed  murderous
designs,  not  only  against  the  people,
but  against  his  relation,  and  has
declared  '  Christianity  shall  not  be
in  that  dUtrict.'  '*

The  missionaries  continue  their
visits  to  those  villages  where  con-
gregations have  been  formed  with
much  encouragement.  The  past
and  present  condition  of  one  of
them,  Satangkoolam,  are  thus  con-
trasted by  Mr.  Rhenius : —

''About  11  o'clock,  divine  ser-
vice .  was  held,  when  the  whole
place  was  filled,  and  large  numbers
of  heathens  wei9  sto.ii&^^  «.\.  ^Sii^


PAN


doon  and  wliidowi,'.    Ob  itufr
fdmidB  in  JBorape,  who  pny  to
the  pfoaperity  niTinn,irnJibMl
graatlj  vqjoiood  at  nsli  a^d '.
What  A  change  bas  taken  fk«i'
this  town  dnrlng  tfaelasti  jtm
When  hrotliar  Bdunld  wtdm^
were  here  5  ymn  ago,  fin  theW
time,  all  was  dailmfl«|  now  fb
light  of  the  Goapel  diiBfl%  lai  ii
sound  of  itgoeaCDrthinto1ha«ii
rounding  coDutryl      Thaa  wd\
school  could  be  estaUUiedi  Mvt
fine  laige  drarch  Is  in  Ike  alMil
it,  and  a  laige  coqgTCgattoa  lifl
it!'*

There  aie»  It  appeam^  U  idMl%
averaging  in  attendance  fBL  h
the  saminaiy  there  are  Stf  ftri^
whoae  stodles  and  praCdoMPf  ^
mach  satiibctiaD.  Than  am  ft
girisin  the  Ainclr  fifuriMBf^eii
are  conafateraUjr  improving  iii#
conduct    [See  ThmnmOr.]  .   •

PALLISERS,  a  cMiff.if
islands  in  the  Facillo..  Oeei%  &
TahiU.  W.  long.  14iF  MT.  &
lat.  15*8r.

After  the  ejcample  of  Hw  SmUT
and    Georgian    ialaad«ib   WV


of  the  inhabitants  raMMueed  l|^
UtrY,  demolished  thehr  idoiL,«|
profesndly  embraced  tlie  GkiMn
religion.  Th^  have  Tisttedllrilll
for  the  purpose  of  obtidniiHg  4^
mentaiy  books  and  Cbristiu  1^
stmction.

PANDITERTPO,  a  pott  U
the  district  of  Jaffiia,  Gejk%ii-
joining  Tillipal^  on  tbe  W.|f  »
N.W.of  Jafmapstam.  AlaAf
portion  of  the  peofile  ateHoM
Catholics.

Dr.  J.  Scodder,  mirnkMia^  mt
physician,  George  Kock»  aaate
of  the  Church  and  medical  afM-
ant,  from  the  A.  B.  C  A  J£,«-
rived  here  in  1820.  Belon  W
time  the  missionazies  at  TDUhv
considered  this  pariifa  aa  mder  Mr
care,  and  opened  a  flonriaUiviil^
school  in  1818.  In  1812,  ^m
,^«t«e  aehoob  of^ttli  damtpttoi


r


^

k


ft
k


PAN

>ected  with  the  station,  4  of
chwere  in\he  villages  of  Make'

y^pooy  and  MutnerkeL  The  board-
-  Ing-schooI,  wliich  promises  to  be  a
i¥My  important  auxiliary  to  the
^B&sion,  was  opened  in  1820:  in
.^823,  it  contained  25  boys  and  8
jiflris,  several  of  whom  manifested
ICD  anxiety  for  their  spiritual  wel-
Ibue,  and  2  had  united  with  the
ehnrch.

Dr.  S.  finds  many  ways  of  {iccess
'  to  the  natives,  in  consequence  of
Ills  medical  skill,  and  his  disposition
tp  relieve  suffering  wherever  it
exists.  He  has  made  frequent  ex-
eunions  in  the  district  of  Jaffna
and- the  neighbouring  islands,  for
ifistributing  books  and  preaching  to
"tihe  natives  in  theiy  villages ;  and
the  boys  of  the  boarding-school
liinre  been  usefully  employed  in
reading  to  their  countrymen.  [See
9h^ffnaJ\
,  *  PANE,  a  town  in  Aorungabad,
^lindoostan,  24  m.  S.  of  Panwell,
supposed  to  contain  17  or  18,000
inhabitants.

-  The  American  missionaries  at
Sombay  established  a  school  here
in  1821,  under  a  Jewish  master.
In  1823,  besides  a  respectable  num-
ber of  native  children,  there  were
1^  Jewish  boys  in  the  school.  [See
MombayJ]

PANWELL,  a  town  of  Hin-
doostan;  in  Aurungabad,  12  or  15
m.  £.  of  Bombay,  which  is  a  place
.of  considerable  trade,  and  a  mart
for  great  numbers  in  the  interior,
who  bring  their  produ\;e  to  market,
sometimes  from  the  distance  of
SOO  miles,  and  carry  back  Euro-
pean articles,  <&c.  This  larg^  and
constant  ingress  and  egress  of  na-
tives from  many  distant  places,
render  Panwell  peculiarly  favour-
able for  a  wide  dispersion  of  divine
imth.  The  American  missionaries
mt  Bombay  have  frequently  visited
it  for  the  purpose  of  communicating


PAR

Christian  instruction  and  distri-
buting the ,  Scriptures  and  tracts.
They  opened  a  school  here  in  1820,
in  which,  in  1823,  7  Jewish  chil-
dren were  instructed.  [See  Jlom-
hayJ\

PARAMARIBO,  a  consideraUe
town  in  S.  America,  and  capital
of  Surinam,  or  Dutch  Guiana,
about  18  miles  from  the  sea;  on
the  river  Surinam,  which  is  here
about  a  m.  wide,  affording  a  good
harbour.  About  one-third,  the  most
valuable  part  of  the  town,  was  burnt,
January  1821.  The  missionary
premises  escaped.  Before  this,  it
contained  2  churches  and  2  Jewish
synagogues;  the  streets  were  all
perfectly  straight,  and  lined  with
trees,  such  as  lemons,  oranges,  shad-
docks,and  tamarinds,  which  present
continual  verdure;  bearing,  at  the
same  time,  blossoms  and  ripe  fruit.
It  is  a  place  of  much  business,  and
contains  about  20,000  inhabitants.
The  owners  of  the  soil  are  mostly
Europeans,  but  are  large  slave-
holders.   W.  long.  55*  15',  N.  lat

The  U.  B,  commenced  a  mis-
sion here  in  1735,  and  have  had
numerous  seals  to  their  ministry,
principally  from  among  the  negroes.
At  the  close  of  the  year  1812,
their  congregation  of  Christian  ne-
groes consisted  of  400  communi-
cants, 42  baptized  adults,  not  ad-
mitted to  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  65
baptized  children ;  in  all  507  per-
sons, besides  candidates  and  cate-
chtunens.  At  the  commencement
of  1823,  there  were  1243  negroes
under  their  care,  775  of  whom  were
communicants ;  80  had  united  with
the  church  daring  the  preceding
year,  and  since  &en  many  have
participated  Christian  ordinances.
Most  of  the  negroes  walk  worthy
of  their  profession.  In  the  vichaity
of  Paramaribo,  the  missionaries
occupy  several  stations,  and  visit
various  estates,  with  happy  effect ;


PAR

tmtog  which  ue  Pakfitld,  ai  the
CannewTDe.  Kbfiuk*^,  and  Mat-
A«w/iDtbe  Cottlca.  ISm&vi'hh.]
jfARRAMATTA,  a  town  In
tho  B.  E.  port  of  New  South  Walai,
Um.W.orSydner.  It  litheiecond
town  In  the  colony,  and  1*  rituted
■t  the  head  oT  Poit  Jackion  bu-
bouT.  In  ISIS,  It  conililad  of  one
principal  itTBet,  nearly  a  mile  In
length,  aBd  contalaed  ISOO  Inhabl-
tanta,  chiefly  Inferior  traden,  aitl-
fecnl  and  labouien.  The  puUlc
buUdlngi,  am  a  chareh,  an  oiphan-
iMWH,  a  hospital,  and  a  tnannfactoir.
In  vUcb  female  conricla  ara  em-

In  IS14,  Oorernor  Macqnarie
founded  an  lutitutlon  for  the  edu-
cation and  clillizatlon  of  the  na-
tlTCf,  which  bat  been  hl)^y  uaeful.
It  ha*  been  removed  about  I!  m.
boa  Parramstta.

The  Her.  B.  Handen,  flnt  cbap-
laln  In  the  colony  of  N.  S.  Walei,
wbo  baa  redded  here  lereral  yean,
hai  been  very  active  In  the  came  of
mioloD!!.  Principally  through  hit
jnitnunentallty,  a  colony  of  English
malefactor*,  who  were  mote  un-
likely lubject*  for  Gospel  influence
than  the  oatiTe  InbabltantB,  have
become  an  ordarly  and  reapectable
community.      [See     Anv    SeiM

PA8SAMAQU0DDY  IN-
DIANS,  about  BSD  in  number.  In
the  ntale  of  Maine.  Their  princi-
pal Tillage  <*  at  PkatanI  Pant,  Id
the  town  ai  Pttry,  where  they
bBT«  a  Raman  Catbollc  church.
They  bate  heretofore  reilded  on
the  ihorei  of  the  Scboodlac,  end
obtained  theli  luatenance  by  hunt-
ing, and  taking  porpolte*  and  leoli.
The  state  has  recently  made  them
a  grant  of  400  dollan  to  purchase
land  and  ogrlcultuial  Implement*.
They  own  ■  township  of  ST,00a
acre*,  and  are  In  a  good  condition  to
Improve,  by  the  attempt!  made  to
ciriUH  them.    In  the  eori;  part  of


PAU

IBI4,  the  national  govemmeol  v
doreii  a  school-bouse  to  I
far  them  In  Verry,  and  tl
/"■  Prtgmgating  the  Gatptlat
ti*  buUan^,  engaged  to  ta
tbem  witha  teacher  fottbetei
The  Kn.  Mr.  Kellogg,  froa  i
Mnie  mctety,  ha*  ooc'  '
Tidied  them,  nud  given  tt
eoutuel  as  tbeir  state

bare  been  highly  approved  ^  fftl


PATNA,  an  extendTC,  n»
louk,  Eommeri'ial,  amd  fartifcd^,
oapilal  uf  Babnr.  niodDMtai
iltuiited  un  an  umLnenae  on  lb(&
■Idi  of  the  Ganges  ]|  n.  Storntt
canlonnienta  of  DioapoRS,  11  fi^  1
DIgHh,  and  about  380  Stan  Ch
eutlu.  The  European  InbRU^
reaiilc  in  the  suburbs  of  BoaUpo*
■  niUe  or  two  W.  Patna.  E.  loB
8a»lfl',  N.  lat- 25"  3T.  UkS
poKd  to  contain  600,000  laW
blUnls.  The  ReT.  T.  S.  Ttmf
■in,  frum  the  B.  M.  S.,  ComsbM*
in  J  8)2,  and  laboured  wllb  dili.
genre  and  success  UU  about  IBlB,
when  be  removed  to  Delbl.  He
establi^hHiI  a  scbool  upon  the  Itw
caittrlnn  syshMn,  preached  in  En^
Udl,  Bengalee,  and  HlndDdoM
and  rirculatod  the  Scriptures  n('
tntts  in  Ibe  lliiidee,  Persian, Bw
gaiee,  and  Ambtc  lajiguages.  fit
elp>  made  several  long  jaumqvtR
Benarp,»,  Allabahad,  LucknoWtUl
other  places,  which  afforded  onx"-
of  widely  praclsimiiv  Itt
nd  of  distributing  the  ficiirr
mullttudes  wtM  hod  SBHf
befofP  seen  or  heui^  of  tkCK
Tbe  missianaries  at  Digah  «V»
doLnll)  labour  bete.

PAUMOTU  islands,  iaW
S.  Pacific  ocean,  from  T6  to  M
m.  K.  Tahiti.  Fonneriy  tbe  Iw
balritantJi  were  notoflom  fi>t  abjerf
BuperMrtinnA,  aitoipiiiahle  rice^M^
nnrelenUnKcraaltlwi  tat  Itairik
tbe  inlliMiiea  •(  flta  ^riowrin  Ift


truth,  a


PEL

the  Society  Islands,  they  have  al-
moft  universally  renounced  idolatry,
changed  their  habits,  and,  at  least
la  name,  become  Christians.  The
laog^aage  is  radically  the  same  as
thttt  of  Tahiti,  but  it  approaches
maxertiieMarquesan.  Mooreaand
Teraa,  native  teachers  of  the  L,
Mm  S.,  are  stationed  here.  These
penons  are  natives  of  the  Paumota
Idands:  they  were  communicants
at  fPilks^s  Harbtmr,  Tahiti ;  and,
in  compliance  with  their  earnest
desire,  were  sent  hither  on  a  mission
lathe  early  part  of  1822.  They  are
settted  on  the  island  Anaa,  where,
pieviousto  this  time,  Christianity
Mt  been  generally  embraced;  and,
1b  every  district,  a  house  had  been
encted  for  the  worship  of  the  true
God.

PELLA,  a  station  of  the  L,  M.
Af  Little  Namaqualand,  S.  Africa,
&.  of  the  Orange  river,  and  about
500  m.N.  of  Cape  Town.

When  Messrs.  Albrecht  and  Eb-
B«r  were  driven  by  a  lawless  plun-
defer  from  their  station  at  ^arm
Bmihy  they  repaired  to  this  place,
and  called  it  Pella,  because  it
proved  a  refuge  to  the  dispersed
nom  Warm  Bath,  like  the  ancient
Pella  to  the  fugitive  Christians  from
Jwnualem.  They  were  followed
by  500  of  the  Namaquas ;  and  con-
thiaed  to  labour  here  with  success,
tUl  1815.  In  1814,  more  than  50
^rsre  added  to  the  church.  About
thia  time,  several  native  preachers
'were  sent  from  Pella  to  Worm
BatAy  Sieinkapff,  and  other  places.

After  the  removal  of  the  first
missionaries,  the  people  were  in-
structed by  others,  and  by  cate-
chists,  and  the  settlement  continued
te  prospei .  The  Namaquas  amount-
ed to  dbout  3.M),  of  whom  between
00  and  70  made  an  open  profession
of  Christianity.  In  the  school
were  nearly  100  children ;  a  good
ehnrah  was  erected;  the  people
poswssed  about  000  head  of  cattle,
10  waggons,  and  about  30  good


PEk

gardens,   and  were  advancing   in'
knowledge,  industry,  and  civiliza-
tion.

Excessive  droughts  have  recently
compelled  the  Namaquas  belong-
ing to  this  station  to  remove  to  the
vicinity  of  the  Orange  River.  A
chief,  named  Gert  de  Klark,  has
since  invited  them  to  remove  to
Steinkopff.

PENOBSCOT  INDIANS,  a
tribe,  principally  on  Old  Town
Island,  in  the  Penobscot  River,
Maine,  12  m.  above  Bangor,  con-
sisting, in  1824,  of  about  340  souls.
These  Indians  are  mostly  Roman
Catholics,  and  are  poor,  degraded,
and  wretched.  In  1730,  the  Sen
ciety  in  Scotland  for  projHigaHng
Christian  Knowledge,  aided  by  a
gprant  from  the  General  Court  of
Massachusetts,  supported  a  mis-
sionary to  labour  for  their  spiritual
good,  till  1737,  when  he  was  dis-
missed for  want  of  success.

In  March,  1823,  a  society  was
formed  in  Bangor  to  promote  the
civilization  and  the  moral  and  re-
ligious hnprovement  of  this  tribe,
which  immediately  employed  Mr.
J.  Brewer,  a  graduate  from  Yale
College,  to  take  a  school  at  Old
Thwn  Island,  which,  in  a  month,
contained  about' 30  children.  It
continued  only  a  few  months,  but
was  resumed  in  1824.

PERSIA,  a  country  of  Asia,
whose  limi^  have  been  various  at
different  periods.  Its  ancient  name
was  Elam,  and  its  inhabitants  were
denominated  Elamites,  as  the  de-
scendants of  Elam,  the  son  of
Shem ;  under  which  appellation
they  formed,  about  the  time  of
Abraham,  a  powerful  state.  The
limits  assigned  by  nature  to  Persia
are  the  Persian  Gulf  and  the  In-
dian Ocean,  S;  the  R.  Indus,  E. ;
and  Ozus,N.  E. ;  the  Caspian  Sea,
and  Mount  Caucasus,  N. ;  and  the
mountains  of  Armenia,  and  the
Euphratesand  Tigris,  W.;  exteiKl-
Ing  from  about  \6P  \o  1^  '^^  Vok^j^.v
1      u  M  ^^"^


PER

wid  from  S5«  to  43f^  (S.  lat.  The
prminceK  of  Georgia,  DaghetUn,
and  Shinan,  between  the  Caspian
and  Black  Seas,  to  about  40^  N.
lat.,  are  now  subject  to  llunia.
Tlie  wandering  tribes  to  tbe  £.
are  governed  by  tbeir  own  Khans,
who  merely  pay  a  militar}-  senrice
to  the  King  of  Persia  when  re-
quired. In  this  way,  it  is  sup-
posed, the  present  King  might  col-
lect a  force  of  150,000  men.

The  government  is  monarchical.
The  king  is  absolute  master  of  the
iires  and  property  of  his  subjects.
In  1816,  h  of  his  sons  were  gover-
nors in  as  many  principalities.
Teheran  is  the  capital.

Estimates  of  the  population  of
I'erKin  are  founded  on  conjecture,
and  are  ver}'  various.  It  probably
does  not  exceed  10,000,000,  though
some  have  supposed  it  to  be
80,000,000.  The  general  charac-
teristics of  the  people  are  mildness
and  gentleness,  with  a  very  consi-
derable degree  of  refinement
Though  the  Mahomedan  religion
prevails,  they  have  long  been  satis-
fied with  a  lax  system  of  faith,  inso-
much that  the  I'urks  and  Arabs  call
them  heretics.  In  addition  to  this,
a  class  of  infidel  Mahomedans  is
rising  up,  called  Soofies,  or  Free
Thinkers,  supposed  to  amount  to
about  100,000,  who  renounce  the
system  of  Islamism,  and  seem  dis-
posed to  examine  the  claims  of  the
Christian  religion.  The  rapid  in-
crease of  this  sect  portends  the
downfal  of  Mahomedanism,  by
principles  silently  operating  in  its
very  bosom,  and  proves  &at  the
thinking  part  of  the  community  are
ripe  for  a  change.

There  are  no  missionary  esta-
blishments in  Persia;  yet  it  be-
grins  to  be  viewed  as  a  field  of
promise.

Like  other  Mahomedan  coun-
tries, it  has  been  too  long  believed
to  be  inaccessible  to  the  efibrts  of
Christian  enterpriBe  \  but  \!i;ie  xeaL^


PER

sons,  which  were  powerful  in  oflia
spheres  of  Mshomednii  Mimbbi,
nerer  existed  In  tbe  wuae  fions  k
Persia,  and  the  force  irliich  tlMj
did  poisesi  Is  mucb  weaWawd  ly
the  extenslTa  ciiciiIatloD  oiTtMk,
and  the  Persian  New  TerfBMit
translated  by  tbe  late  Rer.Heqr
Martyn,  who  it  known^  even  In  fli
counti;}',  by  the  dletinctive  i|pri-
lation,  « that  Man  of  God."  h
1811,  thU  devoted  and  IntRfU  sol-
dier of  the  cxoes  went  almoit  da^
handed  into  the  he«rt  of  tba  a-
pire,  and  performed  the  dlflcntttiric
of.translaUng  the  nriis  Tiirii— t
and  the  Psalms  into  the  PmiIm,
the  vernacular  language  ofMyMI
who  bear  the  Christian  nuns^  mA
which  is  known  over  OBe-iMh
of  the  habitable  globe.  lUi  w
be  considered  as  the  cobbmicj^
ment  of  the  great  work  of  |ff^
the  Goi^el  to  the  millions  of  Fv-
sia,  and  the  time  will  conWy  wHn
his  memory  will  be  cberiM
among  its  natives  as  the  flntjid
great  benefactor  of  their  coinihj.
His  bold  and  able  nttnrV  mi  Tilia
ism,  duihug  his  18  months'  st^at
its  head-quarters  in  SEhiiaiy  nwdBM
impression  on  the  leamadi  sid
produced  an  etkct,  which  vriO  la
held  on  record,  in  Perrii^  to  Ibi
latest  age.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Robinson,  chip-
lain  at  Poonah,  is  advancing  tn  the
translation  of  the  Old  ToitsMnit
into  Persian;  and  the  Kingof  OiAb
has  compiled  and  printed  a  PenAn
Dictionary,  in  7  rollo  vohunes.

Encouraged  Iqr  the  efifeetialna^f
produced,  the  SeoUiak  M,  &  fliln-
blUbed,  in  1814,  a  missioB  at
Attrachan,  in  Rirnian  Tkrtnyi
near  the  N.  W.  shores  of  the  Cas-
pian, which  is  exerting  a  hsiyj  in-
fluence in  Persia.  Tlie  Gaimtm
M.  S,  has  also  appointed  leferal
missionaries  to  enter  this  field,  wbo^
after  spending  ahoat  a  year  at
Astrachan  in  preparation,  set  Sat'
\^vA  Ssst  TVSte  tn  their  mwy  fat


PET

Shirvim,  on  the  W.  shore  of  the
Caspian,  in  April,  1823.  Their
names  are^  Henry  Brenz,  Augustus
Dlttrich,  and  Pelican  Zaremba,—
all  educated  at  the  Basle  seminary.
PETERSBURG,  or  ST.  PE-
TERSBURG, the  metropolis  of
the  empire  of  Russia,  in  a  govern-
ment of  the  same  name,  and  an
archbishop's  see,  with  a  university.
It  is  seated  on  the  Neva,  near  the
Gulf  of  Finland,  and  built  partly  on
some  islands  formed  by  tbe  R.,  and
'partly  upon  the  continent.  The
ground  on  which  it  now  stands  was
avast  morass,  occupied  by  a  few
fishermen's  huts.  Peter  the  Great
first  began  this  city  by  the  erection
of  a  citadel  with  six  bastions,  in
1703 ;  be  built  also  a  small  hut  for
-himself,  and  some  wooden  hovels.
In  1710,  Count  Golovkin  built  the
first  house  of  briclc ;  and  the  next
year,  the  Emperor,  with  his  own
hands,  laid  the  foundation  of  a  house
of  the  same  materials.  From  these
■mall  beginnings  arose  the  imperial
city ;  and  in  less  than  nine  years
after  the  wooden  hovels  were
erected,  the  seat  of  empire  was
transferred  to  it  from  Moscow.  The
Inhabitants  are  computed  to  be
886,000.  The  principal  church  is
that  of  the  Holy  Virgin  of  Kasan,
named  after  the  province  of  Kasan,
the  first  in  the  empire  that  embraced
Christianity;  and  is  a  beautiful
edifice,  completed  in  1813.  There
are  upwards  of  40  more  churches
appropriated  to  the  national  reli-
gion, and  those  of  other  sects,
which  are  tolerated  without  any
Testrictions.  Petersburg  has  a  con-
liderable  trade  in  exporting  the
products  of  the  empire,  and  has  a
communication  by  canals  and
rivers  with  many  of  the  southern
proYinces,as  far  as  AstTachan,on  tbe
borders  of  the  Caspian  sea.  It  is
425  m.  N.  W.  Moscow,  500  E.  by
N.  Stockholm,  and  1000  N.  N.  E.
Vienna.  E.  long.  SO"  19*,  N.  lat.
^0«56'.


PLA

The  Rev.  Mr.  Knill  of  the
L,  M,  S.y  has  been  labouring  for
several  years  in  this  city,  not  with-
out indications  of  the  favour  of  God
and  the  approbation  of  good
men.

PHILIPPOLIS,  a  station  of  the
L.  M.  S.f  S.  Africa,  (so  called  from
respect  to  the  Rev.  Dr.  Philip)^
which  was  formed  a  few  years
since,  with  the  hope  of  reviving  the
mission  to  the  Bushmen ;  for  which
purpose  Jan  Goeyman,  a  Hottentot
teacher,  was  sent  hither,  but  nodis-
cemible  success  attended  his  la-
bours. As  he  thought  an  European
missionary  would  succeed  where  be
failed,  Mr.  Clark  was  appointed
to  this  place.

An  out-station,  belonging  to  it,
was,  in  the  course  of  the  year  1826,
attacked  by  a  party  of  plundering
Caffres,  who,  horrible  to  relate,
destroyed  no  less  than  31  ISush
people,  in  order  to  get  possession  of
their  cattle.  Mr.  C,  having  re«
ceived  information  of  this  dreadful
catastrophe,  proceeded,  as  soon  as
he  was  able,  to  the  spot,  and  re-
moved the  survivors  to  Phllippolis.
He  had  previously  directed  some
Hottentots,  belonging  to  the  latter
place,  to  pursue  the  murderers,  in
order,  if  possible,  to  recover  the
cattle ;  in  which  attempt  they  com-
pletely succeeded.

PLAINTAINS,  several  small
islands,  lyinsr  about  40  m.  S.  E.
Freetown,  W.  Africa;  22  m.  from
Kent,  and  3  W,  the  main  land.
They  belong  to  the  family  of
Caulkers,  native  chiefs  in  the
Sherbro  country,  W.  long.  12®  18*.
N.  lat.  7«  54'.

The  C.  M,  S,  commenced  a  mis-
sion in  this  place,  by  means  of  S.
Caulker,  schoolmaster.  G.  Caulker,
chief  of  these  islands,  was  edu-
cated in  England,  and  is  anxious  to
introduce  Christianity  into  his
native  country.  He  has  translated
into  the  Sherbro,  which  is  a
dialect  of  the  BuUom,  the  momini^


POI

anil  evening  kferrices  of  tlie  United
Church,  which  have  been  printed
by  the  society  for  the  benefit  of  the
nativen.  He  has  also  translated  a
collection  of  hymnii,  Walters  Cate-
chism, and  a  part  of  the  Bible,  and
is  proceeding  with  the  remainder.
S.  Caulker,  a  youni(er  brother,  was
educated  in  the  society's  schools,
and  acted  as  usher  to  Mr.  Ny lander.
In  IfiSJi,  he  had  a  promising  school
of  23  scholars,  some  of  whom  could
read  the  Bui  lorn  and  English
fluently.  They  hni  e  daily  prayers,
morning  and  evening,  in  a  small
place  of  worship,  and  divine  service
is  performed  regularly  on  the
Sabbath  by  the  two  brothers.
According  to  Die  last  report,  there
were  in  the  day  school  81  bo}'s,
ond  in  the  e\'eniiig  school  S  boj's
and  ailultji,  whose  progress  is  fa-
vourably s|K]ken  of.

POINT  P£J)KO,  a  town  at  the
northern  extremity  of  the  district
of  Jaflna,  Ceylon,  21  miles  from
JafTnapatam.  £.  long.  S(fi  86',
N.  lat.  QOfia*.

This  station  of  the  /F.  M.  S.
in  connected  with  that  of  Jafliia-
patum,  und  is  generally  supplied
with  preaching.  Several  schools
are  connected  with  it.  In  ]826,
tl^ere  were,  with  JaiTna,  70  mem-
ben  in  societj.     [See  Jaffna.]

POLYNESIA,  a  term  applied
to  the  numerous  islands  in  the
Pacific  Ocean,  including  the  Pelew,
Sandufich,  Fnendfy,  Socieftf^  Mar-
fuesaM,  and  several  other  islands  of
less  note  ;  from  W.  long.  I3(fi  to
230^,  and  N.  lat.  36®  to  S.  6(fi.

POONAH,  n  populous  city  of
Ilindoostan,  about  16  miles  S.  £.
Bombay.  It  is  the  seat  of  the
late  Mahratta  power ;  but  is  now
subject  to  the  British  government
ill  India.

The  C,  K.  S,  has  a  depot  of
books  at  this  place,  under  the  care
of  the  chaplain,  the  ReV.  Mr.
Robinson,  who  is  translating  the
Old  Testament  into  the    Persian


•.\r


with  Cape  Breton,  to  tbeB^M.
The  capital  Is  Cliariotte  Timk
W.  long.  flS*  SOT,  N.  Ut.  40mt.
The  &  Pnp.  tf.  F.  P.  ta  t»
misiioiuiries  and  one
here.

PULLICAT:,  A  MM-port
in  the  Camatle,  Hiadooftu,  SI  a.
N.  Madras.  E.  knur.  M^tfi-IL
lat.l3»84'.  In  1609,  the  Dil*
settled  hen,  and  built  a  ibrt.  H
is  now  the  seat  of  their  M,iniiiii«rf
on  the  Coramandel  coast

Formerly  the  ninionaiiei  of  te
C,  K.  S.  laboured  here  wtth  IH^
cess.  In  the  early  part  of  tta
present  century,  their  nrinwiit^
cants  were  about  800.  The  Rir.
J.  Kindlinger,  from  the  M  JT.  &,
arrived,  in  18S1,  and  aoon  aftv
had  801  Christians  under  Ui  di-
rection, divided  accordiiig  to  tta^
languages;  181  Tamidy  140  Poda-
guese,  and  40  Dutch.  The  T«nt
and  Portugaeie  were  baptlMd  fa
their  youth,  and  had  litttehntte
name  of  Christianity ;  having  ben
visited  by  a  misslonaiy  only  once
a  year,  ior  88  yean.  He  soon
opened  a  Taaiul  and  Dutch  sekeol
with  nearly  100  pupils^  coUeeted
a  congregation,  and  instltutsd  a
weekly  prayer-meetiag  in  Dutch
and  Taniul.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Iron  arrived  is

4.00


language,  an^or  Ifao  ampioasaf 4l
8,  Frep.  G.  F.  P.    This  wnk,  ti
coivunction  with  tlie  New  T«te*'
ment  of  the  late  Rev.  H.
wiU,  it  is  hoped,  bo  tte
supplyhig  the  If  ahonedL.  .^.w
of  India,  and  other  pait^  wMh't    j
classical  venlon  of    ~
in  their  favourite  tengoage.
PRINCE      EDWABIHS
LAND,  or  Si.  JiaUm,  an
the    S.  part  of  the   Gulf  tf  Ik
Lawrence,  having  New  Bivaalik
on  the  W. )  Nova^Scotte  oa  0»l4
and  Cape  Breton  on  the  E.  9
ii  60  n.  lonff  and  SO  teoai,  mH
exceedingly  fertile,    with
streams.    In  1145,  H


PUL

June,  1888,  and  has  charge  of  the
-Dutch  department.  Since  that
tiiiie»  Mr.  Kindllnger  has  preached
In  Tamul,  and  has^  In  general,  a
numerous  native  cong^gation.
He  has  been  blessed  in  hiscate-
€liising8  of  the  people,  and  decisive
evidence  appears  that  the  labours
bestowed  on  the  scholars  has  not
been  without  fruit.

PULO  PINANG,  that  is  Betel-
mU  Isiand,  called  also  Prince  of
H^ales'M  Island,  lying  off  the  W.
eooft  of  the  Malay  peninsula,  from
which  it  is  separated  by  a  narrow
Stnit.  It  contains  about  160  square
miles,  was  transferred  to  the  East
India  Company,  in  1786,  and  has
aregnlar  government,  subordinate
only  to  the  Governor  General  of
India.  When  the  British  took
ponession  of  it,  there  were  only  a
few  miserable  fishermen  on  the
toast.  The  population,  according
to  a  census  taken  up  to  31st  Dec.
188^,  amounted  at  that  time  to
nearly  38,000  persons;  of  whom
neariy  14,000  were  Malays  and
Bug^ese,  and  about  7,500  Chinese.
Since  tiie  period  mentioned,  nu-
merous migrations  from  the  sur-
roanding  countries  have  raised  the
population,  according  to  the  state-
ment of  a  respectable  individual
in  Pinang,  to  5d,000.  Pinang  is
divided  by  a  range  of  mountains,
running  north  and  south.  The
Emropeans  occupy  the  E.  side  only.
The  harbour  is  capacious,  and
affords  good  anchorage.  A  con-
siderable trade  is  carried  on  by  the
E.  India  Company,  and  the  whole
trade  of  Malacca  and  the  adjacent
islands  centres  here.  Its  N.  E.
point  is  in  E.  long.  IWfi  W.
N.lat.5«25'.

In  January,  1819,  the  Rev.  Mr.
Medhurst,  of  the  L.  M,  S,,  who  had
previously  assisted  Dr.Milne  at  Ma-
lacca, embarked  for  Pinang,  with
the  design  of  commencing  a  Chinese
and  Malay  mission  in  that  island.
Having  explained  his  object  to  the


PUL

Governor  in  council,  he  was  Idndlj
encouraged  to  commence  his  ope-
rations, and  was  informed  that  he
might  expect  from  Crovemment  an
allowance  of  20  dollars  monthly,
towards  the  expense  of  the  Chinese
schools ;  and  half  that  sum  towards
the  support  of  a  Malay  seminary.
The  Chinese  residents,  also,  cheer-
fully granted  the  gratuitous  use  of
one  of  the  temples  as  a  schcfol-
room ;  and  a  considerable  number
of  religious  tracts  were  accepted
by  them  with  readiness,  and  pe-
rused with  attention.

Subsequently  to  ^is,  the  Rev.
Messrs.  Beighton  and  Ince  ar-
rived, 'and  other  schools  were
opened.  On  one  occasion,  the
latter  went  to  witness  the  great
idolatrous  festival  of  Shaou  and
Tseaou,  which  is  considered  as  a
feast  of  pure  benevolence;  being
celebrated  on  the  behalf  of  those
poor  bereaved  spirits  who  have
no  relations  to  mourn  for  them —
to  supply  them  with  clothes,
money,  and  other  necessaries — ^to
rescue  them  from  Tartarus — and
to  exalt  them  to  higher  and  more
felicitous  regions.  On  Mr.  Ince's
arrival  at  the  temple,  he  found  it
surrounded  by  a  vast  concourse  of
people,  whose  general  appearance
reminded  him  of  the  crowds  which
usually  attend  a  fair  in  England.
On  one  side  of  the  temple  was
a  large  paper  idol  of  a  most  uncouth
form,  and  about  14  feet  in  height,
•with  uncommonly  large  glass  eyes,
and  painted  with  various  colours.
Immediately  before  this  hideous
deity  was  a  long  table,  set  out
with  all  kinds  of  provisions,  inter-
spersed with  small  paper  idols.  At
one  end  of  the  table  were  a  number
of  carpets  spread  on  the  ground,
on  which  sat  half  a  dozen  priests,
worshipping  their  god,  chauntingan
unintelligible  jargon,  and  bowing
themselves  to  the  ground.  There
were  many  other  smaller  paper
idols,    represented    as    riding   on


PUL

•iiimalf  of  the  nine  material ;  and
the  vbole  imene  vai  Uluminated
liy   a    profusion    of   lantenu  and
candles.    Behind   the   great   idol
was  a  large  c(uantity  of  pieces  of
papier,  many  ol  which  were  coreied
with    gold  leaf.      I'hese   papers
were  burned  by  the  idoiateis,  under
a  Arm   |)ersuii8ion  tliat  they   are
transfonned   into    money    in    the
world  of  spirits.    Mr.  Ince's  ex-
postulations with  the  people  were
in  vain  ;  and  on  a  second  visit  to
the    same    festival,  he   observes,
**  Thousands  of  people  were  aasem-
bledy  and  the  noises  made  by  the
beating  of  drums,  gongs,  Ac,  were
of  surh  a  horrid  description,  that
it  appeared  as  if  tlie  gates  ciif  the
lower  regions    had   been  thrown
open,    and  all  the  infernals  had
issued   forth    at    once    to    tenify
mankind.    These  people  spare  no
pains  nor  cost  in  the  worship  of
their  idols;   but  if    they   are   so
zealous  in  the  cause  of  error,  what
ought   Christians   to    be    in   the
glorious  cause  of  truth  r**

On  the  27th  of  December,  18S0,
Mr.  Medliurst,  who  was  then  at
Pinang,  went  to  the  house  of  an
old  man,  who  had  recently  died,
with  the  design  of  improving  the
solemn  even^  by  addressing  the
surviving  relations.  None  of  these,
however,  could  find  leisure  to  at-
tend to  him.  The  body,  when  laid
in  the  cofiin,  was  dressed  in  a  com-
plete  suit  of  new  clothes,  though
the  relatives  were  very  poor,  and
an  abundance  of  gilt  paper  was
Kept  continually  burning  near  the
corp!;e.  After  the  coffin  was  nailed
down,  an  incense  pot,  with  eat-
ables, was  placed  before  it;  and
the  relatives,  beginning  with  the
eldest  son,  bowed  down  nine  times,
with  tbetr  faces  toward  the  earth,
before  the  deceased.  The  mat  and
pillows  belonging  to  the  late  occu-
pier of  the  house  were  then  taken
out,  to  be  thrown  away ;  ond  all
the  friends  who  had  assisted  in  the


roir


oil,  !■  Older,  m  ttty  aid,  ti|ii.
veat  uijr  noskMM  Inftiwict  Hi
■dberiBg  to  them.

During  the  yau  Ittt,  tteal»
slonariat  At  Pinang  Iwaei  pnpirt
for  erecting  a  chmpek  ky  ■*«%
tioD,  to  be  need  tiiiiliiilphrtib
for  Chlneae,  MaUy,  end  S^
worship.  The  iMindettan  4W
was  Uid  on  the  llthof  JoH^  wt
in  the  couiie  of  the  ennim  M|t
mer  the  chepel  wee  oyeaed  hMp
tended  by  Inge  end  lei
congregatkmi.  In  IBSd,
was  called  to  the  how
await  the  faithful  leboerrar.

The  following  partlcuUnoffti
mission  are  thoee  noit  tmrn/Bf
given : —

Afa/Sqr  SehoeU. — Then
have  been  increased  to  ^  el
6  are  for  boys  and  1  lor  gtalh  Ihi
number  of  the  fonneron  theidMl^
register  la  1S7,  of  the  leUif  m
making  a  total  of  10A.  Mr.Bi^
ton  founds  much  of  hli  hope  of  im>
fulness  among  the  MohemidH^
in  many  of  whom  a  decline  el  p^
judice  is  perceptible,  on  the  Chrii*
tian  instruction  dinemlnaM  If
means  of  the  native  iclwolfci

Mttiay  R^orthw On  ev^  9^

bath  morning  the  mivioaniv  en-
plains  Jthe  doctrines  of  the  GomI
to  a  small  congregation  of  11^
lays,  partly  conaiathig  of  Ihi
teachers  and  scholan  beloiHkV
to  the  acbools.  In  tte  Ai
noon,  he  visits  one  or  other  of  the
schools,  and  gives  an  eiharti-
tion  to  the  childrea,  and  to  mA
adults  as  may  attend  Aoni  the  !■•
mediate  vicinity.  Of  the  ^dt
Malays  who  hoir  flie  Oospeli  s^
veral  of  whom  appear  to  makepio-
gress  in  the  knowledge  of  the  telp-
tures,  the  number  Is  Incned^g.
Some  who  privatriy  aeknowledgt
the  divine  authority  of  the  New
Testament,  fear  to  avow  their  mh-
viction  openly.

EfigUih  /F0ra««e.~A*UbtBe,

408


'PUT

pleached  by  Mr.  B.  at  the  chapel,
OB  Sabbath  evenings,  is  attended

gf  lereral  of  the  more  lespectable
Uiopeans  of  the  settlement.  This
•nnrice,  which  has  proved  very  use-
Sak  to  individuals,  tends  generally
to  keep  alive  an  interest  in  favour
mi  the  mission.  A  church  was
Jbrmed  on  the  11th  oS  July,  1826.
Among  its  members  are  a  gentle-
man and  lady,  residents  iu  Pinang,
"VlJto  hove  lately  renounced  popery.

The  state  of  religion,  generally,
UBong  the  European  residents,
nben  compared  with  what  it  was
7  years  ago,  exhibits  proofs  of  de-
cided and  gratifying  improvement.

In  1816,  a  Bible  Society  was
finned  in  connexion  with  the  Cal-
cutta Bible  Sociey,  under  the  pa-
tronage of  the  Governor  and  com-
ttiandants.

.  PUTAW ATOMIES,  or  Pot-
iawaiiamiesf  a  tribe  of  about
8600  Indians,  dispersed  in  Indiana,
Illinois,  and  Michigan.  The  Rev.
Inac  M'Coy,  while  an  itinerating
miniouary  from  the  j4merican  B,
Mi*  S.,  was  instrumental  of  much
good  among  this  people.  In  two
villages,  many  of  the  inhabitants
were  persuaded  to  abandon  intem-
perance, and  regularly  to  observe
fiunily  worship.  An  establishment
has  recently  been  formed,  for  the
improvement  of  this  tribe,  in  the
Michigan  territory,  by  the  Gooem'
mmU  of  the  United  States,  and  the
Baptitt  Beard  of  Foreign  Miseione.

PUTHUPETT,  a  village  of
coUers,  or  thieves,  wbo  became
Christianized,  principally  through
the  instrumentality  of  Mr.  Swartz,
They  are  occasionally  visited  by
missionaries.

Q.

QUILON,  or  Coulan,  a  sea-
port of  Travancore,  Hindoostan,
88  m.  N.W.  of  Cape  Comorin.  The
peculation  was  formerly  estimated
at  100,000,  and  latterly  at  80,000.
A  station  was  commenced  here  by


RAI

the  Zr.  Jtf.  .S.  in  1821,  and  the  Rer.
Messrs.  Smith  and  Crow,  and  ae-
veral  native  readers,  labour^  with
much  zeal  and  eneigy.  The  num-
ber of  schools  under  their  superin-
tendence, in  1826,  was  8  ;  that  of
scholars,  including  16  girls,  wbo
also  received  Christian  instruction,
363 ;  and  all  of  them  were  in  a
prosperous  state.  About  this  time
Mr.  S.  was  obliged,  on  account  of
ill  health,  to  return  home ;  and  Mr.
C,  whose  constitution  was  also  un-
able to  bear  the  climate  of  India,
arrived  in  England,  Dec.  12, 1826.

On  his  departure  from  Quilon,the
mission  was  placed  under  the  super-
intendence of  Mr.  Ashton,  assistant
missionary  from  Nagercoil.  He  has
collected  a  native  cong^gation,
consisting  of  about  20  persons,  wbo
assemble  every  Sabbath  afternoon,
when  a  service  is  performed,  in
which  he  is  assisted  by  the  reader,
Rowland  Hill.  The  readers,  beside
visiting  the  bazars  and  other  places
of  public  resort,  itinerate  in  the
neighbouring  villages.

The  native  schools,  which  con-
tain about  300  children,  are  in  an
improving  state.

R.

RAIATEA,  Bometimef  called
Uiietea,  one  of  the  Society  Islaivls,
in  the  S.  Pacific  Ocean,  about  W.
long.  151^  30",  S.  lat.  llfi  6(/;
SO  m.  S.  W.  Huahin^,  and  60  in
circuit,  with  many  good  har-
bours, containing  about  1300  inha-
bitants. This  island  was  formerly
the  chief  seat  of  idolatry,  and  the
source  of  all  political  authority  to
this  group.  Human  sacrifices  were
brought  hither  from  all  the  neigh-
bouring islands,  and  ofiered  to  Oro,
the  god  of  war ;  and  here  the  now
Christian  Prince,  Tamatoa,  was
once  prayed  to  as  a  deity.

The  Rev.  L.  £.  Threlkeld  and
John  Williams,  from  the  L.  M.  &,
removed  from  Eimeo,  and  settled.


RAI

Sept  1818,  on  the  W.  coast,  In  the
roldnt  of  a  forei^  where  icaicely  a
habitation  itood.

In  1H23,  a  beautiful  town  had
been  built,  extending  about  2  m.
iitonpc  tlie  marfcin  of  a  bay,  having
several  bridgeii  over  streams  which
fall  into  the  bay.  In  the  centre  is
A  chHiKrl,  156  feet  by  44,  in  which
1000  persons  usually  assembled  for
Christian  Instruction.  Agriculture
and  the  mechanical  arts  have  been
introduciMl  by  the  missionaries  with
happy  effect;  but  the  triumph  ot
the  cross  must  be  regarded  as  one
of  the  most  signal  ever  achieved
since  the  world  beg^n.  Not  a  ves-
tige of  idolatry  remains.

In  tracing  the  introduction  of
Christianity  into  this  island,  we
are  carried  back  to  1809,  when
a  few  of  the  natives  were  in-
structed at  Eimeo.  In  1810,
the  Rev.  C.  Wilson,  missionary  at
Kimeo,  and  Pomarre,  late  King  of
Tahiti,  were  providentially  cast
u^Min  this  island,  and  obliged  to  re-
main for  some  time.  Mr.  W.  em-
braced the  opportunity  of  preaching
tile  Gospel  to  the  natives,  while
Pomnrrc  employed  all  his  influence
to  induce  them  to  abandon  their
idolrt  and  embrace  the  truth.  Suc-
cess attended  their  united  efforts ;
and  the  King,  with  his  chiefs  and
people,  avowed  themselves  Chris-
tians. Immediately  they  desisted
from  offering  human  sacrifices,  from
idolatrous  worship  and  infanticide  ;
built  places  for  Christian  worship  ;
but  knew  little  of  the  Gospel  ex-
cept the  name,  and  continued  in
the  indulgence  of  every  evil  desire,
till  after  the  settlement  of  the  mis-
sionaries among  them.

In  1823,  the  Deputation  thus
wrote  concerning  the  religious
state  of  the  people : —

''  With  much  satisfaction,  we
witnessed  the  baptism  of  150
persons  in  one  day,  making  the
number  of  baptized  about  1100;
leaving  a  remainder  of  persons  in


RAI     '

the  ifllandy  unbaptlaed,  ahont  Ml
In  examining  the  miiifd  nonl^

or  temples  at  Opoa,  vecooldha^P
realise  the  idea  that  6  or  T  ywi
ago  they  were  ail  in  me;  nAwem
rather  inclined  to  imagine  tben  th
ruins  of  aome  wretched  lioittf,
which  IukI  aufiered  its  ovotlnv
15  or  SO  centuries  ago.  In  kMfe-
ing  over  the  large  congn^slii%
and  in  seeing  so  manj  deewt  ni
respectable  men  and  womoB^  jl
conducting  themselves  wltt  flii
greatest  decorum  and  proprieljyVB
have  often  said  to  ounrivei^ '  Gli
these  be  the  very  people  who  din
ticipated  in  the  horrid  scenesmA
we  have  heard  described  ?—«j,
the  very  people  who  mnidendthiir
children  with  their  own  hairii;
who  slew  and  offered  human  ae^
fices;  who  were  the  very  peipelM*
tors  of  all  these  indescribable  ahh
minations?  To  realize  the  fact ii
almost  impoadbie.  Bot^  thnf^
6  or  7  years  ago  they  acted*
if  under  the  immediate  and  ud^
strained  influence  of  the  most  ■§•
llgnant  demons  that  tlie  hiaw
regions  could  send  to  torment  te
world,  we  view  them  now  in
their  houses,  in  their  vsikMi
meetings,  and  in  their  daily  avee^
tions,  and  behcdd  them  dMetlj  end
in  their  right  minds,*  "

On  the  subject  of  the  instmetioi
enjoyed  by  tlie  natives,  la  coi-
nexion  with  the  Raiatean  misrio^
the  deputation  observe — *'i^ll  thi
people,  both  adults  and  chil^ro^
who  are  capable  of  it,  an  in  a
stete  of  school  instruction.  May
of  the  men  and  women,  and  not  a
few  of  the  children,  can  lesd^
fluently  and  with  accuncyy  tha»
portions  of  the  sacred  Soiptiiies
which  have  been  translated,  and  of
course  all  the  elementary  boola;
the  rest  read  in  one  or  other
of  these  elementary  boola;  maqr
can  write,  and  several  cypher.-
Such  is  the  state  of  tilings  and
such  is  the  system  of  improvemnt

404


RAI

fpiatli  BOW  in  operation,  thataota
^riR^  child  or  grown  person  can
gfwiifn  in  this  island  unable  to  read.
^Pbe  children,  comprising  3^0  boys
find  gliiU,  assemble  every  morning
aX  sniuriie  for  instruction  in  a  large
jpoue erected  for  the  purpose;  while
tiw  adults  assemble  at  the  same  time
^  the  chapelj  Saturday  and  Sabbath
fmnlngs  excepted,  to  read  and  re-
JiMit  their  catechisms.  After  the
idiool  hours  are  over,  which  is  about
8  o'clock,  they  go  to  their  several
i^tcupations  for  the  day."

Qt  the  progress  of  civilization  in
lUifttea,  they  give  the  following
Account: —

**  Around  the  settlement,  in  both
fkt  valleys,  the  ground  is  enclosed,
to  a  great  extent,  with  bamboo
Mces.  In  these  enclosures,  which
fn  of  different  dimensions,  tobacco
sugar-canes  are  planted ;  and
tobacco  and  sugar  the  people
learnt  to  prepare  for  the  mar-
The  specimens  which  we
pne  seen  of  both  were  of  the  best
^nality,  and,  we  conceive,  cannot
^exceeded  by  similar  productions
In  any  country.  Both  g^w  here
In  great  luxuriance.  The  tobacco
froduces  three  or  four  crops  in  the
jvdx  $  sugar  something  more  than
ana.  The  people  have  also  learnt
lb  make  salt  irom  sea-water,  by
jboiliDg  it  in  large  iron  pans :  that
m  have  seen  is  equal  to  the  best
&D§^ish  salt  Here  is  not  only  a
.i«gar-mill,  but  also  a  smithy ;  and
jnme  of  the  natives  do  common
jobsy  such  as  making  hinges,  «fec.
feiy  well.  Most  of  the  men  can
work  at  carpentry;  and  we  have
nen  some  chairs  and  other  articles,
■ttde  by  them,  which  have  greatly
niiprised  us.  In  fact,  they  begin
to  emulate  the  missionaries  in  their
bodes  of  living,  and  are  anxious  to
KMsess  ever>-  article  of  furniture
rhlch  is  necessary  to  enable  them
o  live  in  the  English  style.'*
<  Since  that  time  proq>erity  has
ttended   the  various  eflbrts  that


RAI

have  been  made.  Several  portkms
of  the  Scriptures,  and  other  works
have  been  translated.

The  members  of  the  church  ra-
pidly increase,  and  their  condiiet
continues  to  be  as  becometh  the
Gospel.

During  the  year  1886,  7  or  8
native  Christians  in  Raiatea  died
happily  in  the  Lord,  among  whom
was  Tahitoe,  one  of  the  principal
chiefis.  The  school  contains  4Q0
scholars.  Mr.  Williams  has  trans-
lated into  Tabitian  the  Assembly's
Shorter  Catechism,  and  has  in  huid
a  translation  of  the  Prophecy  of
Isaiah.

The  cocoa-nut  oil  contriboted
by  the  members  of  the  Raiatean
auxiliary  society,  for  the  year
]8Sd-6,  has  been  sold  for  300/.
sterling,  of  which  sum  80/.  was
subscribed  by  the  children  belong-
ing to  the  schools  of  the  station.
[See  Society  Islands.]

R AIVAIV AI,  a  group  of  islands
in  the  S.  Pacific  Ocean,  at  consi-
derable distance  from  each  other>
viz. :  Raiwtivaifltaroioafllimaiarm,
Rutui,  BuruHt,  and  l\ijmai.  The
inhabitants  resemble  those  of  Ta-
hiti, and  speak  a  similar  language.
Till  recently  they  were  ignorant
of  God,  gross  idolaters,  and  ad-
dicted to  crimes  common  to  such
a  state  of  ignorance  and  super-
stition. But  the  change  produced
calls  alike  for  wonder  and  gratitude.
The  Rev.  Mr.  Davies,  of  the
Zr.'if.  S.,  arrived  at  Raivaivai,where
3  native  teachers  labours,  on  the
4th  of  February,  1826.  Onthefcd-
lowlng  morning,  it  being  the  Sab-
bath, he  attended  an  early  prayer-
meeting,  and  found  a  tderably
larg^  congragati<H)  assembled.  The
worship  was  conducted  by  two  of
the  natives  of  the  island  (one  of
them  the  son  of  a  chief),  each  of
whom  read  a  chapter  in  the  Gos-
pels and  prayed.  The  congrega-
tion that  assembled  in  the  forenoon
consfeted  of  from  900  to  1000:


RAN

many  from  the  opposite  side  of  the
Mand  having  returned  home,  the
congregation  in  the  afternoon  was
much  snnaUer.  In  the  scImoI  be
found  17  of  the  natives  capable  of
reading  in  the  Tahitian  Gospels.
During  his  visit  he  preached  three
times  to  the  natives ;  held  a  meet-
ing with  the  baptized  adults,  in
number  122 ;  and  admitted  17  can-
didates, after  due  examination,  into
church-fellowship.  [See  Rimaiara,
Rurutttt  Tapnai,)

Rangoon;  a  fortified  city,  and
chief  port  of  the  Burman  Empire,
on  a  branch  of  the  Irrawaddy,  SO
m.  from  its  mouth,  and  6705.  E.
Calcutta.  E.  long.  96«  f)',  N.  lat.
Sd^  48'.  Population  30,000,  of  va-
rious nations.  Having  long  been
the  as}'lum  for  insolvent  debtors
from  different  settlements  of  India,
it  is  crowded  with  foreigners  of
desperate  fortunes,  who  carry  on  a
small  trade.  The  Exchange  exhi-
bits a  motley  assemblage  of  mer-
chants, of  Malabars,  Moguls,  Per-
sians, Parsees,  Armenians,  Portu-
guese, and  French,  who  are  per-
mitted to  enjoy  the  most  liberal
toleration  in  their  various  religious
creeds.  It  is  the  only  port  in  the
empire  where  Europeans  have
been  allowed  to  trade.

In  January,  1807,  the  Rev.
Messrs.  Chater  and  Mardon,  from
the  B.  M,  S.,  having  consented
to  undertake  an  exploratory  visit,
arrived  at  Rangoon,  and  were  re-
ceived in  the  most  friendly  man-
ner by  some  English  gentlemen,  to
whom  they  bad  been  recommended
by  a  friend  at  Calcutta.  They
were  also  treated  with  gpreat
civility  by  the  Shawbundar,  or  In-
tendant  of  the  port,  and  by  one  of
the  Catholic  priests,  who  resided  in
the  vicinity  of  the  town.  On  the
23d  May  they  returned  to  Seram-
pore,  and  expressed  their  most  san-
guine hopes  of  the  establishment  of
a  mL<«ion.  Mr.  Mardon,  however,
having  subsequently  dAcUued  the


RAN


underlakiiigy  on  Hm  pin  oC  Jtltoa
health,  Mr.  Felix  Carey  voholMiliii
his  lerviceBy  and  wai  ehoMK^
succenor.  In  Novenber,  MMMd
Chater  and  Caiey,  with  thdi  tUtt
lies,  left  Serunporoy  with  n»l
priate,  aflfectionate,  and  nHplg
instnictions,  and  Hm  aMMtfaiqlU
prayers ;  and  shortly  alter  Ui  ■■  K

Mh

H


\


rival,  Mr.  C,  wlio  had
studied  medicine  at  Cakat^ll-
troduced  Taeclnatlon  into  Bniih
and  alter  Inoculating  sevsnl  |»
sons  in  the  city,  was  sent  foe  ferti
Viceroy,  and,  at  his  order,  paoi-
ed  tlie  operation  on  3  of  Hi  dl-
dren,  and  on  6  other  penoni  rf  ti
family.

The  mlsrionarles  andtteb  teii-
lies  were  for  some  time  iafoMh
considerable  diAcnltj,  ionniAff
a  suitable  habitation,  and  dtoif
bread ;  hi  consequence  of  WMP  i
the  health  of  Mia.  ChatersMi.  ^
Carey  was  so  seiion^j  sAflH
that  tliey  were  obliged  to  vBtani
Serampore  about  the  mUdissf  Mi^
1808.

The  medical  skffl  of  Mr.  C^
procured  him,  however,  high  njfi'
tation  among  the  BonnsH^  ■!
also  some  influence  with  the  Vlp^
roy.  A  dwellingubooK  teti
missionaries,  and  ajplace  of  woiil^
were  erected  at  BMDgoan^  sadi
handsome  sum  was  sobscrlM  If
the  merchants  residing  in  the  m|P^
bouihood,  towards  the  eipMii
But  towards  the  end  of  1801^  Mb
Chatei  remarks,  "  So  Utile  lidlii-
tion  towards  the  tiiiogs  of  Ooiw
evinced,  even  bytbe  Eonpan
inhabitants,  tliat  tliong^  tiw^MV
chapel  had  been  cipened  tat  mt-
ship  on  3  RuccesslTe  Sabbattn^  lOt
an  individual  residing  in  tiie  ftatt
came  near  it."  At  tiba  saae  Hm
he  describes  the  aspect  of  aAinsi
very  gloomy  and  dlKonraging^  fkoB
the  Burman  government  bei^g  •■-
broUed  in  hostiUties  with  Ihs  Si-
mese,  and  tiba  ccrantiy  being  ii
^Gonsecfpence  inviAved  in  confiwi


RAN

on  afterwards  the  whole  town  of
iDffoon,  excepting  a  few  huts  and
B  Iraiises  of  the  two  principal
Seers,  was  completely  burnt  down ;
dihe  capital  of  the  empire  shared
thnilar  fate.  It  is  stated  by  a
fltish  captain,  who  happened  to
there  at  the  time,  that  40,000
WBSwere  destroyed;  and  before
'  came  away,  it  was  ascertained
at  no  fewer  than  250  persons  had
it  their  lives.  It  seems  to  have
«n  the  work  of  an  incendiary,  as
B  flames  burst  out  in  several  parts
the  city  at  the  same  time.  The
rty  the  royal  palaces,  the  palaces
the  princes,  and  the  public  buUd-
Of  were  all  laid  in  ashes.
The  general  appearance  of  things
m  became  worse  and  worse ;  and
ttie  summer  of  1811,  Mr.  Chater
BBorki— ''  The  country  is  com-
Btoly  torn  to  pieces,  as  the  Mugs
d  Rachmurs  have  revolted  and
Et  off  the  Burman  government;
d  the  Burmans  themselves  are
rming  large  parties  under  the
Herent princes.  Rang^oonisthreat-
md,  end  will  most  likely  be  at-
eked,  though  probably  not  till
ter  the  rainy  season.''  Soon  after
Ify  Mr.  Chater  relinquished  his
ition  at  Rangoon,  and  pitched  at
dumbo,  in  Ceylon,  as  the  scene
his  future  labours.
Mr.  Carey,  now  left  alone,  was
Mlly  employed  in  translating  the
tiiptnres  into  the  Burman  lan-
lage,  till  the  autumn  of  1 818,  when
I  Tisited  Seramporei  in  order  to
tt  one  or  two  of  the  Gospels  to
««,  and  to  consult  with  his  father
id  brethren  respecting  the.mis-
m.  At  Uie  end  of  November  he
turned  with  a  very  promising  col-
Bgue,  named  Kerr,  but  who,  in
■  than  18  months,  was  compelled
f  declining  health  to  go  back  to
»rampore.  The  differences  with
e  Siamese  having  been  adjusted,
id  the  Burman  government  re-
tablished,  Mr.Carey  was  ordered,
the  summer  of  1813,  to  proceed


RAN

to  the  court  of  Aya,  for  the  purpose
of  inoculating  some  of  the  royal
family,  by  whom  he  was  received
with  many  marks  of  peculiar  dis*
tinction.  Unhappily,  however,
though  Mr.  Carey  lost  his  wife
and  his  children, — the  family  being
wrecked  on  their  way  to  Bengal,  to
obtain  a  new  supply  of  virus  by
order  of  the  King,  he  was  so  en*
snared  on  his  return  to  Ava,  as  to
accept  the  appointment  of  ambas-
sador to  Calcutta,  for  the  purpose
of  arranging  some  differences  which
existed  between  the  two  govern-
ments. Thither  he  proceeded,  and
lived  in  a  style  of  Oriental  magni-
ficence :  but  his  connexion  with  the
Burman  government  was  of  short
duratton;  and  after  having  been
subsequently  employed  by  an  eest-
emRajah,he  returned  to  Serampore,
where  he  was  engaged  in  trans-
lating and  compilingvarious  literary
works  till  the  time  of  his  death.
The  superintendence  of  the  mission
was,  in  the  mean  time,  transferred
to  others,  of  whom  some  account
will  shortly  be  given.

In  1810,  the  Rev.  Messrs.  Prtt-
chett  and  Brain,  from  the  L,  M,  S,,
proceeded  to  the  Burman  Emplrei
but  the  valuable  life  of  the  latter
was  suddenly  terminated  soon  after
his  arrival.  It  was  the  wish  of  his
colleague  to  continue  there,  and  if
possible  to  proceed,  as  was  origi-
nally intended,  to  Ava,  the  capital,
to  commence  a  mission;  but  the
distracted  state  of  the  country,
owing  to  the  war  with  the  Siamese»
rendmd  it  absolutely  impractica-
ble. Rangoon  seeined  to  be  the
only  place  in  vfbich.a  missionary
could  reside  with  safety ;  and  as  8
of  the  Baptist  brethren  continued
at  that  station,  and  Mr.  Pritchett
was  earnestly  requested  by  the
mlMionaries  at  Vizegapatam,  who
greatly  needed  his  assistance,  to
come  to  them,  he  judged  it  his  duty
to  comply  with  their  widies.

The  Rev.  A.  and  Mrs.  JudMii>


KAN  RAN

from  tln»  -•/.  //.  U,  h\  M.,  arrniNl  at  j  previously  to  which,  Mr.  and  Mr*.

RnitifiHiit  ill  lHi:{,!i?iii  tomtit  II  home  .  Iloiiirh  had  sailed  for  Bensfal,  and

nt  tin'  iiii'J^HHi  lu»UM'  iTtM't.'d  by  Mr.  '  in   Unit  or  five  weeks  Messrs  Col-


«'lmi«T.     Tht'  .-i^jMMt   nl  ;itViiir<  nt
lli.-tt  |MTioii  \va<  truly  lUMOiintifintr.
Mr.  Miiil  Mr^.  .I.n|i|>ii»"l  thiMiiM'l%»»s
with  imiili  ;i«"»iil«iiiy  \o   tin*  '•.tiiity
ot"   tli»'  i;iii:r'i!iir«*,  ^'M*!!  al'ttT  tlieir
arrival,  ami   IimiihI   i!   atl«'inli'd  by
many  tllHirulUfs;  tln'y  Mic<v»»dt»d,
h«»\v«'vi'r,  ill  |'vt»t»arin:;  a  ratorhiMii,
and   aNo  a  •iiiminary  o(  rbri>tian
d<N'triiii"<,  whirh  tin*  pn'^eiit  n(  a
jin'-s-i  and  ty|u»<i  fr«»iii  tin*  S<*rain|»ori*
bn«tlir«'n  »'nabli'«i  tlii'iii  siibM»«|iKMitly
ti»  print,  by  tin*  av^ivtaiiri*  t»t"  Mr.
IliHit^h,  who  with  Mrs.  II.  joiin^d
th(Mn,  <)(tol>tT  I.'n  IHIH.     Findiiiir
atU»r  this  that  they  had  papor  siitli-
ritMit  lor  an  (Miition  o!"  h(m»  iM)pi<*<  of
St.  Matthew's  (Mispid,  they  roni-
nuMicrd.    ill  1H17,    this  important
work,  as  introductory  to  a  tarirer
edition  «»lthi»  wholi^New'IVstaintMit.
Mrs.  J.  was,  iilso,  able  to  rollert
from  1.)  to  20  females  on  the  Sabbath,
who  were  attentive  while  she  read
and  explained  the  Scriptures;  and
4   «H'  .')   chiMren    committed    the
cHterhism  to   memory*,    and   often
repeated  il  to  eacli  titlier.     In  I)e-
ri'inber,  l*i*22.  Mr.  J.,  for  the  reco-
very of  his  health,  and  hopin<jr  to
obtain  the  assistance  of  one  of  the
Arrakanese     lalelv    convertwl     at
(.'hittatronir,  took  a  voyage  to  sea.
SiMUi  after  his  departure,  some  cir-
oumstances  occurred  which  threat-
ened the  destruction  of  the  mission ;
but,  happily,  the  evil  was  averted.
Not  till  ,luly,  however,  diti  any  in-
tellit^ence  arrive  respect iiitr  Mr.  J.
The  captain  of  the  vessel  in  which
he  sailed  stated,  on  his  return,  that
he  was  not  able  to  make  ('hitta-
i^onir ;  that  after  beinuf  tosse«l  about
in  the  bay  for  «i  months,  he  made
MiLsulipatam,    a    port     north     of
Madras,    on   the  coa>t  :  an«l   that
Mr.  .1.  left  the  ship  immediately
for  Madras,  hupin<r  to  find  a  pas-
snii;o  homo  from  thence.     About  a
month  ftft<?r,  he  reached  IVau^oou  *,


man  and  Wheelock  arrived  as  co-
adiutors.     A  piece   of  crroundwis
now  purrhnsedy  and  a  place  of  wor-
ship  was  erected.     On  April  4th,
1HI»,  Mr.  J.   savs— "To-day  the
buiblinir  of  the  Zayut  hein^  suiS-
ciently  advanced  for  this  purpov  I
called  toirether  a   few  i>eople  who
live   nroiitid   us,    and  commenced
public  worship  in  the  Biirnian  lan-
irnaire.       I     say    commeneeflf  for
thouirh  I  liave  ifreqiiently  read  and
di>coiirspd  to  the  natives,  I  have
in»ver  before  conducted  a  course  of
exercises  which  de<terveil  the  name
of  puhlic  worship,  accordlnsf  to  the
usual  acceptation    of  that  phrase
anion,fl^  (Christians;  and   tliouirb  I
becran  to  preach  the  Gospel  as  soon
as  I  could  speak  inteliifribly,  I  have
thouirlit  it  hardly  becomniflT  to  apply
the  term  preach in.cr  (since  it  has
acquired  an  appropriate  mearuDi;
in  modern  use)  to  iny  imperfeet,
desultory  exhortations  and  conver-
sations.  The  contrregation,  to-day,
consisted  of  fifteen   persons  only,
besides  children.      Much  disorder
and  inattention  prevailed,  most  of
them  not  having  been  accustomed  to
attend  Burnian  worship.    May  tbr
Lord  grant  his  blessing  on  attempt^
made  in  u:reat  weakness  and  nmler
great    disadvantages,    and  all  the
glory  will  be  Hisr"

Aft(*r  Mr.  Judson  had  thus  com-
menced public  preaching,  Mrs.  J.
resumed  her  female  meetings,  which
were  given  up,  from  the  scattereil
state  of  the  Burmans  around  tbem,
at  the  time  of  their  government
difficulties.  They  were  attended
by  thirteen  young  married  women.
<)iie  of  them  said,  she  appeared  to
herself  like  a  blind  person  just  be-
ginning to  see.  And  another
afiirmed  that  she  believed  in  Christ,
prayed  to  liim  daily,  and  a«ked
what  else  was  necessary  to  make
V\i<et«.  xt&^VdvEciQle  of  Christ?    ''I


i


RAN

totd  her/'  says  Mrs.  J,  ''she  most
:W>t  only  say  that  she  believed  in
jCSffist,  but  must  believe  with  all
heart.''  She  again  asked  what
some  of  the  evidences  of  be-

„ ^  with  the  heart  ?    I  told  her

ike  manner  of  life  would  be  changed;
tjatone  of  the  best  evidences  she
CQwld  obtain,  would  be^  when
dtiiert  came  to  quarrel  with  her,
^ooA  use  abusive  language,  if,  so  far
fmok  retaliating,d)e  felt  a  disposition
fO  bear  with,  to  pity,  and  to  pray
§att  them.  The  Burman  women
■re  particularly  given  to  quarrel-
lb^  ;  and,  to  refrain  from  it,  would
ve  a  most  decided  evidence  of  a
(Bluuige  of  heart.  About  this  time
^  missionaries  had  some  interesting
vlritors ;  among  whom  were  Moung
K^>  described  as  thirty-five  years
.aU— no  family— middling  abilities
—quite  poor — obliged  to  work  for
|rii  living, — ^who  came,day  after  day,
to  hear  the  truth;  Moung  Shway
pOy  a  yovng  man  of  pheasant  ex-
terior and  of  good  circumstances,
and  Moung  Shway  Doan.  On  the
Oth  of  June  the  following  letter,
wliich  Moung  Nau  had  written  of
Uf  own  accord,  was  read  and  con-

''I,  Moung  Nau,  the  constant
leeipieiht  of  your  excellent  favour,
approach  your  feet.  Whereas  my
kjUord's  three  have  come  to  the
•cguntry  of  Burmah,  not  for  the
parpose  of  trade,  but  to  preach  the
leligion  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of
the  Eternal  God,  I,  iaving  heard
and  understood,  am,  with  a  joyful
mind,  filled  with  love.

**  I  believe  that  the  Divine  Son,
Jesus  Christ,  suffered  death,  in  the
place  of  men,  to  atone  for  their
tins.  Like  a  heavy  laden  man,  I
ieel  my  sins  are  very  many.  The
punishment  of  my  sins  I  deserve  to
laffer.  Since  it  is  so,  do  you,  Sirs,
consider,  that  I,  taking  refuge  in
the  merit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
and  receiving  baptism  in  order  to
become  his  disciple,  shall  dweU,


RAN

one  with  yourselves,  a  band  pf  brob-
thers,  in  the  happiness  of  heaven,
and  (therefore)  grant  me  the  ordi-
nance of  baptism.

[At  the  time  of  writing  this,  not
having  heard  much  of  baptism,  he
seems  to  have  ascribed  an  undue
efficacy  to  the  ordinance.  He  after^
wards  corrected  his  error ;  but  the
translator  thinlcs  it  most  fair  and
impartial  to  give  the  letter  just  as
it  was  written  at  first.]

*'  It  is  through  the  grace  of  Jesua
Christ,  that  you.  Sirs,  have  come,
by  ship,  from  one  country  and  con-
tinent to  another,  and  that  we
have  met  together.  I  pray  my
Lord's  three,  that  a  suitable  di^
may  be  appointed,  and  that  I  may
receive  the  ordinance  of  baptism.

^*  Moreover,  as  it  is  only  since  I
met  with  you.  Sirs,  that  I  have
known  about  the  Eternal  God,  1
venture  to  pray,  that  you  will  still
unfold  to  me  the  religion  of  God,
that  my  old  disposition  may  be  de-
stroyed, and  my  new  disposition
improved."

The  missionaries  having  been  for
some  time  satisfied  concerning  the
reality  of  his  religion,  voted  to  rer
ceive  him  into  church  fellowship  \
and,  on  the  following  Sabbath,  Mr.
Judson  remarks,  <'  After  the  usual
course,  I  called  him  before  me,
read,  and  commented  on  an  appro-
priate portion  of  Scripture,  asked
him  several  questions  concerning
his/atVA,  hopey  and  love,  and  made
the  baptismal  prayer ;  having  con-
cluded to  have  all  the  preparatory
exercises  done  in  the  Zayat.  We
then  proceeded  to  a  large  pond  in
the  vicinity,  the  bank  of  which  is
graced  with  an  enormous  jmag^  of
Gaudama,  and  there  administered
baptism  to  the  first  Burman  con-
vert. This  man  was  subsequently
employed  by  the  missionaries  as  a
copyist,  with  the  primary  design
of  afibrding  him  more  ample  m«
struction.    In  November,  %  otber

NW  V»


RAN

vho,  with  his  family,  had  lived  near
them  for  M)me  time,  had  regularly  at-
tended worship,  had  learned  to  read,
though  60  years  old,  and  a  remark-
ably moral  character ;  and  Moung
Thahlah,  who  was  superior  to  the
generality,  had  read  much  more,
and  had  been  for  some  time  under
instruction, — applieil  by  means  of
Ter>'  interesting  statements  for  bap-
tism, which  was  administered  by
their  particular  request  at  sun-set,
November  7,  and  a  few  days  after,
the  3  coiivertsheld  the  first  Burman
prayer- meeting  at  the  Zayat  of
their  own  accord.

In  the  miilst  of  these  pleasing
circumstances,  Mr.  \yheelock,who
had  long  been  unwell,  left  Ranfl^oon,
and  soon  afterwanis  died ;  and  so
violent  u  spirit  of  persecution  arose,
that  the  Znyat  was  almost  de-
serted, and  Mr.  Judson  and  Mr.
Colman  determined  on  presenting  a
memorial  to  the  young  King.  As
the  Emperor  cannot  be  approached
without  a  present,  the  missionaries
resolved  to  offer  one  appropriate  to
their  character — the  Bible,  in  6
volumes,  covered  with  gold  leaf,  in
Burman  style,  each  volume  being
enclosed  in  a  rich  wrapper.

After  un  anxious  and  perilous
voyage,  they  obtained  an  intro-
duction to  the  King,  surrounded
by  splendours  exceeding  their  ex-
pectation, when,  after  a  long  con-
ference, Moung  Zuh,  the  private
minister  of  state,  interpreted  his
royal  master's  will  in  the  following
terms : — "  In  regard  to  the  objects
of  your  petition,  his  Mojesty  gives
no  order.  In  regard  to  your  sacred
books,  bis  Majesty  has  no  use  for
them  :  take  them  away."  After  a
temporary  revival  of  their  hopes,
the  missionaries  found  that  the  po-
licy of  the  Burman  government,
in  regard  to  the  toleration  of  any
foreign  religion,  is  precisely  the
same  with  the  Chinese ;  that  it
js  quite  out  of  the  question,  whe-
ther any  of  the   subjecU  oi  \)^«


RAN

Emperor,  wbo  emlmee  a  rdlgiai
different  from  hk  own,  wUl  be
exempt  from  punlihment;  tai
that  they,  in  presenting  a  petttfon
to  that  effect,  had  been  gnlUj  of
a  most  efin^egioiui  blunder— n  n-
pardonable  ofience.

In  February,  they  xetonwd  to
Rangoon,  and  after  giring  te
three  disciples  a  full  undentudtag
of  the  dangers  of  tlieir  conditliM,
found,  to  their  great  deUgiit,  diit
they  appeared  advanced  in  seal  aod
energy  ;  and  vied  with  each  ofliei
\n  trying  to  explain  away  dUBcdlla^
and  to  convince  the  teachenftst
the  cause  was  not  quite  despente.

After  much  conaidemtioo  It
was,  subsequently,  resolved  ^
Mr.  Colman  should  proceed  imns-
dj^tely  to  Chittagong,  collect  .te
Arrakanese  converts,  who  ipetk  t
language  similar  to  the  Bumii,
and  are  under  the  govenunent  d
Bengal,  and  form  a  station,  t»
which  new  missionaries  mi^tfnt
repair,  and  to  which  his  fi^ev-
labourers  should  flee  with  those  of
the  disciples  who  could  leave  fbB
country,  if  it  shiould  be  rendend
rash  and  useless  to  continue  at
Rangoon  ;  and  that  Mr.  and  Mn.
J.  should  remain  there,  in  caie
circumstances  should  prove  man
propitious.

Private  worship  was  now  resnmed
in  the  Zayat,  the  front  doors  being
closed;  but  shortly  afterwards  it  wn
abandoned,  and  a  room  previou^y
occupied  by  Mr.  Colman,  wbo  died
soon  after  his  arrival  at  CiUttagoiig^
was  appropriated  to  this  purpose.
Inquirers  increased,  notwitlistuid-
ing  surroundbig  difficulties  and
prospective  sufferings,  and  five  per-
sons were  baptized.  Among  these
were  Mah  Men-lay,  the  principal
one  of  Mrs.  J.'s  female  c<»npaiiy,
and  Moung  Shway-g^ong,  a  teacher
of  considerable  distinction,  who
appeared  on  his  first  acquabitaaoe
(with  the  missionaries  to  be  half
^«\&\  veA  \iiaiM  «^'^\S&^  vid  wJio


RAN

had  for  a  long  time  engaged  in
disputation  with  them.  A  sixth
was  added  to  this  sacred  commu-
nity, after  the  missionaries  had
,  'visited  Bengal  in  consequence  of  the
stressing  state  of  Mrs.  J.'s  health.
Mr.  J.  now  proceeded,  assisted
hy  Moung  Shway-gnong,  in  the
xerision  of  those  parts  of  the  New
Testament  which  had  been  trans-
lated but  not  printed ;  and  recom-
menced occupying  the  Zayat.  |
Mah  Myat-lay,  sister  of  Mah
Men-lay,  was  baptized ;  and  on
July  3,  the  first  Christian  marriage
was  performed  between  persons  of
pure  Burman  extraction.

Mrs.  J.'s  malady  increasing,  she
was  conipelled,  in  August,  to  em-
bark for  Bengal  on  her  way  to
America,  and  her  husband  was  left
at  Rangoon  alone.    Two  attempts
were  made  upon  the  life  of  Moung
Shway-gnong,   but,  providentially,
he  escaped.    Moung  Thahlah,  the
second  convert,  expired  after  an
illness  of  19  hours.    Three  more
persons  were  baptized.      Mr.  J.
was  much  refreshed  by  the  arrival
of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Price ;  but  his  ex-
pectations' of  finishing  the  New
Testament     without    interruption
were  blasted  by  the  arrival  of  an
order  from  the  Kin^,  summoning
Dr.   P.    to    Ava,  on   account   of
his  medical  skill ;  and  on  August
23,  he  left  Rangoon  with  the  Dr.,
hoping  by  his  means  to  gain  some
footing  in  the  capital  and  the  pa-
lace.     Mr.  Hough    superintended
the  mission  in  the  interim.

In  Dec.  1823,  Mrs.  J.  returned,
and  proceeded  with  Mf .  J.,  who  had
during  her  absence  been  making
preparations  for  that  purpose,  to
Ava.  In  the  May  following,  the
war  broke  out  between  the  Bengal
and  Burmese  governments,  and
during  the  greater  part  of  its  con-
tinuance, Mr.  Judson  was  confined
in  prison  and  chains,  at  and  in  the
vicinity  of  Ava;  Mrs.  J.,  however,
remained  at  liberty^  and  wasper-


RAN

mitted,  though  under  difficult  cir-
cumstances, to  minister  in  some
degree  to  the  wants  of  her  suffer-  •
ing  husband.    At  the  close  of  the
war  she  returned  with  him  to  Ran-
goon ;  from  whence,  in  the  latter
part  of  June,  1826,  with  a  view
to  the  formation  of  a  new  mis*,
sionary  station,  they  proceeded  to
Amherst  Town, — a  place  which  had
been  selected  for  the  site  of  a  new.
town,  but  at  that  time  a  wildei>
ness,  with  the  exception  of  a .  few
bamboo  huts,  erected  for  the  ac-
commodation of  part  of  a  regiment
of  sepoys  and  a  few  natives.    Hav-
ing left  Mrs.  J.   in  this  place  as
comfortable  as  circumstances  would
permit,  Mr.  J.  returned   to  Ran-
goon,   and    proceeded    with  -the
envoy  to  Ava,  as  interi)reter.   Mrs.
Judson,  as  soon  as  was  practicable,
commenced  a  native  school,  which
consisted,  at  the  time  of  her  illness,
of  about  1 0  pupils.    But  after  an  in* .
termittent  fever  of  nearly  a  month's
continuance,  this  excellent  and  de-
voted wohian  closed  her  eyes  in
death,  in  the  absence  of  her  affec-
tionate and  zealous  husband.

Other  labourers  have  since  been
sent  by  the  Board  to  Burmab,
and  in  their  last  report  the  fol-
lowing general  view  of  the. hopes
and  prospects  of  the  mission  is
given : —

*'  In  view  of  all  the  circum-
stances connected  with  the  late
war  in  Burmah,  and  the  conse*
quinces  resulting,  from  it,  the
Board  feel  justified  in  expressing
their  belief,  that  it  has  widened
the  sphere^  of  their  labours  incal-
culably ;  and  rendered  the  pros-
pect of  success  on  the  part  of  their
missionaries  far  greater  than  be-
fore, particularly  within  the  con-
quered provinces.  They  may  now
have  free  access  to'the  people  with-
out fear,  and  employ  aU  the  means
of  instruction  within  their  reach ;
they  may  preach,  and  establish
schools  in  which  the  prinoiplesof


RAP

Cliristlanity  shall  be  taaght;  fhe
natives  may  also  Inquire,  read  tbe
Scriptures,  hear  the  Gospel,  and
embrace  it,  without  being  sub-
ject to  penalty  or  oppression.  Here-
tofore it  has  been  otherwise  :
when  the  missionaries  preached,
it  was  with  caution ;  and  when  the
people  wished  to  hear  and  converse
on  religfion,  they  were  often  de-
terred by  the  certain  displeasure
of  their  rulers.  If,  then,  some-
thing was  accomplished  for  the
cause  of  Christ  under  former  dis-
advantages, how  much  more  may
be  anticipated,  now  these  hind-
rances are  removed !  Divine  Pro-
Tfdence  has  committed  this  field  of
labour  to  the  American  Baptists  j
and  it  now  calls  on  them,  in  a  most
impressive  manner,  for  increased
and  vigorous  exertions,  as  sevend
new  stations  ought  soon  to  be  com-
menced and  sup))orted."  [  See  Ar^
racan  and  Burman  Empire.  ]

RAPA,  or  OPORO,  one  of  the
Society  Islands.  S.  lat.  27°  60*,
W.  long.  144».

In  July,  1825,  the  Snapper  cut-
ter, belonging  to  the  chief  Tati,
and  commanded  by  Capt.  J.  Shout,
sailed  for  the  Paumotus,  with  in-
struction, if  wind  and  circumstances
would  permit,  to  call  at  Rapa,  and
to  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  state
of  the  island,  and  the  disposition  of
its  inhabitants.

On  the  13th  of  September,  1826,
Captain  Shout  returned  to  Tahiti,
and  informed  Mr.  Davies^  that
when  he  arrived  off  Rapa,  a  few
of  the  natives,  in  the  first  instance,
came  on  board  the  cutter ;  but  a
considerable  number  of  canoes
afterwards  putting  off,  he  deemed
it  prudent  to  put  to  sea  forthwith  ;
— that  at  the  moment  of  his  sailing,
two  of  the  natives  of  Rapa,  named
Paparua  and  Aitaveru,  remained
on  board  the  cutter ; — that  he  had
brought  them  with  him  to  Tahiti ;
— ^that  they  had  been  treated  with
kindness,  both  by  hltiii^etf  and  bis


RAP

crawon  thefo^agej — and  ttitii
was  dedtoos  ib^  iiioiild  iMMe'te
a  time  under  the  eaie  dftheddp^
TatI,  and  the  miaiioiiaiieii  ia
order  that,  dioold  tbey  retaim  ft
Rapa,  they  might  go  with  fine»>
able  improHioiia  on  their  wSaoikf  ii
reference  to  the  TahtOafti  and  the
ndsiionaries.  Hemoreofer  ifito^
that  as  he  bad  learned,  during  fta
voyage,  that  their  isUnd  eonWari
sandal-woody  it  wiaa  hit  faitBottoi^
in  a  short  time,  to  go  fhoiaftra
cargo  of  that  artide ;  when  the  w-
tives  of  Rapa  wcnild  have  aa  vjh
portunity  of  returning  to  ftn
country.  In  parsaance  ef
representationSy  the  atraiigeiB
invited  to  take  np  their  leridBan  i
with  Tati.  During  their  vi4
which  extended  to  8everalweelii»
they,  however,  ment  thegreatv  ^A
of  every  day  Airith  Mr.  BavleL  irito
took  them  to  the  miirion  wmkf
gave  them  boolu,.  and  tangiitttHh  ^
the  alphabet.  They  were  aha
present  at  the  meetings  for  paUi
worship,  d;c.

On  the  87th  of  Septonber,  m
Snapper  again  sailed  for  Riptf
having  on  board  the  two  nafiieiaf
that  island,  accomi>anled  Inr  taa
Tahitians,  named  Hota  and  Nea^
members  of  Mr.  Daviea^  chmc^
who  had  often  exprened  their  d»-
sire  to  be  sent  out  as  teaebn
to  other  islands.  The  Tahiffani
were  supplied  with  a  varic?^  flf
useful  articles,  as  presentip  to  tie
chiefs  of  Rapa.  Their  object  b
the  first  instance,  was  to  see  tts
country,  to  ascertain  tfie  mottte
and  character  of  its  inhabitasfe,
and  then  return  to  Tahiti.

On  their  arrival  at  itana,  ttej
met  with  a  kind  reception  noin  na
principal  chief,  ah  old  man  anleil
Teraau  (or  Teranga).  Tlie'  t#o
natives  of  the  island,  iHio  acoon-
panied  the  teachers^  wdre  wiB(*
comed  by  their  coontiTmen  with
no  small  joy,  as  tbojf  had  been
.  gjlven  uvi  as  dead  men*
\  va


RAP

a  and    Nene  remained   on
about  a  fortnight  (during  the
16  captain  and  men  belonging
cutter  were  engaged  in  pro-
sandal- wood),     and   were
Bred  in  the  light  of  friends  of
d    chief,    who,  as   well   as
natives,  entreated  them  to
with  their  wives  and  fami-
nd  reside  in  the  island,  to
them  the  good  things  Xhoi
known    at  Tahiti;   and,  as
NQxe  no  large  trees  in  Rapa,
d  to  the  erection  of  a  place
ship,  they  were  requested  to
with  them  the  requisite  tim-
ir  that  purpose,  from  Tahiti,
tie  teachers  engaged  to  do.
the  return  of  the  teachers  to
,   several  meetings   of  the
of  Paparawere  held;  and
at   length   determined,  in
xence  with  the  wish  of  the
def,  that  the   two  teachers
return,  with  their  wives,  to
to  instruct  the  people  there,
panied  by  two  other  Tahi-
Mahana  and  Pauo  by  name,
r  them  intelligent  men,  and
ent  in  their  Christian  pro-
;  the  former  as  a  school-
and  a  cultivator,  the  latter,
an  ingenious  man,  as  a  boat-
',  <fec.

Tahitians  were  examined
proved  at  a  public  meeting
,  Papara,  at  which  several  of
ssionaries  were  present,  and
afterwards  solemnly  desig-
to  the  work  to  which  they
voted  themselves,
y  were  furnished  by  Tati,
16  members  of  the  church,
various  useful  articles  for
$lves;  and  also,  as  presents
)  natives  of  Rapa,  a  supply  of
g-books  and  portions  of  the
ires,  cfec,  with  shrubs  for
ig.  They  were  likewise
»d  by  the  congregation  with
onsfor  the  voyage,  and  posts
fters  for  a  chapel.
Davies  was  requested  by  his


RAP

brethren,  the  missionaries,  to  ac-
company, the  teachers  to  Rapa;.
and  as  Mr.  Bourne,  on  his  voyage
in  182^,  to  the  islands  S.W.  and  S.,
had  not  been  able  to  visit  those  of
Raivaivaiand  Tupuai,  it  was  agreed
that  Mr.  Davies  should  afterwards
proceed  thither.

On  the  16th  of  January,  182T,
Mr.  Davies,  accompanied  by  the
teachers,  went  on  board  the  brig
Macquarie,  which  arrived  off  Rapa
on  the  24th  of  the  same  month  ;
when  Mr.  Davies  and  his  com-
panions were  grieved  to  hear  that
the  old  chief,  Teraau,  was  dead.
As,  however,  Koinikiko,  his  son,
and  other  members  of  the  family,
were  favourable  to  the  object  in
view,  they  went  on  shore  on  the
27th,  and  the  teachers  were  shortly
settled  on  a  pleasant  and  convenient
spot  of  land  belonging  to  Koinikiko,
the  young  chief.  They  immediately
proceeded  to  erect  for  themselves
dwelling-houses;  in  which  work
they  were  assisted  by  Mr.  Davies,
the  natives  from  Eimeo,  and  by
Koinikiko  and  his  people.  The
site  of  the  proposed  chapel  was
also  fixed  upon.

The  29th  of  January,  1827,  being
the  Sabbath,  Mr.  Davies  preached
on  shore,  and  afterwards  adminis-*
tered  the  Lord's  Supper  to  the  Ta-
hitian  Christians.  The  teacher^,
Pauo  and  Mahana,  and  the  crew  of
the  Macquarie,  attended;  also
some  of  the  chiefs  of  Rapa,  who
viewed  the  service  with  silent  amaze.

It  afforded  Mr.  Davies  great
satisfaction,  before  he  left  Rapa,
to  observe  that  Koinikiko,  and
another  chief  named  Koenga,  who
appear  to  Be^the  chief  men  of  the
island,  manifested  a  friendly  dis*
position  towards  the  teachers.

Mr.  Davies  describes  Rapa  a^
greatly  resembling  the  interior  of
Eimeo,  which,  had  Rapa  the  addi-
tion of  a  border  of  low  land,  would,
he  says,  nearly  equal  it  in  extent.
Mr.  Davies  supposes  the  nunber  of


RAR

inliahiinnt«  fin  Rnpn  to  he  about
:2(M)U;  ilicir  (*(iiiipl(*\ioii  i<  diirkt'r
than  that  of  the  Tahitian<,  but
tln»ir  IfaturiN  am  vitv  Mmilnr;
lh«»ir  sinMT>litio!K  ri*"»»«iiiM»»  those
whicli  toriiiLMly  |iri'vaiIiM!  in  Fuhiti,
hut  i?i  a  ruilcr  lonn.  whhout  the
|iani<!i'  aihl  ^hiiw  of'  the  hitter.
TluMi-  l.iiii::uatr«*  Is  a  iliah'ft  of  tlu»
l*(ihiu'<'ian.  When  tin*  Snapper
fiT^i  \Mti>il  the  i^hind,  tlie  inhabit-
ant.'. \MT«'  all  without  clothiiii?;  hut
when  it  returneii witli  theTahitians,
in  Septeniher,  many  had  hei^un  to
attire  theiUMdves,

KAROTOXdA,  n  larire  and
piipMlou<<  island  in  the  S.  Paridc
Orean»  hidiujijinir  to  a  crroup  of  7
nu>re,  whieJi  lie  S.  W.  of  the  So-
f'iet\  Ulatids,  between  W,  Umfr.
l.-.v-  a'ld  ]iW\  and  S.  hit.  10"  and
:Ji".  Four  of  the<e  are  verv  nu-
merouslv  iiihahitei).  InlS2.'i,  two
missionaries  of  the  Soeietv  Islands
visitiHllhenj»stationeii  native  teaeh-
ers  on  1  -  -vi/„  j-IHnhtkpy  on  whieh
teaeliev<  liad  Imm'II  settled  before,
Alftnfr,  Mifiaro,  an«i  liarofo/t^a.
The}  per>uMt!ed  the  Kinu:  of -/////,
where  teacher'*  had  also  been
plaeed,  to  sail  with  them  to  Matttc
and  Mtftdro,  two  adja<'ent  islands,
of  which  he  is  aUo  Ivintr«to  use  his
intliience  in  estahlishinu:  teachers
therr.  •' lie.  came  j>n  lioard/'  say
the  nii'jsiotjaries,  "abitroted  idola-
ter ;  he  was  induced  to  embrace  the
true  wonl,  to  u.<e  his  influence  in
overt hrowinc:  the  adoration  of  aijes
at  the  two  islands,  and  returns  to
his  own  with  a  full  determination
to  do  the  same  there.''  They  also
prepared  the  way  for  the  establish-
ment of  t«Nichers  i\i  MaN^cfa,  one
of  the  ujroup.  In  several  of  these
islaniis,  chapels  have  been  erected.

The  wlu)Ie  of  the  inhabitants  of
Rarotonjra,  who.se  number  is  cal-
culated io  be  between  0  and  7000,
have  eudiraced  Christianity;  and
their  principal  idol  has  been  sent  to
this  country,  and  deposited  in  the
Z.  Af,  >S.'s  museum.    livCimUcide


RAW

I  htL%  ceased.  A  chapel,  240  feet  fay
I  42,  has  been  erected,  and  numerous
plastered  dwelling-houses  (indud-
irtfr  one  for  the  teachers,  90  feet
by  30),  have  been  built.  The  mis-
sion-hoiLse  is  furnished  with  lofss,
chairs,  tables  &c.,  all  of  natire
manufacture.  The  people  are  in-
dustrious  also  in  the  cultivatioQ  of
tiie  earth.  It  is  probable  that  Mr.
Pitman,  who  was  sent  out  to  flie
South  Sea  Islands  by  the  society,  ii
1824,  and  Mr.  Buzacott,  one  of  tlK
missionaries  who  have  accompt-
nied  Mr.  Nott  on  his  return  to
Tahiti,  will  be  eventually  stationed
in  this  island.

RAWADUNDA,  sometiaes
called  Choule,  a  large,  popidoui,
and  anciently  fortified  town,  W.
coa.st  Hindoostan,  about  SOm.S.
Bombay,  formerly  a  Portugnese
settlement,  but  now  in  possession
of  the  English.  Soon  after  tbe
Portupruese  came  to  this  cotmtty,
they  commenced  a  settlement,  ud
built  a  fort  in  front  of  the  town,
nearly  2 m.  in  circumference,  which
at  present  is  one  uniform  cocoa-nut
cnrove,  spreading  a  wide  and  me-
lancholy shade  over  the  mouldering
ruins  of  churches,  monasteries,  and
other  splendid  edifices,  once  the
superb  mansions  of  a  Christian
people,  but  now  inhabited  only  by
loathsome  reptiles.  Within  2  m.
of  the  same  spot,  the  ruins  of  Ma-
homedan  fortifications,  temples,
seraglios,  monuments,  drc,  shew
that  in  some  former  periods  another
empire  must  have  existed,  flourish-
ed, and  then  vanished  away.  The
inhabitants  are  mostly  Hindoos,
with  a  few  Jews,  and  a  small  rem-
nant of  Roman  Catholics.  This
was  formerly  the  residence  of  St.
Francis  Xavier,  who  removed  to
Goa  in  1640.

Tbe   j4merican  missionaries  at

Bombay  have  devoted  much  thne

to  the  distributing    of  books  and

tracts,  and    to   other  labours,  for

vthe  benefit  of  the  people  in  this


RED

town  and  its  vicinity.  In  1818,
"ibey  establislied  a  school  at  Rawa-
donda,  more  particularly  for  Jewish
children,  which  consisted  of  84
itholars  in  1824,  more  than  80  of
^rfaom  were  Jews.  The  mission-
aries have  named  this  the  Andover
School,  60  dollars  having  been  don-
tribnted  by  benevolent  individuals
in  Andover,  Massachusetts,  for  the
flopport  of  a  Jewish  school  under
tiieir  direction.     [See  Bombay,]

RED  RIVER  SETTLEMENT,
A  trading  establishment  of  the  Hud-
ton's  Bay  Company,  on  Red  River,
about  60  m.  S.  of  its  entrance  into
lake  Winnipeg,  which  is  defended
In^  Fort  Douglas.  It  was  formed
tn  1812,  and  contains  about  700
settlers,  besides  Canadians  and
fialf-breed,  who  are  very  numerous.
W.  long.  980,  N.  lat.  49«  40*.

In  1820,  the  Rev.  John  West,
chaplain  to  the  Company,  oiTered
his  services  to  establish  schools
among  the  numerous  tribes  of  In-
dians in  the  Company's  territory,
and  the  C.  M.  S,  placed  100/.  at
Ills  disposal  for  the  purpose.  He
immediately  opened  a  school  in  the
aetttement,  and  found  the  Indians
MUing  to  commit  their  children  to
hli  care  and  instruction.  A  school
house,  60  feet  by  20,  was  after-
wards erected,  which  is  also  used
as  a  place  of  worship .  The  success
of  Mr.  W.'s  attempt  encouraged
the  society  to  send  other  labourers
to  his  aid,  that  he  might  have  op-
portunity to  adopt  similar  measures
for  the  instruction  of  the  natives
in  the  vicinity ;  and  the  North  West
and  Hudson's  Bay  Companies  are
disposed  to  render  every  practicable
assistance  to  this  benevolent  enter-
prize.  Another  church  has  since
been  provided,  and  schools  have
been  opened.

In  the  midst  of  much  outward
distress,  it  appears,  from  the  mis-
sionaries' accounts,  that  their  mi-
rUstry  has  been  attended  by  many
encouraging  circumstances.  The
Sunday  services  at  both  churches,


RED

and  the  prayer-mating  tft  Imuge
Plain,  in  the  week,  are  well  at-
tended.

^'Ihave  had,"  says  Mr.  Jones,  in
Dec.  1825,  "  several  conversations
with  a  female  native  Indian  of  this
colony,  in  regard  to  her  partaking
the  Lord's  Supper.  She*has  been
most  assiduous  in  the  use  of  the
means  for  a  long  time ;  and  her
knowledge  of  divine  things  has
been  increasing  so  rapidly,  as  to
become  a  striking  proof  of  thegra-
cious  and  efficient  teaching  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  She  came  to-day
again  with  her  half-breed  daughter,
who  is  also  determined  to  forsake
the  world  and  follow  Christ.  I
could  not  help  shedding  tears  of  joy
at  this  additional  proof  of  diidne
approbation  afforded  to  my  labours,
T/us  is  the  first  real  Indian  who
has  become  a  communicant.

"  Last  fall,  an  Indian  came  to
the  settiement  for  the  benefii  of
medical  assistance,  having  had  his
hand  shattered  by  the  bursting  of  a
g:un.  He  is  a  very  extraoroinaTy
man — his  inquiries  concerning  our
religion  manifest  a  degree  of  kitel-
ligence,  which  would  make  him
shine  as  a  light  in  the  world,  if
illuminated  by  the  Gospel.  He  is
particularly  anxious  to  learn  all  that
he  can  before  he  returns  to  his
wilds  in  the  spring,  in  order,  as  hfi
says,  to  make  his  '  friends  and  chil-
dren more  wise.'

**  The  half-breed  young  woman
just  mentioned,  told  me  to-day,
that  she  does  all  that  she  can  to  in-
struct him,  but  finds  it  very  difficult
to  explain  herself  to  him  in  the
Indian  lang^uage  on  particular  sub-
jects. She  said,  *  I  was  never  so
anxious  to  speak  well  to  him  as  I
was  this  morning;  and  never  made
a  worse  hand  of  it :  my  sister  and
I  both  tried,  again  and  again,  but
could  not  get  on  well  at  all.'  '  My
young  friend,'  said  I,  '  what  were
you  so  anxious  to  tell  him  of?*
She  replied, '  I  was  endeavourin(^to
teUh\mwYi«X\]fcA  ^^'N\<Q!at  «qSk«^


RED

for  him,  and  wby  it  was  neressaxy
lliat  he  shuiiUI  »ifli*r  u  He  did,  in
onltT  to  Mve  jsinners.*  I  enrou-
riK^i'd  her  to  prucettl  in  her  iiwtmc-
tioiirt  with  him  nnd  bift  wife,  by  set-
linf(  before  her  thepromiu*s  of  God
which  Ixire  un  the  subject.  At
the  Mime  time  1  cuuld  not  but  think
bow  delighted  many  Christian
Imlies  in  EiiKlnnd  wouhl  lie  with
tliis  my  youni^  d i^riple.  Two  years
Af^i  this  youuf(  woman  was  ax  ig-
norant as  any  Indian  in  the  countr}*;
but  now  she  haji  learned  to  read  her
Kible,  and  has  found  a  Saviour
there,  tlic  swwtness  of  whose  love
malces  her  long  for  tlie  time  when
tier  )KHir  countrymen  sliall  partici-
pate  tiierein.  Let  the  friends  of
missiouii  tiien  ^i  on,  and  thrif  $hatl
rtHtp  if  they  faint  not ;  yea,  they  do
reap,  in  part,  already."

Of  the   Schitoh,  Mr.  Coclcran
thus  reports  In  July,  18i0 : —

<*  lioth  tlie  Sunday  and  weelc
day  schools  were  in  a  flourishing
Ntate  in  the  winter:  the  children
regularly  attended,  even  when  the
weather  was  very  stormy ;  but  since
the  latter  end  of  April,  we  have  all
liad  to  pass  through  many  vicissi-
tudes: from  the  3d  of  Alay,  the
settlers  have  been  so  dispersed,  that
it  is  imiM>ssihle  for  their  children  to
attend  the  schools.  We  h<)|>e  that
in  a  few  weeks  they  w  ill  be  more
collected,  and  then  our  schools  will
flourish  again.  The  Indian  boys
are  making  considerable  progress
in  knowledge  :  some  of  them  seem
to  attend  with  a  great  deal  of  sin-
cerity when  religious  instruction  is
delivered,  but  it  is  natural  to  them
to  give  close  attention  to  every-
thing."

The  desire  which  some  of  the
Indians  evince  for  the  instruction
of  tlieir  children,  appears  from  the
following  circumstance  mentioned
by  Mr.  .tones: —

"  Mr.  Ross  told  me,  in  reference
to  the  parents  of  the  boys  ivought
to  Red  River  school,  that  they  were
Fei;>' jiidignant  when  be  fii&\,  ii\.  \.\i^


RED

initance  of  Gofetporftimiwony  «»-
licitod  their  gfring  up  their  loni;.
and  asked  him  if  they  *  were  looM
upon  as  dogSyWillingto  giTe  aptiwir
children  to  go  tliey  Icnew  not  whi-
ther.' Bat  when  he  told  tliem  Hut
they  were  going  to  a  minister  of
religion,  to  learn  how  to  know  Md
serve  God,  they  said  lie  might  hue
'  Hundredt  of  ekitdren  m  am  kmai*9
time;*  and  hie  selected  two,  ImIm
the  sons  of  the  most  puweiM
chiefs  in  that  part  of  the  eon-'
tr)-.»

Mr.  Jones   thus    describes  ths
state  of  the  people : —

<<  A  striking  combination  of  eb-
cumstances  tends  at  present  ts .
throw  a  gloom  oyer  the  tempai^ .
interests  of  this  cokmy.  no
failure  of  the  huffSslo  in  the  hont- .
ing  grounds  conunenced  the  dl^
tress;  since  that  time,  theseisoB,
both  in  duration  and  aeverify,  hsi
exceeded  any  former  instance  of
the  kind  within  the  memory  of  fte
oldest  inhabitant.  The  setBm
have,  for  a  long  time,  been  dhUgBd
to  support  their  cattle  entirety  on
wheat  and  barley,  and  the  Gonsomp-
tion  has  been  so  gpreat  as  to  lewine
to  apprehend  a  scarcity  of  seed  for
tlie  soil.  The  season  is  getting  a»
late  as  to  render  it  probaUe  thatM
wheat  crops  can  be  expected  at  ill;
and  should  anything  occur  to  ]^
vent  the  prosi^erlty  of  barley  isd
potatoes,  we  shall  be  threatened
with  a  famine.  Many  prayers  and^
strong  cries  are  sent  up  to  Him  who
alone  can  sate,  and  I  hope  they  wOl
be  heard."

The  distress  occasioned  by  the
severity  of  the  weather,  was  In-
creased by  a  dcstructire  inuids-
tion  from  the  beginning  of  May
till  the  middle  of  June,  In  the
course  of  which  nearly  evexyiiiaoat
was  swept  away,  and  the  coimtiy
laid  under  water  as  far  as  the  eye
could  reach.  The  missionaries,  in
common  with  the  rest,  of  the  inha-
bitants, were  obliged,  lor  about  a
\  vno\i\^)  \o  \«v(«  ^a&ft\x.   dwellinpi


REE

^tbd  reside  in  tents  pitched  oh  a  high
MfM  of  ground.

Oik  the  12th  of  June,  Mr.  Jones
tflfttteji  in  his  journal, — "  We  are
WOfW  nearly  te-established  in  our
d#eUlngs.  The  parsonage  is  all  in
ttie  rbom,  and  served  for  a  church
^Mterday,  where  I  preached  twice ;
Jfr.  Cockran  having  gone  to  the
Mills,  where  the  people  are  still  en-
Mmped.  The  ploughs  are  at
work  to-day,  and  I  trust  that  we
Atll  yet  have  crops  of  barley
ihd  potatoes.  The  people  are
ilo^  drawing  near  the  banks  of
ihe  river,  to  the  site  of  their  old
habitations.  Thus  deliverance
KJomes  in  God's  own  time  and  way.
If  e  want  nothing  but  faith  to  rely
on  Him."

Mr.Cockran  subsequently  writes :
-7'*  Though  the  flood  has  destroyed
dmost  every  house,  yet  we  have
Mcaped  very  wonderfully :  we  have
received  very  little  damage ;  our
churches  are  standing;  our  dwel-
(faig-house,  with  the  schoolmasters'
uid  the  school-house,  are  left  alone ;
AS  it  were,  as  monuments  of  the  pre-
lerving  mercy  of  God."

REED  FOUNTAIN,  Little
tSTamaqualand,  S.  Africa,  about  40
m.  from  Lily  Fountain.

The  Rev.  Mr.  ArchbeU,  of  the
^,  M,  S,,  commenced  a  settlement
here  among  the  Bastard  Hottentots,
vHfh  the  approbation  of  the  Go-
j^mor,  in  1819  ;  and^n  connexion
nrith  that  at  Khamies  Berg,  it  has
B6quired  an  established  and  highly
Interesting  character;  abolishing
Paganism  among  the  people  of
the  tribe,  and  greatly  promoting
their  temporal  welfare.

At  Ihis  place  the  L,  M,  S,  has
bIso  a  station.  The  Namaquas  be-
longing to  it  keep  up  family  wor-
ship, morning  and  evening — read
the  Scriptures  diligently— and  when
the  catechist  is  absent  at  other
places,  perform  divine  service
themselves.

REGENT'S  TOWN,  formerly


REG

cAlled  Hoghrodi,  a  town  of  libe-
rated n^gr6&s,  Sierra  Leone,  W.
Africa,  5  m.  S.  S.  E.  Freetown,  in
a  vallejr  near  the  heights  of  the
Sierra  Lebne  mountains.

Its  situation  is  healthy  and  highly
romantic.  No  less  than  8  moun-
tains, covered  "tvith  ever^en  fo-
rests, rear  their  heads,  and  form  a
chain  around  the  settlement.
Streams  descend  from  the  various
clifi^,  and  lAake  a  large  brook,
which  runs  through  the  middle  of
the  town.  On  the  banks  is  a  mea-
dow for  the  cattle,  which  is  always
green.

In  1813,  this  then  uninhabited
spot  was  set  apart  for  tfte  recep-
tion of  Aegrdes  delivered  from
slave  ships  by  the  vigilance  of  Eng-
lish cruizers,  who  are  here  sup-
ported by  government  till  they  can
be  taught  to  earn  a  livelihood.

In  1816,  the  number  amounted
to  1100,  from  22  different  tribes-
some  of  them  barbarous  to  an  asto-
nishing degree ;  the  mixed  multi-
tude speaking  many  different  lan-
guages, having  no  medium  of
communication  except  a  few
words  of  broken  English ;  all  to-
tally destitute  of  principle,  disin-
clined to  civilization  and  improve-
ment, and  addicted  to  stealihg,  and
to  the  worship  of  devils.

In  1823,  the  number  had  In-
creased to  upwards  of  2000.  In  the
midst  of  the  habitations,  which  are
built  of  stone,  is  a  large  stone
church,  80  feet  by  64 ;  which  has
been  five  times  improved  and  en-
larged, to  accommodate  the  crowds
which  assemble  to  hear  the  word
of  God.

The  Rev.  W.  A.  B.  Johnson,
and  his  wife,  were  sent  from  EUig-
land  by  the  C,  M.  S.  in  1816,  and
were  appointed  to  this  station  by
the  colonial  government,  which  was
accountable  for  their  salaries.
They  sqpn  obtained  a  school  of
160  pupils,  from  the  rude  mass  of
people  in  the  i&t^mvDis  \]i<q&>  Vdl


REG

l^l*!,  there  were  only  12  cornmu-
iiicAiits,  and  ver}'  few  attended
liulilic  worship.

In  IH^I,  about  one- fourth  of  the
whole  populatiun  were  in  coinmu-
nioii,  and  nliout  one-half  were  in
the  huh  it  of  attending  morning  and
evening  prayerx  in  the  church ;
besides  which,  the  communictnts
regularly  conducted  family  worship.
An  Knglish  rnptnin,  who  vixited  the
town  ill  1H17  and  1821, writes — "In
contrasting  its  then  condition  with
the  present,  I  must  confess  a  just
description  cannot  be  given  without
XIh".  appearance  of  exaf^cration.
The  change  is  so  visible,  that  no
sceptic,  however  hardened,  but
must  confi>ss  the  hand  of  the  Lord
hath  done  it."

AlKUit  the  middle  of  1822,  the
comniunicantjt  had  Increased  to  375 ;
nnd  in  the  spring  of  1^23,  they
amounted  to  4.30.  The  whole  l>ody
of  the  people  formed  one  indus-
trious and  happy  conmiunityj  the
authority  of  the  word  of  God,  in
connexion  with  Christian  disci-
pline, almost  entirely  supersedinl
the  necessity  of  human  laws;  all
relics  of  former  superstitions  were
banished,  andllugrant  vice  and  pro-
faneness  were  almost  entirely  un-
known.

In  181K,  a  society  was  formed  for
the  relief  of  the  sick,  and  nn  Aux-
iliarj'  Missionary'  Society.  The
contributions  to  the  latter  amounted,
in  1823,  to  upward  of  1 1.^0  dollars ;
nnd  to  both,  during  one  year,  they
have  exceeded  500  dolhirs.  In
1823,  the  schools  embraced  1052
))upils.

The  ChrUtian  Institution,  esta-
blished at  Leicenter  Mouni(fin,  was
removed  to  this  place,  in  IS20,  with
the  design  of  rendering  it  a  semi-
nary, in  which  the  most  promising
youths  in  the  colony  may  be  edu-
cated for  schoolmasters  and  mis-
sionaries to  their  diflerent  tribes.

The   Rev.   Mr.  Johnson  died,
May  3,  ]  823,  much  esteemed  and


REG

lamented  by  the  eommiinity  iniiiBd
him,  and  especiaUj  fay  multitadei,
of  the  once  vretcbed  and  degraded
wns  and  daughters  of  Africa,iriMm
he  was  the  iostminent  of  bringliig.
out  of  darkness  into  mancflooi
light.  Various  laboureis  have  liBei.
that  period  been  employed  at  till,
place,  but  the  trials  that  hut
arisen  Invest  it  with  a  deep  nd
melancholy  interest.

The  Rev.  W.  K.  Betti  hm  R-
cently  been  appointed  to  the  chnn.
of  this  station,  and  entered  oi  tts
duties  of  it  the  end  of  Febranji
1826.  Tn  May,  David  Nosh  re-
moved from  Kissey,  andavistedii
visiting  the  sick,  and  the  cuecf
the  people,  and  took  the  ofeni^
of  the  bo}'8'  school.  In  the  msnge-.
ment  of  which  he  is  assisted  by
John  Essex  Bull,  a  native  teadM.
•  In  the  exercise  of  his  smiMry,
Mr.  BetU  has  met  with  litUa  en-
couragement.

Only  one  School,  and  that  fa
boys,  has  recently  been  leapt.  His
numbers  at  Christmas,  1826,  ven
—liberated,  48  \  living  with  ibeir
parents,  59:  Total  107.

Mr.  Beits  thus  speaks  of  tbetvo
classes  of  children  of  which  the
schools  now  consist : —

<«  The  behaviour  of  the  liberated
children  is  as  g^ood  as  can  reasoft-
ably  be  expected,  from  poor  chil-
dren, on  whose  tender  minds  the
first  impressions  were  made  liy  the.
errors  and  vices  of  heathenism.  .1
have  been  much  strucic  by  the  con-
trast between  these  children,  and
those  who  were  born  of  lUieiitri
parents  and  have  been  reared  in
the  town :  these  last  appear  moe
intelligent,  frank,  and  happy,  and
have  the  air  of  liberty  in  flieb
whole  deportment ;  while  the  othen
exhibit,  in  their  downcast,  timid,
and  suspicious  mien,  the  appear-
ance of  a  servile  and  €ippreBsed  racef

"  I  regret  that  there  ere  msny
nice  little  girls,  belonffing  to  tb9
I  people  of  the  town>  who  iiave  no
\  -  418


^  REG

instruction  ;  there  being  no  female
iiere  to  take  charge  of  a  girls'
iKhool.  A  little  while  previous  to
that  trying  dispensation  of  Provi-
dence, by  which  I  was  deprived  of
Ydj  dear  wife,  we  had  frequently  a
number  of  pleasant  little  children
ieome  up  into  our  piazza,  asking  us
to  let  them  come  to  school.  A
steady  and  clever  woman,  capable
of  acting  as  schoolmistress,  would
be  very  valuable."

At  Christmas,  David  Noah  gives
the  following  view  of  this  station : —
*'  The  regular  number  of  communi-
Cjunts  attending  the  Lord's  Supper
'at  this  time,  is  100  ;  and  their  out-
ward conduct,  for  the  most  part,  is
good.  The  general  attendance  of
the  people  at  divine  service,  on  the
Sabbath  day,  is  encouraging ;  but
on  week  days  very  few  attend,  in
^consequence  of  many  of  the  men
working  at  Freetown.  Daily  morn-
ing and  evening  service  is  regularly
kept,  and  divine  service  three  times
on  Sundays.  The  present  state  of
Regent  is  much  to  be  lamented.
We  are  now  as  sheep  without  a
ishepherd.  The  harvest  truly  is
plenteous,  but  the  labourers  are
few:  may  we  pray  that  the  Lord
will  be  pleased  to  send  out  more  la-
bourers into  his  harvest."

In  the  Christian InstitutionXbRTe
are  at  present  no  youths.

The  Rev.  C,L,f,  Haensel  has
lately  departed  for  the  colony,
having  tendered  his  services  to  the
iDciety  with  an  express  view  to  the
^education  of  the  African  youths.
The  frequent  losses  which  the  so-
ciety has  sustained,  in  the  removal,
by  sickness  or  death,  of  persons
employed  in  the  mission,  have  hi-
therto been  an  obstacle  to  the  effi-
ciency of  the  institution.  The
subject  has  for  some  time  occupied
the  attention  of  the  committee,  and
they  have  come  to  the  fixed  deter-
mination of  prosecuting,  by  all
means  in  their  power,  and  in  any
place,    whefher  in  Europe  or  in


RIM

Africa,  which  may  ultimately  prove
most  eligible,  the  education  of  in-
telligent and  pious  natives,  with  the
view  of  their  becoming  Christian
teachers  among  their  countrymen.
In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  they  have
placed  two  African  youths  under
the  care  of  a  clergyman  in  the  W,
of  England.

RIMATARA,  one  of  the  islands
of  Raivaivai,  in  the  S.  Pacific
Ocean,  in  which  idolatry  has  been
renounced.  Its  population  is  about
300.

This  island  is  capable  of  support-
ing a  great  number  of  inhabitants ;
but  it  has  hitherto  been  the  custom
for  the  women  to  labour,  while  the
men  did  nothing :  this  has  been  a
great  obstacle  to  marriage,  since  the
women  knew,  that  if  they  married,
they  should  have  to  work  hard.  The
teacher  from  the  L,  M,  S.  had  re-
peatedly attempted  to  alter  this  sys-
tem of  things,  without  success ;  but
the  people  had  promised  that,  should
a  missionary  visit  them,  they  would
pay  regard  to  his  advice  on  the  sub-
ject. "  On  hearing  this,  I  called,"
says  Mr.  Bourne,  who  visited  the
island, "  a  meeting  of  all  the  people,
and,  addressing  the  King  and
Chiefs,  represented  to  them  the
nature  of  the  obligations  which
they  had  laid  themselves  under  in
embracing  Christianity;  and  in-
formed them  that  the  females  in
other  islands,  whose  inhabitants
had  embraced  the  Gospel,  did  not
till  the  ground  and  prepare  the
food,  but  made  cloth,  bonnets,  hats,
(fee.  I  exhorted  them  to  have
compassion  on  their  wives,  and  not
make  them  work  like  slaves,  while
they  themselves  did  nothing  at  all.
I  then  called  on  each  chief,by  name,
to  give  his  opinion  on  the  subject:
the](^  all  spoke  in  answer ;  and  I  was
happy  to  find  that  there  was  not  a
single  dissentient  voice.  It  was
therefore  agreed,  that,  from  that
day  forward,  the  men  should  Qlant^
dig,  andpieipvra  \2tA  lwA>  vck^^^


RUR

wonien  make  cloth,  mats,  bonnets,
d;c.  The  vromen  who  were  pre-
sent manifested  thi>ir  joy  cm  the
occasion ;  but  I  cautioued  them
affuiiict  idlenesi,  and  to  take  care
that  they  tliem«*lves  had  good
clothes  and  boiuiets,  aiul  their  bus-
bands  good  bats.  One  of  the  Ta-
hitian  tearherK  of  the  L,  M.  5.,
who  laboured  here,  is  deceased.
Fanraoa,  the  sunivor,  earnestly
calls  tor  assistance.  The  work  of
the  liord  continues  to  prosper.  A
number  have  been  baptized,  all  of
whom  npiH'ur  firm  in  their  religious
profession.  Tliey  have  established
a  sninll  missionary  society.

KlRUTr,  one  of  the  islands  of
Uaivavai,  which  are  situated  about
500  ni.  southward  of  Tahiti.  The
renunciation  of  idolatry  in  this
island  was  unexpectedly  effected
in  tbe  manner  thus  described  by
the  missioiuuries  of  the  L,  Ai,  S.  at
Raiatea : —

"  We  one  day  i)erceived  a  strange
sail  at  sea,  which  made  towards
the  reef,  and  ap|)eared  to  be  deter-
mineil  to  hazard  running  on  it,
instt>ad  of  bearing  up  for  the  proper
harbour,— a  practice  resorted  to  by
the  natives  when  in  extremity.
Perceiving  their  imminent  danger,
the  chiefs  manned  our  boats,  and
went  off  to  pilot  the  strangers
safely  into  tbe  harbour.  When
they  arrived,  we  found  they  were
natives  of  the  island  of  Kurutu.
They  had  come  from  Maupiti,  and
touched  on  their  voyage  at  Bora-
horu,  but  could  not  get  in  for  the
contniry  wind.  They  had  been
drifted  about  at  sea  for  three  weeks  j
and  latterly,  without  either  food  or
water,  except  sea  water,  which
they  were  obliged  to  drink.  Con-
trary winds  drove  them  from  their
own  island ;  but  the  Lord,  to  whose
merciful  designs  winds  and  waves
are  subsenient,  protected  and
guided  them  hither.

"  They  were  exceedingly  as-
tonished at  the  dlffeience  ol  cvks-


RUA

tons  here,  'puticnUriy  la  ijechl
men  and  women  eatiiig  tq
and  the  Aieol  Society,  tEeir
and  eveiy  lascivioiis  ai
completely  put  away.  Wheq
heanl  of  the  new  syateni  of  ieUgk£
and  saw  tbe  people  wonhippiqgpf
llrlng  and  true  God^  tMj  ifiii
convinced  of  iti  propriety  iBli^
periorlty,  and  InunedlBte^  he^
to  learn  to  read*

«  The  chief,  with  hit  wife  pfa
few  others  went  on  ifaoR  d
Borabora.  .Mr.  OnaaoBd,  tb
nintonaiy  at  that  etatioa,  |p|i
every  attention  to  then  M^
their  short  atay ;  save  tbemhqak^
and  began  to  teach  them  to  ngfi
but  as  the  canoe  and  the  gvnv
part  of  the  people  were  at  Ralii:^
they  soon  followed.  Hief  mi
about  85  In  number,  men  ipj
women.  We  set  apart  a  nntrfj
time  for  their  instruction,  npf/Si
them  all  with  elementaiy  boqli%
and  gave  them  in  chaige  to  tar
deacons,  who  were  very  wa^
pleased  with,  and  diligent  in  ^
discharge  of,  their  new  GriOce.  lUk
language  being  somewhat  diifavH^
the  deacons  could  make  Ihemsrfii
understood  better  than  we  could.

**  Auura,  their  chief,  paid  yv-
ticular  attention,  as  wdl  as  hb
wife;  the  greater  part  of  the  ofi|ni
appeared  indolent.  He  wpe^sd
to  appreciate  the  worth  of  knov^
ledge,  and  the  value  of  tiie  goal
tidings  of  salvation ;  and  hiy  fB»
tions  upon  our  discourses  weiench
as  surprised  not  only  tbe  RaieteHi^
but  ourselves  also.  We  thln^  hi
possesses  a  very  acute  jn^gmeojty  ID
far  as  he  knows.  We  do  not  wblL
in  thus  speaking,  to  be  undentooi
that  we  believe  him  to  be  wha|
would  be  called,  in  En^apV  a
converted  character;  though  ne
have  indubitable  evidence  tfaaths
is  a  true  convert  from  idcdatiy  t9
Christlanit}'.  God  hath  cdledttsn
out  of  darkness  to  tlie  knowle^S*
oCbAE Son Jetus Christ.    Maytbi^


RUR

"oally  know  Hinii  whom  to
aright  is  eternal  life !
was  continually  expressing
cious  desire  to  return  to  bis
ind,  and  to  carry  to  his  poor
ymen  the  knowledge  he  had
ed  of  the  true  God,  and  his
esus  Christ;  expressing  bis
in  an  ailectionate  manner,
hen  he  got  back  he  should
try  few  left,  as  the  evil  spirit
.pidly  destroying  them,
pportunity  for  their  return  to
I  having  arrived,  from  the  brig
touching  at  Raiatea,  they
iccompanied,  at  their  own  re-
by  two  native  teachers.  From
subsequently  received,  it  ap-
that  immediately  after  the
of  Auura,  a  meeting  of  the
was  convened,  and  such
t  arguments  were  brought
rd  in  behalf  of  the  Christian
ID,  that  the  assembly  formally
id  the  abandonment  of  ido-
In  order,  however,  to  put
wer  of  their  gods  to  the  test,
agreed,  that  before  carrying
resolution  into  effect,  they
.,  contrary  to  their  established
,  eat  together  the  next  day,
npany  with  their  wives  and
en.  If  any  died  according
i  predictions  of  the  priests,
sserted  that  any  female  pre-
g  to  eat  either  hog  or  turtle,
y  other  person  venturing  to
on  a  sacred  place,  would  be
ibly  devoured  by  the  evil
then  they  would  not  re-
e  their  idols;  but  if  no  one
injured  they  would  destroy
all.  They  accordingly  met
i  time  appointed ;  and  after
'ing  their  appetites  without
ng  upon  themselves  the
ened  calamity,  they  pro-
1  to  the  demolition  of  the
s,  and  agreed  to  send  their
ss  deities  to  the  missionaries
iatea.

t  is  worthy  of  remark^  that
the  boat  with  Auura  and  the


SAB

native  teacheiS)  first  reached  th^
shore,  those  persons,  with  their
companions,  knelt  down  to  return
thanks  to  God  for  their  preser-
vation, not  knowing  that  the  spot
was  sacred  to  Oroo,  one  of  the
idols.  The  Rurutuans  said  imme-
diately. '  These  people  will  die  I'
The  party  also  ate  inadvertently
on  a  sacred  spot.  When  the
Rurutuans  saw  that,  they  said,
*  No  doubt  they  will  die  for  this
trespass  on  the  sacred  ground^'
and  looked  earnestly,  expecting
some  one*  to  have  swoUen  or  fallen
down  dead  suddenly;  but  after
they  had  looked  a  considerable
time,  and  saw  no  harm  come  to
them,  they  changed  their  minds,
and  said,  '  Surely  theirs  is  the
truth ;  but,  perhaps,  the  god  will
come  in  the  night  and  kill  them —
we  will  wait  and  see.'  One  man
actually  went  in  the  night  to  the
wife  of  the  chief  (Auura),  who
also  ate  a  part  of  a  hog  or  turtle
on  the  sacred  spot,  and  said,  '  Are
you  still  allvef '  When  the  morning
arrived,  and  the  Rurutuans  found
that  no  harm  had  happened  to  any
of  them,  they  became  exceedingly
disgusted  at  their  having  been  so
long  deceived  by  the  evil  spirit."

It  appears  from  a  recent  commu-
nication of  Mr.  Bourne's,  that  the
population  of  this  island  does  not
exceed  200  persons,  all  of  whom
have  been  baptized.  The  church
consists  of  30  members.  The
people  continue  diligent  in  learning.
They  carry  on  cultivation  to  a
great  extent,  and  their  houses  are
weU  built.


S.


SADRAS,  a  Dutch  settlement
on  the  sea-coast,  47  m.  south  of
Madras.  Inhabitants,  4  or  ^000*
Here  are  upwards  of  30  pagodas.
In  the  latter  part  of  the  last  c«p*
tuxy,  the  iD\aa\!(3in»s\«%Ql^«  BKl^rva*

CO  ^\


SAO

6*.  began  their  laboan  at  thii  place,
and  have  hail  many  leaU  to  their
mlnUtr}*.  The  Xetheriimdt  M,  8,
vent  the  Rev.  J.  C.  T.  Winkler
and  a  native  aaustant  hither,  ia
1M3.  In  1625,  it  is  stated  by  the
wiclety's  representatives  at  Chin-
surah,  that  thouflrh  Mr.  W.  had
been  much  afflicted,  he  was  so  far
ndvanced  in  Tamul,  as  to  be  able
tu  address  the  congregation  In  that
language.  On  New  Year's  day,
he  received  6  catechumens  as  mem-
berx  of  the  church ;  and,  on  the
following  day,  administered  the
sacrament  to  17  persons.  He  has
collected  1 90  rupees  for  the  schools ;
which  serves  to  defray,  if  not  all,
a  part  of  their  expense.  A  boys'
flcbool  is  conducted  regularly,  and
Mr.  W.  thinks  of  establishing  a
girls'  school.  Mrs.  Kegel,  the
widow  of  the  late  Resident,  has
offered  to  superintend  it.

SAGANAW  BAY,  a  large  bay,
60  m.  by  30,  on  the  S.  W.  shore  of
Lake  Huron.  Saganaw  River  enters
this  bay.  The  adjoining  territory
is  very  fertile,  and  was  recently
purchased  by  the  United  States  of
the  Chippewoys  and  Ottawas.  On
the  peninsula,  between  the  Lakes
Huron  and  Michigan,  the  Indians,
computed  at  about  8000,  are  in  a
state  of  ignorance,  vice,  and
wretchedness;  but  the  different
tril)es  are  dLspased  to  favour  the
establishment  of  schools  among
them.  Within  a  few  years,  the
Northern  M.  S,  of  New  York  has
made  some  attempts  to  enlighten
and  reform  them ;  and  more  re-
cently the  U,  F.  M,  S,  has  con-
templated a  mission  to  the  Indians
in  the  vicinity.

SALATIGA,  a  town  on  the
Island  of  Java,  about  40  m.  inland
from  Samarang.  The  inhabitants
are  less  attached  to  the  doctrines
of  Mahomed  than  in  many  other
parts  of  the  island.  The  Rev.  G.
Bruckner  commenced  his  labouis
at  Samarang,  under  lYie   London


SAL

AnVfri  In  1S14 ;  M  i
the  BofiUtM.  Owing
healthlnesi  of  the  dtii
the  want  of  sncceMy  he
tfaii  place.  In  18:iS,  am!
lated  the  New  Testi
fome  tract!  on  ChrlstiBi
into  the  Javanese  langv
popolatlon,  for  whose  b(
works  aie  intended,  la  e
2,000,000.

After  a  long  aeries
ezertioDs,  attended  wtt
parent  benefit,  he  was
by  a  formidable  insnnec
natives  against  their  Dot
to  remove  to  Batarla  \
quently,  other  dlfllcaltl
to  Sumatra;  where  his
of  the  Malay  would  hi
diate   service,  and  whi
also  carry  forwud  the
translation  for  the  ben
Javanese,  for  whose  be
he  appears  deeply  eoncei

SALSETTE,a  BrlttiJ
the  W.  coast,  Hlndoosts
N.  of  Bombay,  from  i
separated  by  a  narrow  st
which  is  a  causeway.
18  miles  long  by  14  h
fertile,  and  about  200  yar
continent.  The  populatli
60,000,  chiefly  Hindoos.
Jews,  and  Portugoese,
merous.

Tannahf  the  capital  o(
of  Salsette,  25  miles  N.
bay,  commanding  the  pa
the  island  to  the  nei
continent,  is  a  popoloi
creasing  town.  The
Nichols,  from  the  A,B
came  here  in  1818  \  and
his  arrival  commeucec
school  for  native  chlldi
has  since  been  named  the
School.  The  expense
station  are  nearly  de£n
boarding  school,  son
principally  by  Mn.  Ni
V  the  early  part  of  1893,  11
W  'ift  ^w^'^— \^  ^  ^


SAN

supported  by  their  parents,  4  by
Ihe  -misuon,  and  4  by  benevolent
individuals  in  the  country ;  and  2
ipiphan  children,  for  whose  main-
tenance a  moderate  allowance  was
Mcured  by  their  father.  An  asso-
fdation  has  been  formed  among
the  scholars  to  support  2  children
in  Ceylon,  to  bear  the  names  of  the
%  deceased  children  of  Mr.  Nichols.
The  children,  generally,  have  made
Imodable  proficiency,  and  great
C«re  is  taken  -in  their  religious
Intfaruction.  Much  of  Mr.  N.'s
time  has  been  devoted  to  the  lapsed
Ci^olics ;  he  also  superintends  the
^ee  schools  at  BoMeen,  Chandnee,
iuid  Tannak,  In  the  latter  place
fg  one  school  of  50  scholars,  in
viiicb  12  Jewish  children  are  in-
structed. The  mission  family  has
|!!eceived  many  kindnesses  from
JSuropean  residents,  and  Mr.  N.
has  been  useful  to  them  by  trans-
Ia:ttng  ofiicial  papers.

SANDUSKY,  Upper,  un  Indian
•ettlement,  Ohio,  on  the  Sandusky
River,  about  60  m.  S.  of  Lake  Erie,
and  65  N.  of  Columbus,  in  the  large
national  reserve  of  the  Wyandot
Indians.    The  Society  of  Friends

Ered  this  tribe  for  improvement,
ouDsel  and  pecuniary  aid.
1803  to  1810,  the  Preaby-
terian  church  supported  a  mls-
lionary  and  a  farming  establish-
ment among  them.  A  few  converts,
the  fruits  of  the  mission,  were  put
to  death,  on  account  of  their
religion,  by  the  Roman  Catholic
Indians.  A  few  years  since,  a
man  of  colour,  named  Stewart,  of
the  Methodist  church,  laboured
•uccessfully  with  this  tribe,  and
60  embraced  the  Gospel.

The  Methodist  Ohio  Conference
•tationed  the  Rev.  James  B.  Finley
at  this  place,  October,  1821,  to
labour  for  the  spiritual  good  of  the
Wyandots.  A  small  school  was
•oon  opened,  which  contained,  in
1884,  60  scholars,  chiefly  Wyandots,
who  are  supported  in  the  mi»ion


SAN

family,  and  make  very  encouras^ing
progress.  Tbe  buildings  and  larm
are  extensive.  In  1823,  about  50
acres  were  planted  with  corn.

In  the  early  part  of  1824,
260  bad  become  hopeful  converts,
and  joined  the  society ;  among
whom  are  several  chiefs,  who
render  important  aid  to  the  mission.
The  people  are  generally  fast  im*
proving  in  the  arts  of  civilization
and  the  knowledge  of  Christianity.
A  special  work  of  grace  has  pre-
vailed, which  has  extensively  pro-
duced a  very  salutary  influence.
Tbe  Rev;  Mr.  Elliott  has  recently
been  associated  with  Mr.  Finley.
This  station  has  sometimes  been
called  Camp  Meigs,

SAND  USKY,  £ouTer,  a  post  town,
Ohio,  on  the  Sandusky  River,  a  few
miles  from  its  mouth,  about  120  m.
S.  of  Detroit,  among  the  Wyandot
Indians.  The  Rev.  J.  Badger  was
stationed  here,  in  1806,  by  the
Synod  of  Pittsburgh,  and  wa9
afterwards  patronized  b}^  the  Society
for  propagating  the  Gospel  among
the  Indians  cmd  others  in  North
America,  When  this  mission  was
commenced,  there  were  no  white
settlements  within  1 00  miles  of  tbe
station.  The  Wyandots  at  this
place,  and  Upper  Sandusky,  made
considerable  progress  in  civilization,
and  some,  it  was  hoped,  were
benefited  by  the  religious  instrue-
tions  of  Mr.  B.  and  his  associates.
In  consequence  of  Mr.  B.'s  ill
health,  the  care  of  the  mission  was
assigned  to  the  Rev.  W.  Matthews
in  1810,  and  it  was  relinquished
during  the  first  year  of  the  late  war
with  Great  Britain.

SANDWICH  ISLANDS,  a
group  of  10  islands  in  the  N.  Pacific
Ocean,  W.  of  tl^  southern  part  of
N.  America,  discovered  by  Captain
Cook  in  1778.  They  extend  in  a
direction  W.  N.  W.  and  E.  S.  E.
between  W.  long.  \64P  53'  and
1600  15',  and  N.  lat.  W  50'  and
22<>  20':    Hawaii  being  the  south


SAN

eiuteni  ialand,  and  Niihau  the  north-
western. The  difltance  of  the
extreme  irarti  Is  about  390  m.
Huiraii  U  97  m.  In  length  by  78  In
hnsndth  ;  MaMi,  -18  by  20  ;  Taku-
raira,  11  bv  8;  iUutai,  17  by  9;
Sturohii,  40  hv  7  ;  Oa/iM,  46  by  83 ;
7ViMaf ,  33  by  28  ;  Mihau,  20  by  7  ;
Taura  and  J/oroAvui  are  un  i  n  habited.
Thi*  fuUowinp:  are  the  distances  in
EnKliih  miles,  and  the  bearini^
from  Hawaii : — Aiam',  30  N.  W. ;
Takftrafra,2H  W.N.  W. ;  Morokai,
75X.  W. ;  f)a/»if,  130W.  N.  W.;
Tauai,  2^.0  W.  N.  W.  Tiie  cli-
muto  is  snhibrious,  and  the  soil  fer-
tile. The  niissiunaries  say  the
whole  popiilatitni  does  not  exceed
130  or  li>0,0a0»  of  which  85,000
inhiihit  Hawaii,  The  inhabitants
ure  hiinly  and  industrious,  of  a
complexion  considerably  darker
than  the  Tnliitians;  and  though
ver>-  civil  and  friendly,  much  less
inquisitive  and  loquiicious  than  their
southern  neighbours.  In  the  con-
struction of  their  canoes,  sleeping-
mats,  war-ell  Niks,  and  helmets,  and
in  dying  their  calabashes  and  print-
ing their  cloth,  they  discm-er  a  su-
l)erior  degree  of  ingenuity  and
neatness ;  but  in  their  houses,  and  in
the  fabrication  of  their  cloth,  they
are  inferior  to  them.  The  simi-
larity of  their  features,  habits,  tra-
ditions, and  language,  to  tliose  of
the  natives  of  New  Zealand,  the
Marquesas,  and  the  Society  and
Friendly  Islands,  ufibrds  proof  that
they  were  originally  one  nation,  or
emigrated  from  the  same  country
ond  people.

Until  recently,  the  inhabitants
of  these  isliuuls  were  gross  idolaters.
The  Taboo  system  had  been  in  ope-
ration, ond  mostly  rigidly  obser\-ed,
for  thousands  of  years.  By  this
every  thing  was  prohibiteil  which
wos  contrarj'  to  the  will  of  the
King.  It  perpetually  interdicted
certain  kinds  of  food.  Women
were  utterly  forbidden  by  it  to  eat
poiic  and  plantains,  two  very  un-


8AK

portuit  arUelea  ta  tiMw  UlNi;
or  to  eat  with  the  ideOy  Hit  ami
to  hare  food  cooked  hj  the  ens
Are.  It  prohibited  eho  the  Mi^
of  certain  thlnga  on  certaladqi}
as  at  the  new  moon,  fid,  tti
quarters,  when  the  Klqg  w  k
the  noraly  performing  the  ^HtStm
miunmerlec  of  idolatiy;  aadve-
men  were  foriridden  to  go  on  4b
water.  A  breach  of  then,  illt
multitode  of  such  like  muMrilig
restrictlonsy  Impoaed  bj  thb  ^
tern,  exposed  the  delinqanl  Id
'  the  panlshment  of  death !

Tlie  morab  were  Mcved'ii-
cloiares,  formed  fay  a  nrt'flf
fence,  where  human  moMbci
were  oflbred.  Before  then,  rtiod
the  idols,  from  8  to  Hfeetlkh
most  fantastically  decorated,  i&
the  upper  part  was  canred  ifldft  •
hideous  resemblance  of  the  faaMi
face !  Totheseidolse^ieBslfeMMl-
ftces  were  constantly  presentei^mi^
on  certain  occasions,  the  hlgfafriert
was  permitted  to  require  and  dB«
signale  homan  yictims  I  Bat  ttk
delightful  to  remember  that  ftb
is  tile  stoiy  of  former  timei.  la
the  early  part  of  Nor.  181f,  mkj
a  few  dajTs  afber  the  lint  wlbh
sionaries  to  these  islands  mUed
from  Boston,  America,  the  ehna
was  broken,  and  the  woik  of  de-
stractkm  commenced  ia  Haw^ly
the  order  of  the  yoong  Kli^  who
succeeded  his  father  a  few  montts
before.  About  the  26th  of  the
same  month,  the  King's  oideii  to
burn  the  monuments  of  Idolaliy
were  dispatched  to  Oaho  and  T^sosly
which  were  promptly  obeyed.  In
Tauai  the  nmrait  and  the  come-
crated  buildings,  with  tbe  idqb,
were  set  on  fire  tbe  firrtefenliig
after  the  order  arrlred;  and  the
same  was  done  in  all  the  ideadi.
The  motives  which  influenced  the
monarch  in  this  decisive  meosen^
the  war  it  occasioned,  and  tbe  coo-
sequences  which  ensued,  are  hOf
detailed    in    a   most   lateieiti^f

4S4


SAN

worky  entitied  "Narrati?e  of  a
Tour  through  Hawaii,"  by  the  Rev.
Wm.  Ellis.

In  tracing  the  events  which  seem
to  have  led  to  this  important  mis-
lioOi  in  the  mysterious  providence
of  God|  one  of  those  extermina-
ting wars  must  be  mentioned, which
liave  often  almost  desolated  these
idands,  when  Henry  Obookiah^  a
native  of  Hawaii,  at  the  age  of
about  10  or  12  years,  was  made  an
orphan,  and  left  almost  friendless
on  these  inhospitable  shores.  In
this  forlorn  condition,  after  a  few
years,  he  was  noticed  by  an  Ame-
rican captain,  who  took  him  and
Thomas  Hopoo  on  board,  to  sail  for
America.  They  landed  at  New
Haven,  Connecticut,  in  the  autumn
of  1809,  where  they  were  noticed
by  some  students  of  Yale  College.
Henry  was  afterwards  instructed  by
that  devoted  servant  of  God,  the
Rev.  S.  J.  Mills,  who  conceived  the
plan  of  educating  him  as  a  mis-
fionary  to  his  native  land,  and  took
efficient  measures  to  accomplish
Us  benevolent  designs.  Others
were  soon  found,  from  these  and
other  heathen  lands,  which  gave
rise  to  the  Foreign  Mission  School
at  Comioall,  and  subsequently
to  this  mission.  Henry  soon  be-
came decidedly  pious,  and  strongly
advocated  a  mission  to  his  benight-
ed countrj-men,  in  which  he  most
ardently  longed  to  engage ;  but  it
was  ordered  otherwise.  He  died
at  Cornwall,  Feb.  17,  1818,  and  the
elevated  hopes  of  the  church,  that
be  would  soon  become  a  faithful
and  able  witness  for  the  truth  among
his  countrymen,  were  cast  down ;
but  <'  his  mantle  fell"  upon  others,
and  the  missionaries  of  the  A,  B.
C  F.  M,  sailed  from  Boston,  Oct.
23,  1819,  and  arrived  off  Hawaii
March  30, 1820 ;— viz.  the  Rev.  H.
Bingham  and  A.  Thurston;  Dr.
Holman,  ph}'sician ;  Mr.  D.  Cham-
berlain, agriculturist;  Mr.  S.
Whitney^   mechanic  and  school-


SAN

I  master ;  and  Mr.S.Ruggles,  school-
master, who   have   since  become
licensed   preachers;    and  Mr.  E.
Loomis,printer  and  schoolmaster ; —
all  married.     The  following  na-
tives of  the  Sandwich  Islands,  hav-
ing been  educated  at  the  Foreign
Mission  School,    Cornwall,   Con-
necticut, sailed  with  the  mission-
aries as  teachers,  viz. :— J.  Honoo-
ree  and  T.  Hopoo,  of  Hawaii ;  W,
Tennooe,  of   Tauai;   and  6.  P.
Tamoree,  son  of  the  King  of  Tauai
and  Niihau :  these  were  organized
into  a  church  previous  to  their  em-
barkation, except  the  young  King.
Not  long  after  their  arrival,   the
missionaries    were  called  to   the
painful  duty  of  withdrawing  their
fellowship  from  Dr.  Holman  and
W.  Tennooe ;  and  the  former  re-
turned to  America  soon  after.  Mr.
Chamberlain  returned  in  1823,  with
the  approbation  of  the  missionaries
and  of  the   Board ;  and  George
Sandwich,  a  native  of  these  islands,
having  been  educated  at  Cornwall,
and  given  evidence  of  piety,  sailed
as  an  assistant,  Nov.  1820.     The
missionaries  were  very  cordially  re-
ceived by  the  natives,  and  imme-
diately engaged  in  the  appropriate
duties  of  &e  mission.    They  found
the  encouragement  so  great,  that
they  sent  an  urgent  request  to  the
Board  for  additional  labourers.  Ac-
cordingly the  following  mission-
aries  embarked   at   New  Haven,
Nov.    19,    1822:— The   Rev.  W.
Richards,  C.  S.  Stewart,  and  A.
Bishop,  missionaries ;  J.  Goodrich,
and  J.  Ely,  licensed  preachers ;  and
Dr. A.  Blatchely,  physician; — all
married : —  Mr.   L.    Chamberlain,
superintendent  of  secular  concerns
and  assistant  missionary ;    S.  Po-
pohee,    a  native   of  the  Society
Islands ;  Wm.  Kum-mo-oolah,  R.
Kriouloo,  and  Kooperee, — natives
of  the  Sandwich  Islands,  all  hope-
fully pious;  and  Betsey  Stockton,
coloured  woman,   teacher;    wbo
arrived  April  27tb,  1829.
002  486


SAN

In  April,  lf»2,  the  Rev.  D.
Tyennaii,  and  G.  Bennet,  Esq.  the
DepiitAlion  of  the  London  Society
to  its  varioiu  Mfttionv,  and  the  Rer.
Wni.  Kllbi,  \iitb  S  pious  Tabitiani
and  their  wives,  visited  the  mis-
sionaries, and  the  result  was  the
cstablislinient  of  tlie  latter  on  these
islands.  After  rendering  ver>' im-
|Nirlau1  aid  to  the  mission,  durini;  a
kUiv  of  more  than  4  months,  Mr.
Kliis  relnrnetl  with  the  deputation
to  tile  Sofiety  Islands,  where  he
hati  lalMiunnl  about  6  years  ;  and
joined  this  nussiun,with  his  family,
Feb.  6,  1H2:i,  still  patronized  by
the  A.  A/.  S,  Here  a  wide  and
inten*stiii}(  ftuUl  for  niissionar}'  en-
terprise has  thus  l>een  opened,  and
a  ver}'  desirable  proprress  has  been
niadif  towani  the  accomplishment  of
tlioso  benevolent  desif^ns  which  the
missionaries  and  their  friends  have
in  view.

In  a  joint  letter  of  the  mis-
sionaries, dated  May  24,  1823,  it
is  said  :  —  *'  God  has  indeed  pro-
vided kindly  for  this  mission.  It
has  hitherto  been  emphatically  the
child  of  providence,  rockeii  in  the
cradle  of  faith  and  prayer  ;  and
thoufl:h  not  free  from  the  sorrows
of  infancy,  It  has  enjoyed  the  pre-
sence of  a  kind  and  faithful  parent.
If  we  trace  the  history  of  the
mission  from  the  wanderinpfs  of
the  friendless  orphan  Obookiah,
pass  by  his  early  grave  and  the
Foreign  Mission  School  at  Com-  i
wall,  through  the  interesting  scenes
at  Goshen  and  Hartford,  and  atBos-
ton,  where  the  little  band  was
organized,  and  where  the  affec-
tionate voice  and  well  directed  pen
of  Worcester's  wisdom  cheered,
and  guided,  and  impelled  it  on-
ward J — if  we  trace  its  path  over
the  mighty  waters,  and  witness  its
auspicious  reception  ;— if  we  call
to  mind  the  downfall  of  idols,  and
the  vanishing  of  the  taboo  system,
— the  issuing  the  first  elementary
book  in  the  language,  containing


SAN

tiw  flnt  prteelplM  of  tke  Oai|i^
received  and  nadby  ■  goodijiniB*
ber  of  the  chlefr  and  peoale^-«hfe
bftd  before  no  alphabet; — &m^B^
pected  visit  of  the  LondoB  uA^
lionary  DeputattoD,  r-the  hmf
settlement  of  Mr.  ^Ua,  ~4fae6i4r
correqxmdenee  opened  betvaea  ikt
rulers  of  these  f*lnwds>  and  te
Christian  raleia  of  the  Beeta^
Isles,— the  attendance  of  the  cUef
rulers  to  the  preaching  of  the  G»
pel  in  their  own  tonane  on  fte
sacred  Sabbath  of  Jefaovah,  bov
acknowledged  as  tibelr  God;— 4f  «e
remember  the  klndnetSy  sod  pfonp-
titode,  and  Uberalltyy  with  which  «
Christian  public  havefomidMai
sent  forth  so  large  areinforceBMal-
their  favoured  embarkation  atNnr
Haven,  their  delightful  ptm^
their  safe  and  seasonable  anMp
their  welcome  reception  bjUK
and  chiefs,  and  people,  whcae  eSk
for  teachers,  and  for  boohs  tti
slates,  are  greater  than  we  eo
supply;— or  if  we  look  ibnrai
to  the  mighty  work  before  m,
waiting  for  our  hands ;  and  to  libA
the  Redeemer  of  the  nattons  hn
purposed  and  promised  shall  be  M-
complished,  well  may  we  ezelsiM
with  Nehemlab, '  The  God  of  Hes-
ven.  He  will  prosper  us ;  there-
fore we  his  servants  will  arise  nd
build."»

Notwitfastandhig  the  evOs  ea-
dured  here  from  nnprine^M
Europeans  and  Americans,  the
mission  in  all  its jparts  is  prwperii^
as  will  appear  nom  the  foUmriBH
enumeration  of  the  chief  fadi^
extracted  from  a  late  oAcial  pobtt-
cation  of  the  A.  B.  C,  F,  M.  :—

<<  Here  are  nine  chiefo,  embo4ylii|r
a  great  portion  of  the  civil  iBflwDee
of  the  islands,  publicly  prolMiig
their  faith  in  Cbrht,  and  heart^y
entering  on  the  discharge  of  tiieir
duties  toward  God  and  their  feHov-
men  —  half  a  score,  and  moiei
churches,  erected  by  the  natives
themselves    for    the   worship   of

4sa


E


k

ft


"I


i
■ft

m


0.
f


SAN

Jehovab,  and  crowded  with  atten-
tive hearers  —  more  than  2000
lilanders,  moving  along  in  one
interesting  procession,  bearing  on
their  sboidders,  from  distant  moun-
tains, the  materials  for  the  erection
of  one  of  these  chorches,  which,
when  completed,  could  contain
'  4000  people,  and  was  thronged  to
overflowing ; — nearly  30,000  people
mider  ins^uction,  taught  by  com-
petent natives,  whom  the  mission-
aries have  qualified  for  the  service ;
— more  than  12,000  persons  able
to  read  the  word  of  God,  were  that
blessed  volume  ready  to  be  put
into  their  hands;  and  a  longing
desire,  everywhere  expressed,  to
come  into  speedy  possession  of  that
richest  treasure ;  the  efl^sions  of
the  Holy  Spirit  in  different  parts  of
Hawaii,  at  Honorooroo,  and  at
Lahaina; — and  as  the  results  of
these  heavenly  visitations,  more
than  2000  natives,  lately  shrouded
in  the  deep  gloom  of  a  barbarous
paganism,  erecting  tbe  family  altar
for  the  morning  and  evening
worship  of  the  true  Grod ; — ^regular
meetings  for  prayer,  among  the
females,  and  among  the  males  of
these  islands,  just  as  there  are
among  ourselves  when  religion
flourishes — and  the  once  haughty
and  cruel  chiefs  mingling,  with  high
satisfaction,  among  those  whom
they  once  despised  and  oppressed,
in  the  solemn  acts  of  devotion."
[See  Hawaii,  Maui,  Oahu,  Tauai.]
SAN6IR,  a  numerous  group  of
islands  in  the  eastern  seas.  The
largest,  called  Sangir  island,  is
about  40  miles  long,  and  12  broad.
Population,  about  12,000.  £.  long.
125°  21'.  N.  lat.  30  30'.  The  Dutch
have  a  fort  on  tbe  island,  and  their
missionaries  have  propagated  Chris-
tianity among  the  natives  with
considerable  success.  The  Rev.
Mr.  Kam,  of  Amboyna,  has  ab^>
been  useful  to  the  inhabitants  of
these  islands,  and  the  B.  fy  F.  B.  S.
has    forwarded   to   them    Malay


SAR

Testaments^  which  have  been
thankfully  received.
.  SAREPTA,  a  missionary  set-
tlement in  European  Russia,  on  the
river  Sarpa,  24  miles  below  Cza-
ritzen,  on  the  Wolga,  near  the
borders  of  Asiatic  Russia ;  situated
on  the  high  road,  by  way  of  Astra-
chan,  to  Persia  and  the  £.  Indies.
Inhabitants,  nearly  500.  In  1823,
three-fourths  of  the  settlement  was
consumed  by  fire.

After  two  unsuccessful  attempts^
in  which  several  of  the  misdonaries
of  the  U,  B.  were  imprisoned  at  St.
Petersburg,  they  obtained  permis-
sion to  settle  in  the  Russian  domi-
nions ;  and  in  1765,  6  of  them
commenced  the  settlement  of  Sa*
repta,  with  a  view  to  evangelise
the  Calmucs,  a  very  numerous  tribe
of  Mongul  Tartars  extensively
scattered  over  Eurqwan  and  Asi-
atic Russia.

Since  the  destruction  of  the
Mongolian  monarchy,  they  hbve
become  divided  into  3  main  hordes;
viz.  the  Koahot,  the  Dorbat,  and  the
TorptUk,  Some  few  of  them  are
Mahomedans;  but  they,  for  the
most  part,  embrace  Bndhism,  to
which  they  are  very  snpeistitionsly
attached.  Large  portions  of  each
inhabit  the  following  regions : —

The  Koshot  Horde  ranges  with
their  herds  and  flocks  on  the  banks
of  the  Wolga  between  Sarepta  and
Astrachan.  A  few  years  since  the
number  of  priests  in  it  was  no  less
than  800,  when  their  tents  amounted
only  to  about  1000.  Prince  Tuman,
feelingthe  burden  of  supporting  such
a  disproportionate  number  of  priests,
reduced  them  to  260;  but  mani-
fested no  disposition  to  renonnoe
his  oppressive  rites,  and  embrace
Christianity.

The  Dorbat  Horde  is  extremely
numerous,  and  ranges  between  the
Kuma  and  the  chain  of  mountains,
which  divides  the  g^at  steppe,
or  plain,  on  the  wMtem  side  of
the  Wolga,  up  to  the  vicinity  of

ASLX


SAR

SareptA'i  in  which,  daring  the
fiumiiier»  thr}'  reside,  vhile,  in  the
winti-r,  they  dwell  on  the  hanlu
uf  thn  Kuma.

The  Turfuftk,  or  Torfot  Horde,
iiibnbiU  the  uteppe  near  Aitrachan.
Within  a  few  da}*s'  ride  of  thii
citv,  it  is  estimated  that  there  are
106»000  Calmucs  belonging  to  the
dilTerent  hordes.

A  great  feast  among  the  Cal-
mucs, called  the  feast  of  *'  Burcham
Bakshi,"  or  «  God  the  Teacher,"
a  title  given  to  their  principal  idol,
Dshagdshamuni,  is  thus  described
hy  Mr.  Rahmn  : —

Tlie  gailongv,  or  priests,  erected  a
wooden  frame,  about  7  or  8  yards  in
height  .and  a  in  breadth,cofered  with
coloured  woollen  carpets.  Before
this  an  altar  was  placed,  covered
also  with  a  brocaded  carpet,  at  the
foot  of  which  stood  a  tabouret
of  Chinese  workmanship.  Round
about,  in  the  front  of  this  stage,
felts  and  carpets  were  spread  on
the  ground.

In  the  afternoon,  about  half-
past  4  o'clock,  a  procession  com-
menced, consisting  of  160  or  200
gallongs,  followed  by  a  great  mul-
titude of  common  people.  The
gallongs,  dressed  in  their  red  and
yellow  coats,  bearing  <<chadaks,"
fans,  and  musical  instruments,
marched  up  from  the  churall  to
the  above-mentioned  frame:  and,
at  the  bead  of  their  body,  3  grave
looking  men  walketl,  or  rather
danced,  holding  each  of  them  an
image  of  brass,  about  a  quarter  of
a  yard  in  height,  and  gilt,  repre-
senting 3  of  their  burchans,  and  a
fourth  gallong  carried  a  large  scroll
about  2  yards  long.  The  <<  chadak  "
is  a  kind  of  fan,  consisting  of  small
but  long  pieces  of  silk,  like  a  tail :
they  are  held  in  high  repute,  for
being  great  and  powerful  amulets,
as  well  as  ornaments  in  the  tem-
ples. A  whole  apparatus  belong-
ing to  a  heathen  altar,  according
to  the  custom  of  the  Lamities,  was


aAR

carried  hy  other  galkMi
Airivliig  «t  the  fruney  tlw  ol-
longs  iunounded  it.  A  noiqTBiri
of  mutic  began ;  mod  a  jellDv  A
cover  waa  itowly  drawn  ophj  aril
strlngi,  till  a  laige  ptetunwai
unvelhMl.  TUa  pictmeiepffBMW
Dshagdshamoni  neatlj  pataM  m
bl  oe  taflely,  with  light  yeUaw,  ip^
and  blue.  At  that  moawL  fa
whole  multitadey  galtonaa  ad  pai-
ple,  pnatrated  tluMe  bmre  flie  |i>
tore:  after  which  ceieanaiy,  te
gallongs  and  their  dlidplei  Milid
themselvea  in  rowa,  and  bega  fs
sing,  fromthetr  Thibetan  Smomi
to  the  hononrof  their  Idol.  Dii^
their  sioging,  tea,  tih^j^  (or  Mr
mares*  milk),  and  white  hiiiai,— a
dhtrlbuied  among  tlmn.  la  As
mean  while,  the  Prince,  Uifal^,
and  all  the  people,  wdkad  te
place,  praying  their  nnial  ftna  of
prayer,  **  Om  -  ma  -  nl  -bad  •  ■»•
chom-tl;"  and  continued  so  H
sun  set,  when.  In  an  inrerted  orie^
all  was  brou^t  back  to  tliechi-
rall  again.

With  what  emotioni  I  witMwd
this  spectacle  may  easily  be  eoa-
celved.  How  fervently  I  piqfed,
that,  for  many  of  the  people  pf^
sent,  thb  might  be  the  last  tiae
they  should  perform  inch  ai  na-
reasonable  aervice.  To  a  wm
who  asked  me  how  I  liked  it,  I
answered,  **  I  dislike  it  reiy  anefc.
This  people  are  committing  a  hei-
nous sin,  worshipping  the  woik  of
their  own  hands,  althoogfa  we  bfie
but  one  God,  and  one  nedlilor
between  God  and  men,  rii.  Jew
Christ.''  At  this  answer  he  mtle
a  sneer.

An  old  gallong  aat  at  a  dietuee
from  the  others.  He  was  abmct
blind,  and  seemed  to  be  deraqged.
He,  like  the  others,  worrii^iped,
and  uttered  with  a  loud  voieea
kind  of  prayer  or  thank^glvh^;
but  nobody  tocdc  notice  of  liS^'
In  younger  dayi  he  nuqr  bate
acted  his  part  aa  well  as  wisff  birt

488


SAR

now  he  was  quite  overlooked  be-
cause infirm ; — a  fresh  proof  that
lieathenism  tends  to  hardness  and
'  cruelty.

Soon  after  the   arrival  of  the
Inrethren^  they  commenced  an  ac-

Suaintltnce  with   the  Calmucs  of
tie  Dnrbat  HordCy  and   improved
every  opportunity  of  making  known
the  Gospel  to  them,  conforming  to
iheir  manner  of  living,  and  accom-
panying them  in  their  migrations ;
but  with  little  success.    In  1774,
the  principal    horde  retired  from
.       the  vicinity  of  Sarepta,  and  the
.      missionaries,  finding  that  nothing
J      was  likely  to  be  effected  among
-      them,  turned  their  attention  to  the
education  of  heathen  children,  and
to    the    German    colonists    living
on  the  Wolga.     In  1815,  having
been  Assisted  by  the  London  So-
ciety,   they   were  encouraged   to
renew  their    mission    among  the
Calmucs.    Two  of  their  mission-
aries, Messrs.   J.   G.   Schill   and
C.  Hubner,  settled  with  the  Tov
^uUk  Horde,    They  were,  at  first,
cordially  received,  and  soon  col-
lected a  small    society;   but,   in
consequence  of  the  hostility  of  the
Prince,  were    obliged  to   remove
their  congregation,  22  in  number,
to  land  belonging  to  the  settlement,
near  Sarepta.  Since  their  removal,
the  brethren  applied  to  the  Russian
government  for  permission  to  col-
lect congregations,  to  instruct  and
to  baptize  as  in  other  countries,  but
were  refused.    This  circumstance,
and  the  opposition  manifested  by
the  Calmuc  tribes,  has  occasioned
a  suspension  of  the  mission.    But
amidst  all  these  discouragements,
the  missionaries  indulge  the  cheer-
ing hope,  that  some  of  these'  poor
heathens  have  already  died  in  the
faith,  and  that  others  are  the  sincere
followers  of  Christ.    The  Gospels,
and   several    Tracts,    have    been
translated  into  the   Calmuc  lan-
guage.


SAU

The  Rev.  C.  Rahmn,  from  the
L,  M,  S.,  spent  the  summer  sea-
sons of  1820,  1821,  and  1822,
among  the  Calmucs  of  the  Dorbat
Horde,  distributing  parts  of  the
Scriptures  and  Tracts,  and  exerting
himself  particularly  in  the  instruc-
tion of  the  children.  The  attention  of
many  was  excited,  and  the  progress
of  the  school  was  encouraghig.  On
his  return  to  Sarepta,  in  the  winters
of  those  years,  his  time  was  occu-
pied in  preparing  a  Calmuc  gram-
mar and  dictionary,  with  a  version
of  the  psalms ;  and  in  learning  the
Thibet  language.

In  consequence  of  Mrs.  R.'s
state  of  health,  however,  he  was
subsequently  compelled  to  remove
to  St.  Petersburg,  where  he  was
usefully  employed  until  affliction
unfitted  him  to  engage  actively  In
missionary  labours  at  a  foreign
station.

In  1821,  in  consequence  of  the
visit  of  the  Rev.  Drs.  Patterson
and  Henderson,  an  auxiliary  to
the  Russian  Bible  Society  was
formed  for  the  benefit  of  the  Ger-
man colonists  and  Calmucs.

SAULT  DE  ST.  MARIE,  or
Fallg  of  jSif.  3iary,  a  settlement,
Michigan  territory,  at  the  S.  £.
extremity  of  Lake  Superior,  a  few
miles  below  the  outlet,  90  m.  by
water,  N.  W.  of  Mackinaw.

In  1823,  the  population  in  this
place  and  its  vicinity  consisted  of
about  300  officers  and  soldiers  be*
longingtotheUnitedStates  garrison,
150  to  the  British  garrison,  about
150  settlers,  and,  at  certain  seasons
of  the  year,  from  8  to  500  Indians.
It  is  from  3  to  400  miles  beyond
where  the  Gospel  has  been  statedly
preached.  The  fFestern  M,  S,,
under  the  direction  of  the  Synod  of
Pittsburg,  has  appointed  the  Rev.
R.  M.  L^ird  to  visit  this  place,  who
arrived,  October,  1823.  He  found
a  few  professed  disciples  of  Christ
of  different  denominations,  whose

420


SEB

ediftcation  be  teeks  ai  veil  as  the
■piritual  good  of  the  wldlen  and
iiettien;  but  one  of  the  leading
object*  of  bis  mission  in  to  acquire
information  respecting  the  nuinber,
character,  and  history-  of  the  ta-
rious  tribes  of  Indians  traversing
the  vast  territory  of  the  great  lakes,
and  penetrating  into  the  distant
and  r billing  regions  of  the  north,
with  a  view  to  the  establishment  of
schools  among  them.  Mr.  L.  has
been  much  encouraged  by  the  sue-
eeu  of  his  labours  among  the  sol-
diers and  settlers.

SEUOUi  A,  a  village  on  the  bay
of  Tapanooly,  W.  coast  of  Suma-
tra, about  300  m.  N.W.  of  Padang,
situated  among  the  Battas,  in  the
vicinity  of  a  numerous  population,
under  the  authority  and  protection
of  the  Engliith  company  at  Tapa-
nooly, and  about  3  miles  from  the
island  Punchon,  on  which  the  Eng-
lish settlement  is  situated.

The  Rev.R.Burton,fromthe  J9.M.
S.  arrived  here  in  1 8ii :  he  was  cor-
dially received  both  by  the  settlers
and  the  barbarous  natives,  and  the
Rajah  gave  land  on  which  to  erect
a  dwelling-house.  He  made  con-
siderable progress  in  acquiring  the
Batta  language,  which  is  spolcen  by
nearly  1,000,000  of  people,  and  Mrs.
Burton  had  a  small  school  of  or-
phan girls.  Such  success,  how-
ever, attended  the  warlike  opera-
tions of  a  set  of  insurgent  reform-
en,  called  Padries,  that  Mr.  B.
with  his  family,  and  the  females
under  Mrs.  B.'s  care,were  obliged,
from  regard  to  personal  safety,  to
leave  Sebolga  in  July,  182^,  and
they  reached  Calcutta  in  the  fol-
lowing month.  The  timid  Bataks,
among  whom  Mr.  B.had  laboured,
had  all  determined  to  become  Mus-
sulmans, when  their  invaders  took
possession  of  their  country.  At  the
period  of  his  removal,  he  was  en-
gaged in  compiling  a  dictionary,
Eoj^ish,  Malay,  and  Batak,  having


BEL

previouily  conpleted  hli  tmuUtkn
of  the  Gospel  of  St.  John.

SELINGINSK,  a  town  and  i^
litary  station  in  tht  goverBnciitif
IrkuUk,  Siberia*  about  100  m«&S.
of  the  city  of  Irkutric,  and  ahHt
4000  m.  easteriy  from  St  Man-
burgh,  on  the  Sellnga  R.  It  k  a
thoroughfare  for  tbe  Chinen  tnii
carried  on  at  Kaiacbta.  InhaJbUMb
about  3000,  exeluaive  of  thoN  d
several  villages.  E.  long.  101*  Wf^
N.  hit. 51*  Its'.  SellngliHk  Is  iatM
centre  of  all  tbe  BuriaUf  a  mm
given  to  several  populous  tribct  of
Tartan  in  tbe  government  of
Irkutsk,  wbo  aie,  in  generri.  im
ignorant,  even  of  tbe  tenets  of  Mf
own  supentition;  nor  is  it  venii
site,  according  to  their  idea^  a4
they  should  know  them.

Their  religion  li  suited  to  tk*r
indolence  of  mind,  as  well  as  tto
depravity  of  their  natures ;  andttaf
ara  not  easily  induced  to  chaqge  M
for  one  which  addresses  tbe  nide^
standing  and  the  heart.

The  following  practice  Ulii*
trates  their  predominant  charMto-
ristic.  The  Buriat  procures  apngpait
written  on  a  long  slip  of  paper,  ud
suspends  it  where  it  will  be  inoiBd
by  wind  or  passengers,  or  nUi  it
round  the  barrel  of  a  small  wind-
mill, which  keeps  his  petition  Ui
motion,  and  satisfies  his  conscitiMi
that  it  is  acceptably  ofieied  tofts
god.  These  praying  nyills  are  veiy
numerous;  and  they  have  vsrioH
other  modes  of  worship  eqaal^
suited  to  their  indolent  habits.  Ifr
deed,  their  whole  system  is  adBli^
sion,  and  their  services  are  Hi-
meaning  forms.  Their  lestniiii
from  animal  indulgences  are  con-
fined to  the  short  time  spelt  is
their  temples ;  from  which  tiny  re-
tium  to  commit  all  nnrlWinnni
with  greediness.

They  speak  the  MongoUsa  ha-
guage,  but  their  books  aie  hi  aa
unknown  tongue.  The  Selmgiui

430


SEL

Buriats  are  in  the  centre  of  all  the
BmKats  on  the  E.  side  of  Baikal
lake,  and  are  esrtimated  at  about
15,000  ;  they  have  10  temples^  and
not  less  than  2000  lamas,  or  chief

Sests.  The  Chorinsk  tribe  are
tinguished  for  their  wealth.
They  are  divided  into  11  tribes,
tnbabitinff  the  country  easterly  of
8eling^nsk,  are  estimated  at  30,000,
and  have  only  4  temples,  and
scarcely  200  lamas.  Upwards  of
100,000  males  belong  to  the  nation
of  Buriats.

The  Rev.  Messrs.  Stallybraas,
Swan,  and  Yteillef  from  the  L.M,S,,
arrived  in  1819,  and  this  mission,
ftnt  commenced  at  Irkutsk,  has
received  the  full  approbation  and
aid  of  the  Russian  government.
The  missionaries  were  furnished,  by
order  of  the  Emperor,  with  pass-
ports to  the  several  governors,
tiirough  whose  districts  they  were
to  travel  on  their  route ;  a  letter
was  also  directed  to  the  Governor-
general  of  Siberia,  requesting  that
every  necessary  assistance  might  be
affoided  them.  After  their  arrival,
they  were  treated  with  peculiar
kindness  by  the  Governor-general,
who  engaged  to  do  every  tiling  in
his  power  towards  promoting  their
designs.  A  grant  of  112  acres  of
land  was  accompanied  by  the  Em-
peror's engagement  to  defray  the
expense  of  6260  dollars,  incurred
by  the  erection  of  the  buildings.

The  missionaries  frequently  visit
the  Buriats  in  their  different  hordes,
following  them  in  their  various
wanderings,  visiting  their  temples,
distributing  the  Gospel  and  Tracts,
and  otherwise  communicating
Christian  instruction.  Of  the  man-
ner in  which  they  were  received,
soon  after  their  arrival,  Mr.  Swan
wrote: — "The  Buriats  are  every-
where receiving  the  Gospel  and
Tracts  with  avidity,  and  are  daily
coming  to  us  for  them  from  all
quarters ;  and  from  a  distance  of


SEL

hnndreds  of  versts.  We  hare  like-
wise daily  applications  for  medi-
cine and  advice }  and  our  being  able
to  prescribe  simple  remedies,  and
furnish  medicine  for  some  of  their
prevailing  diseases,  has  contributed
not  a  little  to  secure  their  good
opinion  of  us ;  while  we  have,  at
the  same  time,  the  finest  opportu-
nities for  distributing  the  word  of
God.  The  lamas,  or  priests,
themselves,  not  only  come  for  the
Gospel,  but  are  sometimes  seen
sitting  at  the  door,  reading  it  to  a
listening  audience  of  their  own
people.*'

Of  a  new  opening  for  a  mission-
ary, the  report  for  1823,  states,
that  "  a  large  district  round  Ner-
chinsk is  inhabited  by  the  Tun-
ffusians,  a  people  who  are  not  in
possession  of  a  written  language  of
their  own.  Their  neighbours,  the
Chorinsk  Buriats,  have  introduced
among  them  books  relative  to  their
superstitions,  written  in  Mongolian,
which  the  Tungusians  are,atleng^,
able  to  read  and  understand.  Thus
the  way  was  prepared,  by  the  zecd
of  the  Burial  themselves,  for  the
dissemination  of  Christianity  among
the  Tungusians,  who  will  now  be
able  to  read  the  Mongolian  Scrip-
tures circulated  among  that  tribe,
which  otherwise,  from  their  igno-
rance of  letters,  would  have  been
to  them  a  sealed  book."

Since  that  period  the  missiona-
ries have  employed  various  means
for  the  advanti^i^  of  the  people,
which,  with  the  effect  of  their
efforts,  will  be  apparent  from  their
last  report.

Seminary  for  Buriat  Youthg, —
The  number  of  youths  at  present
in  the  seminary  is  six.  They  are
instructed  in  Greek,  Latin,  Ross,
English,  and  Mongolian;  in  the
mathematics,  in  general  knowiedge,
and  in  the  Scriptures;  They  midce
good  progress  in  the  several
branches  of  leaxoinC)  «a!i  x«^^\.


SEL

uieful  sen-ire*  in  the  literary  de«
parUiKMit  of  the  mission,  particu-
Inrly  in  transcribinfl:  nianuKripts,
Ac.  The  number  of  youths  ad-
niitted  Mnre  the  commencement  of
the  Meminary  in  14.  Some  of  there,
from  l(M-iil  I'uuses,  renuiiniMl  but  a
ihort  time  in  the  institution ;  yet
they  till)  not  quit  it  until  they  had
lennuM  to  read  and  write  their  own
luUKuafre,  and  made  surh  pni^^ress
in  oth<'r  vnluuble  attainment*,  as
cannot  fail  to  be  of  f^reat  use  to
Ibem  in  tiiu  course  of  their  future
life.

Xntire  Srrvieet. —The  mlmion-
aricK  siili  continue  stiitinlly  to
preach  tlie  <iospel  to  the  Buriats,
chiefly  di-|NMidants  on  the  mimion,
hut  liitlierto  without  apparent
Kuccess.

Tmnahttitm  of  the  Scripture** —
The  Moncrtdiaii  translation  of  the
New  Testament  wiw  completed
durinp:  the  year  1820,  and  consi-
derable pro^^Ks  has  tx;en  made  in
that  of  the  Old  Testament.  The
imiM)r1ance  of  this  translation  of
the  Scriptun»s  will  be  more  fully
uppreciated,  when  it  is  considered
that  Mon^dian  is  spoken  and  un-
derst4HMl,  not  only  among  the  Bu-
riats,  but  extensively  in  Chinese
Tarlary,  and  in  a  south-westerly
direction,  among  the  inhabitants
of  all  the  intermediate  coun-
trj*,  from  Selinginsk  to  Thibet.
The  Mongolians  Proper  are  sub-
jects of  the  Chinese  empire,  and
the  Kalkas  and  Eluths,  also  under
the  same  government,  use  the  same
language.

Mr.  Stally brass  has  again  visited
the  missionary*  station  on  the  Ona.

«

He  was  absent  from  Selenginsk
about  two  months,  during  which
time  he  availed  himself  of  such
opportunities  as  occurred  of  preach-
ing the  Gospel  to  the  people.

The  lamas  in  that  quarter  are
zealous  in  their  attempts  to  make
proielytes   among  the    Shamaruy


SEN

whoM  religion  b  coMUend  Ihi
moft  ancient  relLrion  of  the  lilip
bltanti  of  the  Buriali,  Toeobb
4ec.  end  consists  pwtlj  of  a  Bid
of  adoration  paid  to  llie,  s  nUMOi
on  amuletiy  dkc.  The  people  iifiili
part  of  the  country  spiMer  to  to
ien  under  the  inflaenee  A  pR||ribB
than  the  other  Borlato.

Mr.  Yuille  has  Tislted  Kstodh^
and  was  received  in  a  fAa^
manner  by  the  Roadan  Dbaeta
of  Trade,  and  by  the  mUltaiy  cMrf
on  the  Chinese  fronttor.  Th^
former  presented  to  him  a  vahrito
work  in  the  Mongolian  lanpnge.

Towards  tlie  close  of  me  jm
1826,  Mr.  Swan  Tislted  a  tribs  of
Buriats  who  inhabit  that  pvi  of
the  country,  which  lies  ahmg  tto
shores  of  the  Bailud,  near  fin
mouths  of  the  Sellnga.  He  e»
f  ened  with  the  Taisha  and  prfad-
pal  people,  endeavoured  to  dheet
their  minds  to  the  Importaaee  of
education,  and  Infonned  tboa  of
the  existence  of  the  seminaiy  it
Selinginsk.  They  were  fully  imR
of  the  importance  of  leandqgto
read  and  write  Russ ;  and  lennlaf
them  seemed  inclined  to  send  tbdi
children  to  the  seminary,  but  wen
prevented,  on  finding  thatlfae  bI^
sionaries  seek  no  remuneratioD  for
the  bstnictions  they  impsrt  A
plan  of  doing  good  ditkUtfutetlgt
they  regard  as  justly  liable  toan-
plcion.

There  are  fewpartooftbewoildl,
perhaps  none;  in  which  the  aociefy
has  stations,  where  more  ComkhUe
impediments  are  to  be  ovenoM
by  missionary  labours,  tlian  tboB
which  (independently  of  tlie  aiflftl
causes  which  operate  ereryiriwia)
exist  among  the  Buriati*  llieB
arise  principally  from  tbeir  want  of
education,  their  deeply-rooted  ss-
perstitions,  and  tlie  influence  of
their  priests.

SENEGAS,  the  remnant  of  a
tribe  of  the  Iroquoii,  or  Six  NatiflW

4SS


\


^  Indians^  scattered  thiougb  se-
veral villages  in  the  W.  part  of  New
Yorkf  consisting  of  about  2500.
lliey  reside  mostly  in  tlie  follow-
klg^  placesy — viz.  on  the  Bu£blo
fecervation,  near  Buffalo,  about
tOO;  on  the  Tonewanta  reserva-
tion, 30  m.  N.  E.  of  Buffalo,  above
300 ;  on  the  Cataraugus  reservation,
fO  m.  S^iff.  of  Buffalo,  450 ;  on  the
Alleghany  reservation,  70  m.  S.
of  Buffalo,  on  the  Alleghany  River,
nearly  600 ;  on  tiie  Genesee  River,
Wterly  from  Buffalo,  450 :  in  this
amount  are  included  a  small  num-
ber of  Cayugas,  Munsees,  and
Onondagas,  who  reside  with  the
Senecas.  There  are  also  about
460  Senecas  on  Sandusky  River,
Ohio.  The  seat  of  public  business
ior  the  six  nations  is  at  Seneca
village,  near  Buffalo,  where  all
tlMlr  national  councils  are  held.
The  people  in  all  the  villages  live
on  the  most  intimate  terms.  In  all
Important  concerns,  such  as  the
death  of  a  person  of  note,  copies  of
papers  from  government,  reports  of
Missionary  Societies,  ^.,  runners
ere  sent  to  acquaint  the  inhabitants
<^  each  village.

Their  ancient  religious  rites  had
a  powerful  tendency  to  dissipate
morality,  and  produce  indolence  and
poverty.  Tonewanta  was  the  re-
ddence  of  the  famous  Seneca  pro-
fit, where  all  the  villagers  resorted
in  cases  of  sickness  and  witchcraft;
and  to  learn  more  perfectly  the
rites  of  their  ancient  religion.  The
most  learned  disciples  of  the  prophet
stUl  reside  there ;  and  it  is  now  the
liead  quarters  of  the  Pagan  party,
who  assembled  there  to  oppose  the
spread  of  the  Gospel  on  its  first  ap-
pearance. The  United  States  go-
vernment appropriates  450  dollars
annually  for  the  support  of  the
mission  schools  among  this  nation ;
and  several  benevolent  societies
have  employed  missionaries  among
this  tribe  with  encouraging  success.
It  is  thought  more  than  one-thhrd  of


SEN

the  whole  population  are  desiroui
of  Christian  instruction^  among
whom  are  several  warriors  and
principal  chiefs;  while  a  strong
Pagan  party  are  strenuonsly  op*
posed  to  the  establishment  oi  mte-
sions.

In  1764,  the  Rev.  Samuel  Kirk-
land  visited  the  Senecas,  with  the
design  of  introducing  Christianity
among  them.  After  remaining  2
years,  suffering  almost  incredible
hardships,  and  finding  no  prospect
of  success,  he  returned  home,  and
soon  after  commenced  a  mission
among  the  Oneidas.  About  1795,
the  Society  of  Friends,  with  the
approbation  of  President  Washing-
ton, commenced  their  exertions  for
the  benefit  of  the  Indians  in  tiie
state  of  New  York,  and  more  par-
ticularly for  those  of  the  Seneca
tribe';  and  in  20  years  they  expend-
ed more  than  40,000  dollars,  with
good  success,  in  supporting  schools,
and  attempting  to  introduce  the
arts  of  civilized  life.  In  1821,  a
school  which  has  been  established
several  years  on  the  Alleghany
reserve,  was  in  active  operation.
They  have  also  laboured  among  the
Senecas  in  Ohio.  The  New  York,
and  other  missionary  societies,
have  occasionally  employed  agents
among  this  people.  The  mission
at  the  Seneca  village,  about  4  m.
E.  of  Buffiilo,  on  Bimalo  Creek,near
the  outlet  of  Lake  Erie,  was  com-
menced by  the  New  York  Mission-
ary  Society,  in  1811,  and  trans-
ferred to  the  U,  F.  M.  S.  in  1821.

In  1811,  the  Rev.  John  Alex-
ander and  Mr.  J.  Hyde,  were  sent
to  this  tribe  with  the  hope  of  form-
ing a  permanent  mission  station.
After  repeated  conferences  with
the  chiefs  in  council,  the  mission-
ary was  rejected,  while  the  teacher
was  invited  to  remain  and  instruct
a  school  for  the  children  of  the
nation.  Mr.  Hyde  continued  among
them  in  the  capacity  of  a  teacher.^
till  1819,  NvYi^ix  \i<6  ^«^  «^\Ri«)^i^

p  p  V^*^


SEN

rat^hUt,  and  Mr.  J.  Yoork  mp-
plied  h'w  place,  lie  mnored  from
the  station  iii  18il,  and  was  mc-
reeded  by  the  Rev.  T.  S.  Harris.
Durinir  the  flrst  7  >'ear8  of  Mr.
H^-de's  residence  amonj;  the  In-
dians, he  suffered  much  from  ill
health,  was  entirely  unacquainted
with  the  lanf^uage,  and  lahoored
under  many  disadvantages  for  its
ari|uisition.  The  war,  which  com-
menced soon  after  his  arrival,
greatly  imiteded  the  prosperity  of
the  miMiou.  In  1 81 8,  the  prospects
began  to  brighten,  and  a  serions
inquiry  after  truth  prevailed,  more
or  less  extensively,  in  all  the  vil-
Iciire)!.  In  lh20,  the  chiefs  reported,
tbat  in  the  4  reservations, 600  were
in  fa^'our  of  Christianity.  The
ninrnls  of  the  CliTi»tian  party  were
considerably  improved :  revelling
and  intemperance  were  almost
wholly  abandoned ;  though  3  years
before,  those  who  refused  to  unite
in  the  prevailing  dissipations,  for-
feited their  reputation  and  in-
fluence. They  also  made  rapid
improvement  in  agriculture,  and
in  their  manner  of  living.  With
the  assistance  of  the  catechist,  a
decent  house  for  public  worship  was
erected,  in  which  they  regularly
asitemhlcd  on  the  Sabbath.  Mr.  H.
translated  and  printi*d  several  por-
tions of  the  Scriptures  in  the  Seneca
language.  The  property  belonging
i(>  the  lloard  consbited  of  2  dwel-
ling-houses and  a  school-house,
with  the  use,  for  an  indefinite  pe-
ri'Ml,  of  the  lond  on  which  they
were  erected.  Mr.  H.  arrived  at
the  mi.csion-house,  Oct.  29,  1821,
and  was  received  with  gratitude
anil  strong  assurances  of  the  per-
manent friendship  and  kind  offices
of  the  chiefs.  Measures  were  soon
adopted  for  the  establishment  of  a
boarding-school;  and  in  July,  1823,
2.')  children  were  committed  to  the
Dire  and  authority  of  the  mission.
On  the  13th  of  April,  of  the  same
yf^nr,  a  church  was  orgMi\ieA>  wi^


SSN

4  intelligMit  jODng  chltfr  vm  af
nKted  to  ccMnmimioii ;  8  oflMi
have  ilnca  been  added,  andievBiri

more  give  erldeoee  of  pielyr  lW
report  of  the  Board,  Mm,  M^-
saya— «<  The  progrea  of  ^wk^
tiooy  lince  the  last  anniial  neeU^
hai  been  unofoaUy  IMemtt^g:
attended  by  many  tokens  of  Mm
faFoar,  it  has  steadi^  adnaori
towanli  the  ultimate  objeetihr
which  It  was  established.  U^v
the  regular  preaehing  of  the  GoM
the  knowledge  and  worship  of  Gal
have  been  gradually  BcqvMagm
ascendancy  over  the  deep>naW
attachment  of  the  Pagan  psr^to
the  costoms  of  their  ancestovh  nl
the  ignorance  and  supentitioa  of
the  whole  tribe.  The  intBOedsri
and  moral  elevation  of  the  ChMim
party,  equaUy  distingoidied  feyi
practical  recognition  of  the  asfr
tlty  of  the  Sabbath,  and  an  faieisah
ing  attention  to  their  agrieattanC
and  domestic  pursuits,  fumldi  eos-
clusive  evidence  of  the  ntUHjaf
efficacy  of  Indian  mlssioiH."  '

The  school  had  also  aanuned  avir
and  interesting  character,  and  tto
general  aspect  of  the  mhnion  entted
the  gratitude  of  Its  iriemb,  and  m
a  new  impulse  to  effisrts  in  betuif  sf
this  tribe.  Such  was  the  Hattertar
state  of  the  mission  at  the  dona
February,  18S4,  when  some  of  Ae
Pagans  were  urged  to  diipenette
school,  and  to  expel  the  adHloo
family  from  the  reservation.  Thb
measure  was  effected  by  tlie'eo*
operation  of  white  inhabitaBti  ii
the  vicinity,  under  a  law  of  the
state,  which  was  designed  to  pis-
vent  the  encroachments  of  diihooect
whites,  and  not  to  Intermpt  the
operations  of  Christian  benevoteooe.
The  school  was  consequently  ^'
moved  to  Cataraugut,  and  flie
missionary  to  Boinlo,  where  be
still  continues  to  visit  tlie  Indiau,
and  to  communicate  reUgiooi  In*
.  struction  on  the  SsJbbatiL  If  per-
\mVa&Vm  tiaosAi  \i%  cMalaed  mm


■  SEN

jpTerament  to  return  to  the  mis-

'sion  premises,  it  is  contemplated  to

•establish  the  mission  on  the  border

jgf  the  resenration,  >(^ithin  3  m.  of

.Hw  principal  village,  where  it  will

'.■lie  Independent  of  the  Pagan  party,

.Mid  will  probably  derive  many  im-

poftant  advantages  from  the  change .

'|8ee  Catarauffus.]

.    S£NE  6  A  L,  a  country  extending

from  the    northern  limits  of  W.

•  Africa,  to  ]0^  N.  lat.,  including

.41ie  countries  watered  by  the  Sene-

.gal  and  Gambia  rivers.    It  belongs

•to  the  French,  and    is  inhabited

.principally   by  Jaloofs,  having   a

.population  of  about  10,000.    The

■  principal   settlement    is   on     the

uland  St.  I^ouis,  which  is  the  ca-

5ital  of  the  country,  and  is  situated
J.  of  Cape  Verd,  near  the  mouth  of
the  Senegal.  Till  recently,  this
people  have  been  left  in  a  state  of
nature.  The  Paris  Education
Society  sent  Mr.  Dard  to  instruct
them,  who  has,  for  some  years,
.superintended  a  school  of  about  200
.niitiTe  children  at  St.  Louis.  Many
of  these  have  become  competent  to
carry  into  the  interior  the  know-
ledge they  have  acquired,  among
whom  are  several  sons  of  chiefs.
Mr.  Dard  has  reduced  the  Jaloof
language  to  grammatical  order,
and  has  formed  elementary  books.
SER  AMPORE,  a  town  of  Ben-
1^,  Hindoostan,  belonging  to  the
Danes,  pleasantly  situated  on  the
W.  bank  of  the  Hoogly,  15  m.  N.  of
Calcutta.  E.  long.  88»  26',  N.  lat.
S2^  45'.  The  houses  for  public
worship  are,  a  Danish  church,  the
mission  chapel,  and  several  small
chapels  for  native  preachers.  This
is  the  seat  of  the  Baptist  mission  in
India.  For  its  history  previous  to
its  establishment  at  this  place,  in
1799,  see  Caicutta  B.  M,  S.  From
Its  commencement,  the  mission-
aries have  acted  on  the  principle  of
having  all  the  property  they  could
accumolate  in  common;  thus  af-


SER

fording  an  example  of  entire  disin-
terestedness.

In  1800,  Dr.  Carey  gave  the
following  mournful  intelligence  :-^

"  It  is  now  7  years  since  we  en-
tered upon  this  mission ;  and  it  is
uncertain,  to  this  hour,  whether
any  of  the  heathen  are  truly  con-
verted."

In  the  month  of  December,  1800,
however,  the  missionaries  were
gratified  in  beholding  the  first  de-
cided convert  to  the  faith,  volun-
tarily breaking  his  caste,  and  boldly
encountering  the  reproach  of  Christ.
On  this  delightful  occasion,  Kristno,
a  converted  native,  was  baptized,
together  with  Dr.  Carey's  eldest
son,  after  having,  a  few  days  be-
fore, publicly  renounced  caste,  by
eating  with  the  missionaries.  This
event  rejoiced  their  hearts,  and  gave
them  renewed  courage  to  pursue
their  high  but  difficult  calling;
some  of  them  had  now,  for  years,
patiently  waited  and  prayed  for  this
day ;  some  had  entered  into  fbetr
heavenly  rest  without  the  gpratiflca-
tion  of  beholding  it;  and  one  of
them,  who  hardly  survived  six
months,  was  carried  in  an  emaci-
ated state  to  witness  a  scene  so
cheering  to  his  soul,  that  he  was
almost  ready  to  say  with  Simeon —
<'  Lord,  now  lettestthou  thy  servant
depart  in  peace;  for  mine  e}'es
have  seen  thy  salvation."  Thns
was  one  of  the  strong  holds  of
Satan  broken  down,  and  the  way
opened  for  numerous  accessions  to
the  church  of  Christ  from  this  peo*
pie,  hitherto  entrenched  in  preju-
dices and  superstition,  and  impene-
trable to  all  the  convictions  of
Divine  truth  and  the  evidences  of
the  Grospel.

In  the  following  year,  several
more  renounced  caste  and  were
baptized ;  the  New  Testament  was
printed  at  the  mission  press;  and
the  missionaries  subsequently  con-
tinued  the  work   of  translating.


SER

printinf^,  tad  distributinf^ythe  Scrip-  |
tiiren   and  portions  of  themi  and
luinf^  Tarloui  other  important  mea-
sure* to  initnict  and  enlighten  the
heathen.

Mr.  Want  givei  the  following
abort  but  intereiting  account  of  the
flnt  attempt  of  a  Hindoo  to  preach
the  Gospel  to  his  countr}-men  :--

«  March  6,  1803.— In  the  efen-
ing»  brother  Care}-  gave  out  a  b^n,
and  read  a  chapter,  after  which,
old  Petumber  preached  in  Ben-
salee  to  a  congregation  of  Hindoos,
Si  ussulmans,  Armenians,  Feringahs,
EngliMh,  dec.  His  text  was  a  small
pamphlet  of  his  mm  wTiting,  which
we  pri nted  for  him.  A fter  praying
a  short  time  with  fervour  and  con-
sist«*ncy,  he  sat  down,  and  with  his
hands  joined  together  and  stretched
■out,  he  craved  their  attention.  He
then  spoke  for  an  hour,  with  faith-
fulness and  much  propriety ;  and
closed  the  whole  with  prater.  We
were  much  pleased  with  this  first
attempt  He  is  the  first  Hindoo
who  has  become  a  preacher.  This
is  another  new  era  in  the  mission,
for  which  we  ba^'e  reason  to  bless
God.  O  that  he  may  increase
the  number  of  faithful  native  la-
bourers !  This  is  the  grand  desi-
deratum that  is  to  move  the  Hindoo
nation."

In  1804,  the  missionaries  were
increased  to  10,  besides  2  natives,
and  14  were  baptized.  In  ISO.'^,
13,  0  of  whom  were  natives,  were
baptized;  and,  in  1806,  24  na-
tives. At  this  time  14  missionaries
w^re  connected  with  the  mission.
Olid  about  the  same  number  of
native  assistants;  who  had  now
formed  4  churches  in  Bengal,  viz.
— at  Serampore,  Dinageporcy
CtUwa,  and  Jettore ;  and  1  at
Rangoon,  in  the  Burman  Empire.
Another  event  of  considerable  im-
portance to  the  cause  of  God  oc-
curred in  the  year  1806 ; — this  was
the  commencement  of  the  printing


of  the   New  Teatement  ti  fti
ShuHcrlty  or  leened  Iwgiiige  of
lodU.    TMflaiigiiBgeocnpleittB
sane  place  maaomg  tbm  eMtani^
Uvet,  that  the  Latin  dmmoMt
m;  it  is  the  vehicle  bj  iMAfti
learned  coeuBimieete  tiieir  Mn^
infennation  horn  oee  to  HMdH^
through  the  nuuieioee  nettMiftit
people  that  vaet  contiBeBt^  fte  d^
pository  of  their  ancient  mjwtb
and  of  all  the  science  they  fommr.
andywhat  isuMHe,  as  Itgiweittt
sacred  character  in  tbeir  cilfeifr
tion,  it  is  the  langnage  in  wUeI
the  stories  of  their  tfaeotagy,  fte
exploiU  of  their  deities,  and  fte
rites  of  their  religion,  are  tnmm$
up ;  so  that  it  is  certain  of  hdm
cultivated  by  the  literati  of  mif
district,  and  is  in  no  dnuar  i
becoming  entirely  ohsoletofa ay.
To  translate  the  H6ty  BcdfUam
into  this  language,  tberefon^  nil
like  laying  them  op  in  tlie  aiehhjn
of  the  countiy;  gMng  tlmn  a  i^
gree  of  reverence  in  tfaeeyeiof  As
people,    and   making   an   Mr
translations  comparatively  eaijiil
certain.     This    great  woifc  lb
Ward  had  the  privilege  of  wdag
accomplished ;  and,  in  the  montha
June  this  year,  he  thos  notieei  te
commencement    of    the  priflU^f^
<'  June  6 —  We  have   hegim  ti
print  the  Shanscrit  Testament,  Ab
publication  of  which  is  of  grerf
importance.    Every  Eastern  pai|tf|i
knows  the    Shanscrit,  and  eoriil
make  from    it    a   good    Innris-
tion    into    his     own    wiotnaiK
tongue.    By  tnmslaUng  the  8ei^
tures,  therefore,  into  this  language^
we,  in  offset,  translate  them  istft
all  the  languages  of  Asia.''   -

In  1810,  there  were  19  mteiataii
and  8  churches.  Dnringthli  year,
106  were  baptized,  most  of  whan
were  in  Jessore.  In  18It,  a  great
calamity  befel  the  misrion,  in  fts
loss  of  their  large  printlng^oflke  by
fire,  containing  the  typei  of  til  tte

486


SER

^riptures  that  had  been  printed^
(  the  value  of  at  least  10,000/.
his  was  a  severe  dispensation  of
covidence,  not  only  as  the  great-
Mi   qkT  the   loss    threatened  to
f«rwhelm  their  feeble  affairs,  but
■s  felt  most  intensely  by  them :  it
•s  feared  that,  for  a  considerable
me  at  least,  it  would  put  a  stop  to
te  publication  of  the  Scriptures
ito^ther;  yet  that  God,  who  in
is  infinite  wisdom,  judged  it  right
lUB  to  try  them,  appeared  for  them
I  this  crisis  in  a  most  wonderful
tanner.    They  were  able  to  re-
iver from  the  fire  the  moulds  for
isting  new  ty^es:  the  sympathy
9ti  assistance  of  their  friends  on
le  spot  was  most  affectionately
BRered  ;   and  no  sooner  were  the
dings  made  known    in   Britain,
lan  every  heart  was  alive  to  the
)6ling  of  their  situation,  and  every
and  ready  to  contribute  towards
3|>airing  their  loss.    Christians  of
rery  denomination  vied  with  each
ther  in  the  most  solid  expressions
f  condolence  ;  so  that,  in  a  com-
aratively  short  time,  a  sum  was
daed  and  forwarded  from  all  parts
f  the  kingdom,  which  more  than
orered  the  amount  of  the  damage
liey  had   sustained.     The   delay
tras  occasioned  to  the  work  of  the
ublication  of  the  translations  was,
owever,  very  distressing :  they  had
9  begin  much  of  their  labour  anew ;
nd  had  they  not  found  among  the
abbish  the  steel  punches  of  aU  the
ndlan  languages,  uninjured  by  the
lames,  years  must   have  elapsed
»efore  they  could  have  replaced  the
3rpes    they  had  lost.      About  70
nembers  were,  however,  added  to
be  churches  at    Serampore  and
!^cutta ;  and  at  the  close  of  the
rear,  the  mission  embraced  12  sta-
ions,  containing  about  500  mem-
lers.    In  about  a  year  after  the
CM  of  the  printing  establishment,
iie  missionaries  were  proceeding
^ith  printing  the  Scriptures  to  a


SER

•

greater  extent  than  ever,  having  IS*
versions  in  the  press,  and  3  more  in
a  state  of  forwardness.  In  the  same
year,  about  1000  scholars  were  in
all  the  schools  connected  with  the
mission.  In  1 8 14,  the  stations  were
increased  to  20,  and  the  preachers
to  41.    They  had  now  extended
their  translations  to  25  languages ;
21  of  which  had  been  put  to  press.
Previous  to  the  close  of  this  year,
the  £,  and  F.  B,  S,  had  made  them
grants  of  more  than  57,720  dollars.
In  the  month  of  August,  1816,  the
work  of  the  missionaries  received  a
partial  and  temporary  check.    On '
the  arrival  of  two  brethren  from
England  to  join  them  in  their  la-
bours, they  were  refused  permission
to  proceed  to  Serampore,  and  at
the  same  time  an  intimation  was
conveyed  from  the  highest  autho-
rity to  Dr.  Carey,  "  that  he  and
his  colleagues  must  not  interfere
with  the  prejudices  of  the  natives ;
that,  in  fact,  they  were    not  to
preach  to  them,  or  suffer  the  native
converts  to  do  so .;  they  were  not  to
distribute  religious  tracts,  or  suffer
the  people  to  distribute  them ;  they
were  not  to  send  forth  converted
natives ;  or  to   take  any  step,  by
conversation  or  otherwise,  to  per-
suade   the    natives    to    embrace
Christianity.''    Though  this  inter-
ruption,  through  the  wise  and  tem-
perate conduct  of  the  missionaries,
and  the  appointment  of  the  two
brethren  recently  arrived  to  a  Jo-
reign  station,  was  at  that  tiihe
removed,  yet,  in  the  year  following,
new  attempts  were  made  to  restrict
their  exertions  \  so  that  for  a  short
time,  they  were  not   allowed  to
preach  in  some  places,— especially
at  Calcutta.  Endeavours  were  also
used  to  influence  the  Britidi  cabinet
against  them,  and  measures  pro-
posed in  Parliament,  which  were
calculated   to  stop  the  spread  of
the  Gospel  among  the  heathen  in
our  colonial  poswstlons;  but  tbs.
p  p  2  437


SRR

powerful  appeals  of  enlightened
and  ("bristlan  men  at  last  premlled
over  the  Ignorant  clamours  of  Infldel
alarmlffls.

Previous  to  1815,  166  had  been
Imptized  at  all  the  stations ;  and  in
thH  S  succeeding  years  more  than
100  were  added  to  the  churches
t'onnectedwith  this  mission;  making
the  whole  number  amount  to  nearly
liOO,  atthecloseof  1817,gatbered
from  14  different  nations.  At  the
last-mentioned  date,  the  mission-
aries say—  *'  Throughout  the  whole
mission,  there  are  scarcely  less
than  10,000  children,  of  every  de-
^ription,  brouglit  in  some  way  or
other  under  instruction  ;  and  this
has  been  hitherto  done  chiefly  by
means  furnished  on  the  spot :  the
Oo!(|>el  is  made  Icnown  at  25  sta-
tiiiuK,  of  which  20  are  occupied  by
teachers  raised  up  in  India.  Surely,
when  we  consider  what  aspect  all
this  bears  on  a  future  harvest  of
enlightened  converts,— of  gifts  that
may  spread  light  and  knowledge  to
the  utmost  bounds  of  India, — we
cannot  but  feel  pjateful.  But,  if
we  turn  our  attention  to  the  trans-
lations which  already  lay  open  the
path  of  divine  knowledge  to  so  many
millions,  and  glance  at  those  in  pre-
paration, which  will  open  the  way
to  nearly  every  nation,  from  China
to  the  borders  of  Persia,—  nations
that,  with  the  Indian.  Isles,  can
scarcely  include  a  less  number  than
200,000,000,beside8thel50,000,000
China  is  allowed  by  all  to  contain,
and  with  these  a  full  half  of  man-
kind,—the  whole  will  surely  furnish
matter  for  gpratitude  and  encou-
ragement.'' About  the  same  time
the  printing  establishment,  includ-
ing the  making  of  paper,  fur-
nished employment  for  about  800
natives.

In  1818,  the  missionaries  pur-
chased ground,  and  commenced  a
college  'f  the  objects  of  which  are>
to  train  up  pious  youths  for  the


Cbrlstiaii  minlitiy,  to  angmenttte
biblical  knowledge  of  meh  ai  an
already  emplojed  In  pieachiqg^nd
to  enaUe  thoae  wIkh  by  the  kwof
CBite  hvre  been  lediieed  ta  hvlW
gence  to  maintain  theaudvai.  It
cental  ned»  in  ltil9, 87  pa|illi,nte
the  Presidency  of  Dr.  Canji  who
deihrentheolofrlcal  lectaieiiBBfli-
galee.  In  1819-30,  Bir.  Wnri
visited  EngUmd  and  the  UiHBd
States  In  Ito  behaU;  and  oMaiBed
25,000  doHara.  The  aOaaamOm
contributed  1 1 ,000dollan  Iraa  thek
own  labours.

From  the  10th  Memoir  of  He
Translations  and  editiont  of  He
Sacred  Scrlptiires»  eondacted  If
the  mlaslonarleBy  pobUabed  in  UM,
the  following  paiUculaiB  aie  e^
tracted : —


The  Bengalee,    8th

edition  in  the  presa  1794  1811

—  Hindee,  2ded.do.  1808  1811

—  Sungsknt,  2d  do.  180S  »ll

—  Orissa,  2d  do.  I80S  1811
~  Mahratta,  8d  do.  1804  1811
--Telinga        -     -  1805  1818

—  Sikh  -     -     -     .  1807  1815

—  Gujuratee    -     •  1807  1810

—  Kunkuna  -    -    •  1808  1811

—  Kumata    -     -     .  1808  18B

—  Pushtoo,  or  Affghan  1811  1811

—  Assamee   -     -     .  |81]  1811

—  Wutch,orMifItaneel8U  1811

—  Bikaneer        -     -  1813  1818

—  Kashmeer      -     -  1810  1818

—  Bhugulkhund      -  1814  1811

—  Maruwar       -     -  I8I4  ItSl

—  Napalee         -     -  1812  1881

—  Harotee         -     -  1815  1881

—  Kanoja     .    -     -  1815  1881

—  Chinese,  2d  edition

of  the  Gosp.  prbited  1808 1817.

The  fbUowing  liat  ezhibiti  Oe
ten  versions  in  the  praw  at  ihit
period,  with  the  time  of  tbdr
commencement,  and  the  state  of
theUr  progien  at  pram : —

489


SER


SER


Begun

Printed  to

The  Jt^mboo

-

*

1814    -

-    Phi1.iii.9.

The  Mtmipoor

-

-

1814    -

•    8Cor.xiii.4.

TheMttgudh

.

-

1814    -

-    Rom.  xiii.  4.

The  Khasee

■■

-

1814    -

-    ■Actsxix.29.

The  Oojjuyuaee

-

.

1815    -

-    Phil.  1.10.

The  Bruj

-

*

1816    -

-    2Cor.ii.e.

The  Kumaoun

-

.

1816    .

-    Lnke  x.  23.

The  Bht^tneer

-

*

1816    -

-    Rom.  xiv.  13.

The  Sree-nugur,

or  Gurwal

1816    -

-    Luke  xi.  21.

ThePalpa

-

-

1817     -

-    Matt,  xxvii.  6

*'  To  these,"  say  the  mission-
ties,  "  we  may  add  the  Kythee
dition,  which  is  the  Hindee,  in
le  current  Naguree  character,
bdefly  used  by  the  mercantile  and
vding  classes,  and  in  which,  at
le  earnest  request  of  the  late  Mr.
hamberlain,  we  prepared  a  fount
f  types  for  the  sake  of  printing
le  New  Testament.   This  edition

advanced  as  far  as  the  Acts  of
IB  Apostles,  the  ninth  chapter  of
hich  completes  precisely  half  of
le  New  Testament."

State  of  the  versions  of  the  Old
'estament : —

The  Bengalee,  second  edition,
tranced  to  1  Sam.  20.
The  Sungskrit,  second  edition,
Ifanced  to  Exod.  31.
The  Orissa,  first  edition,  finished
;  press  in  1819.

The    Mahratta,    first     edition,
inted  off  in  1820.
The  Chinese,  finished  at  press
prU  1822.

The  Sikh,  Pentateuch,  and  His-
fical  books,  printed ;  Prophetic
inted  to  Jer.  xiii.
The  Assamee,  Pentateuch  finish-
\,  Historical  books  begun.
The  Pushtoo,  or  Affghan,  Pen-
tench  advanced  to  Dent.  30.
The  Kashmeer,  Pentateuch  ad-
nced  to  Gen.  30.
The  Telf  nga,Pentateuch  printed,
id  the  version  resigned   to  the
adras  Bible  Society.
<<  The    Old    Testament    now
lated  off  in  Chinese,  forms  the


sixth  version  completed  here  of  the
whole  Scriptures  in  the  different
Indian     languages.      This     was
finished  at  press  in  April  this  yciar ;
and  thus,  after  16  years  of  nnre^-
mitting   labour,    we   have    been
enabled,  through  .the  good  hand  of
our  God  upon  us,  to  redeem  our
pledge  to  the  Christian  public,  by^
presenting    them  with  a  Chinese
Bible  complete.    As  the  Gospels
of  St.  Matthew  and  Mark  were
printed   about  twelve  ^ears  ago,
with  wood  blocks,  In  the  Chinese
manner,  and   that  of  St.   John,
eight  years  ago,  with  our  largest
metallic  moveable  characters,  we
have,    since    finishing    the   Old
Testament    at  press,    printed   a
second  edition  of  these   Gospels
with  the  same  moveable  characters
in  which  the  rest  of  the  Scriptures
are    printed.     This   appeiudng  a
favourable  opportunity  for  such  a
revision,  we  compared  these  Gos-
pels anew  with  the  original  text,
and  also  with  our  esteemed  friend.
Dr.  Morrison's  version;  and  al-
though we  do  not  presume  that
these  Gospels  yet  perfectly  accoM
with  the    original  text.  We  are*
ready  to  hope,  that  this  edition  of
them  is  brought  somewhat  nelnrer
to  it   than  any  one  which    has
before  appeared.    As  leisure  niay
be  afibrded,  we  are  about  to  adopt
the  same  course  with  the  remainder
of  the  New  Testament."  Tbelow-
ness  of  the  general  fund  for  trans-
lation  compelled    the  defonnent

439


SER

of    other   InDdations  of  the  OU
Tcfttament.

In  iBiSy  the  excellent  and  de-
voted Mr.  Ward  was  removed  from
the  labours  of  this  world  to  the
glories  of  another.  In  1825,  it
appears,  that  the  translators  were
prosecuting  their  labours  with  un-
abated ardour,  though  they  had
many  difficulties  to  contend  with —
that  a  body  of  truntees  had  been
ai)i>ointed  for  the  security  of  the
College  property — that  the  con-
tributions derived  from  the  re-
sources of  the  missionaries  was
applied  to  the  grounds  and  buildings,
and  those  of  the  public  to  the
payment  of  the  professors,  the
discharge  of  current  expenses,  and
the  founding  of  scholarships — that
the  number  in  attendance  was  45, —
and  that  Dr.  Marshnian  had  visited
Copenhagen,  for  the  purpose  of
obtaining  from  the  Danish  Govern-
ment a  Royal  Charter  of  Incor-
poration, in  which  he  succeeded  j
so  that  it  possesses  the  power  of
conferring  literary  and  honorary
degrees,  and  the  property  is  im-
mutably secured  for  the  purposes
contemplated  in  its  establishment.
In  the  last  report  the  following
statements  are  made : —

**  Tlie  church  consists  at  present
of  07  memliers  in  full  communion.
10  of  these  are  Europeans  or  de-
scendants of  such,  and  include  a
few  friends  residenIP  in  the  settle-
ment, in  addition  to  the  members
of  the  different  families  connected
with  the  mission ;  4  more  reside  at
Barrackpore,  on  the  opposite  side  of
the  river;  and  the  remainder  are
natives  of  the  countr>',  turned  from
idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true
God.  The  accessions  to  the  church
during  the  year  (1820),  have  been
such  as  to  fill  our  hearts  with  the
liveliest  gpratitude.  Of  13  who  have
been  baptized  and  received  into  the
church,  one  is  an  elderly  gentle-
man residing  in  the  town;  2  others.


SER

the  daufl^ten  of  Mr.  Waid  nl
Mr.  F.  Carey  ;  «  nan  EmU
students  In  Semnpon  ooUegB^
viz.  John  Smithy  ■on  of  Ihk
thar  Smith  of  Benares  Jodai
Howe,  eldeit  aon  of  our  lata  Ihk
ther  Rowe  of  DigaJi,  and  Jawi
Domingo;  6  othon  are  nattft  ^bh
dents  in  the  college^  of  Chrirtiai
parentage,  another  wai  for  yarn
student  alao,  but  haa  lecenti^  baa
taken  Into  employment  ia  Ihi
printing-office,  and  the  hat  w
long  a  aenrant  in  the  coU^ftp  mi
has  linco  been  engaged  as  a  d»-
mestic  in  the  miarton  famflty.  It
is  highly  gratiryina:  that  aU  Ha
senior  lUidenta  in  the  collaga  an
now  memben  of  the  chiiic%  «i
that  their  general  deportnnat  li
such  as  becomea  their  profealoB.

**  Including  the  memben  of  Ha
church,  and  the  Tarioui  btaocta
of  their  respectiTe  frmiltiff,  tiMn
is  a  nominally  Christian  populattai
of  natives  residing  in  Serampon
of  not  less  than  160  indiTidiali.
To  provide  for  the  r^giooi  ii>
structionof  these,  regular  seaiooi
of  worship  are  appointed  cm  Sab*
bath  da}'s  and  throughout  tlie  week.

"A  Christian  ▼ill^  haslala^
been  established,  for  tito  paipoa
of  promoting  the  general  confort
of  our  native  brethren,  and  abo
facilitatiog  the  communlcatloB  of
religious  instruction  to  them.  It
now  consists  of  13  dw^Ung-booae^
with  a  small  chapel  in  the  ceatie ;
and  will,  we  trust,  be  consldazaMy
enlarged  during  the  present  season
as  several  £amiUes  are  dftsirwf  of
removing  to  it  from  the  town,  fam
which  it  is  distant  but  a  veiy  afaoft
way,  on  ao  open  and  elevated  90t
of  ground.  Pran  Ejiahnu,  one  of
the  native  preachers,  reddea  in  it,
and  conducts  daily  wonhlp  in  tha
chapel,  and  in  other  ways  aeeln  tha
edification  of  the  people  under  hii
charge.  On  Tuesday,  Satind^,
and  Sabbath  eveningSp

440


SER

te  conducted  by  one  or  other  of  the
mlfliionaries;  and  an  adult  school
is  held  on  Sabbath,  in  the  chapel,
hy  Mr.  Buckingham,  a  pious  and
aetive  young  man,  who  has  been
with  us  since  before  Mr.  Ward's
lamented  death,  from  whom  he
received   his   first   instruction   in

xeligion*

**  Prayer  meetings  are  likewise
held  on  3  evenings  of  the  week
amongst  the  brethren  in  the  town
and  the  students  of  the  college,
and  there  is  a  sermon  in  the  mis-
sion chapel  every  Thursday  evening.

*'  These  various  services,  together
with  those  in  the  English  language,
occupy  a  great  part  of  our  time  and
■attention ;  but  they  do  not  wholly
■prevent  our  visiting  the  heathen  in
the  streets  and  villages.  Our  la-
bours in  this  way,  however,  are
chiefly  confined  to  Sabbath  after-
noon. It  is  then  usual  for  one  or
two  parties  of  the  native  brethren,
accompanied  by  one  or  other  of
'the  missionaries,  to  repair  to  the
'bazaar,  or  to  one  or  two  neigh*
bouring  villages  to  preach  the  Gos-
pel ;  or  sometimes  a  party  take  a
boat  and  spend  the  whole  day  in
going  from  place  tg  place,  within
8  or  10  miles,  on  this  blessed
errand.  At  the  annual  festivals  of
Juggernaut,  too,  when  vast  multi-
tudes assemble  in  our  vicinity,  we
are  accustomed  to  devote  several
entire  days  to  the  distribution  of
the  word  of  life,  by  preaching,  and
by  tracts  and  portions  of  Scripturei;
and  at  some  seasons  excursions  are
made  by  diiTerent  brethren  to  con-
siderable distances.  In  this  way,  in
the  months  of  October  and  Novem-
ber last,  Mr.  Buckingham,  accom-
panied by  one  native  brother,
journeyed  through  the  districts  of
Hoogly,  Krishnugor,  Moorsheda-
bad,  Burdwan,  and  Beerbhoom,
visiting  several  places  where  the
Gospel  had  never  before  been
preached.

**  Of  these  labours  we  have  teen


SER

no  other  fruit  of  late,  than  the
occasional  calls  of  persons  who
profess  to  come  for  inquiiy  respect*
ing  salvation.  Some  of  these  have
exhibited  considerable  promise,
but  none  have  persevered.  Still
we  have  no  thought  of  remitting
these  labours, — but  rather  it  is  our
desire  to  abound  in  them  more  and
more."

SERINGAPATAM,  or  PA-
TANA,  a  fortified  city  of  Hin-
doostan,  capital  of  the  S.  district  of
Mysore,  and  lately  of  the  whole
country.  Before  this  city,  in  1792,
the  British  compelled  Tippoo  to
cede  half  of  his  dominions  to  them
and  their  allies;  and  a  new  war
breaking  out  in  1799,  the  British
carried  the  fort  by  an  assault,  in
which  Tippoo  was  killed.  The
city  and  island  have  since  been  re-
tained by  the  British.  £.  long.
lef^  46',  N.  lat.  12«  26*.

Of  this  place,  the  Rev.  Mr.
Massie,  of  the  L.  M,  S,,  who  vi-
sited it  in  a  journey  from  Madras,
thus  speaks:—"  Here,  for  the  first
time,  I  beheld  native  built  houses^
in  regular  streets,  rising  to  a  second
story,  and  some  with  a  Uiird.  There
are  about  20,000  inhabitants,  I  un-
derstand, within  the  walls :  most  of
them  are  Mussulmans,  though  there
are  also  many  Hindoos.  There  is
a  considerable  number  of  country-
bom  people,  and  some  Europeans,
who  hold  situations  under  govern-
ment. No  chapUdn  officiates  here,
and  many  are  desirous  to  be  blessed
with  the  stated  means  of  grace.
Mr.  Laidler  has  been  very  atten-
tive to  the  spiritual  wants  of  this
people :  they  are  much  attached
to  him,  and  contribute  towards  the
funds  of  the  L.  M,  S,  They  are
very  desirous  that  a  labourer  should
be  settled  amongst  them,  not  only
for  their  own  benefit,  but  also  to
assist  them  in  thehr  operations  In
behalf  of  the  poor  natives,  for
whom  they  are  veiy  active.  I  met
nearly  80,  and  preached  to  -IhsiEk


BIIA

tJie  vonU  of  eternal  life.  Four
iiatlvet  hare  expretted  tbeir  wish
far  baptism."

SHAWANEES,  Indiaim,  in
Ohio,  near  the  head  of  the  Miami,
roDsixting  of  about  SOO  souls,  in
ti  settlements  —  fydpaghkoMtta,
Lewis  TVirii,  and  Hog  Creek,
They  ba?e  made  considerable  im-
provement!, principally  by  the
eflbrtK  of  the  Soriety  of  Friends,

SliOMOKEN,  formerly  a  large
Indian  settlement  on  the  Susque-
hannah  R.,  about  120  m.W.  of  Cros-
weeks.  New  Jersey.  It  was  inha-
bited by  300  of  3  different  tribes,
spealciiiff  languages  wholly  unin-
telligible to  each  other.  About
one- half  were  Delawares,  the
other  Senecas  and  Tutelas.  They
were  the  most  vicious  and  mis-
chievous people  in  the  whole
countiy.

About  1740,  the  U.  B.  stationed
S  missionaries  here,  who  exerted
themselves  a  short  time  in  this
place  and  its  vicinity,  at  the  hazard
of  their  lives.  In  1715,  the  Rev.
I).  Bminenl  laboured  here  with
some  little  success.

SIERRA  LEONE,  a  countr}'  in
the  W.  part  of  Guinea,  so  named
from  lieing  mountainous,  and  the
mountains  supposed  to  abound  in
lions;  but  it  is  now  certain  that
these  animals  do  not  exist  in  this
country.  Its  limits  are  from  the
Grain  Coast  on  the  S.  E.,  to  Cape
Verga  on  the  N.  W. ;  that  is,  be-
tween 7°  and  10°  N.  lat.  The  wet
season,  from  May  to  October,  is
ushered  in  and  terminated  by
stormy  weather.  The  cultivated
parts  are  rich  in  rice  and  millet ;
and,  upon  the  whole,  it  is  one  of
the  best  countries  on  the  coast.  It
embraces  several  kingdoms  of  na-
tives, who  are  in  a  wretched  state
of  ignorance  and  degradation.  In
the  N.  part  of  the  coast,  are  the
Negroes ;  in  the  interior,  die  Susoos
and  Foulahs ;  S.  of  these  are  the
j^f  dodijigoes ;  about  the  co\oxi7|\)^<&


SIE

TimmmiiaM ;  S.  of  tfaii,  on  fti
coMt.  are  the  Sbeilnoei,  Boliai^
and  Foyi.

Sierra  Leosu,  a  BritUi  eoliv
of  re-captand  negroei^  la  )ki
countiy  of  the  aama  bhbb^  ¥•
Africa.  The  original  pmchmBi
10  m.  aqaare,  on  the  S.  aide  of  tt|
Sierra  Leone  R.,  and  Ui  loed  i
tuation  is  veiy  IkvoorahlB  far  o»
merce.  Thetandaontheiimai
vei7  fertile,  prodneing  eottaa^iiH^
sugar,  and  aioet  of  the  traflal
fruits.  Since  the  tot  jwicM
the  colony  has  been  extended  iM
30  m.  S.  In  18S1,  aU  the  BM
poisenlons  on  this  coast,  fam  tf
N.  UU  to  80^  S.  lat.  wanaanl
to  the  government  of  Siena  I^aiik
under  the  late  Sir  C.  M^Cnfe
The  ccdony  Is  dlrlded  Uitottelii'
lowing  parishes  or  dishdeti^  Ip
which  the  negro  towns  sit  f^
tuated;  riz.: — Si,  George^  U>
James's,  Si.  Peier*s,  Si,  JUhrt^
St.  Charles's,  Si.  PaaPs,  &A>
trick's,  St.  Edward's,  St.  Jfi-
cAael's,  Si.  Thomae's^  Artkm^U>
Henri's,  Si.  Ana's,  and  A.  >
drew's.

Colonization  In  Africa,  withie-
ference  to  civilization,  appesii  iD
have  been  contemplated  in  Ei^tk
as  early  as  1780.  A  definite  pie
was  projected  by  Dr.  H.  ftnen*
man,  in  his  letters  to  Dr.  KnoehH
in  178S.  Several  favooraUe  €!►
cumstances  soon  after  ocanM
which  excited  the  public  sttn*
tion  to  the  soblect,  and  gaie  lie
to  the  Society  far  ike  AMitisa^
the  Slave  Trade.  Mr.  WUbeiftiee
introduced  the  subject  Into  ik
British  Parliament ;  and  bis  p»
severance  and  success  are  fas*
printed  on  the  memory  of  amtj
philanthropist.

The  slaTes  who,  during  the  wv
of  the  revolution  had  servad  uwlcr
the  British  standard,  were,  dbr
the  peace  in  1T8S,  sent  to  fti
Bahama  Islands  and  Nova  Scotisi
^vckd  iwjimbecs  of  them  repairedto


U

vr
fa

hi
Jk

V

f)
n
fc

«
k
a
ii
«
Id


'


SIE

London.  They  became  subject  to
•IrvTy  misery,  and  were  familiar
with  every  vice.  A  Committee  was
Ibnned  for  their  relief;  and,  at
kngtfa,  about  400  blacks,  with
■bout  60  whites,  who  were  chiefly
vomen  of  abandoned  character,
#ere  embarlced  for  Sierra  Leone,
•ad  arrived  May  9,  1787.  In  the
IbUowing  September,  the  colony
was  reduced  to  276  persons,  by
death  and  desertion ;  the  latter
doiitinued  to  increase ;  and  in  Nov.
of  the  same  year,  the  remaining
ecdbnists  were  dispersed,  and  the
tuwii  burnt  by  an  African  chief.

In  179],  some  friends  of  Africa
Jbrmed  an  Association,  entitled
the  Si,  George's  Bay  Company f  by
whose  efforts  sonie  of  the  dispersed
eoionists  were  collected,  and  1200
free  negroes  transported  from  Nova
Scotia.  In  1794,  a  French  squadron
plundered  and  destroyed  the  colo-
nial town ;  but  this  evil  was  soon
remedied,  the  influence  of  the  co*
Ibiny  increased,  and  its  commercial
Tiews  were  promoted.  At  length,
however,  the  Company,  finding  the
profits  were  inadequate  to  cover
tile  expenses  of  the  establishment,
transferred  their  property  to  the
British  Government,  in  1808.
Since  the  adoption  of  this  mea-
fnre,  the  colony  has  enjoyed  a
degree  of  prosperity,  and  large
accessions  are  annually  made,  by
the  vigriiance  of  British  cruisers  in
rescuing  from  slave  ships  those
Africans,  who  have  been  torn
from  their  country  and  friends,
and  sold  into  bondage.  In  1811,
the  population  was  about  2000.
In  1822,  it  had  increased  to  16,671,
of  the  following  descriptions ;  viz.
1S8  Europeans,  601  Maroons,  from
Jamaica ;  722  Nova-Scotians ;  85
West-Indians  and  Americans,  3526
natives,  9559  liberated  Africans,
1103  disbanded  soldiers,  and  947
Kroomen.  This  enumeration  is
eicciusive  of  the  military  and  their
families.       Those    rescued    from


sm

slave-ships,  were  taken  into  the
colony  destitute,  ignorant  be>'ond
conception,  unacquainted  with  all
the  arts  of  civilized  life  and  of
every  kind  of  hope  for  eternity.
The  British  Government  early  es«
tablished  schools  for  the  instruction
of  the  colonists,  and  provides  for
their  support  till  they  acquire
the  means  of  maintainhig  them-
selves.

The  fVesleyantJiidi  Church  missi-
onaries have  successfully  laboured
here,  principally  since  1816.  Since
that  time,  out  of  this  strange  mass
of  people,  a  colony  was  formed,
"  which,  in  order,  and  decency,
and  sobriety,  and  in  the  knowledge
and  practice  ofChristian duty,'' says
an  English  gentleman,  ^'  not  only
may  rival,  but,  I  firmly  and  from
my  heart  believe,  exceeds  any
equal  population  in  the  most  fa-
voured part  of  this  highly  favoured
country."  The  following  state-
ment was  made  by  the  late  Chief
Justice  of  the  colony,  at  a  quarter
session,  about  the  close  of  1822  : —
**  Ten  years  ago,  when  the  colony
was  only  4000,  there  were  40  cases
on  the  calendar  for  trial ;  and  now
the  population  is  upwards  of  16,000,
there  are  only  6;  and  not  one
from  any  of  the  villages  under  the
superintendence  of  a  missionary  or
school-master.''  In  1823,  the  na-.
tive  communicants,  in  connexion
with  the  church  missionaries,  were
680;  scholars,  3523.  At  that  pe-
riod it  was  that  the  first  serious  blow
was  given,  by  the  death  of  the
Rev.  Messrs.  Johnson  and  Deering,
to  the  prosperity  of  the  mission.
Subsequent  and  continual  changes^
from  the  death  of  their  successors,
and  the  labourers  at  other  villages
of  liberated  Africans ;  the  necessity
of  employing  incompetent  teachers,
and  frequently  the  want  of  all
teachers ;  the  heavy  burden  of  the
civil  superintendence  of  the  settle-
ments,which  exhausted  the  strength
and    spirit   of  the  miMloaisteKS

\V1


toyjrihrr  with  otluT  oirrumslances,
-pn'MMii  thi'i  iiii^^iMii  at  Iht;  pre-
*ei\X  tiuif  ii»  an  jihjut;  ptniiliarly
iminful,  i"»|»tM-i.-tU\  in  Um*  n"\ii*Nv  ol'
lis  I'oriniT ini^p'Titx.  Ma>  tlialhe
far  e\t«'«'«I«'w  h}  lli«'  -•wci**'*  ol
b«'iir\ol(>nt  i'XiTtionH  in  lutun*-
jt'arsi

|S»'f   Hti/tanns,  lit f hursts  f'hnr'
!uUt\   I-Wt'f'iM'tt*  (i/ui/ri.\frr^  k*'nf^

//  'atn-lun ,  //  V  ///  Hfi  ton ,  //  t  Ihrr-
fmri\  iin>!   ^ifrk.\

SILIIKT.drSVMlKT,  thorapi-
tnl  of  a  ili<»tii<'t  til'  till'  s.-imt'  nnme
in  tin*  N.  v..  par'i  ul  Hrtual,  Ilin-
i]iM)Htan.  :{lUni.  N.  K.  ut Calrutta.
Thr  n;iti\t'- an'  in  a  wiiil  ami  wri'trh-
I'll  stjilr.  .Toiin  lit*  Silvji,  n  Portii-
^n«"ii',  an  I  Hh;i:r\al,  a  nativo  trach-
•M,  l»«»lli  ini'iiili.M«.  »>l  till'  fhpfist
I'linrrli  at  C.ilfutt.i,  |:ilM)iiri>il  line,
ami  Ml  I'.'.ii'liia,  r.»r  m'vi'hiI  \i.*ai.>;
hul  lln*  want  i»t  tlii»  Snipturi's,  the
fiiTce  nianm'i>,  ji'lI  tin'  supiTsti-
tiuns  nMoiiK  ol"  the  natives,  re-
tanleil  their  pni:iie*.s.  Jihaioat
•Iji'd  in  IM7,  «nii  soon  alter  the
nii.v>ion  \va<  P'lin<ini>heil.

SIN(\\I»()l<K.orSlN(;AP()KE,
a  town  sitiiatetl  on  a  >mall  island  ul'
the  >'iini'  name,  at  the  southern
•'xlreiiiil\  ol"  the  peninsula  of  Ma-
laera,  IC.  lom,^  101",  N.lat.l"il'.
The  town  ami  prineipality  were
I'oniiiled  by  ailvenlurers  from  Su-
matra :  it  was  but  thinly  peoph'd
lill  the  Kntclish  tc»ok  po^se^sion  of
It,  ill  IHIO  ;  since  wliieh,  it  has
nqndly  increased  in  coniiiierce  and
population.  In  14  n)onth>,  the
inhabitants  increased  from  200  to
10,000,  n  larixe  proportion  of  whom
were  ('hinese.

The  Kev.  S.  Milton  and  C.  H.
Thcniisen,  from  the  A.  M.  .S.,  com-
menced a  mission  here  in  islO,
and  a  plot  of  ground  was  i^iven  by
i^ovemment  for  its  u<e.  'I'he  niis-
sionarie>  preached  in  Bm^lish,  Chi-
nese, and  Malay,  and  lluurishinflr
schools  were  establishe«l  for  the  in-
><riictio/i  of  the  cUvldtcw  \u  cacVi  c^l


SIX

these  lanflciiu^es.  Mr.  Milton  hu
en*cted,  chiefly  at  his  own  expeoc,
a  line  uf  buildings  90  feet  by  Is,
intended  as  apartments  foi  the
srhcK>lma.«ters,  teachers,  d'C,  io
connexion  with  the  Chinese  d^
partuieiit  ol*  the  mission.  In  l§2i,
it  was  nirreed  to  connect,  with  the
Anij^lo-Chiiiese  College  at  Malacca,
u  Main}  College  at  Sincapore.  Sir
Stamford  IUiffle5(,  governor  of  Ben-
coolen,  Col.  Furquhar,  the  magiS'
t  rates,  and  other  gentlemen  ot
Siiicapore,  liberally  lent  their  aid
to  thi.s  object.  Mr.  Thumsenw
appointed  professor  of  Malay,  aod
Mr.  Milton  of  Siamese.

Of  the  mission,  the  last  report
thus  speaks  r —

**  Xatire  Schools. — Here  are  3
Malay  schools;  of  which  two  are
for  boys,  and  the  other  for  girls:
and  one  Chinese.  In  the  former
s(*hools  about  30  children  receive
Christian  instruction,  and  in  the
latter  sclux)!  1:2.  The  Malay  chil-
dren  attend  irregularly,  and  their
prounress  is  small ;  the  Chinese  re-
i^ularU ,  and  their  proficiency  is
Ci)n.«iilerHble.

"J/ri/fly  Preaching . — One  of  the
Malay  sen-ices  has  been,  for  the
present,  suspended,  in  consequence
of  the  dispersion  of  the  people  of
the  place  where  it  was  held,  by  a
fire  that  consumed  nearly  200
houses.  The  services  at  the  cha-
pel are  continued  as  formerly,  bat
the  attendance  seldom  exceeds  30.
Of  these,  however,  some  make
t^ood  progress  in  Christian  know-
ledge.

**  A  Malay  female,  who  formerly
shared  in  the  benefit  of  the  school,
after  a  suitable  term  of  probation,
has  been  baptized.  She  is  the  first
adult  native  who  has,  in  this  wayi
manifested  her  desire  to  put  on  the
yoke  of  Christ.

Distrihittion  of  the  Scriptutet,
Tracts,  Syc. — The  number  of  these,
in  Chinese,  Malay,  and  English,
Vu\\xv\a  cvcc^&l&tlQQ  during  the  year


SIR

1^26,  was  upwards  of  6500.  The
Obtef  part  consisted  of  tracts,  given
•Ither  to  Chinese  settlers,  or  to
UKMe  on  board  the  junks,  who  re-
ceived them  with  apparent  interest,
and  sometimes  applied  for  them
with  earnestness.  In  the  distribu-
tion of  Malay  tracts,  Mr.  Thom-
feftn,  beside  supplying  the  prows  in
the  harbour,  avails  himself  of  op-
portunities of  leaving  copies  in  the
•hops  of  the  Chinese,  to  be  given  to
their  Malay  customers.

"Printing-  OJice,'-Ahoui25,00O
Malay  tracts  have  been  printed
during  the  year;  of  which,  part
have  been  sent  for  distribution  to
Pinang,  Malacca,  and  Batavia.

"  Mr.  S.  Dyer,  appointed  to  this
station,  embarked  with  Mrs.  Dyer
4MI  the  1 1  th  of  April.  Mr.  and  Mrs.
I>yer,  having  each  of  them  already
made  considerable  progress  in  the
attainment  of  Chinese,  proceed,
"With  the  pleasing  expectation  of
entering,  shortly  after  their  arrival,
upon  direct  missionary  labours."

SIRDHANA,  the  capital  of  a
fonall  independent  territory,  Hin-
doostan,  near  the  Punjab,  orcoun-
l3nr  of  the  Sieks,about  920  m.  N.  W.
o/Calcutta,  and  200  N.  £.  of  Agra.
The   Rev.  J.   Chamberlain,  from
the  B.  M,  S.,  came  here  in  1813,
at  the  request  of  the  Prime  Minis-
. ter  of  Her  Royal   Highness  the
Begum  Sumroo,  by  whom  he  was
.  faTOurably  received.    He  continued
here  about  2  years,  during  which
time  he  established  5  schools  for
teaching  Persian  and  Hindoostanee.
SIX  NATIONS,  the  remains  of
a  formidable    confederacy  of  In-
.  dians,  celebrated  in  the  history  of
N.  America,  who  were  originally
possessors  of  a  great  part  of  the
State  of  New  York ;  called  by  the
.  French,  Iroquois.    It  formerly  con-
sisted of    6    nations,   viz. ! — The
.  Mohawks,  Cayugas,  Oneidas,  Se-
necas,  and  Onondagas.    The  Tus-
caroras  from  Virginia  joioiid  them
in  1713^  and  several  remnants  of


SIX

other  tribes  have  been  added  at
different  times.      Their  compact
existed  at   the  time  of   the  first
settlement  by  Europeans,  and  the
time  of  their  union  was  then  lost  in
the   uncertainty  of  ancient  occur-
rences.   In  1635,  they  were  a  nu-
merous and  powerful  people,  hold-
ing most  of  the  neighbouring  tribes
under  a  kind  of  subjection.     Pos-
sessing a  large  extent  of  territory,
opulent  in  native  supplies,  and  very
fertile,  the  Iroquois  extended  the
terror  of  their  arms  to  far  distant
tribes.    They  were  able  to  send
several  thousand  warriors  on  dis-
tant expeditions.     Onondaga  wac
their  principal  settlement,  and  the
seat  of  Indian  power,   where  all
their  councils  were  held;   it  had
fortifications  of  sufficient  magni-
tude •  and  strength  for  Indian  war-
fare at  that  period.    Each  tribe
maintained  a  separate  government ;
but  the  grand  council  settled  the
afiairs  of  the  whole  confederacy.
Since  the  Amevicans  took  posses-
sion of  the  country*,  like  the  other
aboriginal  tribes,  they  have  been
gradually    diminishing.     Most   of
tbe   Mohawks  and  Cayugas  have
emigrated  to  Canada ;  the  remains
of  the  other  4  nations,  with  some
other  tribes,  which  they  have  re-
ceived among  them,  amounted,  in
1818,  to457d,  and  resided  on  14
reservations,  on  portions  of  land
reserved  to  the  Indians,  but  sur-
rounded by  whites.    These  reser-
vations contain  265,315  acres,  and
are  in  separate  parts  of  the  State  ;
the  extreme  points  being  250  m.
distant  from  each  other.    These
Indians  have,  of  late  years,  made
great  advances  in  agriculture  and
civilization.    Religious  instructioki
is  provkled  for  them  by  several  so-
cieties, assisted  by  the  government,
but  there  is  a  strong  Pagan  party,
which  opposes  the  introduction  of
the  Gospel.

SIX  TOWNS,  the  most  ^^ulQWk
clan  iu  \h©  ^,1S^,  ^Ja^A^cX  ^  ^^


QQ


\\!b


80C

ChoeUw  naUon,  Population,  In
1M8»  il64.  The  whole  dUtrlct
bai  •ometimet  been  called  by  this
name,  but  iinpru|>erij'.  Fonuerly,
the  Indians  lived  in  6  compact
towns ;  but  are  now  scattered  oTcr
the  countr>'9  for  the  convenience  of
wood,  water*  and  af^cuUural  pur-
Milts.  In  16:i3,  a  school  was
opened  in  this  clan,  in  compliance
with  the  earnest  request  of  the
chief.

SOCIETY,  or  LEEWARD  IS-
LANDS, a  cluster  of  islands  in  the
8.  PftciAc  Ocean,  so  called  after  the
Ilo}'al  Society,  at  whose  Instance
the  expedition  under  Capt.  Cook
was  fitted  out,  in  1768.  They  are
situated  between  15\^  and  162*  80'
W.  long.,  and  10"  and  17*  S.  lat.
Huahine,  the  south-eastern  of  the
group,  is  about  00  m.  N.  W.  Ta-
hiti. Through  the  influence  of
the  L.  S,  missionaries,  idolatry  has
been  untversally  abolished,  and  the
Gospel  is  making  rapid  progress.
[See  Borabora,  Huahaine,  Maiaoiti,
Manpiti,  Raiatea^  Tahaa.\

SOMMEI^DYK,  a  town  in
Surinam,  S.  America,  a  few  miles
distant  from  Paramaribo.

The  (/.  B.  commenced  a  mission
here  in  1735.  The  missionaries
resided  here,  and  instructed  the
slaves  on  the  neighbouring  plant-
ations. Their  labours  were  at-
tended with  less  success  than  those
of  the  missionaries  at  Paramaribo.
In  1798,  66  baptized  negroes  were
connected  with  the  mission.  At
the  close  of  1819,  the  congregation
consisted  of  89,  30  of  whom  were
communicants.

SPRING    PLACE,    a   mission

station  among  the  Cherokees,  in

the  N.  part  of  Georgia,  35  m.  S.£.

of  Brainerd,   and    120  N.   W.  of

Athens.  [See  Cherokeet»\

SQUAKIE  HILL,  a  principal
settlement  of  the  Seneca  Indians,
on  the  Genesee  River,  New  York,
containing  about  SOO  souls.  The
Rev.  D.  S.  Butrick  aUemp\A4>  Vn


fain,  to  BdwanecUltahBeiAh
this  tribe.  Since  tt«t  tlsM,  tt^
have  made  eppUceftioii  to  thftkfi^
volent  in  the  fieinttj  to  csUM
a  •cbool  anMHw  tliem,  eeiti
/Vfffiyfoiy  ^  Qiiftu  ig  hnafb
nidied  a  teacher.  The  Iiiw
have  built  a  achoal-lioan,  ndtl
majority  are  in  IknHw  of  ChriAi
instmctions

STfilNKOPFP,  fonMih  4.
smtiertmHd  Kraal,  Lltye  Nm-
qualand,  S.  Africa,  about  Ma.
8.  of  Orange  River.

PierioDS  to  the  estaUIAAHft  tf
a  mifldon  by  the  L.M.8.,  thh*-
tlon  wai  favoured  with  theoofr
donal  labouB  of  mivdoaariM.  lb
J.  KitcUngman  wacitatlonBdha^
in  181T;  a  place  for  vonAbW
been  previoualy  ereetad*  aidii
people  manifetted  a  geiwnl  dHhi
to  bear  tlie  word.  A  echodeB
soon  opened,  which  oonriiM  d
about  TO  Mikolan.  Tiili  aiiiii
has  encountered  mmy  dtHim*
tages  from  local  circomitances;  W
has  been  productive  of  much  gad
to  the  natives,  vriio  are  muhf
encouragingprogreM  in  GiviUnta.
In  1823,  10  adulte  and  14  dddMi
had  been  baptised.  Bfr.  KitcU^^
man  removed,  about  1610,  iii
was  succeeded  by  a  catoeM
who  continues  his  laboms  with  ■
encouraging  measure  of  SBoeaB.
Many  of  the  Namaqnas,  Iras  to
time,  receive  the  Gospel,  mit
has  latterly  effected  a  plesdig
reformation  in  some  formei^  to-
bulent  characters.

The  continuance  of  iiitwln
drought,  by  conHning  the  cate^
to  the  spot,  has  prevented  Hb
from  visiting  the  people  at  Read
Fountaki,  and  at  ottier  places.

Many,  it  appears,  hare  died
from  famine,  in  consequenee  of
the  want  of  rain.

STELLENB08CH,  a  t0m  is

a  district  of  the  same  name,  Oipe

Colony,  S.  Africa,  M  m.  eastmid

Voi  C«^Town«  pleamthr  siteiiad


I


SUM

at  tbe  foot  of  a  range  of  lofty
mountains.

'  The  Rev.  J.  Bakker,  from  the
X«  M.  S,,  commenced  a  mission
here  in  180],  and  continued  his
Bealous  labours,  principally  among
tbe  Hottentots  and  slaves,  and  in
the  vicinity,  more  than  20  years,
when  his  age  and  infirmities
obliged  him  to  relinquish  the  ser-
vice. He  was  succeeded  l^y  Mr.
Smit,  who  commenced  a  school  for
iMitive  children  soon  after  his  ar-
lEitral.  Mr.  Bakker  was  the  only
■nissionary  who  was  allowed  to  re-
main in  the  colony  after  the  Dutch
tbok  possession  of  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  in  1802 :  and  for
many  years  he  was  not  allowed  to
iM^tize  his  converts,  nor  admit
them  to  tbe  Lord's  table.  Yet,
notwithstanding  these  and  many
other  embarrassments,  he  witnessed
many  pleasing  fruits  of  his  labours.
About  1815,  an  auxiliary  mission-
ary society  was  formed,  which,  be-
gide  supporting  Mr.  B.,  contributed
Kberally  to  the  Parent  Society.

About  1823,  a  colonial  grammar
school  was  opened,  under  Mr.
Brown,  with  150  scholars;  anew
chapel  was  built,  and  well  attend-
ed ;  and  a  Sabbath-school  was
established  for  the  benefit  of  the
slaves.

SUMATRA,  an  island  in  the
Indian  Ocean,  the  most  western
of  the  Sunda  Islands.  It  is  960  m.
long,  and  from  150  to  200  broad  $
separated  from  Malacca  by  the
strait  of  that  name,  and  from  Java
by  the  Strait  of  Sunda.  The  equa-
tor divides  it  into  almost  equal
parts  ;  the  one  extremity  being  in
6»36'  N.,  and  the  other  in  6^  5&
S.  lat. ;  and  Acheen  Head,  the  N.
extremity,  is  in  long.  96°  34'  E.  A
chain  of  mountains  runs  through
its  whole  extent;  the  ranges,  in
many  parts,  being  double  and
treble,  and  among  them  there  were
nrany  volcanos :  Mount  Ophir,  si-
tuate nearly  under  the  equator,  is


SUM

about  the  height  of  tbe  Peak  of
Teneriff.  The  inhabitants  con-*
sist  of  Malays,  Achenese,  Battas,
Lampongs,  and  Rejangs ;  the  latter
are  taken  as  a  standard  of  descrip-
tion, with  respect  to  the  person,
manners,  and  customs,  of  the  Su*
matrans.  They  are  rather  below
the  middle  stature ;  their  limbs,  for
the  most  part,  slight,  but  wW
shaped,  and  particularly  small  at
the  wrists  and  ancles :  their  hair  is
strong,  and  of  a  shining  black.
The  men  are  beardless ;  great  pains
being  taken  to  render  them  so,
when  boys,  by  rubbing  their  chins
with  a  kind  of  quick  lime.  Their
complexion  is  properly  yellow,
wanting  the  red  ting»  that  donsti-
tutes  a  copper  or  tawny  colour;
those  of  the  superior  class,  who  are
not  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  sun,
and  particularly  the  women  of  rank,
approaching  to  a  degree  of  hUt*
ness :  but  the  major  part  of  tbe
females  are  destitute  of  beauty.  A
man  may  purchase  as  many  wives  as
he  may  wish  to  have ;  but  their  num-
ber seldom  exceeds  8.  The  original
natives  are  Pagans ;  but  when  the
Sumatrans,  or  any  of  the  natives  of
the  eastern  islands,  learn  to  read
the  Arabic  character,  and  submit  to
circumcision,  they  are  said  to  be-
come Malays, — the  term  Malay
being  understood  to  mean  Moosel-
min.  Sumatra  is  divided  into  many
petty  kingdoms,  tbe  chief  of  which
are  Acheen,  Indrapore,  Palenbang,
and  Jambi.  The  English  have  two
factories  on  this  island — Fort  Marl-
borough and  Bencoolen.  Tlie
Battas  compose  about  one-third
part  of  the  population,  whose  reU"
gion  is  a  compound  of  the  most
ridiculous  and  barbarous  supersti-
tions founded  on  human  depravity.
They  do  not  worship  images,  but
l)elieve  in  the  existence  ef  certain
deities,  whose  attributes  bespeak
the  existence  of  a  better  race  of
people  than  the  present.  Under
their  principal  deity,  they  hate  a


wUck  iboiiirf  titt*


tlwttey  an  wild  ud
tlM  tigeiB
fotcstc    (See

SL'RAT,  a  citj  of  Hlnliidi^
In  (kK^uratt,  with  a  t^nng^dUdi,
•iiuato  DO  the  left  bnk  cf  ike
Tuptee,  about  80  m.  ftoB  fe
mouth.  It  is  one  of  the  amtk  ah
cient  cities  of  Hlodoostu;  ttl
outer  wall  is  T  m.  la  dmit,  vlfr
13  gates,  aod  irregular  towen  It-


SCM  8I7R

«nd  of  mercy  ;  another  of  jmtice ;
and  a  third,  tlie  lource  of  diKOid
and  roiitifntion,  the  instigator  of
malice  and  revvn^,  tlie  inciter  of
aiipr^r,  and  tlie  sourre  of  fraud,  de-
ceit, lyiiiv.  h}  pucriii}-,  and  murder.
I'he  latter  tia^  the  most  influence.
TlM-y  Itewvch  him  when  tliey  liave
been  ifiiilty  of  thew  vicen,  and  Ter>-
rarely  ofler  petitions  to  the  otiier
deitie^i.  The  only  religious  cere-
mony noticed  nniong  them  is  the
invoration   of  the   nhades  of  their

ance»tori.  A  pemon  named  Dattoo,  !  tween  eaclu  Tho  stieeti  uedMff
skilled  in  every  sortot  supemtitiun,  !  narrow,  and  Irregular;  tbefasMi
is  the  only  resemblance  of  a  priest  ■  generally  lofty ;  and  the  liMt
amon^  them.  Every  village  has  I  tants  estimated  at  600^000.  TIb
one,  who  expoundu  all  their  reli-  i  public  build! ngi  are  few  aad
gious  h(M)k<K,  and  whose  influence  is  and  the  nabob's  palace  is
Mich,  that  they  engage  in  no  un-  I  tibie.  The  moaquei  and
dertaking,  however  trifling,  without  I  are  small,  and  the  Hindoo  edilni
ftnft  consulting  him.  |  etjualiy    insignlflcant.      A    gmt

The  mural  conduct  of  the  Battas  i  portion  of  the  trade  of  Sant  h»
ap|)ears  to  be  influenced  by  all  the  I  been  transferred  to  Bomb^i  M
vile  passions  of  an  irregular  and  |  yet  it  is  conslderahle.  It  is  He
irritable  constitution.  Truth  is  j  emporium  of  the  most  preelae
seldom  regarded,  when  in  the  way  j  pniductions  of  Hindoostan ;  far
of  their  interests  and  feelings ;  and  ;  hither  are  brought  lironi  the  Intaiar
lionesty  is  never  founded  on  prin-  '  an  immense  quantity  of  gosih
ciple,  but  on  the  fear  of  detection,  j  which  the  merchants  export  to1tl»
They  practise  eating  prisoners  taken  ■  Red  Sea,  the  Persian  Gnlf,  the
in  war,  und  the  capital  punishment  coa.^  of  Malabar,  the  Corom^wWi
of  the  roiintr>'  is  eating  the  crimi-  ;  and  even  to  China.     Here  aremM^


nal  a/ife.  Yet,  notwithstanding
these  dark  shiides  in  their  moral
character,  tiiey  respect  foreigners  ;
and  a  little  before  the  arrival  of
the  missionaries,  they  sent  n  depu-
lation  to  the  Britisli  (iovernor,
requesting  to  know  of  what  reli-
gion they  should  be.  The  interior,
from  Hencoolen,  is  inhabited  by
tho  nations  of  llajangs  and  Lam-
|N)ngs,  each  of  whom  has  a  lan-
guage and  written  charHcter  pecu-
liar to  itself.  Their  moral  condition
is  exceedingly  wretched.  Padang
is  considered  tlie  key  to  a  large  in-
land kingdom  named  Menancahow,
which,  in  18i3,  was  ravaged  by
war,  with  a  view  to  restore  the
Mahomedan  religion.  Of  the  in-
habitants of  other  portions  of  this


Mahomedans,  Gentoos,  Jews,  nd
Christians,  of  various  denoaii^
tions.  The  Mahomedans  at  Stnt
are  not,  by  far,  so  strict  as  they  an
in  Arabia,  or  In  other  Tnrfckk
countries ;  nor  are  the  distlBCttoH
of  tribes  amonf^  tlie  Hindoos  vho
reside  here  strictly  obserred.  The
Hindoos  are  almost  all  of  tile  et^
of  the  brahmins;  and  their  lUll
and  dexterity  in  matters  of  calea*
lation  and  economy  often  nbe
them  to  places  of  eonsidenUe
trust.  The  country  round  Surat  is
fertile,  except  toward  the  set,
where  it  is  sandy  and  barren.  Be^
fore  the  English  £ast  India.Coah
])any  obtained  possession  of  Bonn
bay,  the  presidency  of  their  aflhiit
on  the  coast  of  Malshar  was  at
V  449


sun

Jdbrat ;  and  they  had  a  factoiy  here,
alter  ibe  presidency  was  transferred
to  Bombay.  In  1800>  a  treaty  was
concluded  with  the  nabob  of  Surat^
1>7  which  the  management  of  the
dly  and  district  was  vested  in  the
British.  By  a  treaty  in  1803,  the
Mahrattas  were  compelled  to
abandon  all  their  vexatious  claims
OD  this  city,  and  the  British  autho-
rity in  this  place  became  supreme.
Sarat  is  158  m.  N.  of  Bombay.  E.
long.  730  r,  N.  lat.  210  12'.

C.  C.  Aratoon,  •  converted
Armenian  connected  with  the
B,  M.  S.,  proceeded  to  this  city  in
1812,  and  laboured  in  it  and  the
actjoining  country  for  about  9  years,
preaching  and  distributing  tracts
'and  portions  of  the  Scriptures  in
several  languages.  He  afterwards
reeooved  to  Calcutta.  The  Rev.
Messrs.  Skinner  and  W.  Fyvie,  of
ihe  L,  M,  S.,  commenced  a  station
liere  in  1815,  and  were  usefully
employed  among  the  soldiers  and
natives  in  the  city  and  neighbouring
▼lllages,  and  in  translating  the
Soriptures  into  the  Goojuratt.  Mr.
Skinner  died  Oct.  30,  1821,  the
same  day  on  which  Mr.  A.  Fyvie
sailed  from  Gravesend  to  join  the
mission.  Previous  to  that  time,
the  missionaries  had  translated  and
printed  the  New  Testament  at
Ibeir  press,  and  were  advancing
wMh  the  Old  Testament,  which,  in
Oct.  1822,  was  printed  to  the
Psalms.  The  expense  of  printing
was  defrayed  by  the  Bombay  Bible
Society,  and  the  paper  supplied  by
the  B.  and  F.  B,  S,y  which   also

? granted  upwards  of  2000  dollars
or  the  expenses  incurred  in  trans-
lating, and  the  supply  of  necessary
types.  Large  quantities  of  tracts
were  also  printed  and  usefully  dis-
tributed. In  1822,  about  10,000
Goc^uratt  tracts  had  been  cir-
culated, and  received  with  eager-
ness. About  the  same  time,  the
missionaries  had  4  native  schools
In  the  city,  containing  about  £00


stm

pupils.  Since  that  period  they
have  pursued  their  work  indefa-
tigably,  as  will  be  evident  from
their  latest  statements : —

Native  Schools. — "  The  number
of  these  is  6,  and  that  of  the  boys
under  instruction  about  350.  The
progress  made  by  many  of  them  in
the  knowledge  of  the  Sacred
Scriptures  is  truly  pleasing,  l^be
greater  part  of  them  attend  as
formerly,  with  their  teachers,  every
Sabbath  morning,  to  repeat  their
catechisms,  to  sing  a  Christian
hymn,  and  to  engage  in  prayer.
Several  European  gentlemen,  who
have  attended  on  those  occasions^
have  expressed  mingled  surprise  and
satisfaction  on  witnessing  the  in-
teresting scene.*'

Native  Services, — **The  stated
services  have  been  regularly  hel4
in  the  school -rooms,  and  the  natives
have  been  also  frequently  addressed
in  the  temples,  bazaars,  and  other
places  of  public  resori;  many  of
those  occasions  have  proved  highly
interesting.  D  uring  the  past  year,
the  missionaries  have  made  several
tours  into  the  interior  of  the
country,  during  which  Hie  Gospel
was  published  to  many  thousands
of  the  natives,  who,  in  generalj
listened  with  attention,  and  re>
ceived  books  with  thankfulness."

English  fForship,  —  "  Of  the
English  services,  which  are  sta-
tedly held  on  the  morning  of  each
Sabbath,  and  on  every  Wednesday
evening,  no  report  has  been  re-
ceived during  the  past  year.''

Printing  Office,-^"  Mr.  Salmon
has  placed  this  office  under  an  im-
proved arrangement,  which  is  ex-
pected to  conduce  much  to  the
dispatch  of  business,  as  well  as  to
the  accuracy  of  the  work.  It  has
been  also  furnished  with  a  new  and
improved  fount  of  Goojuratt  types
from  Bengal.  As  they  are  large^
than    the    former   ones,  and  ap-

I  proximate  nearer   to  the  written
character,  the  natives  are  able  to
Q  Q  2  \\^


SI'R

reml  thi»  bcKiks  lor  whirh  llit»y
have  lie«'n  iimvI  witli  irienter
I'nrility  than  thine  foruierl}  piib-
li»|)(>il.

•»  Thr  printing  of  tmrts  with
1!h'  nf\v  t\pi»s  ( iMiimiMu'eil  in  Mny,
iHiti.  AitiT  iH.wOO  tmiMs  hi'ui
hi'iMi  tiirouii  otV,  a  iiunrto  eilitiuii
ni  \)iv  New  'I'l'otaniiMit,  in  (i<h>-
iiirat!.  wn*  roninirnri-ii.  The  im-
l>ii>««iiiii    i«   til   Im'   (Mjiial   to  lUOU

t'trt'ii!atian  *>(  titf  St'rifitnr**»
ontf  Tnn'fif.  '*  Tlu*  nii«»-ionaiit's,
I'lirniu  th«>  x'l-ir  iMuIiiiir  the  liOXU  ot'
N'p*.  iKjll,  ilistribut«>il  in  Sural,
III  thr  oiirrounilintr  villa'jr»»«.,  and
whi'i'  on  toiir<  in  \Uo  intiTinr,  the
ifm.Miiiilfr  nl  the  liist  eilition  «d'  the
Oil  'i't'-laiiuMit,  and  ihe  M'«*on«l
I'liilion  ol  tiie  four  (i»i*«i»eN,
anlll^rlth)L^  in  all,  to  more  tlian
SO(K)  |i;iit«i,  and  alioiit  an  eipinl
iiuiuher  ul  trarls."

JionA  a  ftn'fuirins  f"^  pNhllraHun.
■  "  Mr.  W.  Fyvie  was  ein^aired,
•liiriiiL'"  the  %ear  l'»:2rt,  in  revi-
*»inir  lii^  Kiiiilinh  anti  (iitujurnti
liftinuarif^  and  ex|»e»-teil  to  ha\e
i!  ie!!d>  hir  the  pre^*;  in  Deceni-
Vi'X.  He  has  al^i  n'ady  lor  tiie
pi«'^*>,  a  voeahulary  in  the  same
l«>rni.  He>ide  these,  several  new
trart>  an>  in  hand;  also  a  small
honk  <d  praters,  in  a  simpk'  and
appropri;ite  styh».  "

(iuujurntt  yiiijuliarif  Missltoiarjf
StH'irti/.-  -^''  The  total  of  receipts,
lor  the  year  endini;  October,  lH:?tl,
Is  l.'(H)  rupees,  ;).'0  of  which  were
contributed  l)y  one  p-entleinan,  and
J 00  l)v  another,  without  anv  soli-
citation,  further  than  that  the
niNsionaries  hail  circulated  the
J'ir>t  Report  of  their  Auxiliary
Society,  to  inform  the  members
and  contributors  in  what  way  thev
Ijad  eni[)loyed  their  money.  Several
other  Lccntlemen  al>o  favoured  them
with  donations,  on  the  object  being
submiltc<l  to  tlieir  considention.*'

In  Nov.  JS2.>,  a  society  was
formed    ut    Bombay,     called    the


scs

Bombay  Miuionary  Vmtm^  the
tibjeclK  of  which  are  to  proBOte
Christian  fellowship,  and  to  eon-
5iilt  on  the  best  means  of  adranciBf
the  kinG:dom  of  Christ  in  tkat
part  of  Imlia.  The  missions  repre-
sented fit  this  meeting  were,  the
Anierir.Rii  and  the  Church  Id
Homhtty,  the  l^ndon  Society's  at
Surat  and  Belfiraum,  and  tiie
Scottish  mission  in  the  wuthm
Konkun.  The  missionaries  a-
press  their  hope  that  tbiic  Vmm
will  W  prQiluctive  of  much  good
to  the  nii»^<:ions  at  present  con-
nected with  it,  and  also  to  &&▼
other  Protestant  mission  which
may  hereafter  join  the  a<ssoci>-
lion.

The  missionaries  at  Surat  are
very  desirous  of  establishini^  a
mission  at  Abmedtibnh,  the  capital
*)f  the  province  of  Goojuratt.

SrilLEPL'RUM,  a  village  of
alM)ut  KOO  houses,  in  Changanj
parish,  Jaf}nu  district,  Ceylon,
alHiut  1  mile  and  an  half  from
Panditeri|H).  Dr.  Scudder  opened
a  school  here  of  about  40  scbolan,
in  IKio,  which  promises  to  be
useful.  The  American  missitm-
rmcx  occasionally  preach  to  a  small
con jf relation,  in  this  villoire.

S  IJ  S  ()  O  S,  H  numerous  and
powerful  people,  inhabiting  an  ex-
tensive country  north  and  south
of  the  Rio  Ponficas  River,  Siexra
Leotie  cq,untry,  W.  Africa.  They
have  3  independent  sovereignties,
and  each  king  can  command  about
;  20,000  men.  They  live  in  villages,
containing  commonly  from  100  to
2000  people;  and  few  less  than
;i  or  400  inhabitants.     Thev  bare

m

made  considerable  progress  in
agriculture  and  manufactures.  The
Mahomedan  religion  prevails  to
some  extent  among  them :  but
they  are  generally  superstitiouslj
attached  to  devil-worship,  and
shew  little  disposition  to  examine
the  claims  of  Christianity.
Missions   have  been  attempted

4^0


SYR

Himuug  them  with  litUe  success,
"ii,  the  early  part  of  1798,  the
Messrs.  Brunton  and  Greig,
Edinburgh,  went  to  Fr^
f  a  factory  belonging  to  the
Leone  Company,  situated
.vii  the  Rio  Pongas,  near  a  native
{ikmn  called  Tugekiring,  Here
libey  staid  about  10  weeks,  and
jiaiSXy  visited  the  native  town,  with
I  il  view  of  learning  the  language.
.  Though  they  gained  the  airoction
I  and  confidence  of  many  of  the
,  liatives  ;  yet  the  chief  obliged
.  ^em  to  remove,  and  they  passed
lip  the  river,  about  40  miles,  to
.Mcndaia.      [See    Canqffee,    Kan"

.    .  SYRIAN  CHRISTIANS.    [See


T.


TAHA,  or  OTAHA,  one  of  the
Society  Islands,  40  m.  in  circumfe-
rence, situated  about  5  m.N.  of  Raia-
tea.  It  has  a  great  number  of  iine  bays
and  harbours,  some  of  which  extend
almost  to  .the  centre  of  the  island.
£ztensive  valleys  reach  from  the
heads  of  these  bays  up  to  the  foot
of  the  mountains  \  one  of  these  val-
leys is  of  great  extent,  and  full  of
all  the  vegetable  productions  of  the
country,  such  as  wild»  ginger,  the
tli-plant,  from  which  the  inhabit-
ants formerly  distilled  great  quan-
tities of  rum,the  bamboo,  the  moun-
tain plantain,  arrow  root,  <&c.

The  inhabitants  of  this  island
were  formerly  very  numerous  j  but
war)  disease,  infanticide,  and  the
claims  of  Oro,  have  reduced  the
number  to  about  700.  There  is
4U1  air  of  industry  all  over  the  set-
tlement, and  the  King  is  the  most
industrious  man  in  the  island.

A  few  years  ago,  the  King  and
most  of  the  chiefs  opposed  the
Gospel,  and  went  to  war  with  the
Raiateans  to  suppress  it;  but  he
was  defeated  and  taken  prisoner.


TAH

The  kind  manner  in  which  he
treated  by  Tamatao,  the  Christian
King  of  Raiatea,  so  affected
him,  that  he  cordially  embraced
Christianity ;  he  was  restored  to  his
authority,  and  rendered  indepen-
dent by  his  conqueror.  Places  of
worship  were  soon  built,  tiie  Sab*
bath  observed,  and  the  same  order  of
things  adopted  as  in  the  neighboor*
ing  islands.  The  people  were,  how-
ever, long  destitute  of  a  minister  9
until,  in  February,  1822,  the  Rer.
Mr.  Bourne,  then  in  Tahiti,  lis-
tened to  their  pressing  invitation,
and  settled  among  them,  with  every
demonstration  of  joy.  A  very  ex-
cellent house,  60  feet  by  30,  has
been  built  for  him,  having  a  large
garden.

Pateo,  in  1818,  was  the  largest
and  most  populous  district,  where
a  house  of  worship  was  built.  In
1823,  almost  the  whole  population
had  removed  their  houses  near  the
residence  of  the  missionary,  on  the
coast,  and  the  people  were  about
to  build  a  good  place  of  worship^
80  feet  by  40,  equal  in  extent  to
any  chapel  yet  erected  in  these
islands.  The  number  of  adults
who  had  been  baptized,  Februaiy,
1823,  was  178 ;  children,  266 ;
candidates  for  baptism,  84 :  140
of  the  adults  read  the  New  Tes-
tament, and  160  of  them  elemen->
tary  books.

A  new  chapel  was  opened  at
this  station,  in  April,  1825.  The
number  of  natives  in  church  fel-
lowship is  increased  to  80,  whose
conduct  is  creditable  to  their
Christian  profession.  The  school
is  well  attended.  The  Epistles  to
the  Galatians,  Philemon,  He-
brews, and  those  of  James  and
John,  in  Tahitian,  have  been
printed  by  Mr.  Browne.  The
book  of  Revelation  is  in  the  press.
Mr.  B.  has  also  prepared  a  ca-
techism in  Tahitian,  chiefly  takea
from  that  of  Dr.  Brown.
TAHITI,  one  of  the  Geoi^g^

45f


TAH

T<(1ands  in  the  S.  Pacific  Ocean,
coniiiitinff  of  S  |>eninmilas  con-
nected by  a  low  icthniiii  about  S
m.  acrcwA.  Tbe  Inrrer,  lahiti
Nue,  or  OpowreuHti,  Ik  about  20
m.  by  30;  or  00  In  circuit;  the
leiKi*r,  Tahiti  Kte,  or  Ttiiarabu,
ii  nhout  :iO.  W.  lonpr.  HO"  16'  to
140"  AO',  8.  lat.  17"  30*  to  11"  5;/.

The  face  of  the  country,  except
on  the  Ilea- coast  I  ij  reri'  uneven ;
it  rises  ill  ridf^i^s  to  the  middle  of
the  island,  which  form  mountains
that  may  be  reen  at  the  distance
of  60  miles.

The  island  has  many  good  har-
bours, and  a  border  of  low  land  on
the  coaiit,  except  in  several  points,
where  the  mountains  terminate  in
high  clifls  of  coral  rucks.  The
soil,  except  on  the  tops  of  the
ridges,  is  ver}-  fertile,  and  is  co-
vered with  fniit  trees  of  curious
kinds,  of  spontaneoiLs  growth.

The  population  of  the  2  penin-
sulas, in  1774,  was  ei^timuted  at
200,000  by  Capt.  Cook ;  in  the
<*  Missionary  Voyage,"  published
in  1700,  it  is  stated  to  be  about
50,000 ;  but  a  census  taken  by  the
missionaries,  soon  after  their  set-
tlement, enumerated  only  about
16,000.

In  1803,  accounts  state  that
disease  and  war  had  made  such
havoc  as  to  reduce  the  population
to  6  or  7000.  Prmious  to  their
conversion  to  Christianity,  the
practice  of  infanticide  and  human
sacrifices,  and  the  universal  licen-
tiousness of  morab,  threatened  the
entire  dejKipulation  of  the  island.
Since  the  Gospel  has  been  success-
ful among  them,  and  removed  these
causes  of  decay,  the  population  has
rapidly  increased.  Tbe  inhabitants
are  aliiove  the  common  size.  The
men  are  toll,  strong,  and  finely
shaped.  The  government  is  mo-
narchical, and  hereditary  in  one
family.  There  is  also  un  aristo-
cracy consisting  of  chiefs  of  the
seToral  districts.


TAH

On  the  10th  of  Aug.  iTM.  t
mUonaries  embuked  Iron  Lb*
don  for  this  and  the  nelgliiNMile
Mnndit.     March  6,  I  TOT,  18  liilii
at  Tahiti ;  10  at  TongatAoi^  h
tbe  following  month;  tfaeotell
St.  Christina,  in   the    suceeete
June.    A  number  of  moit  mil*
cknis  circumstances  attendsd  flji
commencement ;  and  tbe  report ri
Capt.  Wilson,  upon  the  reton  H
tbe  ship  Duff,  elated  the  Mfe
of  the    mission   beyond  meii— ■
Something  like   triumph  wu  ifr
preswd  orer  the  cool  and  crioh
lating  minds  of  those,  wltoiriM
for  some  more  civilised  part  of  fte
world  to  be  selected  for  the  III
of  the  flrrt  efforts  of  the  sodel|f.
But  the  triumph  was  soont^Hl
into  lamentation.     Succesrire  n-
ports  of  disastrous  and  discoimgivg
events  tried  tbe  patience  and  no-
lution  of  the  society  to  the  bttp^
most.  The  ca|itute,  by  the  Freidb
of  the  Duff,  in  her  second  vomt
to  the  South  Seas,  with  lOnwitM
and    10  single   mlssionariei— tb
report  of  the  departure  of  11  of  tbe
number  that  were  at  Tahiti,  for
Port  Jackson,  on  account  of  the
ill-treatment  of   the    misslonarki
by  the  natives — ^the  murder  of  oiw
of  them  at  New  South  Wa]«-|
the  murder  of  3  others  at  Tonga*
taboo — and  the  d^Mutuie  %ii  tlis
remainder  for  Port  Jackson,  mt
with  one  exception,  their  suhe'
quent  arrival  in  England, — ahoot
overwhelmed  the  society,  and  fa
a    season   threatened    to   quench
the  missionary  zeal  of  the  religioa
public.    The  persons,  who  at  iM
had  objected  to  the  mission,  pitldl
the    weakness   and   censureo  tte
temerity  of  those  who    projected
it.    The  cause  of  the  South  fles
Islanders,   however,    was  not  re-
linquished.   The  Directors  eneoo-
raged     the     T    missionaries    re-
maining  at   Tahiti   to   continoe^
urged  those   that   were   at    PMt
Jackson  to  return,  and   tent  odt

A5%


I


f-.


TAH


IK  more  missionaries  in  the
Jl^jal   Admiral,    commanded    by

fCippt.  Wm.  Wilson.    The  mission-

'iiries  at  Port  Jackson  returned  to
Tahiti ;  and,  with  those  previously
^iere,  endeavoured  to  persevere  to
liecomplish  the  work  for  which
^(bey  were  sent;  and  some  cir-
.^umstances  arose,  which  encou-
jjwged  their  hopes,  till  in  1810,
yghen,  owing  to  the  wars  among
tbe  natives,  all  the  missionaries,
esjECept  Messrs.  Nott  and  Hayward,

.  leA  the  islands,  and  sought  refuge
|i;t  Port  Jackson,  13  years  after
^ir  first  reaching  Tahiti.    This

-  news  again  greatly  humbled  and
afflicted  the  society;  and  their  hopes
of  final  success  were  almost  ex-
tinguished. Patience  and  perse-
verance were  thought  to  be  pre-
mmption  and  enthusiasm.  It  was
triumphantly  said,  the  folly  of  at-
tempting to  evangelize  a  people,
before  they  are  civilized,  is  no
longer  a  subject-  of  reasoning ;
it  is  now  decided  by  experiment.
■More  than  once  it  was  proposed,
•in  the  direction,  to  recall  all  tbe
missionaries  from  the  South  Seas.
It  was,  however,  a  time  of  great
anxiety  and  much  prayer.  The
minority  prevailed  in  favour  of
presenting  an  urgent  request  to
the  missionaries  at  New  South
Wales,  that  when  more  auspicious
circumstances  should  arise  in  the
islands,  they  would  return  to  them,
and  make  another  effort  in  the
strength  of  tbe  Lord.  Happily  for
the  society,  the  cause,  and  the  wel-
fare of  the  islanders,  the  mission-
aries did  return  ;  and  now,  the  sun
of  prosperity  brightened  upon  them.
The  set  time  to  favour  Zion  came.
Several  of  the  missionaries  had
become  quite  masters  of  the  lan-
f^uage,  and  the  saving  power  of  the
Spirit  accompanied  their  preaching.
The  King,  a  principal  chief,  and  a
priest  of  the  first  order,  were  con-
verted to  Christ.  Some  of  the  na-
rtives,  held,  by  their  own  appoint-


TAH

ment  meetings,  for  prayer.  At  the
close  of  1814,  50  on  this  island
and  Eimeo  had  renounced  their
idols,  and  wished  to  be  considered
worshippers  of  Jehovah,  and  more
than  200,  principally  adults,  at-
tended the  schools.

About  this  time,  not  less  than
500,  in  all  the  islands,  had  deter-
mined to  turn  from  their  lying  vani-
ties to  the  living  God.

Now  the  enemy  began  to  raisa
his  terrific  front.  The  idolatrous
chiefs  in  Tahiti  formed  a  con-
spiracy, and  resolved  to  massacre
the  praying  people.  These  were
apprized  of  their  danger,  and  fled
to  Eimeo.

The  Pagans  then  quarrelled
among  themselves,  and  the  chief
instigators  of  the  plot  were  slain.
Still  they  were  resolved  on  war^
and  for  some  time  the  issue  was
doubtful;  but  the  counsel  of
the  froward  was  defeated,  and
Pomarre  was  restored  to  the  go-
vernment of  Tahiti  and  its  depend-
encies, Nov.  1815,  by  universal
consent.  This  was  the  dawn  of  a
most  glorious  day  in  this  and  the
neighbouring,  islands.  Pomarre,
in  bis  progress  through  the  several
districts,^  to  replace  his  friends  in
their  estates,  constituted,  as  chiefs,
many  of  those  who  had  made  a
public  profession  of  their  faith*
The  people,  assisted  and  encoa-
raged  by  their  chiefs,  demolished
their  morals,  overthrew  the  altars^
and  burned  their  gods  in  the  fire.     .

Of  the  g^eat  moral  in  Opare,  Mr.
Jefierson  gave  the  following  ac-
count : —

**  This  place,  appointed  for  the
worship  of  the  eatooa,  stands  on  a
sandy  point  of  land,  projecting  a
little  way  out  towards  the  sea,  and
forming  a  small  bay  on  each  side.
I  arrived,  in  company  with  a  Ta-
hitian  priest,  between  eleven  and
twelve  o'clock  in  the  forenoon,
and  observed  a  number  of  bread*
fruit,  cocoa-nut,  and  other   tceea


TAH

ffrowlnff  dote  to  the  moral.  Be-
fore we  entered,  my  ^lide  fathered
n  bunch  of  ^reen  lenves  that  fnew
upon  the  bench ;  and,  an  Mwn  u
we  cnme  to  the  arciurtomed  place
for  maklnp:  offerint^i,  he  threw
them  iiiKin  the  pavement,  and  re-
p(*ated,  inacareleM  manner,  a  few
wonU  jtoltriting  the  favour  of  the
deity  supiKMed  to  preside  there.
The  place  when*  this  ceremony
wa«  (NTformediii  dedicated  to  their
principal  eatooot  caliinl  Oro,  and
is  a  niuich  stone  pavement,  about
eifi^hteen  feet  Miuare.  At  tbe
north  end,  opposite  to  the  sea,  is  a
lar}^*  pile  of  stones,  upwards  of  ft?e
feet  hii^h,  three  or  four  feet  wide,
and  about  eightetMifeet  lonp^.  Upon
the  top  are  severiil  pieces  of  board,
some  of  them  six  feet  lonp^  and
tw«*Ive  inches  broad ;  tiie  ends  being
slit  into  Ave  parts,  to  represent  a
human  hand,  with  tlie  ftnc^ers  a
little  extended.  At  the  south  end
are  set  up  ftve  stones,  three  of
which  are  larp^r  than  the  other
two.  These  are  desicrned  to  mark
out  the  places  of  tbe  offlciatinpf
priests,  lK)th  of  superior  and  inferior
rank,  who  sit  cross-lep^p^ed  upon
the  pavement,  supporting  their
backs  against  the  stones;  and  in
this  posture,  with  their  faces  to-
wards the  pile  of  stones  and  boards,
they  present  their  prayers.  The
middle  space  is  where  the  human
Tictims  are  slaughtered,  by  being
knocked  on  the  head  with  stones
and  a  club:  after  which,  a  princi-
pal priest  scoops  out  the  eyes  of  the
murdered  person ;  and,  holding
them  in  his  hands,  presents  them
to  the  King,  who  opens  his  mouth
as  if  intending  to  swallow  them.
When  this  ceremony  is  concluded,
the  carcase  is  thrown  into  a  pit,
and  covered  with  stones ;  and,  from
the  number  of  pits  surrounding  the
place,  as  well  as  from  the  expres-
sions of  my  conductor,  I  appre-
hend that  many  hundreds  of  men
and  women  haive  been  beie  sacrU


\


TAH

9ced  I17  the  abonliiable  wamaA
tlon  of  tiMM  tdoUten.  Berita
the  captives  taken  In  war,  fh»  U'
dies  of  those  ilaln  In  battte,  or  tei
cut  oflTby  the  conmand  of  thsKlK
or  that  are  pvposelylmmokMh
any  other  part  under  hb  joM^
tlon,  are  bnnight  to  the  ■bb^
that  prejers  may  be  made  oiH
them  prerioiMly  to  their  Intemrik

"A  little  to  the  right  of  M
psTement  of  bloody  and  mmi
towards  the  point.  Is  an  aHv  to
Oro,  raised  opon  three  ran  rf
wooden  plllan,  thirteen  ininib
nearly  aewen  feet  high,  and  toft
Are  feet  broad ;  the  top  kfcK
coTered  with  cocoa-nut  leare^  m
the  front  and  ends  decorated  «)i
leaves  of  the  sugar-cane  so  lai
that  they  may  hang  down  Ukohqg
fringes.  Upon  this  altar  wv  i
large  hog,  with  other  oflfeiiBgirf
fish,  bread-fruit,  and  mosaiili
plantains.  A  little  mora  toUn
right,  was  the  frame  of  aaiHB
going  to  decay,  dedicated  to  m
imaginaiy  deity  named  Ora-nadooi;
and  a  few  yards  farther  towndi
the  extremity  of  the  landappeadi
a  pile  of  stones,  ten  or  tweiraM
high,  and  about  twenty  in  iWjh,
sacred  to  a  marine  god,  called  Ti*
pall,  and  said  to  be  tiie  occasloMl
scene  of  human  sacrifices.  9j
this  time,  however,  I  was  tiifd
and  disgusted  with  these  tvM
proofs  of  man's  apostacy,  aid  ti
Satan's  power  orer  bin;  sid
therefore  desired  my  guide  to
withdraw."

Idolatry  was  at  length,  however^
completely  abolished;  the  wonUp
of  Jehovah  substituted  in  its  place  j
numerous  buildings  were  lane-
diately  erected  for  worship  and
schools  in  every  district,  aaiooBtp
ing  to  upwards  of  60,  and  tiie
missionaries  resumed  their  labom
in  this  island.  In  June,  1816,  one
of  them  stated : — *'  All  aceoonti
agroe  that  a  most  wQnderfnl  ebufe
has  been    produced    in    all  tie

454


TAH

iMociety  Islands;  and  the  spread
■  ^  the  Gospel  seems  to  be  almost
n  jHiiversal.''  This  change  has  been
i  anreught,  by  the  blessing  of  God
f.  iq^n  missionary  exertions,  among
k  #. people  the  most  unlikely,  on  ac-
i  «CKint  of  their  savageness,  sen-
ii^«liality,  and  every  thing  that  de-
!  grades  the  human  character.  The
r  ^Uefs  were  intriguing,  perfidious,
I  cvael,  and  prodigal  of  their  people's
j  lives,  both  in  war  and  in  furnishing
I  aacTifices  to  demons ;  the  people
I  were  universally  thieves,  lewd  be-
I  yond  description,  enslaved  by  the
^ossest  superstitions,  and  always
fVeady  to  murder  any  one  at  the
lightest  intimation  from  their
jehiefs;  the  strangling  of  infante
p  iwas  also  the  crime  of  every  day,
w  pierpetrated  by  almost  every  mother
f  without  shame  and  without  re-
I    norse.

f         An  Auxiliary  Missionary  Society

k     wag  formed  here,   May  13,  1818,

^1^  the  people  of  Tahiti  and  Eimeo,

i     tif  which  Pomarre,  the  late  King,

president,  and  the  chiefs  of


the  several  districts  were  appointed
•governors.  On  this  occasion  the
43rowd  was  so  great,  that  the  King
erected,  in  1819,  a  large  building
•at  Papaoa,  712  feet  long  and  54
wide,  with  3  pulpits,  upwards  of
-SOO  feet  from  each  other,  and  the
extreme  ones  100  feet  from  the
ends  of  the  house,  which  he  called
-the  Royal  Mission  Chapel.  May
.11,  1819,  the  chapel  was  opened,
and  3  of  the  missionaries  preached
at  the  same  time  to  an  assembly  of
•natives  consisting  of  about  6000.
■On  the  following  day,  the  anni-
Tersary  of  the  Missionary  Society
wasobser^ed  with  peculiar  interest,
by  a  similar  assemblage.  In  1822,
the  contributions  amounted  to
12,055  bamboos  of  oil,  36  pigs,
867  balls  of  arrow  root,  and  191
baskets  of  cotton-wool.

On  the  21st  of  Sept.  18S1,  the

deputation  arrived  safely  at  Tahiti,

.  and  on  the  3d  of  December  they


TAH

wrote  from  Eimeo  to  the  following
effect : —

'*  We  are  in  health  and  comfcfrt
up  to  the  present  moment,  and
have  been  more  delighted  wiUi  the
victories  and  blessed  results  of
preaching  and  living  the  Gospel
of  Christ  than  we  are  able  to  ex-
press, at  every  station  where  we
have  already  been  in  Tahiti,  and
in  this  island  (Eimeo).  Truly,
'the  half  was  not  told  US  !'
God  has  indeed  done  great  thingg
here,  in  a  civil,  moral,  and  religious
view.  The  people  here  exhibit  as
literal  and  pleasing  a  proof  of
being  'turned  from  darkness  into
light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan
unto  God,'  as  can  be  conceived.

''  A  nation  of  pilferers  has  be-
come eminently  trustworthy.  A
people  formerly  universally  ad-
dicted to  lasciviousness,  in  all  its
forms,  have  become  modest  and
virtuous  in  the  highest  degree :
those  who,  a  few  years  ago,  de-
spised all  forms  of  religion,  except
their  own  horrid  and  cruel  super-
stitions, have  uniformly  declared
their  approbation  of  Christianity —
study  diligently  those  parts  of  the
Christian  Scriptures  which  have
been  translated  for  them  —  ask
earnestly  for  more — and  appear
conscientiously  to  regulate  them-
selves by  those  sacred  oracles,
under  the  dhrection  of  their  kind
teachers,  whose  self-denying  zeal
and  perseverance  have  been  almost
as  remarkable  as  the  success  with
which  God  has  been  pleased  to
honour  them.

**  The  King  was  unwell,  and
was  at  this  island  when  we  arrived
at  Tahiti.  He  soon  made  two
obliging  communications  to  as,
through  our  excellent  friend,  Mr.
Nott,  in  which  he  expressed  his
hope  of  soon  being  at  Matavia  to
receive  us.  On  finding,  however,
that  he  rather  grew  worse  than
better,  we  came  over  to  Eimeo,
and  were  received  by  bim  with  tin


I


T.MI  TAH

uiiiiii*t  •!i'im)ii'»\i.itit»n'»  <tf  kiii'.iu"'*,  OmmMl  by  i*ersons  who  were  [hi-
aifi  wi'U  ni.iii\«'i  ?vikr:i*  n:  n'*,.iTt;  iii>lit*(l,  fu-ronlinc:  to  the  iihwlav!,
Mf«Hi«.  Niitt  aiiil  lliMin  iiiroiii-  lur  tnil  ilnintr  ;  and  the  intention  is,
I  iiiiMii::  u^,  itii'l  iiit'Tpri-iiii;;  lor  IK.  l'i<'>l  i^  sh.ill  he  cunipieteU  by  per-
il i<«  iiiiiMiiia'iMii.  lor  a  ixTMiii  who  .  miiih  oI'  tliiil  dei»('riptioiis.  Itisie-
liuH  rt-a.l  (iiil\  thi>  Taliiiiaii  laii-  iiiarkiihle  llmt  these  perMim  have
iMiiiu"',  M,»,T.ii»'«l  io  US  rnii-u!i"ral»ii',  no  ni*«'d  to  lie  superintiMided  in
Iniiii  till*  •|tii>oti«iii«  he  a^'krii  n>-  their  lalHiiir,  but  they  unifonnlj
H,HM  ii!i- our  MMii'tx '<  lalHuir*,  tlieir  '  perlorni  the  portir>n  of  worl:  il-
^iirri><».,  auil  tlifir  iutiMiili*>l  liili!:*  f>l'  lotted  to  tlieiii.  lieiore  thiii,  there
l..hi>nr ;  alMi  hi^  iuijuino*  n'>|»e«-t-  whs  no  road  in  any  part  uf  the
III:;  tlic  ri\il  ulVaiisui  KuL-Jaiid  and  inland,  except  the  iianxiw  wimiiiuf
Luio[>i'.  trarks  In- ^^lli«•h   the  natives  founli

»•  ^  uu   ha\«*    li'ariHMl,    we  lru>t,  tlieir   way   Ironi   one  place  to  BD-

l.iiiu  !•  Mjm*  ^I'lii    l.iuni*  h»*n»n'  \\e  other."

ii-.u  lir.l    laiiiM.  that  thi'  tran.sla-  The  KinirN  illness  continued  to

ti*ui«   aiiil    pnuiiim   are   iroiui^^  on  ini'rea<(>  rapidly  ;  and  on  the  7th of

Will.     Matthi'w      and    Jidm     are  DeiHMnber,     Mr.    Crook    was  re-

l"iiiit«'.l   in  thr  Tahitian  lauirua-^e,  ipif>ted,  by  a  messenger,  to  attend

nnil  ail'  mi  iiiiiuiiirrable  haini^:   the  iinincihately,       as      Pomarre    had

honk    III     (M'ui'^i^,     Jo>hua,     thr  .  fainted.     He  accordinirly  haMened

Is.diiis.    Kai.ili,    the      Art-,     the  to  the  royal   resuleiice,  with  Mr.

K|>i<>il('s   lo   thi'   Koiiiaus,  ami  the  Keiifern,    a    surireon      from    Poit

oihiT    Kpi^th-s,    an-   in   ruurof    ol  .fackson,  and  found  that  hispatient's

Ir.insl.iiuHi.    aul  an*  waifiti::    tin*  <'nd  was  fast  approuchini;.  After  he

niuiual  coireriioiiMil' the  hriMhreii.  had  revived,    Mr.  Crook  reminded

'1  ht>   !;niinm.'ir  aiui  (lictioiwirv   are  him,  that  tlioucrh  be  was  a  great

iiiii  ill  M>  r.trwaiil  a  ^late  ;  l>ut  hoth  sinner,  tlie  l^ord  .lesus  was  a  threat    i

ti.tM>    an'   Ml   i.iipMtaiit,    that   wc  Sa\ioiir,  and  be  alone  could  niJ  bin

hup  •  to  iii.rKr  a   niore  eiu'ouraL'-Jii.i  in    the    article     of    death.      The

r«  |M.it  ol  tiu-ir  pn'icress  at  iHi  di>-  liniu;   monarch    replied,   emphati-

laul  pniow."  rally,  .//'*//*  f/ /owe/   and   then  sanlc

*•  We  an'  ur.itifu'ii  in  o])s»'r\in:;.  into  a  kind  of  stupor,  which  contl*

almost  ev<'r\  wIu'H',  niaii\   marks  ol  iiui*.l  till  ahoiit  h  o'cUwrk,  when  hk

iiiipro\enu'ul.     HelliT  Ikuim's  auii  s;»iiit  was  summoned   into  the  un-

cliapfN  ha\iii!^    hiTii    luiilt,   t>r  in  seen  world.                                              ,

pri'i'aiation  for heiui(l)uilt, at  nearly  ,       During   the    j-ear   ending  May,     ;

every  station     raplil    iiiiproxement  i  lH2^i,  the  nund>er  baptized  at  J/tf*

in  reailiii'JT  and  writinii:  -  Kun>|iean  :  favai^  in  the  district  of  that  name,

dresses    partially     superseiliiiii:  the  ,  was,  of  adults  120,  of  children  lOU;     |

Tahitian—  the    chiefs    ingeniously  '  making  a  total  of  the  former,  3M,


niul  «lilit;«'iitly  huiKling  their  own
hJinl.N  in  tln^  European  form,  with
Kui'opcan  tools-  many  cultivating


of  the  hitter,  238:  candidates  for    ^
baptism,  IS;  addition  to  the  com-
nuinicants,  .33  :  making  a  total  of


lohai'co  ami  sugar — aiui  nearly  all  I  lOH.     Marriages  during  the  same


manulactuiini?  cocoa-nut  oil.

*' Among  other  maiks  of  improve-
ment, we  nuist  mention  a  road,
whi(di  is  already  made  to  a  consi-
derable extent,  and  which  is  in-
tendtnl  to  go  round  the  whole
island.  This  is  of  ver>-  great  and
obvious  importance.    It  huL&  beeu


period,  12.

This  station  was  afterwards
named  H'au^h  Town,  Mr,  Ilay-
wnrd  was  compelled,  by  Mrs.  H.'s
state  of  health,  to  return  to  Nev
South  Wales,  where  he  is  usefully
employed;  and  his  devoted  coad-
,  jutor,  Mr.  Nott,   after  a  diligeat


TAH

tsnd  faithful  service  in  the  islands  of
nearly  30  years,  visited  his  native
eoantry.

'  On  his  departure  for  Europe,  the
care  of  the  stations  at  Waugh
Town  and  Hankey  City  devolved
open  Mr.  Wilson,  together  with
tmit  of  Wilks'  Harbour,  until  the
removal  of  Mr.  Pritchard  to  the
latter  in  November,  1825.  The
number  baptized  by  Mr.  Wilson,
Ifom  May  in  that  year,  until  the
period  of  Mr.  Pritchard's  removal,
was,  for  the  3  stations,  31  adults
and  33  children.  Subsequent  to
the  settlement  of  Mr.  Pritchard  at
WUks'  Harbour,  in  May,  1826,  the
nmnber  baptized,  belonging  to  the
districts  of  Pare  and  Matavai,  was
14  adults  and  32  children.  The
members  in  the  churches  of  these
two  districts  amounted  at  that
time  to  about  400 ;  candidates  for
communion,  87  ;  those  for  baptism,
7  $  couples  married  during  the  year
1825-6,  11.

Among  those  lately  baptized,  are
several  young  persons,  who,  unhap-
pily, had  adopted  some  of  their
iormer  pernicious  customs.  Some
who  were  baptized  here  several
jears  ago,  and  who  had  afterwards
relapsed  into  sin,  have  renounced
fhelr  evil  courses,  and  resumed
their  attendance  on  the  special
ineetings  appointed  for  the  baptized.
Some  church  members,  who  had
fallen  under  censure,  have,  on
proof  of  repentance,  been  re-ad-
mitted to  communion.

The  services  on  the  Sabbath  are,
in  general,  well  attended,  and  the
people  manifest  a  laudable  desire  to
understand  the  meaning  of  what
they  hear.  The  number  who  at-
tend the  preaching  on  the  Wednes-
day evenings  is  small.  The  various
meetings  for  catechetical  instruc-
tion, <fec.  during  the  week,  conti-
nue to  be  regularly  attended,  that
on  Saturday  excepted.  The  adult
and  children's  schools  are  both  well
Attended.  '  The  number  of  chil-


TAM

dren  under  instruction  is  170.  A
new  school-room  of  large  dimen-
sions has  been  lately  erected.

I'he  parts  of  the  New  Testament
not  hitherto  circulated,  have  been
translated,  and,  when  revised,  will
be  sent  to  press ;  so  that  it  is  pro-  ^
bable,  shortly  after  Mr.  Nott's  re-  *
turn  to  the  islands,  the  New  Testa-
ment will  be  given  to  the  islanders
in  a  complete  form.  [For  other
stations  in  Tahiti,  see  Bogue  Toam,
Burder^s  Point,  Haweis  Town,
Hidia,  fVilks'  Harbour,  ]

TAMA  RACOOLUM,  or  TA-
MARANGCOOLUM,  a  village  in
Travancore,  Hindoostan,  near
Nagercoil,  in  the  midst  of  a  wood
of  palmyra-trees ;  inhabited  by  a
large  number  of  native  Christians,
whose  employment  is  the  cultiva*
tion  of  the  palmjrra-tree.  The
paddy  fields,  given  by  the  Queen
to  the  mission,  lie  near  this  vUlage.
A  heavy  quit- rent,  formerly  attach-
ed to  this  grant,  has  been  removed.
In  1818,  the  congregation  consisted
of  4  or  500.  More  than  1000  have
entered  their  names  as  renouncing
heathenism.  They  have  a  large
church,  where  the  congregation
soon  assemble  at  the  sound  of  the
tom  tom,  or  Indian  drum.  The
missionaries  wish  to  substitute  a
bell  for  this  appendage  of  lieathen
worship.  The  Scriptures  are  read
every  Sabbath  by  a  native  catechist,
A  flourishing  school  is  in  operation ;
more  than  1100  verses  from  the
Bible  were  recited  by  the  boys  to
Mr.  Knill,  during  one  visit.  The
London  missionaries  at  Nagercoil
superintend  the  school  and  congre-
gation.

TANJORE,  a  province  in  the
Camatic,  Hindoostan,  bounded  N.
and  W.  by  part  of  the  Camatic,  and
S.  and  E.  by  the  Bay  of  Bengal.
The  effects  of  the  faithful  laboursof
the  apostoliCiSpAtrarte,  and  his  asso-
ciates, are  very  apparent  in  this  part
of  Hindoostan.  In  1705,  Frede-
rick the  Fourth,  Khig  of  DenmariK


TAN

tent  S  mUilonarlci  to  Tnnquebar ;
B.  Ziegenhatg  and  H.  Flmtcho,
who,  with  their  anociatef  and  suc-
ceKon»  did  much  to  Introduce  the
Protectant  rell((ion  Into  the  king-
dom of  Tanjore,  which  has  since
been  irradually  increasing.  In
1809,  the  native  Christians  belong-
ing to  the  Tai\joro  minion,  in-
cluding the  Tinnevelly  district,
•mounted  nearly  to  12,000.  There
is  scarcely  a  ▼illage  in  the  whole
countr}',  in  which  the  miisiionaries
have  not  been  requested  to  esta-
blish schools.

TVntKwr,  a  populous  city,  and
capital  of  a  province  of  the  same
name,  In  the  Carnatlc,  Uindoos-
tan,  on  the  Caveiy  R.,  about  60  m.
from  its  mouth ;  travelling  difstance
S.  S.  W.  Madras,  805  m.  It  was
formerly  the  great  seat  of  learning  in
the  S.  of  India.  Including  the  sub-
ubi,  It  is  about  6  m.in  circuit,  de-
fended by  a  double  wall  and  a  large
ditch.  E.long.70»]0',N.lat.]0040'.

The  Rev.  Christian  F.  Schwartz,
from  the  Soc,  for  Prom.  C,  K,,
undertook  a  mission  to  India,
under  the  government  of  Den-
mark, in  1750 ;  and  after  labour-
ing many  years,  at  Tranquebar,
and  in  the  neighbouring  country,
be  was  established  at  Tricbino-
poly,  in  1766,  under  the  ('.  K.  S,,
where  he  remained,  till  about
1778 ;  when  he  removed  to  Tan-
jore,  and  continued  here  till  his
death,  in  1798.  While  at  Trichl-
nopoly,  he  had  a  congregation  at
Tai\jore,  to  which  he  devoted  much
attention,  employed  several  native
preachers,  and  witnessed  the  con-
version of  many  heathen.  Soon
after  his  establishment  at  Tanjore,
be  erected  a  church  for  the  garri-
son, and  another  for  the  natives.
His  unblameable  conduct,  and  de-
▼otedness  to  the  cause  of  his  Mas-
ter, gave  him  a  decided  influence
over  all  classes,  and  secured  the
confidence  of  the  bigoted  Hindoos,
la  the  time  of  war  with  Europeans,


TAN

the  R^ah  lubMle  Ua  iddMliti
Injure  ttwt  good  umb.  T&q^  ^
noured  him  in  life,  and  minA
long  for  blm  after  hfe  death.  Tm
miles  E.  of  Ta^iore,  Mr.  Sdnttlk
built  a  houae  for  hb  nMmotj^i
made  it  an  orphan  aqrlnai.  Baft
the  last  20  yean  of  hli  Hfe  wM
spent  In  the  edocatlon  mat  vMAm
instruction  of  ehUdren,  paitMn^
of  Indigent  parentis  ni^aai  hr^
tuitously  maintained  and  tBMhocht
and,  at  hia  death,  wflled  hk  |»
perty  to  the  mlarion  at  Tmjim,
His  snccem  waaeztnonUBUT:  tth
said  he  reckoned


savingly  converted  bj  bk
Mr.  Kolhoir  Is  hk


faithfully  devoted  to  flie
interests  of  the  mlMka.  hi
many  yean  after  the  deaft  of  Ife
Schwaits,  Mr.  Iluhbuift  ami
elated  with  Mr.  Kolhoff.  AttUi
|dace  a  school-hooae
in  1808,  which  maj
upwards  of  1000  acholaik  Ik
schools  and  congregatloBt  mte
the  care  of  the  miaaionarlef  at  IHi
station  are  prasperooa.  The  cm-
gregations  extend  aboot  800  m  li
1816,  the  Christians  in  the  d^  of
Tanjore  were  aboat  1500;  aadfai
the  vicinity,  about  1000.  CoMhy
priests  have  long  been  'empl«9ed
with  happy  effect,  in  the  dlftnirt
congregations  connected  with  tth
mission.  The  countiy  coiigwgf-
tions  of  the  t>aniBh  mkrioB  to
Tranquebar  have  been  rseeBtllf
trans/erred  to  the  C  jK.  &,  ml
attached  to  this  station,  whi&  hss
thus  received  an  addition  of  1I8T
souls.  The  Rajah  favours  and  pa-
tronizes the  missionaries,  and  hii
done  much  to  forward  their  piMi
of  benevolence.

Bishop  Heber  arrived  at  fki^^
on  the  25th  of  March,  1880;  and  it
was  there.  In  the  institutioni  of  tte
venerable  Schwartx,  in  tte  laboas
of  the  excellent  men  who  haie
succeeded  him  in  the  same  fdd,
and  In  the  numerooi  choidMs  af

4S8


TAN

BttliTO  Christians  which  they  have
Ibonded   and  built  up, — ^that   his
Interest     was     most     powerfully
•Kcitedy  and  the  energies  of  his
■Bind    most    earnestly  employed.
ffhe   morning   after    his    arriTal
(  Easter-day),  bis  Lordship  preached
Ml  the  mission  church  in  the  fort,
mod  administered  the  Lord's  Sup-
per to  53  native  Christians,  using
C^i  was  his  constant  custom  in  all
lUtiTe  congregations)  the  words  of
adnkinistration  in  their  own  lan-
AQBge.   In  the  evening  he  attended
Vie   Tamul  service  in   the  same
<£hurch ;  the  liturgy  being  read  by
the  missionaries  present,  and  the
ieermon  preached  by  Dr.  Caemerer,
-of  Tranquebar ;    and    he    himself
priHiouncing   the    benediction    in
TamuL   "  Gladly,"   be  exclaimed
to  me,  says  the  Rev.  T.  Robinson,
while  taking  off  his  robes,  '  gladly
vould   I   purchase  this  day  with
years  of  existence.'    On  the  fol-
lowing morning  (Easter  Monday),
he   confirmed   12  descendants  of
Europeans,  and  50  natives  in  the
•ame  church  $  and  in  the  evening
of  the  same  day  he  attended  divine
service  in    Tamul,  at   the  small
chapel    in    the    mission   garden.
After  the  sermon,   his  Lordship,
from  his  seat  at  the  altar,  addressed
the  missionaries  who    were    pre-
sent, and  the  native  teachers  by
whom  they  were   attended.     He
exhorted   them    to   fidelity,    dili-
gence, and    increasing  zeal,   pa-
tience in    bearing   privations  and
neglect  for  Christ's  sake,  looldng
for  the  recompence  of  reward,  to
earnest  prayer  for  themselves,  for
him,  for  their  flock,  and  for  the
Rajah,  who  had  shewn  such  kind-
ness of  the  church  of  Christ.    He
alluded  beautifully  to  the  gprave  of
Schwartz,  over  which   they  were
then  standing,  and  charged  them
to  follow  his  bright  example.    The
effect  produced  on  the  minds  of  all
present  was  such  as  I  never  wit-


TAN''

nessed — it  will  never  bo  oblite*
rated."

The  importance  of  this  station
will  be  fully  apparent  from  another
quotation  from  the  same  pen : —

''  I  commend  the  Tkinfore  mis-
sion, with  all  its  important  iaboursy
to  the  patronage  and  support,  I  will
venture  to  say  more, — ^to  the  affec-
tionate regard,  of  the  Committee.
Most  richly  do  they  deserve  all  the
nurture,  all  the  assistance,  all  the
kindness,  that  can  be  shewn  them.
The  wisdom  of  all  the  institutions
of  the  venerable  Schwartz  (whose
name  is  yet  as  fresh  in  every  town
and  village  of  the  Christians,  as  if
his  earthly  labours  were  just  ended,
and  whose  memory  is  held  in  such
deep  and  holy  veneration,  as  we  are
accustomed  to  render  to  Apostles
only)  is  visible  to  all  who  visit  that
most  interesting  country,  and  leaves
no  doubt  on  the  mind,  that  the  best
and  wisest  method  of  sending  tiie
kingdom  of  Christ  in  this  country,
is  to  strengthen  these  existing  es-
tablishments. They  have  in  them
a  principle  of  unlimited  self-ex-
tension ;  and  if  in  the  last  20  years,
with  many  and  gpreat  discourage-
ments, the  labours  of  those  vene-
rable men,  who  have  trod  in  the
steps  of  SchwartZf  have  effected
so  much,  what  may  we  not  hope
from  the  same  men,  when  their
means  of  usefulness  are  increamd
by  your  bounty?  But,  alas!  they
have  a  still  stronger  claim  upon
your  hearts.  They  were  the  ob-
ject of  the  deepeist  interest  and
most  intense  aiudety  to  our  dear
lamented  Bishop.  It  would  be
hardly  too  much  to  say,  that  his
blood  was  a  libation  on  the  sacri-
fice of  their  faith  $  for  he  died
while  caring  for  their  welfare,  and
labouring  for  their  good.  He  had
seen  every  part  of  India,  but  he
had  seen  nothing  like  the  SooieijfU
missions  in  Tui^ote.  Again  and
again  did  he  repeat  to  me,  ^Here

459


TAR

M  the  t&engtk  of  the  Ckrietimk
cufse  in  ittdia,  it  inntld  indeed
be  a  grieveme  ami  heavy  tin,  if
KHf^/amd,  and  all  the  tiffemtt  of
it*  itouttty,  dv  not  noMrith  and
/irotet't  thfte  chvrehes,* "

On  the  receipt  uf  this  commii-
nii'iition,  a  desire  to  nrc(iiii|ilish
UN  tnr  ns  putwible  tbe  plniiK  uf  the
laiiHMiteii  pnMHte  prevnihul  in  every
iNtMim  ;  and  at  a  yiwciHl  general
meeting,  although  the  superiii-
tendaiice  of  the  niisAionK  had  been
transfiTred  to  the  Sttniety  for  the
fir»fHiftitioH  of  t/tP  Hot  pel  in  Fo-
reign Parts f  it  wan  rewolved  to
carry  the  recominendatiouM  of  Bi-
shop Helier  into  full  eHect.  In
pnnfuanre  of  this  reM>lntion»  it  was
determined  to  ex|)end  the  sum  of
£4600,  partly  tn  building,  repair-
ing, and  enlarging  churcheis,  clia-
pelii,  niiMiionary  preniisex,  and
school- houses  in  tbe  Tunjore  dis-
trict, iHirtly  in  extending  the  mls-
Kion-press  at  f'ep*ry,  and  partly  in
the  endowment  of  two  additional
srlioIan(bi|M  at  JiishopVi  College,
Cuiciittii,  to  be  for  ever  called
liishop  IIel>er's  scholarships,  and
to  be  iippn)priati*d,  in  compliance
with  his  earnest  \ii>h  and  rt*com-
mendation,  1o  tlie  maintenance
mid  education  of  memlH^rs  of  fo-
reign episcopal  churches  in  the
Kast,  not  in  sulmrdi nation  to  the
see  of  Kome.

TAKTARY,  in  the  most  ex-
tensive sense  of  the  wonl,  includes
nil  that  vast  country  of  Asia,  be-
tween the  Frozen  ()cean  and  Per-
sia, Hindoostan,  and  China.  Russian
Tartar}'  embraces  all  tlie  northern
part  of  this  territorj- ;  Chinese
Tartar}'  includes  the  S.  and  E.
part ;  and  Indei)endent  Tartar}*  lies
K.  of  the  Caspian  Sea.

The  inhabitants,  scattered  over
a  wide  extent  of  countr}',  are  ge-
nerally called  Tartars ;  but  they
are  divided  into  3  distinct  races  of
men ;    viz.  the  Huns,   or  Proper


TAU

Tartan,  the  Mandrinint  aad  Hei*
golef;  and  these  into  a  gmt
variety  of  tribes,  eacb  of  irMd
i  has  iti  appropriate  nanM.  -  ThM
3  famlliei  of  TarUn  have  MM
languages ;  In  addition  to  lAtab
many  dlffoTent  dialects  prataiL

The  religrion  of  many  of  ttft
Tartan  in  tbe  S.W.  part  of  ttr
country  is  Mabonnedan;  ottmif
them,  with  tbe  great  body  of  fto
other  Tartars  in  Asia,  wbrfhcr
Huns,  Mongoiesy  or  MaadAMb
are  Pagans,  or  worabippen  tf
Budbu.  They  Lave,  genenPy,  f
strong  aversion  to  i&  ChfiiOni
religion,  and  are  dopes  to  Ihdi
own  superstitions.

A  true  estimate  of  tbe  wide^
extended  population  of  this  coaalij
cannot  be  formed ;  but  that  thne
are  many  millions,  who  need  te'
hapd  of  Christian  charity  to  eziflii
to  them  the  light  of  life,  caairt
be  doubted.

I'be  mission  stations,  which  hve
Iwen  established  to  diflbse  the  UgM
of  the  Gospel  among  the  dUfeicBt
Tartar  tribes,  are  jitirachaHf  £i>
rats,  Nazranf  Nogay^  OrenAergt  &-
repta,  tmd  SelingiHsk.  (Whichiee.)

The  missions  established  ia  tUi
vast  range  of  territory  were  gieaQy
assisted  l>y  the  Russian  BiSle  A-
cietif  and  its  numerous  aaxiliariei. '
The  PetersbMrgh  Teaei  Society  abo
rendered  valuable  aid  ;  and,l^  tbe
liberality  of  the  Princen  Mevt-
chersky,  they  are  supplied  with
tracts  in  the  Russian  language.
She  has  translated  a  number  of
English  Tracts  in  that  language ;
hundreds  of  thousands  of  wUeh
are  in  circulation.

TAUAI,  one  of  the  Sandwich
Islands,  33  miles  in  length,  and  M
in  breadth,  tbe  residence  of  the
Ciovemor,  Kaikioera ;  having  a
{K)pulation  of  15,000.  A\  9Vwmem^
on  the  southern  coast,  there  is  a
I  station  of  the  A.  B.C,  P.  M.,  wUcb
was  commenced  in  1820.

460


i


TEL

tn  Jon.  \h24,  Mr.  Whitney givei
tbe  following  account  of  it : —
'.    f'Tl\e  chiefs,  at  their  own  ex-
liense,  have  built  us  a  very  con-
venient house  for  public  worship  $
in  wliich  I  have  preached  regularly,
in  the  vernacular   tongue^   for  8
months  past,  twice  every  Sabbath,
•Dd   occasionally  on  other    days.
pur  meetings  are  generally  well
attended,  and  many  of  tbe  people
•re  desirous  of  becoming  acquaint*
ad  with  the  GospeL     Under  our
iaimedtate  inspection,  we  have  2
flourishing  schools,   of  about  120
scholars:   there  are  other  schools
in  different  parts    of  tbe  island.
Many  more  are  anxious  to  learn ;
bat,  for  wantof  boolcs  and  teachers,
they  must,  for  tbe  present,  be  denied
that  privilege.    Orders  have  lately
been  given  out  for  all  the  people,
without  exception,  on  this  and  the
aeighbouring    island,    Niihau,    to
observe  the  Sabbath  as  holy  time,
devoted  to  the  service  of  Jehovah.
Drunkenness  is  prohibited;  and  in-
fiuiticide,   which    heretofore    has
been  practised  to  no  inconsiderable
extent,    is    now  punishable  with
death.''

On  June  24,1825,  Mr.  W.  says :— -
**  While  I  was  writing  this,  our
Governor,  KaIkioeva,came  in,  and
inquired  to  whom  I  was  writing.
On  being  informed;  'Give  them,'
said  he,  with  much  warmth  of  ex-
pression, *  my  affectionate  saluta-
tion. Tell  them  I  thank  them
much  for  the  good  news  of  salva-
tion which  they  have  sent  us ;  that
learning  and  religion  shall  be  the
business  of  my  life.'  He  has  lately
bailt  a  new  church,  90  feet  by  30,
which  is  probably  the  best  house
that  ever  was  erected  on  Tauai."
[See  Sandwich  Islands,]

TELLI CHERRY,  a  city  of
Hindostan,  pleasantly  situated  on
the  Malabar  coast,  N.  W.  Cochin,
246  m.  S.  S.  W.  Goa,  belonging  to
the  English.  E.  long.  U^  SS',  N.
lat.  1 1**  46'.


TER

The  C  M,  S,  commenced  a  mi^
sion  here  in  1817,  which  was  for
some  years  superintended  by  the
Rev.  Francis  Spring,  the  chaplain.
He  prepared  the  church  catechism
and  liturgy  in  Malayalim.  A  school
of  60  scholars  here  has  been  highly
useful,    and    formerly    supported
•  itself.    Many  who  were  educated
in  it  are  engaged  in  public  offices,
or   useful   occupations,    and  have
done  credit  to  the  instniction  they
had  received.     Much    opposition
has  been  made  by  the  Roman  Catho*
lic^.    Respecting  this  station,  Mr.
Spring    writes: — <'  Something    is
almost  daily  occurring  to  animate
us  in  our  course.    Here,  flashes  of
the  heavenly  light  are  continually
gleaming  through  the  darkened  at-
mosphere.   I  hear  that  there  is,  on
every  side,  a  readiness  among  great
numbers  to  receive  the  tidings  of
the  Gospel."    A  poor  man's  fund
was  also  established,  which  relieved
400persons  weekly ;  20,000  mpees
were  bequeathed  to  it  by  a  deceased
friend,  who  was  the  principal  agent
in  its  establishment.    This  measure
conciliated  the  natives,  and  gave
them   favourable  views  of  Chris*
tianity.

In  1823,  Mr.  Spring  left  this
station  for  England,  having  made
the  best  arrangements  in  bis  power
to  secure  the  continuance  of  the
school  established  by  him,  and  now
maintained  by  the  Madras  Corre-
sponding Committee  of  the  C.  M,  S,
In  1824,  since  which  no  accounts
of  it  have  been  published.  It  con-
tained 69  children  of  various  castes
and  classes.

TERN  ATE,  a  smaU  island  in
the  E.  Indian  Sea,  one  of  the  prin«
cipal  of  the  Moluccas,  of  a  circular
form,  18  miles  in  circumference.
A  large  volcanic  mountain  in  the
centre  extends  nearly  to  the  sea  in
every  direction.  This  island  was  first
settled  by  the  Spaniards,  who  were
driven  away  by  the  Dutch,  to  whoqo
the  King  of  the  island  Is  in  some

R  a  2  ^^V


THE

tlein^e  subject.  The  govrrnment
uf  Trriiate  Iniiudes  the  islniidii  of
Thiort*,  Motlr,  Mnchlaii,  and  Bb-
cliiiin.  (Muvi*ii  lire  the  princiiMil
BrtU'lc  of  commerce.  K.  lung.
1*7"3:I',  Int.  N.O"dU'.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Jungmichely  of  the
N,  M,  .v.,  was  Mntiuned  here  In
18111.  I'mler  his  care  are  2:2
churches  in  Temnte  and  the  neigh-
bouring i<»landx.  The  Kev.  Mr.
Kam,  miM(ionar}'  at  AmboynAy  has
been  iiiMrumental  of  much  good  in
hix  occasional  viititi  to  Ternate.

THKOI'OLIS,  a  settlement  of
Ilottentotsiy  in  the  district  of  Al-
bany, Ch\h*  Colony,  S.  Africa,  00
m,  N.  K.  of  Hethelsdorp,  and  about
000  K.  of  Cape  Town ;  Mitnatcdin  a
Talley,  surninnded  on  all  sides  by
hiliKfovertMl  with  trees.  The  land
belonging  to  the  L,  M.  S,  extends
S  miles  down  a  river  to  the  ^ea,  is
well  watert^d,  and  aflbnis  abun-
dance of  pa.stnrage,  and  nuiny  faci-
lities for  a  conifortabic  subsistence.
The  inhabitants  are  6U0.

Tiiis  M'ttlenient  was  commenced
by  the  He  v.  Mi^ssrs.  Hnrtlett  and
I'libricbt,  and  other  settlers  from
Bethel.o-dorp,  in  ISI-I,  on  a  s|)ot
selected  «!jd  granted  to  the  society
by  Governor  Cradock.  Mr.  B.
continued  here  a  short  time,  and
was  succetNled  by  the  Rev.  Mr.
Barker,  in  IH16.  Mr.  U.  remained
till  his  death,  in  1821.  The  mis-
sionaries have  abundant  evidence
that  their  labours  have  not  been  in
vain.  Both  the  tem|)oraI  and
spiritual  condition  of  the  people
have  greatly  improved.  They  have
genemliy  b<>come  industrious,  and
many  of  them  give  evidence  of
piety  y  more  than  70  were  added  to
the  church,  during  one  year.  In
1819,  the  church  consisted  of  106
members,  andthere  were  240  chil-
dren in  the  school.  Since  this,  the
prasperity  of  the  mission  has  been
somewhat  retarded  by  the  absence
and  death  of  the  missionaries.  In
1883,   the   settlement  was    again


THI

'  flooridiing.  '  Manjr  dliaJfMtiga

attending  the  IocbI  ritiutiOB,»MV

Tillage  was  fonnliiff .    The  ■farthi

has  suflered  much  nam  the  icfaiM

I  invasiom  of  the  Caf&cs.    In  181%

I  when  the  Rtatloii  wu  Imreded,  mm

'  than  3  monthi,  by  aevefral  thaenyj^

:  the  breTeiy  of  the  Hottentili  iC

Theo|xili9  saved  tiie  coioi^  tai

i  much  depredation.    An  tollfaqf

j  MIsiionao- Society  hasbeeafcilii

I  ed,    which    contributed,    in  «b

j  year,  more  than  SOO  doUais.

I     The  congregation  <m  ths  flih-

bath-day  still  continues  good;  fti

attention  of  the  people  is  pleeri^^

and  some  appear  seriously  ifiM»

ed  with  the  truth.     The  ■eahn

of  the  church  grow  in  CbMlai

experience,  hut  few  additionifans

been  lately  made  to  theh  nanker.

The  school  is  in  a  prospenmstite.

The  annivenaxy  of  tiie  TkttfaKt

AuMtiarif  Soeietjf  was  heU  on  tte

7th  of  June,  188fl^  when  itappenti

that  the  receipts  for  the  preeediig

year  amounted  to  riz  dcdian  S7^

or  about  80/.  steiUng.    It  woold

be  improper  to  pass  by  this  coatrt-

bution,  without  observing^  that  It

is  from  a  single  congregatioa  of

Hottentots.

Several  of  the  people  belongiBg
to  this  institution  have  gone  to  m-
sist  in  the  secular  operations  of  the
mission  lately  established  on  the
Buflalo  River,  Caffieland.*

THIBET,  a  country  In  Asia,
including  Bootan,  extmids  lirom  the
source  of  the  Indus  to  the  borden  of
China,  and  from  Hindoostan  to  tiie
deserts  of  Gobi ;  1600  m.  from  E.
to  W. ;  the  breadth  is  unequal,  sod
in  some  parts  unknown ;  between
E.  long.  700  and  100>,  N.  lat  8fl^
and  38®.  The  populaticm  b  Taii-
ously  estimated,  from  IS  to
16,000,000.

This  country  is  tribntaiy  to
China;  but  is  governed  bj  the
Grand  Lama,  who  is  lovereigD
pontiff  of  the  greater  part  of  Chi-
nese and  Independent  Tartaiy.
\  '    408


THI

■Ho  receives  the  adoration  of  the
IMUiveSj  as  well  as  vast  crowds  of
iDreigoers,  who  undertake  long  and
paiiuul  journeys  to  bring  their
cosily  offerings,  and  pay  him
homage.  He  is  worshipped  as  pos-
coising  all  the  attributes  of  Deity,
pnd  the  power  to  impart  divinity  to
every  thing  he  pleases.  The  kings
Qf  Tartary,  by  rich  gifts,  obtain  his
blessing,  which  he  bestows  by
putting  his  hand  on  their  heads,
while  they  knovel  before  him ;  but
he -does  not  deign  to  converse  with
the  greatest  monarch  in  Asia.  He  is
rarely,  if  ever,  seen  by  common
worshippers,  except  in  the  rear  of
some  distant  window.  His  resi-
dence is  the  centre  of  an  enormous
and  most  splendid  palace,  on  the
top  of  Patelli>  or  Holy  Mountain,
near  the  Burrampooter,  and  about
T  m.  from  Lassa,  the  capital.  It  is
a  vast  block  of  temples,  built  of
stone,  ^d  inhabited  by  700  lamas,
who  are  attached  totheGrandLama,
and  perform  daily  worship.  The
mountain  descends  in  every  di-
rection from  the  temple;  around
which  are  circles  of  buildings  of
■uperb  structure,  extending  to  the
plain.  Bentick  saj's,  more  than
20,000  lamas  reside  in  these  several
circles,  according  as  their  rank  and
dignity  render  them  more  worthy
to  approach  their  sovereign  pontiff.
Those  lamas,  who  reside  in  the
higher  circles,  possess  great  wealth
and  reputed  sanctity  of  character ;
and  to  maintain  their  high  preten-
sions to  holiness,  they  seldom  appear
before  the  multitude.  It  is  difficult
to  imagine  a  scene  better  calcu-
lated to  overwhelm  the  superstitious
worshipper  than  the  ascent  of  the
HolyMountain.  Every  step  becomes
more  and  more  sacred,  and  brings
him  nearer  to  the  courts  of  that
being,  whom  he  adores  as  imma-
culate, immortal,  omnipresent,  and
omniscient ;  and  though  he  is  only
permitted  to  glance  a  distant  look
at  the  object  of  his  worship,  or


THI

behold  his  portrait  at  the  entrance
of  the  court,  to  which  he  pays  his
devotions  as  to  the  god  himself;  he
feels  confident  of  his  favour,  and  is
richly  rewarded  for  a  pilgprimage  of
1000  miles.

The  votaries  of  the  Crand  Lama
maintain,  that  when  be  seems  to
die,  his  soul,  or  the  divinity,  only
quits  a  crazy  habitation  to  seek
another ;  and  that  it  is  discovered
again  in  the  body  of  some  child  hf
certain  tokens,  known  only  to  the
lamas^  in  which  order  he  always
appears.  The  infant  lama  is  then
conducted  to  Terpaling,  about  20
m.  from  Lassa,  into  the  centre  of
the  monastery,  which  is  a  mile  in
circumference,  enclosed  by  lofty
walls,  and  situated  on  the  summit  of
a  high  hill.  In  this  pile  of  build-
ings, 300  priests  perform  religious
service  with  Tesboo  Lama,  for  se-
veral years,  when  he  is  prepared  for
his  inauguration;  after  which  he
resides  in  his  palace  on  the  Holy
Mountain,  and  receives  the  adora-
tions and  costly  gifts  of  his  deluded
votaries,  who  are  supposed  to  em-
brace about  one-third  part  of  the
human  family !

Thibetian  idols  are  numerous.
Budhu,  Fo,  and  Manippe,  belong
to  the  first  rank.  Budhu  seems  to
be  venerated  chiefly  for  his  anti*
quity.  Fo  is  supposed  to  reside  in
the  Grand  Lama.  Manippe  is  a
large  idol,  sitting  on  a  throne,  with
9  heads  placed  one  above  another
in  the  form  of  a  cone,  and  is  the
great  goddess  of  the  Thibetians.
In  their  temples  dre  an  almost
endless  variety  of  images,  which
are  increasing.  When  the  Grand
Lama  dies,  his  body  is  placed  erect
in  a  golden  shrine,  and  ever  after
visited  with  sacred  awe.  The  body
of  every  inferior  lama  is  burnt
immediately  after  death,  and  the
ashes  are  enclosed  in  a  little  brass
image,  which  is  placed  in  the  sacred
cabinet.  In  addition  to  these,
almost  every  man  has  small  images,

463


THI

and  pictaret  or  the  Grand  Lnraa  In
hU  home,  which  receive  family
worship.  In  common  with  the
Ilindoox,  they  hold  the  water  of  (he
Gangef,  and  a  fariety  of  other
objects,  lacred.

I'hey  believe  in  the  transmlf^ra-
tion  of  the  loui;  that  when  it
leaves  the  body  it  goM  to  heaven,
or  is  born  asrain  Into  the  world,  as-
suming another  human  body,  or  that
of  an  animal,  according  to  the
degree  of  sanctity,  or  the  multitude
of  good  works  performed.  They
also  believe,  that  all  the  sufferings
incident  to  a  man  in  this  life  are
the  evil  consequences  of  win  com-
mitted in  his  former  life,  before  his
last  birth.

This  article  might  be  extended
to  great  length,  in  detailing  a  par-
ticular account  of  their  unmeaning
modes  of  wornhip,  and  a  multitude
of  Inhuman  practices ;  but  tbis  par-
tial view  of  their  deplorable  condi-
tion must  awaken  Christian  sym-
pathy, and  prompt  the  inquiry',  Can
any  efficient  measures  be  taken  to
enlighttMi  and  reform  this  people  ?
To  this  quest  ion  it  may  he  answered,
The  obstacles  to  the  introduction  of
the  Gospel  into  Thibet  are  great
and  appalling ;  but  the  magnitude
of  the  object  demands  no  trifling
sacrifice.  A  mission  station  at  the
head- quarters  of  lamaism  would  be,
perhaps,  more  important  than  any
now  in  existence.  For  a  long  pe-
riod, all  books  printed  in  tbe  Thi-
betian  language  have  been  consi-
dered sacred.  Tbis  prepossession,
with  the  sanction  of  some  lama  of
distinction,  would  give  the  Scrip-
tures, printed  in  that  language,  a
high  character  ;  and  they  would  be
read  by  every  learned  lama  in  Asia,
and  might  be  most  extensively  cir-
culated among  tbe  vast  crowds  of
pilgrims  to  the  Holy  Mountain.  Let
the  Gospel  be  introduced  into
Thibet,  and  an  effectual  door  would
be  opened  into  China,  as  the  Em-


THO

peror  and  court  look  to  ThibeCloi
their  reUgkrn.  With  tbe  tmmh
sioB  of  the  lAnwiy  the  pa^inlMi  if
aU  Asi*  would  tremble  inwih
foundation,  and  the  Gotpalweri
flow  in  the  deeerted  chwneili  tf
Lamalsm  through  Tartaij,  TUM^
and  the  vast  empire  of  China,  lib
Is  the  ftiong  hold  of  Satu,  mi
must  be  aaulled  by  the  GhiMtai
soldier.  Let  the  fortrem  no  lopgB
be  Tiewed  as  Impfegnable  tiUi  lAi
tempts  have  been  miale.  <*TliehBHf
of  <the  Grand  Lama'  Is  in  tit
hand  of  the  Lord.''  [See  TViiM
THOMAS,  ST.  the  prindpdrf.
the  Virgin  Islands,  W.  Indies,  abod
25  ro.  in  circumference,  undnlhe
authorit}'  of  the  Danes.  It  hsi  •
commodious  harbour,  and  is  a  filaes
of  conaiderahle  trade.  A  gnd
portion  of  the  population  are  Am»
A  negro,  named  Anthony^  wfab
became  acquainted  with  the  senuto
of  Count  Zlniendorf,  iriiikt  Urt
nobleman  was  attending  the  eon-
nation  of  Christian  VI.,  hi  1711,
at  Copenhagen,  first  gave  rtae  to  tic
idea  of  sendipg  out  miarionariei  to
these  benighted  islands,  where  tbe
miseries  of  personal  slaveiy  wen
superadded  to  those  of  satanlo
bondage.  This  man,  in  the  cooM
of  conversation,  stated  that  he  hsd
a  sister  in  the  idaqd  of  St.  Tluns^
who,  with  many  of  her  haplsH
companions,  earnestly  desired  to  be
taught  in  the  way  of  salvatioD,
and  earnestly  implored  God  to  sead
some  person  to  their  assistance,
capable  of  giving  them  rellgiou
instructions.  Tbis  statement  wal
afterwards  repeated  at  Hemhnt,
Anthony,  having  obtained  pennis-
sion  to  visit  that  settlement;  an^
though  it  was  now  added,  that  the
neg^roes  could  obtain  no  opportunity
of  attending  to  the  truths  of  the
Gospel,  unless  their  teachen  wen
united  with  them  in  their  daily
and  laborious  avocations,  9  young
men,  Leonard  Dober  and  Tobias

494


TIL

Id^immediately  formed  the  re-
whtution  of  going  to  these  poor  nntu-
i  %iKed  creatures ;  and  absolutely
Vdeelared  their  willingness  to  sell
^t^entselves  as  slaves,  should  such
l&^  step  prove  necessary  to  the  ac-
AooBiplishment  of  their  purpose..
i(  Though  this  sacrifice  was  not  re-
•Vqiiired,  others  little  less  painful
ilvere  submitted  to  for  many  years;
pp  but  after  encountering  many  hard-
i  diljM  and  discouragements,  and
A  wen  imprisonment  itself,  tbey  at
'^  last  began  to  reap  the  fruit  of  their
.if  Idll  andperscTerance.  About  1750,
U  tbtir  congregations  consisted  of
%  neariy  1000,  who  sought  with
■:  Mgemess  the  bread  of  life.^  More
1  than  100  they  baptized  yearly.
i  The  proprietors  of  the  island,  who
i  hod  strenuously  opposed  ail  efforts
A  to  enlighten  the  negroes,  now  ac-
I  knowledged  the  happy  effects  of  the
i  brethrens'  labours  on  the  slaves,
^  and  encouraged  their  attendance
J  on  the  means  of  grace.  The  mis-
1  sionaries  established  themselves  at
I  two  diflerent  places  on  the  island,
I  called  New  Hemifiut  and  Niesky ;
I  'Hrhere  they  have  chapels  and  other
i  accommodations  for  the  mission.
I  In  1812,  the  baptized,  at  New
Hermhutf  amounted  to  1009;  the
communicants  to  430.  At  Niesky,
the  baptized  to  1276;  the  commu-
nicants to  758.  In  1823,  the  mis-
fioo  was  in  a  flourishing  state.

TILLIPALLY,  a  parish  in  the
district  of  Jaffna,  Ceylon,  0  m.  N.
of  Jaffnapatam,  7  or  8  m.  from
Batticotta.  Population  nearly
1300.  At  a  place  about  2  m.  from
Tillipnlly,  many  thousand  pilgrims
annually  resort  to  bathe  in  the  sea.
The  missionaries  improve  these  sea-
sons for  disseminating  the  Gospel
among  them.

The  Rev.  J.  D.  Palm,  from  the
L,  M.  S.f  was  stationed  here  in
1805.  He  preached  in  the  old
Dutch  church,  in  which  Baldaeui,
in  former  times,  used  to  preach  to


TIL

2000  natives,  and  which  has  re-
cently been  repaired  by  the  Ameri'
can  missionaries.  He  had  made
considerable  progress  in  the  Ian*
guage,  and  bad  opened  a  school  for
the  instruction  of  native  youth,
when  the  ill  health  of  Mrs.  Palm
rendered  it  necessary  to  remove  for
a  season  to  Colombo.  After  the
death  of  Mrs.  P.  in  1812,  having
no  missionary  associate  at  Tilii-
pally,  Mr.  P.  accepted  an  invita-
tion to  becomepastor  of  the  Dutch
church  at  Colombo.  During  their
residence  in  this  place,  Mrs.  Palm
instructed  a  female  school,  and  Mr.
Palm  frequently  preached  and  cate-
chised the  children  in  Jaffhapatam.
It  appears  that  the  Gospel .  was
there  heard  with  general  attention.
The  property  granted  by  govern-
ment to  the  mission  at  this  station,
under  the  direction  of  the  A,  B,  C,
F,  M,  consists  of  about  4  acres  of
land,  a  large  church  and  mansion*
house,  built  by  the  Portuguese  in
the  16th  century,  chiefly  of  coral
stone,  and  50  palmyra-trees,  the
fruit  of  which  constitutes  the  prin-
cipal food  of  the  natives  about  half
the  year«  The  Rev.  Messrs.  E.
Warren  and  D.  Poor  commenced
this  mission,  and  took  up  their  re-
sidence at  Tillipally,  October  1816.
Their  objects  were  the  establish-
ment of  schools,  in  which  they
were  very  successful,  the  acquisi-
tion of  the  Tamul  language,  and
occasional  preaching  by  interpre-
ters. But  scarcely  had  they  entered
on  their  work,  when  their  flatter^
ing  prospects  were  clouded  by  the
sickness  of  Mr.  Warren.  On  the
13th  of  August,  1817,  be  had  an
attack  of  bleeding  at  the  lungs,  and
on  the  6th  of  October,  left  Jaffna
for  Colombo,  to  avoid  the  rainy
monsoon.  Thence,  in  company
with  Mr.  Richards,  he  proceeded
to  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  where
he  rested  from  his  labours,  August
11,   1818,  aged  32,  beloved   and


TIL

Umented  bj  all  wlio  knew  bit  worth.
Death  hu  been  repeatedly  com-
mlMioned  to  anall  this  little  band  of
labourer*.     Mrs.  Poor,  a  moit  ex-
cellent and  faithful  helper  of  the
minion,  ffreatly    endean^   to  all
who  were  amociatad  with  her,  and
particularly  to  the  children  of  the
heathen,  whom  spiritual  interests
she  habitually  consiulted,  was  re-
leased from  the  cares  and  labours
of  this  world.  May  7,  IHjl.    Soon
•iter  the  death  of  Mrs.  P.,  Mr.  and
Mrs.   Richards  remored  to  Tllii-
paUy,  and  took  the  whole  charge  of
the  temporal  concerns  of  the  fa-
mily and  boardlnflr-school,  till  the
death  of  Mr.  Richards,  August  3,
ISii.    In  January  IRi3,  Mr.  Poor
was  married  to  Mikb  Knii^ht,  the
sister   of  the    Re?.    Mr.    Knig^it,
church  missionary  at  Nellore,  and
in  July  of  the  same  year,  removed
to  Batticotta,  to  take  the  superin-
tendence of  the   mission  college.
His  place  is  supplied  at  Tillipally
by  Mr.  Woodward.     In  1824,  Mrs.
RicJiurds     was     married   to   Mr.
Knii^ht,  of  Nellore.

This  is  one  of  th«  most  Interest-
Inf^  of  the  Ceylon  stations,  and  the
prospect  of  usefulness  in  highly  en-
couraging. Immediately  after  the
arrival  of  the  missionaries,  a  free
school  was  commenced,  and  about
30  boys  were  collected  in  a  few
months.  From  this  school  several
of  the  most  promising  children
were  selected  and  boarded  at  the
expense  of  the  mission.  In  1823,
there  were  0  free  schools  connected
with  this  station,  in  which  H5  girls
and  355  boys  were  instructed.  In
the  boarding-school  were  8  girls
and  30  hoys,  who  were  named  and
supported  by  benevolent  associa-
tions, and  individuals  in  America,
and  7  others  were  on  trinl.  The
improvement  of  the  pupils  has,  in
general,  been  highly  sjitLsfactory.
Many  oif  them  have  been  subjects
of  religfious  Impre-ssions^  and  seve-


nii

nl  hara  poUidj  prafModCU^
tlanlty,  uiil  are  imfnl  nMoli k'
the  mbiloD.  In  the  aarij  put  4
1823,  lOnttTW  hvlhMBRHt
at  thU  place  aa  meaiben  il  %k
chuidi ;  6  of  wboB  ttmiMiMit
the  fltatlon.

Although  tlie  ntaionariHhiiii
met  with  conalderBble  opporiln
and  Indifference  froai  the  a^IlM^
they  have  the  ntlaAwtlflB  toM
that  their  •  prcjodicei  aad  npB*
stitions    are    gradoally   MeweilMi
particularly  thoee  relating  U  m
male  education.      Thnragfa  ttak
instrumentality,     a   boqiltal   hm
been   provided  for  the  beniltrf
the  sick,  by  the  aid  of  buntwnhl
indifiduali  at  Jaffna.    Since  ai-
quiring  the  lan^uagey  the  inlatai
aries  have  aougbt  inteitlewa  wUh.
the  Brahmins  and  the  peoolB^  iC
the    temple*,    in    the   hignwqi^
and  in  the  fields.    The  ^cdasi
the  young,  the  rich  and  the  fotify
have  been  warned  to  flee  fitcei  te
wrath  to  come»  aad  Invited  tD  ifi^
cept  of  the  blesdngs  of  the  Goad.
The  need  of  divine  agency  !■
been  felt  and  acknowledged.    Tin
promises  of  the  Scriptures  in  bshiff
of  the  heathen  have  been  iapn^
tunately  pleaded  in  the  midit  of
pagans ;  and  cheering  tokens  hm
been  received,  that  the  great  Hesd
of  the  church  has  IdniSyregBided
the    labours   and    pnyen  of  Ui
servants.

In  the  early  part  of  1824»  a
general  seriousness  prevailed  it
each  of  the  stations,  conaectad
with  the  American  Board  In  JalBu.
The  gracious  work  lint  became
signally  manifest  at  this  st^UoBf
on  the  18th  of  Januaiy,  and  con-
tinued to  increase  till  all  the
scholars  in  the  boarding -school
the  domestics  in  the  family,  and
2  or  3  schoolmasters,  were  amoay
the  anxious  inquirers.  It  soon  pre*
vailed,  in  a  similar  degree,  at  each
station  ;  and,  in  the  latter  part  of
\  460


TIN

Xkf  arch,  80  had  become  the  hopeful
of  renewing  gprace,  and  the
naries  were  still  cheered  with
hope   that  they   should   see
Caeuter  things  than  these.    [See

i.TTriMOR,  a  Dutch  island  in  the
.  'Indian  Archipelago,  2*50  m.  long,
i^-  60  average  breadth.  E.  long.
i  -IW  B(if,  S.  lat.  100  Q',  The  inba-
hi 'Wants  are  of  a  dark  colour,  in
i  'Mfantenance  more  nearly  resem-
b  Utng  the  South  Sea  Islanders  than
I  maj  of  the  Malay  tribes.  They
i  Appear  to  have  no  regular  system
f  m  laws,  being  governed  principally
I  iQr  the  will  of  the  sovereign.  The
I  ttUgion  of  the  island  is  mostly  pa-
i  gin.  Most  of  the  princes,  how-
i!  0V8r,  profess  Christianity  $  but  are,
I  at  the  same  time  entirely  guided
I  by  pagan  priests  and  customs.
I  '  In  1820,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Le  Brurni
I  was  stationed  here  by  the  N.  M,  S.
vith  8  native  assistants,  educated
bf  Mr.  Kam  at  Amboyna.

TINNEVELLY,  a  district  in
the  Carnatic,  Hindoostan,  150  m.
Jong^  by  average  breadth  60 ;  oc-
cupying the  S.  E.  extremity  of  the
'  peninsula ;  bounded  N.  by  Madura,
K.  and  S.  by  the  Gulf  of  Manaar,
and  W.  by  Travancore,  from  which
K  is  separated  by  the  Ghaut  moun-
tains. The  number  of  inhabitants
la  700,000,  of  whom  176,000  are
Brahmins,  30,000  Roman  Catho-
lics, and  4000  Protestants.  The
Hindoos  are  divided  and  subdivided
into  no  less  than  60  castes,  and
are  deeply  rooted  in  idolatiy  and
tuperstition.  They  speak  the  Ta-
mil language  in  g^eat  purity.

The  mUts  of  Mr.  Schwartz's  la^
bours,  in  the  last  century,  are  still
apparent  in  this  district.  The
C,K,S.  commenced  a  mission  hare,
in  1800;  it  has  S  native  priests,
at  Muthelkwr  and  NazareiA, — 27
churches,  erected  on  land  given
1^  the  nabob,~as  many  cateonistf,
and  it  supplies  the  congregatiOB
with  books.


TIT

The  Rev.  Wm.  T.  Ringletanbe,
from  the  L.  M.  S,,  arrived,  in  1806,
and  continued,  in  the  district  and
IVavancore^  till  about  I8I64  He
preached  in  6  churches  erected  by
him,  among  the  Shanars,  S.  of
Palamcotta,  near  the  Ghauts,  and
superintended  several  schools.  His
labours  were  followed  by  consider-
able success.  Several  hundreds
were  baptized.    [See  Palamcotia.]

TIRUPALATUREY,  a  town
in  the  Carnatic,  Hindoostan,  M
miles  westerly  from  Tranquebar
near  Tanjore.  About  the  com-
mencement of  the  18th  century,
the  missionaries  at  Tranquebar,
laboured  here  with  some  success  $
and,  in  1747,  their  congregatioa
amounted  to  639.  Much  has  since
been  done  to  promote  the  spiritual
good  of  the  people  by  schools  and
other  means  of  instruction.

TITALYA,  a  town  and  British
military  station,  in  Hindoostan,
in  the  district  of  Rungpore,
on  the  borders  towards  NepauU
From  its  situation,  it  aflbrds
favourable  access  to  Bootan,
Thibet,  and  China.  Through  the
instrumentality  of  Major  Barre
Latter,  Commanding  Officer,  the
Rev.  Frederick  C.  G.  -Schroeter,
of  the  C.  M,  S.,  was  stationed  at
Titalya,  in  1810,  for  the  purpose  of
acquiring  the  Thibet  language^
with  the  ultimate  design  of  trans-
lating the  Scriptures  mto  that
difficult  and  important  tongue.
Here  he  continued,  with  little  in*
terruption,  in  the  steady  pursuit  of
his  ^new  and  arduous  work,  till  hia
death;  July  14, 1820.  He  poswfsed
uncommon  talent  in  the  acquisition
of  languages,  and  amid  many
difficulties,  without  any  properiy
qualified  assistant,  had  preparod  a
Thibetian  and  English  dictionary,
consisting  of  74  quires  of  paper,
which,  with  a  supplement  to  i^
written  on  16  quhres,  forms  a  cq«i*

gete  dictionaiy,    Thibetian  and
oglish*    He  bad  also  commencad


TIT

a  Thibet  grammar,  on  which  he
WB*  employed  at  the  time  of  bis
dereaiie.  The  tltctionary  hax  been
put  into  the  hniid*  of  the  Rev.
I)r.  Ciin»y,  of  Serampore,  wh«i  has
mid<'rlnkeii  to  correct  and  publish
it,  and  aluo  to  form  a  i^rammar  of
thn  Thibet  laniruaf^  from  Mr.
Srhroeter'A  material<i.  The  die*
tioiiar>'  will  occupy  between  900
and  IIMIO  quarto  pai^e!*,  and  will  be
printisl  on  a  type  ca«t  for  the
puri^oM*  at  Seramiwre.  Notwith-
standing the  ardour  with  which
Mr.  Schroeter  devoted  himself  to
these  objects,  he  did  not  lose  slight
of  hilt  more  direct  work  as  a  mis-
sionan'.  He  had  divine  worship
twice  on  the  Sabbath,  in  Hlndoos-
tanee,  and  improvetl  other  oppor-
tunities of  spreading;  the  know-
leili^  of  Christianity.  Native
scIkhiU  were  establishetl,  as  far  as
prnctiruble.  In  a  journey  to  the
hill  conntry'  of  Nepaul,  he  made
himself  known  nn  a  preacher  of
rffchteoiL«ness,  and  was  ererj-whrre
recelveii  with  attention  and  re8i)ect.
Thori;  npiH*ared  no  unwillingness
in  th(»  iMHiple  to  instruct  him  in
tho  liinufuiii^e  of  the  country,  and
thi'y  were  very  desirous  that  he
shoidd  in  retuni  teach  them
Ruj^lisli.  During  the  first  years
of  Mr.  Sc'hroeter's  residence,  he
was  supporttHl  by  the  Society ;  but
through  the  instrumentality  of
Major  Ijatter,  he  afterwards  re-
ceived n  stipend  from  the  English
(vovernment  for  his  support,  while
pn)secuting  the  translation  of  the
Scriptures.

ScK>n  after  the  death  of  Mr.
Schroeter,  the  Rev.  B.  La  Roche,
who  hiid  just  arri\tHl  at  Calcutta
from  Kngland,  was  accepted  by
government  to  prosecute  the  work
so  auspiciously  begun.  His  111-
henllh,  however,  frustrated  this  de>
!»i^n.  The  intended  estublishment  of
tlie  Rev.  Messrs.  Mnischand  Reicb-
ardt  at  Tilalya  was  prm-ented  by  the
death  of  Major  Latter,  in  October


TOB

1  182S.  Thij  worthy  beMiktaiil|
the  beathen  spmred  neither
tlon  nor  expense  in
the  object  of  tbe  mieidoD..  II  |
obtained  an  eztraofdlnaiy  dnRl
of  Influence  over  a  number  of  Mi  ]
before  unknown  to  Euiopeu^ai
carried  on  ft  friendly  iBtciwi
with  various  lamae,  mn  whoak
recei\-ed  much  valuable
tion,  and  procured  feveral  of  Hih
religious  books  in  exebaMge  li
Bibles.  By  bis  wiU,  he  dfaeeM
that  his  literary  collection  of  ■§•
nuscrlpts  and  printed  books  in  tti
Thibet  language,  relating  to  ti
language,  history,  mytboiogyyBB-
ners,  and  tbe  social  and  ciril  iMi
of  the  inhabitants  of  Thibet,  fhnH
be  presented  to  some  society,  udK
whose  care  they  mtgfat  be  beitflB-
ployed  for  tbe  promotion  of  Utenp
ture  and  religion.  Tbeywevei^
coniingly  presented  to  the  Iftmy
of  the  Bishop's  College  at  CalcuttL
The  Societj^  fur  propagaOng  tk
Uotpel  has  also  purchued  rorlhs
same  library  the  very  valoiUe  nd
expensive  collection  of  booki,
which  Major  Latter  made  in  leli-
tlon  to  Thibet.  His  puicbafleswcn
made  In  Paris,  at  the  time  of  the
dispersion  of  many  of  the  contip
nental  libraries,  under  the  inflnence
of  the  French  Revolution,  ^rideh
placed  numerous  rare  and  valoaUs
books  within  his  reach.

The  Corresponding  Comnltiee
of  the  C,  if.  S.  at  Calcutta,  de-
sign to  avail  themselves  61  tiie  Itait
opportunity  of  renewing  their  ex-
ertions in  this  very  promising  iMd
of  labour ;  a  field  which  will  open
a  medium  of  communication  be-
tween the  labourers  of  India  and
those  of  Russia,  enable  them  to
carry  their  co-operations  Into  Thi-
bet, and  facilitate  the  circulation
of  the  Scriptures  among  the  Tartar
tribes  boidering  on  China,  and
through  the  wwtem  part  of  that
empire.    [See  7%t&f#.|

TOBAGO,  tbemoetsoutiieniof

468


TOB

Caribbcse  Iglancte^  and  the  most
rn  except   Barbadoes.    It  is
in.  long  and  8  broad ;  and  near
N.  E.  extremity  is  Little  To-
_  >  which  is  2  m.  long.     The
•Qmate  is  not  so  hot  as  might  be
\  expected  from  its  situation  so  near
^pui  equator;  nor  is  it  visited  bj
jftuih  dreadfiil  horricanes  as  fre-
^JfomntLy  desolate  the  other  islands.
xK'U  diversified  with  hills  and  Vales,
.mid  equal  in  richness  of  produce
.'  to  any  island  in  these  seas.  In  1748
,lt  JWas  declared  a  neutral  island,
but  in  1763  was  ceded  to  the  Bri-
tfah.    It  was  taken  by  the  French
ia  1T81,  and  confirmed  to  them  in
1788.     In  1793  and  1803  it  was
tiken  by  the  British,  and  ceded  to
ihism  in  1814.    The  principal  place
b  ScariKMTOugh.    W.  long.  dO^^  30',
K.  lat.  ll«  le*.    The  number  of
Inhabitants  is  about  15,000.
'.  AX  the  pa^jticular  request  of  Mr.
Hamilton,  one  of  the  planters,  the
.  Rdv.  J.  Montgomery,  of  the  U,  B,,
tras  sent  as  a  mlsiionary  to  the
staves,  in  1789;  but  the  death  of
himself  and  his  wife,  together  with
the  unsettled  state  of  the  island,  oc-
casioned the  suspension  of  the  mis-
sion till  1798,  when  it  was  renewed
1^  the  Rev.  C.  P.  W.  Shirmer,  who
net  with  a  very  favourable  recep-
tion from  several  of  the  planters.
In  1801,  the  brethren  and  the  other
white  inhabitants  were  much  alarm-
ed by  a  conspiracy  among  the  ne-
groes to  murder  all  the  white  peo-
ple on  the  island,  and  the  mission
has  since  been  abandoned. .

About  1808,  the  Rev.  R.  Elliott,
from  the  L,  M,  S.,  commenced  a
mission  here.  A  chapel  was  erect-
.  ed  for  his  accommodation  at  Scar-
borough, where  he  had  a  small
congregation  of  white  and  coloured
people.  He  also  laboured  among
the  slaves  on  several  estates ;  but  as
the  mission  was  attended  with  much
expense  and  little  success,  Mr.  El-
liott removed  to  Demarara,  ahont
1814.


TOB

In  1816,  the  Rev.  Messrs.  Nel-
son and  Stephenson,  of  the  fV.  M,
/8.,  arrived, were  cordially  received,
and  heard  with  attention.  Soon
after,  in  addition  to  preaching  at
Couriand  and  Scarborough,  tbey
visited  several  estates  with  much
access.  Sabbath-schools  were  also
established.  In  1823,  there  were
50  members  in  society.

In  1826,  the  state  of  the  mission
is  thus  reported : — "  Our  congrega-
tions continue  generally  good,  both
in  the  town  and  country,  and  are
serious  and  attentive.  In  some
places  there  is  a  peculiar  spirit  of
hearing  manifested.  A  few  have
been  added  to  our  society,  most  of
whom  give  good  evidence  of  a
change  of  heart.  The  society  in
general  maintain  a  pious,  circum-
spect, and  consistent  walk  and
conversation ;  and  though  most  are,
as  yet,  only  babes  in  Christ,  some
have  attained  a  good  degree  of
stability,  and  are  our  rejoicing  in
the  Lord.  Number  of  members —
Whites,  2  ;  Free-coloured  and
Black  persons,  57 ;  Slaves,  24.
Total,  83.

Schoolt,  —  "It  is  with  regret
that  we  review  this  department
of  our  labour  for  the  past  year.'
At  its  commencement,  our  school
at  Scarborough  was  in  a  flourishing
condition^  but  we  have  now  to  re-
port that  our  numbers  are  reduced
one  half.  We  have,  however,
some  hope,  that  on  the  re-appoint-
ment of  ^  missionaries  to  tliis  sta-
tion, it  will  revive,and  again  become
effective  and  well  attended.  Those
children  who  have  continued,  have
been  attentive,  and  affi>rd  us  en-
couragement.

<'  The  neg^roes  that  we  have  been
able  to  visit  and  instruct,  are  ac-
quiring a  good  knowledge  of  the
catechism  ;  and  we  entertain  the
hope,  that  the  tmths  thus  learned
wlU  be  productive  of  the  happiest
eflbcts.  Scholars—  50  females  and
25  males.  Total  16."
at  "^


TON

TONAWANTA,  a  reterration
of  Si*nrca  IiMilani,  In  the  Stale  of
New  York,  30  m.  from  Buffalo,
and  10  N.  W.of  BaUvia.  The  popu-
lation ii  upwards  of  300.  This  is
the  bead  quarters  of  the  Pai^n  In-
dians, and  few  have  embraced  the
tfospel,  though  different  mission-
aries have  occasionally  laboured  to
enlighten  them.    f:tee  &Meca#.]

TONGA,  TONGATABU,  or
the  Sacred  Tonga,  one  of  the  most
southerly  of  the  Friendly  Islands,
in  the  S.  Pacific  Ocean,  about  16
m.  long,  and  8  at  its  greatest
breadth.  The  toil  is  fertile,  and
the  general  productions  are  similar
to  those  of  Tahiti.  The  sugar-cane
grows  to  the  uncommon  height  of
SO  or  SO  feet.  Except  occasionally
a  cuUifated  fteld,  the  island  is
almost  covered  with  fruitful  trees.
Before  the  arrival  of  the  late  mis-
sionary, the  only  quadrupeds  on  the
island  were  the  dog,  hog,  and  cat.
The  only  venomous  reptile  is  the
centipede,  and  this  is  rarely  found.
This  island  was  discovered  by  Tas-
man,and  visited  by  Captain  Coolc  in
1777.  Tonga  is  divided  into  three
large  districts ;  viz.  Aheefo,  at  the
N.  W.  part ;  Ahagee,  at  the  S.  E. ;
and  Mooa,  in  the  centre.  Each
diiitrict  is  governed  by  a  chief,  who
reigns  with  absolute  authority,  and
claims  a  right  to  dispose  of  th^  lives
and  property  of  his  subjects.  These
districts  are  subdivided  into  smaller
ones,  which  have  their  respective
chiefs,  who  exercise  the  same
authority  as  the  superior  chiefs,  to
whom  they  are  in  some  measure
accountable.  Palau,  the  chief  of
Mooa,  possesses  the  most  influence,
and  has  the  principal  authority
among  the  neighbouring  islands.
Tata,  the  chief  of  Aheefo,  is  next
in  power.  The  population  is  esti-
mated at  about  10,000.  W,  long.
174M6',  S.  lat.  21<»  9*.

The  inhabitants,  though  superior
to  the  New  Zealanders,  are  indo-
lent and  treacbetoui  \  but  not  «d-


TOK

dieted  to  hniiMii  neilficct.  and  !>•
fanticide»  ai  the  inhabitanti  of  Tti
hiti  were.  Fov  the  laat  SOyen^
the  people  of  thto  and  the  mUgb-
bouring  latanda  hsfe  been  tapj/i
in deiftlatiog wan ;  mndit ii  ~
by  the  natlvea^  that  these  i
aiy  contesta  bate  occailoiM^'fti
depqiulatimi  of  one-half  of  ta,
They  helieie  in  the  tranmigniiiB
of  the  soul,  and  that  mogt  of  te
departed  apirita  retire  into  boMi
beings.

The  Zr.  Jifm  Sm  lint  attwipM  t
mission  on  tlUa  ialand.  In  lt9tf
Captain  Wilaon,  after  aettUng  fte
missionaries^  at  Tahiti,  iMM
Tonga,  and'  left  9  unmanied  ■k*
sionariet :  hot  thia  attempt  had  ■
unhappy  trnmination;  8  of  the  t
fell  victima  to  the  Intestfaia  eoa-
motions  and  the  lerociont  dl^ait
tions  of  aome  of  the  islandR%  li-
stigated  by  a  felon  wlio  had  einpad
from  Botany  Bay :  one  of  thdr
number  apoatatized,  andbeeeipoa
chief,  and  the  remaining  S  wbr
taken  off  by  a  Fesael,  in  Janmiy,
1800.

Since  that  period,  the  illflk"***-
attending  a  mission  to  these  iriaDdi
have  appeared  extremely  fond*
dable.  For  several  yean,  a  veaol
could  not  touch  here  with  mkis>
In  December,  1806,  the  siilp  Pan*
au- Prince  arrived  in  these  seas,  ml
was  treacherously  seized  by  the  n^
tlves.  Of  her  crew,  consisting  of
60  men,  26  were  inhumanly  mss-
sacred,  17  left  the  island,  and  IT
remained  scattered  in  the  dlflereit
islands:  Mr.  W.  Mariner,  afler  4
years'  residence,  made  his  escape ;
and  has  furnished  materials  iw  3
interesting  volumes,  with  a  gnon-
mar  and  vocabulaiy  of  the  lan-
guage.

The  fr.  M.  S.  having  deter-
mined, in  1822,,  to  attempt  a  le-
newal  of  missionaiy  labour  on  the«
islands,the  ReT.A&.Lawiy,wliolMd
been  for  some  yean  in  New  Soafli
Wales,  set  saU  with  Mn.  L.  imd  his

«0


TON

ftfsociates,  and  landed  at  Mooa,
August  17.  The  Governor  furnish-
ed him  with  catfle  and  sheep ;  he
mad  his  companions  were  received
in 'a  friendly  manner  by  the  natives,
"and  they  were  taken  under  the  pro-
lection  of  Palau,  the  King.  After
a.abort  residence  at  Tatatamatonga,
they  removed  to  Cokevemal,  where
fbe  missionary  biiildings>  &c,  had
lieien  prepared.
.'    In  1823,  Mr.  L.  wrote: —

*,'  There  are  in  Tonga  19  towns,
and  3  sacred  places.  It  is  at  one  of
Ihese  latter  that  we  reside.  1  think
Ihere  are  not  less  than  700  souls  in
this  village.  The  large  town  of
Hoey  is  only  one  mile  to  the  £.,
and  the  towns  of  Holonga  and
'Vinee  are  about  a  mile  and  a  half
'to  the  W.  Beside  these,  there  are
Talafoo,  Toony,  and  Totunoto,
from  6  to  7  miles  hence.  These
are  all  within  the  reach  of  the  mis-
irtonary  at  Cokevemal.  This  sta-
tion may  embrace,  in  round  num-
bers, 4000  souls.  Another  station,
exceedingly  convenient  for  t  mis-
sionar}',  is  the  Bea,  which  is  very
populous,  and  in  its  vicinity  are  the
following  towns;  viz.  Ootoolow,
Coiofpo,  Navi,  Howma,  Noogro,
Noogoo,  and  Hoorey.  The  next
district  proper  for  a  mission  is
Heeheefoo,  a  very  large  town,  ad-
jacent to  which  are  Tahafa,  Fague,
Newcaloffa,  and  Vado.  The  peo-
ple are  very  numerous  on  that  side,
and  it  would  constitute  the  most
comptkci  station  on  the  island.
-It  was  here  that  the  missionaries,
85  years  ago,  erected  their  Master's
stendard.  At  each  of  these  3
stetions,  there  should  be  2  mis-
sionaries ;  which,  I  think,  would  be
the  number  sufficient  to  afford  in-
struction to  the  whole  of  Tonga,
and  to  some  small  islands  conti-
guous to  it.  The  beautiful  and
fertile  island  of  Eooa  lies  about  12
miles  east  of  Tonga,  and  would  be
a  fine  stetion  for  9  missionaries.
The  islands  called  Hapie  are  tome


TOR

of  them  30,  and  others  50,  miles
from  Tonga,  and  being  many  in
number,  would  probably  r^qufare
full  as  many  instracton.  That
large  and  fine  gproup  of  islands,
called  by  the  natives  Wavow,  is
still  further  N.,  and  would  consti-
tute a  larger  station  than  either
Tonga  or  Hapie.  These  all  speak
the  same  language;  the  Wavow
natives  hold  Intercourse  with  tiie
natives  of^Samao,  or  Navigator's
Islands;  and  the  Tonga  people
sometimes  go  as  far  as  the  Fiji
Isles.  But  the  natives,  both  of
Samao  and  Fiji,  speak  a  dialect  not
easily  understood  by  the  Tongese.'^

Mr.  L.  laboured  with  di%enee
until  his  departure  for  England^
when  the  mission  was  suspended :
butithaslatelybeenresomed;  other
labourers  having  been  sent  forth.

TORTOLA,  the  principal  of  the
Virgin  Islands,  in  the  West  Indies,
12  miles  long  and  4  broad.  It
belonged  to  the  Duteh,  who  built  a
strong  fort,  from  which  they  were
expelled  by  the  British  in  16M.
The  harbour  is  at  the  east  end  of
the  island.  W.  long.  64<»  50*,
N.  lat.  199  2H\  The  number  of
inhabitants,  in  1805,  was  10,500,
of  whom  9000  were  slaves.  The
population  has  considerably  de-
cre&sed  *

,  In  1788,  Dr.  Coke,  of  the
fF,  if.  5.,  commenced  a  mission
here ;  but  owing  to  the  degraded
stete  of  society,  the  progress  was
slow  for  some  years.  At  length,  a
chapel  was  erected,  religion  was
respected  by  all  classes,  and  pub-
licly countenanced  by  the  principal
bihabitents  of  the  island.  The
missionaries  also  extended  their  la-
bours successfully  into  many  of  the
neighbouring  islands.  Since  the
commencement  of  the  present
century,  the  average  number  of
members  has  been  about  8000.
The  number,  in  1883,  was  48
Whites,  and  8035  Blacks.  As  an
expression  of   gratitude    to  the


TOR

BVftefmn  ibcieiy  for  (he  Uboun
of  iti  mtafcMwriefl,  the  expenie  of
whtrh  bai  been  defrsTed  by  the*
peo|)le,  an  auxlUiiry  foelety  was
Ibrmed  at  Road  Ttwm  for  thii  and
the  other  Viry^n  Iflandi,  Aiiff.  18,
I((j3,  which  if  patronized  by  the
principal  men  on  the  inland.

"  The  ftate  of  our  society  in
Tortola  and  the  Virgin  islands,''
the  missionaries  obserre,  in  ]8i0,
<'  is  of  so  mixed  a  kind,  that  it
excites  many  regrets,  while  it
famishes  frequent  matter  of  joy.

"  Connected  with  Road  7bm
cha|)cl  are  upwards  of  1000  mem-
bers. Out  of  this  number,  during
the  past  year,  we  have  been  under
the  painful  necessity  of  excluding
many  ;  nevertheless,  we  have  many
excellent  people  in  Road  Town,
who  are  walking  in  the  foar  of
God.  We  have  witnessed,  during
the  year,  instances  of  the  support-
ing and  consoling  power  of  Chris-
tianity, in  seasons  and  circum-
stances of  deep  affliction ;  and
Aome  of  our  people  have  died  in
full  hope  of  a  better  world.

*'  To  characterize  our  society
at  the  fFest  Knd,  would  be  to
rt'poat  the  same  things.  Calls  for
the  exercise  of  discipline  prevent
an  increase  of  number,  but  leave,
wc  trust,  n  purer  moss.

<*  Our  society  at  the  East  End
is  beromo  very  small,  in  coiise-
nuRiice  of  the  removals  of  last  year.
By  removals  and  exclusions,  our
society  at  Peter* t  Island  is  also
redacAil  to  a  very  *  little  flock.'
We  hope  they  are  *  working  out
their  own  salvation ;'  but  they
labour  under  great  disadvantages,
and  wo  have  not  been  able  to  give
them  adequate  attention  during  the
year.

"  At  Jos  fan  Dykes,  the  en-
forcements of  marriage  discipline
h'as  compelled  us  to  cut  oif  a  few
members,  whose  coses  had  been  by
some  means  overlooked :  other-
wise we  have  no  reason  to  think


thit  the  pteplB  «riB  goliKWh
wwdi.  ASiotftoB  kei  pnmW
cor  fliitlBg  theH  m»  eflBBMlkv
oi«ht  to  hne  beoB  vfaMid  ~
ia  prabaUe  we  adglit  hew
A  giester  iBipsoveBMl
them.  We  lunre  itnilvitMtotl
awke  of  faejeih  nl  4«#
Teieii.

*'The  praeent  mmtbn  li »
ciety  in  the  Vligln  Unte  ^
Whites,  95;  Free  OoloMd  «l
Btacks,  S76;  SUrna,  UM:  AH
1588.    Ob  trial,  M.>'

SohooU^**  Ib  o«  MJM  il
Road  71mm,  we  hewe  Tl  bojyi/Mi
84girli,  with M adidt^  wte «»
care  of  IT  teechen.

^  We  caimot  n^Mrt  oj  oto
•elioQl  as  beini^  Id  an  dUoit
ftate.  The  veaaonsaie,aw«iitflf
teacben,  and  alao  of  that  ettottoa
and  overdg^t  froBBllie  MlMinMrii^
which,  from  unafofdaUe  thc—i
atances,  could  nett  poalbly  be  gftiM
them."

TRANQUEBAR,  a  m<ta
seaport,  and  prtnelpal-  utgSA
settlementyln  the  aoathemCansHfl^
Hindoostan,  with  a  ppood  hnbov,
at  the  mouth  of  one  of  Ihe  briMinhni
of  the  Cavery  river,  defended  If  ■
fortress  erected  bj  the  l>aMi  to
1621.  The  towniabetwewliii
3  miles  in  circiimlenDee,  «■>•
rounded  by    a  wall  and   wwiwi

bastions.     The  twapriliiiry  frff|«y^g^

to  the  town  is  of  eonaldeiahla  ik-
tent,  and  is  fiill  of  popakmi  iIDmim
Within  the  walla  are  %  cbam»
for  Protestants ;  I  fior  Hoaiae  Oh
tholics,  descendants  of  FottegaesB^
who  were  in  poweesioQ  of  the
town  before  the  Danes;  a  liqte
mosque  for  the  Mf  twriftdtn%  airf
several  pagodas  for  Geatoos.  It  is
146  miles  S.  by  W.  of  Madrai^aBd
56  S.  of  Pondicherry,  which  is  fl»
seat  of  the  Roman  Catbidio  nilatow
in  this  part  of  Hindoostan.  B.
long.  19^66',  N.  let.  U«  S*.

The  first  FrotetlHit  missloa  fa
India  was  establUhad  at  ttis  plaAft

4T9


TRA

4iy'  Frederick  IV.  King  of  Den-
•^faaikf  in  1706,  in  consequence  of
-:4lui.Tecommendation  of  one  of  his
'idiaplainsy  the  Rev.  Dr.  Lutkens;
fOkd  the  Rev.  Messrs.  BartholomjBw
^iegenbalg  and  Henry  .  Plutcho
•were  the  first  missionaries.  Here,
wider  many  embarrassing  and  dis-
'^onraging  circimistances,  they
commenced  the  study  of  the  Tamul
Uungnage,  soon  formed  a  grammar
yuMi  vocabulary,  and  engaged  in
the  arduous  work  of  translating  tbe
Scriptures.  In  May,  1T07,  they
Jwptized  6  natives,  the  fint  fruits
of  their  labours  among  the  heathen,
and  erected  a  chapel.  They  like-
wise opened  several  schools.  In
July,  1709,  the  following  mission-
aries joined  them  ;  viz.  Messrs.
Grundler,  Boeidng,  and  Jordan.
Soon  after  the  C.  K.  S,  came  for-
ward with  alacrity  and  zeal  in  tbe
'cause,  furnished  a  printing  esta-
blishment, and,  ever.since,  has  been
a  principal  instrument  of  supporting
and  extending  the  undertaking.

In  1714,  the  Danish  Mission  Col-
lege was  founded  at  Copenhagen ;
and,  since  that  period,  this  mis-
sion has  been  the  object  of  its  spe-
cial care  and  patronage.

Principally  through  the,  indefati-
gable labours  of  the  eminent  mis-
sionary, Ziegenbalg,  a  grammar
and  dictionary  were  formed,  and  the
Scriptures  translated  into  .the
Tamul  language.  The  translation
was  completed  after  his  death,  in
)  719,  by  Mr.  Schultze.  His  faithful
coUeague,  Mr.  Grundler,  died  in
the  following  year ;  not,  however,
before  3  missionaries  arrived,  viz.
Messrs.  Schultze,  Dal,  and  Kisten-
macher.  In  1783,  Aaron,  a  native
convert,  was  ordained  to  the  pas-
toral office.  He  was  the  first
native  preacher ;  at  this  time,  how-
ever, there  were  24  native  converts
employed  as  assistants  in  the  various
departments  of  the  mission.  At
the  close  of  1 736,  in  the  extended
field  of  the  mission,  they  reckoned,


•TRA

in  all,  3517  converts.  In  ]747»
the  converts,  including  the  chfldre^
baptized  in  infancy,  amounted  to
8066.  In  1760,  the  Rev.  Messn*
Schwartz,  Hutteman,  andPdzen*
hagen,  joined  the  mission.  During
the  flnC  century,  the  concerts  to
the  Christian  faitii  were  estimated
by  Dr.  Carey  at  40,000 ;  and,  by
Dr.  Buchanan  at  80,000,— at  all
the  branches  of  this  mission.  It  ki
to  be  feared,  however,  that  many  of
these  were  only  nominal  Christians,
as  the  Hindoo  converts  were  not
required  to  viohite  the  rules  of  their
caste.

About  1772,  Dr.  Jchn  com-
menced his  labours  here,  and  de-
voted his  time  to  the  instouction  of
the  young,  to  prepare  them  to  be-
come assistants  to  the  missicm,  and
to  be  otherwise  useful.  A  seminary
hfis  been  ^tablidied  for  this  pur-
pose. In  1810,  he  commenced  the
establishment  of  free  schools  in
Tranquebar,  and  in  thesurroundiog
towns  and  idllages,  on  the  plan  of
Dr.  Bell  and  Mr.  Lancaster, which,
in  2  years,  he  increased  to  20.  Tbe
number  was  annually  augmented  ;
and,  in  1815,  nearly  2000  scholars
had  been  admitted,  of  whom  up-
wards of  1000  were  then  uiidier
instruction.  In  1822,  tbe  number
of  conununicants  at  this  station
was  125.

Dr.  John  died  in  1813,  and^  in
1816,  the  C,  M,  &  took  charge  of
the  seminary  and  the  schools.
Their  number  and  usefulness,  for
many  years,  greatiy  increased*
under  the  care  of  the  Rev.  J.  C.
Schnarre.  Previous  to  1824,  529S
scholars  had  been  admitted;  of
whom  1760  were  under  instruction*

The  Rev.  Mr.  Biirenbruck  now
regularly  administers  the  word  of
truth.  In  June,  1826,  he  reported
that  the  total  number  of  children
attending  the  schools,  which  are
S3  in  number,  had  been,  during
the  preceding  quarter,  1738 -tt
being  an  increase  of  86  on  former

8  8  2  ^'la


TRA

■ttendaneet;  uul  that  tht  naaber
during  the  cuiKiit  quarter  wai  1 T40.

In  the  SgiiMii0ry  at  this  itatloo
there  are  14  youths,  of  whom  John
Dewafagayam  makes  the  following
report  In  October  :**

**  Since  our  last  report  of  the
Seniinarists,  in  October  last,  two  of
tbem  have  been  promoted ;  one  as
a  reader,  and  another  as  an  as-
sistant to  the  Seminarist  scbool-
naster.     Both  of  them  are  rery

Sromislng  jrouths,  and  have  bJ-
lerto  given  us  satisfaction,  by
their  good  behaviour  and  strict  at-
tention to  their  r(*i^ctive  duties.
In  the  daily  conduct  of  the  former
we  frequently  witness  an  ardent
desire  for  the  salvation  of  his  fel-
low-creatures, and  for  proclaiming
the  love  of  God  in  giving  us  his
only  begotten  Son.  The  latter,  as
well  in  refi|>ect  of  his  age  as  hik
attainments,  is  qualified  to  occupy
an  employment  as  an  assistant
reader,  at  any  time.  The  other
Seminarists,  who  are  12  in  number,
having  had  great  advantages  since
our  settling  nere,  under  Mr.  Baren-
bruck's  instruction,  their  progress
has  been  ver>' satisfactory.''

Muny  pleasing  circumstances
have  recently  occurred  at  this  sta-
tion, which  evince  the  concern  of
the  natives  for  the  instruction  of
their  offspring,  the  desire  and  gra-
titude of  the  children  themselves,
and  the  disposition  of  the  gentlemen
resident  in  that  part  of  the  country
to  take  a  warm  interest  in  th6
school  establishment.

TRAVANCORE,  a  very  popu-
lous country  on  the  S.  W.  coast  of
Hindoostan,  separated  from  the
soutt>ern  Camatic  by  the  Ghaut
Mountains,  and  extending  from
Cape  Comorin,  about  150  miles,  to
Cochin.  It  is  divided  into  30  dis-
tricts, in  3  of  which  only  the  Ta-
mul  language  is  well  known ;  the
Malayim  is  generally  spoken.  It
is  inhabited  by  various  religious  de»
nominations;  Christians,  Jews,  Ma-


TBI


acoovdhigto  tteir

wttboat

others


of    ChrtattMil^i


■ti  '


miiwIiHl.
ptognm
thougiit,   naj  he

poUtical  Tatbw
jeakrasj.

Travancon  fa  chMIr  WUHM
by  the  tribe  of  Neii%  •  e^kwA
to  the  hrehniiie:  they  an  the  i^
blUty  of  the  eooHtryy  ad  ie
strictest  of  all  the  HiadDQiftiik
■eiring  the  lulee  of  their  CMliw  .

The  Rev.  Wm.  T.  IUi«Mn^
of  the  JL.  M.  S.,  *i^T^>^  Hi
laboun  in  Soiith  TmraMon^h
ISOffy  and  eontiaiied  till  18U.  Hi
■was  stationed  et  MkgiU^  Bi
preached  at  wteral  neMboHhy
places,  and  occaaienalfy mnite
districts;  diatriboting  Pnriiyi
and  Tamol  tracti»  and  i^ri»
tending  schooli.

A  view  of  the  mtafkiH  inlW
vancore  may  be  obtained  tj  la-
ference  to  the  fnlkMring ^j^rff  ?-l
Miepie,  Coijfmy  Kag€r9^i^  Q^m,
and  Ttewmdtrum,

TREVANDERUM,  a  popdov
town  in  I^Tancote,  EUndMhik
about  40  milea  N. W.  ofM^^|«eri(
and  the  same  dlatance  S.E.cf  Qi^
ion.  For  senna  yean,  the  m'T*'^
aries  at  Quikm  have  soperialeiM
a  school  at  this  place^  and  ti  h  coi^
sidered  higbly  eligible  as  a  wliiiai
station;  next  in  importance  In  On-
chin.  It  ia  the  reridence  tf  tl»
Rannee,  who  has  unilbnnlyaBM
with  great  liberality  towanh  the
different  missions  is  flie  cowhy;
and  no  doubt  is  entertained  ofkr
dispodtioB  to  extend  her  caesa*
ragement  to  every  prodent  mlsrimi
ary.  Within  a  cticnrnfaence  of  9
miles,  the  inhabitants  are  ertknaied
at  50,000.

TRICHINOPOLY,  a  d^  of
Hindoostan,  iaflie  f^n^tiMV,  cqd*
tal  of  a  fertile  district  which  w«

474


i.


TRl

Jmnaeily  a  principelify.  It  issur-
SynuMled  by  a  douUe  wall,  with
ttfm&n  and  a  ditch ;  and  stands  on
tt«  south  side  of  the  Cavery,  which
m  little  above  divides  into  branches,
Mid  forms,  opposite  the  city,  the
Maud  of  Seringham,  on  which  are
tifo  magnificent  pagodas#  It  is  ST
■i«  W.  by  N.  of  Tanjore.  £.  long*
t§«  60;  N.lat.  10*60'.
•  In  1766,  the  Rev.  C.  F.  Schwartz,
ftrom  the  C,K,S,f  was  appointed
to  preside  over  the  missions  then
■•oently  established  at  this  place.
He  employed  8  or  9  catechists  unr
der  him  in  the  extensive  field,  which
opened  here  and  in  the  adjoining
€CNintry.  He  removed  to  Tanjore,
•bcmt  1778 ;  and  left  the  care  of
ike  mission  to  the  Rev.  Christian
FoUe,  who  continued  till  his  death,
Ib  1818,  and  was  succeeded  by  Mr.
Bosen.  Previous  to  1776,  Mr.
flehwartz  received  206  converti
from  heathenism ;  to  the  number
of  whom  almost  annual  additions
hftve  been  made.  In  1819,  ^re
were  169  communicants,  of  whom
81  were  English,  24  Portuguese,
and  108  Tamul.

On  Sunday,  the  2d  AprU,  1826,
tka  morning  after  his  arrival  at  Tri-
ehinoj^ly.  Bishop  Heber  preached
■iSt.  J<^'s  church  (the  govem-
■lent  church,  which  had  been  con-
aerated  by  Bishop  Middleton)  with
idl  his  accustomed  animation  $  and,
in  the  evening  administered  oon-
llmation  to  48  candidates,  and  de-
livered his  charge  to  them  with
something  more  than  his  ordinary
iikipressiveness  and  affection  oif
manner.  On  the  following  mom*
ing,  at  day- break,  he  attended
divine  service  in  the  Tamul  lan-
guage, at  the  mission  church  in  the
fort,  and  confirmed  fifteen  natives,
in  their  own  tongue.  He  inspected
the  schools  and  the  mission  house,
and  received  an  address  from  the
poor  Christians,  eaioestly  praying
that  he  would  send  sohm  pastor  to


TRI

watch  over  tiiem  and  inatmet  tbcai.
He  answered  them  with  all  that
gentieness  and  kindness  of  manner
which  never  failed  to  wht  every
heart;  and  assured  liiem  that  he
would  immediately  provide  for  their
wants.

<<  There  is  a  church  in  the  fiori,^'
says  the  Rev.  Thoi.  Robinson,  in
1826,  capable  of  <<  containing  1500
or  2000  pemns,  but  requiring
considerable  repairs:  and  a  house
for  the  residence  of  the  missionaiy^
with*small  school  rooms  for  Tamul
and  English.  The  present  number
of  the  congregation  is  490  persons ;
and  it  is  melancholy  to  Ibid  this
number  annually  decreasing,  en-
tirely from  the  want  of  a  resident
European  missionary,  and  the  ne-
cessary establishment  of  catechists
and  aclioohnasters,  for  which  the
funds  have  hitherto  been  utterly
inadequate ;  the  whole  income  of
the  mission  appears  to  be  about  30
rupees  per  ra€Hith.  There  can
hardly  be  desired  a  field  of  greater
promise  than  this  interesting  con-
gregation. Labourers  only  are
waptiag  to  make  it  realize,  to  its
fullest  extent,  the  hopes  of  its
iirst  founder,  and  of  its  last  firiend,
(Bishop  Heber).  It  was  his  lord-
ship^ intention  to  plaee  here  a
resident  missionary,  witii  as  little
delay  as  possible)  and  to  make
other  arrangements  for  its  future
prosperity.^'  These  int(»itions>  it
appears,  will  not  be  altogether  Iras-
trated.  An  appeal  made  by  Mn
Robinson  to  tjie  liberality  of  the
British  inhabitantsof  Tricbinopoly,
was  nobly  answered  on  the  IbUow*
ing  rooming,  when  a  meeting  was
convened  at  the  ahurch  for  this
object.

TRINCOMALEE,  a  large  town
on  the  N.  E.  coast  of  the  distiict  of
Jaffha,  Ceylon,  70  nriles  N.  E.  of .
Kandy.It  has  one  of  the  safest  and
best  harbours  on  the  island,  capable
of  containing  1000  vessels.    The

475


TRI

country  aroand  U  banent  and  the
air  unwholeaome.  £.  long.  81'  17',
N.  lat.  8«3S'.

In  18S:2,  the  W.  JT.  &  had  a
chapQl  here,  18  memben,  and  4
KchouU,  containing  304  scholan.
In  January  18il,  the  first  native
con? ert  wa*  haptiwd.  By  tlie  last
accounts,  the  number  in  the  schools
a{ii>ears  to  have  been  greatly  re-
duced; that  of  persons  in  society
is  8.

TRINIDAD,  an  island  in  the
West  Indies,  near  S.  America,  se-
parated from  Tobago  by  the  Strait
of  Trinidad,  90  miles  long,  average
breadth  about  30;  belonging  to
the  Uritiidi.  It  contains  about
40,000  inbabitantii,  a  large  portion
«>f  whom  are  Roman  Catholics.
Port  of  S|)ain  is  the  principal  town.

The  fy.  hL  &•  commenced  a
mission  here  in  1788.  Members,
in  1823,  146.  Restrictions  which
fonnerly  retarded  the  progress  of
the  mission  have  recently  been  re-
moved, and  the  missionaries  are
now  patronised  by  the  legislature
and  many  of  tlie  planters.  Schools
have  been  established;  and  the  pro-
Kl>ect  of  future  usefulness  among
the  slave  population  is  very  encou-
raging.

'*  Port  of  Spain, *^  the  mission-
aries remark,  in  1828,  **\s  our  prin-
cipal settlement.  Our  congregation
here  bassuflfereda  reduction  during
the  rebuilding  of  the  chapel.  The
society  continues  stedfast,  and  a
few  are  casting  in  their  lots  with
us— flUing  up  the  places  of  those
who  are  gone  to  join  the  church
above.

"  The  Quarteri  of  Arima  and
Tacarigua. — In  each  of  these  quar-
ters we  preach  every  other  Lord's
day ;  but  we  have  no  society  in
either  place,  and  our  congregations
a^  very  limited,  owing  to  the  want
of  a  proper  place  of  worship :  at
present  we  preach  in  the  houses  of
the  proprietors."


TRI

<<  7%#.  QiMrtf«r  ^INefO  JUMk
-rHeie  wtt  virit  an  ama  .9mi
other  Lord's  6mj.  ThenaniM
170  nenoea  uponil,  all  fnwlli
island ciToartoU.  TUipea|li«
not  in  a  good  state,  idiieh  wmh
owing,  in  a  great  leMUia^'  taM
removal ;  ell  tbeb  little  eiUU*
menti  haTingbeen  tnoksauy  mi
new  ones  were  to  be  eflfeetadiris
clrcumstaneea  of  dUBcallj.  Hi^
ever,  to  whatever  caaM  thtkt^
gkMis  dedenalon  b  atWMAK
they  seem  to  baie  littta  ^^ttli
pursue  the  things  of  God;  ■tfw
iqg  ahnost  as  indiiSateiit  ta  te
things  of  this  life,  ai  tiujaie  •>
conoerned  aboot  eternity.  Oillb
estate  we  have  no  cbap^  asdaiM
is  a  place  wlieie  our  pnMpecfi«tM
present  bedouded,  we  on  Mpi
huts,  or  any  otber  pla^e^  vM  &•
cumstances  of  a


a


aspect  shall  arise.  We  nam  m
down  the  Guff  ^  Ptifimt  and  &
rafiehtdMa^  Caifaeai,  Stwmttk,
PaifU  A  Pierre,  and  SmUklkf^-
rinut,  are  the  quarteiK  in  vidchjn
have  gained  partial  openingi  te
ing  the  year.  In  these  qaartn
the  great  masa  of  the  negro  pqa-
lation  of  the  idand  have  tbei^.kt:
and  yet  there  is  not  a  minlitar  tt
any  denomination  to  sliew  to  thee
the  way  of  salvation.  We  km
formed  a  small  society  ia  Canpt
chaima,  and  could  form  oflMiBli
Caqacal  and  NuMurima;  bat  thai
places  lie  so  £ur  nom.  Portof  fl^
andfrom  each  other,  that  wt  hiM
been  able  to  attend  tfaem  oa^pv-
tially;  and  with  but  two  auMse-
aries  this  year,  we  shall  not  beaUe
to  visit  them  oftener  than  ooBe  a
quarter.  We  are  satisfied,  aAor
mature  refieotion,  that  a  settleflWBt
in  the  quarter  of  Cova  has  also  SMMt
pressing  claims  on  the  considsiatkm
of  the  committee.

^f  SchooU, — A  great  decraam
has  taken  place  in  the  nmnber-of
our  scholan  and  toachna.    XUtJi

4T6


tUL

ocfsnrence  which  it  has  not  b^n
:|ii«  our  power  to  preventy  and  may
310..  traced  to  a  variety  of  causes.
■Wis.  haye^  however,  yet,  a  few
flbbolars, '  who  have  con^nued  to
iAttend  tolerably  well  up  to  the
present  time.  This  affords  us  con-
flkicnrable  pleasure;  as  they  have
■mnifested,  by  their  attendance  in
.vnfa^urable  circumstances,  an
attachment  to  the  school,  which  we
jtrast  will  not  only  remain,  but  in-
crease ;  and  which,  by  the  blening
of  God,  will,  we  hope,  be  over-
ruled to  their  spiritual  welfare  in
tline  and  in  eternity.  This  iiope  is
cikicouraged  by  the  pleasing  fact,
•that  1  of  the  senior  scholars,  vizr. —
.6  girls  and  2  boys,  are  now  on  trial
jfor  admission  as  members  into  the
jwcieity.  Scholars — 50  females  and
10  males ;  total  60."

The  L,  M,  S,  has  had  3  stations
tm  this  island  ;  but  from  various
eaiivei  they  have,  of  late,  been  re-
linquished.

TULBA6H,  a  town  of  Cape
Colony,  S.  Africa,  in  Tulbagh  dis-
trict, about  100  miles  N.  E.  of  Cape
Town.  After  labouring  success-
liilly  at  Rodezand,  and  in  the
vicinity,  among  the  Christians,
Hottentots,  and  slaves,  for  10  or
1^  years,  the  Rev.  Ajriel  Vos,  of
the  L,  M.  S.f  was  stati<med  at  this
place.  The  beneficiid  effects  of
flis  labours  here  and  in  the  vicinity
are  very  apparent*  among  the  Hot-
tentots and  others ;  and  also  in  the
wide  extent  of  country  which
forms  the  sphere  of  his  itinerant
Tisits.  In  1822,  desolating  rains
and  gales  almost  entirely  demolished
the  buildings  in  Tulbagh ;  in  con-
sequence of  which,  the  progress  of
the  nlission  was  retarded.  These
difficulties  were,  however,  at  length
furmounted.

Mr.  Vos  continues  bis  labours
with  unabated  zeal  and  delight,-
though  with  diminished  activity,  in
consequence  of  the  feebleness  of
advancing  age.    The  various  reli-


TUP

gious  services,  for  the  tenefit  of
the  heathen,  are  well  attended;
and  many  of  the  people  make  good
progress  in  divine  Icnowledge.  Thd
monthly  prayer-meetings,  in  parti-
cular, for  free  persons  and  slaiveSy
are  frequented  wjith  much  interest.
On  Mr.  V.'s  missionary  tours,  ct
which  he  performed  six  during  the
year  1826,  his  congregations  often
amount  to  between  laO  and  200.
They  consist  of  cc^nists  and  per-
sons of  colour,  who  are  generally
very  attentive;  while  not  a  few  ap-
pear to  listen  with  deep  feeling.
Mr.V.  states,  that,  to  the  bestof  Us
knowledge,  all  the  adults  who,
frdmtime  to  time,  have  been  bap-
tized by  him,  adorn  their  profession
by  an  irreproachable  conducts
Among  those  to  whom,  during  the
past  year,  the  rite  of  baptism  was
administered,  is  a  Mosambiqoe
slave,  whose  piety  appears  to  be  of
the  most  decided  character.

In  tlie  school  at  Tulbagh  there
are  some  who  read  well;  but  Mr.
V.  laments  to  state,  that,  in  con-
sequence of  his  frequent  and  long
absence  from  home,  on  his  mission-
ary tours^  the  scholars,  in  general,
make  comparatively  sioall  progresa.

TUPUAI,  one  of  the  Islands  of
Raivaivai,  situated  about  500  m.
southward  of  Tahiti.

The  names  of  the  teiidiers  of  the
L,  M,  S.  who  labour  here,  are
Huapania  and  Sarauela,  whom  Mr.
Davies  found,  with  their  wives,  ia
good  health,  when  he  visited  this
place'  in  1826.  While  on  the
island,  he  preached  twice  to  re-
markably attentive  and  apparently
intelligent  congregations,  and  bap-
tized 38  adults,  with  whose  prompt
and  appropriate  answers  to  the
questions  proposed  to  them  on  the
occasion  he  was  much  gratified.
He  heard  both  of  the  principal
chiefs,  Tamatoa  and  Tahuhu,  read
in  the  Tahitian  Gospels,  and  spealtt
highly  of  the  manner  in  which  thej
acquitted  themselves.


TUB

TUSCARORAS,  a  rennant  of
the  Six  Nationi  of  the  Indiani,  re-
lidinff  in  Tmcaiora  village,  4  m.
E.  of  Lewiiton,  Niagara  County,
New  York»  about  8  m.  from  Niagara
River,  and  4  from  its  mouth,  ad-
joining New  Stockbridge.  The
Indianx  are  about  800  in  number,
and  hold  a  considernbie  tract  of
laud,  which  ii  well  coUivAted.
Thej  are  nominally  Chriftians,
iind  considerably  advanced  in  civi-
liiation.

The  Kew  York  Miuionarw  So-
tiety  employed  the  Rev.  E.  Holmes,
in  1900,  among  the  Indians  in  the
western  part  of  New  York,  who
met  with  a  very  cordial  reception
from  the  Tuscaroras,  and  the  next
year  returned  and  commenced  a
permanent  missioA  among  them.
He  WAS  patronized  by  Government,
who  made  provision  for  a  scbool-
hoose  and  meeting-house.  After
a  few  years,  Mr.  H.  was  succeeded
by  the  Rev.  A.  Gray.  In  1817,
the  R«*v.  J.  C.  Crane  was  employed
by  the  same  society ;  and  continued
in  their  sen'ice  tillJanuHry,  182),
when  the  mission  was  transferred
to  the  United  Foreien  AfitsioHary
Sitciety,  In  1823,  Sir.  Cmhe  re-
signed the  charge  of  the  mission,
and  the  Rev. D.  Smith,  of  Lewiston,
was  appointed  a  temporary  supply.
The  mission  farm  comprises  about
140  acres,  with  a  good  hoase,  bam,
and  orchard,  occupied  by  an  ex-
emplary farmer.  They  have  also
a  house  for  the  accommodation  of
the  mission,  and  a  school  in  the
centre  of  the  Tuscarora  village.

The  faithful  labours  of  the  mis-
sionaries at  this  station  have
evidently  been  attended  with  a
Divine  blessing,  and  have  been
instrumental  of  much  good,  in
meliorating  both  the  te mitral  and
spiritual  condition  of  this  people.
They  live  in  comfortable  dwellings,
have,  in  a  great  measure,  aban-
doned the  chase,  and  depend  upon
the  produce  of  the  soil  for  their


VAL

principal  snppoit.    Tbey  gMnl|
renrd  the    Sabteth,  and  itM
public  worship  regularly  vlfh  kt
coram    and    Kilemnltj.    Mirii
have  been  taxurfat  by  the  Mb
ndMlonarles.    Some  of  tte  joA
have  made  coiuidenble  pdUn^
in  the  elementafy  braaehBirfa
Engllab  education^  anddiseoma
increasing  desire  for  impiOiiMf
In  the  early  part  of  lBi4,  Ikae )
was  a  regularlj  organised  chnl
of  SI  memben,   .


la'


V.

tALLEY  TOWNS,  is  Ik
upper  part  of  the.  Cherokee  oooBlii,
situated  on  the  HiwasMe  River,  h
the  S.  E.  part  of  Tennettee.  b
this  part  of  the  nation  aie  ficn
6  to  8000  Indians,  amoag
the  A.  B.  B.  F.  M.,  in  1818,
menced  a  mission.  The
aries  cultivate  TO  acres  of  Int
and  have  several  buiidinn.  Tk
mission  property  is  valued  ^4111
dollars.  Here  is  a  iloiMiig
school,  limited  to  60  scholn.
There  is  another  school  at  JVMii,
16  miles  distant.  Several  Indiav
have  been  baptized  by  ^flie  Bm*
T.  Roberts,  who  was  formolyiB-
perintendent  at  Valley  Towns,  ad
is  now  agent  for  the  mlsioii.  Is
1820,  there  was  a  small  school  it  i
Tituawatta,  about  00  niileiS.E.
of  Valley  Towns,  connected  vitk
this  mission.

VAN  DIEMEN'S  LAND,  •
fertile  island  in  the  Sontiien
Ocean,  separated  from  New  Hol-
land by  Bass'  Straits ;  ITO  nu  kng
by  160  broad;  between  B.  loiig.
1450  and  149<>,  and  8.  lat.  40*  and
43<>.  The  climate  is  healthy.  The
European  inhabitants  are  aboat
10,000 ;  many  of  whom  are  cod-  ,
victs,  banished  from  England  for "
their  criines,  and  given  to  abaoit
every  vice  which  debeies  the
human  character.      The   nativai

4T8


ID4

the

Be
idc
Tl
vi

Id

ha
or
fi:
cc

is
li
V
a

U

?^

is

e:
t]

a
U
h

a
tl


n
a
h
i
r
I


VAN

^#aiid6r   in  the  interior,   and  are

•«BKHig  the  most  wretched  of  the

rbttman  species.    Their  complexion

fk  black  ;  they  wear  no  clothing ;

JIund  lodge  in  all  seasons,  aroond

^'dieir  fires,  in  the  open  air.    They

Make  no  provision  for  the  body,

VfeOLcept  as   they   are   impelled  by

-necessity,  and  appear  to  have  no

fitea    of  God    or  a  future  state.

■  Though  they  have,  for  several  years,

witnessed    the    superior   comforts

fnd  pursuits  of  civilized  men,  they

have  made  no  advances  from  their

original  barbarism.    The  principal

Bnglish    settlements   are     in   the

'  counties  of  Bucliinghamshire^and

Cornwall.    The  former  cpmprises

Ibe  S.  £.    part  of  the  island,  in

which  Hobart  Town,  the  capital,

is  situated ;  the  latter  is  on  the  N.

side,    at    Port    Dalrymple.      To

Macquarie    Harbour,  on, the  W.

side,    incorrigible     offenders    are

banishedi

The  fVealeyan  Society  has  em-

Sloyed  several  missionaries  on  this
dand  since  1820,  .who  have  formed
extensive  circuits,  chiefly  among
the  English.  They  found  a.  few
members  of  thfe  Methodist  Swiety,
to  which  considerable  cdditions
have  been  made.'  The  following
are  the  most  recent  accounts  of
their  proceedings :  —

"  Hobart  Town  CiVcmiV.— The
society  is.  yet  feeble,  but  there  is
gpround  to  believe  that  its  spiritual
state  is  improving.  Several  new
members  have  joined  the  classes,
and  some  of  the  old  members  have
been  stirred  up  to  press  after  an
increase  of  grace.  Various  re-
movals, however,  have  somewhat
reduced  our  numbers.

<*  Our  congregations  are  seldom
numerous ;  yet  it  should  be  stated,
that  the  hearers  on  Sunday  morn-
ing have,  for  some  time  pe^,  been
very  encouragingly  on  the  increase.
As  to  our  prayer-meetings  and
class- meetings,  they  are  pretty  well
/  attended,  and  are  not  unfrequently


VAN

times  of  refreshing  from  the  pre-
sence of  the  Lord.

"  There  are  four  out-stations,
viz.  Glenarchy,  Clarence  Plains,
Kangaroo  Point,  and  Sandy  Bay,
At  the  two  places  first  tnentigned, '
the  men  continue  to  be-  mustered
regularly.  The  number  of  hearers
is  from  20  to  30,  most  of  whom
are  Government  servants.  At
>  Kangaroo  Point,  the  attendants  are
chiefly  composed  of  a  few  aged  men,
and  a  small  number  of  young  chil-
dren%  Sandy  Bay  is  visited  by  our
local  brethren  only.  The  average
number  of  hearers  is  about  13.

''  With  respect  to  the  schools  in
Hobart  Town^  they  have  been
united  since  the  occupation  of  our
new  chapel,  and  will  henceforth  be
only  one.  The  teachers,  as  a  body,
have  exerted  themselvj^*  well;
absentees  have  been  sought  after
with  vigilance  and  perseverance.
And  hence  the  attendance  of  the
xhildren  is  encouraging;  and  as
the  school  has  lately  received  from
London  a  good  supply  of  suitable
books  (of  which  there  was  before
a  deficiency),  I  trust  something
more  cheering  will  ere  long  deve-
lope  itself."

VANS-VARIYA,  a  settiement
in  Bengal,  Hindoostan,  30  m.  N.
of  Calcutta,  and  DO  S.  of  Cutwa.

In  1813,  several  natives  of  this
place  were  baptized  by  the  Baptist
missionaries  at  Serampore.  Pre-
viously to  their  knowledge  of  the .
missionaries,  they  had  obtained
eopies  of  the  Scriptures,  renounced
idolatry,  and  assembled  together
for  divine  worship.  Two  native*
teachers,  Tarachund  and  Mut'-
hoora,  under  the  superintendence
of  the  Baptist  missionaries,  have
supported  Uiemselves  by  their  own
industry,  and  have  laboured  here
successfully  for  the  benefit  of  the
natives.  Mut'hoor  tanght  a
school,  in  which  many  of  the  pu-
pils were  so  well  instructed  in
Christianity,  as  to  b^  able  to  refvts


VEP

tlH  ftrf(iiineiiU  of  UloUten,  and  to
explain  the  Scriptures  with  much
bitelliff^nre.

VEPERY,  a  Tillage  nesr  Ma  Jni%
Hindoortan,  where  the  C.  A'.  S,
hat  laboured  since  172T,  and  has
DOW  S  minsioiiaries.

The  annual  examination  of  the
schools  toolc  place  Dec.  24,  182d:
the  Tamul  school  had  64  boys  and
47  girht ;  the  English  classes  con-
sists of  140  boys  and  77  girls.
The  examination  afforded  gn^at  sa-
tisfaction to  those  present,  among
whom  were  some  pemns  of  dis-
tinction.

VINCENT,  ST.  one  of  the
Carihbee  Islands,  lying  66  m.  to
the  \V.  of  Barbadoes.  It  is  inha-
bittHl  by  Cnribs,  a  warlilce  race  of
Indians,  between  whom  and  the
aborigines  of  the  larger  islands
there  is  a  manifest  distinction.
They  are  conjectureii  to  have  been
originally  a  colony  from  North
America';  their  fierce  manners  Ap-
proaching nearer  to  those  of  the
original  nntives  of  that  continent,
than  tliey  du  to  that  of  South  Ame-
rica, and  their  language  also  hav-
ing some  afiinit}-  to  that  siralcen  in
Fluridn.  St.  Vincent  was  long  a
neutral  island  ;  but,  at  the  peace  of
17tt3,  the  French  agreed  that  the
riglit  to  it  should  be  vested  in  the
British.  The  latter,  soon  after,
engaged  in  a  war  against  the  Ca-
rihs,  on  the  windward  side  of  the
island,  w1k>  were  obliged  to  consent
to  a  peace,  by  which  they  ceded  a
large  tract  of  laud  to  the  crown.
The  consequence  of  this  was,  that
in  1779,  they  greatly  contributed  to
the  reduction  of  this  Island  by  the
French,  who,  however,  restored  it
in  1783.  St.  Vincent  Ls  14  m.long
and  10  broad ;  a  ridge  of  mountains
passes  along  the  middle  through  its
whole  length,  the  highest  of  which,
called  Souffrier,  is  at  the  N.  ex-
tremity. From  this  mountain,  in
1812,  after  the  lapse  of  near  a  cen-
tnry,  proceeded  a  dreadful  etu\^-


VI5

tioB,  bj  which  tliB  UbnA  Wfli-
▼eloped  In  a  chaotic  gloon  hil
daya,  and  whollj  cowend  ly  *»
en  of  volcanic  tttfttor.  tk^
jrton  is  tha  capital.

Mr.  Clarka,  who  am^igliW
Dr.  Coke  to  the  Wm^InSka^tm.
mencedamlMlononthisMamr
opening  a  sciiodl  among  IhedAs
and  the  leglalatuie  gate  an  tMt
for  the  support  off  the  iMliltfBi;
but  the  Catholle  prtasli  mm  a-
cited  a  jealousj- aaong  the  |«|li^
which  rendered  it  nrir— ijtniii
linquishthe  mivlon.    AaaNgte
negroes  they  were  aMMe  wateMi,
and  ioon  collected  a  floaUtev-
ciety.    In  )79S»  the  Cote^Oo*
vemment  passed  an  act  praUUthK
the  missionaries  from  ymMBgii
the  negroes,  under  tlia  pensHif  sf  •
fine  for  the  first  tnuHgradOBi  av*
poreal  punishment  and  liiiilimiiiit
for  the  second,  and  death  for  the
third.    This  restriction  wii^  hve-
erer,    of  short   daratlon ;  as  the
King  of   England  diealhnrad  the
act,  as  inccmsistent  with  As  pris-
ciples   of   toleratian.     Sines  tint
period,  no  material  impediawirthH
been  thrown  in  the  way  of  the
mission.    For  more  than  90  jesiii
tlie  average  number  in  society  hii
exceeded    8200.     In   IMS,  tiMn
were  2904.

<<In  reporting  the  stateofthb
circuit,"  the  missionaries  Ny,
**  notwithstanding  Tarioue  Uii*
drances  to  the  prosperity  Of  tUi
mission,  during  the  year  IMS,  the
Lord  has  been  pleased  to  ciewn
our  humble  but  united  endeavesB
to  extend  religious  instruction  to
many  hundreds  by  whom  m  ate
surrounded,  far  beyond  oor  Boet
sanguine  expectations.  This  good
woric  has  not  been  ezelosifeiSy  eon-
fined  to  the  negro  poptdation  i  bat
many  respectable  free  peisani  of
colour,  both  male  and  iiemalf  ,  old
and  young,  have  felt  the  sariitt  ia*
fluence  of  the  Gospely  and  hare
joined  the  loeiety.     Tbesei  we


s


VIN

liflipe,  will  prove  ornaments  to  re-
^igion^  by  hBeommg  extensively
#Mefiil  in  this  large  and  growing
port  of  tfae  church  of  Christ.  Our
«hapel8  are  numerously  attended  in
dftvty  part  of  the  Circuit,  and  our
«ause  is  evidently  increasing  in  im-
(Murtance,  both  at  the  windward  and
leeward  part  of  the  island.
,  *'  We  have  also  attended,  for
^Dme  time  past,  to  a  small  village
called  Calliaqua,  about  3  miles  and
ip  ludf  from  Kingston,  and  have
4>een  so  far  encouraged  as  to  con-
tinue our  labours,  in  the  hope  that
our  weekly  visits  will  be  accompa-
xiied  by  the  Divine  blessing,  and
that  this  little  town  will  become  a
central  preaching  place  for  many
negroes  of  the  neighbouring  estates.
.Our  congregations  are,  in  this
place,  large  and  attentive ;  and  we
nope  to  see  a  cha{»el  built.  Our
^umbers  in  society  are — 13  Whites,
j64  Free-coloured,  124  free  Blacks,
,aad  3277  Slaves.    Total,  3478."

Schools, — '<  On  this  island  we
4iave  four  Sunday-schools;  cme  in
■Kingston,  one  in  Prince's  Town,
-  one  at  Chateau-Bellair,  and  one  at
Layon.  The  school  in  Kingston
M  by  far  the  most  important,  and
at  present  assumes  a  very  pleasing
4wpect.  Many  respectable  young
i)eople  of  colour,  who  have  re-
■cently  joined  themselves  to  the  so-
ciety, have  offered  their  services  as
teachers,  and  are  very  diligent  in
the  great  work  of  instructing  the
rising  generation  in  the  rudiments
of  our  holy  religion.  Peace  and
unity  prevail  among  the  teachers,
and  a  good  degpree  of  prosperity  has
crowned  their  labours.  In  this
school  we  have  204  children ;  98
boys  and  106  girls."

"  The  school  in  Prince's  Town
is  attended  to  every  Loid's  day,  as
well  as  that  in  Kingston,  and  is
more  or  less  under  the  superintend-
ence of  the  resident  missionary, —
which  is  an  advantage  the  other
couatiy  schools  do  not  poaen.


VIZ

Many  of  the  children  can  read
well ;  and  all  of  them,  as  well  as
the  teachers,  are  regular  in  their
attendance.  Number  of  children
in  the  school,  53 — 20  boys  and  33
girls ;  and  S  teachers-^1  male  and
4  females,"

<<  The  schools  at  Chateau-Bel-
-lair  and  Layon,  are  small ;  and  as
they  cannot  be  attended  to  more
than  once  a  fortoiight,  are  far  from
'being  so  prosperous  as  we  could
wish.  Notwithstanding  all  the  core
of  the  missionaries,  those  schools
have  decreased  in  the  year  1826  $
but  we  hope  they  will  soon  be  re-
vived again,  as  the  teachers  are  far
from  being  discouraged.  At  Cha-
teau-Bellair we  have  28  children —

15  boys  and  13  girls;  At  Layon
we  have  26  children — 10  boys  and

16  girls.  So  that  we  have  4  schools,
-—311  children  ;  143  boys  and  168
g^ris.  Besides  these,  the  mission-
aries catechise,  in  different  parts  of
the  island,  636  slave  children,  be-
longing to  estates. "

VIRGIN  ISLANDS,  a  cluster
of  small  islands,  W.  Indies,  £.  of
Port  Rico,  belonging  to  different
European  powers^;  extending  about
70  m.  from  E.  to  W.,  and  36  from
N.  to  S.  [See  Croiof  Si.,  Jan  St.
Thomas  St,,  Tortola,]

VIZAGAPATAM,  a  town  in
the  Circar  of  Cicacole,  on  the
coast  of  Orissa,  Hindoostan,  483
m.  N.E.  of  Madras,  and  557  S.W.
of  Calcutta.  It  is  a  large  civil  and
military  station,  containing  about
80,000  inhabitants,  with  many  con-
siderable villages  in  the  vicinity.
Near  the  town  is  a  large  pagoda,
dedicated  to  monkeys,  which  abound
in  the  neighbourhood.  E.  loi»g.
88®  24',  N.  lat.  170  42*.

In  1805,  the  Rev.  Messrs.  Cran
and  Des  Granges,  of  the  L.  M,  S,,
arrived  here.  Besides  acquiring
the  Telinga  language,  which  is
understood  over  a  very  eztensivo
country,  they  preached  to  Euro-
peans refttdlns  \sbl  Una  Vomtk^  wbA.


VIZ

pprfnrmetl  the  oAce  of  chaplain  in  |
the  lurt,  for  which  they  received  a  '
inunthly  allowance   from   govem-
iiuMit.       They     also     eitabUthed
Kbmiis  &"d  taiiucht  the  nativei  in
their  own  lniiguni{e.    In  INO^,  they
(tlitainril  a  very  important  assistajit,
in  Anunilarayer,  a  conveited  brah-
min.    Hut  scarcely  had  they  en-
tered on  tlie  motft  important  part  of
their  miiwionary*  work,  when  they
were  both  unexpectedly  removed
by  death  ;  Mr.  Cran  in  1H09,  and
Mr.   Des  (i  range!  the    following
year.    The  latter,  with  the  amist-
ance  of  Anundamyer,  bad  trans-
luted    the    (r(M«pelii    of   Matthew,
Mark,  and  Luke,  into  the  Telinga,
wliich   have  been  printed  by  the
Haptisl  misnionaries  at  Serampore.
Mciwni.  (iordon  and  Lee  joined  the
misKiuii    in    IbUO,    Mr.    Pritchett
about  Ihll,  and  Mr.  Dawson  in
lh\5.    About  1818,  Mr.  Pritchett
completed  tiie  translation  of  the
New  Testament,  and  superintended
the  printing  of  it  at  Madras,  under
the  putmnnge  o(  the  Calcutta  B,
S.    After  the  completion  of  this,
till  his  death,  in  1820,  he  was  em-
ployed in  the  translation  of  the  Old
Testament,  in  which  he  had  made
considerable  progress.     In    1823,
Mr.  (lordon  was  carrying  forward
the  version  of  the  Old  Testament,
and  Mr.  Dawson  was  superintend-
ing 6  native  schools.     Since  the
New  Testament  has  been  circu-
tatod  among  the  natives,  and  pub-
licly, read  and  explained  to  them,
an  increasing  interest  has  been  ex-
cited in  favour  of  Christianity.

The  Native  Schooit  have  re-
cently been  increased  to  12,  and  the
scholars  to  526,  They  continue  to
inspire  in  the  missiunaries  a  lively
hope  of  many  among  the  now  rising
generation  at  Vizogapatam  even-
tually becoming  Christians.  The
progress  of  the  scholars  is  very  en-
couraging ]  their  prejudices,  gene-
rally speaking,  are  abating,  and
their  acquointaDce  with  ChmU^


WAR

nitj  Inereaalng.  Scarcely  a  i^
paswe  In  which  iome  clitiuMlMCt
does  not  tvansplre  indlcatife  of  the
beneftctal  influence  of  rdigiODi  In*
■tniction  upon  their  lieerti ;  ni
some  of  the  elder  boji  not  vifre*
quently  eik  queetJOMt  wfilcfa  tto
most  sagacious  braluniiis  M
themselvei  unable  to  auMrer.

Such  Is  the  repute  In  wUek  the
schools  are  held,  that  manj  am
would  forthwith  be  eitiiMWis(^
were  the  means  of  soppnt  ud  sf
efficient  superintendence  witUafhi
reach  of  the  misaionaries.

A  Gooroo  not  long  ago  hmfM
discovered  the  second  oobbibb£
meat  in  one  of  the  books  ustd  ti
the  schooly  employed  his  iBHneaee
in  removing  several  of  the  boys
from  the  school  to  which  they  ba*
longed;  their  places,  howeier,
were  soon  filled  up  bj  otben.

An  English  lady,  resideat  it
Vizagapatam,  to  whom  the  mtarioa-
aries  are  undei^  many  obUgstiooi
for  the  kind  aid  she  has  rendendto
the  mission,  has  taken  the  natht
girls'  school^  superintended  by  the
late  Mrs.  Dawson,  under  her  ova
immediate  chaigOy  together  with
two  other  native  giris'  schoob
situated  in  the  fort.

The  C.  M,  Sm  supports  a  flou-
rishing English  school  here,  for
the  benefit  of  the  children  of  Euro-
pean invalids,  who  would  otherwiie
be  neglected.  The  school  was
opened  in  1819,  by  Mr.  Churcb,
then  chaplain  at  the  station,  and
who  was  highly  useful  among  this
class  of  people.


W.

WARM  BATH,  formerly  a  sta-
tion of  the  L.  M*  S.in  Great  Na-
maqualand,  S.  Africa,  near  the
Orange  R.  about  dOO  m.  N.  of
Cape  Town.

It  was  conunenoed  about  180#,


WAT

V  the  Rev.  Messrs.  C.  Albrecht,
•A*  Albrecht,  and  J.  Sydenfaden,
■who  laboured    among  the  neigh-
bouring savages  with  considert&le
success,  till  1810 ;  when  Mr.  A.
Albrecht  died :  and,  soon  after,  the
nitsionaries  were   plundered  and
driven    from  their  settlement  by
,  Africaner,  at  that  time,  the  terror
<oif   all  this  part  of  Africa  ;  but,
afterwards,  a  Christian  teacher  at
. Africaner^ 9  Kraal,     In  October,
1808,    the  congregation  bad  in-
•  creased  to  700 ;  and  some  months,
i  after,  it  is  stated,  that  the  number
-.of  names   on   ^e   church  books
amounted  to  about  1200,  including
men,  women,   and  children.    Of
these  about  300  resided  at  Warm
3ath  $  the  rest  lived  in  the  vicinity,
and  some  at  a  considerable  distance.
Several  became  hopeful  subjects  of
xenewing  grace.     In    1811,   the
fltation  was  removed  to  PelUiy  in
Little  Namaqualand,    with  about,
6W  of  the  Namaquas.

WATERLOO,  a  town  of  libe-
rated negroes  and  disbanded  Airi-
.can  soldiers,  in  ^e  parish  of  St.
Michael,  E.  part  of  Sierra  Leone
Colony,  W.  Africa,  near  the  head
^  the  Bunca  River,  bordering  on
the  Timmanees,  about  18  m.  S.  E.
4>f  Freetown.  This  settlement  was
commenced  in  1819.  Population,
in  1822,  647,  of  whom  16  were
communicants.  The  town  is  well
laid  out,  and  the  houses  are  ralher
superior  to  those  in  the  other  vil-
lages.

In  1820,  the  C  M.  S,  com-
menced a  mission  here;  large
farms  were  cleared,  and  schools
opened  with  encouraging  prospects.
In  1823,  a  Missionary  Association
was  formed,  and  about  25  dollars
were  collected.

The  Rev.  J.  G.  Wilhelm  and
Mrs.  Wilhelm  have  for  some  yean
attended  here  to  their  respective
duties.  There  being  no  European
teacher  at  this  station  besides  them-
fclves,  the  care  of  the  schools  d^-


WEL

Tolves  on  them,  in  which  they  are
assisted  by  Henry  Steady.

The  Minisiry  of  the  word  has
been  regularly  attended  to ;  but  Mr.
W.  gives  a  melancholy  account  of
the  body  of  the  people,  who  have
been  very  considerably  increased  by
accessions  from  captured  slave  ves-
sels. He  writes  at  Michaelmas,
1826 :  -  "  The  greater  part  of  the
inhabitants  not  only  keep  them-
selves purposely  ignorant  of  the
worship  of  Jehovah,  and  the  way
of  siUvation,  but  clandestinely  op-
pose what  is  good.''

The  average  number  of  commu-
nicants is  about  16j  and  their  con^
duct  Becomes  their  Christian  pro-
fession. An  Ebo  man,  who  had
been  baptized  in  May,  was  admit-
ted among  the  communicants  at
Midsummer.

By  the  returns  of  the  Schools,  it
appears  that  there  has  been  a  con-
siderable accession  of  scholars
from  slave  ships.  The  numbers
were  as  follow : — Boys,  108;  girls,
116.

The  Mediterranean  press  will
here  find  a  new  vent  for  its  valuable
labours.

WELLINGTON,  a  town  of
discharged  African  soldiers  and
their  families,  in  the  parish  of
Arthur,  £.  side  of  Sierra  Leone
Colony,  W.  Africa,  commenced  in
1819.  Population,  in  January,
1822, 547,  of  whom  351  were  men.
At  the  same  date,  John  Sandy,
native  teacher  of  the  C.  M.  S.,  was
placed  here,  and  prosperous  schools
were  opened.

This  station,  in  the  present  des-
titute circumstances  of  the  mission,
is,  with  Kissey,  under  Mr.  Metz-
ger's  care.  On  his  removal  to
Kissey,  in  the  Midsummer  quarter,
the  immediate  charge  of  Welling-
ton was  committed  to  Wm.  Tamba.
He  is  assisted  in  the  boys'  school
by  Henry  Johnson,  while  Mrs.
Macfoy  continues  to  take  chaigo
of  the  girls.


WES


WHA


Mr.  Metxffrr  preaf  hes  at  Wei- 1  lew  tku  SS^tOO  Begraa  tnteii^
lin^toii  every  Sunday  eft* niiiff,  and    ttnictlon ;  in  l^M,  the  Mefliodhfc


ttaf  |i«i|ile  continue  to  attviiU  \Tr}'
nunieitNBly.  lie  hoi  apjKiinted  a
few  pious  and  experienced  men  to
take  charge,  each  of  a  Kuituble
number  of  persons,  whom  they
meet  at  fixed  time*,  to  warn,  di-
rect, and  encouroge  them  us  tkiene
ma>  be  occasion.

Mr.  M.  administers  the  Lord's
supiier  once  a  month.  The  a\'e-
raffe  numlier  of  comnionicnnts  is
lOs ;  13  adults  have  been  baptized.

A.«  re)(tirdK  the  attendance  on  di-
vine i<er\ice  on  the  Sunday  morn-
ing, Mr.  M.  SB}-*— *•  It  art  ill  con-
tinues to  bear  an  encournf^ng  ap-
penninre.  Tbi^re  are  as  many  as
our  teni^Kirary  f^aNH-hoiLse  can  lu>ld,
nlthouf^h  enlarged  since  la!>t  rains.
On  Sunday  iil'ternoons,  and  on  week
duyK,  we  have,  on  an  avemure,  200
adults;  they  are  at  all  times  ap-
parently attentive.  There  are  J3
on  trial ;  some  of  them  will  soon  be
admitted  to  the  ordinance  of  bap-
tism. The  cunmiunicunts,  who
are  lOS  in  nunil>er,  continm^  stea-
dily to  attend  ut  the  Lord's  supper ;
n!ul  they  manifest  u  ple»siH[(  cor-
diality towards  each  other,  und  a
consistent  conduct  on  the  whole."
At  LmlyDuy,  182C,  there  were  in
the  scIkkjI — Huvs,  1^1  ;  pc'iTiSf  'H,

IVESTINDIKS,  ij«lands  in  the
Atlantic,  extending  fmm  Siirinuni,
S.  America,  to  tlio  coast  uf  Flo-
rida, bitwecn  N.lat.  10°  umi  ::>>'»  j
and  W.  long.  5S"  anil  80®.  They
helon<^  to  various  European  na-
tioiLs,  hut  principally  to  the  English
nnd  Spaniards.  The  inhabitants
are  estimated  at  about  2,000,000,
of  whom  al)Out  three-fourths  are
slaves.

The  missions  of  the  United
Brethren  were  commenced  in
these  islands  in  1732,  those  of  the
Methodists  in  1788 ;  since  which
time  several  other  societies  have
supported  missionaries  here.  In
l'!i24,  the  United  Brethren  had  no


had  S7,168  memben  la  aocMfiOf
whom  815  were  wbltei.

( See  .thsguilla,  AiUigm,  JBtrib-
moif  Bathadaest  BtartJMumem  8t^
CkriiMer  St.,  DmUmhOj  Mm-
tatia  St.,  Oremada,  H^ti,  Jk*
MotfM,  Mtariht  8i,^  Mitrntten^
Nevisy  Tobago,  Trmidai,  Vhaud
St.,  rirgin  hkmdo^l

WHANGAROOA,  a  tern  6C
New  Zealand,  on  tlw  E.  eoai^  &
of  the  Bay  of  Maads.  H«rB  Hh
fFeate^am  mSaitoii  waa  eonaeiNl
in  June,  1833.  It  wn  etfldttM
in  a  beautifbt  and  lerCUe  ^^tf,
now  denomimftted  Weileydole,  wd
situate  about  7  m.  from  the  inaA
of  a  river,  wlilcli  emptlci  ItMf
into  the  harbour  of  Wbaaguo0%
and  about  20  W.  Iron  Kiddee  KM-
dee,  the  nearest  settlement  of  thBd
M.  S,  in  the  Bay  of  Islaiids.  k
substantial  and  commodloos  diM-
ling-house,  together  with  a  ban;
carpenter's  sbofs  and  fwrfooi  otber
out-buildingSyhad  been  elected.  Aa
excellent  and  prodnctiFe  gardM
had  been  formed  y  which  wUh  ■
plat,  culti%1ited  fop  wheats  cooh
prised  about  4  acrest  The  idiofo
premises  were  snrroimded  by  a  good
fence;  and  constituted  a  respectiiUe
specimen  of  English  civiliutktt
in  the  midst  of  a  barbarous  people.

The  natives  who  resMed  is  tbv
valley  amounted  to  near  200,  and
were  called  the  NgrateburQ  tribe :
they  were  headed  by  several  chieft/
of  whom  the  principal  was  Tepoi.
At  a  distance*  of  5  miles  dwelt
another  tribe,  called  the  Ngatepo;
which  contained  000  or  700  souli.
To  these  two  tribes  the  misriona-
ries  directed  their  labours.  Having
made  some  proficiency  in  the  lan-
guage, they  regularly  employed  the
Sabbath,  and  as  much  of  their  tine
on  the  otlier  davs  of  the  week  As
could  be  spai^  mun  other  occupa-
tions, in  comnranicatfaig  to  them
.Cluistlan   instruction.     A  school


WHA

Va^  also  established,  which  was  at-,
tended  daily  by  about  20  youths :
8  of  these  had  learned  to  read  and
ivfite  their  vernacular  tongue  ;  and
•n  their  minds,  as  well  as  on  the
jninds  of  many  of  the  adult  popu-
lation, the  truths  of  God  have  been
•Miduously  inculcated,  and,  in  some
eaaes,  received  with  much  apparent
interest.

"  We  began,"  say  the  mission-
aides,  referring  to  these  results,
^*  to  be  greatly  encouraged  in
our  work;  a  good  deal  of  the
most  fatiguing  and  disagreeable
part  of  our  undertaking  had  been
accomplished,  and  we  entertained
lively  hopes  of  increasing  and  per-
manent prosperity.  This  cheering
prospect  has,  however,  by  a  mys-
terious dispensation  of  Providence,
been  suddenly  darkened,  and  our
pleasing  anticipations,  at  least  for
the  present,  blighted."

Shunghee,  it  appears,  had  been
driven  almost  to  a  state  of  despe-
ration by  a  variety  of  circumstances,
and  he  resolved  to  abandon  the  spot
which  had  been  the  scene  of  them,
and  where  he  was  perpetually  re-
minded of  their  occurrence.  Thus
chafed  and  irritated,  however,  there
iras  much  reason  to  dread,  that
wherever  he  might  remove,  there
war  and  bloodshed  would  accom-
pany him.  In  Jan.  182T,  some
men  of  his  tribe  came  to  the
station,  saying,  on  their  business
being  asked — *'We  are  come  to
take  away  your  things,  and  bum
down  your  premises ;  for  your  place
is  deserted,  and  you  are  a  broken
people."  The  work  of  plunder
and  of  spoliation  soon  commenced,
and  was  carried  on  by  an  increase
of  numbers ;  until  the  missionaries,
who  had  resolved  not  to  leave,  but
at  the  last  extremity,  took  their
departure,  and  with  heavy  hearts
directed  ttieir  course  towards  Kid-
dee  Kiddee,  the  nearest  station  be-
longing to  the  Church  mission;
where,  after  exceiiive  toik  and  i


WHA

appalling  dangers,  they  at  length
found  a   friendly,  asylum.     They
subsequently  leamt,  that  on  the  ar-
rival at  the  mi»i(Mi  settlement,  of
the  Shuke-angha  party,  whom  they
had  actually  met  to  their  great
alarm  when  fleeing  to  Kiddee  Kid-
dee  the5^  had  driven  away  the  first
plundei'ers  who  belonged  to  Shung-
hee's  party,  and  who  were  able  to
carry  off  only  the  more  portable
part  of  the  booty ;  and  that  they
had   seized  the  remainder  them-
selves ;  that  they  had  returned  to
Shukeaoghathe  following  morning,
loaded  with  the  spoils;  that  the
mission   premises,   together   with
about  100  bushels  of  wheat  in  the
straw,  which  had  just  before  been
deposited  in  the  bam,  were  com-
pletely, burnt  to  ashes;   that  the
cattle,  of  which  there  were  eight
head,  the  g^ats,  poultry,  <fec.  were
all  killed ;  that  the  heads  and  feet,
and  other  parts  of  the  stock,  were
lying   strewed    about    upon    the
ground,  mixed  with  other  articles
which  the  robbers  did  not  think
worth  their  while  to  carry  away ;
that,  not  content  with  what  they
found  above  ground,thesebarbarians
had  dug  up  the  body  of  Mr.  Turner's
child,  which  had  been  interred  a
few  months  before,  merely  for  the
sake  of  the  blanket,  in  which  they
supposed  it  was  enveloped;    and
that  they  had  left  the  corpse  of  the
tender  babe  to  moulder  on  the  sur-
face of  the  earth, — a  monument  of
their  relentless  cruelty.    "  These
men  also  informed  us,"   say  the
missionaries,  **  that  Shunghee  was
not  dead,  hut  that  he  had  been
shot  through  the  body;  that  the
ball,  having  broken  his  collar  bone,
and  passed  in  an  oblique  direction
through  the  right  breaft,  had  come
out  a  little   helow  the   shoulder
blade,  close  to  the  spine  ;  and  that
after  his  return  from  pursuing  the
Ngatepo,  his  principal  wife,  Turi,
whose  heroism  and  judgment  were
much  admired>  and  whose  abilitiei


WHA

in   WHr  were  m  suqiriKinpr,  thai  |
mrtwitkuflamUnfC  her  bllndneM  and  ;
utber  iiifirmitlvii  of  agi*,  she  always  ;
accompanied  her  huNband  In   bis  ',
Itirhtinif  enteriiriws,  had  dted   at  j
WhanKaroua.    On  tlie  10th,  sume  :
native*  arrived  at  Kiddee  Kiddee,  |
in  a  canue,  from  the  S.  E.  part  \
of  the  iiilnnd;  who  reported  that
the    news     of    SbunKhee*s   mis-
fortunes was  received  there  with
e^ery  expremiun   of  joy   and   trf-
iimph,    such  as  sin^inif  and  danc-
iiiif,    whirh    were  Isept  up  with-
out intermifisiion  nif(ht  and   day ;
and  tliut,  in  ra^  of  his  death,  a
ver}  liinre  bod)-  niijcrht  be  exi)ectert
at  tlie  Ray  of  Islnnds,  to  revenue
the  ntrorious  injuries  which  be  had
inflirted  upon  them.    This  eveninpr
«  leller  was  received  by  the  Rev.
Menr>  Williums,  from  Ciipt.  Kurd,
of  Uie  New   Zealand    Company's
ship,  the  Kosnnna,  then   lyinp^  at
Shulceanffhn,  in  which  the  Captain
ver}-    Icindly  expn»ssed   the    deep
concern  that  lie  felt  on  hearinfi;  of
our  disiistem,    and  creneroibJly  of-
fered  to  nccuinmo(lute  us  with  a
pnAiiii^  to  Sydney,  and  to  render  ns
any  other  ;ui!(istance  that  lay  in  his
power  ;  surh  kindness,  manifested
by  a  struni?er,  under  circumstances
sii  peculiarly  trjiupf  as  ours  were,
excited   in   our  bosoms   the  live-
liest emotions  of  gratitude  ami  re-
»l)ect."

•*  The  Church  missionaries  con-
sidered their  situation  in  New
Zealand  as  so  precarious  that  they
shipped  about  20  tons  of  p^ds  on
boanl  the  Sisters,  to  be  conveyed  to
Sydney;  and,  of  tlie  rest,  what
was  oi"  any  value,  ond  not  required
for  luiniediate  use,  they  either
buried  under  fj^ound,  or  deposited
on  board  a  vessel  in  the  harbour.
They  adopted  these  precoutionary
measures,  to  secure  what  might  be
requisite  for  their  voyoge:  deem-
ing it  not  improbable  that  they
should  be  compelled  to  flee  to  Port
Jaclc^on;  and  fearing  that,  if  the


«,  hi


WHA

BAtivof  iboald  MddsB^
them,    they    wvMld,  lUn
stripped  of  eTersr  thioff."

"  On  WedDeKlvy,  theilth,  iM-
ter  wea  received  finmi  MrXMByrf
Kiddee  Kiddee,  stating,  that  na
messengers,  who  had  been  leitii
Shunghee,  had  bioagtat  inteliigmDi
of  his  being  likely  to  iccoier,ai
of  hhi  having  almost  uttei|y  An
stroyed  the   Kaltangsta  tribe,  vfto
resided    on    the   western  side  rf
Whnngarooa  Harhour ;  theititsto>
ment  was,  that    oaky  10  of  the
unhap|)7   tribe    were  supposed  to
have  escaped  ;    that  oU  Mat^4
the  chief,  who  was  the  prindpd
actor  in  plondering  the  brig,  Ha*
cury,  was  among  the  riain;  tkd
Shunghee 's  athriee  to  the  bMob*
aries  at  Kiddee  Kiddee  was,t»»
main  on  their  station  while  he  iifei^
but  to  flee  to  their  own  eouatiy  ■
soon  as  he  dies;  that  the  eontHi
in  that  quarter  had  been  1iniii|;iitto
a  close;  and  that  the  natives  «sn
dispershig  to  their  respective  ptec«
of  abode.      The  head  of  Matspo
was,  a  few  days  alterwaids,  esU-
bited  on  a  pule    at   the  Bay  cf
Islands,  as  a  trophy  of  Sbangbse^
success

'<  When  we  left  New  Zealand,
which  was  on  the  8§th  of  Jaouaiy,
a  very  large  party,  led  by  the  Chief
Tarria,  was  laying  in  Kororadikt
Bay,  which  is  on  the  £•  side  of  the
Bay  of  Islands.  This  was  so  iah
midable  a  body,  that  when  tbej
were  making  toward  the  Sisten,
Captain  Duke  tlioughtit  ezpetttent
to  ftre  two  6  pounders  overtikeii
beads,  to  deter  them  from  ap-
proaching. Their  real  views  were
not  known;  but  their  leoder,
Tarria,  is  one  of  those  chie£i  who
had  ttireatened  the  l^liea  tribe;
considerable  alarm  was,  theiefoie,
felt  in  that  quarter.

*'  We   forbear  to   express  our
opinion  as  to  what  may  be  the
result  of  this  tumultuous  state  of
things ;  though  we  cannot  but  fesr
\  AM


WIL

.tlMEt  the  hBBterihite  eontoqutoees
iMil  be  (liiastrDiB*  Howerer^  we
beg  it  to  be  distinetly  understood,
tluit  ottv  mission  to  New  Zealand,
tfao«gb  suspended,  is  by  no  Beans
,  ff^tadoned.  WMe  we  ore  not
blind  to  tfae  difficuHies  whidi  at
pneent  obstruct  its  piogres^  we
oore  convinced  that  it  may  yet  be
iMRisecoted  with  rational  ftiope  of
eExtensive  and  lasting  usefntDesB.''

Mr.M  arsden  writes  on  the  Ttfa  of
Biarch,  1827,  that  he  was  on  the
point  of  sailing  from  port  Jackson,
in  H.  M.  S.  Rainbow,  on  a  visit  to
2^ew  2i6aland ;  in  ordier  to  render
advice  and  assistance  in  the  criti-
cal state  of  afi'aira.  (See  New  Tka-
tand»]

WILB£RFORCE,  a  towB  of
Africans,  in  the  parish  of  St»  Paul,
Sierra  Leone  colony,  W,  Africa,
«  iormed  in  1817,  by  the  union  of
Mtusa,  Congo,  and  CO990  Toums,
In  January  1822,  the  inhaMtants
were  596;  of  whom  366  were
liberated  slaves,  1 16  Kroomcn,  and
the  rest  other  natives.
.  In  1 8 1 7,  the  C  if.  5.  commenced
this  station.  The  Rev.  H.  C.
Decker  reported,  in  1821,  that  7^
adults  had  been  baptized,  and  that
there  were  40  communicants,  most
of  wliom  walked  according  to  the
Qospel,  and  90  scholars.  At  the
same  time,  a  spirit  of  inquiry  gene-
rally prevailed.  A  missionary  as-
sociation has  been  formed.  No
report  has  lately  been  received.

WILKS'  HARBOUR,  a  mission
station  of  the  L,  M.  S,,  on  the
N.E.  side  of  the  island  of  Tahiti.
In  May  1822,  323  adults  had  been
baptized  at  this  station,  and  198
children :  ttiere  were  73  commu-
nicants, 28  candidates  for  baptism  ;
adult  scholars,  from  100  to  150;  and
children,  whose  attendance  was
irref^ular,  from  60  to  200.

Mr.  Pritchard  has  recently  com-
menced preaching  in  Tahitian.
The  congregation,  on  the  Sabbath,
is  large.     The  severml  week«day


WIL

meetings  are  also,  in  general,
well  attended.  The  English  ser-
vice, for  the  benefit  of  the  seamen
belonging  to  ships  ift  the  harbour,
is  continiied,  and  tbe  congiegatioo
which  assembles  on  those  occa-
sions is  usually  confrkierable.  A
new  and  conunodioos  chapel,  with
extensive  galleries,  erected  at  this
station,  was  opened  ka  publie
worship  on  the  i&ik  of  December,
1826.

The  attendance  of  the  children
at  the  school  is,  unhappily,  very
irregular*  Mr.  Pritchard  has  com-
menced an  Engiish  and  TuhiUim
Dictitmary,  which  he  hopes  will
afford  considerable  facilities  for  the
acquisition  of  the  latter  language.
The  natives,  beside  completing  the
cluqpel,  have  built  a  good  dwelling
bouse  for  the  missionary.
.  The  number  baptized,  £rom  Nov.
1825,  the  titte  of  Mi.  Pritcbard's
settlement  here,  up  to  May  1896^
was  74.  Tbe  measbevs  of  the
church  amounted,  at  the  latter
period,  to  266.  Of  the  baptized,
many  axe  desiroos  of  entering  into
church  fellowship.

WILLSTOWN,  a  Cherolcee
village,  withhi  the  dwrtered  limits
of  Alabama,  about  60  miles  S.  W.
of  Brafaieid.  The  Rev.  Mt .  Chan-
berlain,  of  the  A.  B.  C  P,  M.,
visited  the  people  of  this  settlement,
Dec:  10,  1822,  and  found  them
anxious  for  a  school.  They  soon
erected  buildingi  for  the  school
and  family ;  and  Mr.  C.  removod
his  family  horn  Brainerd  to  this
place  in  March  foibiwing.  A  sbsH
school  was  conmenced  on  the  12th
of  May.  A  church  has  been
organized,  and  public  worship  is
attended  by  a  considerable  number
of  natives,  who  heacr  with  serioos-
ness.  A  larger  number  of  Che-
rokees  in  this  place  understand
English,  than  in  most  other  places
in  the  nation.  Mr.  C.  itinerates
in  difiereat  ports  of  the  Cherokee
cowitry.


YOK


Y.


YOKENA  CIICKAMAH,  re-

rently  called  ilutkeH,  a  station  of
the  A.  H.  C.  F.  M,,  in  tlie  NUte  of
MiNjiiKKlppi,  among  the  Cbortaws,
iilMiut  the  centre  ol  the  Six  Towns,
1 15  miles  S.  by  W.  of  Mayhewr,  60
W.  liy  N.  of  Emmaiis,  nml  25  from
the  siMitheni  limits  of  the  nation  ;
coninicnced  in  August,  1823.  A
pnw}teroiis  school  has  been  opened,
and  a  church  organized*  The  po-
pulation for  10  miles  round,  is
thought  to  be  more  dense  than  in
any  other  part  of  the  nation  ;  but
they  mo  in  gross  darkness,  and  live
rery  misenibly,  thougli  there  are
siMiie  murks  of  industry.

YOilK,  a  town  of  liberated
Africans,  in  the  parish  of  St.
Ilenr)-,  Sierra  Leone  colony,  W.
Africa,  on  the  Whale  river,  near
its  mouth,  about  10  miles  N.  of
Kent.  Population  afa^ut  500.  This
town  has  been  supplied  with
iweaching  mostly  from  the  neigh-
bouring settlement.  Jn  1822,
about  40  were  admitted  to  com-
munion. This  station,  which  is
under  the  care  of  Henry  Chris-
tian, a  native  teacher,  has  been
visitetl  by  the  Uev.  Mr.  Gerber.
There  is  among  the  people  a  hun-
gering and  thirsting  after  the  word
of  God,  which  promises  well  for  the
future  labours  of  a  missionar}',  if
one  cmild  be  placeil  among  them.
The  number  of  communicants  at
Christmiut,  1826,  was  84.  There
were  in  the  schools  at  Lady-day,
72  bo}'s ;  and  31  girls  had  been  re-
moved hither  from  the  Bananas.

The  wife  of  a  discharged  sol-
dier, who  attended  several  times
the  meetings  of  one  of  the  co-
loured people  at  Freetown,  l)e-
camc  powerfully  convicted  by  the
word  of  God,  and  determined  to
spend  her  remaining  days  to  the
glory  of  God ;  in  which  determina-
tion she  has  several   years  con-


ZAK

tinued.  Aiter  her  letarn  to  Ycik»
she  triad  to  pemiade  herhnbad
fwbOy  acconlliig  to  hU  own  onk
fesiion,  lived  a  my  wkkaa  tt
before)  to  follow  her  ezamfh)
after  bar  patience  had  been  m^
exercised,  her  prayen  in  this  h»^
half  were  answered :  he  not  ob^
became  a  sincere  foUower  of  the.
Lord  himself,  but  iiegan  to  eatnil
his  countrymen  to  flee  fnm  tla
wrath  to  come :  he  is  sboot  M
}-ean  of  age»  and  lame;  hecooH
neither  read  nor  write;  butfim
his  anxiety  to  read  the  woid  d
God,  he  lias,  within  a  short  Htm,
improved  himself  so  far  ss  to  to
now  able  to  read  a  little  in  th»
New  Testament.

He  has  btiilt  a  mail  neatgna
house,  in  which  he  holds  a  meel-
ing  eveiy  morning  at  5  o'dfoA,
and  also  in  the  evening.  Tlw  pn-
sent  number  of  boOi  men  ui
women,  who  haTC  joined  with  Ua
to  follow  the  Lord,  Is  29 ;  of  wbon
the  greater  part  walk  consistentlf
with  their  profession,  and  are,  ac-
cording to  the  testimony  of  Ifr.
Johnstone,  the  superintendent,  the
best  of  the  inhabitants.  lliM
people,  in  particular,  desire  a  mi-
nister to  be  sent  among  tbem.


Z.


ZAK  RIVER,  4  or  500  B.
N.  E.  of  Cape  Town,  South  Africa,
on  which  a  station  was  formed  bj
the//,  if.  &

In  May  1799,  Mr.  Kitcherer  and
his  colleague,  Mr.  Edwanli,  ieA
Cape  Town,  and  arri^-ed  on  the
6th  of  August,  at  a  spot  near  the
Zak  River,  where  they  agreed  to
take  up  their  aliode.  The  cir-
cumjacent country  was  barren  and
thinly  inhabited,  but  the  place  at
which  they  felt  Inclined  to  settle
was  evidently  adapted  for  cul-
tivation, and  was  contiguous  to
two  fine  spriogs  of  water.   Hers,


2AK

'tteiefore,  they  began  to  prepare  a
pBot  of  ground  for  a  garden,  and
to  6rect  a  but  of  reeds,  no  timber
being  within  their  reach.  To  this
liMGrble  settlement  they  gave  the
nttnue  of  Iktppy  Prospect  FoutI'
tmin,  and  solemnly  devoted  both
Ibe  place  and  themselves  to  the
Wttffbe  of  the  Lord.

Of  the  natives  among  whom
the  brethren  were  now  to  labour,
Bfr.  Kitcherer  observes — "They
bftTe  no  idea  of  a  Sopreme  Being,
«nd,  consequently,  they  practise  no
Iddd  of  worship.  They  have  a  su-
perstitious reverence,  however,  for
AD  Insect  known  by  the  name  of
tte  Creeping  leaf,  a  sight  of  which
ttey  consider  as  an  indication  of
MMnething  fortunate,  and  to  kill
It  they  suppose  will  bring  a  curse
upon  the  perpetrator.  They  have,
also,  some  notion  of  an  evil  spirit,
which  occasions  diseases  and  other
mischief;  and  to  counteract  his
^1  purposes,  a  certain  descrip-
tion of  men  are  appointed  to  blow
with  a  humming  noise  Over  the
sick,  for  hours  together.

"  Their  mode  of  life  Is  extremely
wretched  and  disgusting.  Utter
strangers  to  cleanliness,  they  never
wash  their  flesh,  but  snffer  the  dirt
to  accumulate,  till,  in  some  in-
stances, it  literally  hangs  from
their  elbows.  They  delight,  how-
.  ever,  in  smearing  their  bodies  with
the  fat  of  animals,  mingled  with
a  powder  which  gives  them  a
shining  appearance.  They  form
their  huts  by  digging  a  hole  about
three  feet  deep,  and  then  thatching
it  over  with  reeds,  which  are  not,
however,  impervious  to  the  rain.
Here  they  lie  close  to  each  other,
like  pigs  in  a  sty ;  and  they  are  so
extremely  indolent,  that  they  will
remain  for  days  together  without
food, 'rather  than  take  the  pains  to
procure  it.  When  constrained,  by
extreme  hunger,  to  go  out  in  quest
of  provisions,  they  evince  mncb
dexterity  in  destroying  the  various


ZAR

animals  with  which  their  country
abounds ;  or,  if  they  do  not  happed
to  procure  any  of  these,  they  make
a  shift  to  live  npon  sn8kes>  mice,
and  almost  any  thing  they  can
find.  There  are,  also,  some  pro-
ductions of  the  earth,  of  the  bul-
bous kind,  which  they  occasionally
eat,  particularly  the  cajneron,
which  is  as  large  as  a  child's  head,
and  the  baroo,  about  the  size  of  an
apple.  There  are,  likewise,  some '
little  berries,  which  are  edible,  and
which  the  women  go  out  to  gather ;
but  the  men  are  too  idle  to  do  this.

"  The  men  have  several  wives,
but  conjugal  afibetion  is  little
known,  and  they  are  total  strangers
to  domestic  happiness.  They  take
little  care  of  their  children,  and
when  they  correct  them,  they
almost  kill  them  by  severity.  In
fact,  they  will  destroy  their  oflT-
spring  on  a  variety  of  occasions,
as  when  they  are  in  want  of  food,
or  obliged  to  flee  from  the  farmers,
or  when  an  infant  happens  to  be
ill-shaped,  or  when  the  father  has
forsalten  the  mother.  In  any  of
these  cases  tiiey  will  strangle  them,
smother  them,  bnry  them  alive,  or
cast  them  away  in  the  desert.
There  are  even  instances  of  pa-
rents throwing  tlieir  tender  ofT-
spring  to  the  hungry  lion,  which
stands  roaring  before  thefar  cavern,
refusing  to  depart  till  some  peace-
oflering  be  given  to  him.  In
general,  the  children  cease  to  be
the  object  of  maternal  care  as
soon  as  they  are  able  to  crawl  in
the  field.  They  go  out  every  mom<<
ing;  and,  when  they  return  in  the
evening,  a  little  milk,  or  a  piece
of  meat,  and  an  old  sheep's  skin
to  lie  upon,  are  all  they  have  io
expect.  In  some  few  instances,
however,  a  spark  of  natural  afi^-
tion  is  to  be  met  with,  which
places  its  possessor  on  a  level  with
the  brute  creation.

*'  The  bnsbmen  frequenHy  forsake
their  aged  relatioBs,  when  remof  Ini^


ZAK

from  place  to  pluce,  for  the  sake
uf  bunting.  In  tbu  caw,  Ibey
li*avt'  Uie  old  person  with  a  piece
nf  meat,  and  an  wtrich  eRK-shell
full  of  water.  As  soon  as  this  lit-
tle stock  Ia  exbaiixtedy  the  poor  de-
voted creature  must  perish  by  hun-
irer,  or  become  a  prey  to  wild
beasts."

Soon  after  their  arrival  at  Zak
River,  the  missionaries  were  vi-
sited by  a  party  of  about  SO  bush-
men,  who  were  anxious  to  under-
stand the  object  of  their  settlement.
At  Arst,  however,  they  were  ex-
tremely shy ;  and  in  consequence  of
some  base  slandert,  which  had  been
propagated  among  them,  they  were
induced  to  fear  that  the  brethren
had  some  design  against  their  U-
lierty  or  their  lives.  As  a  proof  of
tlieir  mistrust,  it  is  stated,  that  on  a
certain  occasion,  Mr.  Kltcherer,
hoping  to  conciliate  the  affections
of  tliese  wild  Hottentots,  invited
11  numlier  of  them  to  partake  of  a
little  repast  which  he  had  provided.
Having  cut  up  a  large  cake,  he
presented  a  piece  to  each  of  the
bushmen,  but  not  an  individual
veiitured  to  taste  it.  On  i)erceiving
this,  and  guessing  that  they  were
apprehensive  of  ))oison,  the  mis-
sionary took  a  slice  of  the  cake
himself,  and  ate  it  before  them.
He  thon  stated,  that  he  had  called
them  together  to  assure  them  of  his
friendship,  and  to  inform  them  that,
as  they  were  all  invited  to  eat  of
one  cake,  there  was  one  Saviour,
called  the  bread  of  life,  of  whom
Hottentoto,  as  well  as  others,
might  freely  partake,  in  order  to
obtain  eternal  life.  This  explana-
tion removed  every  evil  surmise,
and  Mr.  Kitcherer's  token  of  love^
was  received  by  every  individual
with  evident  satisfaction.

From  this  time  tlie  number  of
buslimen  who  \isited  the  mission-
aries increased  considerably;  and
Mr.  Kitcherer  observes^  that  he  felt
inexpressible  pleasure   whilst  at-


I


ZAK

tempting  to  ezplalB  to  thett  fM
and  parishlng  creatures  the  iA  [
nite  grace  of  l^e  Lord  JeMi  •
that  though  lie  began  his  woikitt
a  bea\7  heart,  he  freqaentlj  c»
eluded  it  with  joy  and  exaUitt»
When  the  biuhmen  wevs  lAt  M
of  a  God,  and  of  the  lewmgeUw
of  the  dead,  they  knew  not  how  jl
expreai  their  astonhAunent  In  ttm
sufficiently  strong,  that  they  itaili
have  remained  luch  a  leagth  rf
time  without  one  idea  of  the  Gk»
tor  and  Presenrer  of  all  tUnb
Some  of  the  people  nowbegato
pray  with  apparent  eameitaa^Hi
with  the  moat  afiecting  slnphei^t
«  O  Lord  Jesui  Christ,"  they  lorii
say,  *'  thou  hast  made  the  sii,thi
moon,  the  hills,  the  riven,  aadtfep
bushes;  therefore  thon  hait  11^
power  of  changing  my  heut:  0^
be  pleased  to  make  it  eatiR^
new  I*'  Some  of  them  aawH  i
that  the  sorrow  which  they  iialt  m  I
account  of  their  sins  pmeBlcd  1
them  from  sleeping  at  nigfa^  ai  I
constrained  them  to  rise  and  pos  t
out  their  souls  in  supplicatioo  btton  ^
the  Lord ;  and  they  declared  thit
even  in  their  hunting  expeMm
they  sometimes  feit  an  inesiitibk
impulse  to  prostrate  themselves  k»
fore  the  throne  of  grace,  audit
pray  for  a  renewed  heart.  Stm
of  them,  indeed,  seem  to  have  M
interested  views  in  their  pio&Si
sions,  and  to  have  displayed,  v
Mr.  Kitcherer  expresses  it,  **  mack
pharasaical  ostentation;''  bat  then
were  some  others,  whose  langnagv
was  evidently  that  of  Christian  exv
perience,  and  who  Inanifested,  ly
their  conduct  and  converHitioD,1hst
they  had  become  the  subjects  of  t
divine  change.  '

Soon  after  this  occurrence,  Mr.
Kitcherer  was  invited  to  becone
the  minister  of  the  Paarl,  a  ricb
village  near  the  Cape,  withaliand-
some  church.  After  mature  de*
liberation  and  earnest  yuajtg^
however,  he  was  led  to  eonddsr


tb

fr

IB
St

fr
tb
su
ol
h«
ic

tc


2AK

Ikis  as  a  temptation  to  divert  him  |
biOBi  his  attention  to  the  heathen,
nttfaer  than  a  providential  call  to  a
llbtion  of  greater  usefulness.    And
Mfom  this  time  his  labours  among
die  bushmen  were   crowned  with
iveh  remarlcable  success,  that  he
ftbwrv'es,  **  Many  persons,  whose
hfeArts  had  been  harder  than  the
mcks  among  which  they  lived,  be-
Mn  to  inquire  what  they  must  do
Eq  be  saved ;  and  it  frequently  hap-
pmed  that  the  hills  literally  re-
sounded with  their  loud  complaints.^'
'  Mr.  Kitcberer  had  for  sometime
•ntertained  the  thoughts  of  visit-
ing Europe,  partly  with  a  view  to
the  settlement  of  some  domestic
concerns,  and  also  with  the  design
of  consulting  the  directors  of  the
■£f.  A/.  S,  on  the  best  measures  to
be  adopted  in  future.  Accordingly,
on  the  17th  of  January,  1803,  he
took   leave    of  his   congpregation,
with  an  assurance  that  he  would
endeavour   to  return  in  about  12
months.    The  scene  exhibited  on
this  occasion  was  deeply  affecting :
some     of    the    people    express-
ed  an  apprehension    that  it  was
on  account  of  their  guilt,  and  be-
cause   they    had   not   sufficiently
prized  the  Gospel,  that  their  be-
loved minister  was  now  to  be  re-
moved from  them  ;  others,  eagerly
grasping  his  hands  and  weeping  bit-
terly, declared  they  found  it  im-
possible to  consent  to  his  departure  j
and  those  who  were  in  some  degpree
enabled  to  restrain  the   external
marks  of  their  grief,  declared  that
they  should  unremittingly  pray  for
his  speedy  return,  under  a  convic-
tion that  they  should  never  survive
the  total  loss  of  such  a  friend  and
pastor.

One  of  the  male  Hottentots,
named  John,  and  2  females,  called
Mary  and  Martha,  were  permitted
to  accompany  their  instructor  to
Europe  ;  and  on  their  arrival  in
England,  they  afforded  high  grati-
fication to  the  friends  of  the  Re-


ZAK

deemer,  and  to  various  coogrega*
tions,  by  the  decided  testimony,
which  (through  the  medium  of
Mr.  Kitcberer,  as  their  interpre-
ter,) they  were  enabled  to  bear  to
the  beneficial  effects  of  the  Gospel
upon  their  own  hearts,  and  upon
the  hearts  of  their  long  neglected
and  benighted  countrymen.

The  following  farewell  address,
which  Mary  delivered  to  a  vast  as*
sembly,  is  a  touching  specimen  of
natural  eloquence : —

«  What  pity  'tis,  what  sin  tis,
that  you  have  so  many  years  got
that  heavenly  bread,  and  hold  it  for
yourselves,  not  to  give  one  little  bit,
one  crumb  to  poor  heathen  !  There
ate  so  many  millions  of  heathen,  and
you  have  so  much  bread ;  and  yoo
could  depend  upon  you  should  not
have  less  because  you  gave ;  but  that
Lord  Jesus  would  give  his  blessing,
and  you  should  have  the  more.  You
may  not  think,  when  you  do  some-
thing for  poor  heathen,  you  should
have    less  for  yourselves ;  —  that
contrary:  Lord  Jesus  fountain  al-
ways full ; — ^thousand  after  thousand
could  be  helped :  He  always  same,
yesterday,  to-day,  and   for   ever.
The  mora  we  do  for  others,  the
more  we    shall   be   blessed, — ^tbe
more  we  shall  have  for  oar  own
soul.    I  thanic  every  individual  that
do  something  for  missionary  work,
or  that  pray  for  it.    I  thank  people
who  help ;  but  must  say,  same  time.
Lord  bring  Hottentot  here  to  shew,
that  he  will  bless  means,  save  sin-
ner.   And  now  I  hope  and  trust
every  man  will  go  on  to  spread  the
Gospel.    As  Lord  Jesus  so  good,
I  wear  crown  of  prickles  for  us,  for
our  sins,  let  us  work  more  and  more
in  dust  at  his  feet,  to  put  on  his
head  crown  of  glbry.    O  when  you
know  in  what  situation  Hottentot
were,  then  you  will  have  more  com  r
passion  for  them ;  and  when  you
see  wherefore  God  give  such  great
plenty  here,  that  you  might  give
to  other  poor  cventui^ — ^<^V^  vsA.


ZAK

hs&istthem.  1  thnnk  Eni^lUb  nation,
that  M'lil  niivoionnry  tu  ii>;  but
)ir:i}  ttii'>  niii>  n«>l  iiri^lfct,  but  Ru
un  ;  1m*i*hum*  Lonl  iipeii  diKjr,  aiul
M>  iiiuM\  tliuiiMiiulik  know  not  I^nl
Jt'Mi'i.  Wi"  pray  lor  them,  uiid  do
all  wi»  nin  lo  I.Hp  Miw-iiniiiry  So-
i'ift>,  aiul  we  khull  wm'  llit*  IajfU
wilt'liii'vi  it.  I  in>  to  tiir  Iniiil,  uiiii
^liiUl  never  set'  this  people  no  more
in  thN  worM ;  mj  people  of  (iud,
fftreweli.  I  >hitU  meet  3 on  lu^uin
iM'lori'  the  Msrone  ol"  ulory.  And
piHipIe  thiit  know  not  (iod,  I  adnio-
ni»>h  theui  to  eonie  to  Jesus ;  then
we  shull  nil  meet  at  rii^ht  hand  of
ticvl.  Ln!»t  thinff  I  ««y--0  pray
for  fHMtr  hrathvn,**

Mr.  Kiliherer  now  paid  a  visit  to
his  triends  in  Holland,  where  he
vas  dt'iuiiied  a  considerable  time.
On  the  :>l>t  of  ()ctobt*r,  1H04,
howo\er,  he  Miileti  from  the  Texel
with  the  Hottentot  converts  and
some  new  mioionaries,  and  arrived
at  the  Cape  of  (iixvl  Hope  on  the
lUth  of  January,  1M)5.

On  his  return  to  Zak  Uivor,  Mr.
K.  loi'.nd  his  coni^rei^ation  in  a
verj  ilejected  and  wretclied  situa-
tion, iuVons«*'pieniv  of  a  lon^  con-
tinued droiii^ht,  and  the  rublieries
comujitted  hy  the  bushmen.
*•  Many  of  the  jwople,"  says  Mr.
K.**li'ad  been  already  ccnnpelled
to  lake  refuixe  in  another  place,
and  the  reinaimli'r  st»enied  ready  to
perish  for  want  of  every  necessary
of  life.  We  ustnl  our  utmost  en-
deavours to  keep  our  de.ar  conp:re-
^ation  tojretlier,  on  a  spot  which
ha<l  been  formerly  so  much  bless-
ejl,  hut  all  our  ellbrts  were  in  vain,
and  our  pn».*iiects  bt»came  darker
anddaiker;  so  that  neither  cattle
nt)r  corn  could  be  procureil  at  any
price,  and  il  was  impracticable  to
send  to  a  distance  for  pruvisions,  on
account  of  the   plunderinij  bush-


ZAN

men,  who  had  already  munkiedS  \
of  our  baptized  Hottentots.'*

Whilst  the  concerns  of  the  rI-
tlement  were  in  this  situation,  Mr.
K.  was  pruiideiitially  apimiuted  to  j
the  living  of  Graof  Reynet,  vblcfa  |
lie  accepted  on  condition  of  his  |
beini?  still  considered  as  a  roivtOA-
ar>'  of  the  London  Society;  and
thither  he  was  followed  bj  tbe  ',
greater  part  of  bis  conirregation,
who  either  took  up  their  abode  ia
the  village,  or  were  placed  with
dilTerent  families  in  the  vicinity, »
senrants  or  labourers ;  so  that  they  1
were  graduaHy  inured  to  habiti  of  I
induhtry,  whiUt  they  retained  the  I
imiiorlant  privilege  cf  still  hearing
the  GosiH.*!  from  the  lips  of  their  ;
belm'ed  iNistor.

ZANTE,  an  island  in  the  Medi-
terranean, about  12  m.  lonfl[by6
broad.  It  is  the  must  suuthen
and  the  most  fertile  of  the  Ionian
Islands,  and  for  its  size  the  nuKt
lH>puloiu.  Inhabitants  40,000^
chiefly  of  the  Greek  church.  Thii,  ;
with  6  other  islands  in  the  vicinity,  |
form  a  republic,  which  was  put
under  tlie  protection  of  Great
Britain  in  1815.  The  town  of
Zante  is  the  largest  in  the  Seven
Islands,  and  contains  16,000  inha-
bitants.

The  Rev.  I.  Lowndes,  of  the
L,  M,  S.,  was  stationed  here  in
1810,  and  removed  to  Corfu  in
1 822,  as  a  more  eligible  place  for  the
establiMhment  of  a  mission  for  these
islands,  the  principal  object  of
which  is  to  awaken  the  members  of
the  Greek  church  to  relip^ious  in-
quiry, and  to  promote  the  circula-
tion of  tbe  Scriptures  in  modem
Greek.  Previous  to  his  removal,
he  nearly  completed  a  Lexicon  in
modern  Greek  and  English,  and
tranfdated  Mason  on  Self- Know-
ledge.


I


t


THE  BKD.


O .  D>wik^oT\\i,  ^TVoSttx  ,1«,^WmX.Vx«mX.


ft

lii


(


rHB  NEW  YORK  PUBUC  UBRARY

aSPBRBNCB  D8PARTMBNT


I


[LOWELL  (J.  R.)]     The  Missionary  Memorial,  with
J.     " The  Captive/'  by  Lowell;  "The Lake,"  by  Poe,

Colored  front,  and  vignette  title.     Post  8vo,  original
(back  repaired),  gilt  edges.  N.  Y.  1846

The  9th  and  '  Uh  Btansas  of  Lowell's  poem  were  omitted  in
later  editions.     The  .i^nol '  aoyy,  with  book  la^^.


MISSIEOHAIEY    MEMOl^HAILi.


L


nv^


/?.-


V


•>


^z-


'^..


•6-,


•  ^


%.


C-,


/


rj


OJ


MIS


-M^EMO.KIAL


Tffl:


mSSIONAEY  MEMORIAL :


LITERARY  AND  RELIGIOUS  SOUVENIR.


**  WHAT  SOUGHT  THKY  THUS  AFAR  ?
BRIOHT  JEWELS  OF  THE  MINE  ?
THE  WEALTH  OF  SEAS,  THE  SPOILS  OF  WAR?—
THBT  SOVOHT  A  FAITH's  PURE  SHRIME  !*'

MRS.  HEMANS.


NEW  YORK:
E.  WALKER,  114  FULTON  STREET.

M  DCCC  XLVI.


:  II


r  ;   •


8';'456R


T..  .


i


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1845,

By  EDWARD  WALKER,

In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of

New  York.


•*.


Stereotyped  bj

RICHAKD  C.  VALENTINE,

45  Oold-etreet,  New  York.

R.  CRAIGHEAD,  Friater,
119  FuUon-iueet.


eo


**


«!)e  Ixitnis  of  ^10010110,


*»  teapecUttU^  «n»ct(fteli.


5

1


PREFACE.


Of  a  subject  of  such  absorbing  interest  to
the  religious  community,  as  that  of  the  grand
and  glorious  mission  for  the  moral  conquest
of  the  globe,  little  need  be  premised,  since  it
engages  the  sympathies  and  earnest  aspira-
tions of  all  who  desire  the  advancement,
temporal  and  eternal,  of  the  human  famity.
At  no  period  of  the  world's  history  has  the
missionary  emprise  received  so  important  a
share  of  popular  consideration,  or  have  the
sure  tokens  of  its  ultimate  and  triumphant
success  been  so  vividly  displayed,  as  at  the
present  moment.  The  highways  of  idol-
atrous superstition  are  fast  becoming  the
great  avenues  of  celestial  truth,  while  hea-
then darkness  is  rapidly  receding  before  the


TUl  PREFACE.

cheering  dawn  of  Gospel  light  and  blessed-
ness. Already  many  of  the  obscure  corners
of  the  earth,  once  the  habitations  of  cruelty,
have  become  the  peaceful  abodes  of  those
made  "wise  unto  salvation."  The  records
of  this  mighty  crusade  for  the  recovery  of
fidlen  humanity-the  thrilKng  incidents  of
its  eventful  history — its  manifold  vicissitudes
and  onward  career— cannot  fail  of  proving  a
theme  of  intense  and  paramount  importance.
In  the  memorable  words  of  one  long  devo-
ted to  its  interests,  it  inay  be  affirmed,  that
"in  the  whole  compass  of  human  benevo-
lence, there  is  nothing  so  grand,  so  Christian,
so  truly  (jod-like,  as  the  work  of  evange-
lizing the  heathen."

A  desire  to  invoke  the  attention  of  the
religious  public  in  a  more  prominent  degree  to
the  momentous  subject  of  missions,  as  well  as
to  incite  those  already  engaged  in  its  self-sac-
rificing labors  to  renewed  energy  and  devo-


PREFACE.  IZ

tion  of  spirit,  is  a  leading  feature  of  the  present
work.  To  relieve  what  might  otherwise  be
considered  a  monotonous  feature  in  the  vol-
ume, it  has  been  deemed  expedient  to  intro-
duce a  few  occasional  articles  of  collateral  in-
terest or  of  lighter  character ;  the  literary  merit
of  which,  it  is  believed,  will  commend  them
to  the  favor  of  the  reader.  The  plan  of  the
work  being  new,  and  distinct  from  that  of
any  previous  production, — differing  from  the
series  of  Annuals^  its  contents  being  of  a
more  substantial  and  permanent  character, —
it  is  confidently  hoped  it  will  meet  with  that
share  of  attention  from  the  entire  Christian
community,  which  the  claims  of  an  experi-
ment so  costly  in  its  preparation  deserve,  and
that  it  will  prove  admirably  suited  as  a  re-
ligious gift-book  for  the  sea|(jn.

The  illuminated  frontispTefie,  presenting  a
beautiful  specimen  of  Baxter's  new  process  of
printing  in  oil-colors, — a  feature  of  novelty


X  PREFACE.

and  consommate  skill  in  art, — now  for  the  first
time  introduced  to  the  notice  of  the  American
public,  is  derived,  by  permission  of  the  au-
thor, firom  Mr.  Hoole's  admired  work,  "  Mis-
sions in  Madras."  The  vignette  illustration
on  the  title-page  represents  a  small  building
devoted  to  the  accommodation  of  travellers
in  India.  These  edifices  are  erected  by  opu-
lent Hindoos,  firom  charitable  motives ;  they
have  generally  near  them  the  valuable  addi-
tion of  a  tank  of  water,  sufficiently  deep  to
secure  a  necessary  supply  throughout  the  dry
season :  hence  their  occasional  adaptation  to
missionary  purposes.

New  York,  October,  1845.


CONTENTS.


P»ge.
Thc  Spiritual  Vitautt  or  thb  Truth,  considbrbd  in  its  rela-
tion TO  Christian  Missions. — By  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Mezander^  D.  D.  ^      1

Thr  First  BIissionart. — By  Mrs.  Lydia  H.  Sigomnuy 13

Woman,  thb  GtOspbl  Hbssbnobr. — By  Mrs.  E.  R.  Steele 16

A  Mbmorial.— £y  JoAir  O.  Whittier 31

Thb  Bbciprocal  Inplubncb  op  Missions. — By  the  Rev.  Erakine  Ma-

aonj  D.  D 37

The  CkSTvrz.—By  Jcmea  RuaaM  Lowell 47

The  Winds.— By  Harry  Franco 53

The  Sisters'  Grate.— By  ike  Avtkor  of  "  Pen  and  Ink  Sketekear 61

HoHEAQAN  Missions. — ByMiaa  F,  M.Caulkina"* 64

Virr.— By  the  Rev.  Ralpk  Hoyt 100

Sonnet.— By  J7.  T.  Tnckerman 104

BuRMAH. — By  the  Rev.  Eugenio  Kincaid 105

Mart  at  the  Sepulchre.— By  Miaa  Hannah  F.  Oould 122

The  Debt  op  Perishing  Humanitt  to  Redeeming  Deitt 124

MissiONART  IN  THE  New  WESTERN  SETTLEMENTS.- By  Mra.  Lydta  H.

Sigoumey 142

Almost  There,  or,  the  Missionart's  Death. — By  Rev.  Jokn  Dowlitig.  146

The  Wail  op  the  Light-Bearer.- By  C.  Donald  Maeleod.  •• 155

Indian  Missions. — By  Jokn  M.  Peek 158

The  Ship.— By  William  W.  Lord 174

The  Genius  op  War  as  contrasted  with  that  op  Christianitt. — By

J.  Lawrence  De  Oraw 177

Pocahontas. — By  W.  Oilmore  Simma 199

BfART*8  Charm.— By  j9iMia  Cktra  Mowatt • 220

Srlpisbhbss.— By  .Afw  E.JaneCkite 221


Xa  CONTENTS.

SomnET— The  fikst  Lock  of  Gray  HAUc—By  Thomas  W.  Renne 234

Be  True  to  Thyself.— By  the  Rev.  Rufus  W.  Oriswold 235

The  Turk  and  his  Dominions.— By  the  Rev.  S.  W.  Fishery  A.  M 236

Recovery  from  Sickness 249

The  Last  Interview.— JBy  JIfra.  Lydia  Baxter. 250

Martyrdom  of  Missionaries.— By  W.  B.  Sprague,  D.  D 253

The  Missionaries'  Departure.— By  Miss  Hannah  F.  Oould 2f>4

The  Man  whom  his  Regiment  could  not  do  without. — By  the  Author

of  **  The  Palais  Royal,''  eU 266

The  Missionary.— By  J\Sisa  Selina  Sherman 280

Miss  Huntington.— By  Thomas  W.Renne 281

The  Missionary  Institute  and  Society  of  Basle. — By  Rev.  Robert

Baird,  D.  D 284

The  Captive.- By  £pM  Sargent 302

Ceylon.- By  B«o.  Levi  Spavlding 304

Christmas-Eve. — By  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Brown 315

Departure  of  Rev.  John  Williams.— By  the  Author  of  "  Pen  and  Ink

Sketches" 320

The  Lake.— By  Edgar  A.  Poe 324

Pilgrim's  Way-Song.— By  Miss  Hannah  F.  Oould 325

The  Missionary  a  Contributor  to  Science  and  Literature.— By  the

Rev.  J.  O.  Choules,  A.M. 320

Surrey  TO  Geraldine. — By  H.  T.  T^ckerman 337

The  Missionary's  Grave. — By  C.  H.  Hosken 340

The  Burning  of  the  "Tanjorb" 345

The  Extent  of  the  Missionary  Enterprise. — By  the  Rev.  Gardiner

Spring,  D.D • 360

Prayer  for  Missions. — By  Mrs.  Lydia  H.  Sigoumey 371


THE


MISSIONARY    MEMORIAL.


3[i)e  0pintoal  t)ttalits  of  ti)e  QTrnti),

CONSIDERED  IN  ITS  RELATION  TO  CHRISTIAN  MISSIONS.
BY  THE  KEY.  J.  W.  ALEXANDER.  D.  D.

The  grain  of  mustard-seed,  less  than  all  the  seeds
which  be  in  the  earth,  but  which  groweth  up,  and
becometh  greater  than  all  herbs,  and  shooteth  out
great  branches,  so  that  the  fowls  of  the  air  lodge  un-
der its  shadow,  is  a  blessed  missionary  emblem.
(Mark  iv.  31,  32.)  All  Christian  progress,  from  the
beginning  to  the  end,  is  typified  by  this  development :
it  is  our  encouragement  in  the  seed-time  of  the  Gos-
pel. That  which  the  Church  is  scattering,  by  books
and  ministers,  is  not  an  inoperative  principle.  It  is
living ;  it  has  a  propagative  virtue ;  it  perpetuates
life  :  for  it  is  seed.  As  a  means,  in  the  hand  of  the
Spirit,  without  which  no  mind  receives  it,  the  word
of  God  liveth  and  abideth  forever.     (1  Pet.  i.  24.)

This  principle  of  germination  and  increase  de-

1


2  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

•

senres  serious  attention,  especially  in  regard  to  a
great  distinction;  namely,  that  which  subsists  be-
tween a  dead  accretion  and  a  living  development,  or
between  a  structure  and  a  growth.  A  fabric  of  art  has
no  life.  Though  it  be  a  pjnramid,  a  Parthenon,  or  a
Cathedral  of  Cologne,  it  stands — so  long  as  it  stands
at  all — only  as  it  was  built.  It  may  be  preserved,
repaired,  enlarged,  beautified ;  but  it  remains  in' brute
quietude.  The  principle  of  the  whole  mass,  how-
ever vast  or  exquisite,  is  this :  one  stone  upon  an-
other. No  art  can  produce  any  tendency  towards
vital  force.  No  bud  or  blossom  ever  burst  forth  from
amidst  the  carved  foliage  of  the  vine  or  oUve  of  those
glorious  Gothic  piers.  But  that  which  grows,  is  es-
sentially living.  It  may  be  the  merest  winged  seed
of  the  dandelion  or  the  thistle :  yet  it  swells,  and
gathers  force,  and  elaborates  matter  in  due  form,  and
evolves  its  like.

The  truth  of  God,  under  a  spiritual  agency,  is  a
living  principle.  When  cast  into  soil,  it  is  not  buried,
as  if  it  were  only  a  dead  coin,  or  a  jewel  of  gold,  or
a  diamond,  but  awakes  to  new  forms  of  vigorous
beauty,  like  a  precious  seed.  To  this  character  of
the  truth,  all  the  Christianity  now  in  the  world  owes
its  prevalence  :  and  where  the  Holy  Spirit  breathes
on  it,  every  particle  of  this  truth  possesses  a  like
power.  It  is  this  which  emboldens  us  to  send  the
Gospel  where  it  has  never  been  planted.

In  the  Age  of  Missions,  as  the  primitive  age  may


0


*


VITALITY  OF  THE  TRUTH.  3

be  emphatically  called,  this  was  the  encouragement :
it  was  derived  from  the  words  and  acts  of  our  blessed
Redeemer  himself.  He  serenely  dropped  this  seed
in  the  earth,  declaring  its  expansive  nature.  Under
other  images  he  taught  that  it  would  abide  and
spread :  for  it  was  salt,  and  leaven,  and  light.

When  we  multiply  works  of  art,  the  process  is
slow,  and  the  series  is  arithmetical :  but  living  things
increase  in  a  high  geometrical  ratio.  Botanists  tell  us
that  the  most  vulgar  of  our  yellow  meadow-flowers  is
not  indigenous  in  America ;  but  now  it  enamels  all  our
plains,  and  is  carried  on  its  downy  vehicle  beyond
the  Rocky  Mountains.  It  is  so  with  the  harvests  of
the  South.  Maria  d'Escobar,  a  Spanish  lady,  first
brought  a  few  grains  of  wheat  into  the  city  of  Lima.
For  three  years,  she  distributed  their  produce  among
the  colonists,  giving  twenty  or  thirty  grains  to  each
farmer.  Maria  d'Escobar,  says  Mackintosh,  brought
into  existence  more  human  beings  by  this  supply  of
food,  than  Napoleon  has  destroyed.  In  so  doing,
she  typified  the  work  of  missions.  Had  she  built  a
thousand  monasteries  in  Peru,  they  would  have  been
only  a  thousand,  even  now.  But  she  did  not  build —
she  planted.  From  such  small  and  contemptible  be-
ginnings, the  great  harvests  of  Christianity  arise ;
and  the  extent  and  glory  of  the  Church,  in  the  latter
day,  will  be  the  result  of  a  like  plantation.  There
shall  be  a  handful  of  corn  in  the  earth  upon  the  top
of  the  mountains  ;  the  fruit  thereof  shall  shake  like


4  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Lebanon:   and  they  of  the  city  shall  flourish  like
grass  of  the  earth.     (Ps.  Ixxii.  16.)

The  solitary  missionary  carries  his  handful  of
seed-corn,  as  did  the  solitary  apostle.  He  has  the
same  authority,  and  should  entertain  the  same  hope.
The  truth  with  which  we  deal  is  not  only  living,  but
abiding.  The  Spirit  and  the  Truth  are  given  in
union,  first  to  Messiah,  and  then  to  his  people,  to  re-
main forever  :  As  for  me,  this  is  my  covenant  with
them,  saith  the  Lord  ;  my  Spirit  that  is  upon  thee,
and  my  words  which  I  have  put  in  thy  mouth,  shall
not  depart  out  of  thy  mouth,  nor  out  of  the  mouth
of  thy  seed,  nor  out  of  the  mouth  of  thy  seed's  seed,
saith  the  Lord,  from  henceforth  and  forever.  (Isa.
lix.  2L)  The  covenant  promise  is  realizing,  itself
every  day.  If  our  eyes  were  opened,  we  might  trace
the  stream  of  life,  threading  its  silver  way,  like  the
fabled  Arethusa,  through  oceans  of  ignorance,  idola-
try, and  crime.  We  might  trace  the  now  unseen
'links  from  father  to  son,  and  from  lineage  to  lineage.
And  perhaps  we  might  often  discover  that  the  piety,
which  seemed  to  us  insulated  and  transient,  was  con-
nected with  the  faith  and  love  of  foregoing  ages.
We  know  not  the  channel  which  brought  the  truth  to
Augustine ;  but  we  know  that  he,  being  dead,  yet
speaketh.  Church  history  does  not  now  enable  us
to  record  the  transmission,  from  apostolic  days,  of
that  faith  which  dwelt  in  Monica  of  Tagaste.  But
the  child  of  her  prayers  carried  forward  the  line  of


VITALITY  OP  THE  TRUTH.  5

propagation,  and  sowed,  broad-cast,  the  seed  which  is
still  increasing.  After  fourteen  centuries,  we  find  the
very  words  which  he  penned  in  Africa,  exerting  their
vivifying  power  in  Saxony,  in  Switzerland,  and  in
America.  They  wrought  in  Luther,  and  led  him,  by
a  great  change  of  opinion,  to  prefer  Augustine  to  all
the  Fathers.  They  wrought  in  Calvin,  whose  name
has  been  given  to  the  scheme  of  truth  which  was
thus  suggested.  How  many  thousands  have  derived
the  same  doctrines — ^whether  Augustinian  or  Pauline
— ^from  the  writings  of  the  two  great  Reformers !
The  quiet  valleys  of  this  western  world,  sometimes
even  in  the  absence  of  all  evangelical  preaching,
have  received  the  truth  from  the  Augustinian  work
Let  a  single  instance  suffice.  It  is  now  more  than
a  hundred  years,  since  the  county  of  Hanover,  in
Virginia,  was  the  theatre  of  remarkable  reUgious
awakening.  The  parish-sermons  in  the  established
church,  at  that  time,  gave  but  an  uncertain  sound.
But  among  the  books  of  a  certain  old  disciple.  Morns'
by  name,  was  a  copy  of  Luther  on  the  Galatians.
He  gathered  his  neighbors  for  prayer  and  praise,  and
read  aloud  from  this  and  other  good  books.  It  was
a  sowing  of  the  seed.  Souls  were  converted.  Soon
after,  the  living  preacher  was  sent  to  them  in  the
person  of  Whitefield :  at  a  later  period  the  great
Samuel  Davies  became  their  minister.  These  all
walked  in  the  same  spirit — in  the  same  steps,  (2
Cor.  xii.  18 ;)  dispensing  the  same  precious   truth


0  XI88I0NART  MEMORIAL.

which  had  been  the  life  of  Paul,  of  Augustine,  and
of  Luthei:.*

There  is  a  resurrection-power  in  truth,  under  the
beams  of  spiritual  light  and  heat.  It  is  the  vitality
of  genuine  growth  ;  as  in  the  celebrated  instance  of
seeds,  disinterred  from  the  mummy-cases  of  Egypt,
which,  after  twenty  centuries,  have  germinated  in
the  hot-houses  of  British  naturaUsts.  Let  us  not
despise  the  means  which  we  are  employing ;  for  the
humblest  missionary,  who  goes  forth  weeping,  bears
with  him  the  precious  seed  which  may  endure  and
grow  imtil  the  second  appearing  of  the  Lord.

If  we  look  at  the  nature  of  this  truth,  we  shall
find  a  new  reason  for  sowing  in  hope,  even  in  dis-
tant lands.  It  is  the  "  Word  of  Life,"  which  we
"hold  forth."  It  reveals  Him  who  is  "the  Life."
That  which  every  true  missionary  endeavors  to  intro-
duce, is  Christ.  And  where  Christ  is  received,  the
series  does  not  stop.  The  flame  is  communicative,
^his  reUgion  kindles,  "like  a  torch  of  fire  in  a  sheaf."
(Zech.  xii.  6.)  Men  die,  but  the  flame  survives  :  as
in  the  ancient  game  of  the  Greeks,  called  the  Lam-
padephoria,  a  race  in  which  a  torch  was  carried  for-
ward by  one,  and  then  handed  to  another,  and  so  to
another,  until  the  goal  was  reached.!  By  just  such
transmission  the  light  has  come  to  us.  Successive
teachings  and  successive  sacraments  do  "  show  forth

*  Hodge's  History,  yoL  II.  p.  45. '  t  Herodotus,  viiL  98.


VITALITY  OF  THE  TRUTH.  7

the  Lord's  death  till  he  come."  Who  was  the  first
missionary  among  the  glens  of  the  Vaudois,  we  know
not ;  but  we  know  what  seed  he  carried,  for  it  is
there  still.  Can  any  dare  to  predict,  that  the  like
effect  shall  not  follow  a  like  cause  in  Greenland,  in
Burmah,  or  in  Hawaii  ?  Such  distrust  had  been  ex-
cusable in  the  first  missionaries  from  Jerusalem,  but
not  in  us.  The  first  seed  sown  outside  of  Eden,  by
Adam  and  Eve,  may  have  seemed  hopelessly  buried  ;
but  they  were  reassured  by  subsequent  harvests :
and  we  are  eating  the  fruit  of  their  toils.  The  Uving
growth  of  past  Christianity  is  our  encouragement  in
planting  the  Gospel.  Every  evangelical  mission
reads  us  the  same  lesson.  Lament  as  we  may  over
the  continuance  of  error  in  some  localities,  and  the
seeming  decay  of  truth  in  others,  there  is  still  a
meaning,  which  future  light  is  to  reveal,  in  such
words  as  those :  Every  plemt  which  my  heavenly
Father  hath  not  planted,  shall  be  rooted  up.  (Matt.
XV.  13.)  Shiloh,  where  God  placed  his  tent  among*
men,  became  a  desolation ;  Jerusalem,  a  curse  to  all
the  nations  of  the  earth.  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  60.  Jer.  xxvi.
6.)  Wittenberg  is  a  nursery  of  Rationalism,  Geneva  is
the  seat  of  baptized  infidelity ;  and  Cambridge,  where
the  Puritan  confessors  avowed  a  divine  Redeemer,  is
a  high-place  of  Socinianism.  But  Shiloh  may  be  re-
visited by  the  ark  ;  "  they  shall  call  Jerusalem  the
throne  of  the  Lord."  Wittenberg  still  conceals  truth,
which  the  God  of  Luther  can  revive ;  Geneva  already


8  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

shows  some  who  **  spring  up  as  among  the  grass,  as
willows  by  the  water-courses ;"  and  the  prayers  of
Oakes  and  Harvard  are  not  forgotten  before  God.
Evil  dies,  in  many  places,  by  a  divine  law.  What
missions  were  ever  more  flourishing  than  those  of  the
Jesuits  of  Brazil  ?  Their  last  traces  are  now  disap-
pearing in  the  beautiful  country  from  which  that
mighty  Order  has  been  expelled.  On  the  other  hand,
Elberfeld,  and  the  vale  of  the  Wupper,  retidns  to  this
day  the  goodly  fruit  of  the  Reformed  theology ;  and
assemblies  of  four  thousand  sometimes  Usten  to  the
sound  of  a  free  gospel,  from  the  Ups  of  Krummacher.
The  voice  of  the  truth  is  faintly  heard  again  in  the
land  of  the  Huguenots ;  converts  are  welcomed  from
'  the  churches  of  Asia ;  and  we  look  for  the  day  when
the  candlestick  shall  be  restored  to  Antioch,  Alexan-
dria, and  Jerusalem.  There  is  much  in  the  garden
of  the  Lord  to  make  us  hope  that  the  imperishable
vine  will  again  cover  the  spots  where  the  boar  out
of  the  wood  has  wasted  it.  "  In  that  day,  sing  ye
unto  her,  A  vineyard  of  red  wine  :  I,  the  Lord,  will
keep  it ;  I  will  water  it  every  moment :  lest  any
hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day."  (Isa.  xxvii.
2,3.)

While  we  aim  at  sowing  the  word,  wherever  man
dwells,  it  is  good  to  consider  the  source  of  its  vege-
tative energy.  Our  arithmetic  often  misleads  and  dis-
heartens us.  We  spread  the  map  on  our  table,  and
compute  so  many  milUons  of  souls,  and,  over  against


VITALITY  OP  THE  TRUTH.  9

this,  SO  many  feeble  preachers;  and  then,  on  the
scale  of  the  exchange  or  the  shop,  we  conclude  that
such  instrumentahty  in  regard  to  the  proposed  result,
is*  stark  naught.  But  this  reckoning  is  not  valid  in
the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  Rule  of  Three,  blessed
be  the  name  of  God,  is  not  the  rule  of  Grace.  In
God's  account,  the  proportion  sometimes  runs  thus  :
One  shall  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  put  ten  thousand
to  flight.  In  this  problem,  we  have  no  authority  to
omit  the  element  which  is  infinite — the  power  of  the
Spirit  with  the  word.  God's  arm  can  turn  the  bal-
ance against  all  weights.  I  am  reminded  of  the  fa-
mous old  Roman  story.  During  a  Gallic  irruption,
the  barbarians  raised  the  blockade  of  the  capital  for
a  sum  of  money.  Quintus  Sulpicius  complained
that  the  weights  were  false  ;  but  the  Gaul  threw  his
heavy  broadsword  into  the  scale.  Gideon  was  ad-
monished of  this  preponderating  power  of  divine  aid  ;
"  By  the  three  hundred  men  that  lapped  will  I  save
you."  The  watchword  of  his  victory  should  be  ours
"  The  sword  of  the  Lord,  and  of  Gideon."  The
sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God,  shall
countervail  milUons  in  the  scale.  In  God's  work,  one
Augustine,  one  Luther,  or  one  Whitefield,  counts
more  than  a  vulgar  unit  of  enumeration;  and  the
quiver  of  the  Almighty  is  not  exhausted  of  such  ar-
rows. We  do  a  grievous  wrong  to  our  prospects,
when  we  measure  the  coming  day  by  the  morning
twilight.     There  is  a  stage  in  evangelical  effort,  at


10  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL

which  the  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light  of
the  sun,  and  the  Ught  of  the  sun  shall  be  sevenfold,
as  the  Ught  of  seven  days,  in  the  day  that  the  Lord
bindeth  up  the  breach  of  his  people,  and  healeth  the
stroke  of  their  wound.  By  an  effusion  of  the  Spirit
on  the  seed  sown,  Christ  can,  and  doubtless  will,
make  the  labors  of  one  husbandman  equal  to  those
of  thousands.  What  have  our  own  days  beheld,  in
Burmah  and  the  Sandwich  Isles  ?

Such  is  the  preciousness,  such  is  the  vitality  of  the
missionary  seed,  that  we  should  be  hopeful  in  dis-
seminating even  a  handful.  In  the  morning  sow  thy
seed,  and  in  the  evening  withhold  not  thy  hand.  Our
province  is  ministerial :  the  increase  is  of  sovereign
grace.  Not  every  blade  of  wheat  comes  to  the  ear ;
not  every  tract  is  read  vrith  the  eye  of  faith ;  not
every  preacher  turns  the  heathen  from  dumb  idols.
Yet,  in  the  grand  reckoning,  the  truth  is  working,  and
sometimes  mightily.  Who  questions  the  fact  that
there  is  a  deadly  efficacy  in  firearms  on  fields  of
battle?  Yet  miUtary  calculators  tell  us,  that  not
more  than  one  ball  in  twelve  thousand  proves  mortal,
or  strikes  a  human  being.  If  the  church  were  only
putting  forth  a  consentaneous  effort,  causing  the  good
seed  to  fly  over  all  nations,  it  is  reasonable  to  believe
that  the  world  would  soon  behold  singular  and  unex-
ampled increase,  from  direct  copious  visitations  of
spiritual  energy.  "  Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in
the  day  of  thy  power,  in  the  beauties  of  holiness


VITALITY  OP  THE  TRUTH.  1 1

firom  the  womb  of  the  morning  :  thou  hast  the  dew
of  thy  youth."

If  then  it  is  truth,  on  which  the  Holy  Spirit  confers
such  vital  and  prolific  virtue,  we  should  be  sure,  in
laboring  for  foreign  lands,  that  what  we  sow  is  the  very
Word  of  God.  In  the  missionary  message,  it  is
Christ  which  gives  hfe  and  fructifies  the  toil.  The
nominal  church  has  been  bringing  forth  tares  for  cen-
turies.  An  enemy  hath  done  this.  Amidst  them  all
some  seed  has  sprung  up ;  first  the  blade,  then  the
ear,  then  the  fill]  com  in  the  ear.  This  end  is  ac-
complished only  by  the  truth.  To  communicate
this,  pure  and  entire,  is  nowhere  more  indispensable
than  in  the  field  of  missions.  Among  the  multiform
propositions  of  truth,  those  are  most  quick  and  pow-
erful which  he  nearest  the  heart  and  centre.  The
doctrine  of  Christ,  and  him  crucified,  is  the  vivifying
doctrine  ;  the  missionary  germ.  How  long  did  the
Moraviein  brethren  plough  and  sow  in  vain,  plying
the  Greenlanders  with  the  ethics  of  Christianity  !  It
was  a  lambent  flame  ;  true,  but  inefficacious ;  it  kin-
dled nothing.  But  when — as  if  by  chance — they
spake  of  the  Cross,  the  frozen  savages  were  in  a
glow — the  arctic  ice  began  to  melt !  It  is  the  grand
secret  of  Gospel  labor,  at  home  and  abroad  :  but  it  is
especially  pertinent  to  the  dissemination  of  truth  over
new  ground.  The  question.  What  is  the  Gospel,  is
one  of  awful  moment  in  this  vernal  period  of  the
Church;  and  the  Apostle  Peter,  addressing  early


12  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Christians,  ascribes  to  this  gospel  the  very  characters
of  power  and  vitality,  which  have  been  asserted  of  it
in  the  foregoing  desultory  remarks  :  "  Being  bom
again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,
hy  the  Word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  for-
ever. And  this  is  the  Word  which  by  the  Gospel  is
preached  unto  you."


®l)e  Jirat  flliaaionara.

BT  MRS.  LTDIA  H.  8IG0URNEY.

Know'st  thou  the  Leader  of  that  train,  who  toil
The  everlasting  Gospel's  light  to  shed
On  egirth's  benighted  climes  ?

Canst  tell  the  name
Of  the  first  Teacher,  in  whose  steps  went  forth
O'er  sultry  India,  and  the  sea-green  isles.
And  to  the  forest-children  of  the  West,
A  self-denying  band, — ^who  counted  not
Life  de£ir  unto  them,  so  they  might  fulfil
Their  ministry,  and  save  the  heathen  soul  ?

Judea's  mountains,  from  their  breezy  heights
Reply, — "  We  heard  him,  when  he  lifted  up
His  voice,  and  taught  the  people  patiently.
Line  upon  line,  for  they  were  slow  of  heart."
From  its  dark  depths,  the  Galilean  lake
Told  hoarsely  to  the  storm-cloud,  how  he  dealt
Bread  to  the  famish'd  throng,  with  tender  care.
Forgetting  not  the  body,  while  he  fed
The  immortal  spirit ; — how  he  stood  and  lieal'd,
Day  after  day,  till  evening  shadows  fell


MISSIONARY  I


Around  llie  pale  and  paralytic  train,

Lame,  halt,  and  blind,  and  lunatic,  who  sought

His  pitying  touch.

Mount  Olivet,  in  sighs,
Spake  moumfuUy — "  His  midnight  prayer  was  mine,
I  heard  it,  I  alone, — as  all  night  long
Upward  it  rose,  with  tears,  for  those  who  paid
His  love  with  hatred."

Kedron's  slender  rill,
That  bathed  his  feet,  as  to  his  lowly  work
Of  mercy  he  went  forth,  still  kept  his  name
Securely  hoarded  in  its  secret  fount,
A.  precious  pearl-drop  I

Sad  Gethseniane
Had  memories  that  it  falter'd  to  repeat,
Such  as  the  strengthening  angel  mark'd,  appali'd,
Finding  no  dialect  in  which  to  bear
Their  wo  to  Heaven.

Even  Calvary,  who  best
Might,  if  it  would,  our  earnest  question  solve,
Preas'd  close  its  flinty  lip,  and  shuddering  bow'd
fn  silent  dread,  remembering  how  ihc  sun
Grew  dark  at  noon-day,  and  the  sheeted  dead
Came  from  their  cleaving  aepulclues,  to  walk
Among  the  living.

But  the  bold,  bad  host,
Spirits  of  evil,  from  the  lake  of  pain.
Who  held  brief  triumph  round  the  mystic  Cross,
Bare  truthful  witness,  99  they  shrieking  fled, —


THE  FIRST  MISSIONARY.  15

"  We  know  thee  who  thou  art,  the  Christ  of  God  :"
While  Heaven,  uphfting  its  eternal  gates,
With  chant  of  cherubim  and  seraphim,
Welcomed  the  Lord  of  glory  entering  in.
His  mission  done.


"4


»      f         !


BT  MRS.  E.   R.  STEELE.
"  Kings*  daughters  were  among  thy  honorable  women." — Psalm.

Theophilus,  emperor  of  the  Romans,  wishing  to
lelect  a  wife,  commanded  the  daughters  of  his  no-
)les  to  be  collected  in  the  imperial  palace  at  Con-
itantinople,  and,  with  a  golden  apple  in  his  hand,
dowly  moved  around  the  blooming  circle.  Stopping
>efore  the  brilliant  Icasia,  he  archly  observed, —

"  Women  have  been  the  cause  of  much  evil  in  the
wrorld."

"And  surely,  sir,"  she  quickly  replied,  "they  have
ilso  been  the  cause  of  much  good  !"

This  assertion — which  cost  Icasia  a  throne,  as  the
jmperor  passed  on  and  presented  the  apple  to  the
pretty  but  silent  Theodora — ^will  be  supported  in
Jiese  pages,  where  the  essential  service  which  wo-
nan  has  rendered  towards  the  general  good,  will  be
jhown  to  be  spreading  the  gospel  truths  abroad.

Since  the  days  when  Solomon  declared  he  vainly
jought  one  virtuous  woman  in  a  thousand,  and  since
he  son  of  Sirach  told  us,  "  wickedness  comes  from


WOMAN,  THE  GOSPEL  MESSENGER.  17

woman,"  a  great  change  has  taken  place  in  her  char-
acter and  situation.  To  Christianity  is  woman  in-
debted for  a  glorious  revolution  in  her  destiny  ;  and
the  Christian  female,  no  longer  the  slave  and  play-
thing of  olden  time,  has  been  exalted  by  man  to  the
rank  of  his  friend  and  counsellor.  There  are  some
who  would  place  her  higher,  and  give  her  a  share  in
the  world's  sovereignty.  But  this  is  not  her  fitting
station ;  let  man  be  lord  of  the  creation,  since  wo-
man's God  hath  said,  "  he  shall  rule  over  thee."

Woman  has  her  own  high  and  peculiar  duties,  and
if  we  look  abroad  into  the  history  of  nations,  we
shall  see  she  has  understood  and  performed  well  her
rdl^  Christianity  having  elevated  her  position,  she
employed  her  new-found  powers  and  energies  in
spreading  its  blessed  doctrines  over  the  earth,  thus
enabling  her  sisters  of  every  clime  to  partake  in  its
inestimable  benefits.  Man  will  scarcely  credit  the
amount  of  female  service  in  the  holy  cause  of  the
gospel ;  he  will  be  surprised  when  informed  how
much  of  the  world  is  indebted  to  her  agency,  as  in-
strument of  the  Saviour  and  the  missionary's  friend,
for  the  introduction  of  Christianity

In  the  early  ages  of  our  faith,  woman  was  ever
among  its  most  zealous  converts, — "first  at  the  cross,
and  first  at  the  sepulchre," — and  when  persecution
commenced,  her  faith  was  sealed  with  her  blood.  I
could  speak  of  Prisca,  Valeria,  and  Paula,  with  many
others,  but  my  subject  would  allude  only  to  those

9*


IS  VISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

who  disseiiiinated  the  truths  of  the  Gospel  by  exam-
ple and  exertion.  The  noble  mother  of  Alexander
Severus,  Julia  Mammae,  gave  the  new  religion  most
important  support.  She  educated  her  son  as  a
Christian,  and  herself  zealously  espoused  its  cause
During  her  reign  the  Christians  enjoyed  a  welcome
repose.  They  for  the  first  time  appegired  at  court,
and  then  churches  were  first  erected.  Julia  was  a
woman  of  great  powers  of  mind.  During  Alexan-
der's minority,  she  enacted  wise  laws,  surrounded
him  with  excellent  counsellors,  and  used  him  to  sim-
ple and  virtuous  habits.  Her  attention  was  directed
to  the  improvement  of  female  manners,  and  she  abol-
ished the  custom,  practised  by  former  empressei^  of
appearing  in  the  councils  of  the  nation,  and  promul-
gated a  law  by  which  woman  was  excluded  from  the
senate.  Let  the  sins  of  Marcia  be  forgiven  when
we  remember  her  efibrts  in  this  holy  cause.  As  if
hoping  to  atone  for  her  misdeeds,  she  declared  her-
self patroness  of  the  Christians,  and  so  well  employ-
ed her  power  as  to  induce  Commodus,  the  emperor
of  Rome,  to  show  them  mercy.  By  her  influence
persecution  ceased,  and  after  having  suffered  thir-
teen years  of  tyranny  the  Christians  lived  in  peace
and  multiplied  greatly.  Like  Magdalene,  Marcia
loved  her  Saviour  much,  although  a  sinner,  and  let
us  hope  she  also  was  forgiven.

But  these  lesser  hghts  must  fade  before  the  ra-
diance which  surrounds  the  pious  Empress  Helena,


WOMAN,  TH£  GOSPEL  MESSENGER.  19

mother  of  the  great  Constantine.  She  was  a  zeal-
ous Christian,  and  in  the  conversion  of  her  son  en-
sured that  of  the  Roman  world.  When  Helena
went  into  retirement,  Constantine  shared  with  his
mother  her  sorrow  and  loneliness  ;  and  neither  those
days  of  gloom,  nor  his  subsequent  exaltation  to  a
throne,  could  shake  the  faith  instilled  by  Helena.
Constantine  gloried  in  the  religion  of  Christ.  He
publicly  proclaimed  it  in  the  senate,  bore  the  initials
of  his  Saviour's  name  as  a  monogram  upon  his  ban-
ner, as  the  sign  by  which  he  hoped  to  conquer ;
placed  his  statue  in  Rome,  bearing  aloft  the  cross ;
and  by  his  decrees  secured  the  civil  and  religious
rights  of  the  Christians.  During  the  reign  of  the
son  of  Helena,  Christianity  became  so  firmly  rooted,
that  not  all  the  efforts  of  the  apostate  Julian  could
accomplish  its  overthrow.  The  pious  Helena,  in  the
midst  of  all  the  splendor  with  which  her  son  could  sur-
round her,  never  forgot  Him  who  was  her  friend  and
supporter  in  adversity.  With  this  feeling  of  rever-
ence strong  in  her  bosom,  she  undertook  a  weary
pilgrimage,  to  look  upon  that  land  where  her  Saviour
had  suflfered  and  died  for  her.  In  Jerusalem,  upon
Mount  Olivet,  on  Calvary,  and  Sinai,  and  other  con-
secrated spots  in  the  Holy  Land,  she  erected  churches
and  convents,  adorned  with  rare  marbles,  gold,  and
mosaic,  as  monuments  to  direct  the  pious  traveller  to
the  spot  where  the  wondrous  events  recorded  in  Holy
Writ  had  taken  place.     Some  have  thought  this  an


20  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

example  and  -precedent  for  much  of  that  mummery
and  trade  in  relics  which,  with  other  corruptions,
have  since  darkened  the  Christian  reHgion ;  but  the
advantages  of  having  these  interesting  places  thus
early  marked  out  will  cancel  this,  and  thousands
have  felt  their  faith  assured,  and  hopes  confirmed,
and  hearts  refreshed,  while  gazing  upon  these  sacred
stations.  A  late  traveller,  in  gratitude  to  Helena,
conferred  upon  her  the  glorious  title  of  "  Mother  of
the  Holy  Land."

Among  the  most  devoted  adherents  of  the  Cross,
let  not  Pulcheria,  virgin  empress  of  Rome,  be  for-
gotten. What  a  contrast  is  the  pure  and  useful  life
of  this  first  reigning  Christian  empress,  to  that  of  the
debased  pagan  princes  who  reigned  before  her  !  The
court  of  her  father  Arcadius  was,  perhaps,  more  lux-
urious and  more  magnificent  than  that  of  any  of  his
Caesar  predecessors,  yet  this,  Pulcheria  renounced,
and  turning  from  all  those  worldly  pleasures,  which
her  youth,  her  beauty,  and  rank  might  have  com-
manded, she  consecrated  herself  to  a  life  of  celibacy,
devotion,  and  good  works.  At  the  age  of  sixteen
she  received  the  title  of  Augusta,  which  she  valued
only  as  placing  more  power  and  wealth  at  her  dis-
posal, to  be  employed  in  furtherance  of  the  gospel.
In  the  presence  of  the  assembled  people,  Pulcheria,
with  her  sisters  Arcadia  and  Marina,  to  whom  she
had  communicated  a  knowledge  of  a  Saviour,  pub-
licly dedicated  themselves  to  the   service  of  their


WOMAN,   THE  GOSPEL  MESSENGER.  21

Redeemer.  Their  solemn  vow  of  religion  and  celi-
bacy was  engraved  upon  a  tablet  of  gold  and  gems,
and  placed  in  the  church  of  Saint  Sophia,  in  Con-
stantinople. This  resolution  was  celebrated  through-
out the  empire  as  a  "  sublime  effort  of  Christian
piety."  These  vows  were  deemed  necessary,  in  that
corrupt  age,  to  strike  the  attention  of  the  pagan  peo-
ple, and  to  keep  the  new  convert  from  all  contact
with  a  vicious  society.  Such  monastic  severity  and
celibacy,  in  our  day  is  not  called  for.  Pulcheria,  in
her  palace,  led  a  solitary,  but  not  a  useless  life.  She
occupied  herself  with  many  Christian  works,  at  home
and  abroad,  and  devoted  herself  particularly  to  the
education  of  her  brother  Theodosius,  who,  under  her
wise  tuition,  became  chaste,  temperate,  liberal,  and
merciful.  The  flame  of  paganism  was  then  flicker-
ing in  the  socket,  and  in  the  reign  of  Pulcheria  and
Theodosius  it  expired.  The  imperial  treasures  were
appropriated  to  religious  purposes  ;  while  institutions
for  the  poor  and  the  stranger,  and  many  magnificent
churches,  attest  the  ardent  faith  and  Christian  zeal
of  Rome's  first  female  sovereign,  the  pious  Empress
Pulcheria.

The  Gospel  was  carried  to  benighted  Russia  by
Olga,  queen  of  that  land.  Through  her  efforts  alone
Christianity  was  introduced  into  that  vast  region,
which  was  then  devoted  to  a  debasing  superstition.
She  had  heard — perhaps  through  some  of  her  pirati-
cal subjects  when  returned  from  a  predatory  excur-


22  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

sion,  or  some  wandering  missionary — of  a  new  and
purer  religion  which  was  acknowledged  by  the  em-
pire of  Rome,  and  as  Christianity  is  always  warmly
welcomed  by  the  female  heart,  she  was  anxious  to
behold  its  benign  influence  shed  upon  her  savage  peo-
ple. For  that  object  the  princess  resolved  to  visit
Constantinople.  The  Russians  had  made  them-
selves feared  by  the  Greeks,  who  looked  with  super-
stitious dread  upon  those  "  arctic  fleets,"  and  count-
less savage  hordes  pouring  from  the  dark  and  un-
known regions  of  the  north  to  ravage  their  borders,
and  they  were  well  pleased  with  the  prospect  of
their  conversion.  The  Emperor  Porphyrogenitus
resolved  to  receive  the  Russian  queen  with  all  the
honor  and  pomp  which  he  thought  would  best  im-
press her  with  an  idea  of  his  power  and  magnifi-
cence. Chariots  of  silver  and  gold,  surrounded  with
purple  curtains,  drawn  by  oxen  covered  with  trap-
pings of  scarlet  cloth  and  jewels,  awaited  to  conduct
Queen  Olga  and  her  train  to  the  imperial  residence.
The  rude  pagans  gazed  with  surprise  at  the  splendid
marble  palaces  and  churches,  and  the  Hippodrome
with  its  obelisk,  and  circle  of  bronze  chariots  each
bearing  a  statue  of  some  famous  hero.

Arrived  at  the  palace,  they  beheld,  through  a  long
vista  of  glittering  guards,  the  Emperor  Constantino
surrounded  by  his  richly  apparelled  nobles,  seated
upon  a  golden  throne,  arrayed  in  robes  of  scarlet,
embroidered  with  golden  dragons.     Two  lions  of


WOMAN,  THE  GOSPEL  MESSENGER.  23

gold  Stood  one  upon  each  side  of  the  throne,  which,
worked  by  unseen  machinery,  roared  aloud  at  the
approach  of  the  strangers,  while  a  grove  of  trees
behind  the  monarch,  formed  of  gold,  resounded  with
the  melody  of  the  gemmed  birds  which  ornamented
the  branches.  Carpets  of  glowing  dyes,  Tyrian
tapestry,  and  columns  of  marble,  supporting  a  ceil-
ing studded  with  stars  and  moon  of  gold,  added  to
the  magnificence  of  the  imperial  palace.

Like  Queen  Sheba  of  old,  Olga  came  with  a  state-
ly retinue  from  afar  to  visit  the  monarch ;  but  not,
like  the  Arabian  queen,  to  mark  his  wisdom,  nor  look
upon  his  glorious  array ;  a  "  greater  than  Solomon"
she  came  to  seek,  and  by  Him,  her  heavenly  Lord,
was  she  graciously  received.

Christianity,  at  first,  spread  slowly  in  Russia,  its
progress  being  retarded  by  Olga's  grandson.  Prince
Walodirair,  a  fanatic  follower  of  the  barbarous  wor-
ship of  his  fathers.  Here  again  we  behold  woman
by  her  gentle  influence  smoothing  the  path  for  the
missionaries  of  the  cross.  Walodimir  loved  Anne,
daughter  of  the  Emperor  Romanus,  and  threatened
war  if  denied  the  princess,  but  promised  to  support
Christianity  if  she  were  given  to  him.  The  gentle
Anne  shuddered  at  the  idea  of  a  pagan  husband,  but
she  was  a  zealous  Christian,  and  when  the  hope  of
'  his  conversion  was  placed  before  her  she  dared  not
hesitate.  Anne  left  her  home,  and  the  luxurious  pa-
lace of  her  fathers  at  Constantinople,  for  a  sad  exile


24  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

among  a  rude  people  in  a  savage  clime.  Her  self-
denial  was  rewarded.  God  touched  the  heart  of  her
pagan  lord  while  he  listened  to  the  Gospel,  now  first
heard  by  him,  and  he  became  a  sincere  Christian.
His  once  worshipped  god  of  Thunder,  Peroun,  was
torn  from  his  throne,  dragged  with  ignominy  through
llie  streets,  and  then  cast  into  the  Borysthenes.  Wa-
lodimir,  once  the  enemy  of  the  gospel,  so  exerted
himself  in  its  cause,  that  he  has  gone  down  to  pos-
terity with  the  glorious  title  of  **  Apostle  of  Russia."

Who  has  not  heard  of  the  noble  Bertha,  through
whose  means,  under  Providence,  Christianity  was
introduced  into  England  ?  It  is  true  Claudia  was  the
first  convert  to  the  new  religion  among  the  ancient
Britons,  and  with  Eigen,  daughter  of  Caractacus,
aided  in  its  dissemination  among  her  countrymen ;
but  her  race  was  swept  away,  or  pent  up  in  the
mountains  of  Wales,  by  the  Saxons,  whose  barba-
rous worship  became  the  religion  of  England.  That
fierce  idolatry,  dear  as  it  was  to  the  Saxons,  as  being
the  faith  of  their  ancestors,  was  overthrown  by  the
zealous  efforts  of  the  pious  Princess  Bertha.

Bertha  was  a  descendant  of  Queen  Clotilda,  of
France.  Here  is  seen  how  far  the  circle  may  extend
which  receives  its  impetus  from  a  single  individual.
Clotilda  was  wife  of  Clovis,  king  of  the  Franks,
daughter  of  the  dethroned  Chilperic,  and  niece  of
Gondebald,  king  of  Burgundy.  She  was  a  devoted
Christian,  and  labored  to  convert  her  husband  to  the


WOMAN,  THE  GOSPEL  MESSENGER.  25

same  faith.  In  her,  Clovis  beheld  such  '^  beauty  of
holiness,"  suid  such  Christian  purity,  as  induced  him
to  Usten  to  her  persuasions  and  turn  his  attention  to
that  new  reUgion  which  had  so  exalted  the  character
of  his  wife.  Dreading  the  disapprobation  of  his
idolatrous  subjects,  he  hesitated  to  declare  his  senti-
ments. At  the  battle  of  Talbaic,  when  he  saw  his
soldiers  flying  before  the  enemy,  and  found  he  had
called  upon  his  pagan  gods  in  vain,  he  remembered
the  Deity  to  whom  his  wife  had  so  often  directed  his
thoughts :

"  O  God  of  Clotilda !"  he  cried,  raising  his  eyes
to  heaven,  "  give  me  the  victory,  and  I  will  believe,
and  be  baptized  in  thy  name  !"  He  who  hears  our
prayers,  imperfect  as  they  are,  Ustened  to  Clovis,
rescued  him  from  his  danger,  and  enabled  him  to  re-
turn victorious.

Rheims  then  beheld  a  more  glorious  pageant  than
any  that  in  later  years  has  graced  its  lofty  walls.
King  Clovis,  his  sister  Albofleda,  wife  of  Theodoric,
and  three  thousand  weirriors  were  baptized.  How
swelled  the  heart  of  Clotilda  then,  while  gazing  upon
this  band  of  warlike  idolaters,  and  upon  her  beloved
ones,  all  brought  to  the  foot  of  the  cross  by  her  hand  !
What  joy  and  gratitude  filled  her  bosom  at  being  thus
the  chosen  instrument  of  her  Saviour !  Their  man-
tles of  state  and  ghttering  armor,  laid  aside  for  bap-
tismal robes  of  purest  white,  the  new  converts  pledged

themselves  soldiers  of  Christ.     The  soul  of  Clotilda

3


26  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

was  lifted  up  on  high ;  in  heaven-sent  visions  she  be
held  the  future,  v^rhen  she  and  all  that  multitude  should
meet  again, — again  should  stand  before  their  Sover-
eign's throne  arrayed  in  white  celestial  garments,  and
see  Him,  not  with  the  eye  of  faith  alone,  but  "  see
him  as  he  is."  The  conversion  of  Clovis  was  yet
too  recent  to  smooth  away  all  the  asperities  of  a  pa-
gan life.  Soon  after  his  baptism  a  sermon  was
preached  at  Rheims,  by  Remigius,  in  which  was
eloquently  described  the  sufferings  and  death  of
Christ.  Clovis  suddenly  started  up,  and  seizing  his
spear,  exclaimed  aloud :  "  O  that  I  and  my  valiant
Franks  had  been  there,  and  I  would  have  rescued
him!"

The  Christian  religion  thus  established  in  France,
was  professed  by  King  Caribert,  father  of  Bertha.
Ethelbert,  Saxon  king  of  Kent,  sought  the  princess
in  marriage,  and  although  it  grieved  the  pious  Bertha
to  become  the  wife  of  an  idolater,  she  duteously  sub-
mitted to  her  father's  commands.  She  consented  to
marry  Ethelbert,  upon  the  condition  that  she  should
be  allowed  to  practise  her  own  religious  rites.  Re-
ceiving this  permission,  she  espoused  Ethelbert.  The
Saxon  king  respected  his  wife's  faith,  and  caused  an
edifice  to  be  provided  in  which  she  might  worship
after  her  own  fashion.  Here,  in  the  little  church  of
St.  Martin,  the  pious  queen  "  sang  the  Lord's  song
in  a  strange  land,"  surrounded  by  a  small  congrega-
tion consisting  of  her  attendants  and  the  few  con-


WOMAN,  THE  GOSPEL  MESSENGER.  27

verts  whom  her  zealous  efforts  had  assembled.  The
Christianity  thus  estabUshed  was  certainly  corrupted
firom  the  purity  of  the  apostolic  ages ;  the  seed,  how-
ever, thus  planted,  God  in  his  own  time  caused  to
bring  forth  rich  fruit.

Soon  after  these  events  Augustin  arrived  in  Eng-
land as  a  missionary  of  the  Gospel,  and  then  did  Ber-
tha reap  a  high  reward  for  her  religious  constancy.
She  had  "  kept  the  faith,"  notwithstanding  the  per-
suasions of  love,  or  scorn  of  her  new  people,  and
she  now  experienced  the  heartfelt  gratification  of  see-
ing her  husband  kneel  with  her  at  her  own  shrine.
The  religion  which  Augustin  came  to  teach,  having
already  obtained  entrance  into  the  country  through
the  queen,  and  warmly  recommended  by  the  king  of
France,  ensured  him  a  favorable  reception.  Ethei-
bert,  through  his  wife's  teaching,  was  an  almost
Christian,  but,  like  Clovis,  dreaded  the  disturbance
his  change  of  religion  would  create  among  his  sub-
jects. As  it  turned  out,  this  "  lion  in  the  way,"  like
many  people's  lions,  was  a  creature  of  imagination
only.

The  Saxons,  and  many  other  barbarous  nations,
believed  the  rapid  spread  of  Christianity  was  in  con-
sequence of  magic  exercised  by  its  ministers.  To
avert  this,  it  was  resolved  to  receive  the  deputation
in  the  open  air,  enchantments  being  thought  thus  less
effective.

Upon  a  shady  spot,  outside  the  city  of  Canter-


28  MISSIONART  MEMORIAL.

bury,  sat  Ethelbert  and  his  queen,  surrounded  by  all
the  nobles  of  his  court.  A  procession  approached,
chanting  a  solemn  anthem ;  at  its  head  the  mission-
ary Augustin  advanced,  bearing  a  large  silver  cross,
followed  by  a  train  carrying  banners,  upon  one  of
which  was  a  picture  of  Christ.  This  show  was,  in
barbarous  ages,  deemed  advisable  to  catch  the  eye
of  these  rude  pagans,  whose  attention  once  gained,
a  better  hearing  was  ensured.  Ethelbert  received
the  missionary  of  his  wife's  religion  with  courtesy,
listened  to  his  arguments,  could  not  deny  their  truth,
and  Augustin  completed  what  Bertha  had  begun.

Ethelburga,  daughter  of  Bertha,  married  Edwin,
king  of  Northumbria,  and,  like  her  mother,  continued
firm  in  her  faith.  She  also  converted  her  husband
aftd  people.  Mercia  also  received  the  truth  through
the  efforts  of  a  woman — ^great-granddaughter  of  Ber-
tha. Peada,  king  of  that  country,  became  enamored
of  Ahlfleda,  daughter  pf  Edwin  and  Ethelburga,  but
she  refused  to  marry  a  worshipper  of  Odin,  even  with
the  permission  of  practising  her  own  religion.  Her
firmness  induced  Peada  to  inquire  into  that  new  re-
ligion which  enabled  a  young  and  timid  girl  to  resist
the  enchantments  of  a  throne,  and  of  love.  He  re-
ceived the  reward  promised  to  those  who  seek,  and
found  the  pearl  of  great  price.  Peada  became  a
Christian,  married  the  princess,  and  through  their  in-
fluence Sussex,  the  only  unconverted  kingdom  of  the
Anglo-Saxons,  received  the  faith.     Thus  in  a  short


WOMAN,  THE  GOSPEL  MESSENGER.  29

time  after  the  arriyal  of  Bertha  in  England,  through
her  efforts  and  those  of  her  descendants,  as  humble
instruments  of  a  higher  hand,  were  the  altars  of  the
Scandinavian  gods  overthrown,  and  Christianity  es-
tabUshed  as  the  religion  of  llie  Anglo-Saxons.

History  tells  us  also  of  Poland,  Christianized  by
a  daughter  of  the  king  of  Bohemia,  who  induced  her
husband;;  a  Polish  king,  to  be  baptized  in  her  religion.
His  people  followed  his  example  :

Of  Bulgaria,  the  wild  fierceness  of  whose  people,
the  terror  of  surrounding  nations,  was  subdued,  and
Christianity  introduced,  by  Bogoris,  sister  of  the
king,  who  received  the  faith  at  Constantinople,  and
succeeded  in  converting  her  brother  and  his  people  :

Of  Hungary,  whose  king,  Geysa,  married  Sarolta,
a  Bavarian  princess^  and  was  induced  by  her  clear
exhibitions  of  gospel  truths  to  become  a  Christian :

Of  Lithuania,  the  sovereign  of  whose  country,
Jagellon,  loved  the  beautiful  Hedwiga,  heiress  to  the
throne  of  Poland,  who,  refusing  to  marry  him,  he
abjured  his  pagan  gods,  and  joined  his  duchy  to  the
kingdom  of  his  bride,  which  became  a  Christian
nation :

Of  Denmark,   converted    to   Christianity  by  its

queen,   Thyra,  who  prevailed  upon  her  husband,

Gomi,  to  permit  the  missionaries  of  Christ  to  enter

the  kingdom,  and  thus  introduced  Christianity  into

that  country  and  Jutland.

The  Christian  religion  had  been  introduced  into

3*


30  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Norway,  but  without  success,  until  the  celebrated
Olaf  Triggvason  married  the  pious  Princess  Gyda,
when  he  became  a  convert  and  overthrew  the  altars
of  Odin.

I  could  speak  of  mafty  more  exalted  and  pious
women,  and  martyrs,  but  enough  has  been  said  to
prove  the  truth  of  my  previous  assertion,  and  to  ex-
emplify the  words  of  a  celebrated  historian,  who  tells
us :  "  Christianity  has,  in  every  age,  acknowledged
its  important  obUgations  to  woman."

O  ye  my  sisters  of  every  clime  !  may  ye  know  the
power  and  influence  which  are  youfs,  and  may  ye
exert  it  as  these  exalted  females  have  done  before
you!

Not  alone  on  pagan  shores,  but  around  you,  in
your  dearest  circle,  you  will  find  a  field  ripe  for  the
harvest.

All  those  "  honorable  women"  whose  deeds  I  have
narrated — Bertha,  Helena,  Pulcheria — are  shining  a
brilliant  galaxy  on  high,  with  a  countless  starry  host
of  witnesses  besides.  See  !  from  the  celestial  city
they  are  gazing  down  upon  you !  While,  pointing
to  a  glorious  cross  on  high,  they  seem  to  say,  in  the
words  of  Constantino — "  In  this  sign  you  shall
conquer."


21  iMcmorial.


BY  JOHN  O.  WHITTIER.


Damibl  Whbblbr,  a  minister  of  the  Society  of  Friends,  and  who  had  la-
iNnred  in  the  cause  of  his  Divine  Bfaster  in  Great  Britain,  Russia,  and  the  isl.
ands  o€  the  Pacific,  died  in  New  York,  in  the  sfning  of  1840,  while  on  a  re-
lifions  visit  to  this  country.


Oh,  dearly  loved !
And  worthy  of  our  love  ! — No  more
Thy  aged  form  shall  rise  before
The  hush'd  and  waiting  worshipper,
In  meek  obedience  utterance  giving
To  words  of  truth,  so  fresh  and  living,
That,  even  to  the  inward  sense,
They  bore  unquestion'd  evidence
Of  an  anointed  Messenger  !
Or,  bowing  down  thy  silver  hair
In  reverent  awfulness  of  prayer —

The  world,  its  time  and  sense,  shut  out —
The  brightness  of  Faith's  holy  trance
Gathered  upon  thy  countenance.

As  if  each  lingering  cloud  of  doubt —
The  cold,  dark  shadows  resting  here
In  Time's  unluminous  atmosphere —


MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Were  lifted  by  an  angel's  hand,
And  through  them  on  thy  spiritual  eye
Shone  down  the  blessedness  on  high,

The  glory  of  the  Better  Land !

t    The  oak  has  fallen  !
While,  meet  for  no  good  work,  the  vine
May  yet  its  worthless  branches  twine.
Who  knoweth  not  that  with  thea  fell
A  great  man  in  our  Israel  ?
Fallen,  while  thy  loins  were  girded  still.

Thy  feet  with  Zion's  dews  still  wet.

And  in  thy  hand  retaining  yet
The  Pilgrim's  staff  and  scallop-shell !
Unharm'd  and  safe,  where,  wild  and  &ee.

Across  the  Neva's  cold  morass
The  breezes  from  the  Frozen  Sea

With  winter's  arrowy  keenness  pass ;
Or,  where  the  unwaming  tropic  gale
Smote  to  the  waves  thy  tatter'd  sail,
Or,  where  the  noon-houj's  fervid  heat
Against  Tahiti's  mountains  beat ;

The  same  mysterious  hand  which  gave

DeUverance  upon  land  and  wave,
Temper'd  for  thee  the  blasts  which  blew

Ladoga's  frozen  surface  o'er.
And  bless'd  for  thee  the  baleful  dew

Of  evemng  upon  Eimeo's  shore.
Beneath  this  sunny  heaven  of  ours.


A  MEMORIAL.  d3

Midst  our  soft  airs  and  opening  flowers
Hath  given  thee  a  grave  !

His  will  be  done,
Who  seeth  not  as  man,  whose  way

Is  not  as  ours  ! — 'Tis  well  with  thee  !
Nor  anxious  doubt  nor  dark  dismay
Disquieted  thy  closing  day,
But,  evermore,  thy  soul  could  say,

"  My  Father  careth  still  for  me  !"
Call'd  from  thy  hearth  and  home — ^from  her,

The  last  bud  on  thy  household  tree.
The  last  dear  one  to  minister

In  duty  and  in  love  to  thee,
From  all  which  nature  holdeth  dear,

Feeble  with  years  and  worn  with  pain

To  seek  our  distant  land  again.
Bound  in  the  spirit,  yet  unknowing

The  things  which  should  befall  thee  here,

Whether  for  labor  or  for  death.
In  child-like  trust  serenely  going

To  that  last  trial  of  thy  faith  !

Oh,  far  away.
Where  never  shines  our  Northern  star

On  that  dark  waste  which  Balboa  saw
From  Darien's  mountains  stretching  far,
So  strange,  heaven-broad,  and  lone,  that  there
With  forehead  to  its  damp  wind  bare


MBMDRIAI,.

He  bent  his  mailed  knee  in  a^ve ;
In  many  an  isle  whose  coral  feet
The  surges  of  that  ocean  beat,
In  thy  palm-shadows,  Oahu,

And  Honolulu's  silver  bay,
Amidst  Owhyiiee's  hills  of  blue,

And  taro-plains  of  Tooboonai,
Are  gentle  hearts,  which  long  shall  be
Sad  as  our  own  at  thought  of  thee, —
Worn  sowers  of  Truth's  holy  seed,
Whose  souls  iii  weariness  and  need

Were  strengthen'd  and  refresh'd  by  thine,
For,  blessed  by  our  Father's  hand.

Was  thy  deep  love  and  tender  care,

Thy  ministry  and  fervent  prayer —

Grateful  as  Eshcol's  cluster'd  vine
To  Israel  in  a  weary  land !

And  they  who  drew
By  thousands  round  thee,  in  the  hour

Of  prayerful  waiting,  hush'd  and  deep,

That  He  who  bade  the  islands  keep
Silence  before  Him,  might  renew

Their  strength  with  His  unslumbering  powei.
They  too  shall  mourn  that  thou  art  gone,

That  never  more  thy  aged  lip
Shall  soothe  the  weak,  the  erring  warn,
Of  those  who  firat,  rejoicing,  heard
Throu^  thee  the  Gospel's  glorious  word —


A  MEMORIAL.  85

Seals  of  thy  true  apostleship.
And,  if  the  brightest  diadem

Whose  gems  of  glory  purely  bum

Around  the  ransom'd  ones  in  bliss
Be  evermore  reserved  for  them

Who  here,  through  toil  and  sorrow,  turn

Many  to  righteousness, —
May  we  not  think  of  thee,  as  wearing
That  star-like  crown  of  hght,  and  bearing.
Amidst  Heaven's  white  and  bUssfiil  band.
The  fadeless  palm-branch  in  thy  hand ;
And  joining  with  a  seraph's  tongue
In  that  new  song  the  elders  sung,
Ascribing  to  its  blessed  Giver
Thanksgiving,  love,  and  praise  forever !

Farewell ! —
And  though  the  ways  of  Zion  mourn
When  her  strong  ones  are  call'd  away,
Who  like  thyself  have  calmly  borne
The  heat  and  burden  of  the  day,
Yet  He  who  slumbereth  not  nor  sleepeth
His  ancient  watch  around  us  keepeth ;
Still  sent  from  His  creating  hand.
New  witnesses  for  Truth  shall  stand —
New  instruments  to  sound  abroad
The  Gospel  of  a  risen  Lord ;

To  gather  to  the  fold  once  more,
The  desolate  and  gone  astray,


B  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Tlie  scattered  of  a  cloudy  day,

And  Zion's  broken  walls  restore  !
And,  through  the  travail  and  the  toil

Of  true  obedience,  minister
Beauty  for  ashes,  and  the  oil

Of  joy  for  mourning,  unto  her !
So  shall  her  holy  bounds  increase
With  walls  of  praise  and  gates  of  peace  :
So  shall  the  Vine,  which  martyr  tears
And  blood  sustained  in  other  years,

With  fresher  life  be  clothed  upon ;
And  to  the  world  in  beauty  show
Like  the  rose-plant  of  Jericho,

And  glorious  as  Lebanon !


Si)e  H^nifvotal  3nfintntt  of  iHiBBionB.

BY  THE  REY.  ERSKINE  MASON,  D.  D.

We  live  in  an  interesting,  because  eventful  age.
Occurrences  are  continually  taking  place  which  ar-
rest attention,  as  well  on  account  of  their  suddenness
as  their  importance,  seeming  to  indicate  the  approach
of  the  world  to  some  great  crisis  in  its  history.  In
this  respect,  the  present  is  more  distinctly  marked
than  the  past,  and  the  future  will  be  more  marked
than  the  present,  as  the  lines  of  God's  providence
converge  more  rapidly  to  the  point  in  which  they  are
all  ultimately  to  terminate.  Every  new  phase  in  the
aspect  of  human  things,  imposes  some  new  obliga-
tion, and  wisdom  is  deriving  instruction  continually
from  the  signs  of  the  times.  We  learn  generally
what  duty  is,  from  the  oracles  of  God ;  we  must  learn
what  are  appropriate  duties,  at  any  given  time,  from
the  particular  developments  of  Providence  by  which
that  time  is  marked.

In  view  of  the  characteristics  of  the  present  event-
ful age,  the  Christian  world  has  been  awakened  to  a
sense  of  the  obligation  which  these  characteristics

4


38  MIS8I0VART  MEMORIAL.


•


impose ;  and  believing  that  the  great  point  in  -which
all  the  lines  of  divine  Providence  are  to  tenninate —
the  issue  upon  which  all  events  are  directly  or  indi-
rectly bearing,  is  the  final  triumph  of  the  Gospel,  the
perfect  establishment  of  the  Redeemer's  kingdom
in  the  world,  the  claims  of  benevolent  effort  assume
a  peculiar  importance,  and  plans  of  usefulness  are
projected  and  prosecuted  with  zeal,  taking  advantage
of  events,  and  having  direct  reference  to  the  spread
of  the  Gospel.

It  can  hardly  be  supposed  of  a  Christian  observer
of  the  signs  of  the  times,  that  he  should  be  indiffer-
ent to  any  right  form  of  Christian  effort ;  and  yet  it
may  be  possible  that,  in  some  instances,  there  may
be  hesitation  as  to  the  most  effective  methods  of  use-
fulness, and  even  a  paramount  importance  may  be
given  to  agencies  which  are  but  secondary  in  their
nature.  It  is  not  believed  that  any  one  of  the  sepa-
rate parts  in  the  great  enterprise  of  the  church  of
God,  which  are  urging  their  claims  upon  the  Chris-
tian world,  can  be  dispensed  with.  They  combine
to  form  a  consistent  whole,  and  a  relaxation  of  effort
in  any  one  department  tends  to  destroy  the  symme-
try of  the  general  arrangement,  and  diminish  its  ef-
fectiveness ;  and  yet  there  maybe  one  form  of  Chris-
tian enterprise  which,  if  not  intrinsically  more  im-
portant than  the  others,  is  so,  because  of  its  relations
to  all  the  rest — it  may  constitute  the  spring  of  the
whole  noAchineryi  without  which  it  could  never  move.


INFLinBNCB  OF  MISSIONS.  39

[f  there  is  one  point  upon  which  the  Christian  eye
should  be  intently  fixed,  it  is  undoubtedly  the  field
d  foreign  effort.  The  bearings  and  relations  of  the
foreign  missionary  work  are  such  as  to  give  it  a  com-
manding position,  and  to  claim  for  it  our  highest  in-
terest. It  is  a  very  superficial  view  of  the  whole
subject  of  Christian  effort,  which  gives  to  the  home
field  a  paramount  importance.  Plausible,  indeed,  is
it  to  say  that  we  have  all  around  us,  in  our  own  land,'
a  large  unevangelized  population,  which  claims,  as
part  and  parcel  of  ourselves— as  linked  to  us  by
strong  social  sympathies,  and  being  immediately  un-
der our  eye  and  within  our  reach— our  first  regards.
The  importance,  nay,  indispensable  necessity  on
every  account,  of  the  firm  establishment  of  the  king-
dom of  God  among  ourselves  is  not  called  in  ques-
tion ;  but  then  it  may  be  asked,  if  an  exclusive  atten-
tion to  this  one  end  alone  is  not  calculated  to  prevent
rather  than  to  secure  its  attainment  ?

There  is,  I  imagine,  a  very  mistaken  notion  preva-
lent,  and  a  very  mistaken  policy  growing  out  of  it,  as
though  there  was  an  undue  attention  given  to  the  for-
eign work,  leading  to  a  neglect  of  that  which  espe-
cially belongs  to  us,  and  which  they  who  are  at  home
imperatively  demand ;  and  efforts  to  carry  the  Gospel
to  the  heathen  are  prejudiced  in  view  of  the  numer-
ous and  pressing  claims  of  home.

In  such  reasoning,  however,  and  the  position  which
it  goes  to  estabUsh,  there  seems  to  be  an  entire  over-


40  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

sight  of  this  one  thought.  The  pecuUar  character-
istic of  the  church  of  God,  the  secret  of  its  efficiency,
and  the  element  of  its  success  in  any  department
whatever,  is  found  in  its  aggressiveness.  Progress,
advancement  to  a  given  point,  is  the  great  law  of
every  thing.  Generally  speaking,  that  which  is  al-
ready attained  is  rendered  secure  in  possession  only
by  renewed  attainments  of  the  same  kind.  The  hu-
'man  frame,  until  it  has  reached  its  maturity,  must
grow,  in  order  to  secure  a  healthy  action  of  its  pow-
ers;  if  its  general  progress  is  arrested,  there  is  no
full  development  of  any  of  its  parts,  but  a  stinted  ac-
tion which  results  in  dwarfishness.  The  mind  re-
tains its  already  acquired  stores  of  information,  only
by  means  of  constant  accessions  to  its  fund  of  know-
ledge, and  by  regular  and  unwearied  application,
preserves  the  strength  and  vigor  of  its  powers.  He
who  ceases  to  learn,  ceases  to  remember;  and  he
who  ceases  to  act,  soon  is  reduced  to  mental  im-
becihty.

So  in  human  enterprises,  whether  of  a  private  oi
national  character,  the  means  of  strength  and  per-
petuity are  means  of  progress  Ukevdse.  The  man
who  at  any  point  in  his  history  gives  himself
up  to  indolence,  generally  loses  what  by  former  en-
ergy he  had  acquired ;  and  a  people,  marked  by  in-
activity and  supineness,  very  rapidly  sinks  upon  the
scale  of  nations.

Analogy,  then,  may  throw  some  Ught  upon  the


INFLUENCE  OF  MISSIONS.  41

spiritual  and  reUgious  world ;  growth  in  grace  is  ne-
cessary to  the  maintenance  of  a  consistent  Christian
character,  and  the  church  of  God  can  hold  her  own
in  the  world  only  by  constant  accessions  to  her  num-
bers, and  constant  additions  to  the  territory  over  which
she  exercises  her  influence  :  and  it  is  not  to  be  doubts
ed,  that  if^  in  order  to  secure  what  has  already  been
attained,  she  should  cease  to  make  new  acquisitions,
she  would  soon  be  crippled  in  her  influence  at  home,
and  as  she  should  not  make  inroads  upon  the  terri-
tory of  heathenism,  heathenism  would  make  inroads
upon  the  territory  which  she  now  claims  as  her
own.

There  is  something  in  a  magnificent  enterprise
which  tends  to  enlarge  the  heart.  He  only  does
great  things  who  aims  high ;  he  only  acts  worthy  of
himself,  and  of  his  difierent  relations,  who  takes  large
and  commanding  views  of  things.  The  man  who
never  looks  farther  than  himself,  or  the  immediate
circle  in  which  he  moves,  whose  thoughts  never  go
beyond  the  boundaries  which  private  interest  has
dravni  around  him,  and  whose  plans  never  contem-
plate as  their  result  any  thing  but  self-aggrandize-
ment, never  illustrates  the  dignity  of  his  nature,  or
puts  forth  any  high  and  honorable  efibrts  :  the  heart
is  a  very  small  one  which  a  imit  fills,  and  the  ener-
gies which  it  controls  are  very  feeble,  and  its  achieve-
ments are  very  insignificant.  He  must  be  a  degraded
being,  failing  to  illustrate  the  very  characteristics  of

4*


4lH  MIBBIONABT  MEMORIAL.

lui  natora^upon  which  he  prides  himself,  or  accom-
pMsh  the  results  which  he  proposes  as  the  main  ends
of  his  existence.  So  true  is  it,  that  a  worthy  char-
acter requires  a  noble  aim,  and  nothing  but  a  grand
enterprise  can  call  out  efforts  which  honor  their  au-
thor.

The  philosophy  of  our  Saviour's  arrangement,  when
he  said  to  his  disciples  '^  the  field  is  the  world,"  and
set  before  them  its  salvation  as  the  prize  for  which
they  were  to  run,  is  perfectly  apparent.  It  was  to
give  them  an  element  of  action  and  a  motive  to  ef-
fort, which  nothing  but  an  elevated  aim  could  fur-
nish ;  and  it  is  the  desire  and  hope  of  accomplishing
the  whole  which  explains  the  busy  activity  which  at
this  moment  pervades  the  ranks  of  the  church,  and
secures  all  the  good  which  is  attained  through  her
instrumentality.  Let  her  lose  sight  of  the  salvation  of
the  whole  world,  as  her  object,  and  her  energies  are
relaxed,  and  her  steps  falter,  and  she  comes  down
firom  the  lofty  sphere  in  which  her  Master  has  placed
her,  and  exhibits  scarce  one  of  the  characteristics  by
which,  in  the  word  of  God,  she  is  distinguished.  It
is  with  the  church,  as  with  individuals ;  she  must
look  out  of,  and  beyond  herself  for  an  aim,  in  order
to  act  worthy  of  herself  and  fulfil  her  destiny.

The  philosophy  of  this  thought  is  fully  illustrated
by  history,  which,  in  the  facts  it  records,  presents  a
strikmg  commentary  upon  our  principle.  The  man
of  large  and  liberal  views,  whose  plans  of  benevo-


INFLUBNCB  OF  MISSIONS.  43

lence  are  graduated  upon  a  scale  of  vast  dimensions,
and  who  contemplates  a  great  amount  of  good  to
mankind  generally,  is  not  the  one  to  overlook  the
claims  of  individual  suffering,  however  obscure  its
subject,  which  are  brought  beneath  his  notice  and
urged  upon  his  attention.  He  who  looks  abroad
upon  the  vnde  field  of  humanity,  and  throws  the  in-
fluence of  his  kindness  over  the  whole  scene,  is  not
the  man  whose  eye  is  closed,  and  whose  heart  is
sealed  to  the  distresses  of  those  who  are  immediate-
ly about  his  person,  or  who  deals  out  in  a  stinted
measure  his  liberality  to  meet  their  wants.

So  with  the  church  of  God.  Her  enlarged  spirit
of  foreign  missions  has  ever  been  her  true  glory,  the
element  of  her  efficiency,  the  secret  of  her  success.
Wherever  it  has  prevailed,  Zion  has  "put  on  her
beautiful  garments ;"  wherever  it  has  declined  she
has  lost  her  energy,  and  seemed  as  though  smitten
by  a  paralysis  which  has  made  her  well-nigh  a  use
less  thing.  Every  man  who  regards  the  history  of
the  present  times  with  a  philosophic  eye,  knows  that,
for  all  the  plans  of  benevolent  effort  to  do  good  at
home  for  which  these  latter  days  are  so  justly  cele-
brated, we  are  indebted  to  the  revival  of  a  mission-
ary spirit  in  the  church  of  God.  It  was  when  she
began  to  look  at  the  wants  of  the  world,  that  the
wants  of  those  around  her  rose  up  distinctly  to  her
view,  and  every  new  plan  of  foreign  effort  has  given
a  new  impulse  to  domestic  enterprise,  and  the  more


44  UUBIOJXAUY  MEMORIAL.

mt  has  done  for  those  at  a  distance,  the  more  has
she  done  for  those  at  hand.

No.obsenrant  man  can  have  overlooked  the  fact,
thaty  for  the  plans  of  benevolence  which  respect  the
wants  of  home,  as  well  as  for  the  means  of  their
execution,  we  are  mainly  dependent  upon  those  who
are  planning  and  acting  for  the  world  at  large.  In
need  of  assistance  to  carry  out  any  designs  of  good,
we  apply  always  with  greatest  confidence  to  men  of
enlarged  and  liberal  views,  and  feel  that  we  can
scarcely  calculate  upon  such  as  are  fearful  of  doing
too  much.  The  men  who  think  most  and  feel  most
in  reference  to  the  world,  think  most  and  feel  most
in  reference  to  all  plans  of  good,  whatever  may  be
their  immediate  objects ;  and  he  who  gives  largely
to  carry  the  Gospel  abroad,  gives  in  proportion  to  his
ability  hi  more  to  secure  the  influence  of  the  Gos-
pel at  home,  than  he  who  withholds  his  means  from
foreign  missions,  upon  the  plea  that  the  wants  of
those  around  him  claim  all  his  benefactions.  In
short,  all  the  enterprises  for  social  good,  all  the  insti-
tutions which  have  for  their  object  the  temporal,
moral,  and  spiritual  elevation  of  the  race,  find  their
•troDgeBt  advocates  and  most  faithful  supporters
among  the  enlightened  and  efficient  firiends  of  the
foreign  missionary  work.

It  is  a  doctrine  insisted  upon  by  some„  that  all
which  is  given  to  cultivate  the  foreign  field,  must  ne-
cessarily be  subtracted  from  the  means  which  might


INTLUBNCE  OF  MISSIONS.  46

be  used  to  build  upon  the  cause  of  truth  among  those
around  us :  hence  the  maxim,  that  "  charity  begins
at  home^  is  urged  too  often  against  the  demands  for
the  good  of  heathen  lands.  The  plea,  however,  pro-
ceeds upon  the  false  assumption  that  we  have  reach-
ed the  maximum  of  benevolent  effort — that  the  source
whence  we  are  to  draw  our  means  of  usefulness,  is
like  a  reservoir  of  limited  and  ascertained  capacity,
whose  streams  must  diminish  in  volume  as  they  in-
crease in  number.

But  what  rational  man  can  suppose  that  the  means
of  the  church  of  God  are  so  stinted,  or  that  she  is
doing  now  a  tithe  of  what  she  can  do,  and  of  what
she  will  shortly  do,  in  fulfilling  the  commands  and
carrying  on  the  enterpnses  of  her  Master  ?  On  the
other  hand,  we  have  not  as  yet  at  all  developed  her
resources.  Our  experience  thus  far  has  proved,  that
the  source  of  our  means,  instead  of  being  of  limited
and  ascertained  capacity,  is  rather  like  a  living  spring
which  yields  more  and  more  as  supplies  are  drawn
from  it.  We  need  no  more  than  the  church  of  God
already  has,  to  accomplish  all  her  high  purposes ;  but
we  do  need  something  to  enlarge  her  heart,  and  draw
out  her  resources,  and  direct  the  streams  of  her  bene-
volence into  right  channels,  and  nothing  will  answer
this  end  but  the  -  spirit  of  foreign  missions ;  and  as
that  spirit  rises  higher  and  higher  in  the  bosoms  of
her  members,  means  will  not  be  wanting  for  her
work.    When  they  generally  apprehend  that  "the


■B  UiaSlONARV  MEUURIAL.

£eld  is  the  world,"  then  even  self-denial  and  eacTifice
will  be  far  more  easy  than  the  bestowment  of  the
scanty  pittance  which  is  now  consecrated  to  Christ ;
and  "Holiness  unto  the  Lord"  written  upon  evety
thing,  will  show  upon  what  principle  we  gather  our
means,  and  to  what  end  we  consecrate  them.

If  Zion,  then,  is  to  arise  and  sliine — if  the  influ-
ence of  the  gospel  is  to  spread  throughout  our  own
land — if  the  church  of  God  is  to  strengtiien  her
stakes,  and  righteousness  is  to  run  down  our  streets
tike  a  mighty  river,  it  will  be  through  the  blessing  of
God  upon  the  spirit  which  looks  over  the  world,  and
seeks  to  bring  its  countless  thousands  to  the  obe-
dience of  the  truth.


BT  JAMBS  BU88ELL  LOWELL.

It  was  past  the  hour  of  trysting,
But  she  lingered  for  him  still ;

Like  a  child,  the  eager  streamlet
Leaped  and  laughed  adown  the  hill,

Happy  to  be  free  at  twilight,
From  its  toiling  at  the  mill.

Then  the  great  moon,  on  a  sudden.
Ominous,  and  red  as  blood.

Startling  as  a  new  creation,
O'er  the  eastern  hill-top  stood,

Casting  deep  and  deeper  shadows
Through  the  mystery  of  the  wood.

Dread  closed  huge  and  vague  about  her,
And  her  thoughts  turned  fearfully

To  her  heart,  if  there  some  shelter
From  the  silence  there  might  be.

Like  dead  cedars  leaning  inland
From  the  blighting  of  the  sea.


B  MISSIOMART  MEMORIAL.

Tet  he  came  not,  and  the  stiUness
Dampened  roimd  her  Uke  a  tomb ;

She  could  feel  cold  eyes  of  spirits
Looking  on  her  through  the  gloom ;

She  could  hear  the  groping  footsteps
Of  some  blind,  gigantic  Doom.


Suddenly  the  silence  wavered
Like  a  Ught  mist  in  the  wind,

For  a  Toice  broke  gently  through  it,
Felt  like  sunshine  by  the  blind.

And  the  dread,  like  mist  in  sunUght,
Furled  serenely  from  her  mind.

"  Once,  my  love,  my  love  forever,
Flesh  or  spirit,  still  the  same,

If  I  missed  the  hour  of  trysting,
Do  not  think  my  faith  to  blame, —

I,  alas,  was  made  a  captive.
As  from  Holy  Land  I  came.

^'  On  a  green  spot  in  the  desert.
Gleaming  like  an  emerald  star.

Where  a  palin-tree,  in  lone  silence
Teaming  for  its  mate  afar.

Droops  above  a  silver  runnel,
Slender  as  a  scimetar,


THB    CAPTIVE.  49

"  There  thou'lt  find  the  humble  postern

To  the  castle  of  my  foe ;  .
If  thy  love  bum  clear  and  faithful,

Strike  the  gateway  green  and  low,
Ask  to  enter,  and  the  warder

Surely  will  not  say  thee  no.


"  Wrap  around  me,  for  an  instant,
The  warm  lustre  of  thine  eyes.

Coldly  gleams  this  northern  moonlight,
Coldly  bend  these  northern  skies, —

Ah,  farewell !  I  hear  the  matins
Sung  e'en  now  in  Paradise."

Slept  again  the  aspen  silence,
But  her  loneliness  was  o'er ;

Round  her  heart  a  motherly  patience
Wrapt  its  arms  for  evermore ;

From  her  soul  ebb'd  back  the  sorrow.
Leaving  smooth  the  golden  shore.

Donned  she  now  the  pilgrim  scallop.
Took  the  pilgrim  staff  in  hand ;

Like  a  cloud-shade,  flitting  eastward.
Wandered  she  o'er  sea  and  land ;

Her  soft  footsteps  in  the  desert
Fell  like  cool  rain  on  the  sand.

5


\


^  MISSIONAKY  MEMORIAL.

Air-nmg  bells  of  convents  faintly
Chimed  sometimes  from  out  the  sky,

Haply  from  those  ghostly  cities
Which  she  saw  before  her  fly.

Frail  as  are  the  tall  sand-pillars
Of  the  mad  wind's  masonry.


Soon  beneath  the  palm-tree's  shadow,
Knelt  ihe  at  the  postern  low ;

And  thereat  she  knocketh  gently,
Fearing  much  the  warder's  no ;

All  her  heart  stood  still  and  listen'd,
As  the  door  swung  backward  slow.

Saw  she  there  no  surly  warder,
With  an  eye  like  bolt  and  bar ;

Through  her  soul  a  sense  of  music
Throbbed, — and,  like  a  guardian  Lar,

On  the  threshold  stood  an  angel,
Bright  and  silent  as  a  star.

Fairest  seemed  he  of  God's  seraphs,

And  her  spirit,  lily-wise.
Blossomed  when  he  turned  upon  her

The  deep  welcome  of  his  eyes.
Sending  upward  to  that  sunlight

AH  its  dew  for  sacrifice.


THE    CAPTIVE.  61

Then  she  heard  a  voice  come  onward,

Singing  with  a  rapture  new,
As  Eve  heard  the  songs  in  Eden,

Dropping  earthward  with  the  dew ;
Well  she  knew  the  happy  singer,

Well  the  happy  song  she  knew.


Forward  leaped  she  o'er  the  threshold.

Eager  as  a  gleaming  surf ;
Fell  from  her  the  spirit's  languor,

Fell  from  her  the  body's  scurf ;
Underneath  the  palm,  some  Arabs

Found  a  corpse  upon  the  turf.


r


i5l)f  tDiniiB.


To  look  upon  creation  and  feel  your  heart  more
sensibly  affected  by  one  object  than  another,  seems
a  proYe  an  imperfect  organization  which  debars
pu  from  appreciating  the  entire  bounties  of  the
Creator.  It  ia  very  evident  that  the  blind  can  never
t>e  delighted  by  the  beauties  of  color,  nor  the  deaf
comprehend  the  charms  of  music.  Some  men  fall
into  ecstasies  at  the  sight  of  a  distant  mountain,
while  others  experience  a  singular  pleasure  in  gazing
open  the  sea.  For  my  part,  I  do  not  know  what  par-
ticular organs  may  lack  their  edge  in  my  composition,
nnce  I  cannot  be  sensible  of  the  want  of  what  I  never
enjoyed.  But  I  have  ever  been  conscious  of  a  pe-
culiar gratification  in  the  feel  of  the  wind  that  I  never
experienced  from  any  other  cause.  I  have  often
sought  pleasure  from  this  source,  when  I  was  scarce-
ly sensible  of  the  motive  which  influenced  me.  When
a  very  small  boy,  I  used  to  climb  to  the  top  of  high
bills  for  the  pleasure  of  reveUing  in  the  fresh  breeze
as  it  flew  by ;  and  my  first  dream  of  freedom  was


THE   WINDS.  53

the  open  sea,  where  there  was  nothing  between  me
and  the  wmds.  Many  a  time  have  I  wished  myself
one  of  tlje  dwarf  cedars  that  fringed  the  bleak  hill  at
the  back  of  my  father's  house, — the  winds  seemed
to  take  such  delight  in  rustling  through  them.  Many
a  winter's  night  in  my  boyhood  have  I  heard  the
nor'westers  carousing  in  the  forest,  roaring  and
screeching  among  their  dry  branches,,  and  wished
myself  among  them.  It  never  mattered  whence  came
the  wind  if  it  only  came  strong  and  fresh,  although  I
confess  to  a  partiality  for  a  sou'wester.  There  is
such  grandeur  and  majesty  in  him,  such  determina-
tion in  his  gradual  development,  as  though  he  felt  his
power,  and  let  himself  out  by  degrees  on  purpose  to
keep  your  curiosity  on  the  stretch  to  know  to  what
lengths  he  really  intended  to  go.  For  you  can  never
know  how  strong  a  souVester  is  until  he  begins  to
hold  up.  While  he  blows,  he  goes  on  increasing.
Very  diflferent  is  it  with  a  nor'wester,  who  comes
tearing  and  shrieking,  with  his  best  foot  foremost,
without  warning  or  preparation,  and  then  sneaks  off
like  a  boaster  and  a  craven.  But  nor'westers  have  a
considerable  capacity  for  mischief,  blusterers  as  they
are,  and,  of  a  winter  night,  they  set  the  whole  world
a-screeching.  Even  at  sea,  where,  it  might  be  sup-
posed, the  dampness  of  the  air  would  blunt  the  edge
of  every  thing,  they  dry  up  the  cordage,  and  cat-
heads, and  davits,  until  they  make  a  noise  as  sharp
and  piercing  as  though  they  were  rustling  through


14  MISSIOKASY  MEMORIAL.

Ley-holes  and  broken  panes  of  glass.  The  sailon
»11  nor'weglerB,  screamers ;  and  for  very  palpable
«asons.  Howerer,  I  like  a  nor'wester  in  spite  of
ill  his  defects.

Birds  always  seemed  to  me  to  be  the  happiest  and
nost  blessed  of  God's  creatures.  0  what  a  glorious
ife  they  must  lead  of  it — always  aloft  upon  the  bo-
lom  of  the  wind.  Eagles,  hawks,  king-fishers,  and
itonny-petrela,  are  the  ones  which  excite  my  envy
nost.  I  never  was  guilty  of  the  cruelty  of  confining
1  biid  in  a  cage,  but  many  a  one  have  I  restored  to
iberty.  A  relative  brought  me  from  Canton,  a  few
irears  since,  a  cage  full  of  Java  sparrows.  There
irere  a  dozen  of  the  beautiful  creatures ;  and  he  had
^en  at  infinite  pains  to  preserve  them  during  a  long
royage,  sharing  his  water  with  them  when  he  was  on
ihort  allowance.  I  appreciated  his  kindness,  but  1
i:ou!d  have  killed  liiiii  for  his  cnielty.  Poor  little
prisoners !  I  looked  at  tlieni  with  tears  in  my  eyes,
md  as  soon  as  I  got  the  cage  in  my  possession,  I
took  them  upon  the  house-top,  and,  opening  the  door
of  liieir  bamboo  prison,  let  them  go  whither  they
pleased.

I  do  not  remember  any  pictured  legend  that  ever
left  so  deep  an  impression  upon  my  memory  as  a
coarse  wood-cut  which  represented  a  flight  of  witches
on  broom-handles.  They  were  careering  on  the
wings  of  a  tornado,  with  tlieir  rags  and  raven  h)cks
fluttering  about  them,  while  the  evil  one  sat  crouched


THE  WINDS.  55

in  a  black  cloud,  like  a  toad.  Although  I  was  very
young  when  I  encountered  this  terrible  picture,  I  re-
member that  it  gave  me  a  feeUng  of  pleasure,  and  I
wished  myself  a  witch,  that  I  too  might  ride  on  a
hurricane.

No  verse  ever  made  so  vivid  an  impression  upon
my  imagination  as  did  Smollett's  Apostrophe  to  Free-
dom :

**  Thy  spirit,  Independence,  let  me  share.
Lord  of  the  lion-heart  and  eagle  eye !

And  brave  the  tempest  with  my  bosom  bare,
Nor  heed  the  blast  that  howls  along  the  sky."

Indeed,  they  are  the  only  four  lines  of  poetry  that
I  ever  could  get  by  heart,  and  I  am  not  certain  that
I  have  quoted  them  to  a  letter.  Bryant's  two  odes,
"  To  the  Evening  Wind,"  and  "  The  Winds,"  are
beautiful  and  grand,  but  they  do  not  impress  me
hke  a  blast.  They  are  the  poetry  of  wind,  and  not
wind  itself.  For  a  similar  reason,  no  wind-instru-
ment ever  affected  me,  not  even  the  grandest  organ ;
for  what  is  a  pair  of  bellows  compared  with  a
sou'wester  or  a  pampara  ?  It  is  not  enough  for  me
to  hear  the  wind ;  unless  I  can  feel  it,  half  my  enjoy-
ment is  wanting.  Claudio's  fear  of  death,  in  Meas-
ure for  Measure,  "to  be  imprisoned  in  the  viewless
winds,  and  blown  with  restless  violence  round  about
the  pendent  world,"  instead  of  a  state  to  dread,  al-
ways seemed  a  very  delightful  condition.     The  fate


66  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

of  the  "  Ancient  Mariner,"  doomed  to  a  breathless
ocean,  on  the  contrary,  gave  me  such  a  feeUng  of
horror  when  I  first  read  it,  that  I  have  never  been
able  to  look  at  the  poem  a  second  time.  I  do  not
know  that  Coleridge  was  as  sensitive  to  the  winds  as
myself,  but  I  thmk  that  he  would  have  been,  for  a
timid  mind  would  never  have  dreamed  of  extracting
horrors  out  of  a  dead  calm.  The  inhabitants  of  hilly
countries  can  appreciate  the  pure  delights  of  a  fresh
breeze,  but  sailors  only  can  know  in  perfection  the
delights  of  a  hurricane.  The  wind  cannot  have  full
swing  except  on  the  ocean,  and  nothing  less  than  a
ship  can  fitly  dally  vnth  this  amazing  power.

I  shall  never  forget  my  first  gale  on  the  ocean.
We  were  about  half-way  across  the  Atlantic.  At
sunset  there  was  a  heavy  bank  of  clouds  in  the  west,
which  began  to  rise  very  rapidly  as  the  sun  went
down.  The  barometer  fell  ten  degrees  in  half  an
hour.  Our  captain  remarked  to  the  mate  that  we
should  have  a  "  screamer ;"  the  mate  rephed  that  it
had  a  "  greasy  look,"  and  immediately  began  to  give
orders  for  shortening  sail.  The  crew  worked  smart-
ly, for  they  felt  the  need  of  making  all  snug.  The
barometer  continued  to  fall,  and  the  wind  continued
to  rise.  There  were  no  flaws,  no  sudden  pufi*s,  no
spasms,  but  a  gradual,  though  rapid,  increase  of  force.
Every  minute  it  blew  harder.  The  waves  rose  with
the  wind.  Our  ship  labored  hard  at  first,  and  was
put  before  it,  but  as  there  was  danger  of  her  swamp-


THE  WINDS.  67

mg^it  was  deemed  prudent  to  heave  her  to ;  and  as
she  came  up  broadside  to  the  blast,  it  seemed  impos
sible  that  she  should  resist  its  fury.  She  yielded  to
its  tremendous  power,  however,  and  lay  for  nearly
an  hour  almost  on  her  broadside ;  the  three  close-
reefed  topsails  were  torn  from  the  yards  as  though
they  were  cobwebs  ;  the  top-gallant  masts  went  next.
The  crew  lashed  themselves  to  the  rigging,  and  no-
body seemed  to  think  of  any  thing  but  personal  secu-
rity. The  captain  could  scarcely  make  himself  heard
by  those  who  stood  at  his  elbow,  even  through  his
spealung-trumpet.  The  night  was  very  dark,  but
the  foam  of  the  sea  cast  a  strange,  lurid  light  upon
the  ship's  deck.  Huge  mountains  of  snowy  foam
threatened  every  moment  to  bury  us  beneath  an  ava-
lanche of  brine.  Down  we  went  into  terrible  depths
of  blackness,  and  then  we  rose  again  as  if  hurled  up-
on the  highest  peaks  of  the  Alps.  It  was  impossible
to  face  the  wind,  and  even  breathing  became  difficult.
Every  moment  we  thought  that  it  could  blow  no
harder,  but  still  it  kept  increasing.  The  sound
caused  by  it  was  like  incessant  claps  of  thunder.  A
roar  of  artillery  would  be  a  feeble  comparison.  Many
of  the  ropes  had  got  loose,  and  some  remnants  of  the
sails  still  clung  to  the  yards,  and  these  snapped  and
cracked  like  millions  of  coach-whips.  I  had  been
prudent  enough  in  the  beginning  to  lash  myself  to  a
ring-bolt  on  the  weather  side  of  the  deck,  and  there
I  sat  secure  and  unruffled,  enjoying  the  terrible  ex-


58  MI8SI0NABY  MEMORIAL.

hibition.  This  was  a  sou'wester.  I  thought  it  a
rather  novel  affair ;  it  was  so  to  me  at  least,  and  left
nothing  to  wish  for  in  the  way  of  wind.  There  is
more  grandeur,  perhaps,  in  a  pampara,  more  pomp
and  circumstance  than  in  a  sou'wester,  or  any  other
wind  ;  but  it  is  always  performed  ^according  to  well-
defined  rules  and  regulations,  and  may  be  termed  the
epic  poetry  of  storms.  It  has  a  beginning,  a  middle,
and  an  end.  All  the  elements  enter  into  its  compo-
sition. It  is  very  grand  on  shore,  in  the  open  pam-
pas, but  it  is  seen  to  best  advantage  at  sea,  Uke  all
other  winds.  It  is  well,  however,  not  to  be  too  far
from  land,  lest  you  lose  some  of  its  elements,  such,
for  instance,  as  pebbles,  dust,  branches  of  trees,
feathers,  hair,  &;c.

The  pampara  gives  timely  notice  of  his  approach ;
and  if  you  fail  to  make  proper  preparations  for  his
coming,  the  fault  will  be  your  own.  He  loves  to
appear  at  the  close  of  a  hot,  still  day,  although  he
sometimes  comes  at  noon,  and  sometimes  in  the
night ;  it  is  the  only  thing  in  which  he  is  not  regular
and  orderly.  The  sky  is  clear,  the  wind  low,  the
sun  has  just  sunk  beneath  the  waves,  when  suddenly
a  bank  of  yellowish  vapor  (as  though  the  sim  had
been  extinguished  in  the  ocean,  and  this  were  the
steam  rising  in  consequence)  appears  in  the  south-
west. Vivid  flashes  of  lightning  immediately  follow,
and  the  exhalation  rises  and  spreads  itself,  growing
yeUower  and  more  murky.    Soon  a  low  moaning  is


THE  WINDS.  59

heard,  birds  fly  screaming  overhead,  a  few  drops  of
rain  fall,  the  cloud  spreads  with  frightful  rapidity ;  then
come  hail,  and  dust,  and  a  strong  odor  of  earth ;  the
atmosphere  grows  sulphurous ;  the  wind  keeps  all
the  time  increasing,  first  a  moan,  then  a  wail,  a
shriek,  and  then  it  roars.  It  blows  now  as  you  never
heard  it  blow  before ;  it  thunders,  Ughtens,  rains,  and
hails ;  your  eyes  are  filled  with  dust ;  the  leaves  of
trees,  blossoms,  and  the  hair  of  cattle  fall  around
you.  The  cloud  passes  over,  the  thunder  ceases,
the  Ughtning  is  done,  the  hail  disappears,  but  the  rain
continues  to  pour  and  the  wind  to  roar  for  the  next
day  or  two,  and  then  they  disappear,  and  the  sun
comes  out  again.  A  pampara  is  very  well  once,  but
a  repetition  is  not  a  thing  to  be  desired.

The  pleasantest  breeze  that  ruffles  the  bosom  of
the  deep  is  the  northeast  trade,  that  blows  in  mid
ocean  between  Afiica  and  America.  If  the  pampara
may  be  called  the  epic,  the  trades  will  be  entitled  to
the  term  of  lyric  among  the  winds.  Bright  suns,
light  feathery  clouds,  blue  skies,  and  a  jocund,  laugh-
ing sea  always  belong  to  it.  It  is  the  purest  and
most  joyous  breath  of  heaven.  You  no  sooner  reach
its  influences  than  you  seem  to  enter  a  new  world
and  gain  a  new  sense  of  enjoyment.  It  seems  like  a
run-a-way  from  Paradise — it  is  all  gladness  and  beau-
ty, youth  and  innocence.  It  is  the  only  thing  that
visits  our  globe  without  a  taint  of  sin  or  death.  But
it  never  sweeps  over  the  earth.     It  goes  laughing  and


60  MISSIOITARY  MEMORIAL.

frolicking  over  the  sea,  dimpling  its  surface  with
smiles,  and  creating  gladness  and  joy  in  the  hearts
of  all  who  feel  it ;  before  it  reaches  the  shore  it  dies
away  as  mysteriously  as  it  sprang  into  being.
Whence  it  comes,  or  why  it  blows,  has  puzzled
many  a  philosopher ;  but  its  existence  is  still  as  great
a  mystery  as  when  Dr.  Martin  Lister,  with  more  poe-
try than  philosophy,  attributed  it  to  the  daily  exhale-
ment  of  the  ocean  flower,  lenticula  marina,  which
grows  in  vast  quantities  in  the  tropic  seas.  It  is  in-
deed like  the  breath  of  an  ocean  flora ;  but  this
theory  has  never  found  favor  with  the  learned.  If
angels  ever  visit  our  planet,  the  region  of  the  trade-
winds  must  be  their  favorite  resort.  There  is  no
green  isle  there  to  receive  them,  but  they  may  float
over  the  bluest  sea  and  in  the  softest  air  that  our  globe
is  blessed  with.  How  cheering  it  must  have  been
to  Columbus  and  his  crew  when  they  first  struck  this
vein  of  aerian  loveliness  !  but  then  they  were  fright-
ened lest  they  should  never  be  able  to  return  to  their
homes,  whUe  such  a  breeze  continually  blew  in  an
adverse  direction.


A  Remimseence  qf  Roath  Church-yard^  South  Wales,


BT  THE  AUTHOR  OF  "  PEN  AND  INK  SKETCHES."


It  was  a  tranquil  summer  eve,

When  by  a  village  church  I  stood,
With  two  fair  children,  thoughtful-eyed,

In  the  green  solitude  :
The  leaves  scarce  flutter'd  overhead ;

The  brook  which  idly  wander'd  by,
Upon  its  surface,  clear  and  calm,

Mirror'd  a  cloudless  sky  ;
And  earth,  in  all  its  glories  dress'd.
Was  tranquil  as  an  angel's  breast.

The  solenm  stillness  of  the  place

Was  only  broken  by  the  chime
From  the  old  turret-bell,  which  swung

At  that  unwonted  time  :
It  summon'd  to  a  new-made  grave.

Which  claim'd  its  unresisting  prey  ;
Around  us  stern  memorials  frown'd.

Themselves  in  slow  decay ;

6


UIBBIONIRY  MEMORIAL.

Life's  lale  was  writ  our  fuel  hcneath,

la  but  two  chapters, — Bihth  and  Death  !

They  come,  a  silent,  mournful  band,

To  lay  within  its  narrow  bed
The  wreck  of  beauty,  youth,  and  hope, —

The  lost — llie  early  dead  !
When  the  pale  prijiirose  sprang  to  light,

When  violets  deck'd  the  hedge-row's  gloom.
She  pluck'd  them,  and  theii  blossoms  laid

Upon  a  sister's  tomb  ;
And  oft  within  the  gray  church-shade,
The  maiden's  pensive  footstep  stray'd.

A  few  brief  weeks,  and  she  hath  pass'd

The  gates  wliich  life  and  death  divide  ;
The  sisters  in  the  grave's  dark  home,

Lie  sleeping  side  by  side.
Unconscious  each  of  sisterhood,

Their  bodies  "rest  in  hope"  together.
Till  angel-tongues,  when  earth  dissolve.

Shall  whisper — "  Come  up  hither!
Come  to  the  realms  of  life,  of  light !
Awake !  arise !  be  infinite  !"

And  should  we  weep  for  those  who  die
In  youth,  ere  life's  bright  sun  dechnes, —

Ere  time  hath  dimm'd  the  radiant  eye,
Or  sorrow  plough'd  its  lines  ?


THE    SISTERS^    GRAVE.  63

Serenely  sleeping  on  the  breast

Of  earth,  they  wait  the  judgment-day,

And  we,  who  con  their  epitaphs,
Are  not  so  calm  as  they  !

Ours  is  the  strife — the  doubt — the  pain —

Which  they  may  never  know  again.

The  last  look  in  the  coffin-lid

Which  hides  the  sleeping  dust,  is  given,
As  stars  shine  faintly,  one  by  one.

On  the  dim  face  of  heaven  !
The  grave  is  closed,  and  o'er  it  laid

The  cold  and  gray  sepulchral  stone ;
The  mourners  quit  the  place  of  graves,

And  she  is  left  alone.
With  but  chill  dews  to  weep  above
The  grave  of  youth  and  buried  love.

As  from  the  spot  I  tum'd  away.

The  children  gave  no  outward  sign
Of  sorrow,  but  each  little  hand

Clasp'd  with  a  firmer  pressure  mine : —
*Twas  the  simplicity  of  Fear  !

They  knew  but  little  of  the  tomb,
Yet  o'er  their  infant  hearts  it  cast

A  vague,  mysterious  gloom.
As  mists  obscure  the  sun's  first  ray,
And  darken  e'en  the  dawn  of  day.

Boston,  August,  1845.


iSIol)eagan    M'lBBione.


John  Elliot,  so  often  and  so  juslly  styled  the  In-
lian  apostle,  may  be  considered  the  earliest  Prot-
letant  misaionary  of  modern  times.  As  far  as  we
mow,  he  is  the  first  to  whom  the  conversion  of  the
leathen  was  the  prominent  object  of  prayer  and  la-
)or,  who  devoted  himself  to  it  from  choice,  prepared
limself  for  it  by  arduous  toil,  and  pursued  it  through
ife  with  unremitted  perseverance.  Though  Thomas
Vlayhew  was  in  the  field  of  actual  labor  before  him,
^et  Elliot's  self-consecration  to  the  work,  and  pre-
paratory study  of  the  language,  was  anterior  to  any
iimilar  known  design,  either  of  Mayhew  or  others.  He
was  engaged  in  acquiring  the  necessary  information  re-
ipecting  the  tribes,  and  in  learning  their  language,  in
[641  ;  how  much  earlier  his  heart  had  been  fixed,
tnd  his  mind  intent  upon  the  great  project,  cannot  be
told.     Mayhew  commenced  preaching  to  the  natives


MOHEAOAN  MISSIONS.  65

of  Martha's  Vineyard  in  1643.  Elliot's  first  sermon
to  the  Indians  at  Nonantum*  was  October  28,  1646.
His  translation  of  the  Bible  into  their  tongue  was
published  in  1663.  Such  was  the  commencement
of  Indian  missions.

The  flame  that  glowed  in  the  bosoms  of  these  ex-
cellent men  set  fire  to  other  hearts,  till  a  desire  to
bring  the  aborigines  of  the  country  under  the  shadow
of  the  Christian  banner,  became  general  with  the
New  England  clergy  of  that  day.  In  Connecticut,
no  pastor  was  more  deeply  imbued  with  the  mission-
ary spirit  than  the  Rev.  James 'Fitch.  Norwich,  of
which  he  was  one  of  the  original  proprietors,  and
first  minister,  was  planted  in  1 660,  in  the  very  heart
of  the  Moheagan  territory.  The  villages  of  that  tribe
were  clustered  upon  its  southern  border,  and  on  all
sides  it  was  overshadowed  and  surrounded  with  their
tents  and  hunting-bands.  No  sooner  was  the  settle-
ment established  and  consolidated,  than  Mr.  Fitch
turned  his  attention  to  the  improvement  and  conver-
sion of  the  heathen  around  him.  This  seemed  an
almost  hopeless  task  ;  without  trust  in  the  divine  aid,
no  man  would  have  undertaken  it.  The  Moheagans
were  peculiarly  warlike  and  savage,  deeply  i^nbued
with  Pequot  energy,  engaged  in  continual  quarrels
with  other  tribes,  and  in  all  their  passions  and  pur-
suits unfriendly  to  the  religion  of  peace  and  forbear-

*  A  hill  at  the  northeast  comer  of  Newton,  Mass.

6*


60  MISSIONARY  ICSMORIAL.

ance.*    Bfr.  Elliot,  in  one  of  his  tracts,  has  these  ob-
servations : —

"The  Monohegen  Indians  were  much  troubled  lest  the
court  should  take  some  course  to  teach  them  to  pray  to  God.
Unkus  their  sachem  accordiogly  went  to  Hartford,  where  the
court  sat,  and  expressed  his  fears  of  such  a  thing,  and  mani-
fested great  unwillingness  thereunto,  "f

Mr.  Elliot  himself  was  afterwards  foiled  in  an  at-
tempt which  he  made  to  interest  the  Connecticut  tribes
in  the  Christian  religi9n.  Being  at  Hartford  attending
a  comicil  of  ministers  in  the  year  1657,  at  his  request
the  Podimks  and  other  Indians  were  convened,  and
he  addressed  them  in  their  own  language,  explaining
the  great  truths  of  Christianity  in  terms  adapted  to
their  understanding.  At  the  close  of  his  sermon,  he
desired  of  them  an  explicit  declaration  whether  they
would  accept  of  Jesus  Christ  for  their  Saviour.
"  But  their  chief  men,"  says  Trumbull,  "  with  great
scorn  and  resentment,  utterly  refused."  Perhaps  no
Moheagans  were  present  at  this  meeting,  but  in  all
the  darker  traits  of  character,  and  particularly  in
their  hostility  to  the  religion  of  Christ,  they  probably
surpassed  the  Jpodunks.

At  a  subsequent  period,  Mr.  Fitch,  in  speaking  of


*  Hist,  of  Conn.,  Chap.  xiz.
t  Moore's  Life  of  EUbt,  p.  57.


MOHEAGAN  MISSIONS.  67

the  Moheagans  and  their  sachems — '^  Unkus  and  his
son,  and  Wanupo,"* — says  of  them

*'  These  at  first  carried  it  teachably  and  tractably,  until  at
length  the  sachems  did  discern  that  religion  would  not  con-
sist of  a  mere  receiving  the  word,  and  that  practical  religion
will  throw  down  their  heathenish  idols,  and  the  sachems*  ty-
rannical monarchy ;  and  then  the  sachems  did  not  only  go
away,  but  drew  off  the  people^  some  by  flatteries  and  some  by
threatenings,  and  they  would  not  suffer  them  to  give  so  mucli
•  as  an  outward  attendance  to  the  ministry  of  the  word  of
God."

Nor  was  the  hostility  of  Unkus  to  Christianity
softened  by  subsequent  intercourse  with  the  English,
or  the  persevering  appeals  of  Mr.  Fitch.  So  late  as
the  year  1674,  we  find  him  manifesting  the  same  spirit.
In  that  year  Elliot  and  Major-general  Gookin,  in
their  missionary  tour  among  the  Indian  tribes,  visited
the  Indian  villages  upon  the  Quinnabaug,  and  held  a
council  in  the  tent  of  a  sagamore  who  resided  at  Wa-
baquisset,  in  a  part  of  what  is  now  Woodstock.  A
great  part  of  the  night  was  spent  in  prayer,  singing,
and  exhortation,  and  many  of  the  Indians  present  ap-
pear to  have  been  sincere  converts.  But  the  narra-
tive adds :

^*  There  was  a  person  among  them,  who,  sitting  mute  a
great  space,  at  last  spoke  to  this  eflfect : — ^that  he  was  agent

•  Probably  a  mii^rint  for  Waweeko,  or  Waweekus,  the  brother
of  Unkus.


68  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

of  UnkoB  the  sachem  of  Mohegan,  who  challenged  right  to,
and  dominion  oyer  this  people  of  Wabaquisit ;  and,  said  he,
Unkus  is  not  well-pleased  that  the  English  should  pass  over
Mohegan  riyer  to  call  his  Indians  to  pray  to  God."*

The  blindness  and  obstinacy  of  Unkus  appear  the
more  extraordinary,  as  he  always  regarded  Mr.  Fitch
as  a  personal  friend,  received  many  benefits  from
him,  and  gratefully  acknowledged  them  by  large
grants  of  land  conferred  on  him  and  his  family.  Yet
only  in  one  instance  does  the  sachem  seem  to  have
cast  a  favorable  eye  upon  the  Christian  religion,  and
this  was  when,  after  a  long  and  distressing  drought,
Mr.  Fitch  called  a  special  meeting  to  pray  for  the
blessing  of  rain ;  and  almost  before  the  conclusion
of  the  services,  the  rains  descended,  and  the  floods
came.  This,  which  appeared  to  the  Indians  an  evi-
dent miracle,  extorted  from  Unkus  the  reluctant  tes-
timony that  "the  EngUshman's  God  was  the  true
God."t  Yet  this  truth  does  not  seem  to  have
affected  his  heart.  He  died  in  1683,  or  the  early
part  of  1684;  and  from  all  that  appears  to  the
contrary,  Cotton  Mather  was  not  out  of  the  way

*  6ookin*B  Hist  Ace.  of  Inds.    Coll.  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.,  Vol.  i.

t  This  anecdote  is  thus  related  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Noyse  of  Sto-
mngton,  a  contemporary  authority : — ^*  I  have  heard  that  the  Rev.
Mr.  Fitoh  did,  at  the  request  of  the  Moheags,  keep  a  fast  for  rain,
in  the  time  of  a  great  drought,  when  their  powaws  had  long  cried
for  rain ;  and  God  answered  by  sending  rain  the  same  day,  to  the
great  astonishment  of  the  heathen."    Magnalia,  Book  vi.


MQHEAGAN  MISSIONS.  69

when  he  characterized  him  as  "an  obstinate  in-
fidel."*

In  contradistinction  to  the  example  of  Unkus,  we
may  place  that  of  Wequash,t  a  sachem  of  far  inferior
grade,  but  who,  like  Unkus,  was  a  revolted  Pequot,
and  took  part  with  the  English  in  their  attacks  upon
that  barbarous  tribe.  After  the  destruction  of  the
Pequot  fort,  and  the  extirpation  or  captivity  of  most
of  his  nation,  he  resided  near  the  English,  and  be-
came an  earnest  inquirer  after  the  truth.  He  was  so
importunate  in  his  appeals  for  religious  instruction,
that  in  his  visits  to  his  English  friends,  he  would
cause  them  to  spend  more  than  half  the  night  in  con-
versing with  him.  Often  would  he  smite  upon  his
breast,  and,  complaining  of  his  wicked  heart,  exclaim,
"  Wequash  no  know  God  !  Wequash  no  know  Je-
sus Christ  !"t  But  he  was  afterwards  brought  to  a
knowledge  of  the  truth  which  he  sought,  and  went
up  and  down  among  his  countrymen  proclaiming  the
religion  of  Christ.  His  death  was  supposed  to  have
been  occasioned  by  poison  administered  by  some  of
his  countrymen,  who  hated  him  for  the  boldness  and
perseverance  with  which  he  preached  the  gospel  to
them.

Wequash  may  be  regarded  as  the  first  Indian  con-
vert— certainly  of  Connecticut,  if  not  of  New  Eng-

*  Magnolia,  Book  iii.,  Life  of  Elliot.         t  Alias,  Wequashkook.
t  Hubbard's  Hist,  of  New  England.


70  IflSSIONART  MEMORIAL.

land.    He  died  in  1642.    Governor  Winthrop's  testi-
mony concerning  him  is  as  follows  :

*'  One  Wequash  Cook,  an  Indian,  living  about  Connecticut
River's  mouth,  and  keeping  much  at  Saybrook  with  Mr.  Fen-
wick,  attained  to  good  knowledge  of  the  things  of  God,  and
salvation  by  Christ,  so  as  he  became  a  preacher  to  other  In-
dians, and  labored  much  to  convert  them,  but  without  any  ef-
fect ;  for  within  a  short  time  he  fell  sick,  not  without  suspicion
of  poison  from  them,  and  died  very  comfortably."*

Another  contemporary  record  respecting  him  is  by
an  eminent  clergyman  to  this  effect :

*'  Weqnash,  the  famous  Indian  at  the  river's  mouth,  is  dead,
and  certainly  in  heaven :  gloriously  did  the  grace  of  God
shine  forth  in  his  conversation  a  year  and  a  half  before  his
death.  He  knew  Christ ;  he  loved  Christ ;  he  preached
Christ  up  and  down,  and  then  suffered  martyrdom  for  Christ ;
and  when  he  died,  he  gave  his  soul  to  Christ,  and  his  only
child  to  the  English,  in  this  hope,  that  the  child  would  know
more  of  Christ  than  its  poor  father  did."

The  conversion  of  Wequash  was  doubtless  an  in-
centive to  Mr.  Fitch,  as  well  as  to  Mr.  Noyes  of
Stonington,  another  laborer  among  the  Indians,  to
continue  their  exertions,  notwithstanding  the  hostility
of  the  chief  sachems  to  Christianity.  Mr.  Filch
indeed  could  not  be  daunted.  He  sought  opportuni-
ties of  conversing  with  the  Moheagans  ;  opened  his

»  Winthrop's  New  Eng.,  Vol.  ii.  p.  74.


M0HEA6AN  MISSIONS.  71

house,  heart,  stores  to  them ;  visited  them  around
their  hearth-stones  under  the  tent-poles  of  the  wil-
derness, and  soon  acquired  a  sufficient  knowledge
of  their  language  to  make  it  the  vehicle  of  his  out-
pouring mind.  And  as  in  the  case  of  his  divine
Master,  though  the  rulers  scoffed,  a  portion  of  "  the
common  people  heard  him  gladly."*  The  legislature
of  the  colony  also  co-operated  with  him,  and  solemn-
ly presented  a  copy  of  Elliot's  Indian  Bible  to  the
Moheagan  sachems,t  enjoining  it  upon  them  to  be
regular  in  their  attendance  upon  Mr.  Fitch's  lec-
tures. Among  the  laws  for  the  regulation  of  the
Indian  settlements  in  1675,  is  this  item  :

"  It  is  ordered  that  a  regular  and  comely  attendance  be
given  to  hear  the  word  of  God  preached  by  Mr.  Fitch,  or  any
other  minister  sent  amongst  them.'^

The  officers  appointed  over  them  were  to  give  them  rules,
"  with  penalties  annexed,  for  prevention  of  their  having  or  wor-
shipping any  false  gods,  profanation  of  the  Sabbath,  for  not
attending  the  lectures  of  Mr.  Fitch  amongst  them  according
to  his  appointment,  for  theft,  drunkenness,"  &c.|

The  persevering  labors  of  Mr.  Fitch  were  crowned
with  considerable  success.  A  little  band  of  converts,
in  number  about  thirty,  was  won  from  the  dark  do-
minion of  idolatry,  and  gathered  with  their  families
into  a  settlement  by  themselves,  under  teachers  of

*  Mark  xii.  37.  t  Trumbull's  Conn.,  Chap.  xi£

t  Hinman's  Antiquities,  pp.  91,  94.


72  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

their  own.  "  For  the  settlement  and  encouragement
of  these  Indians,"  says  Mr.  Fitch,  "  I  have  given
them  of  mine  own  lands,  and  some  that  I  procured
of  our  town,  above  three  hundred  acres  of  good  im-
provable lands,  and  made  it  sure  to  them  and  theirs,
as  long  as  they  go  on  in  the  ways  of  God."*  Ac-
cessions were  afterwards  made  to  this  interesting
company,  till  it  numbered  forty  adult  members.!
We  must  again  quote  Mr.  Fitch,  to  show  the  charac-
ter of  their  teachers  and  head  men  :

*'  He  that  is  chief  among  them,  whose  name  is  Weebax,
hath  learned  so  much  that  he  is  willing  and  able  in  some  de-
gree to  be  helpful  in  teaching  and  prayer  to  the  others  on  the
Lord^s  day.  And  this  Weebax  is  of  such  blameless  conver-
sation that  his  worst  enemies  cannot  but  speak  well  of  his
conversation ;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  another,  whose
name  is  Tuhamon.^'

Such  was  the  result  of  the  first  mission  at  Mohea-
gan.  In  Massachusetts,  the  seed  sown  by  Mr.  El-
liot and  his  coadjutors  had  ripened  into  an  abundant
harvest.  When  the  contest  with  Philip  began,  in
1675,  the  number  of  Indian  villages  in  that  colony
alone,  yielding  at  least  a  nominal  obedience  to  the
Gogpel,  was  fourteen  .J     These  were  mostly  broken

*  See  Letter  of  Mr.  Fitch  m  Gookm's  Mass.  Hist.  Coll.,  Vol.  i.
t  Hist  Am.  B.  C.  For.  Missions,  p.  8.

t  This  enumeration  included  three  considerable  towns  on  the
river  Quinnabaug,  in  Woodstock,  a  town  now  belonging  to  Coii-


MOHSAOAN  MISSIONS.  73

up,  never  again  to  be  reorganized.  Of  Mr.  Fitch's
Indians  little  is  known  thenceforward,  but  that  the
males  took  up  the  hatchet,  with  other  Moheagan  war-
riors, in  defence  of  the  whites,  and  were  absent  on
long  partisan  excursions  with  the  sachem  Oweneco.
It  is  probable  that  their  famiUes  being  much  scattered
and  reduced,  the  whole  settlement  finally  flowed  back
into  the  common  mass  of  the  tribe.  This,  however,
may  not  have  taken  place  until  after  the  good  Mr.
Fitch  had  rested  firom  his  labors,  and  all  that  first
generation,  gathered  into  the  fold  by  his  instrumental-
ity, had  been  welcomed  by  their  divine  Lord  into  the
mansions  of  bliss.

The  blighting  influence  of  war  was  not  only  seen
in  its  effects  upon  the  settlements  themselves,  but  it
seems  to  have  crushed  the  very  spirit  that  formed
them.  The  missionary  enterprise  languished.  The
next  generation  forgot  the  vision  which  their  fathers
had  seen  of  the  wild  Indian  standing  upon  the  shore
and  crying,  "  Come  over  and  help  us."*  They  for-
got the  great  ostensible  motive  which  had  led  to  the
planting  of  the  New  England  colonies,  and  which
formed  the  evangelical  plea  upon  which  their  charters
were  granted,  viz. :  "to  win  and  incite  the  natives  of
the  country  to  the  knowledge  and  obedience  of  the
only  true  God  and  Saviour  of  mankind."

necticuty  but  then  supposed  to  be  within  the  bounds  of  Massachu-
setts.

*  The  seal  of  the  Massachusetts  colony  bore  this  device.

7


T4  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

'  After  the  death  of  Mr.  Fitch,  the  eflforts  made  for
die  religious  improvement  of  the  Moheagans  were
few  and  feeble.  We  need  not  be  surprised  that  the
results  did  not  go  beyond  the  means.  Trumbull  ob-
serves:

*'  The  ministers  of  the  several  towns  where  Indians  lived,
instructed  them  as  they  had  opportunity ;  but  all  attempts  for
Christianizing  the  Indians  in  Connecticut  were  attended  with
little  success.  Not  one  Indian  church  was  ever  gathered  by
the  English  ministers  in  Connecticut.  Several  Indians,  how-
ever, in  one  town  and  another,  became  Christians,  and  were
baptized  and  admitted  to  full  communion  in  the  English
churches."*

This  want  of  success,  which  was  the  general
theme  of  complaint  and  formed  the  excuse  for  inac-
tion, was  undoubtedly  as  much  owing  to  the  ineffi-
cient zeal  of  the  churches,  as  to  the  apathy  of  the
Indian  character,  or  the  yearning  attachment  of  these
poor  heathen  to  the  customs  of  their  ancestors.
Wherever  truly  earnest  and  persevering  experiments
have  been  made  to  bring  the  aborigines  of  North
America  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  the  Spirit  of
God  has  vouchsafed  to  honor  the  work.  A  judicious
historian  remarks :

"  The  result  has  shown  that  the  American  Indians,  com-
pared with  other  heathen,,  have  been  remarkable  for  both
readiness  and  ability  to  perceive  and  admit  the  value,  both  of

♦  Tmmbuirs  Hist  Conn.,  Ch.  xix.


MOHEAGAN  MISSIONS.  75

Christianity  and  of  cirilization.  Among  no  other  heathen  in
modern  times  has  the  Gospel  had  such  earlj  and  decided  suc-
cess. No  other  savages  have  so  readily  thrown  off  their  bar-
barism and  become  civilized  men."*

The  missionary  history  of  the  Moheagans  will
show  that  this  tribe  furnishes  no  exception  to  the
tenor  of  Mr.  Tracy's  remarks.  They  have  ever
been  found  to  have  hearts  as  impressible,  minds  as
acute  and  inquiring,  as  their  white  neighbors ;  to  be
as  cordial  in  the  reception  of  the  Gospel  plan  of  sal-
vation, and  as  steadfast  to  hold  out  to  the  end  as  any
other  people  who,  like  them,  possess  few  advantages,
and  are  exposed  to  great  temptations.

When  Ben  Unkus,  the  younger,  acceded  to  the
sachemship  in  1725,  a  large  Bible,  presented  to  his
ancestors  by  Charles  II.,  was  ceremoniously  placed
in  his  hands  by  the  commissioners  who  were  present
at  his  installation  ;t  and  this  sachem  is  believed  to  be
the  first  who  was  so  well  affected  towards  the  Chris-
tian religion  as  not  to  oppose  its  introduction  among
his  subjects.  A  school  was  established  at  a  very
early  period  in  Moheagan  to  instruct  the  natives  in
the  English  language,  in  morals,  religion,  &c.,  and
this  was  kept  up  with  some  interruptions  to  the  era
of  the  American  revolution.     The  necessary  funds

*  Hist.  Am.  B.  C.  F.  Miss

t  Book  of  Proceedings  in  the  Mason  Controversy,  preserved  in
the  state-house  at  Hartford.


n  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

for  lim  school  were  derived  from  the  commissioners
of  the  United  Colonies,  or  from  benevolent  men  in
Boston,  vi'ho  disbursed  the  sums  received  from  cer-
tain charitable  societies  in  England,  and  added  thereto
liberal  benefactions  from  tlieir  own  stores.  The
charitable  donora  often  expressed  their  disappoint-
ment that  no  greater  advantages  resulted  from  this
school.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  this  was  in
part  owing  to  the  unfaithfulness  of  the  teachers.
The  heads  of  a  complaint  exliibited  against  one  of
them  by  the  Indians  themselves,  were  as  follows  ;

"1.  He  takes  a  great  niiiii!)er  of  English  children,  and
they  take  room  from  the  Iniiian  children  aod  keep  them  away
fiam  the  liie  in  the  coldest  seaaons.

"  a.  Ife  has  no  government  nor  authority  in  his  Bchool,
neither  does  lie  hear  his  schulara  carefully.

"  3.  He  does  not  pray  in  his  school,  neither  does  he  teach
the  Indian  children  English  manners.

"  i.  He  was  to  find  dinner  for  the  children,  and  he  tuma
them  off  with  any  thing.

"  5.  He  has  been  away  from  hia  acbool  many  a  day.

"  S.  He  has  frequently  used  Inilian  hoisea  without  leave  of

It  was  in  this  school,  though  perchance  under  a
more  assiduous  teacher,  that  Sampson  Aukum,t  a

*  HS.  doenmenla  foond  at  Hoheagan.

t  In  the  ligiiBturea  of  the  tribe  to  public  docomenta,  the  name
i»  written  Aukom,  or  Ancom ;  he  hunseif  adopt-


MOHEAGAN  MISSIONS.  77

youth  of  the  tribe,  bom  about  the  year  1723,  ac-
quired the  first  rudiments  of  learning.  The  Rev.
Mr.  Jewett,  minister  of  a  church  in  that  part  of  New
London  called  North  Parish,  now  Montville,  a  man
of  pure  evangeUcal  piety,  peaceful,  yet  fervent  in
spirit,  and  full  of  tender  compassion  for  the  ignorant
and  erring  red-men  in  his  vicinity,  was  accustomed
once  a  fortnight  to  preach  in  Moheagan.*  His  au-
dience was  composed  of  Indians  and  the  white  ten-
ants who  had  obtained  leases  of  their  lands  and  lived
on  farms  among  them.  Under  Mr.  Jewett's  preach-
ing the  heart  of  Aukum  was  touched,  and  at  seven-
teen years  of  age  he  became  a  hopeful  disciple  of  the
truth.  This  was  about  the  time  of  the  great  revival
of  reUgion  in  New  England,  and  the  Moheagans
shared  in  some  degree  in  the  excitement.  Many  of
the  neighboring  ministers  visited  them  and  gave  them
occasional  instruction.  Whitefield,  in  one  of  his  tran-
sits through  the  country,  preached  to  them  through
an  interpreter,  nearly  the  whole  tribe  assembUng  in
a  grove  to  hear  him.

The  youthful  Aukum  appears  to  have  imbibed  the
missionary  spirit  with  his  first  conversion.  His  heart
was  filled  with  longing  desires  to  benefit  his  benight-
ed countrymen.  He  made  known  his  feelings  to  Mr.
Jewett.     Aided  and  encouraged  by  him  and  other

ed  the  orthography  of  Occom,  probably  after  the  example  of  Dr.
Wheelock.

*  Allen's  Biographical  Dictionary.

7*


T8  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

benevolent  friends,  he  obtained  admission  into  the
fiimily  of  the  Rev.  Eleazar  Wheelock,  of  Lebanon,
a  divine  of  enlarged  views  and  energetic  character,
who  had  at  that  time  a  few  English  youths  under  his
tuition  preparing  for  the  ministry.  Aukum  remained
in  this  situation  five  years.  His  exemplary  deport-
ment and  success  in  study  led  Dr.  Wheelock  to  adopt
the  plan  of  an  Indian  mission  school,  where  a  band
of  heathen  youth  might  be  trained  to  become  teach-
ers of  their  coimtrymen  with  far  greater  prospect  of
saccess  than  could  be  expected  from  the  labors  of
EngUsh  ministers.  The  plan  of  such  an  establish-
ment had  been  first  suggested  and  proposed  by  Mr.
John  Sergeant,  missionary  to  the  Stockbridge  In-
dians.* Dr.  Wheelock  revived  the  project,  and  pur-
sued it  with  his  characteristic  ardor.  Indian  boys
were  now  received  into  the  school  not  only  from  Mo-
heagan,  but  firom  Stockbridge,  firom  the  Delawares,
the  Oneidas,  and  various  other  tribes,  funds  being
liberally  furnished  for  all  who  applied  for  admission
firom  the  stores  of  Christian  liberality.

The  institution  subsequently  took  the  name  of
Moor's  Indian  Charity  School,  a  farmer  of  Mansfield,
named  Joshua  Moor,  having  added  largely  to  its
funds.  To  this  seminary  Dr.  Wheelock  at  length
determined  to  add  a  collegiate  institution,  where  both

*  Holmes'  Am.  Axmals,  sub  ami.  1769.  Belknap's  Hist  of  New
Hampshire.


MOHEAGAN  MISSIONS.  79

English  and  Indians  might  be  prepared  for  mission-
aries, or  for  service  in  other  departments  of  life.  To
collect  the  necessary  funds,  Aukum  and  the  Rev.
Nathaniel  Whitaker,  of  Norwich,  went  to  England,
where  they  obtained  Uberal  donations.  Both  the
school  and  college  were  ultimately  established  at
Hanover,  N.  H.,  under  the  presidency  of  Dr.  Whee-
lock.  The  flourishing  institution  of  Dartmouth  Col-
lege may  thus  be  traced  back,  Uke  the  Nile,  to  a  very
small  source,  viz. :  the  attendance  of  a  Moheagan
youth  on  the  occasional  ministry  of  an  English  cler-
gyman in  the  vicinity  of  his  tribe.

The  number  of  Indian  youths  instructed  by  Dr
Wheelock  at  Lebanon  and  Hanover,  was  about  forty.*
Of  these,  six,  and  perhaps  more,  were  intended  for
missionaries.  Of  the  Moheagans,  only  two,  Aukum
and  Joseph  Johnson,  have  left  a  name  and  history
behind  them.  These,  in  their  day  and  among  their
own  people,  were  widely  known  by  the  energy  they
displayed  and  the  good  they  accomplished.  Their
eflforts  and  example  had  a  perceptible  influence  on
the  tribe.  One  and  another  abandoned  their  vicious
habits.  The  memory  is  still  fresh  among  them  of  a
Zacchary  and  a  Martha,  a  Lucy  Tantaquidjin,  an
Elder  Cooper,t  a  Deacon  Peejees,  and  others,  who

*  Allen's  Biographical  Dictionary,  article  Wheelock.

t  Cooper  was  an  Indian  preacher  of  considerable  note.  He  and
othen  q^  the  tribe  were  connected  with  a  Baptist  church  in  the  yi-
cinity  of  Moheagan.


80  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

became  prominent  Christians  and  persevered  to
the  end  in  a  life  of  piety.  At  this  period  they  had
frequent  religious  services  :  it  was  a  second  part  to
the  era  of  Mr.  Fitch.  The  kindred  fraternities  of
Nahanticks,  in  Lyme,  and  Pequots,  in  Groton,  were
also  refreshed.  At  the  former  place,  a  grave  and
well-instructed  Indian  by  the  name  of  Philip,  was
long  their  religious  leader.  At  Moheagan,  their
kind-hearted  neighbors  from  Norwich  estabUshed  a
singing-school,  and  this  exercise  more  than  any  other
seemed  to  attract  them  to  the  Christian  standard,  to
take  hold  of  their  feelings,  and  bind  them  to  the  new
and  holy  way  of  life.  Long  afterwards,  when  this
second  band  of  converts  had  gone  down  to  the  grave,
and  the  sun  of  this  bright  day  had  set,  the  children
of  these  worthies,  in  the  midst  of  their  darkness  and
degradation,  would  recur  with  interest  to  the  great
meetings  and  heautiful  singing  of  former  days.

But  the  fiat  of  Providence  has  gone  forth  that  Ja-
pheth  shall  possess  the  tents  of  Shem,  and  the  star
of  the  red-man  must  still  fade  away  before  the  lustre
of  the  European  sun.  In  the  early  part  of  the  18th
century,  the  Moheagans,  enjoying  the  repose  of
peace  and  the  protection  and  favor  of  the  English,
were  rapidly  increasing  in  numbers.  In  1745,  a  large
number  of  the  warriors  enlisted  in  the  army  that  took
Louisburg,  and  but  few  of  them  ever  returned.  The
revolutionary  war  again  thinned  their  ranks.  A  con-
tagious disease  at  one  time  swept  off  forty  in  a  season ;


M0HEA6AN  MISSIONS.  81

and  not  a  few  of  them,  from  time  to  time,  emigrated
and  became  incorporated  with  other  tribes.  Only  a
remnant  remained,  and  these  gradually  sunk  into  a
state  of  moral  degradation,  dark  and  fatal  as  their
ancient  heathenism.  The  insignificance  of  the  tribe
in  point  of  numbers  and  character  may  perhaps  ac-
count for  the  fact,  that  at  no  period  since  the  settle-
ment of  the  country  have  their  white  neighbors  been
so  forgetful  of  their  religious  interests  as  during  the
latter  part  of  the  last  century  and  the  beginning
of  the  present.  They  had  fallen  into  the  depths  of
neglect  and  oblivion,  and  lay  by  the  wayside  help-
less and  hopeless,  Hke  the  wounded  man  whom  the
good  Samaritan  pitied,  and  healed  with  oil  and
wine.

In  this  forlorn  condition  in  point  of  morals,  educa-
tion, and  religion,  they  remained  until  1827,  when
the  sympathy  of  some  young  Christian  females  in
Norwich  was  enlisted  in  their  behalf.  About  that
time  Sarah  Breed  and  Sarah  Lanman  Huntington,
both  of  Norwich,  commenced  a  series  of  personal
services,  and  urgent  appeals  to  others  for  aid,  which
m  the  course  of  four  or  five  years  procured  for  the  Mo-
heagans  successively  a  Sabbath-schooly  day-school,
chapel,  parsonage,  school-house,  and  all  the  blessings
of  an  organized  church  under  a  settled  pastor.  This
example  of  successful  effort  is  so  eminently  calcu-
lated to  stimulate  and  encourage  those  who  have  a
desire  to  transform  any  portion  of  the  world's  wilder-


88  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Bess  into  a  garden  of  the  Lord,  however  young  their
age,  or  feeble  their  strength,  or  Umited  their  power,
that  its  history  has  a  claim  to  be  recorded  with  the
minuteness  of  detail.

Of  Miss  Huntington,  afterwards  Mrs.  Eli  Smith,
of  the  Palestine  Mission,  we  may  speak  without  re-
serve, since  death  has  sanctified  her  memory,  and
removed  her  to  that  fulness  of  joy  in  which  her  deli-
cate self-renunciation  can  no  longer  be  wounded  by
our  praise.  She  was  bom  at  Norwich,  in  1802 ;  and
while  still  in  the  bloom  of  youth  was  stamped  with
the  seal  of  the  Spirit.  Her  missionary  heart  she  re-
ceived in  1827,  and  immediately  thereupon  began  to
put  forth  her  energies  to  redeem  the  time,  fixing  her
eye  upon  thos6  who  were  perishing  every  passing
hour,  as  well  as  upon  the  days  of  future  glory  prom-
ised to  the  church.  The  zeal  of  her  excellent  asso-
ciate kept  pace  with  hers.  The  first  object  that
drew  them  from  the  sphere  of  their  own  church,  was
the  project  of  opening  a  Sabbath-school  for  the  poor
Indian  children  of  Moheagan.  Satisfied  that  this  was
a  work  which  Heaven  would  approve,  they  marked
out  their  plans,  and  pursued  them  with  untiring  en-
ergy. Boldly  they  went  forth,  and,  guided  by  the
rising  smoke  or  sounding  axe,  visited  the  Moheagans
from  field  to  field,  and  from  hut  to  hut,  till  they
had  thoroughly  informed  themselves  of  their  num-
bers, condition,  and  prospects.  The  opposition  they
encountered,  the  ridicule  and  opprobrium  showered


MOHEAGAN  MISSIONS.  83

upon  them  from  some  quarters,  the  sullenness  of  the
natives,  the  bluster  of  the  white  tenants,  the  brush-
wood and  dry  branches  thrown  across  their  path-
way, could  not  discourage  them.  They  saw  no
"  lions  in  the  way,"  while  Mercy  with  pleading  looks
beckoned  them  forward.

The  Moheagans  are  proprietors  of  a  reserved  tract
of  two  thousand  seven  hundred  acres,  consisting  of
hill  and  dale,  forest  and  cultivated  field,  along  the
banks  of  the  Thames  between  Norwich  and  New
London.  This  was  formerly  called  the  sequestered
land ;  but  the  larger  part  of  it  is  now  occupied  by
white  tenants.  The  number  of  the  tribe  at  this  pe-
riod was  over  one  hundred ;  one-third  of  them  were
children.*  The  nearest  church  was  four  or  five
miles  distant,  and  they  had  no  schools  and  no  reh-
gious  instruction  whatever.  Only  one  person  was
found  among  them  who  had  ever  professed  faith  in
the  Christian  reUgion,  and  she  was  the  senior  of  five
generations,  all  living  together  under  the  same  roof.
This  venerable  woman,  Lucy  Tantaquidjin,  the  sis-
ter of  Sampson  Aukum,  though  ninety-seven  years
of  age,  was  still  able  to  speak  of  her  faith  and  hope,
and  exhibited  pleasing  evidences  of  genuine  piety,
yet  she  had  been  so  long  without  religious  instruc-
tion and  society  that  she  hesitated  to  call  herself  a
Christian,  and  breathed  forth  many  affecting  confes-

*  Mifls  Huntington's  Letter  to  Hon.  Lewis  Cass,  Sec.  of  War.


84  MISSIOHARY  MEMORIAL.

sions  of  her  wanderings  and  backslidings.  In  the
kitchen  of  this  aged  witness  of  the  second  mission  at
M(^eagan,  our  two  new  missionaries,  pioneers  of  a
third  era  of  blessing,  held  their  first  prayer-meeting,
gathered  their  first  Sabbath-school.  Upon  this  an-
cient trunk,  which  in  a  few  weeks  after  their  first
risit  dropped  to  the  ground,  the  germ  of  a  new
church  was  grafted,  which  now  bears  fruit,  and
spreads  a  friendly  shadow  over  the  tribe.

Wild  and  romantic  were  the  situations  in  which
these  young  persons  often  found  themselves,  and
well  calculated  to  kindle  the  fire  of  enterprise  in  ar-
dent breasts.  Their  first  tours  in  Moheagan  were
performed  partly  on  foot  and  partly  on  horseback ;  in
the  latter  case,  perchance,  *^  with  a  Uttle  Indian  girl
behind  on  the  horse  for  a  guide,  and  half-a-dozen
other  children  following  on  foot,  talking  as  fast  as
their  tongues  could  go."*  In  this  manner  they  thread-
ed the  lanes  and  by-ways  of  the  sequestered  tract,
stopping  at  every  hovel  to  give  notice  of  their  design
and  endeavor  to  interest  the  inmates  in  its  favor.
Oft;en  were  their  adventures  stamped  with  a  deeper
and  holier  character.  They  afterwards  reverted  to
"  the  scenes  in  old  Lucy's  kitchen  and  under  the
haystack,"  with  heartfelt  emotion,  and  doubtless  in
heaven  they  vrill  talk  of  them  with  still  deeper  inter-
est.   The  venerable  Lucy  died  in  January,  1830,  a

•  Memoir  of  Mrs.  S.  L.  Smith,  p.  112.


MOHBAOAN  MISSIONS.  85

little  before  the  Sabbath-school  commenced,  but  her
family  so  far  partook  of  her  spirit  as  to  give  it  a  cor-
dial welcome.  For  this  school  our  interesting  mis-
sionaries, energetic,  ardent,  and  sanguine,  with  youth,
health,  and  a  cheerful  trust  in  God,  usually  accom-
panied by  some  efficient  coadjutor  of  the  other  sex,
started  at  an  early  hour  every  Sunday  morning,  and
walked  the  whole  distance,  (five  or  six  miles,)  return-
ing in  the  same  way  at  night.  Before  the  expiration
of  the  summer  they  had  forty  pupils,  quite  a  nimi-
ber  of  them  being  aged  or  adult  persons.

Though  the  associate  of  Miss  Huntington  soon  re-
moved to  a  distant  part  of  the  country,  yet  the  exer-
tions of  the  latter  to  benefit  the  Moheagans  were
unremitted.  A  subscription  was  circulated,  and  a
society  formed,  having  for  its  object  the  erection  of  a
chapel  and  procuring  a  minister  for  the  inhabitants
of  the  reservation,  including  whites  and  Indians.  Of
this  society,  Joseph  Williams,  Esq.,  was  president.
Miss  Huntington  was  active  and  untiring  in  circu-
lating information  and  obtaining  subscriptions.  In
November  of  the  same  year,  in  conjunction  with  an-
other amiable  and  self-sacrificing  coadjutor.  Miss
EUzabeth  Raymond,  who  resided  about  as  far  from
the  scene  of  action  as  Miss  H.,  though  in  a  different
direction,  she  began  a  day-school  for  the  Moheagans,
which  was  continued  through  the  whole  of  a  long
and  severe  winter.  Here  they  taught  the  rudiments
of  learning  to  fifteen  or  sixteen  children  of  various

8


86  MISSIONARY  IfBMORIAL.

•geSy  two  married  women,  one  young  woman,  and
(me  yomig  man*.  They  gave  the  women  also  in-
struction in  sewing  and  making  articles  of  clothing
for  males  and  females.  They  taught  their  pupils  to
sing,  and  explained  the  Scriptures  daily  to  them.  In
fact,  they  became  all  things  to  all  men^  and  were
teachers,  advisers,  counsellors,  lawgivers,  miUiners,
mantuamakers,  tailoresses,  almoners,  as  occasion
served,  and  they  saw  that  they  could  do  good.  By
these  self-denying  efforts  these  young  persons  show-
ed that  they  belonged  indeed  to  a  peculiar  people
sealous  of  good  works ;  and  those  natives  who  at
first  could  not  believe  but  that  some  selfish  motive
lay  at  the  bottom  of  this  zeal,  or  that  it  would  soon
die  away,  gave  them  their  entire  confidence,  and  ex-
tolled the  goodness  of  God  in  raising  them  up  such
kind  friends.

The  school  was  kept  in  a  house  on  Fort  Hill,
leased  to  a  respectable  farmer  in  whose  family  the
young  teachers  boarded  by  alternate  weeks,  each  go-
ing to  the  scene  of  labor  every  other  Sabbath  morn-
ing and  remaining  to  the  evening  of  the  succeeding
Sabbath,  so  that  both  were  present  in  the  Sabbath-
school,  which  was  twice  as  large  as  the  other.  A
single  incident  will  serve  to  show  the  dauntless  reso-
lution which  Miss  Huntington  carried  into  her  pur-
suits. Just  at  the  expiration  of  one  of  her  terms  of
service  during  the  winter,  a  heavy  and  tempestuous
fall  of  snow  blocked  up  the  roads  with  such  high


M0HEA6AN  MISSIONS.  87

drifts,  that  a  friend  who  had  been  accustomed  to  go
for  her  and  convey  her  home  in  bad  weather,  and
had  started  for  this  purpose  in  his  sleigh,  turned
back,  discouraged.  No  path  had  been  broken,  and
the  undertaking  was  so  hazardous  that  he  conceived
no  female  would  venture  forth  at  such  a  time.  He
therefore  called  at  her  father's  house  to  say  that  he
should  delay  going  for  her  till  the  morrow.  What
was  his  surprise  to  be  met  at  the  door  by  the  young
lady  herself,  who  had  reached  home  just  before,  hav-
ing walked  the  whole  distance  on  the  hard  crust  of
the  snow,  alonCy  and  some  of  the  way  over  banks  of
snow  that  entirely  obliterated  the  walls  and  fences  by
the  roadside.

In  one  of  the  letters  of  Miss  Huntington,  written
from  Moheagan,  she  observes,  in  speaking  of  her
duties — and  we  are  not  surprised  at  the  remark —
"  every  energy,  mental  and  physical,  is  called  into
requisition."  Nor  are  we  disinclined  to  admit  the
fact  when  she  playfully  says,  in  writing  to  a  friend
late  at  night — "  the  school  ma'am  begins  to  be
weary."*  Surely  such  days  of  earnest  application,
from  five  in  the  morning  to  ten  at  night,  for  one  ac-
customed to  all  the  dehcacies  and  refinements  of  life,
gave  large  permission  to  he  weary.    Yet  it  must  be


*  For  verification  of  many  of  the  incidents  here  detailed,  see  the
excellent  Memou:  of  Mrs.  Smith  hy  Rev.  E.  W.  Hooker  of  Ben-
nington.


98  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

granted  that  there  was  much  of  exciting  interest  and
positive  enjoyment  in  these  occupations,  and  Miss  H.
entered  into  them  with  a  keen  relish.  She  says —
"  My  duties  here  are  delightful," — "  I  am  quite  satis-
fied,"— "  My  circumstarices  and  duties  are  altogether
new,  and  sometimes  I  think  myself  in  a  dream."
Her  interest  in  the  Moheagans  was  rendered  more
intense  by  an  opinion  which  she  cherished  that  the
aborigines  of  America  were  descendants  of  the  lost
tribes  of  Israel.  The  following  is  an  extract  from
one  of  her  letters  : — "  I  have  just  now  returned  from
a  visit  to  a  dying  man.  As  he  lay  upon  his  bed,  pale
and  emaciated,  I  felt  a  strong  conviction  that  the  In-
dians are  really  Israelites ;  so  strikingly  did  the  en-
tire character  of  his  face  resemble  that  of  the  Jews,
and  especially  the  lineaments  of  our  Saviour,  as  ex-
hibited by  painters,  who  have  probably  followed  the
national  cast  of  countenance."

By  the  exertions  of  the  Moheagan  Association,  al-
ready mentioned,  a  small  church,  capable  of  accom-
modating two  or  three  hundred  persons,  was  erected
on  the  summit  of  Fort  Hill,  not  far  from  the  spot
where  the  royal  fortress  of  the  tribe  swayed  the  sur-
rounding country.  The  aspect  of  nature  is  much
softened  since  the  eyes  of  savage  chieftains  from  this
lookout-post  roamed  over  a  gloomy  waste  of  woods,
ti)l  they  rested  upon  the  broad  bay  at  the  river's
mouth,  or  followed  the  blue  line  that  marks  the  more
distant  Sound.     Here,  where  barbarous  vociferation


MOHSAGAN  MISSIONS.  89

and  noisy  reyels,  and  doubtless  rites  and  ceremonies
devoted  to  malignant  spirits,  marked  the  festal  days
of  the  savage,  peaceful  feet  wind  up  the  hill,  and  the
voice  of  prayer  and  praise  proclaims  the  Christian
Sabbath.  The  cost  of  the  church  was  between  seven
and  eight  hundred  dollars,  which  was  mainly  con-
tributed by  ladies  in  Norwich,  New  London,  and
Hartford.  It  was  dedicated  in  the  summer  of  1831 ;
the  sermon  for  the  occasion  being  preached  by
Rev.  Charles  Hyde  of  Norwich,  from  Zechariah
ii.  5  :  "  For  I,  saith  the  Lord,  will  be  a  wall  of  fire
round  about,  and  will  be  the  glory  in  the  midst  of
her."

Eloquent  appeals  in  behalf  of  the  long-forgotten
Moheagans,  were  successively  made  by  Miss  Hunt-
ington to  the  American  Board  of  Commissioners  for
Foreign  Missions,  to  the  Domestic  Missionary  So-
ciety of  Connecticut,  to  the  legislature  of  the  state,
and  to  the  government  of  the  United  States.  A  dona-
tion received  from  the  Domestic  Missionary  Society
was  immediately  appropriated  to  the  support  of  a
missionary ;  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wheelock  being  en-
gaged, entered  forthwith  upon  the  field  of  exertion  ;
his  wife  as  an  assistant  taking  the  young  under  her
particular  charge.  Nor  in  this  connection  must  we
omit  to  mention  the  name  of  another  interesting  fe-
male who  in  this  season  of  activity  came  forward  as
the  friend  of  Moheagan.  Miss  Rebecca  R.  Wil-
liams of  Lebanon,  (afterwards  Mrs.  Hebard  of  the


00  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Mmioa  to  Western  Asia,)  succeeded  Misses  Hunt-
ington and  Raymond  in  the  day-school  at  Fort  Hill,
and  devoted  herself  for  a  season  to  the  instruction  of
the  tawny  children  of  the  place.  This  initiatory
mission-work  at  Moheagan,  both  to  Miss  Huntington
and  Miss  Williams,  was  but  as  a  vestibule  through
.which  they  passed  into  broader  fields,  white  for  har-
vest, in  the  eastern  world,  and  after  a  short  season
of  toil  in  that  Tineyard,  into  a  still  loftier  sphere  of
service  in  the  world  above.

The  application  to  the  general  government  for  aid
was  successful.  A  letter  addressed  by  Miss  Hunt-
ington to  the  Hon.  Lewis  Cass,  then  secretary  of
war,  obtained  for  her  the  influence  of  that  depart-
BAent ;  and  in  1832  a  grant  was  made  from  the  fund
devoted  to  Indian  improvement  of  five  hundred  dol-
lars towards  erecting  buildings  on  the  Moheagan  re-
servation, and  four  hundred  dollars  for  the  support
of  a  teacher.  The  last-named  sum  has  since  been
received  annually  from  the  same  fund.  A  small
school-house,  and  a  neat  and  comfortable  dwelling-
house  were  soon  afterwards  erected^  Thus  after
three  years  of  arduous  and  patient  exertion,  Miss
Huntington  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  her  benev-
olent plans  crowned  with  success,  a  chapel,  a  par-
sonage, a  school-house,  and  the  means  of  sustaining
liie  Christian  ministry  were  procured,  and  the  same
year,  precisely  when  Mr.  Wheelock  left  the  Mohea-
gans,  and  be  was  most  wanted.  Providence  sent  them


M0HEA6AN  MISSIONS.  91

a  religious  guide,  than  whom,  perhaps,  no  man  in  the
country  was  better  suited  for  the  mixed  station  of
teacher  and  pastor,  for  whites  and  Indians,  in  church,
farm-house,  and  hovel,  which  as  missionary  at  Mo-
heagan  he  was  called  upon  to  fill.

This  was  Mr.  Anson  Gleason,  a  native  of  Man-
chester, Connecticut,  who  had  been  for  several  years
among  the  Choctaws  performing  missionary  service,
though  not  a  licensed  preacher.  The  Indians  with
whom  he  resided  having  been  ejected  from  their  ter-
ritory and  discharged  into  the  far  west,  Mr.  Gleason
returned  to  his  native  state,  and  seeing  no  higher
work  before  him,  was  expecting  to  resume  the  tools
of  his  original  trade,  the  plane  and  the  saw,  when  he
was  providentially  led  to  spend  a  sabbath  at  Mohea-
gan.  Almost  immediately  thereupon  he  was  applied
to  by  Miss  Huntington  and  the  president  of  the  Mo-
heagan  association  to  become  the  religious  teacher
of  that  tribe.  After  some  hesitation  he  accepted
their  proposals,  and  was  soon  settled  with  his  family
in  the  neat  parsonage  prepared  for  their  reception,  on
the  declivity  of  Fort  Hill,  and  entered  with  constitu-
tional alacrity  upon  his  labors.  His  wife — another
blessing  in  the  shape  of  woman  for  Moheagan — took
charge  of  the  school,  which  has  ever  since  been  un-
der her  care.

A  little  church  of  eight  or  ten  members  had  been
gathered ;  but  Moheagan  had  long  been  a  place  of
common  resort,  especially  on  the  Sabbath,  to  the


tS  MISSIONAaY  MSMOaiAL.

Xiiltless  and  idle  in  the  vicinity.  It  was  a  place  aside
ftom  the  rigid  superyision  of  religion  and  law,  where
everybody^  natives  and  visiters,  had  been  accustomed
to  do  as  they  pleased.  Mr.  Gleason  was  obliged  in
many  cases  (to  use  his  own  expression)  to  preach  a
conscience  on  to  them  ;  and  hke  a  shepherd  seeking
his  lost  sheep,  had  to  travel  much  among  the  lots  and
by-paths,  hills,  lanes,  and  pastures,  to  look  up  his
flock.  But  he  knew  that  as  they  were,  the  poor  na-
tives were  all  lost,  and  if  but  a  few  were  saved  this
disciple  of  Christ  felt  that  it  was  entire  gain.

After  two  years  oi  preaching,  Mr.  Gleason  finding
^t  his  little  church  suffered  much  from  a  want  of
tibe  stated  ordinances  of  the  Gospel,  made  an  appeal
to  the  clergymen  of  the  neighborhood  either  to  license
cxr  silence  him.  This  application  was  responded  to
with  hearty  good-will,  and,  April  1,  1835,  he  was
re^ilarly  ordained  pastor  of  the  church.  Since  that
period  the  number  of  church  members  has  amounted
to  sixty,  of  whom  less  th^  one-third  are  Indians,  the
major  part  are  from  the  families  of  tenants  living
isf&a  the  reservation.  Of  the  white  members,  Miss
Dolbeare,  the  first  person  baptized  and  admitted  by
Mr.  Gleason,  has  gone  forth  on  a  mission  to  the
Ghoctaws  of  the  Arkansaw.  Mr.  Maynard,  another
scion  of  this  church,  is  settled  as  a  pastor  in  Com-
#all,  Connecticut.

During  the  year  1844,  this  little  mission  church
ecintributed  ^following  sums  for  benevolent  pur-


MOHEA6AN  MISSIONS.  93

poses,  viz. :  ten  dollars  for  sabbath-schools,  six  dol-
lars for  tracts,  ten  dollars  towards  the  publication  of
the  Choctaw  hymn-book,  and  forty  or  fifty  dollars  for
foreign  missions,  besides  an  appropriation  of  fifty
doUars  to  improve  the  singing  of  the  congregation.*

The  Indians  are  advancing  in  civilization,  and  in
respect  to  numbers  also  are  on  the  increase.  It  was
hoped  that  a  Christian  influence  exerted  over  them
would  result  in  their  enlargement,  and  the  result  has
been  such  as  to  verify,  in  some  degree,  a  remark  of
Miss  Huntington — "  It  is  the  usual  effect  of  moral
elevation  to  make  a  Uttle  one  become  a  thousand."
The  actual  number  on  the  reservation,  however,  has
not  much  increased,  many  of  them  obtain  situations
in  the  neighboring  towns,  and  a  large  proportion  of
the  males  follow  the  dangerous  sea  for  a  livelihood,
and  are  consequently  often  decimated  by  storms  and
casualties.  They  make  excellent  whalemen,  being
as  skilful  in  the  use  of  the  harpoon  as  their  fathers
were  with  the  arrow  and  sling.  Two  or  three  of
them  have  served  as  mates  of  vessels,  and  one  in
particular  is  now  absent  on  an  India  voyage  in  that
capacity.  He  has  built  a  ne^t  house  for  his  mother,
and  embellished  the  homestead  with  trees  and  a  sub-
stantial stone  wall,  from  the  profits  of  his  voyages.

And  here,  perhaps,  we  may  be  allowed  to  descend
firom  the  dignity  of  history  to  relate  a  few  familiar

*  Information  obtained  from  Rev.  Anson  Gleason.    Most  of  the
•abBeqaent  details  are  derived  from  him.


94  uisaioNARv  memorial.

B&ecdotes.  A  little  of  tlie  sailor  and  tlic  Indian
mingled  with  the  Christian,  sometimes  produces  an
originality  of  expression  which  has  a  vivid  effect.
"  Brethren,"  said  one  of  them,  in  an  exhortation  at  a
jHXTate  meeting,  "  let  us  make  all  sail  for  the  city  that
aint  in  eight  !**

Among  the  native  members  aie  three,  whom  their
paatOT  deaignates  as  precious  old  women,  viz. :  Cyn-
diia,  Martha,  and  Panhenia,  descended  from  the
Tantaquidjin,  Wyax,  and  Hoskott  families  of  Mo-
hcagan.  They  are  always  ready  to  revire  his  heart
nnder  discouragement,  and  to  stay  up  his  arms  when
they  are  ready  to  drop,  being  of  that  excellent  gen-
•nti(»  who  "  hope  on,  hope  ever."  One  of  these
^fod  females  in  a  prayer-meetiDg  with  a  few  of  her
own  people,  being  so  much  affected  as  to  be  unable
to  proceed,  lifted  her  hands  and  streaming  eyes  up-
mrd,  and  exclaimed,  "  Lord !  I  cannot  tell  it,  but  I
c«n  cry  it,"  and  said  no  more.

Cynthia  is  the  daughter  of  Lucy  Tantaquidjin,  that
IsBt  suiriTor  of  the  Aukum  age.  She  had  much  to
Mruggle  with  in  the  season  of  her  couTersion,  having
previously  been  very  intemperate,  and  finding  it  diffi-
cult to  free  henelf  from  that  raging  thirst  to  which
abe  bad  so  long  been  a  bond-slave.  Often  her  agita-
tiaa  was  ao  great  as  to  shake  the  floor  beneath  her.
8ha  had  at  the  time  a  small  quantity  of  ardent  spirits
in  the  house,  and  after  beginning  to  hope  that  she  hod
another  heart  and  mind  than  before,  it  being  neces-


MOHEAGAN  MISSIONS.  95

sary  for  her  to  go  to  the  closet  that  contained  the
tempting  poison,  so  great  was  her  fear  lest  the  sight
should  overcome  her  resolution,  that  she  opened  the
door  (as  she  said  afterwards)  with  as  much  trembUng
and  apprehension  as  if  a  wild  beast  had  been  caged
within,  and  ready  to  leap  out  and  devour  her.  She
successfully  resisted  the  temptation,  and  has  ever
since  remained  rigidly  temperate.  One  member  of
the  church,  however,  has  been  excommunicated  for
intemperance,  and  another  is  now  under  suspension
for  the  same  cause ;  yet  many  interesting  instances
might  be  given  of  strict  adherence  to  the  temperance
pledge.  One  young  Indian  having  been  accidentally
wounded,  it  was  proposed  to  dip  the  bandage  with
which  they  were  about  to  bind  up  the  wound,  in  al-
cohol ;  but  he  forbade  the  use  of  it,  exclaiming  with
animation,  "  No  rum  shall  touch  my  flesh  !"

Perhaps  nothing  has  taken  place  under  his  minis-
try that  has  tended  more  to  cheer  the  heart  of  their
pastor,  than  the  case  of  Charles  Wyax.  This  was
an  interesting  youth  nineteen  years  of  age,  with  an
open  countenance,  a  sparkling  eye,  and  a  complexion
tawny  red,  bespeaking  the  pure  Indian  blood.  He
had  attended  the  school  of  Miss  Huntington,  and  be-
ing the  oldest  of  her  male  pupils,  she  had  devoted
herself  with  great  assiduity  to  his  instruction,  and
offered  many  prayers  for  his  conversion.  He  was
eager  to  learn,  but  personally  indifferent  to  the  truth.
His  heart  was  not  right;  and  Miss  H.,  who  even


96  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

from  the  kx  eastern  world  sent  back  her  earnest  re-
gards for  his  welfare,  died  before  any  fruits  of  piety
appeared  to  reward  her  efforts.  Yet  the  seed  sown
was  not  lost  After  Mr.  Gleason's  settlement  at  Mo-
heagan,  he  became  serious,  steady,  pious,  and  being
called  away  from  earth  at  an  early  age,  his  last  days
were  peaceful  and  cheered  with  immortal  hopes.
On  his  death-bed  he  breathed  blessings  upon  the
name  and  memory  of  his  amiable  benefactress.

Such  is  a  brief  history  of  missionary  enterprise  in
Moheagan.  The  inquiry  is  often  made.  Do  the  na-
tives appreciate  the  benefits  bestowed  upon  them  ?
Are  they  grateful  for  instruction  ?  Miss  Hunting-
ton, in  replying  to  similar  interrogatories,  has  given
the  subject  its  right  bearing : — "  The  obligation  is  on
our  side  :  we  are  but  discharging  in  some  inadequate
measure  our  debt  of  gratitude  to  them."  The  peo-
ple of  Connecticut  are  in  truth  debtors  to  the  Mohea-
gans,  not  only  in  the  sense  of  Paul — "  I  am  debtor
both  to  Greeks  and  barbarians," — ^but  in  respect  to
the  interchange  of  good  offices  between  man  and
man.  They  assisted  them  in  their  early  struggle  for
existence.  The  infant  settlements  in  their  vicinity
were  saved  from  the  savage  tomahawk  by  their
faithful  guardianship.  They  supplied  the  wants  of
our  ancestors,  fed  them,  guided  them  often  through
the  vrildemess,  fought  by  their  side,  and  ble^  in  their
defence.  Against  the  Pequots,  the  Narragansetts,
the  Nipnets,  the  Wampanoags,  and  the  French,  they


M0HEA6AN  MISSIONS.  97

sallied  forth  to  fight  our  battles.  In  the  revolutiona-
ry war  they  again  enlisted  in  our  armies.  Rugged,
hardy,  and  wild  as  their  own  granite  hills  and  im-
petuous streams,  yet  stanch  and  faithful  in  their
friendship,  they  stood  around  our  threatened  homes,
a  barrier  to  repel  attack,  or  a  torrent  to  overwhelm
opposition, — and  while  they  remained  an  indepen-
dent tribe,  no  Moheagan  ever  bathed  his  weapon  in
the  blood  of  a  white  man.
New  London^  August,  1845.


Miss  Huntington,  so  often  alluded  to  in  the  pre-
ceding pages,  was  married  to  the  Rev.  Eli  Smith,
missionary  to  Western  Asia,  July  21,  1833,  and  em-
barked with  her  husband  for  Palestine  the  Septem-
ber following.  In  person,  as  well  as  in  mind  and
character,  she  was  uncommonly  interesting.  Very
few  faces  were  so  full  of  what  is  called  expression.
A  stream  of  mingled  sweetness  and  brightness  seem-
ed to  issue  from  her  eyes,  and  bathe  her  countenance
in  its  glow.  The  large  dark  eye,  the  fair,  polished
brow,  the  healthy  hue  of  cheek  and  lip,  the  firm,
erect  gait,  all  were  hers — and  in  combination  formed
a  person  of  surpassing  beauty,  and  great  nobility  of
deportment.  Every  individual  grace  about  her  bore
a  certain  stamp  of  character  and  independence,  yet

9


MB  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

each  was  softened  by  a  gentle  manner  and  winning
kindness  of  speech.  She  was  naturally  sensitive
and  ardent  in  feeling,  and  when  quite  young  often
impetuous  and  passionate,  but  in  after  life  every  im-
pulsive passion  was  subdued  and  chastened  into
beautiful  accordance  with  her  views  of  Christian
duty  and  womanly  propriety.  Still  there  was  ever  a
certain  loftiness  of  feeUiig  and  action  natural  to  her
mind,  that  remained  visible  in  her  air  and  demeanor.
She  left  behind  her,  in  her  native  town,  a  name
more  fragrant  than  precious  ointment.  To  the  young,
especially,  she  had  endeared  herself  by  earnest  de-
votion to  their  improvement.  The  circling  heights
which  overlooked  the  church  in  which  she  worship-
ped, and  on  wjiich  the  Sabbath  pupils  and  Bible
classes  in  which  she  took  such  deep  interest  were
accustomed  to  meet,  were  nature's  witnesses  of  an
affectionate  bond  between  them  and  her.  Sweetly
upon  those  hills  resounded  the  strains  which  so  often
testified  a  grateful  remembrance  of  their  absent
firiend : —

O'er  the  rolling  world  of  waters,

Far  away  is  one  we  love  :
She  to  sad  Jadea's  daughters

Bears  a  message  from  above.
When  she  saw  the  Saviour  grieving

O'er  the  nations  dark  and  dead,
She,  her  home  and  country  leaving,

FollowM  where  his  banner  led.


M0HEA6AN  MISSIONS.  99

There  to  children  lone  and  dreary

She  will  teach  the  Saviour's  name ;
To  his  cross  allure  the  weary  ;

To  the  poor  the  truth  proclaim.
O  may  angels  round  her  hover,

Shield  her  firom  the  Moslem's  rage —
In  disease  and  danger,  cover —

All  her  woes  and  pain  assuage.

Happy  friend !  we  too  will  labor,

Ills  to  cure,  and  souls  to  save  ;
Never  more  our  Gentile  neighbor

Vainly  shall  the  Gospel  crave.
At  thy  throne  in  warm  devotion.

Here,  O  Prince  of  Life  !  we  fall ; —
East  or  west,  o'er  land  or  ocean,

We  will  follow,  shouldst  thou  call.

Soon,  alas  !  were  these  affectionate  strains  chang-
ed for  a  note  of  dee|)er  lamentation.  Mrs.  Smith
died  at  Boojah,  a  small  village  four  or  five  miles
from  Smyrna,  September  30,  1836.


8'V456W


i^M


BT  THE  REY.  RALPH  HOTT.

Was  heard,  'tis  said,  one  tranquil  eve,
A  low  sad  voice  along  the  sky, —

Can  heavenly  natures  ever  grieve  ?
Can  holy  angels  weep  on  high  ?
Sigh, — sigh !

There  spread  a  cloud  of  golden  hue
And  curtain'd  day's  declining  Ught,

Down  floating  from  the  distant  blue
It  came  with  gentle  silent  flight.
Bright, — ^bright !

A  form  upon  celestial  wings  ! —

Wherever  press'd  her  glittering  feet,

Came  gushing  forth  from  hidden  strings
Soft  music,  earth  can  ne'er  repeat,
Sweet, — sweet !


PITY.  101

She  paused,  and  on  a  sunbeam  stood.

Above  a  gently  sloping  hill,
Mute  wonder  fell  on  field  and  wood,

Meandering  stream,  and  mountain  rill  -
Still,— still.

But  that  sad  voice  along  the  sky
Yet  mingled  with  the  passing  gale  ; —

Ah,  do  the  loved  in  heaven  die  ?
Can  sorrow  seraph  hearts  assail  ?
Wail, — ^wail !

She  gazed  o'er  all  the  haunts  of  men,
And  saw  how  sorrow's  fountains  flow  ;

Gay  city,  or  secluded  glen

No  refuge  from  the  certain  blow.
Wo, — ^wo  !

Amid  the  gay  voluptuous  throng,
Moum'd  many  bosoms  sad  and  lone,

Crush'd  in  the  grasp  of  want  and  wrong, —
The  world's  cold  heart  relentless  grown.
Stone, — stone  !

The  captive  pining  in  his  chain.

The  famish'd,  vainly  asking  bread  ;
Sad  partings,  ne'er  to  meet  again  ;

Love's  rose,  that  once  sweet  odors  shed,
Dead, — dead !
9*


)02  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

She  saw,  where,  at  the  pallet  side,
While  orphan  babes  unconscious  slept,

A  scanty  morsel  to  provide.
The  widow  toilsome  vigil  kept,
Wept, — ^wept !

The  weary  stranger  sought  for  rest ;

(Ah,  who  the  goal  hath  ever  won  ?)
No  door  swung  open  for  a  guest.

None  wish'd  the  pilgrim's  journey  done.
None, — ^none.

From  rugged  Labor's  earnest  hand
Uprose  the  palace — ^teem'd  the  soil.

And  navies  swarm'd  at  his  command,
For  lordly  avarice  a  spoil, —
Toil,— toil !

All  moumAil  sat  the  maniac  maid.
No  lover's  voice  in  music  spoke  ;

Confiding  innocence, — ^betray'd !
Poor  heart, — ^what  anguish  when  it  woke  !
Broke, — ^broke  !

Where  lay  a  child  in  death's  cold  sleep,
A  mother  sobb'd  in  wild  despair  ;

Alas  !  the  slumber  was  too  deep.
The  wakeful  spirit  was  not  there  !
Where, — ^where !


PITT.  103

With  feeble  step  deserted  Age

Went  groping  in  a  sightless  gloom,

This  all  his  prayer  on  life's  last  page,
Take  me,  ye  dwellers  of  the  tomb  !
Room, — ^room !

Thus,  gazing  o'er  the  haunts  of  men.
She  saw  how  sorrow's  fountains  flow ;

Gay  city,  or  secluded  glen.
Still  all  resistless  fell  the  blow.
Wo, — wo  !

For  this  upon  that  tranquil  eve

Came  that  sad  voice  along  the  sky ;

For  this  that  heavenly  one  could  grieve.
That  angel,  from  the  realms  on  high.
Sigh, — sigh.

Her  tears  upon  the  sunbeam  spread

A  bow  of  hope  for  every  breast,
A  solace  for  each  heart  that  bled ; —

Earth's  mourners  saw,  and  sank  to  rest,
Blest, — Ablest !

And  still  when  sorrow  presses  sore

They  see  that  radiant  one  above,
The  cloud  of  anguish  passes  o'er,

Descends  again  the  heavenly  dove,
Love, — ^love !


104  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Immortal  Pity  !  Power  Divine  ; —
Down-trodden  ! — ^lo,  a  sure  release  !

Desponding  hearts,  no  more  repine,

Oppression,  grief,  and  want  shall  cease,-
Peace, — ^peace.


Sonnet


BT  H.    T.    TUCKERMAN.


Who  twined  these  flowers  to  grace  my  natal  day  ?

Emblems  of  hope  and  love  that  life  redeem,
Whose  fragrance  charms  desponding  thoughts  away.

And  newly  kindles  youth's  immortal  dream ;
The  rose-geranium — token  blest  of  choice,

Verbena,  in  whose  odor  feeling  Ues,
Sweet  mignionette — ^true  merit's  floral  voice,

And  heliotrope  that  souls  devoted  prize  ?
Who  but  the  gentle  one  that  trial  keeps

Free  from  the  selfish  tyranny  of  earth.
Whose  heart  in  music's  holy  temple  sleeps

Where  kindly  impulse  hath  its  constant  birth :
O  not  with  barren  thanks  will  I  profane
The  cheerful  faith  thy  gift  hath  woke  again !


Burmat).


BY  THE  REV.  EU6ENI0  KINCAID.


The  sun  had  not  yet  risen  on  the  morning  of  the
27th  of  January,  1837,  when  I  left  Ava  for  a  tour
through  the  northern  provinces  of  Burmah.  My
boat  was  long  and  narrow,  managed  by  three  grave,
bearded  Mussulmen,  and  two  active  Burmans.  A
circular  roof,  neatly  constructed  of  palm-leaf,  extend*
ed  over  about  eight  feet  of  the  stem,  to  shelter
me  from  the  rays  of  a  tropical  sun  by  day,  and  the
cold,  dripping  dews  by  night.  Three  miles  brought
us  to  Shmoy-ket-yet,  a  bold  rocky  promontory  ex-
tending a  quarter  of  a  mile  into  the  river  and  crowned
with  temples  and  pagodas,  many  of  them  covered
with  gold-leaf.  We  reached  the  summit  by  a  flight
of  stairs  cut  in  the  solid  rock.  From  this  point,  one
has  a  fine  view  of  three  cities.  Three  miles  to  the
south,  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the  Irrawadi,  is  Ava ;
on  the  opposite  side  is  Sagoin,  and  two  miles  to  the
east  is  Umerapora,  all  royal  cities,  and  surrounded
by  massive  brick  walls.    Suburban  villages  extend  for


106  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

miles  in  some  directions,  and  on  every  side  as  far  as
the  eye  can  reach  are  gardens  for  fruit,  flowers,  and
vegetables.  Groves  of  palm,  tamarind,  mango,  or-
ange, lemon,  and  banana  trees,  are  sprinkled  thickly
within  and  without  the  walls,  furnishing  much  deU-
cious  fruit,  and  a  most  grateful  shade  in  these  warm
latitudes.  This  is  the  most  delightful  season  of  the
year,  the  thermometer  rarely  rising  above  85°  in  the
shade,  a^^  then,  at  this  early  hour  in  the  morning,  the
Sim  is  just  rising  and  bathing  thousands  of  spires  and
minarets  that  glitter  with  gold.  Standing  upon  the
lofty  battlements  of  one  of  these  temples,  the  eye
takes  in  many  miles  of  this  beautiful  valley.  To
the  east  and  west  are  seen  the  dim  outlines  of  moun-
tains, and  at  your  feet  rolls  the  broad  Irrawadi,  bath-
ing the  walls  of  three  proud  cities.  Amidst  the  num-
berless monuments  of  wealth,  industry,  and  supersti-
tion, there  is  one  object  above  all  others  that  will  en-
chain the  attention  of  a  foreigner.  It  is  the  palace
of  Ava,  covering  some  twelve  or  fourteen  acres  of
ground,  with  numerous  graduated  roofs',  and  each
roof  surmoimted  with  many  gilded  spires — ^verandas
of  vast  length  and  vndth,  sustained  by  lofty  colunms
elaborately  carved— rand  all  having  the  appearance  of
burnished  gold ;  it  will  not  fail  to  be  an  object  of  great
interest.  Over  the  eastern  angle  of  the  palace,  and
inunediately  above  the  throne,  rises  the  tallest  and
most  elegantly  constructed  spire  in  the  empire,  and
perhaps  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world.     Ava  has  been


fiURMAH.  10*7

the  residence  of  Burman  monarchs,  with  ]}iit  Uttle
intennption,  for  the  last  five  hundred  years.

Two  miles  further  brought  us  under  the  walls  of
Umerapora,  in  population  and  in  the  splendor  of  its
temples  and  pagodas,  but  Uttle  inferior  to  Ava.  It
was  built  by  the  great  Alompra,  the  founder  of  the
present  dynasty,  about  the  middle  of  the  last  century.
Six  miles  above  Umerapora  is  the  Chinese  mart.  A
caravan  pf  some  fifteen  hundred  had  just  arrived  from
the  province  of  Unan.  I  soon  found  several  who
spoke  the  Burman  language,  and  when  I  brought
forward  a  small  package  of  Chinese  books  there  was
a  great  rush  to  see  and  hear  them.  I  gave  to  a  fine
looking,  inteUigent  Chinese,  the  Gospel  of  John,
translated  by  Dr.  Marshman,  and  bade  him  read  aloud.
It  was  interesting  to  watch  the  countenances  of  these
men,  listening  for  the  first  time  to  the  Messiah's  lan-
guage. I  gave  them  a  few  copies  to  take  back  to
China,  and  we  parted  apparently  well-pleased  with  the
interview.  It  was  near  evening  when  we  came  before
Mengooriy  the  largest  pagoda  in  the  empire.  The
grandfather  of  the  present  reigning  monarch  of  Burmah,
reared  this  vast  pile.  It  is  still  unfinished,  having  been
suddenly  abandoned  in  consequence  of  the  king's  as-
trologers predicting  that,  when  it  should  be  completed,
the  dynasty  of  Alompra  would  cease  to  reign.  It
was  thought  by  many  shrewd  Burmans,  that  the  as-
trologers had  a  hint  that  the  king  would  be  pleased
to  have  some  plausible  excuse  for  abandoning  a  work


108  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

that  wa^  exhausting  the  resources  of  the  empire.  In
the  centre  of  this  enormous  structure,  in  a  room
twenty  cubits  square,  are  placed  images  of  each
member  of  the  royal  family,  made  of  pure  gold,  and
the  amount  of  gold  in  each  image  is  equal  in  weight  to
the  individual  for  whom  it  was  made :  and  also  images
of  each  nobleman  in  the  empire,  made  of  pure  white
silver,  and  the  silver  weighed  against  each  man.  For
ages,  the  Burmans  have  been  accustomed  to  deposite
gold  and  silver,  wrought  into  images,  under  the  base
of  pagodas.  This  custom,  I  beUeve,  is  pecuUar  to
Boodhists.  Every  thing  about  this  pagoda  is  on  a
scale  of  vastness  almost  overpowering.  The  two
lions  that  guard  the  massive  stairs  leading  from  the
river  up  to  the  sacred  enclosure,  are  ninety  feet  high.
They  are  in  a  couchant  posture,  looking  out  fiercely
upon  the  waters.  Nothing,  perhaps,  can  exceed  the
quiet  beauty  of  the  surrounding  scenery.  The  land  is
gently  rising  and  undulating  until  it  terminates  in  a
range  of  hills  three  hundred  feet  high ;  the  villages  are
almost  touching  each  other,  and  embowered  amidst
groves  of  palm  and  tamarind,  their  dark  foliage  forming
a  most  grateful  shade.  The  river  is  more  than  a  mile
broad,  and  on  the  opposite  side  the  rich  alluvial  plain
is  of  vast  extent,  dotted  in  every  direction  with  ham-
lets. In  fourteen  days  I  reached  Bo-maUy  a  city
forty  miles  from  China,  and  the  capital  of  a  rich  and
fertile  province.  To  the  east,  twenty-five  or  thirty
miles,  is  a  lofty  range  of  mountains,  furnishing  a  boun-


BURMAH.  109

dary  between  Burmah  and  China.  This  is  a  vale  of
great  extent,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  mountains,
and  presenting  the  appearance  of  having  formerly  been
a  lake.  Some  twenty  miles  below,  the  Irrawadi,  com-
pressed into  one-third  of  its  usual  width,  rolls  through
a  channel  cut  in  the  solid  rock  for  eight  or  nine  miles.
Evidently  worn  away  by  the  action  of  the  water,  in
some  places  the  rocky  barrier  rises  six  hundred  feet,
and  in  one  place  to  nearly  nine  hundred,  presenting
a  smooth  and  almost  perpendicular  wall  on  each  side.
The  plashing  of  the  oars  and  the  songs  of  the  boat-
men echoed  long  and  loud,  as  if  we  had  been  passing
through  vaulted  caverns.  In  eight  days  more  I
reached  Mo-goung,  a  fortified  town  on  the  north-
western- frontier  of  Burmah,  and  near  the  Yoma,  a
range  of  the  Himmalaya  mountains.  This  city  is  on
the  confines  of  a  vast  wilderness,  which  separates
Burmah  from  India ;  and  by  the  river  is  nine  hundred
miles  from  the  sea.  In  this  tour,  I  visited  nearly  three
hundred  towns  and  villages,  distributed  some  Testa-
ments and  tracts,  and  preached  in  many  places.  I
was  kindly  received  by  the  governors  of  cities,  and
by  the  people  generally ;  and  formed  acquaintance  in
several  Shan  towns  and  with  the  Ka-cheens,  a  people
who  inhabit  all  the  hill-country  between  Ava  and
China,  evidently  a  branch  of  the  great  Karen  family.
During  my  stay  in  the  city  already  named,  I  received
many  substantial  tokens  of  kindness  from  the  governor
and  his  lady,  and  was  invited  to  explain  the  doctrines  of

10


1 10  MISSIONART^OSHORI  AL.

Christianity  in  the  governor's  house.  His  lady  ex-
pressed much  pleasure  on  receiving  a  neatly-bound
copy  of  the  New  Testament,  and  when  I  was  about
leaving,  she  came  to  my  boat  in  company  with  a
younger  sister  and  a  long  train  of  attendants,  bring-
ing me  fruit,  eggs,  rice,  and  various  other  articles  for
my  journey.  These  ladies  apologized  in  the  most
kind  and  dignified  manner  for  the  governor  not  com-
ing to  take  leave  of  me,  and  said  that  urgent  business
detained  him  in  the  court^room.  I  commended  them
to  God  and  that  blessed  book  they  held  in  their
hands,  explaining  for  an  hour  or  more  the  great  doc-
trines of  Christianity.  My  object  in  this  tour  was  to
ascertain  the  nimiber  of  towns  and  villages,  the  dif-
ferent races  of  people,  their  manners  and  customs,  the
climate,  and  the  probable  prospect  of  being  able  to
introduce  among  them  the  knowledge  of  God ;  as  also,
to  learn  the  facihties  for  opening  an  intercourse  with
China,  and  to  ascertain,  if  possible,  whether  the  Ka-
cheens  were  a  people  different  from  or  similar  to  the
Karens  in  the  southern  provinces  of  Burmah.  Having
accomplished  all  that  I  had  in  view,  or  all  that  could  be
done  with  the  means  at  my  conmiand,  I  turned  back
towards  Ava.  We  were  now  four  hundred  miles
north  of  Ava,  and  one  thousand  north  of  Maulmein.
My  boat  glided  rapidly  down  the  river,  and  we  had
the  prospect  of  finishing  the  whole  journey  without
encoimtering  any  serious  difficulty.  True,  while  in
the  Mo-goung  province,  we  had  been  obliged  to


BURMAH.  Ill

spend  three  nights  in  a  wild,  mountainous  region,  in-
habited by  tribes  reputed  j&erce  and  savage,  but  in
the  night  we  kindled  no  fires  and  passed  through  un-
molested. About  one  hundred  and  thirty  miles  be-
low Mo-goungy  we  spent  a  day  at  Kuen^dau,  a  beau-
tiful island  two  miles  long  and  nearly  one  mile  broad.
From  time  immemorial  an  annual  festival  has  been
held  on  this  island,  continuing  firom  ten  to  twelve
days.  It  is  among  the  most  celebrated  in  the  em-
pire, and,  like  all  Boodhist  festivals,  is  partly  for  pur-
poses of  devotion  and  partly  for  traffic.  The  central
part  of  the  island  is  thickly  studded  vnth  pagodas,  few
of  them  more  than  sixty  feet  high,  but  all  surmounted
vnth  bells,  varying  in  nimiber  from  twenty  to  sixty
on  each  pagoda,  and  so  constructed  that  when  the
wind  blows  all  are  set  ringing.  These  pagodas  are
covered  vsrith  gold-leaf  firom  the  base  to  the  top.  In-
credible numbers  of  idols,  formed  mostly  of  marble,
copper,  lead,  and  wood,  are  deposited  in  brick  build-
ings. The  governor  of  the  province,  with  his  police,
was  present,  to  maintain  order  and  to  collect  the
king's  revenue.  The  tents  were  spread  out  on  every
side  to  the  water's  edge,  leaving  narrow  streets  cross-
ing each  other  at  right  angles,  and  still  thousands
were  living  in  their  boats.  The  goods  of  all  nations
were  spread  out  in  one  continuous  bazar,  from  the
rich  silks,  and  velvets,  and  crapes  of  China,  to  the
plain  musUns  and  glass  ware  of  America.  Here  are
shawls  firom  Scotland  and  Cashmere ;  broadcloths  and


112  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

cutlery  from  England ;  fancy  bottles  from  France  ;
idols,  gold-leaf,  and  jewellery  from  Ava  and  Hindostan ;
spices  from  Smnatra  and  Ceylon ;  lackered  boxes  and
pickled  tea  from  the  Shan  principaUties ;  frirs  and  musk
frt)m  Thibet,  and  the  list  might  be  lengthened  in  almost
endless  variety.  The  governor  invited  me  to  tea,  and
again  to  breakfast.  He  was  extremely  affable  and  obli-
ging, and  urged  me  to  spend  a  week  with  him,  and  to
visit  two  or  three  towns  in  the  adjacent  country.  His
wife  was  a  lady  of  fine  imderstanding,  and  poUshed
manners,  though  a  little  vain,  as  she  took  much  pains
to  tell  me  her  father  was  a  distinguished  general  in  the
Burman  army,  and  shared  largely  in  the  confidence
of  his  majesty.  At  breakfast,  a  table  of  soUd  silver
was  placed  before  me  and  loaded  with  luxuries ;  and
when  I  went  to  my  boat  I  found  my  kind  hostess  had
sent  a  variety  of  provisions  thither  for  my  journey.

The  governor  told  me  of  the  ruins  of  ancient  cities
some  forty  miles  below  as  objects  of  great  curiosity.
On  our  way  down,  we  spent  a  few  hours  in  examin-
ing these  remains  of  antiquity.  Some  miserable  vil-
lages are  in  the  neighborhood,  but  I  could  find  no
man  who  was  wiUing  to  act  as  a  guide.  Taking  my
four  Burman  boys,  (young  men  between  sixteen  and
twenty  years  of  age,)  and  three  of  my  boatmen,  I
plunged  into  the  darkj  tangled  forest.  Soon  we  came
upon  a  wall  above  twenty  feet  high  and  twelve  feet
broad,  and  traced  this  in  nearly  a  straight  line  for  a
quarter  of  a  mile.    The  moat  must  have  been  of


BURMAH.  113

great  breadth  and  depth,  for  after  so  many  centuries
we  found  it  clearly  defined  and  in  some  places  eight
feet  deep.  Trees  of  enormous  size  were  growing
in  it.  Climbing  over  a  low  place  in  the  wall,  we
made  our  way  across  heaps  of  ruins,  cautiously,  for
fear  of  cobras  and  tigers.  At  length  we  came  to
what  appeared  to  be  the  base  of  an  abrupt  hill,  cov-
ered, as  every  other  part  was,  with  a  dense  jungle,
excluding  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  almost  shutting  out
the  light  of  day.  We  climbed  up,  till  at  length  we
emerged  into  open  day.  Cutting  away  some  of  the
tall,  slender  bamboos,  which  grew  on  the  very  sum-
mit, we  had  a  fine  view.  To  the  east  and  south  of
us,  the  ruins  extended  to  a  great  distance.  We  stood
on  the  top  of  an  ancient  pagoda,  of  vast  size,  that
has  for  ages  been  melting  down.  Digging  into  the
top,  we  came  upon  images  of  Boodh.  Some  of
them  had  inscriptions  on  them  in  the  ancient  Sans-
crit or  Pali  language.  In  Burman  history,  written
nearly  eight  hundred  years  ago,  these  ruins  are
mentioned,  but  no  reference  is  made  to  their  origin.

Several  boats  laden  with  pilgrims  halted  forthe  night
at  a  sn^all  village  where  we  had  taken  up  our  lodgings ;
they  were  on  their  way  to  Rangoon,  distant  more  than
one  thousand  miles  from  their  home .  The  larger  num-
ber were  aged  people.  It  was  truly  affecting  to  lis-
ten to  the  reasons  they  gave  for  undertaking  such  a
long  and  perilous  journey :  to  obtain  such  an  amount
of  merit  as  would  furnish  them  with  a  passport  to  a

10*


]  14  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

better  world,  appeared  to  be  the  object  of  the  most
thoughtful  and  intelligent.  Sitting  as  they  were  around
a  fire  kindled  on  the  shore,  I  conversed  with  them  till
midnight.  Among  the  most  interesting  in  the  group
was  an  elderly  woman,  gentle  and  dignified  in  her
manners,  with  an  open,  placid  expression  of  coim-
tenance.  As  the  discourse  went  on,  her  attention
became  fixed,  and  her  large  intelligent  eyes  kindled
up  with  extraordinary  animation  when  the  attributes
of  the  Deity  were  explained,  and  then  the  relations
we  sustain  to  Him,  and  the  provision  He  has  made
for  our  happiness.  The  doctrines  evidently  made  a
pleasant  impression  on  her  mind,  and  with  God's  bless-
ing they  may  prove  a  savor  of  life  to  many  in  that
interesting  group.

When  but  httle  more  than  two  hundred  miles  above
Ava,  passing  through  a  moimtainous  region,  some-
thing like  the  Highlands  of  the  Hudson,  a  long,  nar-
row boat,  with  twelve  armed  men,  came  towards  us,
uttering  the  most  savage  yells,  and  ordering  us  to
stop.  "  Robbers  are  coming — robbers  are  coming,"
was  said  in  a  suppressed  but  earnest  tone  by  every
man  and  boy.  We  had  a  musket  and  a  pair  of  pis-
tols as  some  security  against  pirates.  I  told  one  of
the  men  to  hold  up  the  musket  that  they  might  see  we
were  prepared  for  robbers.  Observing  this,  they  rowed
towards  the  shore,  but  soon  returned  with  another  boat
and  twelve  men,  makingnow  a  company  of  twenty-four,
armed  with  muskets,  spears,  and  swords.    I  had  spent


BURMAH.  115

all  the  morning  in  writing,  and  as  yet  remained  sitting
under  my  palm-leaf  roof,  so  that  the  robbers  had  not
seen  me.  My  men  cried  out,  "  Teacher,  come  quickly,
the  robbers  are  on  us — ^what  shall  we  do  ?"  I  rushed
out  and  ordered  them  to  be  off,  at  the  same  time
holding  up  the  pistols  in  a  threatening  attitude.  In-
stantly on  seeing  me,  they  rowed  towards  the  shore,
making  signals  as  they  went :  this  led  us  to  look
carefully,  and  we  saw,  to  our  dismay,  a  large  body  of
men  hurrying  about.  It  was  clear  we  had  fallen  upon  a
large  troop  of  banditti,  men  whose  profession  is  rob-
bery and  murder.  My  poor  Mussulmen  were  more
terrified  than  the  Bu^ans  at  the  savage  appearance
of  these  lawless  men.  I  knew  we  should  have  but
a  slender  hope  of  making  our  escape,  unless  by
boldness  we  could  terrify  them.  In  a  short  time,
however,  six  boats,  with  some  seventy  men,  all  arm-
ed, and  uttering  wild,  savage  cries,  came  down  to-
wards us.  Nearly  naked,  their  hair  hanging  loosely
and  flying  in  the  wind-rsome  brandishing  their
swords,  and  others  poising,  spears  in  the  air  or  grasp-
ing  muskets — it  was  a ,  scene  sufficiently  terrific.
My  men  and  boys,  except  one,  lay  down  in  the  bot-
tom of  the  boat.  Slowly,  in  the  form  of  a  crescent,
they  gathered  around  me,  and  when  about  two  hun-
dred yards  off,  they  fired  a  roimd  of  twenty-five  or
thirty  shots  into  my  boat.  The  balls  whistled  around
me  in  every  direction.  Their  yells  rent  the  air  and
echoed  among  the  hills.     T  looked  around  for  a  mo-


116  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

ment  to  see  if  any  of  my  people  were  killed.  The
turban  of  the  noble  fellow  who  stood  up  was  pierced,
but  no  one  was  hurt.  Thinking  it  madness  to  offer
resistance  against  such  a  body  of  armed  savages,  I
laid  down  the  pistols  and  told  them  to  fire  no  more —
that  I  surrendered.  I  had  hardly  uttered  these
words,  when  five  or  six  shots  more  were  fired,  some
of  which  pierced  the  boat.  I  remonstrated  with
them  on  the  folly  and  cowardice  of  firing  upon  unarm-
ed men — ^told  them  they  had  nothing  to  fear — and
that  they  saw  I  had  nothing  in  my  hands,  and  should
make  no  resistance.  They  gathered  slowly  around
me,  their  bayonets  fixed,  their  spears  poised  in  the
air,  and  their  swords  drawn,  as  if  they  intended  cut-
ting me  in  a  thousand  pieces.  It  was  a  fearful  mo-
ment. Soon  I  was  encased  with  the  points  of  spears
and  bayonets;  they  raved,  threatened,  and  uttered
the  most  horrible  imprecations.  In  a  few  minutes
one  had  on  my  coat,  another  my  waistcoat,  another
my  hat,  and  another  my  shoes ;  they  began  to  tear
off  the  rest  of  my  clothes,  when  I  resisted,  and  ap-
pealed to  the  leader,  who  ordered  them  to  desist.
Brought  to  the  shore,  we  were  hurried  before  the
robber-chief.  All  my  books,  clothes,  papers,  provis-
ions, medicines,  money,  and  every  thing  in  the  boat
were  brought  and  laid  in  a  heap,  and  soon  distributed.
Being  successful  in  retaining  part  of  the  clothes  I  had
on  when  taken^  I  appealed  to  the  robber-chief  for  my
cloak,  or  a  blanket,  but  to  no  purpose — and  then  urged


BURMAH.  117

for  one  of  my  coats,  but  all  in  vain.'  Sitting  down
beside  him,  with  my  hand  upon  his  knee,  and  look-
ing him  full  in  the  face,  I  said — "  I  am  a  teacher  of
religion,  and  have  here  several  English,  Greek,  and
Shan  books,  for  which  your  men  can  have  no  use,
and  I  shall  esteem  it  as  a  great  favor  if  you  will
order  these  fellows  to  give  them  back."  The  mus-
cles of  his  hard  face  relaxed,  and  urging  my  plea  in
a  manner  which  I  deemed  best  adapted  to  awaken
any  latent  feeling  of  kindness  in  his  dark  and  savage
breast,  he  bade  them  return  to  me  my  books  stnd  pa-
pers. This  being  done,  I  was  ordered  to  my  little
boat,  and  the  order  was  rapidly  and  roughly  executed.
A  guard  was  placed  over  me — a  consultation  was
held.  I  was  near  enough  to  hear  much  that  was
said.  Soon  one  of  my  Burman  boys  came  to  me,
pale  and  trembling,  "  Teacher,  you  are  to  be  be-
headed at  sundown," — and  could  say  no  more  ;  cov-
ering his  face  with  his  two  hands,  he  wept  bitterly.
It  was  an  awful  moment.  "  To  be  beheaded  at  sun-
down," I  said  to  myself,  and  a  cold,  death-like  chill
crept  over  my  whole  frame.  I  felt  faint,  and  my
eyes  became  dim.  "  The  Lord  reigneth  ;  He  will
do  all  things  well,"  was  a  consoling  thought.  Rally-
ing a  little,  I  said  to  the  noble  Christian  boy,  in  an
under  tone,  "Where  are  the  rest?"  "They  are
afraid  and  have  hid  in  the  bushes,"  he  rephed.  Soon
the  cry  was  heard,  "  Another  boat  is  coming," — and
away  went  an  armed  boat  to  bring  it  in.     Then  an-


lis  MI8SI0NAEY  MBMORIAL

OtheTy  and  andther,  and  before  night  twenty-nine
boats,  with  men,  women,  and  children,  were  captured
and  robbed.  It  was  a  scene  of  wretchedness  never
to  be  forgotten.  All  were  stripped  of  every  thing,
and  many  cruelly  beaten,  but  none  were  placed  un-
der guard  but  myself.  The  sun  viras  fast  sinking  in
the  west ;  now  and  then  a  chill  of  horror  would  come
over  me,  but  it  viras  only  momentary.  ''  Death  is
but  death,"  I  said  to  myself,  **  and  if  it  be  God's
will  that  I  should  die  by  the  hands  of  these  sav-
ages, it  will  all  be  well ;"  and  I  felt  strong  to  en-
dure. The  sun  was  nearly  touching  the  top  of  the
western  moimtains,  and  I  began  to  count  the  minutes
that  remained.  The  robbers,  except  my  guard,  were
sitting  in  a  body  at  no  great  distance.  I  gazed  alter-
nately upon  these  savages  and  upon  the  retiring  sun.
The  thoughts  and  feeUngs  of  that  hour  must  remain
unrecorded.  One  of  the  robbers  spoke,  and  I  started
upon  my  feet.  In  silence  I  repeated  his  words,  and
for  a  moment  was  bewildered  :  his  words  were  Uke
the  sweetest  music,  and  for  a  moment  I  thought  it  an
illusion.  **  If  this  foreigner  is  killed,  it  will  make  a
great  noise."  "Very  true,"  said  another,  and  so
several  spoke.  Here  they  became  divided  in  their
counsels,  and  a  loud  and  angry  debate  took  place.
The  robber-chief  commanded  silence,  and  then  said,
"  This  foreigner  shall  not  be  put  to  death  to-night--^
hereafter,  we  will  see  what  is  best  to  be  done."
In  a  way  I  had  never  thought  of,  God  brought


«  *^


BURMAH.  119

deliverance.  The  robbers  all  retired,  loaded  with
spoils,  ordering  us  all  to  remain.  At  dark,  my  four
Burman  boys  and  three  of  my  boatmen  came  to  me.
We  fell  on  our  knees  and  thanked  God  for  his  mer-
ciful deliverance.  Without  clothes  and  without  food,
we  lay  down  and  slept.  On  the  following  morning,
very  early,  a  few  miles  further  down,  at  Sabanago,
a  large  village,  I  was  attacked  again  by  about  two
himdred  men.  They  tore  oflF  every  article  of  cloth-
ing, tied  me  with  ropes,  and  drove  me  on  before  the
points  of  their  spears.  Having  only  a  piece  of  cloth
which  one  of  iny  Burman  boys  gave  me,  I  was  taken
into  the  village  and  made  to  sit  in  a  ring,  marked  on
the  ground,  about  three  feet  in  diameter.  A  guard
of  fifteen  men  was  finally  placed  over  me.  My  men
wgre  beaten  with  ratans  in  a  most  brutal  manner ;
the  bodies  of  three  of  them  were  dreadfully  lacerated.
This  troop  of  banditti,  and  that  up  the  river,  I  found
were  leagued  together.  After  sitting  in  the  ring  all
day,  I  was  ordered  into  my  boat,  and  there  guarded.
My  Burmans  not  being  under  a  guard,  and  expecting
that  I  should  be  decapitated  or  sold  into  slavery,  qui-
etly fled  away,  except  one  who  was  ill,  and  a  boy,  who
determined  to  stay  by  me  till  the  last.  He  begged
rice  for  me,  and  at  length  procured  from  the  rob-
bers a  pair  of  my  shoes  and  a  pair  of  trousers.  On
the  third  day  of  my  captivity,  this  noble-hearted
Christian  boy  was  forcibly  taken  oflF  by  one  of  the
robber  chiefs.     This  was  one  of  my  greatest  trials  ;


120  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

foi  my  last  earthly  support  seemed  to  be  removed.
The  same  evening,  however,  between  ten  and  eleven
at  night,  a  young  Kathay,  who  had  been  brought  up
at  Ava,  crept  cautiously  into  my  boat,  and  said, —
"  Teacher,  I  was  once  at  your  house  in  Ava,  and
it  makes  me  sad  to  see  you  without  clothes  and
food.  I  have  bribed  the  guards  to  let  me  bring  you
a  cloth  and  some  rice  and  salt.  I  will  bring  you  rice
every  night,  and  let  you  know  if  there  is  any  way  to
escape."  There  was  just  starlight  enough  to  see  his
form  and  the  outlines  of  his  face.  I  said  to  myself,
as  I  began  to  eat  the  rice  he  brought  me  in  a  plantain-
leaf,  This  is  Heaven's  messenger.  His  language  was
not  more  humane  than  the  tones  in  which  he  uttered
it  were  kind  and  soothing.  He  was  faithful  to  his  word«
My  guards  became  careless.  I  had  amused  th^m
for  hours  every  day  by  telling  them  about  America
and  England,  and  other  coimtries ;  and  they  evidently
thought  me  very  well  satisfied  with  my  situation.
On  the  fifth  night  I  thought  them  all  asleep  before
morning,  but  it  was  extremely  hazardous  to  attempt
an  escape.  The  sixth  day  came,  and  I  was  still  a
prisoner.  To  give  all  the  particulars  of  these  six
days,  the  horrible  cruelty  I  saw  inflicted  upon  men
and  women,  and  all  the  acts  of  barbarity  I  endured,
would  occupy  too  much  space.  Daily  I  saw  women
tied  with  ropes,  their  hands  and  feet  bound  together,
and  they  were  then  beaten  with  ratans.  In  some  cases
they  tortured  them ;  the  object  of  such  cruelty  was  to


BURMAH.  121

get  their  concealed  silver  and  jewels.  I  often  forgot
my  own  wretchedness  whilst  sympathizing  with  these
unhappy  females,  and  whilst  listening  to  the  heart-
rending cries  of  their  little  children,  as  they  crowded
around  and  embraced  their  lacerated  and  bleeding
mothers.  I  saw  one  little  girl  kicked  in  the  most
brutal  manner,  because  she  flung  her  arms  around
her  mother's  neck  and  kissed  her  pale  and  apparent-
ly dying  hps.  Scenes  like  these,  but  as  varied  as
the  most  refined  and  inventive  cruelty  could  produce,
I  witnessed  from  morning  tiU  evening.  I  made  up
my  mind  that  day  to  get  away,  or  die  in  the  attempt.
I  did  get  away,  and  after  traveling  seven  days,  reach-
ed Ava.  How  beautiful  and  impressive  the  language
of  David, — "  Though  I  walk  through  the  dark  valley
of  the  shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil.*^

11


MaxTSi  at  t\}t  Btipnlt\)rt.


BT  MISS  HANNAH  F.  GOULD.


"  Then  the  disciples  went  away  again  unto  their  own  home.  But  Mary  stood
without  the  sepulchre  weeping."— John  zz.  10-11.


O,  he's  gone  !  the  tomb  forsaken  !

They  have  come  where  Jesus  lay,
RolPd  aside  the  stone,  and  taken

Him  they  crucified  away  I
Here's  the  slrroud  we  sorrowing  made  him

Whom  they  pierced  with  nail  and  spear  :
Murderers  of  our  Lord  !  they've  laid  him

Far  from  sight — he  is  not  here.

Lo  !  I  see,  where  he  was  sleeping

Pale,  in  death's  cold,  shadowy  night.
Watchmen ;  they  his  place  are  keeping

Clothed  in  raiment  dazzling  white  !
And,  as  consolatipn  giving,

'Twas  of  him 'they  sweetly  said,
"  Weep  him  not ;  nor  seek  the  living

In  the  mansion  of  the  dead."


*.


MARY  AT  THE  SEPULCHRE.  123

They  are  angels  ! — and  they  know  me  !

Sinful  mortal,  I'm  afraid  !
Stranger,  Sir,  wilt  thou  not  show  me

Where  my  blessed  Lord  is  laid  ?
'Tis  his  voice  ! — my  name  he  calleth !
.  Hail,  Rabboni ! — Israel's  King !
Conquer'd,  death  beneath  thee  falleth  ;

Broke  his  sceptre — ^lost  his  sting !

Netoburyport,  Mass.


Sri)e  SHebt  of  |Pm0i)in9  l|ttmamts  to  Eelreeming

JUritg.

The  duty  of  the  Christian  church  to  give  the  Gos-
pel to  the  heathen,  is  one  that  scarce  seems  at  this
day  to  need  discussion  or  argument.

The  command  of  our  blessed  Redeemer  as  to  this
matter,  forms  the  close  of  Matthew's  Gospel :  "  And
Jesus  came  and  spake  unto  them,  saying,  All  power
is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Go  ye
therefore  and  teach  all  nations,  baptizing  them  in  the
name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the
Holy  Ghost;  teaching  them  to  observe  all  things
whatsoever  I  have  commanded  you :  and  lo,  I  am
with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.
Amen."  We  have  here  a  law  enacted  for  the  church,
by  him,  who  is  not  only  her  Head,  but  who  claims
all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  This  law  requires
that  all  nations  be  taught  his  doctrines  and  his  ordi-
nances. To  encourage  the  church  in  attempting
obedience  to  this  enactment,  he  pledges  his  own  pre-
sence with  them  to  the  end  of  the  world.     Is  it  ask-


THE  DEBT  OP  HUMANITY.  125

ed,  then,  how  long  this  duty  endures  ?  Is  the  inquiry
made,  are  any  other  than  the  apostles  here  addressed  ?
The  answer^s,  the  command  to  preach  Christ's  Gos-
pel 'among  all  nations,  and  the  command  to  practise
Christ's  ordinances,  are  entwined  together.  Most
Christians  believe  in  the  perpetual  obligation  of  these
ORlinances ;  they  must  believe,  then,  in  the  perpetual
obligation  of  Christian  missions.  The  two  are  so
united,  that  he  who  would  divorce  them  must  destroy
both.  That  Christian  missions  were  to  continue,  ap-
pears again  from  the  way  in  which  Christ's  promise
is  pledged  to  his  church.  He  does  not  speak  of  his
presence  as  being  given  to  the  apostles  or  the  Chris-
tians of  the  first  centuries  only,  but  it  is  to  be  the
guard  and  glory  of  the  church  to  the  end  of  the
world.

There  was  something  most  impressive  in  the  scene
and  circumstances  in  which  this  commission  was  given
to  the  disciples  of  Christ.  It  was  the  farewell  trum-
pet as  his  chariot  went  up  the  skies.  Here,  indeed,
he  speaks  to  us  out  of  heaven.  It  was  as  our  Mas-
ter was  quitting  the  church.  His  bodily  and  visible
presence  was  to  cease  amongst  them.  In  its  stead
was  to  come  the  invisible  and  spiritual  superinten-
dence of  the  Holy  Ghost.  At  such  an  hour,  under
such  circumstances,  the  care  of  the  heathen  world
was  a  bequest  made  to  the  world  by  her  departing
Redeemer.  The  name  of  Testament  is  given,  in  the
popular  use  of  language,  to  the  volume  of  the  Chris-

11*


126  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

tian  Scriptures.  Some  think  this  English  word  an
unhappy  one,  as  not  sufficiently  including  the  en-
tire meaning  of  the  original  term  which  ivs  employed
to  translate.  It  would  seem  that  the  title,  "  Te*sta-
ment,"  taking  that  word  in  its  ordinary  meaning  of  a
last  will,  belongs  to  a  small  portion  of  this  volume
rather  than  to  the  entire  book  to  which  it  is  attached.
It  would  seem  to  belong  to  the  parting  command  of
Christ.  We  might  hold  up,  perhaps,  more  properly,
under  that  title,  the  closing  sentences  of  the  Gospel
by  Matthew.  The  missionary  commission  of  the
church  is  in  truth  the  last  will  and  testament  of  our
Redeemer  and  Master.  Sealed  on  the  day  of  Cal-
vary, and  published  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  it  be-
queathed the  charge  of  a  lost  world  to  the  church  of
the  saints  of  the  most  high  God.

The  command  comes  to  us,  then,  with  the  added
sacredness  of  the  last  request  of  a  Friend  whom  we
have  loved,  whose  bounties  we  inherit,  and  whose
memory  we  profess  tenderly  to  cherish.  It  is  no
vulgar  act  of  disobedience  to  neglect  such  an  injunc-
tion. It  is  more  than  insensibility — it  is  sacrilege.
Whetlier  the  executors  of  this  will  have  been  faith-
ful to  tlioir  trust>  or  false,  is  a  question  we  must  leave
to  their  own  conscience.  Every  one  of  us  must  an-
»\vw  lh«t  question  for  himself  and  to  his  God,  for
M^ — H^  nre  those  ejcecwtors-  Christians  are  left  in
eh«^V|te  of  the  fultihueiU  of  an  instrument,  ratified  i»
lh«»  U)\H>d  ^f  their  Lord.


THE  DEBT  OF  HUMANITY.  127

This  command,  the  primitive  disciples  felt  in  all
its  weight.  They  accepted  the  legacy,  and  did  their
share  of  discharging  the  trust ;  and  the  heathen  world
reeled  under  the  shock  given  to  idolatry  by  the  ad-
venturous love  of  the  early  Christians,  as  they  went
everywhere  preaching  the  Gospel.  And  every  revi-
val of  true  Christianity  has  been  marked  by  a  re-
newed regard  to  the  spirit  of  this  parting  command
of  our  Saviour.  A  fervid  piety  has  always  been  ag-
gressive in  its  spirit  towards  the  world.  It  is  matter
of  thanksgiving  that,  in  our  times,  the  obligation  of
this  charge  is  beginning  to  be  more  and  more  felt.
Yet  the  church  has  evidently  much  to  learn  before
reaching  the  zeal  of  primitive  times,  and  before
claiming  rightly  to  feel,  and  fully  to  obey,  this  last
injunction  of  her  ascending  Lord.

Having  adverted  to  our  Lord's  own  explicit  com-
mand, made  at  such  a  time,  it  would  seem  as  if  all
other  discussion  of  the  subject  were  idle.  He  who
does  not  feel  the  obhgation  of  this  motive  can  be
reached  by  no  other.  Yet  it  may  be  well  to  allude
to  yet  other  considerations,  as  further  binding  us  to
obey  this  most  solemn  commandment.

Our  own  professions,  then,  require  of  us  to  dis-
charge the  same  duty.  Each  member  of  the  church
has  by  implication,  if  not  in  explicit  words,  avowed
himself  one  of  a  missionary  body.  A  man's  volun-
tary engagements  may  come  in  to  reinforce  higher
law.     A  man  may  be  bound  by  the  law  of  God  and


128  MISSIONARY   MEMORIAL.

of  nature,  to  discharge  a  duty,  as,  for  instance,  that
of  reheving  an  aged  and  needy  parent.  He  is  guilty
if  he  neglect  that  duty,  though  he  has  never  promised
to  discharge  it.  But  if  he  has  besides  acknowledged
that  obhgation,  and  by  bond  and  by  oath  engaged
himself  solemnly  to  its  fulfilment,  his  neglect  after
such  additional  engagements,  is  most  aggravated.
To  the  want  of  filial  piety,  he  adds  the  crime  of  false-
hood, dishonesty,  and  perjury.  The  man  uniting  him-
self with  the  Christian  church,  has  put  himself  under
such  additional  obligations  to  discharge  what  was  al-
ready a  duty.  He  has  received  baptism  by  virtue
of  that  missionary  commission,  the  charter  of  the
church.

In  all  the  prayers  and  songs  of  the  sanctuary,  the
same  missionary  vows  on  the  part  of  every  Christian
are  implied.  Our  hymns  and  our  supplications  con-
tinually refer  to  the  glorious  prophecies  of  the  final
and  universal  trhimph  of  the  Gospel.  When  we
pray  that  His  kingdom  may  come,  whether  in  verse
or  in  prose,  we  acknowledge  afresh  the  militant  and
aggressive  qharacter  of  the  church,  and  profess  an
interest  in  its  final  conquests.  The  universal  king-
dom of  the  Messiah  presupposes  human  labor  to  aid
in  its  establishment.  Divine  agency,  although  by  no
means  necessarily  confined  to  that  channel,  moves
ordinarily  in  the  channel  of  human  instrumentality.
Faith  is, said  by  the  apostle  to  be  the  gift  of  God,  and
yet  it  Cometh  by  hearing.     The  human  teaching  and


THE  DEBT  OP  HUMANITY.  129

the  divine  blessing  go  together.  To  neglect,  then,  the
appointed  means,  to  be  utterly  indifferent  to  the  mis-
sionary efforts  of  the  church,  is  virtually  to  retract
the  prayer,  "  Thy  kingdom  come,"  and  to  say  in-
stead, "  Let  thy  kingdom  go.  Let  thy  church  decay
and  disappear  from  the  earth.  Let  the  dominion  of
Christ  pass  away,  and  let  his  name  fade  from  under
the  whole  heavens."

Are  we  not  then  justified  in  turning  to  every  mem-
ber of  Christ's  church,  of  either  sex,  and  of  whatever
age  or  condition,  and  in  reminding  them,  that  in  the
sacraments  and  devotions  of  the  house  of  God,  they
have  solemnly  sworn  themselves  away  to  the  mis-
sionary enterprise,  and  that  they  cannot  withhold
.their  sympathies,  their  alms,  and  their  prayers,  with-
out aggravated  guilt  ?

We  welcome  them  to  a  missionary  church,  and  the
songs  and  the  prayers  in  which  they  take  part  are
missionary  intercessions,  prayers  that  God  would
subdue  and  convert  all  nations.  We  must  then  say
to  them,  that  indifference  to  the  welfare  of  Christian
missions,  a  disposition  to  hold  back  from .  their  share
in  the  blessed  work,  is  a  failure  to  frilfil  their  vows
and  oaths.

The  crying  necessities  of  the  unevangeUzed  na-
tions of  our  globe  afford  another  evidence  as  to  the
duty  of  Christians  respecting  the  dissemination  of
the  Gospel.  Misery  may  be  so  extreme  as  to  make
it  at  once  the  charge  of  every  stranger  who  discovers


130  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

it  to  relieve  it.  The  condition  of  those  whom  our
Lord  commanded  to  be  instructed,  and  for  whose  in-
struction the  Christian  church  has  pledged  herself  to
care,  enhances  our  obligations  to  sustain  the  mission-
ary enterprise.  The  more  extreme  the  sufferings
we  undertake  to  relieve,  and  which  we  have  the
means  to  relieve,  the  greater  the  promptitude  with
which  that  relief  should  be  extended.  The  princi-
ple attributed  to  Howard  here  comes  into  exercise :
"Our  superfluities  are  to  be  sacrificed  for  other
men's  necessities,  and  even  our  necessities  must  be
taxed  to  relieve  them  in  their  extremities."  The  un-
evangelized  portions  of  the  globe  are  in  this  extremi-
ty of  riiisery.  Imagination  cannot  look  steadily  into
the  abysses  of  their  wretchedness.  Language  fails
to  wield  such  masses  of  distress.

Ignorance  of  the  true  God  has  brought  with  it
countless  forms  of  vice  and  wo.  Were  it  not  for  our
confidence  in  the  onmipotence  of  that  Saviour  whose
Gospel  we  diffuse,  the  view  would  be  not  merely
appalling,  but  overwhelming,  which  presents  Mtself
to  the  eye  of  the  church  when  gazing  into  the  vast
gulf  of  sin  and  death.  It  is  not  merely  coarse  idola-
try, in  its  foulest  and  bloodiest  forms,  but  it  is  super-
stition organizing  itself  by  the  aids  of  a  false  philoso-
phy into  elaborate  and  learned  and  imposing  systems,
poisoning  the  whole  education  and  legislation  of  a
land,  all  its  arts,  its  science,  and  its  literature.

It  is  not  merely  the  iUiterate  Fetichism  of  Africa


THE  DEBT  OF  HTTMAKlTY.  131

or  the  South  Seas  with  which  we  have  to  deal,  but
the  systems  of  Boodhism  and  Braminism,  the  artful
and  successful  impostures  of  Mohammed,  the  long
obduracy  and  blindness  of  the  children  of  Abraham,
the  friend  of  God ;  errors  ingrained  into  the  heart
and  mind  of  cultivated  and  lettered  nations,  by  all
their  laws  and  all  their  history — ^these  are  among  the
stubborn  evils  to  be  overthrown.  And  under  their
influence,  what  multitudes  of  our  race  are  going  on
to  eternal  perdition !

With  regard  to  the  exact  population  of  our  globe,
the  most  esteemed  authorities  are  at  variance.  Some,
with  Balbi,  would  fix  it  at  seven  hundred  and  thirty
millions ;  others,  with  the  later  German  statists,
rate  it  much  higher — at  nine  hundred  or  one  thou-
sand millions.  All  research  as  to  the  East  seems  to
favor  the  higher  estimate.  Of  this  vast  multitude  of
human  beings,  all  of  whom  are  sinners,  all  fated  to
die,  all  speeding  to  the  judgment,  not  more  than  two
hundred  and  thirty  or  two  hundred  and  sixty  millions,
according  to  the  highest  estimate,  are  even  nominal
Christians,  when  we  include  Romanists  as  well  as
Protestants  under  that  title.  Thus  not  more  than
one-third,  according  to  the  most  favorable  computa-
tion, and  according  to  the  more  probable  compu-
tation but  little  more  than  one-fourth,  give  even  a
nominal  adherence  to  Christianity.  Out  of  all  the
hving  population  of  our  globe,  two-thirds  certainly,
and  perhaps   three-fourths,   are   hving  without  the


132  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

knowledge  of  their  Redeemer  and  Judge.  Let  us
place  before  us  a  map  of  the  world,  as  did  Carey  in
the  early  years  of  his  pondering  the  missionary  ques-
tion, and  it  is  a  melancholy  sight  to  observe  over
what  wide  and  fair  portions  of  our  globe  the  de-
stroyer reigns,  leading  the  teeming  milUons  captive
at  his  will.  If  we  look  to  the  countries  where  Mo-
hammedanism has  sway,  we  see  it  stretching  itself
like  a  broad  and  ragged  belt  over  the  northern  por-
tion of  Africa  and  the  southern  portion  of  Asia,  cov-
ering some  of  the  fairest  regions  of  our  globe,  and
holding  captive  in  its  delusions  one-eighth  or  one-
ninth  of  mankind,  and  some  of  them,  as  the  Persian
and  Arabian,  races  of  high  mental  power.  Its  seats
are  among  the  old  habitations  of  Shem  and  Ham,  the
cradles  of  ancient  science,  conquest,  and  wealth.  Its
political  power  has  shrunk,  and  its  dominions  fretted
away  to  the  West  before  the  incursions  of  Russia
and  the  independence  of  Greece,  and  to  the  East  be-
fore the  colonial  empire  of  Britain  in  India.  But
this  daring  imposture  is  still  preached  and  believed
by  some  one  hundred  and  twenty  millions  of  our
race.  Upon  no  part  of  this  population,  although  the
Christian  Scriptures  have  been  translated  into  their
tongues,  have  Christian  missions  produced  yet  any
perceptible  impression,  except  in  a  few  isolated  cases
of  individual  conversions.  The  political  power  of
Britain  is  deeply  affecting  them.

In  Central  and  Eastern  Asia  reigns  Boodhism,  the

13


THE  DEBT  OF  HUMANITY  133

most  popular  form  of  Mth  in  our  world,  according  to
some  calculations,  and  it  settles  down  like  a  funeral
pall  over  the  one-fourth,  or  according  to  some  esti-
mates, one-third  of  our  race.  It  rules  in  Ceylon,  Bur-
mah,  Siam,  Thibet,  Tartary,  and  among  the  millions
of  China  and  Japan.  Upon  this  form  of  faith  greater
impression  has  been  made  ;  the  Scriptures  have  been
translated  into  several  of  its  tongues.  Much  impres-
sion has  been  made  in  Ceylon,  some  little  in  Burmah^
and  still  less  as  yet  by  Protestant  missions  in  China.
But  large  masses  of  this  population  are  as  yet  com-
paratively shut  up  from  all  access  to  them  in  Thi-
bet, Tartary,  Japan,  and  the  interior  of  China.  It
would  be  tedious  to  estimate  the  other  and  less  nu-
merous forms  of  error.

All  these,  whether  more  or  less  enlightened,  are
servants  of  sin,  and  groaning  often  under  the  terrors
of  a  guilty  conscience  ;  over  all  death  is  raging.  Es-
timating the  unevangelized  portion  of  our  globe  at
six  hundred  millions — and  this  is  probably  too  low  an
estimate — and  allowing  thirty  years  for  the  passing
away  of  one  generation,  fifty*  thousand  are  dying
from  this  class  of  our  race,  the  unevangelized,  every
day  in  the  year.  In  the  course  of  one  week  there
pass  then  from  time  into  eternity  three  hundred  and
fifty  thousand  immortal  beings,  ignorant  of  the  Sa-
viour. Let  us  reflect  on  the  mass  of  existence  and
feeling  thus  passing  into  the  unchangeable  world  of
retribution.     Were  the  largest  city  of  these  United

12


184  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

States  to  be  ingulfed  by  an  e^hquake,  we  may  well
imagine  the  thrill  of  horror  that  would  be  sent  through
the  land.  Yet  the  destruction  of  life  thus  caused
would  not  equal  the  destruction  of  human  life  that  is
each  week  going  on  in  those  countries  and  those
races  that  are  as  yet  destitute  of  the  Gospel.  De-
ducting i&rom  these  numbers  who  thus  weekly  die  ig-
norant of  Christianity,  the  number  who  because  of
their  early  years  are  incapable  of  knowing  the  Gos-
pel, and  for  whose  happiness  beyond  the  grave  we
may  have  hope,  what  a  mass  is  still  left  for  whom  no
such  hope  can  be  cherished  ?  Each  day  fifty  thou-
sand of  our  fellow-beings,  as  yet  unreached  and  un-
subdued by  the  Gospel,  are  entering  eternity.  Let
us  place  ourselves  in  imagination  in  the  stead  of  any
one  of  these  thousands.  Under  the  pressure  of  sin,
and  in  the  prospect  of  death,  I  am  passing  away,  the
victim  of  bodily  and  mental  anguish  ;  I  look  round
for  comfort.  Gaudama  cannot  console  me,  Gunga
cannot  atone  for.  my  sins.  I  look  upward,  and  all  is
dark ;  and  onward,  and  all  is  dark  ;  and  I  am  going
forever,  who  can  tell  me  whither  ?  We  do  not  real-
ize the  horror  of  dying  without  a  Saviour.  Did  we
so,  missions  would  need  neither  agent  nor  convention
to  plead  their  cause  with  the  churches.  Yet  though
we  overlook  such  death-beds — ^they  are — ^they  exist,
as  really  as  if  they  were  seen  crowding  the  aisles  of
our  churches, — as  if  the  sobs  and  wails  of  the  de-
parting spirit,  recoiling,  as  it  looked  into  an  unknown


THE  DEBT  OF  HUMANITY.  135

eternity,  were  thrown  back  now  into  our  ears,  and
were  audibly  echoing  from  our  ceilings.

We  may  not  pause  to  depict  all  the  social  misery,
and  discomfort,  and  oppression,  and  want,  that  grow
out  of  false  religion.  After  the  loss  of  the  soul,
every  other  ill  seems,  and  is  but  petty.

Now  the  men  thus  perishing  are  our  brethren:
the  infidel  disputes  it, — ^the  Christian  missionary  has
proved  it.  The  Gospel  has  gone  to  them,  has  found
m  them  the  same  conscience,  and  has  left  with  them
the  same  consolations  it  found  and  left  with  us ;  and
all  of  these  who  seemed  kin  to  the  brute — the  de-
graded Hottentot  and  the  cannibal  New  Zealander —
it  has  reached ;  and  developed  the  man  and  the  Chris-
tian, the  companion  of  angels,  the  heir  of  heaven,  and
the  child  of  God.  We  have  warrant  to  labor :  they  are
our  brethren  by  nature.  We  have  encouragement  to
labor :  they  may  become  our  brethren  by  grace.  It
is  a  sight  of  all,  to  call  forth  compassion,  and  self-
sacrificing  effort,  and  incessant  prayer.

Upon  the  form  of  paganism  presented  in  Boodhism,
Protestantism,  as  well  as  Romanism,  must  now  make
its  onset  as  it  presents  itself  in  the  vast  and  populous
empire  of  China.

With  the  v\rritten  word  of  God,  which  Rome  has
ever  so  dreaded,  and  with  the  Spirit  of  God,  the
evangelical  missionary  has  no  cause  for  fear  as  to  the
ultimate  result.  But  if  he  may  not  dread,  he  has
little  reason  to  despise  the  Romish  church.     She  has


136  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

talent,  wealth,  zeal.  She  has  her  heroes  and  her
martyrs,  and  can  draw  mto  her  service  the  most  va-
ried instruments  and  the  most  opposite  interests,
whilst  many  of  the  strongest  affections  of  our  fallen
nature  are  enlisted  at  the  first  summons  under  her
banners.  From  her  present  movements  it  is  apparent
that  she  hopes  to  encase  the  globe  in  the  web  of  her
strong  enchantments,  and  to  entangle  in  her  cords  of
delusion  its  freedom,  its  science,  its  art,  and  its  liter-
ature. It  is  not  the  vaunted  spirit  of  freedom,  or  the
boasted  illumination  of  the  press  and  the  common
school,  that  will  avail  to  break  her  spells,  and  they
who  trust  in  such  defences  will  find  her  steadily
gaining  upon  them,  as  she  has  gained,  spite  of  these
defences,  in  some  of  the  old  strongholds  of  European
Protestantism — Germany,  England,  and  Scotland.
There  is  much  in  the  condition  of  the  times,  in  the
importance  of  the  crisis,  and  the  greatness  of  the
difficulties  to  be  encountered,  that  ought  to  crush  out
of  the  true  church  all  self-confidence,  and  make  her
faith  *  in  Christ  more  simple,  direct,  and  entire,  re-
garding him  as  her  only  resource  in  the  impending
conflict

But  if  there  be  much  to  awaken  apprehension,
there  is  also  much  to  encourage.  And  here  we  come
to  the  next  argument  that  binds  American  Christians
to  active  exertion  in  the  missionary  field :  it  is,  the
extent  of  our  opportunities.  The  more  we  can  do,
the  more  we  are  bound  to  do.     Such  opportunities


THE  DEBT  OF  HUMANITY.  137

are  indications  of  divine  Providence,  confirming  and
reinforcing  the  requirements  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,
that  we  should  use  the  power  and  influences  intrusted
to  our  keeping  in  the  Master's  service,  and  occupy
till  he  come  again.

England  and  America  are,  from  their  political  free-
dom, their  commercial  enterprise,  and  the  number  of
their  shipping,  exerting  a  more  extended  influence
over  most  of  the  unevangelized  shores  of  the  globe
than  any  other  nations.  Their  language,  if  not  des-
tined to  supplant  the  French  and  German  in  the  lit-
erature of  the  v^rorld,  seems  likely  to  become  the
language  of  the  w^orld's  commerce.  This  vsrill  give
to  missionaries  speaking  it,  some  great  advantages.

A  great  preparatory  work  for  the  final  triumph  of
the  Gospel,  has  been  accomplished  in  the  form  of
Scripture  translations.  In  the  preparation  of  the
Scriptures,  Protestant  missionaries  have  done  much.
The  Bible  is  now  translated  into  all  the  leading  lan-
guages of  the  world.  Perhaps  it  would  not  be  too
great  an  estimate  to  say,  in  the  tongues  of  seven-
eighths  of  our  race  the  lively  oracles  of  God  are  now
printed.  In  this,  its  earliest  operation,  the  Protestant
mission  moves  more  slowly  and  with  less  of  imme-
diate and  apparent  effect,  than  the  Romish  mission.
But  the  ultimate  result  is  more  abiding,  more  exten-
sive, and  more  sure,  than  that  of  the  opposite  pro-
cess. Like  the  pioneer  husbandman  of  our  western
forests,  it  first  girdles  the  trees,  and  then  sows  its

12*


138  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

harvests  amid  the  dead  trunks.  In  India,  the  decay
and  dying  oflF  under  that  process  of  the  heathen  su-
perstitions, is  seen  in  neighborhoods  where  there  is
as  yet  no  conversion  to  the  Gospel.  Rome  far  more
rapidly  persuades  an  idolatrous  people  to  substitute
one  set  of  names  and  rites  for  another :  the  Virgin
Mary  vrears  the  cast-oflF  finery  of  some  heathen  god-
dess— ^the  old  heathen  festivals  are  retained  imder
Christian  names.

The  children  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  gen-
eration than  the  children  of  light.  For  objects  as  in-
ferior to  the  Christian's  as  is  the  body  to  the  soul,  as
is  earth  to  heaven,  they  are  encountering  perils  and
making  sacrifices,  which  rebuke  our  want  of  liberal-
ity, enterprise,  and  energy.  Opium  has  been  sup-
plied by  nominal  Christians  to  the  millions  of  China,
more  largely  than  the  church  has  supplied  the  Scrip-
tures. Into  Turkey  and  Persia,  New  England  rum
has  preceded  the  New  England  missionary;  and
among  our  western  Indians,  whiskey  and  gunpowder
have  travelled  far  and  fast  in  advance  of  the  Bible.
But  the  great  cause  of  complaint  and  humiliation,  is
not  merely  that  the  world  are  thus  bold  and  adven-
turous in  the  pursuit  of  gain.  The  shame  of  our
condition  is,  that  even  the  Christian  church  seems
more  awake  to  such  motives,  than  to  the  higher  im-
pulses of  love  to  Christ  and  love  to  souls.

Hold  up  before  the  young  men  of  our  churches
the  promise  of  a  liberal  salary  to  be  punctually  paid


THE  DEBT  OF  HUMANITY.  139

for  seirice  to  be  rendered  in  the  most  distant  and
barbarous  lands,  and  have  we  not  reason  to  believe
hundreds  of  them  v^rould  venture  and  sacrifice  all  ?
The  yearly  stipend  of  three  thousand  dollars  for  ten
years,  well  secured  and  punctually  paid,  would  draw
probably  to  almost  every  accessible  part  of  the  hea-
then world  some  thousands  of  the  ardent,  enterprising
young  men  of  our  churches.  It  is  well  that  the
church  has  not  such  sums  to  oflFer,  for  labor  so  pur-
chased would  be  of  httle  spiritual  advantage ;  and
because  hundreds  of  our  young  men,  church  mem-
bers, would  be  attracted  by  the  gain,  that  are  not
now  attracted  by  the  love  of  Christ  and  his  church.
It  would  be  deemed  most  harsh  to  say  that  they  did
not  hold  the  Saviour's  cause  as  being  worth  three
thousand  dollars  a  year.  The  fault  is,  that  their
faith  is  not  here  exercised,  that  they  have  not  suffi-
ciently pondered  the  claims  of  the  perishing  nations,
and  not  sufficiently  yielded  themselves  to  that  love
of  Christ  which  we  believe  to  be  really  their  strong-
est motive.

We  are  not  doing  as  much  as  the  converts  recently
made  from  heathenism  in  some  parts  of  the  mission-
ary field  are  doing — as  much,  we  mean,  in  proportion
to  our  means.  When  the  South  Sea  islanders,  with
comparatively  no  currency,  and  some  of  them  poorly
fed,  clad,  and  housed,  are  seen  bringing  to  the  mis-
sion treasury  their  bamboos  of  oil,  their  cocoanuts,
and  packages  of  arrow-root,  they  who  but  yesterday


140  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL

were  pagans  and  are  still  comparatively  paupers,  are
giving  more  than  our  churches  who  can  look  back
upon  ten  generations  of  Christian  ancestors.  We
who  have  been  cradled  under  the  very  eaves  of  the
Christian  sanctuary,  are  giving,  in  proportion  to  our
resources,  less  than  these  converts  who  take  the  sa-
cramental bread  into  hands  but  recently  washed  from
the  blood  of  their  murdered  infants — murdered  dur-
ing that  dark  night  of  paganism  from  which  they
have  but  just  emerged.  And  thus  the  last  are  first,
according  to  the  Saviour's  prophetic  warning.  It
may  be  said,  they  feel  the  contrast  between  their
present  condition  with  the  Gospel,  and  their  former
condition  without  it,  more  forcibly,  than  we  by  any
possibility  can.  But  although  this  is  so,  our  higher
mtelHgence  should  supply  us  in  the  want  of  personal
experience  of  the  evils  of  paganism  ;  and  it  is  surely
most  unreasonable  that  the  enjoyment  of  the  bless-
ings of  Christianity  for  ten  or  twenty  generations,
should  be  less  abundantly  acknowledged  than  its  en-
joyment for  as  many  years.

They  who  talk  complainingly  of  the  large  demands
of  the  missionary  cause,  or  complacently  of  its  pre-
sent resources,  have  forgotten  their  own  temporal  ob-
ligations to  the  Gospel.  Commerce,  freedom,  and
literature,  owe  more  to  the  Gospel,  than  they  have
ever  paid  for  the  support  and  promulgation  of  that
Gospel.  They  who  talk  of  the  cost  of  religion,
should  calculate  the  cost  of  irreligion.     Calvary  has


THE  DEBT  OF  HUMANITY.  141

left  the  world  hopelessly  and  eternally  in  its  debt.  It
has  laid  the  race  under  obligations,  which  leave  them
bankrupt  as  to  any  hope  of  adequate  repayment.  All
sacrifices  of  gain,  and  comfort,  and  health,  and  even
life  itself,  made  in  the  service  of  the  cross,  are  but
poor  and  paltry  dividends  paid  back  in  acknowledg-
ment of  a  debt  that  man  cannot,  through  time  or
through  eternity,  cancel — the  debt  of  Divine  Love,  of
Suffering  Humanity  ransomed  by  Incarnate  Deity.


JHiBBUittara  m  tl)e  ISm  tD^atem  0^ttUm^nt0.

BT  MRS.  LYDIA  H.  8I00URNEY.

.    The  lake  was  troubled.     Winds  and  waters  strove
On  its  broad  bosom, — while  with  whelming  force
The  many  torrents  of  the  hills  were  loosed
At  the  wild  thunder-gust  that  rudely  sprang
From  summer's  misty  cradle.

O'er  the  tide,
A  little  bark  was  laboring.     Like  a  speck
It  seem'd  amid  the  billows — ^but  held  on
Its  perilous  way,  now  half-submerged,  and  now
Riding  the  surges  with  an  arrowy  speed
To  seek  the  shelter  of  a  quiet  bay.
Two  brawny  oarsmen  steer'd  the  reeling  boat
Safe  to  its  landing-place,  and  with  them  brought
A  youthful  stranger,  of  a  serious  mien
And  gentle  manner.     'Mid  his  slender  stores
Was  seen  the  Book  which  makes  the  simple  wise  :
For  he  was  of  that  self-denying  band
Who  bear  the  Gospel's  mission  to  the  poor,
And  find  their  payment  in  the  wealth  they  give.
A  few  log-cabins  near  that  lonely  lake


THE  WESTERN  MISSIONARY.  143

Rear'd  their  rude  heads.     There,  'mid  the  arid  soil,
The  pine's  low  murmur  met  the  summer  breeze,
While  the  half  prostrate  willow  told  how  strong
Was  the  dire  scourging  of  the  wintry  blast.
A  hardy  race,  remote  from  all  that  charms
A  life  refined,  endured  the  ills  that  wait
The  settler  in  the  wilds.     With  sounding  axe.
They  firom  the  forest  won  each  nook  of  land
On  which  the  bread-corn  for  their  children  grew.
'Mid  this  deep  solitude,  tljp  stranger  paused.
No  taper  spire  allured  him — nor  the  sound
Of  tuneful  sabbath-bell.

Was  this  his  home,
Whose  graceful  form  and  courtly  nurture  spake
Of  pleasant  parlors,  and  of  curtain'3  halls.
Of  pictured  nooks,  whence  trembling  music  stole.
And  the  oak-gamish'd  study,  where  soft  light
Through  Gothic  window,  rich  with  trellis'd  vines,
Gleam'd  o'er  the  storied  page  ?

What  should  content.
In  this  unsightly  wilderness,  a  man
Who  hath  in  him  ambition's  classic  thoughts —
Senses  that  lean  to  pleasure — ^nerves  that  wake
At  memory's  tender  pressure — and  a  heart
To  thrill  and  beat  at  what  the  world  calls  fame  ?
What  bows  him  to  such  bonds  ?

The  love  of  Christ
And  of  the  souls  he  died  for.     Doubt  ye  not :
That  love  shall  yield  a  gain,  which  they  who  serve


144  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Mammon  or  Mars  partake  not.

Come  with  me —
What  time  the  snow-drift  shuts  this  people  out
From  all  beside — ^when  through  long,  icy  months,
Their  care  is  for  the  famine-stricken  herds.
And  how  to  husband  best  the  scanty  store
Of  comfort  for  their  households.

See  the  love
With  which  they  turn  to  him,  who  kindly  shares
In  each  privation,  and  witl^hallow'd  words.
Upbears  them,  'mid  their  pilgrimage  of  toil.
The  old  man,  leaning  on  his  staff,  doth  lift
His  hand  to  bless  him ;  and  the  children's  eyes
Grow  wild  with  pleasure,  when  his  step  is  heard.
For  well  he  skills  to  teach  those  arts  that  lend
A  grace  to  poverty,  and  give  to  man
A  higher  rank  above  the  beasts  he  rules.
He,  the  untutor'd  lip,  from  dulcet  flute
Instnicts,  to  draw  the  breath  of  melody, —
The  healer's  cordial  for  the  sick  he  knows.
And  even  the  snow-shoe,  or  the  fisher's  net
Can  shape,  and  train  the  tree  whose  fruit  delights,
And  bid  the  bright  rose  twine  its  blossoms  round
The  lowly  cottage-eaves.    With  patient  care
He  gives  the  young  the  lore  of  printed  books.
Bidding  the  spirits  of  the  mighty  dead
Hold  converse  with  them  by  the  evening  fire ;
Till,  like  twin  stamens  in  the  unfolding  mind.
Knowledge  and  fiuth  sublime,  rise  side  by  side.


THE  WESTERN  MISSIONARY.  145

His  earnest  eloquence  doth  throw  a  guard
Around  the  Sabbath,  and  the  Law  divine,
Barring  with  sword  of  flame  transgression  out
From  his  loved  field  of  labor.

When  I  mark'd
The  sympathies,  that  made  this  sterile  spot
Even  as  a  garden  of  sweet  thoughts,  I  bless'd
My  Saviour's  meek  religion,  that  inspired
Such  intercourse,  and  ask'd  my  musing  heart
Who  best  the  plaudit  of  high  Heaven  should  win, —
He  who  hath  slain  his  hecatombs,  and  bridged
The  flood  with  soldiers  hearts — or  he  who  steer'd
His  slender  pinnace  o'er  yon  lonely  lake
To  lead  one  soul  to  Christ  ?

13


'  OR,

THE   MISSIONARY'S   DEATH.

BT  REY.  JOHN  DOWLINO.


**  And  when  the  light  of  that  eye  was  gone,
And  the  qniek  pulse  stopp*d,  he  was  almost  there.**

Anon.


That  there  is  a  superintending  Providence,  ever
watchful,  wise,  and  kind,  directing,  regulating,  and
controlling  the  elements  of  nature  and  the  destinies
of  men,  is  a  truth  too  plainly  revealed  in  the  Sacred
Scriptures  and  too  consdatory  to  the  devout  believer,
to  need  argument  or  defence.  Yet  there  are  times  when
even  faith  itself  is  staggered  at  the  dark,  mysterious,
and  unexpected  events  by  which  the  brightest  antici-
pations are  disappointed,  and  the  highest  hopes  of
usefulness,  happiness,  and  honor  are  levelled  with
the  dust.  How  often  has  an  afflicted  and  prostrate
church,  sighing  over  the  loss  of  some  youthful  pas-
tor or  missionary,  removed  from  the  field  of  labor,
which  appeared  before  him  ripe  for  the  harvest,  ere


ALMOST  THERE.  147

he  had  scarce  entered  upon  its  toils,  been  compelled
to  ask  in  astonishment,  if  not  in  unbelief,  at  the  deal-
ings of  Jehovah,  "  Lord,  wherefore  is  it  that  thou
contendest  with  us  ?"  and  in  reply  to  the  inquiry,  no
sound  has  been  heard  to  quiet  the  murmurings  of
unbeUef  but  the  voice  of  God's  sovereignty,  "Be
still,  and  know  that  I  am  God,"  oV  the  voice  of  his
faithfulness,  while  his  hand  pointed  to  a  world  where
all  is  light,  "  What  I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but
thou  shalt  know  hereafter."

Such  an  event  occurred  some  eight  or  nine  years
since,  in  the  lamented,  and,  as  unbeUef  would  say,
untimely  death,  just  as  he  had  reached  the  field  of
his  expected  toil,  on  the  shores  of  the  Brahmaputra,
of  a  devoted  young  missionary,  eminent  among  his
associates  for  piety  and  promise,  and  whose  sudden
and  painful  departure  cast  a  gloom  over  a  wide  circle
of  Christian  associates  and  friends,  whose  prayers
had  followed  him  across  the  deep.

It  was  in  the  autumn  of  1836,  that  a  company  of
devoted  missionaries  of  the  Cross  bade  farewell  to
country  and  friends,  for  a  home  and  a  grave  on  the
sultry  plains  of  Asia.  Each  one  of  this  little  band
was  interesting,  hopeful,  and  devotedly  pious ;  but
among  them  was  one  who  won  every  heart  by  the
fervor  of  his  piety  and  zeal,  and  moistened  every  eye
by  the  pathos,  the  tenderness,  the  heavenly-minded-
ness  that  characterized  his  farewell  address.

He  had  just  left  the  sacred  retreat  of  science  and


148  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

religion,  where  for  many  a  long  year  he  had  studied,
and  toiled,  and  prayed,  to  prepare  himself  for  a  mis-
sionary's work ;  and  high  expectations  (shared  by  all
who  knew  him  best)  were  cherished  by  the  honored
instructors  who  had  just  commended  him  to  God,  of
his  future  usefulness  and  eminence  as  a  missionary
of  Christ.  Never  can  I  forget  tlie  touching  manner
in  which  he  alluded,  with  faltering  accents  and  stream-
ing eyes,  to  that  hallowed  spot  which  he  had  now
left  to  see  no  more  for  ever.

•  "  I  am  going,"  said  he,  "  to  the  far-distant  shores
of  Asia,  to  labor  for  the  •salvation  of  the  heathen.
Long  have  I  desired  to  see  this  day*  and  now  my
highest  wishes  are  realized,  and  I  shall  soon  enter
upon  that  loved  employ  to  which  I  have  so  long  been
looking  forward.  Yet  think  not  that  I  am  indifferent
to  the  charms  of  home,  and  country,  and  friends.  Ah
no  !  the  sacrifice  I  feel  to  be  great,  but  it  is  made  for
the  sake  of  Him  who  gave  himself  for  me,  and  there-
fore it  is  made  with  cheerfulness  and  delight.  1
shall  soon  be  many  thousands  of  miles  away  from
scenes  and  friends  so  dear ;  but  when  toiling  for  the
salvation  of  the  poor  idolatrous  heathen,  think  not  that
I  shall  dismiss  from  my  mind  those  whom  I  leave  be-
hind in  my  native  land.  Far  from  it !  From  the
opposite  side  of  the  globe  my  thoughts  will  often  re-
vert to  my  own  loved  America  ;  I  shall  think  of  its
peaceful  Sabbaths,  of  its  blessed  privileges,  of  the
assemblies  of  the  saints  whose  prayers  I  know  will


ALMOST  THERE.  149

follow  US  to  our  distant  home  ;  I  shall  think  of  Chris-
tian friends  whose  farewell  hand  I  have  grasped,  and
of  the  many  acts  of  kindness  I  have  received  from
them ;  I  shall  think  of  you,  my  Christian  friends  ;  of
this  assembly  loading  me  with  its  parting  blessing ;
but  dearer  than  all  I  leave  behind,  I  shall  think" —
and  here  the  starting  tear  almost  choked  his  utter-
ance— "  I  shall  think  of  that  blessed  Institution  where
I  have  spent  some  of  the  happiest  years  of  my  life ;
of  my  fellow-students ;  of  the  men  of  God  whose  in-
structions I  have  shared ; — and  of  the  beaten  path  in
the  neighboring  grove,  where  I  have  often  held  com-
munion with  my  Saviour —

'  That  blessed  retreat  where  I've  chosen  to  pray/  "

A  few  days  more,  and  with  the  prayers  of  thousands
following  them,  the  missionary  band  spread  their
sails  to  the  wind,  and  were  borne  toward  the  land  of
their  destination.

A  prosperous  voyage  of  five  months  brought  them
to  Calcutta,  the  great  capital  of  the  East,  and  the
hearts  of  anxious  friends  in  their  native  land  were
soon  cheered  with  the  intelligence  that  they  had  es-
caped the  dangers  of  the  ocean,  and  were  separated
only  by  a  few  hundred  miles  of  river  navigation  from
the  chosen  field  of  their  missionary  labors.  That  field
was  the  province  of  Assam,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  city
of  Sadiya,  situated  some  six  or  eight  hundred  miles

13*


150  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

up  the  river  Brahmaputra,  in  a  northeasterly  direc-
tion from  Calcutta.  Boats  were  provided,  and  boat-
men engaged,  and  the  missionary  party,  anxious  to
reach  their  destination  previous  to  the  rains,  with  but
little  delay,  commenced  their  river  voyage.  Another
letter  from  the  devoted  young  missionary  was  re-
ceived, dated  at  Culna,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Sunder-
bunds.  May  3d,  1837,  full  of  pious  joy  and  hope,
which  told  that  they  were  on  their  way  to  Sadiya,
and  expected  soon  to  reach  their  future  home  and
commence  their  labors  for  the  heathen.

At  the  reception  of  this  letter  many  a  heart  of
loved  ones  left  behind  beat  high  with  joy  and  grati-
tude for  the  safety  of  those  so  dear,  and  many  a
prayer  was  breathed  for  their  continued  prosperity
and  success  ;  and  yet,  at  the  very  moment  their  eyes
rested  upon  those  lines,  the  hand  that  traced  them
was  cold  in  death,  and  the  pious  spirit  that  dic-
tated them  had  winged  its  way  to  its  native
heaven !

The  party,  diminished  by  the  departure  of  two  of
their  number  destined  to  another  part  of  the  mission-
ary field,  consisted  of  the  interesting  young  man  who
is  the  principal  subject  of  this  sketch,  a  brother  mis-
sionary who  is  yet  spared  to  labor  for  the  heathen,
and  their  two  devoted  and  affectionate  wives.

The  missionaries,  already  on  the  groimd,  had  been
advised  of  the  expected  reinforcement,  and  were  anx-
iously longing  for  the  arrival  of  those  whose  aid  they


ALMOST  THERE.  151

80  much  needed  in  their  exhausting  and  self-denying
labors  for  the  perishing  heathen.

At  length,  after  nearly  two  months  occupied  in
struggling  against  opposing  winds,  tides,  and  cur-
rents, the  missionary  party  had  arrived  within  three
days'  journey  of  Sadiya,  when  the  force  of  the  cur-
rent was  so  strong  that  the  boatmen  declared  them-
selves unable  to  proceed  ;  and  as  the  other  mission-
ary was  seized  with  the  jungle  fever,  it  was  decided
that  the  subject  of  our  sketch  should  proceed  at  once
in  a  small  canoe,  which  the  boatmen  might  be  able
to  force  against  the  mighty  current,  leaving  the  sick
man  under  the  care  of  the  two  wives,  that  he  might
seek  medical  or  other  necessary  assistance  from  the
missionary  station  now  just  at  hand.

After  some  two  or  three  days'  struggling  against
the  force  of  the  current,  the  solitary  missionary  had
arrived  within  three  hours'*  journey  of  the  termi-
nation of  his  long  and  toilsome  voyage.  He  had
travelled  in  safety  over  half  the  circumference  of  the
globe,  his  eye  was  resting  upon  the  spot  selected  as
the  field  of  his  future  labors,  for  which  he  had  spent
long  years* in  preparing,  and  on  which  his  heart
had  been  set  with  all  the  earnestness  of  intense  de-
sire, when,  alas  !  in  a  moment,  death  came,  in  an
unexpected  form,  and  tore  him  firom  wife,  and  friends,
and  the  scene  of  his  expected  toils,  just  as  he  was
ready  to  set  foot  on  shore,  and  perhaps  counting
the  moments  ere  he  should  grasp  the  hands  of  Chris-


152  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

tians  and  of  brothers  who  were  waiting  to  welcome
him  as  a  fellow-laborer  and  a  fellow-sufferer  to  their
home  in  a  heathen  land.

The  manner  of  his  death  was  as  singular  as  it  was
sudden.  The  canoe  was  pushing  briskly  along  against
the  strong  current  close  to  the  shore,  when  two  trees,
undermined  by  the  action  of  the  waters,  suddenly  fell
from  the  bank  across  the  boat,  causing  it  instantly  to
sink  in  the  shallow  water — the  larger  of  the  trees  ly-
ing directly  across  the  bowels  of  the  missionary,  thus
confining  his  body  beneath  the  surface,  and  crushing
him  almost  instantly  to  death  by  its  weight.

The  messenger  of  these  sad  tidings  soon  reached
the  missionary  station  at  Sadiya,  and  a  few  hours
more  saw  one  of  that  devoted  band,  who  had  for  days
been  straining  their  eyes  to  catch  sight  of  their  ap-
proaching brethren,  in  a  small  boat  on  his  way
to  his  humble  abode,  bearing  with  him  the  lifeless
corpse  of  one  to  whose  coming  they  had  looked
forward  with  so  much  of  joy  and  so  much  of  hope.

We  must  draw  a  veil  over  the  agony  of  the  stricken
wife,  the  grief  of  fellow-laborers,  and  the  sadness  and
disappointment  of  all.  It  is  enough  to  Jyaow  that  the
Lord  reigneth,  and  to  hear  him  say,  in  reply  to  all  the
anxious  inquiries  which  unbelief  might  suggest,
"  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God,"— and,  "  What
I  do  thou  knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know
hereafter."

As  for  the  man  of  God  himself,  he  was  waiting  at


ALMOST  THERE.  153

his  post ;  and  though  the  summons  came  at  an  unex-
pected moment,  he  was  prepared  to  meet  it.

'*  The  voice  at  midnight  came,—
He  started  up  to  hear ;
A  mortal  arrow  pierced  his  frame ;
He  fell,  but  felt  no  fear."

Not  a  word  could  escape  his  lips  dunng  the  fearful
death-struggle  in  the  waters,  yet  the  very  last  entry
in  his  journal  shows  the  posture  of  his  mind.  It  was
penned  while  sitting,  solitary  and  alone,  in  his  little
canoe,  on  the  evening  of  the  Sabbath,  the  last  that
he  spent  on  earth*:

"July  2d.  This  has  been  rather  a  lonely  day.
Jungles  and  sandbanks,  with  here  and  there  a  soli-
tary dinghy  passing  down  the  river,  make  up  the
scenery.  Have  enjoyed  some  sweet  meditations  on
divine  things.  O  how  sweet  will  be  the  rest  of  that
eternal  Sabbath,  in  the  enjoyment  of  which  I  shall  be
eternally  united  with  those  dear  Christian  friends
with  whom  I  have  formerly  worshipped  in  the  courts
of  the  Lord  !  O,  my  heavenly  Father,  I  feel  that  I
am  exceedingly  sinful,  and  unworthy  of  the  least  of
thy  favors  :  but  do  thou  have  mercy  on  me,  and  ac-
cept the  renewed  consecration  of  myself  to  thee,
which  I  now  make.  Employ  me  in  doing  something
to  promote  thy  glory  on  earth,  and  let  me  be  eternally
engaged  in  thy  service  !"


154  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Should  the  reader  at  any  time  pay  a  visit  to  the
Hamilton  Literary  and  Theological  Institution  in
Madison  county,  New  York,  he  will  see  in  the  room
of  the  Society  of  Missionary  Inquiry,  among  other
portraits  of  missionaries  who  have  gone  out  from  this
school  of  the  prophets,  that  of  the  cherished  subject
of  this  sad  but  truthful  sketch.

Should  he  stroll  into  a  soUtary  grov.e  in  the  imme-
diate vicinity,  he  may  find  a  beaten  path  to  a  bower
of  prayer,  and  in  reply  to  his  inquiries  he  will  per-
haps be  told  that  that  path  was  trodden  by  the  feet,
and  that  bower  was  formed  by  the  han^of  the  youth-
ful missionary  whose  remains  rest  on  the  banks  of
the  distant  Brahmaputra — ^the  beloved,  the  devoted,
the  sainted  Jacob  Thomas.


Sljt  tDail  of  tl)e  Ctglit-Bmm  *

BY  C.  DONALD  MACLEOD.

In  the  deep  night  when  stars  were  burning,

And  high  and  white  the  full  moon  reign'd ;
While  my  wild  heart  was  sadly  yearning

For  the  Divine  and  Unattain'd  .
I  thought  upon  that  fallen  one,
The  morning's  proud  Light-bearing  Son  :
And  dream'd  I  saw  him  as  when  hurl'd
Forever  from  the  starry  world.
One  hour  he  seem'd  in  grief  to  bow.
And  veil'd  the  dim  plumes  o'er  his  brow ;
The  next,  gazed  on  the  starry  clime.
Outcast,  but  awfully  sublime  !
Gazed  on  the  heights  he  strove  to  scale,

Accursed,  unwept  for,  and  alone.
And  pour'd  his  sad  yet  scornful  wail

To  the  bright  planet  once  his  throne.

*  "  Ligbt-bearer,"  'Hov^vpo;,  Lucifer,    The  Son  of  the  Mom*
ing.


BY  JOHN  M.  PECK.
"  Lo !  the  poor  Indian.**

The  name  Indian,  given  to  the  aborigines  of
America  by  Columbus,  from  the  supposition  that  he
had  reached  the  eastern  shore  of  Asia,  is  a  misno-
mer. Whence  their  origin,  and  by  what  means  they
reached  the  continent  of  America,  are  questions  yet
unsolved.  We  differ  v»rholly  from  Thoroughgood,
Adair,  Boudinot,  and  other  writers,  who  suppose
they  are  of  Jewish  descent.  After  much  observation
and  inquiry  we  have  discerned  no  marks  of  Judaism
but  what  are  common  to  other  tribes  of  savage,  bar-
barous, or  semi-civilized  humanity.

In  language,  religion,  manners,  customs,  figure,
and  other  characteristics,  the  native  inhabitants  of
North  America  were  originally  divided  into  four  dis-
tinct classes ;  and  these,  again,  subdivided  into  nu-
merous smaller  confederacies  and  tribes,  differing  each
from  the  other  in  dialect  or  pronunciation,  and  by
slight  modifications  of  character.

The  four  grand  divisions  may  be  arranged  under


INDIAN  MISSIONS.  159

the  generic  names  of  Esquimaux,  Algonkin,  Dahco-
tah,  and  Cherokee.

The  division  is  clearly  defined  in  their  respective
languages,  and  their  physiology.

The  Esquimaux  includes  the  nomadic  bands  along
the  coast  of  Labrador  and  the  Northern  Ocean.

The  Algonkin,  formerly  the  most  numerous  race,
has  been  reduced  in  numbers  below  either  of  the
others.

In  this  class  were  included  all  the  tribes  of  Canada
and  New  England,  the  Iroquois,  the  Lenni  Lenopi,
or  Delawares,  the  various  branches  of  the  great  Pow-
hattan  confederacy  in  Maryland  and  Virginia,  and  the
Chouannons,  or  Shawnees,  from  James  River  to
Florida.  In  the  northwest,  of  the  same  stock  we  find
the  O'jibways,  Ottawas,  Pottawatamies,  Saukies,
Miamis,  the  Illinois  confederacy  of  seven  or  eight
tribes,  and  many  others.

A  third  distinct  class  is  found  chiefly  west  of  the
Mississippi.  The  N'Dahcotah,  or  Sioux,  are  a  tjrpe.
To  this  class  belong  the  Winnebagoes,  Osages,  Kau-
zaus,  O^Mahaus,  Ottoes,  Pawnees,  Quappaws,  lo-
ways,  and  many  other  tribes.

The  fourth  radical  stock  is  found  in  the  southwest.
The  Cherokees,  Choctaws,  Muscogees,  or  Creeks,
Chickasaws,  Natchez,  and  many  other  tribes  were
of  this  stock.  These  were  probably  offsets  from  the
Mexican  or  Atzec  race.

The  tribes  into  which  these  four  classes  became


160  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

subdivided  were  found  united  in  confederacies,  with
a  common  name,  which  was  often  derived  from  the
leading  tribe.

The  most  powerful  and  perfect  confederacy  was
that  of  the  Iroquois,  or  Five  Nations,  for  they  had
something  like  a  regular  federal  government.  Their
external  relations  and  general  interests  were  managed
by  a  great  council-fire.  In  1712  they  were  joined
by  the  Tuscaroras  from  North  Carolina,  and  from
that  time  were  known  as  the  Six  Nations.  They
were  the  conquerors  of  the  other  Indians  east  of  the
Mississippi,  and  claimed,  by  virtue  of  conquest,  sove-
reignty over  the  land,  and  the  exaction  of  tribute,  but
allowed  the  subjugated  tribes  to  manage  their  own
afiairs.

The  only  organization  that  deserved  the  name  of
government,  was  the  grand  confederacy  of  the  Five
Nations,  and  they  had  no  executive  or  judiciary  de-
partment. Government  amongst  the  Indians  was
little  more  than  anarchy,  and  their  legislation  was
merely  the  result  of  councils,  and  had  no  greater  in-
fluence over  the  people  than  advice.

The  condition  of  human  nature,  unimproved  by
civilization,  unblest  with  the  influences  of  the  Gos-
pel of  Christ,  is  pitiable  in  the  extreme.  Such  was
the  character  of  the  "  red-skin"  before  his  country
was  visited  by  the  "pale-faces."  We  have  often
seen  the  aboriginal  man  of  America  in  all  his  prime-
val wildness,  when  he  first  came  in  contact  with  the


INDIAN  MISSIONS.  161

evils  and  benefits  of  civilization — ^have  gazed  on  his
noble  form,  admired  his  lofty  bearing,  listened  to  his
untutored  yet  powerful  eloquence,  but  have  found  in
him  the  same  humbUng  proofs  of  depravity,  wretch-
edness, and  want,  as  are  still  manifested  by  the  rem-
nant on  our  western  borders.  The  introduction  of
ardent  spirits,  and  that  terrible  disease,  the  variolus,
are  the  evils  we  have  furnished  the  Indian  race,
while  in  all  other  respects  their  condition  has  been
improved  by  intercourse  with  us.

The  Indians  generally  believe  in  a  Great  Spirit,  or
rather  Being,  for  their  notions  of  spiritual  existence.
Creation  and  a  Creator,  are  extremely  vague.  They
beUeve  in  numerous  other  beings  who  have  an  agen-
cy in  human  aflFairs,  and  to  whom  they  make  offer-
ings. All  believe  in  a  future  state  of  rewards  and
punishments,  though  their  ideas  are  gross  and  carnal.
The  religious  notions  of  different  nations,  and  conse-
quently their  forms  of  worship,  vary.  The  Algonkin
race  worshipped  both  a  good  and  an  evil  Spirit,  be-
sides a  multitude  of  subordinate  or  inferior  spirits,
good  and  bad.  Some  nations  were  idolaters.  The
Natchez  worshipped  the  sun,  and  kept  the  fire  per-
petually burning  in  their  rude  temples.  Their  male
and  female  priests  were  called  in  their  language  suns
and  suneses.  We  have  had  ocular  demonstration
that  some  of  the  Indians  actually  worshipped  images,
in  examining  the  differently  shaped  idols  that  were
undoubtedly  worshipped  by  the  southern  Indians.

14*


162  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

The  great  Pawnees  formerly  worshipped  the  planet
Venus,  under  the  name  of  the  "  Great  Star,"  as  then-
chief  god,  to  which  they  offered  human  sacrifices.
In  1818,  we  saw  a  Spanish  boy  that  had  been  taken
captive  and  devoted  to  sacrifice.  He  was  ransomed
by  the  late  M.  Lisa  of  St.  Louis,  taken  there  and  ed-
ucated.

A  beUef  in  witchcraft,  dreams,  charms,  and  "  med-
icine-men,"  was  common  to  all  the  tribes  of  the  con-
tinent. Theirs  was  the  religion  of  nature,  that  fur-
nished them  no  guide  in  the  pathway  of  hfe,  cast  no
light  on  the  "  Spirit-land."

In  reference  to  Indian  Missions,  we  omit  all  that
may  be  said  of  the  Jesuit  and  other  Roman  Catholic
missions,  as  quite  the  reverse  of  the  principles  of
evangelism,  taught  in  the  Holy  Scriptures.  The
pioneer  in  efforts  to-  evangelize  the  North  American
Indians  was  John  Elliot.  This  benevolent  minis-
ter of  Christ,  while  pastor  of  a  Congregational  church
in  Roxbury,  Massachusetts,  learned  the  Moheagan
language,  and  commenced  his  labors  in  1 646,  at  an
Indian  settlement  called  Natick,  now  Newton.  He
soon  induced  the  Indians  to  form  a  village,  adopt
simple  but  written  laws,  learn  to  read,  and  cultivate
the  earth.  He  preached  and  taught  them  from  house
to  house,  and  finally  translated  the  whole  Bible  into
the  Mohekannuk  language.

In  1642,  the  family  of  the  Mayhews  commenced  a
mission  to  the  Indians  on  Martha's  Vineyard,  an  island


INDIAN  MISSIONS.  163

off  the  coast  of  Massachusetts,  and  Hiacoomes,  a  pow-
erful chief,  was  converted.  In  1674,  in  this  mission,
there  were  about  fifteen  hundred  praying  Indians,  ten
native  preachers,  and  six  places  for  public  worship
on  each  Lord's  day.  On  Nantucket,  a  church  was
formed  of  thirty  members  in  communion,  and  about
two  hundred  famihes  received  instruction.  Of  the
Mayhew  family,  father,  son,  and  grandson,  officiated
in  succession  as  missionaries  to  the  Indians.

In  the  Plymouth  colony,  Rev.  Mr.  Bourne  and
others  labored  amongst  the  natives  with  success,  and
in  1674,  about  five  hundred  had  been  instructed  in
the  Christian  faith,  in  twenty  different  places ;  one
hundred  and  forty-two  could  read  in  their  own  lan-
guage, and  seventy-two  could  write.  Rev.  John
Cotton,  pastor  of  an  English  church  at  Plymouth,
learned  the  Indian  language  and  preached  each  week
to  five  Indian  congregations,  who,  on  the  Sabbath,
had  native  preachers.

A  tribe  called  the  River  Indians  were  settled  on
the  Housatonack,  in  Stockbridge,  to  whom  Rev.  John
Sergeant  ministered  in  1734.  He  soon  gathered  a
congregation  and  opened  a  school.  He  was  sustain-
ed in  his  benevolent  labors  by  the  celebrated  Mr.
Hollis,  a  wealthy  Baptist  in  London.  He  died  in
the  midst  of  his  labors  and  usefulness,  in  1749,  aged
thirty-nine  years.  In  1751,  the  celebrated  Jonathan
Edwards  took  charge  of  this  mission,  where  he  con-
tinued about  six  years.     During  the  war  between


164  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Great  Britain  and  the  colonies  on  the  one  part,  and
France  and  the  Canada  Indians  on  the  other,  from
1755  to  1763,  this  mission,  as  all  Indian  missions
have  been  in  war,  was  much  injured.  The  Stock-
bridge  and  the  Mohawk  Indians  fought  on  the  side
of  the  colonies,  many  were  killed  and  others  scat-
tered abroad.  Eventually  they  removed  to  Oneida
county,  in  the  state  of  New  York,  and  established
a  village  called  New  Stockbridge.  In  1796,  they
numbered  about  three  hundred,  all  nominal  Chris-
tians, and  about  thirty  church  members.  We  can
trace  this  Uttle  band  in  their  migrations  to  the  vicinity
of  Green  Bay,  in  the  Wisconsin  territory,  and  from
thence  more  recently  to  the  Indian  territory  west  of
Missouri,  where  they  still  diffuse  the  light  of  the
Gospel  and  the  blessings  of  civilization  among  their
rude  and  less  cultivated  neighbors.

Amongst  the  Narragansetts,  in  Rhode  Island,  in
1733,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Parks  commenced  preaching.
His  labors  and  those  of  others  were  successful,  and
in  1743  there  was  a  revival  of  religion,  many  were
converted,  about  sixty  joined  the  church,  and  several
native  preachers  were  raised  up.  The  most  noted
of  these  was  Sampson  Occam,  who  was  educated  at
college,  went  to  England  and  preached  before  the
king  and  parliament,  and  finally  settled  at  Brotherton,
New  York,  as  pastor  over  the  Indian  congregation,
and  died  in  1795.

A  fsuthful  native  preacher,  who  for  many  years


INDIAN  MISSIONS.  165

successfiilly  preached  the  Gospel  to  his  tribe,  the
Shinnecock  Indians  of  Long  Island,  deserves  honor-
able mention.  He  died  in  the  year  1812,  and  was
buried  at  Canoe-place,  Long  Island,  where  the  pass-
ing traveller  may  read  the  following  tribute  to  his
worth  on  a  marble  slab,  near  the  roadside,  where  the
meeting-house  then  stood :

ERECTED

BY

THE  NEW  YORK  MISSIONARY  SOCIETY,

IN  MEMORY  OF

THE  RET.  PAUL  CUFFEE,

AN  INDIAN  OF  THE  SHINNECOCK  TRIBE,

WHO  WAS  EMPLOYED  BY  THAT  SOCIETY,  FOR

THE  LAST  THIRTEEN  YEARS  OF  HIS  LIFE,

ON  THE  EASTERN  PART  OF  LONG  ISLAND,  WHERE

HE  LABORED  WITH  FIDELITY  AND  SUCCESS.

HUMBLE,  PIOUS,  AND  INDEFATIGABLE

IN  TESTIFYING  THE  GOSPEL  OF  THE  GRACE  OF  GOD,

HE  FINISHED  HIS  COURSE  WITH  JOY,

ON  THE

7th  DAY  OF  MARCH,  1812,

AGED  55  YEARS  AND  THREE  DAYS.

The  younger  brother  of  Paul  CuflFee,  Obadiah,  is
still  living  among  the  remnants  of  his  tribe,  in  his
eighty-second  year,  but  smart,  tall,  and  yet  with  all
the  activity  and  vigor  of  a  man  of  fifty.  He  is  uni-
versally called  Deacon  Obi/,  and  is  regarded  as  the
patriarch  of  his  tribe.

The  pious  and  devoted  labors  of  David  Brainard


166  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

amongst  the  Indians  at  Croswicks,  New  Jersey,  and
at  the  forks  of  the  Delaware  river,  are  doubtless  fa-
miliar to  our  readers.  A  precious  revival  attended
his  labors,  and  a  church  of  thirty  converts  was  or-
ganized. Brainard's  converts  generally  lived  and
€Ued  pious  Christians.

The  society  denominated  Moravians,  or,  as  they
style  themselves,  "  United  Brethren,"  have  had  suc-
cessful missions  amongst  the  Indians.  In  1734,
Christian  Ranch  commenced  a  mission  at  Shekom-
eko,  now  Amenia,  in  Dutchess  county.  New  York,
where  he  formed  a  village,  established  a  school,  in-
troduced habits  of  civilization,  and  preached  the  Gos-
pel. The  Dutch  magistrates  becoming  alarmed,
drove  him  off,  and  broke  up* the  mission.  Bethle-
hem, a  Moravian  town  in  Pennsylvania,  was  estab-
Ushed  about  this  period,  and  an  Indian  mission  soon
after  commenced  about  thirty  miles  up  the  Lehigh,
called  Gnadenhutten,  or  "Tents  of  Grace."  In  a
little  time  about  five  hundred  were  under  religious
instruction.

The  war  with  the  French  and  Indians  in  Canada,
made  sad  work  with  Indian  missions.  In  November,
1755,  a  party  of  Indians  in  the  French  interest,  at-
tacked  the  mission  while  the  family  were  at  supper,
massacred  eleven  men,  women,  and  children,  and
dispersed  the  rest.  Again,  eight  years  after,  the
settlement  was  broken  up  by  pagan  Indians.  We
can  now  trace  this  band  of  Christian  Indians,  who


INDIAN  MISSIONS.  167

had  been  taught  by  their  pious  instructors  that  all
war  was  wrong,  to  the  head  branches  of  the  Susque-
hanna, next  to  Beaver  river,  where  Friedenstadt,  or
the  "Village  of  Peace,"  was  built.  Driven  from
thence,  their  next  pitch  was  near  the  Muskingum,  in
«Ohio,  where  three  settlements,  Shoenbrun,  Gnaden-
hutten,  and  Litchtenau,  were  a  temporary  asylum  for
about  five  hundred  Christian  Indians.  The  mission-
ary, Zeisberoer,  distinguished  in  the  annals  of  Mo-
ravian missions,  was  their  spiritual  father  and  guide
in  their  pilgrimages  and  sufferings.  His  disciples
were  of  the  Lenni  Lenopi  race,  and  under  his  minis-
trations were  humble,  peaceable,  industrious,  and  had
lost  all  propensity  for  war,  yet  no  people  ever  suffer-
ed more  severely  its  ravages.  Their  religious  prin-
ciples allowed  them  to  take  no  part  in  the  war  of  the
American  revolution,  hence  they  incurred  the  suspi-
cions of  both  the  British  and  Americans.  Wicked
Indians  would  commit  depredations  on  both  sides,
and  lay  the  mischief  to  these  peace-loving  Moravians.
On  one  occasion,  the  British  commander  at  Detroit
removed  them  by  force  to  the  confines  of  Canada.
During  their  absence  their  com  was  stolen,  and  they
suffered  much  distress  from  want.

In  March,  1782,  they  were  found  at  their  villages
on  the  Muskingum,  when  they  were  attacked  by  a
band  of  unprincipled  men,  gathered  for  the  purpose
from  western  Pennsylvania  and  Virginia,  and  a  dread-
ful massacre  ensued.     It  was  reported  that  they  har-


168  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

bored  and  aided  hostile  Indians.  But  when  preju-
dice and  passion  usurp  the  place  of  reason  and  con-
science, man  becomes  ungovernable.  A  party  of
volunteers,  of  about  one  hundred  in  number,  headed
by  Colonel  Williamson,  penetrated  the  wilderness
with  the  desperate  determination  to  destroy  these,
settlements.  The  peaceful  and  unsuspecting  Cliris-
tians  were  gathering  their  com ;  the  white  ruffians  pre-
tended friendship,  promised  them  protection,  and  gave
assurances  that  they  had  come  to  take  them  to  Pitts-
burgh and  place  them  under  protection  of  the  Ameri-
can government.  With  these  assurances  the  Indians
gave  up  their  hunting-guns,  hatchets,  and  property.
Colonel  Williamson  then  called  his  men  to  a  parley,
and  put  it  to  vote  whether  they  should  be  killed  or
taken  to  Pittsburgh  as  prisoners.  Only  sixteen  votes
were  given  to  spare  their  lives !  They  were  then
told  that  as  they  were  Christian  Indians,  they  might
spend  the  night  in  prayer.  They  were  then  shut  up
in  two  houses — the  men  in  the  one,  and  the  women
and  children  in  the  other.  Here  they  prayed,  sung,
and  exhorted,  and  comforted  each  other  with  the
promises  of  God  and  the  prospects  of  eternal  glory
in  the  morning.  About  sunrise  the  slaughter  began
with  tomahawks  and  hatchets.  One  infamous  v^etch
boasted  he  had  killed  fourteen,  and  that  his  arm  had
become  so  wearied  he  could  work  no  longer  !  Two
lads  escaped  the  massacre ;  one  by  crawling  under
the  floor,  where  the  blood  of  his  friends  streamed


INDIAN  MISSIONS.  169

down  upon  him,  the  other  by  escaping  to  the  woods.
About  ninety-five  Christians  fell  a  sacrifice  in  this
most  horrible  massacre.  Their  bones  were  left  to
bleach  in  the  wilderness,  till  some  twenty  years  after
they  were  gathered  up  and  buried.

We  were  well  acquainted  in  Missouri,  some  years
since,  with  an  old  man  who  was  one  of  the  murder-
ers of  these  Christians,  though  he  claimed  that  he
voted  to  spare  their  lives,  and  that  he  "  had  no  heart
to  strike  more  than  once."  He  then  professed  re-
ligion, and  gave  some  evidence  of  discipleship,  yet
we  had  no  heart  to  converse  with  him  about  this  in-
famous business.  We  understood  from  his  friends
that  the  impression -of  the  inhuman  deed  never  left
his  mind.

The  village  of  Shoenbrun  escaped,  and  the  inhabit-
ants fled  to  Sandusky.  Afterwards  they  removed  to
the  river  Thames  in  Canada,  received  the  protection
of  the  British  government,  and  built  the  town  of
Fairfield,  where  their  descendants  still  remain.

The  space  allowed  will  permit  us  barely  to  glance
at  modern  Indian  missions,  the  most  prosperous  of
which  has  been  amongst  the  Cherokees.  About  fifty
years  since,  Presbyterians,  Baptists,  and  Methodists
projected  missions  to  this  people,  and  some  incipient
measures  were  taken  by  the  late  Gideon  Blackburn,
D.  D.,  then  a  resident  of  Tennessee.  In  1808  the
Cherokee  nation  organized  a  form  of  government,
had  a  legislature,  and  expressed  a  desire  for  schools.

15


170  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Regular  missionary  labors  were  commenced  in  the
Cherokee  country  in  1817,  by  the  Rev.  Messrs.
Kingsbury,  Hall,  and  Williams.  A  school  was  open-
ed, and  the  Gospel  preached  to  them  by  means  of  an
interpreter.  These  measures  were  followed  up  with
success ;  some  were  converted,  and  next  year  a
church  was  organized.

One  of  the  most  extraordinary  events  in  the  history
of  mind  and  literature,  occurred  amongst  the  Chero-
kees  in  1825.  This  was  the  invention  of  an  alphabet
by  George  Guess,  a  full-blooded  and  wholly  uned-
ucated Cherokee.  Hearing  some  of  his  countrymen
speak  of  the  superiority  of  the  white  people  in  ma-
king "  the  paper  talk,"  and  by  which,  when  they  had
put  down  a  talk  it  would  stay  there,  and  could  be
carried  to  a  great  distance,  he  took  a  flat  stone  and
attempted  to  make  a  particular  mark  for  every  word.
The  Indians  laughed  at  him ;  but  he  would  go  to  the
woods,  under  pretence  of  hunting,  and  there  make
his  marks  from  day  to  day.  The  number  of  marks
soon  overburdened  his  memory,  when  the  thought
occurred  to  him  to  contrive  a  mark  for  each  sound.
Every  syllable  in  the  Cherokee  language  is  either  a
simple  vowel  sound,  or  a  vowel  preceded  by  a  con-
sonant. There  are  six  vowels  and  twelve  conso-
nants, simple  and  compound.  Consequently,  from
conibinalions,  the  syllables  will  be  seventy-two.  By
modifications  a  few  other  syllables  are  produced,
making  the  whole  number  eighty-five.     For  each  of


INDIAN  MISSIONS.  171

these  sounds  he  invented  a  character  or  mark.  Thus
he  produced  a  perfect  phonic  alphabet.  Hence,  as
soon  as  a  Cherokee  learns  to  pronounce  the  names  of
the  charactersthatrepresentthe  sounds  in  his  language,
he  is  a  perfect  reader.  When  Guess,  who  had  borne
all  the  ridicule  of  his  friends  with  the  most  unwearied
patience,  produced  his  alphabet  and  read,  the  people
were  astonished.

Finding  he  could  make  the  paper  talk  as  well  as
white  people,  numbers  came  to  him  for  instruction,
and  thousands  have  since  learned  to  read.

This  principle  of  phonic  alphabet  has  been  ap-
plied to  other  Indian  languages ;  and  school-books,
hymns,  the  Scriptures,  and  periodicals  have  been
published,  and  are  read  by  great  numbers  of  the  red-
men  of  the  forests  and  prairies.

On  our  table  lies  the  Cherokee  Advocate,  a  news-
paper, respectable  in  size  and  appearance,  and  con-
taining the  usual  matter  of  our  own  hebdomadals.  In
one  colunm  we  see  a  chapter  from  that  inimitable  al-
legory, the  Pilgrim's  Progress,  now  in  process  of
translation  into  Cherokee.

The  Cherokees,  Choctaws,  Chickasaws,  and
Creeks,  have  made  rapid  progress  in  civilization  and
in  the  knowledge  of  the  Christian  religion.  In  their
new  location  in  the  Indian  territory,  lying  to  the  west
of  the  states  of  Missouri  and  Arkansas,  they  are  fast
becoming  a  fixed  and  an  agricultural  people.  The
influences  of  the  Gospel  have  been  signally  mani-


172  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

fested  in  transformation  of  character  and  habits  of
life.

The  great  question  has  been  solved,  that  the  In-
dian race  can  be  civilized,  converted,  and  saved.
Thousands  of  pious,  devoted,  consistent  Christians
of  that  people, — hitherto  "scattered  and  peeled," —
now  stand  up  in  the  Indian  country  to  attest  the
power  and  triumph  of  the  Gospel.

The  territory  west  of  Missouri  and  Arkansas,  that
has  been  set  apart  by  government  as  a  permanent
residence  for  the  Indian  race,  is  well  adapted  to  their
circumstances  and  wants.  It  is  about  six  hundred
miles  in  length  from  north  to  south,  and  for  two  hun-
dred miles  west  has  an  abundant  supply  of  rich,  ara-
ble land,  admirably  adapted  to  raising  cattle,  horses,
and  swine  ;  well  watered  and  healthy.

Besides  Shawnees,  Delawares,  Pottawatamies,
Saukies,  Miamis,  and  the  remnants  of  the  Illinois
nation,  together  with  the  Osages,  Kauzaus,  and  other
tribes  who  are  indigenous  to  that  country,  the  follow-
ing tabular  statement  of  the  southern  immigrant  In-
dians is  given  from  the  returns  of  last  year  to  the  In-
dian Department  of  government :

Cherokees,         ....     26,000
Choctaws,  ....     12,410

Chickasaws,       .         .         .         .       4,111
Creeks,  ....     24,594

The  whole  number  who  have  emigrated  west  of
the  Mississippi,  under  authority  of  the  government.


INDIAN  MISSIONS.  173

amount  to  eighty-nine  thousand  three  hundred  and
forty-eight  About  thirty  thousand  still  remain  in
the  states  east  of  the  Mississippi.

East  of  the  Rocky  Mountains  are  to  be  found
about  one  hundred  and  sixty-eight  thousand.  These,
with  the  tribes  in  Oregon  and  Texas,  claim  the  be-
nevolent attentions  of  the  friends  of  missions.  With-
out the  Gospel  they  must  perish.  It  is  the  direct
influence  of  the  Gospel  alone  that  can  arouse  up  the
poor  Indian  from  the  stupor  of  ignorance  and  sensu-
ality, and  bring  him  into  the  light  and  glorious  liberty
of  the  sons  of  God.

15*


^t  6l)i|t.

BT   WILLIAM   W.   LORD.

Whither,  ye  winged  creatures

That  fill  the  ocean's  side,
With  your  white  wings  on  the  wind.
And  your  broad  breasts  to  the  tide.
Oh  whither  do  ye  flee  ?
Where  do  the  winds  that  blow —
Why  do  the  light  winds  bear
O'er  the  flowing  tides  below
These  things  of  sea  and  air,
These  white  clouds  of  the  sea  ?

Ye  giants  that  o'erthreaten

The  heaving,  restless  plain,
With  your  triple  ranks  of  iron,
Ye  warriors  of  the  Main ;

Why  o'er  the  billows  free.
Ye  things  of  sea  and  air.
Why  do  the  tempests  bear
Your  dark  sides  through  the  foam.
Oh  whither  do  ye  roam.
Thunder-clouds  of  the  sea  ?


THE  SHIP.  175

From  the  ocean  isles  defenceless,

From  the  rampire-shielded  nation,
From  storm'd  and  blacken'd  cities,
The  sound  of  desolation ;

And  a  deep  wail  from  the  sea.
Where  the  goodly  ships  went  under
When  your  hundred-bolted  tliunder
To  the  seamen's  sinking  cry
Made  the  echoes  from  the  sky
Tell  your  victory !

Whither,  you  ships  of  treasure,

Move  ye,  so  richly  laden.
Each  like  a  fair  and  stately
Veil'd,  bejewell'd  maiden  ?
Why  on  the  billows  free,
Ye  winds  that  ever  blow.
And  whither  do  ye  bear
O'er  the  flowing  tides  below.
These  things  of  sea  and  air.
These  ladies  of  the  sea  ?

From  houses  silken,  delicate.

Where  the  banquet-guests  sit  long.
And  drunken  with  the  golden  wine
Of  music  move  the  throng,
A  sound  of  impious  glee ;
And  the  heavy  sound  of  wo
From  workshops,  wheip  the  slow


176  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Incessant  strokes  of  Toil
Make  nature  Cunning's  spoil,
Sell  life  for  luxury.

'But  ye  whose  white  wings  bear

Through  storms  a  Sabbath-cahn,
Who  make  the  silent  ocean  hear
The  voice  of  prayer  and  psalm,
Oh  whither  do  ye  flee  ^
Where  do  the  winds  that  blow-
Why  do  the  hght  winds  bear
O'er  the  flowing  tides  below,
These  things  of  sea  and  air,
These  angels  of  the  sea  ?

From  mamland  and  from  island,

Wild  alps,  and  groves  of  palm,
Dark  woods,  and  ancient  temples,
A  voice  of  prayer  and  psalm.
The  sound  of  jubilee ;
And  on  mountain  and  on  plain.
Rise  the  sleepers,  rise  the  slain.
And  their  coral  shouts  ascend.
And  Earth  and  Heaven  blend
Hymns  of  victory  !


Sl)e  (&mmB  of  tDar  as  tontxaBttb  uittl)  tt)at  of

€l)ri0tianit2.


BT  J.  LAWRENCE  DE  6RAW.

"  The  proud  victor's  plmne,
The  hero's  trophied  fame,  the  warrior's  wreath
Of  blood-dash'd  laurel — what  will  these  avail
The  spirit  parting  from  material  things  ?
One  slender  leaflet  from  the  tree  of  peace,
Borne,  dove-like,  o'er  the  waste  and  warring  earth,
Is  better  passport  at  the  gate  of  Heaven."

Mrs.  Sigournkt.


The  disastrous  consequences  of  war  have  not  of
late  years  been  witnessed  in  our  land.  Although  we
have  not  ourselves  seen  contending  hosts  engaged
in  mortal  strife,  nor  looked  upon  burning  cities,
nor  heard  the  death-shriek  of  the  fallen,  and  the
agonizing  groan  of  the  dying,  mingled  with  shouts
of  triumph,  the  roar  of  artillery,  and  the  clash  of
arms ;  we  yet  remember  the  stories  told  us  by  our
fathers,  of  the  "times  which  tried  men's  souls."
May  the  scenes  of  those  times  never  be  re-enacted.
May  the  prayers  of  Christians  ascend  to  Him  who
rules  in  the  heavens  and  among  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth,  that  the  dreadful  scourge  may  continue  to
be  averted  from  our  own  beloved  country,  and  other


1T8  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

nations  engaged  in  fulfilling  the  great  commission,
by  proclaiming  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  through-
out the  earth ; — ^whose  devoted  missionaries  have  pen-
etrated the  snows  of  the  north,  and  the  sands  of  the
south — who  have  braved  the  winds  and  the  waves
to  plant  the  Gospel  banner  upon  the  isles  of  the
ocean.  War !  who  can  portray  its  dreadful  aspects, —
the  miseries  entailed  upon  the  human  race  by
those  who  have  panted  for  fame  and  glory,  who  in
their  eager  pursuit  of  these  phantoms  have  tramp-
led in  the  dust  all  that  was  beautiful,  lovely,  and
of  good  report — the  high  attributes  of  that  word
and  law  of  the  Most  High,  which  inculcates  peace
on  earth,  good-will  to  man?  Hear  the  commander
of  the  "  Army  of  Italy,"  when  overlooking  the  beau-
tiful vales  of  Piedmont  from  the  neighboring  heights.
"  Soldiers,  you  are  hungry  and  naked.  The  repub-
lic owes  you  much,  but  she  has  not  the  means  to  ac-
quit herself  of  her  debts.  The  patience  with  which
you  support  your  hardships  among  these  barren  rocks
is  admirable,  but  it  cannot  procure  you  glory.  I  have
come  to  lead  you  into  the  most  fertile  plains  that  the
Bun  beholds.  Rich  provinces,  opulent  towns,  all
shall  be  at  your  disposal.  Soldiers,  with  such  a
prospect  before  you,  can  you  fail  in  courage  and  con-
stancy?" This,  it  has  justly  been  observed,  was
showing  the  deer  to  the  hound  when  the  leash  is  about
to  be  slipped.

The  arch  enemy  of  mankind  who  fought  with  his


THE  GENIUS  OF  WAR.  179

hosts,  when  there  was  war  in  heaven,  against  Michael
and  the  angels,  doubtless  holds  a  jubilee,  unseen  by-
mortal  eyes,  upon  each  field  of  carnage  ;  while  the
legions  of  Pandemonium  revel  amid  the  pride,  and
pomp,  and  circumstance  of  glorious  war.

Switzerland,  with  her  beautiful  lakes  and  towering
Alps,  has   been  the  battle-field  of  Europe.      Of
what  avail  have  the  rocks  and  snow-capped  moun-
tains which  hem   in  her   fertile  valleys  been,   in
arresting  the  progress  of  armed  hosts  through  suc-
ceeding ages,  from  the  time  when  Attila,  the  scourge
of  the  north,  burst  upon  Europe  with  his  five  hun-
dred thousand  Huns,  like  an  avalanche,  spreading
destruction  on  all  sides  and  leaving  desolation  in  his
track  as  he  passed  ?    Her  rocky  defiles  have  echoed
to  the  tread  of  the  barbarian  of  the  north,  of  the
wild  hordes  of  the  east,  and,  in  later  times,  to  that
of  the  chivalry  of  Europe.     The  thunder  of  artillery
and  the  deep  sullen  roar  of  the  avalanche  have  min-
gled together.     Banner  and  plume  have  waved  in  the
mountain  breeze,  while  casque  and  helmet,  and  blade
and  bayonet,  glittered  in  the  morning  sun.     The  beau-
tiful lake  of  Lucerne  and  its  valley  might  also  tell
many  a  thrilling  tale  of  outrage  and  horror,  inflicted
upon  the  peaceful  and  defenceless  inhabitants  by  the
cupidity  and  unquenchable  ambition  of  the  French
invader.     And  what  reward  awaited  many  of  those
who  stood  foremost  in  the  ranks  of  the  despoiler?
Let  the  following  facts  supply  the  answer.


180  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Marshal  Ney  stood  erect,  facing  the  platoon  of
soldiers  drawn  up  for  his  execution.  With  his  hand
placed  upon  his  heart,  he  exclaimed,  "  My  comrades,
fire  on  me  !"  He  fell,  j)ierced  by  ten  balls.  His
sword  had  often  waved  amid  the  thickest  of  the
fight.  He  had  faced  death  a  thousand  times,  whilst
leading  his  columns  to  face  the  cannon's  mouth,  or
to  mount  the  deadly  breach.  He  had  charged  the
hosts  of  Waterloo ;  but  now  the  last  enemy.  Death,
had  triumphed  over  him,  and  the  muffled  drum
sounded  his  requiem.  Murat — the  gay,  but  harden-
ed and  daring  Murat,  was  seized  whilst  exciting  a  re-
volt at  Naples;  tried  and  executed  under  a  law  he
had  himself  introduced  when  the  crown  encircled
his  brow.

In  the  month  of  January,  1824,  Felix  NeiF,  the
missionary  of  the  High  Alps,  arrived  at  the  hamlet
of  Arvieux,  in  the  Val  Queyras,  The  department
of  the  High  Alps  is  that  portion  of  the  great  moun-
tain chain  which  divides  France  from  Italy.  Two
lofty  peaks  are  embraced  in  this  division,  mount  Ge-
nevre  in  the  north,  and  mount  Viso,  one  of  the  most
conspicuous  in  Europe,  in  the  south.  "  Looking
from  the  city  of  Gap  towards  Viso  and  Genevre,"
writes  one  familiar  with  the  scene,  "  you  see  nothing
but  successive  ridges  of  peaks,  covered  in  summer
with  masses  of  brownish  rock,  and  in  winter  with
snow  and  ice.  As  thus  seen,  it  seems  wholly  im-
passable to  human  footsteps,  much  less  inhabited  by


THE  GENIUS  OF  WAR^  181

mankind.  But  in  these  mountain  gorges,  the  neces-
sities of  men,  and  especially  cruel  persecutions,  have
compelled  them  to  find  habitations  on  such  spots  as
could  be  made  capable  of  furnishing  even  a  scanty
and  miserable  subsistence."  In  these  mountain  re-
treats,  many  who  were  persecuted  for  the  Truth's
sake  found  an  asylum,  from  the  days  of  Marcus  Au-
rehus  to  those  of  Louis  XV.  It  was  here  and  in  the
valleys  of  Piedmont,  that  the  Waldenses  for  fifteen
centuries  maintained  in  its  integrity  the  true  faith.
That  martyr-people,  after  having  suffered  three  cen-
turies of  violent  persecution,  endured  three  more  of
wars,  in  which  the  dukes  of  Savoy  and  the  kings  of
France,  at  the  bidding  of  the  Pope,  hunted  them  as
the  sportsman  would  the  wild  beasts.  NefF's  field
of  labor  extended  thirty-five  miles  north,  and  twenty
south,  embracing  the  Val  Queyras  on  the  east,  con-
necting with  the  valleys  of  Piedmont  by  the  pass,  or
in  fact  the  chasm  of  the  Col  de  la  Croix  and  the  Val
Fressiniere  on  the  west,  including  in  all  about  eigh-
teen villages  or  hamlets.  What  a  parish  to  superin-
tend !  What  ardor  of  zeal,  as  well  as  strength  of  phys-
ical constitution,  was  needed  to  carry  a  pastor  through
the  toils  necessary  to  the  faithful  oversight  of  the  flock
dispersed  through  such  a  frightful  region  !  We  have
been  familiar  with  mountain  scenes  from  our  childhood,
continues  our  writer ;  we  have  wandered,  too,  amid  the
Alps,  both  in  Piedmont  and  in  Savoy.  We  have  found
among  the  lofty  ranges,  in  many  places,  very  sweet

16


182  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

valleys,  clothed  with  green  meadows  and  yellow  fields
of  grain ;  whilst  pleasant  villages  and  hamlets  marked
them  as  isolated,  but  very  agreeable,  abodes  of  men.
Herds  of  cattle  roaming  in  the  rich  pasturages,  and
innumerable  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  browsing  upon
the  mountain  sides,  and  skipping  from  rock  to  rock,
give  an  animated  picture  of  enjoyment.

But  widely  diflferent  is  the  scene  in  the  High
Alps,  in  Val  Queyras  and  Val  Fressiniere.  There,
on  the  contrary,  the  valleys  are  for  the  most  part
dark  and  sterile.  Alp  rises  upon  Alp,  and  masses
of  rock  of  appalling  aspect,  piled  up  as  it  were
to  the  skies,  block  up  many  of  tlie  defiles,  and
forbid  further  advance,  even  to  the  boldest  adven-
turer. "There,"  says  Mr.  Gilly,  in  his  memoirs
of  Nefi",  "  the  tottering  cliflfs,  the  sombre  and  frown-
ing rocks, — ^which  from  their  fatiguing  continuity
look  like  a  mournful  veil,  which  is  never  to  be
raised, — the  tremendous  abysses,  and  the  comfortless
cottages,  and  the  ever-present  dangers  from  ava-
lanches, and  thick  mists  and  clouds,  proclaim  that
this  is  a  land  which  man  never  would  have  chosen,  even
for  his  hiding-place,  but  from  the  direst  necessity."
In  the  whole  range  of  Alpine  scenery,  rich  as  it  is  in
the  wonders  of  natiure,  there  is  nothing  more  terrific
than  the  pass  from  the  Guil.  For  several  miles  the
waters  of  the  torrent  occupy  the  whole  breadth  of
the  defile,  which  is  a  vast  rent  in  the  mountain  ;  and
the  path,  which  in  places  will  not  admit  more  than


THE  GENIUS  OF  WAR.  183

two  to  walk  side  by  side,  is  hewn  out  of  the  rocks.
These  rise  to  such  a  giddy  height,  that  the  soaring
pinnacles  which  crown  them  look  like  the  fine  points
of  masonry-work  on  the  sunmiit  of  a  cathedral, —
while  the  projecting  masses  that  overhang  the  way-
faring-man's head  are  more  stupendous  and  mena-
cing than  the  imagination  can  conceive.  Enormous
fragments  are  continually  rolling  down  ;  and  as  the
wind  roars  thro\jgh  the  gloomy  defile,  and  threatens
to  sweep  you  into  the  torrent  below,  you  wonder
what  power  it  is  which  holds  together  the  terrifjring
suspensions,  and  prevents  your  being  crushed  by  the
fall.  Much  has  been  related  of  the  peril  of  travers-
ing a  pass  on  the  summit  of  a  mountain  with  yawn-
ing precipices  beneath  your  feet ;  but  in  fact  there  is
no  danger  equal  to  a  journey  through  a  defile  like
this,  where  you  are  at  the  bottom  of  an  Alpine  gulf,
with  hundreds  of  feet  of  crumbling  rock  above  your
head."  Through  this  pass  NefF  forced  his  way  in
the  middle  of  January.  He  was  received  as  an
angel  of  mercy.  He  proclaimed  the  truths  of  the
Gospel  daily ;  he  visited  from  house  to  house,  sat
by  the  bedside  of  the  sick  and  the  dying ;  death
was  robbed  of  its  sting,  and  the  grave  of  its  ter-
rors. He  formed  classes  for  instruction,  schools
for  learning  to  read,  and  for  singing,  for  he  loved
the  songs  of  Zion ;  and  as  he  pursued  his  way
through  the  dreary  mountain  pass,  his  spirit  was
aroused  to  renewed  efforts,  and  cheered  by  the  sound


184  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

of  his  own  voice  echoing  hymns  of  praise  amidst  the
terrific  and  sublime  handywork  of  Him  who  created
the  everlasting  hills.

NeflF  visited  the  most  distant  parts  of  his  field  of
labor  during  the  first  winter  of  his  arrival  in  the  High
Alps.  He  traversed  the  way  on  foot  amid  the  deep
snows ;  braved  the  chilling  blasts,  the  storm,  and  the
tempest.  Onward,  was  his  cry;  forward  to  thy
work,  thy  Master's  work — for  the  night  cometh  when
no  man  can  work.  He  approaches  tlie  village  of  St.
Jean  d'Heran ;  his  coming  was  expected ;  the  peo-
ple throng  the  wayside  to  welcome  him ;  the  old  and
the  young  hasten  to  greet  their  much-loved  pastor.
His  heart  throbs  with  emotion,  and  he  requests  them
to  retire  to  their  homes,  promising  to  visit  each  cot-
tage.

Of  Dormilleuse,  the  highest  village  in  the  valley
of  Fressiniere,  perched  upon  a  cliflf  high  up  the
moimtain-side,  it  has  been  said,  that  of  all  the  hab-
itable spots  in  Europe,  this  is  the  most  repul-
sive. The  traveller  in  search  of  new  scenes  to
gratify  his  taste  for  the  sublime  and  beautiful,  finds
nothing  to  repay  him  but  the  satisfaction  of  planting
his  foot  on  the  spot  which  has  been  hallowed  as  the
asylum  of  Christians,  of  whom  the  world  was  not
worthy.  Here  Nefi"  aided  with  his  own  hands
to  build  a  chapel  and  a  school-house.  After  about
three  and  a  half  years'  labor,  his  health  gave  way,
and  in  a  little  while  he  was  obliged  to  give  up


THE  OENIUS  OF  WAR.  185

his  work,  and  return  to  Geneva,  his  native  city,  to
die.  A  beautiful  tribute — and  well  was  it  deserved —
has  been  paid  to  his  memory.  His  sun  went  down
whilst  it  was  yet  day.  But  as  the  departing  rays  of
the  great  natural  luminary  often  leave  the  western  sky
gloriously  illumined  long  after  the  splendid  orb  from
which  they  emanate  has  sunk  below  the  horizon ;
so  the  piety,  the  zeal,  the  amazing  labors  of  Neff
amid  the  frightful  valleys  of  the  Alps,  have  not
ceased  to  shed  their  heavenly  influence  upon  the
world  to  this  day.  Destitute  of  the  early  advantages
and  the  science  of  Henry  Martyn,  he  was  yet  per-
haps the  equal  of  that  wonderful  man  in  natural  tal-
ent and  zeal.

On  the  other  hand,  possessing  the  devoted  piety
and  ardent  passion  for  the  salvation  of  men  and
the  glory  of  God,  which  characterized  the  life  of  Da-
vid Brainerd,  he  resembled  him  both  in  the  shortness
and  the  sufierings  of  his  missionary  career.

In  contrast  to  the  preceding,  turn  we  to  the  glory
of  war.  An  eminent  statesman  of  our  own  land,  ad-
verting to  the  subject,  says  :  "  Of  the  ten  thousand
battles  which  have  been  fought;  of  all  the  fields
fertilized  with  carnage  ;  of  the  banners  which  have
been  bathed  in  blood ;  of  the  warriors  who  had
hoped  that  they  had  risen  from  the  field  of  con-
quest to  a  glory  as  bright  and  durable  as  the  stars,
how  few  that  continue  long  to  interest  mankind  !"

In  reading  of  all  the  great  and  mighty  deeds  of  men,

16*


186  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

•and  looking  on  the  great  throng,  toiling  and  strag-
gling through  dangers,  difficulties,  and  horrors  for  the
word  glory  y — the  empty  echo  of  renown,  or  perhaps  a
worse  reward,  we  rise  as  from  a  phantasmagoria,  when
a  world  of  strange  and  glittering  figures  have  been
passing  before  the  eye,  changing  with  the  rapidity
of  Ught,  and  each  leaving  an  impression  for  memory,
though  the  whole  was  but  the  shadow  of  a  shade.

Napoleon,  when  addressing  his  troops,  told  them
of  the  "glory  of  France."  Glory  was  his  watch-
word— ^glory  was  his  battle-cry ;  and  tens  of  thou-
sands responded  to  his  call,  from  every  hill  and  valley
of  France  ;  firom  the  cottage  and  the  castle  the  in-
fatuated mass  rushed  forward  to  join  his  eagle  stan-
dard.   Where  are  they  ?

*'  O'er  the  ensanguined  plain
I  gaze,  and  seek  their  numerous  host  in  vain  ;
Gone  like  the  locust  band,  when  whirlwinds  bear
Their  flimsy  legions  through  the  waste  of  air."

Where  are  they  ?  Go  ask  the  rocks  and  chasms
of  the  Alps  to  give  up  their  dead.  Ask  the  vulture
soaring  in  mid  air  above  the  loftiest  heights,  for  the
human  prey  upon  which  he  fed.  Ask  the  bridge  of
Lodi  for  its  victims,  the  action  at  which.  Napoleon,
in  writing  to  the  Directory,  terms  "  the  terrible  pas-
sage of  the  bridge  of  Lodi  ;*'  or  the  marshes  of  Ar-
eola for  the  eleven  thousand  who  fell  there ;  after
which  battle,  said  the  great  commander,  ''  I  have


THE  GENIUS  OF  WAR.  187

scarcely  a  general  left ;"  or  the  sands  of  Egypt  and
the  Pyramids  to  bear  witness  of  the  thousands
slaughtered  there ;  or  the  dark  waters  of  Aboukir
for  those  who  sank  beneath  the  waves  on  the  night
of  Nelson's  victory;  or  the  thousands  afterwards
driven  into  the  sea  by  the  French  army,  the  wa-
ters of  which  were  said  to  have  been  covered
with  floating  turbans.  The  catalogue  is  not  yet
filled  :  there  is  Marengo's  field,  Austerhtz,  Jena,  the
snowy  wastes  of  Russia,  and  Beresina's  icy  flood,
from  whose  waters  thirty-six  thousand  corses  were
taken,  the  remains  of  those  who  had  perished  in  the
retreat  of  the  grand  army  from  Moscow.  Close  the
dreadful  tragedy  with  the  scene  enacted  at  Waterloo,
where  the  loss  of  the  victors  threw  half  of  Britain
into  mourning.  Call  you  this  glory?  "He  who
sows  to  the  wind  shall  reap  the  whirlwind."  Behold
the  man  who  shook  Europe  to  its  centre — at  whose
will  empires  rose  and  fell — in  whose  hands  crowns
were  as  toys : — the  narrow  limits  of  a  rock  in  the
midst  of  the  ocean  are  the  bounds  which  confine  him  !
A  tempest  rages — ^the  sea  is  lashed  in  foam,  and
dashes  with  a  sullen  roar  upon  the  lonely  rock — trees
are  torn  up  by  the  roots — all  nature  is  convulsed  ; —
Napoleon  lay  upon  his  death-bed ;  his  last  thoughts
still  pointing  to  his  master-passion,  he  languidly  ex-
claimed, "  Tete  d^arm^e^''  and  his  spirit  passed  from
its  tenement  of  clay.  Alas  for  earthly  grandeur,
thrones,  palaces,  empires — where  is  their  glory  ?


188  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

On  the  30th  September,  1816,  a  public  meeting
of  great  interest  was  held  in  the  city  of  London.  An
immense  congregation  filled  the  large  church  in  which
the  exercises  were  appointed  to  take  place.  It  was  no
festival  day ;  no  banners  were  borne  aloft,  no  strains
of  music  burst  upon  the  ear — yet  the  aisles  and  gal-
leries of  the  spacious  building  were  thronged.  Nine
young  men  stood  forth  to  receive  commissions, — ^not
as  officers  of  a  martial  host,  to  lead  men  to  fields  of
slaughter  and  carnage — ^to  mingle  in  the  work  of
death — ^yet  they  went  forth  to  conquer,  to  triumph
under  the  banner  of  the  Prince  of  Peace, — ^as  mis-
sionaries of  the  Gospel — soldiers  of  the  Cross —
ready  to  follow  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,
whose  declaration,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory
save  in  the  cross  of  Christ,"  each  one  was  ready
to  adopt  as  his  own.  A  Christian  minister  steps
forth  and  places  in  the  hands  of  each  the  Holy
Bible  :  this  is  their  guide,  their  shield,  their  weapon  ;
this  contains  the  promise  of  the  Son  of  God,  "  Lo
I  am  with  you  alway."  What  need  they  more  ?
They  enlist  under  the  banner  of  the  great  Captain
of  salvation.  They  give  themselves  to  the  great  and
glorious  work  of  proclaiming  the  Gospel  to  the  dark
places  of  the  earth ;  indifferent  to  all  those  ties  which
bind  one  to  his  native  land.  Objects  endeared  by
many  happy  recollections  are  to  be  seen  and  visited
no  more.  Friends  and  companions  are  bid  farewell,
and  that  holy  chain  of  kindred  aflfection,  though  com-


THE  GENIUS  OF  WAR.  189

posed  of  a  thousand  links,  and  each  link  entwined  by
a  wreath  of  Kfe's  sweetest  flowers,  is  to  be  snapped
asunder.  Yet  the  missionary  is  willing  to  endure
all  this  for  the  cause  of  Him  who  freely  gave  his  life
a  ransom  for  guilty  man.

John  Williams  was  the  youngest  of  the  number.
His  field  of  labor  was  the  islands  of  the  South  Sea^
A  few  weeks  before  he  sailed,  the  friends  of  missions
were  cheered  by  glad  tidings  from  those  distant
groups.  After  a  long  night  of  toil,  the  morning  had
at  length  dawned  upon  Tahiti  and  the  surrounding
islands.  The  savage  tribes  had  felt  the  influence  of
the  truth,  and  many  of  the  chiefs  were  the  first  to
embrace  it.  Twelve  months  have  passed  away,  and
the  missionary  stands  upon  a  heathen  shore.  New
scenes  meet  his  view.  Entering  the  chapel  at  Ei-
meo,  he  beholds  hundreds  worshipping  the  true  God,
who  but  a  few  months  before  were  savages,  sacri-
ficing to  idols.  He  hears  the  voice  of  the  island-
er's prayer  imploring  the  blessing  of  God  upon  the
missionaries  and  their  labors.

Having  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  language  and
the  habits  of  the  natives,  the  intrepid  WilUams  com-
mences that  brilliant  and  glorious  series  of  victories
which  he  is  the  instrument  in  accomplishing.  A  canoe,
containing  a  chief  and  a  number  of  natives  from  Ru-
rutu,  launched  upon  the  broad  billows  to  seek  a  refuge
they  knew  not  where,  from  a  fatal  epidemic  which
was  sweeping  over  their  lovely  but  devoted  island.


190  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

The  strangers  arc  providentially  guided,  or  rather
driven  by  the  winds  and  waves  upon  the  shores  of
Mauro,  where  they  find  the  inhabitants  worshipping
the  Christian's  God.  These  point  to  their  demolish-
ed maraes*  and  mutilated  images,  and  inform  the
strangers  that  white  men  had  come  from  a  distant
Jjand  to  teach  them  the  Gospel  of  peace  ;  and  that
they  were  living  on  islands,  the  summits  of  whose
mountains  they  could  see.  Again  the  canoe  is  launch-
ed ;  not  now  to  fly  from  the  anger  of  imaginary
gods,  and  the  destroying  pestilence,  but  in  search  of
those  who  could  tell  them  of  '*  the  way,  the  truth,
and  the  life;"  they  are  wafted  to  the  shores  of
Raiatea, — they  behold  with  wonder  the  men,  the
missionaries  and  their  wives  ;  they  hear  the  precepts
of  peace,  and  love,  and  hope ;  they  hear  of  heaven
and  its  joys, — they  ask  for  teachers  to  accompany
them  to  their  own  native  isle,  and  instruct  their
friends  and  kindred.

A  month  has  passed.  They  have  visited  their
home,  and  return  with  their  boat  laden  with  the  spoils
of  victory,  the  idols  taken  in  a  bloodless  war.  The
missionary  visits  other  islands  ;  he  approaches  Aitu-
laki ;  the  natives  surround  his  boat  and  draw  it  upon
the  shore,  singing  hymns  of  praise.  He  hears  of
other  lands,  upon  whose  shores  the  white  man  has
never  trod  ;  he  desires  to  visit  them,  and  sails  with-

*  Idol  temples.


THE  GENIUS  OF  WAR.  191

out  a  chart  or  guide,  and  returns  unsuccessful.  He
sails  again  and  renews  the  search  ;  and  now  the  lofty
hills  of  Raratonga,  the  unknown  land,  are  descried.
After  many  days  of  doubt  and  anxiety,  the  people
receive  the  truth,  and  the  Gospel  banner  waves  in
peace  over  this  beautiful  island.  The  thoughts  of
the  missionary  now  wander  to  a  far-off  group,  at  a
distance  of  near  two  thousand  miles.  He  resolves
to  build  a  ship,  and  embark  for  those  distant  shores.
But  another  trial  now  awaits  him ;  will  he  leave  the
partner  of  his  life,  the  mother  of  his  children— she
who  cheered  him  in  his  labors,  who  left  her  home  to
be  his  companion  in  these  benighted  lands  ?  "  Go,"
said  the  heroic  wife,  "  go,  and  every  day  my  prayers
shall  follow  you,  that  God  may  preserve  you,  crown
your  efforts  with  success,  and  bring  you  back  in
safety."

The  "  Messenger  of  Peace,"  their  Kttle  vessel,  is
at  length  completed,  and  floats  upon  the  waves.  She
bears  upon  her  flag  the  dove  and  olive-branch.  The
anchor  is  weighed,  and  they  bear  away  for  "  Samoa's
land."  Many  islands  are  visited, — laborers  in  the
vineyard  of  God  are  cheered  in  their  work,  and  at
length  the  Samoan  group  rises  in  view.  The  cloud-
capped  mountains  of  Savaii  are  descried  ;  and  the
first  white  man,  the  messenger  of  salvation,  stands
upon  the  shore.  Thousands  cluster  around  and  list-
en to  the  voice  of  him  who  tells  them  of  Jehovah,
the  only  tnie  God,  the  God  of  peace  and  love ;  they


192  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

ask  if  the  Christian's  religion  will  put  an  end  to  their
dreadful  wars.  The  missionary  proceeds  to  the  resi-
dence of  the  great  war-chief,  Malietoa.  As  the  mes-
sengers of  the  Gospel  of  peace  land  on  the  shore,
they  behold  the  mountains  enveloped  in  flames  and
smoke ;  they  inquire  the  cause.  Has  a  volcano  burst
forth,  spreading  destruction  abroad, — its  torrent  of
lava  overflowing  the  plains  ?  Ah,  no  !  it  is  war.  A
battle  has  just  been  fought,  and  the  flames  are  con-
suming the  houses,  the  plantations,  and  tlie  bodies  of
women  and  children,  and  the  aged  and  infirm,  who
have  fallen  into  the  hands  of  their  sanguinary  con-
querors. Months  have  rolled  on  in  their  course  ;  a
large  chapel  has  been  erected.  The  missionary  de-
clares the  Gospel  truth  to  a  thousand  attentive  listen-
ers. "  Give  us  teachers,"  they  cry.  "  We  will
have  no  more  war.  We  wish  for  peace ;  we  desire
to  be  Christians,  and  to  worship  the  true  God."
And  now  we  approach  the  closing  scene  in  the  life
of  the  martyr  of  Erromanga.  He  had  visited  his  na-
tive land,  his  own  loved  England  ;  he  had  met  with
kind  and  beloved  friends  and  kindred  once  more.
But  he  cannot  stay ;  his  mind,  his  whole  soul  is  in
his  Master's  work.  The  ship  is  bounding  over  the
waves ;  he  is  received  with  joy  in  the  islands  where
he  labored  and  established  the  Gospel,  but  he  cannot
rest;  there  are  thousands  far  beyond  who  are  yet
destitute.  He  £irrives  at  another  group  in  the  West-
ern Pacific ;  Erromanga  is  selected, — selected,  alas  I


THE  GENIUS  OF  WAR.  193

to  be  his  grave.  The  boat  touches  the  shore  ;  he
advances  within  the  shade  of  the  lofty  trees  to  meet
the  natives,  beings  of  a  savage  and  fierce  aspect,  while
the  crew  wait  the  issue  in  fearful  suspense.  A  cry
breaks  the  death-like  silence ;  he  flies  to  the  shore,
pursued  by  cannibals ;  he  falls  ;  the  club  of  the  sav-
age descends  upon  him  ;  and,  pierced  with  poisoned
arrows,  he  yields  his  Ufe  a  martyr  in  the  hallowed
cause  of  his  divine  Master.

Robert  Mofiatt  stood  upon  the  platform  in  Surrey
Chapel,  and  was  commissioned  to  go  "far  hence
among  the  Gentiles,"  at  the  same  time  with  the  Martyr
of  Erromanga.  Their  respective  fields  of  labor  were
both  arduous  but  of  a  widely  difierent  character.  Mof-
fatt  had  felt  the  claims  of  the  perishing,  and  helpless,
and  almost  friendless  millions  of  Africa,  with  whom,  as
he  said,  when  on  a  visit  to  his  native  land,  all  black,
and  barbarous,  and  benighted  as  they  were,  he  hoped
to  live,  labor,  and  die.  Soon  after,  he  embarked  for
the  shores  of  South  Africa,  where  he  is  now,  unless
called  to  rest  from  his  labors,  among  the  children  of
the  wilderness,  the  wild  tribes  of  the  desert — the  Ka-
firs, the  Bushmen,  and  the  Hottentots.

With  the  exception  of  a  single  tribe  in  the  unex-
plored regions  of  the  interior,  there  does  not  exist
a  tribe  or  people  more  brutish,  ignorant,  and  mis-
erable, than  the  Bushmen  of  South  Africa.  They
have  neither  house  nor  shed,  flocks  nor  herds.
Their  home  is  afar  in  the  desert — the  unfrequented

17


194  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

mountaiD  pass,  or  the  secluded  recess  of  a  cave  or
ravine.

The  Bushman  has  a  melancholy  cast  of  features,
with  a  quick  and  suspicious  look.  This  cannot  be
wondered  at  when  it  is  remembered  that  he  asso-
ciates with  savage  beasts,  from  the  lion  that  roams
abroad  by  night  and  day,  to  the  deadly  serpent  which
infests  his  path.  '^  I  have  traversed,"  said  the  mis-
sionary, "regions,  in  which  thousands  once  dwelt,
drinking  at  their  ovni  fountains  and  killing  their  own
game ;  but  now,  alas !  scarcely  a  family  is  to  be
seen.  It  is  impossible  to  look  over  these  desolate
plains  and  moimtain-glens,  vnthout  feeUng  the  deep-
est melancholy,  while  the  wind,  moaning  in  the  vale,
seems  to  echo  back  the  sound,  *  Where  are  they  ?'
Poor  Bushman !  thy  hand  has  been  against  every
one,  and  every  one's  hand  against  thee."  They  kill
their  children  without  remorse,  strangle  or  smother
them,  cast  them  away  in  the  desert,  or  bury  them
alive,  when  forced  to  flee  upon  the  approach  of  foes  ;
and  the  parent  has  been  known  to  cast  his  tender  off-
spring to  the  hungry  lion,  that  stands  roaring  before
his  hiding-place  in  the  rock.  Are  we  not  ready  to
ask,  Can  these  beings  be  human  ?  Kindness  is  the
key  to  the  human  heart.  Even  the  Bushman,  with
his  savage  nature,  has  been  found  to  acknowledge
the  benign  and  transforming  power  of  the  Gospel  of
peace ; — and  a  number,  when  they  heard  the  word
of  life,  believed,  and  a  Christian  church  arose  in


THE  GENIUS  OP  WAR.  195

their  midst;  extensive  gardens  were  laid  out,  and
these  were  cultivated  by  the  wild  Bushman's  own
hands  : — making  the  wilderness  to  rejoice,  and  blos-
som as  the  rose.  The  roving  Bushman  has  been
induced  to  throw  aside  his  spear,  to  construct  a  dwell-
ing-place, to  rear  flocks  and  herds,  and,  on  the  Sab-
bath-day, to  resort  to  the  house  of  prayer.

Such  men  as  the  two  we  have  referred  to  may  well
command  our  highest  admiration  and  gratitude  ;  they
are  the  true  benefactors  of  mankind, — ^the  standard-
bearers  of  the  Gospel,  who  go  forth  sowing  in  tears
its  precious  seed.  Many  have  nobly  fallen  at  their
post  of  duty,  and  prepared  the  way  for  others  to  reap
in  joy ;  'twas  thus  in  Kafir-land.

Doctor  Vanderkemp,  a  native  of  Holland,  was
the  first  to  sound  the  theme  of  divine  love  among
the  Kafirs,  a  nation  of  atheists,  a  people  inured
to  war,  fierce  and  superstitious.  Fearlessly  he
pitched  his  tent  in  their  midst,  although  surrounded
with  dangers  seen  and  unseen ;  looked  upon  as  a  spy
come  to  search  out  their  land,  his  life  was  in  danger
from  the  secret  foe  lying  in  wait  to  stab  him,  and  the
open  hostility  of  the  tyrant  chief.  Yet  his  life  was
preserved  from  the  foe  and  from  the  beast  of  prey.
He  was  the  first  public  defender  of  the  rights  of  the
poor  degraded  Hottentot.  He  seemed,  by  his  firm-
ness of  character  and  distinguished  talents,  prepared
for  the  Herculean  task  to  which  he  devoted  himself.
He  forced  his  way  at  once  into  the  midst  of  a  dense


196  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

population  of  barbarians,  the  most  powerful,  warlike,
and  independent  of  all  the  tribes  within  or  without
the  boundaries  of  the  Cape  Colony.  He  was  not
only  a  profound  student  in  ancient  languages,  but  in
all  the  modem  European  tongues ;  yet  this  man,
constrained  by  the  "love  of  Christ,"  could  cheer-
fully lay  aside  all  his  academic  honors,  when  the
paramount  claims  of  the  destitute  heathen  were  pre-
sented to  his  mind.  He  came  from  a  university  to
teach  the  alphabet  to  the  poor  naked  Hottentot ;  from
the  refinements  of  society,  to  associate  with  beings
of  the  lowest  grade ;  from  a  life  of  earthly  honors
and  ease,  to  one  of  perils  of  waters,  of  robbers,  and
of  the  heathen,  in  the  desert  and  the  wilderness.

How  strikingly  is  the  power  of  the  Gospel  exem-
plified in  the  life  and  death  of  Africaner,  the  terror
of  South  Africa,  who,  in  the  days  of  his  youth,
roamed  free  over  his  native  hills,  and,  with  his  father,
rich  in  the  possession  of  flocks  and  herds !  The  for-
eigner seized  their  lands  and  made  them  dependents.
Africaner,  oppressed  and  goaded  on  to  madness  by
his  tyrannical  master,  sought  revenge.  A  fitting  op-
portunity presenting  itself,  their  oppressors  were  shot
down,  and  Africaner,  with  his  band,  fled  to  the  woods
on  the  banks  of  the  Orange  river,  and  there  fixed  his
abode.  He  soon  became  the  terror  of  the  land.  The
tribes  fled  at  his  approach.  His  name  carried  dismay
even  to  the  solitary  wastes.  This  man,  once  the  lion,
at  whose  roar  the  inhabitants  of  distant  hamlets  fled


THE  GENIUS  OF  WAR.  197

from  their  homes;  may  now  be  seen  to  weep  like
a  child  under  the  influence  of  that  spirit  of  heavenly
peace  and  love,  which  makes  men  a  little  lower  than
the  angels.  Hear  this  former  terror  of  the  land,  now
a  meek  and  humble  follower  of  the  Lamb :  "  What
have  I  now,"  said  he,  "of  all  the  battles  I  have  fought
and  all  the  property  I  destroyed,  but  shame  and  re-
morse?" And  the  hero  of  Europe's  battle-fields
might  have  asked  himself  amid  the  solitudes  of  St.
Helena,  What  have  I  now  of  all  of  the  battles  fought,
and  victories  won,  and  spoils  gained  in  strife  ?  "  Ar-
riving at  Pella,"  says  Mr.  Moffatt,  "  we  had  a  feast
fit  for  heaven-bom  souls  and  subjects,  to  which  the
seraphim  above  might  have  tuned  their  golden  lyres.
Men  met,  who  had  not  seen  each  other  since  they
had  joined  in  mutual  combat  for  each  other's  destruc-
tion ;  met — warrior  with  warrior,  bearing  in  their  hands
the  olive-branch,  secure  under  the  panoply  of  peace  and
love.  They  talked  of  Him  who  had  subdued  both,
without  a  sword  or  spear,  and  each  bosom  swelled  with
purest  friendship,  and  exhibited  another  trophy  destined
to  adorn  the  triumph  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  under
whose  banner  each  was  promoting  that  reign  in  which

*' '  No  longer  hosts  encountering  hosts,
Their  heaps  of  slain  deplore ;
They  hang  the  trumpet  in  the  hall.
And  study  war  no  more.'  "

Africaner  lay  upon  his  death-bed.     He  called  his

17*


198  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

people  around  him :  "  We  are  not,"  said  he,  "  what
we  were,  savages,  but  men  professing  to  be  taught
according  to  the  Gospel.  Let  us,  then,  do  accord-
ingly. Live  peaceably  with  all  men,  if  possible ;
and  consult  those  who  are  placed  over  you  before
you  engage  in  any  thing.  Behave  to  any  teacher
sent  to  you,  as  one  sent  of  God,  as  I  have  great
hope  that  God  will  bless  you  in  this  respect  when
I  am  gone  to  heaven.  I  feel  that  I  love  God,  and
that  he  has  done  much  for  me,  of  which  I  am
totaUy  unworthy.  My  former  life  is  stained  with
blood,  but  I  trust  I  am  pardoned  by  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  and  am  going  to  heaven."

But  we  must  close  our  illustrations  and  remarks,
although  the  theme  is  far  from  being  exhausted  of  its
interest ;  the  contrast  exhibited  between  the  two  con-
ditions of  peace  and  war,  will  never  be  fully  portrayed
till  the  arrival  of  that  great  day  for  which  all  other
days  were  made,  when  there  shall  stand  before  the
"  great  white  throne"  the  conqueror  and  the  conquer-
ed ;  the  leaders  of  armed  hosts,  and  their  mjnriads  of
slain  victims  :  then,  but  not  till  then,  will  it  be  pos-
sible to  learn,  in  all  its  vast  extent,  the  importance
of  the  Gospel  of  peace,  with  its  heaven-appointed
ministrant ; — one  of  whose  glorious  predictions  it  is,
that  the  nations  shall  learn  war  no  more.


)Pocal)onta0.

BY  W.  6ILM0RE  SIMMS.
1.

Light  was  the  heart  and  sweet  the  smile,

Of  her,  the  maid  of  forest-bower,
Ere  yet  the  stranger's  step  of  guile

Bore  one  soft  beauty  from  the  flower ;
The  wild  girl  of  an  Indian  vale,

A  child,  with  all  of  woman's  seeming.
And  if  her  cheek  be  less  than  pale,

'Twas  with  the  life-blood  through  it  streaming ;
Soft  was  the  light  that  fiU'd  her  eye.

And  grace  was  in  her  every  motion,
Her  tone  was  touching,  like  the  sigh.

When  young  love  first  becomes  devotion, —
And  worship  still  was  hers — her  sire

Beloved  and  fear'd,  a  prince  of  power,
Whose  simplest  word  or  glance  of  ire

Still  made  a  thousand  chieftains  cower-
Not  such  her  sway, — ^yet  not  the  less,
Because  it  better  pleased  to  bless,
And  won  its  rule  by  gentleness :


200  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Among  a  savage  people,  still

She  kept  from  savage  moods  apart,
And  thought  of  crime  and  dream  of  ill

Had  never  sway'd  her  maiden  heart
A  milder  tutor  had  been  there,

And,  midst  wild  scenes  and  wilder  men,
Her  spirit,  like  her  form,  was  fair.

And  gracious  was  its  guidance  then.
Her  sire,  that  fierce  old  forest  king.

Himself  had  ruled  that  she  should  be
A  meek,  and  ever  gentle  thing,

To  clip  his  neck,  to  clasp  his  knee ;
To  bring  his  cup  when,  from  the  chase,

He  came,  o'erwearied  with  its  toils ;
To  cheer  him  by  her  girlish  grace,

To  sooth  him  by  her  sunniest  smiles —
For  these,  she  dwelt  a  thing  apart

From  deeds  that  make  the  savage  mirth,
And  haply  thus  she  kept  her  heart

As  fresh  and  feeling  as  at  birth  ;
A  Christian  heart,  though  by  its  creed

Untaught,  yet  in  her  native  wild.
Free  from  all  taint  of  thought  or  deed,

A  sweet,  and  fond,  and  spotless  child ;
Scarce  woman  yet,  but  haply  nigh

The  unconscious  changes  of  the  hour
When  youth  is  sad,  unknowing  why, —

The  bud  dilating  to  the  flower.
And  sighing  with  the  expanding  birth


POCAHONTAS.  201

Of  passionate  hopes  that,  bom  to  bless,
May  yet,  superior  still  to  earth,

Make  happy  with  their  pure  impress.
Such,  in  her  childhood,  ere  the  blight

Of  failing  fortunes  touch'd  her  race.
Was  Pocahontas  still, — a  bright

And  blessing  form  of  youth  and  grace,—
Beloved  of  all,  her  father's  pride.

His  passion,  from  the  rest  apart,
A  love  for  which  he  still  had  died.

The  very  life-blood  of  his  heart.


II.


The  king  would  seek  the  chase  to-day,
And  mighty  is  the  wild  array
That  gathers  nigh  in  savage  play, —

A  nation  yields  its  ear ;
A  bison  herd — so  goes  the  tale —
Is  trampUng  down  the  cultured  vale.
And  none  who  love  the  land  may  fail

To  gather  when  they  hear.
He  goes, — ^the  father  from  his  child.
To  seek  the  monster  of  the  wild.
But,  in  his  fond  embraces  caught.
Ere  yet  he  goes,  he  hears  her  thought, —
Her  wish, — the  spotted  fawn,  his  prize.
The  pet  most  dear  to  girlhood's  eyes.
Long  promised,  which  the  chase  denies.


302  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL

Stern  is  the  sudden  look  he  darts

Around  the  assembled  crowd,  as  now
His  footstep  from  the  threshold  parts,

And  dark  the  cloud  about  his  brow.
"  We  hunt  no  timid  deer  to-day,
And  arm  for  slaughter,  not  for  play, —
Another  season  for  such  prey.

My  child,  and  other  prey  for  thee  :
A  captive  from  the  herd  we  seek.
Would  bring  but  sorrow  to  thy  che^k,
Make  thee  forget  what  peace  is  here.

Of  bird,  and  bloom,  and  shady  tree,
And  teach  thine  eyes  the  unknown  tear  !-
No  more !"

He  puts  her  from  his  grasp
Undoes,  with  gentle  hand,  the  clasp
She  takes  about  his  neck,  and  then,

Even  as  he  sees  her  silent  grief

He  turns,  that  dark  old  Indian  chief.
And  takes  her  to  his  arms  again.
"  It  shall  be  as  thou  wilt — the  fawn.
Ere  from  the  hills  the  light  is  gone.

Shall  crouch  beneath  thy  hands."
How  sweetly  then  she  smiled — his  eye
Once  more  perused  her  tenderly.
Then,  with  a  smile,  he  put  her  by,

And  shouted  to  his  bands.


POCAHONTAS.  203

III.

They  came  ! — ^a  word,  a  look,  is  all—

The  thicket  hides  their  wild  array,
A  thousand  warriors,  plumed  and  tall.

Well  arm'd  and  painted  for  the  fray.
The  maiden  watch'd  their  march, — a  doubt

Rose  in  her  heart,  which,  as  they  went,
Her  tongue  had  half-way  spoken  out.

Suspicious  of  their  fell  intent.
"  A  bison  herd — yet  why  the  frown

Upon  my  father's  brow,  and  why
The  war-tuft  on  each  warrior's  crown.

The  war-whoop  as  they  gather'd  nigh  ?
They  tell  of  stranger  braves — a  race,
With  thunder  clad,  and  pale  of  face,
And  lightnings  in  their  grasp,— who  dart

The  bolt  unseen  with  deadliest  aim, —

A  sudden  shock,  a  show  of  flame, —
Still  fatal,  to  the  foeman's  heart.
Ah !  much  I  fear,  with  these  to  fight.

Our  warriors  seek  the  woods  to-day,
And  they  will  back  return  by  night

With  horrid  tokens  of  the  fray  ; —
With  captives  doom'd  in  robes  of  fire

To  sooth  the  spirits  of  those  who  fell,
And  glut  the  red  and  raging  ire

Of  those  who  but  avenge  too  well !
Ah  !  father,  could  my  prayer  avail.

Such  should  not  be  thy  sport  and  pride ;


204  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

It  were,  methinks,  a  lovelier  tale,

Of  peace  along  our  river's  side ;
And  groves  of  plenty,  fiU'd  with  song
Of  birds,  that  crowd,  a  happy  throng

To  hail  the  happier  throngs  below ;
That  tend  the  maize-fields  and  pursue
The  chase,  or  urge  the  birch  canoe.

And  seek  no  prey  and  have  no  foe !
Ah  !  not  for  me, — ^if  there  should  come
A  chief  to  bear  me  to  his  home, —
Let  him  not  hope,  with  bloody  spear,

To  win  me  to  his  heart  and  will, —
Nor  boast,  in  hope  to  please  my  ear,

Of  victims  he  has  joy'd  to  kill.

No !  let  me  be  a  maiden  still ;
I  care  not  if  they  mock,  and  say

The  child  of  Powhatan  sits  lone,
And  lingers  by  the  public  way

With  none  to  hearken  to  her  moan, —
She'll  sit,  nor  sigh,  till  one  appears
Who  finds  no  joy  in  human  tears."

IV.

Now  sinks  the  day-star,  and  the  eve
With  dun  and  purple  seems  to  grieve  ;
Sudden  the  dark  ascends,  the  night
Speeds  on  with  rapid  rush  and  flight ;
The  maiden  leaves  her  forest  bowers,
Where  late  she  wove  her  idle  flowers,


POCAHONTAS.  2M

Chill'd  by  the  gloom,  but  chill'd  the  more

As  from  the  distant  wood  she  hears
A  shriek  of  death,  that,  heard  before.

Has  grown  famihar  to  her  ears.
And  fills  her  soul  with  secret  dread

Of  many  a  grief  the  young  heart  knows.
In  lonehness,  by  fancy  fed,

That  ever  broods  o'er  nameless  woes.
And  grieves  the  more  at  that  relief
Which  finds  another  name  for  grief.
Too  certain  now  her  cause  of  fear.

That  shout  of  death  awakes  again ;
The  cry  which  stuns  her  woman  ear.

Is  that  of  vengeance  for  the  slain.
Too  weU  she  knows  the  sound  that  speaks

For  terrors  of  the  mortal  strife,
The  bitter  yell,  whose  promise  r^eks

With  vengeance  on  the  captive  Ufe.
"  No  bison  hunt,"  she  cried,  "  but  fight.
Their  cruel  joy,  their  fierce  delight ;
They  come  with  bloody  hands  to  bring
Some  captive  to  the  fatal  ring ;
There's  vengeance  to  be  done  to-day
For  warrior  slaughter'd  in  the  fray ;
Yet  who  their  foe,  unless  it  be
The  race  that  comes  beyond  the  sea,
The  pale,  but  powerful  chiefs,  who  bear

The  lightnings  in  their  grasp,  and  fling
Their  sudden  thunder  through  the  air,

18


806  MISSIONAHY  MEMORIAL.

With  bolts  that  fly  on  secret  wing  ?
The  Massawomek  now  no  more
Brings  down  his  warriors  to  the  shore,

And  'twas  but  late  the  Monacan,
O'ercome  in  frequent  fight,  gave  o'er.

And  bow'd  the  knee  to  Powhatan.
Scarce  is  gone  three  moons  ago
Since  they  laid  the  hatchet  low.
Smoked  the  calumet  that  grew

To  a  sign  for  every  eye.
And  by  this  the  warriors  knew
That  the  Spirit  from  above.

As  the  light  smoke  floated  high,
Bless'd  it  with  the  breath  of  love.
'Tis  the  pale-face,  then,  and  he, —
Wild  in  wrath,  and  dread  to  see, —
Terrible  in  fight, — ah  !  me  !
If  against  my  father's  heart
He  hath  sped  his  thunder-dart !"

V.

Now  gather  the  warriors  of  Powhatan  nigh,
A  rock  is  his  throne,
His  footstool  a  stone.
Dark  the  cloud  on  his  brow,  keen  the  fiire  in  his  eye,
To  a  ridge  on  his  forehead  swells  the  vein ; —

His  hand  grasps  the  hatchet,  which  swings  to  and
fro,
As  if  ready  to  sink  m  the  brain,


POCAHONTAS.  207

But  looking  in  vain  for  the  foe  !
Thus  the  king  on  the  circle  looks  round,
With  a  speech  that  has  never  a  sound ;
His  eye  hath  a  thirst  v^rhich  imparts

What  the  Up  might  but  feebly  essay,
And  it  speaks  like  an  arrow  to  their  hearts,

As  if  bidding  them  bound  on  the  prey.
The  brow  of  each  chief  is  in  air,

With  a  loftiness  born  of  his  own ;
And  the  king,  like  the  lion  from  his  lair,

Looks  proud  on  the  props  of  his  throne.
His  eagle  and  his  tiger  are  there,

His  vulture,  his  cougar,  his  fox, —

And  cold,  on  the  edge  of  his  rocks.
The  war-rattle  rings  his  alarum  and  cries,

"  I  strike,  and  my  enemy  dies  !"
Lifts  the  soul  of  the  monarch  to  hear.

Lifts  the  soul  of  the  monarch  to  see,
And,  quick  at  his  summons,  the  chieftains  draw  near.

And  shouting,  they  sink  on  the  knee, —

Then  rise  and  await  his  decree.

VI.

The  king  in  conscious  majesty
Roll'd  around  his  fiery  eye.
As  some  meteor,  hung  on  high,
Tells  of  fearful  things  to  be,
In  the  record  roll  of  fate —
Which  the  victim  may  not  flee —


908  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

It  may  be  to  one  alone.

Of  the  thousand  fonns  that  wait.
At  the  footstool  of  the  throne  !
Parts  his  lips  for  speech,  but  ere

Word  can  form  on  human  sense,
Lo  !  the  circle  opens — ^there —
One  descends,  a  form  of  light,
As  if  borne  with  downward  flight.

You  may  hardly  gather  whence.
Shght  the  form,  and  with  a  grace
Caught  from  heaven,  its  native  place ;
Bright  of  eye,  and  with  a  cheek.
In  its  glowing,  ever  meek,
With  a  maiden  modesty,
That  puts  love,  a  subject,  by ; —
And  such  soft  and  streaming  tresses.
That  the  gazer  stops  and  blesses,
Having  sudden  dreams  that  spell

Reason  on  her  throne,  and  make
All  the  subject  thoughts  rebel,

For  the  simple  fancy's  sake  ! —
Such  the  vision  now  !     The  ring
Yields, — and  lo  !  before  the  king,
Down  she  sinks  below  the  throne.
Where  he  sits  in  strength  alone, —
She  upon  a  lowly  stone  !
And  her  tresses  settle  down
Loosely  on  her  shoulders  brown,
Headless  she,  the  while,  of  aught


POCA.HONTAS.  209

But  the  terror  in  her  thought.
Eager  in  her  fears,  her  hand

Rests  upon  his  knee, — her  eye
Gazing  on  the  fierce  command

Throned  in  his  with  majesty —
She  alone,  at  that  dark  hour.
Dare  approach  the  man  of  power.

VII.

Dread  the  pause  that  foUow'd  then
In  those  ranks  of  savage  men ;
Fain  would  Powhatan  declare

What  is  working  in  his  soul ;
But  the  eye  that  meets  him  there,
As  the  maiden  upward  looks,

Spells  him  with  a  sweet  control.
Never  long  his  spirit  brooks

Such  control — his  angry  eye
Seeks  her  with  reproving  fire,

And  her  lips,  with  fond  reply,
Part  to  calm  the  rising  ire  ;
Soft  the  accents,  yet  the  sound
Strangely  breaks  the  silence  round.

VIII.

"  Is't  thus  thou  keep'st  thy  word  with  me  ?

I  see  not  here  the  spotted  fawn.
Which  thou  didst  promise  me  should  be,

Ere  daylight  from  the  hills  was  gone,

18*


f  10  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

A  captive  all  unharmed  caught.

For  this,  to  wreathe  its  neck,  I  sought

The  purple  flower  that  crowns  the  wood,
And  gather'd  from  the  sandy  shore
The  singing  shell  with  crimson  core.

As  it  were  dropp'd  with  innocent  blood.
To  thee,  I  know,  the  task  were  Ught

To  rouse  the  silver-foot  and  take,
Even  in  its  weeping  mother's  sight.

The  bleating  captive  from  the  brake.
Yet,  no !  there's  nothing  here  for  me,

No  trophy  of  thy  skill  and  toil ;
Not  even  the  bison-head  I  see,

The  youthfoil  hunter's  proper  spoil.
But,  in  its  stead — ah  !  wherefore  now, —

My  father !  do  not  check  thy  child  !
Why  is  the  dark  spot  on  thy  brow,

And  why  thy  aspect  stem  and  wild  ?
What  may  this  mean  ?  no  bison  chase,

Nor  failing  sport,  not  often  vain,
Has  fix'd  that  sign  upon  your  face,

Of  passionate  hate  and  mortal  pain !
Ah  !  no !  methinks  the  fearful  mood
Has  found  its  birth  in  hostile  blood —
The  warwhoop  shouted  as  ye  went.
This  told  me  of  your  fell  intent ;
The  death-whoop,  chanted  as  ye  came,
Declared,  as  well,  defeat  and  shame !"


POCAHONTAS.  211


IX.

"  Ay !"  cried  the  monarch,  "  well  ye  speak ;

I  feel  the  words  upon  my  cheek,

In  burning  characters  that  cry

For  vengeance  on  mme  enemy.

'Tis  true  as  thou  hast  said,  my  child,

We  met  our  foeman  in  the  wild.

And  from  the  conflict  bear  away

But  death  and  shame  to  prove  the  fray.

Vainly  our  warriors  fought, — our  sires.

Withhold  their  blessings  on  our  arms ;
The  pale-face  with  his  thunder-fires,

His  lightning-shafts,  and  wizard  charms,
Hath  baffled  strength  and  courage.     We

May  fold  our  arms — the  glorious  race.
That  from  the  day-god  took  their  birth,

Must  to  the  stranger  yield  the  place.
Uproot  the  great  ancestral  tree.

And  fling  their  mantles  down  to  earth.
Yet  shall  there  be  no  vengeance  ?     Cries,
From  death,  demand  the  sacrifice ;
Souls  of  the  slaughter'd  warriors  stand,
And  wave  us  with  each  bloody  hand ;
Call  for  the  ghost  of  him  who  slew,
In  bloody  rites,  a  warrior  true, —

And  shall  they  call  in  vain  ?
To  smooth  the  path  of  shadows,  heaven
A  victim  to  the  doom  hath  given.


212  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Whose  brow,  with  stroke  asunder  riven,
Shall  recompense  the  slain !"

X.

Impatient,  then,  the  monarch  chief.
While  fury  took  the  place  of  grief,
A  stalwart  savage  summon'd  nigh, —

"  The  pale-faced  warrior  bring — the  brave

Shriek  o'er  the  valley  for  their  slave, —
I  hear  them  in  the  owl's  wild  cry,
The  wolfs  sharp  clamors — ^he  must  die  !
No  coward  he  to  shrink  from  death,
But  shouting,  in  his  latest  breath.

Its  pangs  he  will  defy : —
It  joys  my  soul  in  such  a  fate.
Which,  though  the  agony  be  great.

Can  still  exulting  sing, —
Of  braves,  the  victims  to  his  brand,
Whose  crowding  ghosts  about  him  stand,
To  bear  him  to  the  spirit-land

On  swift  and  subject  wing !"

XI.

The  block  is  prepared,
The  weapon  is  bared.
And  the  warriors  are  nigh  with  their  tomahawks
rear'd ;

The  prisoner  they  bring
In  the  midst  of  the  ring.


POCAHONTAS.  213

And  the  king  bids  the  circle  around  him  be  clear'd.

The  wrath  on  his  brow,  at  the  sight
Of  the  prisoner  they  bring  to  his  doom,

Now  kindles  his  eye  with  a  lordly  delight;
As  the  lightning-flash  kindles  the  gloom.
He  rises,  he  sways,  with  a  breath.
And  hush'd  grows  the  clamor  of  death ;
Falls  the  weapon  that  groan'd  with  the  thirst
To  drink  from  the  fomitain  accurst ;
Stills  the  murmur  that  spoke  for  the  hate
That  chafed  but  to  wait  upon  fate.

How  trembled  then  the  maid,  as  rose
That  captive  warrior  calm  and  stern,

Thus  girded  by  the  wolfish  foes

His  fearless  spirit  still  would  spurn  ;
How  bright  his  glance,  how  fair  his  face,
And  with  what  proud  enfranchised  grace

His  footsteps  free  advance,  as,  still.
He  follow'd  firm  the  bloody  mace
That  guided  to  the  gloomy  place

Where  stood  the  savage  set  to  kill !

How  fill'd  her  soul  with  dread  dismay,
Beholding  in  his  form  and  air

How  noble  was  the  unwonted  prey
Thus  yielded  to  the  deathsman  there  !

Still  fearless,  though  in  foreign  land.

No  weapon  in  his  fetter'd  hand.

Girt  by  a  dark  and  hostile  band


214  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

That  never  knew  to  spare  !
His  limbs  but  not  his  spirit  bound,
How  looks  the  godlike  stranger  round,
As  heedless  of  the  doom,  as  when.
In  sight  of  thirty  thousand  men,
He  stood  by  Regall's  walls,  and  slew
The  bravest  of  her  chiefs  that  came

His  best  in  beauty's  sight  to  do,
And  seeking  honor,  finding  shame  !
As  little  moved  by  fate  and  fear,

As  when,  in  fair  Charatza's  smile
Exulting,  he  was  doom'd  to  bear

The  Tartar's  blows  and  bondage  vile —

And  slew  him  in  his  resolute  mood.

Though  Terror's  worst  beside  him  stood.
And  all  her  sleuthhounds  follow'd  fast.

Death,  hunger,  hate,  a  venomous  brood.
Where'er  his  flying  footsteps  past.*
Not  now  to  shrink,  though,  in  his  eyes.

Their  eager  bands,  at  last  elate,
Have  track'd  him  where  the  bloodstone  lies.

And  mock  him  with  the  show  of  fate  !
With  courage  still,  as  proiid  as  theirs.
He  keeps  a  soul  that  laughs  at  fears  ;
Too  proud  for  grief,  too  brave  for  tears.
Their  tortures  still  he  mocks,  and  boasts
His  own  great  deeds,  the  crowding  hosts,

*  See  the  Life  of  Captain  John  Smith.


POCAHONTAS.  215

That  witness'd,  and  the  shrieking  ghosts

His  violent  arm  set  free ;
And,  while  his  heart  dilates  in  thought
Of  glorious  deeds,  in  lands  remote,

The  pride  of  Europe's  chivalry.
It  seem'd  to  those  who  gazed,  that  still
The  passion  of  triumph  seem'd  to  fill —
While  nerving  well,  with  deathless  will —

The  exulting  champion's  heart  I
Half  trembled  then  the  savage  foe.
Lest  sudden,  from  the  unseen  bow.
He  still  might  send  the  fatal  blow,

He  still  might  wing  the  dart.
But  soon — as  o'er  the  captive's  soul
Some  tender  memories  seem'd  to  roll.
Like  billowy  clouds  that,  charged  with  streams.
Soon  hide  in  saddest  gloom  the  gleams
Of  the  imperial  sun,  and  hush.
In  grief,  the  day's  dilating  flush
Of  glory  and  pride — the  triumph  fell, —
The  soul  obey'd  the  sudden  spell.
A  dream  of  love  that  kindled  far,
In  youth,  beneath  the  eastern  star.
Is  passing  from  his  hope  to  be
The  last,  best  light  of  memory.
Soft  grew  the  fire  within  his  eyes,
One  tear  the  warrior's  strength  defies, —
His  soul  one  moment  falters — then,

As  if  the  pliancy  were  shame,


216  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Dishonoring  all  his  ancient  fame,
He  stood  ! — the  master-man  of  men !

XII.

That  moment's  sign  of  weakness  broke

The  spell  that  still'd  the  crowd  !  The  chief,
With  mockery  in  liis  accent,  spoke —

For  still  the  savage  mocks  at  grief —
"  No  more !  why  should  th'  impatient  death
Delay,  till  with  the  woman's  breath.
Her  trembling  fears,  her  yearning  sigh

For  life,  but  vainly  kept  with  shame,

He  wrongs  his  own  and  people's  name  !
I  would  not  have  the  warrior  die.
Nor,  to  the  last,  with  battle  cry,

Exulting,  shout  his  fame  !
Spare  him  the  crime  of  tears,  that  flow,
A  sign  of  suffering  none  should  know.
But  he  who  flings  aside  the  bow.

And  shrinks  the  brand  to  bear ;
Let  not  our  sons  the  weakness  see.
Lest  from  the  foe  in  shame  they  flee.
And,  by  their  arms  no  longer  free.

Grow  captive  to  their  fear :
For  him  ! — I  pity  while  I  scorn
The  tribe  in  which  the  wretch  was  bom ;

And,  as  I  gaze  around,
I  glad  me  that  mine  aged  eye
Sees  none,  of  all  who  gather  nigh,


POCAHONTAS.  217

Who  dread  to  hear  the  warwhoop  sound,
Not  one  who  fears  to  die  !"

XIII.

They  cast  the  prisoner  to  the  ground,
With  g3rves  from  neighboring  vines  they  bound,
His  brow  upon  the  ancient  rock
They  laid  with  wild  and  bitter  mock.
That  joy'd  to  mark  the  deep  despair

That  moment  in  the  prisoner's  eye,
As  sudden,  swung  aloft  in  air.

He  sees  the  bloody  mace  on  high  !
But  not  for  him  to  plead  in  fear —
No  sign  of  pity  comes  to  cheer.
And,  with  one  short,  unwhisper'd  prayer.

He  yields  him  up  to  die.
Keen  are  the  eyes  that  watch  the  blow,
Impatient  till  the  blood  shall  flow,
A  thousand  eyes  that  gloating  glow.

In  eager  silence  hush'd  :
The  arm  that  wings  the  mace  is  bending.
The  instrument  of  death  descending, —
A  moment,  and  the  mortal  sinks,

A  moment,  and  the  spirit  soars.
The  earth  his  parting  life-blood  drinks.

The  spirit  lands  on  foreign  shores  :
A  moment ! — and  the  maiden  rush'd
From  the  Tow  stone,  where  still  affrighted.

Scarce  dreaming  what  she  sees  is  true,

19


216  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

With  vision  dim,  with  thoughts  benighted,

She  sate,  as  doom'd  for  slaughter  too ; —
And  stay'd  the  stroke  in  its  descent.
While  on  her  fairy  knee  she  bent,
Pass'd  one  arm  o'er  the  prisoner's  brow,

Above  his  forehead  lifts  her  own,
Then  turns — with  eye  grown  tearless  now,

But  full  of  speech,  as  eye  alone
Can  speak  to  eye  and  heart  in  prayer —

For  mercy  to  her  father's  throne  !
Ah  !  can  she  hope  for.  mercy  there  ?

XIV.

And  what  of  him,  that  savage  sire  ?

Oh  !  surely  not  in  vain  she  turns
To  where  his  glance  of  mortal  ire

In  lurid  light  of  anger  bums.
A  moment  leapt  he  to  his  feet.

When  first  her  sudden  form  is  seen,
Across  the  circle  darting  fleet,

The  captive  from  the  stroke  to  screen.
Above  his  head,  with  furious  whirl,

The  hatchet  gleams  in  act  to  fly  ;
But,  as  he  sees  the  kneeling  girl.

The  glances  of  her  pleading  eye, —
The  angel  spirit  of  mercy  waves

The  evil  spirit  of  vsrrath  away.
And  all  accords,  ere  yet  she  craves

Of  that  her  eye  alone  can  pray.


POCAHONTAS.  219


•


Strange  is  the  wealgiess,  born  of  love,

That  melts  the  iron  of  his  soul,
And  lifts  him,  momently,  above

His  passions  and  their  dark  control ;
And  he  v^rho  pity  ne'er  had  shown

To  captive  of  his  bow  and  spear,
By  one  strong  sudden  pulse  has  grown

To  feel  that  pity  may  be  dear
As  vengeance  to  the  heart, — when  still

Love  keeps  one  lurking-place  and  grows.
Thus  prompted  by  a  woman's  will.

Triumphant  over  a  thousand  foes
'Twas,  as  if  sudden,  touch'd  by  Heaven,
The  seal  that  kept  the  rock  was  riven  ;
As  if  the  waters,  slumbering  deep.

Even  from  the  very  birth  of  light.
Smote  by  its  smile,  had  leam'd  to  leap.

Rejoicing,  to  their  Maker's  sight :
How  could  that  stern  old  king  deny
The  angel  pleading  in  her  eye, —
How  mock  the  sweet  imploring  grace.
That  breathed  in  beauty  from  her  face.
And  to  her  kneeling  action  gave

A  power  to  sooth,  and  still  subdue,
Until,  though  humble  as  the  slave.

To  more  than  queenly  sway  she  grew  ?
Oh  !  brief  the  doubt; — Oh  !  short  the  strife.
She  wins  the  captive's  forfeit  life  ;
She  breaks  his  bands,  she  bids  him  go,


220  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Her  idol,  but  her  country's  foe,
And  dreams  not,  in  that  parting  hour,

The  gyves  that  from  his  Hmbs  she  tears^
Are  light  in  weight,  and  frail  in  power,

To  those  that  round  her  heart  she  wears.


illar2*0  (!II)arm.

BY  ANNA  CORA  MOWATT.

'TwAS  not  the  features — ^not  the  form —

The  eyes'  celestial  blue —
'Twas  not  the  blushes  soft  and  warm —

The  lips'  vermilion  hue —
The  waving  of  her  golden  hair —

The  beauty  of  her  face, —
Though  hers,  in  sooth,  was  very  fair, —

Nor  e'en  her  matchless  grace  !

He  gazed  upon  her  speaking  eye,

But  'twas  the  soul  to  see ;
He  mark'd  the  glance,  the  smile,  the  sigh.

That  spake  of  Purity :
He  sought  the  charms  that  long  endure,

That  beauteous  make  the  mind ;
He  only  loved  the  jewel  pure

That  this  fair  casket  shrined.


BY  M18S  E.  JANE  CATE.

•

"  Yes,  mother,  but  one  cannot  endure  having  the
house  torn  down  about  one's  ears  !  Who  could  eat
or  study,  I  wonder !  One  might  I  suppose  with  Miss
Harriet ;  for  I  fancy  she  is  given  to  solitude,  poetry-
writing,  revery,  and  long  rambles  ;  and  I  could  man-
age to  live  a  month  under  the  same  roof  with  a  young
lady,  if  she  would  sometimes  keep  out  of  my  way.
But  that  Susan  !  Ah,  from  such  as  her,  *  ye  minis-
ters of  grace  defend  us  !'  "

There  was  the  look  of  supplication  in  his — I  mean
Harry  Porter's — eye,  and  its  feeling  was  evidently  in
his  heart  as  he  spoke.  His  sister  sat  near  him  with
her  finger-point  resting  on  the  page  she  had  been
reading,  conjecturing,  all  the  while,  what  faculty  in
its  extraordinary  development,  or  what  in  its  want  of
growth  or  activity,  induced  such  unreasonableness,
when  woman  was  in  the  question,  in  her  otherwise
reasonable  brother.  It  came  in  fact  from  his  selfish-
ness. He  chose  to  sit  and  fold  his  hands  in  his  lux-
urious idleness,  to  wait  for  his  mother,  his  sister,  his

19*


222  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

friends  to  come  and  minister  to  him,  rather  than  to
arouse  himself,  looking  about  him,  and  saying, —
"  Who — who  has  dropped  her  fan  ?  What  lady  would
like  being  helped  to  coffee  ?  to  crossing  a  brook  ?  to
jumping  an  immoveable  stile,  then  ?  to  mounting  a
horse,  or  any  thing  ?"  rather  than  to  lay  his  hand  on
his  heart,  or  touch  the  brim  of  his  hat,  whispering,
"Your  most  devoted,  madam."  All  these  things
were  his  utter  aversion.

Sad  pity  it  is  that  such  a  man  should  ever  look
upon  the  like  of  Susan  Nesmith.  He  is  incapable
of  understanding  her  cheerful  and  self-sacrificing  ex-
ertions for  his  happiness  ;  or  he  may  do  this  at  last
when  the  grave  has  closed  over  her,  forever  shutting
out  those  yearning  acknowledgments,  which  are  set-
tling back  like  lead  upon  his  heart ;  he  can  learn  then
the  value  of  what  was  so  lately  all  his  own,  by  its
irretrievable  loss.

Harry  sat  a  few  moments  with  his  chin  resting  on
his  bosom  ;  then,  throwing  his  book  on  the  table,
he  started  nervously  up,  and  began  pacing  the  floor.
"  But  that  Susan  !  one  can  know  just  what  she  will
be  from  her  letters  to  you,  Vin,  and  from  what  I
have  heard  you  say  of  her  pranks  at  the  Seminary."

"  Why,  brother,  you  know  I  have  told  you  forty
times  already,  that  her  pranks,  as  you  call  them,
were  but  so  many  good,  kind  expedients  to  wake  up
some  sleepy  head,  cheer  some  dull  heart,  or  to  do
good  in  some  way  to  some  person,  without  making


SELFISHNESS.  223

such  a  tedious  parade  about  it  as  most  people  do.
'  Our  home  missionary,'  we  used  to  call  her,  she
was  so  good,  so  useful,  and  so  beloved."

"Yes,  so  you  say.  But  what,  I  would  like  to
know,  about  that  strange  confession  in  one  of  her
letters  to  you, — ^that,  after  all,  there  is  nothing  on
earth  so  fine  as  wearing  magnificent  dresses,  prome-
nading Broadway,  and  breaking  hearts."

"  Ha  !  I  do  not  know  what  of  that,  indeed.  But
I  beUeve  she  had  some  good  reason,  because  she  al-
ways has  for  every  thing  she  does,  as  one  can  see  by
observing  her  closely,  although  she  never  profess-
es any.  I  am  delighted  at  the  thought,  flkl !  I
know  she  will  play  upon  you.  I  only  long  to  see
what  armes  offensives  she  may  employ."  Vinia's  laugh
sounded  harshly  enough  in  the  ear  of  her  sensitive
brother.  "  And  you  know" — resumed  she,  "  you
know" —

"  Yes,  I  know  !  that  is,  I  know  there  will  be  no
such  things  as  writing  or  study  in  the  whole  month
that  she  is  in  the  house.  The  first  thing  one  will
know,  when  one  is  reading,  she  will  creep  slyly  be-
hind one,  and  bhnd  one's  eyes,  or  pull  one's  hair,  or
pinch  one's  ears,  or  snatch  away  one's  book  and  hide
with  it  in  a  comer."

Still  Vinia  and  her  mother  laughed.  And  Harry
laughed,  too,  in  spite  of  the  real  vexation  he  felt,  as

«

in  fancy  he  saw  "  that  Susan"  rumiing  off  with  his
book  imder  her  arm.


224  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

"And  yet,  Hal,"  said  Vinia,  "yet,  although  I
laugh  at  you,  I  do  think  you  are  very,  very  odd.  If
you  were  a  poet,  it  would  all  do  well  enough.  Then
you  might  run  when  you  heard  a  lady  coming,  and
immure  yourself,  and  commit  all  sorts  of  absurdities,
and  it  would  be  resolvable  into  poetic  phrensy.  But
Harry  Porter,  with  his  cool  head  and  cooler  heart,
who  spends  his  days  in  selling  silks  and  molasses,
butter  and  salt — "

"  Silks  and  molasses,  butter  and  salt,  Vin !"  echo-
ed Harry,  now  laughing  outrageously.

"  Yes ;  and  his  nights  in  reading — wrhat  are  you
readiqpnow,  brother — Zenophon? — ^Yes,  and  his
nights  in  reading  Zenophon  !  What  could  be  more
incongruous  ?"  She  pointed  her  pretty  finger  at  him,
as,  laughing  and  shaking  her  head,  she  courtesied
herself  backward  out  of  the  room.

Harry  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  door  where  she  had
disappeared,  and  his  thoughts  on  that  Susan,  half  in
dread,  and. half  in  an  undefined  pleasure  of  some
sort.

Harry  was  sure  he  never  saw  stage-coach  horses
cross  his  mother's  carriage-sweep  with  so  lofty  a
grace,  or  stageman's  whip  describe  so  exactly  "  the
curve  of  beauty,"  or  waiting-boy  throw  down  the
steps  with  such  courteous  alacrity,  as  on  that  beauti-
ful June  evening  which  introduced  Susan  Nesmith  to
the  home  of  the  Porters.  "  Ah  !  just  the  mischiev-
ous, bell-like  laugh  I  knew  she  would  have,"  sighed


SELFISHNESS.  225

Harry,  as,  with  a  laugh  of  joy,  Susan  bounded  into
the  open  arms  of  her  friend  Vinia.  "  And  her  eyes  !"
He  was  looking  through  the  blind ;  and  when  the
girls  came  laughing  and  chatting  up  the  walk  and  to
the  door,  then  Hal  ran  !  Tell  it  not, — yet  he  ran  !
Poor  fellow  !  Instead  of  giving  himself  up  to  delight
in  his  sister's  happiness,  and  casting  his  own  mite  in-
to the  welcome  which  was  to  make  the  stranger  at
home  in  her  new  abode,  he  thought  only — How  she
will  plague  one  !  How  one  will  be  annoyed  with  her
manner,  her  eyes,  her  laugh,  and  her — ah,  dear !
"  there'll  be  nae  luck  about  the  house  till  that  Su-
san is  awa."

And  yet  there  was.  True,  Susan  ran  off  with  his
books  ;  hid  Zenophon  once  for  a  whole  week,  and  he
growling  at  her  all  the  while.  But  he  was  conscious
of  relief  by  his  forced  cessations  from  study ;  and
folded  his  arms,  and  rocked,  and  rested  his  "brain,  and
thought  of  "that  Susan."  Moreover,  she  dragged
him  off  to  moonlit  saunterings  with  herself  and  Vinia.
He  grumbled  then,  likewise ;  but  Susan  was  only
the  more  persevering,  the  more  frolicksome.  At
these  hours,  Harry  could  not  deny  it  to  himself,  that
he  felt  a  warmth  and  happiness  stealing  into  his
heart,  and  over  his  whole  being,  equally  novel  and
grateful  to  him.  Yet  do  not  suppose  that  he  ac-
knowledged this.  No;  for,  although  he  did  often
betray  himself,  by  his  gratified  looks  and  animated
speech,  still,  if  appealed  to  for  confessions,  even  with


226  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

the  gentlest  grace,  the  softest  tones,  and  the  most  be-
seeching looks,  he  only  growled  again,  and  turned
away  to  hide  any  tresycherous  indications  of  gratifica-
tion there  might  be.  But  Mrs.  Porter  and  her  daugh-
ter felt  that  now  again  there  were  Hfe  and  light  in
the  house  ;  and  it  had  seemed  so  empty  and  cold  to
them,  especially  to  the  mother,  since  the  husband
and  father  died  two  years  ago.  Much  of  the  time
since  then,  Vinia  had  been  away  finishing  her  stu-
dies. Harry,  as  he  had  been  these  many  years,  was
swallowed  up  in  his  business  by  day,  and  his  studies
by  night.  He  was  never  what  we  call  unkind,  un-
courteous.  Yet  really  kind,  really  courteous,  he  cer-
tainly was  not.  He  conducted  his  mother  to  church,
was  observant  enough  of  all  the  mere  forms  of  good-
breeding.  He  saw  to  it  carefully  that  she  wanted  no-
thing ;  took  some  pains  to  procure  company  for  her —
matrons,  of  course — and  books.  But  in  all  this  his
manner  was  cold.     He  was  thinking  most  of  self.

Woman  has  been  called,  often,  the  sunlight  of  her
home.  Then  is  not  man  the  glorious  sun  itself?
That  is,  if  he  is  truly  gentle  and  considerate  ;  if  he
goes  about  the  house  with  a  clear  and  open  manner,
seeing  to  this  thing  and  that  thing ;  that  nothing  is
lacking,  that  nothing  annoys  ;  or,  at  least,  sharing  by
his  ever-ready  sympathies  the  trials  which  he  cannot
avert  ?  But  if  he  is  odd  and  selfish  like  Harry  Porter  !
Ah  !  Heaven  help  the  wife  of  such  a  man  !  Heaven
help  Susan ;  for  after  her  return  home,  when  Harry


SELFISHNESS.  227

found  that  he  missed  her  always,  that  life  could  not
be  endured  without  her,  he  wrote  and  told  her  so,
humbly  begging  her  to  be  his  wife.  This  earnest
frankness  was  imprecedented  in  the  deeds  of  Harry
Porter ;  and  it,  together  with  her  desires  to  take  him
and  his  happiness  to  her  own  tender  keeping,  won
Susan.  Alas,  for  the  revulsion  she  was  to  witness  !
Alas,  that  the  transient  devotion  of  the  lover  was
completely  nullified  by  the  long,  long  years  of  cold,
abstracted  selfishness  of  the  husband  !
*  Bear  me  witness,  ye  wives  and  mothers,  ye  good
and  careful  ones,  that  there  are  days  when  things  go
v^ong  the  whole  house  over  ;  when  your  husband  is
particularly  unreasonable,  expecting  roasts  for  din-
ner, when  he  ought  to  know  that  the  larder  is  minus
all  essentials ;  looking  awry  at  linens,  with  which
yourself,  or  your  laundress  at  your  injunction,  have
taken  the  greatest  pains  ;  and  bringing,  without  inti-
mation, guests  to  dine, — ^bachelor  friends,  for  whom
he  expects  you  to  furnish  ten  thousand  incontroverti-
ble arguments  in  favor  of  matrimony;  when  your
children  run  against  open  doors,  Rd  comers  of  ta-
bles ;  contend  about  the  kitten  to  which  they  all  have
mutual  claims  ;  and  wake  the  baby ;  and  when  the
utmost  that  you  can  say  or  do,  only  adds  to  the  clamor
and  increases  the  difiiculties.  And  confess  to  my
conjecture,  that  these  days  come  to  you  when,  upon
waking  in  the  morning,  you  find  yourself  feverish
and  unrefreshed ;  or  when  nervous  headache  or  Ian-


228  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

guor  steal  upon  you  afterward  ;  or  when,  from  some
cause  not  understood,  you  seem  to  have  "nerves
protruding  at  every  pore,"  against  which  everybody
in  the  house  is  running.  These  are  times  of  trial
for  the  woman  whose  aim  it  is  to  do  constandy
what  is  noble  and  wise ;  however  they  may  be
regarded  by  her  whose  nerves  are  of  iron,  who
can  scold  her  way  through  all  such  difficulties,  or
run  away  from  them  without  any  compunctions.
She,  the  former,  can  stand  by  sick  beds,  and  feel  her
strength  and  her  life  fail,  day  by  day.  She  can  shut
the  dying  hd,  even  although  her  heart  seems  "  crush-
ed in  the  closing  of  its  portal  upon  the  departed  due."
She  can  cross  the  wide  seas,  and  tread  the  burning
sands  of  heathen  climes,  if  her  eyes  are  dimmed  at
partings,  if  her  heart  does  bleed,  if  her  feet  are
scorched  and  weary ;  for  all  these  are  the  heavy
trials  which  every  one  who  looks  on  can  under-
stand; and  to  which  every  one  brings  those  kind
sympathies  which  divide  the  sufferings  they  commis-
erate. And  these,  too,  are  the  trials  which,  unaided
by  an  infinite  j^ver,  woman  feels  that  she  cannot
bear.  She  therefore  prays.  In  childlike  humility
and  trust,  she  goes  to  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  and,
thank  Heaven !  there  she  leaves  her  burden.  She
makes  her  way,  then,  with  the  cheerful  eye  and
heart,  and  with  the  strong  voice  of  faith.  Not  so  is
it  wont  to  be  in  what  we  call  the  trifling  vexations  of
life.     Not  so  was  it  with  our  good  Susan,  our  home-


SELFISHNESS.  229

missionary,  on  the  morning  in  which  we  shall  again
present  her  to  the  reader.

Ten  years  she  had  been  the  wife  of  that  unreason-
able body,  Harry  Porter.  She  had,  in  the  time,  had
many  seasons  of  failure  in  duty,  or  in  success ;  many
heart-sickening  discouragements.  She  would  have
had  some  of  these,  doubtless,  under  the  most  favora-
ble circumstances.  Yet  how  few  comparatively,  and
how  easily  they  could  have  been  borne,  if  her  hus-
band had  been  all  that  strong  man  should  be  to  weak,
dependent  woman !  She  never  complained ;  and
this  was  the  reason  that  Harry's  eyes  were  never
opened  to  her  wants  and  his  duties.  But  ah  !  how
often,  -when  grieved  by  the  intractableness  of  her
children,  or  when  worn  by  her  domestic  cares,  had
she  longed  to  have  him  open  his  arms  and  pillow  her
head  on  his  bosom  !  It  seemed  to  her  that  then  its
throbbings  would  be  stilled,  and  its  fever  cooled.
But  no.  He  came  in  from  his  counting-room  at
night,  sipped  his  tea  and  ate  his  toast ;  his  head  full
of  checks  and  invoices,  debt  and  credit,  foreign  duties
and  home  tariflfs,  seldom  entering  into  conversation
with  his  wife,  or  attending  to  the  wants  of  the  chil-
dren.     Supper   over,   he  repaired  inmiediately  to

■

his  study,  and  was  soon  forgetful  that  there  were
such  things  in  the  world  as  business,  wife,  and  chil-
dren.

"A  pity  that  Harry  lived  so  long  unmarried,"
said  Mrs.  Porter  one  evening,  in  soothing  tones  to

20


230  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Susan.  '^  He  has  acquired  such  studious  habits  !
He  really  does  not  attend  to  you  as  you  deserve —
as  you  need.  You  should  complain.  He  was  cer-
tainly a  good-hearted  boy.  He  is  a  good-hearted
man ;  only,  some  way,  it  is  with  him,  as  if  seeing,
he  saw  not ;  and  hearing,  he  heard  not.  You  should
tell  him  just  what  you  want.  Tell  him  of  it  when
you  are  tired,  when  the  children  are  troublesome ;
and  especially  when  you  have  the  nervous  head-
ache. I  do  not  see  how  you  can  keep  that  to  your-
self.''

"  I  do  not  keep  these  things  from  you,  dear  mo-
ther, although  I  do  not  complain  to  you."

"  No,  indeed !  no ;  I  can  tell  at  a  glance  how
things  are  going.  But  Harry  never  looks  round  him
at  all ;  I  am  sorry  he  does  not.  Will  you  complain
as  other  women  do,  after  this  ?  Will  you  say — Look
at  me,  Harry ;  and  the  children,  see  them  ?"

"  Oh  no,  mother  !  This  I  could  never  do,"  said
Susan,  with  a  smile  and  a  sigh.  **  Harry  has  cares
enough  with  his  business.  I  will  never  add  to  his
burden."

"  But  when  his  business  is  over,  Susan,  his  books  ;
it  is  with  these  I  am  vexed."

"  He  does  love  his  books,  better,  perhaps — ^"
Better  than  the  company  of  his  wife,  she  thought,
but  she  .did  not  say  it ;  for  her  voice  became
choked.  And  she  would  not,  if  it  had  remained
clear.


SELFISHNESS.  231

"  Poor  girl !  your  head  aches."

"  Yes,  it  has  ached  all  day,"  said  Susan,  with  fill-
ing eyes.

"  Poor  child !  and  the  children  are  unusually  trou-
blesome. What  is  the  matter  with  Suzy  ?  I  can
hear  her  voice.  Why  did  she  not  go  to  school  to-
day  ?"

"  She  went ;  but  I  felt  so  harassed  this  morning,
the  baby  cried  so  much,  Jamie's  foot  was  so  bad,
and  he  hurt  it  so  often,  I  really  could  not  attend  to
her  hard  lesson ;  or  it  seemed  to  me  that  I  could  not.
She  failed  in  her  recitation.  Nothing  troubles  her
so  much  as  this ;  and,  on  this  account,  I  take  great
pains  with  her  usually.  I  might  have  done  the  same
this  morning,  perhaps,  if  I  had  maintained  a  proper
government  over  myself.  But  my  head  was  so  con-
fused !"

"  Yes ;  I  know  how  it  is.  I  used  to  feel  the
same ;  but  my  husband  was  so  considerate — so  dif-
ferent from  Harry.  I  think  his  kindness  led  him  to
indulge  Harry  too  much.  It  made  him  selfish.  Did
Suzy  come  from  school  on  that  account  ?"

"  She  cried,  it  seems  ;  and  while  blinded  by  her
tears,  ran  against  the  door  of  the  school-room,  and
bruised  her  face  badly.  I  have  been  bathing  it ;  but
the  baby  will  not  let  me  be  long  away  from  the  cra-
dle." Susan's  temples  throbbed  with  increasing  vio-
lence, the  pressure  upon  her  heart  became  heavier,  and,
every  moment,  her  eyes  filled,  as,  unconsciously  to


232  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

herself,  she  went  on  unburdening  her  troubles  to  her
good  friend.

"  And  Ellen,"  said  Mrs.  Porter,  "  she  is  generally
so  quiet  and  orderly.  To-day  I  noticed,  when  I  was
in  the  kitchen,  she  hurries  hither  and  thither,  scarce-
ly seeming  to  know  what  she  is  doing.  And  she  has
been  to  you  no  less  than  three  times  with  her  trou-
bles since  I  came  in."

"  Ah,  mother,  the  fault  is  all  my  own.  When  my
head  is  clear  so  that  I  can  look  through  the  day  and
tell  her  my  plans,  she  always  goes  on  in  a  perfectly
systematic  way.  You  see  I  have  no  grounds  of  com-
plaint anywhere.  I  am  myself  the  cause  of  all  these
misfortunes.  But  I  cannot  help  it.  I  began  the  day
wrong — "

"  You  did  not  pray,  Susan."

"No,  mother,  I  did  not  pray.  And  now  God
seems  afar  oflF ;  and  I  need  him  as  much  in  such  lit-
tle trials,  as  I  do  in  the  great  afflictions  ;  do  not  you,
dear  mother  ?"

"  Yes ;  and  it  is  beautiful  that  we  do.  This  makes
us  draw  near  to  him  daily,  many  times  in  a  day  ;  and
so  he  draws  near  to  us ;  and  this  is  our  true  happi-
ness. But  do  not  weep,  my  dear  child.  It  will  on-
ly make  your  head  ache  worse.  Has  Harry  been  in
since  breakfast  ?  Does  he  know  how  it  is  with  you
and  the  children  ?"

"  No  ;  he  has  not  been  in.  I  fear  I  oflfended  him
this  morning;  yet  I  did  not  mean  it, — ^I  certainly


SELFISHNESS.  233

did  not  mean  it!"  Now  Susan  wept  without  re-
straint. Her  mother  tenderly  drew  her  head  to  her
bosom  ;  and  while  she  bathed  it  in  cologne,  she  re-
peated to  her  a  few  precious  Scripture  promises.
These  seemed  to  lift  Susan  above  her  cares.  In  heart
she  prayed,  and  in  heart  became  calm  and  grateful.

Her  mother  left  her ;  and  in  a  moment  her  hus-
band appeared  at  the  open  door  of  the  sitting-room.
Evidently  he  had  been  in  his  study  and  overheard
the  conversation  between  his  wife  and  mother.  With
a  kindly  beaming  eye  and  gentle  manner,  he  ap-
proached the  sofa  where  his  wife  was  sitting.  She
felt  instinctively  dravra  to  him,  and,  half  rising,  she
held  out  her  hand.  He  held  it  a  moment  to  his
heart ;  then  seating  her  and  himself,  he  encircled  her
in  his  arms  ;  and  there,  "  lip  to  lip,  pulse  to  pulse,
and  heart  to  heart,"  they  felt  that  then,  indeed,  they
were  one.

How  beautiful  was  life  to  them  after  this  !  How
sweetly  went  the  days  and  the  evenings  by  !  And
how  lightly  fell  her  household  cares  on  Susan,  now
that  the  thought  was  forever  in  her  heart — He  loves
me  ;  he  feels  for  me.

Happy  for  those  in  whom  this  bond  of  union  and
sympathy  is  made  perfect,  before  entering  together
upon  the  trials  and  pleasures  of  wedded  life.

"  And  happy  for  those  in  whom  it  is  made  perfect
even  at  the  eleventh  hour !"  would  Susan  and  her
husband  say,

20*


Sonntt

THE  FIRST  LOCK  OF  GRAY  HAIR.
BY  THOMAS  W.  RENNK.

Alas  !  pale  monitor  of  life's  decline,

First  hoar  of  five-and-forty  winters  pass'd, —
And  from  that  warning,  prophet  look  of  thine,
It  needs  no  sage's  wisdom  to  divine

Thou  art  not  of  thy  kind  the  first  and  last, —
What  word  of  firiendly  counsel  dost  thou  bring  ?

What  promise  bright — to  cheer  the  coming  years  ?
What  hope — around  the  heart  its  light  to  fling.
And  gild  life's  winter  with  the  flowers  of  spring  ?

What  joy — ^repaying  former  clouds  and  tears  ? —
I  read  thy  answer, — counsel  heavenly  wise —

With  promise  sure  that  he  who  heeds,  shall  find
Hope  radiant  with  the  glory  of  the  skies.

And  joys  inmiortal  living  as  the  mind.


j^^^


Bt  Srtte  to  Si)Sdelf.

BT  THE  REY.  RUFUS  W.  GRISWOLD.

The  base,  craven-hearted,  quail  under  the  blow
The  strong  give  the  weak,  and  the  proud  give  the

low:
But  he  who  can  back  on  a  true  spirit  fall.
No  wrong  can  excite,  and  no  danger  appal.
The  vision  of  others  is  bound  by  the  sky.
But  he  far  beyond  it  a  home  can  descry ;
And  he  knows  that  by  Truth,  he  its  glories  shall

win: —
He  who's  false  to  himself  can  ne'er  enter  therein.

Be  true  to  thyself : — what  though  perils  assail,

And  thou  standest  alone  in  the  pitiless  gale ;

Thou  art  lord  of  one  soul — thou  art  king  of  one

realm,
Which  no  strong  arm  can  conquer,  no  wave  can

o'erwhelm —
That  shall  last,  and  grow  brighter  as  nations  decay.
That  shall  flourish,  still  yoimg,  when  the  stars  fade

away ; —
If  true  to  thyself,  thou  thyself  dost  control ; —
Oh,  there  is  no  empire  so  great  as  the  soul !


®i)e  Sttrk  anb  t)id  IBominiond.

BT  THE  REV.  8.  W.  FISHER,  ▲.  M.

We  know  of  no  one  system  of  false  religion,  ihat
either  embodies  more  truth,  or  possesses  a  history
more  replete  with  interest  than  that  of  Mohammed.  Of
course  we  exclude  from  this  comparison  the  various
corruptions  of  our  own  Christianity.  Passing  be-
yond the  pale  of  nominal  Christendom,  it  will  be
difficult  to  institute  a  comparison  with  any  or  all
other  false  systems  of  religious  belief,  that  will  not
issue  favorably  to  Islamism.  We  turn  from  pagan-
ism, even  when  enshrined  in  temples  of  Grecian  art,
and  celebrated  in  groves  of  natural  loveliness,  as  the
surgeon,  from  the  mortified  limb  of  his  patient — as
the  naturalist,  from  the  poisonous  fungi  that  accu-
mulate upon  the  trunk  of  the  noblest  trees  of  the
forest  There  might  have  been  poetry  in  its  origin ;
in  the  dim  antiquity  from  which  it  dates,  there  is
room  for  a  vivid  imagination  to  robe  it  in  garments
of  matchless  taste  and  beauty ;  but  when  we  get  be-
hind the  scenes,  when  we  penetrate  their  temples  and
ascend  their  lofty  altars,  the  horrid  reality  fills  the


THE  TURK  AND  HIS  DOMINIONS.  237

mind  with  the  most  intense  disgust.  At  a  distance,
their  religion,  like  their  temple,  with  its  pompous
shows  and  gorgeous  ceremonies,  is  full  of  enchant-
ment ;  but  no  sooner  is  the  temple  entered,  than  we
feel  as  did  Cortez  and  his  oflBicer  on  ascending  the
imposing  teocalli  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  and  behold-
ing there  the  yet  palpitating  hearts  of  human  victims
bleeding  on  the  altar  of  the  senseless  deity.  Spirit-
ual worship,  ennobUng  views  of  God,  cannot  coexist
with  such  revolting  images  of  the  Invisible — ^with
such  horrible  sacrifices  offered  upon  his  altar.

When,  then,  emerging  from  such  scenes,  we  enter
the  mosque,  we  at  once  breathe  more  freely.  Here
is  no^altar,  no  image,  not  even  a  picture,  on  which
the  eye  could  repose  and  delight  itself  with  the  ex-
quisite creations  of  the  pencil  or  the  chisel.  Yet
here  are  worshippers,  in  crowds  prostrating  them-
selves to  the  earth.  Here,  too,  is  preserved  the  great
idea  of  one  God,  spiritual,  invisible.  Before  him
alone  the  Moslem  bows  the  knee  in  worship ;  unto
him  alone  he  offers  his  daily  prayers.  In  these  re-
spects Mohammed  improved  vastly  upon  the  religion
of  his  countrymen.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  he  fired
his  disciples  with  the  zeal  of  propagandists,  and  put-
ting the  sword  into  their  hands,  has  shed  more* blood
in  a  few  centuries  than  did  paganism *in  its  thousands
of  yedk.  Yet  this  was  done  openly,  on  the  broad
field  of  battle,  not  in  secret  or  vrilhin  the  doors  of  a
temple.


238  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

The  very  enormities  that  blacken  every  page  of
its  history  are  attended  with  circumstances  that  mod-
ify our  disgust  and  excite  our  interest.  The  pomp
and  circumstance  of  war — the  splendid  abilities  dis-
played in  conflict  with  half  the  globe — the  fanati-
cism that,  absorbing  all  ordinary  passions,  melted  the
soul  into  one  glowing  mass  of  devotion  to  the  cause
of  their  prophet,  with  the  deep  and  permanent  do-
minion it  established  over  various  forms  of  mind,
conquering  its  conquerors,  and  harmonizing  into  one
spiritual  sovereignty  the  Arab,  Persian,  Tartar,
Turk,  and  Moor, — all  tend  to  relieve  the  darkness  of
the  picture  and  attract  us  to  its  examination.  Even
the  meanness  of  its  origin  amidst  idols  and  Arabs,
heightening  the  impression  made  by  the  Ughtning
rapidity  with  which  it  spread  from  the  Indus  to  the
Guadalquiver,  almost  annihilating  in  its  course  the
most  accomplished  armies  of  Christendom,  deepens
the  interest.  Nor  is  this  interest  diminished  by  our
knowledge  of  the  terror  which  seized  upon  the  heart
of  Europe,  when  the  soldiers  of  the  son  of  Othman
burst  through  the  walls  of  Constantinople,  then  the
metropolis  of  civilization,  and  when,  at  a  subsequent
period,  the  Turk  encamped  around  Vienna,  and  threat-
ened to  consolidate  his  power  in  one  vast  empire,  on
the  ruins  of  all  the  thrones  of  Europe.

But  aside  from  these  circumstances  of  intCTest  to
the  world  at  large,  there  are  others  which  peculiarly
influence  the  Christian  in  his  attention  to  this  form


THE  TURK  AND  HIS  DOMINIONS.  239

of  faith.  It  is  a  system  embracing  vital  error,  re-
cent, comparatively,  in  its  origin,  unique  in  its  char-
acter, vast  in  its  influence,  and,  above  all  other  sys-
tems, determined  in  its  hostility  to  the  cross.  Espe-
cially at  this  day,  when  the  lines  of  Providence  are
converging  towards  one  grand  scene,  and  the  trains  of
events,  pregnant  with  momentous  issues,  seem  rush-
ing onward  to  the  final  elevation  of  our  race,  this  re-
ligion has  drawn  to  itself  the  attention  of  all  Chris-
tendom, as  a  seemingly  rock-built  fortress,  from
which  the  influences  of  our  holy  faith  have  as  yet
not  started  a  single  stone  or  levelled  a  single  but-
tress.

It  is  a  remarkable  fact  that  Mohammedanism,  very
early  in  its  history,  attained  its  largest  extent  of  do-
minion. The  few  first  years  were  employed  in  pre-
paration ;  the  seed  was  germinating  in  the  earth.
The  great  chief  himself  did  not  march  beyond  the
limits  of  Arabia.  His  life  was  devoted  to  a  work
the  most  like  a  miracle  of  any  recorded  in  the  his-
tory of  this  religion.  He  subdued  the  indomitable
Ishmaehte.  He  taught  the  robber  bands  that  swarm-
ed  in  every  part  of  the  peninsula,  and  since  the  time
of  their  great  progenitor  had  known  no  law  but  the
custom  of  their  tribe  or  the  impulse  of  their  will,  to
bear  the  yoke  of  his  stern  authority  as  quietly  as
ever  a  child  submitted  to  a  parent.  Their  prejudices
were  rank;  he  overcame  them.  Their  feuds,  im-
memorial and  deadly ;  he  terminated  them.     Their


240  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

attachment  to  idolatry,  deep  and  violent ;  he  utterly
eradicated  it.  He  even  amalgamated  these  elements
of  confusion  into  a  compact  political-social  and  re-
ligious body,  and  breathed  into  them  an  enthusiastic,
or  rather  a  fanatical  devotion  to  the  religion  of  the
Koran.  This  v^as  the  great  virork  of  Mohammed ;
this  v^as  the  achievement  that  has  given  him  a  place
in  the  front  rank  of  men  to  whom  God  has  committed
the  pov^er  to  create  and  svvray  the  empire  of  mind.
He  forged  and  sharpened  the  svvrord ;  he  won  over
the  arm  that  could  wield  it ;  and  then  passed  away.
The  instruments  of  revolution  and  conquest,  that
were  to  change  the  aspect  of  the  world,  were  all
prepared.  The  Saracens,  those  hardy,  bold,  prince-
ly sons  of  the  desert,  with  all  their  native  vehemence
poured  into  one  channel,  and  swollen  by  the  force
of  religious  fanaticism,  panted  for  universal  conquest,
and  waited  only  for  a  leader  to  guide  to  victory.

That  locust-king  was  Omar,  the  second  caliph.
Bold  in  design ;  rapid  in  execution ;  a  monk  in  the
austerity  of  his  self-discipline  ;  a  noble,  in  the  inde-
pendence and  elevation  of  his  character ;  so  impar-
tial in  the  administration  of  justice,  that  it  ripened
into  a  proverb,  that  Omar's  cane  was  more  terrible
than  the  sword  of  the  bravest  warrior;  despising
luxury,  when  the  treasures  of  half  the  globe  were
poured  at  his  feet;  undated,  when  borne  on  the
flood-tide  of  victory ;  generous  to  the  public,  niggard
towards  himself ;  rearing  splendid  temples  of  worship,


THE  TURK  AND  HIS  DOMINIONS.  241

himself  without  palace  or  court ;  as  strict  in  attend-
ing to  the  minutest  formaUty  of  this  religion  as  the
most  rigid  devotee  of  any  one  of  its  thirty-two  mo-
nastic orders,  yet  as  full  of  martial  enthusiasm  as  the
boldest  of  his  horsemen,  was  this  patriarchal  mind
that  now  ascended  the  pulpit  of  the  Caliphate.  With
such  a  leader  and  such  soldiers,  it  needed  no  prophet
to  foretell  the  result.  The  prodigious  vigor  they  at
once  developed  is  seen  in  the  tens  of  thousands  of
cities,  towns,  castles,  conquered  in  an  incredibly  short
space  of  time,  and  in  the  smoking  ruins  of  no  less
than  four  thousand  temples  of  the  pagan,  the  magian,
and  the  Christian ;  while,  as  if  by  the  wand  of  an
enchanter,  the  mosque  and  minaret  by  hundreds
everywhere  rose  into  view.

This  wonderful  Omar,  from  his  unfurnished  tent
at  Medina,  uttered  his  mandate,  and  instantly  a  total
change  passes  over  the  face  of  civilized  society ;  the
fate  of  nations  is  decided,  and  the  religion  of  the
prophet  spreads  itself  from  the  Caspian  to  the  Atlan-
tic. An  extent  of  empire  Rome  reached  only  after
the  toil  of  seven  centuries,  the  exile  of  Medina  at-
tained in  less  than  one ;  and  while  in  less  than  five
centuries  the  sun  of  Roman  glory  sunk  forever,  the
dominion  of  the  prophet,  after  eleven  centuries  of
vast  power,  still  remains.  During  this  period  great
changes  have  taken  place  without  affecting  the  super-
ficial area  of  Islamism.  Kingdoms  have  been  lost
and  won :  the  Turk  has  been  enthroned  in  Byzan-

21


242  MISSIONARY   MEMORIAL.

tium ;  but  the  dominion  of  the  Tartar  in  Hindostan
is  in  ruins  :  the  Moor  has  been  driven  from  Grenada;
while  the  tombs  and  palaces  of  Delhi  and  Agra,  like
the  Alhambra,  now  stand  as  the  pyramids  of  Egypt,
the  memorial  of  a  race  that  has  passed  away.

The  question  of  chief  interest  to  the  Christian
world  at  this  time  in  regard  to  this  imposture,  re-
spects its  seeming  insensibility  to  the  influences  of
the  Gospel.  Heretofore  it  has  remained  unaffected.
For  this  result  two  causes  may  be  assigned — the  one
internal,  the  other  external.

Mohammedanism  has  usually  been  associated  with
the  state,  so  intimately  as  to  identify  its  own  exist-
ence with  the  rule  of  Mohammedans.  It  began  its
career  with  the  sword.  Its  soldiers  conquered  em-
pires for  their  prophet.  The  throne  of  the  Caliphs
at  Babylon  was  rendered  sacred  by  the  presence  of
his  successors  ;  and  when  the  Turks  overturned  it,
they  only  came  in  as  spiritual  children  of  the  ascend-
ed Mohammed.  They  imbibed  the  same  fierce  fa-
naticism ;  they  fought  to  extend  the  same  miserable
imposition;  they  adopted  the  same  bloody  statutes
respecting  infidels  and  apostates.  To  attack  their
religion  was  to  assault  the  state  ;  apostacy  was  trea-
son, and  hence  the  fanaticism  of  the  banner  mingled
with  the  fanaticism  of  the  symbol,  and  the  sword,
and  the  Koran — war  and  religion,  joined  hands  to  re-
pel innovation  and  eternize  their  reign.  This  is  that
double  wall  of  brass  by  which  Islamism  has  long


THE  TURK  AND  HIS  DOMINIONS.  243

been  girt  about,  and  by  which  it  has  resisted  all  for-
eign influences.

To  this  internal  power  of  resistance,  the  character
of  the  Christianity  opposed  to  it  has  greatly  contribu-
ted. The  Greek,  the  Armenian,  the  Roman,  pre-
sented to  the  Mohammedan  their  wretched  carica-
tures of  our  holy  religion.  A  religion  of  picture-
worship  and  shows,  wonderfully  like  the  idolatry  of
the  Caaba,  which  the  Saracen  had  renounced,  in-
spired disgust.  It  is  a  singular  fact,  that  although
Islamism  has  held  fast  its  iron  sceptre  for  eleven  cen-
turies, right  in  the  heart  of  coimtries  where  true  re-
ligion once  flourished,  it  has  never  yet  understood
the  character  of  Christianity.  The  Gospel  has  had
no  field  for  its  operation.  It  has  been  excluded  to-
tally, and  miserable  superstitions  have  borne  its  name
and  disgraced  its  profession.  What  have  the  follow-
ers of  the  prophet  ever  seen  in  the  miserable  Copt,
in  the  ignorant  Armenian,  in  the  knavish  and  de-
graded Greek,  to  inspire  respect  for  Christianity  or
modify  the  intense  bigotry  of  their  own  fanaticism  ?
Their  thrice-dead  religion,  like  a  tree  lifeless,  leafless,
fruitless,  with  no  spreading,  grateful  foliage,  no  lus-
cious nor  sustsdning  fruits,  has  seemed  to  the  Mos-
lem's eye  fitter  for  the  flames  than  for  practical  utility.
Can  any  one  believe  that  the  pure  spiritual  faith  of  a
Christian  would  have  lived  a  decade  of  centuries,
alongside  of  Mohammedanism,  without  either  silent-
ly infusing  its  own  spirit  into  its  conquerors,  or  awa-


244  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

kening  a  fanatical  opposition  that  would  have
given  to  the  world  another  tragedy  Uke  that  which
followed  the  revocation  of  the  edict  of  Nantes,  and
swept  the  Huguenots  from  the  soil  of  France  ?  The
very  same  cause  which  has  so  long  operated  to  de-
stroy the  vitality  of  religion  on  the  continent  of  Eu-
rope, and  limit  the  success  of  the  word  of  God,  has
availed  in  many  Mohammedan  countries  to  neutral-
ize the  good  influence  of  the  little  Christianity  exist-
ing there.  Wherever  a  form  has  been  substituted
for  the  spirit,  ceremonies  for  faith,  tradition  for  the
Bible,  there  Christianity  dies  out,  and  the  miserable,
shrivelled  skeleton  that  remains,  like  the  ghastly
mockery  of  humanity  in  the  glass  case  of  the  anato-
mist, serves  only  to  repel  the  beholder  from  the  sick-
ening embrace.

In  regard  to  both  these  obstacles,  it  seems  to  us
that  Providence  is  gradually  but  surely  removing
them.  The  Turkish  empire  undoubtedly  is  now,  as
it  has  been  for  a  long  time  past,  the  chief  prop  of  Is-
lamism*.  Among  Mohammedans  themselves,  wher-
ever scattered,  there  is  a  prevailing  impression,  that
when  Constantinople  falls  the  days  of  their  faith  are
numbered.  And  we  cannot  but  regard  this  impres-
sion, from  whatever  source  it  may  have  arisen,  as  in
accordance  with  probability.  When  this  empire  is
dissolved,  there  exists  but  a  single  power  of  any
magnitude,  beneath  which  the  prophet's  faith  can  find
shelter.    While  even  the  Persian  throne,  to  which  it


^


TH£  TURK  AND  HtS  DOMINIONS.  245

must  flee,  is  isolated  from  the  great  mass  of  the  Mo-
hammedan world  by  a  reK^ous  feud,  which  eleven
centuries  has  not  been  able  to  heal.  To  us  it  seems
to  be  in  accordance  with  retributive  justice,  that  this
imposture,  which  began  its  career  with  the  sword,
should  perish  by  the  sword :  which  has  flourished
only  as  it  has  become  the  very  life  of  a  conquering
and  cruel  dynasty,  should  participate  in  the  decay
and  final  extinction  of  such  a  dynasty.  Hitherto  it
has  been  so  thoroughly  interwoven  with  the  civil  gov-
ernment, that  you  could  not  destroy  the  one  without
inflicting  a  deadly  blow  upon  the  other.  But  time,
that  mighty  leveller  of  empires,  has  not  spared  the
Turk  any  more  than  the  Saracen.  Infant  nations
have  swollen  into  gigantic  empires  all  around  him.
France  bivouacks  her  soldiers  within  the  walls  of
Algiers ;  Mohammed  Ali  laughs  at  the  menaces  of
the  sultan,  from  the  throne  of  the  Pharaohs ;  Syria
is  torn  by  intestine  war,  and  kept  from  the  grasp  of
the  Egyptian  rebel  only  by  the  cannon  of  England ;
while  Russia  has  planted  her  foot  upon  all  his  northern
provinces,  and  permits  the  sultan  to  enjoy  his  opium
and  his  harem,  only  as  he  resigns  to  her  the  key  of
the  Euxine.  Meanwhile,  at  home,  royal  debauchery,
oppressive  taxation,  and  the  most  ridiculous  govern-
ment, are  hastening  the  end  of  the  imperial  fanatic.

The  late  sultan  struggled  manfully  to  renovate  the
empire  ;  but,  like  an  empiric  ignorant  of  the  disease,
his  remedy  rather  aggravated  than  cured  it.     He  in-

21*


246  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Iroduced  the  tailor  to  the  consumptive ;  uniformed
his  raw  recruits  ;  exterminated  the  old  corps  of  Jani-
saries  by  one  mighty  sweep  of  his  cimeter ;  but  left
his  despotism  unchanged,  his  taxes  unrepealed,  and
his  son  to  grow  up  in  debauchery.  For  full  a  quar-
ter of  a  century,  this  empire  has  existed  solely  by
the  aid  and  sufferance  of  foreign  nations.  It  cannot
renovate  itself  without  casting  off  Mohammedanism ;
and  to  do  that,  would  be  suicide.  Die  it  must,  unless
all  probability  should  be  outraged,  and  the  clear  indi-
cations of  a  century  nullified.

When  that  time  shall  come,  when  the  cruel  tyran-
ny which  has  shut  down  all  the  gates  against  know-
ledge, civihzation,  and  pure  religion  shall  have  lost
the  sceptre,  then,  at  least,  one  barrier,  the  most  tre-
mendous and  effectual  to  the  spread  of  the  Gospel,
will  be  removed.

Meanwhile,  the  same  course  of  events  that  has
brought  the  empire  to  the  verge  of  ruin,  has  operated
favorably  to  the  diffusion  of  the  Gospel  among  the
subject  nations.  Under  the  powerful  protection  of
Christian  nations — ^and  to  her  honor  be  it  said,  espe-
cially of  Christian  England — missionaries  of  Protest-
ant Christianity  have  labored  there  in  far  more  secu-
rity than  they  could  enjoy  in  Catholic  countries,  and
with  no  small  success.  The  Greek,  indeed,  seems
to  have  resisted  their  influence,  through  the  force  of
his  ignorant,  superstitious  devotion  to  the  mummeries
of  his  church ;  but  the  Armenian  mind,  by  far  the


THE  TURK  AND  HIS  DOMINIONS.  247

most  intelligent  and  active  in  the  Turkish  empire,
and  destined  in  the  breaking  up  of  this  government,
v^e  believe,  to  great  influence,  is  gradually  yielding
to  the  power  of  truth.  Should  this  good  work  ad-
vance among  these  nominal  Christians,  until  a  pure
Christianity  is  suffered  to  give  its  character  to  the
nation,  there  will  then  be  found  in  the  very  heart  of
this  empire  a  regenerating  power  as  yet  unknown.
The  Moslem  will  then  have  a  true  standard  by
which  to  test  the  Bible  and  the  ^f  oran ;  and  it  is  not
too  much  to  hope  that  even  he,  surrounded  by  such
influences,  will  be  brought  to  lay  down  his  native
barbarism  and  put  on  the  spirit  of  Christ.

It  is  a  singular  fact,  and  one,  probably,  destined  to
have  no  small  influence  upon  the  destiny  of  Islam-
ism,  that  the  followers  of  the  prophet  have  been  for
centuries  separated  by  a  schism  of  the  most  invete-
rate character.  Taking  its  rise  in  a  conflict  for  the
fourth  Caliphate,  between  the  partisans  of  Ali  and
Mowiyah,  it  has  perpetuated  itself  to  this  hour,  and
now  forms  an  impassable  gulf  between  the  Ottoman
and  the  Persian.  The  latter  has  far  more  sympathy
with  Christian  nations  tlian  with  the  sultan.  Chris-
tianity hopes  much  from  his  superior  liberality  and
intelligence.  The  Persian  and  the  eastern  Moham-
medans generally  regard  Ali  with  great  reverence,  and
in  their  worship  render  unto  him  almost  divine  hom-
age. He  seems  to  be,  in  their  view,  in  part  divine,
if  we  are  to  judge  from  their  songs  rather  than  their


248  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

creed.  The  following  lyric,  addressed  by  one  of
their  poets  to  Ali,  we  trust  one  day  will  be  sung
alike  by  the  Schiite  and  the  Sonnite,  by  the  Persian
and  the  Ottoman,  to  our  great  Redeemer  and  incar-
nate God :

'*  Beside  thy  glories,  O  most  great !
Dim  are  the  stars,  and  weak  is  fate.
Compared  to  thy  celestial  light.
The  very  sun  is  dark  as  night.
Thine  edicts  destiny  obeys ;
The  sun  snows  but  thy  mental  rays.

"  Thy  merits  form  a  boundless  sea
That  rolls  on  to  eternity ;
To  heaven  its  mighty  waves  ascend,
O^er  it  the  skies  admiring  bend.
And  when  they  view  its  waters  clear.
The  wells  of  Eden  dark  appear.

"  The  treasures  that  the  earth  conceals.
The  wealth  that  human  toil  reveals.
The  jewels  of  the  gloomy  mine,
Those  that  on  regal  circlets  shine ;
Are  idle  toys  and  worthless  shows,
Compared  with  what  thy  grace  bestows.

"  Mysterious  being !     None  can  tell
The  attributes  in  thee  that  dwell ;
None  can  thine  essence  comprehend ;
To  thee  should  every  mortal  bend —
For  'tis  by  thee  that  man  is  given
To  know  the  high  behests  of  heaven.


R£COV£RT  FROM  SICKNESS.  249

*'  The  ocean's  floods  round  earth  that  roll,
And  laye  the  shores  from  pole  to  pole —
Beside  the  eternal  fountain's  stream
A  single  drop,  a  bubble  seem ;
That  fount's  a  drop  beside  the  sea
Of  grace  and  love  we  find  in  thee."


ttewDora  from  QxtkruM.

To  health  again,
From  bed  of  anguish,  grief,  and  pain,

I  have  been  raised : —
Great  God  of  heaven,  thy  name  be  praised  !

Over  my  soul
Did  waters  deep  of  sorrow  roll : —

Past  days  ill-spent.
To  my  sore  pains  their  shadows  lent.

Warnings  of  death !
May  every  future  fleeting  breath

Echo  your  voice
So  I  shun  sin,  the  soul  destroys :

That  halcyon  peace
Be  mine,  when  death  my  soul  release ;
Then  heaven's  high  grace
Shall  fill  my  grateful  songs  through  ceaseless  days,

F.


Sl)t  £a0t  Snittvxtm.

BT  MRS.  LTDIA  BAXTER.

The  parting  hour  had  come — the  appointed  work
Of  Christ  on  earth  was  done,  for  he  had  borne,
On  Calvary's  cross,  the  curse  for  guilty  man,
Had  suffer'd,  died,  and  triumph'd  o'er  the  grave.
Upon  the  eastern  slope  of  Olivet
The  chosen  ones  with  Christ  their  Master  stood.

Upon  their  listening  ears  his  parting  words.
Like  notes  of  heavenly  music,  sweetly  fell :
**  Be  ye  my  witnesses  to  Israel's  seed
And  to  the  Gentile  race.     In  Judea's  land
And  in  Jerusalem,  Samaria,
And  e'en  to  earth's  remotest  limits,*  tell
How  I  have  wept,  and  groan'd,  and  died.
And  burst  in  twain  the  fetters  of  the  tomb."

He  stood  with  hands  and  eyes  upraised  to  Heaven ;
And  as  he  bless'd  the  astonish'd  band,  a  cloud

*  Acts  i.  8.


THE  LAST  INTERVIEW.  261

Of  dazzling  brightness  veil'd  him  from  their  sight.
Then  songs  were  hesird  in  Heaven.     "  Lift  up  your

heads,
Ye  gates,  and  let  the  King  of  Glory  in."
And  prayers  were  heard    on  earth,   in  reverence

breathed
Forth  by  that  lowly  band,  who  prostrate  bow'd
And  worshipp'd  Him,  who  to  the  realm  of  bliss
Had  gone  to  take  his  ancient  seat  beside
The  Father's  throne.

Full  eighteen  hundred  years
Have  run  their  race,  and  countless  millions  down
To  death  have  sunk,  since  thus  the  Saviour  breathed
Sweet  words  of  mercy  for  a  fallen  world.
And  millions  yet  ne'er  heard  that  Jesus  died.
But  lo  !  the  blessed  time  is  drawing  nigh.
When  Zion's  slumbering  watchmen  shall  awake,
And  sound  the  alarm  from  Mount  Moriah's  shade
Gentile  and  Jew  in  love  shall  meekly  bow
Beneath  the  standard  of  the  Saviour's  cross.
And  tell  the  triumphs  of  redeeming  love.
The  scatter'd  sons  of  Israel's  chosen  race
The  olive  and  the  clust'ring  vine  shall  prune,
And  worship  on  their  own  beloved  hill
The  Father  and  the  ever-blessed  Son.
And  soon  shall  sable  Ethiopia,  too.
Her  hands  stretch  forth,  in  praises  glorious.
To  Him  whose  precious  blood  salvation  brought.
The  isles  that  speck  the  mighty  deep  shall  hear,


252  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

And  from  the  idols  which  their  hands  have  made
Shall  rise,  and  grasp  the  precious  saving  truth.
And  shout  aloud  salvation  through  our  God.
From  ev'ry  ship  that  ploughs  the  spreading  sea.
The  banner  of  the  peaceful  dove  shall  stream,
And  from  the  altar  of  the  stoutest  heart
Shall  purest  incense  rise  to  Christ  our  King. —
Then  come,  ye  fainting,  feeble,  blood-bought  soulsy
Come  bow  in  humble  faith  before  the  throne.
And  there  devoutly  pray — "  Thy  kingdom  come.
Thy  blessed,  gracious  will  be  done  on  earth.
As  'tis  by  angels  round  the  throne  above." —
Then  shall  prevail  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,
And  Jesus'  dying  love  fill  all  the  earth.


itlartgrbom  of  MxBBxomms.         •

BT  W.  B.  SPRAOUE,  D.  D.

There  is  scarcely  a  mystery  upon  which  the  con-
templative mind  pauses  with  greater  wonder,  than
the  existence  of  evil,  under  the  government  of  a  Be-
ing of  infinite  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness.  And
yet  there  is  some  light  thrown  upon  the  mystery,  in
that  arrangement  of  providence  by  which  evil  often
visibly  becomes  the  occasion  of  good ;  and  especially
in  the  well-authenticated  divine  assurance  that  all
evil,  even  the  greatest,  shall  be  made  ultimately  to
subserve  the  cause  of  truth,  and  virtue,  and  happi-
ness. We  pity  the  child  of  sorrow,  when  we  see
him  bending  under  a  burden  of  blasted  hope,  and
perhaps  marvel  that  he  should  be  dealt  with  in  so
much  severity ;  but  our  misgivings  give  place  to
confidence,  and  our  sympathy  is  turned  into  joy,
when  we  are  brought  to  feel  that  he  has  become  bet-
ter and  happier  from  having  been  in  the  furnace.  In
like  manner  we  contemplate  both  the  moral  and
physical  evil  that  prevails  throughout  the  earth,  and
our  eye  seems  to  rest  upon  a  vast  field  of  desolation ;
but  here  again  we  take  refuge  in  the  revealed  truth,

22


254  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

that  a  better  day  will  come,  and  jhat  this  very  system
of  evil  which  we  see  in  such'  vigorous  operation,  will
be  found  to  have  been  instrumental,  in  a  degree,  of
working  out  man's  noblest  destiny.  The  ordinance
oWJod  is  indeed  as  truly  mysterious  in  bringing  good
out  of  evil,  as  in  permitting  the  existence  of  evil, —
especiaUy  when  this  result  is  contemplated  in  refer
ence  to  the  universal  triumph  of  truth  and  goodness  ;
though  the  one  certainly  relieves  the  mind  from  much
of  the  perplexity  that  arises  from  a  view  of  the  other.
If  we  can  be  assured  that  light  will  ere  long  shine
out  of  darkness,  and  that  the  result  will  be  the  devel-
opment of  a  perfect  system, — ^however  much  we  may
be  confounded  by  the  mysterious  events  of  providence,
as  they  occur,  we  can  afford  to  possess  our  souls  in
patience,  and  to  wait  with  all  composure — be  it  for  a
longer  or  shorter  period — ^until  God's  day  of  revelation.
If  we  mistake  not,  these  remarks  have  a  striking
illustration  in  the  topic  which  we  propose  briefly  to
present  in  this  article.  The  history  of  missions  has
been  thus  far,  to  a  great  extent,  the  history  of  trials
and  difficulties ;  so  that,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the
faith  which  the  church  has  reposed  in  the  promise
and  power  of  her  Head,  the  enterprise  would  long
since  have  been  abandoned.  But  those  events  which
have  seemed  to  bear  the  most  portentous  aspect,  and
which  have  clothed  the  church  in  the  deepest  mourn-
ing, and  which  withal  have  been  appealed  to  with
the  greatest  confidence  by  the  foes  of  missions,  as


MARTYKDOM  OF  MISSIONARIES.  255

demonstrating  at  once  the  folly  and  the  hopelessness
of  the  cause,  are  the  occasional  sacrifices  that  have
been  made  of  human  life — not  to  excessive  labor,
nor  to  a  sickly  climate,  nor  to  the  thousand  depriva-
tions and  hardships  incident  to  living  in  a  heathen
land, — but  to  the  murderous  ferocity  of  the  people
whom  they  go  to  benefit.  The  three  cases  of  this
kind  that  are  most  prominent  in  the  history  of  mod-
ern missions,  are  those  of  Lyman  and  Munson,  mis-
sionaries of  the  American  Board,  virho  w^ere  inhu-
manly massacred  in  1834,  in  an  adventurous  attempt
to  explore  the  Batta  country ;  and  that  of  John  Wil-
liams, long  devoted  to  the  cause  of  missions  under
the  London  Missionary  Society,  v\rho  shared  a  similar
fate  in  1839,  at  the  hands  of  the  savage  inhabitants
of  one  of  the  South  Sea  islands.  We  have  no  dis-
position to  enter  into  the  harrowing  details  of  these
scenes  of  martyrdom — sufl^ce  it  to  say,  the  circum-
stances, as  might  be  expected,  were  all  horrible  ;  and
no  one  can  contemplate  them,  as  they  have  now  be-
come matter  of  history,  without  a  chill  of  horror
reaching  to  his  inmost  soul.  We  will  not  linger,
then,  on  the  spot  where  the  bloody  deeds  were  done,
any  farther  than  may  be  necessary  to  aid  in  gather-
ing up  the  lessons  of  truth  and  wisdom,  and  even  en-
couragement, which  Providence  hereby  inculcates.
There  is  a  voice  in  these  dispensations  speaking  to
every  friend  of  missions,  and  to  the  whole  church  as
a  great  missionary  society : — ^let  us  put  ourselves


256  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

then  in  the  attitude  of  listeners,  and  endeavor  to  profit
by  what  we  hear.

It  will  be  obvious  to  a  moment's  reflection,  that
these  affecting  events  demonstrate  the  great  impor-
tance of  the  missionary  cause.  For  they  furnish  a
fearful  illustration  of  the  consequence  of  Hving  with-
out God  in  the  world — that  is,  without  any  knowledge
of  the  only  living  and  true  God.  Murder  is  itself
the  foulest  crime  that  man  can  commit  toward  his
fellow-man.  It  involves  the  termination  of  all  earth-
ly action  and  enjoyment  and  hope  ; — it  is  a  violation
of  one  of  the  primary  laws  both  of  society  and  of
God.  Even  the  Pagan,  who  walks  in  no  brighter
light  than  the  light  of  nature,  feels  that  there  is  a  sa-
credness  belonging  to  human  life  ;  and  when  that  is
violated,  there  is  a  voice  within  him  that  cries  out
against  the  deed.  But  if  murdei  in  any  circum-
stances is  a  fearful  crime,  how  much  is  it  aggravated
when  it  is  found  in  connection  with  the  grossest  in-
gratitude— when  tlic  victim  and  the  benefactor  are
united  in  the  same  person  !  And  thus  it  is  with  the
martyr  missionaries.  They  have  gone  among  the
heathen,  not  with  a  view  to  injure,  but  to  benefit  and
save  them.  While  they  were  living  amidst  all  the
advantages  of  civilized  and  Christianized  society,
they  were  moved  with  compassion,  as  they  cast  an
eye  over  the  map  of  the  Pagan  world,  and  they  form-
ed the  benevolent  purpose  of  rehnquishing  all  their
best  earthly  enjoyments,  for  the  sake  of  carrying  the


MARTYRDOM  OF  MISSIONARIES.  257

Gospel  of  salvation  to  those  whom  they  saw  perish-
ing without  it.  And  forthwith  they  girded  themselves
for  the  mighty  enterprise,  and  went  and  planted
themselves  among  the  heathen,  endeavoring,  by  eve-
ry possible  means,  to  find  an  avenue  for  the  Ught  of
truth  to  their  understandings  and  their  hearts.  But
instead  of  being  met  in  the  spirit  of  a  grateful  and
earnest  co-operation,  they  are  deliberately  and  basely
murdered — ^murdered  by  those  whom  they  had  come
to  deliver,  by  God's  blessing,  from  the  miseries  of
the  second  death.  Who  can  estimate  the  complica-
ted guilt  which  such  a  deed  must  have  involved  ?
And  who  can  doubt  that  they  who  were  capable  of
this,  were  capable  of  any  thing  that  comes  within  the
divine  prohibition  ?  Paul,  in  his  first  epistle  to  the
Romans,  has  furnished  a  picture  of  the  state  of  the
heathen  world  in  his  day,  which,  though  drawn  by
the  pen  of  inspiration,  and  of  course  true  to  life,
could  not  have  been  heightened,  in  respect  to  the
darkness  of  its  shades,  by  any  human  imagination  ;
and  yet,  if  the  most  unexceptionable  and  abundant
testimony  can  be  received,  it  is  no  less  descriptive
of  the  present  than  the  past.  Paganism,  though  dif-
fering in  its  circumstantials,  is  everywhere  and  al-
ways, substantially  the  same  ;  it  is  a  monster  under
whose  influence  vice  flourishes  with  deadly  luxuri-
ance ;  and  even  the  most  horrible  crimes  are  render-
ed sacred  by  being  identified  with  the  economy  of
religion.     There  are  those  who  will  have  it  that  the

22*


258  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

heathen  are  by  no  means  either  so  degraded  or  so
wretched,  as  they  are  often  represented  to  be ;  but
as  this  opinion  is  held  not  only  independently  of  evi-
dence but  contrary  to  it,  it  can  result  from  notliing
but  a  voluntary  and  obstinate  incredulity.

Is  such  then  the  condition  of  the  Pagan  world,
that  they  commit  every  species  of  iniquity  with
greediness,  and  sometimes  even  murder  those  who
go  among  them  on  an  embassy  of  love  ?  Could  any
fact  demonstrate  more  clearly  the  importance  of  send-
ing them  that  Gospel  which  is  the  power  of  (Jod  un-
to salvation  ?  There  is  no  other  form  of  philanthropy
that  is  adequate  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  object
but  this  :  of  course  this  is  just  as  important  as  their
restoration  to  dignity  and  happiness  here,  and  the
prospect  of  immortal  glory  hereafter.  Say  not  then,
because  some  of  God's  servants  perish  by  violence
in  heathen  lands,  that  therefore  the  hazardous  enter-
prise of  carrying  the  Gospel  thither  should  be  aban-
doned :  rather  say, — and  act  in  view  of  the  declara-
tion,— that  the  only  effectual  antidote  to  the  ignorance
and  depravity  in  which  these  crimes  originate  is  the
glorious  Gospel,  and  that  Christian  benevolence  im-
peratively requires  that  no  time  should  be  lost  in
sending  it  wherever  it  is  needed.

There  is  that  in  the  martyrdom  of  missionaries,
which  is  fitted  to  increase  our  sympathy  and  render
our  prayers  more  fervent,  in  behalf  of  those  who  give
themselves  to  the  missionary  work.     Alas  !  it  is  but


MARTYRDOM  OF  MISSIONARIES.  259

a  feeble  conception  that  we  can  form  of  the  trials  and
hardships  incident  to  this  kind  of  life,  under  the  most
favorable  circumstances.  There  is  the  separation,
in  all  ordinary  cases  for  life,  from  the  scenes  and  ob
jects  of  early  attachment ;  there  is  the  long  protract
ed  uncertainty  in  respect  to  the  welfare  of  beloved
friends  ;  there  is  the  loss  of  the  ten  thousand  social
and  personal  comforts  that  belong  to  an  advanced
state  of  civilization  ;  there  is  the  necessity  of  ming-
ling continually  in  scenes  of  loathsome  vice  at  which
the  heart  sickens ;  there  is  the  absence  of  that  whole
array  of  Christian  institutions  and  Christian  influ-
ences, which  are  regarded  as  so  important  to  the  suc-
cessful development  of  the  religious  principle  ;  and
finally,  there  is  sometimes  an  actual  personal  insecu-
rity in  respect  to  Ufe  itself, — and  no  one  who  devotes
himself  to  this  work  can  tell  but  that  he  may  meet  a
premature  and  violent  death.  The  men  who  have
engaged  in  this  enterprise,  were  not  constrained  to  it,
except  by  the  high  conviction  of  duty  :  they  volun-
tarily, and  after  having  counted  the  cost,  became  the
agents  of  the  church,  to  fulfil  the  commission  of  her
ascended  Head  ;  and  all  those  dangers  and  depriva-
tions which  they  have  consented  to  encounter,  they
would  have  escaped,  if  they  had  not  felt  themselves
personally  addressed  in  the  Saviour's  command,  "Go
ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  eve-
ry creature."  Is  it  not  fitting,  then,  that  they  should
share  hberally  in  our  sympathy  and  our  prayers  ?


260  MISSIONARY  MEMOAIAL.

Shall  we  not,  in  the  remembrance  of  what  they  have
to  suffer,  manifest  our  sympathy  by  anticipating  by
our  contributions  their  personal  wants,  and  by  com-
mending them  continually  to  God's  gracious  guardi-
anship ?  Especially  shall  we  not  fervently  suppli-
cate God's  blessing  upon  their  labors  ;  that  whether
they  find  an  earlier  or  a  later  grave,  they  may  meet
in  Heaven  at  last,  both  the  record  and  the  monu-
ments of  their  fidelity  ?

The  fate  of  our  murdered  missionaries  still  farther
suggests  the  thought,  that  there  should  be  an  elevated
standard  of  missionary  qualification.  For  in  propor-
tion to  the  labor  to  be  performed,  and  the  danger  and
deprivation  to  be  incurred,  is  the  amount  of  intellect-
ual and  moral  strength  that  is  required.  Never  was
there  a  more  absurd  idea,  than  that  while  the  Chris-
tian ministry  at  home  should  not  be  dishonored  by
tameness  and  imbecility,  yet  almost  any  one  is  ade-
quate to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  heathen.  The
truth  is,  that  if  greater  qualifications  are  required  in
the  one  case  than  the  other,  the  claims  of  missionary
life  are  the  strongest ;  for  there  are  difficulties  to  be
encountered  in  connection  with  it,  before  which  even
the  strong  man  is  sometimes  inclined  to  bow.  It
may  depend  on  the  sagacity,  and  tact,  and  firmness
of  a  missionary,  whether  his  life  shall  be  preserved,
when  the  danger  of  a  violent  death  threatens  ;  and
certainly  he  ought  to  have  that  measure  of  grace
which  shall  prepare  him  for  such  a  death,  provided


MARTYRDOM  OF  MISSIONARIES.  261

he  cannot  lawfully  escape  from  it.  We  repeat,  then,
let  the  standard  of  missionary  qualification  be  regu-
lated by  the  duties  to  be  performed,  by  the  trials  to
be  endured.  Let  every  young  man  who  contem-
plates giving  himself  to  the  missionary  work,  satisfy
himself,  before  forming  the  determination,  that  if  it
be  God's  will,  he  is  ready  to  be  oflfered  up  on  the  al-
tar of  Pagan  barbarity.  And  let  those  who  chiefly
give  direction  to  our  missionary  operations  keep  this
constantly  in  their  eye — nay,  let  the  whole  church
labor  and  pray,  that  those  who  engage  in  this  holy
calling  may  be  abundantly  qualified  for  it ;  and  that
there  may  be  a  more  plentiful  baptism  of  the  Holy
Ghost  vouchsafed  to  our  young  men,  so  that  there
shall  rise  up  from  among  them  many,  who,  like  the
great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  shall  not  count  their
lives  dear  to  them,  if  the  honor  of  their  Master  should
demand  the  sacrifice.

Moreover,  the  events  which  we  contemplate,  fur-
nish a  striking  illustration  of  the  independence  and
sovereignty  of  God  in  carrying  forward  his  own  work.
Notice  how  much  God's  thoughts  are  above  our
thoughts,  and  his  ways  above  our  ways,  in  respect  to
the  manner  in  which  he  accomplishes  his  purposes.
Man,  when  he  has  prepared  an  instrument  to  be  em-
ployed for  a  particular  end,  not  only  cherishes  it  with
.  the  utmost  care,  but  if  by  any  means  it  is  destroyed
or  lost,  he  mourns  over  it  as  perhaps  involving  the
failure  of  his  entire  plan.    But  God,  though  he  is


262  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

pleased  to  employ  instruments  for  the  accomplish-
ment of  his  ends,  docs  it  in  a  way  to  show  that  he  is
not  dependent  on  one  man  or  another ;  for  not  unfre-
quently  what  seems  to  us  the  best  formed  instru-
ment is  suddenly  broken,  and  yet  the  cause  does  not
languish,  because  another  is  forthwith  prepared.
When  the  American  Board  sent  forth  Lyman  and
Munson,  they  looked  upon  them  as  young  men  of
great  worth,  whose  education  had  been  carefully  con-
ducted witli  reference  to  a  foreign  field,  and  who
gave  promise  of  an  extended  course  of  successful
labor.  When  John  Williams  left  London  for  the
last  time,  though  he  had  already  done  much  for  the
missionary  cause,  yet  the  society  that  employed  him,
and  the  church  in  general,  were  still  hoping  that  many
years  of  vigor  and  usefulness  would  be  added  to  his
Ufe.  But  for  reasons  which  it  is  impossible  for  us
to  understand,  God  permitted  each  of  these  devoted
missionaries  to  become  a  prey  to  savage  men  ;  and
thus  the  most  promising  hopes  of  usefulness  were
suddenly,  and  as  we  should  say,  prematurely,  blast-
ed. But  has  the  missionary  cause  been  upon  the
retrograde  in  consequence  of  these  untoward  events  ?
Far  from  it ;  others  have  arisen  to  take  the  place  of
those  who  have  departed,  and  God  is  moving  for-
ward with  his  work  with  just  as  much  energy  and
success,  as  if  those  desperate  deeds  had  not  been
committed.  Nay  more — it  is  not  unreasonable  to
suppose  that  those  very  deeds  have  been  rendered


MARTTRDOM  OF  MISSIONARIES.  263

tributary  to  the  work  which  they  seemed  to  threaten ;
for  no  doubt  they  have  brought  the  friends  of  mis-
sions more  into  an  attitude  of  dependence  on  God,
thus  giving  new  life  both  to  their  prayers  and  their
eflforts.  When  the  hght  of  the  last  day  shall  shine
upon  the  record  of  these  heart-rending  scenes,  per-
haps it  may  appear  that  each  of  the  martyr  mission-
aries rendered  more  important  service  to  the  poor
heathen  in  the  act  of  ascending  to  Heaven  by  a
bloody  path,  than  if  he  had  filled  up  his  threescore
years  and  ten  in  direct  labors  for  their  salvation.

Shall  not  the  friend  of  missions  then  feel  strength-
ened, by  going  in  imagination  to  the  spot  where  Ly-
man, and  Munson,  and  Williams  fell?  'While  he
leaves  there  to  realize  more,  deeply  the  paramount
importance  of  the  cause,  shall  he  not  gather  fresh
confidence  of  its  ultimate  success,  and  new  motives
to  vigorous  effort,  from  the  fact  that  it  is  under  the
direction  of  infinite  wisdom  and  almighty  power,  and
that  these  are  pledged  for  its  triumph,  even  though
every  missionary  on  earth  should  be  sacrificed  to
Pagan  violence  ?  Ye  devoted  and  lamented  men,
who,  like  Stephen,  saw  your  murderers  around  you,
and  looked  upon  your  own  blood  in  the  agonies  of
death — Heaven  forbid  that  your  death  should  have
been  in  vain  to  us !  We  will  think  of  your  zeal,
your  self-denial,  your  fortitude  and  moral  heroism,
and  engage  with  fresh  vigor  in  the  cause  from  which
you  withheld  not  even  the  sacrifice  of  your  life !


Si)e  i{li00tonaru0*  IDtparturt.

BT  MISS  HANNAH  F.  GOULD.

The  crown  of  thorns  He  wore,
Whose  kingdom  yet  shaU  smile

From  ocean's  farthest  shore,
And  every  heathen  isle :

Ai\d  we  would  count  all  else  as  loss

To  spread  the  glory  of  His  cross.

Where  bright  with  gold  their  lands,
And  diamonds  star  the  mine,

The  throne  of  darkness  stsuids
And  souls  in  bondage  pine  ;

We  go  to  sound  the  jubilee

To  all  who  will  in  Christ  be  free.

They  die,  where  rose,  and  palm,

And  cassia  flourish  fair.
For  want  of  Gilead's  balm.

And  a  Physician  there.
Their  grounds  o'errun  with  sin  and  wo
We  go  with  hght  and  life  to  sow.


THE  missionaries'  DEPARTURE.  265

While  in  that  distant  field

To  serve  our  heavenly  King,
Of  faith  we  bear  the  shield,

And  of  salvation  sing :
His  banner  o'er  us  will  be  love,
Our  comforter,  the  Holy  Dove.

No  victim's  blood  must  flow

Our  paths  of  peace  to  stain.
As  forth  we  march  to  show

The  Lamb  for  sinners  slain.
His  veins  have  pour'd  the  sacred  streams
Whose  power  the  soul  from  death  redeems.

Now,  o'er  the  rolUng  seas

A  Saviour's  name  to  bear.
Our  sails  are  to  the  breeze —

To  God  our  parting  prayer .
We  leave  our  native  shores,  and  know
The  Christian  hath  no  home  below !

Friends,  kindred,  all,  adieu  !

Though  through  our  earthly  days.
So  vapor-like  and  few.

We're  hence  as  parted  rays,
On  high  may  we  surround  the  Sun
Of  Righteousness,  in  Him  made  one  !

23


9i)e  jSHan  tDi)om  i)t0  Htgimmt  tottllr  not  2ro

tDUi)OUt


BT  THE  AUTHOR  OF  ''  THE  PALAIS  ROTAL^* — ^^  HRMRI  QUATRB  ;
OR  THE  DATS  OF  THE  LEAGUE,"  ETC.


During  the  entire  war  of  the  Revolution,  New
York  city  was  held  by  the  British.  At  the  close  of
a  December's  evening,  of  the  year  one  thousand
seven  hundred  and  eighty-two,  when  active  warfare
had  ceased,  and  the  hostile  armies  were  waiting  in
their  respective  quarters  the  announcement  of  the
expected  treaty  of  peace,  the  repose  of  the  city  was
disturbed  by  a  sudden  beat  of  drum.

Had  Washington,  or  Wayne — contrary  to  a  well-
understood,  though  not  expressed,  agreement — made
a  descent  on  the  garrison  ?  Had  the  horrors  of  war
recommenced  ?  Various  were  the  conjectures  of  the
startled  inhabitants,  as  they  threw  up  their  windows
or  rushed  to  the  doors.  The  alarm  proved  ground-
less. Simply,  a  man  in  miUtary  undress  was  seen
in  rapid  flight,  followed  by  an  officer  and  some  dozen
rank  and  file  in  pursuit — a  mere  garrison-disturbance,
such  as  was  oft  witnessed — and  the  spectators  mostly


A  TALE  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  267

retired  within-doors,  thankful  that  their  fears  of  an  in-
vasion were  so  quickly  put  at  rest.

Meanv^hile,  the  fugitive  disappeared  down  a  nar-
row street.  It  happened,  that  as  the  soldiers  turned
sharply  the  angle  to  recover  view  of  their  quarry,  a
man  who  had  dropped  from  a  lofty  garden-wall,  reeled
across  the  pathway  in  the  endeavor  to  preserve  his
footing.

"  Thank  Heaven !  we  have  caught  the  renegade  !"
cried  the  officer  who  came  up,  out  of  breath,  and
saw  his  men  surrounding  a  prisoner.

"  And  sure,  your  honor,"  uttered  the  captive,  in
deprecative  tone,  "if  I  had  known  you  were  in
search  of  me,  I  would  have  come  to  quarters  without
your  honor  having  the  trouble  to  turn  out  with  the
guard."

"  Why,  how  is  this  ?"  cried  the  lieutenant.  "  Hen-
ley, you  have  broken  your  parole  and  it  will  go  hard
with  you — but  away,  lads,  or  we  shall  lose  the  cap-
tain !"

The  prisoner  was  clothed  in  the  same  imiform  as
his  captors;  but  it  was  not  the  man  they  were  in
quest  of ;  and  after  ordering  two  of  the  soldiers  to
conduct  Henley  to  t^e  guard-room,  the  lieutenant  con-
tinued the  pursuit.

William  Henley  was  a  frank,  careless  fellow,  of
thirty  years  or  upwards, — in  many  respects  an  incom-
parable soldier,  and  much  liked  by  his  comrades,  and
by  all  the  officers,  save  his  own  captain.    But  he  was


268  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

subject  at  intervals  to  an  irresistible  impulse  to  in-
fringe discipline,  which  was  the  more  regretted,  as,
when  stationed  at  outposts,  his  extreme  vigilance
had,  on  several  occasions,  ensured  timely  warning  of
the  attacks  of  roving  American  corps.  Soothing  and
considerate  treatment  from  his  captain  would  most
probably  have  reformed  him  altogether,  but  he  was
doomed  continually  to  experience  the  imdisguised
hatred  and  ill-will  of  his  superior,  which,  while  it  en-
tailed unmitigated  punishment  for  his  delinquencies,
confirmed,  rather  than  checked,  his  recklessness.
Kindness  and  mercy  would  have  upheld  him  in  his
good  intentions,  for  there  was  an  excellent  founda-
tion to  work  on ;  but  he  was  oft,  through  the  malice
of  the  captain,  doomed  to  suflfer  for  faults  he  did  not
commit ;  and  that  he  did  not  grow  entirely  hardened
was  owing  to  the  excellence  of  his  nature.

The  captain,  by  rare  coincidence,  bore  the  same
name  as  his  victim— WiUiam  Henley.  He  was  uni-
versally disliked  for  his  meanness,  cruelty,  and  un-
officer-like  conduct,  but  he  had  the  tact  to  avoid  com-
mitting any  action  by  which  he  would  incur  disgrace,
or,  what  was  heartily  desired  by  the  others,  expulsion
from  the  regiment ;  and  he  pos^ssed  just  sufficient
conduct  and  bravery  to  carry  him,  without  stigma,
through  the  many  severe  actions  in  which  the  corps
had  been  engaged.  It  was  a  general  feeling,  that  al-
though Captain  Henley  never  openly  violated  military
etiquette,  or  committed  a  punishable  infraction  of


A  TALE  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  269

discipline,  his  Majesty's  service  would  gain  if  he
v^ere  whisked  off  to  where  we  cannot  name ;  whilst
of  William  Henley,  the  private,  it  was  remarked,
that  faulty  as  were  his  occasional  excesses,  he  was
a  man  whom  the  regiment  could  not  do  without
The  identity  of  name,  contrasted  with  the  diversity
of  sentiment  respectively  entertained  towards  the
two  Henleys,  was  doubtless  the  cause  of  the  bitter
ill-will  of  the  captain  to  his  humble  namesake,  a
feeling  which  would  have  had  most  disastrous  re-
sults to  one  who  by  his  conduct  laid  himself  open  to
the  mercy  of  his  superiors,  had  not  the  other  offi-
cers, so  far  as  lay  in  their  power,  mitigated  its  evil
tendency.

When  Henley  was  so  unexpectedly  recognised  by
his  comrades,  he  was  under  orders,  for  a  previous
offence,  to  confine  himself  to  the  barracks ;  but
through  favor  of  the  colonel,  upon  giving  his  parole
not  to  stray  beyond  the  yard,  was  freed  from  the
restraint  of  a  prisoner's  cell.  He  had  now  violated
his  parole,  and  was  immediately  conducted  before
the  friendly  commandant,  who  commenced  reproach-
ing him  for  his  foolish  conduct.  ''In  two  months  after
he  joined  the  regiment,"  remarked  the  colonel,  "  he
had  been  made  successively  corporal  and  sergeant,
had  been  degraded  to  the  rank  and  file,  and  he  feared
the  end  of  his  career  would  be  very  lamentable."

"  Not  if  I  had  your  honor  for  my  captain !"  replied
Henley,  lifting  his  eyes  from  the  floor.

23*


270  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

The  colonel  demanded  whose  garden  he  had  in-
Taded,  and  what  was  his  purpose.  But  William
would  not  divulge  his  motive  or  explain  his  conduct ;
it  was,  he  said, — spreading  his  fingers  over  his  breast,
and  making  his  obeisance, — ^an  afiair  of  personal  hon-
or ;  a  lady  was  in  the  case,  and  he  must  trust  to  his
honor's  leniency.  The  colonel  repUed,  that  through
leniency  parole  had  been  taken,  but  that  having  bro-
ken it,  there  was  no  alternative,  in  justice  to  others,
but  to  place  him  under  guard  whilst  the  regiment  re-
mained in  New  York.  Very  downcast  and  dispirited,
William  was  removed  to  his  cell.

He  soon  discovered  that  his  tyrant  was  the  occa-
sion, though  not  the  cause,  of  his  present  disgrace.
The  captain,  who  had  influential  firiends  and  kinsmen
in  Philadelphia,  through  whom  he  hoped  to  rise  to
consideration,  felt  no  desire  to  return  to  Europe,  and
planned  his  schemes  to  forsake  the  British  service.
But  as  he  meditated  a  parting  blow  at  his  old  firiends,
he  contrived,  under  a  specious  pretext,  to  overdraw
very  largely  his  account  with  the  paymaster.  He
incurred  heavy  debts  with  the  owners  of  certain
stores  who  supplied  the  army  with  necessaries,  and
for  a  finishing  stroke,  on  the  eve  of  his  departure,
got  into  his  possession  the  paymaster's  cash-box.
But  in  grasping  at  so  much  he  lost  all.  His  actions,
of  late,  were  too  suspicious  to  be  overlooked ;  he
was  detected  within  a  few  minutes  of  his  intended
flight,  and  as  a  desperate  resort  resolved  to  attempt


A  TALE  OF  THE  REYOLUTION.  271

reaching  the  barge  in  waiting  to  receive  him.  To
the  unlucky  contretems  by  which  his  less  guilty
namesake  fell  into  redoubled  disgrace,  the  captain
owed  his  safety.  The  delay  in  the  pursuit,  trifling
as  it  was,  enabled  him  to  reach  the  craft  and  throw
himself  into  it.  The  boatmen  pulled  into  the  stream,
— a  few  ineffectual  shots  were  the  closing  adieus  be-
tween him  and  his  regiment.

Apart  from  the  disgrace  flung  on  the  corps  by  the
desertion  of  one  of  his  rank,  his  brother-officers
would  have  been  exceedingly  pleased  with  the  rid-
dance, but  for  the  discovery,  that  through  excess  of
spite,  he  had  stolen  and  carried  off"  the  colors.  To
think  that  banners  worked  by  the  fair  hands  of  an
English  lady  of  rank,  presented  by  herself  to  the
regiment,  and  which  had  so  oft  floated  gloriously  in
face  of  the  enemy,  should  be  now  in  that  enemy's
power,  was  galling  beyond  endurance.  Various
schemes  were  agitated  to  recover  the  regimental  in-
signia, but  none  that  promised  success.  It  was  not
to  be  expected  that  the  foe  would  be  a  party  to  the
restoration,  when  both  British  and  Americans  had
encouraged  and  fostered  desertion  from  each  other's
ranks  throughout  the  war.  A  gloom  was  cast  over
the  spirits  of  both  officers  and  privates — it  was  a
common  loss — ^and  curses,  both  loud  and  deep,  though
impotent,  were  vented  against  the  spiteful  traitor.
Soon  came  news  that  the  captain  was  comfortably
established  in  Philadelphia^  and  that  he  was  well  re-


272  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

ceived  in  that  city.  He  complained  loudly  of  the
bad  treatment  he  had  received  at  the  hands  of  his
late  fellow-officers,  and  boasted  everywhere  of  his
revenge.

Meanwhile,  William  suffered  a  week's  close  im-
prisonment. His  health  and  spirite  gave  way,  and
it  was  evident  his  mind  was  a  prey  to  some  secret
sorrow ;  but  as  he  maintained  a  profound  silence,  the
cause  could  only  be  guessed  at.  By  way  of  diver-
sion, his  comrades,  who  had  admittance  to  the  cell,
would  sometimes  taunt  him  that  his  luck  was  turned —
that  he  need  hope  for  no  more  favor — that  in  these
^asy  times  of  peace  no  occasion  could  possibly  oc-
cur for  gaining  honor,  and  that  the  regiment  could  do
without  him.

"  But  there  is  one  waiting  outside,"  uttered  Ser-
geant Waters,  as  he  entered  with  a  knowing  look,
"who  can't  do  without  *  Mister  William  Henley,'
and  I  can't  say  but  what  I  would  prefer  her  service
to  King  George's !"

**  What  mean  you.  Waters  ?"  demanded  William,
hastily  starting  up  and  approaching  the  sergeant.

"  Easy,  easy,  man !"  replied  Waters,  going  to  the
door  and  beckoning  in  a  young  damsel,  "  'tis  only  a
visiter  in  a  bonnet ;  but  come,  boys,  let  us  clear  out,
so  many  will  frighten  the  poor  lass."

Waters  having  cleared  the  room  of  the  soldiers,
retired,  leaving  the  prisoner  in  surprise  gazing  on
the  unexpected  visiter,  whose  features  were  hidden


A  TALE  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  273

by  a  veil,  and  who  stood  timidly  a  few  paces  from
the  door,  as  though  afraid  or  abashed  at  what  she  had
done.

"Why,  Jeannette — you  here  ! — you  venture
here !"

"  I  did  venture,"  replied  Jeannette,  throwing  aside
her  veil  and  disclosing  a  very  pretty  face,  suffused
with  a  deep  blush ;  "  my  aunt  shut  the  door  in  your
face,  but  they  behaved  much  better  to  me  here  :  but,
WilUam,  what  has  happened  ?  why  did  you  not  keep
your  appointment  ?"

"How  could  I,  Jeannette?"  exclaimed  WiUiam,
impatiently,  "  I'm  a  pri ^"  but  he  checked  him-
self, and  changing  his  tone,  continued  with  an  attempt
at  gayety,  "  I  see  how  it  is — a  soldier  is  held  incon-
stant as  the  wind — ^you  thought  I  had  found  a  new
sweetheart"

"  I  thought  no  such  thing,  WiUiam  Henley,"  re-
plied Jeannette,  firmly;  "but  you  cannot  deceive
me — ^you  are  a  prisoner."

"  I — a  prisoner  ?"  cried  William,  who  was  ashamed
to  own  the  fact

"You  cannot  deny  it,"  continued  the  maiden;
"  where  are  your  belt  and  side-arms  ?"

"  Where  is  my  belt  ?"  echoed  WilUam,  slowly,  at
a  loss  what  to  say.

"  Yes,  sir,  I  ask  again — are  you  not  confined  here,
in  disgrace  ?"

"Jeannette,"  exclaimed  Henley,  approaching,  "you


874  MISSIONARY  MSMORIAL.

have  a  quick  eye,  and  were  bom  to  be  a  soldie/s
wife."

'*  Don't  touch  me,  sir !''  cried  the  maid,  starting
back ;  '^  tell  me  what  you  have  been  confined  for.  I
did  wrong  to  come  here — and  I  am  afraid  you  do  not
deserve  one's  caring  about."

*'  You  did  not  think  so,  Jeannette,"  remarked  the
other,  taking  her  hand,  "  when  I  thrashed  that  tall
dragoon  for  his  rudeness  to  you  in  the  street."

'^  And  what  prompted  you  ?"  asked  the  girl,  smi-
ling archly:  "did  not  people  say  it  was  only  the
jealousy  of  an  infantry-man  towards  the  cavalry  ?"

William  sighed  heavily,  and  let  fall  her  hand.  The
tears  started  to  his  eyes.  Jeannette,  in  alarm,  im-
plored him  to  keep  her  no  longer  in  suspense.

He  was,  indeed,  a  prisoner,  he  replied,  and  for  her
sake.  To  keep  his  last  appointment  with  her,  he
had  broken  his  parole,  and  was  now  confined  to  his
cell.

"  But  what  had  you  done,  William,  that  they  should
want  your  parole  ?"

"  I  have  been  foolish,  Jeannette — I  was  foolish  all
my  life — I  am  not  deserving  your  regard."

He  threw  himself  into  a  chair,  and  buried  his  face
in  his  hands.

Jeannette,  deeply  moved,  endeavored  to  sooth  him.
Her  parents  were  dead — she  was  living  with  a  maiden
amit,  who  very  grudgingly  afforded  the  protection  of
a  home.    It  is  true  the  old  lady,  through  the  disas-


A  TALE  OP  THE  REVOLUTION.  275

lers  of  the  long  war,  was  very  much  straitened  m  cir-
cumstances, but  deficieifcy  of  income  was  compen-
sated by  imbending  pride  and  lofty  notions.  Jean-
nette,  as  a  seamstress,  more  than  maintained  herself,
yet  her  aunt,  who  was  to  a  certain  extent  benefited
by  the  humble,  though  useful  occupation  of  the
niece,  thought  that  the  latter  was  degraded  by  asso-
ciating with  a  private  soldier.  William  Henley  be-
came acquainted  with  Jeannette  by  protecting  her
from  the  coarse  importunities  of  a  dragoon.  He  es-
corted her  home,  yet  when  he  called  a  second  time,
the  aunt  slammed  the  door  in  his  face.  The  young
people,  however,  cared  not  for  the  old  lady's  notions
of  gentiUty,  and  oft  met  clandestinely,  till  the  mishap
of  the  lover  put  a  sudden  stop  to  the  intercourse.  It
was  arranged  they  should  be  married  before  the  regi-
ment returned  to  Europe.  William's  continued  and
mysterious  absence,  therefore,  inspired  Jeannette  with
fears  which  could  not  be  quieted,  and  which  induced
her  to  take  the  bold  step  of  visiting  the  barracks.

She  drew  from  him  the  history  of  his  faults — of
his  excesses ;  yet  his  remorse  was  so  poignant,  his
repentance  so  manifestly  sincere,  that  she  listened,
with  the  ear  of  affection,  to  his  promises  of  amend-
ment. For  her  sake,  he  declared,  that  within  a  week
he  would  regain  the  favor  of  the  colonel  and  the  ap-
plause of  the  whole  regiment,  and  she  believed  him.

On  quitting  the  prisoner,  she  was  escorted  beyond
the  barracks  by  the  gallant  sergeant.    A  green  veil


S76  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

hid  the  face,  but  the  sparkle  of  a  bright  eye  shone
through  the  gauze,  and  ttlb  mysterious  visiter — by
those  vfho  caught  a  gUmpse  of  her — ^was  pronounced
very  pretty,  and  William  Henley  began  to  be  more
envied  than  pitied.  However,  the  prisoner's  state  of
mind  after  the  maiden's  departure  was  certainly  not
enviable.  He  was  morose  and  sullen,  and  replied
alike  savagely  to  every  remark,  whether  of  kindness
or  jocular  taunt.  By  those  who  took  the  trouble  to
watch  him— and  his  condition  excited  extreme  inter-
est — he  was  observed  to  talk  much  to  himself,  and
pace  very  hurriedly  his  cell.  Next  day  he  requested
to  see  the  colonel.  The  conference  was  long,  and  to
the  astonishment  of  every  one,  William  Henley  was
set  at  liberty — nay,  more,  obtained  a  furlough  to  cross
over  to  Long  Island  for  the  benefit  of  his  health.
William's  star  was  again  in  the  ascendant,  but  none,
not  even  Sergeant  Waters,  could  extract  from  him
his  secret,  whether  relating  to  the  maiden,  or  by  what
charm  he  won  the  colonel  to  set  him  free.  It  was
observed,  that  before  leaving  the  barracks  he  had  a
second  interview  with  the  commandant,  at  which  two
other  officers  were  present,  and  that  after  taking  leave
of  his  comrades,  he  started  in  the  direction  of  the
street  where  he  had  been  captured.  Conjecture  was
rife,  but  a  noble  sentiment  of  honor,  which  prevails
in  all  military  grades,  prevented  his  footsteps  being
tracked.

William  certainly  paid  a  visit  to  the  street  in  ques«


A  TALE  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  277

tion,  but  at  ten.  o'clock  at  night  he  was  punctual  to  a
minute  in  stepping  on  the  pier  on  Hudson's  river,
where  he  had  promised  to  meet  the  colonel.  Here,
he  received  his  final  instructions,  with  a  letter  to  the
commandant  at  Paulus  Hook,  the  military  station  on
the  opposite  bank  in  New  Jersey.  Now  we  must
not  conceal  from  the  reader,  that  William  Henley —
stung  by  the  disgrace  of  his  imprisonment,  and  the
despicable  light  in  which  his  actions  would  be  viewed
by  Jeannette — ^planned  a  scheme  to  recover  the  lost
colors  of  the  regiment,  which  was  heartily  approved
of  by  the  officers,  and  every  means,  as  far  as  practi-
cable, placed  at  his  disposal.  At  Paulus  Hook,  he
exchanged  his  uniform  for  plain  apparel,  and  plodded
his  way  on  foot  through  the  enemy's  territory  as  a
joumejrman  seeking  work,  passing  through  New
Brunswick  and  Princeton — ^the  high  road  to  Phila-
delphia.

By  inquiry,  he  learned  that  Captain  Henley  was
residing  at  the  Indian  Queen  hotel.  He  oflfered  him-
self as  stable-helper,  and  was  accepted.  The  rene-
gade's chamber  was  his  next  discovery,  but  to  his
mortification,  he  found  that  Mr.  Henley  never  left
the  hotel  without  locking  up  his  room  and  carrying
with  him  the  key.  William's  occupation  in  the  stable
did  not  permit  him  to  roam  over  the  house  without
Suspicion — and  four  days  passed  ere  he  found  a  key
which  unlocked  the  captain's  room.  His  approaches
were  necessarily  very  slow,  for  he  did  not  dare  en-

24


278  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

counter  the  chance  of  meeting  the  captain  in  hall  or
passage,  where  he  must  have  passed  close  to  his
hated  namesake ;  he  dreaded  his  scrutinizing  glance,
although  he  had  disguised  himself — ^for  no  one  is
more  acute  in  remembering  features  than  a  military
man,  unless  we  except  a  turnkey.

However,  after  WilUam  had  been  a  fortnight  in
Philadelphia,  the  French  minister  gave  a  grand  ball,
and  Henley  was  a  guest.  Now  was  the  time  for  ac-
tion !  With  the  duplicate  key  he  admitted  himself
into  the  captain's  chamber,  locked  the  door,  and  forced
open  the  trunks,  but  without  success — ^the  colors  he
could  not  find.  He  searched  the  bed  and  bedding,
but  in  vain.  What  should  he  do  ?  Had  the  captain
deUvered  the  colors  to  Congress  ?  No — or  it  would
have  been  spoken  of.  Perhaps  the  traitor  feared  to
hold  them  in  his  own  possession  lest  Congress  should
claim  them  before  he  had  made  his  bargain  for  their
delivery — ^for  the  man  was  thoroughly  mercenary.

Our  adventurer  next  made  a  hole  tlirough  the  lid
and  bottom  of  each  trunk  with  intent  to  ascertain
whether  there  existed  a  secret  drawer  or  hiding-place.
In  his  despair  a  sudden  thought  struck  him.  A  mili-
tary cloak,  which  felt  more  than  usually  heavy,  he
hastily  ripped  apart  from  its  lining,  and  behold,  the
sought-for  treasure !  Taking  oflF  his  apparel,  he
wrapped  the  colors  round  his  body,  redressed  him-
self, locked  up  the  chamber,  and  stealing  away  quiet-
ly from  the  Indian  Queen,  went  direct  to  the  banks


A  TALE  OF  THE  REVOLUTION.  279

of  the  Delaware.  The  night  was  chilly,  and  the
river  was  partially  obstructed  with  ice  ;  but  in  imagi-
nation he  was  already  at  New  York,  enjoying  the
smiles  of  Jeannette,  and  the  praises  of  his  comrades.

He  did  not  dare  proceed  to  the  ferry-house,  but
unmooring  a  boat  from  a  wharf,  he  committed  him-
self and  his  prize  to  the  waters.

It  was  on  Christmas-mom  that  William  Henley
entered  the  barrack-yard  at  New  York,  and  presented
himself  to  the  colonel.  A  few  minutes  afterward,
the  drum  beat,  the  regiment  was  paraded,  and  to  the
astonished  and  delighted  eyes  of  the  corps,  the  lost
colors  were  unfurled  and  planted  where  they  had  so  *
oft  stood — in  front  of  the  line.

Henley  was  restored  to  the  rank  of  sergeant,  with
a  handsome  gratuity  from  the  officers.  When  the
regiment  sailed  for  England,  after  the  ratification  of
peace,  and  consequent  evacuation  of  New  York,  our
sagacious  adventurer  was  accompanied  by  his  young
wife.  Her  kinswoman,  though  regretting  her  depart-
ure, consoled  herself  that  the  disgrace  which  had
fallen  on  the  family,  by  one  of  its  members  marrying
an  uncommissioned  officer,  would  remain  compara-
tively unknown.  To  the  solemn  vows  which  he
made  at  the  altar — aided  by  the  judicious  advice  and
kind  treatment  of  the  colonel — ^William  owed  that  he
lever  afterwards  forgot  himself,  and  his  regiment  were
ever  proud  to  admit  his  indispensable  services.

Tt  came  to  the  ears  of  those  whom  it  most  con-


280  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

cerned,  that  after  the  first  burst  of  rage  at  his  loss,
Mr.  Henley  admitted  that  he  was  served  justly,  and
that  he   could  not  conscientiously  regret  that  the

colors  of  the regiment  had  reached  their  proper

destination.


Sljt  iSlt00ionars.

BT   MISS  8ELINA   SHERMAN.

Behold  him, — heaven-sent  to  nations  rude, —
With  prayerful  8€>ul,  in  some  sv^reet  solitude  :
Ah,  virhy,  with  softening  heart,  yet  soul  serene.
Gazes  he  thus  upon  the  varied  scene  ?
Has  witching  mem'ry,  with  mysterious  power,
By  song  of  joyous  bird,  or  sight  of  flower.
Brought  other  scenes  and  other  climes  to  view,
Where  sever'd  hearts  exchanged  a  last  adieu  ? —

Though  pleasing  to  his  soul  the  dream  of  home.
And  the  sweet  memories  that  with  it  come.
Now  higher  cares  engross, — to  pour  the  light
Of  heaven  on  lands  long  veil'd  in  error's  night :
Nor  vainly — Lo  !  where  pagan  altars  rose.
The  Christian  temple  in  the  sunlight  glows.
And  those  who  bow'd  to  gods  of  wood  and  stone.
Bend  in  thy  courts,  0  God  !  to  thee  alone.


illt0d  ^nntington.

(See  article,  "  Moheagan  Blissions,"  ante,  pp.  81-89.)
BT  THOMAS  W.  RENNE.

Fearless  of  danger  as  of  toil,

She  task'd  to  manly  strength  her  powers,
To  pour  in  sorrowing  hearts  the  oil

Of  heavenly  comfort,  and  the  flowers
Of  hope  o'er  bosoms  dark  to  throw,
Where  hope  had  ne'er  been^uest  till  now.

The  Indian — sunk  helpless  low.

And  trembling  still  in  Nature's  night —

Felt  a  strange  joy  his  heart  o'erflow.
When,  like  a  form  of  heavenly  light,

With  pitying  eye,  and  tuneful  tongue.

To  his  charm'd  ear  of  heaven  she  sung.

And  hovering  round  his  cabin  rude
Was  e'er  her  guardian  influence  felt.

Now  luring  to  the  Pure  and  Good,
While  sweetly  now  an  alms  it  dealt :

Thus  ever  came  her  works  to  bless

And  prove  her  spirit's  truthfulnesa

24*


282  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Nor  only  when  young  life  around
Oped  to  his  eager  eye  its  charms,

Was  she  beside  his  hut-fire  found, —
But  when  disease  and  death's  alarms

Disturbed  his  soul  and  shook  his  frame,

To  calm  and  succor,  still  she  came.


Thus,  with  untiring  foot  and  head,

(Strengthen'd  at  once  by  Heaven  and  sent,)

Where'er  the  path  of  duty  led,

With  an  unquestioning  faith  she  went ;

And  prayer  and  praise,  where'er  she  trod,


Bore  witness  that  she  "  walk'd  with  God.


And  far  or  near, — the  same  to  her, —
The  love  and  zeal  at  first  that  won

To  Christ  a  feeble  worshipper,

Would  prompt  her  willing  feet  to  run

And  raise  the  spirit  which,  again.

The  world  was  luring  to  its  chain.


Learning  had  here  found  its  eclipse.
How  deep  soe'er  and  eloquent ;

For  when  was  heavenly  truth  from  lips
Of  earthly  mould  so  forceful  sent  ? —

If  the  cold  heart  her  pleading  stirr'd,

'Twas  that  her  soul  was  in  the  word.


yy


MISS  HUNTINGTON.  283

Her  love-lit  eye,  too,  ere  she  spoke,
Forestall'd  the  office  of  her  tongue,

And  hearts  on  which  its  radiance  broke

Thrill'dwith  new  life,  and  heavenward  sprung:

Its  light  was  like  to  that  which  came

To  Peter  in  his  hour  of  shame.


Thus  wondrously  the  tide  of  peace

That  well'd  within  her  breast  she  tum'd

On  other  hearts  and  souls, — till  these
For  the  same  spiritual  beauty  yeam'd

That  ever  round  her  lived  and  glow'd.

Strewing  with  light  the  path  she  trode.


9i\)t  M\B»\tmaxTa  Instttnte  anb  Boctttg  of

BasU.

BT  RET.  ROBERT  BAIRD,  D.  D.

Before  the  accession  of  Geneva  to  the  Confeder-
acy of  Switzerland,  by  reason  of  a  decision  of  the
Congress  of  Vienna  in  the  year  1814,  Basle*  was
the  largest  city  of  that  wonderful  association  of  little
republics,  usually  called  cantons.

Originally,  indeed,  and  for  a  long  time  after  the
rise  of  the  Helvetic  commonwealths,  Basle  was  a  free
imperial  city,  and  did  not  join  the  Swiss  Confederacy
until  the  year  1501.  For  almost  three  centuries  and
a  half  it  has  been  the  capital  of  a  small  canton  of  less
than  three  hundred  square  miles,  which  contains  at
this  time  about  fifty  thousand  inhabitants

This  little  republic  is  governed  by  a  "  Grand
Council"  of  two  hundred  and  eighty  members,  from
which  a  "  Small  Council,"  composed  of  sixty  mem-

*  Few  cities  on  the  continent  have  so  various  an  orthography  in
English  as  Basle,  which  is  written  almost  interchangeably,  Basil,
Basel,  Basle,  and  Bale.  The  last  should  have  a  circumflex  accent
on  the  letter  a,  and  then  it  would  be  B&le.


INSTITUTE  OF  BASLE.  285

bers,  is  chosen.  This  smaller  body,  in  fact,  carries
on  the  executive  administration  of  the  canton.  A
serious  difficulty  between  the  inhabitants  of  the  cap-
ital and  the  country  portion  of  the  population,  some
ten  or  fifteen  years  ago,  led  to  the  quasi  division  of
this  little  state  into  "  Basle  the  city,"  and  "  Basle  the
country,"  which  continues  to  exist  to  this  day,  to  the
great  detriment  of  the  public  tranquillity,  and  of  a
proper  legislation  in  the  canton.

Basle  has  been  famous  for  several  treaties  of  peace
which  were  made  at  it,  the  most  important  of  which
were  those  of  1499  and  1795.  At  this  place  the
Swiss  made  a  second  Thermopylae  of  the  ground
around  the  church  of  St.  James,  where  sixteen  hun-
dred of  their  troops  withstood  twenty  thousand  French,
under  the  Dauphin,  on  the  26th  of  August,  1444.
Above  all,  this  city  obtained  great  celebrity  from
its  having  been  the  seat  of  a  council  convened  by
Pope  Martin  V.,  and  his  successor,  Eugenius  IV.
The  first  session  of  this  best  but  most  abortive  of  all
oecumenical  or  general  councils  was  held  on  the  14th
day  of  December,  1431.  Its  45th  and  last  was  held
on  the  16th  of  May,  1443.  This  council  had  been
promised  at  the  close  of  that  of  Constance,  because
the  public  voice,  as  well  as  the  Emperor  of  Germany,
demanded  it.  Its  avowed  objects  were  to  extirpate
heresy,  (particularly  that  of  the  Hussites,)  unite  all
Christian  nations  under  the  banners  of  the  Catholic
or  Latin  church,  terminate  wars  between  Christian


286  MISSIONARY  MBMORUL.

princes ;  and  last,  but  not  least,  to  reform  the  Church.
But  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  council,  which
certainly  embraced  many  worthy  men  who  sincerely
desired  the  reformation  of  many  abuses  in  the  Church,
and  Pope  Eugenius,  diiBfered  wholly  in  their  views.
The  pope,  in  fact,  endeavored  to  remove  the  council
into  Italy,  and  afterwards  ordered  its  dissolution.
But  the  council,  backed  by  the  Emperor  of  Germa-
ny, continued  its  sessions.  The  number  of  its  mem-
bers, however,  gradually  diminished,  untU,  when  it
adjourned  to  Lausanne,  it  was  scarcely  any  thing
more  than  a  **Rump"  council.  All  its  decisions,
many  of  which  were  good,  were  wholly  without  au-
thority with  Rome.  In  fact,  they  are  never  pub-
lished in  the  collection  of  the  acts  of  other  councils.
It  was  not  by  such  means  that  the  Church  was  to  be
reformed.  Luthers,  not  councils,  were  to  do  that
work,  less  than  a  century  later.  And  in  truth  it  was
necessary  to  demolish  and  build  up  again,  rather
than  to  repair,  the  old  edifice.  It  was  a  new  crea-
tion, rather  than  a  reformation,  that  was  so  much
needed.

The  religion  of  the  canton  of  Basle  is  Protestant
to  such  an  extent  that  the  Roman  Catholic  element
is  not  worthy  of  notice.  Moreover,  it  is  that  type  of
Protestantism  called  the  Reformed,  in  opposition  to
the  Lutheran,  which  prevails  there.  The  language
spoken  is  the  German ;  but  there  is  a  French  church
in  the  city  for  the  benefit  of  several  hundreds  of  per-


INSTITUTE  OP  BASLE.  287

sons  from  the  French  cantons  of  Switzerland  and  from
France,  who  inhabit  that  place,  or  from  time  to  time
visit  it.  Among  the  pastors  whom  that  church,  which
is  a  sort  of  exotic  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  Teu-
tonic origin  and  tongue,  has  had  in  our  day,  may  be
mentioned  the  celebrated  Drs.  Grandpierre  and  Vi-
net,  the  former  of  whom  is  now  at  the  head  of  the
Missionary  Institute  at  Paris,  and  the  latter  is  Pro-
fessor of  Theology  in  the  Academy  of  Lausanne.

The  city  of  Basle  is  very  pleasantly  situated  on
the  Rhine,  by  which  it  is,  in  fact,  divided  into  the
greater  and  lesser  towns,  which  are  united  by  a  bridge
about  seven  hundred  and  fifty  feet  long.  The  larger
portion  of  the  city  lies  on  the  southern  side  of  the
river,  which  there  continues  to  flow  from  east  to  west,
but  deflects  to  the  north  immediately  after  quitting
its  walls.  The  houses  are  well  built,  the  streets  are
sufliciently  wide,  and  the  whole  air  of  the  place  is
agreeable,  quiet,  and,  to  a  student,  attractive.  The
population  scarcely  exceeds  seventeen  thousand,  and
if  it  increases  at  all,  it  must  be  at  the  slowest  rate
imaginable.  Being  at  the  head  of  the  steamboat
navigation  of  the  Rhine,  and  united  now  by  a  rail-
road, through  the  wide  valley  of  that  river,  to  Stras-
burg,  it  has  become  a  considerable  thoroughfare,  and
is  probably  much  more  animated  than  it  was  a  quar-
ter of  a  century  ago,  to  say  nothing  of  times  more
remote.

The  country  immediately  around  is  level,  fertile,


288  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

and  densely  populated.  At  no  great  distance  in  the
south  lie  the  Jura  mountains, — whilst  the  Black  For-
est bounds  the  horizon  in  tlie  north  and  northeast.

The  trade  of  this  ancient  little  city  is  extensiyCy
consisting  principally  in  silk  stuffs,  cotton,  paper,
linen,  and  gloves.  Its  bleacheries  and  dye-houses
are  very  important.  For  most  of  these  branches  of
business  Basle  is  indebted  to  those  excellent  Italian
and  French  Protestant  exiles  who,  in  the  16th  cen-
tury, sought  and  found  a  refuge  within  its  walls  from
the  bloody  persecution  which  raged  against  all  who
embraced  the  reformed  doctrines  in  their  ill-fated
countries.  Many  of  its  most  honorable  families  are
descended  from  these  illustrious  sufferers  for  the
cause  of  Christ.

Among  the  most  important  institutions  of  Basle
may  be  mentioned  the  University,  which  was  found-
ed in  the  year  1459 ;  it  possesses  a  large  and  well-
selected  library.  In  this  celebrated  estabhshment
many  distinguished  professors  have  given  lessons  to
large  assemblages  of  admiring  students.  Nor  has  it
seldom  happened  that  teachers  and  scholars  who
were  exiled  from  Germany  and  other  countries,
found  both  refuge  and  employment  here ;  for  this
little  republic  furnished  protection  to  martyrs  of
science  as  well  as  of  reUgion.  (Ecolampadius,  Gry-
naeus,  Buxtorf,  Wetstein,  Hermann,  the  Bemouil-
lis,  Euler,  and  other  distinguished  scholars  were
bom  here.    And  here  Erasmus,  though  a  native  of


INSTITUTE  OF  BASLE.  289

Rotterdam,  passed  the  greater  part  of  his  life,  and
his  remains  he  honorably  entombed  in  the  cathedral
of  the  city.

Basle  was  famous  in  the  times  of  the  Reformation
for  the  many  editions  of  the  Bible,  in  various  lan-
guages, which  it  sent  forth.  It  was  one  of  those
great  centres  from  which  truth,  as  contained  in  the
printed  page,  went  forth,  into  Germany,  Switzerland,
and  France.  From  this  point  colporteurs  carried  the
sacred  Scriptures  and  other  rehgious  books  into  the
surrounding  regions,  and  scattered  them  far  and  wide.
Nor  has  this  city  lost  her  attachment  to  the  "  Living
Oracles."  The  Bible  is  here  printed  in  large  edi-
tions, by  an  active  and  well-directed  Society,  which
has,  during  the  last  thirty  years,  given  a  vast  diffu-
sion to  the  Word  of  Life.  For  it  has  been  the  glory
of  Basle,  that  its  churches — ^we  speak  of  the  city
proper — have  ever  maintained  the  truth.  When
Protestantism  had  lost  its  savor,  and  "  the  fine  gold
had  become  dim"  in  all  other  cities  on  the  continent,
the  blessed  Saviour  still  walked  in  the  midst  of  its
golden  candlesticks,  and  kept  his  people  from  de-
parting from  the  pure  Gospel.  Blessed  reward  for
their  love  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  their  care  to  print
and  disseminate  it !  Where  should  we  expect  truth
longest  to  linger  but  in  the  midst  of  those  who  have
delighted  to  propagate  it  ?  "  Becs^use  thou  hast  kept
the  word  of  my  patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee  from
the  hour  of  temptation,  which  shall  come  upon  all

25


290  MISSIONARY  MXMpKIAL.

the  world,  to  try  them  that  dwell  upon  all  the  earth.^
(Rev.  iii.  10.)

But  perhaps  it  would  not  be  going  too  &r  to  say,
that  the  glory  of  Basle  in  our  day  is  its  *^  MissiiMis-
Institute,"  or,  as  we  should  call  it,  its  Missicmary
Seminary ;  from  which  its  Missionary  Society  is  not
to  be  dissevered,  for  they  are  inseparably  united.
Let  us  enter  into  a  few  details  in  relation  to  their
origin.

In  the  month  of  March,  1815,  Bonaparte,  having
escaped  from  his  island-prison,  landed  on  the  French
shores,  and  speedily  arrived  at  Paris,  and  seized  a
second  time  the  throne  of  the  Bourbons.  In  a  few
weeks  all  Europe  was  in  arms,  and  eleven  hundred
thousand  men  were  on  their  way  to  France.  Of  this
vast  invading  force,  a  large  army  of  Russians  and
Austrians,  under  the  command  of  the  Archduke  John,
brother  of  the  then  reigning  emperor  of  Austria,  hav-
ing crossed  Germany,  arrived  on  the  banks  of  the
Rhine  near  Basle.  A  powerful,  but  inferior,  French
force  occupied  the  strong  fortress  of  Huningen,  on
the  frontier  of  France,  at  the  distance  of  but  little
more  than  a  mile  and  a  half  from  that  city.  The
archduke  speedily  took  possession  of  the  portion  of
the  city  north  of  the  Rhine,  and  prepared  to  cross
the  bridge  which  unites  it  to  the  southern  and  larger
part.  The  French  commandant,  fully  aware  of  the
advantage  which  the  possession  of  that  point  would
give  the  invaders,  prepared  to  prevent  this  by  a  heavy


INSTITUTE  OF  BA8LB.  291

canncmade.  At  that  critical  and  awfiil  moment,  when
the  inhabitants  of  Basle  beheld  themselves  on  the
point  of  being  placed  between  two  fires,  and  a  prey
to  both,  the  magistrates  hastened  to  the  Austrian
conmiander,  and  told  him  that  if  the  battle  should  go
on,  their  city  (which  was  entirely  a  neutral  one)
would  be  ruined.  To  his  everlasting  honor,  the
archduke  ordered  the  incipient  firing  to  cease,  march-
ed his  forces  up  the  Rhine,  crossed  that  river  a  few
miles  above,  and  came  down  upon  the  French  firom
the  south.  This  movement  led  the  French  general
to  change  his  position  also ;  and  so  Basle  escaped
destruction.

All  this  occurred  in  the  morning.  The  good  peo-
ple of  the  city,  seeing  the  wonderful  interposition  of
Divine  Providence  for  their  salvation,  flocked  to  their
churches,  and  ofiered  up  their  thanksgivings  to  God
for  this  gracious  interference  in  their  behalf.  This
done,  the  inquiry  arose  in  many  hearts,  "  What  shall
we  do  to  testify  our  gratitude  to  the  Lord  in  an
abiding  manner,  for  this  signal  instance  of  his  merciful
intervention  ?  What  monument  shall  we  erect  to
commemorate  this  blessed  deliverance  ?"  Some  pro-
posed one  thing,  some  another.  At  length  it  was
suggested  that  it  would  be  well  to  found  a  school  in
which  pious  missionaries  might  be  trained,  who
should  go  into  Russia  and  teach  the  poor  ignorant
Cossacks,  thousands  of  whom  had  just  passed  by  their
city,  in  the  ranks  of  the  invading  army.    This  propo-


292  MISSIONARY  MXMORIAL.

sition  was  favorably  received  by  all,  and  instantly
the  work  was  entered  upon.

In  a  few  months  a  seminary  was  opened,  and  sev-
eral pious  young  men  were  engaged  in  the  prosecu-
tion of  their  studies  for  the  ministry.  Soon  the  ideas
of  its  excellent  founders  took  a  wider  extension,  and
they  began  to  think  of  training  up  missionaries  of  the
Cross,  not  only  for  Southern  Russia,  but  for  all  other
portions  of  the  unevangeUzed  world  where  the  Lord
might  deign  to  employ  them.  And  contemporane-
ously with  the  rise  of  this  blessed  Missionary  Insti-
tute, arose  the  Basle  Missionary  Society,  to  employ
those  who  had  become  trained  for  the  enterprise  of
carrying  the  Gospel  to  the  destitute.  Such  was  the
origin  of  both  these  excellent  institutions,  which  have
been  already  so  rich  a  blessing  to  the  world.

The  first  young  men  who  left  the  Institute  finished
their  studies  in  the  summer  of  1818.  Since  that
time,  that  is  to  say,  within  the  last  twenty-seven
years,  more  than  two  hundred  'ministers  of  the  Gos-
pel have  left  its  sacred  walls,  to  carry  the  glorious
Gospel  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe ;  of  whom
about  one  hundred  and  sixty  are  still  alive,  and  near-
ly one  hundred  and  thirty  are  laboring  in  heathen
lands ;  the  rest  are  preaching  Christ  within  the  pale
of  Christendom.  And  whilst  many  of  these  heralds
of  salvation  have  been  supported  on  the  field  by  the
Basle  Missionary  Society,  a  greater  number,  per-
haps, have  been  employed  by  other  societies.    Many


INSTITUTS  OF  BASLE.  393

have  gone  forth  in  the  service  of  the  Church  Mis-
sionary Society  of  England ;  and  a  number  in  that
of  the  London  Missionary  Society.

Ahnost  all  the  young  men  who  have  prosecuted
their  studies  in  the  Institute  at  Basle/have  been  from
the  Germanic  Cantons  of  Switzerland,  and  the  ad-
joining Ungdoms  of  Wurtemburg  and  Bavaria,  and
the  Grand  Duchy  of  Baden.  In  very  many  cases,
they  have  been  poor  young  men,  taken  from  the
plough  or  the  workshop,  and  have  had  almost  every
thing  to  learn  after  they  entered  its  walls.  This  has
required  that  several  teachers  should,  vdth  great  pa-
tience, devote  themselves  to  the  task  of  cultivating
minds,  which  in  most  cases  were  very  rud?,  and  often
sluggish  and  unpromising,  especially  in  the  beginning.
But  God  has  abundantly  blessed  the  labor  of  these
devoted  teachers  and  professors :  for  they  have  had
the  pleasure  of  seeing  many  of  those  who  came  into
their  hands  as  rough  stones,  leave  them  fashioned
like  the  polished  marble,  or  rather  like  the  sparkling
diamond.  The  number  of  students,  we  may  remark,
at  this  seminary,  for  a  number  of  years  past,  has  sel-
dom varied  much  from  forty.  It  would  be  greater  if
the  necessary  means  existed  for  their  support.

For  many  yekrs,  the  late  excellent  Dr.  Blumhardt
presided  over  this  Seminary,  gave  instruction  in  The-
ology and  Church  History,  fulfilled  the  duties  of  Cor-
responding Secretary  of  the  Missionary  Society,  and
conducted  an  admirable  missionary  periodical.    But

25*


2M  MI88I0NAKT  MBMORIAL.

in  the  year  1838,  it  pleased  the  great  Head  of  the
Church  to  call  him  to  his  blessed  inheritance  in  a
higher  world.  We  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  this
humble  and  devoted  servant  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the
summer  of  1835,  and  never  can  we  forget  the  sim-
plicity and  child-like  humility  of  his  appearance  and
manners,  nor  the  spirituality  and  fervor  of  his  con-
versation, so  eminently  becoming  a  minister  of  Jesus
Christ,  so  consistent  with  the  high  and  responsible
post  which  he  occupied,  and  so  largely  partaking  of
what  we  may  well  believe  to  be  the  spirit  of  heaven.
We  may  add  that,  in  the  midst  of  his  multitudinous
and  multifarious  employments,  as  head  of  the  Insti-
tute and  Secretary  of  the  Soeiety,  Dr.  Blumhafdt
found  time  to  write  several  valuable  works,  one  of
which  was  his  popular  History  of  the  Christian
Church,  in  several  volumes,  which,  whilst  it  makes
no  pretensions  to  the  profound  research  of  Neander,
is  sufficiently  learned  for  common  use,  and  bears  on
every  page  the  impress  of  a  mind  richly  imbued
with  the  true  Gospel.

Since  the  death  of  Dr.  Blumhardt,  his  station  has
been  well  filled  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Hoffinann,  the  pre-
sent Inspector,  as  he  is  called,  of  the  Seminary.  Dr.
Hoffinann  was  called,  we  believe,  from  Wurtemburg,
and  was  educated  at  the  University  of  Tubingen.
He  is  one  of  the  ablest  of  the  evangelical  German
theologians.  Nowhere  in  all  Europe,  probably,  is
instruction  in  the  doctrines  and  institutions  of  Chris-


INSTITUTE  OF  BASLE.  295

tianity  more  ably  imparted  than  by  this  distinguished
man ;  and  we  are  happy  to  say,  that  his  piety  and
humility  are  as  profound  as  his  learning  and  talents
are  vast.  -Dr.  Hoffmann  is  well  known  on  the  con-
tinent as  an  author,  as  well  as  a  teacher.  He  is  yet
in  his  prime,  having  scarcely  reached  the  age  of  forty-
five,  if  we  judged  rightly  from  his  appearance,  when
we  saw  him  in  1842.

The  missionaries  who  have  been  trained  in  the
Institute  in  Basle,  have  literally  gone  forth  into  each
of  the  great  quarters  of  the  globe.  Some  are  toiling
at  various  points  in  Asia ;  others  are  laboring  beneath
the  burning  suns  of  Afiica.  Some  are  preaching
Christ  on  our  own  continent ;  whilst  a  few  have  seen
it  to  be  their  duty,  either  from  want  of  health,  or  for
other  causes,  to  remain  in  Europe.  Not  a  few  have
entered  into  rest ;  whilst  a  goodly  number  are  still
fighting  the  good  fight,  with  the  eye  of  faith  intently
fixed  on  the  crown  of  life  which  the  great  Captain
of  our  salvation  holds  up  to  their  view.

Some  of  those  who  have  gone  forth  from  this  ex-
cellent seminary  have  attained  to  great  distinction.
We  can  mention,  however,  but  two  of  them.  One
is  Gobat,  a  native  of  the  Canton  of  Berne,  .who  spent
several  years  of  successful  labor  in  Abyssinia,  and
is  now,  with  health  greatly  impaired,  prosecuting  the
missionary  work  in  the  island  of  Malta,  in  the  ser-
vice of  the  Chufch  Missionary  Society  of  England.
He  is  a  wonderful  man.    Indeed,  we  doubt  very


296  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

much  if  he  is  at  all  inferior  to  the  eminently  pious
and  deyoted  Henry  Martyn.  Their  minds  and  spirit
were  wondrously  similar.  Gobat  is  acquainted  with
more  languages  than  Martyn  was ;  whilst  in  point,  of
knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  and  a  calm,  profound
judgment,  he  is  not  his  inferior.  It  is  greatly  to  be
rogretted,  that  his  admirable  Missionary  Journal,  con^
taining  notices  of  his  residence  and  labors  in  Abys-
sinia,* is  so  little  known  in  this  country.  We  have
never  read  a  work  with  more  profit.  It  displays  so
calm  and  sweet  a  spirit,  so  discriminating  a  judgment,
and  such  an  admirable  tact,  that  it  is  impossible  f<^
any  Christian,  especially  for  any  pastor  or  missionary,
to  read  it  without  being  benefited.

The  other  is  Lacroix,  who  has  been  laboring  more
than  twenty-five  years  in  India,  in  the  employment
of  the  London  Missionary  Society.  He  is  a  man  of
admirable  talents  and  spirit.  Few  men  in  India  are
his  equals.  We  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  much  of
him,  in  the  summer  and  autumn  of  1842,  during  a
visit  which  he  made  to  his  native  Switzerland.!  At
that  time  we  were  residing  in  Geneva.     In  the  month

*  This  wojrk  has  been  published  in  England,  Germany,  and
France ;  the  best  edition  is  the  French,  entitled,  "  Un  SSjour  en
Ahyssinie."  A  better  work  by  far  than  any  of  these  might  *be
made  out  of  them  all,  by  judicious  selection,  retrenchment  and  ad-
dition.

t  Mr.  Lacroix  was  bom  in  the  Canton  ol^  Neuch&tel,  we  be-
Ueye.


INSTITUTE  OP  BASLE.  297

of  October,  of  that  year,  Mr.  Lacroix,  at  the  invita-
tion of  many  distinguished  Christians,  came  to  that
city,  and  delivered  eight  able  and  eloquent  discourses
on  the  subject  of  missions,  to  crowded  assemblies,
composed  for  the  greater  part  of  the  most  influential
people,  evangelical  and  imevangelical,  of  that  place.
Never  have  we  heard  the  whole  subject  of  spreading
the  Gospel  throughout  the  world,  discussed  in  a  more
masterly  manner.  In  particular,  the  history  of  India,
its  present  state,  its  dark  theogony,  its  cruel  rites,  its
degrading  superstitions,  its  castes,  the  genius  of  its
inhabitants,  the  obstacles  in  it,  which  hinder,  if  they
do  not  prevent,  the  difiusion  of  the  truth,  were  all
unfolded  and  discussed  by  a  man  whose  eloquence
was  as  commanding  as  his  person  was  noble.  Never
had  such  things  been  heard  in  that  city,  once  denom-
inated the  "  Rome  of  Protestants,"  but  now,  and  for
a  long  time,  filled  with  a  sect  who  have  abandoned
every  thing  which  constitutes  the  highest  glory  of
Christianity.  The  first  seven  of  these  discourses
were  pronounced  in  the  Casino,  a  large  building
erected  for  popular  entertainments,  and  which  will
hold  about  a  thousand  people.  But  so  great  became
the  crowd,  and  so  overwhelming  the  desire  to  hear
him,  that  the  "  Venerable  Company  of  Pastors,"  who
have  the  control  of  all  the  churches  of  the  state,  which
are  the  only  large  ones  in  the  city  and  canton,  were
compelled  to  open  the  "  Madeleine,"  one  of  the
largest,  where,  on  a  Sabbath  afternoon,  three  thou-


896  MI88I0NAKT  MSMORIAL.

sand  people  and  more  heard,  for  two  hours,  the  last
of  these  wonderful  addresses.  With  astonished  feel-
ings, multitudes  retired,  saying  one  to  another:  ''We
nerer  heard  such  things  before.  We  neyer  knew
that  the  missicmary  enterprise  is  such  a  glorious  af-
&ir,  or  that  it  allies  itself  so  intimately  to  every  thing
that  is  calculated  to  elerate  and  purify  hunmnity.
Why  do  not  our  pastors  preach  in  this  way?^

Nor,  whUst  memory  lasts,  shall  we  cease  to  re-
trace the  scenes  in  which  we  were  permitted  to  share
during  seyeral  happy  eyenings  passed  in  the  company
of  this  honored  servant  of  God,  at  the  houses  of
seyeral  eminent  Christians  of  Geneva  and  its  imme-
diate vicinity.  One  of  them  was  that  of  the  cele-
brated Professor  Merle  d'Aubign6,  known  through-
out the  Protestant  world  by  his  inimitable  "  History
of  the  Reformation  in  the  Sixteenth  Century y^  for
the  completion  of  which  so  many  hearts  are  longing.
On  that  occasion,  a  large  number  of  pastors,  students,
and  ladies,  listened  for  hours  to  the  remarks,  and  an-
swers to  innumerable  inquiries,  touching  the  work
of  missions  in  India,  made  by  this  admirable  man.
Nothing  could  be  more  graphic,  or  more  interesting,
than  his  account  of  the  Brahmin  philosophy  and
theology,  and  of  the  modes  by  which  truth  must  be
propagated  on  the  plains  of  Hindostan, — ^in  conversa-
tion, rather  than  in  preaching ;  amid  small  groups,
tather  than  in  large  congregations;  and  beneath
some  wide-spreading  tree,  rather  than  in  any  house


INSTITUTE  OF  BASLE.  299

erected  for  the  purpose.  And  among  his  numerous
and  delighted  hearers,  none  seemed  so  richly  to  en-
joy the  festival,  if  we  may  so  call  this  charming
soiree,  as  the  distinguished  host  himself.

Another  of  those  sweet  evenings,  so  pleasant  to
recall,  was  passed  at  the  house  of  Pastor  Barde,  one
of  the  few  who  are  "  faithful  found"  among  the  faith-
less "  Company  of  Pastors"  of  Geneva.  There,  sur-
rounded by  some  sixty  or  eighty  ministers  and  lay-
men, this  beloved  missionary  imparted  much  infor-
mation respecting  that  distant  east  in  which  he  had
passed  so  many  years.  Towards  the  close  of  the
eveping,  a  distinguished  professor  in  the  new  School
of  Theology,  ventured  to  ask  Mr.  Lacroix  to  give  his
brethren  some  parting  counsels,  if  not  in  the  charac-
ter "  d^un  p^e,"  (of  a  father,)  which  he  feared  his
modesty  would  not  permit  him  to  do,  at  least  "  en
fr^e  ainiy^^  (as  an  elder  brother.)  But  he  declined,
with  most  unaffected  humility,  to  say  even  as  "  an
elder  brother,"  more  than  a  few  words,  but  preferred
to  ask  their  advice  and  their  prayers  on  his  own  behalf !
Excellent  and  beloved  man  !  He  has  long  sincoire-
tumed  to  his  work  on  the  scorching  banks  of  the
Ganges,  not  far  from  where  that  great  river  rolls  its
floods  by  the  walls  of  the  widely-spreading  city  of
Calcutta,  with  its  myriads  of  heathen  inhabitants.
There,  or  wherever  else  it  may  please  the  Master  to
appoint,  may  he  long  be  permitted  to  live  and  labor
for  the  salvation  of  a  race  perishing  in  their  sins  \


300  MISBIONART  MBMORIAL.

But  it  in  time  to  bring  this  article  to  a  close,  which
we  shall  do  with  a  remark  or  two.

On  what  side  soever  we  view  the  resuscitation  of
evangehcal  religion  among  the  Protestants  of  the
continent  of  Europe,  its  importance  appears  im-
measurable. A  Uttle  progress  has  been  made  dur-
ing the  last  twenty-five  or  thirty  years,  and  behold
one  of  its  blessed  fruits  in  the  establishment  of  the
*'  Missionary  Institutes"  of  Paris,  Basle,  Berlin,  Bre-
men, and  Hamburg,  at  which  more  than  one  himdred
young, men  are  preparing  to  carry  the  Gospel  of
Christ  to  the  perishing  heathen !

It  is  a  peculiarity  of  most  of  the  Protestant  coun-
tries on  the  continent,  that  the  Church  being  intimate-
ly united  with  the  State,  the  governments,  from  econo-
mical considerations,  will  not  allow  new  parishes  to
be  formed,  or  even  churches  to  be  erected,  although
those  that  exist  are  in  many  cases  wholly  insufficient
for  the  population.  The  consequence  will  be,  that
as  there  are  always  more  than  enough  of  candidates
for  the  vacancies  which  death  from  time  to  time
creates,  many  of  those  in  whose  hearts  the  revival
to  true  Christianity  will  implant  a  desire  to  preach
the  Gospel  will  be  compelled  to  go  forth  to  other
lands.  In  this  way,  He  that  "  sits  King  in  Zion,'
and  whose  resources  are  infinite,  is  overruling,  and
will  overrule,  both  the  wicked  devices  and  the  mis-
takes of  His  enemies  and  friends,  for  the  fur-
therance of  His  kingdom.     In  this,  let  us  rejoice.


rNSTITUTE  OF  BASLE.  301

and  find  encouragement  to  "  hope"  even  "  against
hope."

How  important  it  is  that  every  true  Protestant,  live
in  what  country  he  may,  should  daily  labor  and  pray
for  the  regeneration  of  Protestant  Christendom !
Even  abeady  we  begin  to  see  the  happy  conse-
quences of  the  very  partial  revival  of  pure  Christian-
ity which  has  taken  place  in  some  of  the  Protestant
countries  in  Europe.  The  missionary  seminaries  to
which  we  have  referred,  are  delectable  little  fountains
which  have  sprung  up,  and  whose  rills  are  flowing
forth  to  bless  the  world.  But  when  the  evangeUcal
religion  shall  have  taken  possession  of  all  the  Prot-
estant churches  throughout  Europe  and  the  world,
then  similar  streams  will  gush  forth  from  ten  thou-
sand fountains,  and  roll,  not  rills,  but  rivers  of  heav-
enly influence  abroad  upon  the  barren  plains  of  Ro-
manism, Heathenism,  Mohammedanism,  and  Judaism.
Yea,  the  great  deep  will  be  broken  up,  and  the  whole
earth  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God,
as  the  waters  fill  the  seas.  That  this  blessed  day
may  soon  come,  let  the  reader  earnestly  pray  andtm-
weariedly  labor.  And  important  as  is  the  spread  of
the  Gospel  among  the  unevangeUzed  nations  of  the
earth,  not  less  so  is  the  regeneration  of  Christendom.
Both  will,  we  doubt  not,  go  on  simultaneously,  and

perhaps  ^^ pari  passu.''*

26


<ti)e  tfoptiDt.


BT    BPBS    8AROBNT.


**  There  Is  no  danger  con  befall  the  man
Who  knows  what  life  and  death  is.**

CHAPKiJI.


"  Rise  from  thy  dungeon  floor !

Captive  !  thy  hour  is  nigh  :
Look  on  the  rising  sun  once  more,

And  then  prepare  to  die  !
Is  not  the  green  earth  fair  ?

The  morning  gale,  how  sweet !
With  spring's  first  odors  in  the  air,

Her  blossoms  at  our  feet !

"  Captive  !  gaze  well  around —

Wouldst  leave  this  cheerful  light.
This  world,  where  joys  and  charms  abound,

For  death's  perpetual  night  ?
Listen  !  a  word,  a  sign.

That  thou  abjur'st  thy  creed,
Life,  riches,  honors — all  are  thine  !

Ha  !  wilt  thou  now  be  freed  ?"


THE  CAPTIVE.

The  captive  gazed,  and  said :

"  O,  lovely  is  the  light,
And  fairer  scenes  were  never  spread

Beneath  my  waking  sight !
And  fragrant  is  the  breath

Of  this  reviving  breeze —
But  O  !  more  fair  than  all,  is  death,

To  him,  whose  spirit  sees  !

"  For  that  is  Ufe  indeed.

Which  heeds  not  space  and  time.
And  freedom  where  no  bonds  impede

The  spirit's  course  sublime  !
O,  speed  me  to  that  goal

Beneath  that  brighter  sky  !
Death  cannot  daunt  th'  immortal  soul —

Brother  !  lead  on,  to  die  !"


303


BT  EBT.  LBTl  UPAVLDtSB.

Cbtlon,  June,  1844.
My  Dear  Friend —

Had  you  been  with  us,  I  am  sure  you  would  have
been  dehghted  with  the  last  few  days  of  our  journey.
As  we  neared  the  island  of  Ceylon,  which  is  about
two  hundred  and  eighty  miles  long  by  one  hundred
and  seventy  broad,  Adams'  Peak,  among  smaller
mountains  on  a  table-land,  rising  to  about  seven
thousand  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  arrested  our
attention.  The  belt  around  the  whole  island,  except-
ing the  southeast  part,  is  low  and  flat,  and  covered
with  cocoanut,  Palmyra,  and  other  trees,  with  a  great
variety  of  shrubbery  and  plants,  whose  blossoms
spread  a  perennial  beauty  and  fragrance.  East  and
south  of  Columbo,  the  English  capital  of  the  isl-
and, the  cinnamon  gardens  extend  about  five  miles
over  a  light,  sandy,  and  level  surface.  There  are
regularly  laid  out  and  macadamized  roads,  intersect-
ing each  other  in  various  directions,  and  are  exceed-
ingly pleasant  and  inviting  for  an  early  morning  or
evening  drive.     As  you  rise  from  this  belt  you  come


LETTER  FROM  DR.  SPAULDING.         305

into  the  Kandian  country,  which  is  a  table-land  about
sixty  by  fifty  miles  in  extent.  Here  you  see  the  ex-
tensive cofFee-plantations,  which  the  wealth  and  en-
ergy of  English  planters  and  the  muscle  of  native
workmen  have  caused  to  spring  up  within  the  last
ten  or  fifteen  years  out  of  the  dense  jungle  and  for-
est, so  that  coffee  is  now  one  of  the  principal  articles
of  exportation.*  After  a  few  calls  on  some  of  the
English  residents,  who  are  princes  in  the  land,  and
looking  into  several  government  and  mission  schools,
we  took  our  leave  of  Columbo  and  travelled  north-
ward, some  in  palankeens, — the  oriental  mode  of
travelling, — and  some  on  horses,  which  are  imported
from  the  neighboring  continent,  and  brought  there
from  Aribia,  Pegu,  or  Acheen.  We  took  the  old
road  instead  of  the  one  lately  prepared  by  govern-
ment, which  they  call  "  macadamized,"  and  were
pleased  to  find  rest-houses,  or  houses  for  the  accom-
modation of  travellers,  at  convenient  distances,  where
we  spent  the  hottest  part  of  the  day,  and  found  a
quiet  and  safe  place  of  rest  for  the  night.  In  the
jungle  and  forest  through  which  we  passed,  it  is  not
uncommon  to  see  elephants,  buffaloes,  bears,  deer,
wild-hogs,  peacocks,  wild-fowl,  and  sometimes  the
cheater.     One  hundred  and  fifty  miles  brought  us  to

*  The  exports  from  the  island  are  cinnamon,  cofFee,  pepper,  co-
coanut-oil,  tobacco,  salt,  kiar-cordage,  elephant's  teeth  and  tusks,
deer's  horns,  tortoise-shells,  Palmyra  timber,  ebony,  satin-wood,
&c.  &c.

26*


306  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Condachy,  remarkable  only  for  its  extensiye  pearl-
fisheries,  where  sometimes  two  or  even  three  thou-
sand boats  are  engaged  in  bringing  the  oysters  firom
the  banks,  where  they  are  brought  up  by  the  divers
from  a  depth  of  about  ten  fathoms.  As  we  proceed-
ed northward  we  soon  came  to  Manaar,  which  near-
ly a  thousand  years  ago  was  the  emporium  of  Mo-
hammedan commerce  with  Bussora,  Bagdad,  Egypt,
and  Spain ;  and  before  the  Christian  era,  and  even
in  the  days  of  Solomon,  probably  the  Jewish  depot
for  Indian  and  Chinese  merchandise.

Thence  we  came  on  to  the  district  or  province  of
Jaffna,  which  is  almost  entirely  level,  and  but  little
elevated  above  the  surrounding  ocean.  The  soil,
however,  is  good  and  well  cultivated,  producing  rice,
several  kinds  of  dry  grain,  tobacco,  hemp,  and  a  va-
riety of  fruits,  such  as  the  jack,  mango,  plantain,
pineapple,  orange,  lime,  &c.  &c.,  in  abundance.  We
went  directly  to  the  Cutchery,  (principal  government
residence,)  where  we  were  introduced  to  the  govern-
ment agent,  P.  Dyke,  Esq.,  a  very  active  and  intelli-
gent man,  under  whose  administration  the  province
within  the  past  fifteen  years  has  been  greatly  im-
proved. After  a  pleasant  conversation  of  half  an
hour,  he  mvited  us  to  take  a  walk  in  the  gardens.
Here  the  exact  regularity  of  plan,  as  well  as  the  great
variety  of  the  grape,  flower-shrubs,  fruit-trees,  and
plants  which  he  has  collected  from  England,  Ameri-
ca, the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  Isle  of  France,  Siam,


LETTER  FROM  DR.  SPAULDING.        307

and  the  Eastern  islands,  shows  that  he  has  the  well-
balanced  and  cultivated  taste  of  old  England  for  the
beautiful  in  gardening,  as  well  as  for  the  useful  in
government.  The  next  day  we  took  bandies  (car-
riages) and  visited' the  Church  Missionary  stations  at
Nellore  and  Chundiculy,  where  we  were  much  grat-
ified with  the  progress  made  in  the  education  of  the
natives,  both  male  and  female,  as  well  as  with  the
enlightened  and  liberal  views  of  the  missionaries
themselves.  Our  next  call  was  on  the  Wesleyan
missionaries  in  the  town  of  Jaffna,  whose  efficient
labors  in  preaching,  and  in  a  central  day-school  for  all
classes,  have  been  very  successful,  and  are  worthy  of
high  commendation.

After  these  calls  we  spent  several  days  in  visiting
the  stations  in  the  country  occupied  by  the  American
missionaries.  At  Manepy  they  have  a  very  efficient
printing  establishment  and  bindery,  the  only  one  in
the  province,  where  school-books,  tracts,  and  por-
tions of  the  Bible  are  prepared  for  the  village,  cen-
tral, and  higher  schools  and  seminaries,  both  in  the
native  Tamul  and  the  English  languages.  Here,  too,
"  The  Morning  Star,"  (a  small  weekly  paper  of
twelve  or  sixteen  pages,  in  both  languages,  and  the
first  of  the  kind  ever  pubUshed  in  the  island  for  gen-
eral reading,)  is  attracting  the  notice  of  both  natives
and  European  descendants,  and  promises  to  be  a
bright  harbinger  of  rising  literature,  science,  and
Christianity  in  this  isle  of  the  ocean.    About  seventy


308  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

native  workmen,  under  the  supervision  of  a  mission-
ary, arc  here  commencing  that  art  which  now  fills
England  and  America  with  light  and  life.

We  next  passed  on  to  the  seminary  at  Batticotta,
which  is  a  boarding  establishment  at  the  expense  of
the  mission,  where  from  one  hundred  and  twenty  to
one  hundred  and  seventy  Tamul  youth  are  emulating
each  other,  and,  I  might  almost  say,  the  missionaries
too,  in  the  study  of  European  litei-ature  and  science.
We  were  surprised  and  delighted  to  see  how  well
and  readily  these  lads  read,  dissected,  and  spoke  the
English  language,  and  how  accurately  as  well  as
promptly  they  solved  a  proposition  in  Euclid,  or  a
problem  in  simple  or  Quadratic  Equations  on  the  black-
board ;  and  how  accurately  they  would  give  a  geo-
graphical outline  either  of  a  country  or  of  a  nation  ;
while  the  higher  classes,  I  think,  would  not  fail  in
comparison  with  the  young  men  in  our  own  favored
colleges,  whether  in  logic,  natural  philosophy,  or  as-
tronomy. Thus  the  beauties  and  rich  varieties  of
an  English  library  are  thrown  open  at  once  to  the
native  mind,  and  he  is  seen  walking  in  a  new  world,
breathing  a  new  atmosphere,  cured  of  his  blindness,
clothed,  and  in  his  right  mind.  As  I  meditated  on
the  one  hundred  and  thirty  millions  of  British  India
thus  merging  from  the  darkness  of  heathen  idolatry
and  heathen  bondage  into  Christian  light  and  life,  my
heart  grew  warm  with  gratitude,  and  I  sighed  for  the
hastening  chariot-wheels  of  our  Leader.


LETTER  FROM  DR.  SPAULDING.        309

We  hdd  long  conversations,  too,  with  the  native
teachers  and  others,  (most  of  whom  give  evidence
of  a  change  of  heart,  and  belong  to  the  church,)
which  showed  a  degree  of  mental  cultivation,  of  ori-
ental politeness,  and  of  Christian  principle,  which
gave  us  a  delightful  impression  of  the  labors  and  pa-
tience of  those  devoted  men,  and  I  ought  to  add,  la-
dies, too,  for  I  confess  that  I  thought  them  not  the
least  in  this  work  of  self-denial,  love,  and  labor.

After  a  plain  but  well-prepared  dinner,  which  was
made  doubly  acceptable  by  a*  cheerful  conversation
about  Old  and  New  England,  and  the  progress,  the
prospects,  and  the  responsibilities  of  these  two  great
nations,  "we  took  up  our  carriages,"  and  went  to
Oodooville,  the  central  station  of  the  Americans,
where  we  understand  they  always  keep  a  couch  and
lodgings  for  strangers.  The  mild  and  pleasant  even-
ing, (the  thermometer  standing  at  75°,)  and  the
bright,  clear,  and  full  moon,  held  out  strong  tempta-
tions to  a  promenade,  but  weariness  decided  for  re-
tirement, though  the  sound  of  reading  in  the  Bible,
the  voice  of  prayer,  and  the  singing  of  spiritual  songs
among  the  pupils  in  the  other  part  of  the  garden,  held
our  eyes  and  our  hearts  waking  till  a  late  hour.  Af-
ter a  refreshing  rest  we  were  awakened  by  the  ring-
ing of  the  bell  for  prayers,  just  as  the  sun  was  rising
above  the  horizon,  which  at  this  season,  you  know,
passes  far  to  the  north  of  us,  our  latitude  being  only
9**  50'.


310  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Wc  soon  found  ourselves  ivalking  in  the  neat  and
well-planned  little  garden,  where  roses  of  several
kinds,  the  oleander,  jasmine  of  different  species,  and
a  variety  of  other  oriental  flower-shrubs  were  vpng
with  each  other  in  luxuriant  growth,  beauty,  and  fra-
grance. The  uncultivated  parts  of  the  garden,  as  at
other  stations,  are  variegated  with  margora,  jack,
mango,  cocoanut,  and  other  large  trees,  so  as  to  de-
fend the  inmates  from  the  heat  of  the  mid-day  sun,
and  give  a  cooling  shade  to  the  whole  premises.
After  family  devotions  and  a  light  breakfast,  we
were  reminded  that  it  was  half-past  nine  o'clock,  and
that  the  school  was  in  waiting  for  us.

Our  walk  to  the  school  was  under  the  shade  of  the
tall  cocoanut-trees ;  and  the  whole  surface  of  that
part  of  the  garden  occupied  by  the  school  was  grass-
less,  and  swept  as  clean  as  the  white-sanded  parlors
of  our  old  Puritan  grandmothers.  We  were  not
prepared  to  see  one  hundred  girls,  from  eight  to
eighteen  years  of  age,  dressed  so  neatly  in  pure
white  robes,  (for  the  native  dress  is  much  more  like
flowing  robes  than  ours,)  and  so  orderly  and  modest
in  their  appearance.  Their  complexion  varies  from
a  light  olive  to  a  dark  mahogany, — ^black,  sparkling
eyes,  long,  black,  and  thick  hair,  neatly  and  smooth-
ly combed  back,  twisted  and  fastened  with  silver
pins, — their  regular  European  features  verging  nei-
ther to  China  nor  Africa, — their  intellectual  counte-
nances, with  straight  and  well-defined  figures,  adorn-


LETTER  FROM  DR.  SPAULDING.        311

ed  with  two  or  three  strings  of  small  gold  beads
around  the  neck,  and  with  silver  bracelets  on  the
wrists, — were  much  above  our  anticipations.  As
class  after  class  passed  before  us,  we  were  highly
delighted  with  their  quick  discernment,  (though  their
knowledge  of  the  English  language  is  far  short  of
that  in  the  seminary  at  Batticotta,)  and  with  their
ready  answers  in  English,  both  in  arithmetic,  gram-
mar, and  geography,  as  well  as  in  Bible  history  and
Christian  experience.

Their  penmanship  in  English  is  round,  plain,  and
neat,  while  some  of  their  Tamul  writing  is  regular,
and  finished  as  type  itself.  The  whole  school  stood
up,  and  sung  several  Tamul  and  English  hymns  to
our  old  standard  tunes,  by  which  they  showed  a  good
ear  and  some  taste  for  music.

The  missionary  ladies  brought  us  some  specimens
of  their  common  sewing  and  fancy  needle-work,
which  were  really  very  well  done.  They  spend  each
afternoon  in  this  part  of  their  education,  and  two  or
three,  in  rotation,  from  each  class,  assist  in  cooking
and  in  other  domestic  duties  connected  with  the
school.  About  thirty  of  them  belong  to  the  church.
Of  the  seventy  or  more  who,  on  their  marriage,  have
left  the  school,  only  two  or  three  have  left  without
giving  a  good  evidence  of  a  change  of  heart,  and  not
more  than  that  number  have  disappointed  the  hopes
of  the  missionanes  in  reference  to  their  decided
Christian  character  after  their  marriage  and  settle-


312  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

mcnt  in  the  villages.  These  Christian  families,
whose  parents  were  educated  at  Batticotta  and  at
OodooTillc,  where  the  children  are  trained  up  in
Christian  habits  and  in  the  fear  of  God,  are  rapidly
multiplying  in  the  land  and  have  a  most  happy  in-
fluence.

We  next  passed  on  to  Fillipally,  where  we  saw
nearly  four  hundred  children  from  the  village  schools
all  arranged  in  classes  according  to  their  progress,
and  each  class  under  the  care  and  instruction  of  a
monitor.  After  having  recited  their  catechisms,
Scripture  history,  and  Bible  lessons,  they  were  all
seated  in  rows  across  the  church,  on  mats,  and  list-
ened about  twenty  minutes  to  an  exhortation  of  the
missionary.  The  children  (of  whom  nearly  half
were  females)  seemed  much  interested  and  very
happy.  The  next  day  we  crossed  over  the  district
to  what  they  call  "  the  other  side  of  the  river,"  (a
small  and  shallow  arm  of  the  sea  which  runs  quite
through  this  part  of  the  province,)  and  spent  a  day
at  Varany  and  Chavacherry  in  much  the  same  way
in  which  we  had  spent  the  preceding  at  Oodooville
and  Fillipally.  We  took  some  pains  to  understand
their  system  of  village  and  central  schools,  in  which
some  four  thousand  children  are  under  daily  instruc-
tion.  The  course  is  purely  Biblical,  commencing
with  the  smaller  catechism  and  with  the  alphabet  at
the  same  time,  much  after  the  plan  of  our  Sunday-
schools  and  Bible-classes,  thus  carrying  along   in


LETTER  FROM  DR.  SPAULDING.        313

parallel  lines,  both  the  literary  and  Biblical  depart-
ments, until  the  child  can  not  only  read  and  write  the
Tamal  language,  but  until  he  has  a  good  knowledge
both  of  the  history  and  of  the  text  of  the  Bible.  This
system  is  common  to  all  the  missionaries,  whether
church,  Wesleyan,  London,  or  American,  both  in  the
Jaffna  province  and  on  the  neighboring  continent,  and
is  carried  as  far  as  the  missionaries  are  able  to  ex-
tend their  own  personal  labors,  or  as  far  as  the
churches  in  England  and  America  will  contribute
funds  to  carry  it  on  by  native  agency.  In  view  of
this  department  of  missionary  enterprise,  which  is  of
late  gradually  gaining  popularity  among  the  females,
as  well  as  among  the  males, — in  view  of  the  trifling
expense  of  education,  which  amounts  to  only  about
one  dollar  and  twenty-flve  cents,  or  one  dollar  a  year
for  each  child, — and  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  lan-
guage conveys  heathenish  and  idolatrous  meanings,
and  that  the  children  and  people,  too,  must  be  taught
a  Christian  meaning  to  each  word,  and  have  Chris-
tian thoughts  before  they  can  have  Christian  hearts,
and  that  nothing  short  of  this  is  implied  in  preaching
the  Gospel,  we  could  not  help  sighing  for  a  larger
amount  of  funds,  and  for  more  laborers  to  carry  on
this  efficient  system  of  Biblical  education,  which  is
fast  blotting  out  the  heathenism  and  idolatry  of  south-
ern India,  and  filling  the  land  with  Christian  senti-
ments and  Christian  hearts.

As  we  left  this  province  we  could  not  help  repeat

27


314  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

ing  to  each  other  what  Bishop  Turner  said  when  he
Tisited  this  place — "  Surely  this  is  the  Goshen  of
missions  in  India.''  It  certainly  is  a  goodly  land.
The  government  of  the  island  is  liberal  in  the  cause
of  education,  shows  much  kindness  and  impartiality
towards  missionaries  of  different  denominations,  and
is  making  rapid  progress  in  constructing  roads  and
bridges,  and  in  other  internal  improvements.  Pri-
vate individuals  are  also  introducing  the  nutmeg,
clove,  and  other  spices,  from  the  Chinese  archipe-
lago, and  trying  various  experiments  in  the  cultiva*
tion  of  the  soil.  Indeed,  the  whole  island  is  coming
rapidly  into  notice.  The  native,  the  planter,  the  civil-
ian, and  the  missionary,  are  looking  forward  to  no
distant  time  when  Ceylon  will  be  in  reality  the  Eden
of  the  east,  as  it  now  is  in  fable  the  Eden  of  our  first
parents,  where,  it  is  said,  the  footstep  of  Adam  is
still  to  be  seen,  imprinted  in  a  great  rock  on  the  top
of  the  mountain  bearing  his  name,  seven  thousand
feet  high.


BY  THE  REV.  J.  W.  BROWN.

'Tis  Christmas-Eve  ! — ^midst  clouds  of  gold  and

dun,
In  soften'd  glory,  sets  the  winter  sun ; —
While  vale  and  upland,  mead  and  forest  bare,
Sleep  in  calm  beauty  'neath  the  misty  air ; —
The  tall  old  pines  on  many  a  verdant  crown.
Catch  the  rich  lustre  as  his  orb  goes  down.
And  the  bright  brooks,  in  crystal  fetters  bound.
Like  bumish'd  mirrors  skirt  the  landscape  round.

Where  sweeps  the  road  from  yonder  piny  ridge
Through  the  sweet  vale,  across  the  rustic  bridge.
Stands  the  old  hall  midst  elms  and  giant  firs
Through  whose  tall  tops  the  breath  of  ev'ning  stirs ;
High  o'er  the  portal  hangs  the  holly-bough.
And  the  broad  trellis  smiles  with  verdure  now ; —
Cheerful  and  bright  its  mullion'd  windows  gleam
In  the  soft  radiance  of  the  sunset  beam.
And  thickly,  round  its  ancient  porch,  entvrine
The  leafless  tendrils  of  the  clinging  vine.


S16  XI8810NART  XBlfORIAL.


Christm as-£ti  ! — ^from    sweet-toned   village

bells,
The  Tcspcr-pcal  o'er  all  the  countxy  swells.
In  solemn  prelude  to  the  joyous  chime
Which  soon  shall  hail  the  merry  Christmas-prime,
When,  with  to-morrow's  sun,  the  sacred  mom
Shall  ring  with  tidings  of  the  Saviour  bom.
As  softly  mid  the  hush  of  closing  day,
That  ])cal,  like  dying  music,  melts  away.
From  the  broad  post-road  winding  'neath  the  hill.
Loud,  merry  voices  in  the  distance  thrill.
And  quickly,  o'er  the  dells  by  echo  borne.
Breaks  the  shrill  music  of  the  coachman's  horn ; —
They  come — they  come ; — ^the  household  doors  fly

wide.
Forth  rush  the  eager  inmates,  side  by  side,
The  dear,  long  absent  friends  they  haste  to  meet,
The  chcrish'd  ones  with  words  of  love  to  greet.
What  lender  welcome  gleams  in  every  eye  !
How  speaks  tlie  long  embrace,  the  grateful  sigh.
The  quick  inquiry,  warm,  but  half  suppress'd.
Leaving  the  eager  kiss  to  tell  the  rest !

The  lofty  walls  with  joyous  tones  resound.

As  through  the  hall  the  blithe  new-comers  bound  ; —

There,  'neath  the  odorous  fir  and  mistletoe,

The  children  speed  with  quick  steps  to  and  fro,

Wliilc  the  glad  servants  wreathe,  with  willing  hand.

Green  festive  garlands  for  the  youthful  band,


CHRISTMAS-EVE.  317

From  myrtle  stems  and  laurel  boughs  that  twine
Midst  the  rich  tassels  of  the  Christmas  vine.

From  every  portrait  hangs  a  verdant  crown,
And  where  the  lamp-light  faintly  struggles  down.
From  the  high  dome  and  polish'd  architraves
Bright  wreaths  of  laurel  droop  in  verdant  waves ;
The  household  clock,  across  whose  quaint  old  face
The  myrtle  branches  meet  in  hght  embrace.
With  brass-crown'd  turrets,  gleaming    bright    and

fair,
Crowns  the  broad  summit  of  the  oaken  stair.
While  pendent  boughs  along  the  wainscot  shine,
And  far  on  high  ascends  the  lengthen'd  vine.

Lo  !  where  the  lamps  their  mellow  lustre  shed,
Age  lifts  its  brow,  youth  bows  its  radiant  head,
As  the  warm  greetings,  breathed  in  words  that  fall
Like  lingering  music  through  the  pleasant  hall.
Prolong  the  cherish'd  household  legends  yet, —
How  pleasing  now  when  all  the  loved  have  met !
So,  gathering  near  the  cheerful  Christmas  fire.
Gay  tales  they  tell  which  still  new  mirth  inspire ;
The  infant  prattling  on  the  mother's  knee.
At  every  moment  wakes  fresh  shouts  of  glee.
While  the  bold  school-boy,  still  to  mischief  prone.
Provokes  the  smile,  or  fond,  reproving  tone  ; —
And  some,  anon,  with  laurel-cinctured  brows
Speed  the  brisk  game  beneath  the  flashing  boughs,

27*


31b  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

And  the  gay  maskers  from  the  neigliboring  hall,
Grace  for  an  hour  the  quiet  festival.

Dear  Christmas-Eve  !  a  thousand  firesides  bum

With  richer  light  to  welcome  thy  return  !

And  thy  sweet  hours,  in  purest  pleasures  told.

Cheer  the  young  heart  and  satisfy  the  old,

Till  chime  the  bells  the  sacred  call  to  rest.

And  the  calm  night  with  holy  prayer  is  blest.

Then  through  tlie  chamber  rolls  the  hymn  of  praise.

Harmonious  voices  high  thanksgiving  raise ;

The  tones  of  manhood,  blending  in  the  strain.

With  childhood's  silvery  notes  and  woman's  soft  re*

frain,
Till  the  full  chorus,  echoing  free  and  long,
Bursts  on  the  air  in  one  rich  tide  of  song.

Like  a  bright  spirit  throned  upon  her  sphere.
The  moon  ascends  the  sky.     The  atmosphere.
Clear,  cold,  and  brilliant,  seems  a  crystal  sea
On  which  the  wintry  clouds  sleep  tranquilly ;
The  rising  wind,  with  fitful,  plaintive  swell.
Moans  in  the  elms  that  skirt  the  narrow  dell.
And  through  the  court-yard  firs  awakes  again
The  music  of  its  melancholy  strain.

How  richly  now  on  every  hill  and  plain

Sleeps  the  soft  light  of  midnight's  solemn  reign  !

How  brightly,  shrined  in  azure  depths  on  high,


CHRISTMAS-EVE.  319

The  myriad  stars  gem  all  the  cloudless  sky !
To  fancy's  eye  and  ear,  each  radiant  troop
That  treads  those  crystal  fields  in  varied  group
Seems  like  a  choir  of  bright-eyed  cherubim,
Chanting  high  lauds  in  one  unceasing  hymn.

Serene,  mid  those  bright  sentinels  on  high.
The  fuU-orb'd  moon  still  climbs  the  vaulted  sky.
Serene,  as  when  on  Bethlehem's  plain  she  kept
Her  glittering  vigil,  while  the  shepherds  slept.

St.  Gborgb^s  Rbctort,  Astoria,  L.  L


SDtpartttrt  of  HXtv.  lol)n  tDUltamd,


MISSIONARY  TO  THE  SOUTH  SEA  ISLANDS.


BY  THE  AUTHOR  OT  **  PEN  AND  INK  SKETCHES.**


The  circumstances  attendant  on  the  death  of  the
Rev.  John  Williams,  the  martyr  of  Erromanga,  in-
vest with  a  melancholy  interest  every  recollection  of
him  during  the  period  of  his  last  visit  to  England  for
the  purpose  of  procuring  a  missionary  ship  to  navi-
gate the  islands  of  the  Southern  Seas.  Whilst  he
was  laboring  in  the  metropolis  to  effect  his  great  ob-
ject, I  also  happened  to  be  in  London  ;  and  as  the
friend  at  whose  house  I  visited  was  intimately  ac-
quainted with  Mr.  Williams,  I  had  many  opportuni-
ties afforded  me  of  personal  intercourse  with  him.

On  one  of  the  occasions  of  my  meeting  him  in  the
social  circle,  he  gave  us,  I  well  remember,  an  in-
stance of  his  surprising  powers  as  a  linguist ;  for  he
translated  readily  the  Doxology  into  five  or  six  dif-
ferent languages  of  the  Pacific,  and  concluded  by
rendering  it,  at  the  request  of  a  friend,  into  the
Welsh — ^which  difficult  language  he  retained  in  its
utmost  purity,  although  he  said  he  had  not  read  a  line


DEPARTURE  OF  REV.  JOHN  WILLIAMS.  321

of  it  since  his  boyhood.  He  was,  however,  by  birth
a  Welshman,  although  his  early  years  had  been
spent  in  a  district  where  the  Cambrian  language  was
not  spoken.

Mr.  Williams'  manners  in  the  social  circle  were
most  engaging — indeed,  I  scarcely  ever  knew  any
one  of  such  rare  simplicity,  combined  with  so  pro-
found a  knowledge  of  human  nature.  He  romped
with  the  children,  who  almost  idolized  him,  told  the
most  entertaining  anecdotes  of  the  natives  of  the  isl-
ands he  had  visited,  sang  some  of  their  songs,  and
drew  with  great  taste  portraits  and  sketches  of  scene-
ry. He  was  never,  as  some  travellers  are,  tiresome,
or  boastful,  and  communicating  information  seemed
to  be  as  delightful  to  him  as  to  his  hearers.  In  a
word,  he  was  the  pet  of  the  little  circle  at  my  friend's
house.

Mr.  Williams'  personal  appearance  was  rather
that  of  a  substantial  farmer  (with  the  exception  of
his  clerical  dress)  than  of  a  missionary.  His  frame
was  robust ;  his  chest  broad  and  deep,  and  thick  mus-
cular limbs,  evidenced  great  physical  strength.  In
stature  he  rather  exceeded  the  average  standard  of
man,  although  his  stout  figure  somewhat  detracted
from  the  height.  His  complexion  was  florid,  and  in-
dicated robust  and  vigorous  health.  His  forehead
was  low  and  receding,  and  a  slight  cast  in  one  of  his
eyes  somewhat  impaired  the  generally  sweet  expres-
sion of  his  countenance,  which  was  rather  of  a  for-


322  MIBSIONART  MEXORIAI..

eign  stamp.  In  the  pulpit  he  did  not  shine  ;  he  had
so  long  been  used  to  missionary  labor,  that  the  con-
rentionalisms  of  the  sacred  desk  tranmielled  and
hampered  him.

He  presented  me  the  day  before  he  was  to  leave
England  with  a  ticket  to  attend  the  farewell  service
on  board  the  missionary  ship,  the  Camden  ;  and  on
the  morning  of  sailing  I  went  on  board.  She  lay
near  London  bridge,  on  which  structure  crowds  of
people  were  assembled  to  witness  her  departure.  A
large  number  of  the  missionary's  friends  were  as-
sembled on  the  deck,  and  the  farewell  service  com-
menced by  the  singing  of  a  hymn  written  for  the  oc-
casion by  Josiah  Conder,  whose  thin  figure  and  spec-
tacled face  was  discernible  amongst  the  crowd.
Many  of  the  London  ministers  were  present,  and  in
fervent  prayer  they  committed  their  departing  brother
to  the  care  of  Him  who  holds  the  waters  in  the  hol-
low of  his  hand.  At  last  the  hymn,  "  Friend  after
friend  departs,"  was  sung — the  benediction  uttered ;
and  a  flag  having  been  run  up  to  the  masthead,  most
of  the  company  having  previously  shaken  hands  with
Mr.  Williams  and  his  friends,  left  the  deck  and  re-
paired on  board  a  steamboat  which  tugged  the  Cam-
den down  the  river, — the  crowds  on  the  bridge  giving
her  a  farewell  cheer  as  she  hauled  from  the  wharf,
and  Mr.  Williams  responding  to  it  by  waving  his
handkerchief  from  the  deck  where  he  stood.

Down  the  Thames  we  glided  on.   Soon  the  Tower


/
DEPARTURE  OF  REV.  JOHN  WILLIAMS.  323

was  passed,  then  Greenwich,  Tilbury  Fort,  and  other
noticeable  places,  until  the  river  had  grown  broad,  and
less  thickly  dotted  with  ships.  Arrived  oflF  Graves-
end  the  steamer  cast  off  the  hawser,  and  the  Camden
drifted  alongside  of  us.  I  can  see  Mr.  Williams  now
as  he  stood  by  the  rail  of  the  vessel,  exchanging  fare-
wells with  his  friends.  We  were  so  near  that  we
could  almost  shake  hands.  All  felt  indeed  that  the
parting  hour  was  come,  and  many,  many  tears  were
shed.  As  if  by  common  consent,  the  vessels  lingered
for  a  time  near  each  other,  the  streamers  on  the  mast-
heads dallying  with  each  other,  and  occasionally  be-
coming tangled,  as  if  the  ships  were  shaking  hands.
But  time  and  tide  waited  not.  The  last  prayers  were
uttered,  and  then  as  Heber's  beautiful  hymn,  "  From
Greenland's  icy  mountains,"  burst  forth  from  the
people  on  board  the  steamer,  the  strain  was  taken
up  by  the  missionary  and  his  crew,  Mr.  Williams'
voice  being  heard  above  all  the  rest, — a  gun  was
fired, — ^fold  after  fold  of  the  Camden's  canvass  was
loosened  to  the  gale,  and  spreading  her  snowy  wings
she  gradually  increased  her  distance  between  us,  un-
til a  bend  of  the  river  hid  her  from  our  view.

So  departed  the  missionary  of  the  islands — depart-
ed to  his  work,  and  its  reward ;  for  such  is  that
crown  of  martyrdom  which  now  circles  the  brows  of
the  Christian  hero  of  Erromanga.


C|)t  takt.

TO

BY  EDOUt  A.  POB.

In  youth's  spring  it  was  my  lot

To  haunt  of  the  wide  world  a  spot

The  which  I  could  not  love  the  less.

So  lovely  was  the  loneliness

Of  a  wild  lake  with  black  rock  bound.

And  the  tall  pines  that  tower'd  around —

But  when  the  night  had  thrown  her  pall

Upon  that  spot,  as  upon  all,

And  the  ghastly  wind  went  by

In  a  dirge-like  melody,

Then — ah  then  I  would  awake

To  the  terror  of  that  lone  lake.

Yet  that  terror  was  not  fright.

But  a  tremulous  delight —

A  feeling  not  the  jewell'd  mine

Could  teach  or  bribe  me  to  define.

Nor  love — although  the  love  were  thine.


pilgrim's  way-song.  325

Death  was  in  that  poison'd  wave,

And  in  its  depth  a  fitting  grave

For  him  who  thence  could  solace  bring

To  his  lone  unagining—

Whose  solitary  soul  could  make

An  Eden  of  that  dim  lake.


BY  MISS  HANNAH  F.  GOULD.

Tm  bound  to  the  house  of  my  Father,

Oh !  draw  not  my  feet  from  the  way,
Nor  stop  these  wild  flowers  to  gather,

They  droop  at  my  touch  and  decay !
I  think  of  the  flowers  that  are  blooming

In  beauty  unfading  above.
The  wings  of  kind  angels  perfuming.

Who  fly  down  on  errands  of  love.

Of  earth's  shallow  waters  the  drinking

Is  powerless  my  thirst  to  allay ;
Their  taste  is  of  tears,  while  we're  sinking

Beside  them  where  quicksands  betray.
I  long  for  the  fount  ever-living,

That  flows  by  my  Father's  own  door.
With  waters  so  sweet  and  life-giving.

To  drink  and  to  thirst  never  more.

28


Cl)t  iOitef ionars  a  tfontribtttor  to  Sdena  cadi

txtttatmt.

■T  THE  RET.  J.  O.  0H0ULB8,  A.  M.

The  contemplation  of  man  as  a  moral  agent  pre-
paring for  an  eternal  existence,  was  the  origin  of  that
series  of  efforts  in  the  various  departments  of  the
Christian  church  which  we  commonly  term  the  mis-
sionary enterprise.

It  proposes  to  diffuse  knowledge,  morality,  and
Christianity  all  over  the  globe,  and  at  this  moment
the  riches,  the  talent,  the  piety  of  England  and
America,  are  crying  to  the  dark  lands  and  benighted
tribes  of  the  human  family,  "  Arise,  shine,  for  your
hght  is  come."  The  principal  means  employed  are
the  translation  of  the  holy  Scriptures,  the  preaching
of  the  Gospel,  the  estabUshment  of  schools  for  the
benefit  of  the  heathen,  and  where  instruction  is  af-
forded in  the  vernacular  tongue.  In  the  early  stage
of  this  great  Christian  movement,  it  was  strenuously
contended  that  it  was  in  vain  to  attempt  the  religious
improvement  of  the  heathen.  British  statesmen,
Scotch  reviewers,  and  American  philosophers,  de-


INFLUENCE  OF  MISSIONS  ON  SCIENCE.  327

cided  that  the  chain  of  caste  was  riveted  to  the  soul
of  the  Hindoo,  that  the  main  object  of  attempt  was
imattainable ;  they  also  contended  that  civilization  and
literature  must  precede  Christianity.  No  ordinary
modicum  of  ridicule  was  cast  upon  the  character  of
the  pioneers  in  this  benevolent  undertaking ;  their
purity,  simplicity  of  purpose,  ardent  devotion,  and
manly  spirit,  afforded  them  no  shield  from  the  at-
tacks even  of  clerical  infidelity  acting  as  the  ape  of
criticism.  A  learned  professor  in  Rutgers  College,
a  quarter  of  a  century  ago,  in  the  most  splendid
apology  for  missions  that  our  country  has  afforded,
thus  speaks  of  the  objections  of  some  nominal  Chris-
tians: "With  all  their  respect  for  Christianity  and
its  professors,  they  are  decidedly  of  opinion  that  it
would  be  infinitely  wiser,  if,  instead  of  sending  to
the  east  and  west  a  multitude  of  half-crazed  devotees
with  their  Bibles  and  psalm-books  to  insult  all  other
religions  besides  their  own,  we  would  commission  half
the  number  of  graduated  literati  to  go  and  measure
an  arc  of  the  meridian,  collect  stones,  plants,  and
cockle-shells,  or  find  out  the  direction  of  the  Niger.
Besides  the  splendid  discoveries  which  would  ensue
on  these  expenditures,  there  would  be  this  eminent
advantage,  that  the  liberal  patrons  would  be  reim-
bursed by  the  sale  of  their  servants'  quartos  on  their
happy  return  to  academic  bowers.  Now  perhaps  it
will  not  be  amiss  to  meet  such  thinkers  on  their  own
principles,  and  inform  them,  that  though  we  are  too


8S8  MI88IOKART  MSMOEIAIm

fiuiatical  to  throw  away  oar  money  for  the  gratifica-
tion of  hterary  vanity,  when  the  glory  of  God  and
the  salvation  of  eight  hundred  millions  of  our  brethren
are  at  stake,  yet  it  is  quite  possible  that  we  shall
prove  invaluable  contributors  to  their  own  darling
science.  We  might  refer  them  to  what  has  abneady
been  done, — ^to  the  fact  that  Ghreenland,  Iceland,  Abys-
sinia, the  South  Sea  islands,  and  China,  have  all  been
explored  by  enthusiasts, — that  the  most  approved  dic-
tionaiy  of  the  language  of  two  hundred  millions  is
the  work  of  a  missionary,  and  that  every  day  they
are  adding  new  stores  to  political,  physical,  and
moral  science.  Let  it  not  be  objected,  that  these
benefits  are  only  incidental  and  valued  by  their  au-
thors in  subservience  to  something  else.  The  same
will  apply  to  nine-tenths  of  useful  discoveries.  The
ancients  mapped  the  starry  conclave,  not  from  any  love
of  astronomy,  but  to  guide  their  navigation.  The  art
of  printing  was  invented  by  a  vender  of  MSS.  who
aimed  at  dispatch.  Nor  let  it  be  urged  that  they  who
go  forth  are  not  qualified  to  make  learned  researches.
True,  they  are  not  botanists  or  mineralogists,  but  they
are  in  general  acute  and  faithful  observers ;  or  if  this
will  not  content,  they  can  send  the  tidings  that  their
painful  efforts  have  mollified  the  savage  heart  and
peopled  the  wilderness  with  meek  and  gentle  follow-
ers of  the  Lamb,  and  then  your  sages  may  venture
on  a  peregrination  themselves.  But  not  to  dwell  on
this  point,  I  only  suggest  the  inquiry,  what  will  be


INFLUENCE  OF  MISSIONS  ON  SCIENCE.  329

the  effects  in  reference  merely  to  science,  in  the
space  of  fifty  years,  if  the  mania  of  preaching  the
Gospel  *  to  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,
and  nation,'  continues  and  makes  progress  ?  Not  a
language  or  dialect,  to  a  grammatical  digest  of  which
the  student  cannot  turn  in  his  library — not  a  dark
comer  of  the  earth,  but  shall  be  statistically  described;
and  it  is  my  belief  that  if  ever  the  learned  world  en-
joy the  unspeakable  felicity  of  reading  an  accoimt  of
the  north  pole,  they  will  owe  it  to  some  humble  Mo-
ravian, whose  warm  heart  enabled  him  to  brave  its
eternal  snows  in  the  hope  of  carrying  the  hght  of  life
to  some  wretched  outcast,  who,  perchance,  might  be
found  shivering  amid  its  desolations !  We  would
meet  the  mercantile  objector  with  the  same  kind  of
argument  We  would  detail  with  no  Uttle  plausibil-
ity the  probable  benefits  of  the  excitement  to  com-
merce. We  would  suggest  that  it  may  open  new
markets,  make  acquainted  with  the  products  of  the
remotest  climes,  and  in  a  thousand  ways,  if  only  al-
lowed a  free  course,  influence  your  prices  current."*
Now  all  men  amongst  us  well  understand  that  this
annunciation  of  sagacious  foresight  has  received  its
verification  in  the  grand  results  of  Christian  missions.
Every  wind  of  heaven  wafts  a  vessel  with  intelh-
gence  from  some  spot  hitherto  unknown,  or  partially

*  "  Vindication  of  the  Religious  Spirit  of  the  Age,*^  by  Alexan-
der McClelland,  D  D.,  1820.    New  York.

28*


8M>  mSHOKABT  MmomiAL.

beneath  the  eye  of  ciTilisation.  How  different  is  the
sunrey  of  a  map  of  the  world  to  U8,  to  what  it  was
to  our  fathers  !  We  gaze  upon  the  names  of  riTcrs
and  mountains,  and  how  altered  are  our  associations  !
We  think  not  only  of  Alexander  at  the  Granicus  and
Hannibal  at  the  Alps,  but  of  Heber  at  Delhi,  Carey
at  the  Ganges,  Martyn  at  Tocat,  Perkins  on  the
mountains  of  Nestoria,  and  Bingham  at  Honolulu,
and  our  reflections  on  these  modem  names  of  note,
are  as  spirit-stirring  and  momentous  as  belonged  to
the  student  of  the  last  century  when  he  concerned
himself  with  Balbec,  Palmyra,  Babylon,  Nineveh,
the  Pyramids,  and  Persepolis.

It  would  be  a  pleasing  task  and  useful  service  to
delineate  the  mere  moral  and  temporal  immunities
of  missions  among  the  heathen.  We  should  have
the  world  as  the  field  for  research.  We  could  espe-
cially show  the  grand  experiments  which  have  been
made  on  human  nature  in  all  its  various  conditions
of  being,  how  it  has  been  brought  into  contact  with
the  usages  of  civilized  and  social  life,  the  learning  of
the  schools,  and  how  mind  has  been  developed.  Very
curious,  indeed,  and  full  of  interest  to  the  thinking
man,  the  intellectual  and  moral  philosopher,  would
be  this  exemplification.  We  might  show  the  amazing
triumphs  which  have  been  achieved  in  philology,
natural  science,  and  geography,  but  this  is  not  our
immediate  province.  Perhaps  a  brief  survey  of  the
life  and  actions  of  one  laborer  in  the  field  may  afford


iKFLtTENCE  OF  IHSSIONS  ON  SCIENCE.  331

the  reader  some  idea  of  the  grand  aggregate  of  effort
which  has  been  contributed  to  the  happiness,  know-
ledge, and  well-being  of  the  world  by  the  mission-
ary.

The  Rev.  Dr.  Carey,  missionary  to  the  Hindoos,
and  the  translator  of  the  Scriptures,  was  bom  at
Paulersbury,  Northamptonshire,  in  1 76 1 .  He  was  the
son  of  the  parish  clerk,  and  was  apprenticed  at  nine
years  of  age  to  a  shoemaker.  At  twenty-four  he
was  called  to  the  ministry,  and  became  pastor  of  the
churches  at  Moulton  and  Leicester.  From  his  first
entrance  on  the  work  of  the  ministry,  his  mind  ap-
pears to  have  been  deeply  imbued  with  commisera-
tion for  the  state  of  the  heathen ;  his  whole  soul  was
alive  to  the  great  object  of  missions.  He  was  ap-
pointed to  preach  before  the  annual  association  of
ministers  at  Nottingham,  in  1792.  The  theme  of
that  memorable  discourse  was — ''  Expect  great  things
from  God,  and  attempt  great  things  for  God."  Dur-
ing the  course  of  the  day,  it  was  resolved  that  a  plan
should  be  prepared  for  forming  a  society  with  a  view
to  the  propagation  of  the  Gospel  among  the  heathen,
and  at  the  next  meeting  held  at  Kettering,  a  subscrip-
tion was  opened,  and  thirteen  pounds  two  shillings
and  sixpence  collected  towards  fitting  out  and  send-
ing a  missionary  to  India.  In  1793,  Dr.  Carey  sail-
ed, and  arrived  at  Calcutta  on  the  12th  of  November.

Before  he  left  England,  amid  poverty,  and  the
cares  of  business,  and  the  oversight  of  a  church,  he


888  MIBIIOMAET  MSMORIAL.

was  able  to  read  the  Bible  in  seyen  languages.  In
India,  he  applied  himself  to  the  native  tongue  of  the
people,  among  whom  he  purposed  to  liye  and  die.
This  was  the  Bengalee,  spoken  by  a  population  equal
to  that  of  France.

In  1794  he  writes,  the  language  is  '^copious  and
abounding  with  beauties."  He  soon  perceived  that
the  Sanscrit  was  the  grand  root  of  oriental  litera-
ture, the  parent  of  eastern  languages,  and  the  only
key  by  which  he  could  unlock  their  treasures.  He
soon  read  their  shasters  for  himself,  and  was  able  to
translate  the  Bible.  In  1796  he  was  deeply  engaged
in  the  study  of  Sanscrit  and  Hindoothanee.  In  1801
he  was  appointed  by  the  British  government  Profes-
sor to  the  Government  College  at  Fort  William,  and
we  find  him  writing  to  his  friends  :  '*  I  am  much  im-
pressed with  the  importance  of  laying  a  foundation
for  Biblical  criticism  in  the  East,  by  preparing  gram-
mars of  the  different  languages  into  which  we  have
translated  or  may  translate  the  Bible.  Without  ^ome
such  step,  they  who  follow  us  will  have  to  wade
through  the  same  labor  that  I  have  in  order  to  stand
nearly  on  the  same  ground  that  I  now  occupy.  If,
however,  elementary  books  are  provided,  the  labor
will  be  greatly  contracted.  The  necessity  which
lies  upon  me  of  acquiring  so  many  languages,
obliges  me  to  study  and  write  out  the  grammar  of
each  of  them,  and  attend  closely  to  their  irregulari-
ties and  peculiarities.    I  have  therefore  already  pub-


INFLUENCE  OF  MISSIONS  ON  SCIENCE.  333

lished  grammars  of  three  of  them,  viz.,  the  Sanscrit,
Bengalee,  and  Mahratta.  To  these  I  have  resolved
to  add  the  grammars  of  the  Telinga,  Kumatta,  Oris-
sa,  Punjabee,  Kashmeera,  GKijaratee,  Nepalese,  and
Assam  languages.    Two  of  these  are  now  in  the

press I  am  now  printing  a  dictionary

of  the  Bengalee;  I  have  got  to  page  266,  4to.,  and
am  not  through  the  first  letter ;  that  letter  begins
more  words  than  any  two  others.  To  secure  the
gradual  perfection  of  the  translation,  I  have  been
long  collecting  materials  for  a  universal  dictionary  of
the  Oriental  languages  derived  from  the  Sanscrit.  I
mean  to  take  the  Sanscrit  for  the  groimdwork,  and  to
give  the  different  acceptations  of  every  word,  with
examples  of  their  application,  in  the  manner  of  John-
son, and  then  give  their  synonymes  in  the  different
languages  derived  from  the  Sanscrit,  with  the  He-
brew and  Greek  terms  answering  thereto,  always
putting  the  word  derived  from  the  Sanscrit  terms
first,  and  then  those  derived  from  other  sources.
This  work  will  be  great,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  I
shall  live  to  complete  it.  Should  I  accomplish  this
and  the  translations  of  the  Scriptures  now  in  hand,  I
think  I  can  say,  *  Now,  Lord,  lettest  thou  thy  servant
depart  in  peace.' "

It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  the  entire  Scriptures
were  printed  in  six  Oriental  languages,  and  tlie  New
Testament  in  twenty-three  languages ;  and  more
than  two  hundred  and  thirteen  thousand  copies  of


884  MIBSIOMAEY  MEMORIAL.

the  Scriptures  were  printed  by  Dr.  Carey's  instru-
mentality in  forty  languages.

Mr.  Wilson,  the  Sanscrit  professor  at  Oxford,  in  a
paper  on  Dr.  Carey,  says,  "  His  Sanscrit  was  the
first  complete  grammar  published ;  his  Telinga  the
first  in  English :  his  Punjabee  is  the  only  authority  that
yet  exists  for  the  language  of  the  Shikh  nations,  and
the  same  may  be  said  of  his  Mahratta  dictionary.
The  Sanscrit  grammar  is  a  work  of  immense  labor,
forming  a  quarto  of  more  than  one  thousand  pages.
The  Ramayana  of  Valmeeki,  an  epic  poem  in  Sans-
crit, was  translated  in  four  volumes,  quarto,  with  notes,
by  Dr.  Carey  and  his  learned  colleague.  Dr.  Marsh-
man.  This  work  was  selected  by  the  council  of  the
Fort  William  College  to  disseminate  a  just  idea  of
the  religion  and  literature,  manners  and  customs  of
the  Hindoos.  When  Dr.  Carey  commenced  his  du-
ties as  professor,  there  were  scarcely  any  but  viva
voce  means  of  communicating  instruction ;  there
were  no  printed  books,  and  MSS.  were  rare.  It
was  necessary  to  prepare  them,  and  so  assiduously
did  Dr.  C.  apply  himself  to  this  object,  that  he  left
the  students  of  this  language  well  provided  with
elementary  books,  supplied  standard  compositions  to
the  natives  of  Bengal,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  a
cultivated  tongue  and  flourishing  literature  through-
out the  country.  Dr.  Carey's  Bengalee  dictionary
must  in  all  time  be  regarded  as  a  standard  work."

To  the  labors  of  this  eminent  missionary  may  be


INFLUENCE  OF  MISSIONS  ON  SCIENCE.  335

ascribed  the  formation  of  the  Agricultural  and  Horti-
cultural Society  of  India  in  1821.  At  the  prelimi-
nary meeting  only  two  gentlemen  were  present.  Of
this  most  important  and  now  flourishing  institution
he  was  a  long  time  president.  In  1830  government
voted  two  thousand  pounds  in  premiums  to  success-
ful cultivators  of  the  soil.

Dr.  Carey's  garden  was  the  first  private  garden  in
India.  At  five  o'clock  in  the  morning  he  was  always  to
be  found  for  an  hour  amid  his  plants  and  trees.  At
the  removal  of  the  celebrated  Dr.  Roxburgh  from
Calcutta,  he  took  charge  of  the  government  botanical
garden,  and  prepared  the  well-known  Hortus  Benga-
lensis,  or  catalogue  of  plants  growing  in  the  East
India  Company's  botanical  garden  at  Calcutta.  This
was  printed  in  1812.  He  also  at  the  death  of  Rox-
burgh became  the  editor  of  his  papers,  and  published
them  between  the  years  1821  and  1832,  in  five  vol-
umes, under  the  title  of  Flora  Indica.  The  Saul
tree,  of  which  the  ships  are  built  in  India,  has  its
botanical  name  from  Carey,  and  was  given  by  Rox-
burgh in  1797,  as  a  title  of  respect ;  it  is  called  Ca-
reya  arborea :  this,  and  the  Careya  herbacea,  are
both  represented  in  Roxburgh's  Fasciculus  of  the
plants  of  Coromandel.

Mr.  Roscoe,  of  Liverpool,  makes  most  honorable
mention  of  Dr.  Carey  as  an  exact  and  enterprising
botanist.

In  1811,  this  indefatigable  pioneer  of  the  East,


836  MIllIONAET  MSMORIAL.

writing  to  England,  and  to  a  learned  correspondent
in  America,  says :  *^  I  have  long  been  engaged  in  a
description  of  the  birds  of  Asia,  and  have  accom-
phshed  about  half  of  them,  some  of  the  quadrupeds
and  a  few  of  the  insects."  They  appeared  in  the
Asiatic  Researches.  He  regarded  Natural  History
and  Geography  as  important  branches  of  science,  and
deliyered  valuable  lectures  on  both,  in  English  and
Bengalee,  for  many  years.  He  regarded  all  these
topics  as  illustrative  of  the  works  of  God.  ''  How
vastly  does  India,"  writes  one,  "  stand  indebted  to
one  solitary  missionary  landing  on  her  shores  !"  How
vastly  indebted  is  the  civilized  world  to  that  won-
drous man,  the  shoemaker  of  Leicester !

This  great  and  good  man  ceased  from  his  labors
June  9,  1834,  in  his  73d  year,  leaving  his  museum,
minerals,  shells,  corals,  insects,  and  Hortus  siccus  to
the  Missionary  College  at  Serampore.


Unvxt'Q  to  (Btvaliint.

BY  H.  T.  TUCKERMAN.

" She  was  so  beantiftil  as  to  anthorize  the  raptures  of  her  poetical  lover;
and  too  proud  of  such  a  suitor  to  let  him  escape.  He  betrays  an  indignant
consciousness  of  the  arts  by  which  she  keeps  him  entangled  in  her  chain ;  and
accuses  her  expressly  of  a  love  of  general  admiration,  and  of  giving  her  coun-
tenance and  &vor  to  unworthy  rivals.** — Mrs.  Jameson's  Loves  of  the  Poets.

It  was  not  love  ! — ^my  soul  could  never  yield
To  one  who  lives  for  universal  sway,

Within  whose  breast  no  treasure  lies  conceal'd,
To  selfish  hopes  an  unresisting  prey.

It  was  not  love ; — ^won  by  thy  buoyant  grace,
So  cheering  to  a  warm  yet  pensive  mind,

Charm'd  by  the  varying  beauty  of  thy  face.
Madly  to  thee  my  spirit  I  resign'd.

Why,  when  I  thought  to  breathe  affection's  vow,
Came  there  a  chill  upon  my  burning  soul  ?

Why  silent  look'd  I  on  thy  placid  brow,
Hush'd  by  the  magic  touch  of  self-control  ?

29


338  MI88I0NAET  MEMORIAL.

In  absence  o*er  thee  would  I  fondly  brood.
And  clasp  in  fancy  thy  bewitching  form,

Yet  in  thy  presence  ardor  was  subdued,

And  instant  stillness  quelled  the  rising  storm.

Thy  pleasant  ways  beguiled  me  into  joy,

With  rapture  wild  I  caught  thy  kindly  glance.

To  watch  thy  moods  seem'd  life's  divine  employ.
Their  memory  still  my  fancy  will  entrance.

It  was  not  love ; — I  saw  thee  as  thou  art.

Each  careless  word  with  anguish  thrill'd  my  brain,

Intent  I  watch'd  for  tokens  of  a  heart,

And  trembled  with  alternate  bliss  and  pain.

It  was  not  love ;  though  vast  was  my  desire,
I  pined  to  snatch  thee  from  a  worldly  fate,

To  gather  up  the  consecrated  fire,

And  bear  it  all  unquench'd  to  heaven's  gate.

All  gifts  of  thy  young  mind  to  me  appeal'd
Like  richest  pccurls  up-gleaming  from  the  dust,

To  my  fond  gaze  such  promise  was  reveal'd
As  fiU'd  my  bosom  with  devoted  trust.

It  was  not  love ;  yet  sweet  and  generous  aims
Turn'd  unto  thee  as  their  predestined  goal.

All  that  religion  hopes  and  honor  claims,
I  thought  to  lavish  on  thy  wayward  souL


SURREY  TO  6ERALDINE.  3B9

It  was  not  love  ;  or  in  thy  better  hours

Some  deep  response  thy  nature  would  have  felt,

Amid  life's  weeds  thou  wouldst  have  known  the
flowers,
And  suffer'd  pride  in  tenderness  to  melt.

It  was  not  love  ;  but  kindness  deep  and  pure,
Revering  pity, — fancy — hope  ;  nay,  more, —

The  heart's  blind  wish  an  object  to  ensure,

And  for  love's  faith  each  winsome  path  explore.

It  was  not  love  ;  yet  take  my  parting  word, —
Thanks  for  the  fairy  spells  bestow'd  on  me.

Thanks  for  the  sad  emotions  thou  hast  stirr'd, —
Bright,  reckless  creature,  God  be  near  to  thee  !


BT  O.  H.  H08KXR.

•

The  mournful  cypress,  the  sacred  yew,  nor  the
weeping-willow,  were  found  to  adorn  or  cast  their
silent  shadow  upon  his  grave,  for  he  died  in  a  land
where  their  names  are  strangers.  The  deep,  deep
sea,  separates  between  him  and  the  home  of  his  birth,
and  the  trees,  the  fruit,  and  the  flowers,  are  of  another
clime.  Over  his  grave  stands  the  cocoanut-tree,  the
sound  of  whose  rustling  leaves  in  the  evening  breezes,
like  the  plaintive  moan  of  some  loved  one,  mourns
his  loss ;  while  its  wide  palmy  branches  throw  a  cool
protecting  shadow,  during  the  scorching  heat  of  a
tropical  day,  to  secure  his  peaceful  resting-place
from  cracks  and  fissures,  and  preserve  the  same
greenness  and  freshness  there  that  were  found  in  his
hopes  of  immortality.

It  was  a  dark  day  when  death  aimed  his  fatal  ar-
row, and  sent  it  with  unerring  certainty  to  quiver  in
his  youthful  heart.  Then  it  was,  that  many  a  hope
was  blasted,  many  a  fond  expectation  perished,  many
a  spot  was  softened  with  tears.


THE  missionary's  GRAVE.  341

It  was,  at  first,  a  dark  providence  to  himself  to
leave  his  fatherland ;  to  imprint  the  last  kiss  on  the
trembling  lips  of  a  fond  and  aged  mother ;  to  bid
adieu  to  the  sweet  home  of  his  childhood,  plough
the  boisterous  ocean  a  voyage  of  six  thousand  miles,
and  die  after  a  few  months'  residence  in  a  foreign  land.
But  though  for  a  moment  the  heavens  did  appear
dark,  soon,  soon  did  he  perceive  the  rainbow  of  the
covenant  spanning  the  mighty  arch,  and  shedding  its
resplendent  glories  upon  the  surrounding  gloom.  By
very  significant  intimations  the  voice  of  Jehovah  was
heard,  saying  unto  him,  "  Come  up  hither !"  and  as
quickly  as  faith  prevailed  he  looked  up,  and  beheld
the  heavenly  throne,  the  peerless  majesty  of  Him
that  sat  thereon,  and  saw  a  rainbow  round  about  the
throne  in  sight  like  unto  an  emerald.  Amid  these
rich  discoveries  and  overwhelming  glories,  he  might
well  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  and  joyfully
respond  to  his  heavenly  Father's  call.

But  while  he  bowed  joyfully  to  his  Father's  will,
there  were  times  when,  for  the  sake  of  the  heathen
and  his  own  youthfulness,  he  desired  life.  Nor  was
he  insensible  to  the  enjoyments  of  life.  He  knew
that  if  he  once  became  accustomed  to  a  tropical  cli-
mate, though  he  would  be  denied  many  temporal
blessings  which  his  soul  might  anxiously  crave,  yet
were  there  numerous  comforts  to  be  enjoyed  even
there,  which  would  in  some  measure  compensate  the
losses  he  sustained.    For  in  that  land  there  are  no

29*


M2  M18810MAEY  MEMORIAL.

pinching  frosts,  no  chilly  blasts,  no  dreary,  cheerless
winter,  but  one  eternal  spring.  Forever  green,  for-
ever gay  are  its  sunny  plains ;  eternal  verdure  clothes
its  fields  and  forests,  while


*'  Fruits  rich-flaTor*d,  gratify  the  taste.


w


With  the  little  sloop  he  can  reach  the  islands  that
begird  the  coast ;  with  the  pit-pan  and  darey  ascend
the  rivers.  He  can  pluck  the  yellow  orange  that
ripens  on  the  tree,  the  luscious  pine-apple,  and  the
mellow  sour-sop,  the  sun-apple,  the  mango,  the  citron,
the  fig,  the  guava,  and  the  pomegranate;  he  can
drink  the  creani  of  the  young  cocoanut,  and  partake
of  his  most  favorite  part  of  the  turtle  or  .hecate.
Every  thing  is  in  the  first  style,  and  should  he  pos-
sess health,  he  has  little  in  these  respects  of  which  to
complain.  Merchants,  magistrates,  and  sometimes
governors,  pay  him  their  early  compliments  and  seek
his  society  and  friendship.  He  exerts  an  influence
and  sustains  a  position,  exceedingly  pleasing  and
honorable,  which  will  enhance,  rather  than  depre-
ciate, the  value  of  human  life.  His  sphere  of  labor
is  waiting,  the  fields  are  white  ready  to  the  harvest,
and  he  who  "reaps"  in  some  cases  "receives"  instant
"  wages"  to  repay  his  toil ;  while  the  affection  and
devotedness  of  the  people  soon  produce,  or  cherish,
if  already  glowing,  a  flame  of  love  towards  them
which  many  waters  cannot  quench.

He  liad  tasted  these  sweets ;  he  had  engaged  in


THE  missionary's  graye.  343

this  delightful  labor.  Around  him  had  gathered  the
African,  the  Carib,  and  the  Creole,  with  not  a  few
natives  of  colder  regions  with  a  fairer  skin.  To
these  were  made  known  the  wonders  of  redeeming
grace  and  dying  love.  And  many  a  dark  athletic  has
wandered  into  the  bush,  sat  him  down  beneath  a  pal-
metto-tree to  weep,  and  there,  in  broken  accents,  well
understood  in  the  upper  sanctuary,  implored  for  his
guilty  soul  that  mercy  that  massa  minister  say  so
freely  given  through  Jesus  Christ,  the  Spirit  itself
making  intercession  with  groanings  which  cannot  be
uttered.  For,  as  if  to  wither  the  vanity  and  pride  of
man,  it  is  recorded :  "  A  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,
O  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise."

But  his  warfare  was  soon  accomplished.  Small,
indeed,  was  the  amount  of  labor  he  performed,  but
"  he  did  what  he  could,"  and  a  burning  seraph  could
do  no  more.  His  last  text  sweetly  indicated  the  tone
of  his  feeUngs  and  the  state  of  his  mind.  It  was
Christ's  question  to  Peter,  "  Simon  son  of  Jonas,
lovest  thou  me  ?"  Doubtless  his  own  response,  like
that  of  Peter,  was,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things,
thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee."  "  Whom  have  I  in
heaven  but  thee,  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I
desire  beside  thee."

And  now  the  dim  visions  of  earthly  hope  vanish
like  a  dream ;  his  wasted  flesh,  his  palUd  cheek,  his
sunken  eye,  tell  that  he  is  drawing  near  to  the  cham-
bers of  death.     He  reaUzes  his  condition,  and  is  not


844  MISSIONARY  MEMOKIAL.

afraid.  A  momentary  pang  was  felt  when  he  thought
of  the  associations  of  home,  his  days  of  boyhood,
his  father's  cottage,  the  family  group  assembled  for
prayer,  their  hymns  of  praise.  He  could  haye
wished  once  more  to  embrace  them  all,  and  give
them  a  parting  farewell ;  but  he  quickly  wiped  away
the  fugitive  tear,  and  faintly  exclaimed,  "  Not  as  I  will,
but  as  thou  wilt.''  The  stillness  of  death  succeeded.
He  turned  away  from  earth  to  commune  with  heaven.
Ministering  angels  hover  round  his  couch,  and  invite
him  up  to  the  abodes  of  bhss.  Heavenly  raptures
delight  his  soul,  sounds  as  of  hynms  seraphic  burst
upon  his  ravished  ear,  and  the  dazzling  glories  of
eternity  are  all  open  to  his  vision.  He  bathes  in  an
ocean  of  eternal  love.  He  has  clasped  in  the  arms
of  a  living  faith  the  Son  of  God,  and  feels  his  heaven
already  begun.     Then

"  Softly  his  fainting  head  he  lay
Upon  his  Maker^s  breast ;
His  Maker  kiss'd  his  soul  away,
And  laid  his  flesh  to  rest.*'


®l)e  Burning  of  ti)t ''  STanfore.'*

Perhaps  no  incident  caused  a  greater  sensation  at
the  time,  than  did  the  destruction  of  the  "  Tanjore"
East  Indiaman,  by  Hghtning.  This  intensely  inter-
esting incident,  which  forms  the  subject  of  the  beau-
tiful embeUishment  of  the  present  volume,  has  been
detailed  by  Mr.  Hoole,  in  so  picturesque  and  graphic
a  style,  in  his  "  Madras  Mission,"  that  we  are  com-
pelled to  let  the  author  tell  his  own  story ;  feeling
assured  that  no  additions  of  our  own  could  render
the  narrative  more  impressive.  We  may,  however,
be  permitted  in  this  place  to  record  our  high  esti-
mate of  the  absorbing  interest  and  value  of  the  work
above  referred  to.

"  After  an  unavoidable  delay  of  some  months,  we
embarked  at  Gravesend  on  Friday,  May  19th,  1820,
in  the  ship  *  Tanjore,'  a  private  trader  of  five  hun-
dred tons'  burden,  bound  (on  her  first  voyage)  for
Madras  and  Calcutta,  and  commanded  by  Captain
G.  H.  Dacre,  an  able  and  experienced  officer  of  the
royal  navy.

"  Besides  my  valued  colleague  and  his  wife,  I  had
the  happiness  to  reckon  among  my  fellow-passen-


346  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

gersy  the  pious  and  much-esteemed  Sir  Richard  Ot-
Icy,  Chief  Justice  of  the  Island  of  Ceylon,  and  the
Rev.  Thomas  and  Mrs.  Browning,  of  the  Church
Missionary  Society,  who  were  appointed  to  Kandy,
in  the  same  island,  whose  friendship  and  society
formed  a  principal  part  of  our  enjoyments  on  board,
and  rendered  more  tolerable  the  prospect  of  the  con-
finement and  tedium  of  so  long  a  voyage.

"  On  the  evening  of  the  following  day  we  anchor-
ed off  Deal,  and  gladly  embraced  the  opportunity
afforded  us  of  passing  another  Christian  Sabbath  in
our  native  land.  The  Rev.  W.  M.  Harvard,  former-
ly missionary  in  Ceylon,  showed  us  much  kindness.
He  introduced  us  to  his  congregations,  commended
us  to  their  prayers,  and  when  we  re-embarked,  on
the  morning  of  Monday,  May  22d,  dismissed  us  with
some  valuable  advice,  respecting  our  voyage,  and  the
climate  in  which  we  should  probably  have  to  reside
and  labor  for  many  years.

"  Our  passage  down  the  Channel  was  boisterous,
and  exceedingly  trying  to  persons  unaccustomed  to
the  sea.  I  was  the  only  passenger  who  did  not  suf-
fer from  sea-sickness,  and  was  happy  to  have  it  in
my  power  to  render  some  assistance  to  my  less  fa-
vored friends.  The  Lizard-Point,  the  last  English
land  we  saw,  died  away  from  our  view  on  the  even-
ing of  May  31st ;  we  then  immediately  entered  into
fine  weather,  and  became  more  settled  and  comforta-
ble in  our  new  circumstances.


BURNING  OF  THE  TANJORE.         347

"  We  passed  through  the  Bay  of  Biscay  without
experiencing  the  rough  weather  we  had  anticipated  :
we  entered  the  tropics,  extended  our  sails  to  the
trade-winds,  which  blow  there  all  the  year  round,
and  sailed  on  the  vast  ocean  as  smoothly  as  on  a  lake.
We  had  a  distant  view  of  St.  Antonio,  one  of  the
Cape  de  Verd  Islands,  the  only  land  we  saw  until
we  made  the  Island  of  Ceylon  ;  and  were  delighted
by  the  interesting  phenomena  peculiar  to  those  lati-
tudes ;  such  as,  the  thousands  of  flying-fish,  the  beau-
tiful bonito  and  dolphin,  the  voracious  shark,  (of  each
of  which  we  caught  several,)  the  glories  of  the  rising
and  setting  sun ;  and,  during  the  night,  the  phosphoric
brightness  of  the  waves  and  spray  of  the  sea,  the
gradual  sinking  of  the  north  polar  star,  and  the  rising
of  the  beautiful  constellations  of  the  southern  hemi-
sphere.

"  The  gale,  and  the  favorable  breezes  which  suc-
ceeded it,  carried  us  so  much  to  the  eastward,  that
when  we  re-entered  the  tropics,  we  were  in  the  lon-
gitude of  Point  de  Galle,  and  had  consequently  to
keep  a  due  northern  course.  We  rode  on  the  wings
of  the  monsoon,  till  the  3d  of  September,  when  we
saw  the  Island  of  Ceylon,  having  been  only  three
months  and  three  days  in  making  the  voyage  from
land  to  land.  During  the  whole  of  this  period,  we
had  only  seen  one  sail, — a  homeward-bound  vessel.

"  Sir  Richard  Otley  and  the  other  passenger?  for
Ceylon  were  desirous  of  landing  at  Point  de  Galle ;


948  lOMIOKAftT  MBMORIAL.

but  the  wind  blowing  steadily  from  that  quarter,
made  it  impracticable  to  retrieve  the  few  nciiles  we
had  passed  to  the  eastward  of  it :  we  therefore  coast-
ed along  the  southeast  side  of  the  Island,  enjoying
the  smell  of  the  land,  which  was  extremely  grateful,
much  like  the  scent  of  new  hay ;  and  admiring  the
many  romantic  views  of  hill  and  dale,  cultivated  land
and  jungle,  skirted  by  the  cocoanut-tree  and  the
Palmyra,  which  every  hour  of  our  progress  opened
to  us.

"  On  Monday,  the  4th,  we  were  visited  by  many
of  the  natives,  in  their  homely  but  ingenious  canoes,
who  brought  for  sale  various  kinds  of  fruit,  which,
though  unripe,  proved  very  acceptable  to  us.  Adam
Munhi  Rathana  and  Alexander  Dherma  Rama,  the
two  Buddhist  priests  who  had  been  instructed  and
baptized  in  England,  and  were  our  fellow-passengers
in  the  *  Tanjore,'  proved  of  service  here.  By  their
interpretation  we  learned  the  news  of  the  island,  and
understood  we  might  conveniently  land  our  party  for
Ceylon  at  Batticaloa,  which  was  not  far  distant  The
master  of  a  large  native  vessel  undertook  to  conduct
us ;  and  finding  that,  though  under  shortened  sail,
we  went  much  quicker  than  themselves,  they  fasten-
ed a  tow-line  to  their  foreship,  to  enable  them  to  keep
up  with  us.  Towards  evening  the  wind  freshened  a
little,  and  we  thought  to  give  them  a  fair  specimen
of  our  superiority  in  sailing ;  but  they  became  fran-
tic with  terror,  and,  with  violent  shouting  and  gestic-


BURNING  OF  THE  TANJORE.        349

ulation,  begged  us  to  loosen  the  line,  or  their  vessel
would  soon  go  to  pieces,  for  it  was  already  giving
way.  We  could  not  but  be  amused  with  their
alarm,  from  which,  however,  we  quickly  relieved
them,  and,  proud  of  our  gallant  ship,  left  them  far
behind.

'*  The  following  day  we  made  Batticaloa,  and  came
to  anchor.  The  next  day,  September  6th,  we  weigh-
ed anchor,  and  stood  out  for  sea,  intending  to  make
direct  for  Madras.

"  Although  oppressively  hot,  it  was  a  fine  day.  In
the  evening,  however,  we  were  neither  surprised  nor
alarmed  at  a  heavy  storm  of  thunder,  hghtning,  and
rain,  coming  direct  upon  us ;  for  we  had  seen  much
lightning  every  night  since  we  had  been  in  the
neighborhood  of  land.  It  was  dusk,  and  I  was  ta-
king a  farewell  view  of  the  tops  of  the  mountains  of
the  island,  fast  diminishing  in  the  distance,  when  I
observed  an  unusually  heavy  cloud  hastening  towards
us.  I  pointed  it  out  to  Captain  Dacre,  with  whom  I
was  conversing  at  the  time :  he  rephed  that  it  was  of
no  importance  ;  and,  alluding  to  a  luminous  appear-
ance in  the  centre  of  it,  said  that  we  might  see
through  it.  The  rain  soon  began  to  descend  in  tor-
rents, and  drove  all  on  deck  to  seek  shelter  in  the
cuddy,  or  below :  the  storm  increased ;  and  flash  af-
ter flash  of  hghtning  following  each  other  in  such
quick  succession,  that,  with  little  interruption,  it
would  have  been  possible  to  read  by  the  glare.

30


350  M ISBIONAftT  MEMOEIAL.

*'  I  sat  in  the  cuddy,  watching  the  stonn,  till  past
eight  o'clock,  when  a  flash  which  illuminated  the
whole  hemisphere,  and  was  accompanied  with  loud
cracking,  and  a  tremendous  noise,  struck  the  ship,
prostrated  one  of  the  passengers  who  was  reading  by
the  glare,  and  kiUed  upon  the  spot  two  of  the  seamen
on  the  fore-castle.  I  ran  to  the  door,  to  ascertain  the
effects  of  the  stroke,  and  heard  the  second  mate,  who
was  between  decks,  cry  out,  '  Fire  in  the  hold  !  Fire
below !'  The  cargo  had  taken  fire  firOm  the  electric
fluid.  The  scene  which  followed  exceeds  all  de-
scription ;  it  was  one  that  can  never  be  forgotten  by
any  who  witnessed  it.

''  In  a  moment  all  hands  were  on  deck ;  buckets
were  supplied  in  abundance ;  the  pumps  were  man-
ned and  leaked,  that  the  water  might  be  discharged
on  the  burning  cargo ;  passengers  and  crew  were  all
on  the  alert ;  I  threw  off  my  boat-cloak,  which  I  had
procured  by  rushing  below  through  the  smoke  into
my  cabin,  and  assisted  at  the  pumps.  When  the
hatches  were  taken  off,  to  allow  of  water  being  pour-
ed into  the  hold,  flames  and  clouds  of  smoke  issued
forth  as  from  a  furnace,  increasing  every  instant  in
heat  and  density.  It  was  soon  found  that  all  exer-
tion was  in  vain ;  the  vessel  must  perish.

"  From  the  pumps  we  ran  to  the  boats :  the  gig
hung  over  the  larboard  quarter,  so  as  to  be  lowered
in  a  moment ;  but  we  should  have  lost  its  valuable
services,  had  not  a  gentleman  threatened  to  send  a


BURNING  OF  THE  TANJORE.         351

bullet  through  the  head  of  the  carpenter,  who,  insane
with  terror,  had  brought  a  hatchet  to  cut  the  ropes,
and  drop  it  at  once  into  the  sea.  The  yawl,  a  larger
boat,  was  our  great  difficulty ;  it  was  turned,  keel
upwards,  over  the  lonf-boat,  to  serve  as  a  roof  to  the
live-stock  kept  in  the  latter.  Many  attempts  were
made  in  vain  to  raise  it  from  its  situation  ;  the  long-
boat was  already  on  fire  by  the  flames  bursting  from
the  main  hold.  I  climbed  into  it,  (without  feeling
that,  in  doing  so,  I  broke  my  shins  severely,)  to  give
my  assistance  ;  and  when  we  were  just  ready  to  de-
spair, the  yawl  eased  and  rose,  no  one  knew  how,  and
was  over  the  side,  and  floating  in  the  water,  more
quickly,  the  seamen  said,  than  they  had  ever  before
seen  it.

"  Captain  Dacre  had  already  affirmed,  in  answer
to  my  inquiries,  that  the  two  boats  could  not  carry
all  the  ship's  company,  passengers,  and  crew ;  (and,
imder  other  circumstances,  we  should  not  have  dared
to  try  them ;)  but  the  trial  must  now  be  made.  The
two  ladies,  one  of  whom  had  to  be  hurried  from  her
bed,  where  she  had  retired  for  the  night,  were  first
put  safely  into  the  yawl ;  some  other  passengers  and
myself,  with  part  of  the  crew,  followed,  and  our
weight  sank  it  nearly  to  the  water's  edge  ;  the  cap-
tain and  others  entered  the  smaller  boat,  and  suffi-
ciently filled  it,  leaving  the  vessel  with  honorable
reluctance  ;  while  the  first  mate,  Mr.  Ibbetson,  gal-
lantly remained  on  board  to  the  last,  suggesting  the


8M  MISBIOKAftT  MBMOmiAL;

best  arrangemenU,  and  assisting  to  hand  to  us  any
article  that  could  be  secured  at  the  moment,  which
mi^t  possibly  be  useful  to  us  in  the  extreme  perils
we  were  about  to  encounter.

**  Many  of  the  party,  hayif%  retired  to  their  ham-
mocks before  the  electric  fluid  struck  the  vessel,
were  half  naked,  but  were  supplied  with  trousers  and
jackets  by  those  seamen  who  had  been  on  the  watch,
who,  in  consequence  of  the  heavy  rain,  had  cased
themselves  in  double  or  treble  their  usual  quantity
of  clothing.  My  own  dress  was  merely  a  nankeen
jacket  and  trousers,  a  shirt,  and  neckcloth ;  I  had
lost  my  hat  in  assisting  to  get  out  the  boat.

"We  happily  succeeded  in  bringing  away  two
compasses  from  the  binnacle,  and  a  few  candles
from  the  cuddy-table,  one  of  them  lighted ;  one  bottle
of  wine  and  another  of  porter  were  handed  to  us,
with  the  table-cloth  and  a  knife,  which  proved  very
useful ;  but  the  fire  raged  so  fiercely  in  the  body  of
the  vessel,  that  neither  bread  nor  water  could  be  ob-
tained.

"  It  was  now  about  nine  o'clock  :  the  rain  poured
in  torrents ;  the  lightning  continued  to  stream  from
one  side  of  the  heavens  to  the  other,  one  moment
dazzling  us  by  its  glare,  and  the  next  leaving  us  in
darkness,  relieved  only  by  the  red  flames  of  the  con-
flagration from  which  we  were  trying  to  escape.

"  Our  first  object  was  to  get  clear  of  the  vessel,
lest  she  should  explode,  and  overwhelm  us.     But  to


BURNING  OF  THE  TANJORE.         353

our  great  distress  we  discovered  that  the  yawl  had
no  rudder,  and  that  in  the  two  boats  we  had  only
three  oars,  all  exertions  to  obtain  more  from  the  ship
having  proved  unsuccessful.  From  the  gig,  which
had  a  rudder,  they  gave  us  a  line,  to  keep  us  in  tow ;
and  by  means  of  a  few  spars,  found  at  the  bottom  of
Jhe  boat,  we  assisted  in  moving  ourselves  slowly
through  the  water.  Providentially,  the  sea  was  very
still,  or  our  boats  would  have  swamped,  and  we  must
have  perished.  There  was  also  very  Uttle  wind ;
but  it  sometimes  changed,  and^  assisted  by  the  pre-
vailing current,  urged  forward  the  burning  ship ;  for
the  sails,  being  drenched  with  rain,  did  not  easily
take  fire.  Our  situation,  therefore,  was,  for  some
time,  exceedingly  perilous.  The  vessel  neared  us
more  than  once,  and  seemed  to  threaten  to  involve
us  in  its  own  destruction.  The  cargo,  consisting  of
combustible  articles,  including  a  considerable  quanti-
ty of  spirits,  burned  with  violence  and  rapidity,  and
the  flames  rose  to  an  amazing  height.

"We  succeeded  in  increasing  the  distance  be-
tween us  and  the  vessel ;  directing  our  course  to-
wards land,  by  help  of  the  compass,  which  we  could
see  by  the  light  of  the  candles  we  had  with  us.
About  ten  o'clock  we  saw  the  masts  fall  over  the
side,  and  the  vessel  seemed  to  be  burned  down  to
the  water's  edge.  The  spectacle  was  grand,  con-
templated abstractedly  from  a  recollection  of  our  own
circumstances.     The  destruction  by  fire  of  the  ani-

30*


8M  M I88I0M1BT  MBMOKIAIm

mals  on  board,  dogs,  sheep,  &c.,  at  another  time
would  have  excited  our  deepest  commiseration ;  but,
at  present,  the  total  loss  of  property,  the  awfully  sud-
den death  of  the  two  seamen,  our  own  narrow  es-
cape, and  the  great  probability,  even  yet,  that  we
should  never  again  see  the  light  of  day,  or  set  our
feet  on  solid  ground,  seemed  to  absorb  our  faculties
and  feelings :  for  some  time  the  silence  was  scarcely
broken,  and  I  doubt  not  that  many,  like  myself,  were
engaged  in  thoughts  most  suitable  to  immortal  be-
ings on  the  brink  of  eternity, — ^in  self-examination,
and  in  prayer.

'*  The  number  of  persons  in  the  two  boats  was
forty-eight ;  and  all,  with  the  exception  of  the  two
ladies,  who,  I  must  observe,  bore  these  awful  cir-
cumstances with  extraordinary  fortitude,  took  it  in
turns  to  work  at  the  oars  and  paddles.  After  some
time,  to  our  great  relief,  the  rain  ceased ;  the  labor
of  bailing  water  from  the  boats  was  considerably  di-
minished; the  occupants  of  the  two  boats  hailed
each  other  frequently  during  the  night,  and  the  hon-
est tars,  true  'hearts  of  oak,'  occasionally  gave  a
simultaneous  'hurra,'  to  cheer  each  other,  and  to
keep  up  our  spirits.

"  The  *  Tanjore'  must  have  risen  in  the  water,  as
it  gradually  consumed :  we  saw  it  burning  the  whole
night,  and  at  daybreak  could  distinguish  a  colunm
of  smoke  arising  from  it, — which,  however,  soon
ceased ;  and  we  saw  and  heard  no  more  of  our  fa-


BURNING  OF  THE  TANJORE.         355

vorite  ship.  Some  months  afterwards,  during  my
residence  at  Negapatam,  on  the  Coromandel  coast,
about  three  hundred  miles  from  the  spot  where  the
disaster  occurred,  a  spar,  partially  consumed  by  fire,
was  thrown  on  the  beach  by  the  surf ;  and  appeared
to  me  to  have  been  the  fore-sail  yard,  or  foretop-sail
yard,  of  the  unfortunate  *  Tanjore.'

"  When  the  sun  arose,  we  could  clearly  discern
land  ahead :  the  sight  of  it  filled  us  with  grateful
joy,  ah(^  nerved  us  with  fresh  vigor  for  our  exertions
in  managing  the  boats.  We  then  discovered  that  the
purser  was  the  only  person  in  our  party  decently  at-
tired :  the  wretched  and  forlorn  appearance  present-
ed by  the  rest,  in  either  only  half  clothing,  or  the  un-
suitable clothing  of  others,  increased  by  exposure,
want  of  rest,  and  the  anxieties  of  the  past  night,
could  not  but  provoke  a  smile  and  a  few  good-na-
tured remarks.

"  As  the  day  advanced,  we  more  clearly  discover-
ed the  nature  of  the  country  which  we  were  ap-
proaching. It  was  wild  and  covered  with  jungle,
without  any  appearance  of  populaticm:  could  we
have  got  ashore,  therefore,  our  condition  would  have
been  Uttle  improved ;  many  of  us  might  have  perish-
ed, before  human  habitations  could  have  been  reach-
ed, or  assistance  procured ;  but  the  breakers  dashing
upon  the  rocks  convinced  us  that  landing  was  im-
practicable, even  had  we  desired  it

^^  About  seven  o'clock,  a.  m.,  we   discovered   a


356  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

dhoney,  or  native  yessel,  lying  at  anchor  at  some
distance  ;  the  wind  just  then  began  to  favor  us,  and
we  exercised  our  ingenuity  to  avail  ourselves  of  it
In  the  yawl,  we  managed  to  extend  the  table-cloth  as
a  sail ;  and  in  the  other  boat,  a  blanket  (which  the
butcher  had  brought  away  with  him,  being  the  whole
of  his  properly)  was  made  to  serve  the  same  pur-

•

pose.  We  were  delighted  with  this  additional  help ;
which  was  the  more  seasonable,  as  the  rays  of  the
sun  became  intolerably  hot,  and  greatly  increased  our
sense  of  weariness.  One  of  the  officers  gave  Mrs.
Mowat  his  tartan  cap,  to  serve  as  some  cover  from
the  heat ;  and  I  thought  myself  happy  in  securing  a
hat  that  had  been  used  during  the  night  for  bailmg
water :  it  was  soon  partially  dry,  and  screened  the
top  of  my  head  from  the  direct  rays  of  the  sun.
Some  of  the  seamen,  suffering  from  heat  and  ex-
hausted by  their  exertions,  began  to  drink  salt  water ;
but  the  passengers  abstained  from  it.

"  It  was  near  noon  before  we  reached  the  dhoney.
The  natives  on  board  of  it  were  astonished  and
alarmed  at  our  appearance,  and  expressed  some  un-
willingness  to  entertain  us ;  but  our  circimistances
would  admit  of  no  denial,  and  we  scarcely  waited  till
Alexander,  the  Singhalese,  could  interpret  to  them
our  situation  and  our  wants,  before  we  took  posses-
sion of  their  vessel ;  assuring  them,  that  every  ex^
pense  and  loss  sustained  on  our  account  should  be
amply  repaid.


BURNING  OF  THE  TANJORE.         357

"  They  treated  us  very  kindly ;  gave  us  water
sparingly,  but  as  many  cocoanuts  as  we  could  de-
vour ;  they  also  boiled  some  rice  for  us,  which  they
presented  in  cocoanut  shells,  with  curried  fish,  and
jaggery,  a  sort  of  coarse  black  sugar  ;  and  laughing
at  our  method  of  eating,  made  for  us  a  few  rude
spoons  of  bits  of  cocoanut  shell  and  spUnters  of  bam-
boo. They  informed  us  that  Trincomallee,  which  we
knew  to  be  one  of  our  mission  stations,  "tg^as  not  far
distant ;  and,  agreeing  to  take  us  thither,  they  pro-
ceeded to  weigh  anchor,  while  we  stretched  our
cramped  and  weary  limbs  on  the  pent-roof  thatch,
which  served  as  a  deck  to  the  vessel.

"  In  the  evening  they  cast  anchor  for  the  night :
the  heavens  were  again  darkened  with  clouds ;  the
lightnings  flashed,  and  the  distant  thunder  rolled  and
murmured  ;  awakening  us  to  a  more  lively  and  aw-
ful remembrance  of  the  dangers  we  had  escaped.

"  We  had  some  difficulty  in  fixing  ourselves  for
the  night :  the  ladies  were  accommodated  with  the
master's  apartment,  if  a  small  but  clean  division  of
the  vessel,  in  which  it  was  impossible  to  stand  up-
right, may  be  dignified  with  the  name ;  and  the  rest
were  left  to  choose  their  own  quarters.  The  smoke
of  cooking  deterred  me  from  going  below,  till  the
cold  and  dew  made  me  think  shelter  necessary.  I
then  stooped  into  the  interior  of  the  vessel,  and  creep-
ing over  the  cargo,  which  seemed  to  consist  entirely
of  09coanuts,  thought  myself  fortunate  in  finding  a


358  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

narrow  board,  five  or  six  feet  in  length,  on  which  I
stretched  myself,  putting  a  bundle  of  fire-wood  under
my  head  as  a  pillow.  Alexander,  who  had  attached
himself  closely  to  me  since  our  misfortune,  came  and
lay  by  me.  In  the  night  he  roused  me,  to  drink
from  a  cup  he  held  in  his  hand :  it  contained  hot
conjee,  or  rice-water,  not  an  unpleasant  beverage  at
any  time,  but  then  peculiarly  grateful  to  my  parched
mouth.      *

*'  I  slept  soundly,  and  rose  refireshed ;  but  should
have  been  more  so,  had  not  one  of  the  seamen,  in
searching  for  accommodations,  after  I  had  fallen
asleep,  chosen  my  head  for  his  pillow,  which  before
did  not  rest  very  easily  on  the  bundle  of  sticks,  and
now,  pressed  by  the  weight  of  a  sailor's  skull,  felt,
when  I  awoke,  as  though  it  did  not  belong  to  me  ;  a
bathe  in  the  sea-water  restored  the  circulation.

"  In  the  morning  we  again  weighed  anchor,  and  in
a  few  hours  came  in  sight  of  the  flag-staff  of  one  of
the  forts  of  the  harbor  of  Trincomallee :  the  wind
was  unfavorable,  and  we  could  not  get  into  the  har-
bor ;  we  therefore  sent  our  smaller  boat,  with  four
of  the  best  seamen  and  the  purser,  to  give  informa-
tion of  our  circumstances.  It  was  a  good  distance,
and  the  men  were  weary ;  but  within  two  or  three
hours,  we  discerned  the  beautiful  boats  of  a  man-of-
war,  then  in  the  harbor,  hastening  towards  us  under
crowded  sail :  next  we  could  distinguish  the  naval
uniform  of  the  officers ;  and,  as  they  drew  n^rer,


BURNING  OF  THE  TANJORE.         359

could  see  the  fine  countenances  of  our  countrymen
beaming  with  interest  and  commiseration,  as  they
gazed  on  us,  and  directed  their  boats  alongside  ;  it
was  a  scene  to  awaken  the  most  powerful  feelings ;
and  will,  I  think,  ever  be  depicted  on  my  memory.
My  heart  had  been  stout  till  that  moment ;  but  I  then
leaned  against  the  mast,  scarcely  able  to  stand,  from
the  mingled  emotions  excited  in  my  mind.

"  We  soon  stepped  into  the  boats,  answering  the
numerous  and  kind  inquiries  of  the  officers,  and  en-
joying the  slight  refreshment  of  fruit,  &c.,  they  had
brought  with  them.  The  men  pulled  hard  at  th«r
oars :  we  soon  entered  the  harbor,  admiring  its  spa-
ciousness and  the  beauties  of  its  scenery ;  but  ad-
miring, most  of  all,  the  wondrous  dealings  of  that
gracious  Providence,  which  had  preserved  us  in  such
Hfusual  perils,  and  brought  us  to  a  place  of  rest  and
safety.  We  landed  in  the  dockyard  of  Trincomallee
about  three  p.  m.  on  Friday,  the  8th  of  September,
1820,  being  exactly  sixteen  weeks  after  our  embar-
kation at  Gravesend."


C^e  dxttftd  of  tl)e  iPlt00imutrs  <Stittr|nriaft.

BT  THK  BBT.  «ABDIllSm  SPBIlie,  D.  D.

NoTHiNO  is  more  certainly  determined  in  the  Bible,
than  that  the  heathen  are  given  to  the  Son  of  God  for
hitinheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for
his  possessicm ;  that  he  must  reign,  until  all  enemiea
are  put  under  his  feet;  and  that  the  earth  shall  be  filled
with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  coFer
the  sea.  Tell  me  not  of  difficulties  in  the  accom-
plishment  of  these  purposes,  for  '^  the  mouth  of  the
Lord  hath  spoken  them."  Say  not  that  the  world
opposes  itself  to  these  designs  of  mercy,  for  ''  as  I
liye,  saith  the  Lord,  all  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with
my  glory !"

Why,  then,  should  we  take  a  more  limited  sunrey
of  the  field  than  is  taken  by  the  Divine  purpose  ?
Why  not  include  within  our  efforts  all  that  is  included
within  his  ?  If  his  purposes  are  circumscribed  by
nothing  but  the  world,  why  should  our  plans  be  so
narrow  as  to  retard  and  embarrass  his  career  ?  If
nothing  else  will  satisfy  the  extent  and  largeness  of
his  desires,  nothing  short  of  this  may  satisfy  ours.


THE  MISSIONARY  ENTERPRISE.  361

Why,  when  he  is  going  forth  conquering  and  to  con-
quer, and  with  the  avowed  purpose  of  subjugating
the  world,  why  should  not  his  church  prepare  the
way  for  his  most  extended  and  universal  triumphs  ?

There  have  been  seasons  when  unyielding  difficul-
ties have  stood  in  the  way  of  every  thing  like  com-
bined and  well- organized  effort  for  the  conversion  of
the  world ;  and  when,  from  the  paucity  of  numbers  in
the  church — from  the  want  of  means — from  various
circumstances  in  the  existing  state  of  human  society —
from  hostile  relations  of  different  parts  of  the  earth —
from  intrinsic  difficulties  in  international  intercourse —
from  the  domination  of  anti-christian  governments —
and  from  the  internal  agitations  of  heathen  lands,  it
would  have  been  impossible  to  have  disseminated  the
Gospel  beyond  very  circumscribed  limits.  More
than  once,  the  church  has  had  enough  to  do  to  save
her  single  self  from  being  swept  away  by  the  torrent.
Such  was  her  condition  during  several  periods  of  the
patriarchal  age.  Such  was  her  condition  after  the
confusion  of  tongues.  Such  was  her  condition  at
the  calling  of  Abraham.  And  long  after  this  period,
a  dark  and  heavy  cloud  overshadowed  the  earth.
The  Sun  of  Righteousness  was  withdrawn,  and  save
the  single  nation  of  the  Jews,  was  withdrawn  for
more  than  six  thousand  years.  During  the  most  of
this  period,  there  was  no  encouragement  for  mission-
ary effort.  There  were  no  intimations  in  the  provi-
dence of  God,  that  the  time  had  come  for  the  ex-

31


362  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

tended  and  universal  dissemination  of  his  truth.  So
forbidding  were  the  indications,  even  in  the  days  of
the  apostles,  that  those  holy  men  did  not  venture  to
labor  among  the  heathen  until  they  were  expressly
and  divinely  directed  so  to  do.  For  several  of  the
earlier  centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  the  pagan
world  was,  indeed,  more  accessible,  and  every  part
of  it  was  by  turns  open  to  missionary  effort,  and  suc-
cessively visited  by  the  heralds  of  the  cross.  But
this  little  illumined  zone  of  time  grew  narrower  and
narrower,  and  the  light  gradually  waned,  and  became
more  and  more  dim,  till  it  almost  vanished  away.
During  the  middle  and  dark  ages,  ignorance  and  su-
perstition overspread  the  earth ;  the  fairest  portions
of  it  were  desolated  and  overthrown;  the  church
herself  was  fleeing  before  an  implacable  enemy ;  and
every  thing  precluded  generous  and  benevolent  eflfort.
Never  was  the  human  mind  subjected  to  a  heavier
bondage ;  never  did  a  longer  or  more  afflictive  night
pass  over  the  earth ;  never  did  every  thing  concur
to  throw  a  deeper  shade  over  the  prospects  of  the
heathen.

But  these  days  have  gone  by.  Since  the  revival
of  letters  in  the  sixteenth  century,  and  especially
since  the  great  Reformation,  there  has  been  a  gradual
expansion  of  the  human  mind  in  all  the  departments
of  knowledge.  Men  have  been  preparing  to  appre-
ciate every  advance  in  intelligence,  liberty,  and  re-
ligion ;  and  to  co-operate  in  designs  for  the  purpose


THE  MISSIONARY  ENTERPRISE.  363

of  superseding  the  dominion  of  vice,  anarchy,  idola-
try, hypocrisy,  and  superstition,  by  the  simplicity  and
power  of  the  Gospel.  Since  the  invention  of  the  art
of  printing,  the  deep  foundations  of  human  ignorance
have  been  broken  up,  and  the  knowledge  of  God  and
his  salvation  have  found  a  channel  through  which  they
may  be  poured  upon  the  world  like  a  flood.  Since
the  discovery  of  the  mariner's  compass,  also,  there
is  no  shore  so  distant,  but  is  sought  with  eagerness ;
no  ocean  so  vast,  but  is  traversed  with  safety.  Re-
mote continents  and  distant  islands  are  brought  within
our  reach.  In  every  view,  the  aspect  of  the  world
is  changed.  The  present  state  of  the  sciences  uni-
versally— the  discoveries  in  astronomy  and  geogra-
phy— in  natural  philosophy  and  chemistry — the  won-
derful power  of  steam  in  its  application  to  the  me-
chanical arts,  and  the  means  of  intercourse — all  these
lay  open  the  world  to  the  eye,  and  heart,  and  hand
of  the  Christian.  The  despotic  sceptre  of  human
governments,  also,  is  melting  away ;  the  influence  of
a  corrupt  and  wicked  priesthood  begins  to  be  sus-
pected ;  the  Islam  power  is  on  the  wane,  and  large
portions  of  the  pagan  world  are  already  under  the
influence  of  Christian  governments  and  wholesome
laws.  And  never  was  there  a  time  when  the  heathen
world  itself  was  so  prepared  to  receive  the  Gospel  as
it  is  now.  The  pagan  intellect  is  waking  up.  The
Indian  tribes,  the  islands  of  the  sea,  Africa,  Burmah,
Ihe  hither  and  farther  Indies,  and  even  China,  weary


364  M18810MART   MEMORIAL.

of  their  philosophy,  and  half  disgusted  with  their
idols,  are  stretching  forth  their  hands  unto  God.
Everywhere  the  church  is  breaking  forth  on  the  right
hand  and  on  the  left.  The  blood  of  her  martyrs  has
begun  to  flow.  There  is  a  magnificence  in  her  plans,
a  concurrence  in  her  operations,  a  promptness,  a
bounty,  a  zeal,  an  invention  in  her  benevolence,
which  have  never  been  before  witnessed.  Mission-
ary stations  are  to  be  found  in  almost  all  parts  of  the
earth.  And  when  you  take  the  map  of  the  world,
you  will  see  that  they  have  been  so  selected  as  to
afibrd  a  ready-intercourse  with  one  another,  and  with
pagan,  Mohammedan,  and  anU-christian  countries.
There  is  a  line  of  stations  in  difierent  latitudes,
making  circles  of  light  round  the  globe.  The  sacred
fire  is  thus  enkindled,  and  at  such  distances,  that  it
is  not  difficult  to  see  that  it  must  spread,  till  it  burns
over  this  vast  desert,  and  prepares  it  for  the  harvest.
It  deserves  to  be  noticed  with  gratitude,  also,  that
through  the  noble  efforts  of  the  different  Bible  So-
cieties, and  especially  of  the  British  and  Foreign  So-
ciety, the  languages  of  the  earth  are  in  the  progress
of  rapid  attainment  by  Christian  missionaries ;  and
this  formidable  obstacle  to  the  world's  conversion  is
so  far  surmounted,  that  in  nearly  two  hundred  differ-
ent languages,  men  may  now  read  in  their  own  tongue
the  wonderful  works  of  God.  Add  to  this  that  there
are  schools  and  higher  seminaries  of  learning  estab-
lished by  Christians  in  pagan  and  anti-christian  lands,


THE  MISSIONARY  ENTERPRISE.  365

where  thousands  upon  thousands  of  youth  and  chil-
dren are  instructed  in  the  truths  of  the  GospeL
Never  had  the  church  so  fair  an  opportunity  of  ma-
king an  impression  on  the  minds  of  this  apostate
world  as  she  has  now.  There  is,  in  a  word,  at  this
moment,  a  more  extended  and  a  more  varied  series
oi  causes  for  the  conversion  of  men,  and  a  more
rapid  succession  of  means  and  ends  for  this  grand
result,  than  has  ever  distinguished  any  preceding  age,
not  excepting  that  of  the  apostles.  And  if  these  ef-
forts are  continued  and  advance,  in  humble  depen-
dence on  God,  we  cannot  suppress  the  hope,  that  in
a  few  generations  more,  perhaps  when  another  gen-
eration shall  have  passed  away,  the  strongholds  of
paganism  will  be  broken  down.

But  if  we  ever  expect  to  send  the  Gospel  to  the
world,  there  must  be  something  Uke  an  equal  distri
bution  of  the  means  of  grace  and  salvation.  This  is
the  way  in  which  the  Gospel  was  first  published.  It
is  obvious,  at  a  glance,  that  the  apostles  directed  all
their  movements  upon  this  principle.

Take  a  glance  at  the  unevangelized  portions  of
our  globe.  Look  at  Russia,  extending  from  the
Baltic  to  the  Pacific,  and  containing  a  population  of
fifty-seven  millions  ;  and  for  this  vast  territory  there
are  but  six  Christian  missionaries.  Look  at  China,
containing  a  population  of  three  hundred  milUons,
with  but  forty  messengers  of  the  Gospel,  and  even
these  reached  there  but  within  a  few  years  past,

.    31*


366  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

Look  at  the  countries  lying  on  the  Indian  ocean,  and
you  see  Siam  with  a  population  of  two  millions,  and
Burmah  with  eleven  millions,  and  Hindostan,  where
there  is  a  population  of  one  hundred  and  twenty
millions,  and  where  there  are  more  missionaries  than
in  any  one  pagan  country,  and  even  there,  there  is
not  one  Christian  teacher  to  a  million  of  people.
Look  at  Persia,  where  there  are  eleven  millions  of
inhabitants,  and  at  Arabia,  where  there  are  twelve
millions,  and  where,  in  neither  country,  until  within
a  short  period,  has  there  been  a  single  missionary.
Look  at  the  thirty  millions  scattered  throughout  the
Asiatic  islands,  most  of  them  pagans  and  Moham-
medans, with  a  supply  of  only  sixty  missionaries.
Look  at  Africa,  containing  probably  one  hundred  and
ten  millions  of  souls,  and  throughout  all  its  coasts,
including  the  English  settlement  of  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope,  and  the  districts  of  Sierra  Leone  and  Liberia,
there  are  less  than  a  hundred  Christian  teachers.

Now  look  at  Christendom.  The  United  States  of
America  contain  nearly  seventeen  millions  of  inhab-
itants, and  have  more  than  eleven  thousand  ministers
of  the  Gospel,  and  in  addition  to  these,  from  three  to
four  thousand  young  men  in  training  for  the  sacred
ministry.  England  has  a  population  of  sixteen  mil-
lions, and  has  not  far  from  twenty-four  thousand  min-
isters of  the  Gospel.  Scotland  has  a  population  of
two  and  a  half  millions,  and  about  two  thousand  min-
isters of  the  Gospel.    Were  the  means  of  religious


THE  MISSIONARY  ENTERPRISE.  367

instruction  in  the  American  stales  equally  distributed,
the  country  would  be  amply  supphed.  But  it  is  no
uncommon  thing  for  us  to  see  a  city,  containing  tliirty
thousand  inhabitants,  supplied  by  thirty  ministers  of
the  Gospel ;  and  still  more  common,  to  see  a  village
that  contains  but  twenty-five  hundred  inhabitants,
have  five  or  six  settled  ministers.  And  the  same  is
true  of  Britain,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  Wales,  only
upon  a  more  extensive  scale,  and  more  obvious  in-
equahty  of  distribution.  The  United  States  has  one
minister  of  the  Gospel  for  every  fourteen  hundred
souls,  England  has  one  for  every  six  hundred,  Scot-
land has  one  for  every  twelve  hundred,  and  the  poor
heathen  have  one  to  a  million  and  a  half  I

I  am  not  for  emptying  Christendom  of  its  ministers  ;
but  I  am  for  distributing  this  immense  disparity  of
her  supplies.  What  should  give  a  few  favored  lands
a  pre-eminence  in  this  respect  so  much  above  all  oth-
ers ?  Must  we  despair  of  devising  some  method  by
which  the  conflicting  interests  of  sect  and  denomina-
tion may  be  so  adjusted,  that  this  evil  may  at  least  be
in  some  measure  removed,  and  the  number  of  mis-
sionaries to  the  heathen  augmented  a  hundred-fold  ?
England,  if  all  her  ministers  are  true  men,  has  at  this
moment  five  or  six  thousand  to  spare  for  the  heathen.
The  United  States  could  spare  fifteen  hundred,  and
Scotland  a  thousand.  Ten  thousand  ministers  might,
during*  the  present  year,  be  drawn  off"  from  Christen-
dom and  given  to  the  heathen.    What  a  donation  ta


968  MISSIONARY  MEMORIAL.

a  dying  world  !  What  a  present  to  its  redeeuiing
God  and  King !  Oh,  Christians !  what  miserable
economy  is  this,  of  mind,  and  heart,  and  moral  pow-
er, that  a  single  man,  who,  if  he  were  on  heathen
ground,  might  preach  the  Gospel  every  Sabbath  to
thousands,  should  remain  in  Britain  or  the  United
States,  and  exhaust  his  life,  and  wear  out  his  days,
in  preaching  to  some  two  or  three  hundred ;  and  who,
if  they  were  deprived  of  his  labors,  would  be  well
supplied  elsewhere !  Where  is  our  warrant,  when
the  Master  bids  us  evangeUze  the  world,  thus  to  con-
fine our  efforts  ?  The  world  can  never  be  converted
at  the  heavy  and  slow  rate  at  which  the  work  is  now
going  on.  Centuries  of  darkness  must  roll  over  the
earth,  unless  something  is  done  to  secure  a  more
equal  dissemination  of  the  Gospel.  Oh  thai  the
day  would  dawn,  when  all  who  fove  the  Lord  Jesus
shall  be  of  the  same  mind  and  judgment — when  party
animosities  and  sectional  jealousies  shall  die  away —
when  apprehension  and  distrust  at  home  shall  no
longer  diminish  the  number  of  laborers  abroad — and
when  churches  of  every  name  shall  consecrate  their
best  services  and  their  first  men  <o  the  great  end  of
converting  the  world.

Do  you  acknowledge  the  prerogative  of  your  Prince
in  this  matter  ?  Do  you  recognise  on  this  commis-
sion the  image  and  superscription  of  your  divine
Leader  ?  Then,  to  what  part  of  the  world  does  it
send  you  ?     V/here  does  it  require  you  to  unfold  and


TH£  MISSIONARY  ENTERPRISE.  369

plant  the  banner  of  the  great  Captain  of  our  salva-
tion ?  Is  it  in  the  territories  of  light  and  life,  or  in
the  region  and  shadow  of  death  ?  Is  it  at  Home,  or
abroad  ?  Inclination  leads  a  man  to  stay  at  home.
Friends  and  family,  name  and  worldly  comfort,  lead
him  to  stay  at  home.  Sickly  chmes,  savage  men,
and  the  blood  of  martyred  missionaries  say,  stay  at
home.  But  his  commission,  the  only  commission
by  which  he  is  warranted  to  preach  the  Gospel  any-
where, runs  in  this  solemn  form :  "  Go,  preach  to
every  creature  !"  He  may  not  shrink  from  difficul-
ty, nor  be  afraid  of  toil,  nor  tremble  at  the  wrath  of
kings,  nor  the  malice  of  the  people.  Nay,  rather  let
him  aim  at  the  martyr's  crown,  than  basely  shrink
from  the  service  to  which  his  more  than  martyred
Saviour  calls  him.

We  scarcely  know  how  to  account  for  it  that  so
few  of  that  sacramental  host,  who  have  professed  be-
fore God,  angels,  and  men,  an  unreserved  submission
to  their  duty,  and  who  glory  in  being  the  disciples  of
the  self-denying  and  crucified  Saviour,  should,  for
seventeen  centuries  past,  have  consented  to  devote
themselves  to  the  most  extensive  promulgation  of  the
Gospel.  When,  O  when  shall  the  time  come,  that
young  men,  baptized  with  the  spirit  of  their  ascend-
ing Lord,  shall  press  in  crowds  to  heathen  lands?
When  shall  the  time  come,  thai  it  will  no  longer  be
thought  the  dream  of  chivalry  and  romance  to  talk  of
the  conversion  of  the  world  ?     I  am  persuaded  that


870  MISSIOMAEY  MBMOAIAL.

the  day  of  mercy  lias  dawned  upon  tlie  heaths.
Tlie  time  is  just  at  hand,  when  it  will  be  deemed  no
marvellous  act  of  self-denial  to  forsake  all  and  follow
Christ — when  not  young  men  only  will  flpck  to  pagan
lands — but  when  men  of  fortune,  men  of  talent,  men
of  family,  will  deem  it  their  highest  honor,  their
greatest  joy,  to  live  and  die  and  fill  up  the  measure
of  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  for  this  perishing  world.
Oh,  what  are  a  few  years  of  labor  and  fatigue,  a  few
short  years  of  suffering  and  sorrow,  of  faithful  and
painful  devotement,  for  an  object  so  immeasurably
important  ?

We  inhabit  a  world  where  there  are  more  than
six  hundred  millions  of  immortal  beings  living  and
dying  without  God  and  without  hope.  What  de-
mands upon  our  compassion  and  tenderness,  our  mu-
nificence and  prayers  !  Eighteen  hundred  years
have  passed  away  since  the  blood  of  propitiation
was  shed,  and  yet  three  fourths  of  the  world  in
which  we  dwell  have  never  seen  a  Bible,  or  heard  of
the  name  of  Jesus.  "  O  that  our  head  were  waters,
and  our  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears  !"  Why,  why  do
we  thus  ignobly  slumber  in  the  work  ?  O  for  that
abhorrence  of  human  impiety  wliich  moved  the
heart  of  Paul !  O  for  that  compassion  for  the  souls
of  men,  and  that  zeal  for  the  honor  of  God,  which
gave  self-denial  and  firmness  to  men  who  counted  it
all  joy  to  labor  and  suffer  for  a  dying  world  !  O  for
the  love  of   Swartz  and  of  Brainerd,  of  Marlyn,


PRA¥ER  FOR  MISSIONS.  371

Carey,  and  Judson,  towards  the  perishing  heathen  !
O  for  the  day  when  the  heart  of  Christendom  shall
be  moved  with  pity  to  the  heathen,  as  the  trees  of
the  forest  are  moved  by  a  mighty  wind ;  when  the
hallowed  influence  of  the  Gospel  shall  be  difiused
through  every  land ;  when  the  wilderness  shall  blos-
som as  the  rose,  and  the  songs  of  salvation  shall
everywhere  ascend  to  God.


JJrager  for  Mibbioixb.

BT    MRS.    LYDIA   H.    SIOOURNEY.

Night  wraps  the  realm  where  Jesus  woke,

No  guiding  star  the  magi  see,
And  heavy  hangs  oppression's  yoke

Where  Jirst  the  Gospel  said,  "  befree.^'*

And  where  the  harps  of  angels  bore
High  message  to  the  shepherd-throng,

"  Good-will  and  peace"  are  heard  no  more
To  murmur  Bethlehem's  vales  along.

Swarth  India,  with  her  idol-train.

Bends  low  by  Ganges'  worshipp'd  tide.

Or  drowns  the  suttee's  shriek  of  pain
With  thundering  gong  and  pagan  pride.


372  HISSIONABT  MEMORIAL.

On  Persians  hills  the  Sophi  grope ;

Dark  Burmah  greets  salvation's  ray ;
Even  jealous  China's  door  of  hope

Unbars,  to  give  the  Gospel  way.

Old  Ocean,  with  his  isles,  awakes.
Cold  Greenland  feels  unwonted  flame,

And  humble  Afric  wondering  takes
On  her  sad  lips  a  Saviour's  name.


Their  steps  the  forest-children  stay.
Bound  to  oblivion's  voiceless  shore,

And  lift  their  red  brows  to  the  day,

Which  from  the  opening  skies  doth  pour.

Then  aid  with  prayer  that  holy  light
Which  from  elcnial  death  can  save,

Anil  hid  Christ's  heralds  speed  their  flight,
Kro  millions  find  a  hopeless  grave.


THE   END.


^^


r*\    %


-■^
